
THE CAR STEREO 
COOKBOOK

This page intentionally left blank.

Car Stereo 
Cookbook
How to Design,
Choose, and Install 
Car Stereo Systems
SECOND EDITION
Mark Rumreich
McGraw-Hill
New York • Chicago • San Francisco • Lisbon • London
Madrid • Mexico City • Milan • New Delhi
San Juan • Seoul • Singapore • Sydney • Toronto

Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United 
States of America. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 976, no part of this 
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or 
retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher. 
 
0-07-146706-8
 
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: 0-07-144847-0. 
 
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after 
every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit 
of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations 
appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps. McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at 
special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training 
programs. 
For 
more 
information, 
please 
contact 
George 
Hoare, 
Special 
Sales, 
at 
george_hoare@mcgraw-hill.com or (212) 904-4069. 
 
TERMS OF USE 
 
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) and its licensors 
reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted 
under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not 
decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, 
transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without 
McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; 
any other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you 
fail to comply with these terms. 
 
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO 
GUARANTEES 
OR 
WARRANTIES 
AS 
TO 
THE 
ACCURACY, 
ADEQUACY 
OR 
COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, 
INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA 
HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS 
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its 
licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your 
requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its 
licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of 
cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility for the 
content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill 
and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar 
damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised 
of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause 
whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise. 
 
DOI: 10.1036/0071467068 

	


Want to learn more?
We hope you enjoy this 
McGraw-Hill eBook! If 
you’d like more information about this book, 
its author, or related books and websites, 
please click here.

To my father, who loved music and always had the time
to explain how things work.

This page intentionally left blank.

CONTENTS
Introduction
xix
CHAPTER 1
Before You Begin
1
Ask Yourself Some Preliminary Questions
2
Transferability
2
Upgradability
3
Factory Look
3
Understand All Your Options
4
Understand What’s in Your Car
4
Familiarize Yourself with Available Products and Approaches
5
Design Your System
5
Sketch a Block Diagram
6
Make Your Shopping List, Then Buy
7
Read the Manuals and Draw a Complete Wiring Diagram
8
CHAPTER 2
Connectors, Supplies, Tools, and Techniques
11
Connectors
12
Soldering
12
Crimp Connectors
13
Quick Splice/Scotchlok Connectors
14
Wire Nuts
16
Fuse Taps
16
Taps for AGC Fuse Blocks
17
Taps for ATO/ATC Fuse Blocks
17
Taps for MINI Fuse Blocks
18
Installation Tips
18
Cable Ties
20
Heat-Shrink Tubing
20
Specialty Tools
21
Using a Multimeter—Wiring Harness Example
30
Step 1: Identify the Power Wires
31
Step 2: Identify the Ground Wire
32
Step 3: Identify the Speaker Wires
33
CHAPTER 3
Speakers and Speaker Projects
35
Imaging and You
36
What Is Imaging?
36
Achieving Good Imaging
38
For more information about this title, click here

Adding Surface-Mount Tweeters
39
Choosing Tweeters
39
Placing Tweeters
40
Connecting Tweeters
42
Upgrading Existing Speakers
43
Choosing Speakers
43
Making the Best of the Existing Enclosure
46
Installing Speakers in a New Location
48
Choosing a Location
48
Center Channel Speakers
50
Installing a Door Speaker
51
Cutting the Hole
52
Wiring It Up
55
Installing Separates
57
CHAPTER 4
Subwoofers and Subwoofer Projects
61
System Configuration Options
62
Conventional Speaker-Level Crossover, Subwoofer
64
Tri-Way Crossover, Subwoofer
64
Separates
65
Amp with Built-In Crossover, Subwoofer
67
Separate Crossover, Amplified Subwoofer
67
Amplified Subwoofer with Built-In Crossover
68
What to Look For in a Subwoofer Crossover
70
Choosing a Subwoofer Amplifier
72
How Much Power Do You Need?
73
The Best Amplifier/Subwoofer Configurations
74
Subwoofer Enclosure Options
77
Subwoofer Amount of Assembly Options
78
Types of Enclosures
80
Choosing a Driver
83
Power Handling
84
Sensitivity
84
Bass Response
85
Cone and Surround Material
89
Dual Voice Coil Subwoofers
90
Box Design
92
Computer Programs for Box Design
92
Step 1: Calculate fob and Vof from the T/S Parameters
92
Step 2: Label the Frequency Response Diagram for Your Driver
94
Step 3: Choose Your Box Size and Type
94
Step 4: Calculate the Port Tuning Frequency
103
Sealed/Ported Box Design Example
104
viii
CONTENTS

CONTENTS
ix
Bandpass Box Design Example
106
Multiple Drivers in One Box
108
Box Construction
112
Box Materials and Shapes
112
Assembly and Bracing
113
Bandpass Box Construction
113
Constructing Ports
114
Port Design Example
117
Speaker Terminals
119
Make It Airtight
120
Enclosure Damping
122
Finishing Touches
122
Installation
124
Bass Blocking Crossovers
124
Trunk Sonic Isolation Check
125
Secure Your Subwoofer
126
Turning It On the First Time
128
System Adjustment, or the Secret to Tight Bass
128
Bass Transducers
129
CHAPTER 5
Head Unit Projects
131
Why Choose an Aftermarket Head Unit?
132
Pick One That Fits
132
Size and Mounting Method Basics
132
Determining What Your Vehicle Can Accommodate
134
Cassette, CD, Satellite Radio, and HD Radio
135
Performance and Features
135
General Features
135
Radio Features
139
Cassette Features
143
CD Features
145
Satellite Radio
148
HD Radio
152
Installation
154
Mechanical Mounting
154
Electrical Wiring
159
Factory Steering Wheel Control Interfaces
163
Premium Factory Sound Systems
164
2000 and Up GM Vehicles with the Class 2 Data Bus
166
Chime Module Interfaces 
166
Relocation Harnesses 
167
Vehicles with OnStar
168

x
CONTENTS
CHAPTER 6
Mobile Video and 5.1 Channel Audio
169
Mobile Video Configurations
170
DVD Head Unit with Built-in Monitor
170
DVD Head Unit with Separate Monitor
171
CD Head Unit Controlling DVD Changer 
173
Separate DVD Player with Separate Monitor 
173
Overhead/Headrest DVD Player with Built-In Monitor 
173
Portable DVD Player with Built-In Monitor 
176
Monitor Locations
176
Monitor Performance and Features
179
Other Video Sources
183
TV Tuner 
183
Satellite TV Receiver
184
VCR 
185
DVD Changer 
186
Digital A/V Player 
186
Rearview Camera 
186
Wiring Up Your System Using an A/V Switcher 
187
5.1 Channel Audio Formats
188
Dolby Pro Logic II 
189
Dolby Digital/DTS 
189
DVD-Audio 
190
5.1 Channel Audio Sources
190
CD Head Unit with Dolby Pro Logic II
191
DVD Head Unit with Dolby Digital/DTS Optical Output 
and Separate Surround-Sound Processor
192
DVD Head Unit with Built-In Dolby Digital/DTS 
Surround-Sound Processor
192
DVD Head Unit with Built-In Dolby Digital/DTS 
Surround-Sound Processor and DVD-Audio
193
CHAPTER 7
Amplifiers and Amplifier Projects
195
What to Look for in an Amp
196
Amps for Subwoofers
197
Performance and Features
197
Advertised Power versus Honest Power
199
How Much Power Do You Need?
201
More Power for Your Money
202
Running 2-Ohm Loads
202
Bridging
203
Where to Put Your Amps
204

CONTENTS
xi
Power and Ground Wiring
206
Wire Gauge
206
Power Wire Hookup
208
Fuses
210
Wiring for Automatic Turn-On
212
Ground Wire Hookup
214
Connectors
214
Speaker Wiring
215
Boosting Head Units with Four Front and Rear Preamp Outputs 216
Standard Configuration
216
Cable-Saving Configuration
218
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
218
Amplifier-Saving Configuration
219
Cable-Saving Amplifier-Saving Configuration
219
Boosting Head Units with One Set of Preamp Outputs
219
Standard Configuration
220
Fader-Restoring Configuration
220
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
222
Amplifier-Saving Configuration
222
Cable-Saving Amplifier-Saving Configuration
222
Boosting Head Units with No Preamp Outputs and Four 
Speaker Outputs
223
Standard Configuration
223
Converter-Saving Configuration
225
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
226
Amplifier-Saving Configuration
226
Boosting Head Units with No Preamp Outputs and Two 
Speaker Outputs
226
Standard Configuration
227
Two- to Four-Speaker Upgrade Configuration
227
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
228
Amplifier-Saving Two- to Four-Speaker Upgrade Configuration
228
Boosting Premium Factory Sound System Head Units
229
Premium Factory Sound System Basics
229
Do You Need to Replace Your Factory Speakers?
230
Bypassing Factory Amps
231
Line Output Converters for Bose/Ford Premium Head Units
231
System Configurations
232
Adjusting Amp Gain Settings
235
Procedure for Two-Amp Configurations
235
Procedure for Amp-Saving Configurations
236
Eliminating Turn-On and Turn-Off Pops
237

CHAPTER 8
Equalizers and Equalizer Projects
239
To Equalize or Not?
240
How Many Bands Do You Need?
240
What About Equalizer Boosters?
242
Connecting Your Equalizer
242
How to Set Your Equalizer
243
Setting by Ear
243
Setting by RTA
245
CHAPTER 9
Biamping and Crossovers
249
Crossover Basics
250
Speaker-Level and Preamp-Level Crossovers
250
Crossover Slopes
252
Why Biamp?
254
Increased Practicality of High-Order Slopes
254
Driver Impedance Characteristic Doesn’t Affect 
Frequency Response
255
Tweeter Protection During Clipping of Bass
255
What to Look For in Equipment
256
Choosing a Crossover
256
Buying Amps for Biamping
258
Speakers
259
Biamping Head Units with Front and Rear Preamp 
Outputs
259
Separate Rear Crossover Configuration
262
Shared Crossover Configuration
262
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
262
Full-Range Rear Configuration
262
Amp-Saving Full-Range Rear Configuration
263
Biamping Head Units with One Set of Preamp Outputs
263
Separate Rear Crossover Configuration
263
Shared Crossover Configuration
266
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
266
Full-Range Rear Configuration
267
Amp-Saving Full-Range Rear Configuration
267
Adjusting Your System
268
Setting Tweeter High-Pass and Woofer Low-Pass 
Crossover Frequencies
268
Setting Woofer High-Pass Crossover Frequencies
269
Setting Woofer and Tweeter Amp Levels
269
Setting Subwoofer Crossover Frequency and Amp Level
271
xii
CONTENTS

CHAPTER 10 Changer and Player Projects
273
Adding a CD Changer to Your System
274
Head Units Without CD Changer Controls
274
Aftermarket Head Units with CD Changer Controls
276
Factory Head Units with CD Changer Controls
277
CD Changer Performance and Features
278
Adding a DVD Changer to Your System
281
System Already Has a DVD Player
282
Using a Changer as the Main DVD Player
282
DVD Changer Performance and Features
283
Adding a Digital Music Player to Your System
285
Digital Music Player Performance and Features
287
Installation
289
Choosing a Mounting Location
289
Mounting
291
Connecting
291
CHAPTER 11 Accessories
295
Power Line Capacitors
296
Should You Install a Power Line Cap?
296
Choosing the Right Cap
297
Installation
298
Battery Savers and Monitors
298
Premium Speaker Wire
300
Premium Patch Cables (Interconnects)
301
Portable Music Player Head Unit Adapters
302
Cassette Adapters
303
FM Transmitters
304
Auxiliary Input Converters
304
Antennas and Antenna Boosters
305
Embedded Windshield Antennas
306
Motorized Antennas
306
Antenna Installation
307
Antenna Boosters
308
Sound-Deadening Materials
308
CHAPTER 12 Battling Noise
311
Noise Basics
312
What Is Noise?
312
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
313
CONTENTS
xiii

Signal Level and Signal-to-Noise Ratio
313
Why High-Power Systems Are More Noise Prone
314
Differential Versus Single-Ended Signals
316
Ground Loops
317
Common Ground Impedance
318
Power Supply Noise
318
Buying Equipment
319
Head Units
319
Amplifiers
320
Crossovers and Equalizers
320
Cables
321
Line Drivers
321
Installation and Level Adjustment
322
Equipment Placement
322
Cable Routing
323
Grounding
323
Step-by-Step Level Adjustment
324
Troubleshooting Noise Problems
326
Identifying Noise Sources
327
Shorting Plugs
327
Ground Loop Isolators
328
Power Line Filters
329
Noise Sniffers
332
Copper Shielding Tape
333
Step-by-Step Troubleshooting Procedure
334
Recommended Mail-Order Suppliers
337
Recommended Reading
338
Bibliography
341
Index
345
xiv
CONTENTS

PREFACE
A lot has changed in the world of mobile entertainment in the seven
short years since the first edition of this book was published. Innovations
in mobile video, digital music players, satellite radio, HD Radio, and 5.1
channel audio have reshaped the mobile entertainment landscape. And
the performance and features of all mobile electronics have continued to
increase while prices drop.
But with all the exciting innovations, you've got more and harder deci-
sions to make. Whether you realize it or not, there's a war being waged
over the radio-sized hole in your dashboard. Automobile manufacturers
want you to buy a factory sound system and will do everything in their
power to sell you one. Face it, vehicle manufacturers have strategic advan-
tages. They can style the radio to match the dash and tailor speaker
placement and equalization to match the acoustics of each vehicle (few go
to the trouble, however). They're not above some dirty tricks either. Inte-
grating climate controls and vehicle control functions into the radio, non-
standard equipment mounting sizes, proprietary CD changer protocols
and hard-to-interface-with premium factory sound systems have made
aftermarket installation more challenging.
But the aftermarket is up to the challenge with high-performance solu-
tions to almost any problem. The aftermarket itself is far from being a
uniform front in the car stereo war, however. Numerous aftermarket com-
panies are vying for your hard-earned dollar too.
It's hard to get a straight story on what you really need to get the per-
formance you want. And the rules are constantly changing. That's where
this book comes in. It provides the right answers to the growing list of
questions—so you can win the war!
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This book would not have been possible without considerable help from
a lot of people, including my wife and family. Thanks to Judy Bass at
McGraw-Hill for her support throughout the process and to Donna Gray
for an awesome cover design. Extra thanks to Alan Hoover for his
thoughtful and painstaking review of the manuscript.
I'd also like to thank all the companies that courteously provided prod-
uct images and information for the book.
–MARK RUMREICH
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank.

INTRODUCTION
The Car Stereo Cookbook provides a comprehensive and well-organized
guide to designing, choosing, and installing car audio and video systems.
It’s geared toward the technically oriented do-it-yourselfer who is inter-
ested in mobile entertainment. It assumes some familiarity with car
stereos, but you don’t need to have a degree in electronics or have installed
equipment before.
The Cookbook Approach
Unlike other car stereo books and magazines, which describe complete
installations for specific vehicles, The Car Stereo Cookbook offers a more a la
carte approach. Chapters are organized by the type of project, such as
speaker projects or amplifier projects. Projects may be used individually
or combined to create a more advanced installation.
The Car Stereo Cookbook covers an entire spectrum of projects from sub-
woofers to mobile video and from basic to advanced. It also presents a
range of cost options. Step-by-step instructions are provided for difficult
procedures and just the right amount of explanation is given to help you
make smart choices.
Why Do It Yourself?
There are many reasons to do it yourself—saving money, making sure it
gets done right, the freedom to select exactly the products you want, and
the satisfaction of knowing that you did the job. This book will help you
meet all these goals.
How This Book Is Organized
The first two chapters provide useful preparatory information. Chapter 1,
“Before You Begin,” describes how to plan your system, from considering
upgradability, transferability, and maintaining a factory appearance to
drawing a wiring diagram. Chapter 2, “Connectors, Supplies, Tools, and
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Techniques,” covers popular methods of connecting wires, describes the
basic specialty tools useful for car stereo work, and explains how to use a
multimeter.
The heart of the book is composed of the project chapters. These cover
the following types of projects:
■Speakers and speaker projects
■Subwoofers and subwoofer projects
■Head unit projects
■Mobile video and 5.1 channel audio
■Amplifiers and amplifier projects
■Equalizers and equalizer projects
■Biamping and crossovers
■CD changer projects
■Accessories
Chapter 3, “Speakers and Speaker Projects,” starts by explaining what
good imaging is all about and how to achieve it. Projects range from
adding surface-mount tweeter modules to installing a component speaker
system.
Chapter 4, “Subwoofers and Subwoofer Projects,” is by far the largest
chapter. This is for good reason, since subwoofers play such an important
role yet are frequently misunderstood. There are clear explanations of
how to choose the right crossover, amplifier, driver, and box. For the more
adventurous, box design and construction for sealed, ported, and band-
pass boxes are covered.
Chapter 5, “Head Unit Projects,” explains what to look for in head units,
including satellite radio, HD radio, and MP3 features. It covers installation
in any type of vehicle including cars with premium factory sound sys-
tems, steering wheel controls, OnStar, and GM vehicles with the Class 2
data bus.
Chapter 6, “Mobile Video and 5.1 Channel Audio,” covers ways to add
mobile video to your car, what to look for in video equipment, and how
to choose the best monitor locations. It also includes how to put together
a 5.1 channel sound system.
Chapter 7, “Amplifiers and Amplifier Projects,” explores how much
amp power you need and how to get more power for your money. Power,
ground, and speaker wiring are covered in detail. Projects cover boosting
head units of all types and include procedures for properly setting ampli-
fier gains.
xx
INTRODUCTION

Chapter 8, “Equalizers and Equalizer Projects,” explains the differences
between graphic and parametric equalizers and how to choose the right
number of bands for your application. Installing and setting up an equal-
izer, both with and without a real-time analyzer, are explained in detail.
Chapter 9, “Biamping and Crossovers,” details the advantages of biamp-
ing, covers the basics of crossovers, and tells you what to look for in equip-
ment. Projects cover biamping with head units of all types and include
procedures for adjusting the system.
Chapter 10, “Changer and Player Projects,” explains the different meth-
ods of interfacing a CD changer, DVD changer, or digital music player to
your system as well as what to look for in a changer. Projects cover instal-
lation of changers and players with head units of all types.
Chapter 11, “Accessories,” separates science from snake oil when it
comes to power line caps, premium speaker wire, premium patch cables,
and sound-deadening mats. Battery savers, portable music player adapters,
and antennas are also discussed.
The last chapter is Chapter 12, “Battling Noise.” This chapter explains
the common causes of automotive noise problems and how to fix them
(or better yet, avoid them).
INTRODUCTION
xxi

This page intentionally left blank.

THE CAR STEREO 
COOKBOOK

This page intentionally left blank.

Before You
Begin
CHAPTER 1
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This chapter is intended to get you thinking about some of the less obvi-
ous, but still important, factors in planning your system.
Ask Yourself Some Preliminary
Questions
Here are a few questions you need to ask yourself before you start to
design your system:
■How long am I going to keep this car? Will I sell the audio and video
system with it?
■Is this a one-shot deal, or might I want to upgrade later?
■Do I want a factory look?
Transferability
It’s hard to think ahead to the time when you’ll be selling (or possibly
junking) your car. One day it will happen, and on that day you’ll either
have to remove your upgraded audio and video system (and possibly
restore the original one) or sell it with the car.
Putting in a really awesome mobile entertainment system is almost
like installing a built-in swimming pool in your backyard. It’s worth
every cent to you, but it’s hard to get your money back when it comes
time to sell. At least with an audio and video system, you can take it with
you. Unfortunately, you may leave behind gaping holes in the dash, doors,
and deck.
This implies a few things. First, don’t drill or cut any holes that you
can’t easily repair, conceal, or accept, unless you’re willing to leave what’s
in them. Cutting the dashboard should be avoided if at all possible. Sec-
ond, NEVER cut off factory wiring harness connectors. Either splice into
the wires or spend a few extra bucks and buy wiring harness adapters.
Third, try to choose equipment that is easily transferable to another vehi-
cle. This means things such as buying a subwoofer box that will fit in
your next car or truck as well as your current one.
It makes more sense to sell less dramatic upgrades with the car. Things
like upgraded speakers or a well-chosen head unit can add value to a vehi-
cle at selling time.
2
CHAPTER ONE
Elaborate systems
should be easily unin-
stallable to an accept-
able condition.

Upgradability
You should also consider what type of improvements you may make to
your system in the future. A few extra dollars now may save you hun-
dreds later, as well as considerable time. Some examples:
■Buying a head unit with two or three sets of preamp outputs will
expand your options if you later decide to add amplifiers, a sub-
woofer, or electronic crossover. If you think you might add a CD
changer or digital music player down the road, CD changer controls
are a must. Choose a head unit that’s both XM and SIRIUS ready if
you’re thinking about satellite radio.
■An amp that has speaker-level and preamp-level inputs, plenty of
power, and a flexible and high-quality built-in crossover stands a
much better chance of being useful in the next incarnation of your
system.
■If you’re planning to add a DVD head unit with built-in monitor
and are thinking about a navigation system in the future, choose a
head unit with navigation input. This will let you connect a com-
patible navigation unit and share the touch screen of your head
unit.
Factory Look
Maintaining a factory appearance is important to many people for aes-
thetic as well as theft deterrent reasons. Others prefer to showcase their
installations and protect their investment with an alarm system.
Having good sound while maintaining a factory appearance is easier
than ever before. Today’s factory head units can provide excellent perfor-
mance and can be connected to external amplifiers if you need more
power. Factory speakers can be replaced with better aftermarket drivers,
and factory-look powered subs can be added to provide a rock-solid bot-
tom end. Add-on CD changers and digital music players that will work
with any factory head unit are readily available.
Even if you decide to replace the factory head unit, aftermarket mod-
els designed to match the factory styling are available for many vehicle
makes. These offer CD changer controls and even plug into the factory
wiring harness.
For mobile video, there are monitors and DVD players with built-in
monitors designed for factory overhead console replacement. Headrest
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
3

monitors that are exact matches of factory headrests are available for some
vehicles.
Understand All Your Options
It’s easy to spend more money than you need to on a car audio or video sys-
tem. You can avoid making this mistake by understanding all your options
before you design your system. This means understanding what’s in your
car now, what products are out there, and what approaches will meet your
needs.
Understand What’s in Your Car
The first step to understand all your options is investigating the system
you have in your car now.
In some vehicles, it’s difficult or impossible to replace the factory head
unit. The vehicle manufacturer may have integrated climate controls into
the radio face, used the head unit for warning chimes and important dash-
board controls and messages, or used a proprietary system to run the
amplifiers. In most (but not all) cases, the aftermarket has developed a solu-
tion, but the installation will be more time-consuming, complex, and
expensive. So it pays to understand your factory system before you start
thinking about gear. Crutchfield can help—their sales advisors can tell you
if your vehicle requires special adapters or if an upgrade just can’t be done.
If you bought your vehicle used, you’ll need to understand any
changes made by previous owners—you may be in for a surprise (pleasant
or otherwise). A previous owner may have upgraded the speakers or
added an amp under the dash. On the other hand, maybe the wiring har-
ness was butchered or the CD player has an intermittent problem.
Spotting an aftermarket head unit or sub is easy, but looking for
speaker or amplifier upgrades may require a little digging. Take a look at
the back of a speaker in the trunk for evidence implying an upgrade of
some sort. Look at the fuse block for fuse taps—a sure sign some elec-
tronics have been added.
You may have a premium factory sound system, in which case ampli-
fied speakers are probably involved. This can be a blessing or a curse,
4
CHAPTER ONE

depending on what you want to do. See the appropriate project chapters
for more on this subject.
Familiarize Yourself with Available Products
and Approaches
The more familiar you are with what products are out there and how to
use them, the better you’ll be able to design a system that sounds great
and is affordable. Study catalogs, surf the Net, and visit your local car
stereo shop. Check out the latest products—some could be just the answer
you need. And use this book to familiarize yourself with both common
and not-so-common car stereo solutions and how to squeeze the most out
of each component you buy.
Some of the best car stereo solutions are often the ones that aren’t obvi-
ous. A few good examples:
■Using amplifier-saving configurations for boosting head units. These
can save you the cost of an amplifier with no appreciable loss in per-
formance.
■Adding surface-mount (or flush-mount) tweeters rather than upgrad-
ing front factory speakers. This can save money and provide better
high-frequency reproduction and stereo imaging.
■Adding a subwoofer to fix a system that isn’t loud enough. You’ll be
able to turn down the bass control to your main speakers and use the
subwoofer to provide a rock-solid bottom end. By transferring the
burden of bass to the subwoofer, you enable the rest of your speakers
to play louder with less distortion. This frequently eliminates the
need to boost the head unit with an amplifier.
Design Your System
Whether you’re starting from scratch or upgrading, the other chapters in
this book should give you the basic information you need to design your
system. If you’re thinking of upgrading, Table 1-1 can help point you in
the right direction.
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
5

Sketch a Block Diagram
As a part of your system design process, you should sketch a simple
block diagram of the system you intend to create. The purpose of this
diagram is to make sure you haven’t forgotten some key piece of equip-
ment (like an amplifier, or maybe a line output converter to convert
speaker-level signals to preamp level). The diagram doesn’t need to be
anything fancy. It should show each piece of equipment in the system
as well as the basic connections. Your diagram might look something
like the one in Fig. 1-1.
If you’re putting in multiple high-power amplifiers, you should include
power distribution hardware (such as fuse blocks) in your diagram.
6
CHAPTER ONE
TABLE 1-1
Upgrade Solutions
to Common
Complaints
Factor
Possible Solutions
Chapter
Not loud enough
Replace head unit with higher-power model
5
Boost head unit with external amp
7
Add a subwoofer
4
Poor treble response
Upgrade speakers
3
Add surface-mount tweeters
3
Want to play MP3s
Install a new head unit
5
Add a CD changer or digital music player
10
Use a portable music player head unit adapter
11
Weak bass
Add a subwoofer
4
Boomy/muddy bass
Add a subwoofer
4
Install an equalizer
8
Poor imaging/staging
Imaging upgrade 
3
Want satellite radio
Install a new head unit
5
Use a plug-and-play tuner
5
Want backseat video
Install an overhead or headrest DVD 
6
player/monitor
Use a portable DVD player/monitor
6

Make Your Shopping List, 
Then Buy
Once you’ve finished a simple block diagram of your system, make your
shopping list. This will reduce the chances of buying the wrong stuff and
having to return it and/or needing to make multiple trips to the store dur-
ing the middle of your installation.
Your shopping list should include everything on your block diagram,
plus tools and supplies you’ll need for the job. See Chap. 2 for advice on
specialty tools you may want to buy. Don’t forget:
■Speaker wire (not needed for most simple head unit installations)
■Power, ground, and remote turn-on wire, fuse and fuse holder (for an
outboard amp)
■Patch cords (for an outboard amp)
■Wiring harness adapter, antenna adapter (for a head unit)
■Connectors, heat-shrink tubing, and wire ties
■Solder
As you’re deciding which models of equipment to buy, visit your local
car stereo shop. They can demonstrate what specific head units, speakers,
and subwoofers actually sound like and can calibrate you on how much
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
7
FIGURE 1-1
A simple block
diagram.

power you need. Be sure to choose a shop that has a reputation for a
knowledgeable and friendly staff and that carries quality equipment.
You’ll also want to check out Crutchfield’s latest catalog and website for
the newest products and a wealth of information. Product performance
and feature charts show you what to look for and simplify the compari-
son process. Their website lets you specify your vehicle, then shows you
the equipment that will fit it. Or if you prefer, it will show you every-
thing and then tell you whether it will fit. Crutchfield maintains an
extensive database, and their well-trained staff can alert you to special
adapters and tools you’ll need for your project. They also provide detailed,
vehicle-specific MasterSheet installation instructions with any car audio
or video equipment purchase.
See the list of recommended companies at the end of the book for
other mail-order companies.
Read the Manuals and Draw a
Complete Wiring Diagram
Once you have all your equipment in hand, it’s time to read the pile of lit-
erature that came with it. As exciting as it is to dive right in and start
installing, it’s smarter to read the owner’s manuals first. You may discover
8
CHAPTER ONE
FIGURE 1-2
A more complete
wiring diagram.

a fundamental problem in your plans due to a bad assumption about a
particular piece of equipment.
After you’ve read the owner’s manuals, it’s a good idea to draw a more
complete wiring diagram for your system. If all you’re doing is upgrading
factory speakers or a simple head unit replacement with a wiring harness
adapter, then you can skip this step. If you’re doing a complex system,
then a detailed wiring diagram can go a long way toward avoiding hook-
ing things up wrong. You should show every wire with its color and func-
tion indicated. Your diagram might look like the one in Fig. 1-2.
Drawing a complete wiring diagram can be the least fun part of
preparing for your installation. But the payoff comes when you wire up
the system quickly and without errors. Another payoff comes down the
road when you need to repair the system or if you decide to upgrade.
Now you’re ready for installation!
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
9

This page intentionally left blank.

Connectors,
Supplies, Tools,
and Techniques
CHAPTER 2
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Discovering you don’t have the right tool in the middle of a job can be
frustrating. In many cases people are not aware that some of the most
useful tools even exist, and continue to “drive screws with a hammer.”
This section is intended to make you aware of the most useful of the
car stereo specialty tools and supplies. Most of the tools only cost a few
dollars, and can be used for other projects around the house. The time to
buy tools and supplies is before you start your car stereo project.
Connectors
Talking about connectors before tools may seem backward, but you
should think about connectors first since they may affect what tools you
need.
Most car stereo projects involve making lots of connections. Table 2-1
shows the four commonly used methods of making connections—sol-
dering, crimp connectors, Scotchlok™connectors, and wire nuts.
Soldering
Soldering produces the best electrical connection by far. It provides a low-
impedance, corrosion-resistant, mechanically strong connection. Unfortu-
nately, soldered connections are also the most time-consuming, both in
soldering and in insulating. And a hot soldering iron always seems to find
its way to the upholstery.
12
CHAPTER TWO
TABLE 2-1
Common Connec-
tion Methods
Method
Advantages
Disadvantages
Soldering
Best electrical connection
Time consuming, must 
insulate
Crimp 
Good electrical connection, 
Can corrode or pull apart if 
connectors
self-insulating, a type for any
improperly crimped
connection
Quick splice/
Good electrical connection, 
Can corrode, bulky, for splices 
Scotchlok
self-insulating, easiest way 
only
to make a splice
Wire nuts
No special tools needed
Easily become untwisted—
not recommended for car
stereo

The traditional way to insulate a soldered connection is with electrical
tape, but the adhesive used with most tapes gets gummy after a few years
and the tape is likely to slide off. A better solution is heat-shrink tubing.
Heat-shrink tubing must be slid onto the wire before soldering; then it is
slid over the soldered connection and heated with a butane lighter or
heat gun until it shrinks to conform to the connection.
Crimp Connectors
Crimp connectors are the most popular connectors for autosound. There
are crimp connectors available to make almost any type of connection
imaginable for any type of wire (Fig. 2-1).
Disconnectable terminals are available for ease of disassembly (for
repair, for example). To use, simply strip 1⁄4 inch of insulation from the 
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
13
Soldering Tips
Soldering requires skill and patience. To get good results, follow these tips:
■
Use only 60/40 (60 percent tin, 40 percent lead) rosin-core solder.
■
Make sure the connection to be soldered is free of dirt and corrosion.
■
Periodically “tin” the tip of the soldering iron by coating it with solder
and brushing off the excess with a cloth until it is smooth and silvery.
■
Always heat the connection, not the solder.
■
Use the side of the soldering iron tip near the point, not the point itself,
to heat the connection. This allows more heat to flow from the tip into
the connection.
■
A proper solder joint is smooth and silvery, not rough and gray. Rough
and gray joints are called cold joints because not enough heat was used to
melt the solder. Always resolder cold joints.
FIGURE 2-1
A world of crimp 
connectors: (left to
right) spade, ring,
male disconnect,
female disconnect,
bullet plug, bullet
receptacle, butt 
splice, closed end.

end of the wire, insert into the crimp terminal, and crimp with a termi-
nal crimping tool. Try to pull the wire out of the terminal to verify a
good connection.
The key to success with crimp terminals is to have the right size con-
nector for the gauge of wire. If you try to use a connector that is too large
for the wire gauge, it will not make a good connection and is likely to
slide off. Terminals are generally color coded according to the industry
standard shown in Table 2-2. If you don’t know the wire gauge, use a
crimper/stripper to figure it out by stripping some insulation, or just
choose the smallest crimp connector that fits the wire. Be sure to use the
pull test for each crimp.
A trick you can use when a wire is too small for a connector is to first
fortify the wire by twisting additional strands around it (Fig. 2-2). This is
useful for super-fine wires or for making a butt connection between two
wires of different gauges.
Quick Splice/Scotchlok Connectors
Scotchlok connectors are the best way to splice into an existing wire
without having to cut it. There are two types of Scotchlok connectors:
original and T-tap (Fig. 2-3). The original type connector opens like a
clamshell and has channels for the existing wire and the wire to be spliced
into it. The T-tap connector opens like a clamshell, has a single channel
for the existing wire, and mates with a 1⁄4-inch male disconnect terminal
for the wire to be spliced into it. It’s great for applications requiring mul-
tiple disconnects or testing. 
After the wires are put in their channels, the clamshell is closed with a
pair of pliers. Since the connector cuts into the insulation, the insulation
should not be stripped. 
This connector is often used with power and ground wires. Scotchlok
connectors can also be used to connect an aftermarket head unit to a fac-
tory wiring harness without cutting off the end of the harness. This is
14
CHAPTER TWO
TABLE 2-2
Color Code for
Crimp Connectors
Standard Crimp
Wire Gauge
Connector Color
22–18
Red
16–14
Blue
12–10
Yellow

useful if a wiring harness adapter isn’t readily available and makes it easy
if you ever decide to reinstall the factory radio.
There are two keys to success with Scotchlok connectors:
■Be sure to use the right size connector for the wire. Too large a con-
nector will result in a poor (or no) connection. Too small a connector
will cut through many of the wire strands, weakening the wire.
■Be very careful when centering all the wires within their channels in
the connector to prevent cut wires or bad connections.
Scotchlok connectors are usually color coded as shown in Table 2-3.
Most of the original type connectors specify the same wire gauge range
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
15
FIGURE 2-2
(a) Fortification
trick—before; (b) for-
tification trick—after.
(a) 
(b) 
FIGURE 2-3
Scotchlok connec-
tors: (a) Original; (b)
T-tap. (Courtesy of 3M.)
(a) 
(b) 

for both wires, but some specify one range for the run wire and another
for the tap wire. This lets you splice into a thick wire with a thin wire.
T-tap connectors automatically let you splice in any gauge wire by using
the proper gauge 1⁄4-inch male disconnect terminal.
If you’re unsure about the wire gauge or connector, compare the size
of the gap in the metal teeth of the Scotchlok connector against the
wire’s conductor diameter. The gap should be roughly one-third to one-
half the conductor diameter.
Wire Nuts
Wire nuts (Fig. 2-4) are the standard connector for home wiring, but are
not intended for car stereos. They can easily untwist and cause a short or
open circuit. This may result in damaged equipment or equipment that
simply fails to operate.
Fuse Taps
When you need a source of power for a new accessory, you can splice into
one of the existing power wires. However, a better alternative is to use a
16
CHAPTER TWO
TABLE 2-3
Color Code for
Scotchlok 
Connectors
Wire Gauge
Standard Color
22–18
Red
18–14
Blue
12–10
Yellow
FIGURE 2-4
Wire nuts.

fuse tap. Fuse taps provide an easy way to tap into an automotive fuse
block. They come in a number of styles, depending on the type of fuses
your car uses.
Taps for AGC Fuse Blocks
For AGC (glass tube) fuse holders, use AGC fuse taps (Fig. 2-5). Temporar-
ily remove an existing fuse, insert the fuse tap, then reinsert the fuse. The
fuse tap provides a 1⁄4-inch male solderless terminal for the accessory
power wire to connect to.
Taps for ATO/ATC Fuse Blocks
For ATO/ATC (blade) fuse holders, you have more styles to choose from.
The clip-style fuse tap (Fig. 2-6) is the least expensive option. You tem-
porarily remove an existing fuse, clip the tap onto the fuse, then reinsert
the fuse. The fuse tap provides a 1⁄4-inch male solderless terminal for the
accessory power wire to connect to.
The lead-wire fuse (Fig. 2-7) is actually an ATO/ATC fuse with a 7-inch
fully insulated lead wire coming out the back. One advantage of this
approach is that there is no risk of mechanically overstressing the termi-
nals in the fuse block. Another is that the lead wire can be bent fully
back, allowing the fuse box cover to fit back on. A disadvantage of this
approach is that since the fuse itself is part of the assembly, you’ll need to
buy a lead-wire fuse with the proper current rating. If the fuse ever
blows, you’ll need to replace the entire assembly and redo the accessory
connection. If you choose this approach, be sure to order a spare. Lead-
wire fuses are available from MCM Electronics.
The Add-A-Circuit™fuse holder by Littelfuse (Fig. 2-8) plugs into the fuse
block and has two fuse holder slots built in. The first slot is for the origi-
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
17
FIGURE 2-5
AGC fuse tap.
Tip: Clip-style fuse
taps that wrap around
the fuse terminal can
mechanically overstress
the terminals in the
fuse block. This can
cause nuisance blows
due to excessive heat
produced by a loose-
fitting fuse. A “through
the hole” design
(shown in Fig. 2-6)
avoids this problem.

nal circuit and the second is for the new accessory circuit. A fully insu-
lated lead wire is provided for the new accessory circuit. This ingenious
design eliminates having to install an in-line fuse holder for the accessory.
Its only drawback is its size—you may have difficulty fitting the fuse box
cover back on.
Taps for MINI Fuse Blocks
Many newer vehicles use MINI fuses in their fuse blocks. These are
miniature blade-type fuses, similar to ATO/ATC fuses, but smaller. For
this type of fuse, you can use MINI clip-style fuse taps (Fig. 2-9).
Littelfuse also makes an Add-A-Circuit fuse holder for MINI fuses.
Installation Tips
With any type of fuse tap, you’ll need to identify which side of the fac-
tory fuse is connected to the battery and which side is connected to the
18
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-6
ATO/ATC clip-style
fuse tap. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)
FIGURE 2-7
ATO/ATC lead-wire
fuse. (Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)

load. You’ll need to use a multimeter for this. Remove the factory fuse,
turn the ignition on, and connect the black lead of the multimeter to the
vehicle’s chassis ground. Touch the red test lead of the multimeter to each
of the fuse terminals. The terminal that shows approximately +12 volts is
the battery side of the fuse. The terminal that shows approximately 0 volts
is the load side.
Now you’ll need to decide whether to locate the fuse tap on the bat-
tery side or the load side of the existing fuse. For the Add-A-Circuit fuse
holder, the lead wire should be located on the load side. For the other
types of fuse taps, it’s a matter of choice. Using the battery side requires
that you add a fuse to the accessory power wire as close to the factory fuse
block as possible, for safety reasons. The advantage of this approach is that
the accessory cannot cause the factory fuse to blow and the factory cir-
cuit cannot cause the accessory fuse to blow. Locating the tap on the load
side of the factory fuse is the safest and best approach if the accessory
draws only a small amount of current (less than 1 ampere).
When adding a fuse tap, tap a fuse on a circuit labeled IGNITION if you
want accessory power only when the ignition switch is on. If you want
accessory power all the time, choose a fuse on a circuit labeled BATTERY.
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
19
FIGURE 2-8
ATO/ATC Add-A-
Circuit fuse holder.
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
FIGURE 2-9
MINI clip-style fuse
tap. (Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)

Cable Ties
Cable ties (also called wire ties or tie wraps) are so handy, they deserve
their own section. They are molded of high-tensile-strength nylon and
are used for bundling together wires and cables. The flat, flexible tail is
inserted through a ratcheting slot in the head to create a self-locking, per-
manent loop (Fig. 2-10).
Cable ties come in a variety of sizes—4 and 8 inches are the two most
popular lengths for car stereo work (Fig. 2-11). They are most commonly
white or black, but virtually every color is available, including neon colors
for the fashion-conscious installer.
Uses for cable ties include:
■Bundling wiring together for a neat installation.
■Routing wiring out of sight and out of harm’s way by cable-tying
wiring to objects along the desired path.
■Securing crossovers or small modules under the dash, inside doors, or
in the trunk.
■Marking wires—use different numbers of or different colors of cable
ties to identify identical-looking wires. You can also buy special iden-
tification cable ties with a built-in writeable tab.
Heat-Shrink Tubing
Heat-shrink tubing is the best way to insulate, moisture-proof, and color-
code electrical connections (Fig. 2-12).
Heat-shrink tubing is slid onto a wire before soldering, then it is slid
over the soldered connection and heated with a butane lighter or heat
gun until it shrinks to conform to the connection.
It’s available in almost any diameter and color, in pieces or spools. A 2:1
shrink ratio is standard (the diameter shrinks to half). A 3 : 1 shrink ratio
20
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-10
How a cable tie
works.

is slightly more expensive but will accommodate large and irregular shapes
better. Adhesive-lined heat-shrink tubing uses a special layer of thermo-
plastic adhesive that flows when heated, to provide a moisture-proof seal. 
Specialty Tools
In addition to the usual screwdrivers, wire cutters, pliers, and wrenches,
there are a number of tools worth investing in, even if you only install a
stereo once. The following tools are especially useful for working on car
stereos, although most of them are also useful for other jobs. The list in
Table 2-4 includes all my personal favorites.
A crimper/stripper (Fig. 2-13) is a necessity if you plan to use crimp
connectors. These are often packaged with an assortment of terminals,
which is a good way to start. Cheap models often do a poor job of crimping,
which can result in bad connections over time. Most crimper/strippers
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
21
FIGURE 2-11
World of cable ties.
FIGURE 2-12
Heat-shrink tubing.
(Courtesy of Parts Express.)

cover the range of 22-gauge to 10-gauge wire terminals—more than adequate
for most projects. For 8-gauge wire or lower, you’ll need to use an expensive
impact or lever-style crimper or switch to set-screw-type terminals.
A soldering iron can be purchased for as little as $5, and it will do a
fine job. More expensive irons offer features such as a built-in stand, inter-
changeable tips, and temperature control. Most soldering irons are 120-volt
models—they plug into a wall outlet (Fig. 2-14). There are two types of sol-
22
CHAPTER TWO
TABLE 2-4
Useful Tools for Car
Stereo Work
Tool
Cost
Comments
Crimper/stripper
$3–10
Must have for crimp connectors
Soldering iron
$5 and up
Must have if you plan to solder
Ratcheting offset 
$12–15
Must have for some jobs
screwdriver
Hollow-shaft nutdrivers
$10–25
Luxury
Torx (star drive) driver set
$5–20
Must have for some jobs
SnakeLight™
$20
Luxury
24-inch claw pick-up tool
$3
Very handy
Utility hacksaw
$4
Very handy
Utility knife or 
$3
Very handy
X-Acto knife
Black paint pen
$3
Great for minor chips and scratches
Window crank clip 
$4–6
Luxury
remover/installer
DIN removal tools
$0–3
Needed to remove DIN-E head units
Test CD
$10–25
Simplifies tweaking your system
Multimeter
$15 and up
Recommended

CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
23
FIGURE 2-13
Crimper/stripper.
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
FIGURE 2-14
Soldering iron—
120 volts. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)
dering irons of particular interest for car stereo work—the 12-volt iron
and the butane iron.
The 12-volt iron (Fig. 2-15) plugs into your cigarette lighter socket. It lets
you solder in your car without having to use an extension cord.
Butane soldering irons (Fig. 2-16) start at about $30. They refill using
standard butane lighter fuel. Butane models are nice because they can sol-
der where there is no power of any kind and they don’t have a cord to get
in your way. They also can be used with optional tips such as a hot knife
(for cutting plastic) and a hot blower (perfect for shrinking heat-shrink
tubing or tape). Optional tips cost about $10 each. A butane iron is really
nice if you can afford one.
A ratcheting offset screwdriver (Fig. 2-17) is often the only good way
to access screws in tight places. Dashboard work (such as installing a new
head unit) is the most common situation requiring this tool. Replacing
speakers in doors is another job that may require an offset screwdriver.
Skewdriver™and Skewdriver Jr.™offset screwdrivers perform the same
job, but with a screwdriver handle instead of a ratchet handle.
Hollow-shaft nutdrivers (Fig. 2-18) are useful for removing or installing
hex-head screws and hex nuts. The hollow shaft makes them ideal for the
shallow nuts on head unit control shafts (such as the volume control). A
socket set with a screwdriver handle adapter makes a good substitute for
most applications. Metric is standard today on new cars and equipment, but
if you’re working on older cars, you’ll want English sizes too.
Torx (star drive) screws are widely used in cars for dashboards and
speaker assemblies. They are also used for many appliances and electronic

24
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-17
Ratcheting offset
screwdriver. (Courtesy
of MCM Electronics.)
FIGURE 2-15
Soldering iron—
12 volts. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)
FIGURE 2-16
Soldering iron—
butane. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)

items, so Torx drivers are good to have around the house. Unlike with flat
or Phillips screws, you must have exactly the right size driver for the screw.
The most common sizes are T10, T15, T20, T25, T27, T30, and T40. T50 is
needed for some seat belt bolts.
To economize, you can buy a Torx key set for as little as $5. For a little
more, you can buy a set of Torx screwdrivers. Yet another option is a set
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
25
FIGURE 2-18
Hollow-shaft nut-
drivers. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)
FIGURE 2-19
Torx bit set. 
(Courtesy of DEWALT.)

of Torx bits (Fig. 2-19) that can be used in a cordless screwdriver. Most
ratcheting offset screwdrivers and Skewdrivers come with a set of small
Torx bits, so you can kill two birds with one stone by buying one of these.
The SnakeLight (Fig. 2-20) is a flexible flashlight particularly well
suited to working under dashboards. Its flexible shape lets it fit into tight
spots as well as hold itself in place. There are numerous clones available.
There are also many other specialty flashlights that have clamps, head-
straps, or magnets to give you two hands to work with. A no-hands flash-
light is handy to have around the house as well. Be sure to get something
bright—a halogen, xenon, or krypton bulb is a real plus.
A claw pick-up tool (Fig. 2-21) is indispensable for retrieving small
parts dropped inside a car door or behind the dashboard. Another great
use for this tool is in starting screws in hard-to-reach spots. It’s also very
handy for things other than car stereo work, like retrieving a key dropped
through a crack in your deck.
A utility hacksaw (Fig. 2-22) is the best tool I have found for cutting
small holes in dashboards, door panels, or rear decks. It’s slow compared to
a jigsaw, but doesn’t require a flat working surface to rest the saw on. It
also reduces the risk of damage from scratching the surrounding area.
A utility knife (Fig. 2-23) is useful for cutting and trimming wood,
plastic, and upholstery. A precision knife (Fig. 2-24) performs the same
jobs, but provides better control. A variety of blades are available for preci-
sion knives, but the standard triangular pointed blade is best for most jobs.
26
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-20
SnakeLight. (Courtesy of
Black & Decker.)

CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
27
FIGURE 2-21
24-inch claw pick-up
tool. (Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
FIGURE 2-22
Utility hacksaw. (Cour-
tesy of Stanley.)
FIGURE 2-23
Utility knife. (Courtesy
of Stanley.)
FIGURE 2-24
Precision knife. (Cour-
tesy of Stanley.)

A black paint pen (Fig. 2-25) looks like a magic marker, but it dis-
penses fast-drying black paint instead of ink. It does a great job of con-
cealing minor chips and scratches and slightly damaged painted screw
heads, inevitable during even careful installations. It’s perfect for painting
the thin metal lip visible along the edge of some DIN mounting sleeves.
Black permanent markers work in a pinch, but don’t cover evenly and, in
some light, take on a reddish cast. Once you use a paint pen, you’ll never
want to go back. Paint pens are also available in various other colors
including white, silver, and gold.
When installing door speakers in vehicles with manually operated
windows, you’ll need to remove the window crank in order to remove the
door panel. Some window cranks are held on with a screw. In GM, Ford,
and other vehicles, cranks are held in place by a C type spring clip. A piece
of bent coat hanger will do the job of removing the spring clips (just
bend a tiny hook in the end and use it to pull off the clip), or you can
carefully push it off with a flat-blade screwdriver. A window crank clip
remover/installer tool (Fig. 2-26) makes the job fast and easy, and helps
prevent damage to door panel upholstery. The opposite end of the tool
firmly holds the clip for easy installation.
DIN removal tools (Fig. 2-27) are just two U-shaped pieces of solid
wire. You’ll need them to pull a Euro DIN head unit out of a dash. These
are often included with a head unit purchase, but are also sold separately.
This is yet another tool that you can make out of bent coat hangers to
save a few bucks.
Tweaking your system for the best sound is easier with a good test CD.
There are lots of test CDs (Fig. 2-28) to choose from—which is best
depends on what your project is and whether you have a sound pressure
28
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-26
Window crank clip
remover/installer.
(Courtesy of Parts Express.)
FIGURE 2-25
Black paint pen.
(Courtesy of Sanford.)

level meter to take advantage of some of the test tones. Some test discs are
made for a specific purpose such as setting amplifier levels, “system con-
ditioning,” or preparing for auto sound competition.
A multimeter (Fig. 2-29) is the single most important piece of test equip-
ment you can own. It lets you check connections, inspect speakers, and 
verify power to equipment. Without it, tracking down problems is like
working in the dark.
A multimeter can be bought for as little as $10, a digital model for as lit-
tle as $20. I highly recommend digital. If you never make mistakes, never
have equipment problems, and always have full wiring documentation for
the vehicles you work on, then you don’t need one. Otherwise, it’s a worth-
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
29
FIGURE 2-27
DIN removal tools.
(Courtesy of Scosche.)
Recommended Test CDs
“My Disc”
From Sheffield Lab/Autosound 2000. Contains 86 tracks engineered to provide
a thorough evaluation of your audio system’s performance, the listening
environment, and your personal critical listening ability. Contains special
tracks that enable you to analyze performance with or without specialized test
equipment. There are also six complete music tracks from Sheffield. A detailed
20-page booklet takes you through each procedure track by track.
The Sheffield Lab/Coustic Test Disc
Developed to help installers, competitors, and audio enthusiasts set up and test
high-performance auto sound systems as well as home theater systems.
Appropriate for the simplest of systems and for the most sophisticated. In
addition to narration and musical excerpts, this disc provides test tones for
proper channel identification, phasing, and polarity.
Tip: If your multimeter
comes with pointed tip
probes, you might
want to replace both of
them (or just the black
one) with an alligator
clip or mini-hook-type
test clip. This solves the
frustrating problem of
only having two hands
when you’re trying to
simultaneously make
good connections with
two probes and read
the meter.

while investment. Buy a model with an audible continuity checker. Cur-
rent measurement capabilities are not required.
Using a Multimeter—Wiring Harness
Example
The basic functions of a multimeter are shown in Table 2-5.
The best way to explain how to use a multimeter is to dive right in
with an example. The following shows how to use a multimeter to figure
out a radio wiring harness in a car.
30
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-29
Digital multimeter.
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
FIGURE 2-28
Test CDs. (Courtesy of
Autosound 2000.)

Let’s say you plan to replace a factory radio with something better.
You’ve removed the factory radio, and the eight-pin connector (which
plugged into the back of the radio) looks like the one in Fig. 2-30.
Step 1: Identify the Power Wires
Turn on your meter and put it in the DC VOLTS mode. Connect the
black probe of the meter to a known good electrical ground, such as bare
metal on the body of the car or the outer sleeve of the cigarette lighter
socket.
Table 2-6 shows the three types of power wires that may be connected
to a car radio.
Some or all of these may be provided to the radio. First, we’ll look for
the BATTERY +12V. With the headlights off and the key out of the igni-
tion, probe each of the terminals inside the connector. In our example, we
find that the red wire measures approximately +12 volts.
Next, turn on the headlights and repeat the procedure. In this case, we
find that the yellow wire now measures about +12 volts. Finally, put the
key in the ignition and turn it to the ACCESSORY or IGNITION posi-
tion (you don’t need to start the car). Now the orange wire measures +12
volts too, so it must be the accessory/ignition wire.
We have identified all the power wires (Fig. 2-31), so the lights can be
turned off and the key taken out of the ignition.
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
31
TABLE 2-5
Multimeter Func-
tions and Their Uses
Function
Common Car Stereo Use
Measure DC voltage
Confirm that power is provided to a component
Measure AC voltage
—
Measure continuity
Verify a connection
Measure resistance
Check a speaker or speaker connection
Measure current
—
Tip: For most vehicles,
a wiring harness
adapter is available.
Wiring harness
adapters mate with the
existing car harness so
you don’t need to
splice into any wires.
Adapters are supplied
with a color code cross-
reference that identifies
all the wires so you
don’t need to figure
them out yourself.
FIGURE 2-30
Eight-pin factory
radio connector.
black wire
red wire
green wire
purple wire
orange wire
yellow wire
gray wire
brown wire
• •
• •
• •
• •

Step 2: Identify the Ground Wire
Put your meter in the CONTINUITY mode. This mode is often indi-
cated with a musical note symbol. If your meter doesn’t have this feature,
use the RESISTANCE mode instead. Momentarily connect the two
probes of your meter together, and you should hear a beep. If you are
using the RESISTANCE mode, you should see a meter reading very close
to 0 ohms when the two probe tips are touching. If it doesn’t read near
zero or jumps around when you move the leads, you have a bad connec-
tion.
Once again, connect the black probe of the meter to a known good
electrical ground, such as bare metal on the body of the car or the outer
sleeve of the cigarette lighter socket. Now probe each of the wires in the
connector that have not previously been identified. In our example, we
find that the black wire causes the multimeter to beep, so it must be the
ground wire (Fig. 2-32).
32
CHAPTER TWO
TABLE 2-6
Types of Power
Wires in a Radio
Harness
Name
When On
Battery
Always on
Accessory/ignition
On when engine is running (or when ignition switch is in ACC
position)
Lights
On when headlights (or dash lights) are on
FIGURE 2-31
Connector with
power wires identi-
fied.
black wire
battery +12v = red wire
green wire
purple wire
orange wire = ign/acc +12v
yellow wire = lights +12v
gray wire
brown wire
FIGURE 2-32
Connector with
power and ground
wires identified.
ground = black wire
battery +12v = red wire
green wire
purple wire
orange wire = ign/acc +12v
yellow wire = lights +12v
gray wire
brown wire 
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
Tip: Get in the habit
of shorting your test
probes together before
making a resistance
measurement to make
sure that you get a
meter reading near
zero.

Step 3: Identify the Speaker Wires
By the process of elimination, the remaining wires must be speaker wires.
Put the multimeter in the RESISTANCE mode.
It doesn’t matter which wire we start with. Connect one probe to the
green wire terminal. Now, use the other probe to search the other uniden-
tified terminals for one that gives a meter reading between 3 and 10 ohms.
In this example, we find that the purple wire gives a meter reading of
3.5 ohms. (Some meters might show 0.0035 Kohms, which is equivalent,
since 1 Kohm equals 1000 ohms.) The other terminals show infinite resis-
tance with respect to the green wire. This reveals that the green and pur-
ple wires go to the same speaker.
The only unidentified wires remaining are the gray and the brown
ones. Connecting a probe to each gives a meter reading of 3.5 ohms, con-
firming that these wires go to a second speaker.
We know that the green and purple wires go to one speaker and that
the gray and brown wires go to another. We don’t know the polarity of
the wires or which wires go to which speaker. Sometimes you can tell by
CONNECTORS, SUPPLIES, TOOLS, AND TECHNIQUES
33
What Is Ground?
Modern cars use a 12-volt DC negative ground electrical system. (When the
engine is running, this voltage can actually be as high as 14.4 volts.) This means
that the frame, chassis, and body of the car, as well as almost all the electrical
circuits in the car, are electrically connected together and to the minus terminal
of the car battery. This super-connection is referred to as electrical ground.
The advantage of having an electrical system with a common ground is a
reduction in wiring. For example, a light bulb only needs one wire rather than
two—the second terminal of the bulb is connected to the chassis of the car.
Tip: Most car speakers
are 4 ohms, but some
are 8 or even 10 ohms.
In the case of a 4-ohm
nominal speaker, 4
ohms is the impedance
for music signals. A
multimeter actually
measures DC resis-
tance, which is a lower
number, such as 3.2
ohms.
FIGURE 2-33
Speaker polarity
tester.

looking at the actual speaker connections inside the trunk or by remov-
ing a door speaker. At other times you may need to use the sophisticated
speaker polarity tester in Fig. 2-33.
This is nothing more than a flashlight battery with wires connected.
Any 1.5-volt battery will work. (Note: do not use a 9-volt battery to check
a tweeter’s polarity—the higher test voltage could destroy it.) Use tape to
hold the wires onto the battery terminals. Connect the minus wire to the
green terminal and touch the plus wire to the purple terminal. In this
case, we hear a pop coming from the left speaker. Now watch the cone of
the left speaker when you connect the battery. Does it move out or in? In
this example, it moves out—this means that the plus terminal of the bat-
tery is connected to the plus terminal of the speaker. (If it moves in, the
plus terminal of the battery is connected to the minus terminal of the
speaker.) Repeating this procedure for the gray and brown wires, we com-
plete our chart (Fig. 2-34).
34
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2-34
Connector with all
wires identified.
ground = black wire
battery +12v = red wire
left speaker - = green wire
left speaker + = purple wire
• •
• •
• •
• •
orange wire = ign/acc +12v
yellow wire = lights +12v
gray wire = right speaker -
brown wire = right speaker +

Speakers 
and Speaker
Projects
CHAPTER 3
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

With today’s factory stereos, speakers are often the weak link in system
performance. The problem may be a lack of deep bass, a lack of a crisp
high end, high distortion, or poor imaging. Adding or upgrading speak-
ers can be the key to improving your system (Table 3-1).
In many cases, it makes sense to keep some or all of the existing speak-
ers and correct their deficiencies by adding surface-mount tweeters or a
subwoofer. In other cases, replacing the existing speakers with something
better makes the most sense. For exceptional performance (and a price to
match), separates can be used.
The following sections present various speaker projects independently.
But, in many cases, information of general use may not be repeated in
each section. For example, the section on upgrading existing speakers gives
advice on choosing drivers. This advice applies just as well to other sections.
The imaging overhaul is presented first because it introduces imaging
principles used in all later sections.
Imaging and You
What Is Imaging?
The term imaging refers to how well you can “close your eyes and tell
where the sax player is standing.” In your living room, proper imaging is
easily achieved by arranging your speakers and listening chair as shown
in Fig. 3-1.
In the recording studio, music is mixed to provide proper imaging for
speakers arranged this way—in front of the listener, and forming a 60°
angle. It makes sense to optimize music for this speaker arrangement
because that’s how most people listen to it. This arrangement also makes
sense because it duplicates the listening zone of a normal live perfor-
mance (assuming you have good seats).
36
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-1
Ideal listening room
arrangement.

A typical listening arrangement for a car is shown in Fig. 3-2.
This setup has the potential to wreak havoc with imaging. For exam-
ple, the sax player who was supposed to be standing directly in front of
you might now seem to surround you. Or, if the back speakers are
louder than the front, the sax player may seem to be directly behind
you.
This leads to the key question: How much do you care about imaging?
For most people, imaging in the car is not a big concern. But for some, it
is. Achieving good imaging is not without its sacrifices, either. It puts a big
performance burden on the front speakers as primary drivers, since the
rear speakers are used only for fill.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
37
TABLE 3-1
Popular Speaker
Projects
Project
Comments
Imaging overhaul
Optimizes imaging—may require adding a sub-
woofer.
Adding surface-mount tweeters
Low-cost way to improve high-frequency response
of moderate-quality speakers.
Upgrading existing speakers
Simple and unobtrusive way to extend high-
frequency and bass response plus increase power
handling.
Installing speakers in new location
Useful when existing speaker locations are inade-
quate.
Installing separates
Provides highest sound quality, but expensive and
labor intensive.
Adding a subwoofer
Best way to achieve thunderous bass—removes bur-
den of bass from the other speakers, allowing them
to play louder and with less distortion. (See Chap. 4.)
FIGURE 3-2
Typical car arrange-
ment.

Achieving Good Imaging
For most vehicles, good imaging means sacrificing the easy bass available
from trunk-mounted main drivers. For pickup trucks and mid-engine
sports cars (where trunk-mounted speakers are not an option), this isn’t as
much of an issue. In either case, the difficulty of getting good bass out of
the front usually makes a subwoofer necessary when good imaging is the
goal. 
For the ultimate imaging performance in car audio, 5.1 channel audio
is now an option. Surround sound is already popular for home-theater
systems, and is starting to appear in factory and aftermarket car audio. A
hurdle with upgrading to 5.1 is the center channel speaker required in the
middle of the dashboard. To achieve the proper surround-sound effect, all
five primary channels (right and left front, right and left rear, and center
channel) need to be voice-matched. This means that they should all sound
the same or you’ll hear a change in sound quality as a performer moves
across the stage (or behind you). It means that the center channel speaker
should ideally be at the same height and use the same driver as the other
two front speakers. Upgrading to 5.1 requires other changes, too. See Chap-
ter 6 for more info.
For those who want to perform an imaging overhaul in a four-channel
system, here is my three-point program:
■Use the front speakers as your primary drivers. The goal here is to
provide good power handling and frequency response down to 150
Hz, where a subwoofer can take over. A crossover can be used to block
energy below 150 Hz to the primary drivers. This allows them to play
louder with less distortion. You may also decide to upgrade your
existing front speakers with drop-in replacements or even go with
separates.
■Use the rear speakers for fill. Operating rear speakers at a reduced vol-
ume level (with respect to the front speakers) actually expands the
stereo image. Rear speakers used for fill don’t need to have extended
bass, high frequency, or power handling capabilities, so don’t buy
expensive drivers for this application (you can keep the rear speakers
you have). Set the front/rear fader control to the point where you can
barely tell that the rear speakers exist.
■Add a subwoofer. A subwoofer takes over the job of providing deep
bass where the front speakers normally give out. Removing the bur-
den of bass from the front speakers allows them to play louder and
with less distortion. (Chapter 4 has details.)
38
CHAPTER THREE

In those rare cases where the front speakers provide adequate deep bass
and power handling, you can consider yourself lucky and forget about
adding a subwoofer.
Adding Surface-Mount Tweeters
Inexpensive speakers usually do a good job of reproducing mid-range,
but they generally lack good high- and low-frequency capabilities.
Adding surface-mount tweeters (Fig. 3-3) is a low-cost way to add a crisp
high end to cheap factory speakers not incorporating a tweeter. If the
sound of cymbals doesn’t shimmer, then your high end needs improve-
ment.
Choosing Tweeters
A pair of surface-mount tweeter modules can cost anywhere from $12 to
over $200. I have found that units costing as little as $20 a pair can provide
excellent performance. Follow these rules to avoid buying something
you’ll regret later:
■Buy domes, not cones.
■Do not buy piezo tweeters.
■For high-power applications, ferrofluid is recommended.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
39
FIGURE 3-3
Surface-mount
tweeters. (Courtesy of JL
Audio.)

Dome tweeters offer superior dispersion (which means they radiate well
in all directions) and high-frequency response characteristics compared to
cones. Cones are an obsolete technology for tweeters. Watch out—if it
doesn’t say it’s a dome, it’s probably a cone.
Piezo tweeters are highly efficient and do not require a crossover capac-
itor, but their advantages end there. Because of their inherently resonant
behavior, they almost always exhibit a poor frequency response. Don’t
buy them.
Ferrofluid allows better cooling of the voice coil and thus provides
greater power handling. It also smooths the frequency response some-
what. A ferrofluid-cooled model is recommended for high-power appli-
cations.
Another factor to consider is the mounting base. Some models allow
the mounting angle to be adjusted by rotating the base. This can be quite
helpful when trying to mount the tweeters so they aim toward the ears
of the listener.
Placing Tweeters
If you use rear speakers only for fill, you can add surface-mount tweeters
in the front only. If you listen to front and rear speakers at nearly equal
volume levels, you should add tweeters in the rear too. This will improve
the frequency response for backseat listeners and will avoid the problem
of “floating” stereo images in which instruments appear to move around
depending on the frequency range they are producing. For optimum
performance, tweeter modules should be mounted using the following
guidelines:
■Mount tweeters near their corresponding full-range speakers.
■Do not mount where a passenger forms an obstacle between you and
a tweeter.
■Do not mount too close to your ear (you’ll hear only that speaker).
■Mount tweeters as close to ear level as possible.
■Aim tweeters toward listeners’ ears.
■Beware of windshield reflections.
Some of these rules conflict in a normal installation, and the practical
and aesthetic aspects of mounting must be considered as well, so you
must weigh the relative importance of many factors.
40
CHAPTER THREE

Under no circumstances should a tweeter be mounted more than 6
inches from its corresponding full-range speaker. Violating this rule will
degrade imaging. Restrict tweeter placement to a 6-inch range in all direc-
tions, then consider how to best satisfy the other guidelines. Possible loca-
tions include door (Fig. 3-4), dashboard, windshield pillar, and kick panel.
Remember, you’ll need to run wires to the tweeter from the full-range
speaker, so consider ease of wiring.
Windshields can be thought of as sound mirrors for tweeters. If you
imagine your tweeter as a lightbulb, then consider what you would see in
the reflection of the windshield when sitting in the driver’s seat. The
apparent image of the tweeter is just as real and powerful as the tweeter
itself. If you can see both the lightbulb and its reflection at the same time,
you are in trouble—imaging will be smeared. The further apart the
apparent image and the actual source, the worse the smearing. If you
must mount a tweeter on the top of the dashboard, either mount it very
close to the windshield or aim it so that either the direct path or reflected
path will strongly dominate over the other.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
41
FIGURE 3-4
Door-mounted
tweeters. (Courtesy of
Crutchfield.)

Connecting Tweeters
Surface-mount tweeters should be wired as shown in Fig. 3-5.
The crossover capacitor allows only the high-frequency components of
the signal to reach the tweeter. This prevents low frequencies from caus-
ing distortion in the tweeter or burning it out. The crossover frequency
defines the dividing line between the high frequencies, which are passed
to the tweeter, and the low frequencies, which are filtered out. The capac-
itor should be the non-polarized type (also called bipolar). Table 3-2 shows
some common values of crossover frequencies and the corresponding
crossover capacitor values for 4-ohm tweeters.
If you want to calculate your own capacitor values, use this equation:
C =
where f is the crossover frequency in hertz, R is the tweeter impedance in
ohms, and C is farads.
Normally tweeter modules are provided with crossover capacitors, but
you may wish to use a different value depending on the high-frequency
performance of your existing speakers. Experiment to find the value that
sounds best, opting for the smallest capacitor value (highest crossover fre-
quency) you find acceptable.
After installing tweeter modules, you may find that they seem too
loud compared to the existing speakers. (This is because tweeters are nor-
mally more efficient than full-range speakers.) There are three ways you
can deal with this:
■Turn down the treble control on the head unit.
■Increase the crossover frequency (by reducing the capacitor value).
■Pad the tweeters using resistors.
Pads are special attenuation circuits designed to maintain the imped-
ance looking into them. In this case, the pad maintains a 4-ohm input
1

2 π fR
42
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-5
Wiring for surface-
mount tweeters.
Important: Changing
the crossover frequency
strongly affects how
much power the
tweeter must handle.
For example, lowering
the crossover frequency
from 8 to 6 kHz sub-
jects the tweeter to
roughly 40 percent
more power. Similarly,
increasing the crossover
frequency from 8 to 12
kHz subjects the
tweeter to roughly 40
percent less power.

impedance so that the crossover works as intended. The circuit for
padding tweeters is shown in Fig. 3-6. Table 3-3 shows the resistors to use
for 3- and 6-dB pads for a 4-ohm tweeter. Be sure to use power resistors, or
you will burn them out. The power ratings shown are adequate for a
high-power head unit—power ratings will need to be increased when
higher-power amplifiers are used. Mount the crossover and pad compo-
nents on a small board secured to the car. This will prevent short circuits
to ground that could blow your head unit.
Upgrading Existing Speakers
Upgrading your existing speakers is a simple and unobtrusive way to
extend high-frequency and bass response. It also lets you increase power
handling.
Choosing Speakers
The first step in upgrading is to understand what you have space for.
Drop-in replacements are made for almost any size opening, but you
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
43
TABLE 3-2
Capacitor Values for
Common Crossover
Frequencies
Crossover Frequency
Capacitor Value (4-ohm Tweeter)
6 kHz
6.8 µF
8 kHz
4.7 µF
12 kHz
3.3 µF
FIGURE 3-6
Circuit for padding
tweeters.

must know the maximum depth as well as the size of the mounting hole.
For odd-size factory holes, mounting adapter plates that permit standard
aftermarket speakers to fit are available.
Crutchfield has done a tremendous job in this department. Their cata-
log shows what size speakers (including depth) fit in each factory location
in your vehicle. They also provide installation guides that tell you how to
access and remove your existing speakers. Their product lineup includes a
wide selection of speakers.
When choosing speakers, opt for a two-way model using a dome
tweeter (Fig. 3-7). Dual-cone models can’t reproduce high frequencies, and
the extra driver in three-way models (Fig. 3-8) is more for show than per-
formance. If a speaker is to be mounted off-axis from your ears, choose a
model with a pivoting tweeter so you can aim it toward you for better
sound. Power handling and frequency response are important, but unfor-
tunately you can’t trust most published specs. Even supposedly reputable
manufacturers often make exorbitant claims about power handling and
frequency response. All other factors being equal, voice coil diameter is a
44
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-7
Kappa 62.5i two-way
speaker. (Courtesy of
Infinity.)
TABLE 3-3
Component 
Values for 
Padding Tweeters
Attenuation
Rs (4-ohm Tweeter)
Rp (4-ohm Tweeter)
3 dB
1 ohm
10 ohms
2 watts
2 watts
6 dB
2 ohms
4 ohms
5 watts
2 watts

good indicator of power handling. A typical 1-inch voice coil can be
expected to handle about 35 watts, and a 2-inch voice coil about 125 watts.
For frequency response, there’s something to be said for listening to
speakers in a showroom.
Sensitivity is a term for how loud a speaker will play with 1 watt of
power. This is important if you are using a normal or high-powered head
unit, but not so important if you are using separate power amps capable
of higher output power. A decibel or two of difference doesn’t matter, but
more than that should be weighed in your purchase decision.
Cone material and surround material (Table 3-4) are important in the
harsh automotive environment, but it’s hard to wade through the hype.
Polypropylene cones are extremely resistant to environmental deteriora-
tion and are unaffected by humidity. But poly cones are a temperature-
sensitive plastic, and become soft in the heat, and hard when cold, affecting
their sound. Paper-based cones absorb moisture, so humidity affects their
sound. Coatings can be used to improve the resistance to humidity and
sunlight, and reinforcement additives such as Kevlar, glass, mica, or ceramic
can be used to improve the sonic performance of paper-based cones. Yet
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
45
FIGURE 3-8
Kappa 63.5i three-
way speaker. (Courtesy
of Infinity.)
TABLE 3-4
Common Speaker
Surround Materials
Surround Material
Comments
Foam
Deteriorates with sunlight and time
Butyl rubber
Good choice

another option is fiber cones made from woven or nonwoven Kevlar or
carbon (graphite) fibers. The problem with pure Kevlar is that it’s so light-
weight and rigid, it tends to ring like a bell. Materials such as Tri-Laminate,
resin laminate, carbon-blended poly, kapok, poly-graphite, graphite-quartz,
Foam-Infused IMPP, titanium composite, ceramic metal matrix, Duralam,
and mica-injected polypropylene offer the promise of superior perfor-
mance. Most of these are variants of polypropylene and paper-based cones,
and may provide a performance advantage. What they mainly provide is a
marketing advantage.
The surround is the soft ring around the outside of the cone with the
bulge in it. Choose rubber (Table 3-4) if this driver will be exposed to the
sun (for example, if you’re mounting it on the top of the dashboard or on
the rear deck).
Strive for the most bass possible in front. It will prevent the undesirable
effect of all the bass coming from behind you. The keys to good bass in
the front (or anywhere, for that matter) are a good driver and a good enclo-
sure. Creating good bass means moving lots of air, so cone area is impor-
tant too. Choose the largest driver that will fit in a hole. You can buy
adapters that let you mount a larger driver in a hole (Fig. 3-9): for example,
a 6 × 9 driver in a 4 × 10 hole. Depth extender rings that let you install
deep speakers in shallow compartments such as kick panels or doors are
also available (Fig. 3-10).
Making the Best of the Existing Enclosure
The enclosure will strongly affect your sound quality, especially the bass
and mid-range. To a large extent, you are stuck with whatever the car has
to offer. Ideally, the enclosure is large, sealed, and nonresonant.
In the case of replacing door speakers, doors are usually large and
somewhat sealed, but they are typically resonant. You can reduce the res-
onance problem by using foam baffles (Fig. 3-11). These are soft foam cups
46
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-9
6 × 9 adapters. 
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)

installed behind the drivers. Foam baffles have the added benefit of
reducing road noise (which can pass right through the speaker cone) as
well as protecting the back of your speaker against water and dirt that
may sometimes find their way inside your door. Applying Dynamat or
other sound-deadening material is another effective way to improve the
sound of door speakers by reducing unwanted door panel vibrations and
road noise.
In the case of replacing dash-mounted speakers, the enclosure is an
open-backed cabinet. Open-backed cabinets allow the sound from the
back of the speaker to be heard—in this case, from under the dashboard.
This causes frequency response ripples (peaks and valleys) in the mid-
range and cancellation of deep bass. The closer the speaker is to the bot-
tom of the dashboard, the worse the problem is.
Some improvement can be made in the case of frequency response rip-
ples by installing a cardboard box stuffed with damping material (such as
fiberglass or polyester batting) behind the driver (see Fig. 3-12). You may be
able to use the flaps of the box as a mounting flange; otherwise you must
devise your own method of securing the box. It’s not important that the
box make a tight seal against the dashboard, but it should be secure
enough not to rattle or vibrate.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
47
FIGURE 3-10
Depth extender
rings. (Courtesy of Parts
Express.)
FIGURE 3-11
Foam baffles. (Cour-
tesy of MCM Electronics.)

In cases where dash speakers are mounted near the bottom of the dash,
it may be best to consider an alternate location.
Installing Speakers in a New Location
Installing speakers in a new location is necessary when existing speaker
locations are inadequate. Existing locations may be inadequate for reasons
of imaging, inability to accommodate drivers of the desired size, or enclo-
sure volume. This is often the case for front factory speaker openings.
One important rule when adding speakers is that more isn’t better. This
refers to the number of speakers covering a particular frequency range.
For example, you don’t want to have a full-range driver in the kick panel
and also on the top of the dashboard. Even with good-quality drivers, you
should not try to create a wall of sound. Not only will it degrade your
imaging, it will create a frequency response with lots of peaks and valleys.
(This is because the two drivers have a slightly different time delay to reach
your ear, and this produces an interference pattern that cancels some fre-
quencies and reinforces others.) If you need increased power handling,
choose a speaker that can provide it rather than using multiple drivers.
The one exception to the “more isn’t better” rule is subwoofers. The
wavelengths at deep bass frequencies are long compared to the distances
between drivers, so interference patterns aren’t a problem.
Choosing a Location
There are two main factors for deciding where to put speakers for the
best sound: imaging and enclosure. Imaging depends on where the speak-
ers are with respect to your ears. For best imaging, you want to minimize
48
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-12
Box with damping
material behind the
driver.

the path length difference between your ears and the speakers (Fig. 3-13).
Imaging also involves things like reflections off the windshield or
obstructions, such as passengers. Enclosure is the space that the back 
of the speaker radiates into—ideally it’s large, sealed, and nonresonant.
Table 3-5 shows common mounting locations for front speakers and their
imaging and enclosure traits.
The front edge of the front doors is a popular location for front speak-
ers because of the ease of installation. It provides a good enclosure but is
a non-ideal imaging location because of the typically large path length
difference. Placing the speakers toward the center or rear of the front
doors makes imaging even worse. It causes each listener to hear mainly
one speaker and shifts the image too far back. In some cases, it may cause
a passenger to block a speaker entirely. If you choose door-mounting
speakers, use foam baffles behind the speakers to reduce resonance prob-
lems and road noise as well as protect the back of your speakers against
water and dirt.
Kick panels (the side panels, under the dash) are one of the best loca-
tions for imaging because the path length difference is usually small.
Speakers here should be aimed toward the listener for good results. The
small enclosure volume usually strongly limits the bass response. This
means you will either need to use back speakers to provide deep bass or
add a subwoofer.
The dashboard can provide reasonable imaging from a path length dif-
ference standpoint, but the top dashboard location suffers from windshield
reflections that degrade imaging and frequency response smoothness.
Another problem with the dashboard is that it’s a poor enclosure–an
open-backed cabinet. This allows the sound from the back of the speaker
to be heard through the bottom of the dashboard. The combined sound
from the front of the speaker and under the dash results in a frequency
response with ripples in the mid-range and deep bass cancellation. The
cardboard box with damping material, explained previously, helps with
mid-range smoothness. Because of the limited bass response, you will
either need to use back speakers to provide deep bass or add a subwoofer.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
49
FIGURE 3-13
Path length differ-
ences for front
speaker locations.

The best location for rear speakers should be determined by enclosure
rather than imaging concerns. This is because in most installations the
rear speakers provide the deep bass for the entire system. You should
choose whatever location provides the biggest and best sealed box. If you
have a trunk, use it!
Center Channel Speakers
For 5.1 channel audio, you’ll need a center channel speaker. This is in addi-
tion to the right and left front, right and left rear, and subwoofer speak-
ers. Ideally, the center channel speaker should be at the same height and
should have the same frequency response as the front speakers. 
Unfortunately, most cars don’t provide a factory speaker hole in this
location, and dashboard real estate is tight. Trying to install a speaker in
a dashboard without a factory hole is a difficult project, especially if you
want it to look and sound good. In addition to the challenge of mount-
ing a center channel speaker, most amplifiers lack the fifth channel
needed to drive it.
Fortunately, there are some clever products to help you solve this prob-
lem. Clarion offers a 1/2 DIN (1-inch tall) center channel speaker with
amplifier (Fig. 3-14). This mounts in your dash just like any other 1/2 DIN
50
CHAPTER THREE
TABLE 3-5
Common Front
Speaker Locations
Front Speaker Location
Comments
Front door—front
Good enclosure but non-ideal imaging loca-
tion
Front door—center or rear
Good enclosure but very poor imaging loca-
tion
Kick panel
Good imaging location (must aim toward
ears) 
Small enclosure makes bass below 150 Hz
difficult
Dashboard—top
Windshield reflections degrade imaging. 
Open-back enclosure produces mid-range
frequency response ripples and makes bass
below 100 Hz difficult
Dashboard—front or bottom
Open-back enclosure produces strong mid-
range frequency response ripples and makes
bass below 200 Hz difficult

accessory. The SRK5 has five 3⁄4-inch full-range speakers in a sealed enclo-
sure and two 1-inch mid-bass reinforcement speakers ported to the front
of the enclosure. It comes with a 25 watt amplifier. The amp has an inter-
nal 200 Hz crossover to prevent overdriving the speaker with deep bass.
Alpine offers another option (Fig. 3-15). The SBS-0715 is a dash-mount
center channel speaker. It uses a 2.75-inch full-range speaker and comes
with a 20 watt amplifier.
Installing a Door Speaker
The first step in installing a new speaker in a door is removing the door
panel. Start by removing the window crank handle (Fig. 3-16). Some han-
dles are held on with a screw, which is sometimes hidden by a snap-on
cap. Most are held in place by a spring clip. To remove the clip, you can use
a window crank clip removing tool or a piece of coat hanger with a tiny
hook bent into the end. Depress the surrounding panel, look behind the
window crank handle, and rotate the handle until you see the spring clip.
Then gently push it off with the window crank clip removing tool or
pull it off with the hook.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
51
FIGURE 3-14
Clarion SRK5 
1/2 DIN center 
channel speaker.
(Courtesy of Clarion.)
FIGURE 3-15
Alpine SBS-0715
dash-mount center
channel speaker.
(Courtesy of Alpine
Electronics, Inc.) 

NOTE
To reinstall the handle later, first snap the spring clip onto the handle,
then push the handle back onto its shaft until it locks into place.
After removing the window crank handle, remove the armrest (usually
secured with a few Phillips-head screws) and any trim around the door
handle. The only thing holding the door panel on now should be a half
dozen friction fittings and possibly a few more screws.
With all the screws removed, start at a bottom corner and pull the
panel straight out. Use a large flathead screwdriver to help pry it off. If a
friction fitting breaks, you can get replacements from an auto parts store.
Once the corner is loose, work across the bottom and up both sides, being
careful not to use too much force. With the bottom and sides loose, the
panel should now be hanging by some trim that sticks down into the
window well. Lift straight up and it should come free.
Cutting the Hole
Once you’ve decided on the general location for the new speakers, get out
the template that comes with them. You’ll find it along with the instruc-
tions or printed on the box. Place the template over the area you’ve
selected and make note of any possible obstructions or problems such as
an irregular mounting surface.
Check what’s behind the surface you’re about to cut. Make sure no
internal mechanisms will be affected. Be especially careful to check that
the speaker will not interfere with the window and window crank mech-
anisms. Check the clearance with the window rolled down. If it’s close,
52
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-16
Removing a window
crank. (Courtesy of
Crutchfield.)

try rolling the window up and down before doing anything permanent.
Also try closing the door—the mechanism that holds the door open can
sometimes intrude into the speaker mounting cavity as the door closes.
The risk of clearance problems is smaller when enlarging a factory loca-
tion for a speaker than when creating a new opening.
Keeping in mind the general area you’ve selected for the speaker, check
the door to see how much, if any, metal you’ll need to cut. Very few doors
are solid sheets of metal—there are usually several holes. Double-check
the depth available in the door for mounting your speaker. If you think
the measurement is too close, you may be able to use a spacer ring.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
53
FIGURE 3-17
Cutting a door hole
with a jigsaw. (Courtesy
of Crutchfield.)
Metal Cutting Tips
Here are some techniques that will help you make cleaner cuts and avoid
damaging your car:
■
Instead of trying to cut through the door’s hardboard panel and sheet
metal at the same time, remove and cut the hardboard panel with an 
X-Acto or utility knife. Then cut the corresponding sheet metal with a jig-
saw equipped with a metal cutting blade. If you try to cut both layers at
once, you may rip the panel covering.
■
Make sure the blade of the jigsaw (in its most extended position) doesn’t
reach through the surface you’re cutting to the exterior sheet metal of the
car. If it does, it will peck numerous dents very quickly! Similarly, make
sure the window is rolled up and there are no other obstructions the saw
blade can reach.
■
If you’re cutting metal that will not be concealed behind a door panel,
wrap the base of the saw with electrical tape to prevent marring.
■
When using a jigsaw or any other power tool, always wear safety glasses or
goggles (Fig. 3-17).

Locate this same position on the back of the door panel. Tape the sup-
plied template on the exact spot and trace the inside edge with a pen. Lay
the panel flat on a clean surface and cut out the circle with a sharp X-Acto
or utility knife. Be patient. A dull blade or too much haste here might rip
the fabric. Repeat the procedure for the other door, making sure to cut in
the same place. You can hold the cut door panel against the uncut one and
trace the hole with a pen to guarantee they will be the same.
Frequently the speaker location will partially overlap an existing hole,
which can be easily enlarged. If the amount of cutting involved is small,
a utility hacksaw can be used. If there is no hole to start with, use a drill
to make a pilot hole for the jigsaw blade.
After the hole is cut, but before the speaker is installed, vacuum out all
the metal particles and other debris. Particles can get into a speaker and
cause buzzing.
If you’re going to apply Dynamat or other sound-deadening material,
now is the time. You’ll first need to clean the surface with solvent to
ensure a permanent bond with the adhesive-backed sheets. Using a utility
knife or scissors, cut the sheet to the desired shape and size. You may find
a cardboard or paper template helpful. Remove the backing from the sheet
and apply the material to the prepared surface. On large surfaces, remove
the backing in sections, working your way down and across the panel.
Using a roller tool (Fig. 3-18) to work the material into the contours of the
54
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-18
Installing sound-
deadening material.
(Courtesy of Dynamic
Control.)

metal panel helps improve adhesion and damping performance. Use a util-
ity knife to poke holes into any air pockets that may have formed, then roll
them out.
Wiring It Up
Before replacing the door panel, don’t forget to run the speaker wire. It
will have to exit the body of the car in the doorjamb and enter the door
as close to that spot as possible. Often there are precut holes (with plugs in
them) that will work out nicely. To run your wires from the door into the
car body, try to use the factory rubber tubing between the door and the
door jamb. If the tube is not present on your car, it may be available from
a junkyard. If a factory boot or plugs are not present, you’ll need to drill
3⁄8-inch holes to run the wiring. Before you drill a hole in the door, make
sure it will provide access to the speaker location. Sometimes structural
steel isolates the front edge of the door. It may still be possible to route
this way, but check first.
Protect the wiring from the sharp edges of the holes by using rubber
grommets in the holes or flexible tubing run between the two holes. This
will keep the insulation from being cut after countless openings and clos-
ings of the door. Make sure the wire can’t get pinched by the hinge or
some other portion of the door jamb. Remember to leave enough slack in
the wire to accommodate the door opening all the way.
Once you’ve finished pulling the speaker wire through the holes, pull
the end through the speaker hole you’ve cut in the door panel and hang
the panel from the top (hooked into the window well). If you accidentally
broke a strategically located (like a corner) friction fitting when removing
the panel, replace it with either a new one, or in a pinch, one taken from
the middle of the panel along the bottom.
If your new speaker is designed to be top mounted, you can replace
the door panel now. A foam baffle should be installed between the door
and the door panel. When the door panel is properly positioned, push the
friction fittings back into their seats and replace enough of the screws,
armrest, etc. to hold the panel loosely in place. Do not reattach the win-
dow crank yet, since you may have to remove the panel again.
Hold the speaker in its new home, mark the screw holes, and remove
the speaker. Drill the holes. Connect the speaker wires to the speaker,
observing the proper polarity. The positive terminal is usually marked
with a + or a colored dot.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
55

When supplied, use speed clips (Fig. 3-20) over the new screw holes.
They give the screws something extra to hold on to, providing extra sup-
port when the door is slammed. Once the speaker is installed, put the
grille on immediately to prevent damage to the speaker while you do
other work.
56
CHAPTER THREE
Speaker Polarity Tip
It is important to observe the correct speaker polarity when connecting
speaker wires. If you attach a set of wires to the terminals of one speaker
backward, that speaker will be out of phase and your bass performance will
suffer as a result.
NOTE
If EVERY speaker in the vehicle is wired backward, no
problems will result, but it is best to wire them properly to make
sure future repairs or speaker additions won’t inadvertently cause a
phasing problem.
If the positive terminal of a speaker isn’t marked, use the speaker polarity
tester in Fig. 3-19.
This is nothing more than a flashlight battery with wires connected. Any
1.5-volt battery will work. (Note: Do not use a 9-volt battery to check a tweeter’s
polarity—it could destroy the tweeter.) Use tape to hold the wires onto the
battery terminals.
Connect the minus wire to one speaker terminal and touch the plus wire
to the other speaker terminal. Watch the speaker cone when you connect the
battery. Does it move out or in? If it moves out, then the plus terminal of the
battery is connected to the plus terminal of the speaker. (Otherwise, the plus
terminal of the battery is connected to the minus terminal of the speaker.)
Mark the plus terminal accordingly.
FIGURE 3-19
Speaker polarity
tester.

Installing Separates
Separates (also called component speakers) are individually installed
woofers and tweeters (Fig. 3-21). (This is instead of having the tweeter
mounted in front of the woofer, as is the case with coaxial speakers.) Nor-
mally, separates are sold as matched sets, including woofer, tweeter, and
crossover.
The advantages of separates are the quality of the components—espe-
cially the crossover—and the flexibility of mounting. The disadvantages
are the high cost and the additional installation work.
The quality of component woofers and tweeters is usually superior to
that of coaxial speakers, for marketing rather than technical reasons. In
other words, there’s no reason why component drivers should inherently
be any better than those used in a coaxial speaker, other than that this
market niche demands it. So don’t rush out and buy some amazingly
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
57
FIGURE 3-20
Speed clip.
FIGURE 3-21
Separates. (Courtesy of
JL Audio.)

low-priced component system assuming you’re getting more than you
paid for.
The crossover splits the music signal into low frequencies (bass), which go
to the woofer, and high frequencies (treble), which go to the tweeter. In a typ-
ical coaxial speaker, a simple capacitor is used to prevent bass from going to
the tweeter and nothing is used to prevent high frequencies from going to
the woofer. This approach is inexpensive and small enough to fit conve-
niently on the basket assembly of the speaker. Unfortunately its perfor-
mance is marginal. The crossover module provided with component
systems does not have the same size limitation, and because of the market-
ing niche, some money can be spent on a real crossover. Component
crossovers provide filtering for both the woofer and tweeter and are often 12
dB/octave (as opposed to 6 dB/octave for a simple capacitor). The difference
can be quite audible, particularly in mid-range smoothness and lower dis-
tortion.
Having a separate tweeter provides flexibility of mounting in the sense
that you can now mount the woofer in a spot that would be unacceptable for
tweeter orientation in a coaxial speaker. Also, you can mount the tweeter in a
spot where a woofer wouldn’t fit. For example, you could mount a woofer on
the bottom front corner of the kick panel, facing the opposite woofer, and a
tweeter on the top rear corner of the kick panel, facing the listeners.
Follow the guidelines in the “Adding Surface-Mount Tweeters” section
earlier in this chapter for where to mount tweeters. Remember, a tweeter
58
CHAPTER THREE
FIGURE 3-22
Q-Forms kick panel
pods—(a) before; (b)
after. (Courtesy of 
Q-Logic.)
(a)
(b)

should not be mounted more than 6 inches from its woofer. Violating this
rule will degrade imaging. Restrict tweeter placement to a 6-inch range in all
directions, then consider how to best satisfy the other mounting guidelines.
Separates are most advantageous in front, where mid-range perfor-
mance is most critical and mounting flexibility is more likely to provide
a benefit. You may choose to use separates in front and coaxial speakers
in the rear to save money without sacrificing top-notch performance.
If you plan to use separates in the front, consider the kick panel pods
by Q-Forms (Fig. 3-22). These custom-molded pods are available for many
popular vehicles and accommodate a 51⁄4-inch woofer plus a separate
tweeter. The pods aim the speakers toward the listener for good imaging,
increase the size of the enclosure to improve bass response, and maintain
a factory appearance. They are available from Crutchfield and are priced
at about $150 a pair.
SPEAKERS AND SPEAKER PROJECTS
59

This page intentionally left blank.

Subwoofers
and Subwoofer
Projects
CHAPTER 4
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This chapter is by far the largest in the book. There are two good reasons
for this. First, subwoofers (“subs”) are one of the most important compo-
nents in a high-quality auto sound system. Second, there are a tremen-
dous number of options you must choose from every step of the way.
A subwoofer not only gives you a rock-solid bottom end, it lets you
play your other speakers louder with less distortion by diverting the bur-
den of deep bass to the subwoofer. A subwoofer is almost a necessity if
you use the front speakers for imaging and the rear speakers for fill,
because of the difficulty in getting decent bass from the front.
Because subs are so important, manufacturers offer a staggering array
of products to support a vast number of approaches. You must choose
between everything from powered subs with built-in crossovers to sepa-
rates, and every combination in between. You can design and build your
own box, choose a pre-made one and install your own driver, or buy a
ready-made system. There are sealed, ported, bandpass, and other types of
enclosures to choose from.
This chapter will cut through the hype and give you the know-how to
choose and use the right components, whether you want to buy or build.
System Configuration Options
There are six basic configurations for adding a subwoofer system (Table 
4-1). The first two use speaker-level crossovers, the rest use preamp-level
crossovers.
Speaker-level crossovers are used between the amplifiers and speakers
and are passive (requiring no power). Preamp-level crossovers are used
before the amplifiers and are generally active (requiring power). It’s com-
mon to see the terms passive and speaker-level used synonymously in
advertising, but preamp-level crossovers can be passive too.
The preamp-level crossover configurations vary only in how they
repackage the three basic building blocks of a subwoofer system: crossover,
amp, and subwoofer. Separates provide the greatest flexibility; amplified
subs with built-in crossovers provide the most convenience. Other options
fall in between.
The secret to good subwoofer performance is in the crossover. Regard-
less of which approach you choose, make sure you satisfy the require-
ments for a good crossover. This is explained in detail in the sec-
tion entitled “What to Look For in a Subwoofer Crossover,” later in this 
chapter.
62
CHAPTER FOUR

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
63
TABLE 4-1
Configurations 
for Adding a 
Subwoofer
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Conventional 
Lets you use a single amp to 
speaker-level 
drive a dual voice coil subwoofer
crossover, sub
and boost a pair of speakers.
Subwoofer level and crossover
frequency are not adjustable.
Typical 12-dB/octave sub slope is
inadequate for most applications.
Not recommended.
Tri-way crossover, sub
Lets you use a single tri-way-
capable amp to drive a sub-
woofer and boost a pair of
speakers.
Subwoofer level and crossover
frequency are not adjustable.
Typical 12-dB/octave sub slope is
inadequate for most applications.
Not recommended.
Separates: crossover, 
Offers the most flexibility and
amp, sub
best performance.
(Amp has no built-in crossover
or one considered inadequate.)
Amp with built-in 
Can save the cost of a separate
crossover, sub
subwoofer crossover.
Built-in crossover may be inade-
quate.
Separate crossover, 
Offers potential cost savings and
amplified sub
convenience by combining a
subwoofer with a matching amp.
(Amplified subwoofer has no
built-in crossover or one consid-
ered inadequate.)
Amplified sub with 
The ultimate in convenience.
built-in crossover
Built-in crossover may be inade-
quate.

Conventional Speaker-Level Crossover,
Subwoofer
A conventional speaker-level crossover connects between any power amp
and your speakers. It’s a high-power device that generally provides a 6-dB/
octave high-pass filter to a pair of main speakers and a 12-dB/octave 
low-pass filter to a dual voice coil subwoofer (or a pair of regular sub-
woofers).
This approach lets you use a single amp (rather than two) to both drive
a subwoofer and boost a pair of speakers. This would seem to provide a
substantial cost savings, but for the same amount of total power, this is
not usually the case. For example, the cost of a single 100W × 2 amp for a
speaker-level crossover setup is comparable to the cost of two 50W × 2
amps for a preamp-level crossover approach.
In addition, there are a number of performance limitations involved
with using a speaker-level crossover. Because a single amp is shared by all
drivers, the tweeters are unprotected against clipping of deep bass to the
subwoofer (explained in detail in Chap. 9). Unlike most preamp-level
crossovers, speaker-level crossovers have fixed crossover frequencies and
cannot be adjusted to optimize your system. Furthermore, the subwoofer
level is not adjustable with respect to the main speakers with a speaker-
level crossover.
Finally, the 12-dB/octave subwoofer slope usually found in this type of
crossover is generally inadequate. This is because a 12-dB/octave slope
allows mid-bass to be heard, which lets you hear where the sub is located.
This degrades imaging. You can fix this deficiency by using an 18- or 
24-dB/octave slope, but this generally requires you to design and build
your own crossover using coils and capacitors. A 12-dB/octave slope can
be acceptable with bandpass subwoofers because of their inherently
reduced high-frequency output.
For these reasons, conventional speaker-level crossovers are not recom-
mended for subwoofers.
Tri-Way Crossover, Subwoofer
A tri-way (or tri-mode) crossover connects between a tri-way-capable amp
and your speakers. It’s a high-power, passive device that generally provides
a 6-dB/octave high-pass filter to a pair of main speakers and a 12-dB/octave
low-pass filter to a single subwoofer.
64
CHAPTER FOUR

This approach lets you use a single amp (rather than two) to both drive
a subwoofer and boost a pair of speakers. This would seem to provide a
substantial cost savings, but for the same amount of total power, this is
not usually the case. For example, the cost of a single 100W × 2 amp for a
tri-way setup is comparable to the cost of two 50W × 2 amps for a preamp-
level crossover approach.
In addition, there are a number of performance limitations involved
with using a tri-way crossover. Because a single amp is shared by all driv-
ers, the tweeters are unprotected against clipping of deep bass to the sub-
woofer (explained in detail in Chap. 9). Unlike most preamp-level
crossovers, tri-way crossovers have fixed crossover frequencies and cannot
be adjusted to optimize your system. The subwoofer level is not
adjustable with respect to the main speakers in a tri-way setup. Finally,
the 12-dB/octave subwoofer slope found in this type of crossover is gen-
erally inadequate. This is because a 12-dB/octave slope allows mid-bass to
be heard, which lets you hear where the sub is located. This degrades
imaging.
For these reasons, tri-way crossovers are not recommended.
Separates
Using a separate crossover, amp, and subwoofer offers you the most flexi-
bility and the best performance of any of the configurations. You can
choose whatever power level you need in an amplifier and pick a sub-
woofer that is a perfect fit for your vehicle. Most importantly, you can
select a subwoofer crossover that provides a steep slope as well as impor-
tant features usually found only in separate crossovers.
The amplifier in this configuration either has no built-in crossover or
has one that is considered inadequate. You may be able to take advantage
of an inadequate built-in crossover to reduce the requirements for a sepa-
rate crossover. See the box to learn how.
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
65
Using a Built-In Crossover Together with a Separate Crossover
If you’ve got an inadequate built-in crossover, you have two choices:
■
Bypass the built-in crossover and use a good separate crossover.
■
Use the built-in crossover together with a separate crossover.
An inadequate built-in subwoofer crossover can be defeated by choosing
the bypass setting. (If there is no bypass setting, setting the built-in crossover

66
CHAPTER FOUR
to the highest cutoff frequency will usually allow the separate crossover to
dominate.) Since the separate crossover will now be doing all the work, you will
need to choose a model that meets all your needs. The advantage of this
approach is that you then have a single set of controls to deal with, and what
you see with them is what you get.
Alternately, you can use the built-in crossover to effectively increase the
performance of the separate crossover. This reduces the requirements for the
separate crossover and can save money. For example, each crossover by itself
might have a 12-dB/octave slope. Using the two together, you can achieve a 
24-dB/octave slope (the slopes of two cascaded filters add).
Table 4-2 shows an example of how this works. Suppose both your crossovers
are 12 dB/octave and have 80/120-Hz cutoff frequency selection switches. The
possible crossover setting combinations and their combined responses are
shown in Table 4-2.
There are two important things to notice in this table. First, you now have
more cutoff frequencies available than either individual crossover provides. This
gives you finer control (unless one of the crossovers was already continuously
variable).
Second, the crossover frequencies shift to lower values when you combine
two crossovers—about 20 percent below the nominally selected frequencies in
this case. (This makes sense if you think about it: The two 80-Hz filters were
each 3 dB down at 80 Hz, so the combination is 6 dB down at 80 Hz. The 3-dB
down frequency of the combined response must be a lower frequency.) This
could be good news or bad news depending on the frequency you want and
the available frequencies.
Important: For best results with this approach, try to set both cutoff
frequencies the same. This will give you the sharpest filter characteristic near
the cutoff frequency.
Filter slopes aren’t the only things that can benefit from this tactic. Features
such as subsonic filters, polarity switches, and 45-Hz bass boost might be
included in one crossover, but not the other.
TABLE 4-2
Combined Cutoff Frequency of Cascaded Crossovers
Separate Crossover
Built-In Crossover
Combined
Setting
Setting
Filter Response
(12 dB/octave)
(12 dB/octave)
(24 dB/octave)
80 Hz
80 Hz
65 Hz
80 Hz
120 Hz
74 Hz
120 Hz
80 Hz
74 Hz
120 Hz
120 Hz
97 Hz

Amp with Built-In Crossover, Subwoofer
Most of today’s amps include a built-in low-pass crossover. This can be a
great way to save the cost of a separate subwoofer crossover, but you need
to make sure the built-in crossover meets your needs. (If it doesn’t, con-
sider the previous configuration and see the preceding box.)
Many built-in crossovers use shallow 6- or 12-dB/octave slopes. This
may be acceptable if you plan to use a bandpass subwoofer (because of
their inherently reduced high-frequency output), but shoot for 18 or 
24 dB/octave otherwise. Similarly, many built-in crossovers offer only a
single fixed cutoff frequency. This limits your ability to seamlessly inte-
grate a subwoofer into your system. Few models offer subsonic filtering.
Amplifiers with capable built-in crossovers do exist. Alpine’s MRP-
M350 Class D mono sub amp (Fig. 4-1) provides a 24-dB/octave subwoofer
crossover that’s continuously variable from 50 to 200 Hz. It has a 15 Hz
subsonic filter, adjustable bass boost, and both speaker and preamp-level
inputs. Since it’s Class D, its higher efficiency produces less heat and can
save you money in power wiring, too.
Separate Crossover, Amplified Subwoofer
This approach uses a separate crossover in conjunction with an amplified
subwoofer. The amplified subwoofer either has no built-in crossover or
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
67
FIGURE 4-1
Alpine MRP-M350
amplifier. (Courtesy of
Alpine Electronics, Inc.)

has one that is considered inadequate. Either way, this approach offers
potential cost savings and convenience by combining a subwoofer with a
matching amp. Using a separate crossover guarantees you can obtain the
performance and features you need in a crossover without severely limit-
ing your choice of amplified subs.
Amplified subs without built-in subwoofer crossovers are becoming
rare as manufacturers realize that they can include a bare-bones crossover
for a small incremental cost. Unfortunately, most of these crossovers are
inadequate for the job and need the help of an external crossover. You
may be able to take advantage of an inadequate built-in crossover to
reduce the requirements for a separate crossover. See the box on p. 65 to
learn how.
The separate crossover used with this approach may be a subwoofer-
only crossover or one with high-pass filtered outputs for the main chan-
nels too. If you are using separate amps to drive the main channels, then
the latter is the way to go.
Amplified Subwoofer with Built-In Crossover
This approach is the ultimate in convenience. You just connect power and
signal leads, adjust your settings, and you’re done. Many amplified subs
are designed to fit in the trunk or cargo area of almost any vehicle. Other
products, such as MTX’s Amplified Thunderforms (Fig. 4-2), are custom
68
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-2
MTX’s Amplified
Thunderform for
GM/Chevrolet
extended cab. (Cour-
tesy of MTX.)

designed for specific popular cars, trucks, and SUVs to take advantage of
wasted space and to match the vehicle’s interior. If you’ve only got space
for a shoebox, there’s the KSC-SW1 from Kenwood (Fig. 4-3). This is a com-
pact powered sub that puts out surprising bass for its size.
The main concern with all amplified subwoofers is making sure the
built-in crossover meets your needs. (If it doesn’t, consider the previous
configuration and see the box on p. 65.) Many of the built-in crossovers
use shallow 6- or 12-dB/octave slopes. This may be acceptable for bandpass
subwoofers, but you need 18 or 24 dB/octave otherwise.
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
69
Adding a Subwoofer to Premium Factory Sound Systems
If you have a premium factory sound system (such as Delco/Bose or Ford/JBL)
and want to add a subwoofer, the situation is slightly more complicated than
with standard systems.
You can use any of the four preamp-level crossover configurations outlined
at the beginning of this chapter, but you’ll need to use a line output converter
designed specifically for Bose or Ford Premium systems. The line output
converter is needed to convert the signals from the premium factory head unit
to a standard preamp-level signal suitable for crossover inputs.
Line Output Converters for Bose/Ford Premium Head Units
Line output converters are commonly used to convert head unit speaker-level
outputs to levels suitable for the preamp-level inputs of amps.
If you’re dealing with a Bose or Ford Premium Sound factory head unit,
you’ll want to use a line output converter specifically designed for interfacing
to these units. Using a standard LOC having low input impedance may damage
the output circuit of a Bose or Ford Premium Sound head unit. Using a
standard LOC with a Bose or Ford system can also result in extremely low
FIGURE 4-3
Kenwood KSC-SW1
compact powered
subwoofer. (Courtesy of
Kenwood.)

What to Look For in a Subwoofer
Crossover
There are a number of considerations for choosing the right crossover for
your application. You might choose a dedicated subwoofer crossover with
subwoofer outputs only, or one with high-pass outputs too if you use
amps to drive your main speakers. If you’re thinking of biamping later
on, you might choose a three-way model with subwoofer, woofer, and
tweeter outputs. (See Chap. 9 for more details.)
The most important subwoofer crossover characteristics are listed in
Table 4-3.
The crossover filter slope may be the single most important item to
consider. To make it possible to put a subwoofer anywhere in the vehicle,
the subwoofer crossover must be 18 dB/octave or higher. Slopes less than
18 dB/octave allow mid-bass and even mid-range to be heard from the
70
CHAPTER FOUR
output from the LOC because of the relatively low signal levels of many
premium factory system head units.
The LOCB.2 by Soundgate will accept any input signal from 350 mV to 
6.6 volts and convert it to a 2.5-volt audio output suitable for aftermarket
crossovers and amps. It also has a noise-blanking circuit that activates the audio
path after turn-on noises have subsided.
Line Output Converters for Systems Using GM’s Class 2 Data Bus
In 2002, GM added a new twist to some of its premium factory sound
systems—Class 2 data bus control. GM’s Premium/Smart Bose system is used in
2002 and later full-size trucks and SUVs. With this system, the head unit
provides fixed-level audio signals to the factory amplifiers. The head unit issues
commands to each amp via the Class 2 data bus to control volume, fader, and
balance. This approach provides improved noise immunity, but makes adding
a subwoofer more challenging.
The GMAA line output converter by Peripheral Electronics decodes GM’s
Class 2 data bus commands and uses them to provide varying output levels to
an aftermarket subwoofer crossover and amp. Additionally, the GMAA reads
the data bus and generates an amplifier remote turn-on signal so the
aftermarket amp turns on and off with the head unit, not with the ignition. 
Chrysler/Infinity Systems
Unlike Bose and Ford, Chrysler/Infinity systems use standard head unit
technology. No line output converter is needed with crossovers having speaker-
level inputs. A standard LOC will do the job of interfacing a Chrysler/Infinity
head unit to a crossover lacking speaker-level inputs.

subwoofer. Since only deep bass frequencies are nondirectional, this gives
away the subwoofer location and degrades imaging. Who wants a bass
guitar player under the seat? The only exception to this is bandpass boxes,
where you can successfully use a 12-dB/octave crossover.
A subwoofer cutoff frequency range of 75 to 150 Hz in three or four
steps is adequate for most situations. A continuously variable cutoff fre-
quency control gives you full flexibility to seamlessly blend the sub-
woofer with the rest of your system. Even with high-pass crossovers on
your main speakers, the natural low-frequency rolloff of woofers makes it
difficult to predict the best subwoofer crossover frequency. A continu-
ously variable crossover lets you avoid a gap or peak in your mid-bass.
High-pass outputs are an important feature if you have amps driving
your main speakers. Using this feature saves you from having to install bass
blocking crossovers in line with your main speakers. A 6-dB/octave slope is
acceptable, but 12 dB/octave or higher is better. The high-pass slope for the
main speakers does not need to be the same as the subwoofer low-pass slope.
A subsonic filter prevents very low frequencies from getting to the sub-
woofer amp and speaker. These frequencies are too low to be effectively
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
71
TABLE 4-3
What to Look For in
a Subwoofer
Crossover
Item
Comments
Crossover filter slope
18-dB/octave minimum.
12-dB/octave minimum for bandpass boxes.
Cutoff frequency range
75- to 150-Hz minimum range.
Continuously variable—a big plus.
High-pass outputs
Important if you have amps driving main speakers.
6-dB/octave slope minimum.
Subsonic filter
Crucial for ported boxes, beneficial for others.
45-Hz bass boost
Useful for improving bass.
Polarity switch
Useful for improving bass.
Speaker-level inputs
Important if your head unit lacks preamp-level out-
puts.
Preamp-level inputs
Ground loop isolation is a big plus for reducing noise
problems.
Output level controls
Of limited value—usually redundant with amp input
level controls.
Automatic amp wake-up output
Saves having to run remote turn-on wire from head
unit to sub amp.

reproduced by a subwoofer anyway, but they use up valuable amplifier
and speaker headroom. A subsonic filter protects against unnecessary dis-
tortion and speaker damage as well as reducing annoying turn-on thumps.
A subsonic filter is important for any subwoofer system, but it is crucial
when ported boxes are used because they lack the protective air “shock
absorber” of a sealed box.
Five to 10 dB of bass boost at 40 or 45 Hz extends the low-frequency
response of most subwoofer systems without overdriving them.
A subwoofer polarity switch lets you select the proper polarity with-
out having to reverse any speaker wires. Choose the setting that gives you
the most bass.
If your head unit lacks preamp-level outputs, then speaker-level inputs
are an important feature. This saves you from having to buy a line output
converter to convert your head unit’s speaker-level signals to preamp level.
Preamp-level inputs are provided as standard equipment on almost every
crossover. If you plan to use them, buy a model with ground loop isola-
tion. This will go a long way toward preventing system noise problems.
Output level controls are usually provided for each set of outputs, but
they are of limited value. They are usually redundant with the input level
controls found on your amp.
There are many names for automatic amp wake-up output, a useful
feature that eliminates having to run a remote turn-on wire from your
head unit to your sub amp. It works by monitoring the DC voltage on a
speaker wire from the head unit, and provides a signal to activate the
subwoofer amp when the head unit is on. This can be a big time-saver
when you’re adding a subwoofer system in the trunk by tapping into
the rear speaker wires and you have no other reason to pull the head
unit out.
One final point. The important thing is to obtain the performance
you need in your combined system. Many of the features listed above
may be included in your power amp. If your amp has a subsonic filter, for
example, you don’t need to have one in the crossover too. If neither do,
you can add one externally if you want to.
Choosing a Subwoofer Amplifier
Most of what you should know about choosing amps is contained in
Chap. 7. That chapter also contains information on installing amps, ampli-
72
CHAPTER FOUR

fier power and ground wiring, remote turn-on hookup, and speaker
wiring. There are two additional points worth covering here: how much
power you need in a subwoofer amp and the best amplifier/subwoofer
configurations.
How Much Power Do You Need?
The appropriate power for a subwoofer amp mainly depends on how
much power is used for the rest of the system and the subwoofer crossover
frequency used.
The typical frequency distribution of power in music is shown in
Table 4-4.
Notice that less than half the power in music is above 300 Hz. This
means that at least half the power in music is below 300 Hz. To make sure
you’re covered, use the following rule of thumb:
For example, suppose you are using a 50W × 4 amp to drive your main
speakers. The rule of thumb says you should use a sub amp that can pro-
vide roughly 1.5 × (50 watts + 50 watts) = 150 watts to your sub. This could
mean a 75W × 2 amp driving a dual voice coil sub or an amp that pro-
duces 150 watts when bridged to a single sub.
Rule of Thumb: The sub amp power should equal 1.5 times the power to the
front speakers.
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
73
TABLE 4-4
Frequency 
Distribution of
Power in Music
Maximum Power Above
Frequency
That Frequency
300 Hz
50%
600 Hz
25%
1200 Hz
10%
2400 Hz
5%

This rule of thumb is quite generous with power to the sub for typical
situations, but not all situations are typical. Consider using more power
for your subwoofer amp if:
■Your subwoofer crossover frequency is higher than 150 Hz.
■Your subwoofer sensitivity is exceptionally low.
■Your subwoofer is installed in a trunk that is sonically isolated from
the passenger compartment.
■You like music with lots of deep bass.
The Best Amplifier/Subwoofer Configurations
You should choose the right amplifier configuration to provide efficient
power transfer to your speakers based on the number of subwoofers you
plan to use and their impedances. Only by doing this are you getting the
amplifier power you paid for.
Subwoofers are commonly available in 4-ohms, dual 4-ohms, and dual 
2-ohms. Amplifiers usually support bridging and are 2 ohm stable, but
there are exceptions. Because of the many possible combinations, the best
configurations are shown for convenience in Table 4-5.
Table 4-5 shows maximum power and rated power configurations for
both one- and two-subwoofer systems. Rated power configurations pro-
vide acceptably efficient power transfer to your speakers with little risk of
overheated amplifiers. Rated power configurations are so named because
they give you the rated power nominally specified using a 4-ohm load.
Maximum power configurations provide the maximum power transfer
to your speakers that is still safe for your amp. Maximum power configu-
rations typically provide 50 percent more power transfer than rated
power configurations for a given amp.
Configurations other than those shown may not provide satisfactory
power to the speakers or may risk blowing the amp. For example, using
rated power configurations with higher-impedance speakers than those
shown is throwing away amplifier horsepower. Using maximum power
configurations with lower-impedance speakers than those shown will
most likely overheat your amp.
If the thought of having to choose an amplifier based on a subwoofer
configuration bothers you, JL Audio has a solution with their “Slash”
74
CHAPTER FOUR
Tip: An amp used in a
maximum power con-
figuration runs hotter,
so be sure to mount it
where it will have good
air circulation.

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
75
TABLE 4-5
Amplifier/
Subwoofer 
Configurations
Number of
Maximum Power
Rated Power
Subwoofers
Configurations
Configurations
1
2
Note: Configurations with the same letter (such as b1 and b2) use the same hardware, but are config-
ured differently. For example, b1 and b2 both use a two-channel amp with a 2-ohm dual voice coil sub.
Both provide the same performance, but you may prefer one method of wiring to another (or may not
have a bridgeable amp).
2Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
4Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
(a) 
1 ch amp 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
(c) 
2 ch amp 
bridged 
to 1 ch 
4Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
(d) 
4 ch amp 
bridged 
to 2 ch 
2Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
(b1) 2 ch amp 
2 ch amp 
bridged 
to 1 ch 
(b2) 
 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
(l) 
4 ch amp 
bridged 
to 2 ch 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
(j1) 
4Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
4Ω 
dvc 
2 ch amp 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
(h) 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
1 ch amp 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
(k2) 
2Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
2Ω 
dvc 
4 ch amp 
bridged 
to 2 ch 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
(k1) 
2Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
2Ω 
dvc 
4 ch amp 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
(i) 
2Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
2Ω 
dvc 
1 ch amp 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
(j2) 
4Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
4Ω 
dvc 
2 ch amp 
bridged 
to 1 ch 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
2Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
(e) 
4Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
(f) 
(g1) 
1 ch amp 
2 ch amp 
4Ω 
+
- dvc 
+
-
(g2) 
2 ch amp 
bridged 
to 1 ch 
1 ch amp 
 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
2Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
2Ω 
dvc 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
(m) 
4Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
4Ω 
dvc 
1 ch amp 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
(n1) 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
2 ch amp 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
(n2) 
2 ch amp 
bridged 
to 1 ch 
4Ω 
+ 
- 
(o1) 2 ch amp 
(o2) 
2 ch amp 
bridged 
to 1 ch 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
2Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
2Ω 
dvc 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
(p2) 
4Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
4Ω 
dvc 
4 ch amp 
bridged 
to 2 ch 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
(p1) 
4Ω 
+ 
- dvc 
+ 
- 
4Ω 
dvc 
4 ch amp 

76
CHAPTER FOUR
Bridging
Bridging converts a stereo amp into a mono amp, which gives you more power
than the sum of the two stereo channels. Of course, you must use an amp that
is bridgeable to do this. As an example, a 50-watt per channel stereo amp might
be bridgeable to a 150-watt mono configuration. Similarly, a 50-watt per
channel four-channel amp might be bridgeable to a 150-watt per channel stereo
configuration.
You must use a 4-ohm or higher speaker load when bridging. This means
you can’t run two 4-ohm woofers wired in parallel, for example. This is because
a bridged amplifier “sees” a speaker load of half the actual value, so a 4-ohm
speaker looks like a 2-ohm equivalent load. Very few amps can handle using
anything less than 4 ohms in the bridged mode.
Be sure to follow the instructions included with the amp for the correct
bridging procedure and connections—not all amps are alike.
Series and Parallel Wiring
If you want to try your hand at creating your own amplifier/speaker
configurations, you will need to calculate the combined impedance of series-
and parallel-wired speakers.
Series wiring refers to connecting multiple speakers (or the two sets of
terminals on dual voice coil woofers) as shown in Fig. 4-4.
Notice that the plus terminal of one speaker (or set of terminals) is always
connected to the minus terminal of the other. This is so both speakers (or voice
coils) are driven in phase with each other. Calculating the combined
impedance of series-wired speakers is easy—just add up the individual
impedances. This is true for any number of speakers.
Parallel wiring refers to connecting multiple speakers (or the two sets of
terminals on dual voice coil woofers) as shown in Fig. 4-5.
FIGURE 4-4
Series-wired 
speakers.
FIGURE 4-5
Parallel-wired 
speakers.

series of amps (Fig. 4-6). JL Audio’s Regulated Intelligent Power Supply
(R.I.P.S.) detects the impedance of the subwoofer load and delivers the
same maximum power to impedances from 1.5 to 4 ohms and for power
supply voltages from 11 to 14.5 volts.
Subwoofer Enclosure Options
When it comes to choosing a subwoofer enclosure, there are two factors
involved—the amount of assembly you prefer and the type of enclosure
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
77
Notice that the plus terminal of one speaker (or set of terminals) is always
connected to the plus terminal of the other. This is so both speakers (or voice
coils) are driven in phase with each other. Calculating the combined
impedance of parallel-wired speakers is more complicated. You need to add up
1 over each of the individual impedances, then take 1 over the total. This
formula works for any number of speakers.
Once you understand the two basic calculations, you can calculate the
impedance of combined series and parallel configurations. All you need to do
is break the problem down by calculating simple series or parallel pieces of the
configuration first. By substituting in the calculated values for these pieces,
you’ll be able to calculate the next level up until you’re done.
The key to maximizing power in amplifier/subwoofer configurations is to
present each amplifier with the lowest impedance load it can safely handle.
This is usually 2 ohms for nonbridged amps and 4 ohms for bridged amps, but
you should check the specs of any amp you plan to use.
You should avoid series wiring of speakers, with two exceptions—series
wiring of the two voice coils of a dual voice coil subwoofer and series wiring
of two opposing drivers mounted in an isobarik system. Wiring drivers in
series otherwise can cause the back EMF of one driver to modulate the other
driver, increasing distortion.
FIGURE 4-6
JL Audio 500/1
amplifier with
R.I.P.S. (Courtesy of 
JL Audio.)

that is best for your installation. These two factors are interrelated, since
the type of enclosure you choose might depend on the amount of assem-
bly you prefer, and the amount of assembly you prefer might depend on
the type of enclosure.
Subwoofer Amount of Assembly Options
If you plan to use one of the powered subwoofer configurations, then
your subwoofer and box are already designed and assembled for you.
Otherwise you have the flexibility to choose the amount of assembly you
prefer. The three possibilities are shown in Table 4-6.
A ready-made subwoofer is by far the easiest approach, and is sure to
look professional. For people who have no interest in delving into box sci-
ence or construction, this is the way to go. Unfortunately it’s no guaran-
tee of good sound quality. If you choose this route, either buy a product
with a solid reputation or audition before you buy. Don’t trust specs to
tell the whole story—a lot of manufacturers bend the truth in the way
they specify performance.
If you’re willing to spend the extra money, some manufacturers such
as JL Audio and MTX offer ready-made subwoofers custom designed for
popular makes of trucks and sport utility vehicles (Fig. 4-7). The fiberglass
enclosures are contoured to precisely fit behind a seat and are carpeted to
match the vehicle’s interior. The sound is tailored to match the vehicle’s
acoustics as well.
Installing component drivers in a prefabricated box gives you the flex-
ibility to choose both enclosure and drivers without having to build the
78
CHAPTER FOUR
TABLE 4-6
Subwoofer Amount
of Assembly Options
Amount of Assembly
Comments
Ready-made subwoofer
The easiest approach, and sure to look professional.
No guarantee of good sound quality.
Component woofers 
Gives you the flexibility to choose both enclosure and drivers 
in a prefab box
without having to build the box yourself.
Can save money compared to ready-made and provide better
performance.
Build your own box
If you have basic woodworking skills, can save a lot of money.
Lets you create any size and shape enclosure you wish, making
best use of odd space.

box yourself. If you choose your speakers wisely, you can save money
compared to ready-made and get better performance. (Advice on choosing
a speaker and box is given later in this chapter.) Prefabricated boxes are
available in a variety of sizes, shapes, and types (sealed, ported, bandpass)
to accommodate almost any size driver or drivers. They generally come
carpeted and have speaker terminals installed.
Some prefabricated boxes are custom made for specific applications. An
example is the Q-Customs Camaro/Firebird/Trans Am enclosure (Fig. 4-8).
It’s designed to fit precisely in the rear storage well and accommodates a
pair of 12-inch woofers.
If you have basic woodworking skills, building your own box can save
a lot of money. It also lets you create any size and shape enclosure you
wish, making best use of whatever odd space is available. Box design and
construction are covered later in this chapter.
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
79
FIGURE 4-7
JL Audio Stealthbox.
(Courtesy of JL Audio.)
FIGURE 4-8
Q-Customs
Camaro/Firebird 
enclosure—
(a) before; (b) after.
(Courtesy of Q-Logic.)
(a) 
(b) 

Types of Enclosures
There are many types of speaker enclosures you can choose from, includ-
ing sealed, ported, bandpass, and transmission line. Whether you plan to
buy a ready-made subwoofer, use a prefab box, or build your own, it’s
important that you understand the fundamental differences.
If you’ve ever seen a pair of 6 × 9 speakers wedged between the rear
window and deck of a car, with no enclosure, you may have wondered:
Why use a box at all? The basic answer is that the back of a speaker makes
as much sound as the front, but of the opposite polarity. If you happen
to be sitting where you get an equal amount of sound from front and
back, the two will totally cancel each other out and you’ll hear nothing!
In practice, speakers without any enclosure will provide some high fre-
quencies and mid-range, but no deep bass. This is because the sound from
the back of the speaker gets delayed due to a longer reflected path to your
ear. This causes sound cancellation at some frequencies (especially low
ones) but reinforcement at others.
Using an enclosure is the practical solution to this problem. The most
popular enclosure types for subwoofers are shown in Table 4-7.
Free-Air.
Free-air (or enclosureless) subwoofers are designed to be
mounted on the rear deck or behind the backseat, using the trunk as a
large speaker enclosure. The idea here is for the trunk to isolate all of the
sound from the back of the speaker, thus avoiding the problem of sound
cancellation explained previously.
Assuming you have a trunk and a suitable mounting location, free-air
subwoofers eliminate the need to build or buy a box. The problem is that
most trunks do not provide good sonic isolation. This means that sound
from the back of the speaker can be heard in the passenger compart-
ment, canceling out deep bass. To check this for yourself, have a friend
with a deep voice talk into your open trunk from the outside. You should
be listening inside the passenger compartment with the windows rolled
up. If you can barely hear your friend, then a free-air subwoofer will
work in your car. Otherwise, choose one of the other options.
Sealed.
Using a sealed box effectively prevents sound from the back of
the speaker from being heard, but also affects the sound coming from the
front of the speaker. The air inside a sealed box acts like a spring, effec-
tively changing the behavior of the speaker. How this affects the sound
depends on the size of the box and the particular driver.
Sealed boxes offer a number of advantages over the other enclosure
types. They are the easiest box type to design and build. Sealed systems
80
CHAPTER FOUR

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
81
TABLE 4-7
The Most Popular
Enclosure Types for
Subwoofers
Enclosure Type
Diagram
Comments
Free-air (trunk is 
Requires a trunk as the 
enclosure)
enclosure.
Eliminates the need to build or 
buy a box.
Poor performance in most cases 
due to poor sonic isolation of
trunk causing deep bass cancel-
lation.
Sealed
Easiest box type to design and
build.
Woofer is protected against turn-
on thumps and subsonic bass.
Provides the deepest bass if you
must use a small enclosure.
Cannot provide bass as deep as
the other enclosure types for
large enclosures.
Ported
More difficult to design and
build than sealed systems.
Provides no woofer protection
against turn-on thumps and
subsonic bass.
Can provide bass at least an
octave deeper than sealed boxes
for a given driver.
Requires a much bigger box
than sealed systems.
Bandpass
More difficult to design and
build than either sealed or
ported systems.
Produces sound over a narrow
frequency range, reducing the
requirement for a steep low-pass
slope in a subwoofer crossover.
Runs the risk of sounding like a
“one-note” system.
Requires a much bigger box
than sealed systems.
Transmission line
Elaborate and expensive con-
struction required to create the
internal labyrinth structure.
Possible to achieve deeper bass
than with a sealed box.
Not recommended.

are the least sensitive to using a box that is a little too big or small, or to
drivers that are different than their published specs. This is a big benefit
if you are planning to use component woofers in a prefab box. The spring
effect of air in a sealed box provides woofer protection against turn-on
thumps, subsonic bass energy, and going over bumps.
Sealed boxes provide the deepest bass if you must use a small enclosure.
The big drawback of sealed boxes is that they cannot provide bass as deep
as the other enclosure types for larger enclosures. However, the low-
frequency rolloff characteristic of sealed systems is relatively shallow com-
pared with that for ported and bandpass systems, resulting in useful deep
bass below the “official” −3-dB cutoff frequency. Exactly what defines a
small enclosure and how deep a sealed box can go is covered in the “Box
Design” section later in this chapter.
Ported.
Ported enclosures make constructive use of the sound from the
back of the speaker. Because of this, it becomes possible to achieve deeper
bass than with a sealed box. In a ported system, the sound from the back
of the speaker produces a resonant output at the port, much like producing
a tone by blowing air across the mouth of a soda bottle. The port is tuned
to provide constructive reinforcement of bass at the proper frequency.
Ported systems are more difficult to design and build than sealed sys-
tems. They are more sensitive than sealed systems to using a box that is a
little too big or small and to drivers that are different than their published
specs. Ported boxes provide no woofer protection against turn-on
thumps, subsonic bass energy, and going over bumps.
The big plus of ported boxes is that they can provide bass at least an
octave deeper than sealed boxes. That’s the difference between 80-Hz bass
and 40-Hz bass. However, a much bigger box—typically five times big-
ger—is required to get that octave improvement.
A primary factor in whether to use a ported box or a sealed box is how
big a box you can tolerate. Small boxes should always be sealed, and large
boxes should generally be ported. What is considered a big or small box
is explained in the “Box Design” section later in this chapter.
Bandpass.
Bandpass enclosures are based on ported enclosures, except
that the direct sound from the speaker is blocked off using a secondary
sealed chamber. This means all you hear is the tuned output from the
port. Unlike the other enclosure types, bandpass boxes only pass sound
over a narrow frequency band. This reduces the requirement for a steep
low-pass slope in a subwoofer crossover. Like the tone from a soda bottle,
however, bandpass designs run the risk of sounding like “one-note” sys-
tems.
82
CHAPTER FOUR

Bandpass systems are more difficult to design and build than either
sealed or ported systems. They are very sensitive to speaker parameters,
box volumes of the sealed and ported sub-enclosures, and port tuning.
Because of this, using component woofers in a “one size fits all” prefab
bandpass box is insanity.
Bandpass systems produce deep bass that is comparable to that of equally
sized ported systems. Like ported systems, bandpass systems require big
enclosures. A unique property of bandpass systems is that they allow you
to trade efficiency for bandwidth by changing the sealed fraction of the
box. Very efficient bandpass designs have inherently narrow bandwidths,
resulting in a “one-note thump monster.” The efficiency/bandwidth trade-
off is shown in detail in the “Box Design” section later in this chapter.
Transmission Lines.
Even though the way they work is different than
ported enclosures, transmission line enclosures also make constructive
use of the sound from the back of the speaker. Doing so makes it possible
to achieve deeper bass than with a sealed box.
Transmission line enclosures delay the sound from the back of the
speaker through a labyrinth structure. The delay is chosen to provide
constructive reinforcement of bass at the proper frequency.
Transmission line enclosures utilize elaborate and expensive construc-
tion to create the internal labyrinth structure. They do not offer any
advantages over properly designed ported enclosures and often have col-
oration problems in the mid-bass region. Their design typically involves
more trial and error than science to produce a satisfactory result. For
these reasons, transmission line enclosures are not recommended.
Choosing a Driver
Whether you buy a pre-made box or build your own, you will need to
choose your own subwoofer driver.
Choosing a driver and buying or building a box are interrelated
because your choice of driver affects the size and type of box required.
Most people choose a driver, then buy or build a suitable box. The prob-
lem is that you can end up needing a box that is bigger than you have
space for or not the type you want. This section will help you avoid that
problem by showing you how you can quickly and easily estimate what
box you would need for a specific driver. It will also cover power han-
dling, sensitivity, and other factors influencing your choice of driver.
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
83

Power Handling
How much power a subwoofer driver can handle is limited by two things—
the diameter and maximum excursion of the cone and the power rating of
the voice coil. Either factor can be the weak link in power handling.
At low frequencies, a subwoofer has to move lots of air to create loud
bass. How much air it can move is proportional to the area of the cone
multiplied by the maximum excursion of the cone. Since area is propor-
tional to cone diameter squared, large drivers have the potential to move a
lot more air than small ones. Cone excursion means how far out the cone
can realistically move before distortion or damage to the speaker occurs.
This is shown as Xmax on subwoofer spec sheets.
Voice coil power handling depends on the diameter of the voice coil,
the gauge of wire used, and other factors affecting how much heat the
voice coil assembly can handle and effectively dissipate.
When choosing a driver, make sure its power rating exceeds that of the
amplifier you’ll be driving it with. Unfortunately, many manufacturers
make exorbitant claims about power handling for their subwoofers. If it
seems too good to be true, compare the Xmax and voice coil diameter
specs against a reputable driver with the same size cone. If the driver in
question claims higher power handling with similar specs or similar
power handling with a smaller Xmax or voice coil diameter, watch out.
Sensitivity
Sensitivity tells you how loud a speaker will play at a specified power level.
This number is given in decibels and is normally measured at 1 meter
using 1 watt. A typical value is 90 dB, and higher numbers are better.
For example, a subwoofer with 90-dB sensitivity is 3 dB better than one
with 87 dB. This means that it is 3 dB louder—equivalently, it would
require 3 dB less amplifier power to play at the same volume level. Table 
4-8 illustrates how sensitivity affects how much power you would need to
produce the same volume level.
Table 4-8 shows that the 87-dB driver would require 200 watts of power
to play as loud as the 90-dB driver using 100 watts. This seems dramatic,
but you may not achieve the big benefit you expect, since high-sensitivity
drivers often produce higher cutoff frequencies. This means that the
gains you pick up in sensitivity may be lost in having to boost the deep
bass frequencies.
84
CHAPTER FOUR
Tip: Be careful when
reading manufacturers’
literature—some list
Xmax as total excur-
sion, others as one-way
excursion, still others
as one-way + 15%!

The bottom line is not to overemphasize the importance of sensitivity.
Consider it along with bass response to paint a more complete picture.
Bass Response
The bass response of a subwoofer system depends on two things—the
driver itself and its enclosure. In general, the larger the enclosure you are
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
85
TABLE 4-8
How Sensitivity
Affects Required
Power
Sensitivity
Required Amp Power
87 dB
200 W
88 dB
158 W
89 dB
126 W
90 dB
100 W
91 dB
79 W
92 dB
63 W
93 dB
50 W
Pioneer TS-SW124D shallow-mount sub
If you crave the performance of a full-size sub but don’t have space for a big
box, the TS-SW124D (Fig. 4-9) may be just the ticket. It’s a 12-inch sub that’s only
4 inches deep, and has the power handling and excursion of a thick sub. Not
only is the driver thin, it’s optimized for use in small boxes. This is great news
for pickup truck owners looking to put a sub behind their seat without giving
up leg room.
FIGURE 4-9
Pioneer TS-
SW124D shallow-
mount subwoofer.
(Courtesy of Pioneer.)

willing to use, the lower the bass response will be for a properly designed
sealed, ported, or bandpass system. For free-air applications, bass response
depends only on the driver.
The most accurate way to compare the bass response potential of vari-
ous drivers is to simulate the frequency response of each in your
intended application. This would entail a large amount of work, not to
mention the fact that you may not have even decided what size your
intended enclosure should be.
However, you don’t need to go through all that work. You can calculate
a single number for each of the drivers you’re considering that lets you
compare its bass response potential to that of the others. Better yet, you
can do this without knowing anything about your intended application,
other than whether it’s free-air or not.
Introduction to T/S Parameters.
When you want to compare the
bass response potential of various drivers (or, later, design a subwoofer
box), there are three magic numbers that tell you everything you need
to know about a driver. These are called the Thiele/Small (T/S) para-
meters.
T/S parameters are normally provided in mail-order catalogs or printed
right on the box in stores. If you can’t find them, ask the retailer—you
can’t do anything without them. Table 4-9 lists the T/S parameters:
The problem with T/S parameters is that they don’t tell you much in
their raw form. You need to use your calculator or computer to do some-
thing useful with them.
Comparing Woofers for Sealed, Ported, and Bandpass Applica-
tions.
To compare woofers for sealed, ported, and bandpass applications,
here’s the calculation you need to perform:
ffb = fs V
as
86
CHAPTER FOUR
TABLE 4-9
Thiele/Small 
Parameters
T/S Parameter
Units
Meaning
fs
Hz
Resonant frequency of driver
Qts
Total Q at the resonant frequency
Vas
ft3*
Volume of air having the same compliance as driver
*Some manufacturers provide Vas in liters rather than ft3. Divide the number of liters by 28.3 to convert
to ft3.

ffb indicates how low the bass response would be for that driver in a
reference-size evaluation box. (Lower numbers are better.) Suppose you are
trying to decide between the two 10-inch subwoofers in Table 4-10.
Calculating ffb for each driver provides the results given in Table 4-11.
This shows that the Polk driver provides bass response about 15 percent
lower than that of the Rockford Fosgate driver. (This would come as a big
surprise if you used fs to judge bass potential.) This holds true regardless
of what the box volume is, so long as you are comparing both drivers
using the same box volume. This simple calculation lets you compare
woofers without knowing the size or type of your box.
If you know your box size and type, the actual cutoff frequencies for
sealed and ported systems can be estimated using these equations:
sealed box:
f3 = 0.8ffb/V
b
ported box:
f3 = 1.0ffb/V
b
where f3 is the cutoff frequency and Vb is the box volume in ft3.
These equations show that a larger box provides a lower cutoff fre-
quency. Furthermore, it takes a box that is 4 times larger to lower the cut-
off frequency by a factor of 2. Suppose you have space for a 1.1-ft3 box
behind the seat of your truck and you have chosen to use a ported box.
The approximate cutoff frequencies for the above subwoofers would be as
shown in Table 4-12.
Comparing Woofers for Free-Air Applications.
To compare
woofers for free-air applications, the calculation is different:
fob = fs/Qts
fob indicates how low the relative bass response would be in a gigantic
box. (Lower numbers are better.) Calculating fob for the same two 10-inch
subwoofers used previously provides the results shown in Table 4-13.
In this case, the Rockford Fosgate driver is better—it provides a relative
cutoff frequency about 10 percent lower than that of the Polk driver. The
actual cutoff frequencies can be estimated using:
f3 = 0.9 fob
Calculating for the previously mentioned subwoofers gives us the val-
ues in Table 4-14.
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
87
Tip: Avoid drivers with
unusually high Qts val-
ues—anything above
0.8 is too high. High
values are caused by
undersized magnet
structures and usually
result in frequency
responses with a large
resonant peak.

88
CHAPTER FOUR
TABLE 4-14
Actual Free-Air
Response 
Comparison
Free-Air Cutoff
Model
Frequency
Rockford Fosgate P110S4
52.6 Hz
Polk Audio dB104
58.4 Hz
TABLE 4-12
Bass Response Com-
parison in a 1.1-ft3
Ported Box
Cutoff Frequency in
Model
1.1-ft3 Ported Box
Rockford Fosgate P110S4
38.0 Hz
Polk Audio dB104
32.5 Hz
TABLE 4-13
Relative Free-Air
Response 
Comparison
Model
fob
Rockford Fosgate P110S4
58.5
Polk Audio dB104
64.9
TABLE 4-10
T/S Parameters of
Two Contending
Subwoofers
Model
fs
Qts
Vas
Rockford Fosgate P110S4
30 Hz
0.51
1.77 ft3
Polk Audio dB104
37 Hz
0.57
0.85 ft3
TABLE 4-11
Relative Bass
Response of Two
Contending Sub-
woofers
Model
ffb
Rockford Fosgate P110S4
39.9
Polk Audio dB104
34.1

Notice that these cutoff frequencies are actually worse (higher) than
those obtained using the 1.1-ft3 ported box. This demonstrates that free-
air applications usually sacrifice deep bass compared to properly designed
sealed and ported systems. This is true even for the best of trunks, where
sonic isolation is not an issue.
The Infinity Kappa Perfect10 VQ subwoofer (Fig. 4-10) offers a unique
variable Qts feature, which allows you to optimize the driver for use with a
variety of enclosures—sealed, ported, bandpass, and free-air applications.
The sub is shipped with two metal polepiece inserts, which can be
plugged into the motor assembly to vary the Qts. Using no insert provides
a Qts of 0.63, making it most suitable for free-air applications. The small
insert provides a Qts of 0.42, most useful for medium-size sealed and
ported boxes. The large insert provides a Qts of 0.32, most useful for small
sealed and ported boxes.
Cone and Surround Material
Cone material (Table 4-15) and surround material (Table 4-16) are impor-
tant in the harsh automotive environment, but it’s hard to wade through
the hype. All of the cone materials listed in the table are capable of excel-
lent performance, so I’ll emphasize the differences. Polypropylene cones
are extremely resistant to environmental deterioration and are unaffected
by humidity. But poly cones are a temperature-sensitive plastic, and
become soft in the heat, and hard when cold, affecting their sound. Paper-
based cones absorb moisture, so humidity affects their sound. Coatings
can be used to improve the resistance to humidity and sunlight, and rein-
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
89
FIGURE 4-10
Infinity Kappa Per-
fect10 VQ variable Q
subwoofer. (Courtesy of
Infinity.)

forcement additives such as Kevlar, glass, mica or ceramic can be used to
improve the sonic performance of paper-based cones. Another option is
fiber cones made from woven or nonwoven Kevlar, carbon (graphite), or
glass fibers. Metal cones (usually aluminum or magnesium alloy) are
strong and light, and offer good environmental stability. They also help
conduct heat away from the voice coil. You’ll need to be careful not to
dent them. Materials such as Tri-Laminate, resin laminate, carbon-blended
poly, Kapok, poly-graphite, graphite-quartz, Foam-Infused IMPP, tita-
nium composite, ceramic metal matrix, Duralam and mica-injected
polypropylene offer the promise of superior performance. Most of these
are variants of polypropylene and paper-based cones, and may provide a
performance advantage. What they mainly provide is a marketing advan-
tage.
The surround is the soft ring around the outside of the cone with the
bulge in it. Foam deteriorates with sunlight and time—choose rubber if
your subwoofer will be exposed to the sun.
Dual Voice Coil Subwoofers
A dual voice coil speaker (Fig. 4-11) is simply one in which two separate
voice coil windings and sets of terminals are provided. It’s more expensive
to wind and terminate dual voice coils, but you typically pay only a small
premium compared to a similar single voice coil speaker.
90
CHAPTER FOUR
TABLE 4-16
Common Subwoofer
Surround Materials
Surround Material
Comments
Foam
Deteriorates with sunlight and time
Butyl rubber
Good choice
TABLE 4-15
Common 
Subwoofer Cone
Materials
Cone Material
Comments
Paper-based
Humidity-sensitive performance
Polypropylene
Temperature-sensitive performance
Fiber
Expensive
Metal
Subject to dents

The main advantage of dual voice coil speakers is wiring flexibility. A
single dual voice coil driver offers the user three hookup choices: parallel,
series, and independent. In a parallel hookup the drivers’ impedance will
be half that of each individual coil (a dual 4-ohm speaker would be a 
2-ohm speaker in parallel). A series hookup results in twice the imped-
ance of each single coil (a dual 4-ohm speaker results in 8 ohms if its coils
are wired in series). Finally, you can wire each voice coil to a separate chan-
nel of your amplifier, which can be useful if your amplifier is not mono-
bridgeable or if you are bridging a four-channel amplifier down to two
channels to run your sub.
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
91
Tip: For independently wired DVC subs, adding a choke coil in series with
each winding of the subwoofer (Fig. 4-12) will prevent power amp oscillation
problems. The interwinding capacitance or mutual inductance of DVC
subwoofers can cause some power amplifiers to oscillate. The oscillation can be
at almost any frequency, from very low (“motorboating”) to very high—even
ultrasonic. Ultrasonic oscillation is not directly audible, but results in reduced
headroom and increased distortion. In some cases, oscillation can result in
amplifier overheating or destruction.
You can purchase choke coils inexpensively or wind your own. Twenty
turns of #22 wire around a 1⁄4-inch bolt (keep the bolt in) will provide about 
20 µH of inductance—a good value. Make sure the DC resistance is less than 
0.1 ohms to prevent signal loss to the subwoofer and ensure adequate power
handling of the choke.
FIGURE 4-12
A choke in series
with each sub-
woofer winding.
FIGURE 4-11
JL Audio 10W3V2-
D4 dual voice coil
subwoofer. (Courtesy of
JL Audio.)

If a dual voice coil subwoofer is wired to two independent channels,
the inputs to both channels should ideally be the same (summed mono).
If there is any difference between the signals driving each coil, the voice
coils effectively fight each other. This results in wasted amplifier power,
reduced headroom, and increased distortion.
A common misconception with regard to dual voice coil speakers is the
assumption that nothing changes if you use only one of the voice coils.
With only one coil hooked up, a dual voice coil speaker will suffer a loss
in reference efficiency of about 3 dB as well as a significant shift in its
Thiele/Small parameters (Qts will go way up). This renders any enclosure
calculations inaccurate unless you measure the speaker parameters with
only one coil hooked up. Failure to account for the different parameters
of a dual voice coil speaker with only one coil powered can result in very
poor performance.
Box Design
Whether you buy a pre-made box or build your own, this section will
show you how to design or choose the right box for your driver.
Computer Programs for Box Design
There are many excellent computer programs for helping you design a
speaker box. Many of them are available at little or no cost. The Loud-
speaker Design Cookbook by Vance Dickason lists and describes the most
well known of these programs.
Even if you plan to use a computer program, this section will give you
an intuitive understanding of how box size and enclosure type affect the
bass response. If you don’t have a computer, this section has everything
you need to design your enclosure.
Step 1: Calculate fob and Vof from the T/S
Parameters
As explained in the “Choosing a Driver” section earlier in this chapter,
there are three magic numbers that tell you everything you need to know
92
CHAPTER FOUR

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
93
about a driver for the purposes of box design. These are called the
Thiele/Small (T/S) parameters. As mentioned earlier, T/S parameters are
normally provided in mail-order catalogs or printed right on the box in
stores. They are listed again in Table 4-17 for convenience.
The first step in designing your box is calculating the following two
parameters, plugging in the T/S parameters of your driver:
fob = fs/Qts
Vof = Vas  Q 2
ts
These two parameters will be used many times throughout the design
process.
Subwoofer Design Toolbox 
The Subwoofer Design Toolbox by MFR Engineering (Fig. 4-13) is an easy-to-
use but powerful program for designing subwoofers, for Microsoft Windows
(95 or higher). Its convenient tab interface lets you choose from box design, port
design, enclosure design, and woofer selection tools.
Box designs can be sealed, ported, or bandpass. Context-sensitive design
hints and recommended values assist beginners and pros alike. The enclosure
design tool helps you design rectangular and wedge-shaped boxes. The woofer
selection tool lets you quickly compare woofers without having to design a box
for each of them. 
With the Subwoofer Design Toolbox, it’s easy to compare frequency
responses of different box designs on a single graph. Frequency response
printouts can be in color or with symbols enabled to improve readability with
black-and-white laser printers.
Features of particular interest to automotive applications include free-air
modeling, multiple port design, and isobarik loading. The Car Response feature
lets you see the effect of operating your sub in a wide range of vehicle sizes.
FIGURE 4-13
Subwoofer Design
Toolbox. (Courtesy of
MFR Engineering.)

94
CHAPTER FOUR
Step 2: Label the Frequency Response
Diagram for Your Driver
The next step is to refer to the appropriate frequency response diagram.
Choose the diagram with the nearest Qts value to your driver, as well as the
desired enclosure type (Figs. 4-14 and 4-15). For each value of Qts from 0.2
to 0.8, there is a combined sealed and ported diagram and a separate
bandpass diagram.
Once you’ve identified the proper diagram, it’s time to label the fre-
quency axis of the diagram using the value of fob calculated in Step 1. Rela-
bel 0.1 fob, 1 fob, and 10 fob frequency points with their calculated values.
Label intermediate points of 0.2 fob through 0.9 fob and 2 fob through 9 fob for
more detail. You might want to make a photocopy of the diagram, or you
can write directly in the book with pencil.
Similarly, you’ll need to label the enclosure volume for each curve,
using the value of Vof calculated in Step 1.
Step 3: Choose Your Box Size and Type
Once you’ve labeled the curves, you’ll have a graphic representation of
what is possible for your driver. You can now choose the best trade-off
between box size and bass response for your needs.
Sealed and Ported Boxes.
For both sealed and ported boxes, you can
see that increasing the box size results in deeper bass. Notice that the
smallest boxes are sealed and the largest ones are ported. This is because
porting helps large boxes, but hurts small ones.
TABLE 4-17
Thiele/Small 
Parameters
T/S Parameter
Units
Meaning
fs
Hz
Resonant frequency of driver
Qts
Total Q at the resonant frequency
Vas
ft3*
Volume of air having the same compliance as driver
*Some manufacturers provide Vas in liters rather than ft3. Divide the number of liters by 28.3 to
convert to ft3.

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
95
FIGURE 4-14
Frequency response
diagrams for sealed
and ported drivers. 
(a) Qts = 0.2; 
(b) Qts = 0.3.
(a) 
(b) 

96
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-14
(continued)
Frequency response
diagrams for sealed
and ported drivers. 
(c) Qts = 0.4; 
(d) Qts = 0.5.
(c) 
(d) 

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
97
FIGURE 4-14
(continued)
Frequency response
diagrams for sealed
and ported drivers. 
(e) Qts = 0.6; 
(f) Qts = 0.7.
(e) 
(f) 

98
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-14
(continued)
Frequency response
diagrams for sealed
and ported drivers. 
(g) Qts = 0.8.
(g) 
FIGURE 4-15
Frequency response
diagrams for band-
pass drivers. 
(a) Qts = 0.2
(a) 

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
99
(c) 
FIGURE 4-15
(continued)
Frequency response
diagrams for band-
pass drivers. 
(b) Qts = 0.3; 
(c) Qts = 0.4.
(b) 

100
CHAPTER FOUR
(e) 
FIGURE 4-15
(continued)
Frequency response
diagrams for band-
pass drivers. 
(d) Qts = 0.5; 
(e) Qts = 0.6.
(d) 

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
101
(g) 
FIGURE 4-15
(continued)
Frequency response
diagrams for band-
pass drivers. 
(f) Qts = 0.7; 
(g) Qts = 0.8.
(f) 

2 Vof defines the boundary between small and large boxes for a partic-
ular driver. For box volumes near this boundary, sealed or ported boxes
can be used successfully. Larger boxes should be ported and smaller boxes
should be sealed.
For sealed and ported boxes, you are not limited to the six curves on
each diagram. You can easily use a box size that is between those shown.
In that case, your results will be between the nearest two curves. You can
also use a box that is slightly smaller or larger than any of those shown,
with predictable results.
Bandpass Boxes.
As with sealed and ported boxes, increasing the size
of bandpass boxes results in deeper bass. With bandpass boxes, however,
you have an additional degree of flexibility—you can trade sensitivity for
102
CHAPTER FOUR
How Low Do You Need to Go?
Deciding how low in frequency you want your subwoofer to go is usually a
compromise between performance and practical box size. It’s easy to weigh the
acceptability of a particular box size, but how do you weigh the importance of
bass response?
FM radio broadcasts are limited to between 30 and 50 Hz. With CD players,
you can expect response down to 20 Hz or even lower. This doesn’t mean your
music goes that low, it just means that your CD player can pass it if it does.
In spite of the fact that humans can hear (or feel) bass below 20 Hz, 30 Hz
is the realistic lower limit of recorded music. The truth is, very little recorded
music (including CDs) contains much below about 40 Hz. Between 40 and 
60 Hz, kick drums, tympani, and the low incisive “chunk” of bass guitars kick
in. Between 60 and 100 Hz is where you find the power of drums and the deep,
tight, strong bass that makes rock solid.
Table 4-18 gives you some idea of what to shoot for.
TABLE 4-18
Subwoofer Response Goal
Subwoofer
Response
Comment
30 Hz
Overkill
40 Hz
Realistic goal for auto sound
50 Hz
Respectable performance
Rule: Use a port when the box volume is greater than 2 Vof.

bandwidth by changing how much of the total box volume is used for
the ported section.
There are six curves shown for each of the bandpass diagrams. The
three to the left use a box volume of 5 Vof, and the three to the right use
a box volume of 2 Vof. For each of the two box sizes there are three curves:
3 dB, 0 dB, and −3 dB. (0 dB on these diagrams is identical to 0 dB on the
sealed and ported diagrams, so you can directly compare them.)
The 3-dB bandpass designs play 3 dB louder than the 0-dB designs (or
require half the amplifier power to play at the same level). The price you
pay for using them is their narrow bandwidth. Narrow bandwidths can
leave a hole in the system frequency response if the subwoofer’s high-end
response doesn’t extend high enough to cover the low-end response of
the main speakers. Narrow bandwidths can also cause a “one-note thump”
subwoofer sound.
For bandpass boxes, you must choose one of the six curves shown on
each diagram. If you want a different box volume or sensitivity, you’ll
need to use a computer program to design it.
Step 4: Calculate the Port Tuning Frequency
Once you’ve decided on a curve for your driver, you’ll need to calculate
the port tuning frequency. This applies only to ported or bandpass
boxes—no additional calculations are needed for sealed boxes.
The port tuning frequency is normally referred to as the box frequency.
Its symbol is fb. The box frequency will be needed for port construction.
Ported Boxes.
For ported boxes, calculating the box frequency is easy.
Here’s the formula:
fb = 0.39 fob
Bandpass Boxes.
For bandpass boxes, refer to Table 4-19 or Table 4-20
for the value of fb/fob that applies to your design. (You will also want to
make note of the ported fraction of volume entry from the table. This
tells you how to partition your box internally.) To calculate the box fre-
quency, plug the value of fb/fob from the table and the fob of your driver
into this formula:
fb =
fob
fb

fob
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
103

Sealed/Ported Box Design Example
For this example we’ll design a box for the JL Audio 10W3V2-D4 10-inch
subwoofer. The T/S parameters for this driver are listed in Table 4-21.
104
CHAPTER FOUR
TABLE 4-20
Bandpass 
Design for Box 
Volume = 5 Vof
+3 dB
0 dB
-3 dB
Ported
Ported
Ported
Fraction of
Fraction of
Fraction of
Qts
Volume
fb /fob
Volume
fb /fob
Volume
fb /fob
0.2
0.565
0.707
0.475
0.649
0.388
0.606
0.3
0.540
0.724
0.445
0.671
0.355
0.632
0.4
0.502
0.749
0.405
0.704
0.315
0.672
0.5
0.458
0.787
0.358
0.749
0.270
0.724
0.6
0.405
0.834
0.308
0.806
0.228
0.787
0.7
0.355
0.894
0.262
0.872
0.192
0.859
0.8
0.305
0.963
0.222
0.947
0.162
0.937
TABLE 4-19
Bandpass 
Design for Box 
Volume = 2 Vof
+3 dB
0 dB
-3 dB
Ported
Ported
Ported
Fraction of
Fraction of
Fraction of
Qts
Volume
fb /fob
Volume
fb /fob
Volume
fb /fob
0.2
0.578
1.107
0.490
1.010
0.402
0.936
0.3
0.568
1.117
0.478
1.024
0.390
0.954
0.4
0.552
1.130
0.460
1.042
0.370
0.977
0.5
0.535
1.151
0.440
1.069
0.348
1.008
0.6
0.510
1.175
0.412
1.100
0.322
1.048
0.7
0.485
1.209
0.385
1.142
0.295
1.095
0.8
0.455
1.248
0.355
1.190
0.268
1.150

Calculating fob and Vof from the T/S parameters, we obtain:
fob = fs/Qts = 56.9 Hz
Vof = Vas  Q 2
ts = 0.426 ft3
Since Qts is 0.499, we will use the Qts = 0.5 sealed/ported diagram. The
frequency axis of this diagram can now be relabeled based on fob =
56.9 Hz. Similarly, the enclosure volumes can now be relabeled based on
Vof = 0.426 ft3. The result is shown in Fig. 4-16.
A reasonable goal for bass response is −3 dB at or below 40 Hz. Looking
at the curves, you can see that the p2 curve just makes this goal and that
the p5 curve exceeds it. Even the largest sealed box (s2 curve) doesn’t quite
make it. The p2 curve is −3 dB at about 37 Hz and the p5 curve is −3 dB at
about 26 Hz. The box sizes required for these two designs are 0.85 and 
2.13 ft3, respectively. Assume our application has room for something a lit-
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
105
TABLE 4-21
T/S Parameters 
for JL Audio
10W3V2-D4
Model
fs
Qts
Vas
JL Audio 10W3V2-D4
28.4 Hz
0.499
1.71 ft3
FIGURE 4-16
Relabeled
sealed/ported 
diagram.

tle bigger than the p2, but not as big as the p5. A 1-ft3 box seems like a
good choice.
Since we decided on a ported design, we also need to calculate the box
frequency:
fb = 0.39 fob = 22.2 Hz
The box frequency will be needed for port construction. The “Box
Construction” section later in this chapter explains how to build a port.
Bandpass Box Design Example
Now we’ll design a bandpass box for the same driver used in the
sealed/ported example. The T/S parameters for the JL Audio 10W3V2-D4
10-inch subwoofer are repeated in Table 4-22 for convenience.
Calculating fob and Vof from the T/S parameters, we obtain:
fob = fs/Qts = 56.9 Hz
Vof = Vas  Q 2
ts = 0.426 ft3
Since Qts is 0.499, we will use the Qts = 0.5 bandpass diagram. The fre-
quency axis of this diagram can now be relabeled based on fob = 56.9 Hz.
Similarly, the enclosure volumes can now be relabeled based on Vof =
0.426 ft3. The result is shown in Fig. 4-17.
We must choose from one of two box sizes here—we cannot choose an
in-between size as we did in the ported example. In this case, the three b2
curves use a 2 Vof = 0.85 ft3 box and the three b5 curves use a 5 Vof = 2.13 ft3 box.
For bandpass systems, a reasonable goal is bass response from 40 to 100
Hz. (This means that the −3-dB frequencies should be below 40 Hz and
above 100 Hz, respectively. Note that the −3-dB points are properly refer-
enced to the center frequency level of each curve; thus they are at 0 dB for
the +3-dB curves, −3 dB for the 0-dB curves, and −6 dB for the −3-dB curves.)
Looking at the curves closely, the b2(3), b2(0) and b2(−3) designs meet the
40- to 100-Hz goal. The b2(3) and b2(0) designs are the top contenders over
106
CHAPTER FOUR
TABLE 4-22
T/S Parameters 
for JL Audio
10W3V2-D4
Model
fs
Qts
Vas
JL Audio 10W3V2-D4
28.4 Hz
0.499
1.71 ft3

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
107
the b2(−3) design because of their higher sensitivities and flatter passband
responses. The b2(0) provides deeper bass, but less efficiency than the
b2(3)—either one would be a good choice.
Although all three of the b5 curves easily meet the 40-Hz goal, they fall
short at the 100-Hz end. If your main speakers have no problem providing
output down to 70 Hz and you have space for a bigger box, then you could
use any of the b5 designs and get deeper bass from the subwoofer.
To determine the box frequency, we need to refer to the proper table.
Choosing the b2(0) design, we will use Table 4-19. The 0-dB columns for 
Qts = 0.5 give us:
ported fraction of volume = 0.440
fb/fob = 1.069
This lets us calculate the ported volume and box frequency as follows:
ported volume = 0.440 (0.85 ft3) = 0.37 ft3
fb = (fb/fob) fob = 1.069 (56.9 Hz) = 60.8 Hz
These two numbers will be used for box and port construction. The
“Box Construction” section later in the chapter explains how.
FIGURE 4-17
Relabeled bandpass
diagram.

Multiple Drivers in One Box
Using two or more identical woofers in a single subwoofer cabinet can
provide a number of advantages over single subwoofer boxes. Multiple
driver formats can be used with sealed, ported, or bandpass designs. The
five basic configurations are shown in Table 4-23.
Standard.
The standard configuration can be thought of as two iden-
tical subwoofer systems joined together with the separating wall removed.
This doubles the size of your enclosure and the power handling as well.
Because the cone area is doubled, the acoustic sensitivity is 3 dB higher
than that of a single driver.
This approach can be used with sealed, ported, or bandpass designs.
Follow the same box design procedure as you would for a single driver,
but assume that you are using a driver having a Vas value twice that of an
actual single driver. This method will end up giving you a box that is
twice the original size, and any port calculations will come out right.
Push-Pull.
The push-pull configuration is a simple variation of the
standard configuration, and shares the characteristics explained above.
The only difference is that the direction of one of the two woofers is
reversed (and the polarity of its speaker connections is reversed as well, to
drive both speakers in phase acoustically). This type of setup will cause
even-order nonlinearities to cancel, and will result in substantially lower
distortion.
A disadvantage of this approach is that you must look at the back of
one of your drivers. Some driver manufacturers enhance the appearance
of their subwoofer backs just for this purpose. This is only a cosmetic con-
108
CHAPTER FOUR
How Do Vehicles Affect Bass Response?
The interior volume of cars and trucks can be small enough to affect the bass
loading of a subwoofer, particularly when all the windows are rolled up. The
good news is that you will usually end up with deeper bass than you expected
in your car, especially for sealed boxes. The bad news is that you may have built
a larger box than you needed, or tuned your port suboptimally.
The smaller the car, the bigger the bass boost. A midsize car can boost 40 Hz
bass by 4 dB, and a compact car by 6 dB or more. Some subwoofer design
software lets you specify the size of your vehicle and see how it affects your bass
response. The question then becomes how much to include this effect in your
box design—the free bass boost disappears when the windows are rolled down.

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
109
TABLE 4-23
Multiple Driver Con-
figurations
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Standard
Sensitivity is 3 dB higher than that of a
single driver.
Doubles the size of your enclosure with
respect to that of a single driver.
No woofer back is exposed.
Even-order distortion products are not
canceled.
Push-pull
Sensitivity is 3 dB higher than that of a
single driver.
Even-order distortion products are can-
celed.
Doubles the size of your enclosure with
respect to that of a single driver.
Woofer back is exposed.
Front-to-front 
Allows you to cut the size of 
isobarik
your enclosure in half with respect to
that of a single driver.
Even-order distortion products are can-
celed.
Sensitivity is 3 dB lower than that a sin-
gle driver.
Woofer back is exposed.
Best isobarik configuration for sub-
woofer applications.

cern—the sound coming from the back of a subwoofer is just as good as
that from the front at subwoofer frequencies.
Front-to-Front Isobarik.
Isobarik (which means constant pressure)
designs were first described by Harry Olson in the early 1950s. The pri-
mary benefit of any isobarik configuration is that it allows you to cut the
size of your enclosure in half with respect to that of a single driver. This
can be valuable if you are trying to squeeze a subwoofer box into a tight
space. It comes at the price of having to buy a second driver and power it.
The acoustic sensitivity of an isobarik pair is also 3 dB lower than that of
a single driver (due to the doubling of the effective cone mass). This is 6 dB
lower than the standard or push-pull configurations for the same num-
ber of drivers and amps.
110
CHAPTER FOUR
TABLE 4-23
(continued)
Multiple Driver 
Configurations
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Back-to-back 
Allows you to cut the size of 
isobarik
your enclosure in half with
respect to that of a single driver.
Even-order distortion products
are canceled.
No woofer back is exposed.
Sensitivity is 3 dB lower than that
a single driver.
Construction is more difficult.
Heat from both drivers is
trapped, reducing power han-
dling.
Not recommended.
Piggyback 
Allows you to cut the size of 
isobarik
your enclosure in half with
respect to that of a single driver.
No woofer back is exposed.
Sensitivity is 3 dB lower than that
a single driver.
Even-order distortion products
are not canceled.
Construction is more difficult.
Heat from front driver is
trapped, reducing power han-
dling.
Not recommended.

Of all the isobarik configurations, front-to-front is the most useful for
subwoofer applications. (The back of a driver is as good as the front for
deep bass.) In addition to cutting the enclosure size in half, the front-to-
front setup also provides the even-order distortion canceling characteris-
tic of the push-pull configuration.
Isobarik loading can be used with sealed, ported, or bandpass designs,
although in practice bandpass isobarik designs can be particularly difficult
to get right. Follow the same box design procedure as you would for a sin-
gle driver, but assume that you are using a driver having a Vas value half that
of an actual single driver. This method will end up giving you a box that is
half the original size, and any port calculations will come out right.
When mounting the drivers, a spacer must normally be used between
the two drivers to prevent the two surrounds from touching each other.
You can use a ring of medium-density fiberboard (MDF) with appropri-
ately spaced holes to pass the mounting bolts/screws through. Lay the
bottom driver in the box after wiring it up (this driver should have its
leads wired normally). Lay the MDF ring on top of this driver. Invert the
second driver over the first, line up the mounting holes, and screw the
whole assembly to the enclosure. The outer driver should have its leads
wired in a reversed fashion. This will assure that both drivers are moving
in the same direction when a voltage is applied. If you hook everything
up and get no bass from your subwoofer, chances are that you’ve got a dri-
ver’s polarity reversed.
Back-to-Back Isobarik.
The back-to-back isobarik configuration
requires a tunnel subenclosure to tightly couple the two drivers. The chief
advantage of this approach over the front-to-front isobaric is cosmetic—
you get to look at the front of a woofer rather than the back. As with the
push-pull and front-to-front isobarik configurations, even-order distor-
tion products are inherently canceled.
Because of the relatively large mass of air coupling the two drivers,
accurate frequency response predictions become more difficult. The tun-
nel makes construction more challenging as well. A further disadvantage
of this approach is that the heat generated by both magnet structures is
essentially trapped in the subenclosure. This will greatly reduce the ther-
mal power handling of both drivers. For these reasons, this configuration
is not recommended.
Piggyback Isobarik.
The piggyback isobarik configuration also
requires a tunnel subenclosure to tightly couple the two drivers, although
it is smaller than that required for the back-to-back isobarik. As with the
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
111

back-to-back isobarik approach, you get to look at the front of a woofer
rather than the back. Unlike with the other isobarik configurations, even-
order distortion products are not canceled.
The piggyback isobarik setup shares a number of disadvantages with the
back-to-back isobarik. Because of the relatively large mass of air coupling the
two drivers, accurate frequency response predictions become more difficult.
The tunnel makes construction more challenging. The heat generated by
one of the magnet structures is essentially trapped in the subenclosure.
This will greatly reduce its thermal power handling and will cause a per-
formance imbalance between the two drivers as one heats up more than the
other. For these reasons, this configuration is not recommended.
Box Construction
Whether you buy a pre-made box or build your own, this section con-
tains useful information on mounting drivers, damping enclosures, and
constructing ports.
Box Materials and Shapes
A good speaker box should be both rigid and nonresonant. Choosing the
right box material is an important step in ensuring this.
Subwoofer boxes should be constructed of 3⁄4-inch-thick particle board
or medium-density fiberboard (MDF). Both of these materials are rigid,
nonresonant, uniform, easy to work with, and, best of all, cheap. MDF is
approximately 35 percent stronger than particle board, but is more expen-
sive and harder to find. Other materials such as hardwood, plywood, or
oriented strand board (OSB) may be used, but none are as good as parti-
cle board or MDF.
Rectangular boxes are the easiest to build, but to take advantage of an
odd-sized space, you may want to use a wedge or other shape. For sub-
woofers, the shape and relative dimensions of the box do not affect per-
formance. You can build a perfect cube, a tall, thin box, or a pyramid—it
doesn’t matter, so long as the volume is the same. (This is not true for full-
range loudspeakers, where the shape influences mid-bass and higher-
frequency response.)
If you want a cylindrical enclosure, use large cardboard tubing called
Sonotube
® (manufactured by Sunoco for forming concrete pillars). It’s
112
CHAPTER FOUR
Important: When
calculating the vol-
ume of an enclosure,
be sure to use the
internal (not exter-
nal) dimensions.
Subtract the volume
of items that reduce
the internal volume,
such as bracing and
the back of the
woofer itself. For
ported boxes, the
volume of the port
should be deducted
too. These volume
adjustments normally
amount to about a 
5 percent reduction
in the internal box
volume.

available at construction supply outlets. The cylindrical shape provides
superior rigidity even though its wall thickness is only 1⁄4 to 1⁄2 inch. You
can also use large-diameter PVC pipe, available in diameters as large as 12
inches from pipe suppliers. Cut circles of particle board or MDF to fit
inside the ends and fasten with Liquid Nails or similar construction
adhesive.
Assembly and Bracing
The most popular method of box construction today is to build a six-
sided box without removable access panels. This provides maximum
strength and makes the box more airtight. Access to the inside of the box
is provided through the speaker cutout. The speaker must be mounted
from the outside with this method.
Bracing refers to fastening strips of wood (usually 2 × 2 lumber) along
internal seams, across panels, or between panels. Bracing strengthens the
box and improves its performance by reducing the sound radiated by the
box itself. Corner bracing is important where the precision of cuts for
the box pieces was limited due to the use of a hand saw, jigsaw, or circu-
lar saw. Bracing across panels is beneficial for large enclosures (greater
than 1 ft3).
Because of the speaker cutout, the front panel is usually the weakest. It
should either be braced or constructed from a double thickness of parti-
cle board. If you use the double thickness approach, you may want to pre-
cut the speaker cutout in each thickness before gluing them together,
depending on the capabilities of your jigsaw.
All box joints and bracing should be glued generously and then nailed
or preferably screwed together. Use a wood glue such as Elmer’s
® Carpen-
ter’s Wood glue. Two-inch drywall screws work well for this application. If
you don’t have an electric drill and screwdriver bit for driving screws, you
can use 6d (2-inch) finishing nails.
Bandpass Box Construction
Bandpass designs present some unique challenges when it comes to box
construction.
In other types of designs, the woofer is attached from the outside so
the box can be constructed without any removable access panels. This is
not the case for bandpass boxes. Furthermore, a bandpass system requires
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
113

sealed and ported chambers. The normal construction technique for a
bandpass box is to build the outer cabinet, then add an inner partition to
create the two chambers. The removable access panel can be on the sealed
side or the ported side (Fig. 4-18). If you want to see your woofer in action,
you can use 3⁄8- or 1⁄2-inch-thick Plexiglas for the access panel. It should be
sealed with foam gasket material or nonhardening caulk and then
secured with a generous number of screws.
For the most part, woofer direction isn’t critical. The front of a woofer
provides the best high-frequency response. For full-range systems, good
high-frequency response is an asset, but for bandpass systems it’s a liabil-
ity. For this reason, it’s better to have the back of the woofer in the ported
chamber. (If you use a crossover with a steep slope, this factor shouldn’t
matter.) A second benefit of this orientation is that it provides better cool-
ing for the motor structure of the driver. This points to putting the access
panel on the sealed chamber.
Constructing Ports
Ports can be constructed of PVC pipe (the large-diameter plastic pipe
plumbers use). You can also buy prefab speaker ports that you trim to the
desired length (Fig. 4-19). There is also an adjustable type that has a sliding
outer tube (Fig. 4-20). The advantage of prefab ports is their attractive
appearance—they have a contoured mounting flange and are black. The
disadvantage is that the length you need in the diameter you want may
not be readily available. Another kind of prefab port worth considering is
the Aeroport flared port tube (Fig. 4-21). The two flared ends reduce port
turbulence and provide increased linearity and greater output with less
port noise. The ports come 12-inches long—you trim the center tube for
114
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-18
Removable access
panel construction.

the desired length. The cost of Aeroports is higher than standard prefab
tubes, but the benefits are real.
Here’s the equation to calculate the port length you need:
L =
−0.732D
2117 D 2

f b
2Vb
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
115
FIGURE 4-21
Aeroport flared port
tube. (Courtesy of Light-
ning Audio)
FIGURE 4-19
Fixed prefab ports.
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
FIGURE 4-20
Adjustable prefab
port. (Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)

where port length L and internal diameter D are in inches and box vol-
ume (Vb) is in ft3.
All you need to do is plug in the internal diameter of the port you
want to use, the box frequency (calculated in the “Box Design” section),
and the box volume. (For a bandpass enclosure, the box volume refers to
the volume of the ported section only.)
What port diameter should you use? PVC pipe is available in a number
of diameters, including 1.5, 2, 3, 4, and 6 inches (inner diameter). Prefab ports
cover a similar range, but often have oddball diameters. Small-diameter
ports limit the amount of air passing through them and thus have reduced
effectiveness. They are also more prone to audible vent noise. In general, the
bigger the better, but as a practical matter, try to use a port diameter that is
one-third to one-half the woofer diameter. This is especially important for
bandpass boxes because all of the output is from the port.
Large port diameters usually generate extremely long ports, so you
may need to limit yourself to a smaller practical diameter. PVC elbows
let you create a PVC port that is longer than the box itself by having one
or more 90 degree bends. Prefab ports don’t offer this flexibility. Use a
hacksaw to cut PVC pipe to the desired length and use PVC cement to
attach elbows.
If long port length is a problem, there are other options:
For ported boxes:
• Increase fb. This usually provides a good solution, but you’ll need
speaker design software to check the resulting frequency response. A
40 percent increase in fb will give at least a 50 percent reduction in the
port length.
• Increase the size of the box. This will reduce the required port length
and give you deeper bass too.
• If all else fails, consider using a different driver (with a higher fob).
For bandpass boxes:
• Choose a design curve with higher sensitivity. For example, use b2(3)
instead of b2(0). This will reduce the required port length.
• Choose a design curve with a smaller box. For example, use b2(0)
instead of b5(0). This will reduce the required port length. Speaker
design software is a big help here because it will let you choose any
size smaller box—you’re not limited to the two sizes in the charts.
• If all else fails, consider using a different driver.
116
CHAPTER FOUR

Ports may be located on any side of the enclosure. Ports should be
placed a minimum of 4 to 6 inches from the woofer to prevent interac-
tion between the cone and the vent. The back of the port should be a
minimum of 3 inches from the opposing wall to prevent a reduction of
airflow (Fig. 4-22).
To install the port, hold the small end of the port tube against the box
where you want it to go and trace around it with a pencil. Use a jigsaw to
cut just inside the pencil mark to provide a snug fit. You will then need
to file or sand the hole to make it exact. Use Liquid Nails or a similar con-
struction adhesive to glue the tube to the hole.
Port Design Example
Now we’ll finish the port design for the bandpass box used as an exam-
ple in the “Box Design” section. For the JL Audio 10W3V2-D4 10-inch sub-
woofer, we previously calculated the ported volume and box frequency:
ported volume = 0.440 (0.85 ft3) = 0.37 ft3
fb = (fb/fob) fob = 1.069 (56.9 Hz) = 60.8 Hz
Plugging these in to the port length equation, we get:
L =
−0.732D
=
−0.732D
= 1.548D 2 −0.732D
= 11.74 inches for 3-inch PVC
= 21.84 inches for 4-inch PVC
2117 D 2

(60.8)2 (0.37)
2117 D 2

f b
2 Vb
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
117
Tip: Allow adhesives to
cure before installing
your woofer, since the
fumes released by
some sealants during
curing may have an
appetite for foam sur-
rounds.
FIGURE 4-22
Minimum port spac-
ing.

Since our woofer has a diameter of 10 inches, we would like to have a
port diameter of one-third to one-half that, or 3.3 to 5 inches. For this sys-
tem, a 3-inch diameter PVC port would need to be 11.74 inches long, and
a 4-inch diameter PVC port would need to be 21.84 inches long. Consid-
ering that the ported section of the box is only 0.37 ft3, even the 3-inch
diameter PVC port will be difficult to fit in the box without a PVC elbow.
Using the higher sensitivity b2(3) curve is the other option—it reduces the
required 3-inch diameter port length to a manageable 7.57 inches.
118
CHAPTER FOUR
Multiple Ports
Multiple ports can be used when the look of several smaller ports is preferred
to that of a single large port.
There are two widely used methods for calculating the length of multiple
ports for a single chamber. Only one method is correct—but, unfortunately, it
is the least commonly used.
The incorrect method says that the effective port diameter is equal to the
square root of the sum of the squares of the actual port diameters. This is
equivalent to saying that we can simply add the cross-sectional areas of multiple
ports together and treat them as a single port with the combined cross-sectional
area. This sounds reasonable, but it can lead to errors, as we’ll see below.
The correct way to figure out how long each port should be follows this
simple two-step procedure:
1. Divide the chamber volume by the number of ports you wish to use
for that one chamber.
2. Use that as your Vb (box volume) in the port formula, and calculate how
long each port should be.
Let’s take the previous example using the JL Audio 10W3V2-D4 10-inch
subwoofer. We’ll replace the 3-inch diameter port with four 1.5-inch diameter
ports and see what the two methods give us.
Incorrect Method
According to this method, the effective port diameter of four 1.5-inch ports
is equal to that of a 3-inch port, since both have the same total cross-sectional
area. Plugging this into the port formula yields a port length of 11.74 inches—
the same result we calculated previously.
Correct Method
We want to use four ports, so we divide 0.37 cubic feet by 4. Vb now becomes
0.0925 ft3. Plugging this into the equation using a port diameter of 1.5 inches
gives us a port length of 12.84 inches.
The incorrect method neglects the fact that the end effect (the 0.732D term
of the port equation) changes with port diameter.

Speaker Terminals
Speaker terminals should be used rather than running wire through a
hole drilled in your speaker box. This reduces air leakage and lets you eas-
ily disconnect your speakers.
The most popular terminal types are the spring-loaded pushbutton
type (Fig. 4-23) and binding/banana posts (Fig. 4-24).
The spring-loaded pushbutton types are cheaper and easier to use, but
provide less reliable connections and break fairly easily (Table 4-24). Both
types accept standard speaker wire, but binding/banana posts also accept
spade lugs and banana plugs (Fig. 4-25). These can be soldered onto the
ends of speaker wires for a superior connection.
It’s best to recess mount terminals. This lets you mount the terminals
on the bottom of your box or on a side of it that rests against a wall. It
also reduces the chance of breaking the terminals or accidentally releas-
ing them. Recessed mounting cups with built-in terminals are commonly
available, but their thin plastic construction allows sound to radiate
through them from inside the enclosure. The best approach is to cut a 
3-inch round or square hole where you want the terminal, then glue and
screw a piece of 3⁄4-inch particle board behind it (inside the box). Mount
your terminal to the recessed particle board panel.
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
119
FIGURE 4-23
Spring-loaded push-
button terminal.
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
FIGURE 4-24
Binding/banana
posts. (Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
Tip: Do not tin the
ends of your speaker
wires with solder
unless you actually
solder them to spade
lugs, banana plugs,
or the like. Solder is a
relatively soft alloy
and will readily cold
flow under pressure,
causing compression
connections (such as
binding posts or
unsoldered crimp
connectors) to even-
tually loosen.

Make It Airtight
It’s important to make your speaker enclosure as airtight as possible. This
applies to sealed as well as ported and bandpass enclosures. Air leaks
degrade the box performance and can cause whistles and other noises.
Caulk all internal box seams, the speaker terminals, and the port where
it enters the box. Use a siliconized exterior latex caulk for long life and
easy cleanup.
Air leaks frequently occur where the woofer mounts to the box. Ironi-
cally, woofers have a gasket on their front face, but most woofers are
mounted from the outside of the box so this gasket is on the wrong side.
Install a foam gasket or use a nonhardening caulk between the box and
the woofer to prevent air leakage. DO NOT use regular caulk or silicon
rubber sealant to glue the woofer to the box. You will destroy the woofer
when you later try to remove it for access inside the box. (Trust me, you
WILL want to get inside the box again—you may need to replace a bro-
ken speaker terminal or a foreign object may have mysteriously found its
way through the port inside your subwoofer box.)
In addition to using a gasket or nonhardening caulk to prevent air leak-
age, the woofer should be mounted tightly to the box. Wood screws are
acceptable, but their holes easily strip out if you aren’t careful. A better
alternative is to use tee nuts and machine screws. Tee nuts (Fig. 4-26) are
inserted into the back of a drilled screw hole and then tapped in with a
hammer so their prongs hold them in place. For a high-tech look, use
socket-head-cap (Fig. 4-27) or button-head-cap (Fig. 4-28) machine screws.
For isobarik boxes with front-to-front woofers, both woofers are nor-
mally mounted outside the box, as shown in Fig. 4-29. When mounting
120
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-25
Banana plugs. 
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
Tip: Allow caulk to
cure before installing
your woofer since the
fumes released by
some sealants during
curing may have an
appetite for foam sur-
rounds.
TABLE 4-24
Types of Speaker
Terminals
Speaker Terminals
Comments
Spring-loaded pushbutton
Cheaper and easier to use
Binding/banana posts
Provide better connection, less prone to breakage

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
121
FIGURE 4-28
Button-head-cap
machine screws.
FIGURE 4-29
Isobarik gasketing.
FIGURE 4-26
Tee nuts.
FIGURE 4-27
Socket-head-cap
machine screws.

the drivers, a spacer must normally be used between them to prevent the
two surrounds from touching each other. You can use a ring of medium-
density fiberboard (MDF) with appropriately spaced holes to pass the
mounting bolts/screws through. Use a foam gasket or nonhardening
caulk where one woofer meets the box and where each woofer contacts
the spacer ring. Tee nuts and machine screws are highly recommended for
mounting.
Enclosure Damping
Enclosure damping refers to using fiberglass, polyester, or dacron batting
or similar materials to line or stuff a speaker enclosure.
Enclosure damping is traditionally used for two reasons. First, it
reduces the effects of internal reflections within a speaker enclosure,
which can cause resonant peaks and dips in the frequency response at
mid-bass and higher frequencies. One to two inches of fiberglass are nor-
mally used to line the internal walls of an enclosure for this. This is
important for full-range systems, but because subwoofers are used only
for very low frequencies, lining them with damping material provides no
benefit.
The second use of enclosure damping is to increase the effective size of
a sealed box. Fully stuffing a sealed box can increase its effective size by
15 to 25 percent. This can be a useful technique where space is extremely
tight, but otherwise isn’t worth the trouble. Care must be taken to keep
damping material out of and away from the rear basket of the speaker
itself. If you plan on stuffing, use only materials that do not shed short
fibers. These can find their way into the voice coil gap and cause rubbing
and distortion in the speaker. Enclosure stuffing should not be used for
ported or bandpass boxes.
Finishing Touches
Many products are available to give your handcrafted subwoofer box a
professional appearance and protect it from damage. These include cus-
tom carpet (Fig. 4-30), corner protectors (Fig. 4-31), handles (Fig. 4-32), and
grilles (Fig. 4-33).
Speaker carpet is available in colors to match every automotive interior.
It provides a more durable finish than paint and conceals minor imper-
122
CHAPTER FOUR

SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
123
FIGURE 4-32
Handle. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)
FIGURE 4-33
Grilles. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)
FIGURE 4-30
Custom carpet. 
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)
FIGURE 4-31
Corner protector.
(Courtesy of Parts Express.)

fections in the cabinet. Carpet is normally applied to all sides of a speaker
box using spray adhesive, hot glue, or a staple gun.
Plastic corner protectors reduce damage to the box and other objects if
you bang a corner against something. They also make corners look bet-
ter—it’s difficult to make a corner carpet seam look good otherwise. Plas-
tic or metal speaker grilles protect your expensive woofers from damage
from objects in your trunk, dropped screwdrivers, and pets.
Installation
Refer to Chap. 7 for how and where to install the amp for your subwoofer
system. In general, the subwoofer crossover should be located close to the
subwoofer amp to prevent ignition noise pickup.
Installing a subwoofer system also involves installing the subwoofer
box and adjusting the system. This section tells you how.
Bass Blocking Crossovers
Adding speaker-level bass blocking crossovers in line with each of the
main (especially the front) speakers is recommended when it’s impossible
to use a preamp-level high-pass crossover for those channels. This is the
case with most head unit speaker outputs. This will reduce the burden of
deep bass on the head unit and main speakers, allowing higher volumes
with less distortion. The subwoofer will pick up the slack.
For systems where head unit preamp outputs are used for the subwoofer,
simply install a bass blocking crossover in series with each speaker (Fig. 4-34).
124
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-34
Bass blocking
crossover locations.

When using head unit speaker outputs for the sub, be sure to connect
the subwoofer crossover inputs to the head unit side of the bass blocking
crossovers to prevent blocking bass to the subwoofer (Fig. 4-35).
Bass blocking crossovers should be second-order high-pass filters. You
can buy them pre-made or build your own (Fig. 4-36). In either case, you’ll
need to know the nominal speaker impedance (usually 4 ohms) and
decide on the cutoff frequency you want. Use something close to 100 Hz
for most applications. Choose a higher frequency when the main speak-
ers are weak in bass or unusually small.
If you want to build your own, refer to Fig. 4-36. The formulas allow
you to calculate capacitance and inductance values for any speaker
impedance (R) and cutoff frequency (F ) you want. The table in Fig. 4-36
shows three possibilities, based on standard capacitor values and 4-ohm
speakers. Capacitors should be of the nonpolarized (bipolar) type.
Trunk Sonic Isolation Check
If you plan to use your subwoofer box in the trunk, you should perform
the following check.
Have a friend with a deep voice talk into your open trunk from the
outside. Alternately, you can use a boombox in your trunk. You should be
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
125
Bass Blockers
Bass blocking capacitors (or bass blockers) are commonly used as a low-cost
method of keeping deep bass from getting to front speakers. Ironically, bass
blockers may actually increase the amount of deep bass getting to the speakers.
How can this be? If the impedance of a speaker looked like a 4-ohm resistor
at all frequencies, then bass blocking capacitors would work as advertised—
they would produce a 6-dB/octave high-pass filter with the specified cutoff
frequency. In reality, the impedance of a speaker looks nothing like a 4-ohm
resistor near the resonant frequency of the loaded driver. The capacitance of
the bass blocker interacts with the inductance of the speaker below resonance
to produce a low-frequency response peak that can easily be 3 dB higher than
with no bass blocker at all!
The bottom line on bass blockers is: DON’T USE THEM! If you want to
block deep bass to a speaker and must use a speaker-level filter, use a second-
order crossover for the job. Second-order crossovers are relatively immune to 
the problem just described because they put an inductor in parallel with the
speaker. This inductor effectively swamps out the high impedance of the
speaker near resonance. Second-order crossovers also provide a superior 
12-dB/octave slope.
Tip: If you can’t find a
capacitor with the
value you want, you
can wire capacitors in
parallel (Fig. 4-37).
The capacitance of
parallel-wired capaci-
tors is equal to the
sum of the individual
values.

listening inside the passenger compartment with the windows rolled up.
If you can hear your friend loud and clear, then you’ll have no problem
using a subwoofer in the trunk. If you can barely hear your friend, then
you may want to provide a better path for the sound to get from the
trunk to the passenger compartment.
One method is to cut a hole in the rear deck and conceal it with a
speaker grille. Another is to cut a hole in the panel behind the back seat.
Secure Your Subwoofer
Whether you’ve got a tube enclosure that wants to roll around or a box
that wants to slide, it’s important to secure your subwoofer. If you’ve got
a hatchback, station wagon, sports utility vehicle, or van, the enclosure can
become a projectile in a collision, and must be firmly attached.
126
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-35
Don’t block bass to
the subwoofer!

Nylon tie-down straps are available for this purpose and include vehicle
mounting hardware. They do a great job of securing any size and shape
enclosure without screwing into it. Velcro® hook and loop fasteners (Fig.
4-38) work well for keeping boxes from sliding around in the trunk. By
stapling the “hook side” of the strips to the subwoofer box, the vehicle’s
carpeting can act as a suitable “loop side.” Either of these approaches lets
you easily remove the subwoofer when you temporarily need some extra
room.
A final option is to use flat or 90 degree mounting brackets, available at
any hardware store (Fig. 4-39). These are screwed or bolted to the sub-
woofer and vehicle. Bolt the brackets through the metal of the floorpan
or the frame of the vehicle, with large diameter washers for reinforcement. 
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
127
FIGURE 4-36
Build your own bass
blocking crossover.
FIGURE 4-37
Parallel-wired 
capacitors.
Bass Blocking Crossover
Freq (Hz)
C (mF)
L (mH)
188
150
4.8
141
200
6.4
94
300
9.6
Table values shown for a 4-ohm speaker
FIGURE 4-38
Velcro. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)

Turning It On the First Time
IMPORTANT: Before turning the system on for the first time, turn the
volume controls of the subwoofer amp and the head unit to minimum.
Set the crossover cutoff frequency control to the highest frequency.
After turning the system on, slightly increase the head unit volume to
check that sound is coming from each of the main speakers. If it is not,
check for shorted or open connections.
If sound comes from each of the main speakers, increase the subwoofer
power amp level control. Listen for bass from the subwoofer. If little or
nothing is heard and you are using speaker-level crossover inputs, try set-
ting the head unit’s balance control all the way to one side. If this produces
bass, one of the subwoofer crossover’s inputs has been connected to the sys-
tem backward. If bass is still not heard, check for +12 volts at the subwoofer
crossover power wire and power amp supply and remote turn-on wires.
Inspect for shorted, open, or reversed speaker connections.
System Adjustment, or the Secret 
to Tight Bass
Proper system adjustment is just as important as choosing the right com-
ponents and hooking them up correctly. In fact, a properly adjusted inex-
pensive system easily sounds better than a more expensive one not
adjusted right.
The secret to achieving tight bass with a system having a subwoofer is
to set and keep the head unit’s bass control slightly below the central flat
response position. The subwoofer is then adjusted to fill in.
128
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-39
Mounting brackets.

This provides two important benefits. First, it reduces the burden of
bass on the main speakers and amps. (The subwoofer will pick up the
slack.) This lets you play the stereo louder with less distortion. Second, it
provides tighter, less boomy bass. Vehicle interior acoustics are notorious
for overemphasizing upper bass frequencies. By turning the bass control
down, you reduce this boomy-sounding upper bass. Adjusting the sub-
woofer crossover cutoff frequency for optimum sound allows the sub-
woofer to fill in with a deep, solid-sounding bottom end.
Perform the adjustments in this order for best results. Use your favorite,
CD, cassette or radio station. Use several sources to get a good average.
Initial Settings.
Preset the subwoofer crossover to 100 Hz. If there is a
bass boost feature, turn it off for now. Adjust the subwoofer amp level
control to the point that sounds best, erring on the side of too little bass.
Crossover Polarity Switch.
If there is a subwoofer polarity switch, set
it to whichever position gives you the most bass. The effect is usually small.
Crossover Bass Boost.
If you plan to use the bass boost feature, turn it
on now. In general, it will help extend the system bass response and pro-
vide tighter-sounding bass. If you later find that your subwoofer some-
times distorts, you should turn the bass boost off.
Crossover Cutoff Frequency and Power Amp Level.
Now fine-tune
the cutoff frequency of the subwoofer crossover and the level control of
the subwoofer power amplifier to provide the most natural-sounding bass.
The bass control of the head unit should be slightly below the flat posi-
tion as you do this.
You will find that you need more bass when you are driving to overcome
the masking effects of road noise. (See the box on road noise masking in
Chap. 8.) Try to find a level that is a good compromise for all conditions.
After you’re satisfied with the settings, you can use the bass control of the
head unit to compensate for individual cassettes, CDs, and radio stations.
Bass Transducers
Bass transducers are a relatively new development in car audio. Working
on the principle that low bass is mostly felt and not heard, bass transduc-
SUBWOOFERS AND SUBWOOFER PROJECTS
129

ers directly vibrate the chassis of your vehicle. An example of a bass trans-
ducer is the Aura Bass Shaker (Fig. 4-40).
Bass transducers are most effective when bolted to the floor beneath
the seats. This provides good coupling to the entire vehicle. (Mounting
them directly to the seats may seem like a better idea, but you can feel
where the source of the vibration is.)
Bass transducers have a 4-ohm impedance, and are designed to be
driven like ordinary subwoofer drivers. Any car stereo amp with the
desired power can be used—25 to 50 watts per channel is normally rec-
ommended. Although not strictly required, a crossover is advised to pre-
vent any audible vibrations. (An amp with built-in sub crossover is ideal.)
As with a subwoofer, the level of the amplifier must be properly set for a
realistic effect.
Since bass transducers produce vibration rather than sound, they are
best used in conjunction with subwoofers rather than instead of them.
What bass transducers can give you is the sensation of extremely power-
ful bass with zero boominess.
Bass transducers are ideal for open-air vehicles such as convertibles,
Jeeps, or Trackers. In these vehicles it is almost impossible to achieve the
sensation of solid bass with traditional subwoofers alone because you are
radiating into open air. Bass transducers are also well suited for vehicles
lacking the space for a large subwoofer, such as two-seater sports cars and
small pickup trucks. By using a bass transducer, you can get away with
using a smaller subwoofer having a higher cutoff frequency.
130
CHAPTER FOUR
FIGURE 4-40
Aura Bass Shaker.
(Courtesy of AuraSound.)

Head Unit
Projects
CHAPTER 5
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Head unit is the industry name for an in-dash radio or receiver. Adding
or upgrading a head unit along with a new set of speakers is one of the
most popular car stereo projects—not surprising since the head unit is
the heart of any car stereo system. In many vehicles, head unit projects are
easier than ever with convenient wiring harness adapters and mounting
kits.
If you have a premium factory sound system (such as Delco/Bose or
Ford/JBL), OnStar, or a 2000 and up GM vehicle with the Class 2 data bus
and want to replace your head unit, the situation may be more compli-
cated. See the sections at the end of this chapter for details.
Why Choose an Aftermarket 
Head Unit?
Even if your factory system is top of the line, chances are good it’s miss-
ing many of the features you wished you had. MP3 compatibility, satellite
radio, HD radio, and mobile video are a few examples. Another advantage
of aftermarket head units is easier integration with equipment such as
disc changers, digital music players, amplifiers, and video components. If
you’re interested in mobile video and 5.1 channel audio, Chap. 6 covers all
the options.
Pick One That Fits
Before shopping for head units, you’ll need to determine what size,
mounting method, and depth your vehicle can accommodate. First, it’s
important to understand the basics of how the aftermarket head unit
industry supports the wide diversity of mounting applications with just
a few standard sizes.
Size and Mounting Method Basics
Factory head units come in many sizes and use a number of different
mounting methods. Automobile manufacturers are constantly inventing
132
CHAPTER FIVE

new sizes and mounting methods, which makes it more challenging to use
aftermarket head units. Most aftermarket head units today will directly fit
in Euro DIN, ISO-DIN, and wide-face ISO-DIN vehicle applications. With
the proper mounting adapter kit, these units will also fit virtually any
other late-model vehicle. For older vehicles, universal shaft-style head units
must be used to avoid the need for major dashboard modification.
The most important types of head units (size and mounting method)
are shown in Table 5-1.
Aftermarket DIN-compatible head units are of the correct size and pro-
vide means to support both Euro DIN and ISO-DIN mounting standards.
A front adapter plate is included to support the wide-face ISO-DIN-J
applications. (Without the adapter, you would have a gap on each side of
the head unit in ISO-DIN-J applications.)
Universal shaft-style radios are required for many pre-1984 vehicles.
They can also be used in almost any later vehicle with the proper mount-
ing adapter.
Even though DIN head units can be made to fit almost every late-
model vehicle with the proper mounting adapter kit, there are cases
where this gives the look of a small head unit in a big panel. This is where
GM- and Chrysler-style aftermarket head units come in. These are
designed to fill the large factory openings in many GM and Chrysler
vehicles without a mounting adapter kit.
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
133
TABLE 5-1
Common Head Unit
Size/Mounting
Methods
Name
Comments
Euro DIN
Most common size and mounting method. Flat front design. Fits through
a rectangular hole in dash and snaps into place with locking tabs.
ISO-DIN
Same size as Euro DIN, but mounts to a side-support factory frame using
screws. Common in Subaru, Toyota and Nissan.
ISO-DIN-J
Same as ISO-DIN, but with wider face. Common in Toyota, Nissan and
Mitsubishi.
Universal
Shaft style, fits three-hole dash opening. Mounts from behind dash.
Required for many vehicles prior to 1984.
GM
Front-mount, oversized-face design. Found in many 1982–present GM
vehicles.
Chrysler
Front-mount, oversized-face design. Found in many 1981–2002 Chrysler,
Plymouth, and Dodge vehicles.
Double DIN
Twice the height of ISO-DIN. Used for combined CD/cassette units.
Found in late-model Toyota and Nissan.

Determining What Your Vehicle 
Can Accommodate
In addition to head unit size and mounting method, you also need to
check mounting depth. Head units have a typical mounting depth
requirement that ranges from about 6 to 7 inches. Vehicles can have a
mounting depth of as little as 51⁄2 inches to as much as 12 inches. This
means that not all head units with the proper face size and mounting
method will automatically fit your vehicle. In cases where depth is a prob-
lem, a mounting adapter kit with a molded extension may be available.
One way to determine what size, mounting method, and depth your
vehicle can accommodate is to inspect and measure the vehicle yourself.
This requires familiarity with each of the sizes and mounting methods
listed in Table 5-1 and forces you to remove your old head unit before you
buy a new one. An easier alternative is to consult with a car stereo shop or
use a head unit application guide. Crutchfield takes it a step further.
Their website lets you specify your vehicle, then shows you the head units
that will fit it. Or if you prefer, it will show you everything and tell you
whether it will fit. The Crutchfield catalog (Fig. 5-1) contains a wealth of
information on the many head units they carry.
134
CHAPTER FIVE
What Does DIN
Stand For?
DIN stands for
Deutsche Industrie
Norm, which means
“German Industry
Standard.” The DIN
head unit standard
was created in the sev-
enties and has been
widely adopted in
Europe. It is used
throughout the world
for aftermarket head
units.
FIGURE 5-1
Crutchfield catalog.
(Courtesy of Crutchfield.)

Cassette, CD, Satellite Radio, and 
HD Radio
Deciding whether to choose cassette, CD, satellite radio, or HD Radio is a
matter of personal preference and cost. Many, but not all combinations
are possible, and the features for each format vary considerably from head
unit to head unit. Read the “Performance and Features” section to know
what to look for in each format.
If you want both CD and cassette, you have two options. You can put
a cassette receiver in the dash and add a CD changer in the trunk or else-
where. The other option is to install a combined CD/cassette head unit.
Most of these require a double height (double DIN) dash opening, so they
only fit in some vehicles. The Sanyo FXCD-1350 (Fig. 5-2) manages to fit it
in a standard single-DIN package.
Performance and Features
It’s easy to get confused over all the features and performance aspects of
head units. This section explains what each feature is all about. For con-
venience, features are categorized as general features, radio features, cas-
sette features, CD features, satellite radio, and HD Radio.
General Features
The features in Table 5-2 are important to consider in any head unit,
regardless of how often you listen to the radio or whether you choose cas-
sette, CD, satellite radio, or HD Radio.
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
135
FIGURE 5-2
Sanyo FXCD-1350
combined CD/
cassette single DIN
head unit. (Courtesy of
Sanyo)

Theft Deterrents.
There are a number of types of theft deterrents
available in today’s aftermarket head units:
■Fully detachable face
■Partially detachable face
■Concealable face
■Security code
A fully detachable face lets you take the entire head unit faceplate with
you, leaving only a blank panel behind. A partially detachable face lets
you take only the essential controls, leaving the bulkier ones behind. The
disadvantage of detachable faces is that you need to remove and carry the
faceplate with you.
On some Pioneer units, a built-in alarm system is armed each time the
faceplate is removed and disarmed when it is reinserted into position.
When the alarm is activated, the system emits an ear-piercing tone
through the audio system speakers inside the car.
136
CHAPTER FIVE
TABLE 5-2
Head Unit General
Features
Performance/
Feature
Comments
Theft deterrents
Many deterrents are available: fully and partially detachable
faces, concealable faces, and security code systems.
CD changer controls
Key feature if you want to add a CD changer, DVD changer,
or digital music player now or in the future.
Sound shaping
Tools that go beyond basic bass and treble controls—equaliz-
ers, preset eq curves, time alignment, built-in crossovers, and
more.
Detailed display
Range from single-color, no-frills display of information to
animated displays with full-motion color graphics.
Preamp outputs
One, two, or three sets of RCA jacks on the back of the head
unit to connect an external amp.
Preamp output voltage
Higher voltage makes it easier to get noise-free performance.
Typical range is 1 to 5 volts.
Balanced line driver
High performance, but expensive alternative to preamp 
outputs
outputs.
Remote control
Hand-held and mounted types.
CEA compliant power
Look at CEA compliant power rather than peak power for a
more accurate indication of performance.

Concealable face head units have a manually operated or motorized
fold-down face. Kenwood’s 3D MASK Pro head units automatically dis-
play a blank panel when the ignition is turned off. This approach elimi-
nates the hassle of removing and carrying faceplates; however, it leaves a
complete functional head unit for thieves.
User-programmable security codes are commonly used on high-end
factory units and a number of aftermarket head units. If power to the
unit is ever removed, the security code must be entered to reactivate it.
Instead of entering a number, Eclipse head units have you choose one of
your CDs as a key CD. This disc must be loaded to reactivate the unit
after loss of power.
CD Changer Controls.
This is a key feature if you think you might
want to add a CD changer, DVD changer, or digital music player now or
in the future. Head units with CD changer controls have a special con-
nector on the back for a direct audio connection with the changer or
player, for the best possible sound. They provide all the buttons and dis-
plays needed to support full operation of the changer/player as well.
In general, you’ll need to choose a changer/player from the same man-
ufacturer as the head unit for compatibility. Some controller/changer
combinations have special programming features. For example, you can
specify exactly which track will play on each CD, a great way to eliminate
songs you don’t like. Some let you assign each disc a name that will
appear on the dash display when that disc is loaded.
There are alternate ways to add a changer or player to a system, but
none are as good as using a head unit with CD changer controls. See
Chap. 10 for details.
Sound Shaping.
These are tools that go beyond basic bass, treble, and
loudness controls. Look for built-in graphic or parametric equalizers or
selectable preset equalization curves. Some head units even provide digi-
tal time alignment so the sound from each speaker reaches your ears at
the same time, to improve imaging. 
SRS WOW® is a collection of sound-enhancing tools found in some Ken-
wood head units. It improves the bass performance of small speakers, raises
the sound stage to ear-level, and creates a convincing 3D surround effect.
Pioneer’s Front Image Enhancer provides an enhanced imaging mode
for a more authentic sound stage. This is achieved by using the front
speakers as primary drivers and the back speakers for deep bass and rear
fill. When you want maximum volume or have passengers in the back,
you can turn the feature off.
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
137

Built-in crossovers can now be found in many head units. 12 dB/octave
high-pass filters are a great way to prevent deep bass from overdriving
front speakers, and are better and more convenient than speaker-level bass
blocking crossovers. Subwoofer crossovers are also frequently provided,
but don’t look to them to be sufficient for the job—at best they’ll let you
get away with using a sub amp with an otherwise too shallow crossover
slope.
Detailed Display.
Basic displays give you a single-color, no-frills display
of information. Custom color displays let you choose the color you want,
to match or complement your dash. If you want to add excitement,
choose an animated display with full-motion graphics. Some even let you
add your own images, for the ultimate in customization.
Preamp Outputs.
RCA jacks on the back of the head unit that allow
you to use a standard patch cable to connect an external amp. (Speaker
outputs can be also used to provide signal to some amps, but preamp out-
puts provide a low-noise, low-distortion interface to any amplifier.)
Many head units have a single set of preamp outputs. Head units with
two sets of preamp outputs provide increased flexibility for boosting
with amplifiers. Having two sets of preamp outputs means the head unit
fader control can remain functional for most configurations. Some head
units have three sets of preamp outputs, one of which is intended to be
used for a subwoofer amp.
If you plan to boost your head unit with external amps, see Chap. 7 for
details on how the number of preamp outputs affects your system con-
figuration options.
Preamp Output Voltage.
A higher preamp output voltage makes it
easier to get noise-free performance from external amps. The typical
range is 1 to 5 volts.
Balanced Line Driver Outputs.
Balanced line driver outputs go one
step beyond high-voltage preamp outputs for providing noise-free per-
formance with external components. They provide differential 16-volt
drive, which essentially allows externally induced noise to be subtracted
out. Balanced line driver outputs must be used with crossovers and
amps having balanced line driver inputs. Balanced signals are normally
routed using special XLR connectors and cables. Not for the budget
conscious.
138
CHAPTER FIVE

Remote Control.
There are two categories of remote controls for head
units: hand-held and mounted. Hand-held remotes are useful if you want
to control the head unit from outside the vehicle or from anywhere in a
van or RV. Mounted remotes may be of the type mounted on the steer-
ing wheel within reach of your thumb (Fig. 5-3), or they may be mounted
on the console or steering column. The idea is to make it easier to control
your stereo without taking your hands off the wheel or your eyes off the
road.
CEA Compliant Power.
The amount of continuous power, measured
in watts, that an amplifier produces. The higher the number, the louder
your music can play without distorting. Manufacturers often show peak
power ratings on the faces of their products. Peak power measures the
instantaneous power at the peak output voltage of the amplifier. Look at
CEA compliant power for a more accurate indication of performance. See
Chap. 7 for more details.
Radio Features
If you spend a lot of time listening to the radio, you’ll want to choose a
head unit with good FM performance and features. Look for a tuner with
low FM sensitivity and high FM selectivity. If you like to channel surf, go
for lots of presets and features like preset scan and automatic preset pro-
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
139
FIGURE 5-3
Blaupunkt
Thummer™remote
control. (Courtesy of
Blaupunkt.)

140
CHAPTER FIVE
Low-Power, High-Power, and Very High Power Head Units
For head units, there are actually three distinct power categories (Table 5-3).
These correspond to three types of internal circuitry commonly used for head
units. The power categories arise because of the 12-volt electrical system of the car.
Low-power amps are the least expensive type, and are found in many older
factory and low-cost aftermarket head units. Their power is limited by the
fact that one amplifier output terminal is ground (0 volts) and the other
terminal has a dynamic range of roughly 12 volts (its maximum swing is
limited by the 12-volt power supply). This restricts the CEA compliant power
to approximately 5 watts per channel.
High-power factory and aftermarket head units achieve roughly 4 times the
power of the low-power amps by driving both plus and minus output terminals
via separate internal amps. By driving the minus output terminal with an
inverted version of the signal at the plus terminal, the effective output voltage to
the speaker is doubled. Doubling the speaker voltage results in 4 times the power,
and is good for a CEA compliant 18 watts per channel. This also explains why
you can’t ground one side of the speakers when using high-power head units—
the minus side of the speakers is actually being driven by an internal amplifier.
To achieve power levels greater than high-power head units requires a
power supply voltage greater than 12 volts. DC-to-DC converters are used for
this purpose and can provide any desired voltage. The practical limitation to
power levels is packaging—it’s hard to fit all the required circuitry in a head
unit–sized package and safely dissipate the heat generated. Very high power
head units require amplifier-type power wiring to the battery, due to the high
current draw.
The Panasonic CQ-C9901U (Fig. 5-4) is an example of a very high power
head unit. It produces 60 watts per channel using a DC-to-DC converter and
Tripath Class-T® amplifiers. The Tripath switching amplifiers provide the
high efficiency needed to keep the heat down in the head unit package.
TABLE 5-3
The Differences Between Low-, High- and Very High Power Head Units
Head Unit Type
Internal Circuitry
Power Category
Low-power
12-volt supply, single-ended
5 watts per channel typical
High-power
12-volt supply, internally bridged
18 watts per channel typical
Very high power
DC-to-DC converter supply
>18 watts per channel
FIGURE 5-4
Panasonic CQ-
C9901U very
high power head
unit.(Courtesy of
Matsushita Electric
Corporation of 
America.)

HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
141
gramming. Check out what RDS has to offer too. Table 5-4 gives a sum-
mary of the various radio features.
AM/FM Presets.
These user-programmable push buttons let you go
directly to the station you want. Some head units have as many as 36 pre-
sets available.
Diversity Tuning.
Uses two antennas and a special tuner to improve
reception. It works by automatically selecting the antenna with the best
reception. The speed of the selection process is so rapid that you cannot
perceive it.
Systems with diversity tuning have excellent multipath rejection. Mul-
tipath is that swishing sound you hear when driving around large build-
ings or the suddenly bad reception you sometimes get when you’re
stopped at a traffic light. It’s caused by a reflected version of the radio sig-
nal interfering with the direct signal. Diversity takes advantage of the fact
TABLE 5-4
Head Unit Radio
Features
Performance/
Feature
Comments
AM/FM presets
User-programmable push buttons let you go directly to the
station you want.
Diversity tuning
Uses two antennas and a special tuner to improve reception.
FM mono/
Allows you to improve the signal-to-noise ratio during weak 
stereo switch
signal conditions.
RDS
Enables your head unit to display the station name and other
text. Allows station tuning by format. Works only for FM
stations transmitting RDS.
Preset scan
Plays a brief sample of what’s on each of your preset radio
stations.
Station scan
Plays a brief sample of what’s on each strong station.
FM mono sensitivity
Tells you how weak an FM station a tuner can pick up.
FM selectivity
Tells you how well a tuner can reject the signal of a nearby
interfering radio station.
FM stereo separation
The ability of an FM tuner to recreate the proper stereo image.
Automatic preset 
Automatically loads your presets with the strongest available
programming
signals.

that it is extremely likely that there is good reception at one of the anten-
nas at all times.
FM Mono/Stereo Switch.
Allows you to revert to mono mode during
weak signal conditions to improve the signal-to-noise ratio. On some head
units, operation is automatic.
RDS.
Enables your head unit to display the station name, song title, and
artist and other text messages that many FM radio stations now include
with their broadcast signal. Also allows you to tune radio stations by
music format, such as rock or jazz.
142
CHAPTER FIVE
More About RDS
RDS stands for Radio Data System. This term is commonly used to refer to the
European system as well as the newer, slightly different U.S. system. (The official
name of the U.S. system is RBDS, short for Radio Broadcast Data System.) Over
1,500 U.S. FM stations use RDS, most of them in the top 50 markets.
RDS is a system for sending digital information along with the regular FM
program. You can receive it using one of the newer tuners that have RDS
decoding and an alphanumeric display built in. The RDS data stream can
carry lots of useful data, such as:
■
Station name (WFBQ or Q95)
■
Format (country, rock, jazz, etc.)
■
Song title and artist or other text
■
Time of day
■
Traffic alerts
■
Weather alerts
Some stations use RDS just for its basic features, displaying their station
name and format on RDS radios. With an RDS radio (Fig. 5-5), a scan looks first
for RDS stations. If you further scan by format, then the radio will only stop
at RDS stations that identify themselves as broadcasting that format. All of the
rest are ignored.
RDS can also update some head units’ clocks. With a unit capable of
receiving the traffic and weather alert features of RDS, you can be alerted with
reports even while listening to a CD.
FIGURE 5-5
Blaupunkt
Casablanca
MP54 CD/MP3
head unit with
RDS. (Courtesy of
Blaupunkt.)
More About
Multipath
The nature of a multi-
path signal is such
that the received radio
signal can drastically
change strength over a
distance of only 
5 to 10 feet. This is
because the typical
half-wavelength of an
FM signal is about 5
feet, and cancellation
often occurs as two
signals travel different
path distances to
reach the same point
(hence “multipath”).
If there is cancellation
at one point, then
about 5 to 10 feet
away there is usually a
useful-strength point.

Preset Scan.
Touch a button and your receiver automatically plays a
brief sample of what’s on each of your preset radio stations. Touch the
button again when you hear something you want to stay with.
Station Scan.
Touch a button and your receiver automatically plays a
brief sample of what’s on each strong station. Touch the button again
when you hear something you want to stay with.
FM Mono Sensitivity.
This figure tells you how well a tuner can pick
up weak FM radio signals. Lower values are better. Expressed in decibel
femtowatts (dBf).
FM Selectivity.
Alternate channel selectivity tells you how well a
tuner can receive a desired radio station’s signal while rejecting the signal
of a nearby radio station. It is rated in decibels. Unlike the spec for sensi-
tivity, the higher the number for selectivity the better. A good figure is
75 to 80 dB.
FM Stereo Separation.
A measure of the ability of an FM tuner to
recreate the proper stereo image. Normally specified at 1 kHz and mea-
sured in decibels. Anything 30 dB and above should be considered
acceptable.
Automatic Preset Programming.
Different manufacturers have dif-
ferent names for this feature. Activate it and the tuner automatically loads
your presets with the strongest available signals. This makes finding sta-
tions easier when you’re traveling.
Cassette Features
If you listen to a lot of tapes, look for a wide frequency response and
Dolby noise reduction. Most prerecorded tapes use Dolby B, but if you
record your own with Dolby C you may want a deck that offers both B
and C. For features, look for auto reverse and auto music search. Choose
soft-touch electronic controls if you dislike the feel of mechanical ones.
Table 5-5 shows a range of cassette features.
Auto Music Search.
Fast-forwards or rewinds to the next song and
begins to play automatically. Multitrack auto music search skips forward
or backward over multiple songs—hit the fast-forward or rewind button
once for each track you want to skip over.
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
143

Auto Reverse.
Automatically plays the other side of the tape when the
end is reached. This feature also lets you switch to the other side of the
tape at the push of a button.
Dolby.
Noise reduction system to virtually eliminate tape hiss. Head
units with this feature decode Dolby-encoded tapes during playback. Dolby
B is the most widely used system, but Dolby C offers a greater improvement
in signal-to-noise ratio. Dolby is not as important in the relatively noisy
automotive listening environment as it is in the home. Note: You have to
record with Dolby C to get any benefit from a Dolby C car deck.
Tape EQ Switch.
Selects the best equalization response according to the
type of tape—normal, high-bias, or metal. In some head units selection is
automatic.
Tape Frequency Response.
The frequency range a tape deck can
faithfully reproduce. Humans can hear sounds as low as 20 Hz and as
high as 20 kHz.
144
CHAPTER FIVE
TABLE 5-5
Head Unit Cassette
Features
Performance/
Feature
Comments
Auto music 
Fast-forwards or rewinds to the next song and begins to play 
search
automatically.
Auto reverse
Automatically plays the other side of the tape when the end is
reached.
Dolby
Noise reduction system to virtually eliminate tape hiss.
Tape eq switch
Selects the best equalization response according to the type of
tape—normal, high-bias, or metal.
Tape frequency 
The frequency range a tape deck can reproduce.
response
Power-off 
Disengages the pinch roller from the capstan when you turn off 
release
the tape deck. Prevents a flat spot in the pinch roller.
Radio during 
Automatically plays the radio when a tape is fast-forwarding 
rewind
or rewinding.
Tape signal-to-
A measure of how well a cassette player silences background 
noise ratio
noise. Almost purely a function of whether the deck has Dolby, 
and which type.
Soft-touch controls
More luxurious than the traditional spring-loaded mechanical
buttons.
Wow and flutter
How stable the tape playback speed is.

Power-Off Release.
Disengages the pinch roller from the capstan
when you turn off the tape deck or turn off your car without first eject-
ing the tape. Prevents a flat spot from forming on the pinch roller, as well
as a crease in the tape.
Radio During Rewind.
Automatically plays the radio when a tape is
fast-forwarding or rewinding. On some head units this feature is auto-
matic; on others it’s selectable.
Tape Signal-To-Noise Ratio.
A measure of how well a cassette player
silences background noise. Ratings are in decibels; higher ratings indicate
less noise. This spec is almost purely a function of whether the deck has
Dolby noise reduction and which type. Don’t be swayed by better specs
on decks with Dolby C if you only listen to Dolby B tapes: Chances are
the performance with Dolby B tapes is the same as for decks with only
Dolby B. In other words, you have to record with Dolby C to get any ben-
efit from a Dolby C car deck.
Soft-Touch Controls.
Soft-touch electronic controls are more luxuri-
ous than the traditional spring-loaded mechanical buttons. When you
insert or eject a cassette, the deck automatically loads or smoothly
unloads the tape. Soft-touch controls also make possible a number of
advanced features, such as multi-track auto music search and blank skip.
Wow and Flutter.
This spec indicates how stable the cassette deck’s
playback speed is. The lower the percentage, the better.
CD Features
A CD player in the dash is now considered standard equipment. Excellent
frequency response and signal-to-noise ratio are the norm, and features
like intro scan, random play, and track repeat are found on almost all
models. A model with electronic shock protection can help reduce skip-
ping on bad roads. The most important differentiating CD feature is
MP3/WMA playback—some head units support neither, some MP3 only,
others MP3 and WMA. If you’re a competitor or plan on using super-
high-power amps, you’ll want to shop for a unit with higher signal-to-
noise ratio. Table 5-6 provides an overview of CD features.
Number of Discs.
Single-disc capacity is standard for CD head units.
An exception is the Nakamichi MB-VI (Fig. 5-6), a head unit with a built-
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
145

in six-disc CD changer. The MB-VI is a DIN-compatible unit, so it will eas-
ily fit in most dash openings. 
CD-R, CD-RW Compatibility. CD players with this capability can
play audio CD-Rs and/or CD-RWs as well as prerecorded CDs. Most CD
players will play CD-Rs, but some will not play CD-RWs (rewriteable
discs). This is an important feature if you record your own CD-RW
discs.
146
CHAPTER FIVE
TABLE 5-6
Head Unit CD
Features
Performance/
Feature
Comments
Number of discs
Single-disc capacity is standard, six-disc capacity is available.
CD-R, CD-RW 
Can play audio CD-Rs and/or CD-RWs as well as prerecorded 
compatibility
CDs.
CD text display
CD players with this feature will display the song title, album
name, and artist for CDs having CD text information encoded
on them.
MP3/WMA playback
Allows you to listen to CDs with MP3- or WMA-compressed
music files.
ID3 tag display
Similar to CD text display, but for MP3/WMA files.
CD frequency 
The frequency range a CD player can reproduce.
response
Electronic shock 
A buffer memory used as a reserve against skipping.
protection
Intro scan
Lets you hear the first few seconds of each track. Hit the
button again when you hear the song you want.
Random play/shuffle
Mixes up the order of songs for variety during playback.
CD signal-to-noise ratio
A measure of how well a CD player silences background noise.
Zero-bit detect
Mutes the output whenever a series of zeros is detected in the
digital bitstream, for complete silence between songs.
FIGURE 5-6
Nakamichi MB-VI
six-disc head unit.
(Courtesy of Nakamichi.)

CD Text Display. CD players with this feature will display the song title,
album name, and artist for CDs having CD text information encoded on
them.
MP3/WMA Playback. Allows you to listen to CDs with MP3 or WMA
compressed music files. Some players support MP3 only, others support
MP3 and WMA. With this feature, you’ll also want ID3/WMA tag dis-
play. 
ID3/WMA Tag Display. Similar to CD text display, but for MP3/WMA
files. CD players with this feature will display the song title, album, artist,
year, genre, and comments for MP3 files having ID3 tags and for WMA
files having WMA tags. Later versions of ID3 (ID3v1.1, ID3v2) add even
more information capabilities. This is a very useful feature if you play
MP3s, because so many of them fit on a CD.
CD Frequency Response.
The frequency range a CD player can faith-
fully reproduce. Humans can hear sounds as low as 20 Hz and as high as
20 kHz. Virtually every CD player exceeds this range.
Electronic Shock Protection.
Electronic shock protection is a buffer
memory used to store music as a reserve against skipping. It can signifi-
cantly reduce skipping on bumpy roads or off road.
Intro Scan.
Lets you hear the first few seconds of each track. Hit the
button again when you hear the song you want.
Random Play/Shuffle.
Mixes up the order of songs for variety during
playback.
CD Signal-to-Noise Ratio.
A measure of how well a CD player silences
background noise. Ratings are in decibels; higher ratings indicate less
noise. The signal-to-noise ratio of CD players is generally so good that
noise picked up by other means determines the system noise level. Unless
you’re a competitor or plan on using super-high-power amps, don’t place
too much emphasis on this spec.
Zero-Bit Detect.
Mutes the output whenever a series of zeros is
detected in the digital bitstream. The result is complete silence between
songs. This is important if you’re a competitor, but otherwise you’ll never
hear the difference.
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
147

Satellite Radio
Satellite radio provides unparalleled musical variety (over 65 channels of
commercial-free music per service), news, sports, and entertainment.
148
CHAPTER FIVE
MP3, WMA, and WAV Digital Audio Formats
MP3 compression revolutionized the audio industry by allowing music
files to be small enough to transfer over the Internet and efficiently stored in
computers and music players. This revolution has changed the way people
exchange and listen to music, and has spawned many exciting new products
and features in car stereo. 
Even though MP3 started it all, it’s not the only game in town. Newer
compression schemes such as WMA outperform MP3 and are gaining in
popularity. Table 5-7 shows a comparison of MP3 and WMA compression at
near-CD quality to the uncompressed WAV format.  More details on each of
these formats is below.
WAV
Standard audio format for Windows, used for storing high-quality,
uncompressed sound. WAV files can contain CD-quality (44.1 KHz/16-bit) audio
signals. However, CD-quality WAV files require relatively large amounts of
memory, roughly 10 MB per minute of music. 
MP3 (MPEG1, Audio Layer 3)
The most popular compression method for storing and transferring music.
Although it uses a “lossy” compression system, MP3 delivers near-CD sound
quality in a file that’s only about a tenth the size of a corresponding WAV file.
When creating an MP3 file, varying amounts of compression can be selected,
depending on the desired file size and sound quality. 
WMA (Windows Media Audio)
Developed by Microsoft, WMA is one of today’s most popular Internet
audio formats. Though not as popular as MP3, WMA outperforms MP3 when
it comes to compression for a given sound quality. WMA produces a file that’s
about half the size of an MP3 file for near-CD quality sound. This
performance advantage makes it handy for applications like portable digital
audio players, where total play time is limited by the amount of internal
memory. Like MP3, varying amounts of compression can be selected,
depending on the desired file size and sound quality.
TABLE 5-7
Compression Comparison of Digital Audio Formats
Format
Bitrate
Sound Quality
MB per minute
WAV
CD
10
MP3
128 kbps
near-CD
1
WMA
64 kbps
near-CD
0.5

There’s also continuously updated traffic and weather for major metro-
politan areas. The sound is near-CD quality and the programming is
available from coast to coast. To receive satellite radio, you’ll need a suit-
able receiver. You’ll also need to subscribe to one of the two satellite radio
providers, XM or SIRIUS.
There are three factors in deciding which satellite radio service is right
for you: the equipment, the fees, and the programming. Once you’ve stud-
ied your equipment options, you may have a strong incentive for choos-
ing one service over the other. But if your equipment options are open,
your decision should be about the programming. Look at the websites of
XM and SIRIUS to learn about the music, sports, news, and entertain-
ment channels they offer. Better yet, talk with people you know who sub-
scribe and share your taste in music. All commercial-free music channels
are not created equal.
You’ve got a number of equipment options when it comes to receiving
satellite radio in your car. These are shown in Table 5-8. Head units with
built-in satellite radio or that are satellite-ready will give you top-notch
sound, put all your controls in one place, and provide a clean installation.
The plug-and-play approach has the advantages of working with any head
unit and letting you use your satellite radio receiver in your car and at
home with a single subscription.
Head unit with built-in satellite radio. Choosing a head unit with
built-in satellite radio (Fig. 5-7) simplifies installation and can reduce over-
all cost, since there are no extra tuner boxes, adapters, or cable assemblies
to deal with. The sound quality is guaranteed to be high quality, since
there’s no FM modulator involved. But since head units with built-in
satellite radio only support a single service, you’re locked in to that service.
Satellite-ready head unit and satellite radio tuner. This approach
offers the flexibility to add satellite radio later, if you’re not quite ready to
take the plunge now. If you buy a head unit that supports both XM and
SIRIUS, you’ll be able to choose either service, or even change services
down the road by purchasing the appropriate satellite radio tuner mod-
ule. With this approach, the tuner module must match the brand and vin-
tage of head unit. The sound quality is guaranteed to be high quality,
since there’s no FM modulator involved. 
Satellite-ready head unit and universal tuner with head unit
adapter.
This is identical to the previous configuration, except that it
uses a universal tuner with head unit adapter instead of a head unit spe-
cific tuner. The XMDirect XMD1000 (Fig. 5-8) is an example of an XM
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
149

satellite radio universal tuner. With this approach, the same XM tuner
works for many head unit brands. Head unit specific adapters are used
between the universal tuner and the head unit. If you switch brand of
head unit, you’ll only have to get a new adapter instead of a whole new
tuner. The biggest benefit of this approach will occur if adapters allowing
you to use XM universal tuners with SIRIUS-ready head units (and vice
versa) become widespread.
Plug-and-play satellite radio tuner with FM modulator. Plug-and-
play receivers let you listen to satellite radio with any head unit by using
an FM modulator (either built-in or included in the car kit). If your head
unit has an aux input, you can use a direct connection for better sound.
150
CHAPTER FIVE
TABLE 5-8
Satellite Radio
Receiver Config-
urations
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Head unit with built-in  
Head units only support one 
satellite radio
satellite radio service.
Satellite-ready head unit and 
Some head units support 
satellite radio tuner
both satellite radio services.
Tuner module must match 
brand and vintage of head
unit.
Satellite-ready head unit and 
Lets you use same tuner for 
universal tuner with head  
many brands of head unit.
unit adapter
Adapter must match brand 
and vintage of head unit.
Plug-and-play satellite radio 
Works with any head unit.
tuner with FM modulator
Optional home kits and 
boombox docking stations let
you enjoy satellite radio any-
where with a single subscrip-
tion.
Plug-and-play tuner with 
Eliminates having a plug-and
docking adapter and 
play tuner cluttering your
satellite-ready head unit
dash and puts all your con-
trols in one place.
Enjoy satellite radio anywhere
with a single subscription.

An optional home kit lets you connect the receiver to your home stereo
and an optional boombox docking station lets you enjoy satellite radio
wherever you go. With plug-and-play, you pay only one subscription for
the ability to have satellite radio anywhere. The Delphi XM2Go MyFi 
(Fig. 5-9) takes this convenience even further. This hand-held receiver has a
built-in FM modulator, built-in satellite radio antenna, ear buds, and a
rechargeable integrated battery. If that weren’t enough, it lets you record
five hours of your favorite shows (even when the unit’s not in use), then
go back and listen later.
Plug-and-play tuner with docking adapter and satellite-ready
head unit.  Docking adapters, such as Blitz Safe's SkyLink Direct, allow
your plug-and-play satellite radio to be installed anywhere in the vehicle
and controlled directly by your satellite-ready head unit.  This eliminates
having a plug-and-play tuner cluttering your dash and it puts all your
controls in one place.  The sound quality is guaranteed to be high qual-
ity, since there's no FM modulator involved.  Best of all, you pay only one
subscription for the ability to have satellite radio anywhere.
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
151
FIGURE 5-7
Alpine CDA-9820XM
head unit with built-
in XM satellite radio.
(Courtesy of Alpine Electron-
ics, Inc.)
FIGURE 5-8
XMDirect XMD1000
universal tuner and
head unit adapter.
(Courtesy of XM.)

HD Radio
HD (high-definition) radio technology provides the best-sounding
AM/FM ever. It produces near-CD quality FM and near-FM quality AM
broadcasts, without a subscription. All you need is a suitable receiver. The
digital signals that make HD Radio possible share the same frequencies as
normal FM and AM broadcasts, but the HD signal is designed not to
interfere with the regular broadcast signal, so old radios aren’t adversely
affected. HD Radio receivers automatically detect the presence of the HD
signal and switch to it, providing improved sound quality and displaying
program information such as song title and artist. 
HD Radio signals aren’t available in all areas, but more radio stations
are upgrading to digital every day. Two thousand U.S. stations have com-
152
CHAPTER FIVE
TABLE 5-9
HD Radio Receiver
Configurations
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Head unit with built-in 
Simplifies installation and 
HD Radio
can reduce overall cost.
HD-ready head unit and 
Offers the flexibility to add 
HD Radio tuner
HD Radio later.
Tuner module must match
brand and vintage of head
unit.
FIGURE 5-9
Delphi XM2Go MyFi
hand-held satellite
radio. (Courtesy of XM.)

mitted to HD Radio, meaning multiple stations in top 100 markets and
reception available to more than 90 percent of the U.S. population. 
You’ve got two equipment options when it comes to receiving HD
Radio in your car: head units with built-in HD Radio, or HD-ready head
units with a separate HD tuner box. Table 5-9 shows the details.
Head unit with built-in HD Radio.
Choosing a head unit with
built-in HD radio (Fig. 5-10) simplifies installation and can reduce over-
all cost, since there are no extra tuner boxes, adapters, or cable assemblies
to deal with. The Panasonic CQ-CB8901U (Fig. 5-10) is a head unit with
this feature. It also plays CDs, MP3, and WMA files and has an aux input.
HD-ready head unit and HD Radio tuner. This approach offers the
flexibility to add HD Radio reception later, if you're not quite ready to
take the plunge now. The Kenwood KDC-MP228 (Fig. 5-11) is an example
of an HD Radio-ready head unit, to be used with an optional Kenwood
HD Radio tuner.  With this approach, the HD Radio tuner module must
match the brand and vintage of head unit. 
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
153
FIGURE 5-10
Panasonic CQ-
CB8901U head unit
with built-in HD
radio. (Courtesy of Mat-
sushita Electric Corporation
of America.)
FIGURE 5-11
Kenwood KDC-
MP228 HD Radio-
ready head unit.
(Courtesy of Kenwood.)

Installation
Once you’ve determined what size, mounting method, and depth your
vehicle can accommodate and what features and performance you want,
you’re almost ready to buy and install your head unit. 
The key to making head unit installation go smoothly is having the
necessary mechanical and electrical adapters, supplies, and tools on hand.
For vehicles with integrated radio/climate controls, premium factory
sound systems, OnStar, steering wheel head unit controls, or 2000 and up
GM vehicles with the Class 2 data bus, more sophisticated mechanical or
electrical adapters are usually required. Details are covered later in this
chapter. The best time to buy adapters and supplies is when you buy your
head unit, so it’s best to understand what you’ll need beforehand. For
guidance on the supplies and tools you’ll need, check out Chap. 2.
Installing a head unit is really two projects in one—a mechanical
mounting project and an electrical wiring project. Each of these is
explained next.
Mechanical Mounting
For many installations, an aftermarket head unit will directly fit the fac-
tory mounting system and dash opening. For these, you don’t need a 
special mounting kit or faceplate. For other installations, the key to
mechanical mounting is using the right mounting kit.
Mounting Kits.
Mounting kits are available to make a DIN head unit
fit in virtually any late-model dash. (For vintage vehicles, a shafted head
unit must be used, and no kit is required.) Different kits are designed to
remedy different mounting problems. For shallow mounting depths, kits
154
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-12
Metra Pocket with a
Purpose GM installa-
tion kit. (Courtesy of
Metra.)

with extended faces can give you additional depth to work with. Some
kits have a half-DIN equalizer opening built in.
The Metra Pocket with a Purpose GM installation kit (Fig. 5-12) will hold
an AM/FM/CD player and a CD jewel case. This solves the problem of
where to stash a CD case and is a great way to take advantage of the extra
space available with a DIN head unit in a GM slot.
Kits for some vehicles require a lot of exposed plastic. For these, it’s
important to match the factory appearance as much as possible. The
Scosche GM1482 kit for Chevy and GMC full-size trucks (Fig. 5-13) is avail-
able in six colors to match the dash.
Some vehicles present special challenges. Starting in 2003, Honda
decided to integrate the climate controls and head unit controls into the
same dashboard panel in their Accords. This made aftermarket head unit
installation an extremely difficult proposition. That same year Metra
responded with the TURBO2 integrated control panel kit (Fig. 5-14). This
kit made it possible to install an aftermarket head unit in an Accord dash
while retaining the factory climate controls.
The point of all this is that not all mounting kits are created equal. Ask
about your options when shopping.
Removing and Installing in an Oversize GM or Chrysler Dash
Opening.
The oversize dash openings found in many GM and Chrysler
vehicles give you lots of options because they have extra space to work with.
You can choose an adapter kit that lets you install a Euro DIN or ISO-DIN
head unit plus a half-DIN equalizer. You can choose a kit that centers the
head unit in a plain panel or one with a storage pocket below the head
unit. If you prefer the look of a head unit face that fills the entire dash
opening, GM- and Chrysler-style aftermarket head units are available.
These are designed to fill the large factory openings in many GM and
Chrysler vehicles, and eliminate the need for a mounting adapter kit.
Before you can install your new head unit, you’ll need to remove the
old one. Normally a factory trim panel will need to be removed first. This
might be attached with screws or spring clips, or a combination of the
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
155
FIGURE 5-13
Scosche GM1482
kit. (Courtesy of Scosche.)

two. Often, screw heads are hidden by the ashtray or the glove compart-
ment door. After you’ve removed all visible screws, gently try to pry the
panel off. Sometimes a putty knife is helpful here. If you find a spot that
doesn’t budge, you’ve either missed a screw or there’s a spring clip behind
it. Don’t use too much force or you’ll break the trim panel. Crutchfield
MasterSheets can really come in handy here because they show you the
locations of hidden clips and screws unique to your vehicle.
After you’ve taken off the trim panel, remove all the screws attaching
the factory head unit to the dash and gently try to pull it out. If it seems
156
CHAPTER FIVE
Tip: Always try to find a way to provide rear support for a head unit. The
bumps and vibrations in the automotive environment can reduce the life of an
unsecured unit and increase skipping in a CD deck or wow and flutter in a
cassette deck. Abuse from potholes and railroad crossings can also put stress on
the installation kit and surrounding dash panels.
A backstrap (strip of metal perforated with a series of holes) is often
supplied with a head unit for rear support (Fig. 5-15). One end of the strap
attaches to a stud on the back of the head unit, the other to an existing bolt or
screw under the dash. The multiple holes give you a choice of attachment
points. You will normally need to bend or twist the backstrap to reach the
point of attachment.
FIGURE 5-15
Backstrap. (Courtesy
of MCM Electronics.)
FIGURE 5-14
Metra 2003/4
TURBO2 Accord kit.
(Courtesy of Metra.)

stuck, there may be some type of rear support. Once you slide the old
head unit out, disconnect the antenna plug and factory wiring harness.
If you’re installing a GM- or Chrysler-style aftermarket head unit, the
installation process is exactly the reverse of the removal process.
If you’re installing a Euro DIN or ISO-DIN head unit, you’ll need a
mounting adapter kit. Most adapter kits are combination Euro DIN and
shaft style or combination ISO-DIN and shaft style, where pieces are cut
away or omitted for nonshafted applications.
For a Euro DIN head unit, the first step is to screw the adapter to the
dash. It should mount the same way the original head unit did. Next, slide
the metal mounting sleeve supplied with the head unit (Fig. 5-16) into the
adapter opening until the small outer lip makes contact with the edges of
the opening. Once you put the sleeve in position, bend the tabs on the
sleeve out to secure it in place. Connect the wires to the head unit and test
it. Now push the head unit into the sleeve—it should click into place.
Install the trim ring, factory trim panel, and backstrap.
For an ISO-DIN head unit, you’ll first need to mount the head unit to
the adapter. This is achieved by using screws in matching holes in the
adapter and sides of the head unit. Next mount the adapter to the dash.
Install the factory trim panel and backstrap.
Removing and Installing in a Euro DIN Dash Opening.
Euro
DIN installations are usually quick and easy. Removal and installation is
done from the front, and no dash panels need to be removed.
The factory head unit is secured in a sleeve by spring clips, which 
you release using a pair of DIN removal tools (Fig. 5-17). These look like 
U-shaped pieces of bent coat hanger and are often included with a new
head unit. Most receivers also have some type of rear support that needs
to be detached before the old head unit is pulled out. Once you slide 
the old head unit out, disconnect the antenna plug and factory wiring
harness.
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
157
FIGURE 5-16
Tabs on Euro DIN
sleeve. (Courtesy of
Crutchfield.)

Your new Euro DIN head unit will come with a metal mounting
sleeve. You may be able to use the sleeve already in place in the dash, or
you may need to replace it with the new one. See if your new head unit
slides in properly and whether it locks into place securely in the old sleeve.
If not, remove the original sleeve by bending back the metal tabs holding
it in place and sliding it out. Slide the new sleeve into position until the
outer lip makes contact with the edges of the opening. Make sure the top
of the sleeve is facing up, then bend the tabs on the sleeve out to secure it
in place.
After you make the appropriate wiring connections and plug in the
antenna, slide the new head unit into the sleeve. Try the head unit to
make sure it’s functioning properly. If everything is OK, push it all the
way in until it clicks into place.
Removing and Installing in an ISO-DIN Dash Opening.
ISO-DIN
dash openings are common among Toyotas and Nissans. The ISO-DIN
mounting method uses factory side support brackets, so no mounting
adapter is needed for ISO-DIN head units. 
Before you can install your new head unit, you’ll need to remove the
old one. Normally a factory trim panel will need to be removed first. This
might be attached with screws or spring clips or a combination of the two.
Often, screw heads are hidden by the ashtray or the glove compartment
door. After you’ve removed all visible screws, gently try to pry the panel
off. Sometimes a putty knife is helpful here. If you find a spot that
doesn’t budge, you’ve either missed a screw or there’s a spring clip behind
it. Don’t use too much force or you’ll break the trim panel.
After you’ve taken off the trim panel, remove all the screws attaching
the factory head unit assembly to the dash and gently try to pull it out.
158
CHAPTER FIVE
Tip: Many cassette 
and CD head units are
shipped with a plastic
or metal locking screw
that you’ll need to
remove before instal-
lation. The owner’s
manual will tell you
whether this is the
case.
FIGURE 5-17
DIN removal tools in
action. (Courtesy of
Crutchfield.)

If it seems stuck, there may be some type of rear support. Once you slide
the old head unit assembly out, disconnect the antenna plug and factory
wiring harness.
For an ISO-DIN head unit, remove the ISO-DIN brackets from the
sides of the factory head unit and install them to the sides of the new
head unit in the same way (Fig. 5-18). The plastic trim ring included with
the new head unit for Euro DIN installations will not be used here. From
this point, the installation process is exactly the reverse of the removal
process. Install the head unit assembly in the dash, then install the fac-
tory trim panel and backstrap.
Electrical Wiring
The key to making the electrical wiring part of head unit installation
easy is to use the proper wiring harness and, if necessary, original equip-
ment manufacturer (OEM) integration and antenna adapters.
Wiring Harness.
Snapped into the back of your factory head unit,
you will find one or more rectangular wiring plugs. This is called the fac-
tory wiring harness, and it contains power, speaker, and various other wires
such as a power antenna turn-on.
Unfortunately, the factory wiring harness will not directly connect to
an aftermarket head unit. For most vehicles, however, you can purchase a
wiring harness (Fig. 5-19) to mate with the existing car harness, so you
don’t need to splice into any of the factory wires. (Crutchfield includes
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
159
FIGURE 5-18
Mounted ISO-DIN
brackets. (Courtesy of
Crutchfield.)

one of these harnesses with the purchase of a head unit.) The wires of this
mating harness are first connected to the appropriate wires of the after-
market head unit. The other end of the harness then snaps right into
your car’s factory wiring harness.
There are a number of good reasons to use the mating wiring harness
approach (Fig. 5-20). With a mating harness, you can do the job of con-
necting wires on a well-lit workbench rather than underneath a dash-
board. Leaving the factory wiring harness intact makes it easy if you ever
decide to reinstall the factory radio. And when you buy a mating wiring
harness, the job of identifying each of the factory wires is done for you.
Use butt-splice or closed-end-splice crimp connectors to attach the
wiring harness wires to your new head unit’s wires. If you prefer, you can
solder the wire ends together and use heat-shrink tubing. Some harnesses
come with bullet connectors already attached, to mate with those on the
head unit’s wires. The most important factor is getting a tight connection
that won’t come loose over time. Harnesses are supplied with a color code
reference chart identifying all the wires (or each of the wires is labeled), so
you don’t need to figure them out yourself.
If a wiring harness isn’t available, Scotchlok connectors can be used to
connect an aftermarket head unit to a factory wiring harness without
cutting off the end of the harness. This makes it easy if you ever decide
to reinstall the factory radio.
OEM Integration Adapters.
In most cases, a wiring harness is all you
need to properly connect an aftermarket head unit to a vehicle’s power
160
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-19
World of wiring har-
nesses. (Courtesy of
Scosche.)

and speaker wires. However, there are many cases where you need to use
an OEM integration adapter between the head unit and wiring harness.
These include:
■Vehicles with chassis-grounded speakers
■Vehicles with common-grounded speakers
■Vehicles with steering wheel head unit controls
■Premium factory sound systems
■2000 and up GM vehicles with the Class 2 data bus 
■Vehicles with OnStar
How do you know if you’re a candidate for an OEM integration
adapter? The easiest and most reliable method is to consult with the
pros—stop by your favorite local car stereo shop or call Crutchfield. They
should each have access to an up-to-date database containing the informa-
tion. You may be able to scope it out yourself. It should be obvious if your
car has steering wheel head unit controls or OnStar. If you have a 2000
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
161
FIGURE 5-20
Use a wiring harness
adapter!

and up GM vehicle, listen to see if the door chime comes through the
stereo—if so, you have the Class 2 data bus. Check for evidence of a pre-
mium factory system by looking for logos on the head unit or speaker
grilles. Chassis-grounded and common-grounded speakers can often be
detected by inspection of trunk speaker wiring.
OEM integration adapters for chassis- and common-grounded speakers
are described here. The last four cases are covered separately, in the next
sections.
Vehicles with chassis-grounded speakers or common-grounded speak-
ers not connected to chassis ground present a problem for high-power
head units. This is because the minus speaker wires from high-power
head units cannot be grounded or tied together and are needed to carry
music as well as DC voltage to each of the speakers.
With chassis-grounded or common-grounded speakers, you have two
options:
■Rewire the system so two independent wires are used for each
speaker.
■Use an OEM integration adapter.
Rewiring the system is a lot of work, but has the added benefit of let-
ting you put in speaker wire better than the 22-gauge stuff commonly
used for factory speaker wiring. If you’re willing to spend the time, this
is the best option from a performance standpoint.
OEM integration adapters provide a quick and easy solution to the
problem of using high-power head units in many vehicles. Unfortunately,
there may be performance sacrifices involved. In the case of OEM inte-
gration adapters for chassis-grounded speaker wiring, it is normal to sim-
ply AC-couple the plus speaker wires through a capacitor and not use the
minus speaker wires from the head unit at all. This results in slashing the
162
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-21
SoundGate FLT1.
(Courtesy of SoundGate.)

power to the speakers by a factor of 4—no better than using a low-power
head unit!
In the case of OEM integration adapters for common-grounded (but
not connected to chassis ground) speaker wiring, it is possible to maintain
a high-power output. Although not all units do this, one device that does
is the FLT1 by SoundGate (Fig. 5-21). Not all OEM integration adapters of
this type maintain a full 20- to 20,000-Hz frequency response, so check
before you buy.
Antenna Adapters.
Aftermarket head units all use the standard
Motorola antenna connector, but many factory antennas do not. That’s
where antenna adapters come in. Adapters are available to adapt various
factory antennas to aftermarket head units (Table 5-10). Adapters are also
available to adapt aftermarket antennas to factory head units, so be care-
ful to get the right adapter.
Factory Steering Wheel 
Control Interfaces
Many late-model vehicles have steering wheel audio controls in addi-
tion to the normal controls on the head unit. They make it easier to con-
trol your stereo without taking your hands off the wheel or your eyes off
the road. When you install an aftermarket head unit, you normally lose
use of these auxiliary controls.
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
163
TABLE 5-10
Types of Factory
Antenna Connectors
Type
Comments
Standard (Motorola)
Used on all aftermarket equipment.
GM mini
Used on 1988 and up GM.
Ford
Used on some 1995 and up vehicles, usually for radios with DSP
controls.
Chrysler
Used on 2002 and up Chrysler/Jeep.
Nissan
Diversity (two-antenna) system.
Volkswagen/Euro
Factory antenna needs 12 volts to turn on impedance-matching 
circuit.

SoundGate now offers solutions to this problem with their factory
steering wheel control interfaces (Fig. 5-22). These allow you to retain use
of auxilliary head unit controls with most popular brands of aftermarket
head units. Interfaces are available for many late-model GM, Ford, and
Chrysler vehicles.
Premium Factory Sound Systems
If you have a premium factory sound system (such as Delco/Bose or
Ford/JBL) and want to replace your head unit with an aftermarket model,
you’ll need to use a suitable OEM integration adapter between the head
unit and wiring harness. The XR4 radio replacement interface from
164
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-22
Soundgate
REMOTE1.5V4 
steering wheel 
control interface.
(Courtesy of SoundGate.)
FIGURE 5-23
SoundGate Premium
Sound System
Interface. (Courtesy of
SoundGate.)

HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
165
Premium Factory Sound System Basics
Although the details of Bose and Ford Premium systems differ (as do different
Bose systems among themselves) they share the same basic principle. They all
use external amplifiers (amplified speakers or an outboard amp) and they all use
differential signals between the head unit and amplifiers.
The advantage of using differential signals is noise immunity. The
differential outputs of the head unit provide two equal but opposite versions
of the music signal (an inverted version and a noninverted version). At the
differential inputs of the amplifier, the two versions of the signal are
subtracted. Since any externally induced noise presumably affects both
versions of the signal the same, subtraction causes cancellation of the noise.
Because one of the music signals was inverted, subtraction also results in a
music signal that is twice the original signal.
The differential outputs of the head unit have a DC offset to eliminate the
need for coupling capacitors in the head unit and amplifiers. DC offset is also
used in Bose systems to “wake up” the amplifiers.
Bose systems often incorporate speakers with impedances much less than
the usual 4 ohms (0.4 ohms is common!). This allows the Bose amplifiers to
achieve much higher power levels without having to incorporate expensive
DC-to-DC converters to provide a higher supply voltage.
GM’s Class 2 Data Bus
In 2002, GM added a new twist to some of its premium factory sound
systems—Class 2 data bus control. GM’s Premium/Smart Bose system is used in
2002 and later full-size trucks and SUVs. With this system, the head unit
provides fixed-level audio signals to the factory amplifiers. The head unit issues
commands to each amp via the Class 2 data bus to control volume, fader, and
balance. This approach provides improved noise immunity, but makes adding
an amp to your head unit more challenging.
Chrysler/Infinity Systems
Like Bose and Ford Premium systems, Chrysler/Infinity systems use external
amplifiers (amplified speakers). Unlike Bose and Ford, Chrysler/Infinity
systems use standard head unit technology. This approach allows upgrading to
the premium system in the assembly plant by simply using amplified speaker
assemblies instead of normal ones.
Some earlier Chrysler/Infinity systems (prior to 1995) use low-power head
units; the rest use high-power head units. If you want to replace a high-power
factory head unit with a high-power aftermarket model (and keep the
amplified speakers), no OEM integration adapter is required. If the factory
head unit is low power, you will need to use an OEM integration adapter of
the type normally used for chassis-grounded speaker wiring.
If you’re replacing the factory head unit, be sure to connect the remote
turn-on wire from the aftermarket head unit to the remote turn-on wire in
the factory harness. Chrysler/Infinity systems use this wire to “wake up” the
amplifiers.
Another approach you can use when replacing the factory head unit is to
bypass the amplifiers at the amplified speakers. This is feasible in Chrysler/
Infinity systems because standard-impedance speakers are used. (This is not the

SoundGate (Fig. 5-23) converts aftermarket head unit signals to the low-
level differential type audio signals used by many GM and Ford premium
factory sound systems. For more details on how premium factory sound
systems work, see the sidebar.
2000 and Up GM Vehicles with the
Class 2 Data Bus
General Motor’s Class 2 data bus was designed to reduce the amount of
wiring in vehicles by providing serial communication (rather than more
wires) between system components. Starting in model year 2000, the Class
2 data bus was connected to factory head units in some vehicles. In some
cars, this bus connection to the head unit is used only for the radio anti-
theft feature and vehicle warning chimes. In other vehicles, the bus con-
nection to the head unit also allows the factory radio to act as a control
center for programming a number of vehicle functions. In either case,
simply replacing the factory head unit means a loss of important vehicle
functions. But with the proper adapters and harnesses, it’s possible to
replace a Class 2 data bus head unit and retain full functionality of your
vehicle’s features.
Chime Module Interfaces
In most of their Class 2 data bus vehicles, GM uses the factory head unit
to play warning chimes through the front left speaker. Replacing the fac-
tory head unit is a serious issue in these vehicles because warning chimes
for high coolant temperature, low oil pressure, and other safety related
chimes are lost when the head unit is replaced.
SoundGate’s GMCHIME (Fig. 5-24) solves this problem by bringing the
chime warnings back into the vehicle via a compact, easy-to-install inter-
face unit. GMCHIME’s self-contained speaker and digital electronics
166
CHAPTER FIVE
case for Bose systems, which commonly use ultra-low-impedance speakers.) By
bypassing, you will lose the benefit of custom equalization built into the
factory amps, but you will gain the ability to boost the head unit with your
own amp.
Tip: Some interfaces
are two-channel units.
If this is the case, you
will need to buy two
units to retain func-
tionality of your head
unit fader and balance
controls.

duplicate the sound of each of the four chimes used by GM. The
GMCHIME interface also provides a Class 2 data bus generated acces-
sory/ignition lead. This lead is needed to shut off the head unit when the
ignition is off, and is absent from the wiring harness in some GM vehicles.
Relocation Harnesses
In some vehicles, the head unit is used for programming car functions
over the data bus in addition to playing warning chimes. These functions
include oil life reset, low tire pressure reset, delayed headlamp illumina-
tion, automatic door lock and unlock mode, remote visual verification,
content theft operation, remote keyless entry programming, and horn
chirp on timer. If the factory head unit is removed, these functions are
lost, and there is no OEM integration adapter available to restore them. 
For these vehicles, a head unit relocation harness (Fig 5-25) can be used
to relocate the factory head unit to the trunk. The relocation harness
HEAD UNIT PROJECTS
167
FIGURE 5-24
SoundGate
GMCHIME chime
module interface.
(Courtesy of SoundGate.)
FIGURE 5-25
Best Kits BHA2004T
head unit relocation
harness. (Courtesy of
Best Kits and Harnesses.)

extends the factory wiring, allowing the relocated factory head unit to
program car functions as well as play warning chimes through the fac-
tory speaker system. The relocation harness also provides power and
speaker wires for the dash-mounted aftermarket head unit. 
Vehicles with OnStar
The OnStar system is standard equipment in many late-model GM,
Acura, Audi, Saab and Subaru vehicles. OnStar uses cell phone and GPS
technology to provide emergency and other helpful services to sub-
scribers. The problem for aftermarket audio is that the OnStar system
routes information through the factory head unit. Replacing the head
unit disables OnStar.
An OnStar interface (Fig. 5-26) can be used to retain your OnStar fea-
tures while replacing the factory head unit. A variety of models are avail-
able, depending on your application. Some are for head unit–only
replacement, others for when you’re replacing the head unit and adding
amps. Some models even include a GM chime interface, so you don’t need
to add a separate interface to solve your Class 2 data bus problem.
168
CHAPTER FIVE
FIGURE 5-26
SoundGate STAR-
MOD2V2 OnStar
interface. (Courtesy of
SoundGate.)

Mobile Video
and 5.1
Channel Audio
CHAPTER 6
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Mobile video and 5.1 channel audio are two of the most exciting new
developments in mobile entertainment. The link between them is the
DVD. Although there are other video and 5.1 audio sources, DVDs rule. So
when you’re planning your mobile video system, it’s a great time to think
about 5.1 channel audio too.
Mobile Video Configurations
There are numerous ways to add mobile video to your vehicle. Which is best
depends on whether you’re planning on entertaining the kids in the back-
seat or yourself, what type of vehicle you have, and, of course, your budget.
Table 6-1 lists the most common mobile video configurations. Keep in
mind that you can add an additional monitor or monitors, DVD changer,
and other video sources like TV tuner, VCR, satellite TV receiver, or digi-
tal video player to most of the configurations.
Even if you’re not planning on adding any additional monitors, check
out the section “Monitor Performance and Features” for what to look for
in the built-in monitor of your DVD player.
DVD Head Unit with Built-In Monitor
A DVD head unit with built-in monitor is the ultimate in front-seat
entertainment. But the benefits go way beyond being able to watch
movies. Having a big up-front display is perfect for wading through fold-
ers of MP3 titles, monitoring a rearview camera, or as a navigation system
display. If you have a touch-screen monitor, it’s even better. Touch screens
give you a graphical user interface rather than lots of tiny buttons to
command your system. A DVD head unit can also serve as the center-
piece of a 5.1 channel audio system.
Most DVD head units with built-in monitor have motorized retractable
displays that let you fit a 6.5- or 7-inch monitor in a single DIN head unit
(Fig. 6-1). This is a clever solution to the problem of where to fit a monitor
in the dash, and provides stealth when you’re out of your car, to help deter
theft. But with a retractable monitor, you need to be sure that the
extended display doesn’t block important dashboard controls or air vents,
or interfere with the shift lever or stick shift as it’s extending/retracting.
If you have a double-DIN dash opening, you can use a DVD head unit
with a non-retracting display. This provides an attractive flush mount
170
CHAPTER SIX

and reduces the chances of any clearance problems. The Kenwood
Excelon DD7015 (Fig. 6-2) is an example of this approach and features a 6.5-
inch touch-screen monitor. The monitor motors down for access to the
DVD/CD slot.
DVD Head Unit with Separate Monitor
A DVD head unit with separate monitor is the best option if you want a
DVD player in the dash but prefer a monitor (or monitors) elsewhere. This
configuration also makes sense if your main interest is audio. A DVD
player in the dash gives you 5.1 channel sound capabilities (see the section
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
171
TABLE 6-1
Mobile Video Con-
figurations
Configuration
Comments
DVD head unit with built-in monitor
Ultimate in front-seat entertainment. An
in-dash monitor is also ideal for wading
through folders of MP3 titles, monitoring
a rearview camera, or as a navigation sys-
tem display.
DVD head unit with separate monitor
Best option if you want a DVD player in
the dash but prefer a monitor elsewhere.
This configuration also makes sense if
your main interest is audio—a DVD
player in the dash gives you 5.1 channel
sound capabilities, and a recordable DVD
can hold over a thousand MP3 songs.
CD head unit controlling DVD changer
Requires a head unit with changer con-
trols, DVD changer, and monitor. Provides
a great way to add video and audio func-
tionality in situations where replacing the
head unit is difficult or impossible.
Separate DVD player with separate monitor
Requires considerably more installation
effort than overhead or headrest DVD
players with built-in monitors. Can make
sense if you want a monitor in a size or
location not feasible with an overhead or
headrest player/monitor.
Overhead/headrest DVD player with 
Simplest way to provide permanent 
built-in monitor
backseat entertainment.
Portable DVD player with built-in monitor
Easiest and cheapest way to provide back-
seat entertainment. Downside: cable clut-
ter, lost space, and rigging and unrigging
hassles.

172
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-1
Pioneer AVIC-N2
DVD head unit with
retractable display.
(Courtesy of Pioneer.)
FIGURE 6-2
Kenwood Excelon
DD7015 DVD head
unit with flush-
mount display. 
(Courtesy of Kenwood.)
FIGURE 6-3
Alpine DVA-9965
DVD head unit. 
(Courtesy of Alpine 
Electronics, Inc.)

on 5.1 Channel Audio Sources in this chapter), and a recordable DVD can
hold well over a thousand MP3 songs—a digital jukebox in itself. The
Alpine DVA-9965 DVD head unit (Fig. 6-3) is an example of this approach
and is packed with features. With the addition of a compatible touch-
control monitor, backseat passengers can control the video source.
CD Head Unit Controlling DVD Changer
DVD changers (covered in detail in Chap. 10) play DVDs as well as CDs, and
can be controlled using the changer controls of compatible CD head units.
In this configuration, the DVD changer acts as the main video source and
provides video to one or more monitors. This setup gives you the benefits
of a video system with DVD changer and a CD changer with MP3 playback,
all controlled by a CD head unit that you may already have in your dash.
This approach can be used with a factory head unit having CD
changer controls, by using an appropriate OEM interface changer con-
verter or a factory compatible DVD changer. Overall, it provides a great
way to add front- or backseat video plus audio functionality in many sit-
uations where replacing the head unit is difficult or impossible.
Separate DVD Player with Separate Monitor
Separate DIN or near-DIN sized DVD players are available inexpensively,
for under-seat, under-dash, in-dash, or custom console mounting. You’ll
need to provide a separate monitor or monitors. For sound, you can buy
a set of wireless headphones, or listen through the car’s sound system
using your head unit’s aux inputs.
Installing separate components requires considerably more installation
effort than the combined solution offered by overhead or headrest DVD
players with built-in monitors. But using separates can make sense if you
want a monitor in a size or location that’s not feasible with an overhead
or headrest player/monitor.
Overhead/Headrest DVD Player with 
Built-In Monitor
An overhead or headrest DVD player with integrated monitor is the sim-
plest way to provide permanent backseat entertainment. Compared to
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
173

using a portable DVD player, overhead and headrest players are always
ready to play and eliminate the cable clutter, lost passenger compartment
space, and rigging and unrigging hassles of a portable player.
With an overhead or headrest player system, you’ll need to provide a 12-
volt power connection to the player. Beyond that, it depends on whether
you want the player’s audio output wired to your car’s sound system and
whether you want to connect a second video source or monitor. Many
players include wireless headphones. Some have a wireless FM transmitter
for listening over the car’s sound system without an A/V connection to
the head unit.
Overhead players provide viewing that’s good for both sides of the back-
seat or viewing in second and third rows of seats in vans and large SUVs.
The Panasonic CY-VHD9500U overhead DVD system (Fig. 6-4) is an exam-
ple of this approach. It has two sets of wireless headphones, so you don’t
need to connect it to your car’s audio system.
Vehicle-specific overhead players are available for many popular SUVs.
These replace the factory overhead console and provide a factory-
installed appearance, plus simplify installation. Overhead players for the
Railport Vehicle Personalization System (see sidebar) are also becoming
available, and further simplify installation. Both vehicle-specific and Rail-
port overhead players offer the advantage of being able to cleanly remove
the player when it comes time to sell or return your vehicle.
A disadvantage of overhead mounting is that the monitor can block
the rearview mirror of the driver, especially with large monitors and low-
roofed vehicles. Mounting an overhead monitor offset from center may
provide a good solution in some vehicles. Some models feature rotatable
displays, an asset for offset mounting.
174
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-4
Panasonic CY-
VHD9500U over-
head DVD system.
(Courtesy of Matsushita
Electric Corporation of
America.)

Headrest players provide optimum viewing for individual backseat pas-
sengers, but are difficult to share, so you'll want to install a second headrest
player or auxiliary monitor. This is more expensive than sharing a single
overhead player/monitor, but provides superior viewing—and if you
choose dual headrest players, each passenger can watch his own DVD.
The Audiovox headrest DVD system (Fig. 6-5) provides dual vehicle-
specific replacement headrests with DVD player/monitors. You simply
replace the factory headrests with the player headrests and connect them
to 12-volt power. 
A big advantage of headrest players is restorability. If you have a leased
vehicle or want to sell your car without the system, you remove the
player/monitor headrests and reinstall the factory headrests.
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
175
FIGURE 6-5
Audiovox headrest
DVD system. (Courtesy
of Audiovox Electronics
Corp.)
Railport Vehicle Personalization System
The Railport Vehicle Personalization System by Johnson Controls (JCI) consists
of two parallel overhead rails that run from the front to the rear of a vehicle,
down the center of the headliner. The vehicle owner can equip the system with
various electronic and non-electronic modules, such as DVD players, flip-down
monitors, and storage devices.
This standardized overhead rail is used in Ford minivans, SUVs, and larger
pickup trucks, and is being adopted by Chrysler and General Motors. It’s
estimated that there will be over 1 million vehicles in 2005 with the JCI
Railport, projected to grow to 10 million vehicles by 2008.
The Railport rails aren’t electrified; wires are run through the channels so
that electrical devices can be powered at predetermined positions along the
rails. Although the modules can be removed and replaced, you can’t slide the
modules from one row of seats to another, for crash reasons.

Portable DVD Player with Built-In Monitor
A portable DVD player with built-in monitor is the easiest and cheapest
way to keep the kids in the backseat entertained on long drives. You can
also share a portable player between multiple vehicles and use it at home,
in your hotel room, or cabin.
Some players are designed to hang from the backs of front seats, some
are designed to sit on the front or rear center console, and others can be
used in either spot. Regardless of where they’re located, they must be
secured with straps to prevent them from becoming a projectile in a
crash. A DC adapter plugs into the cigarette lighter for power in your car,
and an AC adapter is used at home. Table 6-2 tells you what to look for in
a portable DVD player.
The disadvantages of portable players are the cable clutter of power and
headphone wires, the lost passenger compartment space, and the rigging
and unrigging hassles of strapping it down. Theft is also a concern if the
player is left in the vehicle. If you like the thought of backseat entertain-
ment without these problems, consider an overhead or headrest DVD
player with integrated monitor.
Monitor Locations
Adding monitors is a great way to improve your mobile video system.
Since off-axis viewing of LCD displays is limited, it’s sometimes difficult
176
CHAPTER SIX
TABLE 6-2
What To Look for in
a Portable DVD
Player
Performance/Feature
Comments
Screen size
6 or 7 inch standard, up to 10 inches available.
Mounting
Choose seat back, center console, or both.
Wireless headphones
Avoids cable clutter and snapped wires.
FM modulator
Lets you listen through the car’s sound system.
TV tuner
Lets you watch TV through antenna or cable TV jack.
A/V inputs
Lets you connect video games to the player.
A/V outputs
Lets you connect to a larger TV to watch DVDs.
Rechargeable battery
Use player where there is no power available. Battery
life often limited to one movie.

to share a single (or even two) monitors. Designing your system with mul-
tiple monitors gives you more placement flexibility. You don’t have to
compromise obstructing the rearview mirror or distracting the driver in
an attempt to find a single location that all the passengers can enjoy.
Monitor products are available that let you put a monitor just about
anywhere in a vehicle. Housed LCD panels can be attached to any surface,
LCD modules from 2 to 30 inches can be used for custom installations,
and a variety of flip-down, retracting, and pivoting displays designed for
specific vehicle locations are available. The most popular locations for
monitors are shown in Table 6-3.
Dashboard.
The most common dashboard displays are retractable DIN
or 1/2 DIN monitors, 6.5 or 7 inches in size. This is a clever solution to the
problem of where to fit a monitor in the dash, and provides stealth when
you’re out of your car, to help deter theft. But with a retractable monitor,
you need to be sure that the extended display doesn’t block important
dashboard controls or air vents, or interfere with the shift lever or stick
shift as it’s extending/retracting.
Visor.
There are two types of visor monitors: visor mount and visor
replacement. Visor mount monitors are attached to your existing visor with
screws or straps. Visor replacement monitors (Fig. 6-6) replace the primary or
secondary factory visor and have the display embedded in them. Size is 
limited to about 7 inches for both types. Visor monitors provide good
front-passenger viewing, and stealth when not in use.
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
177
Driver Distraction and Video Monitors
A factor to consider when choosing monitor locations is driver distraction.
Most states have laws prohibiting video displays that are visible to the driver in
a moving vehicle for this reason. Some states are more strict, prohibiting
displays forward of the driver’s seat, whether the vehicle is moving or not.
Screens for navigation systems are often exempt. But navigation systems and
backseat displays can cause distractions too.
According to a study by the AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety, 25 percent
of the 6.3 million U.S. auto crashes each year are caused by drivers distracted by
“other activities.”
To help reduce the problem, many navigation systems will not allow a
driver to enter a destination while the vehicle is in motion. Others use voice
commands and guidance, so you can keep your eyes on the road while
navigating.
Before installing monitors, check your state laws, and choose monitor
locations that minimize driver distraction.

Center Console.
The center console was initially a popular monitor
location but is losing favor to overhead and headrest locations. Factory
replacement lower consoles with DIN slots in the back are available for
popular SUVs. This can accommodate a DIN retractable monitor or a
DVD head unit with built-in monitor. A housed LCD panel can also be
installed at the back of the factory center console.
Overhead.
Overhead monitors provide viewing that’s good for both
sides of the backseat or viewing in second and third rows of seats in vans
and large SUVs. Universal models (Fig. 6-7) fit any vehicle. Vehicle-specific
overhead monitors are available for many popular SUVs. These replace the
factory overhead console and provide a factory-installed appearance, plus
178
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-6
Vizualogic visor
replacement moni-
tor. (Courtesy 
of Vizualogic.)
TABLE 6-3
Monitor Locations
Location
Comments
Dashboard
Retractable DIN or 1/2 DIN monitors. Size limited to 7 inches. Useful
for rearview camera and navigation. Driver distraction for video.
Visor
Visor mount and visor replacement types. Size limited to about 7
inches. Provides good front-passenger viewing, and stealth when not
in use.
Center console
Factory replacement lower consoles are available to accommodate a
DIN retractable monitor. A housed LCD panel can also be used on
the factory console.
Overhead
Provides viewing that’s good for both sides of the backseat. Universal,
vehicle-specific, and Railport models available. Can block the rearview
mirror view of the driver.
Headrest
Provides optimum viewing for individual backseat passengers, but is
difficult to share, so you’ll want one for each side. Available in factory-
replacement, custom-installed, or bracket-mount types. Housed LCD
panels may also be used.

simplify installation. Overhead monitors for the Railport Vehicle Person-
alization System are also available, and further simplify installation. Both
vehicle-specific and Railport overhead monitors offer the advantage of
being able to cleanly remove the monitor when it comes time to sell or
return your vehicle. A disadvantage of overhead mounting is that they
can block the rearview mirror view of the driver, especially with large
monitors and low-roofed vehicles.
Headrest.
Headrest monitors provide optimum viewing for individual
backseat passengers, but are difficult to share, so you’ll want one for each
side. This is more expensive than sharing a single overhead monitor, but
provides superior viewing. Headrest monitors are available in factory-
replacement, custom-installed, or bracket-mount types. Housed LCD pan-
els may also be used. Factory-replacement headrest monitors (Fig. 6-8) replace
the factory headrests, providing easy installation, a factory look, and restor-
ability when it comes time to sell your car. Custom-installed headrest moni-
tors require cutting and installation, but provide the most professional
appearance in vehicles where factory-replacement headrest monitors aren’t
available. Bracket-mount monitors provide easy installation and restorability,
but lack a factory appearance.
Monitor Performance and Features
Whether it’s a housed LCD panel or the display of a DVD player with
built-in monitor, monitor performance is a key factor in your video
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
179
FIGURE 6-7
Audiovox VOH1012
10.2-inch overhead
monitor. (Courtesy of
Audiovox Electronics Corp.)

enjoyment. Aside from the obvious size and aspect ratio differences, all
monitors are not created equal. Nowadays, all mobile video LCD monitors
are TFT (Thin Film Transistor) Active Matrix displays. But display perfor-
mance is all over the map. Compare resolution, viewing angle, and
brightness when choosing a monitor or player with monitor. Some speci-
fications are hard to find, especially in players and head units, but it pays
to compare the specs you can find. Table 6-4 shows what to look for.
Diagonal Size.
Housed LCD panels are available from 3 to over 15
inches. LCD modules are available from 2 to 30 inches.
Aspect Ratio.
Aspect ratio is the ratio of the picture width to height.
A 4:3 aspect ratio is often called “standard” and 16:9 is called “widescreen.”
Most monitors are 16:9, but there are some 4:3 monitors, especially in the
smaller screen sizes.
Aspect ratio refers to video sources as well as monitors. Displaying 4 : 3
sources on 16 : 9 monitors (and vice versa) means the picture will need to
be displayed using some combination of cropping, letterboxing, or stretch-
ing (see display modes).
Display Modes.
16:9 monitors generally offer multiple display modes to
accommodate the different aspect ratios of video sources:
180
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-8
Vizualogic factory-
replacement head-
rest monitor. 
(Courtesy of Vizualogic.)

■Normal: This mode is suited for watching full screen DVDs or any stan-
dard 4:3 video source, such as terrestrial television or VCRs. 4 : 3 images
are displayed with black bars on the left and right sides.
■Wide: This mode is suited for watching anamorphic widescreen DVDs,
and will completely fill the display with widescreen video. If you
don’t mind a horizontally stretched picture, this mode lets you fill
the screen with a standard 4 : 3 image.
■Cinema: This mode is suited for watching widescreen DVDs, and will
completely fill the display with widescreen video. If you don’t mind
cutting off the top and bottom of the picture, this mode lets you fill
the screen with a standard 4 : 3 image.
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
181
TABLE 6-4
Monitor Perfor-
mance and Features
Performance/Feature
Comments
Diagonal size
Available in sizes from 2 to 30 inches, depending on appli-
cation.
Aspect ratio
Ratio of the picture width to height. Most monitors are 
16 : 9, but some are 4 : 3, especially in smaller screen sizes.
Display modes
16 : 9 monitors generally offer multiple display modes to
accommodate the different aspect ratios of video sources.
Normal, wide, and cinema are the most important.
Video inputs
A second input is useful for selecting from multiple video
sources at the monitor itself, such as between a DVD
player and video game.
Resolution
A measure of the amount of detail that a monitor can dis-
play, given in pixels. Many manufacturers count red, green,
and blue pixels individually, which inflates the specified
resolution by a factor of three.
Viewing angle
With LCD displays, the image brightness and colors
change as your viewing angle changes. A reasonable goal
for a shared monitor is 120 degrees.
Brightness
When you’re trying to view a display in bright sunlight,
you’ll appreciate having extra brightness. Specified in
units of cd/m2, also called nits. A reasonable goal is 
300 nits.
Contrast ratio
A measure of “how black is black.” Most important for
nighttime viewing quality. Look for a monitor with 300 or
higher.

Some monitors provide additional display modes, but normal, wide, and
cinema are the most important.
Video Inputs.
Some monitors provide a single composite video input,
others provide two. A second input is useful for selecting from multiple
video sources at the monitor itself, such as between a DVD player and
video game.
Resolution.
Resolution is a measure of the amount of detail that a
monitor can display, given in pixels. Some manufacturers give the total
number of pixels, others give the number of horizontal pixels times the
number of vertical pixels. Many (but not all) manufacturers count red,
green, and blue pixels individually, which inflates the specified resolution
by a factor of 3. For example, a monitor that has
3 (red, green, blue) × 480 (horizontal) × 234 (vertical) pixels
would be advertised as having 1440 × 234 = 336,960 pixel resolution. How
much resolution do you need? Counting pixels the inflated way, a
widescreen DVD (displayed in cinema mode) has 3 × 720 × 360 = 777,600
displayed pixels’ worth of resolution. That means a 336,960 pixel display
isn’t able to display a widescreen DVD in its “full glory.” For small screen
sizes and normal viewing distances, your eyes are the limiting factor and
lower resolution is perfectly acceptable. For larger screen sizes, you’ll start
to appreciate being able to display the video source to its full resolution.
Viewing Angle.
With LCD displays, the image brightness and colors
change as your viewing angle changes. For tilting headrest displays viewed
by a single passenger, this isn’t a problem. But for shared overhead displays,
you need to have a monitor with viewing angles (horizontal and vertical)
satisfactory for all viewers. Viewing angle can be specified in each direc-
tion (up, down, left, right) or as a total horizontal range. Some monitors
have horizontal viewing angles as narrow as 90° (45° left and right). View-
ing angle in high-end displays can be 170°. A reasonable goal for a shared
monitor is 120°. Unfortunately, viewing angle is not always specified, so
you’re often forced to take your chances, contact the manufacturer, or
look at monitors in a showroom.
Brightness.
When you’re trying to view a display in bright sunlight,
you’ll appreciate having extra brightness. Brightness for LCD monitors is
182
CHAPTER SIX

specified in units of cd/m2, also called nits. LCD monitors can have
brightness levels as low as 140 nits to as high as 450 nits. A reasonable goal
is 300 nits. As with viewing angle, brightness is not always specified, so
you’re often forced to take your chances or contact the manufacturer.
Contrast Ratio.
In practical terms, contrast ratio is a measure of “how
black is black.” Technically, it’s the ratio of the amount of light of the
brightest white to the darkest black. In daylight viewing, contrast ratio
isn’t likely to be an issue. But at night, the importance of contrast ratio
becomes more apparent. Monitors with a poor contrast ratio will have
blacks that look illuminated—more like dark gray. The contrast ratio of
LCD monitors generally ranges from 150 to over 400 (higher is better).
Look for a monitor with 300 or higher. But be warned: contrast ratio spec-
ifications are rarely provided.
Other Video Sources
For mobile video, DVD is king. But there are plenty of other video
sources you can add to your system to take advantage of the monitors and
sound system you’ve installed. Table 6-5 lists the most popular of them.
For systems incorporating multiple video sources and monitors, you’ll
want to consider using an A/V switcher to wire everything together.
These are described at the end of the section.
TV Tuner
A TV tuner adds local VHF and UHF analog television programming to
your mobile video system. Most TV tuner packages include the tuner, a
diversity antenna system, and remote control. Diversity antenna systems
use up to four separate antennas to improve reception in a moving vehi-
cle. Most systems can operate as stand-alone units with any brand of head
unit as well as be directly controlled by compatible head units.
The problem with adding a TV tuner to your system is that analog tele-
vision broadcasting will soon end. The FCC has mandated that analog
NTSC broadcasts cease and the frequency bands used for them be turned
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
183

over to the FCC on December 31, 2006. It’s likely that this deadline will be
extended to 2008 or later, but analog television’s days are numbered.
Satellite TV Receiver
A mobile satellite TV receiver lets you watch DIRECTV in your vehicle,
even while it’s moving. If you’ve ever installed a home satellite TV system,
you know that the dish antenna needs to be precisely aimed to work, so a
mobile system is an amazing feat.
184
CHAPTER SIX
TABLE 6-5
Other Mobile Video
Sources
Source
Comments
TV tuner
Adds local VHF and UHF analog television programming to
your mobile video system.
Analog television broadcasting will eventually cease.
Satellite TV receiver
Lets you watch DIRECTV in your vehicle, even while it’s moving.
DIRECTV subscription required.
VCR
Lets you play your existing library of VHS tapes in the car.
DVD changer
Convenient way to have a collection of discs (DVDs and CDs) on-
tap for any trip. See Chap. 10, “Changer and Player Projects.”
Digital A/V player
Hard-drive-based system that lets you store and play back a com-
bination of songs and movies. The hard-drive cartridge is remov-
able for connection to your home computer, to transfer content
for playback in the vehicle.
Rearview camera
Available in a number of mounting configurations. Be sure to
choose a model with a reversed image.
Mobile HDTV
Since HDTV is being broadcast across the country, and analog television
broadcasting will soon end, it would seem natural to add an HDTV tuner to
your mobile video system. The problem is, nobody is selling one.
Although cost is a factor (HDTV technology is considerably more expensive
than analog TV technology), the main hurdle is technical. In a moving vehicle,
it’s difficult to readjust to the rapidly changing signal strength and multipath
that’s encountered. A diversity antenna system helps, but the HDTV system is
less forgiving of these problems than analog television. A mobile HDTV tuner
will require a considerable development effort to bring to market.

The KVH TracVision A5 mobile DIRECTV package (Fig. 6-9) consists of
a TracVision antenna, compact receiver, and wireless remote control. The
5-inch tall, 32-inch diameter antenna mounts to the roof rack (either 
factory-installed or aftermarket) on your vehicle. It has a rugged plastic
housing to withstand the elements and trips to the car wash. The antenna
uses phased-array, satellite-tracking technology to provide superb recep-
tion in a moving vehicle. The antenna does require an unimpeded view
of the southern sky for DIRECTV reception; reception can be blocked
temporarily by very large obstacles such as bridges or tall buildings. Once
installed, you’ll receive DIRECTV’s hundreds of satellite TV channels (and
over 50 commercial-free music channels) anywhere in the lower 48 states.
A DIRECTV subscription is required.
VCR
A mobile VCR (or VCP, video cassette player, if you don’t need to record)
may not wow your friends, but it will let you play your existing library
of VHS tapes in the car.
Although mobile VCRs are more compact than their at-home counter-
parts, they still require some ingenuity when it comes to finding a good
spot to stash them. Some units allow horizontal and vertical mounting,
which helps. Under a seat is a popular location. Factory replacement cen-
ter consoles with a compact VCR slot and DIN slot in the back are avail-
able for popular SUVs. This can accommodate the VCR along with a DIN
DVD player, retractable monitor, or DVD head unit with built-in monitor.
Models with a TV tuner provide the additional benefit of local VHF
and UHF analog television programming, but without a diversity antenna
system, don’t expect great reception. An important feature not usually
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
185
FIGURE 6-9
TracVision A5
Mobile Satellite Sys-
tem. (Courtesy of KVH
Industries.)

found on home VCRs is dew/heat protection. This checks for condensa-
tion and high internal temperature and prevents operation under condi-
tions that would damage the tape or VCR.
DVD Changer
A DVD changer is a convenient way to have a collection of discs (DVDs
and CDs) on-tap for any trip—long or short. Chapter 10, “Changer and
Player Projects,” tells you what to look for in a DVD changer and how to
connect it to your system.
Digital A/V Player
A digital A/V player is a hard-drive-based system that lets you store and
play back a combination of songs and movies. The hard-drive cartridge is
removable for connection to your home computer, to transfer content for
playback in the vehicle.
GM’s 2005 crossover sports vans offer a digital A/V player by PhatNoise.
Its 40 GB cartridge holds approximately 10,000 songs, 40 movies, or any
combination of the two. Songs can be stored using MP3, WMA, or WAV
formats. Movies and video are stored in MPEG format. The system has a
voice-browsing interface so you can find the song you want and keep
your eyes on the road.
A digital A/V player not only gives you instant access to a sizable per-
sonal library of movies and music on the road, you don’t need to mess
with discs in the car and you can keep the originals at home.
Watch for aftermarket digital A/V players to become available.
Rearview Camera
The view from the back of your SUV probably wouldn’t score a high
Nielsen rating, but when you’re backing up or pulling a trailer, it may be
the most valuable use of your in-dash monitor.
Rearview cameras (also called backup cameras) are available in a num-
ber of mounting configurations including surface mount, under-bumper,
through-bumper, license plate frame, and brake light replacement. Brake
186
CHAPTER SIX

light replacement cameras replace the third brake light assembly of spe-
cific vehicles and have a brake light built in.
Be sure to choose a model with a reversed image so that what you see
on your monitor looks like what you would see in a mirror. The viewing
angle of rearview cameras can range from 85° to 150°—choose a model
that suits your needs. The SAVV VAC-RV2000NC (Fig. 6-10) provides a
reversed image and has a wide 150° viewing angle.
Color cameras usually have a light sensitivity of about 2 lux. Black-and-
white cameras are better—a light sensitivity of 0.2 lux is common. For the
best of both worlds, choose a color/B&W auto switching camera—it
switches to B&W under low light conditions for improved sensitivity. If
you need to see in the dark, choose a rearview camera with IR night
vision. These use built-in LEDs for illumination of objects up to 30 feet
away.
Wiring Up Your System Using 
an A/V Switcher
Once you’ve added all those monitors and extra video sources to your sys-
tem, you’ve got to figure out how to hook them all together. You’d like to
be able to watch any video source on any monitor, regardless of what’s
going on with the other monitors. An A/V switcher makes this possible.
The Kenwood KVA-S300 A/V switcher (Fig. 6-11) has three sets of A/V
(stereo audio and video) inputs and three sets of A/V outputs. You can
connect up to three A/V sources to the inputs, and connect up to three
monitors (and corresponding audio devices, such as wireless headphones)
to the outputs. Each output channel is controlled by its own wired
remote control. The KVA-S300 also has special provisions for a rearview
camera.
I’ll use an example to show how this works. Suppose you’ve got a DVD
head unit with built-in monitor, left and right headrest monitors, a VCR,
and a rearview camera. The head unit A/V outputs, VCR, and rearview
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
187
FIGURE 6-10
SAVV VAC-
RV2000NC rearview
camera. (Courtesy of
SAVV.)

camera are connected to the three A/V inputs of the switcher. The head
unit A/V inputs, and left and right headrest monitors are connected to
three A/V outputs of the switcher. For this example, we’ll forgo wireless
headphones and use the volume controls and headphone jacks provided
on the wired remote controls.
Now each of the backseat passengers can independently watch the
DVD head unit, the VCR, or even the rearview camera. The driver can
manually select the rearview camera when backing up, or take advantage
of the automatic switching feature of the KVA-S300 that connects the
camera to the head unit monitor when the vehicle is put in reverse.
For simple systems, you probably don’t need a switcher. But for com-
plex systems, switchers provide a convenient and flexible solution for
wiring up your equipment.
5.1 Channel Audio Formats
5.1 channel surround sound uses five full-range speakers (right, left and
center front, right and left rear) plus a subwoofer to bring a new level of
realism to your listening experience. It’s already popular for home theater
systems, and is becoming a reality in factory and aftermarket car audio.
Not only is it great for watching DVDs, 5.1 channel sound provides the
ultimate imaging performance for music.
Before thinking about equipment for 5.1 channel mobile audio, it’s
important to understand the various 5.1 channel audio formats. These are
shown in Table 6-6.
188
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-11
Kenwood KVA-S300
A/V switcher. (Courtesy
of Kenwood.)

Dolby Pro Logic II
Dolby Pro Logic II produces 5.1 channel audio from stereo (two-channel)
recordings. The stereo recording may have been produced from a 5.1
channel source that was converted to two channels using Dolby Pro Logic
II encoding. This is the method used by SIRIUS satellite radio for its 5.1
channel programming. If you have a mobile VCR, many VHS tapes con-
tain Dolby Pro Logic II encoded audio as well.
Dolby Pro Logic II is also able to create 5.1 channel audio from ordi-
nary stereo recordings (like regular audio CDs and FM radio), giving them
a more spacious and enveloping feel.
To experience the real impact of what 5.1 channels brings to car audio,
you’ll need Dolby Digital/DTS or DVD-Audio. But Dolby Pro Logic II
provides an indispensable role in 5.1 channel sound systems by providing
convincing surround sound from all your non-DVD audio sources.
Dolby Digital/DTS
Dolby Digital and DTS provide similar but competing formats for 5.1
channel DVD movie soundtracks. Both use compression to fit audio plus
video on a DVD. But unlike Dolby Pro Logic II, they provide discrete 5.1
channel sound. This means individually recorded information for left,
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
189
TABLE 6-6
5.1 Channel Audio
Formats
Format
Comments
Dolby Pro Logic II
Produces 5.1 channel audio from encoded or non-encoded
stereo (two-channel) recordings. Provides an indispensable
role in 5.1 channel sound systems by providing surround
sound from all your non-DVD audio sources.
Dolby Digital/DTS
Similar but competing formats for 5.1 channel DVD movie
soundtracks. Both use compression to fit audio plus video on
a DVD. Provide true 5.1 channel surround sound.
DVD-Audio
5.1 channel audio format specifically designed to provide the
highest possible audio fidelity on DVD. The audio fidelity
exceeds that of conventional CDs and Dolby Digital/DTS.
DVD-Audio discs generally include a Dolby Digital/DTS ver-
sion of the music for backwards compatibility with standard
DVD players.

center, and right front channels, left and right rear surround channels,
and a mono subwoofer channel. The advantage is accuracy and sound
quality. With discrete channels, you hear multichannel sound as it was
intended by the artist who made the soundtrack or audio recording.
Since both formats are popular, you’ll want equipment that can handle
Dolby Digital and DTS.
The good news for audio enthusiasts is that most DVD-Audio discs also
contain a Dolby Digital/DTS version of the music for backwards compat-
ibility with standard DVD players.
DVD-Audio
DVD-Audio (also called DVD-A) is a 5.1 channel audio format specifically
designed to provide the highest possible audio fidelity on DVD. The
audio fidelity of DVD-Audio exceeds that of conventional CDs and
Dolby Digital/DTS audio on DVD-Video.
DVD-Audio has improved on the PCM audio technology used in CDs
by taking advantage of higher sampling rates—96 kHz, compared to 44.1
kHz for standard CDs. DVD-Audio also uses 24 bits of resolution com-
pared to 16 for CDs. The result is richer, more detailed sound.
In addition to audio, a DVD-Audio disc can contain a limited number
of video stills, which can be used to display lyrics, album art, or a photo
album. Up to 16 graphic stills can be associated with each track and on-
screen displays can be used for lyrics and disc navigation. DVD-Audio
discs generally include a Dolby Digital/DTS version of the music for
backwards compatibility with standard DVD players.
5.1 Channel Audio Sources
In many ways 5.1 channel sound is a natural for vehicles. Much of the
hardware you need is already in place. Car systems already have four chan-
nels of amplified sound, and many have a subwoofer. Upgrading to 5.1
requires a 5.1 channel audio source and a center channel speaker. Table 6-7
lists four possible sources of 5.1 channel audio. Adding a center channel is
discussed in the section on center channel speakers in Chap. 3.
190
CHAPTER SIX

CD Head Unit with Dolby Pro Logic II
To experience the real impact of what 5.1 channels brings to car audio,
you’ll need Dolby Digital/DTS or DVD-Audio. But a CD head unit with
Dolby Pro Logic II is capable of improving your sound stage, and works
with all your two-channel sources like CDs and FM radio. For sources
produced from a 5.1 channel source using Dolby Pro Logic II encoding
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
191
TABLE 6-7
5.1 Channel Audio
Sources
Source
Comments
CD head unit with Dolby Pro Logic II
Capable of improving your sound stage,
and works with all your two-channel
sources like CDs and FM radio. Without a
DVD player, this is your only option for
5.1 channel sound.
DVD head unit with Dolby Digital/DTS 
Produces 5.1 channel surround signals 
optical output and separate surround- 
from any DVD. Since most DVD-Audio
sound processor
discs also contain a Dolby Digital/DTS
version of the music, you can listen to
them too.
Processors with Dolby Pro Logic II let
you produce surround signals from two-
channel inputs, giving you 5.1 channels
from every possible source.
DVD head unit with built-in Dolby 
Produces 5.1 channel surround signals 
Digital/DTS surround-sound processor
from any DVD. Since most DVD-Audio
discs also contain a Dolby Digital/DTS
version of the music, you can listen to
them too.
Processors with Dolby Pro Logic II let
you produce surround signals from two-
channel inputs, giving you 5.1 channels
from every possible source.
Simplifies installation and can reduce
overall cost.
DVD head unit with built-in Dolby 
The ultimate in surround-sound source 
Digital/DTS surround-sound processor 
units—provides the best possible 5.1 
and DVD-Audio
channel output for every conceivable
source: DVD-Audio, DVD-Video, and any
two-channel signal.

(like SIRIUS surround programming and some VHS tapes), the results are
even better. Without a DVD player, this is your only option for 5.1 chan-
nel sound.
DVD Head Unit with Dolby Digital/
DTS Optical Output and Separate 
Surround-Sound Processor
Virtually all DVD head units (and DVD changers) provide an optical
output with Dolby Digital/DTS. By connecting this output to a Dolby
Digital/DTS surround-sound processor, you’re able to produce 5.1 channel
surround signals from any DVD. Since most DVD-Audio discs also con-
tain a Dolby Digital/DTS version of the music, you can listen to them too.
You won’t be getting the benefits of DVD-Audio’s extended resolution
and sampling rate, but the sound is CD-quality.
The Clarion DVH940 Dolby Digital/DTS surround-sound processor
(Fig. 6-12) also includes Dolby Pro Logic II circuitry. This lets you produce
surround signals from any two-channel input, giving you 5.1 channels
from every possible source.
DVD Head Unit with Built-In Dolby
Digital/DTS Surround-Sound Processor
Some DVD head units have a built-in Dolby Digital/DTS surround-
sound processor. These usually include Dolby Pro Logic II processing as
well. This provides the same capabilities as the previous configuration,
but simplifies installation and can reduce overall cost, since there are no
extra boxes or cable assemblies to deal with.
192
CHAPTER SIX
FIGURE 6-12
Clarion DVH940 sur-
round-sound proces-
sor. (Courtesy of Clarion.)

DVD Head Unit with Built-In Dolby
Digital/DTS Surround-Sound Processor 
and DVD-Audio
A DVD head unit with built-in Dolby Digital/DTS, Dolby Pro Logic II,
and DVD-Audio processing is the ultimate in surround-sound source
units. It provides the best possible 5.1 channel output for every conceiv-
able source: DVD-Audio, DVD-Video, and any two-channel signal. The
Kenwood Excelon KVT-915DVD head unit/monitor (Fig. 6-13) does all
that, and more. It includes other advanced audio features, like DSP sound-
fields, digital time correction, and a four-band parametric equalizer.
MOBILE VIDEO AND 5.1 CHANNEL AUDIO
193
FIGURE 6-13
Kenwood Excelon
KVT-915DVD DVD-
Audio head unit.
(Courtesy of Kenwood.)

This page intentionally left blank.

Amplifiers 
and Amplifier
Projects
CHAPTER 7
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

With today’s high-power (13 watts per channel and up) head units, you
may not need separate amps to provide the volume levels you want. But if
you have a low-power head unit you want to keep or want to play extra
loud, then separate amps are what you need.
In addition to boosting head units, separate amps are used for adding
subwoofers and biamping. Because of their complexity, the latter projects
are given their own chapters, but be sure to read this chapter for impor-
tant information on choosing and using amps.
The project sections in this chapter focus on using amps to boost all
types of head units. Head units are categorized according to their avail-
able outputs, and fall into one of the first five project classes shown in
Table 7-1.
Before jumping into the head unit boosting projects, there are a few
things you should know about amplifiers.
What to Look for in an Amp
The first thing to consider when buying an amp is the application. Is it
for a full-range application, a subwoofer, or for biamping? How many
channels do you need? What impedance will the amp need to drive?
Once you’ve answered these questions, you’ll need to decide how much
power you need and which specs and features are important to you.
196
CHAPTER SEVEN
TABLE 7-1
Amplifier Projects
Project
Comments
Boosting head units with front and rear preamp outputs 
Boosting head units with one set of preamp outputs 
Boosting head units with no preamp outputs and four speaker outputs
Boosting head units with no preamp outputs and two speaker outputs
Boosting premium factory sound system head units
Adding a subwoofer
See Chap. 4
Biamping
See Chap. 9

Amps for Subwoofers
If you’re looking for an amp to drive a mono subwoofer, you can use a
two-channel amp in bridged mode or a mono amp that specializes in
low-frequency reproduction. Mono sub amps include features useful for
driving subs, such as subsonic filters, bass equalization and steep-slope
subwoofer crossovers. Many of these amps are Class D, providing higher
efficiency. Consult the subwoofer chapter for additional info on choosing
an amp for your subwoofer.
Performance and Features
Table 7-2 lists the most important specs and features to consider when
buying an amp. Read the next few sections of this chapter to understand
what the power specs mean and to figure out how much power you need.
Which features are important depends mostly on your application.
CEA Compliant Power.
The amount of power the amp can deliver
into a 4-ohm load with a 14.4-volt supply and 1 percent distortion. This
provides a uniform method for determining an amplifier’s power for the
car stereo industry. (See sidebar, “CEA-2006 Compliance.”)
Bridged Power.
The amount of power the amp can deliver in the
bridged mode. Bridging combines two channels into one bridged chan-
nel. See “Bridging” in the “More Power for Your Money” section.
2-Ohm Power.
The amount of power the amp can deliver per channel
into a 2-ohm load. You get a 2-ohm load by wiring two 4-ohm speakers in
parallel. See “Running 2-Ohm Loads” in the “More Power for Your Money”
section.
Signal-to-Noise Ratio.
A measure of how well an amplifier silences
background noise. Ratings are in decibels; higher ratings indicate less
noise. Prior to CEA-2006 (see sidebar, “CEA-2006 Compliance”) it was com-
mon to reference noise to rated power. With CEA-2006, noise is referenced
to 1 watt. The difference between the two methods can be substantial. For
a 100-watt amp, the CEA-2006 spec would be 20 dB lower. For a 1000-watt
amp, the CEA-2006 spec would be 30 dB lower. When comparing amps for
SNR, make sure you’re comparing apples to apples.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
197

Class D.
Already popular for mono sub amps, Class D may eventually
make its way into mainstream full-range amps. The big benefit is high
efficiency. This translates to less heat, and higher reliability. It also means
that the amount of current drawn is about half that of an equivalently
rated class AB amp. This can save you money in power wiring and power
line capacitors. (See sidebar, “Power Wiring for Class D Amps.”)
Crossover.
A built-in crossover saves the expense and inconvenience of
adding an external crossover. A low-pass crossover filter blocks unwanted
high frequencies to a subwoofer (or to a woofer, if you’re biamping). A
high-pass filter blocks low frequencies. This is useful for a tweeter in the
case of biamping. It’s also useful for keeping deep bass out of small full-
range speakers, allowing them to play louder with less distortion. All
built-in crossovers are not created equal, so look at the specs for crossover
filter slope and cutoff frequency range carefully. See “What to Look for in
a Subwoofer Crossover” in the subwoofers chapter and “Choosing a
Crossover” in the biamping and crossovers chapter for specifics on what to
look for in crossovers.
198
CHAPTER SEVEN
TABLE 7-2
What to Look for in
an Amp
Performance/Feature
Comments
CEA compliant power
The power the amp can deliver into a 4-ohm load with a 
14.4-volt supply and 1 percent distortion.
Bridged power 
The power the amp can deliver in the bridged mode. 
2-ohm power 
The power the amp can deliver per channel into a 2-ohm load.
Signal-to-noise ratio
A measure of how well an amplifier silences background noise.
Spec strongly depends on measurement method (see text).
Class D
Provides higher efficiency than Class AB. Produces less heat.
Can save you money in power wiring.
Crossover
Saves the expense and inconvenience of an external crossover.
Important for subs, full-range speakers, and biamping. Look
carefully at specs for filter slope and cutoff frequency range. 
Bass boost
Useful for improving bass of subwoofers.
Speaker-level inputs
Important if your head unit lacks preamp-level outputs.
Preamp outputs
Let you feed signals to a second amp.
Remote gain controls
Let you adjust the amp from the comfort of the driver’s seat.

Bass Boost.
Five to 10 dB of bass boost at 40 or 45 Hz extends the low-
frequency response of most subwoofer systems without overdriving them.
Speaker-Level Inputs.
If your head unit lacks preamp-level outputs,
then speaker-level inputs are an important feature. This saves you from
having to buy a line output converter to convert your head unit’s speaker-
level signals to preamp-level.
Preamp Outputs.
Preamp outputs let you feed signals to a second amp.
If you’re planning on having a multi-amp system, these are very handy. 
Remote Gain Controls.
Some amps provide remote gain controls that
let you adjust the amp from the comfort of the driver’s seat. These are
usually in the form of wired remote controls. Kenwood takes this idea to
the next level with its A.M.S. (Amplifier Management System). Kenwood
Excelon amps with A.M.S. (Fig. 7-1) allow you to adjust the bass and treble
EQ, bass extension and gain of up to 8 amps from a connected Excelon
head unit. The system also lets you monitor amplifier source voltage, cur-
rent consumption, internal temperature, and fan speed.
Advertised Power versus 
Honest Power
Unlike the home stereo industry, the car stereo industry has not fully
adopted a uniform standard of power measurement. By fudging the
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
199
FIGURE 7-1
Kenwood Excelon
KAC-X521 with
A.M.S. (Courtesy of 
Kenwood.)

power supply voltage and distortion limit of the measurement, car stereo
manufacturers are able to claim inflated power ratings. Table 7-3 shows
how this works, rating an amplifier using various methods. The amplifier
is an 18-watt per channel amplifier made by a reputable manufacturer.
Honest power (my terminology) uses 13.8 volts for the supply voltage, a
typical value for most cars when the engine is running. It also uses an
audibly acceptable distortion limit of 0.1 percent. This limit is similar to
that used by the home stereo industry. For this amplifier, the power rat-
ing using this method is 13 watts per channel.
RMS power uses a 14.4 volt supply and allows 1 percent distortion. This
is identical to the method specified by the CEA-2006 standard (see side-
bar). This allows manufacturers to claim higher power levels than the
honest power method. For the example amplifier, the power rating by
this method is 18 watts per channel. The adoption of CEA-2006 will solid-
ify this method as the standard power specification for the reputable
segment of the industry.
Maximum power uses a 14.4-volt supply and allows 10 percent distor-
tion. This allows manufacturers to claim even higher power levels than
with the RMS power method. For this amplifier, the power rating using
the maximum power method is 25 watts per channel.
An even more inflated method of specifying power is the peak power
method. This method measures the instantaneous power at the peak out-
put voltage of the amplifier. For this amplifier, the power rating using
this method would be 35 watts per channel—almost 3 times the honest
power value!
The point of all this is that you should make sure you are comparing
apples to apples when you are shopping for amps or head units. Look at
the measurement conditions specified. If none are specified, assume the
worst. I have seen flea market amps use 15-volt supply voltages and 
3.2-ohm loads in addition to the peak power measurement method to
achieve spectacular power ratings for low-power amps.
200
CHAPTER SEVEN
TABLE 7-3
Amplifier Power 
Rating Methods
Measurement
Supply
Method
Load
Voltage
THD
Power Rating
Honest power
4 ohms
13.8 volts
0.1%
13 watts per channel
RMS power-CEA 2006
4 ohms
14.4 volts
1%
18 watts per channel
Maximum power
4 ohms
14.4 volts
10%
25 watts per channel
Peak power
4 ohms
14.4 volts
35 watts per channel

How Much Power Do You Need?
Two good rules of thumb regarding amplifier power are:
■Doubling the volume level requires 10 times more amplifier power.
■A just noticeable increase in volume level requires a 10 percent
increase in amp power.
This can be good news or bad news depending on how you look at it.
If you have 50 watts per channel now and want to be able to play twice as
loud, you’ll need 500 watts per channel. On the other hand, you can have
half the volume level of a 500-watt per channel amp by buying a 50-watt
per channel model.
The bottom line is, achieving high volume levels becomes increasingly
expensive in terms of amplifier power.
How much power you need depends on how loud you want to play
your music. Calibrate yourself by listening to a high-powered head unit
in your vehicle or a similar one. Drive at highway speeds with the win-
dow cracked for the worst-case situation. High-powered head units are
normally rated at 13 to 18 watts per channel, so adjust this figure accord-
ing to the rules of thumb. If you need a little less than twice the volume,
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
201
CEA-2006 Compliance
In May 2003, the Consumer Electronics Association published standard CEA-
2006, “Testing & Measurement Methods for Mobile Audio Amplifiers.” This
voluntary standard advocates a uniform method for determining an amplifier’s
power and signal-to-noise ratio for the car stereo industry. Power is measured
using a 4-ohm load with 14.4 volt supply and allows 1 percent distortion. Signal-
to-noise ratio is measured in weighted absolute decibels (dBA) at a reference of 1
watt into 4 ohms. This standard applies to both external amps and the amps
within head units. 
CEA-2006 allows consumers to compare car amps and head units on an
equal basis. Manufacturers who choose to abide by the new standard are able
to stamp their products with the CEA-2006 logo that reads: “Amplifier Power
Standard CEA-2006 Compliant.” 

then 100 watts per channel would be about right. Speaker sensitivity also
comes into play here; you’ll need more power for inefficient speakers and
less for efficient ones. Remember, 3 dB lower speaker sensitivity translates
to needing twice the amplifier power to provide the same volume level.
More Power for Your Money
Table 7-4 shows two tricks you can sometimes use to get more watts per
dollar from separate amplifiers.
Running 2-Ohm Loads
The formula for power (from your amp to your speakers) is:
Power =
Virtually all car speakers are 4 ohms. By using 2-ohm speakers, you can
double the power from the amp! It sounds too good to be true. It is. There
are three limitations to this scheme:
■You must use an amp that is 2-ohm stable.
■You don’t actually double the power—a factor of 1.5 is more typical.
This is because the amplifier output voltage drops when driving a 
2-ohm load.
■Two-ohm speakers are almost impossible to come by—you must use
two 4-ohm speakers wired in parallel or a dual voice coil subwoofer.
The unavailability of 2-ohm speakers is the big problem with this idea
for most installations. Using two speakers in parallel does make sense if
Amplifier Output Voltage2

Speaker Impedance
202
CHAPTER SEVEN
TABLE 7-4
Methods of Getting
More Watts per 
Dollar from Amps
Technique
Comments
Run 2-ohm loads
Must use two 4-ohm speakers wired in parallel or a dual voice
coil subwoofer
Run bridged amps
Bridging with four-channel amps usually provides the best value

you need multiple speakers per channel to handle unusually high power
levels. Parallel front/rear speaker configurations also take advantage of
this trick. This wiring is shown in Fig. 7-2.
A more common situation for running 2-ohm loads occurs with dual
voice coil subwoofers. Subwoofers are commonly available with dual 
4-ohm voice coils. There is little or no cost premium for the additional
voice coil. These can be wired in parallel to create a 2-ohm subwoofer as
shown in Fig. 7-3.
Bridging
Another method that can sometimes give you more watts per dollar is
called bridging.
Bridging converts a stereo amp into a mono amp, which gives you more
power than the sum of the two stereo channels. Bridging typically pro-
vides 3 times the power of a single amplifier channel (which is 1.5 times
the combined power of two stereo channels). As an example, a 50-watt per
channel stereo amp might be bridgeable to a 150-watt mono configura-
tion. Similarly, a 50-watt per channel four-channel amp might be bridge-
able to a 150-watt per channel stereo configuration.
There are four limitations to this scheme:
■You must use an amp that is bridgeable.
■You need twice as many amplifier channels.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
203
FIGURE 7-3
Parallel-wired DVC
subwoofer.
FIGURE 7-2
Using two speakers
in parallel.
Tip: An amp driving
2-ohm loads runs
hotter, so be sure to
mount it where it will
have good air circu-
lation.

■A bridged amp cannot normally drive less than 4 ohms.
■The lowest bridged power is about 75 watts per channel.
Whether or not bridging can give you more watts per dollar depends
on several factors. Suppose you need two channels of 150 watts for a set of
4-ohm speakers. Table 7-5 shows what you might find.
By bridging model A, you get 150 watts, but you would need to buy two
amps for a grand total of $280. Model B is the conventional solution—a two-
channel, 150-watt per channel amp for $230. This is usually cheaper than
buying two model As. The third option is to bridge model C—for this
example, this ends up being the cheapest solution. Any of these options
could have been the most cost effective, depending on what’s on sale. But in
general, four-channel amps not only start out as a cheaper approach, they
are more aggressively marked down when clearance time comes around!
You must normally use a 4-ohm or higher speaker load when bridging.
This means you can’t run two 4-ohm woofers wired in parallel, for exam-
ple. This is because a bridged amplifier “sees” a speaker load of half the
actual value, so a 4-ohm speaker looks like a 2-ohm equivalent load. Very
few amps can handle using anything less than 4 ohms in the bridged
mode. So if you were thinking of saving big money by running 2-ohm
loads and bridging with the same amplifier, forget it.
Be sure to follow the instructions included with the amp for the cor-
rect bridging procedure and connections—not all amps are alike.
Where to Put Your Amps
Where to put your amps is more a matter of convenience than perfor-
mance, but you should always mount amps away from noise sources and
in a spot with good air circulation. This means avoiding locations like
underneath the driver’s side of the dash and near the blower motor.
Because interference from the amp may affect your radio reception, try to
204
CHAPTER SEVEN
TABLE 7-5
Bridging Cost 
Comparison
Model
Power
Bridged Power
Price Each
Total
A
50W × 2 channels
150W × 1 channel
$140
$280
B
150W × 2 channels
$230
$230
C
50W × 4 channels
150W × 2 channels
$200
$200
Tip: An amp running
in the bridged mode
runs hotter, so be
sure to mount it
where it will have
good air circulation.

mount it at least 3 feet away from the head unit. The most popular
mounting locations are shown in Table 7-6.
If you plan to use a four-channel amp to drive both front and back
speakers, then the best location is probably under the passenger side of the
dash—if it will fit. Many four-channel amps are too big for this location.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
205
TABLE 7-6
Popular Amplifier
Mounting 
Locations
Mounting Location
Comments
Under dash (passenger side only)
Short wires and patch cords can
be used
Space is tight
Moderate electrical noise
Trunk or hatch area
Plenty of space, near rear speakers
Low electrical noise location
Long patch cords from head unit
may be needed
Subject to damage from sliding
cargo
Under seat
Short wires and patch cords can
be used
Space is very tight
Subject to dirt and spills
Important: When mounting a power amp (or any car stereo component),
secure it in such a way that the metal case does not make electrical contact with
the car chassis. This guarantees that the amplifier’s ground wire is the exclusive
connection between the amp’s internal ground and the system ground.
NOTE
A few components have electrically isolated cases—these
should be electrically connected to the car chassis to provide shield-
ing to the internal circuitry. When in doubt, use an ohmmeter to
measure the resistance between the case and ground wire of the
component.
Use rubber grommets inside metal mounting bracket holes to prevent screws
from making an electrical connection with the chassis. Alternately, you can
mount your components on a board, then mount the board to the car chassis.
Electrical isolation is important to prevent ground loops, which are a major
source of noise problems in car audio. See Chap. 12 for more on this subject.

Power and Ground Wiring
Power and ground wiring is one of those subjects a lot of people don’t pay
much attention to. But improper wiring can easily rob your amplifiers of
25 percent or more of their rated power—or, worse yet, cause a fire.
Wire Gauge
There are two factors that determine the recommended wire gauge for
amplifier power and ground wires:
■Voltage drop
■Wire overheating
Voltage drop is determined by the resistance of the power wire multi-
plied by the current. It results in the amplifier getting less than the full
battery voltage for power. A drop of just 1 volt can result in a 15 percent
loss of maximum power to the speakers. Because of the high currents
consumed by power amps, voltage drops can be significant.
Take a 100W × 2 amp, for example. It can provide 200 watts of power to
a pair of speakers, but draws about 30 amps to do so, because of efficiency
losses in the amp. Suppose you need to run 20 feet of power wire to the
amp in the trunk. Using 10-gauge wire (1.0 milliohms per foot), the wire
resistance is 20 milliohms. With 30 amps of current, you would get a volt-
age drop of 0.60 volts, resulting in roughly a 10 percent loss of maximum
power to the speakers. Using 8-gauge wire (0.64 milliohms per foot)
reduces this to a more acceptable 6 percent loss of maximum power.
Wire overheating is a concern because of the high currents drawn by
amplifiers. The current-carrying capacity of a wire is determined by its
resistance per foot and the acceptable temperature rise in the wire.
Exceeding the current rating of a wire will cause melting of the insula-
tion and result in possible short circuits or fire.
Table 7-7 shows the recommended wire gauge, depending on wire
length, for various power amps. Choose the amplifier entry in the table
that corresponds to how you’re actually using the amp. In other words, if
you’re using an amp to drive 2-ohm loads or in the bridged mode, use the
amp power rating for that mode of operation. The wire lengths shown in
the table guarantee a drop of less than 0.5 volts in the power wire. This
should result in less than 8 percent loss of maximum amplifier power.
206
CHAPTER SEVEN

Using a thicker wire (lower gauge) and shorter length will always give you
better performance. The wire gauges shown in Table 7-7 also guarantee a
temperature rise of less than 35°C in the wire at maximum current.
NEVER use thinner wire (higher gauge) than that shown in Table 7-7, even
for short wires, or you risk a meltdown. For example, #10 is the thinnest
wire you should use with a 100W × 2 amp, even for a 1-foot length of wire.
If you are running multiple amps on the same power wire, just add
their power ratings together. For example, a pair of 50W × 2 amps should
use the 100W × 2 row of the table.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
207
Voltage, Current, Resistance, and Power
The best way to understand the four basic electrical quantities is by thinking
about water and plumbing:
voltage (volts) = water pressure (pounds per square inch)
current (amps) = water flow (gallons per minute)
resistance (ohms) = pipe resistance
power (watts) = pressure × flow
Voltage and current are easy to understand—voltage is like water pressure
and current is like water flow.
Electrical resistance is analogous to a pipe’s resistance to flow. Imagine
trying to fill a swimming pool with a regular garden hose. Then think about
how much longer it would take if the hose were the diameter of spaghetti. This
is because of the higher resistance of the spaghetti-sized hose. In both cases the
water pressure is the same, but in the case of the higher resistance, the flow is
reduced. With electricity, this same relationship holds true. It’s called Ohm’s law:
current = voltage/resistance
This says that you can double the current (water flow) by doubling the
voltage (water pressure) or by halving the resistance (pipe resistance). Ohm’s law
can be rearranged to calculate any of the three quantities if you know the
other two.
In electricity, power is calculated using this equation:
power = voltage × current
In terms of water, this means that you need both water pressure and water
flow to hose the mud off your car. Having lots of pressure but little flow is like
trying to wash the car with a squirt gun. Having lots of flow but little pressure
is like gently pouring buckets of water over the car.
This equation can be rearranged and combined with Ohm’s law to let you
calculate any of the four quantities if you know two of them.

Power Wire Hookup
If you are only adding a single 35W × 2 amp, then you can get away with
using the factory distribution/fuse block for power. Otherwise, because
of the high currents drawn by power amps, you will need to provide
208
CHAPTER SEVEN
Power Wiring for Class D Amps
Class D amplification is already popular for mono sub amps and may
eventually make its way into mainstream full-range amps. The big benefit of
Class D amps is their high efficiency, as compared to traditional Class AB amps.
Efficiency is how much of the power consumed by the amp is provided to the
speakers. Class AB amps have a typical efficiency of 50 percent. Class D provides
close to 90 percent efficiency. This translates to less heat (less likely to need a fan,
and higher reliability). It also means that the amount of current drawn by a
Class D amp is about half that of an equivalently rated Class AB amp. This can
save you money in power wiring and power line capacitors.
For a Class D amp, a conservative rule-of-thumb would allow you to go
with a wire gauge that’s two numbers higher (smaller wire diameter) than that
shown in Table 7-7. (Equivalently, you can use the table for an amp that’s one
power level lower.) For example, a traditional (Class AB) 100W x 2 amp should
use #10 wire for a short run. A 200W mono amp would have the same
requirement. If the amp were Class D, you could safely use #12 wire instead.
TABLE 7-7
Recommended Wire
Gauge for Power
Amps
Amplifier
Power Wire
Amplifier
Power Wire
35W × 2
Up to 12′
#16
100W × 2
Up to 17′
#10
Up to 18′
#14
Up to 26′
#8
Up to 30′
#12
150W × 2
Up to 17′
#8
50W × 2
Up to 13′
#14
Up to 28′
#6
Up to 21′
#12
200W × 2
Up to 21′
#6
Up to 33′
#10
Up to 33′
#4
75W × 2
Up to 14′
#12
350W × 2
Up to 19′
#4
Up to 22′
#10
Up to 30′
#2
Up to 35′
#8
500W × 2
Up to 21′
#2
Up to 26′
#1/0

your own power supply wiring directly to the battery. Figures 7-4 and 7-5
show two methods of doing this.
Figure 7-4 is a diagram of a single wire running through the firewall.
A fuse block is located very close to the battery to protect against shorts
on the battery side of the distribution/fuse block. The distribution/fuse
block may be located under the dash, in the trunk, or in any other con-
venient location.
Figure 7-5 is a diagram of multiple wires running through the firewall.
The distribution/fuse block is located very close to the battery to protect
against shorts. This approach eliminates the need for a separate fuse block,
but you have to run multiple wires through the firewall.
You may be able to use an existing hole in the firewall to run wires
from the engine compartment to the passenger compartment. Otherwise,
you’ll need to drill a hole in a strategic location. Always protect the wires
from the sharp metal edges of the hole by using a rubber grommet or
split loom tubing.
Important: The wire from the battery to the distribution/fuse block must
have a current rating high enough for the total current drawn by all the amps.
To determine the proper wire gauge for this wire, add together the power
ratings of all the amps, then refer to the previous table. For example, a 100W ×
2 amp plus a 50W × 2 amp should use the 150W × 2 row of the table.
For a pair of identical amps, you may simply choose a wire gauge 4 less than
the highest gauge (smallest wire) recommended for a single amp. For example,
if you have a pair of 50W × 2 amps, use #10 wire to the battery since #14 wire
is the highest gauge recommended for a 50W × 2 amp.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
209
FIGURE 7-4
Single wire through
the firewall.

Fuses
Even choosing the right fuse requires some thought. In addition to the
standard AGC glass tube and ATO/ATC blade styles, there are giant ver-
sions of each of these for high-current applications (called AGU and
MAXI, respectively). For ultra-high-current applications, there are two
types of wafer-style fuses. Figure 7-6 shows a variety of fuse styles.
The main factor in deciding which style of fuse to use is the current
rating. For applications up to 35 or 40 amps, use AGC or ATO/ATC. For
up to 60 or 80 amps, use AGU or MAXI. Above 80 amps, you must use a
wafer-type fuse. Table 7-8 provides further comparison of the different
fuse types.
Choose a fuse holder that accommodates the wire gauge you plan to
use. High-amperage fuse blocks are generally designed for 8-gauge or 
4-gauge wire. Distribution fuse blocks usually have a 4-gauge input and
multiple 8-gauge outputs.
Important: Make sure the fuse holder is rated to handle the current of the
fuse you plan to use, or you can melt or burn the holder. Do not assume a fuse
holder is designed to work safely with any fuse that will fit in it. For example,
many AGC fuse holders are only rated at 10 amps, even though AGC fuses can
go up to 35 amps.
210
CHAPTER SEVEN
FIGURE 7-5
Multiple wires
through the firewall.

AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
211
For high-current situations, using circuit breakers instead of fuses is
attractive because of the high cost and hassle of replacement fuses. In
many cases, the cost of a circuit breaker is actually less than the cost of a
fuse plus fuse holder. Since circuit breakers do not require holders, you
can actually save money even if you never overload a circuit. (MAXI cir-
cuit breakers are a plug-in replacement for MAXI fuses, and do require a
holder.)  
Some circuit breakers incorporate a “valet” feature that lets you turn off
power to the amplifiers for valet parking or work on your system without
disconnecting wires or a battery cable. A disadvantage with circuit break-
ers is that if you need to change the current rating, it is more difficult
than just popping in a different fuse.
FIGURE 7-6
(a) AGC fuse; (b) ATO/ATC fuses; (c) AGU fuse; (d) MAXI fuses; (e) MIDI fuses; (f ) ANL fuses. (Courtesy of 
Littelfuse.)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

Wiring for Automatic Turn-On
Most amps have a remote turn-on lead—the amp turns on when 12 volts
is applied to this lead. Normally, you connect this lead to the power
antenna lead of your head unit (or amp turn-on lead, if your head unit
provides one). Such a connection will turn your amp on and off with
your head unit.
212
CHAPTER SEVEN
TABLE 7-8
Fuse Types for 
Auto Sound
Fuse Type
Description
Current
Pricing
Comments
AGC
Glass tube
up to 35 amps
Fuse $.50
Standard automotive 
11⁄4 × 1⁄4
Holder $2
fuse of the seventies
ATO/ATC
Blade
up to 40 amps
Fuse $.50
Standard automotive 
Holder $2
fuse of the eighties
AGU
Glass tube
up to 60 amps
Fuse $1
Large version of 
11⁄2 × 13⁄32
Holder $7–16
AGC type
MAXI
Blade
20–80 amps
Fuse $1
Large version of
Holder $4–11
ATO/ATC
MIDI
Wafer (bolt-on)
30–200 amps
Fuse $3–5
Same as AFS and 
Holder $7–16
mini KF. Required for
very high current
applications
ANL
Wafer (bolt-on)
60–250 amps
Fuse $6–14
Required for very 
Holder $8–40
high-current 
applications
Calculating Fuse Current Rating
The simplest method to determine the correct current rating for a fuse is to
add together the maximum currents of everything on that circuit. The owner’s
manuals should list the maximum current; otherwise, look at the equipment
fuses.
An alternate rule-of-thumb method is to add the rated power of all
amplifier channels together and divide by 6. For example, for a pair of 30W × 2
amps (four channels altogether):
(30 + 30 + 30 + 30)/6 = 20
In this case you would use a 20-amp fuse.

If your head unit doesn’t have a wire suitable for amplifier turn-on
(some vehicles provide a low-voltage turn-on signal, some power antenna
leads only work when you actually use the radio, other head units may
have no wire at all), you’ll have to consider your options. For the case of
low-voltage turn-on signals, you can buy a low-voltage turn-on adapter to
convert the low-voltage trigger signal to 12 volts. 
Another option is to buy a remote power adapter. This device monitors
the DC voltage on a convenient speaker wire (5–7 volts for a high-powered
head unit), and provides a 12-volt amp turn-on signal to the amp. Even if
your head unit has a suitable turn-on wire, this device can save you from
having to run a wire from the head unit to the trunk.
As a last resort, you can use the ignition/accessory 12 volts as a turn-on
signal. This will turn on your amps whenever the car is running. The
downside is that you’ll be more likely to hear turn-on and turn-off pops
from your head unit (because the amps will be on during these times).
You may also notice some low-level noise from your speakers when the
head unit is off, that would otherwise be concealed by music.
If you have multiple amplifiers in your system, you can usually tie the
turn-on leads together. If you have four or more amps in your system, the
power turn-on lead of the head unit may not be able to provide enough
current, and you risk damaging the head unit.
A relay can solve this problem. It’s connected to your system as shown
in Fig. 7-7.
The head unit turn-on lead energizes the magnetic coil inside the relay,
which activates the internal switch. The switch connects the amp remote
turn-on leads to 12 volts. Here are the key points for success:
■Use a 12-volt automotive relay or relay with 12VDC coil. The coil rat-
ing should be 100 mA or less to prevent damaging the head unit. The
contact rating should be 2 amps or higher.
■Connect the relay coil terminals to the head unit turn-on lead and
ground as shown. The two coil terminals may or may not be inter-
changeable—the relay case will show + and −if they are not.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
213
FIGURE 7-7
Using a relay for
more current drive.

■Connect the relay switch terminals as shown. Use ignition/accessory
12 volts or battery 12 volts. Some relays have both NO (normally
open) and NC (normally closed) switch terminals in addition to
COM (common). Use the NO and COM terminals. They may be
interchanged.
Ground Wire Hookup
The metal chassis of a car forms a huge, low-impedance ground plane.
The basic grounding strategy is to ground each amplifier (or other com-
ponent) at the nearest chassis ground location.
The ground wire should be the same gauge as the power wire and
must make direct contact with bare metal of the car. Not all metal in a
car is electrically connected to the chassis, so use a multimeter to confirm
a low-resistance connection to a known good ground.
Look for an existing bolt or screw that makes contact with the car
body near the amp. Remove the bolt or screw and scrape away any paint
or dirt. A star washer will help your ground wire maintain good contact
with the car body. Crimp and solder a ring terminal onto the end of the
ground wire, slip it underneath the washer, and replace the bolt or screw.
If you can’t find a convenient ground screw or bolt, drill a hole for one.
Be careful not to drill into the gas tank or a gas or brake line.
If you’re installing several components, ground the amps separately.
This prevents the high currents drawn by an amp from modulating the
ground voltage of any of the other components. It’s okay for low-current
components to share a common ground point.
Connectors
Using the proper wire gauge is an important factor in getting the power you
paid for from your amps. Another equally important factor is connectors.
After about six months, a properly crimped connection has an imped-
ance of roughly 0.03 ohms, due to oxidation (it gets even worse as time
goes on). This doesn’t sound like much, but consider the fact that from
the battery to the amp there can easily be five or more crimped connec-
tions through distribution blocks and so forth.
214
CHAPTER SEVEN
Important: Some
cars (Audi, Porsche)
have galvanized bod-
ies. In these cars, you
must find one of the
manufacturers’
grounding points or
else some noise can
result.

Let’s assume five connections of 0.03 ohms, for a grand total of 0.15
ohms. For a 50W × 2 amp, the maximum current is approximately 
17 amps. This results in a maximum voltage drop of 2.5 volts, and a
reduction in maximum power of over 30 percent. Remember, this is due
to the connectors alone, and is on top of any additional losses in the
wires themselves.
Crimping and then soldering results in an impedance of 0.01 ohms per
connection. This number does not degrade over time. For our example,
this would limit the maximum voltage drop to 0.85 volts, and the reduc-
tion in maximum power to 10 percent.
The point of this is:
■Solder crimped connectors where high currents are involved. This
means power supply and ground wires for all power amps. While you’re
at it, soldering crimped speaker wire connectors is a good idea too.
■Eliminate unnecessary connections.
Soldering crimped spade lugs and quick disconnects is simple because
the end of the wire is exposed. For high-current butt splices, don’t use
crimp connectors. Solder the ends directly and insulate with heat-shrink
tubing.
Eliminating unnecessary connections favors using the “multiple wires
through the firewall” power wire hookup approach explained previously.
Speaker Wiring
For speaker wiring, the dominating consideration in selecting wire gauge
is damping factor. Damping factor is the ratio of speaker impedance to
driving impedance, where driving impedance is usually dominated by
the speaker wires. For 4-ohm speakers, the speaker wires should have an
impedance of less than 0.1 ohms for best performance. Impedance values
higher than this will result in damping factors less than 40, which can
start to affect bass response.
Table 7-9 provides minimum recommended wire gauges, depending on
wire length, for all power amps. The wire lengths shown in Table 7-9 guar-
antee damping factors greater than 40. Using thicker wire (smaller gauge)
and shorter lengths will give you higher damping factors.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
215

If you are running 2-ohm loads, subtract 2 from the recommended
wire gauge in the chart. For example, use #10-2 up to 30 feet.
Boosting Head Units 
with Front and Rear Preamp Outputs 
Head units with front and rear preamp outputs provide the most flexi-
bility for boosting with amplifiers. The preamp outputs provide a low-
noise, low-distortion interface to any amplifier. Having front and rear
preamp outputs means the head unit fader control can remain func-
tional for all but one of the configurations.
There are five configurations with this type of head unit. The first two
configurations let you provide as much power as you want to each of two
pairs of speakers. The third configuration lets you save an amp when
equal power to front and rear speakers is acceptable. The last two config-
urations let you save an amp when high power is needed for only one
pair of speakers. This may seem like a strange idea at first, but it actually
can make a lot of sense. Table 7-10 shows the five configurations.
Standard Configuration
The standard configuration boosts all four channels. Two stereo amps or
a single four-channel amp may be used. In this configuration, the speaker
outputs of the head unit are unused.
You may choose to use two stereo amps with different power ratings if
more power is needed for one pair of speakers. One example of this is for
rear fill applications, where the rear speakers are operated at a reduced vol-
ume level to improve imaging (see the “Imaging Overhaul” section in
Chap. 3). Another example is where the front speakers have much lower
216
CHAPTER SEVEN
TABLE 7-9
Minimum Recom-
mended Gauge for
Speaker Wire
Amplifier
Speaker Wire
All wattages
up to 12′
#16-2
up to 20′
#14-2
up to 30′
#12-2

power handling capacity than the rear speakers. In this case, you might
want to run a more powerful amp in back and put bass blocking filters at
the preamp-level inputs of the front amp. Use 100- or 200-Hz, 12-dB/octave
filters for best results. (Many amps now include built-in 100-Hz high-pass
filters.) These prevent deep bass frequencies from wasting amplifier
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
217
TABLE 7-10
Configurations for
Boosting Head Units
with Front and Rear
Preamp Outputs 
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Standard
Lets you provide as much
power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
Head unit fader control is
functional.
Cable-saving
Lets you provide as much
power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
Saves having to run patch cord
to trunk-mounted amp.
Head unit fader control is
functional.
Parallel front/rear
Saves one amp when equal
speakers
power to front and rear
speakers is acceptable. (No rela-
tive front/rear level adjust-
ment is possible.)
Amp-saving
Saves one amp when high
power is needed for one pair
only:
■Rear fill applications
■Low-power front/high-
power rear applications
Head unit fader control is
functional.
Cable-saving
Saves one amp when higher 
amp-saving
power is needed for one pair
only.
Saves having to run patch cord
to trunk-mounted amp.
Head unit fader control is
functional.

power and distorting your front speakers, so you can run a high volume
level up front. Since deep bass is nondirectional, the back speakers will fill
in the missing deep bass in front.
Cable-Saving Configuration
This configuration lets you provide as much power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
If you choose to use a trunk-mounted amp for the rear speakers, this
configuration saves having to run a patch cord to the trunk-mounted amp
since the speaker wires already in place are used to carry the signal to the
amp. Either the trunk amp will need to be a model that accepts speaker-
level inputs or you will need to use a line output converter to convert the
speaker-level signals to preamp level (see the box on line out put converters
on p. 224).
You may choose to use two stereo amps with different power ratings if
more power is needed for one pair of speakers. One example of this is for
rear fill applications, where the rear speakers are operated at a reduced vol-
ume level to improve imaging (see the “Imaging Overhaul” section in
Chap. 3). Another example is where the front speakers have much lower
power handling capacity than the rear speakers. In this case, you might
want to run a more powerful amp in back and put bass blocking filters at
the preamp-level inputs of the front amp. Use 100- or 200-Hz, 12-dB/octave
filters for best results. (Many amps now include built-in 100-Hz high-pass
filters.) These prevent deep bass frequencies from wasting amplifier
power and distorting your front speakers, so you can run a high volume
level up front. Since deep bass is nondirectional, the back speakers will fill
in the missing deep bass in front.
For proper fader operation, be sure to use the correct set of head unit
speaker outputs.
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
The parallel front/rear speakers configuration shares a single amp for
front and rear channels. This gives you almost the same power per
speaker as having identical separate amps for front and rear. The drawback
with this configuration is that you are stuck with having equal power for
front and back speakers.
Since the amplifier used in this configuration will see a parallel
218
CHAPTER SEVEN

speaker load, it must be 2-ohm stable. An amp driving 2-ohm loads runs
hotter, so be sure to mount it where it will have good air circulation.
Amplifier-Saving Configuration
The amplifier-saving configuration is the same as the standard configu-
ration, except that one amplifier is eliminated by using an existing amp
in the head unit. This can be useful in applications where more power is
needed for one pair of speakers than the other.
One example of this is for rear fill applications, where the rear speakers
are operated at a reduced volume level to improve imaging (see the “Imag-
ing Overhaul” section in Chap. 3). Another example is where the front
speakers have much lower power handling capacity than the rear speak-
ers. In this case, you could use the head unit speaker outputs in front.
Be sure to use the correct set of preamp outputs for this configuration.
The fader control will work properly for one set and oppositely for the
other set.
Cable-Saving Amplifier-Saving Configuration
This configuration is useful when higher power is needed for only the
rear pair of speakers and you want to mount the amp in the trunk. Either
the amp will need to be a model that accepts speaker-level inputs, or you
will need to use a line output converter to convert the speaker-level sig-
nals to preamp level.
As with the previous configuration, this one lets you save an amp and
maintain fader functionality. By using the existing rear speaker wires to
carry the signal to the amp, you save having to run a patch cord from the
head unit to the trunk-mounted amp.
Boosting Head Units 
with One Set of Preamp Outputs
There are five configurations with this type of head unit. The first two
let you provide as much power as you want to each of two pairs of speak-
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
219

ers. The third lets you save an amp when equal power to front and rear
speakers is acceptable. The last two configurations let you save an amp
when high power is needed for only one pair of speakers. The cable-
saving version of the amp-saving configuration saves having to run a
patch cord to a trunk-mounted amp when you are boosting the rear
speakers. Table 7-11 shows the five configurations.
Standard Configuration
In this configuration, Y cables are used to feed the preamp-level outputs
from the head unit to two stereo amps (or a single four-channel amp). The
speaker outputs of the head unit are unused. You may choose to use two
stereo amps with different power ratings if more power is needed for one
pair of speakers. One example of this is for rear fill applications, where the
rear speakers are operated at a reduced volume level to improve imaging
(see the “Imaging Overhaul” section in Chap. 3). Another example is where
the front speakers have much lower power handling capacity than the rear
speakers. In this case, you might want to run a more powerful amp in back
and put bass blocking filters at the preamp-level inputs of the front amp.
Use 100- or 200-Hz, 12-dB/octave filters for best results. (Many amps now
include built-in 100-Hz high-pass filters.) These prevent deep bass frequen-
cies from wasting amplifier power and distorting your front speakers, but
still let you run a high volume level up front. Since deep bass is nondirec-
tional, the back speakers will fill in the missing deep bass in front.
Set the relative front/rear level by using the gain controls on the amps.
Fader-Restoring Configuration
This configuration lets you provide as much power as you want to two
pairs of speakers, and restores use of the fader. This is accomplished by
using speaker-level outputs from the head unit as the inputs to the sec-
ond amp. Either the second amp will need to be a model that accepts
speaker-level inputs, or you will need to use a line output converter to
convert the speaker-level signals to preamp level.
If you choose to use a trunk-mounted amp for the rear speakers, this con-
figuration saves having to run a patch cord to the trunk-mounted amp since
the speaker wires already in place are used to carry the signal to the amp.
220
CHAPTER SEVEN

You may choose to use two stereo amps with different power ratings if
more power is needed for one pair of speakers. One example of this is for
rear fill applications, where the rear speakers are operated at a reduced vol-
ume level to improve imaging (see the “Imaging Overhaul” section in
Chap. 3). Another example is where the front speakers have much lower
power handling capacity than the rear speakers. In this case, you might
want to run a more powerful amp in back and put bass blocking filters at
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
221
TABLE 7-11
Configurations for
Boosting Head Units
with One Set of 
Preamp Outputs 
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Standard
Lets you provide as much
power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
Head unit fader control is
non-functional.
Fader-restoring
Lets you provide as much
power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
Saves having to run patch
cord to trunk-mounted amp.
Head unit fader control is
functional.
Parallel front/
Saves one amp when equal 
rear speakers
power to front and rear
speakers is acceptable. (No rel-
ative front/rear level adjust-
ment is possible.)
Amp-saving
Saves one amp when higher
power is needed for one pair
only.
Head unit fader control is
functional.
Cable-saving 
Saves one amp when higher 
amp-saving
power is needed for one pair
only.
Saves having to run patch
cord to trunk-mounted amp.
Head unit fader control is
functional.

the preamp-level inputs of the front amp. Use 100- or 200-Hz, 12-dB/octave
filters for best results. (Many amps now include built-in 100-Hz high-pass
filters.) These prevent deep bass frequencies from wasting amplifier
power and distorting your front speakers, but still let you run a high vol-
ume level up front. Since deep bass is nondirectional, the back speakers
will fill in the missing deep bass in front.
For proper fader operation, be sure to use the correct set of head unit
speaker outputs.
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
The parallel front/rear speakers configuration shares a single amp for
front and rear channels. This gives you almost the same power per
speaker as having identical separate amps for front and rear. The drawback
with this configuration is that you are stuck with having equal power for
front and back speakers.
Since the amplifier used in this configuration will see a parallel
speaker load, it must be 2-ohm stable. An amp driving 2-ohm loads runs
hotter, so be sure to mount it where it will have good air circulation.
Amplifier-Saving Configuration
This configuration lets you save an amp when higher power is needed for
only one pair of speakers.
One example of this is for rear fill applications, where the rear speakers
are operated at a reduced volume level to improve imaging (see the “Imag-
ing Overhaul” section in Chap. 3). Another example is where the front
speakers have much lower power handling capacity than the rear speak-
ers. In this case, you could use the head unit speaker outputs in front.
For proper fader operation, be sure to use the correct set of head unit
speaker outputs.
Cable-Saving Amplifier-Saving Configuration
This configuration is useful when higher power is needed for only the
rear pair of speakers and you want to mount the amp in the trunk. Either
222
CHAPTER SEVEN

the amp will need to be a model that accepts speaker-level inputs, or you
will need to use a line output converter to convert the speaker-level sig-
nals to preamp level.
As with the previous configuration, this one lets you save an amp and
maintain fader functionality. By using the existing rear speaker wires to
carry the signal to the amp, you save having to run a patch cord from the
head unit to the trunk-mounted amp.
Boosting Head Units 
with No Preamp Outputs 
and Four Speaker Outputs
Head units without preamp outputs can be boosted by choosing ampli-
fiers that accept speaker-level inputs. Alternately, line output converters
can be used to convert a head unit’s speaker-level signals to preamp level
for use with any amp.
There are four configurations for head units with no preamp outputs
and four speaker outputs. The standard configuration provides the most
flexibility, and lets you provide as much power as you want to each of
two pairs of speakers. The converter-saving configuration can eliminate
the need for a second line output converter (at the expense of losing fader
control). The parallel front/rear speaker configuration lets you save an
amp when equal power to front and rear speakers is acceptable. The amp-
saving configuration lets you save an amp when high power is needed for
only one pair of speakers. This may seem like a strange idea at first, but it
actually can make a lot of sense. Table 7-13 shows the four configurations.
Standard Configuration
The standard configuration boosts all four channels and retains the func-
tionality of the head unit fader control. If you use amps without speaker-
level inputs, two line output converters are required for this configuration.
Two stereo amps or a single four-channel amp may be used.
You may choose to use two stereo amps with different power ratings if
more power is needed for one pair of speakers. One example of this is for
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
223

rear fill applications, where the rear speakers are operated at a reduced vol-
ume level to improve imaging (see the “Imaging Overhaul” section in
Chap. 3). Another example is where the front speakers have much lower
power handling capacity than the rear speakers. In this case, you might
want to run a more powerful amp in back and put bass blocking filters at
the preamp-level inputs of the front amp. Use 100- or 200-Hz, 12-dB/octave
filters for best results. (Many amps now include built-in 100-Hz high-pass
filters.) These prevent deep bass frequencies from wasting amplifier
224
CHAPTER SEVEN
Line Output Converters
Line output converters reduce the signal amplitude from speaker level to
preamp level. Better models also eliminate common-mode noise and break
ground loops.
Table 7-12 shows the three basic types of line output converters.
Resistive converters are the least expensive, but do not provide ground
isolation. Transformer and differential amplifier converters do provide ground
isolation, but cost more. Differential amp converters provide better frequency
response and are less susceptible to magnetic fields than transformer
converters.
Ground isolation helps reduce system noise problems caused by ground
loops. Some amplifiers provide ground isolation at their preamp-level inputs, in
which case there is no additional benefit to having isolation in the line output
converter. The level of benefit provided by ground isolation also depends on
the ground structure of your installation. Trunk-mounted amps usually
benefit the most from ground isolation.
When deciding what to buy, either buy a differential amp model right off
the bat or start with a $2 resistive converter and upgrade if necessary.
TABLE 7-12
Types of Line Output Converters
Active or
Type
Price
Passive
Comments
Resistive
$2–$30
Passive
Does not eliminate common-mode noise or break
ground loops.
Typically very small.
Transformer
$15–$30
Passive
Eliminates common-mode noise and breaks
ground loops.
Typically palm-sized case.
Differential 
$15–$30
Active
Eliminates common-mode noise and breaks 
amp
ground loops.
Typically palm-sized case.

power and distorting your front speakers, but still let you run a high vol-
ume level up front. Since deep bass is nondirectional, the back speakers
will fill in the missing deep bass in front.
Converter-Saving Configuration
The converter-saving configuration is similar to the standard configura-
tion, except that a line output converter is eliminated by sharing a single
converter for both amps. If you use amps with speaker-level inputs, then
there’s no advantage to this configuration. The disadvantage is that the
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
225
TABLE 7-13
Configurations for
Boosting Head Units
with No Preamp
Outputs and Four
Speaker Outputs
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Standard
Lets you provide as much
power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
Head unit fader control is
functional.
Converter-saving
Lets you provide as much
power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
Saves one line output 
converter.
Head unit fader control is
non-functional.
Parallel front/
Saves one amp when equal 
rear speakers
power to front and rear
speakers is acceptable. (No
relative front/rear level
adjustment is possible.)
Amp-saving
Saves one amp when high
power is needed for one pair
only:
■Read fill applications
■Low-power front/high-
power rear applications
Head unit fader control is
functional.

fader control on the head unit becomes nonfunctional. You can still set
the relative front/rear level by using the controls on the amps themselves,
but you lose the convenience of head unit control.
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
The parallel front/rear speakers configuration shares a single amp for
front and rear channels. This gives you almost the same power per speaker
as having identical separate amps for front and rear. The drawback with
this configuration is that you are stuck with having equal power for front
and back speakers.
Since the amplifier used in this configuration will see a parallel
speaker load, it must be 2-ohm stable. An amp driving 2-ohm loads runs
hotter, so be sure to mount it where it will have good air circulation.
Amplifier-Saving Configuration
The amplifier-saving configuration is similar to the standard configura-
tion, except that one amplifier is eliminated by using an existing amp in
the head unit. This can be useful in applications where more power is
needed for one pair of speakers than the other.
One example of this is for rear fill applications, where the rear speakers
are operated at a reduced volume level to improve imaging (see the “Imag-
ing Overhaul” section in Chap. 3). Another example is where the front
speakers have much lower power handling capacity than the rear speak-
ers. In this case, you could use the external amp in back.
Boosting Head Units 
with No Preamp Outputs 
and Two Speaker Outputs
There are four configurations for head units with no preamp outputs
and two speaker outputs (Table 7-14). The first simply boosts two speakers.
The last three allow you to add a set of speakers.
226
CHAPTER SEVEN

Standard Configuration
The standard configuration boosts two channels. If you use an amp with-
out speaker-level inputs, a line output converter is required for this con-
figuration.
Two- to Four-Speaker Upgrade Configuration
This configuration lets you boost the original speakers as well as add a
second pair of boosted speakers.
You may choose to use two stereo amps with different power ratings if
more power is needed for one pair of speakers. One example of this is for
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
227
TABLE 7-14
Configurations for
Boosting Head Units
with No 
Preamp Outputs and
Two Speaker Out-
puts
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Standard
Two-to-four 
Most flexible configuration 
upgrade
for adding two channels to
head units with two speaker
outputs.
Parallel front/
For adding two channels to 
rear speakers 
head units with two speaker 
two-to-four 
outputs.
upgrade
Saves one amp when equal
power to front and rear
speakers is acceptable. (No
relative front/rear level
adjustment is possible.)
Amp-saving 
For adding two channels to 
two-to-four 
head units with two speaker 
upgrade
outputs.
Saves one amp when high
power is needed for one pair
only.

rear fill applications, where the rear speakers are operated at a reduced vol-
ume level to improve imaging (see the “Imaging Overhaul” section in
Chap. 3). Another example is where the front speakers have much lower
power handling capacity than the rear speakers. In this case, you might
want to run a more powerful amp in back and put bass blocking filters at
the preamp-level inputs of the front amp. Use 100- or 200-Hz, 12-dB/octave
filters for best results. (Many amps now include built-in 100-Hz high-pass
filters.) These prevent deep bass frequencies from wasting amplifier
power and distorting your front speakers, but still let you run a high vol-
ume level up front. Since deep bass is nondirectional, the back speakers
will fill in the missing deep bass in front.
Set the relative front/rear level by using the controls on the amps.
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
The parallel front/rear speakers configuration lets you add a pair of
speakers by sharing a single amp for front and rear channels. This gives
you almost the same power per speaker as having identical separate amps
for front and rear. The drawback with this configuration is that you are
stuck with having equal power for front and back speakers.
Since the amplifier used in this configuration will see a parallel
speaker load, it must be 2-ohm stable. An amp driving 2-ohm loads runs
hotter, so be sure to mount it where it will have good air circulation.
Amplifier-Saving Two- to Four-Speaker
Upgrade Configuration
This configuration lets you add a pair of speakers and takes advantage of
the existing amp in the head unit to drive the other, lower-power pair of
speakers. This is useful for rear fill applications, where the rear speakers
are operated at a reduced volume level to improve imaging (see the “Imag-
ing Overhaul” section in Chap. 3). Another example is where the front
speakers have much lower power handling capacity than the rear speak-
ers. In this case, you could use the external amp in back.
228
CHAPTER SEVEN

AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
229
Because the head unit lacks a fader control, the proper front/rear level
balance must be set by adjusting the level control on the amp.
Boosting Premium Factory Sound
System Head Units
If you have a premium factory sound system (such as Delco/Bose or
Ford/JBL) and want to boost your head unit with an amp, the situation
is more complicated than with standard systems. You’ll need to bypass the
factory amps plus use a line output converter designed specifically for
Bose or Ford Premium systems. Depending on the system, you may need
to replace the factory speakers as well.
Premium Factory Sound System Basics
Although the details of Bose and Ford Premium systems differ (as do dif-
ferent Bose systems among themselves), they share the same basic princi-
ple. All use external amplifiers (amplified speakers or an outboard amp)
and all use differential signals between the head unit and amplifiers.
Chrysler/Infinity Systems
Like Bose and Ford Premium systems, Chrysler/Infinity systems use external
amplifiers (in the form of amplified speakers). Unlike Bose and Ford, Chrysler/
Infinity systems use standard head unit technology. This approach allows
upgrading of the premium system in the assembly plant by simply using
amplified speaker assemblies instead of normal ones.
If you want to boost a Chrysler/Infinity head unit with an aftermarket
amp, you will need to bypass the factory amps. By bypassing, however, you will
lose the benefit of custom equalization built into the factory amps. Chrysler/
Infinity systems use standard-impedance speakers, so you will not need to
replace the speakers if you decide to drive them with an aftermarket amp.
Some earlier Chrysler/Infinity systems (prior to 1995) used low-power head
units; the rest use high-power head units. In either case, a standard line output
converter will do the job of interfacing a Chrysler/Infinity head unit to an
amp lacking speaker-level inputs.

The advantage of using differential signals is noise immunity. The dif-
ferential outputs of the head unit provide two equal but opposite ver-
sions of the music signal (an inverted version and a noninverted version).
At the differential inputs of the amplifier, the two versions of the signal
are subtracted. Since any noise presumably affects both versions of the sig-
nal the same, subtraction causes cancellation of the noise. Because one of
the music signals was inverted, subtraction also results in a music signal
that is twice the original signal.
The differential outputs of the head unit have a DC offset to eliminate
the need for coupling capacitors in the head unit and amplifiers. DC off-
set is also used in Bose systems to “wake up” the amplifiers.
Bose systems often incorporate speakers with impedances much less
than the usual 4 ohms (0.4 ohms is common!). This allows the Bose ampli-
fiers to achieve much higher power levels without having to incorporate
expensive DC-to-DC converters to provide a higher supply voltage.
GM’s Class 2 Data Bus.
In 2002, GM added a new twist to some of its
premium factory sound systems—Class 2 data bus control. GM’s Pre-
mium/Smart Bose system is used in 2002 and later full-size trucks and
SUVs. With this system, the head unit provides fixed-level audio signals to
the factory amplifiers. The head unit issues commands to each amp via
the Class 2 data bus to control volume, fader, and balance. This approach
provides improved noise immunity, but makes adding an amp to your
head unit more challenging.
Do You Need to Replace Your 
Factory Speakers?
Most Bose systems use speakers that are only 0.4 ohms (instead of the usual
4 ohms). Aftermarket amps can’t handle driving this low of an impedance.
If your vehicle uses low-impedance speakers, you’ll need to replace them if
you want to boost your head unit with an aftermarket amp.
It’s smart to scope this out beforehand, so you know what you’re get-
ting into. Remove one of the factory speaker assemblies. Disconnect the
wires going to the driver itself, then use a multimeter to measure the resis-
tance of the driver. If it’s less than 3.2 ohms, you’ll need to replace the
speakers with aftermarket ones.
An easier alternative is to call Crutchfield. They can tell you what
230
CHAPTER SEVEN

you’ve got and how to proceed. They also stock a wide selection of
adapters and harnesses for interfacing to premium factory sound systems.
Bypassing Factory Amps
Bose and Ford Premium sound systems use external amplifiers (in the
form of amplified speaker assemblies or outboard amps). These amplifiers
need to be bypassed in order to use an aftermarket amp.
In the case of amplified speaker assemblies, the aftermarket amp
should be located near the head unit to make best use of the factory
wiring. Each speaker assembly will need to be removed and modified to
bypass its amp. For amplified speaker assemblies with low-impedance fac-
tory speakers (less than 4 ohms), replace the entire amplified speaker with
a 4-ohm aftermarket speaker. For amplified speaker assemblies with 4-ohm 
factory speakers, bypass the signal wires feeding each amplifier to the
speaker itself.
For outboard factory amp systems, the aftermarket amp can be located
near the head unit or at the factory amp location, to make best use of the
factory wiring. In either case, the wiring harness from the output of the
factory amp will need to be unplugged from the factory amp and driven
by the aftermarket amp.
Line Output Converters for Bose/Ford
Premium Head Units
Line output converters are commonly used to convert head unit speaker-
level outputs to levels suitable for the preamp-level inputs of amps.
If you’re dealing with a Bose or Ford Premium Sound factory head
unit, you’ll want to use a line output converter specifically designed for
interfacing to those units. Using a standard LOC having low-input imped-
ance may damage the output circuit of a Bose or Ford Premium Sound
head unit. Using a standard LOC with a Bose or Ford system can also
result in extremely low output from the LOC because of the relatively
low signal levels of many premium factory system head units.
The LOCB.2 by SoundGate (Fig. 7-8) will accept any input signal from 
350 mV to 6.6 volts and convert it to a 2.5-volt audio output suitable for
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
231
Tip: Most line out-
put converters are
two-channel units. If
this is the case, you
will need to buy two
converters to retain
functionality of your
head unit fader and
balance controls.

232
CHAPTER SEVEN
aftermarket crossovers and amps. It also has a noise-blanking circuit that
activates the audio path after turn-on noises have subsided.
Line Output Converters for Systems Using GM’s Class 2 Data Bus.
As described earlier, some of GM’s Premium/Smart Bose sound systems
provide fixed-level audio signals from the head unit to the factory amps.
Data bus commands from the head unit are used to control volume, fader,
and balance. This makes adding an amp to your head unit more chal-
lenging—but not impossible.
Peripheral’s GMAA (Fig. 7-9) line output converter decodes GM’s Class
2 data bus commands and uses them to provide varying output levels to
an aftermarket amp. The GMAA can be set to provide front, rear, or sub-
woofer outputs. Additionally, the GMAA reads the data bus and generates
an amplifier remote turn-on signal so the aftermarket amp turns on and
off with the head unit, not with the ignition. 
System Configurations
There are four configurations for boosting premium factory sound sys-
tem head units. The standard configuration provides the most flexibility,
and lets you provide as much power as you want to each of two pairs of
speakers. The converter-saving configuration can eliminate the need for a
second line output converter (at the expense of losing fader control). The
parallel front/rear speaker configuration lets you save an amp when
equal power to front and rear speakers is acceptable. The amp-saving con-
FIGURE 7-8
SoundGate LOCB.2.
(Courtesy of SoundGate.)

figuration lets you save an amp when high power is needed for only one
pair of speakers. This may seem like a strange idea at first, but it actually
can make a lot of sense. Table 7-15 shows the four configurations.
Standard Configuration.
The standard configuration boosts all four
channels and retains the functionality of the head unit fader control.
Two line output converters are required for this configuration. Two
stereo amps or a single four-channel amp may be used.
You may choose to use two stereo amps with different power ratings if
more power is needed for one pair of speakers. One example of this is for
rear fill applications, where the rear speakers are operated at a reduced vol-
ume level to improve imaging (see the “Imaging Overhaul” section in
Chap. 3). Another example is where the front speakers have much lower
power handling capacity than the rear speakers. In this case, you might
want to run a more powerful amp in back and put bass blocking filters at
the preamp-level inputs of the front amp. Use 100- or 200-Hz, 12-dB/octave
filters for best results. (Many amps now include built-in 100-Hz high-pass
filters.) These prevent deep bass frequencies from wasting amplifier
power and distorting your front speakers, but still let you run a high vol-
ume level up front. Since deep bass is nondirectional, the back speakers
will fill in the missing deep bass in front.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
233
FIGURE 7-9
Peripheral GMAA
LOC for GM Class 2
data bus systems.
(Courtesy of Peripheral 
Electronics.)

234
CHAPTER SEVEN
Converter-Saving Configuration.
The converter-saving configura-
tion is similar to the standard configuration, except that a line output
converter is eliminated by sharing a single converter for both amps. The
disadvantage is that the fader control on the head unit becomes non-
functional. You can still set the relative front/rear level by using the con-
trols on the amps themselves, but you lose the convenience of head unit
control.
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration.
The parallel front/rear
speakers configuration shares a single amp for front and rear channels. This
TABLE 7-15
Configurations for
Boosting Premium
Factory Sound 
System Head Units
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Standard
Lets you provide as much
power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
Head unit fader control is
functional.
Converter-saving
Lets you provide as much
power as you want to two
pairs of speakers.
Saves one line output con-
verter.
Head unit fader control is
non-functional.
Parallel front/
Saves one amp when equal 
rear speakers
power to front and rear
speakers is acceptable. (No
relative front/rear level
adjustment is possible.)
Amp-saving
Saves one amp when high
power is needed for one pair
only:
■Rear fill applications
■Low-power front/high-
power rear applications
Head unit fader control is
functional.

AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
235
gives you almost the same power per speaker as having identical separate
amps for front and rear. The drawback with this configuration is that you
are stuck with having equal power for front and back speakers.
Since the amplifier used in this configuration will see a parallel speaker
load, it must be 2-ohm stable. An amp driving 2-ohm loads runs hotter, so
be sure to mount it where it will have good air circulation.
Amplifier-Saving Configuration.
The amplifier-saving configura-
tion is similar to the standard configuration, except that an aftermarket
amplifier is eliminated by retaining use of factory amps for one pair of
speakers. This can be useful in applications where more power is needed
for one pair of speakers than the other.
One example of this is for rear fill applications, where the rear speakers
are operated at a reduced volume level to improve imaging (see the “Imag-
ing Overhaul” section in Chap. 3). Another example is where the front
speakers have much lower power handling capacity than the rear speak-
ers. In this case, you could use the aftermarket amp in back.
Adjusting Amp Gain Settings
Once you’ve installed your amp or amps, you’ll need to set the level con-
trols for optimum performance. If you set the level too low, you’ll have
noise problems. If you set the level too high, you’ll have distortion prob-
lems. The goal is to find the level that maximizes the signal-to-noise ratio
while avoiding of distortion.
Follow these steps, depending on the configuration of your system.
Procedure for Two-Amp Configurations
1. Set the amp level controls to minimum and the head unit fader con-
trol to its center detent position. If you’re using any line output con-
verters with their own level controls, set them to minimum.
2. With music, turn up the head unit volume control (you should barely
be able to hear the music). When you reach the point where you start
to hear distortion from any speaker, turn the volume control down

236
CHAPTER SEVEN
slightly until the distortion disappears. Leave the volume control at
this setting.
NOTE
If the sound from the speakers is so low that you cannot clearly hear
the onset of distortion, turn up the amp’s level controls a bit.
3. If you’re using any line output converters with their own level con-
trols, return all amp level control settings to minimum, then turn up
each LOC level control until you reach a point where you start to
hear distortion. Back the LOC level controls down slightly until the
distortion disappears. (If you never reach a point where you hear dis-
tortion, the LOC level controls should be set to max.)
4. Turn up your front amp level control until the system is as loud as
you’ll ever play it or you begin to hear distortion. If you hear distor-
tion, slightly decrease the amp level control.
5. Turn down the head unit volume to a normal listening level.
6. Turn up the rear amp level until the desired front/rear balance is
achieved.
Procedure for Amp-Saving Configurations
If you’re not using a line output converter with its own level controls,
skip to Step 4.
1. Set the amp level controls and LOC level controls to minimum. Set the
head unit fader control all the way toward the channels with the amp.
2. With music, turn up the head unit volume control (you should barely
be able to hear the music). When you reach the point where you start
to hear distortion from a speaker (on an amplified channel), turn the
volume control down slightly until the distortion disappears. Leave
the volume control at this setting.
NOTE
If the sound from the speakers is so low that you cannot clearly hear
the onset of distortion, turn up the amp’s level controls a bit.

3. Return all amp level control settings to minimum, then turn up each
LOC level control until you reach a point where you start to hear dis-
tortion. Back the LOC level controls down slightly until the distor-
tion disappears. (If you never reach a point where you hear distortion,
the LOC level controls should be set to max.) Turn down the head
unit volume control before proceeding to step 4.
4. Set the head unit fader control to its center detent position.
5. With music, adjust the head unit volume to a normal listening level.
6. Adjust the amp level controls until the desired front/rear balance is
achieved.
Eliminating Turn-On and Turn-Off Pops
Turn-on and turn-off pops (or in extreme cases, thumps) are a fairly
common problem when amplifiers have been added to a system. The
problem stems from power supply imbalances, bias problems in amplifier
output stages, or component tolerances.
Using the proper amplifier turn-on signal goes a long way toward solv-
ing most turn-on and turn-off pop problems. Ideally, an amplifier is
turned on a fraction of a second after the head unit, to allow time for the
head unit’s outputs to stabilize. If an amp turns on before this, you can
hear a pop. The reverse is true at turn-off; you want the amp to turn off
a fraction of a second before the head unit, to prevent head unit tran-
sients from being amplified. 
The first thing to do when you have a turn-on or turn-off pop prob-
lem is to make sure the amplifier itself doesn’t have a problem. Unplug all
input cables to the amp and replace them with shorting plugs. Use the
remote turn-on signal of the amp to turn it off and on, listening for pops
or thumps at the speakers. If you hear objectionable pops, the problem is
with the design of the amp, or the amp itself is defective. If the amp is
acceptably quiet for this test, the problem is due to the turn-on/turn-off
order of your system.
If this is the case, first make sure you’re using the best possible amp
turn-on signal. If your head unit doesn’t have a suitable turn-on signal,
adapters are available to convert the low-voltage turn-on signals of some
head units to 12 volts or to generate turn-on signals from the speaker sig-
nals. If these don’t solve the problem, the next line of defense is to use a
specialty trigger device.
AMPLIFIERS AND AMPLIFIER PROJECTS
237

A turn-on delay trigger (Fig. 7-10a) is useful for turn-on pops. It allows
you to delay the amplifier turn-on until the transients from the head
unit have subsided. A turn-off pop eliminator (Fig. 7-10b) is useful for
turn-off problems. It installs in the preamp-level signal path to the amp,
and mutes the signal before the head unit transients have a chance to
affect the amp.
238
CHAPTER SEVEN
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 7-10
(a) TRIGDLA turn-
on delay; (b) TRIG-
RCA turn-off pop
eliminator. (Courtesy of
SoundGate.)

Equalizers 
and Equalizer
Projects
CHAPTER 8
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

To Equalize or Not?
Although equalizers were once thought of as the savior of great sound
quality for high-end systems, the trend for their use is down. The philos-
ophy of many seems to be that less is more. In other words, the fewer the
number of components, the better the guard against the introduction of
noise and distortion. Better-quality speakers, good speaker placement,
and subwoofers have alleviated much of the need for equalizers.
On the other hand, the acoustics of cars are notorious for introducing
frequency response peaks and valleys. Even if your speakers are perfect,
your overall frequency response will be bumpy. Boomy-sounding bass
due to resonances, as well as irregularities in the mid-range and treble due
to window reflections, are typical. Equalization still offers the best solu-
tion to these problems.
How Many Bands Do You Need?
It’s important to differentiate between the different classes of equalizers
(see Fig. 8-1).
Five- and seven-band graphic equalizers are essentially sophisticated
tone controls, and don’t give you the control you need to correct the nar-
row peaks and valleys of your car’s acoustic response. On the positive side,
these definitely give you more flexibility than just bass and treble con-
trols, and can be set reasonably well by ear. For this reason they are best
mounted within easy reach.
Fifteen- through thirty-band graphic equalizers, and most parametric
equalizers, can be considered tools. They give you the control you need to
correct real-world response problems. Unfortunately, they are more
expensive, and cannot reliably be set by ear—a 1⁄3-octave real-time ana-
240
CHAPTER EIGHT
FIGURE 8-1
Classes of equalizers.

lyzer (RTA) is required to set them properly. The good news is that any
serious car stereo shop should have one of these, and should be willing to
help you set your equalizer for a reasonable fee. Equalizers falling into the
tools category are normally set once, then left alone. For this reason, they
are best mounted out of sight and out of reach of curious fingers. Be sure
to write down the settings of each control or use a marker on the face to
indicate the proper setting.
Ten-band graphic equalizers fall in the transition region between
sophisticated tone controls and tools. Table 8-1 shows a summary of the
performance levels for various equalizers.
The Pioneer DEQ-7600 (Fig. 8-2) is a fifteen-band dash-mount digital
equalizer and sound processor. It allows you to create and store three eq
curves. A nuance control lets you fine-tune the setting for a particular
song without losing the stored curve. This solves the “curious fingers”
problem, and provides the convenience of dash access.
The DQT by AudioControl (Fig. 8-3) is a thirty-band (1⁄3 octave) stereo
digital equalizer. It’s a favorite among competitors. The DQS is a six-
channel version of the DQT, perfect for 5.1 channel installations or sim-
ply to let you retain the use of your head unit fader control in
four-channel systems.
Parametric equalizers have been around a long time, but have never
enjoyed the popularity of graphic equalizers. Instead of the familiar
slider controls at each frequency band, parametric equalizers have center,
bandwidth, and gain controls. This provides plenty of flexibility to com-
bat response peaks and valleys, but makes setting these equalizers quite
difficult without a real-time analyzer.
EQUALIZERS AND EQUALIZER PROJECTS
241
TABLE 8-1
Performance Levels
for Various Equalizer
Types
Type
Comments
Five-band
Better than tone controls, but inadequate for serious equalization.
Seven-band
Better than tone controls, but inadequate for serious equalization.
Ten-band (octave)
Can correct broad response problems.
Fifteen-band 
Can correct most response problems
Thirty-band 
The ultimate!
(1⁄3-octave)
Parametric
Can correct most response problems, depending on number of
stages.

What About Equalizer Boosters?
Equalizer boosters typically combine a seven-band graphic equalizer
with a power amp, and have speaker-level inputs. This was a popular pack-
age in the eighties, but is dying out. The decrease in popularity of equal-
izers in general combined with the high power of most modern head
units is one reason. Another is the deservedly poor reputation of these
units for high noise and distortion.
The prices of equalizer boosters are amazingly low, but they’re a good
example of “you get what you pay for.”
Connecting Your Equalizer
Figure 8-4 shows the standard connection for a preamp-level (often incor-
rectly called passive) equalizer.
242
CHAPTER EIGHT
FIGURE 8-2
Pioneer DEQ-7600
15-band dash-
mount equalizer.
(Courtesy of Pioneer.)
FIGURE 8-3
AudioControl DQT
30-band equalizer.
(Courtesy of AudioControl.)

Some models provide speaker-level as well as preamp-level inputs. Since
equalizers are normally two-channel devices, the head unit fader control
is rendered inoperative. Dash-mounted equalizers often provide their
own fader controls and separate front and rear outputs to remedy this
problem. When using an equalizer without a fader, the relative front/rear
level will need to be set by adjusting the amp level controls.
How to Set Your Equalizer
You can set equalizers of ten bands or less fairly well by ear, but you need
a real-time analyzer to set thirteen- to thirty-band or parametric equaliz-
ers properly. Note: If you do have access to an RTA, it can improve the
quality of your five- to ten-band equalizer settings as well.
Setting by Ear
Initial Preparation.
Start by setting your head unit bass and treble con-
trols flat, and your equalizer sliders to their center detent positions. The
fader control should be in the position you normally use when listening.
Pick a CD or tape that you like and that sounds good on your home stereo.
Choose one that covers the entire audio spectrum—something with bass
drums, voice, and cymbals. Acoustic instruments such as piano, sax, and so
on are better than synthesized ones because you know what they should
sound like. Play your selection at a normal listening level.
Familiarize yourself with how each of the frequency bands sounds.
One by one, slide a control to the max position and listen to the effect,
then return it to the center position. Try to characterize each frequency
band in your head, for example, “solid bass,” “boomy bass,” “female vocals,”
EQUALIZERS AND EQUALIZER PROJECTS
243
FIGURE 8-4
Standard connection
for a preamp-level
equalizer.

and so on. This will help you later as you try to compensate for things like
bass that is too boomy or weak female vocals.
Setting the Bass.
The area that normally benefits the most from equal-
ization is the bass. Car acoustics tend to overemphasize mid-bass, so start
by reducing the level in the 200-Hz region. For a seven-band equalizer, this
means moving the 150-Hz slider down a third of the way. For a ten-band
equalizer, move the 120- and 250-Hz sliders down a fourth of the way. You
will probably want to boost the bass in the 60-Hz region to provide a more
solid bottom end. This will also help overcome the masking effects of road
noise. Don’t overdo it—maybe a third of the way up is good.
244
CHAPTER EIGHT
What Is Road Noise Masking?
First of all, what is road noise? Road noise refers to all the sounds associated with
driving your car—the roar of your engine, the sound of your tires rolling on
the pavement, and wind noise. Of course, road noise depends on the vehicle
you’re driving, how fast you’re going, whether the windows are rolled up, and
so forth. The important point is that, in general, road noise is dominated by
deep bass frequencies.
Road noise masking means that you can’t hear the deep bass of your music
until it is loud enough to overcome the road noise. This isn’t just
interference—your ears actually reduce their sensitivity to deep bass in
response to road noise! This means that to provide correct-sounding bass for
normal listening levels, you need to boost your deep bass a bit. About 5 dB in
the 45- to 100-Hz region is a good start, but let your ears have a vote.
Leave the 30-Hz slider of a ten-band equalizer set to its center detent
position. Boosting 30 Hz will not give you much benefit (few speaker sys-
tems can reproduce this range effectively): It will instead dramatically
reduce your amp headroom and cause your woofers to distort on those
passages that have energy in this frequency range.
Adjusting by Ear.
Now the fun part. One by one, slide each control up
and down a little bit and listen to the effect. Ask yourself if the music
sounds more accurate. Listen to specific instruments or vocalists, then to
the overall mix. Be aware that to the human ear, louder always sounds bet-
ter. If you aren’t careful, all your sliders will be set to the top of their
range! Your goal should be to keep most of the sliders at (or very near)
their center detent positions.
Once you are fairly satisfied with your settings, try another cassette or
CD and permit yourself minor touchups. Eventually you will find set-
tings that sound right for most material. Use a marker to make a dot on

the face of the equalizer next to each slider to show the preferred posi-
tion. Now you (or your passengers) can make temporary changes without
having to worry about setting the sliders back.
From now on, you may want to use the bass and treble controls to
compensate for specific tapes or songs that need an extra dose of bass or
treble. The broad characteristics of the tone controls are well suited for
this type of compensation.
Setting by RTA
You would think that having an RTA would make setting an equalizer a
snap. Unfortunately, that’s not the case. Using an RTA properly requires
skill and patience.
The reason for this becomes apparent once you try to use one. You
hook up the pink noise generator, turn on the stereo, and hold the cali-
brated test microphone about where your head would be. Now you move
the microphone about 6 inches to the left and notice that the frequency
response curve now looks nothing like the previous one. What happened?
The problem is that direct and reflected sound add together to create a
highly spatially dependent response. This means that you can’t simply
pick a spot to hold the microphone, then adjust the equalizer until you
get a flat response.
One strategy is to use spatial averaging. This means that you use the
average response from half a dozen strategically chosen microphone loca-
tions to set your equalizer. Easier said than done. Furthermore, this strat-
egy glosses over the fact that the human ear is able to separate the direct
response (the sound straight from the speakers) from the reflected
response (the sound after it has reflected around inside your car). What
sounds best is somewhere between a flat direct response and a flat total
response. What the RTA measures is the total response.
The audio engineers at Ford, AudioControl, Pioneer, and other places
have been trying for years to figure out how to automate setting an equal-
izer by using frequency response measurements from a microphone.
One thing they agree on—it isn’t simple.
The method I recommend for setting an equalizer with an RTA is
explained below. It tries to achieve the desired blend between flat direct
response and flat total response. It also relies on a tool that is impossible to
automate—your ears! Note: This method is designed to provide optimized
sound—it is not the method you would use if you were trying to win the
ruler-flat frequency response portion of a sound-off competition.
EQUALIZERS AND EQUALIZER PROJECTS
245

Initial Preparation.
Start by setting your head unit bass and treble
controls flat, and your equalizer sliders or knobs to their center detent
positions. The fader control should be in the position you normally use
when listening. Connect the pink noise output of the RTA to the inputs
of the equalizer.
246
CHAPTER EIGHT
What Is a Real-Time Analyzer?
A real-time analyzer provides a graphic display of the frequency response of a
stereo system. Its calibrated pink noise* output is connected to the equalizer
input of the system under evaluation, and then a calibrated microphone is used
to monitor the sound output of the system. It’s an invaluable tool for setting
equalizers and for general frequency response evaluation and improvement.
The RTA of choice for car stereo work is the AudioControl SA-3055 (see Fig.
8-5; suggested retail price for the basic version is $1599). It’s a 1⁄3-octave real time
analyzer with calibrated mike and printer interface. The term 1⁄3 octave means
the audio spectrum is broken into thirty bands. This resolution is necessary to
display the narrowest peaks and valleys the human ear can readily perceive.
Audio analysis software for PCs often provides 1⁄3-octave real-time analysis in
addition to other useful tools such as speaker parameter measurement. The
software uses your computer’s sound card to provide a pink noise output and
microphone input. You’ll need a suitable measurement microphone with this
approach. Prices for software and microphone range from less than $100, to
thousands of dollars for professional packages.
* Pink noise is random noise that has been filtered to provide equal energy per octave.
This makes it ideal for use with RTAs because it produces a flat frequency response display
for flat frequency responses. It’s called pink noise because it’s generated from white noise
with a filter that emphasizes low frequencies, and red corresponds to the low-frequency
end of the visible light spectrum.
FIGURE 8-5
AudioControl 
SA-3055 RTA.
(Courtesy of 
AudioControl.)
Presetting the Mid-Bass and Mid-Range.
Turn up the volume to a
normal listening level. Set the balance control all the way to the left, so
only the left speakers are playing. Position the microphone about 6 to 12
inches directly in front of the front left speaker, pointing right at it. This

position strongly emphasizes the direct response over the reflected
response. Now adjust the equalizer for flat response from 150 Hz to 1.5
kHz, trying to keep most of the sliders or knobs centered at their detent
positions.
Setting the Deep Bass.
Position the mike in the driver’s head position,
pointing upward. Adjust the equalizer for flat response from 45 to 150
Hz. Leave the controls below 45 Hz set to their center detent positions.
Boosting these ultra-low frequencies will not give you much benefit (few
speaker systems can reproduce this range effectively)—it will instead dra-
matically reduce your amp headroom and cause your woofers to distort
on those passages that have energy in this frequency range. To overcome
the masking effects of road noise, you should now boost the response in
the 45- to 100-Hz region by 5 dB or so.
Setting the Mid-Range and Treble.
Position the mike in the driver’s
head position, pointing toward the front left speaker. Adjust the equal-
izer for flat response from 1.5 kHz on up. Now move the microphone a
foot to the right. Adjust the equalizer (1.5 kHz and up) to find a good
compromise setting between the two positions. Try more mike positions
in the vicinity of the driver’s head to improve the blend further. In gen-
eral, ignore frequency response valleys that do not occur for all mike posi-
tions. If you see a consistent strong peak or valley below 1.5 kHz, you
should correct it as well, but for the most part, try to leave the lower fre-
quency settings alone.
Touchup By Ear.
Return the balance control to the center detent posi-
tion. Reconnect the equalizer to the head unit. Pick a CD or tape that you
like and that sounds good on your home stereo. Choose one that covers
the entire audio spectrum—something with bass drums, voice, and cym-
bals. Acoustic instruments such as piano, sax, and so on are better than
synthesized ones because you know what they should sound like. Play
your selection at a normal listening level.
Touch up the high-frequency (5 kHz and up) equalizer settings by ear.
Maintain the general shape established previously, but add a gentle
downward ramp as your ear dictates. It’s normal to reduce the response at
16 kHz by 6 dB.
Look over the settings you have made. Any control above 150 Hz with
more than 6 dB of boost compared to its neighbors should be checked by
ear. Try reducing it by 3 dB and listening to decide which sounds better.
Similarly, any control above 150 Hz with more than 10 dB of attenuation
EQUALIZERS AND EQUALIZER PROJECTS
247

compared to its neighbors should be checked. (Response peaks sound
worse than valleys, so the criteria are different.)
Use a marker to make a dot on the face of the equalizer next to each
slider or knob to show the preferred position. Now you can make tempo-
rary changes without having to worry about setting the controls back
right.
From now on, you will want to use the bass and treble controls to com-
pensate for specific tapes or songs that need an extra dose of bass or tre-
ble. The broad characteristics of the tone controls are well suited for this
type of compensation.
248
CHAPTER EIGHT

Biamping 
and 
Crossovers
CHAPTER 9
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Biamping refers to using two amplifiers per channel (rather than the usual
one amp per channel) to separately drive woofers and tweeters. Biamping
offers an improvement in sound quality as well as increased tweeter pro-
tection, but it can be expensive. Biamping makes the most sense for high-
power (50 watts per channel and above), high-performance systems.
More than almost any other subject, biamping requires knowledge of
many areas of car stereo as well as subjects unique to itself. Rather than
repeat information found in other chapters, I would like to direct your
attention to them. Be sure to read Chap. 7 for important information on
choosing and using amps. Chapters 3 and 4 contain similarly useful infor-
mation on speakers and subwoofers, respectively.
Crossover Basics
To understand what biamping is all about, you need to understand the
basics of crossovers.
The job of a crossover is to split the music signal into specific fre-
quency bands—for example, low frequencies that go to a woofer, and high
frequencies that go to a tweeter. Separate drivers are necessary because it’s
impractical to make a single driver that can cover the full audio range.
Woofers can’t effectively reproduce treble because of their large cone mass
and high voice coil inductance. Tweeters can’t effectively reproduce bass
because their radiating surfaces are too small and their lightweight voice
coils can’t handle much power.
Speaker-Level and Preamp-Level Crossovers
For coax speakers, the crossover network is usually just a single capacitor
in series with the tweeter, mounted on the speaker (Fig. 9-1).
250
CHAPTER NINE
FIGURE 9-1
Single-capacitor
crossover.

The capacitor prevents low frequencies from going to the tweeter.
There is no woofer filter—this low-budget approach relies on the natural
high-frequency roll-off of the woofer. For separates, a better crossover
(with an actual woofer low-pass filter) is usually provided (Fig. 9-2).
In both of these examples, the crossover is effectively after the amp, as
represented in Fig. 9-3.
Crossovers after an amp are called speaker-level crossovers because the
inputs and outputs are at speaker level. (Speaker-level crossovers are often
called passive crossovers because they require no power, but this can be mis-
leading since preamp-level crossovers can be passive too.) Speaker-level
crossovers must handle high power levels and are built using large induc-
tors and capacitors (Fig. 9-4).
Biamping instead puts the crossover before the amps, as shown in Fig. 9-5.
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
251
FIGURE 9-2
External crossover
module.
FIGURE 9-3
Crossover after amp.
FIGURE 9-4
Speaker-level
crossover. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)

This is called biamping because it requires two amplifiers per channel
instead of one. This type of crossover is called a preamp-level crossover
because the input and output signals are at preamp level (Fig. 9-6).
Crossover Slopes
One of the most important characteristics of a crossover filter is the slope.
Slope refers to how effectively the crossover filters out the unwanted fre-
quencies.
Figure 9-7 shows the frequency response characteristics of four filters,
each a 5-kHz high-pass filter. This type of filter would be used for a
tweeter. The only difference between the filters is the slope—the shallow-
est slope is for a first-order (6 dB/octave) filter and the steepest slope is for
a fourth-order (24 dB/octave) filter. Second-order (12 dB/octave) and third-
order (18 dB/octave) filter responses are in between.
252
CHAPTER NINE
FIGURE 9-5
Crossover before the
amps.
FIGURE 9-6
Electronic crossover.
(Courtesy of Coustic.)

Above 5 kHz, all four filters are almost the same—they pass the signal
with very little attenuation. This is where the similarity ends. At 2 kHz,
the first-order filter is −8 dB. To put that into perspective, −10 dB sounds
like half volume. This means that the tweeter is still strongly contributing
to the total sound of the system at this frequency. More importantly, it’s
being subjected to lots of additional power. The fourth-order filter is −32
dB at 2 kHz. Not only will you not hear the tweeter at this level, it won’t
be subjected to dangerous power levels.
Why do you care if the tweeter is strongly contributing to the total
sound below the crossover frequency? Two reasons. One, the frequency
response of most tweeters starts to roll off and get bumpy below 2 kHz.
This causes the total frequency response of the system to get bumpy as
well. Two, where both the woofer and tweeter are trying to reproduce the
same frequencies, an interference pattern is created. This causes spatially
dependent reinforcement and cancellation of the sound, which degrades
imaging. It’s beneficial to reduce the range of frequencies where this hap-
pens by using sharper filter slopes.
The biggest concern about shallow slopes for tweeters is power han-
dling. A tweeter that is rated at 50 watts (read the fine print: with a 5-kHz,
12-dB/octave crossover) is really only able to handle about 2 watts. This is
because most of the power in music is in the bass—very little is in the
treble. Table 9-1 shows the normal frequency distribution of power in
music.
Using a shallow 6-dB/octave slope means huge amounts of additional
mid-range and even bass power are directed to the tweeter. You can get
away with this for conservatively powered systems (18 watts per channel
or less) by using a high crossover frequency—for example, 8.5 kHz. Unfor-
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
253
FIGURE 9-7
First- through 
fourth-order
crossover slopes.

tunately, this tactic usually results in a weak and bumpy system response
near 5 kHz due to the high-frequency limitations of the woofer.
The bottom line is to avoid 6-dB/octave crossovers for the tweeter.
Why Biamp?
Everything just said about crossover slopes applies equally to both
speaker-level and preamp-level crossovers. The problems with a shallow
slope are exactly the same for speaker-level and preamp-level crossovers.
You can get the same improvement by using a higher-order crossover,
regardless of whether it’s speaker level or preamp level.
So why would you want to put the crossover before the amps if you
have to buy two amps instead of one? Good question. There are three
main advantages to using preamp-level crossovers:
■Increased practicality of high-order slopes
■Driver impedance characteristic doesn’t affect frequency response
■Tweeter protection during clipping of bass
Combined, these factors provide an improvement in sound quality as
well as increased tweeter protection under a number of circumstances.
Increased Practicality of High-Order Slopes
Speaker-level crossovers must handle the high power levels of the amplifier
outputs. This means massive high-power inductors and capacitors are
254
CHAPTER NINE
TABLE 9-1
Normal Frequency
Distribution of
Power in Music
Maximum Power Above
Frequency
That Frequency
300 Hz
50%
600 Hz
25%
1200 Hz
10%
2400 Hz
5%

required. The steeper the crossover slope, the more components required. In
practice, anything higher than 12 dB/octave is considered cost prohibitive.
Preamp-level crossovers are low-power circuits and eliminate the need
for expensive high-power components. With active filters, the cost of
implementing a 24-dB/octave slope is not much more than that for a 6-dB/
octave slope. Active filters make it simple to provide switch-selectable
crossover frequencies. They are also immune to many of the performance
problems, caused by inductor resistance and saturation and electrolytic
capacitor degradation due to aging, that plague speaker-level crossovers. In
short, they act more like ideal filters.
Driver Impedance Characteristic Doesn’t
Affect Frequency Response
The impedances of woofers and tweeters vary dramatically with fre-
quency. This makes it difficult for speaker-level crossovers to work as
intended. The result is frequency response anomalies.
So-called universal speaker-level crossovers that you can buy assume
that your speakers are 4 ohms for all frequencies. Crossovers that are cus-
tom designed for a specific woofer and tweeter offer some improvement,
but there are practical limitations.
Biamping solves this problem because the amplifiers directly drive the
speakers. Since the output impedance of the amplifiers is small compared
to that of the drivers, driver impedance variations with frequency have no
effect on the response.
Tweeter Protection During Clipping of Bass
In a single-amp system, when you turn up the volume of your stereo loud
enough to cause distortion, massive amounts of high-frequency energy
are produced at the output of the amplifier. This is because distorting
amplifiers “clip” the musical peaks. This generates high-frequency har-
monics not in the original signal. Tweeters are often unable to handle the
additional power, and are damaged or destroyed.
Ironically, using an underpowered amp (in a normal speaker-level
crossover situation) risks blowing tweeters more than using an overpow-
ered amp, because of clipping.
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
255

Most clipping occurs during loud bass passages, such as drumbeats.
Even though a loud drumbeat may only contain bass frequencies, high-
power “spikes” are produced at high frequencies when the amp clips.
These spikes get to the tweeters with a single-amp system, but not with
biamping. Biamping eliminates this problem because the tweeters are
powered by their own amp, which is unaffected by the woofer amp. Clip-
ping of the tweeter amp is not a concern because the total power to the
tweeters is not increased.
What to Look For in Equipment
Before you start shopping for equipment, study the project sections
(“Biamping Head Units with Front and Rear Preamp Outputs,” “Biamping
Head Units with One Set of Preamp Outputs”) to see which configura-
tion best suits your needs. If you’re buying a head unit, get one with
front and rear preamp outputs so you can be sure to have full use of your
fader.
Choosing a Crossover
There are a number of considerations for choosing the best crossover for
your application. These include crossover configuration, filter slopes, and
choice of crossover frequencies.
A common configuration is shown in Fig. 9-8. All inputs and outputs
are preamp level.
There is no standard configuration for crossovers, but this configuration
is assumed for the projects section because it’s the most prevalent. Other
variations exist, and may be better suited to your needs. For example,
speaker-level inputs would be important if your head unit doesn’t have
preamp-level outputs. Manufacturers’ “front” and “rear” designations simply
256
CHAPTER NINE
FIGURE 9-8
Common crossover
configuration.

indicate which inputs are used for each of the outputs—they may not be
accurate for your application. Similarly, manufacturers often refer to the
woofer outputs as the mid-band or bandpass outputs, and the subwoofer
outputs as low-pass. It is standard for all output pairs to have level controls.
The requirements for crossover filter slopes and frequencies are shown
in Table 9-2.
The tweeter crossover slope must be 12 dB/octave minimum for tweeter
power handling considerations. Anything less forces you to use a crossover
frequency that is too high for good woofer response. The woofer low-pass
slope and crossover frequency should match those of the tweeter for best
performance.
To enable placement of a subwoofer anywhere in the vehicle, the sub-
woofer crossover must be 18 dB/octave or higher. Slopes less than 18
dB/octave allow mid-bass and even mid-range to be heard from the sub-
woofer. Since only deep bass frequencies are nondirectional, this gives
away the subwoofer location and degrades imaging. Who wants a bass
guitar player under their seat? The only exception to this is for bandpass
boxes, where you can successfully use a 12-dB/octave crossover. Either buy
a crossover that has a steep enough subwoofer slope or use a separate sub-
woofer crossover that does.
A continuously variable subwoofer cutoff frequency is a real plus. It
gives you the flexibility to seamlessly blend the subwoofer with the rest
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
257
TABLE 9-2
Crossover 
Requirements
Crossover
Subwoofer
Woofer
Woofer
Tweeter
Characteristic
Low-Pass
High-Pass
Low-Pass
High-Pass
Filter slopes
18 dB/octave 
6 dB/octave 
12 dB/octave 
12 dB/octave 
minimum
minimum
minimum
minimum
Need not be 
Need not be 
Should be the 
Should be the 
the same as 
the same as 
same as tweeter 
same as woofer 
woofer high-
subwoofer low-
high-pass slope
low-pass slope
pass slope
pass slope
Crossover 
75 to 150 Hz 
100 to 200 Hz 
2.4 to 5 kHz 
2.4 to 5 kHz 
frequencies
minimum 
minimum 
minimum 
minimum 
range
range
range
range
Other important 
40 or 45 Hz 
features
bass boost
Subsonic filter
Polarity switch

of your system. Even with high-pass crossovers on your woofers, the nat-
ural low-frequency roll-off of woofers makes it difficult to predict the
best subwoofer crossover frequency. A continuously variable crossover lets
you avoid a gap or peak in your mid-bass.
Five to 10 dB of bass boost at 40 or 45 Hz extends the low-frequency
response of most subwoofer systems without overdriving them. A sub-
sonic filter and polarity switch are other important features for a sub-
woofer crossover. See the chapter on subwoofers for a detailed explanation.
Buying Amps for Biamping
Most of what you should know about buying amps is contained in Chap.
7. For biamping, you also need to know the relative power levels for
tweeter amps, woofer amps, and subwoofer amps (if you have them).
This comes down to the normal frequency distribution of power in
music. Table 9-3 shows the maximum percentage of power above various
frequencies.
How much power a tweeter amp should have depends on the crossover
frequency. The higher the crossover frequency, the less the required power.
Rarely is a tweeter crossover frequency lower than 2400 Hz, so a tweeter
amp having roughly 5 percent of the total system power should be suffi-
cient.
On the subwoofer end, the power requirements also depend on the
crossover frequency. The lower the crossover frequency, the less the re-
quired power for the sub amp, but the more the required power for the
woofer amp.
The rules of thumb in Table 9-4 should help you determine the right
power levels for tweeter and subwoofer amps, based on the total system
power. The tweeter recommendation applies whether you have a sub-
woofer or not.
258
CHAPTER NINE
TABLE 9-3
Normal Frequency
Distribution of
Power in Music
Maximum Power Above
Frequency
That Frequency
300 Hz
50%
600 Hz
25%
1200 Hz
10%
2400 Hz
5%

For example, suppose you’re biamping in front and back and don’t
plan to use a subwoofer. If you’re using 100-watt per channel woofer amps,
then your tweeter amps should have at least 5 watts per channel. (In prac-
tice, you’ll have to buy 35-watt per channel amps, since they’re the small-
est available.)
Suppose you plan to have a subwoofer as well as biamp in front and
back. Let’s say you’re shooting for a total system power of around 400 watts
(about the same as the last example). Once again, the tweeter amps should
have at least 5 watts per channel. (You’ll have to buy 35-watt per channel
amps.) The total power to the subwoofer should be about 160 watts. The
total power to the woofers would be 220 watts or 55 watts per channel.
Speakers
For biamping, you’ll either need to use separate woofers and tweeters
(component speakers) or biampable coax drivers. Biampable coax drivers
are like regular coaxial speakers, but they provide separate terminals for
the woofer and tweeter. These save you from having to mount separate
tweeters, but you lose the flexibility of being able to put the tweeters
wherever you want.
More about selecting and mounting component speakers is contained
in Chap. 3. Subwoofers are covered in Chap. 4.
Biamping Head Units with Front and
Rear Preamp Outputs
Having front and rear preamp outputs is a big plus for biamping because
it lets you retain full use of your head unit fader in most configurations.
There are five biamping configurations for head units with front and rear
preamp outputs (Table 9-5)—all but the second and third retain use of the
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
259
TABLE 9-4
Amplifier Power
Requirements for
Biamping
Amps
Power
Tweeter amps
5% of total system power
Sub amps
40% of total system power

260
CHAPTER NINE
TABLE 9-5
Biamping 
Configurations for
Head Units with
Front and Rear 
Preamp Outputs
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Separate rear 
Allows you to 
crossover
retain full 
use of your 
head unit 
fader.
Lets you 
choose different 
crossover 
frequencies for 
the front and 
rear.
Crossovers may 
be purchased 
as a single 
combined unit.
Shared crossover
Head unit fader 
becomes non-
functional.
Difficult to 
make front/rear 
level adjustments 
since you must 
also maintain 
the proper 
relative tweeter/
woofer levels.
Not 
recommended.
amp
left
right
amp
left
right
front
rear
amp
left
right
amp
left
right
sub
head
unit
p
reamp
crossover
amp
head
unit
p
reamp
amp
left
right
amp
left
right
front
crossover
rear
amp
left
right
amp
left
right
amp
sub
crossover

BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
261
TABLE 9-5
(continued)
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Parallel front/
Saves two amps 
rear speakers
when equal 
power to front 
and rear 
speakers is 
acceptable. 
(No relative 
front/rear level 
adjustment is 
possible.)
Full-range rear
Allows you to 
retain full use 
of your head 
unit fader.
Saves the cost 
of an amplifier, 
and you only 
need a single 
crossover.
Provides 
virtually same 
performance as 
separate rear 
crossover 
configuration.
Amp-saving 
Allows you to 
full-range rear
retain full use 
of your head 
unit fader.
Useful for rear 
fill applications 
where high 
power is needed 
for front only.
Saves the cost 
of two amplifiers, 
and you only 
need a single 
crossover.
amp
left
right
amp
left
right
front
rear
left
right
left
right
amp
sub
head
unit
p
reamp
crossover
head
unit
p
reamp
amp
amp
left
right
amp
left
right
amp
sub
front
left
right
rear
crossover
head
unit
p
reamp
amp
left
right
amp
left
right
amp
sub
front
left
right
rear
crossover

fader. The first configuration provides the most flexibility and highest
performance, but the fourth and fifth provide the best performance value.
Separate Rear Crossover Configuration
This configuration provides the most flexibility and highest perfor-
mance, but is the most expensive. It uses separate crossovers for the front
and rear speakers, which allows you to retain full use of your head unit
fader. This also lets you choose different crossover frequencies for the
front and rear (of limited value). The crossovers may be purchased as two
separate units or as a single combined unit.
Shared Crossover Configuration
This configuration shares a single crossover for front and rear component
speakers. The main problem is the loss of head unit fader functionality—
you must use the amp level controls to set the relative front/rear levels.
Since you must also maintain the proper relative tweeter/woofer levels, it
becomes a chore to make slight front/rear readjustments. For this reason,
this configuration is not recommended.
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
The parallel front/rear speakers configuration shares amps for front
and rear channels. This gives you almost the same power per speaker as
having identical sets of amps for front and rear. The drawback with this
configuration is that you are stuck with having equal power for front and
back speakers.
Since the amplifiers used in this configuration will see a parallel speaker
load, they must be 2-ohm stable. Amps driving 2-ohm loads run hotter, so
be sure to mount them where they will have good air circulation.
Full-Range Rear Configuration
This configuration biamps only the front set of speakers—the rear speak-
ers are full-range (usually coaxial) speakers. This saves the cost of an ampli-
262
CHAPTER NINE

fier and you only need a single crossover. This configuration allows you
to retain full use of your head unit fader.
Since the performance of the front speakers is the most critical, this
configuration provides virtually the same performance as the separate
rear crossover configuration, but at a much lower cost.
Amp-Saving Full-Range Rear Configuration
This configuration is identical to the previous one, except it saves an addi-
tional amplifier by using the head unit’s internal amp to drive the rear
speakers. This makes sense if you are using the rear speakers for rear fill
and operating them at a reduced volume level to improve imaging (see the
“Imaging Overhaul” section in Chap. 3). This configuration allows you to
retain full use of your head unit fader as well.
In general, providing rear fill requires one-tenth the power necessary
for the front. Assuming an 18-watt per channel head unit, this configura-
tion should work for up to 180 watts per channel in the front.
Biamping Head Units with One 
Set of Preamp Outputs
Having only one set of preamp outputs is a minus for biamping because
you generally lose use of your head unit fader. There are five biamping
configurations for head units with one set of preamp outputs (Table 
9-6)—only the fifth retains use of the fader. The first configuration pro-
vides the most flexibility and highest performance otherwise, but the
fourth and fifth provide the best performance value.
Separate Rear Crossover Configuration
This configuration provides the most flexibility (except for the loss of
fader) and the highest performance. It is the most expensive as well. It uses
separate crossovers for the front and rear speakers. This lets you choose
different crossover frequencies for the front and rear (of limited value).
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
263

264
CHAPTER NINE
TABLE 9-6
Biamping 
Configurations for
Head Units with 
One Set of Preamp
Outputs
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Separate rear 
Head unit fader 
crossover
control is non-
functional, but 
setting the 
relative front/rear 
level is facilitated 
by having a 
common rear 
level control.
Lets you choose 
different crossover 
frequencies for 
the front and 
rear.
Crossovers may 
be purchased 
as a single 
combined unit.
Shared 
Head unit fader 
crossover
is non-
functional.
Difficult to 
make front/rear 
level adjustments 
since you must 
also maintain 
the proper 
relative tweeter/
woofer levels.
Not 
recommended.

BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
265
TABLE 9-6
(continued)
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Parallel front/
Saves two amps 
rear speakers
when equal 
power to front 
and rear speakers 
is acceptable. (No 
relative front/rear 
level adjustment 
is possible.)
Full-range rear
Head unit fader 
control is non-
functional, but 
setting the 
relative front/
rear level is 
facilitated by 
having a common 
rear level control.
Saves the cost of 
an amplifier, and 
you only need a 
single crossover.
Provides virtually 
the same 
performance as 
the separate rear 
crossover 
configuration.

Although the head unit fader control is nonfunctional, setting the rela-
tive front/rear level is facilitated by having the level of all rear speakers
affected by a single control (the full range output control of the front
crossover). The crossovers may be purchased as two separate units or as a
single combined unit.
Shared Crossover Configuration
This configuration shares a single crossover for front and rear component
speakers. The head unit fader control is nonfunctional. Setting the rela-
tive front/rear levels is especially difficult because there is no level control
that affects only all front or only all rear speakers. For this reason, this
configuration is not recommended.
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configuration
The parallel front/rear speakers configuration shares amps for front and
rear channels. This gives you almost the same power per speaker as hav-
ing identical sets of amps for front and rear. The drawback with this con-
figuration is that you are stuck with having equal power for front and
back speakers.
266
CHAPTER NINE
TABLE 9-6
Biamping 
Configurations for
Head Units with One
Set of Preamp Out-
puts
(continued)
Configuration
Diagram
Comments
Amp-saving 
Allows you to 
full-range rear
retain full use of 
your head unit 
fader.
Useful for rear 
fill applications 
where high 
power is needed 
for front only.
Saves the cost of 
two amplifiers, 
and you only 
need a single 
crossover.

Since the amplifiers used in this configuration will see a parallel speaker
load, they must be 2-ohm stable. Amps driving 2-ohm loads run hotter, so
be sure to mount them where they will have good air circulation.
Full-Range Rear Configuration
This configuration biamps only the front set of speakers—the rear
speakers are full-range (usually coaxial) speakers. This saves the cost of an
amplifier, and you only need a single crossover. Although the head unit
fader control is nonfunctional, setting the relative front/rear level is facil-
itated by having the level of all rear speakers affected by a single ampli-
fier control.
Since the performance of the front speakers is the most critical, this
configuration provides virtually the same performance as the separate
rear crossover configuration, but at a much lower cost.
Amp-Saving Full-Range Rear Configuration
This is the only configuration that provides head unit fader control for
head units with one set of preamp outputs. Like the previous configura-
tion, this one biamps only the front set of speakers, but it saves an addi-
tional amplifier by using the head unit’s internal amp to drive the rear
speakers. This makes sense if you are using the rear speakers for rear fill
and operating them at a reduced volume level to improve imaging (see the
“Imaging Overhaul” section in Chap. 3).
In general, providing rear fill requires one-tenth the power necessary
for the front. Assuming an 18-watt per channel head unit, this configura-
tion should work for up to 180 watts per channel in the front.
NOTE
If you’re using this configuration and have front preamp outputs, your
fader control will operate properly between the front biamped speakers and the
rear head unit driven speakers. But if you have rear preamp outputs, you’ll want
to connect your rear speakers to the front head unit amps to restore fader control.
The change is easily made at the head unit wiring harness. This will cause the
fader control to operate backwards, but it’s a small price to pay for fader control. 
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
267

Adjusting Your System
Once you’ve installed everything, it’s time to set all the crossover fre-
quencies and amp levels. Follow the order below for best results.
Setting Tweeter High-Pass and Woofer 
Low-Pass Crossover Frequencies
Setting the tweeter high-pass and woofer low-pass crossover frequencies
should be done prior to the other system adjustments.
The optimum tweeter high-pass and woofer low-pass crossover fre-
quency settings depend on the specific woofer and tweeter involved. If
you are fortunate enough to have recommended crossover frequencies or
frequency response data for your drivers, you can base your crossover set-
tings on that information. Otherwise, you’ll have to make an educated
guess.
■If your component speakers came with speaker-level crossovers:
Component
speakers bought as a matched set often come with speaker-level
crossovers. Using the same crossover frequencies as the speaker-level
crossovers is your best bet.
■If you have frequency response curves for your speakers:
Ideally, the high-
frequency roll-off point of the woofer extends above the low-
frequency roll-off point of the tweeter. If so, the woofer and tweeter
crossover frequencies should both be set to the same frequency—an
equal compromise between woofer and tweeter roll-off points. If the
high-frequency roll-off point of the woofer does not extend above
the low-frequency roll-off point of the tweeter, you will need to set
the woofer crossover frequency higher than the tweeter crossover fre-
quency. This usually means using 5 kHz for the woofer and 3.5 kHz
for the tweeter.
■If you don’t have anything (except the chart in Table 9-7):
In general, the
smaller the woofer, the more extended its high-frequency response.
Table 9-7 is based on that fact.
Regardless of which method you use, don’t be afraid to use your ears
and experiment with other settings later, after you’ve made a first pass at
all the other system settings.
268
CHAPTER NINE

Setting Woofer High-Pass Crossover
Frequencies
If you don’t have a subwoofer, and you’re using the rear speakers only for
fill, then you should not use any woofer high-pass filtering at all. If you
don’t have a subwoofer, and you play your rear speakers loud enough to
provide bass for the whole system, then consider using 150-Hz high-pass
filtering for the front woofers. This will let them play louder with less dis-
tortion, and will not significantly reduce the total bass of the system. This
is especially true for small front woofers.
If you do have a subwoofer, then you should use high-pass filtering for
all your woofers. Use 200 Hz for 6-dB/octave woofer high-pass slopes and
150 Hz for 12-dB/octave or higher slopes.
Setting Woofer and Tweeter Amp Levels
Setting woofer and tweeter amp levels is a complicated process. You
need to simultaneously set the proper relative tweeter-to-woofer levels,
the proper relative front-to-rear levels, and the optimum absolute levels
for lowest noise and distortion. On top of that, you probably have level
controls on the crossover outputs as well as amplifier inputs to worry
about.
Follow the procedure for your specific configuration.
Separate Rear Crossover and Shared Crossover Configurations.
1. Set the head unit fader control to its center detent position. Set all
tone controls and equalizer controls flat.
2. Set the level controls of all amps to minimum. Set all crossover level
controls to maximum.
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
269
TABLE 9-7
Crossover 
Frequency Settings
Based on Woofer
Diameter
Woofer Crossover 
Tweeter Crossover 
Woofer Diameter
Frequency
Frequency
4″
3.5 kHz
3.5 kHz
51/4″
3.5 kHz
3.5 kHz
61/2″
5 kHz
3.5 kHz

3. With music, turn up the head unit volume control (you should
barely be able to hear the music). When you reach the point where
you start to hear distortion, turn the volume control down slightly
until the distortion disappears. Leave the volume control at this 
setting.
4. Turn up the front woofer amp level control until you the system is as
loud as you’ll ever play it or you begin to hear distortion. If you hear
distortion, slightly decrease the amp level control.
5. Turn down the head unit volume to a normal listening level.
6. Turn up the rear woofer amp level until the desired front/rear bal-
ance is achieved.
7. With the fader set all the way to the front, turn up the front tweeter
amp to achieve the proper tonal balance.
8. With the fader set all the way to the rear, turn up the rear tweeter
amp to achieve the proper tonal balance. Return the fader to its center
detent position.
Parallel Front/Rear Speakers Configurations.
1. Set the head unit fader control to its center detent position. Set all
tone controls and equalizer controls flat.
2. Set the level controls of all amps to minimum. Set all crossover level
controls to maximum.
3. With music, turn up the head unit volume control (you should
barely be able to hear the music). When you reach the point where
you start to hear distortion, turn the volume control down slightly
until the distortion disappears. Leave the volume control at this 
setting.
4. Turn up the woofer amp level control until you the system is as loud
as you’ll ever play it or you begin to hear distortion. If you hear dis-
tortion, slightly decrease the amp level control.
5. Turn down the head unit volume to a normal listening level.
6. Turn up the tweeter amp to achieve the proper tonal balance.
Full-Range Rear (Not Amp-Saving) Configurations.
1. Set the head unit fader control to its center detent position. Set all
tone controls and equalizer controls flat.
270
CHAPTER NINE

2. Set the level controls of all amps to minimum. Set all crossover level
controls to maximum.
3. With music, turn up the head unit volume control (you should barely
be able to hear the music). When you reach the point where you start
to hear distortion, turn the volume control down slightly until the
distortion disappears. Leave the volume control at this setting.
4. Turn up the (front) woofer amp level control until you the system is
as loud as you’ll ever play it or you begin to hear distortion. If you
hear distortion, slightly decrease the amp level control.
5. Turn down the head unit volume to a normal listening level.
6. Turn up the (front) tweeter amp to achieve the proper tonal balance.
7. Turn up the (rear) full-range amp level until the desired front/rear
balance is achieved.
Amp-Saving Full-Range Rear Configurations.
1. Set the head unit fader control to its center detent position. Set all
tone controls and equalizer controls flat.
2. Set the level controls of all amps to minimum. Set all crossover level
controls to maximum.
3. With music, set the head unit volume to a normal listening level.
4. Turn up the (front) woofer amp level control until the desired
front/rear balance is achieved.
5. Turn up the (front) tweeter amp to achieve the proper tonal balance.
Setting Subwoofer Crossover Frequency 
and Amp Level
Perform the adjustments in this order for best results. Use your favorite
cassette, CD, or radio station. Use several sources to get a good average.
Preset the subwoofer crossover to 100 Hz. If there is a 40- or 45-Hz bass
boost feature, turn it off for now. Adjust the subwoofer amp level control
to the point that sounds best, erring on the side of too little bass. If there
is a subwoofer polarity switch, set it to whichever position gives you the
most bass. The effect is usually small.
If you plan to use the 40- or 45-Hz bass boost feature, turn it on now.
In general, it will help extend the system bass response and provide
BIAMPING AND CROSSOVERS
271

tighter-sounding bass. If you later find that your subwoofer sometimes
distorts, you should turn the bass boost off.
Now fine-tune the cutoff frequency of the subwoofer crossover and
the level control of the subwoofer power amplifier to provide the most
natural-sounding bass. You will find that you need more bass when you
are driving to overcome the masking effects of road noise. (See the box on
road noise masking in the chapter on equalizers.) Try to find a level that
is acceptable for all conditions.
272
CHAPTER NINE

Changer and
Player Projects
CHAPTER 10
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Adding a CD changer, DVD changer, or digital music player to your sys-
tem will give you hours of audio or video without having to fumble with
discs as you drive. 
A CD changer is a great way to add CD and/or MP3 capabilities to your
system without having to replace your head unit. Even if you have a
CD/MP3 head unit, there’s nothing better than a changer loaded with
your favorite discs for long road trips.
If your system already has a DVD player, a DVD changer can be added
to conveniently store the entertainment for your mobile video system. If
you don’t have a DVD player, a DVD changer can be used as the main
DVD player for your system. And since DVD changers also play CDs, you
get the benefits of a CD changer included. 
Digital music players give you easy access to your entire music collec-
tion without the hassle of discs in the car. They connect to your system
like a CD changer, but store MP3, WMA, or WAV files of your music
rather than discs. Files are transferred to the digital music player using
your home computer.
Adding a CD Changer 
to Your System
Unlike most other car stereo projects, adding a CD changer strongly
depends on the type of head unit you have. That’s because many head
units don’t have CD changer controls, and there is no industry standard
for those that do. It’s important to scope out the interfacing issues before
you start choosing features or brands of equipment.
For the purposes of adding an aftermarket CD changer, there are three
head unit categories: head units without CD changer controls, aftermar-
ket head units with CD changer controls, and factory head units with CD
changer controls. Table 10-1 provides an overview of these head unit cate-
gories.
Head Units Without CD Changer Controls
Most older head units (and many new ones) have no provisions for adding
a CD changer. Many people deal with this situation by replacing their
head unit with one having CD changer controls. If you want to keep the
274
CHAPTER TEN

head unit you have, the aftermarket industry offers a solution: CD chang-
ers with FM modulators. Figure 10-1 shows how this type of CD changer
connects to your system. The JVC CH-X1500RF (Fig. 10-2) is in this
changer category. 
With this approach, the CD changer effectively becomes a personal
radio station for your FM receiver. The FM modulator converts the audio
signals of the CD changer to an FM stereo signal that is injected into your
existing antenna wire. This assures good reception. You can choose the
frequency of your personal radio station to avoid a conflict with a com-
mercial station.
When you want to listen to the CD changer, you simply tune your FM
receiver to your “personal station.” Your head unit controls (such as vol-
ume, bass, and treble) function normally. The CD changer itself is con-
trolled through a dash-mounted display panel with controls. A wireless
remote control is offered with some models.
The weakness of the FM modulator approach is the degradation in the
signal quality due to the modulation/demodulation process. Frequency
response, signal-to-noise ratio, distortion, and stereo separation all suffer.
Because of this, purists often consider the FM modulator approach unac-
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
275
TABLE 10-1
Head Unit 
Categories for
Adding a CD
Changer
Head Unit
Comments
Head unit without
An aftermarket CD changer can be added using an 
CD changer controls
FM modulator.
Aftermarket head unit
No performance compromises and all your controls 
with CD changer controls
are in one place.
You are generally restricted to choosing the same brand
and vintage of equipment for both changer and head unit.
Factory head unit with
Adding an aftermarket CD changer is often possible using  
CD changer controls
a factory-compatible changer or a standard aftermarket
changer with an OEM interface CD changer converter.
Tip: If you travel,
choose a model that
lets you change the
transmitting fre-
quency from the con-
trol panel.
FIGURE 10-1
CD changer with FM
modulator.

ceptable. But to put this in perspective, consider the sound quality of the
most noise-free, best-sounding FM station you’ve ever heard. That’s what
you’ll get. In fact, because of the heavy compression used by commercial
broadcasters to reach the maximum audience, the audio quality can be
much better than any FM broadcast.
Aftermarket Head Units with CD 
Changer Controls
With an aftermarket head unit with CD changer controls, it’s easy to add a
CD changer. There are no performance compromises and all your controls
are in one place. You can even control everything with a single remote. The
Sony CDX-757MX (Fig. 10-3) is an example of this type of changer.
276
CHAPTER TEN
FIGURE 10-3
Sony CDX-757MX
CD changer. (Courtesy
of Sony Electronics Inc. Sony
is a registered trademark of
Sony Corporation.)
FIGURE 10-2
JVC CH-X1500RF CD
changer with FM
modulator. (Courtesy of
JVC.)

It’s important to realize that not all CD changers work with all head units.
In fact, you are generally restricted to choosing the same brand and vin-
tage of equipment for both changer and head unit. This means that you
should look closely at CD changers when you’re choosing a head unit. It
also means that you shouldn’t put off buying a CD changer too long after
buying a head unit, or incompatibility may become a problem.
Factory Head Units with CD 
Changer Controls
Adding an aftermarket CD changer to a factory head unit with CD
changer controls is often possible using a factory-compatible changer or a
standard aftermarket changer with an OEM interface CD changer con-
verter.
Factory-compatible CD changers can be either brand-specific or uni-
versal. USA SPEC makes a line of brand-specific factory-compatible chang-
ers to cover many popular makes and models of vehicles. Their model
SCD-VW44EBU (Fig. 10-4) is compatible with many Volkswagen factory
head units. The Neo Changer (Fig. 10-5) is a universal factory-compatible
CD changer. It comes with a set of 15 different cables that fit most factory
car stereos. You just use the one that fits your car.
OEM interface CD changer converters connect between the factory
head unit and the aftermarket CD changer. For some applications, it’s sim-
ply a matter of converting from one connector type to another. In other
cases, the handshaking protocol between the head unit and changer must
be digitally converted from one format to another.
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
277
FIGURE 10-4
USA SPEC SCD-
VW44EBU CD
changer for Volks-
wagen factory
stereos. (Courtesy of USA
SPEC.)

Precision Interface Electronics (PIE) manufactures OEM interface CD
changer converters for many vehicles (Fig. 10-6). Each of these is designed
to work with a specific brand and vintage of CD changer, so don’t buy a
changer until you’re sure a suitable converter exists.
CD Changer Performance and Features
If you listen to MP3 or WMA compressed music files, you’ll want a
changer with MP3/WMA playback. If your head unit doesn’t have this
feature, it’s a great way to add MP3/WMA capabilities to your system
without having to replace your head unit.
You can expect excellent frequency response and signal-to-noise ratio
with virtually any CD changer. Features like intro scan, random play, and
track repeat are found on almost all models. Look to the number of CDs,
CD-R/CD-RW compatibility, CD text, and disc naming/track program-
ming features to help you choose the right changer. If you go off road,
278
CHAPTER TEN
FIGURE 10-6
PIE DPX™ OEM
interface CD changer
converter. (Courtesy of
Precision Interface 
Electronics.)
FIGURE 10-5
Neo Changer univer-
sal factory-compati-
ble CD changer.
(Courtesy of Neo Car
Audio.)

electronic shock protection can help reduce skipping. Don’t forget to con-
sider size and mounting angle, especially if you’re thinking about a glove
compartment or console installation. Table 10-2 provides information on
various CD changer features.
Number of CDs.
Most changers hold six, ten, or twelve CDs. 
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
279
TABLE 10-2
Performance and
Features of CD
Changers
Performance/Feature
Comments
Number of CDs
Choose 6, 10, or 12 discs.
CD-R, CD-RW compatibility
Can play audio CD-Rs and/or CD-RWs as well as prere-
corded CDs.
CD text display
CD changers with this feature will display the song title,
album name, and artist for CDs having CD text informa-
tion encoded on them.
MP3/WMA playback
Allows you to listen to CDs with MP3 or WMA com-
pressed music files.
ID3 tag display
Similar to CD text display, but for MP3/WMA files.
Disc naming/track 
Lets you program disc names to appear on the display 
programming
and preprogram the songs you want to hear on each
disc.
FM modulator
Important for head units lacking CD changer controls.
The CD changer effectively becomes a personal radio
station for your FM receiver.
Mounting angle
Defines the range of mounting angles for proper opera-
tion.
CD frequency response
The frequency range a CD player can faithfully repro-
duce.
Electronic shock protection
A buffer memory used as a reserve against skipping.
Intro scan
Lets you hear the first few seconds of each track. Hit the
button again when you hear the song you want.
Random play/shuffle
Mixes up the order of songs for variety during playback.
CD signal-to-noise ratio
A measure of how well a CD player silences background
noise.
Zero-bit detect
Mutes the output whenever a series of zeros is detected
in the digital bitstream.

CD-R, CD-RW Compatibility. CD changers with this capability can
play audio CD-Rs and/or CD-RWs as well as prerecorded CDs. Most
changers will play CD-Rs, but some will not play CD-RWs (rewriteable
discs). This is an important feature if you record your own CD-RW discs. 
CD Text Display. CD changers with this feature will display the song
title, album name, and artist for CDs having CD text information encoded
on them.
MP3/WMA Playback. Allows you to listen to CDs with MP3 or WMA
compressed music files. Some changers support MP3 only, others support
MP3 and WMA. With this feature, you’ll also want ID3/WMA tag display.
For more information about MP3 and WMA, see the chapter on head
unit projects.
ID3/WMA Tag Display. Similar to CD text display, but for MP3/WMA
files. CD changers with this feature will display the song title, album,
artist, year, genre, and comments for MP3 files having ID3 tags and for
WMA files having WMA tags. Later versions of ID3 (ID3v1.1, ID3v2) add
even more information capabilities. This is a very useful feature if you
play MP3s, because so many of them fit on a single CD—not to mention
a whole changer-full!
Disc Naming/Track Programming.
Disc naming lets you program
disc names to appear on the display. Track programming allows you to
preprogram the songs you want to hear on each disc. Most changers with
these features will store information for about 100 discs.
FM Modulator.
Important for adding a CD changer to a head unit
lacking CD changer controls. With this approach, the CD changer effec-
tively becomes a personal radio station for your FM receiver. The FM
modulator converts the audio signals of the CD changer to an FM stereo
signal that is injected into your existing antenna wire. You can choose the
frequency of your personal radio station to avoid a conflict with a com-
mercial station.
Mounting Angle.
Defines the range of mounting angles for proper
operation. Almost all models allow 0°, 45°, and 90° (90° means “face up”).
Some allow mounting over the entire 0- to 90° range or more, important
for glove compartment installations.
280
CHAPTER TEN

CD Frequency Response.
The frequency range a CD player can faith-
fully reproduce. Humans can hear sounds as low as 20 Hz and as high as
20 kHz. Virtually every CD player exceeds this range.
Electronic Shock Protection.
Electronic shock protection is a buffer
memory used to store music as a reserve against skipping due to bumps in
the road.
Intro Scan.
Lets you hear the first few seconds of each track. Hit the
button again when you hear the song you want.
Random Play/Shuffle.
Mixes up the order of songs for variety during
playback.
CD Signal-to-Noise Ratio.
A measure of how well a CD player silences
background noise. Ratings are given in decibels; higher ratings indicate
less noise. The signal-to-noise ratio of CD players is generally so good that
noise picked up by other means determines the system noise level. Unless
you’re a competitor or plan on using super high-power amps, don’t rely
too heavily on this spec.
Zero-Bit Detect.
Mutes the output whenever a series of zeros is
detected in the digital bitstream. The result is complete silence between
songs. This is important if you’re a competitor, but otherwise you’ll never
hear the difference.
Adding a DVD Changer to 
Your System
If your system already has a DVD player, a DVD changer can be added to
conveniently store the entertainment for your mobile video system. If
you don’t have a DVD player, a DVD changer can be used as the main
DVD player for your system.
Most DVD changers can be controlled by a compatible head unit of
the same manufacturer and vintage as the changer, using the head unit
CD changer or DVD changer controls. Most changers can also be used
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
281

without a compatible head unit. This is called stand-alone operation, and
utilizes a separate remote control, which may be included with the
changer or may be an optional accessory. The Clarion VCZ625 (Fig. 10-7) is
a DVD changer that can be controlled by a compatible head unit or used
in stand-alone mode.
System Already Has a DVD Player
If you have a head unit that plays DVDs or an overhead DVD player with
built-in monitor, a DVD changer is a convenient way to have a collection
of discs (DVDs and CDs) on-tap for any trip. You’ll need to connect the
video output of the changer to a video input on the head unit or moni-
tor. You’ll also need to connect the stereo audio outputs of the changer to
your head unit or overhead DVD player. If your system is equipped for 5.1
channel sound, you’ll want to connect the optical output of the changer
to your surround-sound processor.
Using a Changer as the Main DVD Player
It’s possible to use a DVD changer as the main DVD player for your sys-
tem. To complete your video system, you’ll need a monitor, and option-
ally, wireless headphones. If you have a head unit with compatible
changer controls, it can conveniently control the changer. This is the best
arrangement if you have a head unit with built-in monitor or other type
of front-seat viewing monitor. If your head unit doesn’t have compatible
282
CHAPTER TEN
FIGURE 10-7
Clarion VCZ625
DVD changer. (Cour-
tesy of Clarion.)

controls, control the changer using stand-alone mode with the included
(or optional) remote.
To use a changer as your main DVD player, you’ll need to connect the
video output of the changer to the video input of the monitor, and the
stereo audio outputs of the changer to your head unit aux inputs or wire-
less headphones. If your head unit lacks aux inputs, you can use an FM
modulator or auxiliary input converter (see the chapter on accessories) to
provide audio to your head unit.
Regardless of whether your system already has a DVD player or you’re
planning to use a changer as the main DVD player, many mobile video
system configurations are possible, depending on the equipment involved.
Refer to the chapter on mobile video for more details on the many ways
to configure your mobile video system.
DVD Changer Performance and
Features
Choosing a DVD changer can be simple or complex, depending on your
needs. If you want a changer that can be controlled by a particular head
unit (and such a changer exists), then choosing will be simple. If you’re just
looking to play standard prerecorded DVDs and CDs and don’t care about
head unit controls, then virtually any DVD changer will meet your needs.
But if you’re into recordable DVDs and CDs, 5.1 channel sound, or advanced
features, then you’ll want to look more closely at features and specs.
Table 10-3 shows important performance characteristics and features to
consider. Since DVD changers also play CDs, most of the CD changer
specs in Table 10-2 also apply. For brevity, only the most important of
these are included in Table 10-3. Even though DVD changers play CDs,
they may not provide all the features you’ve come to expect in a CD
changer. For example, DVD players may not automatically play the next
CD when the current CD is over. And DVD changers are often one step
behind in-dash DVD players when it comes to features.
Number of Discs. Most changers hold 6 or 10 discs (DVDs and/or CDs).
Stand-Alone Mode. Can be controlled using its own remote control
(rather than a compatible head unit with changer controls). Allows the
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
283

changer to be used with any head unit, or even without a head unit. Most
DVD changers have this feature.
CD-R, CD-RW Compatibility. DVD changers with this capability can
play CD-Rs and/or CD-RWs as well as prerecorded CDs. This is an impor-
tant feature if you record your own CDs.  Most DVD changers are CD-R
and CD-RW compatible.
MP3/WMA Decoding. Allows you to listen to CDs with MP3 or WMA
compressed music files. Some changers support MP3 only, others support
MP3 and WMA. For more information about MP3 and WMA, see the
chapter on head unit projects.
Video CD Compatibility. Able to play video CDs (VCDs). Most DVD
changers have this feature.
284
CHAPTER TEN
TABLE 10-3
Performance and
Features of DVD
Changers
Performance/Feature
Comments
Number of discs
Choose 6 or 10 discs.
Stand-alone mode
Can be controlled using its own remote. Allows the
changer to be used with any head unit.
CD-R, CD-RW compatibility
Can play CD-Rs and/or CD-RWs as well as prerecorded
CDs.
MP3/WMA playback
Allows you to listen to CDs with MP3 or WMA com-
pressed music files.
Video CD compatibility
Able to play Video CDs (VCDs).
DVD-R, DVD-RW, DVD+R, 
Look for a changer that’s compatible with any 
DVD+RW compatibility 
recordable and rewriteable DVD formats you use.
Selectable aspect ratio
Allows you to set the video output for 16 : 9 or 4 : 3
modes.
Two sets of video outputs
For driving front and rear monitors.
Digital optical output
For connection to a Dolby Digital/DTS surround-
sound processor.
FM modulator
Important for providing audio from the changer to a
head unit without aux inputs.
Mounting angle
Defines the range of mounting angles for proper oper-
ation.

DVD-R, DVD-RW, DVD+R, DVD+RW Compatibility. These are some
of the different standards for recordable and rewriteable DVDs. If you
record your own DVDs, look for a changer that’s compatible with the for-
mats you use.
Selectable Aspect Ratio. Allows you to set the video output for 16 : 9
Wide (when connected to a wide-screen monitor), 4 : 3 Pan & Scan, or 4 : 3
Letterbox.
Two Sets of Video Outputs. Provides two composite video outputs for
driving front and rear monitors.
Digital Optical Output. For connection to a Dolby Digital/DTS sur-
round-sound processor for 5.1 channel audio. Some changers allow this
output to be configured for linear PCM for connecting to an amp or
decoder that’s not Dolby Digital/DTS compatible.
FM Modulator. Important for providing audio from the DVD changer
to a head unit without aux inputs. The modulator converts the audio sig-
nal to FM, then sends it through your head unit’s antenna input. You can
choose the frequency of the modulator to avoid a conflict with a com-
mercial station. 
Mounting Angle. Defines the range of mounting angles for proper
operation. Almost all models allow 0 degrees, 45 degrees, and 90 degrees (90
degrees means “face up”). Some allow mounting over the entire 0 to 90
degree range or more, important for glove compartment installations.
Adding a Digital Music Player 
to Your System
Digital music players give you easy access to your entire music collection
without the hassle of discs in the car. They connect to your system like a
CD changer, but store MP3, WMA, or WAV files of your music rather
than discs. Files are transferred to the digital music player using your
home computer.  
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
285

Digital music players are generally hard-drive-based MP3/WMA play-
ers. The hard drive provides tremendous amounts of music storage, espe-
cially for compressed music files. A 20 GB hard drive can hold about 5,000
MP3 or WMA files. Some digital music players have 80 GB of storage
space, enough for 20,000 music files! 
Using software (included with the player) with your home computer,
you convert your CDs to MP3, WMA, or WAV files. You can also down-
load music from the Internet. The software lets you convert from one for-
mat to another and organize your music into playlists. Music files are
then transferred from your computer to your digital music player
through the USB port.
Some digital music players use cartridge docking, others use player dock-
ing. Cartridge docking systems use a relatively small cartridge (containing
the hard drive) to transfer music files from your computer to the music
player in your car. The advantage of this approach is the compact size of
the cartridge. The Kenwood Music Keg (Fig. 10-8) is an example of this
kind of system.
With player docking systems, the player itself docks with your com-
puter. After transferring music files, the player then docks in your car. The
advantage of player docking is that you can have a docking station for
your home stereo as well as your car stereo, and have access to your entire
music library in both places. You could even share the same digital music
player between multiple vehicles.
Digital music players connect to your car stereo just like a CD changer.
Some are controlled by a dash-mounted controller, others use the CD
changer controls of compatible head units. The Alpine HDA-5460 (Fig. 
10-9) is an in-dash player, so all the controls and display are on the face of
the unit itself. It fits in a single DIN slot, has a removable 16 GB hard drive
286
CHAPTER TEN
FIGURE 10-8
Kenwood KHD-C710
Music Keg digital
music player. (Courtesy
of Kenwood.)

with a USB port for connection to your home computer, and will work
with any brand of head unit. 
The audio outputs of music players are generally connected to the aux
inputs of the head unit. If the head unit lacks aux inputs, an FM modu-
lator or aux input converter may be used. With compatible head units, the
audio is connected through the changer cable. 
Digital Music Player Performance 
and Features
Table 10-4 shows important performance characteristics and features to
consider in a digital music player. 
For most people, choosing the right model comes down to your dock-
ing system preference and whether a player can use the CD changer con-
trols of your head unit. Other factors may also be important to you. If
you’ve got a huge music library, more memory is a plus. If you own a Mac,
the operating system requirement is critical. And features like WAV com-
patibility, WiFi file transfer, and voice index may strongly appeal to you. 
Memory. The standard is 20 GB, which will store about 5,000 MP3 or
WMA files. The exact number of files depends on the length of songs and
the amount of compression used (higher compression produces smaller
files but lower sound quality). Some players support 80 GB or more.
MP3/WMA/WAV Compatibility. Most players support MP3 and WMA
files with compression bit-rates up to 320 kbps, as well as variable bit-rates.
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
287
FIGURE 10-9
Alpine HDA-5460 in-
dash digital music
player. (Courtesy of
Alpine Electronics, Inc.)

Some players also support WAV files. WAV files are uncompressed music
files that are truly CD quality and require no encoding, but are about 10
times larger than high-quality (128 kbps) MP3 files. 
ID3 Tag Display. Standard feature. Displays the song title, album, artist,
year, genre, and comments for MP3 files having ID3 tags and for WMA
files having WMA tags. Later versions of ID3 (ID3v1.1, ID3v2) add even
more information capabilities.
Docking System. Choose cartridge docking or player docking. (See
explanation above.)
Computer OS Requirement. Most are compatible with newer versions
of Windows, including Windows XP, Win2000, WinME, and Win98. Some
are also compatible with Mac OS 9 and OS 8.
288
CHAPTER TEN
TABLE 10-4
Performance and
Features of Digital
Music Players
Performance/Feature
Comments
Memory
20 GB is standard and will store about 5,000 songs.
MP3/WMA/WAV compatibility
Most players support MP3 and WMA, some also
support WAV.
ID3 tag display
Standard feature. Displays the song title, album,
artist, year, genre, and comments for MP3 files.
Docking system
Choose cartridge docking or player docking.
Computer OS requirement
Most are compatible with newer versions of Win-
dows.
Controller
Some units use a dash-mounted controller, others
use the CD changer controls of compatible head
units.
Audio connection to head unit
Can be through aux inputs, FM modulator, or aux
input converter. With compatible head units, con-
nection is through the changer cable.
WiFi file transfer
Allows wireless transfer of music files from your
computer to the digital music player in your car.
Voice index
Lets you browse your music library using speech
technology, so you can keep your eyes on the road.
Mounting angle
Defines the range of mounting angles for proper
operation.

Controller. Some units use a dash-mounted controller; others use the
CD changer controls of compatible head units. Dash-mounted controllers
can be surface mounted or mounted in a DIN chassis adjacent to your
head unit.
Audio Connection to Head Unit. The audio outputs of the player are
generally connected to the aux inputs of the head unit. If the head unit
lacks aux inputs, an FM modulator or aux input converter may be used.
With compatible head units, the audio is connected through the changer
cable.
WiFi File Transfer. Optional accessory with some players. Allows wire-
less transfer of music files from your computer to the digital music player
in your car, up to 150 feet away. This method is slower than USB transfer,
so it’s most useful for updates rather than initial transfer of files. Requires
that your computer has a WiFi wireless router.
Voice Index. Lets you browse your music library using speech technol-
ogy, so you can keep your eyes on the road.
Mounting Angle. Defines the range of mounting angles for proper
operation. Some specify mounting horizontally or vertically; others
allow mounting at any angle.
Installation
Installing a CD changer, DVD changer, or digital music player is a matter
of choosing a mounting location, mounting it and connecting it up. It’s a
good idea to understand the basics of installation beforehand, to help you
choose the right changer or player, and so you know what to expect.
Choosing a Mounting Location
No single mounting location is best for every vehicle, changer, or person
(Table 10-5). Think about where you might want to put your changer/
player before shopping for one—it can determine the size and mounting
angle range you’ll need. Grab a tape measure and scope out your vehicle,
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
289

then look at sizes of changers or players. The Crutchfield catalog has
dimensions for every model that Crutchfield carries, so you can easily
get an idea of what is possible.
Trunk.
In the trunk, finding space for a changer or player is rarely a
problem. In vehicles without a trunk release lever, the trunk provides the
mounting location least vulnerable to theft. A disadvantage of trunk
mounting changers is accessibility—you need to change disc magazines
from outside the vehicle. If your trunk is packed with luggage, changing
disc magazines is a chore. You also need to be careful about the changer
or player getting wet if you open the trunk when it’s raining.
If you want to mount your changer/player at an angle (against the slop-
ing front of the trunk, for example), make sure you choose a model that
allows mounting over the entire 0- to 90° range.
Under Seat.
The beauty of mounting a changer/player under a front
seat is that it takes advantage of otherwise unused space. The amount of
space under a seat varies quite a bit from vehicle to vehicle. When mea-
suring for space, you need to check all the possible positions of the seat
for interference, including front-to-back position, tilt, and height settings.
A disadvantage of mounting under the seat is its susceptibility to dirt,
spills, and getting kicked from behind.
290
CHAPTER TEN
TABLE 10-5
Changer and Player
Mounting Locations
Mounting Location
Comments
Trunk
May be least vulnerable to theft.
For changers, you need to change disc magazines from outside
the vehicle. If your trunk is packed with luggage, changing disc
magazines is a chore.
Under seat
Takes advantage of otherwise unused space.
Susceptible to dirt, spills, and getting kicked from behind.
Console
For changers, lets you comfortably change discs from the driver’s
seat.
Glove compartment
Most glove compartments are too small to hold even a six-disc
changer or compact digital music player.
Usually requires an odd mounting angle, so choose a model that
allows mounting over the entire 0- to 90° range.
Tip: When choosing
a spot to mount a
changer or player, be
sure you can easily
remove the disc mag-
azine/hard-drive car-
tridge. This is a
common oversight
for under-seat
mounting.

Console.
For changers, console mounting lets you comfortably change
discs from the driver’s seat. Space is tight, so you may need to choose a six-
disc changer. The obvious disadvantage of this location is the loss of most
of the useable console space.
Glove Compartment.
Most glove compartments are too small to hold
even a six-disc changer or compact digital music player. If your vehicle is
one of the select few, glove compartment installation provides convenient
access to the changer or player. Glove compartment installation usually
requires an odd mounting angle, so choose a changer that allows mount-
ing over the entire 0- to 90° range.
Mounting
Almost all changers and players can be mounted at 0 and 90° (90° means
“face up”). Many allow mounting over the entire 0- to 90° range. You’ll
need to adjust a changer’s suspension to match the mounting angle.
Check the owner’s manual for instructions.
Make sure the mounting surface you’ve chosen is strong enough to
support the changer/player firmly, so it can’t rip loose during a sudden
stop. If you are mounting under the rear deck, make sure it won’t inter-
fere with the torsion spring of the trunk lid. Before you choose an exact
mounting spot, observe how the spring moves as you close the lid. Don’t
mount your changer anywhere it would be subjected to direct sunlight
or rain.
When drilling holes for mounting brackets, be careful not to drill into
the gas tank or a brake line.
Connecting
If you’re using the changer controls of a compatible head unit, you’ll
need to run the changer cable to the head unit and plug it in the back.
You’ll have to pull the head unit out to do this. If you are using the CD
changer controls of a factory head unit to control a changer, you’ll need
to insert an OEM interface CD changer converter between the after-
market CD changer and the factory head unit.
If you’re mounting your changer/player in the trunk, run the changer
cable down one side of your car, along the door sill. Look for a hole to
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
291

pass the cable from the trunk into the passenger compartment. You may
have to remove the back seat to find it. To conceal the cable under the car-
peting, you’ll have to take off the door sill plate (or plates).
If you’re mounting the changer under a front seat, do not run the
cable too close to a seat rail where it could be cut or pinched when the seat
is moved.
If you have an amp in the trunk, run the CD changer cable on the side
opposite the amp’s 12-volt power cable. You’ll be less likely to introduce
engine noise into your system. Secure any excess cable with wire ties so it
doesn’t end up in the way of the pedals or hood latch.
After you plug the changer cable into the head unit, test the changer
thoroughly before you fully reinstall your head unit.
Changers/Players with FM Modulators.
Changers or players with
FM modulators require a few additional connections. These can include
battery +12 volts and ignition/accessory +12 volts. The best place to find
these power sources is at your fuse panel. Use fuse taps at appropriate loca-
tions in the panel. You’ll also need to connect the black ground wire to
the metal chassis of the vehicle with a screw.
Your factory antenna cable will need to plug into the FM modulator
(usually integrated into the changer, or a separate module in some units).
A cable from the FM modulator also needs to plug into the head unit’s
antenna jack. When deciding where to mount a separate FM modulator
module, be sure its antenna cable will reach your head unit’s antenna
input. Use cable ties to secure any slack in the antenna lead, so it can’t fall
down and interfere with your pedals.
Try to make the selector switch for the FM modulator frequency as
accessible as possible. (Some models allow the frequency to be changed
from the dash-mounted control panel.) If the selector switch will be dif-
ficult to access, set it before you mount the unit. Determine which of the
available FM frequencies is least likely to be used by a strong local radio
signal, and choose that one.
Video and Surround Hookup for DVD Changers.
In addition to
the controller and stereo audio connections required for all changers and
players, DVD changers require a video connection as well. Depending on
your system, you’ll need to connect the video output of the changer to
the video input of your head unit or the video input of your monitor.
If your system is equipped for 5.1 channel sound, you’ll also need to con-
nect the optical output of the changer to your surround-sound processor.
292
CHAPTER TEN

Controlling Multiple Changers Using a Multi-Changer Adapter.
By using a multi-changer adapter to share the changer port on your head
unit, you can connect multiple changers and players to your system and
control and listen to them all through a single head unit. For example,
you could connect a CD changer and digital music player to your head
unit or multiple CD changers.
You must use a multi-changer adapter that’s compatible with your
head unit, and all the changers and players must be individually compat-
ible with the head unit as well. Some multi-changer adapters allow two
changer/players to be connected, others allow as many as seven
changer/players by daisy-chaining adapters. MCAs are available for Ken-
wood, Sony, Alpine, and other head units.
CHANGER AND PLAYER PROJECTS
293

This page intentionally left blank.

Accessories
CHAPTER 11
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

The level of hype for accessories is even higher than that for car stereo as
a whole. This section will help you separate science from snake oil when
it comes to items such as power line caps, premium speaker wire, and
sound deadeners.
Power Line Capacitors
The term power line capacitors refers to one or more large capacitors (0.5
farads or greater) connected to an amplifier’s power wire (Fig. 11-1). The
purpose of using these is to provide a reserve power source from which
the amplifier can rapidly draw power when it needs it (such as during a
deep bass note). The electrical theory is that when the amplifier attempts
to draw a large amount of current, not only will the battery be relatively
slow to respond, but the voltage at the amplifier will be a little lower than
the voltage at the battery itself (this is called line drop). A capacitor at the
amplifier will try to stabilize the voltage level at the amplifier, dumping
current into the amplifier as needed.
Should You Install a Power Line Cap?
Considering the relatively high cost of power line caps, you should first
make sure that you have done everything possible to reduce the voltage
296
CHAPTER ELEVEN
FIGURE 11-1
Power line caps.
(Courtesy of Parts Express.)

drop between the battery and the amplifier. This means keeping power
and ground cables as short as possible, using the proper wire gauge, and
soldering crimped connectors to reduce their resistance.
If you’ve done what you can to reduce line drops, and your dash lights
still dim every time your subwoofer hits a strong bass note with the
music turned up and your engine running, a power line cap could help
you out.
Choosing the Right Cap
The commonly accepted rule of thumb for determining proper capacitor
size is 1 farad per kilowatt of amplifier power. For example, a system run-
ning at 500 watts would need a 0.5-farad (or 500,000-µF) capacitor. Choose
a cap with a working voltage (WVDC) rating of 20 volts. Anything less
than this is risky, and anything more is a waste of money.
You should consider the Equivalent Series Resistance (ESR) of the
capacitor. Capacitors should have an ESR less than that shown in Table 
11-1 for maximum effectiveness of the cap.
Equivalent Series Inductance (ESL) is also important, because it domi-
nates the impedance of the capacitor at the high frequencies used by
switching power supplies in high-power amps. For a capacitor to provide
a benefit at high frequencies, it should have an ESL lower than that of the
power cables to the amp. A reasonable value is 1 microhenry. Unfortu-
nately, ESL is not normally advertised.
Another factor to consider is temperature rating. Power line caps have
a temperature rating anywhere from 85 to 105°C. No one expects to oper-
ate a power line capacitor at temperatures near the boiling point of water,
but temperature rating is actually an accurate indicator of the useful lifes-
pan of your power line cap. This is because high temperatures accelerate
the process of the electrolyte inside drying out, reducing the capacitance
and dramatically increasing the ESR. A cap with a high temperature rat-
ACCESSORIES
297
TABLE 11-1
Maximum Recom-
mended ESR for
Power Line Caps
Capacitance
Maximum ESR
0.5 farad
4 mΩ
1 farad
2 mΩ
2 farads
1 mΩ

ing is less susceptible to this process and has a longer lifespan. Opt for a
cap with a temperature rating of 95°C or higher.
If cost is no object, you can buy electronically monitored power line
caps. These provide an indication of the state of charge on an LED bar
graph display. Some electronically monitored models also provide reverse
polarity protection in case you connect the cap backwards.
Installation
If you connect a power line cap backwards you will destroy it (the elec-
trolyte will ooze out), so double-check your polarities before making any
connections. To install a capacitor, you should not simply attach it to the
power and ground wires near your amplifier, as it will draw a very large
amount of current from the battery and blow the fuse. Instead, precharge
the cap using this procedure:
1. Connect the negative lead to the negative terminal of the cap, but do
not connect the positive lead to the positive terminal yet.
2. Insert an automotive lightbulb between the positive lead and the pos-
itive terminal of the capacitor to pre-charge the cap. When the light-
bulb goes out, the capacitor is done charging.
3. Now connect the positive lead to the positive terminal of the cap.
Battery Savers and Monitors
If you like to crank your stereo for extended periods with the engine off,
then you need to be concerned about draining the battery past the point
where you can start the car. One deep discharge also sacrifices from one-
fourth to one-third the life of your battery.
Some newer cars may keep the battery’s voltage from dipping too low,
but if your car just sits there as the battery drains, you might consider a
battery saver. A battery saver is a computerized switch that automatically
disconnects the battery before it’s drained to its no-go threshold. Open a
door or press a reset button (depending on brand) to reconnect the bat-
tery after the battery saver disconnects it. Battery savers are mounted on
the side of the battery, and require only a wrench for installation.
298
CHAPTER ELEVEN

A leading consumer test magazine compared the PriorityStart! battery
saver (about $80; Fig. 11-2) to another brand. Testers simulated a situation
in which the driver had left the lights on, then tried to start the car at 0°F.
PriorityStart! left the battery with plenty of power to start the engine,
but the battery capacity left by the other brand was sometimes inade-
quate to start a car.
Another factor important to owners of high-powered car stereos is the
contact resistance of a battery saver. This directly translates to voltage drop 
that can rob your stereo of headroom. The contact resistance of Priority-
Start! is less than 1 milliohm, which would cause less than a 25-mV line
drop when using a 100-watt per channel amp. The contact resistance of
some battery savers may be as high as 50 milliohms, which could cause a
line drop of over 1 volt when using a 100-watt per channel amp.
Another option is the “Battery Guard” (about $40; Fig. 11-3) from PAC
(Pacific Accessory Corporation). It’s a battery saver specifically designed
for car audio. It uses a microprocessor to precisely monitor the battery
voltage. When the voltage drops below 11.6 volts, it turns the sound sys-
tem off. When the battery is recharged to 12.4 volts, it turns the head unit
back on. An advantage of this approach is that power to the rest of the car
is never disrupted, so you won’t need to reset your clock or lose informa-
tion stored by your car’s computer. A disadvantage is that you aren’t pro-
tected against other sources of battery drainage, like accidentally leaving
the dome light on overnight.
A cheaper alternative is the “Bat Alert” battery monitor (about $15)
from PAC. (See Fig. 11-4.) This device is mounted under the dash and con-
nected to the ignition/accessory 12-volt supply. Its LED is green for bat-
ACCESSORIES
299
FIGURE 11-2
PriorityStart!
mounted on battery.
(Courtesy of BLI Interna-
tional.)

tery voltages above 12 volts, yellow between 11.9 and 11.5 volts, and red
below that. A red LED tells you it’s time to start your engine or hook up
a charger. The disadvantage of this approach is that you need to keep your
eye on the LED.
Premium Speaker Wire
If you believe the advertising hype, premium speaker wire offers you greater
overall depth and clarity, more dynamic range, and tighter, deeper bass.
What the advertising doesn’t tell you is that these benefits come from
using the proper wire gauge rather than from time-correct windings,
magnetic flux tube construction, linear polyethylene dielectric, and so
on. If you use the proper wire gauge, then the benefits of premium
speaker wire are purely cosmetic.
300
CHAPTER ELEVEN
FIGURE 11-4
PAC “Bat Alert.”
(Courtesy of Pacific Acces-
sory Corporation.)
FIGURE 11-3
PAC “Battery
Guard.” (Courtesy of
Pacific Accessory Corpora-
tion.)

For speaker wiring, the dominating factor for selecting wire gauge is
resistance. For 4-ohm speakers, the speaker wires should have a resistance
of less than 0.1 ohms for best performance. Values higher than this can
start to affect bass response by allowing the impedance characteristic of
the speaker to come into play. A 4-ohm speaker can easily have a 20-ohm
impedance peak at its resonant frequency.
Resistance is strictly a matter of wire gauge and length. Table 11-2 pro-
vides minimum recommended wire gauges, depending on wire length,
for all power amps. The wire lengths shown in Table 11-2 guarantee a
resistance of less than 0.1 ohms. Using thicker wire (smaller gauge) and
shorter lengths will give you lower resistance.
If you are running 2-ohm loads, subtract 2 from the recommended
wire gauge in the chart. For example, use #10-2 up to 30 feet.
Premium Patch Cables (Interconnects)
Interconnects is just a fancy name for patch cables, to make you feel better
for paying a premium price. What you get for the extra money is largely
cosmetic.
Factors such as characteristic impedance and low-capacitance dielectric
just don’t make any difference in audio patch cables. These factors become
important at higher frequencies, in applications involving extremely long
cables, or where impedance matching is used. None of these apply here.
There is no scientific evidence that oxygen-free copper conductors pro-
vide any audible benefit whatsoever.
Gold-plated connectors do provide an additional degree of corrosion
resistance, but you can buy patch cables with gold-plated ends without
spending a fortune.
ACCESSORIES
301
TABLE 11-2
Minimum Recom-
mended Gauge for
Speaker Wire
Amplifier
Speaker Wire
All wattages
up to 12′
#16-2
up to 20′
#14-2
up to 30′
#12-2

One area where there can be an important difference between cables is
noise immunity, especially in the noisy automotive environment (Fig. 
11-5). This is of most concern where:
■Long cables are used (such as between the head unit and the trunk)
■A low (less than 2-volt) preamp-level signal source is involved
■High-power (greater than 100W × 2) amplifiers are used
Unfortunately, cable manufacturers don’t directly specify noise immu-
nity. The best you can do is guess, based on terms like double-shielded or
100% foil shield. Experiments by the Autosound 2000 test lab provide evi-
dence that unshielded twisted-pair cables may furnish the best noise
immunity in the automotive environment. Note: System noise perfor-
mance is often determined by factors other than the type of cable used.
See Chap. 12 for more details.
A useful feature of some premium cables is an extra embedded wire
for remote amp turn-on. This saves you from having to run a separate
wire from the head unit to the power amp.
Portable Music Player Head Unit
Adapters
A head unit adapter lets you listen to your portable MP3 player through
your car stereo. This is a good solution if you want to keep your head
unit but it lacks aux inputs. If your head unit doesn’t play CDs (or it
doesn’t play MP3 files recorded on CD-Rs), a head unit adapter can be
302
CHAPTER ELEVEN
FIGURE 11-5
Premium patch
cables. (Courtesy of Parts
Express.)

used with a portable CD player. Head unit adapters are often a great solu-
tion for leased or rental cars. 
There are three types of adapters available: cassette adapters, FM trans-
mitters, and auxiliary input converters.
Cassette Adapters
A cassette adapter looks like a cassette tape that it has a cable coming out
with a plug on the end (Fig. 11-6). These adapters are inserted into your tape
deck like a normal tape and the plug is inserted into the headphone jack of
your portable CD player. Cassette adapters are available for less than $20.
A disadvantage of using cassette adapters is that the tape deck trans-
port mechanism is active and subject to normal wear during use with the
adapter. (The tape head may or may not be subject to wear, depending on
the design of the adapter.)
Some inexpensive cassette adapters may not work with all tape decks.
For example, Delco tape decks will shut down if they sense that there is
ACCESSORIES
303
TABLE 11-3
Portable Music
Player Head Unit
Adapters
Adapter
Comments
Cassette adapter
Requires cassette head unit—wired solution.
Tape deck transport is active during use and subject to nor-
mal wear.
FM transmitter
Uses FM radio—wireless solution.
Very limited transmission range.
Auxiliary input converter
Requires head unit with CD changer controls—wired solu-
tion.
Requires installation.
Tip: If you plan to
use a portable music
player in your car on
a regular basis, you
will want to use a
power converter to
save on batteries.
These plug into the
lighter jack and con-
vert 12 volts to the
voltage needed by
your player.
Important: Power
converters not
designed to go with
your music player
may not be compati-
ble, even if the con-
nectors are the same.
Always check for the
correct voltage AND
correct polarity
before plugging a
power adapter into
your player. Failure
to do this can result
in a destroyed music
player.
FIGURE 11-6
RCA cassette
adapter. (Courtesy of
MCM
Electronics.)

abnormal tape motion—not all adapters have what it takes to fool the
deck. Choose a reputable brand of adapter to be safe.
FM Transmitters
This adapter is basically a miniature radio station (Fig. 11-7). It converts the
audio from your music player’s headphone jack to an FM stereo signal
picked up by your head unit. These are available for about $30 from Radio
Shack and other sources.
Because of the heavy compression used by commercial broadcasters to
reach the maximum audience, the audio quality using an adapter can be
much better than a normal FM broadcast.
The biggest problem with FM transmitters is their very limited trans-
mission distance. Because of strict FCC limits on maximum transmitted
signal strength, their effective range is quite limited. For some vehicles,
this doesn’t present a problem. For others, it’s virtually impossible to
achieve good reception.
In addition to portable FM transmitters, there are hard-wired FM mod-
ulators that mount behind the dash. These connect through your car’s
antenna cable for more reliable FM transmission, and use 12-volt power
from the car so you don’t need to worry about batteries.
Auxiliary Input Converters
If your head unit has CD changer controls, an auxiliary input converter
can often be used to provide one or more sets of aux inputs. Aux input
converters are available for most aftermarket and many factory head units.
The Aux2Car (Fig. 11-8) by Peripheral Electronics is a universal aux input
converter, programmable for most vehicle applications using internal dip
switches. Low-cost vehicle-specific harnesses are available separately.
304
CHAPTER ELEVEN
FIGURE 11-7
irock! Beamit 450FM
FM stereo transmit-
ter. (Courtesy of FID.)

Some aux input converters require that a CD changer be connected,
some require that no CD changer be connected, and some can be used
either way, so be sure to read the fine print before buying.
Installing an aux input converter may require pulling the head unit
out to connect to the CD changer port. (In some cars you can reach
behind the head unit from the passenger side to plug the converter in.)
Power and ground connections may also be required.
If you have an iPod, Peripheral Electronics’ iPOD2CAR is specifically
made to connect it to most factory and aftermarket head units. What’s
unique about the iPOD2CAR is that it lets you use the CD changer con-
trols of your head unit (and steering wheel controls, if you have them) to
control your iPod. It will even charge your iPod’s battery.
Antennas and Antenna Boosters
If your car already has a working antenna, then there’s probably no rea-
son to replace it. The two exceptions to this are if you have an embedded
windshield antenna or if you want to convert to a motorized antenna.
ACCESSORIES
305
FIGURE 11-8
Aux2Car universal
auxiliary input con-
verter. (Courtesy of
Peripheral Electronics.)
FIGURE 11-9
iPOD2CAR auxiliary
input converter for
iPod. (Courtesy of Periph-
eral Electronics.)

Embedded Windshield Antennas
Embedded windshield antennas keep your car’s body lines clean and
they can’t get broken off by vandals or at car washes, but they are very
directional. This means their performance is good in some directions and
poor in others. If you want to pull in weaker stations from all directions,
a mast-type antenna is a must.
Another factor with embedded antennas is window tinting. Metallic
window-tint films can degrade the performance of embedded wind-
shield antennas. Not all window-tint films are metallic, and there are sev-
eral degrees of metallic film. The more metal in the film, the greater the
degradation in reception. If you have a tinted windshield and your FM
reception seems poor, consider switching to a mast antenna. And if you’re
planning to have your windshield tinted and have an embedded antenna,
specify a high-quality non-metallic film.
Motorized Antennas
Motorized antennas (Fig. 11-10) are automatically raised when the radio is
on and lowered when it’s off. They keep your car’s body lines clean, pro-
vide good reception in all directions, and only get broken off if you for-
get to turn off your radio at the car wash. The performance of motorized
antennas is comparable to that of fixed mast antennas.
Because of the additional bulk of the motor assembly, it may be diffi-
cult or impossible to install a motorized antenna in the front fender of
every vehicle. If you mount it in the rear fender, you’ll need to use an
antenna extension cable and run it under the carpet to the receiver. Some
other disadvantages are cost and reliability. The expected life of a motor-
ized antenna is only five to ten years.
306
CHAPTER ELEVEN
FIGURE 11-10
Motorized antenna.
(Courtesy of MCM
Electronics.)

Antenna Installation
If you are replacing an existing antenna, attach a length of thin wire to
the end of the old antenna cable before you pull it out. As you pull the
cable through the car, the wire will snake through the cable’s mounting
path. Once you’ve pulled the cable all the way out, attach the wire to the
end of the new antenna’s cable, then have someone feed the new cable as
you pull the wire back into the car.
If you’re installing an antenna in a vehicle that didn’t have one before,
scout out the antenna location and cable path the car’s designers
intended. Look for a rubber or plastic plug on the front fender. Another
likely location on Japanese cars is the front pillar between the windshield
and front door. Do not run the antenna cable through a hole with other
wiring or you will risk picking up interference from those wires.
In the unlikely event that you don’t find an existing mounting hole,
you’ll need to drill one. Check where other cars of the same make have
theirs. Once you’ve chosen a location, protect the area with a piece of duct
tape. Use a center punch to mark it and drill a 1/8-inch pilot hole. Gradu-
ACCESSORIES
307
Antenna Adapters
If you are adding or changing an antenna or replacing a factory head unit,
you’ll quickly discover that every antenna doesn’t directly connect to every
head unit. That’s where antenna adapters come in. Aftermarket head units and
antennas all use the standard Motorola connector, but many factory systems
do not (Table 11-4). Adapters are available to adapt aftermarket head units to
factory antennas and also to adapt aftermarket antennas to factory head units.
TABLE 11-4
Types of Antenna Connectors
Type
Comments
Standard (Motorola)
Used on all aftermarket equipment.
GM mini
Used on 1988 and up GM.
Ford
Used on some 1995 and up, usually for radios with DSP controls.
Chrysler
Used on 2002 and up Chrysler/Jeep.
Nissan
Diversity (two-antenna) system.
Volkswagen/Euro
Factory antenna needs 12 volts to turn on impedance-matching circuit.

ally enlarge the hole with successively larger bits to reduce the chance of
the bit slipping. Check the hole as you approach the correct size to avoid
drilling too large a hole.
Antenna Boosters
Antenna boosters are low-noise amplifiers designed to improve weak sig-
nal reception. They are inserted between the antenna and the head unit
by plugging the antenna into the booster and the booster output into the
head unit.
Antenna boosters can improve sensitivity, but not selectivity. What this
means is that if you are trying to pick up a weak signal in the city (where
there are many nearby strong signals), a booster won’t help a bit. On the
other hand, if you are out in the country trying to pick up a weak signal
among other weak signals, a booster might help. How much it might help
depends on how good the booster is and how bad your head unit front
end is. A cheap booster can actually degrade the weak signal performance
of a top-notch receiver.
Sound-Deadening Materials
Sound-deadening materials are used by all automobile manufacturers to
reduce the ambient noise level in the passenger compartment. Effective
sound deadening means you don’t need to turn up the volume control as
much to overcome road noise. It also means you’ll be able to experience
more of the dynamic range available with CDs and even cassettes—you’ll
be able to hear more of the subtle details in the music. Unlike other acces-
sories, sound deadening provides a benefit even when the stereo is off, by
reducing driver fatigue due to noise.
Whether or not a particular vehicle would benefit from additional
sound deadening depends on how much soundproofing was done by the
vehicle manufacturer. Luxury cars tend to have lots of soundproofing,
and are not normally good candidates for improvement. Less expensive
cars, older cars, and sports cars are better candidates.
In addition to reducing road noise, sound-deadening materials can pro-
vide other sonic benefits. They can improve the sound of your system by
reducing unwanted panel vibrations caused by your speakers. By apply-
308
CHAPTER ELEVEN

ing sound-deadening material to door panels, the audible vibrations
caused by door speakers are greatly reduced. And if you have a subwoofer
in your trunk, you can reduce the sound loss through the trunk walls
and actually increase the amount of bass you hear by lining the trunk
lid and walls with sound-deadening material.
Materials generally run $1 to $5 per square foot. Dynamat™, Stinger
Roadkill™, and Accumat™(Fig. 11-11) are some of the popular product
lines. Each line contains a number of materials targeted for specific appli-
cations such as on doors, floor panels, trunks, or under the hood. Most
materials take the form of adhesive-backed sheets, but spray-on products
are also available for hard-to-reach areas.
When trying to reduce road noise, it’s important to focus your efforts
on the weak links. Otherwise you’ll be spending your time plugging pin-
holes when there’s a hole the size of a grapefruit nearby. Determining the
weak link can be difficult, but try to identify the source and location of
noise as you drive on the highway. Try to judge whether engine noise,
noise from the tires on the pavement, or wind noise is dominating. Is
most of the noise coming through the floor, through the doors, or else-
where? In many ways this is a job for an acoustic engineer with sophisti-
cated measuring equipment and lots of time. In addition, many noise
problems, such as wind noise due to the aerodynamics of the car, are dif-
ficult or impossible to correct yourself.
The advertising for noise-deadening products generally claims that
improvements of 3 dB are possible. This is a noticeable improvement for
most people. You need to judge whether the cost of material and your
time are worth it.
ACCESSORIES
309
FIGURE 11-11
Dynamat Xtreme
door kit. (Courtesy of
Dynamic Control.)

This page intentionally left blank.

Battling Noise
CHAPTER 12
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Most people don’t think about noise until after they’ve installed their sys-
tem and experience a problem. For basic low-power systems, noise is less
likely to be a problem, and this is a reasonable approach. But if you’re
installing a high-power multiamp system, the best time to think about
avoiding noise is when you’re planning your system.
This chapter explains the common causes of automotive noise problems,
how to avoid them, and how to fix them. Fixing noise problems can be
frustrating, time-consuming work. Following the techniques explained in
this chapter can help you systematically solve problems and eliminate
much of the frustration.
NOTE
Turn-on and turn-off pops associated with added amplifiers are covered
in Chap. 7, “Amplifiers and Amplifier Projects.”
Noise Basics
This section explains some basic principles of noise and the important
noise mechanisms in car audio. Reducing noise is a complex subject and
many highly technical books have been devoted to it. Understanding the
basics will go a long way toward helping you reduce noise when you
design, install, and adjust your system or have to troubleshoot it.
What Is Noise?
Noise is the undesired sound you hear during (what should be) silent pas-
sages in music or other programming.
Thermal noise sounds like the hiss you hear between stations on your
radio. It occurs due to random electron motion in electronic components.
It’s called thermal noise because the amount of electron motion (and
therefore noise) depends on the temperature.
Induced noise can sound like clicking, popping, whirring, buzzing,
whistling, or whining. What it sounds like is often a good clue as to its
source. Induced noise always has a source (such as the alternator), a channel
(such as a power wire), and a receiver (such as an amp). This is important to
312
CHAPTER TWELVE

remember because induced noise problems can be tackled at the source,
channel, receiver, or some combination of the three.
Signal-to-Noise Ratio
When dealing with noise, it usually makes sense to think in terms of the
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) rather than the absolute noise level. The signal-to-
noise ratio is a measure of the degree of contamination of a signal by noise.
The signal-to-noise ratio is the signal voltage level divided by the noise
voltage level. This number is usually expressed in decibels. For example,
a 1-volt signal contaminated by 1 millivolt (0.001 volt) of noise would have
a signal-to-noise ratio of 1000 : 1 or 60 dB. To put this in perspective, the
signal-to-noise ratio of a Dolby B cassette recording is usually between
60 and 65 dB. Every 10-dB improvement in signal-to-noise ratio (higher is
better) sounds like cutting the noise volume in half.
An important property of the signal-to-noise ratio is that it is not
changed by amplification or attenuation. For example, suppose a 1-volt
signal contaminated by 1 millivolt of noise is fed into an amplifier with
a voltage gain of 10. The amplifier output would have 10 volts of signal
contaminated by 10 millivolts of noise. The SNR is 1000 : 1 (or 60 dB) at the
input as well as the output of the amp.
Signal Level and Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Even though the signal-to-noise ratio is not directly changed by amplifica-
tion or attenuation, amplification and attenuation play crucial roles in deter-
mining the overall system signal-to-noise ratio. That’s because the signal
level at each point in a system determines the noise immunity at that point.
The higher the signal level, the higher the noise immunity at that point.
When it comes to adjusting your system or choosing equipment, higher
signal levels are always better for noise. But you need to make sure that lev-
els aren’t set too high, or you’ll end up with distortion. The proper proce-
dures are explained later on, in the section on installation and adjustment.
Figure 12-1 shows how high preamp levels improve noise immunity.
Systems (a) and (b) are identical, except that (a) uses a head unit with a 
1-volt preamp output level and (b) uses a head unit with a 4-volt level. In
both cases, we’ll assume that 1 millivolt of noise is induced into the cable
BATTLING NOISE
313

between the head unit and amp. We’ll also assume that in both cases the
amp level controls were properly set to provide full output power with
full input voltage from the head unit.
The signal level coming out of each head unit determines the noise
immunity at the cables. Even though the induced noise into each cable is
the same for both systems, the signal-to-noise ratio of system (b) is 4 times
better at the amp input, due to the higher signal level. Since the signal-to-
noise ratios are unchanged by the amplifiers, system (b) provides a 4 times
(12 dB) better signal-to-noise ratio at the speaker.
Why High-Power Systems Are More 
Noise Prone
Figure 12-2 shows why high-power systems are more prone to noise. This
explains why it’s important to think about avoiding noise beforehand
when you’re planning a high-power multiamp system.
Diagram (a) shows a 50-watt system with a head unit having a 1-volt pre-
amp level. Diagram (b) shows a 200-watt system with the identical head
unit, but a more powerful amp. In both cases, we’ll assume that 1 millivolt
of noise is induced into the cable between the head unit and amp. We’ll
also assume that in both cases the amp level controls were properly set to
provide full output power with full input voltage from the head unit.
314
CHAPTER TWELVE
FIGURE 12-1
How high preamp 
levels improve noise
immunity.

Since the signal level coming out of each head unit is 1 volt and the
noise induced into each cable is 1 millivolt, both systems have a signal-to-
noise ratio of 1000 : 1 (or 60 dB). The difference between the two systems is
strictly output power. With a 1-volt input, the 50-watt system provides 50
watts to the speaker and the 200-watt system provides 200 watts to the
speaker. This makes perfect sense, because we expect to be able to achieve
full amplifier power with full input voltage from the head unit.
Now let’s see what happens when we adjust the volume control of the
200-watt system to match the output power of the 50-watt system. This is
shown in diagram (c). (To produce a 50-watt output, a fourfold reduction
in power is needed. Because power is proportional to voltage squared, a
twofold reduction in voltage at the head unit is required.) Since the signal
coming out of the head unit is now 500 mV, and the noise induced in the
cable remains at 1 mV, the signal-to-noise ratio drops to 500 : 1 or 54 dB.
Thus, the signal-to-noise ratio of the high-power system is inferior when
comparing at the same output power.
BATTLING NOISE
315
FIGURE 12-2
Why high-power 
systems are more
prone to noise.

Of course, the higher-power system is capable of 4 times more output
power, but for normal listening levels you pay a price in noise immunity.
Differential Versus Single-Ended Signals
Using differential (or balanced) signals provides a huge improvement in
noise immunity. It’s no wonder that all Bose and Ford Premium sound
systems rely on differential signaling to provide clean signal transfer.
Unfortunately, most aftermarket equipment is single-ended. It is possi-
ble to buy a differential head unit and amp. You can also buy a differen-
tial line driver/receiver for use with single-ended equipment. Another
often overlooked possibility: The speaker-level outputs of high-power
head units are differential. Using the speaker-level inputs of an amp or
crossover with true differential inputs gives you a big noise advantage.
Here’s how differential signaling works (Fig. 12-3): The differential out-
puts of a head unit (or differential line driver) provide two equal but
opposite versions of the music signal—an inverted version and a nonin-
verted version. At the differential inputs of the amplifier (or differential
receiver), the two versions of the signal are subtracted. Since any noise
presumably affects both versions of the signal the same, subtraction
causes cancellation of the noise. Because one of the music signals was
inverted, subtraction also results in a music signal that is twice the origi-
nal signal.
Theoretically, differential signaling can result in complete cancellation
of induced noise. In practice, nonidentical noise into both wires and
imbalances in the subtracter limit the effectiveness of the cancellation
process. It’s very important in differential applications to make sure both
wires are receiving identical noise—twisted-pair cabling is often used for
this purpose.
316
CHAPTER TWELVE
FIGURE 12-3
How differential 
signaling works.

Ground Loops
Ground loops are one of the major causes of system noise problems in
vehicles. It’s important to understand the structure of ground loops and
why they are an invitation to noise.
Basically, a ground loop is a loop formed by redundant ground wiring.
For example, ground loops are formed by the chassis ground and signal
ground wiring between a head unit and amp as shown in Fig. 12-4.
Why is a ground loop a problem? One of the fundamental laws of 
electromagnetics (Faraday’s law) states that when a changing magnetic 
field passes through a loop of wire, a voltage is induced in the wire. The
automotive environment is loaded with changing magnetic fields (and
they’re all potential noise sources). When a changing magnetic field passes
through a ground loop, a noise voltage is induced across the ground 
conductor.
How do you fight against ground loops? For one thing, avoid them as
much as possible. Amps, equalizers, and crossovers with true differential
inputs (either preamp level or speaker level) break ground loops because
they do not create an input connection to ground. IMPORTANT: This
strategy applies to single-ended source applications too—not just differ-
ential. You don’t need a differential output to take advantage of the
ground loop breaking ability of a differential input.
You can also buy true differential line output converters and preamp-
level ground loop isolators for installation at the input of an amp having
ground-referenced inputs.
For short runs between two pieces of equipment, it usually suffices to
make the loop area of ground loops as small as possible. This is because
the amount of noise voltage induced in the loop depends on the size of
the loop. Make the loop small by minimizing both the length and width
BATTLING NOISE
317
FIGURE 12-4
Anatomy of a
ground loop.

of the loop. (Minimizing the width of the loop implies running your
cables close to the chassis ground.) The amount of noise voltage induced
in the loop also depends on the strength of the changing magnetic field
through the loop. This means keeping the loop away from noise sources
such as motors and other wiring.
Common Ground Impedance
In the preceding discussion, you may have wondered about simply cutting
redundant ground conductors as a cure for ground loops. In the previous
example, you could have cut the ground conductors of the patch cables
and used chassis ground for signal ground as well. This would have elimi-
nated the ground loop problem, but it would have introduced another
noise problem—one due to common ground impedance (Fig. 12-5).
The chassis ground is shared by virtually every accessory and electrical
device in the vehicle. This means that return currents from all these
potential noise sources flow through the chassis. Even though the chassis
resistance is quite low, it’s not zero. Return currents from potential noise
sources flow through the resistance between two points on the chassis
and produce a noise voltage between them. In this example, the noise volt-
age would directly couple to the inputs of the amplifier.
As Richard Chinn of AudioControl likes to say, “Ground isn’t ground!”
Power Supply Noise
Another way that noise can find its way into your stereo system is
through the 12-volt power supply.
318
CHAPTER TWELVE
FIGURE 12-5
Common ground
impedance.

The alternator is a primary source of noise on the 12-volt line. It sup-
plies raw electrical power for the vehicle and is used to charge the battery.
It produces alternating current pulses that are rectified and coarsely reg-
ulated. The battery provides strong filtering action for alternator-based
noise, but there is still plenty to go around.
Electrical accessories can also introduce large amounts of noise onto
the 12-volt line. Accessories actually create noise on the 12-volt line by
using power. This is analogous to the water system in your home, where
flushing a toilet causes a pressure drop in the shower. Devices that switch
large amounts of supply current off and on are prime offenders. Good
examples are motors, horns, turn signals, and brake lights.
Car stereo equipment is designed to be somewhat immune to noise on
the power line, but high levels of power line noise can cause objection-
able noise at equipment outputs. All equipment is not created equal with
respect to power line noise immunity, but manufacturers generally don’t
give you any specs to compare in this area.
Power supply noise problems are usually dealt with by adding an
appropriate power line filter at either the source of the noise problem or
the equipment that is affected by it.
Buying Equipment
When it comes to buying equipment with an eye toward good noise
immunity, the most important factors are high preamp levels and ground
loop prevention. Choose amps, crossovers, and equalizers with differential
inputs (speaker level or preamp level) for ground loop isolation. For com-
petition-caliber systems, there are a number of specialty products to keep
even the most complex and powerful systems quiet.
Head Units
If you plan to use the preamp-level outputs of your head unit, the most
important thing you can do to improve noise immunity is to choose a
model with high preamp output levels. (Alternately, you can use the
speaker-level outputs of the head unit for driving an amp, crossover, or
equalizer. The high voltage levels and differential drive provided by high-
power speaker-level outputs is actually superior to 5-volt preamp outputs
for noise immunity.)
BATTLING NOISE
319

Unfortunately, most aftermarket head units have single-ended preamp-
level outputs. An exception is the Eclipse CD8053 (Fig. 12-6). You can select
unbalanced (8 volts) or balanced (16 volts) preamp output signals for a bet-
ter signal-to-noise ratio. (Using the balanced signal requires an amp that
accepts balanced inputs.)
Amplifiers
When it comes to buying an amp, there are two factors to consider from
the standpoint of system noise. The first is whether the amp has differen-
tial inputs and the second is the amp’s signal-to-noise ratio.
Differential inputs are the key to avoiding ground loops with both dif-
ferential and single-ended sources. Both preamp-level and speaker-level
inputs can be single-ended or differential, so make sure the inputs you plan
to use are differential. Differential inputs should be considered a must for
high-power amps located more than a foot or two from a preamp-level
component feeding them. More and more amplifiers now feature differen-
tial inputs to reduce noise—there’s no good reason not to choose a model
with this feature.
An amp’s signal-to-noise ratio spec is of lesser importance. Almost all
decent amplifiers have about 100 dB signal-to-noise ratio, which is more
than enough for most applications. In most systems, the signal-to-noise
ratio is dominated by induced noise prior to the amp or the SNR of the
source itself.
Crossovers and Equalizers
As with amps, the two factors to consider from the standpoint of system
noise are differential inputs and signal-to-noise ratio.
Differential inputs are the key to avoiding ground loops with both dif-
ferential and single-ended sources. Both preamp-level and speaker-level
inputs can be single-ended or differential, so make sure the inputs you plan
320
CHAPTER TWELVE
FIGURE 12-6
Eclipse CD8053 bal-
anced output head
unit. (Courtesy of Eclipse.)

to use are differential. If the crossover or equalizer you like doesn’t have dif-
ferential inputs, you may need to resort to a ground loop isolator later on.
The signal-to-noise ratio spec is of lesser importance. Almost all decent
crossovers and equalizers have signal-to-noise ratios of about 100 dB, which
is more than enough for most applications. In most systems, the signal-to-
noise ratio is dominated by induced noise prior to the crossover or the
SNR of the source itself.
Cables
The type of cable you use can affect the level of induced noise. Cable
noise immunity is most important where:
■Long cables are used (such as between the head unit and the trunk).
■A low (less than 2 volts) preamp-level signal source is involved.
■High-power (greater than 100W × 2) amplifiers are used.
Unfortunately, cable manufacturers don’t directly specify noise immu-
nity. The best you can do is guess, based on terms like double-shielded or
100% foil shield. Experiments by the Autosound 2000 test lab provide evi-
dence that unshielded twisted-pair cables may furnish the best noise
immunity in the automotive environment.
Line Drivers
A line driver boosts the signal level and often provides a balanced output,
both of which greatly improve noise immunity of a preamp-level signal
over a long cable. AudioControl’s Overdrive™line driver (Fig. 12-7) does
both of these and more.
BATTLING NOISE
321
FIGURE 12-7
AudioControl 
Overdrive line driver.
(Courtesy of 
AudioControl.)

The Overdrive provides differential inputs for ground loop isolation,
adjustable gain up to 24 dB, and a peak signal voltage of 13.5 volts. It is
capable of driving the high capacitive loads presented by some cables.
Installation and Level Adjustment
Proper installation and level adjustment are just as important as choosing
the right equipment in achieving good noise immunity. Proper installa-
tion minimizes the induction of noise into your system and proper level
adjustment minimizes its audibility.
Equipment Placement
When deciding where to put each of the components in your system,
noise immunity considerations aren’t likely to be near the top of your
list. But try to keep noise pickup in mind, especially where you have flex-
ibility in mounting locations.
From the standpoint of noise pickup, cable length and cable routing
are prime factors. Equipment placement is important because it dictates cable
length and routing. Choose equipment locations that:
■Allow you to route cables away from noise sources (such as motors
and wiring)
■Let you use short cables for highly noise-sensitive signal paths
An example of a highly noise-sensitive signal path would be the low-
voltage (500 mV) preamp-level outputs of a head unit. Suppose you want
to use these outputs for driving a crossover and amps. Putting the
crossover under the dash, close to the head unit, lets you use a short cable
for the highly noise-sensitive path. The voltage gain of the crossover pro-
vides enhanced noise immunity for the cables to the amps, so cable length
and routing is less important for them.
Another example would be a trunk-mounted subwoofer system with
separate crossover and amp. Using speaker-level signals to the crossover
provides good noise immunity for the long run to the trunk. The 
preamp-level output of the crossover to the amp is a comparatively highly
noise-sensitive path, and should be a short cable.
322
CHAPTER TWELVE

Cable Routing
Avoid running preamp-level signal cables side by side with high-current
power wiring. If you plan to install amps in the trunk, run the signal
cables down one side of the car and the power wires down the other.
Try to route signal cables away from electromagnetic noise sources
such as motors and other wiring. Where possible, run your cables close to
the chassis.
Experiment with different cable routing paths to minimize noise pickup.
Start the engine and turn on the head lights and stereo. To make it easier to
hear noise, set the sensitivity controls of the amps and processors to max,
but turn the volume control of the head unit to minimum. Sometimes
moving a cable just a few inches can make a big difference. The best time to
experiment with cable routing is during the installation, not after it.
Grounding
The chassis is the generally preferred grounding point for amps and other
components because of its low resistance. But it’s important to use the
proper grounding techniques (Fig. 12-8) to reduce noise pickup due to
common ground impedance with potential noise sources.
Figure 12-8(a) shows two components sharing a ground wire to the chas-
sis. This allows the ground currents of one component to affect the
ground reference voltage of the other component. This is mainly a con-
cern where an amp is affecting the ground reference of a component such
as a crossover. At a minimum, each amplifier should have its own connec-
tion to the chassis.
Figure 12-8(b) shows two components using individual but widely sep-
arated chassis grounding points. This allows return currents that flow
through the chassis to produce a noise voltage between the two points.
Figure 12-8(c) shows the proper grounding technique—each component
has its own connection to the chassis, and all connections are closely located.
It’s okay for low-current components to share a common ground point.
Not all metal in a car is electrically connected to the chassis, so use a
multimeter to confirm a low-resistance connection to a known good
ground. Look for values less than 0.3 ohms. Note: When making ultra-low
resistance measurements, first short the two test probes together and
observe the reading. If it’s an analog meter, zero the meter at this point.
For a digital meter, you will need to mentally subtract this reading from
your measurement readings.
BATTLING NOISE
323

Step-by-Step Level Adjustment
When it comes to adjusting your system, higher signal levels are always
better for reducing noise. But you need to make sure that levels aren’t set
too high, or you’ll end up with distortion. The goal is to find the level that
maximizes the signal-to-noise ratio while keeping you out of distortion.
The procedure given next covers the general case of the cascade of
many components, each with a level control at its input (Fig. 12-9). For sim-
plicity, this procedure is written assuming two processors between the
head unit and amp. For example, processor 1 might be an equalizer and
324
CHAPTER TWELVE
FIGURE 12-9
The cascade of many
components.
Important: Some
cars (Audi, Porsche)
have galvanized bod-
ies. In these cars, you
must find one of the
manufacturers’
grounding points or
else some noise can
result.
FIGURE 12-8
Improper and 
proper grounding
techniques.

processor 2 might be a crossover. Your system may have more or fewer com-
ponents cascaded together, but the process remains the same. Note: Some
systems require a deviation from this procedure to satisfy other con-
straints (such as proper level matching between channels in an amplifier-
saving configuration). See the appropriate project chapter when in doubt.
1. Set the amp level control and all processor level controls to minimum.
2. With music, turn up the head unit volume control. When you reach
the point where you start to hear distortion, turn the volume control
down slightly until the distortion disappears. Leave the volume con-
trol at this setting.
NOTE
If the sound from the speaker is so low that you cannot clearly hear the
onset of distortion, turn up the amp’s level control as needed. If turning up the
amp’s level control to max still isn’t loud enough, then start to turn up processor
2’s level control as well. Return level control settings on the amp and processor 2
to minimum when you finish this step.
3. Now, turn up the processor 1 level control. When you reach the point
where you start to hear distortion, turn the processor 1 level control
down slightly until the distortion disappears. Leave the processor 1
level control at this setting.
BATTLING NOISE
325
Important: When mounting a power amp (or any car stereo component),
secure it in such a way that the metal case does not make electrical contact
with the car chassis. This guarantees that the amplifier’s ground wire is the
exclusive connection between the amp’s internal ground and the system
ground. Electrical isolation is important to prevent ground loops.
NOTE
A few components have electrically isolated cases—these
should be electrically connected to the car chassis to provide shield-
ing to the internal circuitry. When in doubt, use an ohmmeter to
measure the resistance between the case and ground wire of the
component.
Use rubber grommets inside metal mounting bracket holes to prevent
screws from making an electrical connection with the chassis. Alternately, you
can mount your components on a board, then mount the board to the car
chassis.

NOTE
If the sound from the speaker is so low that you cannot clearly hear the
onset of distortion, turn up the amp’s level control as needed. Return the amp’s
level control setting to minimum when you finish this step.
4. Now, turn up the processor 2 level control. When you reach the point
where you start to hear distortion, turn the processor 2 level control
down slightly until the distortion disappears. Leave the processor 2
level control at this setting.
NOTE
If the sound from the speaker is so low that you cannot clearly hear the
onset of distortion, turn up the amp’s level control as needed.
5. Turn up the amp level control until the system is as loud as you’ll
ever play it or you begin to hear distortion. If you hear distortion,
slightly decrease the amp level control.
Troubleshooting Noise Problems
If you’ve followed the advice in the previous sections on buying, in-
stalling, and setting equipment, then chances are good you won’t need
this section. But sometimes even well-designed systems have noise prob-
lems. The vehicle itself may aggravating the problem—deteriorated igni-
tion or charging system components, a loose battery cable clamp, or
missing or defective factory noise suppressors can increase the conducted
and radiated noise levels.
This section introduces the most important supplies, tools, and tech-
niques for troubleshooting and repairing noise problems. It concludes
with a step-by-step troubleshooting procedure. Fixing noise problems can
be frustrating, time-consuming work. Following the techniques explained
in this section can help you systematically solve problems and eliminate
much of the frustration.
Important: Troubleshooting techniques should be used only after you’re satisfied
that the system level adjustments are right.
326
CHAPTER TWELVE

Identifying Noise Sources
Knowing what each of the common noise sources sounds like can make
the job of troubleshooting easier. This is especially true for AM/FM noise
entering the head unit through the antenna or power line. Table 12-1 lists
the most common noise sources, what they normally sound like, and what
to try to fix them.
Shorting Plugs
Shorting plugs (or muting plugs; Fig. 12-10) are probably the cheapest and
most useful troubleshooting aid for system noise problems. Shorting
plugs are used for muting the inputs of an amplifier or other component
to determine if the noise is entering after that point.
BATTLING NOISE
327
TABLE 12-1
Common Noise
Sources
Noise Source
What It Sounds Like
What to Try
Alternator
A whine whose pitch changes 
Capacitor to ground at the 
with engine speed
alternator output
Ignition
Ticking that changes with engine 
Using a sniffer to further 
speed
localize the source of the 
problem
Turn signals
Popping synchronized with the 
Capacitor across the turn 
turn signals
signal flasher
Brake lights
Popping synchronized with the 
Capacitor across the brake 
brake lights
light switch contacts
Blower motor
Ticking synchronized with the 
Capacitor to ground at the 
blower motor
motor hot lead
Dash lamp dimmer
A buzzy whine whose pitch 
Capacitor to ground at the 
changes with the dimmer setting
dimmer hot lead
Horn switch
Popping synchronized with 
Capacitor between the hot 
horn
lead and horn lead at the 
horn relay
Horn
Buzzing synchronized with the 
Capacitor to ground at each 
horn
horn hot lead
Amplifier power 
A nasty buzz, not affected by 
Grounding the amp chassis
supply
engine speed

You’ll want at least a pair of them and can make them yourself. Make
each one by soldering a short piece of wire between the center and outer
conductors in a standard RCA plug.
See the step-by-step troubleshooting procedure at the end of this sec-
tion for full details on using shorting plugs.
Ground Loop Isolators
Ground loop isolators (Fig. 12-11) are as much a diagnostic tool as they are
a repair means. By inserting one in the signal path of a known or sus-
pected ground loop, you can quickly determine if a ground loop involv-
ing that path is degrading system noise immunity.
For diagnostic purposes, any ground loop isolator will do. If you
decide you need to install one permanently to solve a system noise prob-
lem, then it pays to buy a high-quality model. Low-quality units usually
have premature bass response roll-off. Passive ground loop isolators use
transformers, and are susceptible to magnetic fields, so you need to keep
them away from motors and other wiring. Both of these problems can be
avoided by using an active ground loop isolator.
A good way to do an A/B test for the level of noise improvement pro-
vided by a ground loop isolator is to use a ground bypass wire (Fig. 12-12).
328
CHAPTER TWELVE
FIGURE 12-11
Ground loop isola-
tor. (Courtesy of Parts
Express.)
FIGURE 12-10
Shorting plugs.

After you’ve installed the ground loop isolator, start the engine and
turn on the headlights and the stereo. Turn the head unit volume control
to minimum. Now use the ground bypass wire to momentarily short the
ground connection across the ground loop isolator. You only need to
short one channel, not both. If you hear a noise difference, then a ground
loop was degrading system noise immunity.
Power Line Filters
Power line filters are used to reduce the amount of noise present on the
12-volt power line. Filters may be used at the source of the noise problem,
at the equipment that is most affected by it, or on the power line between
the two.
There are four common types of power line filters (Table 12-2): capaci-
tors, chokes (inductors), three-terminal passive filters, and electronic noise
suppressors.
Capacitors.
Capacitors are easily connected from any 12-volt point to
chassis ground. The idea behind them is to provide a low-impedance path
to ground for the noise. Capacitors used for noise suppression are generally
0.5 µF in value. For good high-frequency performance, electrolytics are not
used here.
Capacitors specifically designed for automotive noise suppression often
have only a single wire coming from them—the ground connection is
made via the mounting tab of the cap. Feed-through designs are also
common. These also make the ground connection via the mounting tab,
but an in wire and out wire (connected internally) are provided for
wiring convenience.
Unlike the other filter types, capacitors can be added anywhere on the
BATTLING NOISE
329
FIGURE 12-12
Ground bypass wire
for ground loop 
isolator.

12-volt line with no risk of exceeding the current rating of the filter and
little risk of degrading the noise performance of the system. Unfortu-
nately, only a handful of problems are solvable with capacitors—these
tend to be noises affecting radio reception.
Chokes.
Chokes (inductors; Fig. 12-13) are installed in series with the 12-
volt line, normally right at the power lead of the stereo component sensi-
tive to noise. The idea behind them is to provide a high-impedance path
for the noise getting to the component. Chokes usually provide better
noise rejection than capacitors.
Because all the current used by the stereo component flows through
the choke, you need to buy a choke that has a current rating suitable for
your application. Current rating is a good indicator of the DC resistance
of a particular choke—it’s not an indicator of its noise filtering ability.
Don’t buy a choke with a significantly higher current rating than you
330
CHAPTER TWELVE
TABLE 12-2
Types of Power Line
Filters
Type
Connection Diagram
Comments
Capacitor
Can be added any-
where on the 12-volt 
line with little risk 
of degrading the 
noise performance 
of the system.
Solves only a handful 
of problems.
Choke
Usually provides 
better noise rejection 
than a capacitor.
Can pick up magnetic 
fields, especially 
unshielded models.
Three-terminal 
Provides filtering 
passive
action superior to 
that of a capacitor 
or inductor alone.
Electronic 
Provides best noise 
suppressor
rejection of all 
power line filters.

need—it can have lower inductance and provide inferior filtering. Since
manufacturers don’t normally provide inductance specifications for their
chokes, beware of unusually small models.
Mount chokes away from motors and other wiring. The unshielded
models especially can easily pick up magnetic fields.
Three-Terminal Passive Filters.
Three-terminal passive filters (Fig. 
12-14) are installed in series with the 12-volt line, normally right at the
power lead of the stereo component sensitive to noise. They require a
ground connection as well. Three-terminal passive filters contain both
capacitors and inductors. This can provide filtering action superior to
that of capacitors or inductors alone. As with chokes, you need to buy a
model that has a current rating suitable for your application.
Electronic Noise Suppressors.
Electronic noise suppressors (Fig. 12-15)
are three-terminal devices installed the same way as three-terminal passive
filters. Electronic noise suppressors can provide better performance than
even three-terminal passive filters. As with chokes and three-terminal pas-
sive filters, you need to buy a model that has a current rating suitable for
your application.
BATTLING NOISE
331
FIGURE 12-13
Choke. (Courtesy of
MCM Electronics.)
FIGURE 12-14
Three-terminal pas-
sive filter. (Courtesy of
Parts Express.)

332
CHAPTER TWELVE
FIGURE 12-16
PAC NA-1. (Courtesy of
Pacific Accessory 
Corporation.)
FIGURE 12-15
Electronic suppres-
sor. (Courtesy of Navone
Engineering.)
Noise Sniffers
Noise sniffers are hand-held electronic devices used to track down sources
of radiated noise. These are frequently used by professionals to solve dif-
ficult cases.
Electromagnetic Radiation (EMR) sniffers are used to find sources of
audio frequency magnetic fields. PAC’s NA-1 Noise Analyzer (Fig. 12-16)
performs this job and more. The NA-1 comes with inductive and conduc-
tive probes. It has a built-in speaker or can be used with headphones. (For
sensitive measurements, headphones are preferred because they block
some of the mechanical sounds of the engine.)

Use the inductive probe for EMR sniffing. Start the vehicle’s engine.
Start probing near the cable or stereo component that is picking up the
noise. Move the probe to find the loudest source of the noise. The orien-
tation of the probe can make a big difference, so try various orientations.
You can use the probe to find the exact wire bundle and often the spe-
cific wire causing the problem. Once found, you can shield it with copper
tape (be sure to ground the tape), or as a last resort, reroute the offending
wire by splicing in an extension.
The conductive probes can be used for listening to power wires, signal
wires, or multiple ground points for any noise that is present.
Copper Shielding Tape
Copper shielding tape (Fig. 12-17) is useful for wrapping around wires and
cables to provide shielding. It can be wrapped around patch cables you
want to shield from noise, or around power and accessory wiring to re-
duce radiated emissions. Shielding power and accessory wiring to reduce
radiated noise is the generally preferred strategy because there is little risk
of making things worse. Shielding patch cables can actually make things
worse by coupling chassis noise into them.
Copper shielding tape uses an electrically conductive adhesive to pro-
vide a low-resistance path between the backing and substrate. Tinned cop-
per shielding tape is also available to make the job of soldering to it easier.
BATTLING NOISE
333
FIGURE 12-17
Copper shielding
tape. (Courtesy of 3M.)

Any bundles of wire nearby and parallel to patch cabling are good can-
didates for wrapping with copper tape. When wrapping a bundle of wires
with tape, there should be a minimum 1⁄4-inch overlap between layers. To
maximize the shielding effectiveness, the shield wrap should be electri-
cally grounded to the chassis. Solder short wires to the wrap every few
feet and electrically connect them to the chassis via ring crimp connec-
tors and self-tapping screws.
Step-by-Step Troubleshooting Procedure
The key to effective troubleshooting for noise problems is to use a
methodical approach to identify the problem. This saves time, frustration,
and money.
To troubleshoot a noisy system, follow these steps:
1. Start at an amp where you hear noise. Replace each of the signal
cables feeding into the amp with a shorting plug. Start the car’s
engine, turn on the headlights, and turn on the stereo. Is the result
clean? If you hear noise at this point (which is rare), noise is either
getting in on the amp’s power supply wire, there is something abnor-
mal about the speaker load (e.g., a speaker wire is shorting to the chas-
sis), or the amp is defective.
2. If the result is clean, then it’s time to move the shorting plugs
upstream (toward the head unit). Turn off the stereo first. For this
example, let’s assume a crossover is located between the head unit and
amp. Plug the cables from the crossover back into the amp. Unplug
the cables from other outputs of the crossover for the moment. Now
replace each of the signal cables feeding into the crossover with a
shorting plug. Start the car’s engine, turn on the headlights, and turn
on the stereo. Is the result clean? If you hear noise at this point, and
your amp lacks differential inputs, the noise is probably due to a
ground loop involving the cables between the crossover and amp.
(This theory can be tested by temporarily inserting a ground loop
isolator at the amp’s inputs.) It could also be due to a high level of
induced noise on the cable or noise getting in on the crossover’s
power supply wire.
3. If the result is clean, replace the cables you just unplugged from the
other outputs of the crossover. If noise returns, you’ve got a ground
loop involving the cables you just plugged in. If it’s still clean, then
334
CHAPTER TWELVE

the problem has to involve the head unit connection to the crossover.
If your crossover lacks differential inputs, the noise is probably due to
a ground loop involving the cables between the head unit and
crossover. (This theory can be tested by temporarily inserting a
ground loop isolator at the crossover’s inputs.) It could also be due to a
high level of induced noise on the cable or noise getting in on the
head unit’s power supply wire.
Once you’ve located the component or cable most affected by the noise
and made a preliminary diagnosis of the problem as ground loop related
or not, you’ll need to follow up each of your leads. If you discovered a
ground loop problem, you’ll need to break the loop with a ground loop
isolator or equipment having differential inputs. If you don’t have a
ground loop but are experiencing high induced noise in a cable, you’ll
need to experiment with cable routing and shielding nearby wiring with
copper tape. If this fails to fix the problem, the next step is to track down
the source of the noise itself. You may have deteriorated electrical system
components or inadequate factory noise suppressors. This level of trou-
bleshooting usually requires professional help. Finally, if you suspect
your problems are power line related, try an appropriate filter.
BATTLING NOISE
335

This page intentionally left blank.

RECOMMENDED MAIL-ORDER SUPPLIERS
Crutchfield
Great selection of quality car stereo
1 Crutchfield Park
equipment combined with unequaled 
Charlottesville, VA 22911-9097
service. Well-trained staff and Master-
(888) 955-6000
Sheet instructions provide all the 
www.crutchfield.com
guidance you’ll need.
Parts Express
Car stereo supplies and tools, compo-
725 Pleasant Valley Drive
nent speakers, boxes, and electronic 
Springboro, OH 45066-1158
components.
(800) 338-0531
www.parts-express.com
MCM Electronics
Car stereo supplies and tools, 
650 Congress Park Drive
component speakers, boxes, and elec-
Centerville, OH 45459
tronic components. Their huge catalog 
(800) 543-4330
contains lots of hard-to-find items.
www.mcmelectronics.com
David Levy Company
Car stereo supplies and tools, compo-
12753 Moore Street
nent speakers, vehicle security, and 
Cerritos, CA 90703
restyling.
(800) 421-3533
www.dlcparts.com
Madisound Speaker 
Component speakers and speaker 
Components
building supplies. A favorite of home 
8608 University Green
speaker building enthusiasts. Top-
P.O. Box 44283
notch products at wholesale prices.
Madison, WI 53744-4283
(608) 831-3433
www.madisound.com
MFR Engineering
Subwoofer Design Toolbox™direct 
10308 Indian Lake Blvd. South
sales.
Indianapolis, IN 46236-8329
www.mfr-eng.com
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

RECOMMENDED READING
Books and Technical Papers
The Loudspeaker Design Cookbook
If you’re serious about designing and 
Vance Dickason
building your own subwoofers, this 
Published by Audio Amateur 
book is unsurpassed. Now in its sixth
Press
edition, this book is an industry stan-
$39.95
dard. Includes a chapter on auto sound.
Designing, Building and Testing
Another excellent book for subwoofer 
Your Own Speaker System
builders. Now in its fourth edition, 
David Weems
this is a completely revised version of 
Published by McGraw-Hill
Weems’s best seller. A hands-on 
$19.95
approach to design and construction
of speaker systems.
AudioControl Technical Papers
Cover a range of topics from car 
AudioControl
acoustics to crossovers. Visit their web-
site at www.audiocontrol.com for a list
of papers or to download PDF versions
of many of them.
JL Audio Tutorials
Cover a range of topics from setting
JL Audio 
amplifier gains to subwoofer box
design and construction. Visit their
website at www.jlaudio.com.
Magazines
Car Sound & Performance 
Covers car stereo, plus security, 
460 Park Avenue South
navigation, and performance. Includes 
9th Floor
product reviews, buying tips, 
New York, NY 10016
installation techniques, and new 
(212) 378-0400
product guides.
www.carsound.com
$15.00/year (6 issues)
338
RECOMMENDED READING
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Car Audio and Electronics
Published for the car audio and 
P.O. Box 420235
mobile electronics enthusiast. Includes 
Palm Coast, FL 32142-0235
test reports and custom installations. 
(800) 243-6400
Annual product directory issue each 
www.caraudiomag.com
April.
$15.95/year (12 issues)
Mobile Entertainment
1633 Broadway, 40th Floor
New York, NY 10019
(212) 767-6000
www.m-emag.com
$12.00/year (6 issues)
audioXpress
Somewhere between a magazine and a
P.O. Box 876
technical journal. For those interested 
Peterborough, NH 03458-0876
in building loudspeakers as well as 
(888) 924-9465
those who want to understand the 
www.audioxpress.com
technology behind them.
$34.95/year (12 issues)
RECOMMENDED READING
339

This page intentionally left blank.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Chapter 1: Before You Begin
Higgins, Michelle. “Custom Auto Add-Ons Get Tricky.” Wall Street Journal,
October 14, 2004, p. D3, cols. 1–3.
Chapter 3: Speakers and Speaker
Projects
Crutchfield. Car Stereo Installation Made Easy. 1995.
Crutchfield. Car Stereo and Home Audio/Video Catalog & Buyer’s Guide. Fall
2004/Winter 2005.
Kinsler, Lawrence E., et al. Fundamentals of Acoustics. 3rd ed. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1982.
Klasco, Mike and Rob Baum. “What’s New With Speaker Cones?” Voice Coil,
April 1999, pp. 29–34.
Navone, David and Richard Clark. “Updating Your Image.” AutoMedia,
August 1998, pp. 34, 36, 64.
Chapter 4: Subwoofers and Subwoofer
Projects
Clark, Richard. “Blocking That Bass.” CarSound, December 1997, 10–12.
Clark, Richard. “Speaking Out On Speakers.” Car Sound & Performance,
October 2000, pp. 22, 76.
Dickason, Vance. The Loudspeaker Design Cookbook. 5th ed. Peterborough,
NH: Old Colony Sound, 1995.
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

Kinsler, Lawrence E., et al. Fundamentals of Acoustics. 3rd ed. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1982.
Klasco, Mike and Rob Baum. “What’s New With Speaker Cones?” Voice Coil,
April 1999, pp. 29–34.
Putman, Rob. “Beating Bose.” AUTOMEDIA, September 1997, 36–43.
Rumreich, Mark. “Box Design and Woofer Selection: A New Approach.”
Speaker Builder, Issue 1, 1992.
Chapter 5: Head Unit Projects
Crutchfield. Car Stereo Installation Made Easy. 1995.
Crutchfield. Car Stereo and Home Audio/Video Catalog & Buyer’s Guide. Fall
2004/Winter 2005.
Crutchfield. How to Upgrade Your Factory Stereo: OEM Integration Made Easy.
Higgins, Michelle. “Custom Auto Add-Ons Get Tricky.” Wall Street Journal,
October 14, 2004, p. D3, cols. 1–3.
Klasco, Mike. “Tripath Profile: Class T.” Multi Media Manufacturer, Septem-
ber/October 2004, pp. 1, 4, 6, 7.
Putman, Rob. “Aftermarket Ambush.” AutoMedia, January 2000, pp. 34–46.
Putman, Rob. “Beating Bose.” AUTOMEDIA, September 1997, 36–43.
Putman, Rob. “Update on GM’s Class 2 Serial Data Bus.” AutoMedia, July
2000, pp. 44–49.
Sonada, Paul. “Satellite Radio Round-Up.” Car Sound & Performance, July
2004, pp. 66–68.
Strassberg, Dan. “RECEIVERS’ FUTURE LOOKS DIGITAL.” EDN, Decem-
ber 26, 2002, pp. 44–48.
Chapter 6: Mobile Video and 5.1
Channel Audio
Aruti, Scott. “Feds Concerned About Driving Distractions.” AutoMedia,
July 2000, p. 22.
342
BIBLIOGRAPHY

“CAR VIDEO Watch your movie!” Consumer Reports, July 2003, pp. 54–55.
Crutchfield. Car Stereo and Home Audio/Video Catalog & Buyer’s Guide. Fall
2004/Winter 2005.
Sonada, Paul. “VIDEO: WHAT YOU GET PAID FOR.” AutoMedia, October
2004, pp. 64–65.
Sonada, Paul. “YOU’RE SURROUNDED Four things you need to know
about 5.1 to make a sale.” AutoMedia, April 2004, pp. 66–67.
“What’s New with Displays.” PC Magazine, May 4, 2004, pp. 115–120.
Chapter 7: Amplifiers and Amplifier
Projects
Crutchfield. Car Stereo Installation Made Easy. 1995.
Crutchfield. Car Stereo and Home Audio/Video Catalog & Buyer’s Guide. Fall
2004/Winter 2005.
Kinsler, Lawrence E., et al. Fundamentals of Acoustics. 3rd ed. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1982.
Noguez, Rob “O”. “Upping the Amps.” AutoMedia, September 2003, pp.
64–66.
Putman, Rob. “Beating Bose.” AUTOMEDIA, September 1997, 36–43.
Putman, Rob. “Finger On The Trigger.” AutoMedia, January 1999, pp. 54–56,
62.
Wehmeyer, Andy. “CEA 2006.” AutoMedia, January 2004, pp. 63–68, 76.
Chapter 8: Equalizers and Equalizer
Projects
Geddes, Earl and Henry Blind. “The Localized Sound Power Method.” 
J. Audio Eng. Soc. 34, no. 3, 1986.
Janis, Robert. “Signal Processors: Trends and Merchandising.” Mobile Elec-
tronics Specialist, June 1996, 10–15.
Kinsler, Lawrence E., et al. Fundamentals of Acoustics. 3rd ed. New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 1982.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
343

Chapter 9: Biamping and Crossovers
Chinn, Richard. Crossovers and Biamplification, AudioControl technical
paper number 104, 1987.
Chapter 10: Changer and Player Projects
Crutchfield. Car Stereo Installation Made Easy. 1995.
Crutchfield. Car Stereo and Home Audio/Video Catalog & Buyer’s Guide. Fall
2004/Winter 2005.
Chapter 11: Accessories
“Time for a Battery Check?” Consumer Reports, October 1997, 23–27.
Crutchfield. Car Stereo Installation Made Easy. 1995.
Navone, David and Richard Clark. “Misconceptions in Cabling.” AUTOME-
DIA 2, no. 6, 1997, 29–42.
Navone, David. “The Tint Dilemma.” AutoMedia, May 2001, pp. 52–53.
Chapter 12: Battling Noise 
Chinn, Richard. Level Matching for Autosound . . . Or Why Is My System So
Noisy? AudioControl technical paper number 103, 1986.
Navone, David. “A Nose for Noise: How to Use Car Audio Sniffers to
Detect System Noise.” AUTOMEDIA, September 1997, 60.
Navone, David. “Troubleshooting: Sound Advice.” CarSound, December
1997, 86–88.
Navone, David and Richard Clark. “Misconceptions in Cabling.” AUTOME-
DIA 2, no. 6, 1997, 29–42.
344
BIBLIOGRAPHY

INDEX
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

This page intentionally left blank.

A
2-ohm power, amplifiers, 197
2-ohm stability, amplifiers, 202–203
5.1 channel audio: 
CD head unit with Dolby Pro Logic II,
191–192
Dolby Digital, 189–190
Dolby Pro Logic II, 189
DTS, 189–190
DVD-Audio, 190
DVD head unit and separate surround-sound
processor, 192
DVD head unit with built-in surround-sound
processor, 192
DVD head unit with DVD-Audio, 193
formats, 188–190
sources, 191–193
speakers, center channel, 50–51
accessories: 
antenna boosters, 308
aux input converters, for portable music
players, 304–305
battery savers and monitors, 298–300
cassette adapters, for portable music players,
303–304
FM transmitters, for portable music players, 304
iPod adapter, 305
motorized antennas, 305–308
power line capacitors, 296–298
premium patch cables, 301–302
premium speaker wire, 300–301
sound deadening materials, 308–309
Accumat, 308–309
adapters: 
amplifier turn-on, 213
antenna, 163, 307
adapters (Cont.):
aux input, 304–305
cassette, 303–304
chime module interface, 166–167
common ground, 160–163
factory steering wheel control, 163–164
floating ground, 160–163
iPod to head unit, 305
multiple changer, 293
OnStar interface, 168
(See also converters)
Add-A-Circuit fuse holder, 17–18
AGC fuses and fuse holders, 210–212
AGU fuses and fuse holders, 210–212
alternator whine, 318–319
amplifiers: 
2-ohm power, 197
2-ohm stable, 202–203
A.M.S. (Amplifier Management System), 199
automatic turn-on wiring, 212–214
boosting head units with front and rear
preamp outputs, 216–219
boosting head units with no preamp outputs
and four speaker outputs, 223–226
boosting head units with no preamp outputs
and two speaker outputs, 226–229
boosting head units with one set of preamp
outputs, 219–223
boosting premium factory sound system head
units, 229–235
bridging, 74–76, 203–204
CEA compliant power, 197, 200–201
Class AB, Class D, 198, 208
connectors for power wiring, 214–215
crossover, built-in, 67, 198
distribution blocks, 209–210
features, 197–199

amplifiers (Cont.):
fuses, 210–212
ground connection, 214
ground wiring, 206–215
maximum power, 200
mounting location, 204–205
noise immunity considerations, 320
oscillation with DVC subs, 91
peak power, 200
performance, 197–199
pops, turn-on/turn-off, 237–238
power per dollar, 202–204
power rating methods, 199–201
power required, 201–202
power required for subs, 73–74
power requirements for biamping, 
258–259
power wiring, 206–215
preamp outputs, 199
premium factory sound systems, 229–235
remote gain controls, 199
RMS power, 200
setting gains, 235–237
signal-to-noise ratio, 197
speaker wiring, 215–216
speaker-level inputs, 199
subwoofer, 67, 197
turn-on/turn-off pops, 237–238
wire gauge, 206–208
ANL fuses and fuse holders, 210–212
antenna boosters, 308
antennas: 
adapters, 163, 307
connectors, factory, 163, 307
installation, 307–308
motorized, 306
windshield, 306
aspect ratio: 
DVD changers, 285
monitors, 180
ATC fuses and fuse holders, 210–212
ATO fuses and fuse holders, 210–212
Aura Bass Shakers, 129–130
automatic turn-on wiring, amplifiers, 
212–214
auto reverse, cassette head units, 144
aux input converters, for portable music 
players, 304–305
B
backstraps, 156
backup cameras, 186–187
balanced line driver outputs, head units, 138
balanced signals, 316
banana plugs, 119
bandpass box:
advantages of, 82–83
box design software, 92–93
construction, 113–114
damping, enclosure, 122
design example, 106–107
one-note thump, 103
port design example, 117–118
port length, calculating, 114–117
ports, constructing, 114–117
ports, multiple, 118
port tuning, 103–104
bass blockers, 125
bass blocking crossovers, 124–125
bass response: 
goal, 102
vehicle affect on, 108
bass shakers, 129–130
bass transducers, 129–130
battery monitors, 299–300
battery savers, 298–299
biamping: 
adjusting your system, 268–272
advantages of, 254–256
amplifiers for, 258–259
choosing a crossover, 256–258
configurations for head units with front and
rear preamp outputs, 259–263
configurations for head units with one set of
preamp outputs, 263–267
speakers for, 259
binding posts, 119
books, recommended, 338
Bose (see premium factory sound systems)
box design, 92–112
bandpass box construction, 113–114
bandpass design example, 106–107
box assembly and bracing, 113
box design charts, 95–101
box materials, 112–113
box shape, 112–113
348
INDEX

box design (Cont.):
construction, 112–124
damping, enclosure, 122
finishing touches, 122–124
isobarik configurations, 109–112
multiple drivers in one box, 108–112
port, when to use, 102
port design example, 117–118
port length, calculating, 114–117
ports, constructing, 114–117
ports, multiple, 118
sealed and ported design example, 104–106
software, 92–93
terminals, speaker, 119
bridged power, amplifiers, 197
bridging, 74–76, 203–204
C
cables (see patch cables)
cable ties, 20
cameras, rearview, 186–187
capacitors, power line, 329–330
carpet, speaker, 122–124
cassette adapters, for portable music players,
303–304
cassette features, head units, 143–145
CD changer controls, head units, 137
CD changers: 
for aftermarket head units with CD changer
controls, 276–277
CD-R, CD-RW compatibility, 280
CD text display, 280
connecting to system, 291–293
converters, 277–278
disc naming, 280
ESP (Electronic Shock Protection), 281
for factory head units with CD changer
controls, 277–278
features, 278–281
FM modulator, 274–276
for head units without CD changer controls,
274–276
ID3 tag display, 280
installation, 289–293
mounting, 291
mounting angle, 280
CD changers (Cont.):
mounting location, 289–291
MP3 playback, 280
multiple changer adapter, 293
performance, 278–281
shuffle play, 281
track programming, 280
WMA playback, 280
WMA tag display, 280
zero-bit detect, 281
(See also head units, CD changer built-in)
CD features, head units, 145–148
CD-R, CD-RW compatibility: 
CD changers, 280
DVD changers, 284
head units, 146
CD text display: 
CD changers, 280
head units, 147
CEA-2006, 201
CEA compliant power: 
amplifiers, 197, 200–201
head units, 139
CEA compliant SNR, 197
center channel speakers (see speakers, center
channel)
characteristic impedance, of patch cables, 301
chime module interfaces, 166–167
chokes, power line, 330–331
Chrysler head units, 132–133, 155–157
Chrysler/Infinity (see premium factory sound
systems)
circuit breakers, power wiring, 211
Class 2 data bus, 166–168
premium factory sound systems, 165, 230, 
232
Class AB, Class D amplifiers, 198, 208
Class-T, head units, 140
claw tool, 26
clipping, 255–256
component speakers (see separates)
computer programs for box design, 92–93
connectors: 
crimp, 13–14
power wiring, 214–215
Scotchlok, 14–16
wire nuts, 16
contrast ratio, 183
INDEX
349

converters: 
aux input, 304–305
CD changer, 277–278
(See also adapters)
copper shielding tape, 333–334
crimp connectors, 13–14
crimper/stripper, 21
crossovers: 
amplifiers with built-in, 198
for biamping, 256–258
capacitors for tweeters, 42–43
cutoff frequency for subs, 71
filter slope for subs, 70–71
noise immunity considerations, 320–321
passive, 251
preamp-level, 250–252
purpose, 250
setting frequency, 268–269, 271–272
slope, 252–254, 257
speaker-level, 250–252
tri-way, 64–65
current, water analogy, 207
D
damping, enclosure, 122
damping factor, 215
Delco/Bose (see premium factory sound 
systems)
detachable face, head units, 136
differential signals, 316
digital music players: 
adding to system, 285–287
cartridge docking, 286
computer OS requirement, 288
connecting to system, 291–293
docking system, 286
features, 287–289
ID3 tag display, 288
in-dash, 286–287
installation, 289–293
memory, 287
mounting, 291
mounting angle, 289
mounting location, 289–291
MP3 compatibility, 287–288
multiple changer adapter, 293
digital music players (Cont.):
performance, 287–289
player docking, 286
voice index, 289
WAV compatibility, 287–288
WiFi file transfer, 289
WMA compatibility, 287–288
digital optical output, DVD changers, 285
DIN head units, 132–134, 157–158
DIN removal tool, 28
DIRECTV, 184–185
distortion, 324–326
distribution blocks, power wiring, 209–210
diversity tuning, 141–142
Dolby B, Dolby C, 144
Dolby Digital, 189–190
Dolby Pro Logic II, 189
double DIN head units, 132–133
DTS, 189–190
dual voice coil speakers, 90–92
DVD changers: 
adding to system with DVD player, 282
aspect ratio, selectable, 285
CD-R, CD-RW compatibility for CDs, 284
connecting to system, 291–293
digital optical output, 285
DVD-R, DVD-RW, DVD+R, DVD+RW
compatibility, 285
features, 283–285
installation, 289–293
as main DVD player, 283–283
mounting, 289–291
mounting angle, 285
MP3 playback for CDs, 284
multiple changer adapter, 293
performance, 283–285
stand-alone mode, 283–284
video CD (VCD) compatibility, 284
WMA playback for CDs, 284
DVD head units, 170–173
DVD players: 
component, 173
headrest, 173–175
overhead, 173–175
portable, 176
Railport, 174
DVD-A (see DVD-Audio)
DVD-Audio, 190
350
INDEX

DVD-R, DVD-RW, DVD+R, DVD+RW
compatibility, DVD changers, 285
Dynamat, 308–309
E
efficiency (see sensitivity, speakers)
EMR sniffers, 332–333
equalizer boosters, 242
equalizers: 
bands, number needed, 240–242
connecting, 242–243
noise immunity considerations, 320–321
parametric, 240–242
setting by ear, 243–245
setting by RTA, 245–248
ESP (Electronic Shock Protection), 147
F
ffb, 86–87
fob, 87, 92–93
fs (see T/S parameters)
factory look, 3
Faraday’s law, 317
fiberglass damping, 122
filters, power line, 329–332
FM boosters, 308
FM modulator CD changers, 274–276
FM selectivity, 143, 308
FM sensitivity, 143, 308
FM transmitters, for portable music players, 
304
foam speaker baffles, 46–47
Ford Premium Sound (see premium factory
sound systems)
Ford/JBL (see premium factory sound systems)
free-air subwoofers, 80
Front Image Enhancer, 137
fuses, power wiring, 210–212
fuse taps: 
for AGC fuse blocks, 17
for ATO/ATC fuse blocks, 17–18
installation tips, 18–19
lead-wire fuse, 17
for MINI fuse blocks, 18
G
galvanized bodies, grounding to, 214
GM Class 2 data bus (see Class 2 data bus)
GM head units, 132–133, 155–157
ground, definition, 33
ground impedance, common, 318
grounding:
to galvanized bodies, 214
noise considerations, 323–324
ground loop isolators, 317, 328–329
ground loops, 317–318
H
hard-drive players (see digital music players)
HD Radio, 152–153
HDTV, 184
headrest DVD players, 173–175
head units: 
auto reverse, cassette, 144
backstraps, 156
balanced line driver outputs, 138
cassette features, 143–145
cassette frequency response, 144
CD/cassette combined, 135
CD changer built-in, 145–146
CD changer controls, 137, 276–278
CD features, 145–148
CD-R, CD-RW compatibility, 146
CD text display, 147
CEA compliant power, 139
chassis-grounded speaker wiring, 
162–163
chime module interfaces, 166–167
Chrysler, 132–133
Class 2 data bus, 165–168
Class-T, 140
common-grounded speaker wiring, 
162–163
crossovers, built-in, 138
depth, mounting, 134
detachable face, 136
DIN, 132–134
diversity tuning, 141–142
Dolby B, Dolby C noise reduction, 144
double DIN, 132–133
INDEX
351

head units (Cont.):
DVD, 170–173
electrical wiring, 159–163
ESP (Electronic Shock Protection), 147
features, general, 135–139
FM selectivity, 143
FM sensitivity, 143
Front Image Enhancer, 137
GM, 132–133
HD Radio, 152–153
high-power, 140
ID3 tag display for CDs, 147
installation, 154–163
ISO-DIN, 132–133
ISO-DIN-J, 132–133
mechanical mounting, 154–159
mounting kits, 154–155
mounting methods, 132–133
MP3 playback for CDs, 147
noise immunity considerations, 
319–320
OEM integration adapters, 160–163
OnStar, vehicles with, 168
preamp outputs, 138
preamp output voltage, 138
premium factory sound systems, 
164–166
radio features, 139–143
RDS (Radio Data System), 142
relocation harnesses, 167–168
remote control, 139
satellite radio, 148–151
satellite-ready, 149–150
shuffle play, 147
sizes, 132–133
soft-touch controls, 145
sound shaping controls, 137–138
theft deterrents, 136–137
Thummer remote control, 139
universal, 132–133
very high power, 140
wiring harness adapters, 159–160
WMA playback for CDs, 147
WMA tag display for CDs, 147
zero-bit detect, 147
heat-shrink tubing, 20–21
high-level to low-level converters (see line 
output converters)
I
ID3 tag display: 
CD changers, 280
CD head units, 147
digital music players, 288
imaging: 
definition, 36–37
good, achieving, 38, 48–50
in-dash receivers (see head units)
induced noise, 312–313
interconnects (see patch cables)
iPod head unit adapter, 305
isobarik: 
configuration, 109–112
driver mounting, 120–122
ISO-DIN head units, 132–133, 158–159
ISO-DIN-J head units, 132–133
J
JCI Railport (see Railport system)
K
kick-panel pods, 58–59
L
lead-wire fuse, 17
line drivers, 321–322
line drop (see voltage drop)
line noise, 318–319
line output converters, 224
premium factory sound systems, 69–70,
231–232
LOC (see line output converters)
M
magazines, recommended, 338–339
mail-order suppliers, 337
MAXI fuses and fuse holders, 210–212
maximum power amplifier rating, 200
MDF (medium-density fiberboard), 112
352
INDEX

metal cutting tips, 53
MIDI fuses and fuse holders, 210–212
mobile video: 
A/V switchers, 187–188
cameras, rearview, 186–187
digital A/V player, 186
driver distraction, 177
DVD changers (see DVD changers)
DVD head units, 170–173
DVD players, component, 173
DVD players, headrest, 173–175
DVD players, overhead, 173–175
DVD players, portable, 176
DVD players, Railport, 174
HDTV, 184
laws regarding, 177
monitor locations, 176–179
monitors, center console, 178
monitors, headrest, 179
monitors, in-dash, 177
monitors, overhead, 178–179
monitors, performance and features, 
179–183
monitors, visor, 177
satellite TV receivers, 184–185
TV tuners, 183–184
VCRs, 185
wiring up your system, 187–188
monitors: 
aspect ratio, 180
brightness, 182–183
center console, 178
contrast ratio, 183
display modes, 180–182
driver distraction, 177
features, 179–183
headrest, 179
in-dash, 177
laws regarding, 177
locations, 176–179
overhead, 178–179
performance, 179–183
resolution, 182
viewing angle, 182
visor, 177
MP3 digital audio format, 148
MP3 playback: 
CD changers, 280
MP3 playback (Cont.):
CD head units, 147
digital music players, 287–288
DVD changers, 284
multimeters, 29–30
using, 30–34
multipath, 142
multitesters (see multimeters)
Music Keg, 286
muting plugs, 327–328
N
noise: 
alternator whine, 318–319
amplifiers, buying, 320
balanced signals, 316
cable routing, 323
capacitors, 329–330
chokes, 330–331
common ground impedance, 318
crossovers, buying, 320–321
differential signals, 316
electronic suppressors, 331
equalizers, buying, 320–321
equipment placement, 322
Faraday’s law, 317
filters, power line, 329–332
ground loop isolators, 317, 328–329
ground loops, 317–318
grounding, 323–324
head units, buying, 319–320
high preamp levels, 313–314
high-power systems, 314–316
induced, 312–313
line, 318–319
line drivers, 321–322
patch cables, 321
power supply, 318–319
shielding tape, 333–334
shorting plugs, 327–328
signal-to-noise ratio, 313
sniffers, 332–333
sources, identifying, 327
system level adjustment, 324–326
thermal, 312
troubleshooting, 334–335
INDEX
353

noise (Cont.):
turn-on/turn-off pops, 237–238
twisted-pair cabling, 316
noise, road (see road noise)
noise immunity, of patch cables, 302
nutdrivers, 23
O
OEM integration adapters, 160–163
offset screwdriver, 23
Ohm’s law, 207
OnStar, 168
overhead DVD players, 173–175
oxygen-free copper, in patch cables, 301
P
paint pen, 28
parallel wiring, 74–77
parametric equalizers, 240–242
patch cables, 301–302
noise immunity considerations, 302, 321
remote turn-on wire, 302
routing to reduce noise, 323
twisted-pair, 316
patch cords (see patch cables)
peak power amplifier rating, 200
pink noise, 246
portable DVD players, 176
ported box: 
advantages of, 82
box design software, 92–93
damping, enclosure, 122
design example, 104–106
port length, calculating, 114–117
ports, constructing, 114–117
ports, multiple, 118
port tuning, 103–104
when to use a port, 102
ports: 
Aeroport, 114–115
constructing, 114–117
diameter to use, 116
flared, 114–115
length, excessive, 116
ports (Cont.):
length equation, 115–116
multiple, 118
(See also ported box; bandpass box)
power (see CEA compliant power)
power, water analogy, 207
power line capacitors, 296–298
ESL (equivalent series inductance), 297
ESR (equivalent series resistance), 297
installation, 298
precharging, 298
temperature rating, 297–298
power line filters, 329–332
power supply noise, 318–319
preamp outputs, head units, 138
preamp output voltage, head units, 138
premium factory sound systems, 164–166
basics, 165–166, 229–230
boosting, 229–235
bypassing factory amps, 231
Class 2 data bus, 165
line output converters for, 231–232
speakers, 230–231
Q
Qts (see T/S parameters)
quick splice connectors (see Scotchlok
connectors)
R
radio features, head units, 139–143
radios (see head units) 
Railport DVD players, 174
Railport system, 175
RBDS (see RDS)
RDS (Radio Data System), 142
rear fill, 38
receivers (see head units)
relay for more current drive, 213–214
relocation harnesses, head units, 167–168
remote control, head units, 139
remote turn-on wiring, amplifiers, 212–214
(See also patch cables, remote turn-on wire)
resistance, water analogy, 207
354
INDEX

resolution, monitors, 182
RMS power (see CEA compliant power)
road noise, 244
masking, 244
(See also sound-deadening materials)
RTA (real time analyzer), 246
setting equalizer with, 245–248
S
satellite radio, 148–151
docking adapters for plug-and-play tuners, 151
hand-held, 151
head unit with built-in, 149
plug-and-play tuners, 150–151
tuner for satellite-ready head unit, 149
universal tuner with head unit adapter,
149–150
satellite-ready head units, 149–150
satellite TV receivers, 184–185
Scotchlok connectors, 14–16, 160
sealed box: 
advantages of, 80–82
box design software, 92–93
damping, enclosure, 122
design example, 104–106
selectivity (see FM selectivity)
sensitivity, FM (see FM sensitivity)
sensitivity, speakers, 45, 84–85
separates, 57–59
(See also biamping)
series wiring, 74–77
shielding tape, 333–334
shorting plugs, 327–328
shuffle play, 147, 281
signal-to-noise ratio, 313
amplifiers, 197
CEA compliant, 197
SIRIUS satellite radio (see satellite radio)
SnakeLight, 26
sniffers, noise, 332–333
SNR (see signal-to-noise ratio)
soft-touch controls, head units, 145
soldering, 12–13
crimped connections, 215
irons, 22–23
tips for, 13
Sonotube, 112–113
sound-deadening materials, 308–309
installing in door, 54
sound shaping controls, head units, 137–138
soundproofing materials (see sound-deadening
materials)
soundstage (see imaging)
speaker wire, 215–216, 300–301
speakers: 
adapters, 46
for biamping, 259
center channel, 50–51
chassis-grounded (see OEM integration
adapters)
choosing, 43–46
choosing a location, 48–50
common-grounded (see OEM integration
adapters)
cone material, 45–46
foam baffles, 46–47
installing in door, 51–56
kick-panel pods, 58–59
parallel wiring, 74–77
polarity, 56
polarity tester, 56
premium factory sound systems, 230–231
sensitivity, 45
separates (component speakers), 57–59
series wiring, 74–77
speed clips, 56–57
staging (see imaging)
steering wheel controls, factory, 163–164
Stiffening capacitors (see power line capacitors)
subsonic filter, 71–72
Subwoofer Design Toolbox, 93, 337
subwoofers: 
adding to premium factory sound systems,
69–70
amplified, 67–69
bandpass box construction, 113–114
bandpass design example, 106–107
bandpass enclosure type, 82–83
bass response goal, 102
bass response potential, 85–89
box assembly and bracing, 113
box construction, 112–124
box design, 92–112
box design charts, 95–101
INDEX
355

subwoofers (Cont.):
box design software, 92–93
box materials, 112–113
choosing a driver, 83–92
choosing an amplifier for, 72–77
comparing bass potential, 86–89
cone material, 89–90
configurations, 62–70
crossover considerations, 70–72
damping, enclosure, 122
dual voice coil, 90–92, 203
enclosure types, 80–83
finishing touches, 122–124
free-air, 80
installation, 124–129
isobarik configurations, 109–112
multiple drivers in one box, 108–112
parallel wiring, 74–77
port design example, 117–118
ported box enclosure type, 82
port length, calculating, 114–117
ports, constructing, 114–117
ports, multiple, 118
power handling, 84
Q-Customs enclosure, 79
ready-made, 78
sealed and ported design example, 104–106
sealed box enclosure type, 80–82
secret to tight bass with, 128–129
securing, 126–127
sensitivity, 84–85
series wiring, 74–77
shallow-mount, 85
Stealthbox enclosure, 78–79
system adjustment procedure, 128–129
terminals, speaker, 119
transmission line enclosure type, 83
trunk sonic isolation, 125–126
when to use a port, 102
(See also bass transducers)
suppliers, mail-order, 337
surround sound (see 5.1 channel audio)
T
terminals, speaker, 119
test CDs, 28–29
theft deterrents, head units, 136–137
thermal noise, 312
Thiele/Small parameters (see T/S parameters)
Thummer remote control, head units, 139
tie wraps (see cable ties)
tools: 
claw tool, 26
crimper/stripper, 21
DIN removal tool, 28
multimeter, 29–30
nutdrivers, 23
offset screwdriver, 23
paint pen, 28
SnakeLight, 26
soldering iron, 22–23
test CDs, 28–29
Torx drivers, 23–26
utility hacksaw, 26
utility knife, 26
window clip remover, 28
Torx drivers, 23–26
transferability, when planning a system, 2
transmission line enclosure type, 83
tri-mode crossover (see tri-way crossover)
tri-way crossover, 64–65
troubleshooting noise problems, 334–335
T/S parameters: 
introduction to, 86–89
Qts, high values, 87
TV tuners, 183–184
tweeters: 
choosing, 39–40
connecting, 42–43
crossover caps, 42–43
damage by clipping, 255–256
dome, 40
level matching, 42–43
piezo, 40
placing, 40–41
surface mount, 39–43
twisted-pair cabling, 316
U
universal head units, 132–133
upgradability, when planning a system, 3
upgrade solutions to common complaints, 5–6
utility hacksaw, 26
utility knife, 26
356
INDEX

V
Vas (see T/S parameters)
Vof, 92–93
VCRs, 185
vented box (see ported box)
video CD (VCD) compatibility, DVD changers,
284
voice index, digital music players, 289
voltage, water analogy, 207
voltage drop, 206–208, 215
W
WAV digital audio format, 148
WiFi file transfer, digital music players, 
289
window clip remover, 28
wire, speakers, 215–216, 300–301
wire gauge: 
amplifier wiring, 206–208
speaker wiring, 215–216
wire nuts, 16
wire ties (see cable ties)
wiring harness adapters, 159–160
WMA digital audio format, 148
WMA playback: 
CD changers, 280
CD head units, 147
digital music players, 287–288
DVD changers, 284
WMA tag display: 
CD changers, 280
CD head units, 147
X
Xmax, 84
XM satellite radio (see satellite radio)
Z
zero-bit detect, 147, 281
INDEX
357

This page intentionally left blank.

About the Author
Mark Rumreich has written articles for Electronics Now, Speaker Builder,
Radio-Electronics, and Audio Amateur magazines and has taught seminars in
loudspeaker design and automotive acoustics. In his capacity as a senior
design engineer for Thomson Consumer Electronics, he specializes in
analog and digital audio and video systems.
Copyright © 2005 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. Click here for terms of use. 

