CARGO THEFT, LOSS
PREVENTION, AND
SUPPLY CHAIN SECURITY
BY DAN BURGES
AMSTERDAM • BOSTON • HEIDELBERG • LONDON • NEW YORK • OXFORD
PARIS • SAN DIEGO • SAN FRANCISCO • SINGAPORE • SYDNEY • TOKYO
Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier

Butterworth-Heinemann is an imprint of Elsevier
225 Wyman Street, Waltham, MA 02451, USA
The Boulevard, Langford Lane, Kidlington, Oxford, OX5 1GB, UK
 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the Publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this ﬁeld are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden
our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become
necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and
using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information or
methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom
they have a professional responsibility.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any
liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or
otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the
material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Burges, Dan.
Cargo theft, loss prevention, and supply chain security / by Dan Burges.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 978-0-12-416007-1
1. Cargo theft-Prevention. 2. Cargo theft. 3. Business logistics. I. Title.
HV6652.B87 2012
658.4073–dc23
2012007344
For information on all Butterworth-Heinemann
publications visit our website at www.elsevierdirect.com
Printed in the United States of America
12 13 14 15 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

DEDICATION
To my wife and children, whose love and affection are the
light of my life.
Team Burges

PREFACE
Why Is This Book Needed?
In early May 2009, an organized crime group specializing in
cargo theft was observed by police in Plainﬁeld, Indiana. On
an almost daily basis in the United States gangs are seen
staking out logistics hubs across the country in such places as
Plainﬁeld, Memphis, Louisville, Atlanta, Miami, and Dallas-
Fort Worth. This group was observed driving a late-model
green
sedan,
conducting
surveillance
throughout
several
industrial park areas in and around the Indianapolis interna-
tional airport.
The gang members were from Hialeah, Florida, the epicenter
for cargo theft activity in the United States, and quite a distance
from Plainﬁeld.
A call to the Miami Tactical Operations Multi-Agency Cargo
Anti-Theft Squad (TOMCATS), the nation’s most well-known
anticargo theft task force, conﬁrmed the group’s identity and
their status as persons of interest in a number of ongoing inves-
tigations. At the TOMCATS’ request, the Plainﬁeld Police
Department began surveillance of the group.
Eventually the gang left their hotel in Plainﬁeld on Tuesday,
May 5, and traveled east on Interstate 70 toward Ohio in a sedan
and a “bobtail” (a tractoretrailer without a trailer attached).
As the suspects left the jurisdiction of Plainﬁeld, the police
surveillance ceased.
At the same time, another big rig departed Plainﬁeld, Indiana,
also heading east on Interstate 70 toward Ohio, but this one was
pulling a trailer loaded with high-value prescription drugs from
a major pharmaceutical company.
Less than 12 hours later, the truck driver of the pharmaceutical
shipment stopped at a truck stop along the Pennsylvania
Turnpike for fuel and a quick break from the long drive. While the
driver was paying for fuel inside the station, his load of phar-
maceuticals jolted into motion, this time with a South Florida
resident behind the wheel, and in an instant, $37 million in
prescription medication was gone.
While it is not every day that loads of this extreme value are
stolen on our nation’s highways, cargo theft is, however, occur-
ring multiple times every single day. In 2010 there was an average
of two and a half tractoretrailers loaded with cargo being stolen

daily in the United States with an average loss of $471,000 per
incident.
Scope and Organization
The purposes of this book are to detail one of the most
underreported and misunderstood crimes of our time and to
provide a comprehensive methodology for establishing supply
chain security and loss prevention programs that will assist in
reducing theft and keeping cargo secure.
This book is presented in two parts. Part 1 covers the problem
of cargo theft in detail. While the history of cargo theft goes back
to the ﬁrst time goods were moved from one point to another, this
book focuses on the cargo theft problem in the 21st century.
Part 1 provides an in-depth analysis of the methods by which
cargo theft occurs, who is committing these crimes, why cargo
theft is so lucrative, and why most of the public has never heard
of it.
Often people ask me “what do cargo criminals steal?” to which
I simply reply, “walk into your house, turn around in a full circle,
and everything you see a cargo criminal will steal.” Cargo theft is
a true market-driven crime. Loads of product are worth nothing
to a theft gang unless they can sell them. Buyers of stolen goods
have gangs target only items they know they can sell (or have
already sold) on the black market. Consumer electronics, food,
apparel, computers, building materials, furniture, appliances,
liquor, perfume, metals, and pharmaceuticalsdthe list goes on
and ondall of these products are at constant risk of being tar-
geted by criminal elements throughout the year.
This part also discusses cargo theft through multiple modes of
transportation, focusing on over the road trucking, but also
includes cargo theft via air, ocean, rail, and pipeline. The ﬁrst
half of this book ends with a detailed look at the downstream
costs incurred due to cargo theft, which can increase by multiple
times over the initial loss value.
Part 2 proposes a methodology for mitigating the risk of cargo
theft for both facility (manufacturing, warehousing, and distri-
bution) and in-transit operations. Part 2 also covers the roles of
personnel at every level in the supply chain and policies designed
to not only secure cargo from origin to destination, but also assist
in creating increased supply chain efﬁciencies beyond simply
preventing thefts, as well as technologies available today and
methods for employing these technologies into an overall
strategy of risk mitigation and cargo recovery in the event of
a theft.
xvi
PREFACE

Part 2 begins by analyzing methods of determining risk,
a critical component to creating a logistics and security plan.
Factors such as product type, geography (cities and states where
cargo is shipped, transits through, stopped, or stored), existing
security and in-transit security policies, and the ways supply
chain channel and transportation partners are selected and
audited to ensure compliance all have an impact on the potential
for loss.
The goal of this book is to provide a clear understanding of the
threat cargo theft poses to the national economy, along with the
impact to individual supply chain stakeholders from the manu-
facturer all the way to the consumer. Additionally, the book
provides a variety of methods and concepts for ensuring that
cargo remains secure from origin to destination.
Once risk is determined, a methodology and level of security
can be established using a layered approach including personnel,
policies, and technology to ensure that the supply chain security
plan is not reliant on a single person or device but rather an
interwoven system that incorporates redundancies, thus casting
a true net of security around cargo. Unfortunately, there is no
silver
bullet
in
cargo
theft
prevention;
therefore,
creating
a combination (and at times even overlapping) of physical and
procedural controls is a shipper’s best bet. Chapter 13: Physical
Security and Chapter 14: In-Transit Security discuss the multiple
components necessary for a complete supply chain security and
cargo theft prevention program, as well as providing a template
for policy creation in both of these critical areas.
One of the most advanced methods of ensuring in-transit
cargo security today is the concept of active monitoring. Active
monitoring provides a combination of all three layers of a supply
chain security program (people, policies, and technology) by
which a shipper can establish in-transit security protocols for
transportation providers. These policies are agreed to and
provided to a third-party monitoring (command and control)
center. This monitoring center is responsible for tracking ship-
ments en route, sending location and other relevant data through
covert, usually embedded, tracking devices. Covered extensively
in Chapter 15: Active Monitoring, this concept has proven over
time to be a most efﬁcient and effective risk-mitigating tool; it can
also be used by shippers for ancillary, yet important, purposes
such as conﬁrming transportation provider compliance with
preshipment instructions such as routing, stopping points, and
the like. Moreover, in the event that a theft occurs, response time
is virtually immediate with the monitoring center able to contact
local law enforcement and provide them with an accurate
PREFACE xvii

location of the stolen truck and cargo. If you read only one
chapter in Part 2 of this book, I strongly encourage you to spend
your time on Chapter 15: Active Monitoring, as it provides a step-
by-step methodology for creating, implementing, and maintain-
ing a program that will provide monitored in-transit cargo
security.
At the end of each chapter in this book is a short summary of
the primary or key points that the reader should take away. As
industry professionals, educators, students, and crime enthusi-
asts, we all have busy lives and taking the hours to read every page
is not always a luxury we have. If this applies to you and
a summation is what you need, simply go to the end of each
chapter and read these key points to ensure that you capture the
primary elements of each chapter.
Additional resources are provided at the end of this book as
well, including companies and organizations where additional
information, products, and services can be found for supply chain
security and theft prevention programs.
There are a variety of industry associations dedicated to
spreading the word about cargo theft, sharing security best
practices, and assisting members in discerning emerging threats
and methods that thieves are using to victimize shippers, trans-
portation providers, and other supply chain interests. Many of
these organizations are discussed in this book, with contact
details provided in the Resource section at the back of the book.
xviii
PREFACE

FOREWORD
One of the most thought-provoking books I read at the
beginning of the new millennium was Thomas Friedman’s “The
World Is Flat.” He was one of the ﬁrst I remember having called
out the way in which traditional boundaries, geographical and
historical, that deﬁned our world up to that time were collapsing
around us as the economic advantages of globalization were
pursued.
While I don’t recall the more subtle points of all of the “ﬂat-
teners” described by Friedman, those he made in the area of
supply chains left impressions that have stuck with me. Although
I was not at Dell at the time, I particularly remember what’s
referred to as his “Dell Theory of Conﬂict Prevention” or the
notion that no two countries that are both part of the same global
supply chain, like Dell’s, will ever ﬁght a war against each other.
I guess only time will tell whether that proposition proves true.
The title also alludes to the perceptual shift required of countries,
companies, and individuals who wish to remain competitive in
a global market where historical and geographical divisions are
becoming increasingly irrelevant
In addition to perceptual shifts, real-world tactical shifts are
also required as we grapple with the challenges of this new
world. To help us avoid the pitfalls that would otherwise
undermine the realization of the advantages of a globalized
supply chain, experts like Dan Burges help us understand the
risks of this new attenuated terrain. Dan particularly provides
a clear understanding of the threat cargo theft poses in that
world
not
only
to
the
individual
supply
chain
stake-
holdersdfrom the manufacturer all the way to the consumerd
but to the national economy generally. To that understanding he
adds a practical mix of methods and concepts for ensuring that
cargo remains secure from origin to destination in a well-
reasoned manner that prudently assesses risk and an entity’s
tolerance of it.
Many of us may lament the passing of a world in which
discrete boundaries of interests could be rigidly deﬁned. Out of
the ensuing obscurity comes an opportunityda necessitydto
collaborate with critical partners in a way that will assure our
interests will continue to be protected against unacceptable risks.

The cogent taxonomy Dan provides here should prove a valuable
tool in the hands of security practitioners charged with that
responsibility.
John E. McClurg
Austin, Texas, Winter 2011
xx
FOREWORD

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Barry Conlon, CEO of FreightWatch, without whom
I would have never entered the world of cargo security.
To Barry Tarnef, who has mentored me from my ﬁrst day in
the cargo security communitydand without whom this book
would not existdnever once asking for anything in return and
being my sounding board before my frequent attempts to dive off
the deep end. Barry, you’re a consummate professional and
valued mentor.
To John McClurg for not only writing the foreword to this
book, but for being what I aspire to be.
Thank you to my parents who always knew those countless
essays would pay off.
This acknowledgement would not be complete without
thanking Ed Petow, Chuck Forsaith, Fred Burton, Dennis Stabile,
Graciela Martinez, all the great people at FreightWatch, John
Tabor, Kevin Johnson, Rich Widup, Alan Spear, John Monetta,
Brandon Stroud, Victor Garcia, Joey Reed (Go Devils), Willie
Morales, Mike McDonnell, Allen Gear, Tom Stimach, and the
Microsoft Supply Chain Security team.
A very special thank you to the Starbucks Coffee Company,
without whom civilization would be far less civilized.
To Fred Burton, whose mentorship, guidance, and inspiration
have touched countless people and have meant the world to me.
I’m truly blessed to have worked for you and with you.
A special thanks to Rick Adams, David Bevans, Amber Hodge,
and the wonderful people at Butterworth-Heinemann for all their
assistance, coaching, and faith in me on this project.
Finally, this acknowledgment would not be complete without
the most sincere of thanks to two gentlemendTony Jeary and JB
Glossinger. In early 2010 I spent a half day with Tony and it turned
my life upside down, propelling me toward my goals and dreams
in ways I could never have imagined. The wisdom and guidance
Tony provided to me, taking time from his day-to-day coaching of
the world’s top CEOs, left an unmistakable mark on my
consciousness and the clarity and focus I need to execute at the
highest levels. And to JB GlossingerdI would not have written this
book without JB’s daily inspiration, giving me the drive to make it
through the hard times and excel in the good times, improving by
1% every day.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Dan Burges CPP
Dan is the senior director of intelligence at FreightWatch
International, where he specializes in supply chain intelligence
and risk analysis. He is responsible for FreightWatch’s global
intelligence division, as well as the company’s security assess-
ment program. Dan started with the company as a business
analyst, growing the intelligence division from the ground up.
Previously, he was a security analyst with Strategic Forecasting’s
security division.
Dan has been featured providing supply chain security anal-
ysis for numerous media outlets, including the Wall Street Jour-
nal,
CBS
News,
Fox
News,
BusinessWeek,
Newsweek,
the
International Herald Tribune, and the Financial Times. He also
writes for a variety of industry and trade publications and is
a columnist for Cargo Security International.
Before joining FreightWatch, Dan served in the U.S. Army as
a military police and antiterrorism ofﬁcer. In 2003 he was
deployed to Baghdad, Iraq, where he was awarded the Bronze
Star for 18 months of service in the Middle East, overseeing
security and antiterrorism operations at a forward operating base.
Dan also served as duty ofﬁcer at the U.S. detention center in
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in 2002.
Dan is a graduate of the U.S. Military Academy at West Point
where he received a degree in Political Science and Nuclear
Engineering. He also holds a Master’s degree in Criminology and
the Certiﬁed Protection Professional designation. Dan lives in the
Dallas/Fort Worth metroplex with his wife and two children.

1
CARGO THEFT 101
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Overview of cargo theft in the United States
• What criminals target and how they steal in-transit cargo
• Summary of downstream costs from cargo theft
• Overview of industry efforts to combat theft gangs
• Discussion of government supply chain initiatives and their relation to theft
prevention
Known as the “silent” or victimless crime, cargo theft ulti-
mately costs the U.S. economy several billion dollars annually. At
this point we are only able to give an estimated magnitude of the
crime. Across the country, trailers loaded with hundreds of
thousands of dollars in electronics, pharmaceuticals, clothing,
tobacco, and other high-value goods are being stolen at an
alarming rate right out from under the noses of those who make,
store, and ship the goods that fuel our stream of commerce. And
while the cargo theft gangs turn huge proﬁts for crimes that carry
very little risk, their victims are left scrambling to pick up the
pieces.
Truck stops, parking lots, and other unsecured locations
are becoming a veritable battleground between cargo criminals
and those tasked with moving and securing goods in transit.
What’s more, the downstream costs incurred by our nation’s
manufacturers and shippers as a result of cargo theft exacerbate
the direct monetary losses due to hidden and typically unbud-
geted charges.
These are the costs that inﬂate the total value of theft incidents
exponentiallydcosts that manufacturers bear in the short term as
they remake, replace, and reship goods to their originally in-
tended destinations, but costs that are partially borne by them
but ultimately paid for by all of us at the cash register.
According to FreightWatch International, 899 cargo theft
incidents occurred in 2010, a record high since FreightWatch
began tracking cargo theft in 2006 (Burges, 2010, p. 2). Other
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00001-7
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
3

organizations such as CargoNet, Chubb Insurance, and the
Supply Chain Information Sharing and Analysis Center (SC-ISAC)
all report comparable numbers using a variety of methods of
collecting statistics and incident data.
While deﬁnitions of cargo theft vary and estimates of product
loss values range from $8 to $30 billion per year, it is clear that this
problem is having a devastating impact on the bottom lines of
companies. Understanding the full impact of cargo theft on
supply chain operationsdand creating cutting-edge technologies
and solutions to stay ahead of the gangsdis the imperative of all
professionals in and around the industry, not just the ones whose
companies are currently suffering losses.
In 2009, more than $188 million in pharmaceuticals alone
were stolen off America’s highways. The following year that sector
suffered another $185 million in cargo losses. This is despite the
fact that the drug industry has been securing its supply chains
and ﬁghting cargo crime on a national level since 2005, the year it
became apparent to industry professionals that large-scale
pharmaceutical theft had moved well beyond the discrete and
seemingly random.
The forerunner in developing cargo theft prevention stan-
dards, however, was the high-tech industry, which has been
tangling with theft gangs for well over a decade. Facing full-
truckload losses of computers, cellular phones, televisions,
gaming consoles, accessories, and more since the late 1990s,
industry logistics and security professionals began sharing
information. This led to the formation in October 1997 of the
Technology Asset Protection Association, now the Transported
Asset Protection Association (TAPA). As the number of thefts
continued to rise into the 21st century, however, industry
professionals became keenly aware that it was no longer a ques-
tion of “if” a company was going to suffer a loss, but rather
“when.”
With this dose of reality as the motivating factor and infor-
mation-sharing groups such as TAPA the means, in-transit
security policies and procedures and formalized warehouse
security
standards
for
the
manufacturing
and
distribution
network came into existence.
And sure enough, these protective measures worked. Compa-
nies that began hardening the supply chain by implemen-
ting security protocols saw a marked decrease in cargo theft.
However, the cargo thieves did what they do best: they adapted.
With the vast U.S. supply chain providing virtually unlimited
opportunities, the criminals simply adjusted their operations to
target the weakest linksdfocusing on trailers left unattended in
4
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101

unsecured parking areas, facilities with minimal security systems,
and transportation providers and intermediaries not following
standard security practices. By ratcheting up defenses at ﬁxed sites
such as manufacturing plants, warehouses, and distribution
centers and in transit, these early adopters essentially made
themselves less vulnerable than others and, in effect, just redi-
rected cargo thieves to seek out facilities and mobile assets lacking
adequate protection.
The lack of formal theft reporting results in wild variations in
estimates of total annual losses. In 2006, as part of the PATRIOT
ACT renewal, cargo theft was added to the list of crimes that must
be reported to the Uniform Crime Report (UCR). Despite this
6-year-old mandate, data have yet to be collected and entered by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the law enforcement
agency responsible for the UCR.
Organizations and private companies that track cargo theft
and share data within the supply chain industry are able to
capture
the
majority
of
high-value
cargo
thefts
through
company records, informal networks, law enforcement sources,
open source documents, and other means. However, it is the
unknown quantity of unreported lower-value thefts that makes
estimating the total value of cargo theft such an exercise in
futility.
No one can say for sure the true impact of cargo theft because
it is one of the most underreported and underinvestigated crimes
in the nationdhence its “silent crime” label. Yet it is one of if not
the property crime with the highest payoff in the United States.
According to Jared Palmer, general counsel at AFN, a third-party
logistics provider (3PL), if all types of thefts were combined,
including identity theft, bank robberies, jewelry theft, and others,
their total loss would not equal the amount of losses suffered at
the hands of cargo thieves.
Even in those cases where cargo theft incidents are reported to
police, investigations can be more basic and involve fewer details
as police forces and their resources are pulled into other, more
pressing criminal matters, such as violent crimes, and if a culprit
is apprehended and convicted, sentencing is light, with prison
time rarely served. Cargo thieves take full advantage of the justice
system, as arrested suspects released on minimal bail immedi-
ately return to their lucrative activities.
With cargo theft up 144% from 2006 through 2010 and no
indication that thieves are becoming less active, the onus is on the
logistics and supply chain security professionals to be forward-
thinking, creative, and proactive in instituting effective in-transit
and physical security procedures.
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101 5

Evolution of Cargo Theft
And the problem is growing. Cargo theft increased annually by
5 to 15% from 2005 through 2010. Additionally, the average loss
per incident increased dramatically, by more than 60% over the
same time period. Single thefts resulting in seven-ﬁgure losses
have become commonplace as thieves target speciﬁc, high-end
products that can be fenced and sold easily on the black market.
Proliﬁc cargo theft gangs travel across the country, from south to
north and east to west, seeking goods they have been tasked to
steal and then transporting them, often to major cities on the East
Coast or Los Angeles for sale on the black market, or to maritime
ports for export principally to Latin America and Europe. From
there, the stolen products are sold through a variety of methods,
sometimes being reshipped to the United States for reintro-
duction into our domestic supply chain. This presents a twofold
loss for the owner of the goodsdnot only do they not reap the
beneﬁt from the sale but an end consumer acquires their product
at a signiﬁcantly lower price.
The impact of a cargo theft goes well beyond the monetary loss
that results from the stolen load or a warehouse burglary. Effects
can be in the form of increased cost of goods to higher insurance
premiums to decreased market share. Companies hit repeatedly
by cargo thieves are compromised in their ability to deliver safe
and reliable products on time and intact to the marketplace,
resulting in loss of consumer conﬁdence. Looking further
downstream, additional costs resulting from cargo theft include
manufacturing replacement goods, lost time and efﬁciency,
potential product recalls, increased consumer prices, and the loss
of intellectual property rights. All of these have direct impacts
on the victimized company, the industry as a whole, and the
U.S. consumer market, all of which pay for cargo theft.
Because of this, corporations are losing their tolerance for
cargo losses, with many adapting more aggressive strategies to
prevent theft. Using internal resources, external supply chain
security consultants along with mandating security procedures to
3PLs and others who have the cargo in their care, custody, and
control at some point, corporations are leading the way in cargo
theft prevention and innovation. At the same time, they are
growing more and more determined to see thieves prosecuted.
Unfortunately for the corporate security manager, it is an
uphill battle, as well-organized, internationally connected and
highly motivated cargo theft gangs continue to adapt their
methods and redouble their efforts, meting every prevention
strategy/tactic with another way to get at high-value, theft-
6
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101

attractive products. Furthermore, criminals who are arrested,
even ones charged with thefts of goods worth millions of dollars,
face notoriously low bail and shockingly light prison sentencesd
if they even bother to appear for trial. By avoiding violence in the
commission of their crimes, unlike armed robbers, cargo thieves
ﬂy largely under the radar of most law enforcement, as well as the
media whose coverage of these crimes could begin to shed some
light on the serious scope of the problem.
Despite the signiﬁcant toll cargo theft can have on a com-
pany’s bottom line and a nation’s productive output, surprisingly
little is known about the gangs that repeatedly manage to steal
full truckloads of multimillion-dollar product, make six-ﬁgure
proﬁts for a few days’ work, and then vanish without a trace. The
most proliﬁc of these are the Cuban cargo theft gangs. Based in
south Florida, primarily the Hialeah area, they have applied their
knowledge and skills to a more lucrative trade, stealing cargo for
brokers who have already made arrangements for their sale in
bulk on the black market or to foreign companies that specialize
in repackaging and reselling products to legitimate companies.
South Florida is not the only base of operation for cargo theft
gangs. Los Angeles, Dallas/Fort Worth, and the New York/North
Jersey areas are also known hubs of cargo theft activity, where cell
members, while connected by ethnicity, work under a loose
structure, different from traditional organized crime groups.
Targeting
There’s a reason why cargo thieves target high-value, easily
moveable, and “marketed” items. Cargo theft is a market-driven
crime, and thieves simply steal what consumers want to buy by
simply understanding our purchasing patterns. There’s a method
by which cargo theft gangs operate. With hundreds of thousands
of tractoretrailers crisscrossing the United States on a daily basis,
thieves generally do not simply pick a truck at random and see
what they get nor do they decide one day to go out and steal
a load of televisions or pharmaceuticals. For structure and
direction in this seemingly endless sea of available cargo, they
look for guidance from the broker.
Brokers, individuals who make their living buying and selling
stolen merchandise on the U.S. black market, as well as through
international ﬁrms (both legitimate and illegitimate), drive the
market for stolen goods. These are the people placing the orders
with professional cargo theft gangs for certain products, espe-
cially name-brand high-value commodities. But these are not
purchase orders per se. They are orders to steal, and the broker
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101 7

pays the thieves pennies on the dollar, knowing he will make
between 20 and 40% of the load’s retail value.
To determine which products to target, the broker ﬁrst asks
the question that ultimately powers the nation’s economy: What
will the consumer buy? Televisions, computers, cell phones,
bottled drinks, clothing, and pharmaceuticalsdthese are all
products that can be found in households across America. And if
the consumer will buy it, the cargo thief will steal it.
The purchasing of illicit products is not as foreign as one may
think. “Who purchases stolen product?” is a common question.
The answer is we do or, more accurately, consumers do. Indeed,
brokers are incredibly skillful at reintroducing stolen product into
the legitimate supply chain through shell companies, often based
in Latin America. By offering discounted rates on high volumes of
products, they easily sell to low-margin retailers who are unaware
of the illicit nature of their purchase. Then the consumer
becomes the ﬁnal purchaser, fanning the ﬂames of cargo theft,
while manufacturers and distributors are left to bear the loss, of
course, ultimately passing it down to consumers in the form of
higher prices.
In the theft-to-order scenario, cargo thieves receive an order
from a broker, or other purchaser, for a particular product or type
of product. The theft gang commences research, ﬁnding where its
targeted goods are manufactured, distributed, and shipped. The
gang, generally three to six members, then travels to the location
of the targeted product. Traveling economically, the gang will
rent an economical car (usually having a girlfriend or someone
without any direct connection to the gang handle the trans-
action), stay in a budget motel, and commence surveillance on
the targeted facility.
While some theft gangs specialize in burglarizing warehouses
and distribution centers, the vast majority of large-scale cargo
thefts occur while loads are in transit. The gang will use surveil-
lance to gather intelligence on transportation patterns; what time
trailers are picked up; what companies are providing trans-
portation services; routing; and if any stops are made near the
point of departure.
In the most typical of cargo theft scenarios, the cargo theft
gang identiﬁes a loaded trailer at its point of departure and then
follows the trailer from a safe distance until the driver stops and
leaves the load unattended. The gang then moves in, stealing the
tractoretrailer and its entire load in the blink of an eye.
Traditionally, the area at highest risk for in-transit theft is
within 200 miles of the point of departure. Known as the “red
zone,” this stretch of road continues to be the area in which
8
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101

drivers must remain most aware of their surroundings and ensure
they stop only in the event of an emergency. However, cargo theft
gangs are now willing to travel incredible distances, with thefts
occurring well over 500 miles from the point of origin.
Downstream Costs
America’s manufacturers, distributors, and logistics/trans-
portation companies suffer billions of dollars in direct losses
annually. Unfortunately, these losses are only the tip of the
iceberg, with a slew of associated costs inﬂating the total impact
of the base amount.
Unplanned replacement manufacturing and assembly, expe-
dited shipping, loss of competitive advantage, future sales and
market share, increased marketing efforts to, inter alia, deal with
concerned customers, insurance costs (deductibles and potential
future premium increases), administrative time to report the
claim, complete the requisite paperwork, and conduct prelimi-
nary investigation, and, in some instances, product liability issues
and recall expenses all contribute to the total extent of loss that
can be incredibly hard to quantify. These losses are not all
absorbed by the companies that suffer the losses, rather some of
the expense is ultimately passed down to the consumer.
The pharmaceutical and food industries face added compli-
cations when their products are stolen. When mishandled,
products made to be ingested, injected, or eaten present
consumer safety issues, and thus substantial corporate reputa-
tional (brand) concerns. In addition to protecting consumers
from stolen product that might be tainted, companies have no
choice but to spend millions more to recall and destroy perfectly
good product that reached the shelves legitimately but happened
to share the same lot number with a stolen product.
Cargo Theft Prevention
Where does the burden of responsibility lie when it comes to
cargo theft prevention? When considering violent crimes such as
murder, robbery, assault, and so on, many look to law enforce-
ment agencies for crime prevention. While police (and punish-
ments for convicted criminals) may serve a role in deterrence,
Americans quite commonly take small steps to ensure their
personal safety, such as locking the front door when leaving for
the day, not walking down a dark alley at night, or parking in
a well-lighted area. Similarly, each participant in the supply chain
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101 9

must take steps to deter cargo crime. From corporate security
managers at manufacturing sites down to the transportation
provider’s driver, each member of the supply chain bears some of
the responsibility for securing goods. But this will not happen on
its own. It must be mandated from the top down with compliance
checked to ensure that each provider is following prescribed
procedures.
The use of private security in the supply chain is not new,
although most of us think about manguarding at static facilities
such as warehouses and distribution centers. What has been
growing steadily over the past decade is the use of private
security for over the road (in-transit) shipments. This role most
assuredly does not duplicate that of law enforcement, as private
security is focused primarily on theft prevention, whereas law
enforcement’s job is to attempt to recover cargo after it is
stolen. However, some private security ﬁrms also are becoming
deeply involved in the recovery process as well, using electronic
cargo tracking to learn in real time when a load is off course and
then notifying police and assisting them in locating the stolen
cargo.
One particular electronic-tracking methodology is the use of
embedded, covert tracking devices coupled with active moni-
toring that allows for shippers to “see” where their cargo is at all
times, regardless of its location. This method of tracking has
signiﬁcantly increased the security of in-transit cargo and led to
a spike in the recovery of stolen goods and the prosecution of
numerous cargo thieves. It has also launched a new era in which
private security and law enforcement now work hand in hand
tracking down criminals and bringing them to justice.
Cargo theft affects a broad spectrum of stakeholders, most
notably the product owner, often a manufacturer or a distributor
that purchased the product. Others include freight forwarders
and 3PLs, carriers, private security ﬁrms, insurance companies,
police agencies, and the U.S. government (Departments of
Justice, Commerce and Agriculture, and the Food and Drug
Administration, to name a few). Each of these entities has a direct
interest in cargo theft in the United States, largely because they
regulate product being shipped, are responsible to protect cargo
from loss, investigate cargo theft, and provide ﬁnancial support
for the losses. Also, each plays a signiﬁcantly different role in
keeping cargo secure.
The product owner is primarily responsible for loss preven-
tion, using either in-house staff or independent supply chain/
logistics security ﬁrms to assist. Freight forwarders and 3PLs
share the task of product security, often complying with security
10
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101

measures directed by the product owner. The U.S. government
regulates interstate shipping and ships product itself.
Insurance companies assist with loss prevention (best prac-
tices), loss mitigation, and subrogation tools to fairly allocate
losses, as well as providing ﬁnancial restitution to victims. And
the police respond when losses occur, investigate and attempt to
recover the product, and arrest the culprits. Cargo theft task
forces exist in several states where theft is the most severe; these
local, state, and/or federal agency units investigate cargo theft
gangs actively, building cases against their members and assisting
in recovering stolen goods.
Lack of In-Transit Security
it is not surprising that corporations pour millions of dollars
into
their
physical
and
information
technology
security
programs. Fences, cameras, alarms, motion detectors, and
security ofﬁcers are all considered by many as critical to the
security of their company and product. An amazing truth in
supply chain security, however, is that these same companies put
multimillion-dollar loads into a trailer driven by someone they do
not know, whose identiﬁcation they did not check, who may or
may not actually work for the transportation provider they claim
to represent, and may not think twice about whether the load will
arrive at its destination safelydor at all. From a virtual fortress to
a trailer that doesn’t even have a padlock on the door, this
disparity is never realized until a company suffers its ﬁrst full-
truckload theft, and sometimes not even then.
A frequent question regarding cargo theft and its prevention
is “What are the police doing about it?” While it is understand-
able to look to law enforcement for answers, the simple truth is
that law enforcement cannot and does not serve in a theft
prevention role, particularly in the supply chain. With hundreds
of thousands of loads on the nation’s roads at a given time, it is
simply not practical to think police alone can make a dent in
in-transit theft.
A good comparison is home security. As much as regular
police patrols offer some comfort, the average homeowner does
not rely solely on the police to prevent his home from being
burglarized. Instead, he locks the doors and windows, perhaps
has an alarm system installed, or opts for monitoring by a third-
party security provider. All of these are personal steps taken by
the owner to prevent a theft from occurring, none of which is
reliant on law enforcement.
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101 11

While it is incumbent upon every person that touches cargo to
keep it secure and mitigate the risk of theft, the true responsibility
lies with the shipper. Supply chain security policies and proce-
dures, contractual agreements, visibility of every leg of the cargo’s
journey, and the ability to audit compliance with every supplier
are crucial to a safe and sound supply chain. These steps,
however, are often seen as too overbearing on suppliers or too
costly or burdensome on the shipper.
Cargo theft is nothing new. Going back centuries, criminals
attacked merchant ships, pilfered from loading docks, held up
trains, and robbed stagecoaches on horseback. As transportation
has evolved with new technologydsuperfreighters replacing
wooden ships and tractoretrailers replacing horse-drawn wag-
onsdso too have cargo criminals. Today’s road pirates are
organized at the international level, stealing, storing, and moving
goods throughout the world while reaping proﬁts measured in the
billions of dollars.
Cargo Theft and CustomseTrade Partnership
Against Terrorism (Theft Prevention vs Supply
Chain Security)
After the attacks of September 11, 2001, ﬁghting terrorism
became the focus of virtually every law enforcement agency in the
United States, especially at the federal level. Agents from the FBI,
customs, and other organizations were moved from their daily
assignments to work leads on terrorism plots aimed at the
American public. During this transition, the U.S. supply chain
was identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant gap in the nation’s security. The
fear was that the supply chain could be exploited for purposes
beyond the usual smuggling of stolen products, people, and
narcoticsdthat it could be used by nefarious groups to smuggle
a weapon of mass destruction into the country.
One solution to this problem was the establishment of
the CustomseTrade Partnership Against Terrorism (C-TPAT)
program. A voluntary initiative between the U.S. government and
businesses, C-TPAT was established as a means of enticing
businesses to adopt minimum security standards throughout
their supply chains in return for fewer inspections and faster
clearance at our ports of entry. The program’s ultimate goal is to
prevent the supply chain from being used by terrorist organiza-
tions for illicit purposes. Due to the massive volume of freight
being imported on a daily basis, however, customs and border
12
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101

protection (CBP) simply does not have the manpower or equip-
ment to screen every piece of cargo entering the country; there-
fore, one of the pillars of C-TPAT was to have U.S. importers assist
CBP by vetting their overseas suppliers and their shipping prac-
tices so there would be end-to-end visibility of shipments.
Because of this, CBP has reached out to businesses, providing
a set of security guidelines and a system of rewards for complying
with them. So, a company that meets or exceeds these guidelines
not only gains increased security, it also gets fewer CBP inspec-
tions, expedited processing for inspections, eligibility for the CBP
Importer Self-Assessment program (ISA), and other beneﬁts.
Customs’ goal is that by providing preferential treatment to their
trusted trade partners, more companies will enter the program
and remain compliant (Mento, 2004, p. 10).
In 2001, approximately 2% of all cargo coming into the United
States was inspected (Tirschwell, 2003, p. 6). U.S. Customs (and
later Homeland Security) quickly realized that this presented
a signiﬁcant threat to national security, which could not be
mitigated through government action alone. The sheer volume of
goods entering the domestic stream of commerce, coupled with
the massive delays that a 100% inspection policy would cause,
made such an action Draconian.
Based on their level of compliance and validation status with
CPB, an importer is assigned a tier level. Each tier has speciﬁc
requirements to meet, with more advanced levels requiring
increased security and compliance efforts. Accordingly, however,
no matter an importer’s status, the aforementioned incentives are
there.
Tier 1: In this, the basic level of C-TPAT certiﬁcation, importers
must show that they have met the minimum standards
established by CBP. Tier 1 importers are subjected to fewer
inspections during the import process compared to non-
C-TPAT importers. They are also eligible for expedited cargo
processing at the border (“FAST” lanes), receive “front of line”
inspection privileges at ports should an inspection be required,
and are eligible for ISA programs, as well as being able to attend
C-TPATtraining seminars.Ofcourseanother beneﬁt thatno one
really wanted to contemplate was the fact that if a U.S. port did
experience a major disruption, C-TPAT importers would be ﬁrst
to be processed when operations resumed.
Tier 2: Additional commitment demonstrated by an importer
as a result of having undergone validation by CBP can make
them eligible for Tier 2 status. A Tier 2 importer receives all
the same advantages as a Tier 1 importer, but has signiﬁcantly
fewer security-related inspections of cargo.
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101 13

Tier 3: For importers proven to exceed the minimum security
criteria and having adopted what CBP considers security best
practices can be granted Tier 3 status. A Tier 3 importer enjoys
all the beneﬁts of Tier 1 and Tier 2 and is subject to infrequent,
at port, inspections. Tier 3 status is also a precursor to CBPs
“Green Lane,” a zero inspection program (except for occa-
sional random inspections) for importers meeting established
criteria, including shipment through a Container Security
Initiative port and the use of prescribed (e.g., security seals
that meet ISO PAS 17712 physical and mechanical speciﬁca-
tions) container security devices.
The overall impact of C-TPAT has been an increased aware-
ness on the part of importers and their supply chain partners with
regards to basic security in preventing unauthorized product
from being inserted into a container or trailer for transit into the
United States. While this represents a clear improvement in
overall supply chain security, there is a clear distinction between
the goals of C-TPAT and those of companies looking to reduce
their in-transit cargo losses. In a very basic sense, attaining
C-TPAT status at the minimum allows a U.S. importer to get
a holistic view of its supply chain and then can discover any
security gaps along the path.
C-TPAT’s primary end game is preventing weapons of mass
destruction from being introduced into the U.S. supply chain.
Because of this, container/trailer integrity is paramount, with
seven-point inspection loading procedures and proper use of
high-security seals being major focal points. The seven-point
inspection consists of:
1. Front wall
2. Left side
3. Right side
4. Floor
5. Ceiling/roof
6. Inside/outside doors
7. Outside/undercarriage
While this clearly increases overall security, such efforts have
little impact on theft prevention when viewed through the cargo
theft lens. These security best practices do not prevent a thief
from stealing an entire tractoretrailer while it is stopped or from
opening container doors with a pair of bolt cutters and unloading
the product from the back. In C-TPAT terms, the quick identiﬁ-
cation of a broken seal, which occurs when a container’s doors
are opened, would evidence load tampering. While vital for
homeland security, this is not truly a theft-prevention measure.
14
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101

However, any measure that would raise supply chain security
awareness helps.
This distinction between antiterrorism security and theft
prevention is critical. While they both serve vital roles in a com-
pany’s secure and efﬁcient supply chain, they are vastly different
from one another, with only some overlap in basic practices. As
such, a company that is C-TPAT compliant may be at extreme risk
for cargo theft due to in-transit practices. Understanding and
being able to recognize these differences are vital to a successful
cargo security and theft prevention program.
Key Points
•
Cargo theft has a serious ﬁnancial impact on the U.S. economy
that is not fully understood.
•
What started with the high-tech sector in the late 1990s, the
modern era of cargo theft now affects virtually every manner
of consumer good.
•
Cargo theft is committed by gangs that specialize in tractore
trailer theft and facility burglaries. The three most proliﬁc
gangs in the United States operate out of south Florida, New
York/North Jersey, and the Los Angeles area.
•
Cargo theft is known as the “silent crime” because these
crimes are generally not prioritized by law enforcement and
the judicial system. This is in large part due to the lack of
violence associated with cargo theft, with less than 2% of cargo
theft involving confrontation or force.
•
It is the responsibility of every supply chain constituent to
ensure cargo security.
•
C-TPAT compliance does not necessarily equate to a secure
supply chain. C-TPAT is aimed at preventing terrorist attacks,
not cargo theft. Therefore, meeting minimum standards may
not necessarily translate into less cargo theft. However, it is
a start or a component to any existing security program.
Chapter 1 CARGO THEFT 101 15

2
CARGO THEFT DEFINED
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Cargo theft deﬁned
• Discussion of full truckload theftsdthe preferred targets of cargo criminals
• Analysis of how, when, and where thefts occur
• Discussion of facility burglaries and other forms of cargo theft
Distrust and caution are the parents of security.
Benjamin Franklin
What Is Cargo Theft?
Cargo theft presents a unique and difﬁcult challenge to
manufacturers,
distributors,
terminal
operators,
third-party
logistics providers, and transportation providers. While they
create programs to secure facilities and product as they pass
through a truly global supply chain at the same time being
exposed to exploitation by creative and highly motivated theft
gangs. FreightWatch International deﬁnes cargo as “partial or
entire shipments, containers, or cartons of property which are
contained in or on a trailer, motor truck, aircraft, vessel, rail,
warehouse, freight station, freight consolidation facility, or air
navigation facility.” While cargo can be stolen at any point in the
supply chain, the majority of large-scale losses in the United
States involve the theft of loaded tractoretrailers. Warehouse
burglaries are also a signiﬁcant concern due to the likelihood of
huge losses in a single incident, but the rate of warehouse
burglaries is substantially lower than that of in-transit theft. Other
forms of cargo theft involve smaller but more insidious pilferage
events that result in fewer dollar losses for the victim, but occur at
higher frequencies to make them of interest.
In the United States, cargo thieves are most commonly
nonconfrontational and nonviolent. There are two primary
methods of in-transit cargo theft. The ﬁrst is the “potluck”
method in which cargo thieves prowl truck stops and other
locations seeking unsecured tractoretrailers they can steal,
hoping for a load they can sell on the black market. In the second,
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00002-9
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
17

more prevalent, method, cargo theft gangs actively seek out and
track preselected loads of known high-value goods they can sell
easily. The thieves then wait patiently to steal the loads when the
driver stops and leaves the bounty unattended. Gangs using this
method continually target the origin: manufacturers, distribution
centers, and other nodes within the supply chain known to house
and move the most lucrative goods.
Domestic cargo crime operates within loosely organized,
transnational structures, without the strict hierarchy normally
associated with traditional crime groups. These teams work
independently of each other; moreover, each member has
a speciﬁc duty, working to fulﬁll orders for cargo given to them by
brokers who sell stolen goods on the black market. Latin Amer-
ican gangs have been the most effective in cargo crime across the
nation. They can be neatly categorized into three distinct groups:
•
Cuban gangs operating from the Miami, Florida, area
•
Ecuadorian gangs operating out of the New York/North Jersey
area
•
Mexican/Central American gangs based in the Los Angeles
Basin (Burges, 2009b)
Cargo theft groups exist in other areas, composed of criminal
elements, such as the more traditional “maﬁa” groups operating
in such metropolitan areas as Chicago, Dallas/Fort Worth,
Atlanta, and Memphis. These locations suffer from the prolif-
eration of these major cargo theft gangs in addition to their own
indigenous
players.
Also,
law
enforcement
agencies
in
Columbus, Ohio, have reported new groups of cargo thieves
becoming active, made up primarily of members of the local
Somali community.
Some street gangs, particularly those in the Los Angeles
region, are getting into cargo theft because of its high payoff.
While professional cargo theft gangs understand the value of
remaining nonviolent in the commission of their crimes, street
gangs often resort to such measures because they are inexperi-
enced in cargo theft; for example, they will opt to attack a rig that
is already runningdand that is hijacking.
Theft of a Trailer
Cargo thieves prefer to target full “over the road” trailers
because not only do they get a large quantity of product but it also
comes ready for immediate movement to a controlled location
where it can be safely off-loaded, stored, and ultimately distrib-
uted. Theft of a mixed, or less-than-truckload (LTL), shipment is
not as favored because, even though the thieves may acquire their
18
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED

desired product, they also could end up with a majority of goods
that have less street cachet. LTL shipments are more commonly
involved in smaller, pilferage-type losses.
The saying “cargo at rest is cargo at risk” is well known
throughout the supply chain industry. This is because the
common denominator in 99% of all recorded full-truckload thefts
is the freight was not moving at the time it was stolen. High-value
loads left unattended at truck stops, parking lots, terminals, off
streets, and other unsecured locations are ideal targets. Even
criminals that conduct active surveillance and follow high-value
loads for hundreds of miles will wait until the load is stopped and
left unattended before they attempt the theft. This isn’t neces-
sarily the case in Latin America, the Asia-Paciﬁc region, and some
countries in Europe where cargo thieves will use weapons to force
a truck driver to stop. This modus operandi (MO) is rarely seen in
the United States where hijacking is a more severe crime, carrying
tougher sentencing, and apparently simply not worth the risk for
cargo thieves.
Cargo theft gangs are extremely proﬁcient at breaking into
tractors, starting the vehicles through a variety of methods, and
leaving with the stolen product in a manner of minutes. In an
interview after he was arrested by the Los Angeles County Sher-
iff’s Department, one cargo thief revealed the ease by which
thieves steal tractoretrailers. He also named the make and model
of tractors known to be easier to break into and hot-wire.
Gangs will also target preloaded trailers parked at distribution
centers and other shipping points for pick up. Certainly there are
operational advantages for this practice as it saves time and
money because the loaded trailers or containers can be moved
away from dock doors, allowing continued activity from them
and drivers just have to get in the truck and drive. However, the
vulnerability is also present as the loads are highly mobile. The
criminals will conduct surveillance on facilities to determine
whether loaded trailers are staged and the level of security in
place, especially during the time when there is no activity (night
and weekends).
If they determine that minimal security is used and the trailers
are not being checked they know they may have as much as
a 60-hour window (even more if the theft takes place over a holiday
weekend) to steal a load from the terminal lot and transport it
before the cargo is reported stolen. This allows the criminal to
transport the load signiﬁcant distances without fear of being
detected or apprehended. In such cases, there have been occur-
rences in which a stolen tractoretrailer was pulled over by police
for a trafﬁc infraction, a citation issued, and the vehicle released,
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED 19

all because the theft occurred over a weekend and the tractore
trailer had not been discovered missing and reported stolen.
Once the theft has occurred, removing markings such as trailer
numbers and logos is often a priority. The gang members
accomplish this by stopping in a secluded area and painting over
any identifying features that would be noticeable to someone
looking for that particular load. They will also remove or change
numbers or lettering to make the trailer appear legitimate so it will
not be identiﬁed as stolen if examined by law enforcement. This
technique is being used less often by professional cargo thieves as
they have realized that detection by trailer number is remote, as
their stolen trailer is simply one of hundreds of thousands on the
road at any given time. Additionally, they risk being observed in the
act of painting over the numbers on a trailer, and this suspicious
behavior could draw a law enforcement response.
Because a very large number of trailers are left unattended
with the tractor still attached, the criminals commonly steal
the entire rig. When this occurs, the thieves move the stolen
tractoretrailer a short distance and then unhook the trailer,
abandoning the stolen tractor. This is done for a couple of
reasons: ﬁrst, the tractor likely has a global positioning system
(GPS) unit, which the thieves can disable but often will not out of
fear that this action will trigger an alert. Second, because tractor
markings are often more difﬁcult and time-consuming to
disguise, driving around in one “as is” could draw attention from
law enforcement, increasing the likelihood of capture.
Instead, the gang will bring a tractor with them, generally one
they have stolen in the past and have taken the time to remove
tracking devices and distinguishing markings.
After the thieves have hooked up their tractor to the trailer,
they will proceed to their destination. This is frequently the South
Florida area for loads stolen east of the Rocky Mountains and
Los Angeles for those stolen in the West. Using their own form of
a supply chain, the criminals will transport, store, and eventually
ship the stolen cargo to their buyer. This often involves the use of
a warehouse for an extended period of time as the thieves store
product that may contain serial numbers or be sought after by
police. Then, once the heat dies down and the thieves feel more
secure in fencing the stolen product it is moved to a seaport for
shipment to Latin America (and sometimes Europe) or to the
buyer’s warehouse for further distribution and sale on the black
market or re-entry into the legitimate market within the United
States.
In another method of stealing cargo, albeit one of the more
complicated ones, thieves pretending to work for a legitimate
20
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED

carrier pick up loads that freight brokers have posted on the
Internet. This MO, which has surfaced more frequently since
2008, is common in the western United States, speciﬁcally
California. Individuals using this method pose as an existing
trucking company and make an online bid to transport a load.
The thieves even send falsiﬁed paperwork to the freight broker,
including copies of their operating authority.
The driver will arrive on site, present a driver’s license (which
is fake), and will then be given the load never to be seen again.
According to the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department and
the California Highway Patrol, use of this MO shows no sign of
slowing down. There are other variations on this fraud theme. In
the most basic, a cargo thief simply presents himself to a plant,
warehouse, or distribution center and either provides docu-
mentation or has information that would be consistent with
a driver picking up a shipment. The cargo is loaded on the truck
and, within a short period of time, the legitimate driver turns up
only to be informed that the shipment has already been picked
up. One would have to think that the imposter would need to
have access to relevant information to pull this off successfully.
The other option, which is far more elaborate and therefore
more difﬁcult to ferret out, is when thieves decide to set up their
own trucking company, going so far as to obtain operating
authority from the Department of Transportation and even
purchasing cargo legal liability and other insurance coverage. So
in essence there is nothing obviously different about these
trucking companies. Of course that is until a shipper tenders
a load to them never to be seen or heard from again. Here you
have a small initial investment resulting in a large future payoff.
When
Cargo thieves, while operating in a manner unique to their
speciﬁc “trade,” still follow many of the tactics used in the
criminal world. For instance, like other thieves, the cargo variety
generally prefers to carry out their crimes during periods when
they are most likely not to get caught. In the supply chain, this
means loads frequently are stolen over weekends, when ware-
houses and distribution centers are closed, and drivers have left
their loads sitting in parking lots, truck stops, and anywhere else
they can so they can take the time off. From 2006 to 2010,
approximately 68% of all cargo theft incidents occurred between
Friday evening and Monday morning. This time frame provides
a signiﬁcant window for thieves to steal the load and transport it
long distances without risk of detection (Figure 2.1).
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED 21

Again, as said previously, good transit security starts with the
shipper, and while it is believed that the most critical component
of any cargo-related program is carrier selection and security
program compliance, we would be remiss if we made no mention
that
shippers
or
their
customers
(consignees)
can
make
a demonstrable difference when it comes to weekend cargo theft.
Many companies have well-deﬁned receiving times at their
facilities whether they be plants, warehouses, or distribution
centers. These windows are sacrosanct, if not immutable, so all
logistical decisions revolve around them.
Case in point, a company is importing containerized goods
and wants them delivered to them between 8 and 10 a.m. on
a Monday morning. This scenario seems rather innocuous unless
you understand the realities of port/marine terminal operations.
Many, actually most, terminals do not open until 7 or 8 a.m. so
a trucking company has two options:
1. Get in the truck queue ﬁrst thing Monday morning and hope
they can get their “box” in time to make it to their destination
at the required time.
2. Pick up the container Friday afternoon, in which case they
have plenty of time.
The question is where does the trucker park the loaded
container over the weekend? Unfortunately, there is no consistent
answer for this as locations chosen by drivers are as diverse as the
drivers themselves. Ultimately, and most critically though, is that
the most likely location chosen by a driver will not be a secured
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
Saturday
Friday
Thursday
Wednesday
Tuesday
Monday
Sunday
Cargo Theft: By Day of the Week
 
Figure 2.1 Courtesy of FreightWatch.
22
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED

environment for the cargo, but rather the most convenient
location for their chosen activity while biding time.
A similar scene involving the domestic move of a full trailer
load can also be made. A shipper gives a shipment to a trucking
company on a Thursday or Friday and tells the driver the cargo
does not have to be delivered until the following Monday or
Tuesday.
If the load is lost in either of these instances, the ﬁrst impulse
is to blame the trucking company and/or driver. When you drill
down into the particulars of the loss, perhaps you ﬁnd other
culpable parties.
Nighttime is another period of heightened cargo theft activity,
as criminals by their very nature prefer to conduct their activities
in the dark, out of eyesight and away from other people. John
Tabor, national investigations manager for National Retail
Systems, has said if he had to put his entire security budget into
one thing, it would be lights. Well-lighted areas deter crime more
than any other security feature, as criminals seek darkened areas
in order to avoid detection. Additionally, when facilities do not
have adequate lighting, surveillance cameras are less effective;
the images captured by them are less clear at night, reducing the
chances that the criminal will be identiﬁed should their activities
be recorded.
Locations
More cargo thefts occur at truck stops than at any other place.
Of all tractoretrailer cargo theft incidents in the United States,
68% occur in unsecured locations. From these thefts from unse-
cured locations, the most popular (intuitively) is from truck stops,
with 82% of loads from an unsecured location. The reason for this
is that unattended loaded tractoretrailers are there. Moreover, the
speed at which cargo thieves operate makes every trailer sitting at
a truck stop a potential target, regardless of whether the driver
spends as little as 5 minutes inside the facility using the restroom
and paying for fuel or a few hours showering, eating, and resting.
Of course, thefts occur anywhere tractoretrailers are left
unattended. Drop lots (secured and unsecured), distribution
centers, big box stores, other retailers, restaurant parking lots,
and roadsides along with transportation provider yards are other
target-rich environments.
In May 2009 a cargo thief driving a stolen tractor followed
a company driver into a secure drop lot and hooked his tractor to
a loaded trailer. Then, claiming he was from a different region of
the United States and had forgotten the access code, the thief was
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED 23

able to convince the company driver to open the gate. The thief
then drove off the lot with more than $200,000 in stolen product,
thanks to the unwitting help of the very company he victimized.
This incident highlights the risk inherent in leaving loads unat-
tended as well as the creativity (and audacity) thieves will employ
to steal them.
As stated previously, cargo theft gangs operate throughout the
United States, actively seeking high-value products that can be
fenced and sold easily on the black market or to foreign entities.
While these gangs travel to wherever the cargo is located, cargo
theft is centered primarily in areas with high numbers of
manufacturing or distribution centers. Miami, Dallas/Fort Worth,
Los Angeles, Atlanta, Memphis, Louisville, New Jersey, and Phil-
adelphia are all known for their high rates of cargo theft. In some
of these areas the thieves target a variety of product types.
Memphis, for example, has high rates of pharmaceutical theft due
to the presence of major drug company and wholesaler distri-
bution centers; New Jersey also experiences a higher rate of stolen
pharmaceutical loads due to the fact that there are a number of
companies in the area, whereas Dallas/Fort Worth, an electronics
manufacturing hub, sees signiﬁcant amounts of thefts in this
category, including cell phones and televisions.
Warehouse Burglaries
Although the primary MO of cargo thieves is to follow a loaded
trailer and steal it at the ﬁrst opportunity, gangs sometimes seek to
increase their proﬁts by ﬁlling multiple trailers worth of high-end
goods in one fell swoop. Hence, warehouse break-ins are a devel-
oping trend in the United States. Moreover, less sophisticated
“smash-and-grab” thefts are becoming a thing of the past as cargo
thieves’ techniques become more technologically advanced.
To carry out a successful warehouse/distribution center
burglary today, cargo thieves conduct extensive intelligence-
gathering and intensive surveillance. The gangs use a variety of
techniques to gain information, ranging from the sublime
(embedding gang members within intended targets, normally as
temporary
workers)
to
the
simplistic
(Internet
searches,
observing distribution routines, or simply asking questions).
Factors cargo criminals consider in their surveillance mode
include watching security ofﬁcers on site, camera and alarm
systems, and lighting.
This is why it is recommended that facility owners and oper-
ators deploy their security guards a bit unconventionally. In
24
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED

addition to their normal duties and external threat mindset
(concerns with someone entering the premises and/or building),
they also need to engage in countersurveillancedwatching
people who are watching them. Ultimately the thieves will decide
whether they have enough data to disable alarm and camera
systems without drawing a response from law enforcement.
To make a deﬁnitive determination, a common technique is to
test a facility’s response protocols associated with the alarm
system. Gangs will intentionally set off the alarm by shaking or
jarring a dock door or window without causing any noticeable
damage. They then will retreat to a safe place to observe the
response by the company and/or law enforcement. The idea is
that after being called to the facility for two or three “false”
alarms, management will assume the system is malfunctioning
and turn it off. This of course gives the criminals free rein to break
into the facility and steal as much product as they can while the
facility remains closed. If a security guard from the alarm
company or a manager is posted inside the facility while the
alarm system is disabled, the gang will either move on to another
facility or return another time to try a different MO.
In lieu of setting off the alarm system repeatedly in hopes it
will be turned off, gangs also will cut the phone lines to disable
the system. However, in case the facility has a redundant trans-
mittal method in place, such as a cellular backup, the thieves will
nonetheless try to avoid setting off the alarm. This is often done
by cutting a hole in a dock door so that the alarm sensors pro-
tecting this access point won’t be triggered or by gaining entry
through a skylight (again, many facility owners do not factor in
attack from above when designing their alarm systems; thieves
are now using this way to entry a building so sensors need to be
arrayed accordingly). Some gangs have attempted to gain entry
by pointing hidden video cameras at a facility’s keypad and then
summoning a keycard holder to the location by pretending to
represent the alarm company.
In one example, a cargo theft gang placed an ashtray/trash can
combination by an employee entrance. Attempting to determine
what the entry code for the employee door was, the gang hid
a camera inside the trash can. The camera was pointed at the
keypad in an attempt to record employees entering their entry
code. The trash can was eventually discovered by a staff member
as being out of place and, upon moving the can, the camera was
found (Figure 2.2).
Once inside, the gang seeks out and disables any backup
communication devices and closed circuit television (CCTV)
systems. Some gangs will also spray paint camera lenses in order
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED 25

to reduce footage obtained before the CCTV system can be
disabled. Inside information is always extremely beneﬁcial in this
process. During a
March
2009
burglary in
Olive Branch,
Mississippi, the gang was captured on video sprinting directly to
the alarm and CCTV systems to disable them, clearly they knew
exactly where the systems were located.
In the now infamous March 2010 burglary in Enﬁeld, Con-
necticut, criminals disabled the entire alarm system after
lowering themselves through a hole in the roof directly over the
room that housed the security communications equipment.
These are both clear examples of criminals having extensive
knowledge of a facility’s layout, the locations of key security
Figure 2.2 Trash can with a camera hidden inside recording employee access
codes. Courtesy of FreightWatch.
26
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED

components, and the most effective means of disabling them
without detection.
After all security and camera systems are disabled or bypassed,
the gang will proceed to steal as much product as possible, often
using the facility’s own forklifts to move large amounts of product
to the loading docks and into trailers. Cargo theft gangs are
extremely efﬁcient in this process. After viewing footage of a theft
gang moving pallets through a warehouse, one manager said he
wished his employees were as good forklift drivers as the crimi-
nals. As with in-transit cargo theft, gangs will often bring previ-
ously stolen tractors with them to a targeted facility and then use
on-site trailers for transporting the stolen load. If no trailers are
available at the facility, the thieves will have discovered the fact
during their preop surveillance and will simply steal them as well.
Warehouse burglaries can be extremely lucrative. While the
value of a single full truckload of cellular telephones averages
$2.3 million, the net loss from a January 2010 warehouse burglary
in Orlando, Florida, broke the $10 million mark.
As with in-transit thefts, the locations of warehouses can also
play a major role in a criminal group’s decision-making process.
A facility located on a well-lighted, heavily trafﬁcked street may
present far too much risk for a gang to burglarize and they may
opt to try to steal a load that in is transit after departing the
facility. In the aforementioned Enﬁeld, Connecticut, burglary,
the facility was located in a secluded area and barely visible from
the street unfortunately, there was a nice area aerial shot
accessible via Google Earth; another facet of cargo criminality
that must be considered. The thieves have computers and
can look up the same type of information we all do. For example,
they
can
surf
the
net
looking
for
physical
addresses
of
manufacturers, warehouses, and distributors of certain goods.
Additionally, the thieves ensured themselves even more cover
from detection because they hit on a night when the weather
cooperated, bringing heavy rain and winds, causing substantial
damage throughout the community. As of publication of this
book, the Enﬁeld warehouse burglary at $76 million is the largest
on record.
CASE STUDY: BIG MONEY FOR CREATIVE CRIMINALS
Numerous factors must be considered when a company chooses
a facility or warehouse to store and ship their cargo from. Often the size
of the facility, costs, and accessibility by tractoretrailers play the
most major roles. Because of this, the type of buildings used throughout
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED 27

the United States supply chain varies in almost every way imaginabled
from standalone, state-of-the-art facilities, with perimeter fencing,
single entry and exit points, all the way to a small warehouse sand-
wiched between other tenants in a larger industrial or even retail center,
with no fencing, and multiple points of access.
Two of the most common methods for gaining entry into a ware-
house are through the roof and through the shared wall of a neighboring
business.
As gaining entry through a warehouse’s skylight became increasing
popular for criminals, it became more common for companies to install
security countermeasures, such as steel bars and motion detection at
points of roof entry (sky lights, access portals, etc.). To combat this,
criminals began to cut holes in roofs, away from the points of entry,
knowing that security coverage was less likelydsometimes knowing full
well that security in a certain location did not exist due to inside
information.
This method has been used in multiple cases over the past decade,
most notably in the $76 million Enﬁeld, Connecticut, heist, in another
pharmaceutical warehouse burglary in Richmond, Virginia, in August of
2009, and in a $4 million cell phone heist outside of Chicago’s O’Hare
International Airport in 2008.
By attacking facilities in this manner, criminals are able to bypass
the most common points of intrusion detectionddoors, windows, roof
access pointsdand gain entry to the facility interior.
Another increasingly popular method is to gain access to facilities
that have a shared wall with other businesses by breaking into the
neighboring businessdpresumably because the neighboring business
has less (or no) security infrastructure in place and then cutting a hole
through the shared wall, again bypassing the common points of intru-
sion detection.
On October 23, 2011, in Norcross, Georgia, an unknown number of
suspects gained access into a cell phone distribution warehouse by
cutting a hole through the concrete wall from an adjoining business that
had a minimal security infrastructure in place. Once inside the facility,
the criminals were able to deactivate the security system and proceeded
to steal approximately $1.8 million in mobile phones. Cameras showed
several of the suspects upon entry to the facility, but they were
disguised, eventually pushing the cameras up to face the ceiling.
Within a year of that incident, two other facility burglaries had
occurred, both within the Norcross, Georgia, area, and both through
similar methods as the October 23 burglary.
While facility burglaries only comprise 4 to 5% of cargo theft inci-
dents year after year, the average take can be 10 times that of a full
truckload theft, as criminals will load multiple trailers as full as they can
before departing.
On November 4, 2007, a distribution center in Grapevine, Texas, was
hit for $8 million in TomTom GPS devices. A similar heist in Richmond
Hills, Ontario, Canada, netted a crew over $10 million in printer
cartridges, while another theft crew also obtained $10 million in goods
28
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED

from a warehouse burglary, this time stealing cell phones from a facility
in Orlando, Florida, in January 2011.
As with over-the-road cargo theft, gangs that target warehouses and
distribution centers are extremely creative; in fact, they are considered
to be more creative and knowledgeable due to the increased level of
security and risk of being detected and apprehended by entering
a facility in lieu of stealing an unattended trailer. But with that risk
comes signiﬁcantly higher payouts, and while not every theft gang is
quick to attempt a warehouse burglary, the right crew, with the right
motivation, can certainly land big bucks if they do it right.
Other Forms and Modes of Cargo Theft
While over the road, full-truckload thefts and warehouse
burglaries are the most common methods of stealing cargo in
large quantities, other forms of theft certainly exist. While the
majority result in the loss of trailers/containers or large-scale
theft of a facility, smaller incidents occur with far more regularity,
resulting in countless thefts at the single product or box level,
undetected and seemingly impossible to quantify.
A few of the common forms of supply chain theft that cost the
industry billions of dollars annually are given here.
Pilferage
One type of pilferage or attritional loss, also known as
“leakage,” within the supply chain, occurs when the perpetrator
goes by another named“your employee.” Generally started with
some sense of entitlement or “they owe me” mentality, a ware-
house employee quickly opens a carton, pulls out the product,
puts it in his car, and drives home. The next day he is anxious to
return to work and try it again, regaining from the company what
he feels is rightfully his.
While full-truckload thefts are generally conducted by those
considered to be professional cargo thieves, pilferage often takes
place from within, generally one piece at a time, far below any
insurance deductible, done on a daily basis from the very people
responsible for their care.
Pilferage, which shrinks the U.S. economy by millions, if not
billions, of dollars each year, can be a gateway crime for other,
larger forms of cargo theft as the theft of one piece grows to a box,
then a case, then a pallet. As this new form of income becomes
a way of life for the employee, movement to larger targets is often
the next logical step. While this clearly is not the case with every
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED 29

employee who has ever walked out of a warehouse with product
hidden in his lunch pail, it does hold true for uncountable others.
In 2009, a warehouse supervisor in Ohio was arrested and
convicted on charges of cargo theft and conspiracy to commit
cargo theft after he colluded with a truck driver to steal more than
$200,000 worth of infant formula. The supervisor, who oversaw
the entire staff and millions of dollars in product during his shift,
very likely did not start off stealing on this grand scale.
Fictitious Pickup
A growing trend that started to ﬂourish around 2005, ﬁctitious
pickup involves criminals posing as legitimate truck drivers,
sometimes going so far as to create fake transportation compa-
nies, in order to secure and steal loads directly from shippers. In
order to deceive companies into willingly, albeit unwittingly,
giving up high-value loads, criminals have used online load
brokering sites and other means of winning transportation bids or
have simply shown up at facilities as drivers, claiming to be
assigned a scheduled load.
A variation of this MO involves a driver for a transportation
provider arriving at the pickup site ahead of his company’s
assigned driver and then simply disappearing with the fully
loaded tractoretrailer. This MO has also been used by recently
terminated drivers. Often after one of these thefts is discovered,
a comment such as “Everyone knows Mike. He picks up every
day” is heard from the red-faced shipper.
Driver Theft
Although similar to the ﬁctitious pickup, driver theft occurs
when the actual driver assigned by the transportation provider or
contracted directly by the shipper, operating in a legitimate
business, decides to steal the load. In its most common form,
driver theft involves stealing part of a load while in transit or
selling the product from the back of the trailer. On occasions,
however, drivers will disappear with the entire load, never to be
heard from again and the product long gone unless it turns up
sold through the black market. These incidents can fuel drug or
other substance abuse or simply stem from a disgruntled driver
thinking he is owed some back pay.
In 2009 a driver was caught stealing bags of salad and vege-
tables from the back of his tractoretrailer in Brooklyn, New York.
This is a classic example of an otherwise responsible driver who
decided to make some extra money. In some cases, drivers have
been known to drive their big rigs to their home to ofﬂoad
30
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED

televisions and other electronics, later claiming they were victims
of short shipments during the loading process.
Hijacking
In the United States, truck hijacking cases comprise less than
2% of all cargo theft activity. Deﬁned as the in-transit theft of
goods through the use of violence or threat of violence, hijacking
of tractoretrailers is generally attributed to local gangs trying to
make a quick buck when the opportunity arises. Professional
cargo theft gangs such as those operating out of South Florida,
New Jersey, or other cargo crime hotbeds understand that
hijacking is a higher level of crime, ramping up more attention
from law enforcement and dramatically stiffer penalties for
convictions (not to mention increased risk of detection and
capture due to the driver’s presence at the time of the theft).
Hijackings take place most commonly in southern California,
where gangs, including some small-time cargo theft gangs, tend
to be more aggressive. From 2006 through 2010, over 40% of all
hijackings in the United States were recorded in Los Angeles and
San Bernardino counties.
While rare here, hijacking is a common MO in numerous other
countries,
including
Mexico,
Brazil,
South
Africa,
Russia,
Malaysia, and the Philippines. In these and other countries, its
prevalence can be attributed to a complicated mixture of socio-
economics, law enforcement presence and strategies, supply
chain security practices, and the overall level of violent crime in
each country. In Mexico, cargo theft occurs almost exclusively
through the use of violence or threat of violence, with thefts of
unattended cargo occurring only rarely.
Air
While product is virtually never stolen from aircraft, the airline
and indirect air carrier (freight forwarder) cargo terminals that
surround our major airports are rife with theft. As with rail theft,
these incidents may not necessarily be listed as thefts from an air
carrier because the product was in a facility when stolen, but
there is no denying the desirability of product selected for ship-
ping via air. Such product generally has a high value associated
with it and some level of perishability equating to timee
sensitivity. We would argue that many goods that are not
susceptible to damage from temperature extremes are indeed still
perishable. Think of brand name apparel that “enjoys” as many as
six seasons in a single year. Due to the inherent higher freight
costs, shippers tend to move goods in this mode only when there
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED 31

is a real value proposition. Therefore, shipments transported by
air usually share the aforementioned characteristics, thus making
them ideal targets for theft.
Rail and Pipeline
Theft from other modes of transportation such as rail, air,
pipelines, and sea come in two general forms. First is pilferage
from the transport mode itself. In the case of rail, that often
involves people jumping onto trains when they are stopped or
moving at very slow speeds, breaking security seals to “go shop-
ping,”
and
then
throwing
cartons
from
desirable
ocean
containers and intermodal trailers along the tracks so that their
accomplices following behind in small trucks or vans can pick the
stolen goods up. Second is the theft of product at a hub, such as
a rail yard. While the ﬁrst generally involves lesser volume of
product loss per incident, the aggregate adds up very quickly and
has a substantial impact on a nation’s economy due to cargo
theft. The latter method of theft may not be reported as rail theft
due to the product being in a drop yard or other facility, even
though it was moved via rail. This is explored more in Chapter 17:
Rail and Pipeline Security.
There is no question that America is dependent on energy.
Pipelines run across the country carrying oil and gas products.
There are miles and miles of networked pipes that by the very fact
that they cover vast distances and are in every corner of the
United States make them vulnerable to tampering if not outright
theft (people tapping into the lines) or attack and virtually
impossible to protect.
Theft of equipment in the pipeline system is the biggest
concern to those in the industry. From 2005 to 2007, over 500
cases of equipment theft involving pipelines were recorded in the
state of Texas alone with losses estimated at $78 million.
Key Points
•
For the purpose of this book, cargo theft refers to large-scale
theft such as trailer or container theft and facility burglaries
and robberies.
•
Small-scale theft such as pilferage and “leakage” are typically
not factored into cargo theft statistics cited.
•
Warehouse
burglaries are far
more lucrative than
full-
truckload or container theft; however, the increased risks
and complexities of warehouse burglaries keep this mode of
theft between 4 and 5% of incidents each year.
32
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED

•
Truck hijackings and warehouse robberies are just full-
truckload
thefts,
and
warehouse
robberies
are
akin
to
burglaries with the added component of violence or threat of
violence during commission of the crime.
•
Thefts in other modes of transportation can present a signiﬁ-
cant
challenge
to
supply
chain
professionals,
requiring
comprehensive and ﬂexible supply chain security programs.
•
Theft in the rail industry, for example, has been occurring for
over 100 years in the United States and today has simply taken
on a different form than in years past, but is no less present
and continues to have signiﬁcant impacts on supply chain
efﬁciencies, costs, and product delivery.
Chapter 2 CARGO THEFT DEFINED 33

3
RISK VS. REWARD
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Why theft gangs are dedicated to cargo theft
• Prosecution and sentencing
• Risk vs reward of cargo theft compared to other crimes
• Efforts underway to increase punishment for convicted cargo criminals
Go where the money is . and go there often.
Willie Sutton
Why Cargo?
Cargo theft, which rivals even the most grandiose white collar
crimes, far surpasses the total losses from property crimes such as
bank robberies, jewelry theft, and others. Given that cargo theft is
such an underreported crime, industry experts are hard pressed
to provide a precise annual price tag, although estimates range
from $3 to $30 billion in the United States alone. What’s more,
only relatively small amounts of cargo are ever recovered and few
cargo crooks are prosecuted and sentenced (Badolato, 1999).
The reason is that cargo theft is a very low priority for most
policing agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), because by and large these crimes are nonviolent.
Furthermore, professional cargo thieves in the United States are
fully aware that the involvement of weapons would considerably
raise the proﬁle of their crimes to law enforcement and the
judicial system. In the end, they choose to leave those sleeping
giants alone by leaving the weapons at home.
As things now stand when thieves weigh the slight risk of
capture against the extraordinarily high payoff for loads such as
cell phones, pharmaceuticals, high-end clothing, and computers,
action wins out every time. When the value of one of these loads
can run as high as $40 million, and thieves can make 10 to 40
cents on the dollar (a fence makes about 50 cents on the dollar),
it’s easy to see why the scale tips in favor of theft. Even if they get
caught, they may spend a few months in jail or get away with only
probation (Eiserer, 2008).
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00003-0
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
35

In October 2009, several men were arrested in South Florida
after being found in possession of $2.3 million in stolen
cigarettes. A search of the residence of one of the suspects turned
up product from almost all of the 22 reported thefts in Palm
Beach County, Florida. In all, police found $13 million worth of
stolen goods in his possession. In February 2011, after spending
16 months in the legal process, the cargo thief pleaded guilty
to grand theft in Palm Beach County Court and was sentenced
to 3 years’ probation.
Three months prior, four coconspirators, two warehouse
supervisors, and two truck drivers were convicted in connection
with the theft of $200,000 worth of baby formula from a ware-
house in Lehigh Valley, Pennsylvania. One of the warehouse
supervisors, Daniel C. Vertilus, 24, of South Whitehall Township,
Pennsylvania, was sentenced to 100 hours of community service,
as he had no prior criminal history.
One of the drivers, Rene Chavez-Garcia, 45, of York, Pennsyl-
vania, was convicted on nine theft charges and sentenced to 6 to
23 months in prison and 5 years’ probation. The second driver,
Angelo Rodriguez, 46, of Brentwood, New York, received 5 years’
probation (Amerman, 2009). This is just one example of the
punishments meted out to cargo criminals.
Bank Robbery vs. Cargo Theft (Electronics)
Of the 5531 bank robberies recorded by the FBI in 2009, 5246
were successful in that the perpetrators departed with money or
other valuable property. The monetary loss to the banks ranged
from less than a thousand dollars on the low end to an estimated
high of $300,000. Of the total thefts recorded, the average bank
robbery resulted in a $10,000 loss.
Also in 2009 there were 160 recorded cargo theft incidents
involving electronics, with an average loss per incident of
$870,000. Because cargo thieves earn 10 to 40% of the load’s
value, they made $87,000 to $348,000 per theft.
Of the $57 million stolen during bank robberies in 2009, law
enforcement agencies recovered approximately 14%, while less
than 3% of the $150 million in stolen electronics was ever
found.
Cargo Theft vs. Bank Robbery
Even though bank robberies exceeded cargo thefts of elec-
tronics by well over 5000 incidents in 2009, bank robberies had
36
Chapter 3 RISK VS. REWARD

a net result of $93 million less than cargo thefts, with an average
value per incident of $10,000 compared to $870,000 (Figure 3.1).
Because of the immediate response to bank robberies by
police and the FBI, the arrest rate is estimated at 60%. This
percentage does not include bank robbers who got away but are
later arrested for committing other crimes. Bank robbers get
caught largely because their images are captured on closed circuit
television systems during commission of the crime. These
pictures are shared with law enforcement throughout the country
and aired in the media, often resulting in a tip that leads to the
culprit’s arrest.
For cargo theft, the arrest rate is less than 4%. While arrests
for bank robbery often occur because the perpetrators’ pictures
have been captured on camera and then disseminated to law
enforcement, rarely do pictures factor into the cargo theft equa-
tion. With more than 70% of all cargo thefts occurring at truck
Figure 3.1 Data obtained from the
FBI Bank Crime Statistics and
FreightWatch.
Chapter 3 RISK VS. REWARD 37

stops or unattended/unsecured lots, criminal gangs face minimal
risk of having their identity exposed.
One similarity between cargo theft and bank robbery is the low
chance of being caught spending the money stolen or fencing the
stolen product. Once stolen money leaves a bank, there is very
little chance the thief will be caught spending it, even if the serial
numbers are known to police and the bank’s ofﬁcers. The same is
true with stolen cargo. With so many warehouses and ocean
containers/trailers coming and going, the likelihood that stolen
cargo will be recovered is minimal.
Sentencing is based on criminal history and the use of a ﬁrearm
during the commission of a crime. Federal sentencing guidelines
do not take the value of the loss into considerations, and thus loss
amounts rarely play a signiﬁcant role in sentencing. A bank robber
who uses a note to commit a crime will receive a far lighter sen-
tence than one who uses a ﬁrearm. Because cargo theft is almost
exclusively a nonviolent crime in the United States, cargo thieves
also receive less punishment, often suspended sentences with
parole, despite the incredibly large loss suffered by the victim.
Identity Theft vs. Cargo Theft
According to the Federal Trade Commission, 9 to 10 million
people fall victims to identify theft per year in the United States.
On average, identity theft generates losses of approximately $50.8
billion in the United States alone (Javelin Strategy and Research).
Even though the number of identity thefts surpasses the
number of cargo theft incidents, the average loss per cargo theft
incident is considerably higher. For instance, single loads of
electronics and pharmaceuticals are estimated at $870,000 and $3
million, respectively, whereas the amount of loss for identity theft
ranges from $2000 to $5000 per incident. (“Fighting Back against
Identity Theft”).
Unlike cargo theft and bank robberies, it is difﬁcult to estimate
the number of identity crimes that are solved, as most incidents
are reported by the victims only if ﬁnancial harm is recognized or
because of mysterious crimes appearing on an innocent person’s
criminal record.
In addition to monetary losses, identity theft also affects the
victim’s lifestyle. Because identity thieves tend to target people
with good credit scores, years of creditworthiness can vanish in
a matter of weeks, days, or even hours. As a consequence, even if
the criminals pay a penalty or go to jail, the victims are not
exempt from the difﬁcult process of cleaning up their credit/
38
Chapter 3 RISK VS. REWARD

background records (Pearl, 180). Even though the consequences
of cargo theft also go beyond monetary losses and result in order
delays and customer dissatisfaction, most companies have cargo
insurance and are able to recover at least a percentage of the
value of the goods.
Similar to cargo crime, sentencing for identity theft is minimal.
The average prison sentence for ﬁnancial identity theft ranges
from 3 to 5 years. In some states, criminals may serve no jail time,
instead being required to pay a penalty ranging from $50,000 to
$100,000 (IdentityTheft.com). Factors often considered in sen-
tences for identity theft are the number of individuals/businesses
affected and the ﬁnancial loss.
Gene Franklin, a San Francisco-area man, was sentenced in
August 2009 to 31 years in state prison following his conviction on
more than 46 felony counts, including identity fraud. Franklin
was accused of stealing the identities of more than a dozen
people and using their ﬁnancial information to buy property.
Prosecutors estimated the value of his fraudulent purchases at
$2.8 million, including a $685,000 house in Huntington Beach,
California.
In September 2004, Philip Cumming was found guilty of
identity theft and fraud and was sentenced to 14 years in prison.
Cumming, a computer help desk assistant at a Long Island-based
credit company, had access to clients’ personal information,
including usernames and passwords. Cumming not only stole
client information to open bank accounts, he also downloaded
credit reports and sold them to other identity thieves for as little
as $30 each. The FBI investigation revealed that Cumming
belonged to a large, international criminal organization that had
been responsible for some 30,000 incidents involving identity
theft and $100 million in losses (Swarts, 2004).
Similar to cargo theft, it is difﬁcult to have a clear picture of
identity thieves right after a theft is reported. Even with more
traditional identity theft methods (such as the garbage method,
where criminals acquire personal information by searching
through trash cans and recycle bins), thieves are not able to be
identiﬁed by their victims or witnesses.
Today, police face greater challenges trying to solve identity
theft. Identity thieves are increasingly making use of the
Internet with modern technology, allowing them to make their
methods more sophisticated and harder to track. In the same
way in which cargo thieves have resorted to the use of global
positioning system jammers to thwart tracking devices, identity
thieves prefer to use the Internet to access a company’s bank
account or to steal personal information at corporate and
Chapter 3 RISK VS. REWARD 39

individual levels instead of going through garbage (Lacey and
Cuganesan, 2004).
Cargo Theft Sentencing
In 2007, Carlos Alarosa, a native of Cuba, stole approximately
2800 Tom Tom global positioning units and an 18 wheeler in
Dallas. The total value of theft was $842,000. Apprehended with
the stolen load by police in Mesquite, Texas, Alarosa was con-
victed and sentenced to 5 years’ deferred adjudication, meaning
the offense won’t count on his criminal history if he completes
probation successfully (Eiserer, 2008).
Bank robbers and those who commit other high-visibility
crimes do not draw tougher sentencing from the courts because
their crime made the national news. Sentencing is largely based
on their criminal history, as well as whether weapons were
involved in the crime. Although law enforcement investigates all
bank robberies intensely, perpetrators who made off with a few
thousand dollars by passing a note to the teller will receive
considerably lighter sentences upon conviction than those who
brandished weapons inside the bank. In a similar vein, a con-
victed thief with no criminal history who stole a $12 million load
without using a weapon will often receive no prison time, despite
the value of the goods. For this reason, law enforcement agencies
do not give high priority to even major cargo theft cases. It is
simply not worth their time.
One strategy for correcting this problem is through appeals to
legislators to stiffen the federal sentencing guidelines for cargo
theft, asking them to factor in the potentially extreme impacts of
such crimes on the national economy along with the recidivist
nature of cargo thieves. The latter comes into play since left
unchecked, with a veritable slap on the wrist, convicted criminals
will otherwise be back on the streets the very next day.
Clearly the current process does not serve as a deterrent for
cargo criminals, even those who are being processed by the
judicial system. In 2010, several men stole four tractoretrailers
loaded with cosmetics worth in excess of $4 million in Roanoke,
Virginia. The criminals moved three of the trailers successfully,
but were caught while attempting to paint over the distinguishing
markings on the fourth. Of the gang members arrested, one had
been arrested previously for the June 2009 theft of $10 million in
pharmaceuticals that took place in Tennessee.
The four men arrested were Armando Canaura, 54; Jose Can-
aura, 44; Osvaldo Pedraza Roja, 48; and Denis Perez de Castro, 41.
40
Chapter 3 RISK VS. REWARD

On July 13, 2011, all four entered Alford pleas (an Alford plea is
not an admission of guilt but acknowledges the prosecution has
the evidence to persuade a judge or jury of conviction) of guilty to
felony possession of stolen property with intent to sell or
distribute (Adams, 2011). Each man received a suspended sen-
tence and was placed on probation by the judge. The prosecutor
for the case did not object when the defense requested that
the convicted men serve their probation in Florida and be allowed
to continue driving trucks for a living, which was granted by
the judge.
To exacerbate the problem, the Bloomberg BusinessWeek
article on cargo theft dated May 30 2011, “Cargo Theft: The New
Highway Robbery” by Daniel Grushkin lists Jose and Armando
Canaura and Perez de Castro by name as active cargo criminals
from South Florida.
U.S. Sentencing Guidelines for Cargo Theft
Over the past decade the losses associated with cargo theft-
related crimes have risen dramatically. One reason for the
increase is that criminals involved in cargo theft see an oppor-
tunity for high reward with only minimal risks. Thefts of sought-
after products such as televisions, cell phones, computers, and
pharmaceuticals can allow them to reap signiﬁcant paydays.
Another factor causing an increase is the absence of sentencing
guidelines or code under the Uniform Crime Reporting system
that was speciﬁcally designated for cargo theft until the reau-
thorization of the Patriot Act in 2006. Furthermore, local and state
police agencies often see cargo theft as a victimless crime because
insurance companies reimburse victims for their losses.
There are, however, provisions to prosecute cargo theft gangs
on the books. The following is a list of applicable federals laws
that relate directly to cargo theft and racketeering:
•
Title18U.S.Code,Section659:Theftfrominterstateshipments.
•
Title 18 U.S. Code, Section 1951: Interference with commerce
by threat or violence.
•
Title 18 U.S. Code, Section 1952: Interstate and foreign travel
or transportation in aid of racketeering.
•
Title 18 U.S. Code, Section 1957: Engaging in monetary trans-
actions in property derived from speciﬁed unlawful activity
(cash value greater than $10,000).
•
Title 18 U.S. Code, Section 1961 (1): Deﬁnition of racketeering
activity, to include any act or threat involving murder, kidnap-
ping, gambling, arson, or robbery.
Chapter 3 RISK VS. REWARD 41

•
Title 18 U.S. Code, Section 2117: The breaking and entering of
a carrier facility, as well as breaking the seals of railcars and
commercial trailers.
•
Title 18 U.S. Code, Section 2314: Interstate transportation of
stolen property of a value of $5000 or more.
•
Title 18 U.S. Code, Chapter 96: Racketeer-inﬂuenced and
corrupt organizations.
These regulations and guidelines, however, have proven to be
ineffective, providing virtually zero deterrence to cargo theft
gangs. Because of this, a group of pharmaceutical companies
[Abbott Laboratories, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Johnson &
Johnson, and Novo Nordisk] joined forces in 2010, forming the
Coalition for Patient Safety and Medicine Integrity, to lobby
Congress for stiffer penalties on cargo theft, speciﬁcally as it
relates to the pharmaceutical sector. The result is a bill being
sponsored by six U.S. senators that would grant police new
investigative powers and tougher penalties on pharmaceutical
theft (Eban, 2011).
Citing the 350% increase in monetary losses resulting from
cargo theft since 2007 and the $76 million warehouse burglary in
Connecticut, the senators introduced a bill in March 2011 calling
for increased penalties on convictions for theft of medical prod-
ucts under the Racketeer Inﬂuenced and Corrupt Organizations
law. The legislation would also give stiffer penalties for those who
dilute and counterfeit stolen drugs, change the labels, or damage
the drugs by storing or transporting them incorrectly.
In submitting the bill, the senators cited as a chief concern the
repackaging of stolen, temperature-sensitive specialty drugs, and
their reintroduction into the legitimate pharmaceutical supply
chaindwhere consumers face signiﬁcant risk of adverse medical
effects from mishandled or relabeled drugs. A case in point
occurred in 2009 following the theft in North Carolina of a full
truckload of insulin valued at $10.9 million. The mishandling of
the insulin and its later return to the legitimate supply chain
resulted in the death of a Houston man, among other adverse
effects on consumers.
Crime of Opportunity
While cargo theft is carried out most often by well-trained,
highly skilled and focused gangs, it remains a crime of opportu-
nity. The theft gangs, of course, go to great effort to ensure they
are ready when the opportunity arises, often following the load
for what could be hundreds of miles. In more than 98% of all
42
Chapter 3 RISK VS. REWARD

cargo theft incidents in the United States, theft occurs when the
load is left unattended.
Fortunately for the cargo criminal, there are countless
numbers of trucks on the road every single day, and thus no
shortage of opportunities to ply their trade. Cargo is moved
throughout the United States 365 days a year, with loads stopping
at truck stops, rest areas, drop lots, parking lots, terminals,
roadsides, and any other place a trailer will ﬁt.
Of course, for the theft to be a money-making enterprise, the
criminals must steal something they can sell. As discussed further
in Chapter 5: The Black Market, virtually anything of value to
consumers can be sold and moved on the black market. Furniture,
appliances, electronics, yard equipment, food, clothing, phar-
maceuticalsdthe list goes on and on. All of these have a market
and are regularly sought after by cargo gangs. With this seemingly
endless supply of available targets, theft gangs do not have to work
too hard to ﬁnd loads they can steal and sell for a proﬁt.
Another key component of cargo theft that makes this partic-
ular crime so attractive is the difﬁculty in catching criminals in the
act. Cargo crime occurs almost exclusively when there is no one
around, with no witnesses to the crime. In contrast, a bank robbery
is guaranteed to have both surveillance camera footage and live
witnesses, giving the police a head start in catching the offender.
Once a bank robbery occurs, the surveillance footage is often on
the local news within a few hoursdnot so in cargo crime. After
a load is stolen, it may not be discovered missing for days, may not
be reported to police at all, and the chances of having legible,
actionable video footage of the criminals in the act are nearly nil.
Key Points
•
Cargo theft is a low-risk, high-reward crime, with millions of
dollars in product available to be stolen with very little risk
of detection.
•
Criminals can make 10 to 40 cents on the dollar for stolen
loads, some of which are valued in excess of a million dollars.
•
Cargo theft provides criminals with the opportunity to make
substantially more money than bank robberies, with exponen-
tially less risk of capture or incarceration.
•
Arrest, prosecution, and sentencing levels for cargo theft are
light, with little outcry from the public for increased law
enforcement attention to this problem.
•
Criminals caught with millions of dollars in stolen goods from
cargo theft more often than not simply receive probation for
their crime.
Chapter 3 RISK VS. REWARD 43

4
ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Major theft gangs in cargo crime
• Similarities and differences between gangs and their modus operandi
• Risk of theft based on geography and theft gang areas
• Role of the stolen cargo broker
Florida is the southeast point of what’s been dubbed the
Bermuda Triangle of cargo theft.
Barry Tarnef
Cargo theft gangs do not usually ﬁt the traditional mold of
organized crime. These loosely knit organizations rarely have
a leader, as groups operate in small teams, traveling throughout
their region (or country), each performing a speciﬁc task in order
to acquire their targeted product. While power or control is often
the underlying motivator for typical street gangs and organized
crime groups, this is not the case with cargo theft gangs, who are
motivated almost exclusively by money and the lifestyle that
high-value thefts afford.
The leader of any job is traditionally the gang member who
initially found the target or brought the opportunity to the gang.
Because of this, cargo theft gangs are known for working
extremely well together, with members performing their roles
very efﬁciently.
In order for shippers, freight forwarders, carriers, and other
supply chain and security professionals to combat these cells
effectively, they must ﬁrst learn how the gangs operate. They
then must ensure that their employees receive cargo security
awareness training on what to watch for and that these
employees are constantly reminded to be vigilant. From suspi-
cious activity around a distribution center or a truck stop, to
paperwork with obvious mistakes being provided by a driver that
is not known to shipping personnel, the vast array of methods
used by theft gangs and methods by which they can be detected
should be well known by anyone who operates within the supply
chain arena.
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00004-2
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
45

Cargo thieves are not your usual run-of-the mill crooks.
Certain skills and an understanding of the supply chain industry
are required to successfully steal a loaded tractoretrailer or
break into a distribution center. Gangs need personnel who
know how to drive a truck, unhook a trailer, and are know-
ledgeable about the rules of the road when it comes to big rigs
(Gonzalez, 2009).
Regardless of the mode by which cargo is stolendwhether
from a warehouse, rail facility, air cargo facility, drop lot, truck
stop, storage yard, or any other of the countless other places
where cargo is stored or stageddif thieves steal the product in
any kind of bulk, they are going to need to transport it via
a tractoretrailer or container pulled by a tractor. This speciﬁcity
to the crime of cargo theft creates a different dynamic than
almost any other; the thieves must not only have the knowledge
and skills to commit the crime, but also the ability to transport
the product in a highly regulated environment.
Cargo theft gangs operate throughout the United States,
focusing primarily on areas with high volumes of manufacturing
and/or logistics operations. Rates of theft in relation to certain
industries and the areas in which these thefts occur are quite
predictable in fact. Consumer electronics and computer hard-
ware and peripherals are commonly stolen in the Dallas area and
in California (where numerous assembly and return centers are
located). Pharmaceutical loads are commonly stolen in the
Pennsylvania area (where a number of drug manufacturing sites
are located) and in Tennessee (with its wealth of pharmaceutical
distribution centers). For the major transportation hubs such as
Atlanta, Chicago, Louisville, or Columbus, cargo theft tends to be
more general, as theft gangs steal goods they can sell on the black
market, but do not necessarily focus on one product type or
industry.
Cargo Theft: 2006e2011
It is not by coincidence that the most proliﬁc cargo theft
centers in the United States are colocated with some of the
country’s largest seaports. With tremendous volumes of cargo
moving in and out of the ports of Los Angeles/Long Beach, New
York/New Jersey, and Miami, cargo thieves have a captive
market not only for product selection, but also a ready-made
thoroughfare for moving the product after it has been stolen
(Figure 4.1).
46
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS

Figure 4.1 Cargo theft incidents in the United States from 2006 through 2011.
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS 47

South Florida
In the modern era of cargo theft, no area has become more
synonymous with this crime than South Florida. Referred to as
this crime’s epicenter, well-organized gangs, primarily from the
Hialeah area near Miami, travel the country in search of high-
value goods that they quickly transport back home and sell for
signiﬁcant proﬁt and relatively little risk.
Cargo theft activity by these gangs became such a problem
in the mid-1990s that the Miami-Dade Police Department
joined forced with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the
U.S. Customs and Border Protection, the Florida Department of
Law Enforcement, the Florida Highway Patrol, and the Florida
Department of Transportation to form a South Florida cargo
theft task force called the Tactical Operations Multi-Agency
Cargo Anti-Theft Squad (TOMCATS). The task force is housed
within the ofﬁces of the robbery bureau, cargo crimes section.
This facility is used as the central clearinghouse for the collec-
tion and dissemination of all cargo theft information in the
South Florida area.
South Florida-based cargo theft gangs typically operate in the
eastern half of the country, although they will travel throughout
the United States. “These groups are highly organized. For
example, they will go to Kentucky, Texas, Georgia and other areas
of the country to do surveillance on loads they want to take. They
will rent vehicles in those areas, target locations to make thefts.
They research it; they’ll know whether to pursue a load if it’s
something they really want,” said Lieutenant Twan Uptgrow,
head of the Miami TOMCATS (Morasch, 2008).
Cargo criminals from Florida are well organized, but not in
the traditional sense. While many are of Cuban descent,
nationality or heritage is not necessarily the underlying factor in
formation of a theft gang. TOMCATS ofﬁcers say that in actu-
ality, many smaller groups have formed their own partnerships
based more on money-making capability than on traditional
crime family hierarchy (Morasch, 2008). The theft rings often are
described as “lateral” organizations that work together only
through loosely based business relationships and less like
traditional maﬁa families, Uptgrow said. Their less formal
approach makes it tougher to take them down than a traditional
crime organization.
Many rings are composed of people with international
connections. These groups are rarely larger than 25 members and
are run by leaders who live in multimillion-dollar homes and
drive Land Rover SUVs among other high-dollar toys (Morasch,
48
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS

2008). Thefts throughout the country are transported to South
Florida and shipped out of the port of Miami.
The Cuban theft gangs of South Florida operated locally in the
Miami area during the 1980s, targeting logistics providers,
delivery services, and warehouses they could exploit. Later in the
decade, the group began to expand their operations with thefts
occurring along the I-95 corridor throughout the state being
attributed to them as empty trailers from thefts were often found
in the Miami area.
In the mid-1990s, the theft gangs of South Florida, perhaps
due to the increased scrutiny of law enforcement or simply
looking for a wider sphere of inﬂuence, spread their tentacles
across the southeastern United States and became recognized as
much more than a local problem. Thefts in other parts of the
country conducted by these gangs may have occurred earlier but
the police may have been confused as to whom the suspects were
as they were not known nationally at the time, and the law may
have believed they were dealing with indigenous (Puerto Rican,
Honduran, Ecuadorian, Mexican) criminal groups.
As stated, they operate in most states east of the Mississippi
and also in Texas. Additionally, several Miami groups have been
arrested and convicted of cargo crimes in southern California and
as far north as Beaverton, Oregon. These gangs were the ﬁrst and
remain the most proliﬁc at traveling to the desired product source
(manufacturing facility/DC) in order to facilitate the theft.
As with most successful ethnic criminal gangs, they have
emigrated from a country with a dictatorial government and
rarely accept anyone outside their nationality/heritage; gang
members often have ties to the same village or province. Many of
the skills that make them excel at criminal activity were learned in
their home country while serving in the military.
As the efforts of law enforcement agencies and the Miami
TOMCATS made operating in the South Florida area more difﬁ-
cult, the theft gangs took their show on the road, expanding
throughout the southeastern United States and today are associ-
ated with theft incidents in almost every state.
Cargo theft gangs out of Miami are traveling signiﬁcant
distances in order to obtain goods and are transporting them
back to their roots. Since 2008, over 75 thefts were associated with
the South Florida gangs, with thefts occurring as far away as
Chicago and Dallas.
Of the loads recovered in the Miami area, those with known
values ranged from $300,000 to $6 million; three were shipments
of liquid crystal display televisions, a known targeted commodity
by cargo thieves (Figure 4.2).
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS 49

Figure 4.2 Theft incidents where cargo or equipment was recovered in Miami-Dade County.
50
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS

While the South Florida theft gangs are generally associated
with theft involving primarily consumer electronics and phar-
maceuticals, assuming they target these verticals exclusively
would be a mistake. When analyzing thefts in which the cargo
and/or the equipment involved was recovered in South Florida,
products ranged from food and beverages to clothing to tobacco
and building materials. While the electronics and pharmaceutical
sectors certainly give cargo theft gangs of South Florida a great
way to earn a high return on their investment, these gangs are
clearly willing to steal any item that can be sold quickly.
The majority of stolen product funnels back to South Florida
where it is redistributed within the United States or exported.
Outbound goods are shipped to this state’s largest trading part-
ners for legitimate goods, that is, Brazil, Costa Rica, Argentina,
and other South and Central American countries. Other product
is taken to New Jersey, where they also maintain warehouses and
have buyers. A small percentage of product is staged at ware-
houses in the area where the theft occurred and then trucked
directly to a buyer in a legitimate truck or, on occasion, via an
unknowing legitimate carrier (i.e., the criminals literally contract
with a valid transportation company to move the product).
These cargo criminals are certainly among the most creative in
the United States. Through years of experience and a large
number of successful cargo thefts, these gangs have been adap-
tive and ensure their success whether they are stealing an unat-
tended trailer or breaking into a warehouse or distribution center.
To demonstrate their creativity, these gangs have created some
unique modi operandi (MO), such as videotaping alarm keypads
to
“capture”
alarm
codes,
impersonating
alarm
company
personnel, and tricking target company employees to divulge
alarm codes.
In January 2011, a criminal gang broke into an empty ware-
house space that was part of a larger facility occupied by several
different companies. The criminals then broke through a wall that
served as the barrier between the empty space and a company
that stored cellular phones. The criminals made off with over
$10 million dollars’ worth of product.
Moreover, the gangs have begun efﬁciently separating pallets
of stolen goods before they’re fenceddin their version of less-
than-truckload (LTL) operations. They divide full truckload
shipments they have stolen into smaller quantities, moving them
to different buyers in varying locations. By separating the
stolen goods, this makes locating global positioning system-
tracked loads more difﬁcult, only adding to headaches police
already face.
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS 51

In 2008, according to Daniel Grushkin’s article in Bloomberg’s
BusinessWeek magazine, an explosion of theft incidents were
occurring in Palm Beach County, Florida, one of the counties
immediately north of Miami-Dade along the eastern seaboard.
With a growth from three incidents in 2007 to 22 in 2008, police
began to really take notice. As mentioned in the previous chapter,
one individual was arrested in possession of product from these
incidents, all found in his house in Miami-Dade county, approx-
imately 70 miles away.
During the investigation that led to the arrests and recovery
discussed in the BusinessWeek article, an array of people were
observed entering and exiting the same residence, many of whom
had listed the home as their place of residence at various times, an
intricate relationship with each other and the homeowner. Despite
the numerous soft relationships that the homeowner had with
knowncargo theftgangs,atnopointduringtheinvestigationwashe
observedcommitting anycrimeorevenseeninoraround industrial
areas, truck stops, or other places in which cargo crime typically
occurs. In fact, he was observed doing little more than ﬁshing.
This showed the obvious levels of organization that exist
within the South Florida groups, insulating members and leaders
from criminal activity when possible and only getting involved as
necessary to ensure successful completion of their thefts and
fencing operations.
Groups such as these do not limit themselves to criminal activity
in the southern region of Florida. In fact, the largest percentage of
high-value goods targeted and stolen in the United States is
attributed to South Florida (Cuban) cargo theft gangs. These
aggressive gangs have managed to sustain high levels of activity
since before 1993, leading to creation of the TOMCATS in 1996.
Their personnel, who generally are 20 years of age and older,
include many former truck drivers from Cuba who are unem-
ployed new citizens in the United States. Although most members
are male, it is quite common for cargo theft gangs to use females
as diversions or to gain entrance to those areas to which male
members likely would be denied access.
The South Florida cargo theft gang members are assigned
speciﬁc tasks. In this system, there is a leader, a truck driver,
warehouse workers, thieves, a broker, and buyers. Within this
system, all members generally are Cuban with the exception of
the broker and possibly the buyer.
These cargo theft gangs are set in motion when they receive
orders for certain products or commodities. In order to fulﬁll
a particular order, their standard MO is to ﬂy or drive to the location
where their desired product is manufactured or stored and then
52
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS

rent an SUV locally. They will stay in a hotel near their target and
conduct surveillance of the facility in order to determine the best
way to steal the cargo. Options for theft include warehouse
burglary, stealing a loaded trailer in the terminal yard, or following
the load while in transit and then stealing the cargo when the driver
stops. Although facility security measures often will cause cargo
gangs to move on to an easier target, some groups will respond to
thesemeasuresbyusingmoreaggressivetacticssuchasattempting
to videotape door codes or cutting the phone lines.
Also, most of the full truckload and full container cargo theft
incidents in New Jersey are committed by Cuban theft gangs.
They have, on many occasions, been mistaken for Ecuadorians,
Colombians, or Venezuelansdall common to the New Jersey
area with regards to being active in the cargo theft arena.
However, although these other ethnic groups are very proliﬁc and
well-known cargo thieves in the New York/New Jersey area, they
specialize in thefts of high-value items (jewelry, watches, and
small
consumer
electronics)
from
package
delivery
trucks
(think FedEx and UPS) and LTL carriers, while making deliveries
and pickups.
New York/New Jersey
In 2010, cargo theft in New Jersey increased by 143% over the
previous year, growing from a midlevel state in terms of supply
chain crime, emerging as the third highest state in the country for
cargo theft rates.
Generally considered to be an area of old school organized
crime as it relates to cargo theft, New Jersey has remained in the
shadows of the big three states for cargo theft (California, Florida,
and Texas) for the past decade, only in 2010 recording a level
of theft that makes it one of the riskiest states in the country for
in-transit cargo. Part of this sudden rise in crime statistics might
simply be better data collection and reporting by the industry and
law enforcement organizations, such as the New Jersey State
Police cargo theft unit.
Regardless, there is no denying the incredible level of cargo
theft activity occurring in the state and the efforts that industry
professionals must go to in order to keep their cargo securedboth
stored and in transit.
The most common form of cargo theft in New Jersey occurs
from the local or regional distribution center on trucks destined
for delivery at stores or retailers. Because of this, inside infor-
mation remains a high concern (as it does elsewhere in the
country) and enhances the need for transportation provider
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS 53

compliance with shipper security policies, such as not stopping
while in transit, not leaving loads unattended, and not discussing
the contents of their loads with other people.
Los Angeles Basin
Los Angeles is home to the highest rates of cargo theft in the
country. Its seaports are a national hub for cargo, moving
nearly 40% of the nation’s imports (Gale Group, 2005) every
year, which subsequently brings a tremendous volume of cargo
theft activity with it. From 2006 through 2011, 21% of all
reported cargo theft activity occurred in and around Los
Angeles. In fact, Los Angeles and San Bernardino counties
combined to account for one-quarter of all cargo theft activity
in the United States.
With these alarming statics comes some confusion and debate
regarding how cargo theft is classiﬁed based on mode of trans-
portation. With an incredibly high volume of sea freight in the
area, many are perplexed at the high rates of containers being
stolen, as seaports, particularly after September 11, 2001, are
considered substantially more secure than other nodes in the
supply chain. This line of thought is quite accurate. While inside
the ports, cargo is safe, particularly after the security upgrades
that came post-September 11; once the cargo leaves via truck
(or rail), however, cargo thieves lie in wait, knowing the load will
stop eventually, giving them the perfect opportunity to steal the
cargo.
Extremely common locations for theft in Los Angeles are the
yards that service the maritime and intermodal rail industries.
Hundreds of thousands of loaded containers, waiting to be picked
up and shipped, are virtual ﬁsh in a barrel for theft gangs.
In California, gangs from Central and South America,
including MS-13 (also known as Mara Salvatrucha), are active
in the cargo theft arena (Palmer, 2009, p. 1169). Known for
their violence in other criminal matters, these gangs are known
as the few involved in cargo theft willing to hijack trucks and
risk
the
increased
police
response
and
potential
stiffer
sentencing.
The aggressiveness of cargo theft gangs in Los Angeles, also
including the Mexican and African-American contingents, is
becoming well known to the supply chain community, with the
majority of violent cargo theft incidents occurring here. While
violence comprises less than 2% of all cargo theft activity,
Los Angeles accounts for approximately 40% of all hijackings and
warehouse robberies.
54
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS

Four days before Christmas in 2010, a group of armed thieves
hijacked over $2.5 million in computer products transiting
through Inglewood, California. This incident came on the heels of
a transportation company being robbed by six armed men just
outside of the Los Angeles International Airport. The gunmen
held the employees while trailers were opened and searched,
eventually departing with almost a million dollars in consumer
electronics.
Others
While theft data analyzed by state provide excellent trends at
the macrolevel, the ability of supply chain and transportation
professionals to see cargo theft incidents down to the county or
city level is crucial if they are to adjust in-transit security poli-
cies and keep their cargo secure. Los Angeles, Dallas/Fort
Worth, San Bernardino, Miami-Dade, and Memphis were the
top ﬁve metropolitan areas for cargo theft in the United States
over the past 5 years. Jacksonville, Florida; Cook County, Illinois
(Greater Chicago area); Hudson County, New Jersey; Fulton
County, Georgia; and Middlesex County, New Jersey, rounded
out the top 10.
Each of these areas, along with an array of other major and
mid-major U.S. cities, is plagued by cargo theft from external
gangs operating in these areas, as well as local theft criminal
gangs. While professional cargo theft gangs will travel signiﬁcant
distances from their homes to seek out high-value cargo, steal it,
and then return to their local area where their brokers or buyers
are generally located, supply chains must also deal with local
theft gangs (those that specialize in cargo and those that will
target low-hanging fruit in the supply chain). These local gangs
are ever present in a majority of cities throughout the country and
account for a signiﬁcant of theft volumes in the cities discussed,
often hitting loads happened upon and easy targets derived
through inside information.
When analyzing cargo theft state by state, cities such as these
listed earlier serve as the focal points with rates of theft
decreasing quickly as one moves away from the metropolitan
areas (Figures 4.3 and 4.4).
The Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex is a veritable mecca for
cargo thieves seeking consumer electronics. With dozens of
manufacturers in the area, along with countless suppliers,
logistics providers, the Alliance corridor, Dallas/Fort Worth
International Airport, and three interstates, thieves have no lack
of available cargo to target and steal. Local theft gangs in the
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS 55

Dallas area are known to target the Alliance corridor, known for
shipping and receiving high-end electronics through its private
airport. Product stolen from this area has been found for sale on
the black market in Central and South America, showing the
connection between the theft activity in north Texas and Latin
American theft gangs, which also includes the Cuban gangs out
of South Florida.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
California
Florida
Texas
Georgia
New Jersey
Tennessee
# Cargo Theft Incidents (2006–2010)
# Incidents
Figure 4.3 Courtesy of FreightWatch.
Major Risk Zones
(Number of Thefts  2006–2010) 
Los Angeles (518) 
Dallas/Fort Worth (243)  
San Bernardino County (168)  
Miami-Dade (158)  
Memphis/W. Memphis (110)  
Jacksonville, Fla. (74) 
Cook County, Ill. (61) 
Hudson County, N.J. (55) 
Fulton County, Ga. (54) 
Middlesex County, N.J. (50) 
Figure 4.4 Courtesy of FreightWatch.
56
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS

When analyzing cargo theft rates compared to the general
population of a city, there is no riskier place for in-transit cargo
than in Memphis and the surrounding communities.
Chicago, the county seat for Cook County (one of the riskiest
counties in the country for cargo theft), accounts for double-digit
rates of theft in the supply chain every year. With a long history of
theft and the railroad system in Chicago due to the signiﬁcant
volume of rail activity in the city, over the road trucking crime
has been on the rise. Industrial products (including metals),
auto parts, and tires, as well as electronics and tobacco, are all
commonly targeted in the greater Chicago area.
In 2010 and 2011, Louisville emerged in the supply chain
consciousness as a hotbed for cargo theft activity. Even though its
rate of theft remained far below those of places such as Los
Angeles, Dallas, and Miami, cargo theft gangs were spotted
frequently in the Louisville area with numerous incidents of
facilities being probed.
In Louisville, one of the main attractors for cargo criminals
is the presence of the UPS hub that naturally brings with it
extraordinary volumes of cargo. As with the FedEx hub in
Memphis and the substantial supply chain hubs present in
cities such as Los Angeles, Miami, Chicago, and Jacksonville, so
with the increase in supply chain operations came the cargo
criminals. With this increase has come additional gangs beyond
the
traditional
South
Florida
groups,
to
include
eastern
Europeans and other local gangs, all attempting to make money
on the backs of the supply chain operations in and around the
Louisville area.
In April 2011, several men were spotted conducting surveil-
lance in an industrial complex in Louisville. A description of the
suspects’ vehicle was circulated throughout law enforcement and
industry personnel. The same suspects were subsequently
spotted in two other vehicles, and then on July 7, 2011, a full
truckload of cell phones was stolen, valued at approximately
$1 million.
While it is unclear if the gang spotted repeatedly by authorities
in the area is responsible for this theft, there is no denying the
substantial increase in cargo theft gang activity in and around
Louisville to include the theft of loads originating in the city that
were subsequently stolen when left unattended while in transit.
The Broker
Cargo theft is not a random crime. While earlier criminals
in this particular industry may have been prone to conducting
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS 57

“pot luck”-style thefts, that mode has given way to active tar-
geting of high-value, easily moveable loads for sale on the black
and gray markets. The process of fencing, however, is rarely
handled directly by the theft gang. Instead, this process, and
subsequently the direction and targeting by the theft gangs, is
often handled by an individual commonly referred to as a broker.
Brokers make their living in the business of ﬁnding, acquiring,
and fencing stolen products for proﬁt.
The majority of the time, cargo thieves know what they are
stealing.
They
acquire
inside
information,
understand
the
trucking and shipping industry, and take advantage of it. They
also have a buyer already lined up (Gonzalez, 2009).
Under this process, brokers ﬁnd buyers for product through
a variety of methods and locations. This can occur after the theft
has occurred or beforehand. In the case of the latter, the broker
develops a buyer for a load or product that has yet to be stolen, in
which case the broker then tasks or hires a cargo theft gang to
seek out, ﬁnd, and steal the in-demand goods.
For loads that have been stolen prior to a buyer being
acquired, the cargo is stored by the theft gang and made available
to brokers and buyers. The process to sell can be in bulk to
individual buyers or in smaller portions, all the way down to
individual piece sales through a variety of means discussed
further in Chapter 5: The Black Market.
Cargo theft in the United States is becoming far less random
and increasingly speciﬁc. Many loads stolen are targeted actively
by gangs in what is referred to as theft-to-order scenarios. Simply
put, brokers or buyers place an order with a cargo theft gang for
a particular product. The gang then conducts its research,
locates the desired product, and steals the cargo at the ﬁrst
opportunity.
Key Points
•
The most proliﬁc cargo theft gangs in the United States origi-
nate in South Florida, New York/New Jersey, and the Los
Angeles area.
•
Historically, gangs would operate in their local areas; however,
increased pressure from law enforcement agencies and
increased security-hardening measures by the supply chain
industry have caused gangs to operate across larger geograph-
ical regions.
•
Gangs can specialize in certain industries; however, thefts of
product generally occur in the areas that they are manufac-
tured or distributed.
58
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS

•
Many metropolitan areas and large logistics hubs are under
attack by both local gangs seeking high-value cargo and
regional/national criminal groups.
•
Cargo theft gangs are not the ones selling the goods once they
have been stolen; in fact, individuals known as brokers are
largely responsible for arranging the sale of goods once
merchandise is made available to them.
Chapter 4 ORGANIZED CRIMINAL GROUPS 59

5
THE BLACK MARKET
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Methods for selling cargo after it has been stolen
• Sales of stolen cargo through legitimate and illegitimate channels
• Exportation of stolen goods
• Impact of a recession on the sale of stolen cargo
The black market was a way of getting around government
controls. It was a way of enabling the free market to work. It
was a way of opening up, enabling people.
Milton Friedman, economist
When a theft occurs, the reason for the crime can be seen from
one of two perspectives. The stolen product is either for the use
and enjoyment of the thief or the stolen product is to be sold for
a proﬁt. If the motivation is the latter, then the product has to be
sold, a process known as fencing. Fencing, loosely deﬁned, is the
act of stealing or buying stolen goods at a signiﬁcantly reduced
price in order to resell the goods for a proﬁt. In the case of cargo
theft, the goods are virtually never for the theft gangs themselves
(although it is common for them to keep some of the product for
personal use at times), therefore requiring the load to be moved
and sold.
Once a load of cargo is stolen and moved to a secure area for
storage, the next step is moving it to the broker, or to the location
directed by the broker, to sell on the black market, move back into
the legitimate market, or export to another country. Typical
venues for fencing of goods have traditionally been pawn shops
and ﬂea markets. For cargo theft gangs and their brokers, places
such as ﬂea markets certainly are an option for moving their
newly acquired goods, but are difﬁcult to scale and run consis-
tently. Therefore, other means of moving high volumes of
product are used.
Being able to determine where exactly stolen cargo ends up is
next to impossible, but stolen goods have been found on Internet
auction sites, small retail stores, and discount outlets (Eiserer,
2008). Companies that proﬁt from the purchase and sale of large
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00005-4
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
61

volume products are prime conduits (either knowingly or
unknowingly) for stolen cargo, where bill of sales, identiﬁcation,
or other requisite documentation showing product authenticity
are not required. Once in possession of the stolen goods, thieves
are able to distribute their product through brokers or so-called
“ghost” companies, which have developed extensive networks of
clients. These ﬂy-by-night operations are often locally registered
ﬁrms that close up shop after less than 2 years in business and
promptly reopen under new names (Chavez and Tello, 2009).
Bulk purchase and sale on the black market, e-fencing,
exportation to another country, and secondary wholesale markets
are all commonly used methods for off-loading stolen cargo
without detection or being traced back to the broker.
E-fencing
With the proliferation of the Internet came the ability to move
massive amounts of stolen product with limited interaction and
virtually complete anonymity. While the traditional fence is the
person who knowingly purchases stolen goods in order to resell it
at a later date, the movement of stolen goods through the Internet
is often referred to as e-fencing. E-fencing is particularly common
in online auction sites such as ebay.com and Craigslist, with
others popping up on the Internet seemingly on a weekly basis.
These sites have become so commonplace in today’s society that
it has become second nature for people to go straight to the
Internet in search of their desired product, often landing them in
online bids.
While the concept of fencing product has existed for centuries,
the explosion of electronic options has made the task of selling
stolen goods signiﬁcantly easier for the criminal and far more
difﬁcult to monitor and prevent for the loss prevention profes-
sional and law enforcement community.
According to CNBC in January 2007, e-fencing is a $37 billion
business, resulting in conﬂicts between retailers and online
market sites as to who is responsible for keeping stolen goods
from these legitimate market places. While online market sites
take the position that moving stolen product through their sites is
a quick way of getting caught, prosecutors and law enforcement
alike see these avenues as a quick means to move product
without the requirement for face-to-face contact when making
a sale.
Some obvious beneﬁts of moving stolen goods over online as
opposed to traditional locations include anonymity, decreased
62
Chapter 5 THE BLACK MARKET

interaction with potential buyers, and, most importantly, phys-
ical separation from the event to avoid detection and apprehen-
sion. The identity of the e-fence can be vague or completely secret
pending on the chosen website’s requirements. Criminals can use
this to their advantage by spreading product across multiple sites
with multiple people using a variety of payment methods avail-
able, all with the goal of ensuring that the true identity of the
seller remains unknown.
In addition to increased security for the criminals as they sell
product, doing so through online sources is more lucrative for
them as well. In a study by Wholesale Central, online shoppers
were found to pay approximately 70 cents on the dollar compared
to purchases made at physical locations (ﬂea markets) where the
rate was substantially lower.
For the cargo criminal, the opportunities for e-fencing exist
beyond the individual or small bulk sale, with sites and compa-
nies in the business of purchasing large quantities of items for
resale in smaller quantities at higher proﬁts. These goods are
moved most frequently under the guise of excess or overstocked
product from established distributors and then moved into the
legitimate market for sale to the public.
Export
It should be no surprise that South Florida, New York/New
Jersey, and Los Angeles are three of the major cargo crime zones.
With the presence of major ports comes an endless stream of
goods for thieves to seek out and steal within hours of being off-
loaded from ships.
Thieves can also use these ports as part of their own supply
chain, moving stolen cargo out of the United States to their
overseas buyers. Cuban gangs have an afﬁnity for cargo from the
Alliance corridor in Tarrant County, Texas. Stolen goods from this
area have shown up as far away as Central America (Eiserer, 2008).
Cases have been recorded of stolen cargo from the United States
appearing in countries such as Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina,
Paraguay, and Guatemala.
While supply chain crimes, such as smuggling, terrorism, and
theft, are of marginal concern in Costa Rica, the country is still
known for being a popular destination for stolen cargo. These
goods are often exported to Costa Rica for sale on the local market
and for repackaging under phony company names and sold back
into the legitimate markets of the United States and European
countries.
Chapter 5 THE BLACK MARKET 63

When discussing the exportation of stolen goods to Latin
America for sale, the most signiﬁcant topic that commonly arises
is the presence of the terrorist group Hezbollah and their re-
corded activities in South American countries. The connection
between stolen goods and terrorism is a commonly held belief,
although there have been no recorded connections between
gangs that steal cargo and products that end up funding terrorist
groups. While such a connection is certainly possible after
multiple degrees of separation, it is important to note that by all
accounts, cargo theft in the United States is a monetary crime and
not a proven avenue for terrorist activity.
Secondary Wholesale Market
The U.S. supply chain is a vast network of manufacturing,
distribution,
transportation,
freight
forwarding,
third-party
logistics providers, and countless other touch points that prod-
ucts transit before ﬁnally reaching the shelf. When product is
stolen and fenced, it enters an undeﬁned area where stolen goods
are moved from person to person, ﬁnally reaching the consumer
through illicit, untraceable channels.
There is, however, an alternate method of fencing product that
takes stolen goods from the black market and moves them back
into the legitimate supply chain, eventually reaching the retail
outlet, pharmacy, or any other of the countless places of business
where goods are purchased every day. A common way for this to
happen is for a secondary wholesale company, usually operating
within close proximity, to purchase stolen goods, often know-
ingly, and then reselling them to another wholesaler or to
a retailer as legitimately acquired goods.
It only requires one company, such as a distributor, willing to
purchase cargo without questioning its origin. In the United
States there are an almost endless number of companies that
operate slightly off the mainstream of cargo movement, making
their living buying and selling goods, taking advantage of every
opportunity to acquire goods at a substantially discounted rate to
then turn around and sell them for proﬁt.
This is particularly true in the pharmaceutical sector, where
thousands of secondary wholesalers make their living trading
among each other, fulﬁlling client orders, and moving hundreds
of millions of dollars in pharmaceuticals annually. This particular
area went largely unregulated for years and is a prime area for
illicit (stolen or counterfeit) goods to reenter the supply chain,
eventually making it to the pharmacy or hospital where it is then
provided to the consumer.
64
Chapter 5 THE BLACK MARKET

This process is far more common than people realize, with
illicit goods ﬁnding their way onto retailers’ shelves after passing
hands numerous times until ﬁnally reaching a legitimate channel
partner in the supply chain. As such, the victim who lost the cargo
fails to beneﬁt from the sale, experiencing a number of down-
stream costs, and the consumer unknowingly purchases stolen
product, which can result in a number of possible negative
consequences to include mishandling, health issues for food and
pharmaceutical product, and more.
Anchoring
On March 14, 2010, a pharmaceutical manufacturer suffered
a $76 million warehouse burglary, the largest recorded in the
United States. The criminals executed a well-orchestrated, well-
timed plan, catching the company off guard. By analyzing
behaviors in criminality, as well as black market supply and
demand, the question is asked; could this theft have been
predicted?
There are various contemporary theories that aim to explain
the nature of crime by studying the factors that inﬂuence
a person’s behavior (Van Zandt, 2009). One of these is the concept
of anchoringda term that describes the marrying of a criminal or
criminal group to a certain crime, or victim type, due to the
logistics, established infrastructure, or experience of the crimi-
nals with completing the crime successfully.
A criminal or criminal element who steals a certain type of
product for the ﬁrst time must then put time and effort (and
potentially money) into creating a system for turning that product
into cash (fencing). Once that system has been established, the
criminal will continue to use the established method for obtain-
ing money from a particular stolen product until it is no longer
viable. In essence, they become “anchored” to that system. Once
a criminal has found a method for making money, what is the
likelihood of him changing? What does it take to make him
change to another method or product?
There are psychological and sociological principles that
explain what causes criminals to commit crimes and to make
modiﬁcations in their behavior (Schmallyer, 2009). Criminals will
make changes in the methodology used to commit crime when
punishment, rewards, or other alternatives stimulate or force
them to change their conduct; even greed and poverty play
a major role in the decision-making process of a criminal. When
greed is the primary motivation rather than necessity, criminals
Chapter 5 THE BLACK MARKET 65

target commodities in high demand or those in which the price is
expected to increase (Schmallyer, 2009).
The principle of behavioral conditioning, under psychological
theories, states that the frequency with which a crime is
committed can increase or decrease through punishment and
reward (Schmallyer, 2009). However, in the case of cargo theft,
evidence shows that when government attempts to stop crime by
imposing stricter punishments, it also motivates some criminals
to evolve and change their methods. In this case, the threat of
punishment would not meet its objective, which is to stop crime,
due to the fact that these punishments are being applied to well-
established criminals who adopted this type of lifestyle and do
not plan to change it. Additionally, existing laws and punishment
for cargo crime pale in comparison to other comparable property
crimes, providing no disincentive for thieves to stop. To use
business terminology, the barriers to exit are high and incum-
bents are more likely to adapt rather than cease activities.
CASE STUDY: U.S. PHARMACEUTICAL CARGO THEFT
In the ﬁrst half of the 2000s, high-value cargo theft in the United
States was centered predominately on the high-tech sector. With
signiﬁcant increases in electronic thefts occurring, organizations such
as the Transported Asset Protection Association (established in 1997)
emerged, encouraging information sharing and increased supply chain
security both in situ and in transit (over the road).
During this time, thefts in the pharmaceutical sector were occurring
more sporadically, with companies suffering losses at an extremely low
rate, falling well within acceptable loss ratios. It is argued, however, that
during this time, cargo thieves were in the process of establishing
methods for fencing stolen pharmaceutical products. Using experience
in selling high-tech goods, thieves were able to ﬁnd buyers (brokers) and
systems for exporting stolen pharmaceutical products to Latin America
for sale or resale back into the U.S. supply chain.
Once established, the level of pharmaceutical theft activity exploded
in 2005, with rates doubling each year until 2009 when they appear to
have leveled off, although the total value of losses experienced in 2009
nearly doubled.
During this time frame, pharmaceutical cargo theft in Europe was
relatively limited, with minimal reports throughout the industry. In late
2009 and early 2010, however, reports began to emerge of extremely
high-value thefts occurring in western Europe, often with product being
moved into eastern Europe for sale. Overall, however, pharmaceuticals
are rarely targeted in Europe, largely due to socialized medicine
throughout the continent, while what thefts do occur are mostly of
lifestyle drugs and others that can have a high value in eastern Europe.
66
Chapter 5 THE BLACK MARKET

There are several notable points to be made about pharmaceutical
theft rates in the United States. First, companies with established in-
transit security policies that go above and beyond industry standards
have had their losses reduced to virtually zero for all loads that fall
within these protocols. For loads that are shipped without these
measures, theft rates remain consistent with the industry averages. For
targeted loads inside a hardened supply chain (i.e., criminals experience
an increase in the likelihood of failure or capture), data suggest that
criminals prefer to ﬁnd an alternate target to obtain similar products at
less risk. Second, through collaborative efforts with law enforcement
agencies, a signiﬁcant amount of stolen product has been recovered by
pharmaceutical companies. It has been argued that the recovery of
product increases the level of desire for product by cargo thieves as their
“sale” was unable to be completed.
Example
On May 2, 2009, a known cargo theft gang was discovered to be
staying at a motel in Plainﬁeld, Indiana. At the request of the Miami-
Dade Cargo Theft Task Force, the Plainﬁeld police department set up
surveillance on the gang and followed them for approximately 48 hours.
During that time, the theft gang drove in and around several
manufacturing and distribution centers in the area.
On Sunday, May 4, the gang left Plainﬁeld, heading east toward
Pennsylvania, and local police relinquished surveillance. On the same
date, a tractoretrailer loaded with $37 million worth of pharmaceuticals
also left Plainﬁeld, Indiana, heading east toward Pennsylvania.
Within 24 hours later, the load was stolen at a truck stop on the
Pennsylvania turnpike while the driver was paying for fuel. Upon
discovery of the theft, the driver notiﬁed the state police whose barracks
was adjacent to the truck stop, and a patrol was dispatched.
The thieves, who were known to be well versed in cargo theft
deterrence measures, had parked the tractoretrailer a few miles away in
order to test for covert tracking devices that may be aboard. The dis-
patched state police trooper discovered the load and the criminal
element escaped.
This creates several points that should be addressed.
a. The product aboard the trailer (mostly antidepressants), based on
the concept of active targeting, has a known value on the black
market.
b. The cargo theft gang knows what company manufactures these
products and has an understanding of their supply chain and current
security protocols.
c. Due to recovery of the load, the gang was unsuccessful in completing
the transaction into the black market, thus the demand remains and
is potentially greater.
On March 14, 2010, the same company suffered a $76 million dollar
warehouse burglary of the same products that were stolen during the
May 5, 2009, in-transit theft.
Chapter 5 THE BLACK MARKET 67

Based on this concept, cargo thieves have limited reason to stop
stealing cargo, and as supply chains become more secure (or if laws and
potential punishment became more severe), it is more likely for crimi-
nals to merely adapt their strategies to account for these new conditions
than it is for them to cease stealing cargo altogether.
Recessionary Impact
During the recent recession, a signiﬁcant concern among
those in the logistics industry was the possibility of cargo theft
rising due to a “down” economy. While cargo theft rates
continued to rise during this time (þ13% in 2009, þ4.1% in 2010),
on a year-by-year basis, the rate of growth was actually lower than
in the previous years of the decade. While researching this
particular topic, what the author discovered was an apparent
willingness of consumers to purchase goods with the knowledge
(or strong possibilitydgoods for sale at prices way below market
value) that the product may have been stolen.
According to a June 2009 article in Brandweek magazine
entitled “Copying Machines,” intellectual property ﬁrm Marks
and Clerk questioned companies on the topic of illicit goods and
found that 80% of respondents believed that any sense of prog-
ress in consumers purchasing goods through legitimate channels
would be easily undone by a recession. “In other words, a bargain
speaks louder than morality.” Simply put, when recession hits,
people seek better deals, including the purchase of stolen goods.
“There’s concern that in the current climate, low-price fake
goods will be of increased interest to consumers looking to make
their money go further” (Economist, 2010, p. 18). In the same
environment where
counterfeit
goods
are
knowingly
being
purchased by consumers for fractions of retail costs, so too are
stolen goods being sold at comparable low rates, but with increased
demand over counterfeits as the product is from the original
manufacturer and brings with it the quality lacking in knockoffs.
In addition to the loss of sale by manufacturers due to the
purchasing of stolen goods, most companies are also faced with
the dilemma of providing lower cost products to remain
competitive during times when consumers are seeking better
deals. Less expensive alternatives are becoming a necessity for
manufactures in fear of losing their consumer base. Adding to the
impact of a recession is the proliferation of e-commerce, making
the moving of stolen goods easy and extremely proﬁtable for theft
gangs and their brokers.
68
Chapter 5 THE BLACK MARKET

Between the burgeoning of electronic fencing and other
methods for moving stolen goods through the black market and
into the legitimate market, combined with consumers’ desire to
stretch their buying power, cargo criminals have a signiﬁcantly
easier time selling stolen goods while reducing their risk of
exposure or arrest.
Key Points
•
A number of methods exist for moving cargo once it has been
stolendfrom e-fencing to exporting to reintroducing it into
the legitimate supply chain; the end goal is for the product
to reach a consumer.
•
Exportation of stolen cargo is very common, especially to
South and Central America for sale on the local market or for
repackaging and sale back into the U.S. and European
economies.
•
Once criminals have found an industry or product type to steal
and have developed an effective means for fencing the
product, there is a high probability they will continue to target
these or comparable goods and move them using the same
methods until those means are no longer viable.
•
While minimal evidence suggests that recession impacts will
cause an increase in cargo theft, studies have shown that
consumers are more willing to turn a blind eye when
purchasing product that may have been stolen.
Chapter 5 THE BLACK MARKET 69

6
INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT
A Warning for the United States
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Variations in cargo theft outside the United States
• Common modi operandi around the world
• Predictive modeling for supply chain risk
• Understanding risk based on regional or international boundaries
It is no surprise that the cargo theft hot spots in the world
coincide with countries that play a signiﬁcant role in the global
and our domestic supply chains, such as Mexico, Brazil, South
Africa, Malaysia, and the majority of Europe. Where these coun-
tries differ from the United States is the common use of violence
involved in cargo theft. Hijackings, weapons, and assault are
commonplace in these countries but violence is almost never
associated with cargo theft in the United States. There are
multiple reasons for this disparitydmainly the general crime
culture, laws regarding the use of violence, and hardening of the
supply chain.
As supply chains are hardened in the United States, however,
there is an argument that violence may increase as cargo crimi-
nals become more aggressive out of necessity to steal high-value
goods successfully. On February 27, 2011, a group of 15 armed
gunmen raided the Unigen Corp. electronics facility in Fremont,
California. The gunmen forcibly locked all the employees in a
high-value cargo security cage while they loaded a tractoretrailer
full of components before making their getaway.
While such instances are still considered a rarity in the United
States, they certainly occur in several countries overseas where
they are considered more the rule than the exception.
Malaysia, for example, has the highest rate of cargo crime
in the Asia-Paciﬁc region, which is centered primarily along the
northesouth highway corridor, where large amounts of precious
metals and electronics are moved every day. Cargo thieves in
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00006-6
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
71

Malaysia are very aggressive, and because laws make the use of
a ﬁrearm during the commission of a crime punishable by death,
they resort to using knives and machetes while they hijack loads.
This technique, however, makes the criminals more aggressive; as
their bladed weapons do not share the intimidation factor of
a loaded gun, it is not unusual for the thieves to become more
physically engaged with the driver or facility employees during
the commission of the robbery.
Cargo to and from China has traditionally not been targeted
for theft; however, shippers frequently suffer from losses through
pilferage (particularly at seaports), along with intellectual prop-
erty right theft and counterfeiting. Over the past few years,
however, full-truckload thefts have been on the rise, but still
nowhere near the rates of other Asian countries such as Malaysia,
the Philippines, or India.
The high-reward, low-risk nature of cargo theft is not limited
to the United States. In many countries, criminals caught stealing
cargo face minimal punishment. In 2007, a man in Melbourne,
Australia, received two and a half years in prison for stealing
$10 million in cigarettes from a customs-bonded facility, the
equivalent of 1 day in prison for every $11,000 worth of product
stolen. If he had not been caught, the theft would have cost the
Australian government approximately $2.3 million in lost tax
revenue alone.
Europe
Cargo theft modi operandi (MO) in Europe are conservatively
5 to 10 years ahead of those in the United States in terms of tactics
and aggressive behavior (Burges, 2006), where cargo theft
remains largely a nonviolent crime. During the late 1990s, cargo
theft in Europe began to increase signiﬁcantly, resulting in
awareness for shippers, forwarders, and carriers throughout the
continent, which led to hardening of the supply chain. As product
became more difﬁcult to steal, cargo thieves became more
aggressive with nonviolent theft giving way to hijackings,
weapons use, forced police stops, and kidnappings.
The United Kingdom, France, Italy, Germany, and The
Netherlands all report high rates of cargo theft annually,
comprising an estimated 80% of all cargo theft in western Europe.
Intrusion, pilferage, hijackings, and a variety of other MOs were
seen throughout the continent as cargo thieves actively seek high-
value goods and move them quickly across international lines
and onto the black market.
72
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

While the overall number of full-truckload or container thefts
has increased year after year for the past decade, the number of
thefts from vehicles (chieﬂy intrusions) has declined. Accord-
ingly, the loss value per incident continues to rise as cargo thieves
seek a higher return for their efforts. Thieves are stealing more
expensive goods, committing larger scale thefts, and continuing
with aggressive tactics as needed to succeed in the commission of
their crimes. In the United Kingdom, the average value per theft
incident increased an estimated 70% from 2009 to 2010.
In July 2009, a truck loaded with tobacco products was forced
to stop in Hamburg, Germany, by two men in a black Volkswagen.
Armed with a handgun, the driver of the VW forced the truck
driver to get out and then handcuffed and put him in the trailer.
They took the truck to another location where they transferred
the cargo into another trailer and made their getaway.
Thieves in England are arguably the most aggressive of any
European country. It leads the European Union (EU) in terms of
violence across all crime categories with cargo theft being no
exception where violence during the commission of freight theft
is often considered to be the norm, not the exception, as is the
case in the United States.
In contrast to most of the Western Hemisphere, where cargo
theft incidents are primarily thefts of entire trailers or ocean
containers, the most common MO in Europe is referred to as
intrusion. Intrusion is the act of breaking the lock or security seal
of a trailer or slashing the panels of the ubiquitous soft-sided
“curtain” trailers and stealing as much of the cargo as possible
before discovery. Intrusion also refers to breaking into a cargo
storage facility to steal product. Incidents of fake police check-
points, diverted drivers, violence, and forged paperwork have all
been recorded by pharmaceutical and electronic companies in
Europe.
Intuitively, reported cargo theft is highest in countries that
actively compile statistics and participate in cargo theft incident-
sharing programs. The vast majority of cargo theft data is derived
from law enforcement sources, and countries with dedicated
agencies to deal with cargo theft (such as TruckPol in the United
Kingdom) no doubt have better cargo theft data than countries
that don’t. Thefts throughout eastern Europe and Russia are far
more difﬁcult to track as data are sparse, with mostly anecdotal
information being provided. The lack of veriﬁable and quantiﬁ-
able
statistics
exists
throughout
the
global
supply
chain,
continuing to make the development of a clear picture of the
scope and magnitude of this international problem nearly
impossible.
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 73

The United Kingdom is one of the most active countries
addressing and combating cargo crime in Europe. According to
Freight Industry Times, an estimated 40,000 truck crimes are
reported annually in the United Kingdom, mostly in England’s nine
regions. These crimes, according to the industry quarterly publi-
cation, account for £500 million worth of stolen trucks and cargo.
TruckPol, the U.K.’s national freight crime intelligence unit,
however, estimates higher losses. It says that each instance of
freight crime averages more than £25,000 per loss. Just as dis-
cussed earlier, product loss is just part of the total extent of the
economic damage, as it can also adversely affect client trust and
loss of business. Of course the converse holds truedmeaningful
beneﬁts can accrue to companies with better supply chain
security, leading to fewer thefts and, principally, more proﬁtable
sales.
One aspect of over the road security that differs in Europe,
particularly the United Kingdom, from that of the United States,
is vocal support for the development of secure truck stops. In
a European survey taken in 2009, 66% of respondents rated the
availability of secure truck stops as poor or very poor, while none
rated them as very good (Falkner, 2009). There were 793 truck
thefts recorded in the fourth quarter of 2008, which is approxi-
mately the total number of thefts recorded for the entire year in
the United States.
According to the World Bank’s Logistics Performance Index
(LPI), the United Kingdom is one of the top 10 logistics
performers in the world. Results of a 2009 survey (released in
2010) ranked the United Kingdom No. 8 worldwide, moving up
one position from the previous year, with Germany garnering the
top spot, scoring a composite 4.11 out of a maximum score of 5.
Strategically located in the center of Europe, linked to Scan-
dinavia via the Jutland Peninsula and claiming some of Europe’s
most advanced road and rail networks, Germany sees more cargo
pass through it than any other country on the continent. This
factor also makes it one of Europe’s hot spots for cargo theft. That
said, theft reports from Germany decreased in 2010 as compared
with 2009, although this could be more the result of a drop in
crime reporting than to an actual decrease in cargo thefts.
Regardless, according to the World Bank’s most recent LPI,
Germany ranked No. 1 worldwide in the survey, scoring 4.11 out
of a total possible of 5.
Germany took serious steps in 2010 to address its chronic
shortage of secure parking places for trucks. Projects have been
undertaken to expand rest areas and to create more than 8000
secure parking spaces for trucks along several major highways.
74
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

Another effort aimed at improving logistics operations saw
progress in 2010. The North Sea Freight Intelligent Transport
Solutions project hosted a workshop in June at the Port of Bre-
merhaven to demonstrate how the system would work and to
showcase the range of information expected to be made available
to drivers and transport operators via this system. Among its
objectives is to allow drivers to plan and adapt their activities by
supporting them with route-related information, including live
trafﬁc updates, crime hot spots, secure parking areas, weather
alerts, and truck-speciﬁc road conditions.
Cargo theft in France continues to be on the rise, according to
the government’s Central Ofﬁce for the Fight Against Itinerant
Delinquency. Their latest report estimates that cargo crime in
2010 increased to 1600 thefts with a total loss of V31 million.
Although France is known for underreporting of cargo crime, it
is nonetheless clear that the country remains a high threat area
for cargo crime in Europe due to factors such as its size,
geographical location, and high level of economic development.
Continued incidences of cargo theft in 2010 and 2011 made
France a hot spot within the EU again.
The majority of cargo thefts occur in northern France, espe-
cially in Ile-de-France (Paris metropolitan area), Champagne-
Ardenne, and Picardy, although the Languedoc-Roussillon region
and the Rhone Valley in the south are also affected by this type of
crime.
Thieves also are known to run trucks off the road or force the
driver to stop by posing as police or customs agents. At other
times thieves simply block the road using two or more vehicles.
Some sophisticated criminals have been known to fraudu-
lently create transportation companies, get hired to move
a shipment, and then simply drive off with the cargo, never to be
seen again. As in other areas of western Europe, violence occurs
occasionally during the commission of cargo thefts.
For example, on October 8, 2010, a truck driver hauling 24
pallets of cigarettes was hijacked in Croissy-Beaubourg. Accord-
ing to reports, two armed assailants forced the driver to stop by
waving guns at him. The driver was then kidnapped by one of the
assailants while the other drove the trailer to another location,
where accomplices were waiting. Although police arrived on the
scene quickly, the thieves managed to escape with half the load.
Goods most targeted by cargo thieves in 2010 were elec-
tronics, building/industrial materials (including metals), clothes/
shoes, and consumer care products. As in other European
countries, thefts of metals have increased. Most of the incidents
were thefts from vehicles parked in rest areas along major
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 75

international and national roads, with thefts from warehouses
also prominent. In 7 of every 10 in-transit incidents, thieves
slashed the trailer’s side curtain or cut off the security seal while
the driver was either away from his vehicle or sleeping in it.
Thieves have somewhat altered the proﬁle of cargo crime in
Spain recently as they switched their focus to products that tend
to net them higher proﬁts and also expanded their repertoire of
MOs. Thieves there are known for using aggressive and unusual
tactics, including stealing from trailers while the vehicle is in
motion.
Regions reporting the highest number of cargo thefts in 2010
were Catalonia in the northeast, Madrid in the center, and
Andalusia in the south. Together these regions accounted for
more than 50% of all cargo theft incidents in the country.
Early in 2010, in Catalonia, opportunistic thieves forced open
the trailer doors and stole a load of liquid crystal display televi-
sions from a truck parked at a Figueres service station during
a heavy snowfall. Also in this region, an entire trailer loaded with
consumer electronics was stolen in the town of Terrassa. The
theft occurred after the driver parked the truck less than a mile
from his pickup location and went home for lunch. The driver
discovered the theft only after police notiﬁed him that the truck
was parked irregularly. The loss was estimated at V275,000
($346,514 USD).
Methods used by cargo theft gangs in Spain are among the
most varied in Europe. The most daring by far is when they hit
a targeted truck while it is in motion, often at night. As depicted in
the Spanish newspaper El Paı´s, one of the thieves’ vehicles moves
in front of the truck in order to slow it down. Then, thieves
traveling closely behind in a pickup or similar vehicle jump from
the hood to the back door of the truck, where they saw or force
open the lock. (In some reported cases last year, thieves actually
harnessed themselves to the target truck.) The thieves then pass
the cargo from the truck to their accomplices in the cargo bed of
the pickup, repeating this action until several have been loaded.
These thefts often are discovered only after the trucker arrives at
his destination. Loads of computers, televisions, and food prod-
ucts were reported stolen by thieves using this MO (Figure 6.1).
Russia is one of the hot spots for cargo theft in Europe. Well-
organized, heavily armed and at times well-connected gangs
operate throughout the country, often hijacking trucks and
kidnapping drivers at gunpoint. In addition to cargo crime,
endemic corruption and infrastructure deﬁciencies remain as
serious impediments to the supply chain. The lack of serious
investment in Russia’s aging road and rail networks is hindering
76
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

Figure 6.1 Courtesy of FreightWatch.
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 77

logistics operations. Moreover, their crowded and poorly main-
tained highway system presents problems for the road transport
industry. In its 2010 Corruption Perceptions Index, Transparency
International, an independent organization that monitors busi-
ness corruption worldwide, ranked Russia as the most corrupt
nation among the developed economies.
For the logistics industry, corruption can affect the efﬁcient
and safe ﬂow of goods along every link/node of the supply chain
when organized crime and corruption have penetrated both
public and private sectors. Strong relationships with ofﬁcials from
customs and other regulatory bodies are essential to those
companies wanting to avoid losses.
Media reports from the country last year indicate that
government efforts to ﬁght crime and corruption are growing.
Earlier this year, more than 50 international companies operating
in Russia signed a pact pledging intolerance to bribery. Russia
and Europol have also started negotiations on a cooperative plan
to combat transnational criminal activities.
Cargo theft in Russia regularly involves guns and/or violence,
as armed hijackings and robberies are common while most thefts
occur while cargo is in transit. Russian thieves force drivers to
stop by pretending to be police or customs ofﬁcers.
That is not to imply that stationary vehicles are ignored. Five
masked and armed men stole 13 tons of caviar from a truck
parked in an unsecured area near St. Petersburg. The driver and
a security guard hired to escort the truck were kidnapped and
later released in a suburb. The loss was estimated at nearly
$650,000.
Mexico
Since 2007, cargo theft in Mexico has taken on new and more
sophisticated patterns. Small-time gangs have evolved into
specialized rings that are employed by organized criminal groups
to target speciﬁc high-value shipments that can be resold easily
through the informal market across the country (Chavez and
Tello, 2009). Cargo crime in Mexico is extremely violent. There is
a history of assaults throughout the country, for example, in the
state of Veracruz, due to the large volume of goods imported and
exported through the port.
Mexico City serves as the country’s supply chain hub, with
inbound lanes traveling eastewest from the nation’s seaports,
while a tremendous amount of goods transit northesouth to and
from the United States; the so-called “Golden Cross.” With so
much product being transited through this single area, Mexico
78
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

City has arguably the highest rate of cargo theft per geographic
size than anywhere in the world, with an estimated 1000 cargo
theft gangs operating in the Federal District alone. This criminal
activity is having an impact. According to the Mexican Associa-
tion of Insurance Companies, insurance premiums for policies
covering cargo damage and theft increased $1 million in a single
year (Chavez and Tello, 2009).
Products targeted in Mexico are similar to most other coun-
tries, where electronics, building materials, high-end clothing,
and food are all commonly sought after by cargo thieves. Gangs
operate by developing relationships with distributors and/or
transport company employees. The thieves also inﬁltrate the
companies to gain access to information on shipments and
transit routes.
Driver give-ups are common in Mexico due to the propensity
for violence used by criminal gangs. Information ﬂight is also
common. Armed escorts, armored cabs, and duress systems
(such as real-time communications, remote engine kill switches,
or panic buttons) are the only protection against armed criminals
and a successful hijacking. A driver in Mexico without some or all
of these countermeasures is virtually helpless to keep his cargo
secure. In contrast, just remaining with a load in the United States
generally is all it takes to keep criminals at bay.
The intense conﬂict between drug cartels and the Mexican
government since the turn of the century has affected all facets of
society. In addition to cargo theft, natural disasters, and infra-
structure deﬁciencies, drug-related crimes present a serious
ﬁnancial threat to the supply chain and transportation industry.
In 2010, transportation companies in Mexico experienced a 12%
increase in security costs (e.g., security cameras and surveillance
systems) and cargo insurance rates also rose by 20% in some
states with high cargo theft activity.
Drug-related
violence has
particularly
affected northern
border cities, such as Nuevo Laredo, Reynosa, Tijuana, and Ciu-
dad Juarez, all major conduits for cross-border trade. The cartel’s
effort to control trafﬁcking access routes into the United States is
the main reason for the constant and deadly ﬁghting.
Cargo theft activity is rampant in central Mexico. This is also
the region where products stolen across the country most often
end up being sold on the black market, particularly in the
boroughs of the Federal District. In 2010, half of all cargo theft
occurred in the Federal District and the states of Mexico, Jalisco,
Puebla, Veracruz, Hidalgo, and Nuevo Leon.
Despite the elevated cargo theft risk in some states, only
certain cities contribute to this status. For instance, in the state of
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 79

Coahuila there is a high risk of cargo theft; however, the majority
of incidents take place in the cities of Monclova, Torreon, and
along the SaltilloeMonterrey and MonclovaeMonterrey high-
ways. The rest of Coahuila state experiences low levels of cargo
crime.
According to FreightWatch International, Cities with the
highest cargo theft activity include Mexico City, Guadalajara,
Puebla, Monterrey, Pachuca, and Queretaro. Additionally, theft
activity
on
highways
between
and
within
certain
states
(QueretaroeMexico, PueblaeVeracruz, Guadalajarae Colima,
MexicoePuebla, SaltilloeMonterrey, San Luis Potosie Queretaro,
MexicoeVeracruz, GuadalajaraeMichoacan, PachucaeSahagun
City, and Nuevo LeoneTamaulipas) is worth noting by shippers,
transportation intermediaries, trucking companies, and anyone
with logistics responsibilities.
Food and beverage items were the most stolen commodity in
Mexico in 2010, with one apparent anomalydloads of sugar,
followed by building and industrial materials and automotive
parts, especially in the states of Jalisco, Michoacan, State of
Mexico, and the Federal District. Also, agricultural products such
as cereals, grains, seeds, and beans were among the most targeted.
Mexican organized cargo theft gangs have developed sophis-
ticated methods to steal loads. As in many Latin American
countries, Mexican cargo thieves develop working relationships
with, or threaten, warehouse and distribution center employees
in order to obtain cargo routing and schedule information. This,
of course, allows them to plan and execute thefts with minimal
risk of capture by police.
Many gang members also ﬁnd employment in warehouses
and trucking companies (usually as drivers or security guards) to
obtain the necessary information. When they steal the truck, they
make police and cargo owners believe that the driver was the
victim of a hijacking.
One methoddgang members wearing police or military
uniforms to conduct fake truck safety inspectionsdcontinues to
be among the most popular in Mexico. This MO allows them to
ﬁnd out the type of products inside the trailer before deciding
whether to proceed with a theft.
Central and South America
Central and South America have booming cargo theft markets.
They buy stolen goods from the United States and sell them
on the black markets locally or elsewhere. Most cargo stolen in
the United States is exported to countries such as Paraguay,
80
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, the Dominican Republic,
and Costa Rica (Palmer, 2009, p. 1169) where it will be either sold
domestically or repackaged and returned to the United States,
appearing as legitimate product, and thereby reintroduced into
the U.S. supply chain.
Supply chain risk as a whole in Central and South America
continues to vary, sometimes widely from country to country,
with Brazil, Guatemala, and Venezuela ranking among the most
dangerous. Shippers and freight forwarders continue to be keenly
aware of these variances, as transportation providers can at times
be very selective as to which countries they will cross into and
which ones they will not.
Cargo theft gangs in South America are generally organized,
with in-depth planning, well-honed methods for eluding police,
and intricate networks for fencing stolen goods. While violence
or the threat of violence is common, some countries such as
Guatemala report a larger percentage of drivers being injured
during theft incidents than countries such as Brazil, where cargo
crime is so common that interaction between the driver and the
thieves has almost become routine.
Electronics, including computers, cell phones, and high-
deﬁnition televisions; pharmaceuticals; food products; metals;
and tobacco are commonly targeted goods in Brazil. Brazilian
cargo thieves will use fake police, corrupt police, and violence (to
include deadly violence)(Burges, 2009b, p. 46) to get what they
want. In March 2008, a security manager of an electronics
manufacturer in Jundiai and his family were kidnapped while at
a shopping mall. The kidnappers held his wife and children while
their associates forced the manager to enter the warehouse,
allowing the criminals to overtake the facility and hold all of the
employees as hostages. As a result, more than 100,000 compo-
nents and 2000 laptops were stolen.
Criminal gangs in Venezuela and Guatemala continue to rank
among the highest countries for cargo theft using the topography
and road infrastructure to easily block convoys of trucks, move
stolen products into secluded areas for storage, and then sale on
the black market.
The majority of cargo theft incidents in countries such as
Brazil, Venezuela, Argentina, and Guatemala are classiﬁed as
hijackings. Thieves use violence or the threat of violence to stop
trucks en route and steal the goodsdoften along with the truck
and trailer.
There is at least one bright spot in Latin America, however; to
combat cargo theft in Colombia, the federal government has
developed a national strategy through its law enforcement
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 81

organizations to target cargo theft gangs and inﬂuence the
various factors that contribute to criminal activity, investigating
incidents vigorously, conducting 800 in 2010.
In Brazil, the southeast region accounts for 81% of all cargo
theft in the country. The level of industrialization and high freight
volume in Sao Paulo, Minas Gerais, and Rio de Janeiro states
provide an opportunity for thieves targeting loads traveling along
highways connecting major industrial cities.
Ofﬁcial cargo theft statistics indicate a total of 5198 cargo
thefts in Sao Paulo state over a 9-month period representing
a total loss of R$207.8 million ($125.9 million USD). The highest
number of incidents, just over one-half, occurred in the capital,
Sao Paulo, with another 38% taking place on highways around the
city. Cargo theft has been consistent since 2008, with only minor
ﬂuctuations.
Despite a decrease in the total number of thefts occurring
during the ﬁrst three-quarters of 2010 compared with the same
period in 2009, there was a corresponding uptick in the value of
the stolen goods.
Brazilian cargo thieves know that most trucks are equipped
with global positioning system (GPS)-tracking devices and
attempt to circumvent the devices by installing towing equip-
ment or trailer hitches on their vehicles. They make off with only
the trailer, gambling that the GPS remains in the tractor they have
left behind. More tech-savvy cargo thieves are starting to use GPS
signal jammers in order to thwart logistics security.
Cargo thieves in Brazil are violent. In every attack, they kidnap
the driver until the stolen load is transferred to a secure location.
If provoked, they will beat the driver severely.
Advanced cargo criminals try to develop relationships with
warehouse employees, police, lawyers, and custom agents in
order to obtain false documentation and information about types
of loads and routes. They also forge strong alliances with buyers
of stolen goods and deliver products to them through intricate
distribution networks that rival those of legitimate businesses.
In Argentina, the attention given by law enforcement to cargo
theft is higher than in other South American countries. Federal,
provincial, and local law enforcement agencies, together with
victimized companies, often work together from the moment
a theft is reported. However, the number of theft incidents
exceeds their collective ability to solve all cases or even to prevent
fast-acting thieves from delivering a load to a buyer or getting it
onto the black market.
In order to minimize losses from cargo theft and thus avoid
rate increases, insurance companies operating in some provinces
82
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

of Argentina now require trucks to have GPS devices or escorts as
a precondition for getting coverage.
According to Argentina’s Chamber of Commerce of Logistics
Operators (CEDOL), in 2010, an average of ﬁve to six truckloads of
cargo were stolen per day on highways connecting large cities.
The CEDOL estimate an annual average of 1800 to 2200 cargo
incidents with an average loss per incident of $250,000.
Currently, 72% of all cargo thefts occur in Buenos Aires
Province, which is composed of the city of Buenos Aires and its
outlying districts, as well as the surrounding Federal Capital
district. However, industry reports state that cargo thieves are
expanding to other provinces, with increases noted in Santa Fe,
Mendoza, San Juan, Formosa, and Entre Rios. According to police
reports, six districts in Greater Buenos Aires account for 56% of all
cargo theft in the area. These are La Matanza, Mercedes, Moron,
San Isidro, Almirante Brown, and Quilmes. Two other districts
within this region, San Martin and Lomas de Zamora, also
consistently report high rates of cargo theft.
Wednesdays and Fridays show the highest incidences of cargo
theft, at 24 and 22%, respectively. The frequency of incidents on
Mondays and Tuesdays are both at 17%, with Saturdays and
Sundays only a combined 20%. Moreover, 70% of all incidents
take place between 6 a.m. and noon, while 14% occur from noon
to 6 p.m. and 8% from 6 p.m. to midnight.
Consumer electronics, primarily televisions, cell phones, and
laptop computers, continue to be the most desirable goods to
thieves, accounting for one-third of all thefts.
The consumer care and tobacco category comprised 22% of
the total stolen, with perfume and cigarettes favorite targets.
Building/industrial (13%), food/drinks (11%), and pharmaceuti-
cals (6%) round out the rest of the list of notables.
According to the newspaper La Nacion, 90% of loads stolen in
Argentina in 2010 consisted of products that had been ordered
in advance. Thieves seek loads based on their client demands. In
2010 and 2011 the most targeted products within the food and
beverages category were agricultural products, mainly cereals,
soybeans, and sugar cane. Also, truckloads of soft drinks, snacks,
and alcohol were among the most targeted.
According to CEDOL, 41% of all cargo theft in Argentina occurs
within the Greater Buenos Aires area, while 26% occurs in the
Federal Capital and 11% in the interior of the country, with Santa
Fe and Cordoba topping the list in the interior.
Although recent industry reports show an increase in the
number of thefts in the central Argentine province of Cordoba,
some companies operating in the province have witnessed
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 83

a dramatic decrease in thefts since 2008. Thanks to law enforce-
ment efforts, these companies no longer see cargo theft as one of
the main problems for their supply chain and transportation
industry; instead, other crimes, such as drug trafﬁcking and bank
robberies, are the major threats in the province.
Argentine cargo thieves are among the most sophisticated in
Latin America, and technology, including the use of GPS
jammers, plays a key role in their MOs. Some gangs also are
known to seek technical assistance from professionals in the use
of GPS jammers to discover other useful methods to thwart
technology advances coming from the security industry.
Argentine cargo thieves are organized gangs with hierarchical
and complex structures. As such they are known to assign roles to
speciﬁc gang members for all phases of the operation, such as
intelligence gathering, planning, attack, sales, and distribution.
Furthermore, the theft gangs often have ties with terrorist orga-
nizations and powerful drug cartels.
Although thieves are well-armed in Argentina, the use of
violence is rare during attacks. Given the already strong law
enforcement focus on cargo crime, thieves tend to avoid the
violent hijackings that may result from the increase in highway
surveillance, stricter punishments, and longer prison sentences.
However, if drivers do not respond to intimidation or other
nonviolent tactics, the criminals will not hesitate to act swiftly
and cruelly.
Thieves have the necessary tools, such as trailer hitches and
towing equipment, to carry out the theft quickly. They move the
load to the next truck stop or another safe haven where they can
unload the cargo.
Guatemala’s Public Ministry estimates that Guatemala City
alone experienced an average of 18 cargo thefts per week in 2010.
It is no surprise, then, that companies operating in the capital
regularly protest what they consider inadequate police protection
against cargo thieves.
Next to Guatemala City, the cities with the highest cargo theft
rates were Palin in Escuintla and the Santa Ana municipality in
Peten. Guatemalan police reported that an average of 200 truck
hijackings occurred each month, at a loss of $2 million, in the four
regions comprising the southern coastal region of Escuintla,
Santa Rosa, Retalhuleu, and Suchitepequez.
In Guatemala, most thefts occur on the main national high-
ways, with some of the worst spots for cargo crime along the
Inter-American (CA-1), the Atlantic (CA-9), and the Paciﬁc (CA-2)
highways. Although police patrol these roads, their efforts are
sporadic and generally limited to populated areas. Due to the
84
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

continued threat from cargo thieves on these highways, compa-
nies are requiring that their vehicles travel in convoys, both
organized and informal.
Like other countries that experience high rates of cargo theft,
trucks in transit and warehouses are the most common targets of
thieves. Guatemala’s well-armed gangs all tend to use the same
MO when attacking trucks. They intercept their target and force
the driver to stop by using or threatening violence. Some gangs
are known to steal the truck along with the cargo and then sell the
truck’s parts on the black market.
Compounding the cargo theft problem in Guatemala are cases
that involve collusion by corrupt police and/or employees of
warehouses and transport companies. For example, Guatemalan
authorities identiﬁed a powerful cargo theft gang they believe has
been operating for years along the Atlantic Highway. Specializing
in stealing loads of food and drink products, clothing and foot-
wear, and auto parts, the criminals are adept at obtaining insider
information as to the types of products being transported and the
trucks’ routes.
On November 17, 2010, the National Civil Police arrested ﬁve
members of the Guatemalan military during the theft of a truck-
load of food, beverages, and consumer care products along the
northern section of the Atlantic Highway.
Police also recovered a stolen truckload of food products
worth $48,000 USD at a cargo thieves’ garage. Three additional
stolen loads of automotive parts and fabric were also recovered.
Africa
The continent of Africa is wrought with cargo theft. While
South Africa often gets the most attention for high rates of
violence and cargo theft (Burges, Global risk, 2009, p. 47), that is
mainly due to its being the most industrialized country on the
continent and therefore offering increased abilities to measure
and track crime. Based on numerous crime statistics and esti-
mations, western Africa (including Nigeria, Niger, Liberia, Cote
d’Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Benin, and Cameroon) has the highest risk
of cargo theft in the continent.
South Africa is plagued with theft and violent crime. Statistics
speciﬁcally regarding cargo theft are not maintained in South
Africa, but hijackings of trucks and freight are far more common
than the nonviolent versions of cargo theft seen in the United
States and Canada. That being said, cargo theft has been rising in
South Africa, particularly in the areas around the airport in
Johannesburg. This increase in cargo theft rates and hijackings
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 85

has reached the point of being “unacceptable.” According to an
eyefortransport September 11, 2008, article, “South Africa [is]
becoming a no-go transit route for foreign shippers.” In the
article, eyefortransport went on to report that the convenience of
transporting through South Africa is outweighed by the “ﬁnancial
risk due to cargo theft.”
According to FreightWatch International, it is important to note
thatthefrequencyofhijackingsthatoccurinSouthAfricafarexceed
the rates of traditional “nonviolent” cargo theft in virtually every
other country where such data exist.
Asia
Asia presents extremely diverse levels of cargo theft and risk to
supply chain operations. Malaysia and the Philippines both report
frequent incidents of in-transit cargo hijackings, with violence or
the threat of violence being used in commission of the crime. In
contrast, China experiences a far different form of cargo crime,
with small-scale pilferage considered rampant and intellectual
property rights at the core of multinational business concerns.
There’s little question that cargo theft and supply chain risk
have increased throughout Asia over the past decade. As
manufacturing and logistics functions continue to operate at high
levels, the overall appetite for obtaining products at less expen-
sive prices grows. India is becoming increasingly noted for large-
scale theft incidents, including truck hijackings and warehouse
robberies. While these trends continue to be of concern, it is
important to note that the rate of theft experienced throughout
Asia is at a signiﬁcantly lower rate than seen in countries such as
Mexico, Brazil, and South Africa.
China
presents
a
wide
array
of
security
problems
for
manufacturing plants and distribution centers. Political, labor,
and social unrest are tightly controlled in a more reactive than
preventive mode, while inconsistencies and unpredictability in
regulatory enforcement are the norm. The central government’s
limited control over the regulatory whims of regional and local
governments, where corruption is rampant, exacerbates this
problem.
The government is now reasserting its authority over directing
energy and economic policy in certain strategic industries, such
as energy, aviation, and possibly ﬁnancial services. There is also
a move to direct investment and trade relations from southeast to
inland China. China has long stood out as a country at very low
risk for cargo theft. However, corporations have seen a deﬁnite
increase in theft numbers since 2009.
86
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

Pilferage has always been an issue in China, with items
stolen in free trade zones or at seaports and airports prior to
a load’s shipment overseas. Throughout 2010, however, reports
of full-truckload thefts increased steadily, presenting logistics
managers with a security problem that was largely unheard of in
years past.
The major high-tech manufacturing centers around Shanghai,
Beijing, and Tianjin began to see shipments targeted, mainly
involving ﬁnished consumer electronics and microprocessors.
Law enforcement and media in these areas reported cases in
which criminals followed loaded trailers in order to steal full or
partial loads.
An MO seen before in China, and in certain countries in
Europe, continued to be an issue in 2010, particularly in southern
China. In this MO, criminals steal cargo from loaded trucks that
are in motion on highways. As Figure 6.1 illustrates, criminals
board the moving truck, break into the trailer, and then ofﬂoad
the cargo into a trail vehicledall without the driver’s knowledge
that theft is transpiring. One report indicated that this MO was
used four times in quick succession on the highway system near
Heyuan city.
Also in 2010, Hong Kong saw increases in thefts of wine and
other alcoholic beverages after this region eliminated all duties
on wine. Criminal activity subsequently increased as thieves
attempted to smuggle the stolen alcoholic beverages into main-
land China.
As in the past, pilferage and larger thefts from ports and free
trade zones in 2010 saw the products reintroduced into the
Chinese market through means that avoid taxation. It is at this
point that many counterfeit products are introduced into the
supply chain to be sold as legitimate products.
It is well known, of course, that China’s massive counterfeiting
operations reach well beyond the country’s borders. In 2010, U.S.
customs conducted more than 14,000 seizures of counterfeited
products originating in China, far more than from any other
country. Additionally, one report showed that 64% of all seized
counterfeit goods in the EU originated in China.
Malaysia, which manufactures a signiﬁcant amount of goods,
especially those of the high-tech variety, is one of the countries in
Asia with the highest rate of cargo theftdviolence or the threat of
violence is often involved. The major manufacturing centers
around Penang and Kuala Lumpur especially have attracted
organized criminals, including the long-active Mamak gang,
which turned to cargo theft after high-tech manufacturing
increased.
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 87

Facing increasing rates of cargo theft in the country, the
Malaysian government stepped up law enforcement efforts,
speciﬁcally monitoring heavily transited routes and cargo theft
gang activity, and focused on improving interagency coordi-
nation. In several cases, police presence in a certain area, and
thus ofﬁcers’ quick response to a theft in progress, prevented
loads from being stolen. For the same reason, some criminals
were arrested, and the cargo fully recovered, within minutes of
a theft.
Initial reports
in 2010 indicated signiﬁcant
success by
authorities in curbing cargo theft activity, as theft rates fell
dramatically in the ﬁrst half of the year. However, despite law
enforcement effortsdand more stringent in-transit and facility
security measuresdcargo crime continues to be a signiﬁcant
problem, with hijackings occurring on a weekly basis.
Complicating the issue are reports of collusion between local
police and criminal gangs, which thwarts efforts to curb cargo
theft activity and creates a level of distrust between industry and
some local agencies. According to the Asia Economic Institute,
Malaysia remains one of the riskiest areas in Asia in terms of
cargo theft. Although perceptions are beginning to change,
further action to combat cargo crime will be necessary.
Thieves in Malaysia commonly target high-value products.
Hence, building/industrial, electronics, food/drinks, and con-
sumer care product types were most favored by thieves in 2010. In
the building/industrial category, precious metals topped the list,
while cosmetics were most targeted in the consumer care
category.
Thefts of precious metals occurred in transit and at the site of
delivery, suggesting that either loads were being followed for long
distances or the thieves had previous knowledge of delivery times
and the cargo being transported.
As in previous years, thefts across the country occurred both in
transit and at warehouses. Most in-transit thefts involved armed
hijackings, with criminals either threatening violence or using
violence in order to stop trucks and steal their cargo. Thieves also
staged truck break-ins to get at cargo in 2010.
Among the many issues facing the supply chain industry in
India are infrastructure deﬁciencies, including the lack of paved
roads connecting major industrial cities with the rest of the
country, cargo theft at the hands of well-armed thieves, and
corrupt law enforcement ofﬁcials and industry employees who
collude with cargo criminals.
Although the Indian government approved several projects for
future improvements on roads and railways and set up dragnets
88
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

on some of the worst highways for cargo crime, little headway was
made on any of these fronts in 2010. As in previous years, efforts to
nab the worst of the cargo theft gangs and opportunistic criminals
failed, and the number of incidents increased in some states.
Meanwhile, 2010 perhaps will be remembered for its outbreak
of iron thefts, principally in the central Indian state of Uttar
Pradesh. Nationwide, thefts of iron in just the second half of 2010
were valued at $13 million. Although no ﬁgures were provided,
this reportedly far exceeded such thefts in previous semesters.
Given that 65% of all cargo is transported by road in India, the
nation’s roadsdpaved and unpaveddare hot spots for cargo
criminals. However, warehouses and freight forwarding yards are
also frequent targets. Furthermore, although stolen loads are
often recovered in other countries, such recoveries are rare in
India, even when authorities are alerted immediately to a theft.
The central and north-central regions of India, especially Uttar
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh states, reported increases in cargo
thefts in 2010. Additionally, the risk remained high in regions
throughout India’s upper half.
For instance, the number of theft incidents increased along
National Highway 22 (NH22) near the city of Jabalpur, Madhya
Pradesh. In this area, thieves tend to target trucks traveling on
unpaved roads connecting to the NH22. Most incidents occur late
at night when police surveillance is limited. Although Jabalpur
police were aware of specialized cargo theft gang operating in this
area, efforts to capture any of the gang members or discover
where they keep the stolen merchandise failed.
Cargo theft in this country is mainly the domain of opportu-
nistic criminals who take advantage of isolated trucks or loads left
unattended. However, there are also many sophisticated gangs
that operate in an organized manner. In all cases, thieves are well-
armed and can be violent.
Organized gangs are known to collude with corrupt police
and/or employees of warehouses or freight forwarding yards.
Employee payoffs in return for information regarding cargo
arrivals and security measures in place allow thieves to plan their
attacks.
Additionally, organized thieves tend to store stolen cargo in
illegal warehouses before selling it on the black market or
distributing it to existing clients. Police in the Dhule District,
Maharashtra state, discovered several illegal warehouses report-
edly operated by an extremely violent, powerfully armed gang. The
outgunned district police apparently did not confront this gang.
Within the building/industrial product type, steel and scrap
iron were among the most targeted products in 2010. In fact,
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 89

Indian government authorities have expressed their concern over
the $13 million in losses resulting from stolen truckloads of iron
in the second half of 2010.
Placed on alert to this rising problem, police established
security checkpoints to inspect commercial trucks on highways
where the greatest number of iron thefts had occurred, including
near the hot spot city of Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh state. Although
several drivers were held for lack of proper documentation, none
of the gangs targeting truckloads of iron was captured.
According to industry reports, some thieves have begun to
target iron with the intention of selling it to state-owned Indian
railways (IR). In January 2011, an IR employee was apprehended
in the midst of negotiating with a cargo thief. Both the thief and
the IR employee were arrested. Police have been unable to
determine whether the thieves responsible for the increase in iron
theft belong to a single large gang or multiple independent gangs.
Regardless, iron thefts have continued into 2011. For example,
a truck loaded with 13 tons of scrap iron was stolen in the city of
Mandi Gobongarh, Punjab state, in January. The truck disappeared
from a restaurant parking lot while the driver was having a meal.
Conclusion
One of the most common trends that differ when analyzing
cargo theft around the world compared to the United States is the
presence of the driver when the crime occurs. When assessing
cargo theft in Europe, Mexico, South America, and Asia, in almost
every case, the driver is present when the crime occurs, requiring
the criminals to force the driver to separate from the load.
Whether through violence or simple threat, these criminals take
a more overt and aggressive action that is rarely seen in the
United States, where cargo theft is almost exclusively nonviolent,
occurring while loads are left unattended.
Key Points
•
While cargo theft in the United States is almost exclusively
nonviolent, that is not the case in other parts of the world,
including Mexico, Brazil, South America, Russia, South Africa,
and throughout Europe.
•
The reason for the high levels of violence in cargo theft in other
countries is complicated and goes deeper than supply chain
security and operations; however, these do have a direct
impact on the methods used by criminals to steal cargo.
90
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT

•
Even for countries that border each other, the methods and
rates of cargo theft from one country to the next can change
dramatically.
•
As the supply chain become increasingly hardened to prevent
supply chain theft, industry professionals can expect thieves to
alter their tactics, targeting, or level of aggressiveness in order
to obtain the product they need to sell on the black market.
•
It is critical to understand the various changes in supply chain
risk from country to country (or region to region) and ensure
that in-transit security policies are adjusted accordingly.
Chapter 6 INTERNATIONAL CARGO THEFT 91

7
PRODUCT TARGETING
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• What products are popular for cargo criminals to target
• Cargo theft data analysis
• Supply and demandda criminal’s perspective
• Active targetingdhow thieves steal the right cargo
By the time I grew up, there was thirty billion a year in cargo
moving through Idlewild Airport and believe me, we tried to
steal every bit of it.
Henry Hill, Goodfellas
Cargo thieves steal every variety of products imaginable.
Computers, cell phones, aspirin, cigarettes, wine, energy drinks,
steak and lobster, lawn chairs, appliances, furniture, auto parts,
you name it. If the American consumer has a use for it, a cargo
criminal will steal it.
The author has been tracking cargo theft for FreightWatch
since 2006 with the goal of determining the kinds of products
cargo thieves go after, where the thefts occur, and the monetary
losses that result from these crimes. When possible, based on the
information available; date and time of the theft; city, country, or
state of the incident; location type; thieves’ modus operandi;
product stolen; and its loss value are all recorded. The ultimate
objective is to better understand cargo theft to be better able to
provide meaningful intelligence and forward-thinking analysis to
mitigate risk and prevent cargo theft.
The analytics allow tracking a variety of trends or patterns,
including geography, method of theft, locations (truck stops,
parking lots, terminals), and, the most critical information, the
type of product stolen. As trucks travel down the road, the cargo
they contain is the number one factor determining whether it will
be targeted by thieves. Other factors could inﬂuence the likeli-
hood that a theft occurs, but the product itself is the key driver for
criminals.
While cargo thieves will steal literally anything, there are
certain requirements that the product must meet. First, there has
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00007-8
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
93

to be a demand for the product on the black or gray market. If the
criminals (or brokers) cannot sell the stolen merchandise, then it
is of no value. Also, the higher the demand, the easier the product
is to sell, and therefore more desirable to the theft gang. Second,
the more valuable the product is, the more likely it is to be tar-
geted. High-deﬁnition televisions are more desirable than tradi-
tional sets; prescription drugs are favored over generics and
designer clothes over low-cost brands.
Before going forward the reader needs to know that there is no
universal product classiﬁcation system in use by those who track
theft data. For example, some list cell phones, televisions, and
computers individually, while the system developed at Freight-
Watch groups cargo into product categories such as electronics,
consumer care, and building/industrial products in order to keep
the listing manageable. A “miscellaneous” category was also
added for products that do not ﬁt neatly into any other category
or when a shipment contains several types of goods like one
would see in a less than truckload move.
The FreightWatch classiﬁcation system, which the author used
for this book, divides cargo into 11 product types:
•
Alcohol
•
Auto/parts
•
Building/industrial
•
Clothing/shoes
•
Consumer care
•
Electronics
•
Food/drinks
•
Home/garden
•
Miscellaneous
•
Pharmaceuticals
•
Tobacco
It should also be noted that cargo theft data are fragmented
because there is no centralized reporting mechanism in the
United States (or elsewhere for that matter). Even if police and
sheriff’s departments around the country shared cargo theft
reports with one another, or a single data repository, which they
do not, many theft incidents are never reported to authorities at
all. Whether it’s for fear of negative publicity, a desire to avoid the
hassle of police involvement, or another reason, many victims
simply are averse to reporting cargo theft incidents. And yet
logistics and security professionals would beneﬁt from up-to-
date and accurate cargo theft data. This dichotomy has led to the
creation of a number of disparate cargo theft collection and
distribution systems across the country. Even when combined,
the information may not offer the most complete picture of cargo
94
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING

theft in the United States. However, it does provide a pretty
decent snapshot, giving us theft trends and ratios of thefts by
product type and locations, and pinpointing cargo theft hot spots.
Because of this lack of a single cargo theft data source, the
author has spent six years collecting information from cargo theft
task forces, insurance companies, online newspapers, and
victims themselves, all in the attempt to capture the clearest
picture possible of cargo theft within our national supply chain.
In 2010, FreightWatch recorded 899 incidents of cargo theft in
the United States. In each case, the incident was categorized by
product stolen, city and state of the theft, location of the theft if
known (truck stop, parking lot, terminal, and drop lots, to name
a few), and reported value of the loss. Figure 7.1 shows the level of
thefts from 2006 through 2010.
While the number of incidents grew steadily each year, the
average value per incident over that time increased by 108%.
However, that only tells part of the story. Cargo theft trends are
a push and pull between criminals seeking high-value cargo and
those law enforcement and industry security specialists devel-
oping ways and means to reduce losses.
While the total volume of cargo theft in 2006 was signiﬁcantly
lower than the years following (310 incidents in 2006 vs. 899
incidents in 2010), cargo criminals were very successful in seeking
high-value cargo that year. Possibly the tipping point in the
logistics industry, the year cargo theft prevention registered in the
0
200
400
600
800
1000
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Cargo Theft: 2006–2010 
# Incidents
Log. (# Incidents)
Figure 7.1 Courtesy FreightWatch.
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING 95

minds of shippers of high-value cargo, as well as the compa-
nies handling, storing, or transporting them, was in 2006 when
there was an inordinately large number of catastrophic (over
$1 million) losses.
That year, 20 such incidents were recorded, representing 6.5%
of the annual total. In comparison, in 2010 the 28 incidents of the
same magnitude made up just 3% of the thefts.
The average loss per incident peaked in 2009 for a variety of
product types, including electronics and pharmaceuticals. As
shown in Figure 7.2, it reached $591,000, surpassing every other
year studied.
From 2006 through 2010, electronics were the most targeted
product type, variously accounting for between 19 and 38% of the
total. Only in 2010 did thieves not target electronics more than any
other product type. That year, the food and beverage product type
accounted for 21% of all cargo theft incidents, whereas electronics
loads dropped to second, with 19% of all incidents (Figure 7.3).
Pharmaceutical thefts grew exponentially from 2006 to 2008,
increasing a whopping 283% (from 12 recorded thefts in 2006 to
46 incidents in 2008). Since 2008, the rate of growth has been
almost ﬂat, with one additional incident in 2009 and three addi-
tional incidents in 2010.
The average loss per incident has been volatile, with a low of
$1.13 million in 2007 to a peak just under $4 million 2 years later
(Figure 7.4). For additional data and analysis of cargo theft in this
particularly high-value industry, see Chapter 9: Pharmaceuticals.
$0
$100,000
$200,000
$300,000
$400,000
$500,000
$600,000
$700,000
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
# Theft Incidents vs. Average Value per Incident
# Theft Incidents
Avg Value per Incident
Figure 7.2 Courtesy FreightWatch.
96
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING

Alcohol
4%
Auto/parts
6%
Building/industrial
10%
Clothing/shoes
11%
Consumer care 
products
6%
Electronics
19%
Food/drinks
21%
Home/garden
9%
Miscellaneous
8%
Pharmaceuticals
5%
Tobacco
1%
By Product Type: 2010
Figure 7.3 Courtesy FreightWatch.
$0
$500,000
$1,000,000
$1,500,000
$2,000,000
$2,500,000
$3,000,000
$3,500,000
$4,000,000
$4,500,000
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Pharmaceutical Theft vs. Average Value per Loss
# Thefts
Avg. Loss Value
Figure 7.4 Courtesy FreightWatch.
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING 97

Product Demand
As in any capital market, the laws of supply and demand are
the key drivers for those who buy and sell stolen goods. As such,
the price of products on the legitimate market clearly plays a vital
role in the desirability of cargo.
Over the 2010 Labor Day weekend, a group of thieves entered
the S.H. Bell Company yard in Baltimore, Maryland, and made off
with six trailers loaded with high-value metals, including nickel
and copper, valued at $1.82 million. The theft was hardly an
anomaly that year, as 43 cargo theft incidents involved metals, for
an estimated $17.4 million in direct losses.
Not coincidentally, the value of copper and other precious
metals had skyrocketed in 2010. Figure 7.5 demonstrates the
correlation between the value of copper and the rate of its theft.
This trend toward targeting high-value merchandise is not
isolated to a single industry or product type. Cargo theft gangs are
becoming increasingly selective in the products they steal, often
traveling unheard of distances to attain the desired goods. Instead
of more readily available generic or lesser value products, cargo
thieves are going after more expensive name brands, which are
more attractive to today’s consumers.
Price, of course, is not the only factor thieves consider before
selecting targets. A demand has to exist as well. One factor is the
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
9000
10000
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Q1- 07
Q2-07
Q3-07
Q4-07
Q1-08
Q2-08
Q3-08
Q4-08
Q1-09
Q2-09
Q3-09
Q4-09
Q1-10
Q2-10
Q3-10
Q4-10
Copper Theft: # Cargo Theft Incidents vs. Price Index
# Thefts
Price Index
Figure 7.5 Courtesy FreightWatch.
98
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING

increased marketing efforts of manufacturers and retailers, as
consumers are driven to higher end goods and are less willing to
settle for a similar (generic) product. The products people are
enticed to purchase appear on television and newspaper ads, the
Internet, and even on NASCARs race cars are the exact same
products that cargo thieves are going to steal. In this market-
driven economy, criminals will opt for in-demand merchandise
that will fetch them the best return.
This is especially clear in markets in which new products
emerge regularly, such as the electronics industry. As new cell
phones and computers are rolled out, thieves, like the rest of us,
quickly lose interest in outdated models. The pharmaceutical
sector is another good example of the power of advertising on
consumer buying habits, and ultimately on the products that
thieves target. As the miracle drugs to alleviate aches and pains
and improve the overall quality of people’s lives exploded over
the past few years, so too did consumer demand. This desire is
reﬂected directly in the rate of cargo theft. Cargo thieves are no
different than legitimate for-proﬁt enterprise in that they must
understand their markets and the products they will be able to
sell at a premium. Because of this, high-demand products are
targeted and then sold at discounted rates on the black and gray
markets, netting thieves huge amounts of money for a few days of
work.
Additionally, cargo thieves are becoming more sophisticated,
conducting preoperational surveillance, knowing where products
are made and stored, and acquiring inside information through
various means. This has increased the range that thieves are
willing to follow a load due to the increased conﬁdence that their
efforts will result in a large payday. After putting in the effort to
ﬁnd and travel to the load’s origin, following loads longer
distances is now less of a drawback for cargo thieves.
Product launches are prime opportunities for cargo thieves to
achieve a signiﬁcantly higher margin. When a new cell phone,
computer, or gaming console is set to hit the market, cargo
thieves often increase their operations in and around areas where
these products are made, stored, and shipped with the goal of
stealing a full truckload of them and then getting the items to
their outlets at/before the ofﬁcial launch date.
Active Targeting vs. Pot Luck
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, cargo thieves were far more
opportunistic. In those days most of them were content with
the “pot luck” approach at truck stops, where they would steal
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING 99

any accessible rig and then determine whether the product
inside could be fenced. While not terribly efﬁcient, this modus
operandi (MO) posed a minimal risk to cargo thieves and
required little or no preoperational efforts on their part. The
drawback, however, was that loads were often sold for minimal
proﬁt or were simply left abandoned because they had no
“market” value. The desire for increased proﬁt drove cargo
thieves to actively target higher end products that could be
fenced easily.
Of course, this method of cargo crime involves more invest-
ment; gangs now have to gather more intelligence, travel, be more
persistent in tracking in-transit cargo, and take greater risks in
stealing the goods.
CASE STUDY: THEFT IN CLUSTERS
Cargo theft often occurs in clusters. These clusters can be
geographically based (a rash of thefts happening in a short period of
time in a small area), product based (multiple thefts of the same product
type occurring in a short time period), or MO based [numerous thefts
occurring with a similar (often rare) MO being used].
Sometimes, on rare occasions, a cluster of thefts will occur that meet
several of these categories. In November/December 2011, a rash of
thefts occurred that were targeting gaming consoles. A common target
for cargo criminal, especially during the holiday season, gaming
consoles are moved quickly by criminals and sold on the black market
effortlessly for extremely high proﬁts. This was a classic example of
product-based clustering.
Additionally, details surrounding these thefts placed each theft
either within close proximity to Memphis or the cargo had departed the
Memphis area as the point of origin before the theft had occurred. In
fact, each of these thefts involved trailers and cargo that had all departed
the same distribution center in Memphis, Tennessee (Olive Branch,
Mississippi). This example of geographical-based clustering was not
only very apparent to the victim in this string of thefts, but also provided
signiﬁcant evidence of the potential for insider information compro-
mising the security of these shipments (i.e., criminals being provided
shipment information in order to accurately ﬁnd, follow, and steal these
high-value loads).
Often, cases of clustering involve a particular theft gang, such as the
South Florida cargo theft gangs. In this case, evidence was traced to theft
gangs from New Jersey (where the cargo from the ﬁrst theft was
recovered by the state police), and additional cargo from these thefts
was discovered in the Miami/Hialeah area. While a connection between
gangs in New Jersey and Florida has always been relatively known, cases
such as this only help conﬁrm this apparent link.
100
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING

A case such as this creates not only a substantial headache for
shippers as cargo lost in mass during the holiday season can put
a signiﬁcant strain on the supply chain and generate the potential for
lost sales and damaged relationships with retailers, but could also have
signiﬁcant impact on the bottom line for the freight forwarder that
could possibly lose a signiﬁcant customer as a result of the potential
security breach.
This case also demonstrates the willingness of cargo criminals to
continue targeting and stealing loads even though law enforcement
agencies are aware of their activity. The ﬁrst load of gaming consoles
was recovered within days of the theft by the New Jersey State Police,
before any of the subsequent thefts had occurred, but the criminals
continued to target and successfully steal loads from the Memphis
logistics center, stealing in excess of $5 million in product.
Finally, this case reafﬁrms the notion that if a supply chain is tar-
geted or hit successfully by a theft gang, every effort should be made to
discover why and how the theft occurred and what can be done to
prevent it from occurring again in the future. Too many times shippers
feel that after a theft or attempted theft has occurred that they are no
longer “on the hook” for gang targeting, but nothing could be further
from the truth as criminals will continue to exploit weaknesses in
a supply chain until they have ﬁlled their orders or that weakness is
eliminated.
Components of Active Targeting
Active targeting refers to the method used by professional
cargo criminals to steal a particular product. The process works as
follows.
The broker or buyer places an order with the cargo criminals
for a product type or a speciﬁc item. The theft gang conducts
research to determine where the product is manufactured or
distributed. The gang then chooses which facility to target,
assembles the necessary team, and travels to the location, usually
in a rental car or two acquired by an acquaintance of the team
(often female). Finally, the gang will rent a room at an inexpensive
motel near the targeted facility.
The gang will then conduct surveillance of the facility to
determine the ﬂow of goods in and out, shipping schedules, and
other intelligence that will help them select the trailer that
contains their target.
During the information-gathering phase, gang members will
seek insider details through a number of methods from the more
simplistic ﬁshing or purchasing information from employees
(sometimes purchasing information), seemingly wandering into
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING 101

facilities pretending to be lost and seeking directions, or
attempting to be hired as a temporary employee. On rare occa-
sions, more elaborate means have been devised with some
thieves going so far as to place hidden cameras near doors to
record entry codes.
Once the gang has the intelligence it needs, members move
into an operational mode by trailing the truck. Historically,
thieves would go as far as 200 miles before giving up and selecting
another load. In recent years, however, they have been known to
follow a desired load more than 500 miles just waiting for the
driver to stop and create the vulnerability (“cargo at rest .”) they
seek. Then they pounce.
Because cargo theft continues to be a nonviolent crime,
thieves generally wait for the driver to leave the load unattended
before they move in to steal the entire tractoretrailer. Gangs are
proﬁcient at an almost endless array of creative means for gaining
access to locked tractors and getting them started for a quick exit.
Once stolen, the truck is driven a short distance to an out-of-
sight place and the tractor is unhooked and another tractor,
usually stolen a day or two before the job and swept clean of any
form of tracking device, is then attached to the trailer and the load
is moved to its destination.
After his 2009 arrest in California, one suspected cargo thief
told authorities he primarily targeted facilities that would preload
trailers and leave them in their lots overnight, preferably over the
weekend. By going after these loads, the criminal was able to
move the cargo a signiﬁcant distance before it was ever discov-
ered missing and reported to police. He even acknowledged
having been stopped by police on several stops for trafﬁc viola-
tions. In each case he was allowed to continue on his way because
the police had no way of knowing he was transporting a stolen
load.
Cases such as the previously mentioned Plainﬁeld, Indiana,
incident illustrate the lengths to which theft gangs will go in order
to ﬁnd, “case,” track, and eventually steal high-value cargo. No
longer do criminals operate only within the general areas where
they live or limit themselves to following loads over short
distances. Today’s cargo criminal has a far different mentalityd
one consistent with what the general public would deem appro-
priate for a modern business enterprise.
Key Points
•
Cargo theft is a market-driven crime. Organized theft gangs
will seek out, target, and steal products that are most desired
102
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING

by the consumer, and therefore easiest to sell for a high proﬁt
on the black market.
•
By understanding market demand, price ﬂuctuations, and new
product releases, manufacturers and shippers can predict the
risk of being targeted by thieves and adjust their supply chain
security program accordingly (for more information, see
Chapter 11: Determining Risk).
•
Although truck stops and other unsecured parking areas
continue to be the most common location for thefts to occur,
organized theft gangs rarely use “pot luck” methods to steal
cargo any more.
•
Shippers and transportation providers should not underesti-
mate the lengths to which criminals will go following loads
across the country in order to steal them at their ﬁrst
opportunity.
Chapter 7 PRODUCT TARGETING 103

8
HIGH TECH
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Historical perspective of cargo theft
• Introduction of industry collaboration to combat cargo theft
• Analysis of theft trends in high-tech sector
• Discussion about the most targeted items by cargo criminals
Background
Cargo theft as we know it today began during the high-tech
boom of the 1990s, with the proliferation of the computer
industry by companies such as Compaq, Dell, HP, and others.
With this boom came a new-found problem, cargo theft, which
was largely unrecognized as it slowly crept into our supply chain
until the problem became rampant, causing signiﬁcant and
adverse ﬁnancial and operational impact on these companies.
During the latter half of the 1990s, security in the high-tech
industry centered primarily on manufacturing sites preventing
internal theft. There was minimal effort to reduce in-transit theft
or burglaries from third-party warehouse facilities.
In April 1997, Gary Alton, then divisional security manager at
Compaq Computers, received a call from one of the company’s
logistics managers. Thieves were running roughshod over Com-
paq’s supply chain, stealing computers and laptops seemingly at
will and something had to change.
Compaq, it turned out, was not the only company suffering
such losses. Discussions between Alton and Don Greenwood at
Sun Microsystems, Steve Lund at Intel, and others indicated an
industry-wide problem. With this recognition came a decision to
have an informal meeting in Phoenix in July 1997. Compaq, Sun
Microsystems, Dell, Intel, HP, and Texas Instruments all attended
with 35 representatives from 25 different companies showing up.
The initial meeting ended with a clear agreement that their
industry was under attack and in desperate need of a proactive
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00008-X
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
105

approach to securing their supply chains, including facilities and
in-transit lanes, and that the manufacturers had to lead this
effort.
A second meeting was hosted later that year in Boston where
the Technology Asset Protection Association (TAPA) was formed,
chaired by Mr. Alton, with the goal of sharing information,
developing supply chain security standards, and reducing losses
from theft and pilferage.
Direct losses were not the only problem this sector was facing.
Theft of components and accessories added an entirely different
dimension to the problem, as manufacturing centers failed to
receive needed components on time, slowing the production
process, resulting in lost revenues, proﬁts, and customers.
TAPA’s emergence, however, was only part of the required
response. The size and breadth of the U.S. supply chain still left
cargo thieves with countless opportunities to steal goods as
physical and procedural weaknesses became known, human
errors occurred, and lapses in security arose. Cargo theft rates still
grew. In 2004, the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s department
investigated 284 thefts, an increase of 20% from 2003 (Gale
Group, 2005).
2006 through 2010
From 2006 through 2010, FreightWatch recorded 896 cargo
theft incidents in the electronics sector, accounting for more than
$512 million in direct losses. While the annual number of cargo
thefts moved considerably in the electronics sector from year to
year over the 5-year period (peaking at 221 incidents in 2007), the
net result was an overall increase. At the same time, however,
the percentage of electronics thefts in relation to all cargo theft in
the United States declined signiﬁcantly.
In 2006, electronics comprised 38% of all cargo theft incidents,
while years later this product type accounted for only 19% of the
totaldfor the ﬁrst time dropping to second place on the list of
most stolen products (Figure 8.1).
Not surprising, given their “Big Three” status, California,
Florida, and Texas recorded the highest levels of cargo theft
activity in the electronics sector from 2006 to 2010. Tennessee,
Illinois, and Georgia followed with New Jersey just behind on the
5-year argument (Figure 8.2).
The theft of electronics is far more likely to occur in and
around Los Angeles, Miami, and Dallas/Fort Worth. In fact, 34%
of the thefts in these three metropolitan areas involved elec-
tronics loads, as compared to roughly 20% nationwide.
106
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH

0
50
100
150
200
250
300
California
Florida
Texas
Tennessee
Illinois
Georgia
New
Jersey
Electronics Thefts (2006–2010) 
# Incidents
Figure 8.2 Courtesy FreightWatch.
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
50
100
150
200
250
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Electronics Cargo Theft: By Year
# Electronic Theft Incidents
% of Total Cargo Theft
Figure 8.1 Courtesy FreightWatch.
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH 107

When looking at the county level for electronics losses, Los
Angeles County, Miami-Dade County, Dallas/Tarrant counties,
and San Bernardino County collectively accounted for 41% of all
electronics thefts in the country over this time (Figure 8.3).
Memphis/West Memphis (Shelby/Crittenden counties) was the
ﬁfth most active area in the country for thefts in this industry. Cook
County (Greater Chicago area), which was the site of nearly every
electronics theft incident recorded in Illinois, was next in line.
One of the most surprising discoveries, given its status as one
of the nation’s hot spots for cargo theft, was the relatively low
number of electronic thefts in Fulton County (Atlanta). In this
sector, Fulton County placed ninth, even trailing Texas’s El Paso
County and Florida’s Duval (Jacksonville) County. Indeed, Fulton
County earns its overall high rate of cargo theft as a result of thefts
in other industries, such as food/drinks and building/industrial,
and a large number of thefts of all product types in the Atlanta
general area, but outside the county lines.
Although the number of cargo thefts was higher every year after
2006, the increase was not steady. An examination of theft totals on
a yearly basis reveals an almost cyclical pattern (see Figure 8.4), as
rates increased and then decreased every other year consistently.
The average loss per incident was less consistent, with varying
percentages of growth each year from 2007 to 2009, followed by
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Electronics Theft by County
# Theft Incidents
Los Angeles
Miami-Dade
Dallas/Tarrant
San Bernardino
 Shelby/Crittenden
Cook (III.)
El Paso (Tex.)
Duval (Fla.)
Fulton (Ga.)
Figure 8.3 Courtesy FreightWatch.
108
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH

a substantial decline in 2010. The most dramatic change occurred
from 2007 to 2008, when the average value of an electronics theft
jumped from $421,900 to $791,900, a 71.1% increase.
It has long been understood and now proven through analysis
of cargo theft data since 2007 that cargo is more at risk over
weekend periods than during the middle of the week. This
absolute, however, does not hold true when looking speciﬁcally at
the electronics industry.
While thefts occur with somewhat increased frequency over
weekend periods, Tuesday and Thursday both experienced higher
rates of theft than Saturday. Still, the highest levels of theft of this
product type were recorded on Friday and Monday (Figure 8.5).
One possible explanation for this deviation from traditional
cargo theft patterns is the level of targeting of electronics prod-
ucts by cargo criminalsda result of the degree of desirability of
these products on the black market. The opportunity to fence
coveted products quickly provides added incentive for aggressive
cargo thieves to work midweek. Additionally, the electronics
sector as a whole, now well versed in the dangers of cargo theft,
is less likely to leave high-value loads stationary during the
weekend.
Most Targeted Items
The popularity of electronics is easy to understand, as people
now view them as necessities, buying them at an astonishing pace
over the past decade. Televisions, smart phones, laptops, tablet
$0
$100,000
$200,000
$300,000
$400,000
$500,000
$600,000
$700,000
$800,000
$900,000
0
50
100
150
200
250
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
# Theft Incidents vs. Average Loss Value
# Incidents
Avg. Value
Figure 8.4 Courtesy
FreightWatch.
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH 109

PCs, gaming consoles, and software are all commonplace in the
U.S. economy, with an ever-increasing demand.
According to a survey conducted in March 2010, 91% of all
Americans (approximately 275 million people) use mobile
phones, up 15 million users from the same survey conducted the
year prior, and up from just 82% in November 2007.
An additional 15 million consumers of mobile phones in just
a single year is a clear indication of the incredible demand
for high-end electronicsdiPhones, Androids, and Blackberriesd
expensive items people will gladly purchase for a lower price, thus
creating a signiﬁcant black market demand. In fact, the demand
is so high that many insurance companies are unwilling to insure
full truckloads of mobile phones due to their extreme value and
the rate at which cargo thieves target them. The average load of
mobile phones can range from $1 million to in excess of $3
million, rivaling pharmaceuticals and tobacco products in value,
but far surpassing each for demand and ease of sale on the black
market.
Similarly, with 99% of all Americans owning a television, and
with more than 80% of the population having multiple sets in
their households (not to mention those in businesses, restau-
rants, bars, hotels, and other public places), there is little surprise
that TVs are the most sought-after product by cargo criminals in
the United States. With over 300 loads of televisions stolen since
2007, criminals are frequently successful at seeking, tracking, and
acquiring large quantities, with ﬂat screen and high-deﬁnition
models being the most popular.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Saturday
Friday
Thursday
Wednesday
Tuesday
Monday
Sunday
Electronics Theft: By Day of the Week
# Thefts
Figure 8.5 Courtesy FreightWatch.
110
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH

Cell Phones
The volume of cargo theft within the cell phone industry has
been inconsistent since 2007. The highest number of thefts of this
product (a subset of the electronics product type) occurred in
2007, with 26 recorded incidents, followed by 21 incidents in
2009. However, although 2007 ranked ﬁrst, it was last in average
loss at $802,700 per incident. By comparison, 18 theft incidents
were recorded in 2010, with an average loss value of $3.65 million
(Figure 8.6).
By state, Florida (27), California (12), and Texas (12) all re-
corded double-digit theft incidents, with Tennessee (6), Kentucky
(5), Illinois (4), and Georgia (4) rounding out the top seven. By city,
Miami recorded 16 theft incidents of cell phones from 2006 to
2010, the most on record. This was followed by Fort Worth with six
loads, Memphis with four loads, and Los Angeles with three.
Televisions
When compared to any other speciﬁc item, televisions are the
most commonly stolen item by cargo thieves in the United States.
With over 250 recorded theft incidents since 2006, televisions are
the easiest items to sell on the black market with no service and
activation requirements that accompany computers, laptops, or
cell phones; televisions are extraordinarily easy for consumers to
acquire and begin using within minutes of their purchase.
On July 7, 2008, a shipment of high-deﬁnition televisions
arrived in Miami, Florida, as part of a new product launch.
$0
$100,000
$200,000
$300,000
$400,000
$500,000
$600,000
$700,000
$800,000
$900,000
0
50
100
150
200
250
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
# Theft Incidents vs. Average Loss Value
# Incidents
Avg. Value
Figure 8.6 Courtesy
FreightWatch.
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH 111

Stopping brieﬂy for fuel and to use the restroom, the truck driver
returned to ﬁnd his rig, along with the load, stolen, a loss esti-
mated at $4 million, one of the largest television heists on record.
While television loads generally have a lower average value
($375,000) than other electronics, such as cell phones (average
value: $1.9 million), laptops (average value: $590,000), or gaming
consoles (average value: $730,000), their marketability is so
immense that stealing television loads is akin to printing money
as they almost guarantee a speedy and successful sale on the
black market.
Computers
Computers and computer equipment are historically among
the most targeted of all products by cargo thieves. Desktops,
laptops, notebooks, hard drives, and accessories are all stolen
throughout the United States with little geographic concentration
and done so routinely month after month. Companies such as
HP, Dell, Toshiba, Sony, IBM, and Lenovo continually update and
alter their supply chain security programs attempting to stay
ahead of criminal elements targeting their cargo.
With the boom of personal electronics in the late 1990s and
early 2000s, computers were among the most sought after of all
items by cargo criminals. Companies manufacturing, assembling,
and transporting items within the computer sector quickly real-
ized they were under ﬁre from these gangs, leading to the even-
tual creation of the Technology Asset Protection Association and
other similar groups that continue to thrive today.
With emerging technologies, new products, and a consistent
demand
by
consumers,
the
ability
of
criminals
to
move
computer-related products on the black and gray markets is high,
with good proﬁt margins for the gangs and their brokers while
enjoying the minimal risk of arrest and prosecution associated
with cargo crime.
Chips, Chip Sets, and Memory Devices
Historically, computer chips have been highly sought after by
cargo criminals. The value to product size ratio is higher than any
other electronics equipment and rivals most pharmaceutical
products. High-end computer chips packed into a shoebox-size
carton can easily be worth seven ﬁgures, making their desirability
for cargo criminals and their brokers unmistakable.
At approximately 8:45 a.m. on Sunday, February 27, 2011,
ﬁfteen armed gunmen entered the gated property of Unigen
112
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH

Corp. in Fremont, California, by cutting a hole in the fence.
Armed with automatic riﬂes and handguns, the suspects, all
dressed in black, accosted employees, binding, gagging, and
securing them in the company’s cargo security cage. The suspects
then proceeded to steal ﬂash memory chips, a theft valued at
$34 million.
According to multiple experts in the electronics ﬁeld, a take
this large would be too much for sale in the U.S. market, making
export to foreign buyers a likely scenario, possibly China. Before
the product could be exported, however, law enforcement was
able to track down the product through a variety of sources and
methods, eventually recovering all the stolen cargo and arresting
9 of the 15 suspects. Additionally, two men arrested were iden-
tiﬁed as Pierre Ramos and Leonardo Abriumdemployees at
Unigen Corp.
The investigation was spearheaded by REACTda multicounty
technology crime task force led by the Santa Clara County District
Attorney’s Ofﬁce (Benedetti, 2011). The quick action by the team
and key leads culminated in the product recovery and the arrests
made.
Consumer Electronics
Consumer electronics are extremely popular for cargo crimi-
nals to steal, as with the other products listed earlier, due
primarily to the demand by the consumer and their ease of sale
on the black market. Televisions (discussed previously in this
chapter), gaming consoles, and book readers are constantly on
the thieves’ radar. From 2006 to 2010, over 200 consumer elec-
tronics loads were stolen in the United States with another 18
loads of gaming console and software (games).
A recent subset of consumer electronics is book readers such
as the Amazon Kindle and the Barnes and Noble’s Nook, as well
as tablets such as the iPad and various other similar products. A
sea container of book readers can be worth up to $2.5 millionda
signiﬁcant take by criminals for a product that is extremely easy
to move on the black market or reintroduce into the gray market.
Key Points
•
The modern era of cargo theft began with signiﬁcant losses to
the high-tech industry.
•
This spike in cargo theft led to creation of the Technology
Asset Protection Association, the ﬁrst industry group formed
speciﬁcally to combat over the road and facility cargo crime.
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH 113

•
Criminals highly motivated to acquire cutting-edge and newly
created products will deviate from normal trends to acquire
them, including thefts from highly secured facilities and yards.
•
Televisions are the most commonly stolen type of electronics.
•
New products being introduced into the market are at extreme
risk of being targeted by cargo thieves and should be given
special
security
consideration
during
both
storage
and
distribution.
114
Chapter 8 HIGH TECH

9
PHARMACEUTICALS
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Attractiveness of the pharmaceutical sector for cargo thieves
• Cargo theft trends in the pharmaceutical sector
• Methods of theft, storage, and sale of stolen pharmaceuticals
• Impact of supply chain complexity and cargo security
It was quickly no longer a matter of “if” we were going to get
it, but a matter of “when.”
Kenneth Obriot, Wyeth Pharmaceuticals
On June 17, 2009, a driver pulled his tractoretrailer into
a TravelCenters of America truck stop approximately 5 miles off
of Interstate 40 in Denmark, Tennessee. Having just completed
a 5-hour leg of his trip from a distribution center in Louisville,
Kentucky, to a medical supply wholesaler in Memphis, he was
anxious to stretch his legs and fuel up. He ﬁlled up and then
went inside the truck stop to pay the cashier and grab a quick
shower. When he returned a short time later his entire rig, along
with $10 million in prescription drugs, was goneda loss of
approximately 100 times that of the average bank robbery, and
one that would ultimately cost the shipper, a foreign-based
pharmaceutical manufacturer, an estimated $47 million in
product recalls.
Cargo theft of the pharmaceutical industry has exploded since
the turn of the century. Although thieves in Canada, Mexico,
Brazil, and a few other countries occasionally target this sector,
no other country has experienced anything like the boom seen in
the United States, particularly since 2007. In 2010, this sector
recorded 49 cargo theft incidents, a 287% increase over 2006
levels.
One argument for the spike in thefts is the emergence of heavy
marketing of prescription drugs designed to do everything from
improve a patient’s quality of life to treat life-threatening
conditions. With television commercials and other advertise-
ments promoting the beneﬁts of a vast array of new and improved
drugs, consumers are now driving demand for many of these
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00009-1
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
115

products rather than the medical professionals who prescribe
them.
Another argument for this demand could be the high value of
the drugs themselves. With consumers struggling to afford name
brand medications and the ability to move stolen goods easily
into the legitimate market through secondary wholesalers, cargo
thieves have a variety of methods for moving these high-value
goods at substantial proﬁt.
The result has been an explosion in cargo theft incidents
throughout the pharmaceutical sector.
History
Although cargo theft has existed to some degree in the
pharmaceutical industry since the late 1990s and earlier, orga-
nized cargo criminal groups started targeting loads in earnest in
2006.
Kenneth Obriot of Wyeth Pharmaceuticals in Madison,
New Jersey, began tracking cargo thefts involving the industry
in 2005, logging every pharmaceutical theft that occurred in
the United States. Obriot began recording these incidents
after his company, which had not experienced any thefts
previously, lost two loads to thieves in 2004, both the result
of
what
was
then
called
“driver
error.”
These
“errors”
involved breaks in established protocol, such as leaving a load
unattended and dropping the load (i.e., detaching the trailer
from the tuck and leaving it). Both thefts occurred off of the
major transportation arteries in areas where it would be
difﬁcult for opportunistic criminals to ﬁnd high-value cargo.
Cargo thieves were now apparently targeting and trailing
pharmaceutical loads. Previously, cargo theft in the pharma-
ceutical industry was considered more of an acceptable risk
due to low quantities being stolen at very infrequent intervals.
When thefts did occur, it was indeed more a case of “our
time” or bad luck rather than overt targeting by cargo theft
gangs.
While dealing with his company’s two losses, Obriot became
aware of thefts suffered by Abbot Laboratories and Bayer Phar-
maceuticals around the same time. Comparing notes on the
incidents, Obriot and his peers at Abbot and Bayer quickly real-
ized similarities among the incidents, including the thieves
bringing their own tractor to transport the loads, targeting
products that were sold readily on the black market, and stealing
the load the ﬁrst time it was left unattended, revealing a more
systematic approach by the thieves.
116
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS

Obriot recorded a pharmaceutical theft at a truck stop in late
2005, followed by a two-trailer theft only a few weeks later from
the same truck stop as the ﬁrst theft incident where his company
was victimized. He shared this information with Bob Monteiro
of Pﬁzer and Chuck Forsaith of Purdue Pharmaceuticals, and
they realized that the industry needed a means of sharing
information to prevent incidents like the dual thefts from the
same truck stop.
With Pﬁzer as its host, the pharmaceutical security groupd
later named the Pharmaceutical Cargo Security Coalition
(PCSC)dheld its ﬁrst meeting in fall 2006 in New Jersey, with 40
professionals representing mainly pharmaceutical manufac-
turers in attendance. After opening the meeting with a few
words, Pﬁzer’s Bob Monteiro asked the attendees to share their
experiences of losses they had suffered. The room went quiet
for a few minutes before the chatter of small side conversations
began to spread. Monteiro, realizing the open discussion he
had anticipated was not forthcoming, took the podium again.
This time he pointed out that everyone in the room was
experiencing the same problem, cargo theft, and everyone in
the room wanted the same thing, to make it stop. The best way
to get there, Monteiro insisted, was for the professionals to
share their experiences. With those words, a few hands reluc-
tantly went up. Rick Demberger of GlaxoSmithKlein was
the ﬁrst to open up about a loss his company had recently
experienced. After Demberger, others began to speak up one
by one, until it dawned on everyone that each of the stories
was resoundingly familiar. With that realization, the PCSC
was born.
The next meeting, hosted by Purdue Pharmaceuticals’ Chuck
Forsaith 6 months later, drew more than 100 attendees, including
a handful of security vendors. Meetings have been occurring
consistently ever since then, the most recent in late 2011, with
more than 300 people participating.
Pharmaceutical companies, like any others, dislike having
their dirty laundry aired in the public. Add to that their inherent
public trust issues along with the heavy government regulations
involved. Within 48 hours of a pharmaceutical theft, a company
can be sure that two agents, one from the Drug Enforcement
Administration and one from the Food and Drug Administra-
tion (FDA), will come calling. This level of oversight provides
additional motivation for the industry to harden its supply
chain and seek out innovative ways to secure cargo and keep
potentially dangerous substances away from unsuspecting
consumers.
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS 117

2006 through 2010
According to data collected by the author and reported by
FreightWatch, Pharmaceutical thefts grew substantially from
2006 to 2008, increasing by 283% (from 12 recorded thefts in 2006
to 46 incidents in 2008). Since 2008, the rate of growth has been
almost ﬂat, with only one additional incident recorded in 2009
and two more the next year. Despite the rate of growth in phar-
maceutical thefts since 2006, the average value per incident has
ﬂuctuated signiﬁcantly, from a low average of $1.13 million in
2007 to the highest at $3.95 million in 2009.
While Tennessee ranked sixth in total cargo theft incidents since
2006, the state recorded the highest number of thefts in the phar-
maceutical product type over the same time period, with 25 thefts.
Florida was second with 20, and California was third with 17. Also
noteworthy, Pennsylvania, fourth in pharmaceutical thefts with 16
theft incidents, ranks just 16th in total cargo theft (Figure 9.1).
At the county level, the Memphis area (Shelby and Crittenden
counties) recorded the most pharmaceutical theft incidents
with 20. Los Angeles County was second with 11, while Dallas/
Figure 9.1 Courtesy of FreightWatch.
118
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS

Fort Worth (Dallas and Tarrant counties) was third with 6. Of
particular note, Dauphin County (Harrisburg), Pennsylvania,
ranked fourth in pharmaceutical thefts over the 5-year period,
even though the Harrisburg area ranks very low for cargo theft
overall (Figure 9.2).
October stands out as the highest month for pharmaceutical
theft incidents, recording 23 total incidents in that month from
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Pharmaceutical Theft by County (2006–2010) 
# Thefts
Shelby/Crittenden
Los Angeles
Dallas/Tarrant
Dauphin, Pa.
Jefferson, Ky.
Miami-Dade
San Bernardino
Duval, Fla.
Hendricks, Ind.
Orange, Fla.
Figure 9.2 Courtesy of
FreightWatch.
Figure 9.3 Courtesy of
FreightWatch.
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS 119

2006 to 2010. September, the second highest month for thefts in
this sector, only ranked 10th for all cargo theft during the same
30-day period (Figure 9.3).
Full truckload thefts accounted for 87.8% of all pharmaceu-
tical incidents since 2006. During the same period there were 12
hijackings, nine warehouse burglaries, and a single robbery.
Extreme Value
Given the prices of prescription narcotics on the streets, it is
no surprise that there is such a high demand for pharmaceuticals
on the black market. In a June 1, 2011, article featured in CNN
Money Magazine, Parkia Kavilnaz compared the street price of
prescription drugs with their price when sold legally. The
disparity between the two was shocking.
According to the report, one pill of Oxycontin will cost $50 to $80
on the black market, while the cost is $6 per pill at a pharmacy.
Oxycodone is another example that costs $12 to $40 on the street
compared to the same $6 retail price. While both pills cost the same
in a legitimate market, prices can vary signiﬁcantly on the black
market, largelybased on demand and whatpeopleare willing to pay
to acquire these narcotics through illicit channels. A tablet of
Vicodin costsamere$1.50fromthepharmacy,butcanrun$5to$25
per pill on the black market. When the price for a prescription drug
jumps from 2 to 12 times its normal value, and when criminals can
obtain it atvirtually no cost tothem, the draw is clear. Why wouldn’t
criminals be attracted to this high-reward, low-risk venture?
Consumer Care Products
When developing the cargo theft database for FreightWatch,
the author decided to separate consumer care from pharma-
ceuticals, as this category includes any products that are used on
a person’s body, such as creams, lotions, perfumes, and tooth-
paste, but are not designed to be ingested or injected.
The level of theft activity in the consumer care market also
showed a substantive increase from 2006 (8) to 2010 (54), a stag-
gering 575% jump (Figure 9.4).
This obvious trend could be the result of hardening of the
supply chain for higher value pharmaceutical products, such as
prescription drugs and narcotics. Although these loads would
bring a higher pay day for criminals, due to the higher value of
these drugs on both legitimate and illegitimate markets,
consumer care products are also sought after due to their high
level of desirability, and ease of sale, on the black market.
120
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS

During the 2006e2010 period, criminals stole consumer care
products most predominantly in the counties and states in which
cargo theft rates typically are high. Thus, Los Angeles, Miami-
Dade, San Bernardino (California), and Duval (Florida) counties
all made the top seven (Figure 9.5).
Middlesex County, New Jersey, recorded the second highest
number of consumer care thefts, with 11. While New Jersey has
emerged as a hot spot for cargo theft in the United States, inci-
dents in the state are generally spread across all product types.
This second-place ranking, however, clearly indicates the exis-
tence of a market for these products in North Jersey (Figure 9.6).
Other counties with high rates of consumer care thefts include
Los Angeles, Miami-Dade, San Bernardino, Duval (Jacksonville,
Florida), and Dallas. The presence of Los Angeles and San
Bernardino are worth noting, as neither is present on the high
theft rate list for pharmaceutical products.
Complex Supply Chain
Reprint from Cargo Security InternationaldOctober 2009d
with permission
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
Consumer Care Cargo Theft: By Year
# Thefts
Expon. (# Thefts)
Figure 9.4 Courtesy FreightWatch.
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS 121

5
10
15
20
25
30
California
Florida
New Jersey
Pennsylvania
Texas
Georgia
Illinois
27
23
23
6
6
5
4
Consumer Care Thefts by State (2006–2006) 
# Theft Incidents
Figure 9.5 Courtesy FreightWatch.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Los Angeles
Middlesex
Miami-Dade
San Bernardino
Duval (Fla.)
Dallas
Hudson (N.J.)
Consumer Care Thefts by County (2006–2010) 
# Theft Incidents
Figure 9.6 Courtesy FreightWatch.
122
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS

Risks in the Pharmaceutical Supply Chain
While in-transit cargo theft within the pharmaceutical industry has persistently existed, the attention drawn to it, as
well as overall values of those types of thefts, until recent times remained relatively low. Beginning, however, in 2005,
the industry experienced a sharp rise in theft rates, which has seemingly continued to rise to the present day. Many
factors are involved, to include the inherent risks involved in shipping consumable products, the complexity of the unique
pharmaceutical supply chain, as well as the unusually high values that can be attributed to certain pharmaceutical
products. This issue has caused both logistical and security personnel within the pharmaceutical discipline to become
more intensely focused in attempting to protect the world’s pharmaceutical supply chain.
The pharmaceutical industry has an inherent risk that is comparable todand some would argue greater thandother
industries such as electronics and tobacco. The most signiﬁcant source of this risk lies primarily with products that are
consumable: i.e., something a consumer would ingest, apply to, or use in conjunction with the body. As with any-
thing that is considered “consumable” there are potential risks if the product is not maintained properly, stored at
acceptable temperatures, or otherwise mishandled. If distributed by personnel that are not properly licensed, have
contractual authority, and/or trained, these risks only increase.
Pharmaceutical product distribution is unique when compared to other commodities. Rarely does a manufac-
turer sell their products directly to an end-user or patient. Manufacturers typically sell products in bulk to drug
wholesalersdexamples being companies like McKesson, Cardinal Health, and AmerisourceBergen. The whole-
salers, whose proﬁt margins are somewhat less than a manufacturer, then sell the products to pharmacy retai-
lersdexamples being CVS, Walgreens, and Wal-Martdas well as hospitals and other medical institutions. The
retailers, in turn, sell to the end-users or ultimate consumers. This multiple-touch model presents an increased
risk of theft within the supply chain and is noticeably different from other typical commodities.
Certain pharmaceutical products, for example, “biotech” type drugs used to treat those with medical issues such as
cancer, literally take years to research, develop, and receive government approval for distribution. The processes used to
manufacture these products are extensive, as well as very costly. Environments in which these products are manu-
factured are required to meet extremely high standards for processing, quality assurance, quality control, cleanliness,
and overall accountability. Many in the discipline of pharmaceutical manufacturing follow established and required GMP
(Good Manufacturing Processes) to remain compliant with government regulatory programs. All of these processes,
whether the product is the high-end example of a prescription-required biotech drug, or a product purchased simply over
the counter (OTC), those required processes add to the costs associated with manufacturing and distribution of
that particular consumable product. Hence, those additional costs drive up the overall value of a pharmaceutical
shipmentdlarge or small.
In certain instances, the overall cost of an in-transit theft can easily exceed the original value of a particular
shipment. To better comprehend that point one must understand that pharmaceutical products are manufactured in “lot”
sequences, with each lot individually numbered for track and trace purposes. In certain instances an entire “lot” might
be shipped in one conveyance, all at the same time. More commonly, however, that is not the case. Goods under
a particular lot designation are more typically shipped multiple times, over an extended period of time, by numerous
conveyances.
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS 123

Beyond Full Truckload
While the industry continues to make great strides in securing
large-scale pharmaceutical shipments and storage facilities,
criminals continue to adapt their targeting techniques that
plague the industry and create a multimillion-dollar drain on
manufacturers and their transportation and logistics partners.
Adding to the problem are reports of drug shortages in the
United States. According to the University of Utah Drug Infor-
mation Service, in 2010 there were 211 vital drugs reported as
being in short supply (Aleccia, 2011). This not only drives demand
(and price) in legitimate markets, but also skyrockets demand
through illegitimate markets, making these drugs more appealing
to cargo criminals and their middlemen due to the exponential
proﬁts that can be made by selling them into gray markets. As
practitioners and consumers increase their demand for phar-
maceuticals, so drives the market for criminals, middlemen, and
others willing to skirt regulations to move product at low or no
cost to them in order to sell it for high proﬁtsdeven when placing
consumer safety in jeopardy.
Deception and Counterfeit
Not a single pharmaceutical manufacturer anywhere in the
world sells its products directly to a pharmacy, hospital, or other
consumer retail outlet. Rather, they all go through wholesale
channel partners. These distributors/wholesalers purchase prod-
uct in bulk for sale to the retail outlets or to other, smaller distrib-
utors, and so on down the line the product goes, moving through
a potentially complex supply chain with numerous touch points
before ﬁnally reaching the consumer.
The largest, most valuable shipments of pharmaceutical products are those associated with the original manu-
facturer. Typically these are full truckload shipments that, because of their overall value and insurance requirements
should receive a high degree of attention when it comes to in-transit security. Even today, unfortunately, this is not
always the case.
As with every commodity, the concept of there being no “silver bullet” solution for supply chain security rings
ever truer in the pharmaceutical sector. The multi-touch model of the pharmaceutical supply chain, coupled with the
extremely high value of the product, brand reputation issues, and the multiple methods of shipping and distributing
product create an environment that requires ﬂexibility and creativity for both the logistics and security staff to ensure
each shipment is as secure as possible.
By Chuck Forsaith and Dan Burges
124
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS

This complex process opens the door for dishonest entities to
steal product and introduce the goods into the marketplace all
under the disguise of legitimacy.
Deception occurs when stolen products are sold as legitimate
product to a distributor, normally small ones eager to turn
a proﬁt; once purchased by them, the product resumes its
“legitimacy” even though it is stolen, bound for legitimate outlets
such as pharmacies and hospitals.
In 2009, an 85-year-old resident of Maryland was taking
a litany of drugs for various ailments. Each day her husband
would line them up on the kitchen table, ensuring that each
dosage was correct and administered at the right time. One of
these was an injectable medication that is prescribed for
Alzheimer’s, the ailment that prevented her from being able to
administer her own medicine, so her husband did it and since
he did so every day, he could readily see the results of the
medication.
One day on the phone with his son, the father mentioned that
the Alzheimer’s medication hadn’t been working like it used to.
The son, a security executive for a pharmaceutical company,
offered some words of encouragement, but over the weeks as they
continued to chat, the father brings it up againdthe medication
isn’t working like it used to. Finally, on the third time, the son ﬂies
to Baltimore and collects the medication from his parents and
brings it back to his company’s headquarters where there is
a testing laboratory.
Their discovery was that his mother’s Alzheimer’s medication
was, in fact, water, introduced into the pharmaceutical supply
chain by someone, somewhere, that made its way to a reputable
pharmacy and then purchased by a patient in need.
The introduction of stolen goods into the supply chain,
without evidence of alteration or tampering, remains a struggle
for the pharmaceutical sector as they not only strive to protect
their intellectual property and sales, but, more importantly, to
protect their customers and the consumer.
Secondary Wholesale Market
The complexities of a pharmaceutical supply chain create
opportunities for criminal enterprises to proﬁt by exploiting the
intricacies. Nowhere is the system more vulnerable than the
secondary wholesale market. As discussed in Chapter 5: The Black
Market, this legitimate marketplace is ﬁlled with unscrupulous
people, unlicensed distributors, and businesses willing to cut
corners (and overlook product efﬁcacy issues) to turn a proﬁt.
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS 125

In the pharmaceutical supply chain there are the manufac-
turers, the primary distributors (including McKesson and Amer-
isource Bergen), and a host of secondary wholesalers. This
secondary market can range from multimillion-dollar legitimate
companies to unlicensed dealers buying and selling prescription
drugs from their bedrooms.
With corrupt wholesalers and middlemen ready to acquire
stolen goods, forge pedigree documents, and eventually sell the
product at full market value to unknowing and unwitting phar-
macies (and by extension consumers), cargo security in the
pharmaceutical industry is quickly moving from a “nice to have”
into a “must have.”
In fact, according to the MSNBC report where over half of
hospitals and pharmacies willingly and knowingly purchase
drugs from gray market vendors (Aleccia, 2011), there is no lack of
demand for companies willing to obtain drugs through less than
legitimate means and move them into the consumer market.
Gray-market suppliers take advantage of the ongoing shortages,
monitoring drug availability and then exploit the vulnerable
supply chain, according to Mike Cohen, president of the Institute
for Safe Medication Practices. This, of course, leads to worries
that the drugs sold to hospitals and pharmacies may be of
questionable quality, may not have been handled properly, or
may be counterfeit or stolen (Aleccia, 2011).
Reputation
Consider the husband of the Alzheimer’s victim discussed
earlier in this chapter. Even though the manufacturer of the
medication had no direct complicity in the substitution do you
think the man ever felt quite as comfortable injecting his wife
with that drug again?
Reputation is vital to the well-being of every company, but
perhaps no more so than to those in the pharmaceutical industry.
As the makers of powerful medications, some of which are
injected directly into the bloodstream, drug makers work fever-
ishly to earn and keep our trust. One cargo theft, if the result is
tainted or mishandled product, can undermine years of work and
millions of dollars in marketing, especially if the product causes
severe adverse reactions or, worse yet, fatalities.
In 1982, seven people in the Chicago area died after taking
Tylenol that had been laced with potassium cyanide, a lethal
poison. The case was investigated by local police as well as the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)dwho named the case
126
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS

TYLMURS.
The
poisonings
involved
Extra-Strength
Tylenol
capsules, manufactured by McNeil Consumer Healthcare, a
subdivision of Johnson and Johnson. The pills were laced with
potassium cyanide. A reward of $100,000 was offered by Johnson &
Johnson, but has never been claimed.
Because the affected product had come from different plants
and all the deaths occurred in the Chicago area, tampering during
the manufacturing process was ruled out. Instead, the culprit was
believed to have entered various grocery and drug stores over
a period of time, removed Tylenol product from the shelves,
added the poison, and then replaced the product back onto
shelves. Eight bottles in total were discovered as being tampered
with the poison during this case.
As with the Tylenol case, a product that creates adverse
medical reactions, even at no fault of the manufacturer, can have
signiﬁcant consequences that are not resolved easily. Johnson
and Johnson went to great strides to keep the public informed,
ﬁnd the guilty parties, and ensure that consumer safety and
conﬁdence were restored, and restored quickly. In fact, Johnson
and Johnson’s actions were praised throughout the industry and
media as the ideal way in which such situations should be
handled and is used frequently in business schools as a case study
in how companies should respond to public relations disasters.
In such incidents where pharmaceutical product results in
adverse medical reactions, if overt criminal activity is not known
or cannot be proven, the manufacturer, not the unknown crimi-
nals, is often considered to be responsible. This is also true in the
case of cargo theft when product is mishandled but ends up back
in the normal stream of commerce. Even when companies go to
every length possible to recall product and keep them off the
shelves, it is still the manufacturers names associated with the
harmful
products
and
the
conditions
that
resulted
from
consumers taking the mishandled or tampered drugs.
Consumers will remain at risk as long as stolen drugs are
brought back into the supply chain regularly, with no guarantees,
of course, that they are being handled properly during the detour.
They exit the manufacturer and the consumers are at risk.
“No one is selling Lipitor on the street,” the FBI’s Tom Hauck was
quoted as saying in a March 2011, Fortune article (Eban, 2011),
illustrating the point that these products need to be moved back
into legitimate retail outlets to be sold. Whereas a consumer
buying drugs on the street should understand they are taking
a risk by doing so, those purchasing from a pharmacy do so with
the impression the drugs they are buying are safe, but that might
not always be the case. While the product moves through the vast
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS 127

array of secondary wholesalers, most of them legitimate, but
some who readily welcome stolen drugs onto their docks, the
drugs can lose their potency quickly and even turn toxic.
According
to
the
Fortune article, Americans
are
rarely
informed about cases in which consumers are harmed or become
sick after taking stolen medications they have purchased from
legitimate outlets.
In 2009, some consumers suffered adverse medical reactions
after taking insulin purchased at two different pharmacies, one in
Texas and one in Ohio. The insulin sold at both pharmacies came
from a single stolen load. Despite the warnings and recall notices
by the insulin manufacturer and the FDA, one company
purchased the vials from a secondary wholesaler and then sold
them to consumers through pharmacies.
Such instances are not uncommon. Because the warning
system and recall process is manual (meaning there is no auto-
matic system for detecting recalled products), stolen drugs can
slip through the system, putting both consumers and manufac-
turers at risk.
To help combat this problem, Abbott Laboratories, Eli Lilly,
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Johnson & Johnson, and Novo Nordisk
announced formation of the Coalition for Patient Safety and
Medicine Integrity in early 2011. The group seeks to amend laws
governing cargo theft in general (and speciﬁcally in the phar-
maceutical sector) as discussed in Chapter 3: Risk vs Reward.
The change in criminal penalties to better reﬂect the risk to
consumers is a key component of their mandate, as cargo
criminalsdeven those stealing millions of dollars in pharma-
ceuticalsdrarely see jail time and have no incentive to help
investigators
in
stopping
this
seemingly
endless
criminal
enterprise.
Proactive cargo security programs that ensure traceability
throughout the supply chain, to include monitoring of tempera-
ture and other required controls, vendor compliance, and rapid
response in the event of a theft, can save a company tens if not
hundreds of times over the cost of such a program by preventing
stolen and tampered drugs from reaching the consumer.
Key Points
•
Pharmaceutical shipments are among the most sought after by
cargo criminals.
•
There are fewer shipments of pharmaceuticals than of product
types such as electronics and building materials. This is one
128
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS

reason
why
pharmaceutical
thefts
comprise
a
smaller
percentage of the overall total.
•
The average pharmaceutical shipment is worth in excess of
$2 million.
•
Many drugs stolen through cargo theft end up back in the
legitimate supply chain. In most of these cases the drugs
were not stored/handled per protocol.
•
Cargo theft affects the pharmaceutical industry well beyond
the cost of stolen loads. Brand reputation, product recalls,
and overall consumer safety are all issues affecting this sector’s
bottom line.
Chapter 9 PHARMACEUTICALS 129

10
THE TRUE IMPACT OF
CARGO THEFT
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Analysis of downstream costs of cargo theft
• Impacts of cargo theft beyond monetary loss
• Special implications for the pharmaceutical sector
• Role of insurance companies in curbing costs
The cost of cargo theft is ultimately paid for by the consumer.
For decades, corporations have factored into their pricing the
expense of cargo theft and other shortages. The consumer has no
ability to know how much is added to the retail price to account
for these losses, but there is no denying that these costs are
passed on and paid for at the cash register.
With every cargo theft, a value is assigned to the loss by the
manufacturer or product owner. Typically this value represents
either the retail price of the load or the replacement cost, the cost
of manufacturing. Most companies see this amount as the total
loss experienced in the theftdthe total impact. But the declared
value of the loss is only one small part of the total impact of cargo
theft. Costs associated with replacing the load, loss of market
share, increased insurance premiums, and, in some industries,
product recalls and loss of brand trust all must be factored when
analyzing how cargo theft impacts a company’s bottom line.
While it is very tempting for supply chain professionals and
researchers in this space to afﬁx a number to these tangible
and intangible costs, the broad range of variables involved
make this task virtually impossible but certainly no less real.
With lean manufacturing, just-in-time delivery expectations,
outsourced
warehousing
and
distribution,
and
companies
becoming more risk averse, the true ﬁnancial loss due to cargo
theft must be multiplied several times over the product
value. Other downstream costs include product replacement,
administrative time and expense, loss of market share, recall
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00010-8
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
131

and/or destruction of goods in certain industries, and increased
insurance premiums.
Product Replacement
Replacing stolen product gets priority. Whether shipping to
a retailer or directly to the consumer, once an order has been
made, the shipper has the expectation that the right product will
be delivered to the right place and on time. When goods are stolen
en route, it is their responsibility to replace that product as
quickly as possible, while bearing the extra expense. Even in
business-to-business sales, where customers are aware of the risk
of cargo theft and its effects, losses in the supply chain are not
seen as a legitimate excuse to delay order fulﬁllment.
The replacement process delays the manufacturing schedule,
as time is dedicated to making the products for a second time
instead of creating new ones. In addition to the temporary drop in
efﬁciency resulting from product replacement, the manufacturer
endures overhead costs and perhaps equipment changeover and
maintenance during the replacement process.
This repetition decreases the revenue-to-expense ratio, yet
this is rarely, if ever, factored into the loss associated with a stolen
load, but clearly has a direct impact on a company’s bottom line.
Even more downstream costs, such as the time spent by
employees handling the associated administrative processes, are
rarely, if ever, considered. While employees are remaking the
product that was stolen, the company is incurring employee costs
for product that is being made a second time, essentially working
at a zero efﬁciency rate. While not an overwhelmingly high
monetary ﬁgure by itself, these expenses, when combined with all
others involved, clearly add up.
Employee Time and Expense
When replacement goods are being made, the manufacturer is
paying for the personnel’s wages and beneﬁts. There is also
a signiﬁcant administrative burden. For each stolen load, an array
of customer service and administrative staff must deal with
getting the product replaced, but often their hours are not
included in the cost of the loss. Further, the product receives
expedited shipping at no additional cost to the retail customer or
intended consignee (the manufacturer bears the cost) in order to
minimize the delay and limit customer dissatisfaction. This, too,
adds to the monetary burden.
132
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT

The time expense of replicating a stolen load is not the only
one involved. Simply identifying what product has been stolen
can be a difﬁcult task, especially for large shippers with multiple
loads on the road at any given time. Once the theft is reported
by the transportation provider, the manufacturer must assign
a manager to the task of determining which load was stolen and
the product involved. This process literally has the manufacturer
starting from scratch as they receive information from the carrier
and begin the lengthy process to have the stolen product iden-
tiﬁed for replacement as soon as possibleda process that can
take up to a week in some cases. Once it is determined what
product was stolen, each business unit affected by the loss is
contacted and informed of the lost product so they can place their
exchange orders, contact the affected customers, and arrange for
expedited shipping.
Customer service hours spent with the consignee (the com-
pany that would have received the shipment) is another factor to
consider. Ensuring that the replacement order is processed as well
as expedited manufacturing and shipping is applied.
Market Share
With lean manufacturing and direct build models, such as
computers built to the speciﬁcations of the customer, in vogue,
the time from production to shelf (or direct customer) is reduced
signiﬁcantly. This also results in companies keeping minimal
components or product in reserve. While these models are
designed for efﬁcient and cost-conscious supply chains, cargo
theft can clearly wreak havoc as there is almost no wiggle room
between order and delivery times. Loss of market share, customer
dissatisfaction, reduction in brand loyalty, and other “hidden”
costs drive up the real monetary extent of cargo theft several
times, many multiples for industries such as pharmaceuticals and
consumer care products.
First is the loss of market sharedthe percentage of total sales
volume in a market captured by a brand, product, or ﬁrm. With
the interruption in time to market caused by cargo theft, product
is kept off the shelf. Unless there is an unbreakable allegiance,
customers will purchase a similar product manufactured by
another company because it is available. The cargo theft not only
prevented a company from selling its product but it may have
created a sale for one of its competitors.
There are numerous ways to describe the consumer decision-
making process. A common one is illustrated by the traditional
“funnel” diagram shown in Figure 10.1.
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT 133

Consumers are made aware of a product through marketing,
advertising, and, in many cases, word of mouth. As consumers
become more familiar with a product and consider a purchase
they will do so if it is available. If it meets their expectation, the
consumer becomes loyal to the product. Focusing on price,
product,
placement,
and
promotion,
marketing
drives
the
consumer to the purchase. Cargo theft, however, is a signiﬁcant
interruption to this process. If the product does not arrive on
time, then “placement” is lost. Additionally, prices will increase to
account for the loss costs. This effect not only lowers the likeli-
hood of purchase but also increases the probability of the
consumer switching to a competing product.
“Consumers are loyal when there is convenience and/or a real
need,” according to Lenora Greene, managing director of Kick-
Start Marketing, an Austin-based marketing ﬁrm with a national
client list. When convenience is lost because a product is not on
the shelf, then loyalty can diminish quickly and even end as
competitor products are purchased instead and the opportunity
for a new loyalty begins to grow. This does not apply to all
products, according to Greene, as those with a “culture” around
them have consumers who are willing to endure delays and other
inconveniences (e.g., Apple). Brands are increasingly playing
a role in self-identity and self-expression in contemporary
consumer culture. By associating with a particular brand, an
individual can portray a desired image. Apple is an ideal example
of this concept, revolutionizing the way in which consumers
interact with products by marketing user-friendly, personalized,
and stylish consumer electronics. Through product development,
listening to customers, and aggressive marketing campaigns,
Apple embodies creativity, individuality, and convenience, while
allowing consumers to establish their own identity. So, in some
instances, loyalty will outweigh convenience; however, those
products without a culture will lose this strong consumer
attachment.
Awareness
Familiarity
Consideration
Purchase
Loyalty
Figure 10.1 Recreated based on the traditional funnel by McKinsey Quarterly.
134
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT

Customer Retention and Retrieval
Another cost endured by the victims of cargo theft is replac-
ing lost customers. It is signiﬁcantly less expensive to keep a
customer than to acquire a new one. According to studies, the
cost of acquiring a new customer can be six times the costs of
keeping an existing one. When a consumer switches from one
brand to another, getting that customer back is a long, difﬁcult,
and expensive process.
Loss of market share due to cargo theft is exacerbated if the
theft occurs during a product launch due to loss of a competitive
advantage and a concomitant drop in initial sales. Months of
marketing efforts preparing new product launches, driving
potential sales, and customer expectations can lead to nothing if
the company is unable to deliver. Companies that rely on retail
space for their product depend on a manufacturer delivering on
time. When the product does not arrive, the space will be ﬁlled by
a competitor who will not give it back readily.
For “direct build” companies, the customer has already pur-
chased the product and has an expectation of on-time delivery. If
the company is unable to meet this expectation, consumer
dissatisfaction can result in the order being canceled, a refund
being issued, and loss of a future sale. Past purchasing experience
plays a signiﬁcant role in consumer behavior; this was listed as
the most signiﬁcant inﬂuencer in a 2009 article entitled “Deﬁning
Brand Loyalty and Its Relation to Customer Satisfaction” by
Christina Pomoni, a ﬁnancial adviser and marketing expert. It is
important to note that bad experiences typically resound louder
than previous positive ones. Poor experiences can dissuade
consumers from returning to a company with which they did
business previously. In summary, these downstream effects are
extremely difﬁcult to quantify, but clearly have an impact on
a company’s proﬁtability and are losses experienced in addition
to the value lost from cargo theft (Seraﬁne et al., 2005).
Loss of Sales
Another issue is erosion of the customer base due to the
introduction of stolen products into the marketplace. Brokers
who sell stolen cargo often do so through shell companies,
allowing them to introduce these goods into the legitimate
marketplace. To accomplish this, the broker uses legitimate
companies, often shell companies under the broker’s control, to
sell stolen product to wholesalers and others in the distribution
system as legitimate goods. Customers, prepared to purchase
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT 135

a computer or cell phone from an established retailer, ﬁnd
the product available to them at a substantially reduced price,
albeit through illegitimate means almost always unknown to the
consumer. This ﬂow of stolen goods into the market displaces
legitimate sales, resulting in losses that must be accounted for in
the cost of doing business. So while consumers receive the
product from a retail outlet, the manufacturer does not beneﬁt
from the sale.
Additional Costs for Other Sectors
These costs apply to virtually any product affected by cargo
theft. Of those feeling the highest levels of impact, the electronics
and pharmaceuticals industries are the most impacted.
Worldwide, electronics are one of the most sought-after
commodities by cargo thieves, and the industry commonly uses
just-in-time manufacturing and direct build models in which
customers have multiple purchasing options and brand loyalty
is an important component of future sales. In 1999, the Rand
Corporation
conducted
a
study
examining
costs
of
high-
technology hardware thefts. While cargo theft was not the direct
focus of the study, the authors stated “. over 70 percent of the
reported losses occurred while product was in transit” (Dertouzos
et al., 1999, p. xiii). The study examined the added ﬁnancial
burden of cargo theft on society, stating:
If such a ﬁrm experiences hardware losses valued at $1 million, its
indirect losses, including increased security investments and lost
sales, would total an additional $1.8 million. Also, sales would be
displaced from other ﬁrms, amount to another $1.0 million in loss
to the industry at large. Finally, customers would suffer losses
totaling $2.4 million as ﬁrms raise prices in reaction to the higher
cost of doing business. For this example, total costs to society are
over six times the original hardware costs. For the products that are
most likely to be preferred targets of thieves, these other costs can be
even higher (Figure 10.2; Dertouzos et al., 1999, p. xiv).
While the ﬁgure of 6.2 the load value is a good reference
point for determining the overall monetary impact of a theft,
actual ﬁgures can vary based on the load value, type of product
stolen, and other variables on which consistent monetary values
are difﬁcult to determine. Additionally, although the high-tech
sector was the focus of the Rand study, other industries face an
entirely different array of problems and impacts resulting from
cargo theft. Food and beverage manufacturers have to contend
with Food and Drug Administration regulations and the real
136
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT

potential for recalls and product destruction in the event of theft.
While not subject to theft incidents, spinach and peanut butter
recalls in 2009 and 2010 led to widespread removal of these
products from shelves nationwide, draining dollars due to added
costs and a steep decline in sales. Tobacco companies are often
the victims of counterfeiting operations, along with tax evasion
schemes (selling tobacco products without required tax stamps)
through the use of stolen cargo. In October 2010, two men were
arrested for transporting $3 million in stolen cigarettes in Carlisle,
Pennsylvania, charged with possession of stolen property and tax
evasion. The pharmaceutical industry is similarly vulnerable. In
fact, of all industries, the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector
may feel the most profound impacts of all when it comes to cargo
theft.
Pharmaceutical Sector
Product Safety
For consumer safety reasons, most pharmaceuticals, espe-
cially ingestible drugs, cannot be reintroduced into the supply
Figure 10.2 Recreated from Dertouzos et al. (1999, p. xiv).
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT 137

chain once the “chain of custody” has been interrupted or
broken. For example, if a shipment of pain medication is stolen, it
can never be reintroduced into the supply chain (never be
delivered to a pharmacy or placed on store shelves)deven if it
is recovered shortly after the theft. There have been cases
where a trailer of pharmaceutical products was recovered almost
immediately with the tamper-evident security seal still intact, no
temperature excursions, or handling irregularities noted and was
allowed to proceed on to the consignee and eventually to market;
however, such instances are rare and require near instantaneous
recovery in order to not be sent to destruction.
This is true even when the product is recovered with the cargo
door seal intact and/or no temperature control issues are asso-
ciated with the product. The break in the supply chain creates an
ethical situation for the pharmaceutical company that mandates
that the product be destroyed. In the event that product is
recovered quickly, such as in the example that a covert tracking
device was aboard, the company still has an ethical obligation, in
additional to legal requirements, to only put products on the
market that are guaranteed to be safe for consumption and
handled within established speciﬁcations.
When a unique product, such as cancer medications of
extreme high value, is stolen, especially one that has very speciﬁc
handling requirements, such as refrigeration or light limitations,
pharmaceutical companies will initiate a recall of all product with
the same manufactured “lot number,” as they cannot assure that
the drug the consumer is purchasing is the one that arrived
through the legitimate supply chain, as opposed to the stolen
product having been reintroduced into the supply chain through
illegitimate means. Some drug companies are helping to reduce
this loss by creating lot numbers in smaller batches, often only
the size of a shipped trailer load, to minimize the cost and
potential damage if such a load were to be stolen.
Consumers inherently entrust drug companies with their
health and have an expectation that the pharmaceutical com-
panies will not allow product that is tampered with or handled
unsafely to be sold. A ﬁrm that is slow to react when a recall is
necessary not only faces potential litigation, it exposes itself to
long-term reputation damage (Cheah et al., 2007, p. 428). In the
case of some biotech products, unsafe storage, such as loss of
temperature control, could make it potentially toxic, even if it
were never physically tampered with. These issues make chain of
custody and proper standards of care a necessity for the phar-
maceutical industry while such measures are not as necessary in
other industries.
138
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT

Public Relations
The person who coined the term “there’s no such thing as bad
press” probably made his or her living getting company names in
the media. In reality this is patently not true, as bad public rela-
tions have had devastating effects on corporations. According to
a 2004 Journal of Business Communications article by Dwane
Dean, it can often lead to a corporate crisisda nonroutine event
that threatens an organization’s goals (Dean, 2004, p. 192), which
must be handled quickly to minimize the longer term damage.
“The corporation will lose social legitimacy if it is seen as being
irresponsible, dishonest, breaking the law or acting in a manner
that exhibits little concern for the community” (Dean, 2004,
p. 193).
Cargo theft in the pharmaceutical industry can create an
environment for signiﬁcant bad press if the theft of certain
products is not handled properly. Ingestible and injectable
pharmaceuticals present the greatest liability exposure to phar-
maceutical
companies,
especially
those
drugs
with
strict
handling requirements, because of their potential lethality if
mishandled and then passed to the consumer through illegiti-
mate means. If a stolen drug is taken by a consumer and he or she
has an adverse reaction, the company will have to answer for the
safety and security of their manufacturing and distribution, along
with their postloss handling of the situation.
Beyond the monetary loss associated with a product recall,
there are potential diminutions of overall company value and
shareholder wealth. While a pharmaceutical company can keep
such recalls relatively low in volume if lots are produced at
smaller quantities, research has shown that the stock market
reacts negatively to product recalls (Davidson and Worrell, 1992,
p. 472).
Brand Name Trust
Pharmaceutical companies know that consumer trust in their
brand name is critical to their survival. Negative reports in the
media can threaten that trust and require proactive measures be
taken any time product is stolen that could potentially be harmful
to the consumer. Actions that go beyond what is required by law,
embracing a more socially responsible attitude, and striving to do
what is best for their client base can have signiﬁcantly positive
long-term effects, even if such actions are expensive and time-
consuming.
The classic example of a company going beyond the mini-
mum requirements when faced with recalls on a massive scale
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT 139

is McNeil Consumer Products (a subsidiary of Johnson &
Johnson) and their handling of the tainted Tylenol bottles that
killed seven people in the Chicago area. Many market experts
thought that Tylenol would never be sold again; however, due to
the efforts of Johnson & Johnson, the company recovered quickly
and Tylenol continues to be one of the top over-the-counter
drugs in the company. The company’s handling of the crisis is
considered by experts to be one of the best in the history of public
relations.
When the tampering was discovered, Johnson & Johnson
immediately put customer safety over company’s proﬁt and other
ﬁnancial considerations. Johnson & Johnson quickly alerted
consumers across the country not to consume any type of Tylenol
product and not to resume using Tylenol until the extent of the
poisoning could be determined. In addition to stopping all
manufacturing and distribution of Tylenol, as well as ceasing all
advertising, Johnson & Johnson recalled all Tylenol from the
market, a total of approximately 31 million bottles, valued in
excess of $100 million.
These timely actions by Johnson & Johnson, and the com-
pany’s willingness to put the customer ﬁrst in their decision
making, are credited with the survival of the Tylenol product line
and its continued success in the market today.
Product Recall and Destruction
Product recalls and the destruction process place addi-
tional costs to a company that has suffered a loss if required.
Retrieving thousands of bottles of product from drugstores
across
the
country
takes
time
and
is
an
administrative
burden. Companies such as GENCO Pharmaceutical Solutions
specialize
in
product
recall
and
destruction,
taking
the
administrative burden from the manufacturer. They conduct
the process from beginning to end so that the manufacturer
does
not
have
to,
including
actions
such
as
consignee
contact,
product
collection,
lot
number
veriﬁcation,
and
destruction.
Destruction of pharmaceuticals is most commonly out-
sourced to companies that specialize in drug returns and
destruction. Despite the savings to the manufacturer that out-
sourcing provides, this process prevents destruction activities
from being conducted by organic assets, resulting in the entire
process being a 100% cost add-on to the total cost of the theft
incident.
140
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT

Insurance
Many in the manufacturing and logistics industries think
cargo theft is an “insurance issue” handled through the claims
process. Unfortunately, it is not that simple. Cargo may be
insured at every point along the supply chain, and in the event of
a theft, a claim will be made by the entity with the insurable
interest (usually the owner of the product at the time of theft)
against their insurer on some cost basis, depending on the policy
terms and conditions. However, the effects of the theft do not
stop there.
Normally,
every
stakeholder
within
the
supply
chaind
manufacturer, third-party logistics provider, transportation pro-
vider, and every other channel partner that handles, stores, or
transports the cargodwill have some insurable interest and thus
should have some form of coverage for protection in the event of
loss or damage. Cargo insurance is generally provided either by
the shipper (seller) or by the buyer and includes (but is not
limited to) in-transit portions of the supply chain. For example,
stock throughput policies can cover products almost cradle to
grave from raw materials used in their manufacture to the
ﬁnished goods while in storage, distribution, and retail stores
until sold.
Coverage
Cargo can be insured a number of ways, including the prod-
uct’s retail cost, replacement cost, or other variant. Insuring for
replacement costs does not include the loss in sales and the
transportation/freight costs incurred, but insurance premiums
for this type of coverage are lower and thus can be attractive to
a shipper or buyer who sustains minimal losses. The shipper can
also insure the product for the wholesale cost, accounting for
what the product would have sold for had it reached its desti-
nation and the sale had been completed. An alternative to
replacement cost insurance, these policies provide a larger
monetary reparation for the shipper, but such policies come with
higher insurance premiums.
According to Barry Tarnef, a senior loss control specialist and
assistant vice president for the New Jersey-based Chubb Group
of Insurance Companies in business since 1882 and with
a global reach (Chubb is one of the nation’s leading property
and casualty insurance companies), most manufacturers and
product owners insure cargo using a “cost plus” method to be
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT 141

compensated for all expenses involved in a catastrophic loss
(such as a full-truckload theft). Under this method, insurance
policies will cover cost, insurance, and freight (CIF) plus 10 or
20%. CIF covers the cost of manufacturing the product, the cost
of the insurance, and the cost of transportation (or freight).
Tarnef states that the plus 10 or 20% covers the unknown and
unplanned costs inevitably encountered when dealing with
a loss, including employee time required to submit claims, lost
time, and other often unquantiﬁable losses incurred. This
additional coverage also allows the company to recoup at least
a small portion of the missed sales.
Ownership
The terms of sale determine whether the seller or the buyer
owns the goods and thus can make a claim against their insur-
ance company when a theft occurs. For example, if the terms of
sale are Ex Works (EXW), stating that the buyer (consignee) owns
the goods once they have left the seller’s (shipper) premises and
the cargo is stolen in transit, then the buyer will ﬁle a claim. The
buyer’s insurer after paying the claim then has the right to go after
(subrogate) the negligent party, usually the transportation
provider, trying to recoup a portion of the claim or its entirety. In
most cases, however, transportation companies contractually
limit their liability for damage or loss, even if gross negligence
(such as leaving a tractor running, unlocked, and loaded with
high-value cargo) is involved.
Determining who is ﬁnancially responsible for cargo at each
point in the supply chain can be tricky. In order to codify
transfer of ownership and risk of loss/damage, a set of trade
terms, referred to as International Commerce Terms, or most
commonly INCOTERMS, was developed by the International
Chamber
of
Commerce and
adopted
by
most
countries.
INCOTERMS reduce or remove the uncertainties that arise
from different interpretations of responsibility. The scope of
INCOTERMS is limited to matters relating to rights and obli-
gations of the parties involved in the sale with respect to the
delivery of goods. There are 13 different terms, each of which
helps users deal with different situations involving the move-
ment of goods. Figure 10.3 provides a relatively simple version
of the INCOTERMS.
Also, INCOTERMS only apply to international transactions; in
the United States, the Uniform Commercial Code governs sales
terms so the reader should reference those when talking about
shipments within the United States only.
142
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT

Investigations
After a loss has occurred and a claim submitted, the insurance
company will begin an investigation once the claim is submitted.
Signiﬁcant delays in ﬁling the claim, however, can severely
hamper recovery efforts and these are not unusual. According to
Brandon Stroud, vice president of loss prevention at Falvey
Insurance, delays are often due to a transportation provider
(carrier) conducting its own investigation ﬁrst, the victimized truck
driver not reporting the theft immediately, or uncertainty as to the
requirements of the carrier to contact law enforcement and which
agency they need to report to. Insurance companies will involve
claims, loss prevention, and recovery professionals to assist in the
investigation, depending on the size or sensitivity of the loss. Each
has its speciﬁc task during the claims process. The claims
department will handle the mechanicsdreceiving information
from the client, ﬁling the necessary paperwork, and processing the
payment. Loss prevention personnel will look for trends and help
discover any systemic issues that could account for the loss and
share these with their client in order to help prevent future
Figure 10.3
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT 143

incidents. Recovery teams attempt to ﬁnd the stolen product
through GPS tracking, if available, looking at locations known to
store or sell stolen cargo, and working with police.
The insurance company may also send a marine surveyor or
adjuster on site to investigate the loss, just as an auto insurance
company would send an adjuster. Many insurers have in-house
surveyors they send for certain losses based on pre-established
criteria or use third-party surveyors from an approved list (vetted
surveyor database).
The surveyor’s role and scope of assignment are determined
by the insurance company, but generally they are there to
establish the nature, cause, and extent of the loss. The ultimate
goal is full recovery of the stolen goods, but surveyors also look for
opportunities to lessen the ﬁnancial impact of the loss, such as
through developing evidence of negligence and thus liability or
discovering violation of a policy warranty.
Liability
Insurance companies determine liability (who is to blame) for
a cargo theft in a number of ways. Violation of a policy warranty is
one. Warranties are speciﬁc obligations that the assured must do
or not do in order to retain coverage. There are a wide range of
possible warranties that a shipper or transportation provider may
be required to comply with: for example, using team drivers in
order to ensure the load is never left unattended while in transit or
not stopping within the ﬁrst 200 miles from the point of departure
(the red zone, where cargo theft incidents are most likely to occur).
The key in this process is determining if a third party, such as
the transportation provider, has liability for the theft. In the event
that all warranties were followed and all security requirements by
the shipper were met, ﬁnding liability in the transportation
provider will be difﬁcult. However, if during the investigation
certain warranties were ignored or in-transit security policies not
followed, the insurance company then has the opportunity to
develop a case showing negligence on the part of the trans-
portation provider and then potentially offset some of the cost in
paying the claim to the product owner. Even in such cases,
however, the total cost of the claim is rarely deferred completely
due to limits of liability.
Premiums
The loss ratio for an assured is simply the amount of claim
payments and associated expenses made over the course of the
policy period versus the premium. A 100% loss ratio means that
144
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT

premiums paid equaled the cost of the claims to the insurance
company. While the target loss ratio varies between lines of
business and companies, if it is too high, insurance rates can be
adjusted, warranties issued, or other remedial actions taken so
that the insurance company can potentially recoup its losses over
time. Insurers will likely factor in historical experience with
a client and overall relationship so there is a qualitative compo-
nent of the decision-making process.
Cargo insurance is required as a condition for the registra-
tion and continued operation of motor carriers and freight for-
warders, but not for brokers (Augello, 2004, p. 38). 49 U.S. Code
13906 established liability coverage for motor carriers (trucking
companies or transportation providers) (BMC-32 Endorsement)
and provides insurance coverage even if the carrier refuses to pay
a claim for which it has legal liability to pay. As such, the product
owner is provided with legal protections in the event of a loss that
the transportation providers is responsible for, but refuses to pay,
which is signiﬁcant in cases such as a carrier ﬁling for bankruptcy
or closing its doors.
The problem, however, is that for high-value cargo, the motor
carrier and its insurance company’s liability limits are such that
claims paid rarely cover more than 5 to 10% of the shipment
value. The motor carrier is also allowed to be “self-insured” if the
carrier’s ﬁnancials show an ability to satisfy obligations for bodily
injury liability, property damage liability, or cargo liability
(Augello, 2004, p. 39). Again, in the case of high-value cargo,
however, the motor carrier will contractually limit its liability in
the event of a theft, leaving the cargo owner and its insurer to bear
the majority of the loss.
The problems do not end there. Fraud, refusal of payment, and
other issues can arise during the process of making claims for
stolen cargo in which multiple entities are involved. For example,
insurers generally issue checks to their insured party (shipper,
carrier or intermediary) rather than to a third-party claimant.
These proceeds have been embezzled by the carriers, brokers, or
freight forwarders and diverted for their personal use. To avoid
such losses, shippers should enter into preshipment contractual
arrangements with their carriers and intermediaries, requiring
that they be named “loss payee” on the carriers’ and intermedi-
aries’ policies.
In the event that the motor carrier was at fault in a high-value
cargo loss, its insurance limits provide for only a small percentage
of the total claim. Over time, individual losses such as these affect
the entire industry, as insurers raise rates across the board based
on statistical data regarding theft losses.
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT 145

It is similar to auto insurance, in which rates ﬂuctuate based on
the volume of claims paid by the insurance company. In this case,
drivers who have never ﬁled a claim are paying for the claims of
others. The increased costs of insurance premiums are then
passed along, from insurance company to customer to supply
chain vendors, eroding the revenue along the way, until the cost is
ultimately passed down to the consumer through higher prices.
Summary
Multiple variables, in addition to the initial cost of a cargo
theft, must be considered to capture the true impact. Just as with
the time spent remanufacturing product to replace a stolen load,
other business units must spend time reacting to a cargo theft
incident. These administrative costs include time reporting the
theft incident to management, ﬁling the claim with the insurance
company, preparing necessary documentation, and conducting
internal investigations.
These costs result in higher retail prices for consumers. Recog-
nizingthetrueimpactofcargotheftisalsobeneﬁcialindetermining
the return on investment of security programs. While many exec-
utives see security as a nonrevenue-generating function, by high-
lighting the inherent risk of cargo theft and its impacts on the
company’s bottom line and name brand, expenditures designed to
thwart or prevent cargo theft can be shown to have real cash value.
In determining the need for security programs, companies
should consider the full impact felt from a cargo theft, not simply
the value of the load or the expense of replacement parts and
services. The loss of market share, higher insurance premiums
and restrictive policy warranties, and other downstream costs,
not to mention corporate/brand reputation and customer loyalty,
must be taken into account. The actual cost of cargo theft far
exceeds what’s spent for necessary, preventive measures.
Key Points
•
Cargo theft has signiﬁcant downstream costs that go far beyond
the value of the stolen goods, in some cases 4 to 10 times more.
•
These costs, while difﬁcult to quantify, are estimated through
a variety of methods and are passed down to the consumer
through increased prices.
•
Loss of market share presents multiple issues for manufac-
turers, including the loss of customers, increased sales for
competitors, and additional costs to the manufacturer to win
back client loyalty.
146
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT

•
Insurance companies play a key role in this process and are
highly motivated stakeholders in cargo security, especially as
cargo theft is often seen as “an insurance problem” and not
a crime.
•
The pharmaceutical sector endures an even larger array of
downstream costs and liabilities, to include public health
concerns, product recalls and destruction, and reputational
risk.
Chapter 10 THE TRUE IMPACT OF CARGO THEFT 147

11
DETERMINING RISK
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• How to determine the overall risk of theft in a supply chain
• Methods for conducting risk and security assessments
• Sources of information in determining and managing risk
• Key factors of supply chain operations that create risk
Companies are coming to grips with the fact that it is far more
difﬁcult for them to control and understand the risks associated
with today’s truly global and interconnected and thus increas-
ingly vulnerable supply chain. While the increasing risks to
supply chains are becoming more understood, which go beyond
cargo theft speciﬁcally and include other forms of risk such as
supply chain disruptions, delays, and terrorism, it can be
extremely difﬁcult to quantify those risks and create standards by
which both risk and their methods of mitigation are measured.
Supply chain risk varies signiﬁcantly with even small shifts
geographically; cities, regions, and countries experience different
rates of cargo theft with organized crime employing different
modi operandi, posing added potential for serious disruption. In
a multinational supply chain, ﬁnding a singular product or
service (“silver bullet”) that will mitigate every risk encountered is
simply not feasible. A layered approach incorporating policies,
procedures, and personnel, adding in technology, will be required
to shore up security in each phase, but in order for this to occur,
the company must ﬁrst fully understand its risk.
To effectively grasp the supply chain risk that cargo theft
presents to a company, logistics and/or security management
must understand and anticipate the intentions and operations
of cargo thieves, knowing what cargo criminals seek to steal,
what methods they use to conduct their crimes, and how other
companies have been successful in securing their supply
chains. Additionally, logistics and security professionals need to
conduct a thorough assessment of each leg in the supply chain
and, armed with best practices developed internally and through
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00011-X
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
151

collaboration with other companies, analyze logistics proce-
dures, transportation policies, and routing all through the lens of
a cargo thief to better identify where product is prone to large-
scale theft.
A key weakness of many security initiatives is that they focus
only on internal operations (Voss, 2009, p. 9), often overlooking
external threats, vendor management, and other facets of
a supply chain involving numerous entities and people beyond
the control of corporate security. Disruptions to the supply chain,
including catastrophic losses from cargo theft, are more likely to
be caused by forces outside the enterprise, such as cargo theft
gangs, whereas internal operations suffer most often from small-
scale pilferage (shrinkage).
Supply chain professionals must be aware of cargo criminal
activity not only at/near shipping origin points but at destina-
tions and along the expected transport routes. It is imperative
that they take advantage of existing technologies and proven loss
prevention tactics to create an environment where thieves are
more likely to move on to another company to target. To do so,
industry professionals must ﬁrst understand the factors that
contribute to their overall riskdthe ﬁrst key step in developing
a theft prevention plan.
The Complexity of Assessing Risk
Understanding the downstream effects of supply chain
disruption due to cargo theft, natural disasters, damages, ﬁre,
labor disputes, and other natural or man-made events can
be difﬁcult to translate into time lost or monetary costs, making
such endeavors even more necessary. One example often cited
was the 10-minute ﬁre at a Philips Electronics wafer fabrica-
tion facility in New Mexico, which manufactured cell phone
components for both Ericsson and Nokia. The original estimate
of the extent of the ﬁre provided some assurance that production
output would be essentially unaffected; therefore, Ericsson did
nothing.
Taking a more “belt and suspender” philosophy, Nokia
decided to immediately ﬁnd an alternate source for the parts.
Although the plant ﬁre had been isolated to one small section of
the facility, the smoke and particulates had contaminated much
of the building, causing a lengthy shutdown. Ericsson suffered
a serious blow to its business and had to delay the launch of a new
model. Nokia, however, was able to move on with barely a supply
hiccup. Knowledge may be power, but risk management and
decisiveness may win the day.
152
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK

The need to understand, measure, and mitigate supply chain
risks
has
grown
in
importance
for
two
primary
reasons:
(1) complex supply chains (global and interconnected with more
touch points) are more prone to disruptions and (2) inventory
cushions that would dampen any supply shortfall are frankly
anathema
to
today’s
just-in-time
and
lean
manufacturing
practitioners.
Professor Yossi Shefﬁof the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology uses a two-by-two matrix when characterizing supply
chain risk: high probability vs low probability and large impact vs
small impact. Shefﬁargues that managers should only concern
themselves with the quadrants that denote high probability with
low impact and large impact but low probability of occurring. In
order to accomplish this, the industry as a whole, as well as
individual managers, executives, and academics, must be able to
predict the risk of disruption and quantify its ﬁnancial and
operational impacts.
One reason for looking at supply chain disruptions in this way
is the concept that a small number of accidents constitute the
majority of the total supply chain impacts felt in the supply
chain. This concept is also seen with natural disasters, where
a small number of incidentsdhurricanes, for exampledcause the
majority of all damage due to natural disasters. The same concept
can be said about cargo theft, as the major incidents in the United
States make up only a small number of the total; however, they
have the greatest total impact on operational and logistics
disruptions and overall monetary loss.
The other quadrant to be focused ondhigh predictability and
low impactdcan be associated with events such as pilferage
throughout the supply chain. Even though each incident has
a negligible impact on supply chain operations and minimal
ﬁnancial loss or operational setback per incident, when occurring
at high frequency, these attritional drains are insidious and can
lead to an attitude that factors them into the cost of doing
business.
By understanding and applying these concepts into an overall
risk analysis for an entire supply chain or even a single trans-
portation lane, the logistics and security professionals of an
organization are better prepared to apply accurate return on
investment (ROI) metrics when proposing a supply chain or in-
transit security program. Without a solid understanding of the
risk, money and effort are wasted all too oftentimes, providing
either too much security to a low-risk environment or not enough
security to a high-risk environment, both of which can have
signiﬁcant downstream consequences.
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK 153

Product Type and Value
As discussed in Chapter 7: Product Targeting, certain prod-
ucts, such as electronics and food and beverages, are stolen at
a substantially higher rate than other theft-attractive commodi-
ties such as pharmaceuticals and tobacco. This does not mean
that the cargo that experiences less theft is less desirable to cargo
criminals. This is an important distinction to make. One thing
needs to be remembered: consider the amount (volume) of
a product type in transit. While deﬁnitive numbers of full truck-
loads on the road by product type are not available, intuitively we
know there are a substantially higher number of food and
beverage loads transiting our nation’s highway system each year
than speciﬁc products such as pharmaceuticals, consumer care
products, or tobacco. Therefore, the overall risk to certain loads is
not directly proportional to the overall number of thefts each year
or the comparative percentage of thefts of product types, but
rather those data along with their sheer volume.
Through data about theft incidents, interviews with cargo
criminals, and other information collected, there is general
agreement within the supply chain industry that electronics,
pharmaceuticals, tobacco, and consumer care products are the
most-sought-after goods. Their pure intrinsic value and ease of
movement and sale on the black market make these items the
perfect score for cargo gangs.
Aside from the type of product being shipped, the overall value
of goods in transit must be taken into account when determining
the threat from criminal elements. If a product can be sold easily
on the black market, the more expensive the product is will result
in a higher return on investment, or margin, for the cargo crim-
inal and the broker, especially considering that fencing most
stolen goods brings the seller 10 to 20 cents on the dollar.
Another important factor is the price ﬂuctuation of goods. As
demand (and price) goes up for commodities, so does the risk of
theft, providing high-value goods to the marketplace at substan-
tially discounted prices. This was shown in a study by Freight-
Watch, clearly showing the correlation between the rate of copper
theft and the index price of copper. During the study, the theft of
copper was analyzed on a quarterly basis and was compared to the
average price of copper over the same time period; there was an
obvious positive correlation between the two variables.
In a July 20, 2011, Wall Street Journal article by Kelly Evans,
sales of tablet personal computers (PC) and the impact on the
electronics industry were analyzed. Research showed that for
every two tablets sold, one PC was taken off the market (Evans,
154
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK

2011). This shift in buying preference in the consumer electronics
industry represented a clear shift in consumer demand. Based on
these ﬁndings, supply chain security professionals can derive
some sense about the risk they face, particularly in companies
that produce tablets, smart phones, PCs, and other electronics,
and adjust their security protocols accordingly. To understand
product demand, and therefore the theft risk, is a powerful
predictive tool in the ﬁght against cargo criminals.
Location of Facility
Companies that own, lease, or use cargo facilities in Los
Angeles, Dallas/Fort Worth, Miami, Atlanta, Memphis, and other
known hotbeds of cargo theft activity have an increased
propensity to be victimized by burglaries and robberies. There-
fore, operations in high-risk communities must also incorporate
a sort of geographic risk along with the product type and value
mix, as the mere location (in relation to the region, state, or city)
can have a substantial impact on the overall risk faced.
While general crime statistics, such as those provided by local
or county law enforcement agencies or services such as CAP
Index Inc., can be helpful in determining overall crime rates in
areas, to include burglaries, generally these data are more focused
on crimes again homes or persons. Because of this, companies
seeking to obtain updated information regarding warehouse
thefts should contact a local cargo theft task force if one exists in
the area, organizations such as FreightWatch, or a regional
transportation security council to help determine the overall risk
of facility thefts for their area.
Other considerations include a cargo storage facility’s prox-
imity to wooded areas, low trafﬁc roads, and other variances that
can provide criminals with the opportunity to conduct unde-
tected surveillance. Ideal targets for criminals are facilities that
cannot be seen easily from the road and are located in areas with
low trafﬁc volumes with no other nearby facilities but also close
enough to a major highway for quick escape. Thieves that target
warehouses and similar facilities also have an exit strategy. All of
these factors should be taken into consideration during the
facility selection process and the site security development phase.
Routing
As with the risk associated with cities or areas where facilities
are located, shipment routing can have a substantial impact on
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK 155

the overall risk of catastrophic theft. Transporting valuable cargo
through high-risk zones may not affect the potential for loss
directly; however, stopping in these areas will. As discussed
earlier, the concept of active targeting is predicated on criminals’
singular focus on a particular load and stealing it once left
unattended, regardless of the area; criminal elements still exist
that operate only in certain areas, seeking out goods that can be
stolen easily and moved quickly to secured locations for product
download and storage.
As with the route taken, the duration of the trip can have
a substantial impact on the risk of theft, most notably with the
number of stops required while in transit. As over 97% of cargo is
stolen when stationary, each stop presents cargo criminals with
an opportunity to acquire the load if left unattended during
a stop. Of course, countermeasures such as team drivers can be
a mitigating factor to this risk, which is discussed more in-depth
in this chapter; however, this can often be a point of failure,
relying on team drivers to remain with the vehicle at all times,
while overlooking other security best practices necessary to
ensure the security of the load.
Frequency of Shipments
The total number of loads shipped per week, month, or year
has a direct impact on the overall risk of theft through simple laws
of probability. The more often an act is performed, the more
likelihood of something going wrong increases with each
iteration.
If the average person drives his or her car once a week, the
probability of being in an accident in that person’s lifetime is
substantially less than a person who drives his or her car every
day. All other things being equal, the same can be seen with high-
volume shipping. Companies that ship or transport hundreds of
loads each day are more likely to be victims of cargo theft than
a company shipping one per week or month.
Mode of Transportation
Mode of transportation is another component of the overall
supply chain and cargo theft risk. This factor, coupled with
others, such as geographical region or the vendor managing the
cargo, can result in signiﬁcant volatility in risk of theft as well as
other supply chain disruptive events such as delay and damage.
Each transportation method (road, rail, air, and ocean) presents
a different set, and level, of exposure to risk.
156
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK

Truck transport is the most vulnerable to theft; this is intuitive
given the environment. In-transit loaded trucks are often stopped/
staged/stored at un- or undersecured locations such as truck
stops, rest areas, drop yards, and open access parking lots. There
are also meaningful differences in this mode; full-truckload, less
than truckload, and even parcel/express cargo traveling over the
same roads have unique theft and risk proﬁles.
Additionally, if modes other than truck are used for transport,
such as rail, air, or sea, the risk of theft while in transit must be
accounted for, in addition to the inherent risks associated in areas
around the major ports of hubs used by these modes, as discussed
in Part 1 of this book. Finally, shippers must not discount the
inclusion of truck transport associated with other modes, such as
air or rail. Despite these other modes serving as the primary
method of movement for the majority of a trade lane, undoubt-
edly in almost every circumstance, the cargo will be moved by
truck at some point, bringing the cargo back to a substantially
higher level of risk.
In-Transit Policies and Procedures
The breadth and scope of in-transit security policies and
procedures vary dramatically among transportation providers. It
is imperative that shippers clearly understand the security
protocol of their carriers and how effectively this is transmitted to
the absolute linchpin and key cargo theft deterrent, the driver.
Whether a company establishes its own tailored set of standards
or adopts industry best practices, there needs to be rules of the
road.
Many transportation providers have little or no security poli-
cies. Operational efﬁciencies, allowing drivers to select their own
routes and stopping locations based on fuel prices, often trump
proven in-transit security measures. This role is ﬁlled most often
by the shipper and agreed upon with trucking companies as part of
contractual negotiations for pulling high-value cargo for the
shipper. Examples would be actions required by drivers when
stopped (turning off truck, removing keys from the ignition, and
taking them with you; locking doors; using air cuff locks and other
vehicle-immobilizing devices; and not leaving the load unat-
tended), prohibiting stops in high-risk zones, prohibiting drivers to
depart the destination if delivery was not possible upon arrival,
and requiring them to remain on site until the product is off-
loaded.
Of course the requirements placed on a provider will depend
on a wide array of variables, including what cargo is being
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK 157

shipped, origin and destination, mode of shipment, logistics
methodology, and more. Methods of implementing an effective
in-transit security program in order to combat cargo theft are
examined later in this book.
Demographics
The two primary demographic data points to consider when
analyzing cargo theft risk are the population of an area and its
level/volume of supply chain activity. Cities such as Memphis or
Louisville have incredibly high volumes of supply chain activity,
serving as major hubs for two of the most prominent integrated
transportation companies, as well as being linked to major
highway, rail, and ground conduits, with relatively low population
densities when compared to other cargo theft hot spots such as
Los Angeles or Dallas. Based on data gleaned from real-world
cargo crime statistics, it does not appear to matter how many
people live in a certain city of metropolitan area; the key differ-
entiator is the amount of cargo pulsing through its logistics
networks
Other Factors
A variety of additional factors can affect the overall risk of
a facility or in-transit operation. The level of crime in an area,
weather, microeconomics, and packaging all play a role. The
more these are understood, the better able it is to develop
meaningful and actionable measures to deal with them.
Prevailing crime data whether considering in-transit or facility
security cannot be overstated. Nevertheless, local rates are often
overlooked in the decision-making process when establishing
a location for a warehouse or distribution center, but must be
accounted for when determining risk.
Another risk factor is weather. Weather can cause signiﬁcant
delays in in-transit operations, produce false alarms in intrusion
systems, and increase the overall level of complexity in a supply
chain that criminals can exploit. The $76 million warehouse
burglary occurred during a large thunderstorm that had emer-
gency services occupied and resulted in numerous false alarms at
facilities throughout the area. By anticipating local and seasonal
weather patterns, as well as other natural disruptive events, and
incorporating emergency preparedness plans into the cargo
security programs can actually bolster a company’s supply chain
resilience.
158
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK

The use of company names, corporate logos, or other identi-
fying information that can provide clues as to the contents of
a shipment should not be on exterior packaging (cartons, crates,
and drums). Prudent shippers are increasingly moving to plain
packaging, but a struggle still exists between marketing depart-
ments that want to promote the brand and security personnel
tasked with protecting company assets, whether mobile or in situ.
In 2010, several men broke into a public warehouse in Long
Island. The facility was used to store high-value products for four
clients; three used packaging without any obvious identiﬁcation
but the other used their logo on all six sides of its cartons. The
latter cargo was stolen while the rest was left behind.
Security Assessments and Site Surveys
A supply chain security program should be assessed periodi-
cally to ensure effectiveness and that costs are in line with the
program’s stated goals. A program analysis or assessment looks at
the supply chain as a whole (suppliers, shippers, transportation
providers, and intermediaries, along with facilities and physical
and procedural controls) with the goal of determining where risk
or security gaps exist. To facilitate this, security surveys must be
conducted as well. These assessments can be at the site or trade
lane level, where a security expert will assess the infrastructure as
well as policies and procedures that are practiced.
Security assessments and site surveys can be conducted by
one of two means: (1) internal assessment, conducted by a com-
pany’s in-house security staff, or (2) bringing in a ﬁrm special-
izing in supply chain risk analysis and security plans. Regardless
of the method by which a company chooses to inspect its supply
chain security plan, the areas discussed in Chapter 13: Physical
Security and Chapter 14: In-Transit Security must be reviewed,
analyzed, and updated with respect to changes in threat to
a company’s supply chain in order to ensure that effective theft
mitigation occurs.
Before a security assessment begins, it is critical that the goals
are understood by all parties involved. They can be as simple as
a single lane analysis or as complicated as a global supply chain
assessment, determining every risk, ranging from government
regulations to terrorism to piracy to civil unrest. The scope of the
assessment and how the results will be addressed are critical
components of the assessment planning process.
Once the goals and scope have been established, the method
by which the assessment is to be conducted must be determined.
Depending on the depth and breadth of the assessment, it
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK 159

generally consists of a combination tabletop risk analysis and
on-site security survey. When determining what to assess, the
items discussed in Chapter 13: Physical Security and Chapter 14:
In-Transit Security provide an excellent framework for identifying
key assessment elements.
Another decision point is whether the assessment is going to
be conducted by internal personnel or if an outside ﬁrm will be
brought in. There are pros and cons to either option but one
constant remainsdqualiﬁed individuals are needed to perform
the assessment and site surveys. Conducting site surveys is far
more complex than simply following a standard checklist, as
using this method can overlook critical risk exposures, especially
if an inexperienced person is assigned the task.
Another factor in the decision-making process is how the
results will be perceived internally. If the results would be better
received from an outside “expert,” then contracting out the work
makes sense. If, however, the company’s culture is one of
accepting constructive criticism only from within, then an internal,
yet qualiﬁed, inspector would appear the optimal choice.
Regardless if the resources selected for this work are from
internal or external sources, the assessment process must be risk
based and conducted in order to establish or improve the com-
pany’s supply chain security program. Results from the surveys
and assessment should be the basis for the supply chain security
program and written with the company’s business model,
established processes, and overall culture in mind.
Results from the surveys and assessment can provide other
beneﬁts to both operations (principally supply chain) and
corporate management. Metrics such as ROI should measure the
effectiveness of the cargo security program once implemented.
Recommended security measures do not have to always translate
into added costs and should never decrease supply chain efﬁ-
ciency or an increase in costs. In fact, many security best prac-
tices regarding supply chain operations can actually increase
efﬁciencies at no cost.
Ultimately, once the results have been analyzed, the company
has to take the ﬁndings and make a business decision on what
new systems or programs will be implemented or existing ones
improved. Once the supply chain security program has been
implemented or revised based on the security assessment project,
reassessments should be scheduled as necessary (commonly
approximately 12 months from the project implementation date)
to ensure that the program is truly meeting its goals of reducing
cargo theft and maintaining supply chain efﬁciency. Also, the risk
to a modern supply chain can be quite ﬂuid, requiring continual
160
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK

evaluation of a program’s effectiveness so that plans can be
adjusted accordingly.
The environment in which the supply chain operates can be
very dynamic. While some threats will remain constant over
time, others will appear, disappear, and alter at great frequency,
and must be understood, planned for, and security programs
adjusted quickly in order to mitigate from these changes to the
threat environment. Because of this, supply chain risk assess-
ment should be conducted continuallydno less than every
12 monthsdand supply chain security programs should be
written as a living document, being updated constantly to meet
threats as they emerge.
Key Points
•
Determining the risk of theft to a company and its product is
the ﬁrst step in creating a supply chain security plan.
•
Risk is substantially affected by product type and its ability to
be sold on the black market. The overall value of the product
serves as a motivating factor for criminal gangs.
•
The location of a facility plays a role in determining the risk of
theft. While less of a factor than product type and value, areas
with high crime rates are more likely to be attacked.
•
Products shipped through cargo theft hot spots are at
increased risk, especially when truck drivers stop and leave
their loads unattended.
•
Existing contracts with transportation vendors need to be
reviewed by analyzing the operational requirements through
a security lens and determining what policies (or lack of poli-
cies) are placing goods at undue risk. This will provide a start-
ing point for contract discussions with current or prospective
service providers when creating and implementing a new
supply chain security program that includes in-transit security
requirements.
•
Experts should be used to conduct supply chain risk assess-
ments and site surveys in order to determine risk and imple-
ment or revise security programs.
•
Assessments should be conducted periodically and designed
to enhance overall security of supply chain operations within
the existing parameters of the company’s business model
and requirements.
Chapter 11 DETERMINING RISK 161

12
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The Layered Approach
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Role of the supply chain security manager
• Competing priorities in developing security and supply chain security programs
• Topics to be included in policy development and execution
• Role of insurance companies, law enforcement, and third-party security
providers in a supply chain security program
No battle plan survives ﬁrst contact with the enemy.
Helmuth von Moltke
The 21st-century supply chain is longer, faster, and more
complex than ever before, with decreasing product inventory,
increasing number of touch points, and more demanding cost
constraints. This escalation in complexity comes with the added
risk of large-scale theft. Supply chain security has developed
signiﬁcantly since the early 2000s and con\tinues to grow in
importance as vulnerabilities are discovered, supply chains are
expanded, and risk is increased. Securing a warehouse or distri-
bution center is no longer a sufﬁcient means of protecting
a company from theft. “The lengthening of supply chains across
international borders and sometimes entire hemispheres has
resulted in both cheaper labor and more expensive security
measures” (Blanchard, 2006).
Security is becoming a core business function in many
companies and is being integrated into all supply chain activities.
In the past, corporate security has been an optional part of
a company’s business makeup, and even companies with security
would rarely have it involved in the supply chain. Now, the term
“supply chain security” is part of the corporate lexicondeven to
the point that ﬁrms are creating a management position specif-
ically to bridge the gap between logistics and security.
Advances in this niche industry, however, are not without
challenges.
Company
executives
are
not
always
open
to
increasing security expenditures, as security is commonly seen as
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00012-1
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
163

a pure cost to operations often without a quantiﬁable return on
investment. Staff, programs, and equipment such as cameras,
alarms, and other systems are viewed as necessary evils that are
often provided with as little budget as possible to “get by” with.
While the implementation of security measures is often expen-
sive, negatively impacting a company’s bottom line during initial
stages, supply chain security can have a profound monetary
beneﬁt over the long term. “Cargo security technology and
monitoring solution can provide signiﬁcant return on invest-
ment, and often at bargain prices considering the value of the
capital that could be lost by a disruption in the global container
shipping” (Blanchard, 2006).
Quantifying savings from security programs, for the most part,
relate to the change in cargo theft rates year to year. It can be
argued that effective programs provide a number of intangible,
but still valuable beneﬁts. They include:
•
Reducing loss of goods
•
Enhancing overall quality
•
Providing corporate peace of mind (“quiet night’s sleep”)
•
Improving reputation and brand equity
•
Offering competitive, and at times sustainable, advantage
•
Facilitating business acquisition
•
Allowing entry into high-hazard markets
•
Limiting regulatory burdens
•
Lowering noncompliance exposures
•
Lessening inspections and delays
•
Stabilizing, if not lowering, total cost of risk
It is critical that supply chain security managers have a clear
understanding of the return on investment (ROI) that their
programs are providing. By providing quantiﬁable reduction of
theft, potentially to the tune of millions of dollars annually, such
programs can have a dramatic impact on the direct bottom line,
without even including the incredible array of downstream costs
that arise with the theft of large quantities of product.
Security of a supply chain, however, is far more complicated
than hiring a single manager to run an internal program. Corporate
policies and procedures, physical security plans, in-transit security
plans, and collaboration (internally, with vendors, with industry,
and with law enforcement) are all critical to a successful program
and truly secure supply chain. Of course, other stakeholders are
involved in wanting to see a company’s cargo arrive on time and
intact. Insurance companies are the most obvious ones, as a secure
supply chain is critical to reducing losses and thus claims.
This layered approachda combination of personnel, policies,
physical components, and technologydis a proven strategy for
164
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

ensuring that cargo remains secure in a fast-moving, highly
adaptable and complex environment.
Corporate Security and Logistics
The ability to prevent cargo theft has a signiﬁcant impact on
a corporation’s bottom line, reduces overall costs, and prevents
an undue increase in retail prices. In recognition of this fact,
companies are increasing budgets and giving more latitude to
security and logistics managers to develop security programs in
their supply chains and purchase the necessary technologies
necessary to assist in the process.
Companies are starting to manage security as a core business
function through all supply chain activities, a key change in the
overall mind-set in companies regarding security and the ROI
that can be achieved through proactive supply chain security
programs. Such programs can provide a signiﬁcant ROI, often at
bargain prices, considering the value of the capital that would
be lost by a disruption in the global supply chain (Blanchard,
2006).
Supply chain security is driven by the product manufacturer,
owner, or shipper (these terms are felt to be interchangeable but
shippers will be referred to throughout the rest of the book). The
shipper sets the tone for security in the supply chain, providing
guidance to third-party logistics, transportation providers, and
other vendors on the degree of security to be used in handling,
storing, and shipping its product. Because of this, it is imperative
that the shipper has written security standards not only for its
own companies to follow, but also to be passed on to suppliers
and vendors, ensuring that they have and comply with the same
security standards that are applicable to the services provided to
the shipper. There are numerous terms for such a document,
such as freight security requirements or standards of care; no
matter what they are called, they should be the single source for
security requirements that all companies involved in the ship-
per’s supply chain must comply with.
One difﬁculty in determining security standards in the supply
chain is the gap between logistics and security and who is
responsible for fulﬁlling this role. Some companies have begun
assigning a manager who works for logistics but has a dotted line
responsibility to the head of security. This is considered by many
to be the ideal situation; a person with speciﬁc expertise in supply
chain security can create and implement security standards
under the aegis of logistics. Other companies rely on a combina-
tion of security and logistics personnel to work collaboratively.
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 165

Regardless of the method used, shippers in today’s risk envi-
ronment are beginning to see this role as imperative to the overall
success of not only their supply chain, but also the company as
a whole. This position can be used throughout the supply chain,
assisting with procurement, vendor vetting, and, of course, the
governmental regulatory environment for trade programs such as
CustomseTrade Partnership Against Terrorism and Authorized
Economic Operatordareas that would fall directly under the
supply chain security manager’s purview.
Policies and Procedures
After appointing the person who will have responsibility for
oversight and execution of a comprehensive supply chain secu-
rity program, next must come the establishment of the program
itself through written policies and procedures.
Informal,
unwritten
rules
exist
in
many
organizations;
employees and vendors can point to examples of “that’s how
things have always been done” or similar reasons for various
processes. Personal preference by staff members and manage-
ment citing “ﬂexibility” with allowing tasks to be performed in
a variety of methods can result in dramatically varying protocols
at every stage in the supply chain. If this kind of situation is
questioned, a shrug, wink and a nod, or other act of dismissive-
ness is common, particularly if the area under discussion has not
resulted in product loss or damage.
Unfortunately,
while
such
scenarios
are
common,
the
unwritten policy proves to be no policy at all, especially in
a court-room when attempting to determine liability after a large-
scale theft. Simply put, if a policy is unwritten, then the policy
does not exist and cannot be enforced.
Beyond providing an established document for enforcement,
written policies that are thought out and done well can be
extremely effective in providing clarity, responsibility, scope, and
requirements for the security of cargo from origin to destination.
Supply chain security policies must be both inward and outward
lookingdapplied to both company personnel and external busi-
ness partners. A supply chain security policy should cover all the
components listed in Chapter 13: Physical Security and Chapter 14:
In-Transit Security, ensuring that all variances in product ﬂow for
each business line are analyzed and accounted for.
A basic policy outline includes:
•
Roles and responsibilities
•
Authority
•
Communications
166
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

•
Human resources
•
Hiring practices
•
Employee education
•
Background investigations
•
Termination procedures
•
Rehiring practices
•
Facility security
•
Perimeter security
•
Physical security
•
Procedures
•
Subcontracting
•
Investigations
•
Law Enforcement contacts
•
Access control
•
Key control
•
Closed-circuit television
•
Intrusion detections (alarms and motion detection)
•
Alarm monitoring
•
Lighting
•
High-value cage
•
Security ofﬁcers
•
Search procedures
•
Fulﬁllment process
•
Product in storage
•
Product on docks
•
Driver controls
•
Loading process
•
Unloading process
•
Security seal procedures
•
Pick and pack operations
•
Trailer staging
•
Driver instructions
•
Prealerts
•
In-transit security
•
Transportation provider selection
•
Vehicle requirements
•
Truck Security
•
Trailer Security
•
Risk Analyses
•
Tracking requirements
•
Tamper alarms
•
Team drivers
•
Stopping procedures
•
No-stop zones
•
Secured parking locations
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 167

•
Communications
•
Routing
•
Arrival procedures
A shipper may also want to institute an active monitoring
program for high-value shipments. This should be documented
and included as an appendix to in-transit security or as a stand-
alone policy (see Chapter 15: Active Monitoring).
As noted previously, such a policy, if done correctly, can provide
substantial beneﬁts to supply chain efﬁciencies as well as increased
security for cargo and bring a clear return on investment through
dramatically decreased thefts, damages, and other problems along
the supply chain (for additional information on the beneﬁts of an
in-transit security plan and using tracking technology to maximize
the supply chain, see Chapter 19: Beyond Security).
Collaboration
In order to combat cargo theft and provide a truly secure
supply chain, collaboration is critical. This must occur between
all links in the supply chain and relevant stakeholders. From
collaboration, security best practices can be developed, estab-
lishing what works, what does not, and how to implement secu-
rity procedures most effectively without hindering the efﬁciency
of the supply chain. Security programs that diminish supply
chain efﬁciency will be discarded quickly by executives as its
“cost” adds up quickly as the price of logistics increases and
efﬁciency is degraded. Through collaboration and continual
improvement, supply chain security can be an easy ﬁt within any
logistics program, providing a secure supply chain through
procedural changes, technology, and vendor compliance.
Some ﬁrms see their liability ending when ownership of their
product is transferred to a supply chain partner, thereby elimi-
nating the need for collaboration and cooperation. But as already
discussed, cargo theft affects everyone, not only in the supply
chain, but consumers as well. A secure supply chain is beneﬁcial
to all involved, not just the product owner.
Collaboration is not nearly as complicated or difﬁcult as it can
sometimes seem, especially with cargo theft and supply chain risk,
which can be very ambiguous or an area where many companies
are resistant to sharing information that could highlight failures in
their security programs. While this may have been an adequate
depiction of cargo theft collaboration in the past, now there are
numerous organizations and vast amounts of information avail-
able at little or no cost. A list of these organizations and companies
is provided in the resource section at the end of this book.
168
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Insurance Companies
The insurance industry plays a critical role in supply chain
security and reducing cargo losses. As an insurance company
takes on new clients, it goes through an array of processes to
determine a potential client’s overall risk, necessary and recom-
mended improvements to their security programs, and, of course,
the level of coverage and premium offered.
When a new client is proposed, an insurer will perform an
assessment of the client company to determine two things:
(1) insurability of the potential new client, looking at the overall
security of the insured product throughout their supply chain,
and (2) willingness to work with the insurance company and
make changes to ﬁll the security gaps. The insurance company
serves largely in a consultative role, creating a collaborative effort
with the ultimate goal of securing the supply chain using carrier
selection, physical and procedural measures, and contractual
terms with vendors and transportation carriers. After a large loss
or a series of smaller systemic ones, this will often result in policy
warranties and/or rate changes.
Such changes could include requiring team drivers to be used
for more shipments along more lanes, increasing security
measures at facilities or during transit, and adjusting terms with
motor carriers to increase liability, adjust in-transit behavior, or
other terms.
Insurers can also help identify trends not only in a speciﬁc
client’s loss history, but throughout their book of business now
and in the past. These historical data, coupled with best practices,
can be powerful tools in preventing or minimizing cargo theft. Of
course it is the application of this information, which requires
a willing client, that is fostered through a collaborative effort/
environment by the insurer in order for the risk of cargo to be
reduced.
A company’s loss history and experience with a particular
commodity (scar tissue) can have an impact on whether the
insurance company will even provide coverage. One example is
cell phones, items that due to their high value and theft attrac-
tiveness are hard to underwrite proﬁtably.
Loss control is a value-added service provided by most major
insurance companies. According to Alan Spear, director of cargo
security with Chartis Insurance, the aim is to prevent thefts from
occurring, saving both parties’ signiﬁcant time and money in the
long run. Through this role and over time, insurance companies
have been able to develop best practices, security recommenda-
tions, and process improvements that can be brought to bear in
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 169

cooperation with clients to identify and ﬁx problems for clients to
assist them in reducing losses.
Some of these may be mandatory due to the high risk of cargo
theft or the area in which the client operates. Others may be
suggested, recommended, or even strongly recommended, with
the end goals of shoring up the client’s supply chain and miti-
gating the risk of loss. The goal of this process, essentially, is to ﬁx
the problem before it’s broken through a cooperative effort
between the insurance company and its clients.
Insurance companies can be used by a manufacturer to get
vendors to be more compliant with recommended security
measures. Seen as an objective source that is looking for best
security practices, a vendor that a security manager cannot get to
comply but is protected through executive contacts can be moved
into compliance with a negative security rating from the insur-
ance carrier.
With the vast data available to insurance companies, they are
uniquely positioned to conduct risk analysis for clientsd
combining this historical record with the various components of
risk discussed in Chapter 11: Determining Risk. Many insurers
offer these services as a value add-on to their clients in order to
assist in reducing risk and preventing losses before they occur.
As best practices are developed, insurance companies play
a vital role in proliferating those best practices throughout their
client bases, assisting shippers and their logistics providers with
adapting their policies, procedures, and equipment to keep
stored and in-transit cargo as secure as possible. This role is not
only vital to the supply chain industry as a whole, but also has
a direct ROI for the insurance companies, as lossesdand
therefore claimsdare reduced.
One ﬁnal way in which insurance companies play a role in
overall supply chain security is motivation for their clients to
maintain high levels of security and risk mitigation to deter
losses and prevent the negative impacts they cause. Reducing
premiums for companies with good loss experience can be
a positive motivation and resonate with C-level management.
Third-Party Security Providers
Outside security providers enhance supply chain security in
a cost-effective manner. This can be done through a variety of
ways, but largely center around physical security (security ofﬁcers
and on-site guard services) and transportation security (i.e.,
companies that provide human or physical escorts and/or
provide covert GPS tracking technologies) providers.
170
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

This chapter discusses the role that each player in a supply
chain security program plays. Whether or not to use a third-party
security provider is covered in the following two chapters
(Chapter 13 for physical security guard services and Chapter 14
for in-transit security providers).
It must be completely understood that the company that
contracts the services of a security provider is ultimately
responsible for shaping the policy. While these providers can
help determine how they can best assist at the end of the day, it
is that company’s responsibility. This means ensuring that
adequate documentation is created and that all stakeholders are
clear on their respective roles and duties. It is surprising how
often this critical step is missing and contracted security
companies work without a clear set of instructions, yet alone
guidance. This environment can result in signiﬁcant security
gaps that are exploited quickly (and all too easily) by cargo
criminals, resulting in devastating loss at both the facility and
the in-transit level.
Another critical step in determining the role of a third-party
security provider is an analysis of the company’s strengths,
capabilities, and limitations. While this should obviously be
conducted during the selection/vetting process, this analysis is
often overlooked when implementing the contracted services
into an organization’s supply chain.
The role of the security service provider must be tailored to
meeting the speciﬁc needs of the client. The facility and/or in-
transit security provider has to be a good ﬁtdthe right ﬁt for the
client and the assignment. Their products and services must have
enough ﬂexibility to allow them to devise customizable solutions,
rather than off-the-shelf programs, that ensure total supply chain
security.
Law Enforcement
As with securing one’s home or automobile, the role of the
police in cargo theft exists largely to respond after an incident has
occurred. Theft prevention falls almost entirely on the shoulders
of the homeowner or driver. When you park your car at the mall,
you don’t leave the keys in the car and your wallet on the seat and
rely on the police to safeguard your property. Neither should you
leave valuable cargo unattended conveniently loaded in a truck
that has inherent mobility.
While the police can assist through proactive measures such as
additional patrols around industrial areas and other similar
programs, it would be impractical to think this type of activity
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES 171

could be offered across the nation’s vast highway system and the
countless locations where loads are left unattended daily. Any
expectation for police to reduce warehouse burglaries or in-transit
theft can only be possible after the fact, during investigations, and,
hopefully, arrests and successful prosecution. However, it is the
goal of the security professional to keep the theft from occurring in
the ﬁrst place, which requires an understanding that prevention
lies squarely on the shoulders of those involved in the handling
and transportation of cargo. While many of the cargo theft task
forces throughout the United States conduct proactive operations
such as stings, bait trailers, and undercover operations (for addi-
tional information, see Chapter 18: Cargo Theft Task Forces and
Organizations), these programs are designed to target thieves for
arrest and prosecution and should not be considered a substitute
for a sound supply chain security program.
With this in mind, the process of creating security programs
for in-transit risk mitigation should certainly include coordina-
tion with local, state, regional, and national law enforcement, but
primarily as a means for having established relationships and
lines of communication for information sharing and rapid
response in the event of a theft. Plans that rely on law enforce-
ment as a key piece of their theft prevention plan are destined
to fail.
Key Points
•
Supply chain operations are becoming far more complex and
sophisticated, with more potential for disruption in the event
of a theft or other type of loss-causing incident.
•
Supply chain security is becoming a core competency within
many companies inside their supply chain operations.
•
Signiﬁcant return on investment can be achieved through an
effective supply chain security program.
•
Corporate security and logistics divisions must work together
to develop key policies and procedures to keep cargo secure
regardless of where it is in the world.
•
Thorough policy development is the ﬁrst step in ensuring that
an effective supply chain security program is implemented.
•
Insurance companies and third-party security providers can
provide expert guidance and assistance in developing policies
and implementing supply chain security programs.
172
Chapter 12 ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

13
PHYSICAL SECURITY
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• How to take a known risk model and create a security plan for supply chain
operations
• Section by section descriptions of topics necessary for a layered security
approach
• Additional areas of consideration beyond security, such as company culture,
environment, and legal/human resource policies
• How to focus on low- or no-cost solutions to keep security budgets in line with
overall company objectives
A physical security plan serves as the basis for supply chain
security programs. While cargo moves throughout the world, at
no point will there be a large volume of product in one location
than when stored inside warehouses and distribution centers,
which therefore are in need of thorough security policies and
procedures to ensure the product’s protection. According to
Richard Gigliotti and Ronald Jason in Handbook of Loss Preven-
tion and Crime Prevention, there are ﬁve levels of security:
minimum, low, medium, high, and maximum.
Levels of Security
Minimum Security
This level requires the desire to impede some unauthorized
access to a facility or location through a combination of simple
locks and physical barriers. (This would be suitable only for
facilities that store goods of little or no value to a criminal.)
Low-Level Security
This next higher level of security adds to the existing level of
security, along with a measure of detection. Through the use of
physical barriers and locking systems designed to delay or
impede access to a facility, a facility can add the ability to detect
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00013-3
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
173

unauthorized access through the addition of lighting and an
alarm system. (Similar to the minimum level of security, this level
would be appropriate for the same type of facility, but perhaps
located in an area of higher crime rates where vandalism and
other security issues are of concern.)
Medium-Level Security
In addition to impeding access and unauthorized access
detection, this level of security adds an assessment feature that
includes activity around the facility, taking into account the
normal ﬂow of business, as well as possible criminal activity. By
increasing the level of security features from the low level of
security, establishing a perimeter barrier, in addition to an existing
physical barrier, around the primary area being protected, and
using guards or other features enhance deterrence and detection
capabilities. (This is used for facilities manufacturing or storing
items of moderate value with a small level of desirability for sale on
the black market.)
High-Level Security
At the high level of security, existing simple or advanced
security features are replaced with state-of-the-art measures, such
as closed circuit television (CCTV) systems, perimeter alarms,
high-security lighting, access controls to the perimeter and to the
facility, formal response plans, and regularly scheduled site
surveys and security assessments to determine the overall effec-
tiveness of implemented security measures. This protection is
consistent with high-value goods such as electronics, pharma-
ceuticals (typically over-the-counter and consumer products),
high-end clothing, wine and spirits, and tobacco products.
Maximum Security
The pinnacle of security incorporates all the desired attributes
of the ﬁrst four levels, adding the ability to neutralize any unau-
thorized external or internal activity. This would include sophis-
ticated alarm systems that cannot be defeated by a single
individual, on-site response protocols, and 24/7 armed security
staff on site. While this level of security is rarely seen in the
manufacturing and logistics industries, it is used in military
installations, some power plants, nuclear sites, and other critical
infrastructures. Sites that store products of extreme value or
desirability should consider adoption of some or all of these
features.
174
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

An assessment of a company’s products (their value and theft
attractiveness), site location, risk tolerances, and budget will
allow a company to determine the right level of security. Also
inherent in this is the selection of security policies and proce-
dures to be followed.
During this phase it is crucial that all security countermea-
sures be analyzed, determining that their capabilities and
limitations to ensure optimal placement and deployment and
security policies are implemented to ensure coverage, obtaining
the desired level of security.
The emphasis of most cargo facility security plans lies in the
capabilities of physical aspects (fences, gates, lighting, alarm
systems, CCTV, and the like). However, the supply chain adds
another dimension, the introduction and removal of goods. The
process by which drivers arrive; where they are and are not
allowed; counting, verifying, and loading of cargo; and steps to
ensure the cargo is secured is absolutely key to a successful
program and is often the most overlooked from a security
perspective and viewed as a logistics issue.
Note: This chapter is designed to provide an explanation of the
variety of security features and measures that should be considered
when creating or analyzing a security program. It is not the purpose
of this chapter to provide technical details of the technologies
presented. These should be assessed based on speciﬁc needs.
Administrative Information
Any security policy should have information to ensure anyone
reading it understands how it is to be applied to their business unit,
why the roles and responsibilities exist, and how it will be enforced.
It should also include speciﬁc tasks for those identiﬁed in the policy
as well as references used in the creation of the policy and the
responsibilities of those speciﬁcally identiﬁed within the policy.
The scope statement of any supply chain security or cargo
security program should be simple and straightforward. The
purpose of this statement is to ensure that the policy is understood
within the context of what it is attempting to achieve, who it affects,
and, possibly more importantly, what areas it does not apply to.
Authority for policies is generally derived from other policies
or executive decisions that give the policy and its author the
directive to create and implement a cargo security initiative.
Generally citing the directive policy is sufﬁcient for any policy
being developed with regards to authority.
Any references used in creating the policy or those that can be
used to help clarify certain terms or concepts should be listed
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 175

either at the beginning of the document or at the end as an
appendix. This would also apply to technical deﬁnitions used in
the plan.
Responsibilities labeled within this section should include
all personnel with direct involvement in the program’s develop-
ment, implementation, maintenance, or enforcement. This would
include personnel such as the supply chain security manager,
logistics or transportation managers, site security staff, procure-
ment, and any others designated with direct authority or respon-
sibility within the policy.
Site Security Management
The size, number of buildings, functions, operational tempo,
and geographical location all help determine if a site will have
a dedicated security manager. Other factors include product
value or desirability, the level of security desired for the site, and
the culture of a company with regard to security and budget.
A common practice is to give an existing manager the secondary
role of security manager.
There is no “one size ﬁts all” answer to the question of whether
a dedicated site security manager is needed. Clearly in the interest
of maximizing security, having a dedicated site security manager is
ideal, but it is recognized that this is not always feasible.
Whether a dedicated site security manager is in place or an
existing manager serves in this role, every site should have
a single person responsible for all security policies, procedures,
and equipment. This includes an integration of lighting to ensure
proper functionality of CCTV systems, processing and access of
visitors, vendors and truck drivers, and a variety of other daily
practices that have potential impact on the overall security of
a facility and the people and products held within.
The site security manager should also be trained in the best
practices of physical and procedural security. Organizations such
as the American Society for Industrial Security (ASIS) offer an
array of training and certiﬁcation curriculums to assist in
a security manager’s professional development. Continuing
education expands one’s knowledge base and lets one keep aware
of best practices, technology, crime trends, and emerging threats.
Contact Persons
A phone tree or list of designated persons responsible for the
security program should be included within the policy, as well as
176
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

a separate list of those who should be contacted in the event of an
incident, cargo theft, or other emergency. This list should be
reviewed monthly and revised as needed. It is imperative that the
list be accurate to ensure rapid notiﬁcation of the appropriate
personnel in the event of an emergency and that all personnel on
the contact list are trained and ready to fulﬁll their duties once
contacted.
Risk Assessments
Supply chain risk assessments and individual site and lane
assessments should be required for all locations and lanes used
(for additional information, see Chapter 11: Determining Risk).
Lane surveys should be updated at least annually, with site surveys
conducted every 2 years and supply chain level assessments
updated every 3 to 5 years based on outcomes of the lane and site
surveys. Other triggers, such as a large-scale loss or increased theft
activity can determine if an updated survey or assessment is
needed. These triggers should warrant a new survey and/or risk
assessment to ensure that the company’s supply chain security
policy is adequately mitigating risk in that area or business unit.
Components of such a risk assessment should include points
of origin and destination (to include general crime around them
such as CAP Index reports and the routes used between them),
product transported on the lane (to include value and demand on
the black market), and the transportation providers used.
These can be performed internally or by a supply chain
security consultant if a company does not have the staff or
bandwidth to complete these assessments.
Cargo Crime Intelligence
Collecting
information and
intelligence
on cargo
crime,
emerging risks, and industry best practices is critical for a compre-
hensive and effective supply chain security program. There are
a number of organizations and resources available to industry
professionals for them to keep informed of the latest trends, as well
as providing in-depth historical analysis and predictive modeling
for shifts in supply chain risk.
A member of the supply chain security staff should be desig-
nated with ﬁnding resources best suited to meet a company’s
speciﬁc needs as well as monitoring the information coming in to
analyze incidents and trends applicable to the company’s overall
supply chain risk.
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 177

This section should also cover how information is to be
disseminated to appropriate personnel. Acquiring intelligence
and conducting analyses will not enhance a supply chain security
program unless it is being shared with the right people and used
when making security and business decisions.
The Resource section of this book provides information on
a wide range of companies that can assist in this area and provide
industry professionals with an array of intelligence products from
individual theft reports to long-range data analysis.
Applicant and Employee Screening
It is imperative to the success of a corporate security plan that
employees act in the best interest of the company. Internal theft,
leaking
insider
information,
and
other
illegal
actions
by
employees can drain a company and render security policies
ineffective. While it is impossible to predict someone’s actions or
know their intentions, certain measures can be taken by a secu-
rity staff and/or human resources department to assist in the
selection of new employees.
The overall purpose of applicant screening is to ﬁnd the most
appropriate person for a particular position (Purpura, 2008,
p. 110). Screening methods vary signiﬁcantly among organiza-
tions, but some basic components are the resume and the
application form. These documents serve as the primary means
to determine if a prospective employee is a good ﬁt with the
company. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey per-
formed an interesting study on fraudulent information during
the application process by asking if a person had experience with
certain types of equipment. More than one-third claimed to have
experience on equipment that did not exist (Purpura, 2008, p.
117). Other forms of screening include commonly used interview
process and testing.
Once a viable candidate has been identiﬁed and his or her
application received, companies should then conduct a thorough
background investigation. The purpose of the investigation is
twofold: (1) verify all pertinent information in the applicant’s
resume and application and (2) attempt to discover anything in
the applicant’s history that would disqualify him or her from
employment. The interviewer should ask speciﬁc questions about
areas that would disqualify a person.
When reviewing applications, some early red ﬂags can be
easily recognized:
•
Unsigned forms
•
Incomplete addresses or post ofﬁce box numbers
178
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

•
Conﬂicting dates of employment, education, or military service
•
Gaps in employment
•
Change of occupation
•
Sketchy employment information
•
Social security number variance
•
Omission of reason for leaving previous employment (ASIS,
2004)
The
background
investigation
can
be
handled
by
the
corporate security department or by human resources. It is
critical to remember that the purpose behind the investigation
is to ensure the right person is hired, not a mechanism to
disqualify the candidate. Of course, criminal history, convic-
tions, and other negative information not disclosed in the
application process should be analyzed and a decision made as
to the person’s qualiﬁcation based on the “whole man”
concept.
The whole man concept is designed not to allow a single issue
in a person’s background to categorically be a barrier to
employment. For example, if a pharmaceutical company has
a zero drug and alcohol policy, but a 40-year-old applicant has
a citation for marijuana possession at the age of 18, the whole
man concept would take into account the applicant’s age,
maturity level at the time of offense, and the fact the applicant has
had no further offenses.
Perimeter Security
A perimeter boundary, such as a fence, is the ﬁrst layer of
security
that
anyone
attempting
to
enter
a
facility
will
encounter. Regardless of the level of complexity in perimeter
security or the absence of any features, methods used to
secure a perimeter must be included in the facility security
plan and incorporated into the daily operations of the site.
This
can
have
signiﬁcant
implications
on
how
visitors,
vendors, and truck drivers are granted access, the process for
managing unauthorized access to the site grounds, and the
ways by which employees enter and leave for work, impacting
each and every person who enters or leaves the site on a daily
basis.
The most common perimeter boundary used is a fence. Most
often chain link, a fence provides the following:
•
Gives notice of the legal boundary of the outermost limits of
a facility
•
Assists in controlling and screening authorized entries into
a secured area by deterring entry elsewhere along the boundary
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 179

•
Supports surveillance, detection, assessment, and other secu-
rity functions by providing a zone for installing intrusion
detection equipment and CCTV
•
Deters casual intruders from penetrating a secured area by
presenting a barrier that requires an overt action to enter
•
Demonstrates the intent of an intruder by their overt action of
gaining entry
•
Causes a delay to obtain access to a facility, thereby increasing
the possibility of detection
•
Creates a psychological deterrent
•
Reduces
the
number
of
security
guards
required
and
frequency of use for each post
•
Optimizes the use of security personnel while enhancing the
capabilities for detection and apprehension of unauthorized
individuals
•
Demonstrates a corporate concern for facility security
•
Provides a cost-effective method of protecting facilities
The primary objective of a fence or other perimeter barrier is to
delay access by potential criminals and funnel trafﬁc to a minimum
number of entry and access points. In a maximum security envi-
ronment, a fence is not the ideal perimeter barrier (a solid wall is
preferred) but in most cases, a chain link fence with barbed wire
across the top is sufﬁcient for the supply chain industry.
The type of perimeter boundary used will have a signiﬁcant
impact on the policies and procedures for accessing the facility
grounds, including access being granted with or without an
appointment, if identiﬁcation will be checked and/or recorded
prior to entry being granted, registration of personnel and vehi-
cles at the access point, and so on. While this ﬁrst step of estab-
lishing a perimeter barrier seems to be the simplest, it provides
for an array of possibilities and will affect the culture of security at
any location.
As fences and perimeter boundaries will generally only
provide deterrence and delay capabilities, additional security
measures should be included in the planning, installation, and
daily procedures of a perimeter security plan. Additionally, stand-
off distance and use of terrain must be considered in order to
maximize the effectiveness of the perimeter boundary and total
system integration.
Physical Security
Standards for high-security facilities are wellestablished, but are
not implemented easily. Each and every aspect of physical security
must be analyzed, weaknesses determined, and countermeasures
180
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

put into place to ensure that the highest level of security is reached.
These include
•
Personnel doors
•
Locks
•
Dock doors
•
Emergency doors
•
Walls
•
Ram bars
•
Roofs
•
Windows
Even with the ever-changing criminal threat, the basics of
alarms, real-time monitoring, CCTV, and card reader access
systems have been in place for years and are still the place to start
when creating a cargo facility security program. It is critical,
however, that these apparatuses need to be installed not simply
because they are necessary, but are deployed in line with how the
security manager plans for each measure in order to thwart the
efforts of cargo thieves. For example, alarm sensors may be
installed on each dock door so that if opened, the alarm moni-
toring company will be notiﬁed of a break-in. This can be
defeated by criminals, however, using blow torches to cut a hole
in the dock door, sufﬁciently large enough to load a trailer
through, never disturbing the alarm system. Therefore, the
security manager should consider redundant security systems
such as motion detection devices in order to combat this
emerging trend.
In order for physical security features to function properly,
security policies and procedures must be in place. A card reader
system is immediately made ineffective if employees are prop-
ping exterior doors open while they go outside on break or for
ventilation purposes. The same is true for personnel ID badges
and visitor badges. If they are not required to be worn, and done
so in a uniform manner, the ability to recognize who is and is not
authorized to be in critical areas of the facility is diminished
signiﬁcantly. Policies and procedures must be in concert with the
physical security features and compliance with them audited to
ensure that the holistic security system is effective.
One aspect of physical security often overlooked is exterior
lighting. Locations with a large amount of exterior lighting have
a signiﬁcantly lower rate of criminal incidents occurring. While
this seems to be a common sense issue, it must be noted that
lighting is an extremely effective and inexpensive way of pre-
venting theft and other criminal acts. It also makes for a safer
environment, especially if cargo/truck operations take place at
night.
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 181

For a physical security plan to be effective, the functionality
and limits of each physical security feature must be known and
implemented in a manner that allows for overlap and ﬂuid
coverage of all critical points.
Access Control
The basic concept of access control is to permit or deny entry,
manage the density of movement within a deﬁned space, and
protect an area, property, information, or people from unautho-
rized observation or removal. When developing an access control
program, it is critical that the objectives of the program be clear as
this will have signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the type, degree of reli-
ability, and cost of the system (ASIS, 2004).
The key to a successful physical security program is to
understand the risk posed based on the criteria discussed in the
previous chapter, incorporate applicable security measures that
are established as industry-best practices, and understand that
the threat is always changing. Because of this, periodic reas-
sessments are vital to ensure not only if your physical security
program is well maintained and functional but also if there are
any emerging threats or trends that require adjustments to poli-
cies or security measures currently in place.
There are a variety of access control techniques ranging from
simple lock and key to more sophisticated systems such as coded
card access combined with retinal scanners. In its basic form,
the access control system is designed to identify the person
attempting to gain access, determine if he or she is or is not
authorized access, and then grant or deny access. The most
common methods used today for this process are
•
Peopledusually a receptionist or guard to check identiﬁcation
and verify access authorization
•
Card reader systemsdcompare the coded card with computer
records indicating if access is granted
•
Biometric readersduse a person’s physical properties for
identiﬁcation and determine if he or she is allowed access
The system used should have functionality beyond simply
access to a facility. Access controls should be designed to ensure
that only authorized personnel are permitted into areas in which
they work or are required to enter as part of their job function.
For example, ofﬁce staff would not need access to the loading
dock area, therefore their access badges should restrict access
there. Even within a warehouse, there can be only a limited
number of personnel allowed to enter high-value cages and
vaults.
182
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

An electronic access control system should be used throughout
a facility, record all entries (even attempts), and be reviewed
periodically to check for attempted unauthorized use or suspect
behavior (i.e., a single employee exiting the dock area repeatedly
within a small time frame with no valid business reason).
Key Control
A single individual should be made responsible for the
management of all physical keys used within a facility or site. All
lock installation, maintenance, and upgrades should be managed
by this person, who is also responsible for issuing, tracking, and
retrieving keys to and from authorized personnel.
Keys not in use should be placed in a secure container such as
a safe or lock box. All keys should be serial numbered, excess keys
should be inventoried monthly, and a log of all issued keys should
be maintained and updated for accuracy as changes are made
and during the monthly inventory. All keys should be marked
stating that duplication is unauthorized. There are some key
designs that are more difﬁcult to duplicate so investigation into
these seems appropriate.
Management should conduct a periodic audit of the key
control system (annually at a minimum), which would require all
key holders to present their assigned keys as well as an inspection
of the keys kept in storage.
The complexity of the security program will dictate the
features in a company’s key control program, but the minimum
attributes listed earlier are critical to ensuring keys are not
provided inadvertently (or, worst-case scenario, purposefully) to
people wishing to steal from or otherwise cause harm to a site, its
product, or personnel.
Closed Circuit Television
CCTV systems are one of the most frequently used security
applications. Reliable and cost-effective, CCTV systems play an
integral part of most security programs, along with alarms, ﬁre
detection, and access control systems. CCTVs are used in virtually
every facility that houses product with any degree of desirability,
from electronics to tobacco to clothing. While CCTV systems offer
a reliable means for monitoring facilities and allow for detection
of unauthorized access and a means for the apprehension of
offenders, care must be taken to ensure that the systems are
installed properly in order to maximize their full potential.
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 183

Although initially met with resistance by employees in the
industrial community, CCTV systems today are readily accepted
as part of the working environment. As cargo losses have
continued to rise throughout the supply chain, cost-effective
means have been sought out to mitigate thefts and decrease the
overall cost of investigating crimes (and to prevent them from
happening in the ﬁrst place); CCTV plays a deﬁnite role and has
become a common part of this process.
The greatest potential for CCTV is its integration with other
sensor systems (alarms and motion detection), as well as its use to
view remote areas with potential security and safety problems.
When used to its fullest extent, a CCTV system can serve as
a tremendous tool for detecting the presence of unauthorized
personnel by alerting security staff monitoring the system. As part
of an overall security policy, the reaction of the guards once an
unauthorized presence is detected must be established in writing
along with management notiﬁcation procedures.
Beyond detection of unauthorized personnel, CCTV systems
can also serve in other roles, such as investigating accidents,
employee misconduct, and more. The only way in which a CCTV
system can serve as a theft prevention tool is if the system is being
monitored by someone who is in a position to respond imme-
diately to a threat. Without a monitoring and reaction/response
capability, a CCTV system provides historical data and does not
serve in a theft prevention capacity, but remains an integral part
of a physical security plan.
In the role of asset protection, a CCTV system can be used to
detect unwanted entry into a facility, beginning with access
through the perimeter barrier and following the intruder through
a series of cameras throughout the interior and exterior of the
facility.
Coverage
Adequate CCTV coverage should include the following areas:
•
360 degree exterior perimeter
•
Interior and exterior of all entry/exit points
•
Interior and exterior of all dock doors
•
The shipping yard
•
High-value cage/vault
•
Goods in storage
•
Vehicle entry/exit (capturing license plates and truck driver
faces)
•
Security room entry point
184
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

•
Information technology room or location of security systems
entry point
As with the overall level of security, the number of cameras
used, their capabilities, and the areas covered will be dependent
on the product being stored, its desirability by thieves, and the
overall potential loss to a company in the event of a catastrophic
theft.
Typically, the CCTV system serves as a deterrent to (internal)
theft and provides visual evidence of crimes committed (internal
theft and warehouse burglaries/robberies). The most common
mistakes with CCTV systems are a lack of coverage in critical
areas, poor camera positioning, and no active monitoring when
staff is available. CCTV systems have to be integrated into the
overall facility security program and therefore must be installed
properly, designed to provide the desired level of coverage and be
monitored by trained personnel.
Positioning
The positioning of cameras is also important. Cameras set
too low, too high or covering too large of an area can result in
deteriorated images or blocked images altogether. Security
managers should ensure that the camera capabilities and
coverage
requirements
are
clearly
communicated
to
the
provider/installer. Additionally, adjustments must be consid-
ered, for example, how the facility will be set up and operated
during the day, before installation. While a trailer may not be
present when the cameras are installed, if not taken into
consideration, the entire ﬁeld of view could be blocked once
a trailer is backed into place.
The ideal camera-to-door ratio for the interior dock area is one
camera for every three dock doors with the camera positioned so
that the inside of each trailer can be viewed when the doors are
open. Cameras positioned along the same wall that is being
monitored can view product being loaded or unloaded, but are
ineffective at identifying which dock door is being used during
the activity being viewed.
The common location for exterior camera installation is on the
facility, facing down the wall of the facility and/or out into the
parking area facing the facility perimeter. While this method
provides a more cost-effective means of installation and provides
good coverage of parking lots and other areas, it generally fails to
provide adequate coverage of areas closer to the facility, partic-
ularly entry/exit points and dock doors.
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 185

Storage
Just like high-value goods and other critical components
stored within a facility, the CCTV system should also be stored in
a secured environment. Too many times criminals escape
capture or detection because they were able to access the CCTV
system, destroy the DVRs, or disable the monitoring component
of the system. Internal rooms with reinforced doors and locking
systems are ideal for CCTV system storage, along with limited
access and an alarm or motion sensors inside the room for
detection of unauthorized access.
System Integration
A CCTV system is most effective when integrated as part of the
overall physical security program. As with any layered approach
to security, this system combines personnel, procedures, and
technology (equipment) in such a way to maximize the use of
each individual component. When designing a program or
examining additional security features, each element should be
assessed to determine how it will contribute to the overall goal of
preventing loss of cargo.
Other important features of a CCTV system include contin-
uous recording DVRs (vs. motion only), pan-tilt-zoom cameras
(vs. stationary cameras), and infrared capable cameras (vs. those
requiring an external light source). It is important that the
objectives of the CCTV program are understood when selecting
cameras types and their positioning to ensure each camera is
utilized to their fullest potential to maximize all systems being
used.
Management must understand that a complete CCTV system
can be composed of components from several manufacturers;
therefore, they need to ensure that all equipment is compatible.
Other electronic components can also be tied into the CCTV
system to provide overlaps in security coverage, such as alarms
and motion detection by zone, as well as access control systems
to ensure that any activity within the facility (or on the facility
grounds) is covered by CCTV cameras and recorded.
Lighting
Primarily thought of as a tool for detection, a good lighting
system can be one of the most potent crime deterrences
available. Criminals, as a rule, prefer to conduct their activities
under the cover of darkness, clearly with the goal of avoiding
186
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

detection and capture. Because of this, a site that provides an
extremely lit ground and facility creates a difﬁcult environment
for success.
According to John Tabor, director of loss prevention at
National Retail Systems, a logistics and transportation company
that services the retail industry, “If every dime of my security
budget had to be spent on one thing, I would spend it all on
lighting.”
Such statements only highlight the importance of lighting as
part of an overall physical security program, yet it remains one of
the most commonly overlooked best practices.
Outdoor lighting should be (at a minimum) adequate for
both security purposes and safe cargo operations. The spacing
between lighting stanchions should be limited to no more than
150 feet in order to ensure consistent illumination throughout
the area of coverage. Lighting around the perimeter should be
oriented to provide glare in the face of potential intruders and
avoid any glare in the face of CCTV systems covering the facility
exterior.
As with all other security functions, a backup generator or
other power supply should be available and automatically begin
providing power in the event of a power outage in the main
supply. Additionally, all power feeds to the lighting system should
be underground or otherwise protected to prevent intruders from
easily cutting the power and disabling the lighting system.
Alarms (Intrusion Detection Systems)
Alarm systems, also referred to as intrusion detection systems,
provide companies with the ability to detect the presence of
personnel within an established boundary or general area. This
can serve to detect the presence of both authorized and unau-
thorized personnel; however, it is the latter that is often the most
commonly considered when designing and implementing an
intrusion detection system.
While an alarm system may serve as a deterrent for a would-be
intruder, the primary purpose of such a system is detection and
should be used as one part of an overall security system and not
be relied upon for the total security of a facility.
Alarm systems come in a variety of designs and features
tailored to meet speciﬁc user needs. There are three primary
purposes for alarm systems:
•
Perimeter protection
•
Area protection
•
Object/spot protection
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 187

Perimeter Protection
Perimeter protection is the ﬁrst line of defense for a facility or
grounds and can be applied to the entire area in which a facility is
located, the facility perimeter itself, or a particular room or set of
rooms. The most common locations for sensors to detect intru-
sion are doors, windows, skylights, or any other opening by which
an intruder could gain entry.
Area Protection
Area protection is designed to detect the presence of a person
within an interior room or space within a facility. This method is
used to detect intruders who were able to bypass the perimeter
detection system or for “stay-behind” burglars who set off the
perimeter system, but are able to hide within the facility until the
all clear is given. This type of detection system should only be
provided in addition to a perimeter alarm system and not relied
upon solely for intrusion detection.
Object/Spot Protection
The inner-most layer of intrusion detection would be coverage
of an individual object or location. Common examples would be
things such as safes, vaults, cabinets, or desks. This ﬁnal level of
security is used when the ﬁrst two levels of intrusion detection fail
or are evaded, providing the facility or owner with one last means
of detecting the presence of an unauthorized personnel before
a theft has occurred.
It is critical to understand that these three methods of intru-
sion detection are designed to work in combination with each
other, with area protection and object/spot protection serving as
additional layers to perimeter detection, not sufﬁcient intrusion
detection in and of themselves. As with all security measures
used, the level of their effectiveness is impacted directly by the
quality of equipment used, the methodology for their employ-
ment, and the means by which other security components
overlap and complement their capabilities and limitations.
High-Value Cage
For sites that have product of particularly high value or
desirability, use of a high-value or high-security cage is recom-
mended. These cages can range from a simple chain link fence
within a section of a facility to a walled and armored vault.
188
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

Regardless of the style of cage that is created for the security of
these high-value goods, a few common security features should
always be present.
First is a method for ensuring that access is gained by autho-
rized personnel only and that it is limited to a select few
personnel within the company, not simply anyone who works on
site. This is done mostly through electronic access cards with
special entry permissions for the high-value cage gate or door. In
addition to the access control system in place, CCTV cameras
should be positioned to capture images of personnel entering/
exiting the cage from both the interior and the exterior.
Second, a truly effective cage should have a ceiling/roof and
ideally not use an exterior wall as one of its sides. If an exterior
wall is going to be used, anti-ram bars or other physical barriers
should be placed to defend against attempts to access the high
value cage by ramming the exterior wall with a vehicle or other
means. Essentially, the high-value cage should be fully con-
tained with minimal opportunities for access without delay or
detection.
This brings the author to the third point, which is to ensure
that adequate intrusion detection systems are in place on the
exterior and interior of the cage. As outlined in the alarm section
of this chapter, use of a layered alarm system approach is
necessary for the full security of a high-value cage by using
perimeter, area, and potentially object/spot security systems.
Security Ofﬁcers
The decision whether to use on-site security ofﬁcers is based
primarily on the level of security that a company thinks is
required to ensure that their product (and personnel) is kept safe.
If the decision is made to use security personnel, the follow-up
question is whether the ofﬁcers should be armed, which again
goes back to the level of security required at a facility. Of course,
to reach this decision, all the various factors relating to the
necessary level of security are considered, with additional factors
such as budget, company culture, and operational impacts being
considered.
Other considerations to having a security service on site
include other duties/roles that the service can fulﬁll. Visitor
control, driver control, cargo load veriﬁcation, seal application,
and trash collection supervision are just a few examples of roles
vital to having a secured facility and can be performed by
a contract security company rather than having in-house
managers fulﬁll these roles.
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 189

Regardless of the roles performed by contracted security
companies, the duties for each security ofﬁcer on site must be
established in writing as postorders and made available to the
management staff to ensure that each security ofﬁcer is per-
forming as required.
Trash Collection and Disposal
Theft facilitated through the trash collection and removal
process is one of the older but still commonly used methods of
employee theft. Product is hidden inside trash, collected, and
removed by an employee and placed in a dumpster or other trash
receptacle and then later recovered by the dishonest employee.
While this method involves theft at very small quantities per
instance, over time it can become a signiﬁcant problem and one
that can be avoided with relative ease.
Trash collection should be performed by designated personnel
only. All trash should also be screened for any product prior to
being removed from a facility, ideally being by a supervisor or
above or by a member of the security staff. Additionally, the
personnel removing trash should not have to leave the facility to
dispose of the trash or, at a minimum, only have to walk a few feet
away. Any path that requires personnel to walk by or near vehicles
or other areas in which they could off-load legitimate product
while delivering trash to a compactor or dumpster should be
changed.
Compactors are an ideal solution for reducing the risk of theft
through the trash removal process. Compactors loaded directly
from the facility ﬂoor and placed into operation once loaded
prevent product from being hidden within the trash, placed in
a dumpster, and later recovered.
In cases where extremely high-value product is very small,
such as computer chips and components and pharmaceuticals,
such measures are absolutely imperative in preventing rampant
employee theft through this simple and time-proven method.
Shipping and Receiving
Security of products during the shipping and receiving process
is important, as these are operations where goods are vulnerable
to theft. The high level of activity in the dock area, coupled with
loading, unloading, and staging of cargo, makes for a dynamic
environment and, depending on the size and complexity of an
operation, can be extremely difﬁcult in safeguarding goods.
190
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

While barriers, restricted areas, cameras, locks, and other
security features discussed previously in this chapter are impor-
tant factors in keeping a dock area secure, is the processes and
procedures that will have the greatest impact on the cargo
integrity through the shipping and receiving processes.
Another vital aspect of dock security is to ensure that all dock
doors are closed (ideally locked or latched) when not in use. Often
hot weather is cited for keeping some or all dock doors open while
the facility is in operation. Scissor gates or other forms of screens
can be ﬁtted easily into the dock door and allow for airﬂow while
providing an effective barrier to entry.
The use of these systems is crucial for deterring and prevent-
ing both opportunistic thieves and preplanned theft schemes
from stealing cargo in the dock area successfully.
Other aspects of security around this part of a company’s
operation, such as driver control, documentation, and use of lock
and seals on trailers, are included in the next chapter, which
covers in-transit security.
Trailer Storage/Yard Security
Whether or not trailers are kept on site for loading purposes,
it is imperative that the yard area around the docks be secured
from unauthorized access. While not always the easiest thing to
do depending on the facility being used, its proximity to the
street, if it is part of a shared facility, and multiple other factors
involved, the simple fact remains, however, that when ware-
house burglaries occur, the theft gang almost always uses
a tractoretrailer and the dock area to load cargo and remove it
from the facility. If adequate detection security measures are not
in place in this area, criminals will have that much easier of
a time stealing large volumes of cargo successfully.
Securing a yard involves the basic tenants of security,
including deterrence, delay, and detection. This area should be
encompassed by the facility’s standalone perimeter barrier or
fence, most commonly a chain linked fence. Lighting should also
be a priority in this area for both deterrence and detection
purposes.
CCTV cameras should be focused on the gate (entry/exit) as
well as the exterior of the docks and along the fence lines to
capture/detect personnel attempting to gain entry to the yard.
For empty trailers stored in this area (storing/staging loaded
trailers is never recommended), trailers should be parked in
a manner that does not inhibit the proper functionality of security
measures (and vice versa, security measures should be installed
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 191

so that parked trailers will not inhibit their functionality). Trailers
should also be parked a minimum of 6 feet from the fence line
and parked with at least 3 feet between each other to allow for
viewing/CCTV coverage between trailers.
A security guard should control entry and exit to the yard,
allowing only authorized personnel that are expected through
a prenotiﬁcation system. All drivers arriving must be required to
present ID that matches with the information provided in the
prenotiﬁcation system. Guards should also check the yard itself
periodically for potential intrusion or attempts at intrusion.
All outbound trailers must be inspected to ensure that the
driver is taking the load assigned to him and that the seal (if
present) is the correct seal and afﬁxed properly.
Maintenance and Services
Maintenance is a key component to the successful operation
of a security system. If one component fails, it needs to be
repaired or replaced quickly. An out-of-service system provides
no protection. Near continuous operation is accomplished by
the direct replacement methods through immediate mainte-
nance by an in-house service organization or (more commonly)
by having a quick response service arrangement from the
installer or a contracted maintenance company.
Preventative maintenance is critical in decreasing opportuni-
ties for system failure and minimizing system down time. General
inspection, cleaning, and maintenance should be conducted at
a minimum in the CCTV system no less than on a quarterly basis,
with a full system check and maintenance performed by the
installer or contracted service company annually.
Regardless of the method of service used, it is critical to ensure
that the right service company is selected. The company selected
needs to understand emerging technologies and their beneﬁts, be
customer oriented, and be able to inform the user on how new
equipment and products can beneﬁt their overall security program.
Key Points
•
First understand your risk and determine the level of security
necessary. Not all products need the same level of security,
as geography can have a dramatic effect on the required level.
•
Have a written plan and cover every possible aspect of security
necessary to achieve the desired level of security. The plan
should be a living document that is updated constantly.
192
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY

•
Ensure that security measures are strategically implemented,
providing overlap and redundancy so that no single point of
failure leaves a facility vulnerable.
•
Remember that there is more to securing a facility than pre-
venting theftdworkplace violence, outside threats, and other
security concerns should be recognized and accounted for in
the security plan.
•
A company’s culture has a dramatic effect on the acceptable
level of security in place and its level of intrusivenessd
changing this culture to be more security oriented cannot be
done overnight.
•
Do not forget about lighting, trash, or the dock area, as each of
these, if addressed properly, can potentially have the greatest
impact on theft reduction possible.
•
Security improvements do not always require capital. There
are numerous no- or low-cost measures that can provide
signiﬁcant enhancement simply through creation of, or
changes in, processes at zero cost to the company.
Chapter 13 PHYSICAL SECURITY 193

14
IN-TRANSIT SECURITY
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• How to create an in-transit security plan that is customizable to an ever-
changing logistics environment
• A breakdown of the topics required for a comprehensive in-transit security plan
and methods for assessing in-transit security risk
• How to apply a layered security approach to a multitier, multivendor distribution
model
• Use of technology in logistics and transportation security programs
Envision a company that manufactures and distributes cargo
considered by any measure to be high value and theft-attractive.
The company fully understands the desire by criminals to steal
its product and has a state-of-the-art security program at its
facilities.
In place are towering perimeter barriers, armed guards, surveil-
lance cameras surrounding each site, key card access monitored
by a 24/7 security staff, and motion detection throughout the
facility, including all ofﬁces and product in storage. The company
spared no expense in assembling their security program, taking
every reasonable measure to ensure that unauthorized persons
are kept out and product is kept in.
Now imagine this same company using a third-party truck or
freight broker service for transportation providers. A load is ready
for pickup, at which time the broker arranges for a trucker the
company doesn’t know, a driver arrives they have never met, his
identiﬁcation is not checked or employment veriﬁed, he does not
sign in any log book, and yet his trailer is loaded and a company
logo security seal is placed on the trailer.
Also, the driver and his dispatcher are responsible for sched-
uling the delivery appointment because that would require
another staff member for the shipper company, something they
do not want to do. So the driver makes the appointment for Friday
afternoon but leaves the facility on Tuesday for the 10-hour drive
to the destination.
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00014-5
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
195

So a driver whose ID was not retained by the shipper, who may
or may not actually work for the company he claimed to, has
a load valued in the millions of dollars, and 4 days to make
a 10-hour trip.
Additionally, the company doesn’t use any form of covert
tracking devices so the moment that tractoretrailer left their
facility, the company had no idea where its cargo was any more.
Ludicrous? It happens every single day in America’s supply
chain. Every day.
Amazingly, when this complete lack of transit security is laid
out to a company, particularly a company that is very “security
conscious,” the reasons quickly come to the front.
“We are measured on how fast we get product out the door.”
“We don’t have staff to schedule appointments.” “We don’t have
staff to place tracking devices in loads or have them monitored.”
“We’ve never had a loss before.” All ring hollow when a load is
stolen because it sat in an empty parking lot, unattended.
The need for a robust in-transit security policy, one focused on
loss prevention, has never been more necessary than today.
With available policy templates, tracking technologies, vehicle
immobilizers, locking systems, security seals, and other proven
tools at our disposal, it is critical that security and logistics
professionals are well versed in the systems they employ,
understand their uses and limitations, and ensure their programs
are robust, redundant, and limit single points of failure.
Driver Controls
On August 23, 2011, a driver for a transportation provider
arrived at a distribution center in Ontario, California. The driver
obtained the contract for the load through an Internet-based
platform where shippers can place information on loads needing
transportation and allows carriers to bid for the work. The driver
arrived, the trailer was loaded, and he departed, never to be seen
or heard from again.
The driver’s identity was false and the transportation company
was fake. It’s hard enough to deal with a stolen load despite the
best policies and procedures in place, but when a company hands
cargo over to a criminal willingly, literally loading it in his truck
for him, that is a tough pill to swallow. While this particular
incident occurred in California, this happens throughout the
United States and in 2011 at unprecedented levels.
Luckily there are simple, proven steps that can prevent this
from happening. The ﬁrst step lies in the selection process for
transportation providers and what companies can and cannot
196
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

pull high-value cargo from a shipper. This is covered in detail in
the next subsection of this chapter.
Next is making sure the person who arrives to pick up the
cargo is indeed the authorized driver from the preselected
transportation provider. This can be accomplished through the
following measures (or a combination of them):
•
Have the transportation provider send the driver’s name
before his arrival.
•
Provide the trucking company with a pickup number that the
driver must provide to be allowed on site and receive the load.
•
Check the driver’s ID and ensure that it matches with the
name provided ahead of time.
CASE STUDY: GIVING CARGO AWAY
Cargo theft is a multibillion dollar per year problem that plagues our
global supply chain. From small-scale pilferage to full-truckload theft
and warehouse burglaries, criminal enterprises are continually seeking
methods to successfully steal, transport, and sell legitimate goods on the
black and gray markets for proﬁt. While shippers are armed with
knowledge, security countermeasures, and budgets to prevent thefts
from occurring, criminals have the experience, desire, and, maybe most
importantly, the creativity necessary to successfully conduct their
crimes and leave the victims behind to pick up the pieces.
Cargo criminals can be very creative in acquiring goods illegallyd
and modi operandi (MOs) can vary signiﬁcantly from country to country
or region to region. That being said, however, there are only so many
ways for criminals to steal loads. There are partial load thefts, full trailer/
container thefts, warehouse burglaries/robberies, and so on. As such,
many MOs have been seen around the world as they are utilized
successfully by cargo criminals.
Even rarely seen MOs can be repeated in other parts of the world
with no seemingly obvious connection. For example, the method of
stealing cargo from a moving truck by off-loading it into a trailer vehicle
was seen a couple of years ago in China and then later seen being done
successfully in both Germany in 2009 and in Spain in 2010.
Possibly the most frustrating way for any company in the supply
chain to lose a load is through the MO of ﬁctitious pickup: when the
company responsible for the care of the product willingly (albeit
unknowingly) gives the cargo to the criminal, most of the time loading it
into his trailer for him, and watches as the cargo criminal drives away,
only to ﬁnd out hours or days later that the driver was not a driver, but
a crook, and their cargo will never be seen again.
Whether referred to as a ﬁctitious pickup, deceptive pickup, fraud-
ulent documentation, or other various names, the general concept is the
same. A ﬁctitious pickup occurs when a criminal presents him- or
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 197

herself as a legitimate transportation provider to the load point of origin.
Once believed to be the legitimate carrier for that shipment, the facility
loads the cargo and the load is released into the care of the criminal.
Hard to imagine this happening? It occurs all the time.
In the spring of 2011, almost a dozen incidents of ﬁctitious pickups
occurred in the United States. One scam used the same company name
and took eight loads of food products all from the same victim until the
scam was realized. As a result, dozens of warning emails and alerts were
published by various organizations and law enforcement agencies,
attempting to notify and educate the industry of this criminal tech-
nique, but it was barely slowed, with reports continuing into June
regarding additional ﬁctitious pickupsdlosses occurring with the literal
assistance of the victims.
Fictitious pickups are nothing new, particularly in Europe. This
criminal MO has been used for over a decade in various forms, often
with drivers posing as working for legitimate transportation providers,
relying on the legitimacy of their paperwork’s appearance to entice
loads to be released to them. This method of theft accounted for over
10% of recorded thefts in the ﬁrst quarter of 2011.
The primary methods used to complete a ﬁctitious pickup suc-
cessfully are:
•
Creation of a fake transportation company
•
Impersonation of a real/legitimate transportation company
•
Fraudulent pickupdhaving fake paperwork, but not an actual com-
pany set up
In the United States, a method for acquiring bids for transportation
services is to broker loads through the Internet. Shippers post loads
needing to be shipped (origin and destination) to which transportation
providers respond with competitive bids, from which the shipper selects
a transportation provider and awards the load. Unfortunately, this
method is ripe with criminal enterprises posing as transportation
providers, bidding on loads with the sole intent to steal them, and it is
only a matter of time before they are awarded loads and drive away
successfully with their target.
Of course, a company does not have to be victimized by this growing
trend. In fact, prevention can be relatively simple, but it does require
effort on the part of the shipper, and may mean that the lowest cost
bidder might not be the selected carrier.
One of the most successful ways of preventing a ﬁctitious pickup from
occurring is using only a preselected list of transportation providers for all
movements and by providing a pickup number to the selected carrier for
each and every shipment. When the driver arrives on site for the shipment,
the driver must provide the pickup number or else be turned away. This
ensuresthe company beingused islegitimate and the driverthatarrives on
site is the authorized representative of that transportation company.
For companies that choose to not limit themselves to a pre-
determined list of carriers, they need to ensure that they are performing
all necessary due diligence on companies before awarding bids. This
198
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

goes beyond Department of Transportation checks to include company
history records and referrals from other shippers. If a company was
created a month ago and has no clients that will attest to their legiti-
macy, shippers are better off moving on to another transportation
provider, even one that might be quoting a higher price.
In the end, it is incumbent upon the shipper or whomever is con-
tracting transportation services to ensure that only reputable providers
are used and that thorough screening of all companies and drivers are
performed in advance of the load’s departure time to ensure that safe,
efﬁcient, and, most importantly, secure transportation services are
utilized.
Transportation Provider Selection
Companies are rethinking the way vendors are selected. While
cost and efﬁciency remain critical features of a supplier’s
package, security is playing an increasingly signiﬁcant role in the
vendor selection process. Carriers are not chosen strictly on price
and ability to make on-time deliveries, but security protocols,
background checks on drivers, GPS tracking systems, and
other security-oriented measures are being used to determine
a carrier’s suitability to transport a company’s product.
Additionally, shippers contracting for the movement of high-
value goods are moving away from a brokering model, where any
company has the ability to bid for individual loads. Instead, they
are using a pre-established carrier base large enough to fulﬁll the
shipper’s needs, while small enough for management and quality
control. While the use of online sites bidding for loads (via elec-
tronic load boards at truck stops, for example) is a common
practice in the logistics industry, it is harder to vet trucking
companies and drivers; the facilitation the process provides further
removes the shipper from the carrier and is not an acceptable
trade-off, especially when goods of any real value are involved.
This system is essentially composed of websites in which
shippers or their logistics intermediaries, with loads that need to
be moved, are made available to transportation providers for
competitive bid. Trucking companies can access these sites, see
the details of the shipment, and then bid on the business. Ship-
pers can then ﬁlter through the received bids and select a carrier
for the shipment.
While this system is extremely effective in matching carriers
with companies that have transportation needs, it leaves for a lot
of ambiguity and uncertainty in the selection process, particularly
with regard to quality of service, overall security, and the ability to
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 199

comply with shipper in-transit policies. Compliance is certainly
a difﬁculty, as these “one off” loads do not provide carriers with
the motivation to develop a strong relationship with the shipper
as they likely have limited promise of future business.
Background Investigations
Note: this section is intended to provide recommendations
and guidance for the use of background investigations during the
pre-employment process. While a vital step in vetting personnel
who will ultimately be hired to handle, secure, and transport
cargo, background investigations and decisions made based on
information derived from them are highly regulated on a state-
by-state basis. Recommendations in this section should be used
within the scope of what is allowable by state law and your
company’s human resources policies. Please seek clariﬁcation on
any points from your human resources department.
As part of the transportation provider selection process,
background investigations of all drivers authorized to move your
cargo should be required. While the information derived from
these investigations should not be provided to the shipper, the
overall scope, depth, and means by which they are performed
should be so they can be audited by the shipper. The depth of an
investigationdhow far into a person’s history it should go and
what in a person’s history might disqualify him from being an
authorized driverdcan vary; however, the basics of a background
investigation should include the following:
•
Go back a minimum of 7 years.
•
Include records down to the county level.
•
Have a predetermined list of offenses that would make
a person unemployable.
•
Be consistent with the “whole man” concept.
The importance of thorough background investigations cannot
be overemphasized. While it is unclear how often insider infor-
mation is used by criminals to successfully break into a ware-
house or steal cargo while in transit, inserting gang members into
the work force or obtaining information from employees is a well-
known and well-documented MO that must be taken seriously
during the hiring process.
Security Awareness Training
Creating a security culture in business can often be a difﬁcult
task. While many companies have security policies and procedures,
200
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

these are often considered something for the security staff to
worry about and often are never given a second thought by other
employees. Because of this, the security manager is tasked with not
only ensuring that security is considered when business decisions
are made, but also getting employees to recognize security as an
important part of their daily activities.
One means of accomplishing this is through security aware-
ness training. Effective programs involve, at a minimum, annual
training where employees meet with the security staff for
refreshers on current policies and procedures and any new ones
to be discussed and clariﬁed.
While a shipper may require security awareness training for all
drivers working for a motor carrier moving their goods, this does
not preclude the shipper from conducting pretrip interviews and
providing each driver with an abbreviated form of a security
awareness training session prior to being released with the load.
In fact, this practice is quite common as the driver’s information
is being collected and entered into online tracking systems.
Preloaded and Staged Trailers
As discussed in Part I of this book, the absolute most common
element in cargo theft within the United States is a loaded trailer
left unattended. With the countless variations of theft MOs, this
single factor occurs in over 95% of all incidents.
A prime example is the practice of a shipper staging loaded
trailers in its yard, a location that anyone can ﬁnd, with product
inside the facility that can be determined easily; if cargo thieves
are seeking the shipper’s cargo, preloaded and staged trailers are
essentially gift wrapped for criminals to take with virtually no
effort on their part.
At no time should loads, particularly high-value goods, ever be
left unattended for any extended period of time at a facility or
distribution center. This is especially true overnight. While
distribution and transportation models vary, this cargo would
ideally be live loaded with the driver and the tractoretrailer
departing immediately upon completion, the security seal being
afﬁxed, driver interview conducted, and all documentation
veriﬁed.
That said, some companies will still choose to preload and
stage trailers. This often occurs due to a conﬂict of shipping/
loading schedules with delivery times or transportation provider
schedules. If this process is absolutely necessary for the conduct
of business, a number of security measures should be instituted
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 201

to assist in deterring and preventing loads from being stolen
while staged.
First, all staged trailers should be conﬁned to a single secured
area of the yard or lot. Ideally, the area should be fenced, at least
8 feet high with barbed wire or concertina wire at the top. The
area should also be lighted during hours of poor visibility.
Lighting should be substantial, ensuring that any potential
intruders are deterred due to an increased potential for detection.
This area should be within direct eyesight of a security ofﬁcer
who is on duty 24/7 at the facility. If this is not possible, the area
should have adequate closed circuit television (CCTV) coverage,
ensuring that every side of the secured area is captured by the
installed cameras. Without the presence of a security ofﬁcer on
site, it is strongly recommended that the CCTV system be
monitored continuously by a control center, especially when
high-value loads are involved. Some remote monitoring systems
consist of motion-activated CCTV cameras, along with an alert
message via a wireless software package.
On the trailers themselves, the use of king pin (ﬁfth wheel)
locks or other similar immobilization is strongly recommended
in order to slow any attempt to steal them. Also, each door of
the trailer (both left and right sides) should be secured with
high-security locks or seals. Placing a high-security lock on the
right side alone is not sufﬁcient for ensuring the trailer is not
easily accessible; thieves may simply open that door to identify
the nature of the cargo. If the trailer has an inspection door, that
too needs to be locked. Additionally, the use of sensor tech-
nologies, such as those that can detect motion on trailer doors,
is prudent.
Finally, each staged and loaded trailer should have a tracking
device embedded within the cargo and a geofence established
around the perimeter of the secured yard. It is recommended that
the load be monitored actively or that alerts in the event of
a geofence break be sent to an offsite monitoring service in
addition to the shipper’s point of contact in order to expedite the
escalation and recovery process in the event that a theft has
occurred.
These recommendations are designed to mitigate the chance
that a cargo criminal will attempt to steal a staged trailer and
limit the time between any theft and detection to facilitate
a quick and full recovery. By using the methodology described
in this section, the time between the theft occurring and
detection can literally be within secondsda decisive advantage
when attempting to recover stolen cargo and capture the
perpetrators.
202
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

Routing
The most ignored component of supply chain security in the
United States is routing based on risk of theft. Shippers almost
always give free reign to carriers, and sometimes they, in turn, to
their drivers to select the routes, often basing routes on what
truck stops accept the gas card used by the carrier. This can be
a recipe for disaster, especially if drivers stop in areas known for
extremely high rates of cargo theft, leaving high-value (and highly
sought after) product unattended, only to ﬁnd their tractore
trailer gone.
A common claim regarding routing is that (a) drivers know
how to do their job and (b) introducing security into the routing
process will decrease the efﬁciency of the trip and increase costs.
While it is true that drivers do know how to do their jobs, it must
be remembered that drivers are trained to get from origin to
destination; however, they are not always aware of the inherent
risk of theft to certain commodities or how to keep goods safe
from aggressive cargo thieves. It must also be remembered that
drivers transport a wide variety of loads. Today it may be empty
bottles, tomorrow computers. Without explicit instructions,
drivers may handle each load the same.
The introduction of security into the routing process can be
minimally invasive. The primary focus is in determining where
drivers should and, more importantly, should not stop while in
transit. Tools such as county level risk mapping can be used to
designate certain areas known for extremely high rates of cargo
theft as “off limits” or “no stop” zones. It is often unreasonable to
avoid traveling through these areas, as they represent some of the
major thoroughfares in the nation, but preventing loads from
stopping and being left unattended there can signiﬁcantly reduce
the chances of becoming another victim.
Trip Duration
One of the most signiﬁcant risks that in-transit high value
loads face is when the load is dropped for any period of time.
While long stops, such as for dinner or a shower, can present
a signiﬁcant risk, when the trailer is dropped in an open lot,
parking lot, or other unsecured location, the potential for that
load to be stolen increases even more. In most cases, the main
reason a driver is able to drop his load is because the time allotted
between pick-up and the scheduled delivery is much longer than
the actual time it would take for the trip to be completed. If the
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 203

destination only receives shipments by appointment, then the
driver has no reason to arrive early and will drop the load until he
can comfortably make the prearranged time slot. Couple this with
other risk factors, such as the manufacturer’s name or logo being
stamped on the security seal or plastered on the sides of the
trailer or the load being followed by cargo thieves, and the
potential for theft rises sharply.
In order to mitigate this risk, shippers should take a more
proactive role in the process, working with their customers and
carriers to establish delivery appointments that make sense. Once
a time is established, the shipper can work backward and account
for the distance to be covered, weather conditions, potential
trafﬁc and construction, and other issues that transportation
provider may be aware of. Based on this information, in
conjunction with input from the carrier, the shipper should
establish a window when the load can be picked up by the
transportation provider that provides enough time to reach the
destination, but not so much time that the driver will be able to
drop the load and leave it unattended. A 3-day window to make
a 10-hour drive is a simple way to lose high-value cargo and can
be eliminated easily through proper planning.
Security Seals
For all the attention that seals receive in the shipping
community, they essentially serve two basic purposes: it keeps
honest people honest and it notiﬁes the consignee if a truck/
ocean container or other transport conveyance has been opened
while en route. A seal is not a theft prevention tool as much as it is
a theft indicator. If a person wants to see what is inside a trailer or
container, a seal will not prevent him from opening the doors.
Even high-security bolt and cable (designed to loop around the
vertical locking bars and require two cuts to remove) seals are
a simple bolt cutter away from being removed. And certainly
a seal will not prevent a thief from driving off with the entire
trailer. That said, seals are a security tool and should not be left
out of any cargo protection plan. They provide shippers and
consignees with a high degree of certainty in product integrity
and are a vital layer of supply chain security; not to mention
a requisite for CustomseTrade Partnership Against Terrorism
certiﬁcation.
Cargo within sealed trailers and ocean containers is vulnerable
to tampering and many thieves know how to defeat seals without
touching them. Methods such as opening the left side door by
204
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

prying back the right side door, drilling out rivets in the door to
open the hasp, and other techniques have all been used with great
success by cargo thieves. This method is often used when thieves
do not want to alert the victims that the product has been stolen,
providing them with signiﬁcantly more time before any law
enforcement involvement.
New and advanced security seals, such as those available
commercially from Sealock and other seal manufacturers and
vendors, are not only more difﬁcult to defeat but provide far more
evidence of tampering. Shippers should use seals that meet the
physical speciﬁcations per ISO PAS 17712. These seals provide
security on both doors of a container, preventing the container
from being opened without the seal being destroyed. While either
can be removed and will offer little defense if someone steals an
entire trailer or container, they certainly afford a higher level of
protection
than
the
traditional
plastic
or
tin-plated
strap
seal. (For additional information on locks and seals for trailers
and ocean containers, see In-Transit Security Hardware in this
chapter.)
Stopping Procedures
One of the key components of any in-transit security plan is
detailed driver procedures for stopping en route. Ideally, loaded
trailers should never stop, but of course that is only feasible if
traveling over short distances. In today’s complex supply chain,
long haul shipments involve multiple stops en route, dropped
trailers,
transshipments,
and
other
logistical
nuances
that
increase the need for thorough in-transit security requirements
and a higher degree of supply chain/asset visibility.
Several requirements should be required of drivers when they
are stopping with cargo while in transit. The ﬁrst, and perhaps
simplest, action to be taken is for drivers to lock the tractor when
stopped and turn off the engine. This simple step could be the
difference in a theft occurring by simply slowing down the theft
gang just enough to be detected, especially if all other recom-
mendations in this section are followed. Additionally, use of an air
cuff or other comparable locking devices to help slow a theft
attempt can be vital in preventing a theft from occurring.
If dual drivers are being used, one of the drivers must be
required to stay with the vehicle at all times. While this require-
ment may seem obvious, there are numerous instances in which
both drivers went inside, often to have a meal, only to return to
ﬁnd their tractoretrailer gone, along with its cargo. One of the
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 205

common modi operandi of thieves targeting loads at truck stops
is to prey upon married couples that are driving together,
knowing they are very likely to take their meals together. This may
be one reason not to hire husband and wife driver teams (the
same rationale could be applied to fathereson and brothere
brother combinations).
For solo drivers, the time spent inside the truck stop or
facility during the stop should be kept to a minimum. The least
amount of time that the trailer is left unattended, the less
opportunity thieves will have before criminals are able to steal
the cargo. Additionally, the tractoretrailer should be parked so
that the driver can see it as much as possible while inside the
facility.
When available, the trailer should also be backed to a hard-
ened surface in order to prevent access to the doors while
stopped.
For shipments under an active monitoring or other tracking
program, use of a geofence around the truck stop can be an
excellent way of detecting a theft within seconds of occurring.
With the ease of establishing geofences through improved tech-
nologies, these can be done quickly and ensure that loads (or,
more accurately, the embedded tracking device) are detected
leaving the facility before the driver has returned and commu-
nicated to his dispatch that he is resuming his trip.
Whether under a monitoring program or not, it is also rec-
ommended that drivers contact their dispatch prior to stopping
and then contacting dispatch a second time prior to resuming the
trip. While a good practice for any shipment, this is vital for using
geofences successfully around loads while stopped.
Finally, before resuming the trip, drivers should conduct
a thorough inspection of the tractor and trailer, looking for
evidence of tampering, to include the integrity of the seal and lock
and any other compartments or access panels to the vehicle and
that all tires and other equipment appear to be in good working
order.
Overnight Stops/Drop Trailer
For loads that must be dropped over a long period of time,
particularly overnight, there are several optimal ways in which
security can be applied to ensure that the cargo remains safe until
picked up by an authorized driver. Of course, never leaving loads
unattended is the ideal way to ensure their security and is the only
method for complete assurance that loads will not be stolen by
206
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

traditional nonviolent cargo theft gangs; however, this obviously
is not always possible.
The ﬁrst step for securing loads to be left unattended for long
periods of time is selection of a secure lot or location to leave the
loaded trailer. Many factors go into this process, including the
area of the country the drop will occur in, the product being
transported, the level of desired security (or risk tolerance), and
budget. These facilities should be protected by fences, lighting
and other perimeter security features, guarded by on-site staff 24/7
and/or monitored via electronic security measures (such as
motion detection, CCTV, and alarms), and other business models
available by companies offering such services.
Next is the application of appropriate locking devices to delay
access to the doors and prevent tractors from hooking up to the
trailer. While such devices cannot prevent a theft from occurring,
they can certainly deter or delay a theft to the point that criminals
will move to another load due to fear of being detected while
attempting to bypass the security measures in place.
Finally, the use of covert cargo tracking devices can be the
most effective means of ensuring that cargo is not lost in the event
of a theft and that detection occurs immediately once a theft
occurs. In the event that the secured lot and locking systems
emplaced fail to keep a load from being stolen, by emplacing
a geofence (or electronic boundary) around the stationary load,
the user or a control center can be notiﬁed immediately when the
load begins to move and crosses the electronic boundary, which
allows for an immediate response protocol, which can enhance
the chances for recovery exponentially.
Transportation Provider Compliance
Along with selection of a transportation provider, shippers
need to work with their carriers to ensure that requirements for
cargo handling and security will be followed by the vendors’
drivers after shipments have departed. All aspects of a supply
chain security program are often outside of the shipper’s control
(and for many, outside their visibility as well), leaving the prod-
uct’s security solely at the discretion of the driver. Shipper
requirements, ideally written as a standards of care document,
would ideally be included in contractual agreements with the
transportation provider and include, at a minimum, the security
requirements discussed in this chapter.
Compliance can be spot checked both on a scheduled and
a random basis. Assessments or audits can be performed through
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 207

a variety of methods, including interviews, on-site inspections,
following actual loads, or checking GPS tracking systems in real
time or through historical reports. Often shippers will use
a combination of the aforementioned methods and other creative
means to ensure that their cargo remains secure throughout the
due course of transit, including incidental times at rest.
Supply Chain Security Company Selection
Even with the most qualiﬁed supply chain security staff, the
time, effort, and expense demands of a robust supply chain
security program make performing all of the duties in-house
difﬁcult at best. Because of this, most companies outsource some
or its entire supply chain security program to a third party. When
considering a supply chain security vendor, a company should
evaluate the vendor’s program with regards to operational
impact, sophistication of technology, and, of course, price.
While the service offerings, at least in writing, may all seem the
same, the manner in which the discrete functions are performed
will make the difference. Look for experience in the trans-
portation space along with references, most importantly previous
and existing clients.
For more information on supply chain security companies, see
the Resource section of this book.
Physical Escorts
A common method for over the road cargo security is the use
of physical (human) escorts to follow loads and ensure they arrive
at the destination safely and on time. The typical way in which
this is performed in the United States is for an escort company to
provide one or two employees who will follow a tractoretrailer via
a rental or company car. They begin at the point of origin and stay
with the load until received by the consignee.
Prior to departure, the escorts should discuss with the driver
planned stops, actions while stopped (i.e., one escort stays with
the load at all times), actions upon breakdown or other emer-
gencies, and other administrative details that need to be worked
out before transit begins. The escorts follow the load to the
destination and remain on site until received by the consignee.
This process can vary from shipment to shipment, ending when
the security seal is broken, after the product is unloaded, or upon
cargo count and condition veriﬁcation. Whatever the method
used, it should be understood by all parties what constitutes the
208
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

end of a shipment and when the escorts will no longer be
responsible for the security of the product.
It is also important that everyone understands the role the
escort plays in the event that a theft, or theft attempt, occurs. As
discussed previously in this book, the majority of cargo theft
incidents in the United States are nonconfrontational and
nonviolent, which translates into gangs not attempting to steal
loads that are attended. That is not to say, however, that escorted
loads are never targeted by theft gangs and that an aggressive
gang will not make an attempt to steal the load. The role of the
escort and expectations must be established in writing. Generally,
escorts are there to ensure that the criminal is aware that the load
is being watched and then observe any move on the load so they
can report to their client and law enforcement.
Studies have shown that the use of physical escorts is the most
effective way to decrease the risk of theft, with losses occurring in
less than 1% of escorted shipments. This degree of security comes
with a high price tag and an array of other drawbacks that can
make this method of loss reduction less attractive. For example,
cost is often a large issue. A person in a car following a load is not
scalable. Because an escort cannot follow two loads heading in
opposite directions, the expense cannot be spread across
multiple projects or shipments. Another is the liability of the
escort company. Putting millions of miles on the road every year
increases opportunities for mechanical breakdowns, ﬂat tires,
accidents, and other events that can impact not only the escort’s
performance and ability to meet contractual obligations, but also
the potential direct liability of the escort company if the driver is
involved in an accident with another vehicle.
Even with the 99% success rate, other methods of in-transit
security have shown to have nearly the same level of success with
substantially reduced costs and without the wide array of disad-
vantages. The concept of active monitoring, discussed in Chapter
15, is an emerging risk mitigation technique and game changer,
shown to be 97.5% effective and attainable at a fraction of the
costs of physical escorts. It is also scalable, with monitoring
centers capable of tracking hundreds of shipments at a time.
Electronic Escorts and Monitoring
GPS tracking, often referred to as an electronic escort, is
another emerging method for tracking cargo shipments. There
are two primary forms of tracking that provide entirely different
levels of security and transparency and need to be differentiated.
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 209

The ﬁrst is onboard GPS tracking that is provided by the
transportation company. This refers to installed GPS tracking
systems on the tractoretrailer. Attached most commonly to the
cab of the truck, these external tracking devices are the most
common in the transportation industry and provide trucking
companies with a method for knowing a truck’s location, relaying
messages to the driver, and ﬂeet management needs.
The second is covert or embedded GPS tracking devices. These
devices are designed to be placed inside the cargo itself and
provide the shipper (or whomever is managing the tracking
system) with the ability to see where the cargo is at any given
time, even if separated from the tractoretrailer. While many of
these devices do not use actual global positioning systems tech-
nology but are a combination of GPS and cellular with the GPS
secondary for them to work, they need an “eye to the sky” and
that by design should not be feasible inside a trailer, they still are
loosely referred to using the term.
When analyzing each of these types of tracking systems, their
utility and drawbacks will show how each design serves different
purposes. Onboard GPS systems are ubiquitous; it seems as if
every truck is equipped with a device. These devices are marketed
as providing shipment visibility, providing peace of mind to the
cargo owner. The downside to these GPS devices is that cargo
thieves, particularly the more professional gangs out of Florida,
New York/New Jersey, and Los Angeles, know what to look for
and will quickly disable onboard GPS systems installed through
standard means. Consequently, such GPS tracking systems do not
fare well once a truck has been stolen, providing little or no
assistance in actually ﬁnding the cargo. Couple this with the
modus operandi of swapping out a tractor and replacing it with
one brought by the criminals, which further cripples recovery
efforts.
For shippers just interested in tracking cargo and not con-
cerned with monitoring the transportations provider’s equip-
ment, embedded tracking devices are a better ﬁt. These small
devices are relatively inexpensive, are compatible with a variety of
technologies, and, most importantly, are covert so while someone
can retain visibility of the cargo, thieves will not (or should not)
know they are inside the load. A list of devices and technologies
available in the market are included in the Resources section of
this book.
While having a tracking device embedded in the cargo and the
ability to see where the shipment is at any given time are great
tools for supply chain visibility and control, they provide little
theft mitigation (actually stopping thefts from occurring) and can
210
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

be slow to provide recovery assistance in the event that a theft
occurs. The next chapter discusses the concept of active moni-
toring and how it can be used to help prevent thefts from
occurring and provides recovery of stolen loads in near real time.
In-Transit Security Hardware
Before discussing the variety of physical and electronic secu-
rity hardware available, it must be understood that this is
a rapidly evolving ﬁeld, with new entrants and equipment,
updated and improved infrastructure, and developing techniques
to thwart theft. The information contained within this section
should be considered more as a snapshot in time and merely
a sampling of what is available, how it can be used, and how to
maximize its use in order to develop the most comprehensive in-
transit security program possible.
Tracking Systems/Devices
There are generally three different types of tracking systems
available for shippers and those wishing to know where their
cargo (or anything for that matter) is. For the sake of simplicity,
these will be referred to as overt, covert, and embedded models.
Overt tracking refers to tracking systems mounted to the
exterior of a truck, trailer, or ocean container (rarely done). The
device can see the sky, and be seen by everybody, as it is afﬁxed to
the vehicle or trailer/container shell. These come in a tremendous
variety of forms, including the well-known Qualcomm dome,
Skybitz, and trackable locking devices for security trailer or
container doors.
Qualcomm is one of the most recognized names in tracking
systems in the supply chain. Since 1988, the Qualcomm Enterprise
Services division has been providing integrated trucking and
logistics wireless systems and services to trucking companies
around the world. Backed by a global, 24/7, and world-class
technology infrastructure, Qualcomm Enterprise Services provides
service to more than 2500 clients today. Qualcomm’s ﬁrst wireless
products and services included the OmniTRACS satellite locating
and messaging service, used by long-haul trucking companies,
developed from a product called Omninet. The OmniTRACS
mobile information system was introduced in 1988 and proved to
be an innovative force in enterprise mobility.
Covert and embedded tracking refers to use of a tracking
device placed within the shipment, most often within the trailer
or container, and, depending on the depth to which the device
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 211

can be placed and still maintain a strong signal, determines if the
device is covert (simply placed within the trailer/container, but
not placed inside the cargo itself) or embedded (the device can be
placed as deep within the cargo as desired, making it more
difﬁcult for thieves to ﬁnd if the load is stolen).
The two most common technologies used in cargo security are
CDMA and GSM/GPRS. Both are cellular-based technologies,
with CDMA functional exclusively in the United States and
Canada, while GSM/GPRS devices will generally work anywhere
in the world there is a cellular signal, provided the correct SIM
card is in place. Despite the global reach of GSM/GPRS tech-
nologies, there are advantages to using CDMA-driven devices for
domestic loads or import/export with Canada, which are dis-
cussed further in this section.
There are strengths and weaknesses to overt tracking (satellite-
based tracking) vs. cellular-based tracking (covert and embedded
tracking). For overt (satellite) tracking, shipments can be tracked
nearly anywhere in the world, to include crossing oceans. This
ability to roam seamlessly can be very beneﬁcial in knowing
where cargo is at all times without having to worry about various
cellular networks and the services they provide. Weaknesses to
using such systems, however, include potentially weak signals
that require line of sight (can be blocked as the shipment goes
under structures, etc.), they can be quite costly, and possibly the
largest weaknessdthey can be seen by anyone, particularly cargo
criminals. Theft gangs well versed in overt tracking systems can
recognize them and defeat them easily.
For strengths and weaknesses of cellular-based technologies,
let’s look at CDMA and GSM/GPRS separately. As discussed
previously, CDMA technology-based tracking devices only work
in the United States and Canada. Despite that limitation, CDMA
tracking devices are the most popular for cargo tracking in the
United States. CDMA tracking devices support cellular location-
based services, which provide a strong signal strength, allowing
devices to be placed deep within the cargo (embedded) and
receive strong reliable position locations.
GSM/GPRS devices are deployable with near global roaming,
providing shippers with a far wider spectrum for tracking capa-
bilities. The weakness, however, in contrast to the CDMA, is that
GSM/GPRS devices support few cellular location-based services,
which does not allow these devices to be placed deep within the
cargo, therefore making them covert but not exactly embedded.
Manufacturers of covert and embedded devices include
companies such as the aforementioned Qualcomm, Enfora, and
Sendum.
212
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

Locks
A very wide variety of locks are used in the supply chain
industry, ranging from off-the-shelf padlocks to high-end GPS
trackable locks such as the SLM discussed previously. What
follow are some additional locking systems and hardware used
commonly by shippers of high-value cargo to keep their goods
secured while in transit.
Sealock: Sealock hybrid devices combine the tamper evidence
functionality of security seals with the theft deterrence and
delay of locks. Such devices are referred to as hybrid devices
that perform multiple functions simultaneously. Sealock
designs provide a robust tamper-evident physical deterrent,
as well as tamper-evident sealing device. They are all designed
to address the vulnerabilities and ﬂaws inherent in the design
and manufacturing of ocean containers and over the road
trailers (Figure 14.1). For more information, see http://
www.sealock.com.
ENFORCER adjustable lock: Made of 10-gauge, chrome-plated
spring steel, it is placed around the vertical locking bars of
trailers or ocean container doors, thereby securing both.
A cast steel block protects the ABLOY padlock from physical
attack. This lock secures both trailer doors rather than just
Figure 14.1 Sealock.
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 213

one. The ABLOY cylinder allows for a number of keying
combinations and allows for maximum key control as keys
can only be cut by the manufacturer, Transport Security,
Inc. (Figure 14.2).
ENFORCER landing gear lock: Easily installed heavy-gauge
high carbon steel lock box covers and locks the landing gear
handle on the trailer. Once locked in position, the handle
cannot raise or lower the landing gear of the trailer. The unit
comes with a high-security ABLOY 341/25 padlock (chrome-
plated, rotating disc, case-hardened steel, pick-proof design).
Many trucking companies also utilize these as a preventative
measure and lock in the up position when connecting to the
tractor power unit; they prevent the driver from unhooking
from the trailer and dropping a trailer (Figure 14.3).
King pin lock: The king pin lock prevents coupling with any
ﬁfth wheel. Perhaps the most commonly used security device
on the market, this kind of lock has a unique conical cast
aluminum alloy design. The internal capture slide uses an
ABLOY high-security locking cylinder with internal tumblers
like a safe. Only 1 of 360 million keyed combinations will
open it. This king pin lock is utilized typically at distribution
centers and terminals where other security features are in
place as an added security layer (Figure 14.4).
Seal Guard Lock: Portable, easy-to-install steel cover for cargo
seals on trailers and containers. The sleeve and pin slide
through the lever hasp to protect the back and sides. Adding
the cover and lock ensures that only the driver controls access
to the seal for the entire cargo delivery run. Choose from
Figure 14.2 ENFORCER adjustable lock.
214
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

Figure 14.3 ENFORCER landing gear lock.
Figure 14.4 King pin lock.
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 215

a unique hex keyed bolt (5800) or traditional keyed cylinder
(5850) locking system. Many trucking customers have been
having issues with seal tampering and unauthorized removal,
causing refusal of loads, etc. The Seal Guard lock secures the
trailer door as well as prevents unauthorized access to the
trailer seal (Figure 14.5).
ENFORCER air cuff lock: Constructed of thermoformed, high-
impact
resistant
polycarbonate
material,
the
air
cuff
completely covers and locks the dash-mounted air valve levers
to prevent the truck and trailer brakes from being released.
The unit is portable and easy to install with no drilling or
permanent installation parts required. The lock takes only
a few seconds to place and secure. The air cuff lock is cited
as a successful deterrence device used throughout transit
and is believed to have prevented a large number of truck
thefts over the years (Figure 14.6).
Casings and accessories: Rugged, lightweight vinyl case holds
the locks and seals necessary for complete over the road
Figure 14.5 Seal Guard lock.
216
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

tractor and trailer security. Drivers appreciate these tools for
conﬁdence and peace of mind when dealing with the respon-
sibilities of cargo delivery. Owner operators treat these as tools
of the trade, and companies implementing a security kit
program have reduced the number of truck and trailer thefts
within their operations.
Information on locking systems and images was provided by
Transport Security. For additional information, see the Resource
section of this book or www.transportsecurity.com.
Security Hardware Uses and Limitations
While security hardware is a critical component for en-
suring that cargo remains secure while in transit, it is criti-
cal that users understand their uses, effectiveness, and also
limitations.
Understanding what security systems a company wants to use
and the uses for each piece of hardware is critical for a well-
thought-out and overlapping supply chain security program. Just
as important, however, is understanding each security feature’s
limitations and realizing what they are and are not designed
to do.
Figure 14.6 ENFORCER air cuff lock.
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 217

Too often people rely on equipment to perform functions they
simply were not designed to do or were incapable of doing.
A classic example is the use of security seals for over the road
shipments. Simply put, seals were designed to provide shippers
and transportation providers with the ability to identify if a trailer
or container had been opened. All too often though, seals are
thought to provide shipments with a theft prevention measure,
while in reality they provide nothing of the sort. With a large
majority of cargo theft in the United States categorized as full
truckload or full container thefts, seals afﬁxed to a stolen trailer or
container would literally serve no purpose.
The same is true for locks; however, locks do provide at least
a slightly higher level of theft deterrence and delay at least to the
casual criminal. The presence of a high-security lock in the case
of casual criminals may provide just enough of a reason for them
to move on to the next trailerdone without security devices
applieddpreventing the targeted load from being victimized.
The professional cargo theft gang, however, will not be fazed by
the use of a lockdeven a high-security one. In most cases, they
do not even open the trailer doors until the entire load is well
down the road where they can operate without fear of being
detected.
This is not to say that seals and locks should not be used. Quite
the opposite, these best practices are absolutely vital to a robust
supply chain security program in ensuring that cargo arrives at its
destination intact and unmolested. The point, however, is to
ensure that utilization of the devices is done so with full knowl-
edge of their limitations so that adequate policies, procedures,
and other systems can be layered to prevent thefts from occur-
ring, detect thefts that do occur, and/or recover stolen cargo
quickly if a theft transpires.
Key Points
•
In-transit security plans are often overlooked in logistics
operations.
•
Transportation provider selection and their compliance with
security policies are paramount to successfully keeping cargo
secure.
•
For theft prevention, a layered approach (people, policies, and
technology) must be used to prevent a single point of failure
from leaving high-value cargo susceptible to theft.
•
Covert tracking technologies are becoming incredibly com-
monplace in high-value cargo shipments and are considered
218
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY

by many to be the most cost-effective means of providing
security.
•
A variety of security hardware is available that should not be
relied on solely but rather as part of an overall in-transit secu-
rity plan.
Chapter 14 IN-TRANSIT SECURITY 219

15
ACTIVE MONITORING
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• How an active monitoring program works and why it may be right for a
company’s supply chain
• How to get the most from an active monitoring program
• Methods for customizing programs to meet a company’s supply chain needs
• Impact of an active monitoring program on overall supply chain security
“Out of intense complexities intense simplicities emerge.”
Winston Churchill
A few minutes before 10 a.m. on Thursday, September 29,
2011, a pharmaceutical delivery driver emerged from a phar-
macy in Detroit, Michigan, after making a delivery to ﬁnd two
men who had broken into his van and were rummaging through
the variety of pharmaceuticals contained within. When the
driver confronted the men, they ran off, climbing into a white
panel van and driving away, taking with them several totes ﬁlled
with pharmaceuticals.
Fortunately for the driver and his company, and less fortu-
nately for the thieves, one of the totes stolen had an embedded
tracking device, and the FreightWatch command and control
center was alerted to the theft.
The control center contacted the Detroit Police Department
and, at 10:30 a.m., the police arrived at a residence where the
tracking device was sending locates from. At the residence, police
found the van and one of the suspects inside the van, who was
subsequently arrested.
Upon entering the residence, the police found the totes, the
pharmaceuticals, and the tracking devicedall of which were
returned to the pharmaceutical delivery company. The second
suspected was found hiding inside the residence, who was also
arrested. All of this occurred in less than 45 minutes.
Supply chain security complexities can sometimes seem
overwhelming to those tasked with securing goods in transit,
ensuring vendor compliance, and attempting to gain transparency
throughout the process. To accomplish all these while keeping
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00015-7
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
221

costs and manpower requirements within a reasonable budget is
no easy chore. Often, the result is to focus on areas where and when
cargo is most at risk and the mitigation technique used will result in
the greatest reduction of loss.
One solution is the concept of active monitoring. While used
primarily for high-value loads that are in transit via over the road
transportation, this concept is simple and effective enough to be
used throughout the supply chain.
Active monitoring is the use of covert electronic tracking
devices placed within the cargo and monitored remotely by an
internal, or contracted, control center. This process provides
a method of checking the location of loads at predetermined
intervals (e.g., every 15 minutes, 30 minutes, hour) and also
monitors the compliance of in-transit security requirements,
such as stopping only in authorized areas, on-time delivery, and
loads remaining on the preapproved route.
Implementation of an active monitoring program can be met
with negativity or pushback, particularly if being emplaced with
the existing ﬂeet of transportation providers. The use of turn-by-
turn
directions,
additional
requirements
around
stopping,
reporting and other administrative tasks, and receiving resis-
tance from transportation companies and their drivers, at least
in the beginning, are quite common; however, over time the
result
is
actually
an
extremely
beneﬁcial
and
mutually
supportive relationship between carriers and the monitoring
center. During the research conducted for this book, multiple
examples were found of drivers calling the control center out of
habit, even for loads that were not being actively monitored, as
well as drivers calling in suspicious activity and stating they
feel more secure on the road when being actively monitored
while hauling loads of extreme value and desirability by cargo
thieves.
The absolutely most critical feature that active monitoring
provides is the positive impact on driver behavior while
transporting high-value cargo. The last line of security for an
in-transit security plan is the driver and compliance with
established protocols while on the road. While examining in
excess of 190,000 actively monitored loads, in almost every
example, as programs were implemented, the rate of protocol
infractions by drivers was high while the volume of ship-
ments tracked remained low. However, after a few weeks or
a month, the infraction rate decreased dramatically, leading
to transportation providers receiving an increased number
of contracted loads of high-value goods because of their
compliance.
222
Chapter 15 ACTIVE MONITORING

Origin and Destination
The ﬁrst step in establishing an active monitoring program is
determining the routes to be transited, starting with the origin
and destination. As origins and destinations are entered into the
online tracking system, geofences are placed around each loca-
tion to prevent unauthorized departures from points of origin and
notiﬁcation, beyond the required phone call from drivers, when
loads arrive at the destination.
Shipments being tracked by an active monitoring program are
identiﬁed as such by the shipper, and an array of administrative
data must be entered into the online tracking software, which is
discussed in additional detail later in this chapter. Once data are
entered and the load is ready for departure, the driver must
contact the control center with notiﬁcation of his departure,
which begins the active monitoring activity.
This notiﬁcation is absolutely critical for a variety of reasons.
First, without notiﬁcation, the control probably thinks that the
load has been stolen (due to the geofence around the facility
being broken when the load departs), resulting in activation of the
theft recovery protocol. Second, loads have to be monitored on
a preset schedule (i.e., every 15 minutes, 30 minutes, or other pre-
established timeline), and without notiﬁcation that a shipment
has begun, the active monitoring program cannot commence.
Notiﬁcation of a load’s arrival at the destination is likewise
important and for more than simply knowing when to dis-
continue the monitoring process. One of the critical risks for
cargo occurs when a driver arrives at the destination and is
unable to deliver the load and decides to depart the facility and
wait for a delivery time. This often coincides with stops for
breakfast or dinner, as drivers relax from a long journey,
frequently leaving loads unattended, not realizing the opportu-
nity this lapse gives criminals.
Routing
Along with the origin and destination of each lane, the carrier
must provide the active monitoring company with turn-by-turn
directions for each lane, sometimes including three or four vari-
ations for the same lane, accounting for the types of trucks used,
road restrictions, weather, and other contingencies. Directions
are the basis for the georoutes to be placed in the tracking soft-
ware. A break in a georoute begins a protocol for infractions,
generally starting with a call to the driver or his dispatch and
escalating as needed.
Chapter 15 ACTIVE MONITORING 223

Additional items to consider when creating turn-by-turn
directions is trip duration, number of stops likely during the
shipment, and high-risk zones transited. During this process,
getting assistance from a company or persons knowledgeable
about high-risk zones can signiﬁcantly alleviate the risk of theft
by ensuring that these areas are designated as “no stop” zones
and/or bypassed altogether; use of a different route can alleviate
a signiﬁcant threat. The monitoring company can then ensure
compliance with the created protocol, for example, ensuring
loads do not stop where they are prohibited.
Administrative Processes
The entry of administrative data into the tracking system is
paramount but often one of the ﬁrst points of failure. Trans-
portation provider details, driver name and contact information,
driver’s license information, and tractoretrailer license plates
number and other markings, as well as trailer license plate and
trailer number/markings, are all critical pieces of information
necessary to ensure that monitoring is performed correctly and
that, in the case of a theft, recovery is made efﬁciently.
In addition to the information obtained and loaded into the
tracking system prior to loads being released, a few administra-
tive tasks must be completed as well. The most common of these
includes the use of a driver interview, typically in writing with
a checklist that covers the “rules of the road” for the driver.
Additionally, drivers are provided with an active monitoring card
that highlights key points to remember during the route,
including the control center’s phone number and other critical
information pertaining to the shipper and route.
It is the process that surrounds the gathering, entering, and
relaying of this information to all parties involved that ensures
every scenarios can be covered in an efﬁcient manner and truly
begins to enact behavioral change.
Geofences and Georoutes
The use of electronic barriers, essentially establishing routes
for shipments to move within and provide immediate notiﬁcation
of a deviation or breach, is critical to the success of a monitoring
program. Geofences are established around facilities, drop lots,
truck stops, or any other place that a monitored truck is at rest
and requires a phone notiﬁcation before movement can begin
without triggering a recovery protocol. Depending on the tracking
224
Chapter 15 ACTIVE MONITORING

software used, geofences can be placed on the exact barriers of
a facility or yard, providing an extremely precise and timely
notiﬁcation that a load is in motion (regardless of whether it’s
authorized or unauthorized).
Georoutes are similar to a geofence, but are placed along the
route a load is to transit, generally with a 1-mile space on each
side of the route, allowing the driver some ﬂexibility off his route
for stopping, trafﬁc, etc.
Beyond Location Tracking
The concept and execution of an active monitoring program
are relatively simple, effectively composed of collecting all
necessary data for the shipment, pre-establishing geofences and
georoutes, and having a protocol in place for infractions and
a theft in progress. By having an active monitoring program,
however, the shipper is able to obtain a variety of additional
beneﬁts beyond the simple tracking of loads from origin to
destination.
Shippers are able to emplace and monitor the compliance of
transportation providers for detailed in-transit security require-
ments, such as authorized and unauthorized stopping zones,
duration of stops, and actions to be taken at the destination if
immediate unloading is not possible.
Through the use of an active monitoring program, the shipper
or product owner has the ability to know his product is not only
being tracked 24/7 as it moves across the country, but also can
log-in and see any load’s location at any time from his computer.
Additionally, through the use of marrying technologies, such as
an array of sensor technologies in addition to the covert tracking
device, shippers can know the temperature of loads at any time
while in transit, whether an unacceptable level of shock or drop
has occurred, or even if the level of lighting is increased
substantially (i.e., if someone opened the trailer doors).
Immediate Notiﬁcation of Route
Deviation or Theft
As with virtually any other crime that involves the unlawful
acquisition of property, the faster the theft is reported to police,
the higher the likelihood of successful recovery. Even with
a tracking device being embedded in the cargo, if given enough
time, criminals will eventually discover the device and discard it.
With an active monitoring program, realization that a theft has
Chapter 15 ACTIVE MONITORING 225

occurred can often happen even before the driver knows his load
has been stolen, and the recovery process can begin immediately.
For this to occur, the shipper’s protocols must be established
in writing and known to all players in load movement and
monitoring. This will be the basis for the monitoring center to
know when the shipment is on track, or if its movement is outside
of what would be considered normal, and entice a response by
the control center and the recovery process to be activated.
The most common ways a control center can be made aware
that a load has potentially been stolen include
•
Loads moving off course
•
Loads reversing direction
•
Loads departing from a stop too early
In the case of a load reversing direction or having been stolen
while the driver has stopped but the thieves keeping the load on
the same highway that the georoute is set for, there will be no
electronic notiﬁcation of the load being off course. Because of
this, the active monitoring feature of the program (i.e., a control
center representative checking the load’s status every 15 to 30
minutes and being aware of estimated stopping times and other
intricacies of the movement) is vital to recognizing a theft in
progress, even without phone notiﬁcation from the driver.
Recovery Process
The recovery process must be documented in writing and
practiced frequently by the monitoring company along with the
shipper and transportation provider. Because several things have
to happen to recover a stolen shipment successfully, each party
must understand what is required of them. Key factors for
ensuring the quick recovery of a load include
•
Quick reporting of the theft by the truck driver
•
Contacting the law enforcement agency having jurisdiction
where the load is located (identiﬁed by the embedded cargo
tracking device)
•
Ensuring that all descriptive information is readily available for
law enforcement (license plate numbers, truck and trailer
numbers/markings, load contents and descriptions, etc.)
•
Contacting the cargo theft task force (if one exists in the area
that the load is located) to assist in coordination with multiple
law enforcement agencies as required
If these steps are known, understood, and executed promptly
by the parties involved, the likelihood of a prompt and full
recovery increases substantially. While the process seems simple,
it may only be needed once over the course of a year; therefore,
226
Chapter 15 ACTIVE MONITORING

making a process that is unnatural and unfamiliar to the parties
can only seem natural and familiar with practice.
Impact on Driver Behavior
The greatest beneﬁt of an active monitoring program is the
positive impact on driver behavior with regards to ensuring that
shippers’ in-transit policies are complied with and the cargo
remains secure.
Data from transportation providers that begin active moni-
toring programs show a dramatic decrease in the number of route
deviations and policy violations in a very short period of time. As
routes, policies, and security requirements become more routine
for drivers, companies also see increased efﬁciency on the road,
better delivery times, and a clearer sense of what is happening
with high-value cargo while in transit.
While such a program is often seen as intrusive or a burden to
drivers while they are on the road, the long-term results are quite
the opposite, with drivers often making statements such as
feeling more secure while on the road with high-value cargo. With
a cooperative program that provides assistance to drivers and
ensures that loads remain secured from origin to destination, an
active monitoring program is by far the most cost-effective means
of reaching the highest level of security for in-transit goods.
Key Points
•
Active monitoring is a key method for shippers to keep track of
their cargo and be able to react in real time to supply chain
disruptions and recover cargo in the event of a theft.
•
In order to achieve proper coverage through an active moni-
toring program, several points have to be recorded and kept
on ﬁle in order to identify the associated load with the tracking
device providing locates.
•
Electronic borders around lanes and speciﬁc locations can
provide instance notiﬁcation that a load is off course or
moving when supposed to be stationary.
•
Active monitoring can provide information on a variety of
metrics beyond simple location that can improve supply chain
efﬁciency, vendor compliance, temperature maintenance and
control, and more.
•
The primary beneﬁt of active monitoring is the impact on
driver behavior, which can ensure compliance and provide
immediate response in the event of a theft.
Chapter 15 ACTIVE MONITORING 227

16
AIR CARGO SECURITY
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• How shipping cargo affects overall security for in-transit cargo
• Nuances to air cargo that increase risk and decrease visibility
• Impact of government attention to air cargo on loss prevention and overall
supply chain security
• Methods for ensuring proper supply chain security compliance in air cargo
The nation’s economy relies on fast and on-time cargo
delivery. Air plays a critical component, facilitating deliveries of
high demand (and often high value) cargo across the country in
timelines measured in hours as opposed to days or weeks. In
2008, U.S. air carriers carried about 4.4 million tons of interna-
tional air cargo, accounting for 18% of the 25 million tons
transported globally in international service. U.S. air carriers’
international cargo trafﬁc generated 33 billion revenue ton-
kilometers, accounting for 25% of about 131 billion revenue ton-
kilometers of global international air cargo trafﬁc. Since 2005, the
U.S. share of world air cargo tonnage and ton-kilometers has
declined as the annual growth rates of Asia’s air cargo markets
increased (Figure 16.1).
The critical nature of a fast and efﬁcient supply chain is only
enhanced through just-in-time manufacturing, lean processes
that call for little or no excess product in storage, and shipment
departure times that leave little room for delay to make on-time
deliveries.
When comparing air shipments versus other modes of trans-
portation, air clearly provides the smallest amount of cargo
transported when analyzed by weight. In 2008, the air cargo
industry moved 11.8 million metric tons of cargo according to the
North American Transportation Statistics database, compared to
1754 million metric tons via rail. When analyzing cargo moved via
air in terms of value, however, the critical nature of the air
component becomes clear. While moving just 0.08% of total
freight tonnage in the United States, the air cargo sector moves
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00016-9
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
229

28% of total cargo by value, according to the U.S. Department of
Transportation.
Since 1980, the growth in freight mileage for air cargo,
measured in terms of ton-miles transported on an annual basis,
has far outpaced growth in any other transportation mode. While
domestic growth in the volume of air cargo shipments has been
relatively, and somewhat unexpectedly, ﬂat over the past few
years, it is estimated that domestic air cargo shipments,
expressed in terms of revenue ton miles, will continue their
historic growth trends and increase another 58% by FY2020
compared to FY2006 levels, according to the Congressional
Research Service.
When analyzing air cargo shipments, virtually all loads are
labeled as either import or export, with domestic ﬂights occurring
in betweendeither from the import hub to a domestic location or
from a domestic location to an export hub. This system requires
a complex array of cargo-handling companies, freight forwarders,
airlines,
government
oversight,
and
customers
themselves,
ensuring that cargo is packaged, labeled, conﬁgured, loaded, and
shipped without incident or errorda daunting challenge when
considering the billions of pieces of freight moved every year
this way.
Figure 16.1 Source: Bureau of Transportation statistics.
230
Chapter 16 AIR CARGO SECURITY

When analyzing various roles, two key ﬁgures in this process
are the freight forwarders and customers. Both of these take on
direct responsibility for cargo collection and preparation prior to
being its delivery to the airport for shipment. The freight
forwarders and/or customer will collect the cargo and build them
on palletsdreferred to as ULDsdor send the cargo loose to
the airline. The airline accepts, veriﬁes, and builds the ULD if
necessary or loads the previously built ULD onto the aircraft.
Very few airlines actually have their own cargo-handling units,
but rather subcontract the work to companies such as Menzies
Aviation and Swissport International. This operation transfers the
responsibility of the cargo from the customer or freight forwarder
to the airline and is a key point in which potential losses can occur.
Additional risks exist within this system that might not be
readily apparent to shippers using air cargo for their method of
shipping. For domestic shipments, portions of the shipments may
actually be shipped via ground even though it was tagged for air.
For example, a cargo load from Shanghai through LAX destined for
Las Vegas, after being off-loaded at LAX and cleared by Customs,
may be loaded onto a truck within the airline’s business (owned or
contracted by the airline) and shipped to Las Vegas via ground.
Not hidden by the airlines (if a customer asks what mode was used
for the last leg of the shipment, the airline will provide the infor-
mationdbut no one ever asks), and the cargo arrives at the
destination on time; it was moved, however, by a much riskier
mode of transportation, especially when dealing with high-value
products, which is the typical cargo label for those shipped via air.
Cargo Theft and the Air Industry
Cargo theft and the air industry constitutes probably the most
complex area of loss prevention and the supply chain with simply
being able to identify losses that are associated with air cargo
versus standard ground, over the road, or facility thefts. For
obvious reasons, losses virtually never occur once cargo is being
loaded onto the aircraft, is in ﬂight, or is being off-loaded. When
losses generally do occur it is while in cargo-handling facilities,
storage at the airport, or in transit to or from the airport or the
aforementioned facilities.
Because of this, the majority of theft associated with the
air cargo industry is pilferage. Small-scale theft occurring on
a frequent basis, leaving shipments “short” as opposed to being
stolen in their entirety, is a constant problem that companies must
deal with when shipping via air, but does not result in crippling
losses that can occur when fully loaded trailers or containers are
Chapter 16 AIR CARGO SECURITY 231

stolen. The cargo is really at risk once the loads are placed into
trucks and leave via ground according to Bob Ghan, security
director for the Western States and Southern U.S. Border with
DHL. Many thefts of cargo designated for shipment via air, which
end up stolen, were done so when outside the purview of the air
cargo industry (i.e., after it was loaded and shipped via ground)
and are associated with ground in-transit thefts.
When analyzing cargo theft trends in the air cargo industry
and looking for hot spots of theft activity, theft rates remain
relatively consistent from airport to airport. Of course the total
volume of losses is higher at an airport with more robust cargo
programs simply due to the volume of theft, with losses occurring
almost exclusively as pilferage, it is often difﬁcult to determine
where in the supply chain the cargo was stolen or if the shortage
was due to mishandling or cargo being lost while en route.
Of course losses occur in other ways and not simply through
theft. Misplaced and mis-shipped cargo is a common occurrence
and a regular headache for freight forwarders. As companies rely
heavily on electronic inventory systems, cargo can arrive at
a facility, be off-loaded, not be scanned, and therefore be
missingdall while sitting inside the very warehouse that it is
supposed to be in. When asked about the cargo’s location,
a manager will check the automated system, see the cargo was
never scanned in, and therefore believe it never arrived and report
the cargo as not present.
Of course, even with the high levels of security around airports
and associated buildings with the air cargo industry, these facil-
ities are not immune from being victimized by criminals. In
early 2007, a recently terminated driver for a logistics provider
managed to steal a company truck. Using his uniform and
familiarity with the air cargo terminal at Miami International
Airport, he was able to pick up a regularly scheduled load of cell
phones, making off with over $1,000,000 in product.
The suspect did not have a company badge or documentation
authorizing him to pick up the shipment, but because of
complacency and familiarity, those involved in the shipping
process failed to realize he was not the authorized transporter and
willingly gave him the cargodvery similar to the ﬁctitious pickup
schemes discussed in Chapter 2: Cargo Theft Deﬁned.
Government Regulation and Air Cargo
Security for the U.S. airline industry is almost entirely regu-
lated by the Transportation Security Administration (TSA).
After September 11, 2001, security and screening at airports
232
Chapter 16 AIR CARGO SECURITY

were almost exclusively for people boarding aircraft. Since then,
however, cargo screening has become an increasingly hot topic,
with government mandates requiring 100% screening of all cargo.
In October 2011, the TSA announced that it would miss the
December 31, 2011, deadline for 100% of all international cargo to
be screened, stating that the expected date for implementation
would be some time in 2013.
The TSA’s security regimen for air cargo is divided into two
distinctive program areas: (1) the Transportation Sector Network
Management air cargo division charged with the strategic
development of programs and (2) the Ofﬁce of Security Opera-
tions charged with program compliance. The air cargo division is
responsible for working across TSA, Department of Homeland
Security, and other governmental agencies, domestic and inter-
national, to develop air cargo regulations, technological solu-
tions, and policies that continuously enhance the security of the
air cargo supply chain while maintaining TSA’s commitment to
ensure the ﬂow of commerce.
According to the TSA website, in response to possible threats
to air cargo security, the TSA uses a multilayered approach that
includes
•
Vetting companies that ship and transport cargo on passenger
planes to ensure they meet TSA security standards.
•
Establishing a system to enable certiﬁed cargo screening facil-
ities to physically screen cargo using approved screening
methods and technologies.
•
Employing random and risk-based assessments to identify
high-risk cargo that requires increased scrutiny.
•
Inspecting industry compliance with security regulations
through the deployment of TSA inspectors.
As discussed in Chapter 1: Cargo Theft 101, government
security programs around the transportation sector are not
designed for purposes of loss prevention, but rather to prevent
terrorism or any other ways by which the supply chain can be
used for illicit purposes. However, because so many security
features overlap with loss prevention programs, in the case of air
cargo, the increased security around airports and cargo terminals
provides signiﬁcant levels of security that assist in mitigating the
risk of theft for cargo while inside the purview of an airport or
carrier’s facility.
Security Considerations and the Air Industry
The risk of theft and pilferage of air cargo ramps up once
goods leave the airport via ground. This requires shippers and
Chapter 16 AIR CARGO SECURITY 233

their logistics providers to ensure that their planning and
security preparations are done with more than the air cargo
portion of the shipment in mind. How cargo will be col-
lected, moved to the airport, handled, loaded, off-loaded,
cleared through Customs, if applicable, moved to storage, and
eventually taken to the end destination must all be planned
for appropriately. This high level of understanding and detail
must be translated in a comprehensive security plan that allows
for the various levels of security necessary at each stage of the
shipment.
The next critical factor in keeping air cargo secure is thorough
vendor vetting, with the high number of touch points in this
mode of transportation with a wide spectrum of companies
ranging from internationally recognized names to local “mom
and pop” ﬁrms. Prior to use, they must be thoroughly vetted.
First and foremost, the company must be a legitimate busi-
ness, having met necessary licensing, insurance, and other
regulatory requirements. Second, the company has a good
reputation within the industry and is known for providing
professional services with a good loss history. Third, personnel
within the company should be screened with background
investigations and trained thoroughly in cargo handling and theft
prevention best practices. Finally, the company is compliant with
all shipper physical and in-transit security requirements as
applicable.
In order to be successful in this process, a company must
focus on reducing the number of suppliers between itself and
who is actually handling the cargo. Every time a logistics function
is brokered to another provider, another layer is applied between
the shipper and the cargo, signiﬁcantly reducing the shipper’s
supply chain visibility, reducing the clarity of security require-
ments
for
storage
and
in-transit
cargo,
and
substantially
increasing the likelihood of loss or theft.
Key Points
•
While cargo shipped via air is quite safe during the air trans-
port process, the ambiguity and multiple touch points around
the process of getting cargo to and from air terminals create
a signiﬁcant risk for shippers.
•
Cargo being shipped by air will still be moved by ground.
Not only will cargo be moved to and from the airport via
truck, but even the air carrier itself may move the cargo
along one leg of the route via ground if necessary and
more cost-effective.
234
Chapter 16 AIR CARGO SECURITY

•
While new restrictions and security parameters around air
cargo have paid dividends in the overall security of cargo at
airports, thefts continue in this mode of transportation,
primarily targeting cargo being moved to and from air cargo-
handling facilitiesdvia ground.
•
With every additional layer of service providers between the
shipper and the cargo, an additional risk of loss or theft is
created.
Chapter 16 AIR CARGO SECURITY 235

17
RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Targeting by criminals of the railroad and what they steal
• Components of the railroad system that leave cargo vulnerable to theft
• Methods for keeping cargo secure while being shipped via rail and intermodal
transportation
• Security issues beyond loss prevention with pipelines in the United States
The nation’s railroad system hauls as much as 45% of our
country’s freight measured in ton miles. Competing with other
modes of transportationdmaritime, air, and roaddthe railroad
continues to remain a critical piece of the supply chain, ideal for
moving bulk products and commodities such as coal, ore, and
chemicals.
In 2002, the rail system in the United States moved 1.5 trillion
ton miles, generating $36.9 billion in revenue.
Bulk items, especially chemicals, and the cross-country (land
bridge) as well as international movement of intermodal con-
tainers quickly led to discussions of national security and
terrorism. In 2002, a member of Al Qaeda was found inside
a shipping container in Gioia Tauro, Italy. The Egyptian man was
found inside a container equipped for a comfortable ride to his
intended destination of Halifax, Canada.
The discovery served as an alarm for the international ship-
ping nature of intermodal containers, many of which are moved
via rail and ground across borders. The scope of this book,
however, is loss prevention and the supply chain security
measures necessary to reduce in-transit losses. As discussed in
Chapter 1, a program designed to prevent terrorism or smuggling
does not necessarily equate to an adequate loss prevention
program and vice versa. While there is a signiﬁcant amount of
overlap, the goals of each program are truly different from each
other and should not be used as a means of accomplishing
another’s goals.
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00017-0
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
237

Cargo Theft and the Rail System
Cargo theft and the railroad has its roots ﬁrmly planted in the
19th century, as legendary characters such as Butch Cassidy and
the Sundance Kid robbed trains while ﬁghting off Pinkerton men
in gun battles made for the movies. Today, passenger trains tar-
geted by robbers from the Wild West have been replaced with
cargo trains targeted by both organized gangs and opportunistic
thieves hoping to make a quick buck.
Strings of rail cars, often loaded with intermodal containers
and trailers of electronics, cars, cigarettes, tires, and a myriad of
other high-value products, serve as a tempting “moving” target
for criminals. Organized gangs often utilize inside information to
assist in locating cargo worth stealing, while leaving low-value or
unmovable product alone.
Organized theft groups are generally associated with larger
incidents, where the criminals clearly knew what they were tar-
geting, leaving trailers or containers alone while successfully
stealing six-ﬁgure loads. Their frequency of activity, however,
is generally far less than that of opportunistic criminals,
who jump on slow-moving trains in hit-and-run-style theft
attempts, seeking to off-load anything that they can sell. Theft
todaydlargely pilferage from stopped or slowed trains and full
container thefts from rail facilities and yards servicing the rail
industrydpresents a substantial problem for the rail system
through economic loss as well as security vulnerabilities.
From 1992 through 2003, the Conrail Boyz (CBR) wreaked
havoc on the railroads in New Jersey. They, the CBR, are
considered by many to be the more proliﬁc train robbers of all
time, responsible for stealing millions of dollars in lucrative
goods, especially electronics and high-end clothing from freight
cars (Thomas, 2010).
The leader of the gang, 28-year-old Edward Mongon, began
stealing small cartons of cargo from stationary freight trains at rail
yards in the late 1980s. By living in an apartment adjacent to the
rail yards in Newark, Mongon learned the schedule of train
arrivals and departures, as well as the times inspections were
made by security guards and local police. Additionally, Mongon
acquired a radio that received transmissions from the trains and
dispatchers. Through this, Mongon was able to get invaluable
information, including departure times, train routes, locations,
and destinations (Sweet, 2006).
As he developed systematic means for selling cargo on the
black market, Mongon began to recruit additional members and
soon had a gang of thieves that became experts in robbing trains.
238
Chapter 17 RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY

In the beginning they only stole cargo from strings of trains at
rest; however, as the gang evolved, they started to target moving
trains.
The Conrail Boyz became efﬁcient in deceiving security
measures utilized by the railroad companies. For secured rail
yards, the gang would break the electricity in the fences to allow
for undetected access. For moving trains, the gang would ﬁnd
desolate areas along the routes, remote intercept points, and
areas of sparse population as opportunities to attack and jump
onto the rail cars (Zambito, 2009).
Equipment used by the gang included items such as bolt
cutters to open the containers on moving trains and infrared
binoculars to keep watch for police at night. Gang members on
the trains would break into the containers, remove the cargo, and
toss the goods to members waiting on the ground, who would
then load the cargo into prepositioned trucks and transport the
merchandise to their storage facilities (Thomas, 2010).
Experts estimate that the Conrail Boyz stole in excess of
$20 million in cargo from trains over an 11-year period. The gang
pulled off countless rail heists, two of which generated some
signiﬁcant media attention. One was a theft of Sony PlayStations
valued in excess of $5 million, and the other was a load of Tommy
Hilﬁger clothing worth more than $200,000. The Hilﬁger theft was
estimated to have taken the gang less than 8 minutes to perform.
An intense police investigation began in December 2001 of the
Conrail Boyz and their theft activity. New Jersey police used
helicopters and strict surveillance on areas where the Conrail
Boyz were believed to be off-loading stolen cargo. During the
investigation, one of the gang members was arrested, and during
his interrogation he revealed important information about the
gang, including modi operandi and additional areas of operation.
Police also found out that Mongon had never held a legitimate job
and that all his revenue came strictly from his cargo theft activity
(Hyslop, 2003).
In 2003, 24 members of the Conrail Boyz gang were arrested
and received sentences ranging from 10 to 12 years in prison. The
leader, Edward Mongon, was charged with racketeering and
money laundering and received a 13-year sentence in prison
(Zambito, 2009).
Organized theft gangs such as the Conrail Boyz continue to
target the rail system, requiring intense efforts by railroad police
and logistics professionals to secure in-transit cargo in this mode
of transportation. The task of monitoring trains, however, is no
simple matter. It is difﬁcult for train engineers to see the entire
train due to their enormous length, often snaking more than
Chapter 17 RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY 239

150 cars long, and the seemingly endless miles of track are ﬁlled
with areas of sparse population difﬁcult to monitor. Additionally,
organized criminals with inside information can move quickly,
targeting rail cars, containers, and trailers with the desired
product, wasting no time searching through containers of
unwanted products, off-loading their goods, and escapingdoften
without detection until the train arrives at its destination.
Cargo criminals are becoming increasingly innovative and
creative in their craft. Understanding train schedules and routes,
they can have trucks waiting for the criminals to hit during a stop
and off-load the cargo right into a vehicle for a quick escape.
As with over the road cargo theft, the rate of theft in the rail
system is statistically very low; however, the impact is clear, with
an estimated direct product loss of $12 to $20 million annually.
This direct product loss does not take into account the entire
array of downstream costs associated with cargo theft discussed
in Chapter 10: The True Impact of Cargo Theft.
Product Targeting
Bulk products and commodities are the not the only items
being shipped via rail in today’s supply chain. Electronics,
automobiles and auto parts, tobacco products, clothing, and
numerous other goods are moved daily through the railroad
system. Organized criminal groups go to great lengths to
acquire information necessary to successfully hit the car or
containers loaded with their targeted products and not waste
time searching through containers with things they cannot
move or sell. The ability to hit the right containers, at a time
when the train is stopped or slowed to allow for easy off-load at
a known location where the gang can have transportation
assets and personnel assembled and ready for the product, is
a combination that is extremely difﬁcult for the railroads and
shippers to combat.
The rate of theft within the rail infrastructure is on par with
national levels of cargo theft, as electronics, building materials,
and household goods are all stolen most frequently from the rail
system.
Hot Spots
In 1995, dozens of armed gunmen attacked a train outside of
El Pasodjust steps away from the Mexican border. Accomplices,
who had boarded the train at an unknown time and location,
tripped the train’s emergency braking system by popping the air
240
Chapter 17 RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY

hose. Then, the gunmen came out of their hiding in the nearby
steep ravines and surrounded the train.
While the train was stopped, the on-board suspects began
dumping productdtelevisions and clothingdfrom the cargo
containers onto the Mexican side of the train. When U.S. Border
patrol agents arrived at the distressed train, the thieves held
the agents off with gunﬁre. Mexican police notiﬁed by phone
arrived at the chaotic scene as well. Eventually a dozen suspects
were arrested, although numerous others escaped, along with
32 televisions.
Since then, numerous security improvements have been put
in place to deter Mexican theft gangs from crossing the border
and attacking the rail system outside of El Paso, but theft in this
mode of transportation is far from gone. In 2002, the rail system
around El Paso experienced 122 robberies in a 9-month period,
showing that the issue of cargo theft and the rail system is not an
easily solvable problem.
Today, cargo theft in the rail system is spread across the
United States in a manner similar to over the road theft, with
areas of concentrated activity occurring around major logistics
hubs and major rail hubs such as Los Angeles, Chicago, St. Louis,
and Memphis.
In 2008, the Chicago-based cargo theft task force investi-
gated over 100 cases with regards to railroads theft, recovered
$6.2 million in merchandise, and made 31 arrests.
With the complexity of such enormous hubs such as Chicago,
containers are moved frequently, being placed in various loca-
tions waiting to be reloaded onto another train or be picked up for
movement via truck. This complexity is ideal for the cargo
criminal, who can use this to his advantage to steal entire
containers and be hundreds of miles away before the containers
(and the product inside them) are even discovered missing.
Security Considerations and the Rail Industry
Systems used for transit cargo security for other modes also
apply to the rail industry. Loading/unloading procedures, locking
devices, and GPS tracking are all applicable for cargo being
moved by train, although the usages of these systems must be
amended in order to meet the particular requirements (and risks)
associated with rail cargo. The classic layered approach of
ensuring that the right people are involved and trained, appro-
priate policies and procedures are in place, and the use of
technology and hardware is applied appropriately are just as
Chapter 17 RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY 241

necessary for a secured supply chain, regardless of the transit
mode of choice.
An additional layer of security within the rail industry is the
existence of railroad police organizations. Railroad police ofﬁcers
are employed by every major rail company and provide an
additional level of security for the rail system as a whole and the
cargo being moved.
With their roots in the mid-1800s with Pinkerton’s, the approx-
imately 1000 railroad police ofﬁcers in the United States are tasked
with securing both freight lines and passenger lines. The duties of
today’s railroad police ofﬁcer often involve routine uniform or
plainclothes patrolofrailyards,depots,and railroadpropertyeither
by foot or by car, conducting complex investigations involving
cargo theft, theft of equipment, arson, and even investigate assault
and murders that may spill over onto railroad property.
Trespassing is a common crime that railroad police handle,
not only for the security of the rail system, but the safety of those
trespassing. Although most trespass for the sake of catching a ride
on a freight car or simply passing through railroad property, there
is no lack of criminals entering railroad property with the intent
to steal. While most are petty thieves, some are organized crim-
inals that steal high-value merchandise from trains, sometimes
using very sophisticated methods to commit their crimes, such as
countersurveillance against railroad police, portable radios and
cell phones to communicate, and rental or stolen vehicles to load
the stolen merchandise.
The supply chain involves numerous modes of transportation,
each of which must be protected in order to prevent further
downstream impacts from being felt. One breach of supply
chain security may result in the denial of service or product
delivery, causing a cascade of events for other transportation,
manufacturing, or distribution mechanisms. This is true for theft
incidents just as much as infrastructure or other potential points
of failure. Rail or highway bridges can become single points of
failure for the supply chain in a particular region. Because of this,
the impacts of theft or other supply chain disruptions can wreak
substantial havoc on the supply chain system as a whole.
Additional tools that shippers can use for enhancing security
for rail shipments include:
•
Better security locks and seals, such as the ENFORCER or Sea-
lock. While they can be defeated, they take longer to break and
in rail theft, timing is often of the essence.
•
If on a stack train, positioning adjacent containers or trailers so
that their doors are facing each other, making it hard to gain
access, let alone opening up doors and getting cargo out.
242
Chapter 17 RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY

•
Using deep well rail cars so that part of the bottom container is
below the rail car top, preventing doors from opening, at least
not very far, so suspects cannot enter the container and cargo
cannot be removed.
Pipeline Security
Pipelines are considered a specialized means of trans-
portation, used since the 19th century to move gases, petroleum,
chemicals, coal, wood, and a variety of liquids such as milk and
water. One of the primary uses of pipelines in the United States
today is the movement of liquid fuels and natural gases. Most
pipelines today are a combination of underground (buried) and
aboveground (exposed) systems.
Pipelines by their very nature are vulnerable targets. Their
distances make them virtually impossible to protect.
When analyzing security strategies for pipelines, the fol-
lowing data points should be gathered and analyzed as part of the
process:
•
Age of the pipeline system
•
Distances
•
Presence of civil unrest (generally not applicable for pipelines
in the United States, but should not be ignored for those tran-
siting multiple international boundaries)
•
Maintenance records
•
Historical loss records (experience from both quantity and
quality standpoints)
•
Percentage of pipeline that is land based vs over water (land-
based spills are easier to contain and clean up)
•
Presence of existing remote-sensing equipment along the
pipeline (pressure changes, leaks, etc.)
There are approximately 493,000 miles of pipeline in the
United States today with
approximately one-third
moving
petroleum products while the remainder is a conduit for natural
gas. Growth in the pipeline sector has been limited as they are
expensive to build with signiﬁcant upfront investment require-
ments and the lack of apparent needs for expansion due to
current demands being met by existing infrastructure.
The protection of pipelines from terrorism, illegal tapping, and
sabotage became an even greater priority after 2001. Similar to air
and rail cargo, discussion regarding security in the pipeline
industry led quickly to terrorism prevention strategy. The
Transportation Security Administration (TSA) even has a pipeline
security division within their Ofﬁce of Transportation Sector
Network Management. In the case of pipelines, protection of the
Chapter 17 RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY 243

transportation mode itself is just as critical as preventing illegal
tapping or theft from the system. Damage to a pipeline can cause
signiﬁcant loss and delays.
Theft and the Pipeline System
Theft from pipelines is far more common in the international
arena than in the United States. Reports of petroleum theft from
pipelines in countries such as China, Nigeria, and Egypt are
almost commonplace, while comparable reports in the United
States are sparse at best.
According to the pipeline security division of TSA, theft of
products from pipelines is not a common occurrence in the
United States. Pipeline theft is more common in Africa, where
deeply impoverished populations live near the pipelines. Pipeline
theft in Africa is done out of desperation for fuel by the impov-
erished populations. The amount of product that is stolen is
usually minimal, but many people are injured or killed during
these thefts.
Product theft directly from the pipeline is rare in the United
States because of the nature of the economy. Populations are
not extremely impoverished as in Africa, and criminal organi-
zations are not as aggressive as in Mexico. Pipeline theft is not
impossible, but it is far from routine in the United States.
Product theft from pipelines occasionally occurs when natural
gas or other commodity providers bypass reading the gas
meter and customers do not pay for the entire product they
received. One product in particular that is sometimes stolen
from pipelines is anhydrous ammonia, which is used to
make methamphetamine. This is not usually stolen in large
quantities.
Ways in which product is stolen from pipelines is by tapping
into the line or siphoning from a valve. Groups that pose potential
threats for pipeline theft include terrorist groups, such as
Al Qaeda, and environmental extremist groups. U.S. companies
do not take much action to prevent theft because it is such an
insigniﬁcant issue (Figure 17.1).
In Mexico, pipelines are common targets for criminals as well
as leftist and other extremist political groups, with theft and
pipeline damage through sabotage occurring endlessly. Accord-
ing to Dow Jones, PEMEX, the state oil company in Mexico,
suffered more theft of fuel from its pipeline system in the ﬁrst
4 months of 2011 than it did in all of 2010. From January through
April it lost more than 22,000 barrels more, in terms of volume
($25 million more in value), than the previous year.
244
Chapter 17 RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY

As fuel prices continue to be a point of ﬁnancial strain, the
threat of criminals stealing petroleum in the United States
through theft from the pipeline system is all the more real.
Key Points
•
While over the road cargo is the preferred choice for criminals
seeking high-value goods, railroads still move ample volumes
of merchandise that traditional cargo theft gangs will target.
•
The extreme length of trains and numerous urban areas trans-
ited make securing cargo in transit a very difﬁcult job for both
railroad police agencies and shippers.
•
Security best practices used for truck transportation can and
should also be applied (albeit in a slightly different manner)
to cargo being shipped via rail.
•
While theft from pipelines continues to be a substantial issue
for companies in other parts of the world, theft from pipelines
is becoming an increasingly rare event in the United States.
•
Theft of equipment from the pipeline industry is the most
common theft issue faced by companies, while securing pipe-
lines continues to be a primary concern for other reasons, such
as terrorism and extremists groups possibly targeting the pipe-
lines for political or idealistic purposes.
Figure 17.1 Courtesy of FreightWatch.
Chapter 17 RAIL AND PIPELINE SECURITY 245

18
CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES
AND ORGANIZATIONS
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Locations and major functions of cargo theft task forces
• Difﬁculties and constraints of law enforcement agencies while investigating
cargo theft
• Industry groups dedicated to combating cargo theft
• Publiceprivate sector collaborative efforts to reduce cargo theft
Cargo theft task forces are located in several areas of the
United States known for extreme rates of cargo theft, including
Miami, Memphis, Los Angeles, and Chicago (Gonzalez, 2009).
The Miami-Dade Tactical Operations Multi-Agency Cargo Anti-
Theft Squad (TOMCATS) is the forerunner in cargo theft inves-
tigations, making arrests on a weekly basis and conducting
numerous investigations of cargo thefts occurring around the
country as the majority of the loads are destined for Miami for
sale or export. The California Highway Patrol’s (CHP) Cargo
Theft Interdiction Program (CTIPs) investigated 773 cases, made
164 arrests, recovered 546 commercial vehicles, and recovered
$21.6 million in stolen goods (Gonzalez, 2009).
Even with the increasing exposure that cargo theft is receiving,
funding for specialized law enforcement is becoming scarce,
particularly from federal sources. The task force in Memphis was
disbanded recently, and while Memphis detectives still work
cargo theft cases, they are doing so as part of an auto-theft group.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has left the Miami
TOMCATs, taking their funding and vehicles with them, dealing
a huge blow to the TOMCATS unit and a tremendous opportunity
for local cargo thieves. So while government ofﬁcials are paying
more “attention” to cargo theft, when it comes down to what is
important (money and manpower), their priorities are elsewhere,
just as they have always been.
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00018-2
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
247

Miami is a hub for stolen cargodarguably the hub for stolen
cargo, with an incredible volume of stolen cargo being moved into
the Miami area on a daily basis for sale on the black market or
loading and exportation to Latin America out of the Port of Miami.
These tasks forces are not immune from the budgetary issues
experienced
by
law
enforcement
agencies
throughout
the
country during economic downturns. In fact, with cargo theft
largely being a nonpriority crime for most police agencies,
funding for these task forces is often in jeopardy as precious few
resources are spread even more thinly. Because of this, many
cargo theft task forces rely on support from their own agencies
driven by priorities from industry and the communities, state and
federal support through joint operations, and industry support.
Miami-Dade Tactical Operations
Multi-Agency Cargo Anti-Theft Squad
When ﬁrst organized, the TOMCATS was composed of local,
state, and federal law enforcement agencies, including the
Miami-Dade Police Department, the FBI, the U.S. Customs and
Border Protection, the Florida Department of Law Enforcement
(FDLE), the Florida Highway Patrol (FHP), and the Florida
Department of Transportation (FDOT). According to their web-
site, the cargo crimes section (CCS) of the Miami-Dade Police
department’s robbery bureau is tasked with the responsibility of
stemming the rising theft of cargo from warehouse and trans-
portation facilities throughout Miami-Dade County. These losses
can have a negative impact on the community’s economy
through negative media exposure and the threat of the loss of
major shippers who are relocating to “safer” ports and taking
hundreds of jobs and millions of dollars with them. Due to the
signiﬁcant increase of organized commercial cargo theft in
Miami-Dade County and its negative impact on commerce, the
CSS took a leadership role and joined with the FBI, the U.S.
Customs and Border Protection, the FDLE, the FHP, and the
FDOT to form a South Florida cargo theft task force called the
Tactical
Operations
Multi-Agency
Cargo
Anti-Theft
Squad.
The task force is housed within the ofﬁces of the robbery bureau,
cargo crimes section. This facility is used as the central clear-
inghouse for the collection and dissemination of all cargo theft
information in the South Florida area.
As of the date this book went to print, the Miami TOMCATS was
undergoing some organizational changes and restructuring due to
budgetary issues. The result of those changes was the disbanding of
248
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS

the TOMCATS as a unit, while some detectives continue to inves-
tigate cargo theft under other divisions within the department.
The TOMCATS conductedfocused investigations intoorganized
groups, individuals, businesses, and other enterprises engaged in
continuing criminal conspiracies pertaining to the theft, distribu-
tion, and exportation of stolen cargo. Detectives use a large variety
of techniques to inﬁltrate criminal organizations, gather evidence,
make arrests, and recover high-value stolen cargo shipments. All
truck hijackings that occur in unincorporated Miami-Dade County
are assigned to the task force for investigation.
“In Miami-Dade, however, the 22-member TOMCATS unit is
truly a collaborative effort. Several Miami-Dade detectives, as well
as a U.S. Customs agent, a criminal analyst, a U.S. Department of
Transportation (DOT) ofﬁcer, one Florida Highway Patrol trooper
and a detective from Broward County Sheriff’s Ofﬁce work jointly
with FBI agents to investigate the crimes” (Morasch, 2008).
The TOMCATS frequently offers advice and guides industry
personnel in keeping their cargo secure. With the sheer volume of
cargo theft occurring around the country, and such a high
percentage of these incidents being tied to South Florida, the
TOMCATS has no shortage of work on its hands.
“Hijackers don’t like crowds. Don’t stop in deserted areas
while waiting to make deliveries,” according to Lieutenant Twan
Uptgrow, commander of the TOMCATS. “Try to stop at reputable
truck stops along the route, and maybe try not to stop at the same
location each time.” The TOMCATS frequently offers advice and
guidance on cargo security to the industry. Among other things, it
urges truckersto calllocal police ifthey’re suspicious about another
vehicle following them. Drivers pulled over by an unmarked police
car should call 9-1-1 to verify. TOMCATS ofﬁcers advise truckers to
plan ahead when possible and park in secure areas. It’s best to ﬁnd
rest stops and other spots where other truck drivers will see them.
Watch for cars or vehicles following your truck when you leave the
highway. Team drivers also stand a much-improved chance of
protecting their loads. Company drivers working alone should have
regular communication with their dispatchers.
“A few hijackings have occurred in which persons have
pretended to be police ofﬁcers in unmarked cars,” Uptgrow said.
“Try to pull over in a well-lit area where someone else can witness
what’s going on” (Morasch, 2008).
California Cargo Theft Task Forces
With the incredible volume of cargo theft experience in the Los
Angeles Basin, and in California as a whole, it is little surprise that
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS 249

the state has three multijurisdictional task forces dedicated to
combating this problem. Two are centered in the Los Angeles
area: LA County Sheriff’s Department and the LAPD. The other
task force is run by the California Highway Patrol, referred to as
CTIPs.
Los Angeles County Cargo Cats
In January 1990, the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department
formed a new investigative unit with the mission to investigate
cargo theft. Named the Cargo CATs (Criminal Apprehension
Team), the new unit fell under the major crimes bureau of the
department’s detective division.
Similar to other task forces, the Cargo CATs are multi-
jurisdictional, capable of investigating the transient nature of
cargo theft as county and state lines are crossed.
The unit’s website touts over $213.5 million in stolen property
recovered and 1275 arrests.
According to the Cargo CATs, the unit’s objectives are:
•
Increase arrest, prosecution, and conviction of cargo thieves
and their receivers.
•
Establish a close working relationship with the cargo, trans-
portation, warehousing, and insurance industries.
•
Recover and return stolen cargo to owners.
•
Reduce cargo theft property crimes.
•
Reduce court costs and time by gathering quality evidence to
ensure guilty pleas.
•
Develop intelligence information about the stolen cargo redis-
tribution system.
•
Act as a resource for cargo theft prevention information.
•
Establish a statistical reporting system to reﬂect the cargo theft
situation accurately.
•
Enhance coordination and cooperation among federal, state,
and local law enforcement agencies, as well as cooperation
and coordination among prosecutors, law enforcement, and
victims.
•
Support the enactment of mandatory cargo theft-reporting
laws, along with development of a statewide cargo theft
database.
California Highway Patrol: Cargo Theft
Interdiction Program
According to the CHP, cargo theft in the state amounts to an
estimated $10 billion annually with the trucking industry,
250
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS

insurance companies, and railroads the major victims. However,
no ﬁnancial total can adequately quantify the actual total cost of
cargo theft-related losses, which include job site downtime,
replacement of stolen commercial vehicles, time spent on addi-
tional paperwork, and increased insurance costs.
Prior to 1990, no proactive enforcement speciﬁcally directed at
cargo theft-related crimes existed in California. In the state,
consequently, the criminal element determined that the level of
proﬁt derived from the theft of cargo loads far surpassed the risk
of apprehension. What quickly became apparent was that proﬁts
from the stolen cargo were substantial and tax free. Thefts of
sought-after commodities, such as televisions, camcorders, VCRs,
and computers, could fetch margins as high as 80 cents on the
dollar. For example, a gang with several reliable buyers that stole
a load of computers valued at one million dollars conceivably
could earn as much as $800,000 from the sale of the commodity.
In response to concerns by the California Trucking Association
over this rising problem, Assembly Bill 1683 was enacted. This
legislation created funding for the enhancement of cargo theft
enforcement statewide, and designated the CHP to coordinate
and implement the program. As a result, the Cargo Theft Inter-
diction Program was established in 1995.
In a state as large and diverse as California, each geographic
region is unique as to the extent and type of cargo theft experi-
enced. In some areas, efforts were already under way to address
the cargo theft problem; in others, virtually nothing was being
done, at least in any coordinated manner. Because of these
factors, the approach taken in each region may be different;
however, the CTIP strived to establish regional teams that can
provide a proactive response to this type of crime. The following
is a list of areas where CTIP teams are actively conducting
investigations:
•
Los AngelesdSouthern Team
•
San DiegodBorder Team
•
Bay Area/Central ValleydGolden Gate Team
In 2007, the CTIP handled 540 investigations statewide, arres-
ted 91 people, found 438 commercial vehicles (tractors, trailers,
and box trucks), and recovered $14.29 million worth of stolen
merchandise (Gonzalez, 2009).
New Jersey State Police
The New Jersey State Police (NJSP) ﬁlled the headlines in
January 2011 with a string of arrests and seizures resulting in
recovery of more than $10 million in stolen goods and a number
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS 251

of people charged with a variety of crimes. One warehouse
entered by the task force, led by Lieutenant Mike McDonnell,
contained stolen product from seven different theft incidents.
The NJSP cargo theft unit is responsible for conducting
criminal investigations and supporting the regional intelligence
collection plan by collecting, evaluating, and disseminating
intelligence data regarding cargo theft activity that affects and is
related to the state of New Jersey. The cargo theft unit responds to
calls
for
assistance
from
other
law
enforcement
agencies
throughout the state and investigates individuals and groups
engaged in cargo theft activity.
Memphis TAMCATs
With the Memphis area serving as a major hub for logistics
operations in the United States, at the crossroads of the Mis-
sissippi River and Interstates 40 and 55, almost every major
logistics company in the country, along with countless manu-
facturers, has logistics operations in Memphis, to include the
global headquarters of Federal Express. With this tremendous
amount of cargo activity also comes an accompanying amount of
cargo theft, with Memphis having the highest per capita rate of
cargo theft anywhere in the United States. Because of this, it is
little surprise that the Memphis area hosts a multiagency task
force with the sole mission of combating cargo theft.
The Memphis Auto/Cargo Theft Task Force (ACTF) was
formed in 1998 to address a signiﬁcant crime problem involving
the interstate transportation of stolen property, including motor
vehicles, and major thefts from interstate shipments. The ACTF is
currently composed of ofﬁcers and special agents of the FBI,
Memphis Police Department, Shelby County Sheriff’s Ofﬁce, the
U.S. Customs Service, and the National Insurance Crime Bureau.
The primary objective of this task force is to reduce the number of
automobile, as well as cargo thefts, by the successful prosecution
of known career criminals and their associates.
Midwest Cargo Theft Unit
In 2006 and early 2007, the auto theft task force in Illinois kept
running into cargo theft cases, resulting in a handful of arrests
and recoveries. The unit was later advised by their policy board,
however, that the unit’s funding was derived from the insurance
claims and recoveries and other revenue sources that came from
auto theft onlydnot in the recovery of cargo. Because of this, the
252
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS

unit was only allowed to work auto theft cases, and cargo claims
were not investigated.
From that situation, however, was derived the idea for an
enforcement initiative. The Illinois State Police formed a group of
investigators to pursue cargo theft cases, and in northern Illinois
there was no shortage of work for them. From this effort the
Midwest Cargo Theft Unit emerged in October 2007 that had
a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the Chicago FBI
ofﬁce in order to expand the group’s investigative powers beyond
state lines and pursue criminals at a federal level.
The Midwest Cargo Theft Unit is made up of six Illinois State
Police personnel and one Norfolk Southern railroad investigator.
Other agencies involved in cargo theft investigations that support
this unit, as necessary, include the FBI, National Insurance Crime
Bureau (NICB), Chicago Police, Immigration and Customs En-
forcement, railroad police, local police, and local auto theft units.
The mission statement of the Midwest Cargo Theft Unit is
dedicated to cargo crime reduction throughout Illinois and
neighboring states through a cooperative effort between law
enforcement and the private sector.
The unit has had several key initiatives since its inception and
continues to push forward with high payoff cargo theft investi-
gations. The ﬁrst key initiative of the unit was acquiring the MOU
with the FBI in 2007, allowing the unit to chase criminals outside
the state of Illinois and investigate federal crimes. The unit is
currently developing a number of cases with the FBI to prosecute
federally. Additional actions include use of a bait trailer that is in
the process of being upgraded with the most advanced tech-
nology available. This tactic can prove incredibly beneﬁcial in
ensuring that cargo theft gangs are caught and charged at the
highest level possible. The unit is also working with state legis-
lators to devise a law exclusively for cargo theft in Illinois with the
ability to seize the criminal’s assets.
Since its inception, this unit has had a number of high proﬁle
successes in arresting and prosecuting cargo theft gangs. After
a 6-month investigation the cargo theft unit was able to arrest
and recover several million dollars’ worth of merchandise. This
investigation resulted in the arrest of a major cargo thief in the
Chicago area who was the person responsible for the largest
fencing operation at that time. After the arrests, the number of
thefts reduced dramatically for several months in the Chicago
area. The unit recovered merchandise from four different ware-
houses that involved numerous companies and insurance claims.
Additionally, the Midwest Cargo Theft Unit provides annual
training seminars for industry and law enforcement personnel,
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS 253

covering cargo theft topics, loss prevention, and supply chain
security methodologies.
Georgia Bureau of Investigations
Georgia’s cargo theft task force began with a single detective,
Keith Lewis, from the DeKalb county Sheriff’s Department
investigating cargo theft cases. Through the process of his
investigations, and over 20 years’ experience in the transportation
industry, Detective Lewis was intimately aware of the intercounty
and interstate nature of cargo theft and knew that a single
detective investigating this criminal enterprise in a single county
was not going to be sufﬁcient.
Detective Lewis approached the Georgia Motor Trucking
Association with his idea for a state-wide cargo theft task force.
The organization embraced the idea and took it to the governor
for funding. With the FBI and Georgia State Police uninterested in
tackling this largely unknown crime, the Georgia Bureau of
Investigation (GBI) was the logical entity to house the new unit,
and in 2009 the major theft unit was created.
With statewide jurisdiction, the major theft unit of the GBI
has had signiﬁcant success targeting cargo theft gangs that
made Georgia one of the riskiest states in the country for over
the road cargo. The unit investigates enterprise-type cases,
going after multioffender gangs with connections to millions of
dollars in losses annually. They have been responsible for the
recovery of $26 million in stolen goods and 91 arrests, with
many arrested being suspected of involvement in numerous
cargo theft cases.
On Wednesday, June 2, 2010, John Raymond Smith Jr., referred
to as Johnny Ray Smith, pled guilty to his part in attempting to sell
stolen cargo valued at $3 million in Georgia. Operating Smith
Sales Company out of warehouses in Mableton and Hiram,
Georgia, the 48-year-old Smith conspired with others to buy,
receive, and possess stolen cargo from nearly two dozen inter-
state tractoretrailer thefts throughout Georgia and surrounding
states, including Alabama, South Carolina, and Tennessee. Items
recovered during the arrest of Johnny Ray Smith included tele-
visions, computers, consumer electronics, cigarettes, sewing
machines, food, and clothing.
The GBI major theft unit continues to run proactive cargo theft
initiatives, targeting organized theft gangs, using the Racketeer
Inﬂuenced and Corrupt Organizations Actand other tools at their
disposal to arrest and prosecute gangs targeting cargo moving
throughout the state of Georgia.
254
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS

The unit is composed of four Georgia Bureau of Investigations
agents, one member of the Motor Carrier Compliance Depart-
ment, and Detective Lewis with the DeKalb County Police.
Technology Asset Protection Association
TAPA began in the 1990s as the Technology Asset Protection
Association, whose goal was to reduce cargo theft rates in the
high-tech industry. With the explosion of new technologies,
creating smaller, faster, and better components and ﬁnished
consumer electronics, cargo criminals targeting these products
increased at virtually the same rate.
Seeing the intersection of cargo crime and virtually all high-
value, theft-attractive goods, TAPA changed its name to Trans-
ported Asset Protection Association, reﬂecting the group’s
expansion to include other commodities, such as pharmaceuti-
cals, but maintaining its main charter, to prevent cargo theft from
occurring for product while in transit or in storage.
TAPA has three chapters currently: TAPA Americas, TAPA
EMEA (Europe, Middle East, and Africa), and TAPA Asia.
According to their website, the vision of TAPA Americas is to
bring
together manufacturers, shippers, logistics
providers,
carriers,
insurers,
service
providers,
law
enforcement, and
government agencies to reduce risks of criminal activity in the
transportation supply chain. The group’s mission is to protect
high-value, theft-targeted assets in the transportation supply
chain by
•
Collecting and exchanging data and intelligence information
on a global basis
•
Cooperating on preventative supply chain security within
industry and with government organizations
•
Setting and promulgating best-in-class standards for facility
security and transport
•
Working as parallel organizations under the TAPA worldwide
umbrella
TAPA created its own certiﬁcation process through which
facilities and transportation providers can be audited and
become “TAPA certiﬁed,” showing their compliance with the
organization’s security standards.
For more information, see www.tapaonline.org.
Nation Cargo Theft Task Force
The National Insurance Crime Bureau is headquartered in Des
Plains, Illinois. The NICB is a nonproﬁt organization designed to
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS 255

detect and investigate insurance fraud and vehicle theft through
information analysis, investigations, training, and legislative
advocacy. The NICB is widely supported within the insurance
industry. According to their website it is sponsored by over 1100
insurance companies and self-insured entities. According to the
NICB, member companies wrote more than $317 billion in
insurance premiums in 2010dan estimated 80% of the nation’s
property and casualty insurance.
The National Cargo Theft Task Force and NICB work in
cooperation with private industry, insurance, and federal, state,
and local governments in order to combat the continued threat
posed by cargo theft perpetrators to the economy, the American
citizens, and the national security of the United States according
to the group.
Pharmaceutical Cargo Security Coalition
A more recently minted organization, the Pharmaceutical Cargo
Security Coalition (PCSC), has made great strides in combating
cargo theft, particularly in the pharmaceutical and consumer
health markets. Two sizeable pharmaceutical theft incidents
occurred in 2005dboth of which occurred in New Jersey, involving
two different companies and millions of dollars’ worth of products,
which jumpstarted this group’s formation. The thefts occurred
essentially a week or two apart, along roughly the same stretch of
highway; however, neither company knew of the other’s loss.
In March 2006, two men, Ken Obriot from Wyeth and Bob
Montero from Pﬁzer, decided to call for a meeting to discuss
these large-scale losses. That ﬁrst meeting, hosted by Pﬁzer in
New Jersey, had approximately 36 invited guests. Most were
manufacturers; however, there were a few law enforcement
people as well.
Initially, no one wanted to open up and discuss losses they
may have suffered. Eventually, however, the walls came down
and several cases were talked about. What was learned was that
the methodology of the criminals in each instance was essentially
the same. The group agreed to begin to keep closer tabs on this
type of illicit activity, as well as to share intelligence about these
crimes and those that committed them. Hence the group became
more formalized but, at that point, didn’t have an ofﬁcial name.
Chuck Forsaith of Purdue Pharmaceuticals volunteered to
become the “clearinghouse” for all of this information and began
a methodical process of collecting data, cataloging it, and sharing
it with others within the industry through periodic “alerts”
disseminated to all relevant parties.
256
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS

The group also decided to hold educational seminars at least
annually to discuss and expose the group’s progress. It was
agreed that each meeting would be sponsored by a different
pharmaceutical company. The group also agreed there would
never be a cost associated with membership or to any of the
meetings/conferences/seminars that are held. The group also
decided not to have an elected hierarchy. Finally, there would
never be any type of a budget. The group would always try to do
as much as possible, with as little a monetary investment as
possible. As unusual as that may sound, it remains true even to
this day.
The name “Pharmaceutical Cargo Security Coalition” wasn’t
created until late 2009dsomewhat reluctantly due to the fact that
the group wanted to maintain the simplest form of organization.
The demand for information became so great that naming the
organization, as well as providing a website for members to be
able to utilize, was ultimately inevitable.
Today the group has over 800 members from a number of
different
disciplinesdpharmaceutical
manufacturers,
whole-
salers and retailers; pharmaceutical industry organizations; local,
state, and federal law enforcement agencies and task forces;
insurers; carriers; freight forwarders; and risk management ﬁrms.
The PCSC is now aligned with over 20 other industry organiza-
tions (representing commodities other than pharmaceuticals)
that either combat or monitor cargo theft activity all over
the world. More information on PCSC can be found at http://
www.pcscpharma.com.
CargoNet
A member of the Verisk Analytics family of companies,
CargoNet is a public company designed to collect cargo theft data
through industry resources in order to help prevent cargo theft
and improve recovery rates using secured and controlled infor-
mation sharing among theft victims, their business partners, and
law enforcement. CargoNet is centered on a national database
and information-sharing system managed by crime analysts and
subject-matter experts.
According to the company, CargoNet offers integrated data-
bases, a theft alert system, task force and investigations support,
a tractoretrailer theft deterrence program, and the TruckStop-
Watch program. CargoNet also provides driver education and
incentives,
secondary-market
monitoring
and
interdictions,
crime trend analysis and loss control services, and training. More
information on CargoNet can be found at www.cargonet.com.
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS 257

Supply ChaineInformation Sharing
and Analysis Center
The
Supply
ChaineInformation
Sharing
and
Analysis
Center (SC-ISAC) is part of the National Council of ISAC, an
industryegovernment
initiative
to gather information from
industry and government sources for the purpose of increased
security and industry awareness.
The mission of the ISAC Council is to advance the physical and
cyber security of the critical infrastructures of North America by
establishing and maintaining a framework for valuable interac-
tion between and among the ISACs and with government. The
National Council of ISACs, formerly known as the ISAC Council,
was formed in 2003 when a volunteer group of ISAC representa-
tives decided to meet monthly to develop trusted relationships
among the sectors and to address common issues and concerns.
The National Council of ISACs activities include drills and exer-
cises, hosting a private sector liaison at the Department of
Homeland Security National Infrastructure Coordinating Center
during incidents of national signiﬁcance, emergency classiﬁed
brieﬁngs, and real-time sector threat-level reporting. The group
also
sponsors
an
annual
Critical
Infrastructure
Protection
Congress to bring together the critical infrastructure community
for networking, learning, and addressing issues of concern to
Critical Infrastructure and Key Structures stakeholders.
Members of the SC-ISAC receive quarterly and annual reports
on cargo theft, as well as information on emerging threats, indi-
vidual thefts, and open source media articles. The organization’s
website says that members are kept informed and are prepared to
act on threats to our global supply chain and, in turn, their own
industry interests.
According to the organization’s website, the mission of the
SC-ISAC is to:
•
Facilitate communication among supply chain-dependent
industry stakeholders
•
Foster a partnership between private and public sectors to
share critical information
•
Collect, analyze, and disseminate actionable intelligence to
help secure the global supply chain
•
Provide an international perspective through private sector
subject matter experts
•
Help protect the critical infrastructure of the United States
For more information, see https://secure.sc-investigate.net/
SC-ISAC/.
258
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS

Transportation Security Councils
As of publication, there are four transportation security
councils in the United States covering the northeast, southeast,
southwest, and west coast. While each council is managed
somewhat differently, the general mission of each is to provide
a centralized means for collecting cargo theft data, typically from
its membership and from other afﬁliated organizations, and then
alerting the membership of recent thefts, emerging trends, or
recently published reports, generally through email distribution.
The Eastern Region Transportation Security Council is one of
the oldest, if not the ﬁrst, transportation security council in the
United States. It was started in the late 1980s by a number of
former law enforcement ofﬁcers and security managers working
in the transportation ﬁeld.
The group’s original name was “The New York/New Jersey
Motor Carrier Security Council.” These individuals discovered
that they were all experiencing the same types of problems, yet
had no way of sharing information. They made cold-call inquires
to one another and determined there was a need to band together
in a collaborative way in order to safeguard their respective
businesses and their customers.
The council has changed over the years, as only one or two of
the original members are still active, yet they still meet about once
a month along with communicating via emails, blasts on thefts,
hijackings, and educational opportunities involving the trans-
portation, manufacturing, and cargo world. Although the turnout
for meetings varies (typically 25e30 members and guests), the
group has approximately 325 active members from the private
sector as well as the law enforcement community. Law enforce-
ment partners include, but are not limited to, state police from
New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Louisiana, Virginia,
Georgia, and Florida. Additionally, the group has participants from
U.S. Customs, the FBI, the Waterfront Commission, and several
local police departments.
For contact information for regional transportation security
councils, see the Resources section of this book.
Key Points
•
Regional cargo theft task forces often serve as the best law
enforcement contact for a stolen load or warehouse burglary.
•
These units are located strategically throughout the country
and work cargo theft cases exclusivelydincreasing their
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS 259

effectiveness in locating stolen loads, recovering the goods,
and making arrests.
•
Budget cuts faced by numerous federal, state, and local
agencies have created signiﬁcant pressures on cargo theft
units for size reduction or elimination altogether.
•
Other organizations exist to assist industry professionals in
information sharing, training in best practices, and keeping
up to date on emerging trends.
•
Groups such as regional transportation security councils are
excellent examples of privateepublic sector collaboration in
the area of cargo theft and its prevention.
260
Chapter 18 CARGO THEFT TASK FORCES AND ORGANIZATIONS

19
BEYOND SECURITY
INFORMATION IN THIS CHAPTER:
• Increasing operational efﬁciencies through low-cost technology
• Monitoring vendor compliance
• Reducing damage/spoilage with same products used for security purposes
• Allowing logistics needs drive the use of tracking systems and budget
with security as the secondary beneﬁt
The beneﬁts of a secure supply chain go beyond reduction in
cargo theft losses. While covert tracking devices, trackable locks,
and other electronic equipment are tremendous assets to protect
in-transit cargo, that is only one of numerous functions they can
perform. By using this same technology as a logistics manage-
ment tool, shippers and their logistics providers can gain
incredible insight into the functionality of their supply chains,
with visibility and previously unattainable control of their cargo
movements.
This concept, if used to its full potential, can quickly result in
the following beneﬁts to a supply chain:
•
Increased productivity
•
Improved inventory management
•
Improved customer relations
•
Increased supply chain visibility
•
Higher proﬁts through theft prevention
•
Product and consumer safety
•
Reduction in transit times
The following feedback is from a major manufacturer and
their usage of covert tracking devices and the multitude of
downstream positive impacts (due to the sensitive nature of their
business, the company’s name was omitted).
The company has 3500 truckloads annually in the United States that
transport cargo to their 19 regional warehouses with an average
wholesale value of $3 million.
Cargo Theft, Loss Prevention, and Supply Chain Security. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-416007-1.00019-4
Copyright  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
261

In 2006, the company began purchasing embeddable tracking
devices (speciﬁcally the FreightWatch tracking devicesdthe PT-200 and
the F1) and monitors loads from end to end.
Since 2006, the company has had four loads stolen, but all were
recovered intact and ultimately made an on-time delivery.
One was even more critical to the company, the variety of other
beneﬁts that the tracking devices and their monitoring has brought,
which include:
•
Carriers are held accountable for the location of the cargo at all times
because the company can track them 24/7.
•
The company can correct problems immediately before they cause
supply chain disruptions.
•
They have established a virtual warehouse concept in which they are
able to receipt cargo while still in transit.
•
The company has been able to lower their deployed inventory, saving
them $100 million over the past 5 years.
•
They have improved customer service by not losing cargo in transit
and making on-time deliveries: 1 late delivery in 2009, 0 later deliv-
eries in 2010, compared to 44 in 2004 and 25 in 2005.
•
The costs of logistics have been lowered substantially.
•
They have become a preferred company to do business with.
•
They have experienced zero stockouts.
•
They have inventory accuracy of 99.99994% with less than three
cases of product unaccounted for.
•
They have increased inventory turns from 34.8 to 52.6 per year.
•
Their total delivered cost per pound of product is 19 cents.
The bottom line for the company is:
•
Outperform their competitors
•
Turn their inventory faster
•
Sell fresher product
•
Have fewer late deliveries
•
Have higher level of inventory accuracy
•
Get preferential treatment from suppliers (carriers and warehouses)
•
Are growing market share in a declining industry
Standards of care, predictability, and supply chain optimiza-
tion are concepts that every logistician wishes to maximize and
can now be accomplished through simple monitoring combined
with in-transit security and operational plans that will improve
proﬁtability and customer satisfaction.
The use of tracking devices throughout the supply chain
for monitoring and optimization can ensure that companies
are provided with real-time information at the granular level,
providing previously unimaginable details on supply chain
262
Chapter 19 BEYOND SECURITY

disruptions, policy compliance, and in-transit milestones to
predict delivery times and cargo disposition upon arrival.
Through this, the supply chain manager is able to take control of
his cargo regardless of where it is in the world and turn data into
action in real time (Greene, 2010).
Delays, temperature excursions, route deviations, and theftd
all of these remove efﬁciency from the supply chain and result in
late deliveries, refused cargo, and, in the end, increased costs. By
seeing
delays
as
they
occur,
downstream
transportation
providers can be made aware and adjust their operations
accordingly. Clients can be notiﬁed and arrangements can be
made to fulﬁll short-term needs until the delays are sorted out.
Temperature-controlled cargo can be intercepted and trans-
ferred into a working “reefer” trailer or nearby cold storage
facility, as opposed to relying on temperature recorders showing
the cargo went out of tolerance; useful information but not
actionabledhelpful in preventing loss.
And of course this is in addition to the security implication of
the tracking devices and software, ensuring that cargo is on the
approved routes, on time, and, when deviations occur, trained
personnel can respond with a predetermined escalation proce-
dure to ensure that the cargo is secure or, in the event of theft, is
recovered promptly.
Operational Efﬁciencies
Data provided by cargo tracking technology enable the
development of real-time supply chain performance, allowing for
more precise information, which leads to better decision making
and customer service. This will enable the concept of standards of
care to take on a whole new dimension with the visibility
provided by the tracking system coupled with operational metrics
such as
•
On-time performance
•
Unauthorized stops/delays/routes
•
Unauthorized transshipment locations
•
Identifying unauthorized carriers
•
Identifying unauthorized modes of transportation
•
Monitoring handling to include temperature, humidity, and
shock/impact
By having this information readily available for every ship-
ment, mangers have a powerful tool for supply chain predict-
ability and optimization. Days of product in inventory, cycle
times, transit times, and unplanned delays are a few of the
metrics that translate into direct costs.
Chapter 19 BEYOND SECURITY 263

By optimizing the supply chain through more pinpoint per-
formance metrics, management can reﬁne operations to the
minute rather than hours or days by having access to
•
Actual departure times
•
Actual arrival times
•
Alerts prior to arrival
•
Transit time measurements
•
Inventory on hand
•
Achieved in-transit milestones
This capability, combined with real-time information sur-
rounding unplanned events, places tremendous power in the
hands of the supply chain manager and his or her ability to ensure
optimal efﬁciency at every step in the operation. By using the
tracking technologies already available today, shippers can weigh
whether they are receiving what they pay for in their supply chain
vendor management process, can ensure optimization throughout
their operations, and can create methods for supply chain ﬂexi-
bility while maintaining maximum security and efﬁciency.
Key Points
•
Operational efﬁciencies can be substantially expanded upon
and improved by being able to track cargo end to end.
•
Supplier compliance will increase as supply chain disruptions
decrease.
•
Beneﬁts also include decreasing logistics costs combined with
more accurate inventories.
•
The addition of sensor technologies coupled with remote
tracking services (such as temperature monitoring and shock/
drop) can allow shippers to reroute or stop damaged/spoiled
goods in transit and dispatch new product in a more timely
manner.
•
Cargo tracking devices allow a company to gain positive
control and visibility of a company’s supply chain from end
to end.
264
Chapter 19 BEYOND SECURITY

RESOURCES
Cargo theft data and risk analysis:
FreightWatch International: www.freightwatchintl.com
Transported Asset Protection Association (TAPA):
www.tapaonline.org
CargoNet: www.cargonet.com
Chubb Group of Insurance Companies: www.chubb.com
Eastern Region Transportation Security Council: 201-330-3681
Southeastern
Transportation
Security
Council:
info@
GaCargoTheft.com
Southwest Transportation Security Council: www.swtsc.org
Western States Transportation Security Council: 562-404-3317
Supply
Chain
d
ISAC:
https://secure.sc-investigate.net/
SC-ISAC/
Cargo tracking device technologies:
Please note that while almost any cargo tracking technology
can be purchased from the device manufacturer, many of
these do not come with associated tracking software, an
obvious prerequisite if your intent is to track cargo on the
move. The companies and websites that follow are excellent
resources to learn more about devices and their capabilities;
however, in order to purchase devices for the purposes of
tracking cargo, please see Cargo Track Solutions.
Cargo tracking solutions:
FreightWatch International e www.freightwatchintl.com
Track What Matters e www.trackwhatmatters.com
OnAsset e www.onasset.com
Lojack SC Integrity e www.lojacksci.com
FedEx SenseAware e www.fedex.com
Cargo security hardware:
Transport Security e www.transportsecurity.com
Sealock e www.sealock.com
Carrier Security e www.carriersecurity.com
TydenBrooks e http://www.tydenbrooks.com/
Truck tracking solutions:
Qualcomm e www.qualcomm.com
Skybitz e www.skybitz.com

Sendum e www.sendum.com
Enfora e www.enfora.com
Cargo theft task forces:
Miami TOMCATS (Miami, Florida): 305-471-2142
LA County Sheriff’s Department (CargoCats): 310-603-3137
California Highway Patrol (CTIPs): soctip@chp.ca.gov
New Jersey State Police: 732-548-7153
Midwest Cargo Theft Unit: cargo_theft@isp.state.il.us
Georgia Bureau of Investigations: info@GaCargoTheft.com
Security manuals and technical information:
“ASIS Protection of Assets Manual” (www.asisonline.org)
“Effective Security Management,” Fifth Edition, by Charles
Sennewald (Butterworth-Heinemann, 2011)
“Handbook of Loss Prevention and Crime Prevention,” Fourth
Edition, by Lawrence J. Fennelly (Elsevier, 2004)
Transported Asset Protection Association (TAPA) Freight Secu-
rity Requirements (FSR) document (www.tapaonline.org/)
Transported Asset Protection Association (TAPA) Trans-
portation Security Requirements (TSR) document (www
.tapaonline.org/)
266
RESOURCES

GLOSSARY
Access controls Systems and barriers designed to ensure that only authorized
personnel have access to an area or facility or sections within.
Active monitoring Process of remotely monitoring shipments through an online
platform that receives a signal from some form of electronic transmitter.
Break glass sensors Motion detection sensors designed speciﬁcally to detect when
glass has been broken.
Brokering When a transportation provider contracts with another transportation
provider to move a load they were asked to move.
Cargo seal A serialized single-use device inserted onto the control door
hasp of the cargo space of an ocean container, rail car, or other cargo
conveyance. The cargo seal is designed to detect signs of tampering or unau-
thorized entry.
Carrier Company contracted to transport product from point A to point B with no
responsibility for breaking down product, conducting inventory, or any storage
or distribution.
Catastrophic loss A large-scale cargo theft incident, generally used when referring
to a full truckload theft or warehouse burglary scenario with loss of
a substantial quantity of high-value goods.
Closed circuit television (CCTV) System composed of video cameras positioned
throughout the interior and exterior of a facility. The term CCTV also refers to
the digital video recorder (DVR) or other system used to record and store the
images.
Contract security guard Use of a third-party security company to provide on-site
(human) security presence. Also known as manguarding.
Corrective actions Recommendations from FreightWatch that McKesson should
implement in an effort to mitigate the observed risk.
Covert tracking Method of tracking in-transit shipments so that if stolen, the
tracking device is not located readily by the criminals, providing an increased
opportunity for recovery.
Covert tracking device A battery-powered electronic device that emits a signal
through either cellular towers and/or GPS satellites. This device is embedded in
the cargo being shipped.
Driver departure interview A documented brieﬁng given to the driver outlining all
in-transit security actions that should be taken while in possession of
a shipment.
Driver pickup process A standardized procedure by which a driver is required to
produce predetermined information, such as a government issued identiﬁca-
tion and bill of lading number, to ensure the individual is authorized to pick up
the intended shipment.
Egress Movement of personnel or vehicles from a facility or its associated grounds.
Embedded When a covert tracking device is placed inside packaging that makes it
appear to be the same as the other product assembled and palletized for
shipment.
Exit searches Process by which personnel are inspected prior to exiting the
warehouse ﬂoor or facility. There are a wide variety of ways by which exit
searches can be conducted, pending local law regulations.

Freight forwarder Company that specializes in storage and distribution of goods
including, at times, handling logistics and carrier selection.
Freight security requirements Requirements that a company places on its
vendors regarding how product is to be handled, stored, or transported. The
requirements are speciﬁc to the security protocols established by the shipper.
Full truckload, also referred to as truckload A dedicated trailer for a single
shipment from origin to destination.
Fulﬁllment Process by which product is selected, staged, prepared, and loaded.
Geofence An electronic barrier established around a single location to trigger a
notiﬁcation when a mobile asset travels outside predetermined parameters.
Georoute Turn-by-turn directions between two directions that has an electronic
fence (same concept as a geofence) that will alert a control center when
a device deviates outside of the allowable boundary around the route.
Global positioning system (GPS) An onboard tracking system used for asset
management, and ancillary, purposes by transportation providers.
High-value cage/vault An interior room within a storage facility that has
additional security measures such as reinforced walls, full ﬂoor-to-ceiling
metal fencing, access control measures, and CCTV for the storage of high-value
goods, controlled substances, and other products more prone to theft.
In transit Term used when a shipment has left the origin but has not yet reached
its destination.
In-transit lanes The highway route a transportation provider uses to move
product from the origin to the destination.
Ingress Movement of personnel or vehicles into the facility or its associated
grounds.
Key control Policy or procedure by which all keys (hard keys/electronic
keys) within a facility or other business unit are assigned by serial number,
logged, and secured when not in use or in the possession of authorized
personnel.
Load/shipment brokering The act of a transportation provider using a third party
to transport a client’s shipment.
Local/howler alarm Audible alarm designed to let personnel within the facility
know that a barrier, such as emergency exit door, has been breached.
LTL Less than truckload carriers collect partial shipments from various shippers
and consolidate them into a single trailer for line haul to the delivering terminal
or to a hub terminal where the cargo will be sorted, consolidated, and trucked
locally to ﬁnal destination.
Minimum security requirements Established corporate security requirements
that must be met by all facilities or business units within a given organization.
Generally written at a high level, from which more speciﬁc security policies can
be tailored to each business unit.
Motion detection An array of sensors designed to detect the presence of a person
within the area of coverage and alert a central monitoring station.
Overt tracking Method of tracking in-transit shipments either by personnel (in
a trail vehicle) or through electronic means that can be identiﬁed readily (e.g.,
a GPS antenna on top of a tractor or trailer).
Perimeter security A combination of physical barriers and access control
measures designed to prevent unauthorized access to a facility’s grounds.
Physical security Used to describe barriers, walls, fencing, and other items that
provide a physical boundary designed to delay the access of unauthorized
personnel.
Ping rate Rate at which a covert tracking device sends a signal detailing its
location.
268
GLOSSARY

Prealerts Transmittal of shipment information to the intended destination,
including information on the driver, security seal numbers, product/inventory,
and estimated arrival time.
Proactive monitoring See Active monitoring
Procedural security Method for securing an area or facility through policies and
procedures, such as not allowing unescorted personnel within a facility.
Red zone The ﬁrst 200 miles traveled from the point of origin (“red zone”).
Security assessment Site-speciﬁc analysis of existing security measures in place
and their effectiveness against the threat of break-in, burglary, and internal
theft.
Security awareness training Formalized training provided by an employer to staff
covering the security policies and procedures of a given organization.
Security countermeasure Policies, procedures, personnel, and equipment in
place to delay, detect, and prevent unauthorized access, theft, and other
criminal activity within a designated area or facility.
Security escort The act of physically driving behind a shipment to provide security
oversight.
Security patrols Security method designed to inspect the interior/exterior of
a facility to ensure the physical integrity of all doors, windows, and other points
of entry.
Security requirements Requirements that a company places on its logistics
service providers regarding how their product is to be handled, stored, and
transported, speciﬁcally relating to the security protocols that the shipper
requires them to implement.
Shipper Company that owns the product being shipped. Typically, this is the
manufacturer that receives orders from a customer base that they fulﬁll
through a distribution chain.
Shipping area Area of a facility where product is introduced into a trailer/
container.
Site security manager Designated member of the staff tasked with developing and
enforcing all security policies and procedures.
Staging Process of placing product in an area (e.g., loading docks) in order to
expedite loading or movement. Term is often used with trailers loaded prior to
the driver’s arrival and then left in a parking area waiting for pickup.
Stopping procedures Part of an in-transit security plan; stopping procedures
outlining authorized stopping points en route, as well as all actions that should
be taken by the driver while stopped with product aboard.
Supply chain security Use of security countermeasures throughout an organiza-
tion’s supply chain to include all facilities and conveyances (including third-
party conveyances) designed to ensure the safety and integrity of product
through customer delivery.
Team drivers Having two drivers transport a load in lieu of a single, or solo, driver.
Theoretically, this is designed to provide virtual nonstop transport from origin
to destination and ensure that one of the team will be with the truck at all
times. The last point is key, which is why consideration should be given to
prohibiting the use of husbandewife, fathereson, or other relative team
drivers.
Transportation providers Third-party provider that manages or provides the
transportation of products for a shipper.
Unmanned facility Term used when a facility is left unattended by associates for
any period of time.
GLOSSARY 269

FREIGHTWATCH
INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S.
CARGO THEFT REPORT
January 19, 2012
Introduction
FreightWatch International actively tracks and records cargo
theft activity around the globe, categorizing stolen loads under 11
different commodity types, and tracking by date, location, modus
operandi (MO), and speciﬁc product. This report summarizes
U.S. theft data collected in 2011 and analyzes trends derived from
database content, law enforcement information, and industry
personnel. It also draws on observations by personnel in the ﬁeld.
Summary
FreightWatch recorded 974 cargo theft incidents throughout
the United States in 2011dan 8.3% increase over 2010. This
represents the highest number of theft incidents per year on
record.
With an average of 81.2 cargo theft incidents per month, the
U.S. supply chain sustained large-scale theft incidents (e.g., full-
truckload/container thefts, warehouse burglaries, driver thefts) at
a rate of 2.67 incidents per day.
Of the 974 cargo thefts recorded, 853 (87.5%) were full-
truckload or
container thefts
and 34 (3.4%)
were
facility
burglaries. The year 2011 also saw a rash of pickups by decep-
tion (ﬁctitious), with 38 recorded for the year. The 38 thefts
accounted for 4% of all incidents. Violence remained an insig-
niﬁcant statistical proportion of cargo theft incidents in the
United States, accounting for only 1% of the total incidents
recorded for the year.

Major Trends
One of the most noticeable trends in 2011 was the continued
decline in cargo theft incidents targeting the electronics sector. In
2006, this sector comprised 38% of all recorded supply chain theft
incidents in the United States, while in 2011 it recorded just 17%.
The most commonly targeted product type for the second year in
a row was food/drinks at 22%, followed by electronics at 17% and
building/industrial products at 14%.
Deceptive pickups continued to rise in 2011, increasing to 29 on
the year, up from 24 in 2010. From April 20 through May 5, eight
deceptive pickups occurred across Indiana, Ohio, Kentucky, and
New York, involving goods across four different product types.
This is just one example of organized criminal gangs’ effective use
of ambiguity in the supply chain process to obtain productdand
in this case have the victims literally hand over the cargo to them.
While the rate of cargo theft has continued to climb annually,
the average value per incident dropped substantially in 2011,
decreasing by 31% for the year. While numerous factors
contribute to the decline in the average loss value, the largest
factors include a lack of multiple $1 million-plus incidents,
a dramatic decrease in the average value of pharmaceutical
thefts, and an increase in theft of lower-valued product types,
speciﬁcally from the food/drinks industry.
By State
The rate of incidents grew in the top six states for cargo theft in
2011. California, Florida, New Jersey, Texas, Georgia, and Illinois
272
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT

all saw increases in the total recorded number of incidents for the
year. The rate of theft for these six states combined grew by 13.7%
in 2011.
The top six states for cargo theft in the United States
accounted for 75% of all recorded incidents. California, which
recorded 254 cargo thefts in 2011, claimed 26% of the nation’s
cargo theft incidents.
Illinois, which saw an increase from 33 theft incidents in 2010
to 53 incidents in 2011, overtook Tennessee as the sixth most
active state for cargo theft in the country.
State
2010
2011
California
229
254
Florida
117
135
New Jersey
121
124
Texas
84
104
Georgia
58
60
Illinois
33
53
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT 273

By Value
The average value per incident has continued to decline since
2009, when it peaked at $591,000 per cargo theft.
The average value per incident in 2011 was $319,000, down
31% from the average 2010 value of $468,500.
The year 2011 also marked the ﬁrst year on record that the
pharmaceutical industry did not have the highest value per theft
incident. Instead, the electronics industry averaged just under
$1 million per theft for the year, while pharmaceuticals averaged
only $585,000.
In fact, as mentioned before, the substantial decline in the
total value of pharmaceuticals stolen for the year is a signiﬁcant
contributing factor to the overall decrease in the loss value per
incident. In previous years, the average loss per pharmaceutical
theft averaged between $3.5 and $4 million, but thefts in 2011
come in at just over a quarter of those ﬁgures.
Warehouse and facility burglaries/robberies in 2011 netted
criminal gangs an average of $2.92 million per incident. The largest
facility robbery occurred in Fremont, California, where armed
thieves made off with $37 million in microchips. The largest facility
274
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT

burglary took place in Orlando, Florida, on January 16, when
criminals stole an estimated $10 million in mobile phones.
By Date
August and October recorded the highest number of theft
incidents in 2011, with 104 and 98 incidents, respectively. This
remains true to historical cargo theft trends, with spikes in
activity common in mid- to late summer and the month of
October. Over the past 6 years, October has consistently been the
month with the highest or second highest rate of theft year
after year.
Product Type
2010
2011
Alcohol
$243,000
$203,000
Auto/Parts
$99,000
$98,000
Building/Industrial
$172,000
$195,000
Clothing/Shoes
$286,000
$190,000
Consumer Care Products
$280,000
$286,000
Electronics
$512,000
$998,000
Food/Drinks
$125,000
$109,000
Home/Garden
$104,000
$88,000
Miscellaneous
$135,000
$99,000
Pharmaceuticals
$3,780,000
$585,000
Tobacco
$1,263,000
$400,000
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT 275

As shown in the chart here, cargo theft rates on average were in
decline throughout 2010 (even though the year ﬁnished with 899
thefts, the most on record at the time), with the rate of theft ﬂat-
lining through the winter months into 2011. Thefts then began to
rise relatively sharply into Q2 and Q3 of 2011.
276
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT

Over the 2011 holiday periods, cargo thefts increased from
2.67 thefts per day to 4.3 thefts per dayda 61% increase. As for
previous reports, FreightWatch analyzed the theft rate for each of
the major U.S. holidays and their associated weekends (days off).
Holidays assessed were:
•
New Year’s Day
•
Memorial Day
•
Fourth of July
•
Labor Day
•
Thanksgiving
•
Christmas
•
New Year’s Eve
Labor Day accounted for 13 theft incidents, Thanksgiving had
12, and the Fourth of July recorded 11, which is comparable to
theft rates over these same holidays in previous years.
As cargo continues to be stolen while parked (or otherwise
stationary) and unattended, the predominant trend of weekend
cargo theft continues. As illustrated in the chart here, cargo theft
in the United States is largely centered around weekend periods,
with
thefts
discovered
on
Sunday
evenings
and
Monday
mornings.
The same is true for facility burglaries, as criminals gener-
ally take advantage of weekends to have additional time to
move the stolen goods before the theft is discovered. In 2011,
24 of the 35 (69%) facility burglaries recorded occurred over
a weekend.
Day
# Thefts
Sunday
163
Monday
146
Tuesday
103
Wednesday
124
Thursday
107
Friday
154
Saturday
177
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT 277

By Product Type
Food and beverages were the most sought-after product type
for the second year in a row in 2011, accounting for 23%, or 221 of
the 974 recorded incidents. Electronics was second at 17%, while
building/industrial was third at 14%.
278
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT

It should be noted that recorded thefts targeting building/
industrial products increased from 86 in 2010 to 137 in 2011,
a 59% jump. Forty-three of the 137 (31%) thefts recorded in this
product type for 2011 occurred in the state of Texas, speciﬁcally
in the Dallas/Fort Worth metroplex.
Electronics
As mentioned previously, the rate of theft in the electronics
industry has declined as a total percentage of general cargo theft,
coming in at 17% in 2011, the lowest rate on record. At the same
time, however, the average loss per incident in the electronics
sector surged in 2011, increasing 95% from $512,000 per incident
in 2010 to $998,000 per incident in 2011.
Of the 166 recorded cargo thefts for the electronics sector in
2011, 63 occurred in the state of California, 22 in Florida, 17 in
New Jersey, and 12 in Georgia.
The most targeted items in the electronics sector were televi-
sions, consumer electronics, and cellular telephones.
Pharmaceuticals
One of the most notable trends for 2011 was not only the
decrease in the overall number of cargo theft incidents involving
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT 279

pharmaceuticals (49 in 2010 vs 36 in 2011), but also the dramatic
decrease in the average value per incident within the sector ($3.78
million in 2010 vs $585,000 in 2011). With only two thefts valued
at more than $1 million, 2011 recorded the lowest overall value of
pharmaceutical thefts in the FreightWatch database dating back
to 2006.
Of the 35 pharmaceutical theft incidents, Indiana and Florida
tied for the most, with six each; Tennessee recorded ﬁve, while
Pennsylvania, Michigan, California, and New York all had two
thefts each.
Theft of trailer accounted for 28 of the theft incidents, with two
deceptive pickups and two facility burglaries.
Foods/Drinks
The food/drinks industry has surged among cargo theft gangs
as the most predominantly targeted and stolen product type in
the United States. Accounting for just 13% in 2007, food/drinks
became the most stolen product type in 2010, at 21%, and grew to
23% in 2011.
Fifty-two thefts occurred in the state of Florida (accounting for
24% of all incidents in the product type), 47 in California, 27 in
New Jersey, and 20 in Texas. These four states (also the top four
states for cargo theft in general) accounted for 66% of all cargo
theft in the food/drinks industry.
The most commonly stolen products in this category included
meat products, energy drinks, cheese, candy, and sodas, with an
average loss per incident of $110,000.
The map shown here is an interactive map showing cargo
theft divided into four main categories: general cargo, elec-
tronics, food/drinks, and pharmaceuticals. Click the URL below
the map to view in your browser and interact with the data
points.
280
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT

(To view the interactive map, go to http://batchgeo.com/
map/c6c1b4bd5b40f95c26c4b02fb11b8b14)
By Theft Type and Location
Cargo thieves in the United States continue to predominantly
target loaded trailers and containers that are stationary and left
unattended. Approximately 85% of all recorded thefts fell into this
category in 2011.
Deceptive pickups increased dramatically in 2011. In the
spring of 2011 more than eight deceptive pickups were recorded
in just over a week. While the thefts were related by MO, the
locations were spread out across the Midwest and Eastern
seaboard, with widely varying types of products targeted.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT 281

In 2011, 63% of all cargo theft incidents with a known location
occurred in unsecured parking areas. The major locations of this
type of theft were truck stops (33%), public parking (18%), drop
lots (11.5%), and facility lots (8.6%).
Theft from secured lots decreased from 23% of known loca-
tions in 2010 to 15% of known locations in 2011.
*There is no general consensus within the industry on the
deﬁnition of “secured lot,” and this designation is assigned when
a theft report indicates that the location was a secured parking
area.
Contact
Dan Burges
Senior Director, Intelligence
512.532.0159
dan.burges@freightwatchintl.com
Facility Burglary
282
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL 2011 U.S. CARGO THEFT REPORT

FREIGHTWATCH
INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL
THREAT ASSESSMENT
March 12, 2012
Global Cargo Theft Risk
Global cargo theft risks as shown on the map vary greatly from
country to country. Even within individual countries, risks can
vary from region to region. On a country-by-country basis, cargo
theft threats, as other criminal activity, typically are rooted in
social, economic, and cultural conditions. The prevention of
cargo theft on a global scale requires intimate knowledge of
incident trends on a regional basis, as security programs and
mitigation techniques do not always transfer successfully from
region to region.

Organizations must diligently gather intelligence and adapt
their anti-theft programs to address local threats. The purpose of
this report is to outline the risk of cargo theft on a global level,
highlighting signiﬁcant countries in the global supply chain, to
assist industry decision makers in determining their supply chain
security needs.
According to data collected by FreightWatch International,
Mexico, Brazil, South Africa, the United States, Russia, India, and
the United Kingdom are the countries most at risk for cargo theft
globally.
About FreightWatch
FreightWatch is the world leader in logistics security services,
offering tracking and monitoring solutions that provide organi-
zations with cargo security, transparency, and supply chain
integrity from origin to destination. Using real-time visibility
technology and layered solutions, organizations can actively
monitor their cargo anywhere in the global supply chain, to
mitigate the risks associated with theft, spoilage, counterfeiting,
and more. With operations across the globe, FreightWatch is
uniquely positioned to deliver regionally and globally across
diverse supply chains.
The FreightWatch intelligence division collects, analyzes, and
reports on cargo theft and supply chain risk across the globe,
providing
readers,
members,
and
clients
with
up-to-date,
actionable intelligence crucial for making informed supply chain
security decisions.
To register for the intelligence center and receive alerts, bulle-
tins and reports, visit FreightWatch at www.freightwatchintl.com.
North America
Cargo theft in North America varies substantially among the
three countries. While cargo theft in the United States is
predominantly nonconfrontational, with less than 2% of all
recorded incidents involving violence, cargo theft in Mexico is
almost exclusively violent, with armed gunmen roaming the
country, stealing high-value loads seemingly at will.
The differences do not stop there. Cargo theft in Canada is
centered in the country’s metropolitan areas, with minimal theft
occurring in its rural countryside, but Mexico sees thefts occur-
ring throughout the country, with rural locations, particularly
284
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

those involving trafﬁc bottlenecks, at the same level of risk as
large metropolitan areas.
The United States experienced an 8% increase in cargo theft
activity in 2011 over the previous year, reaching a record volume.
Mexico saw a comparable rise in the rate of cargo theftdup 13%
over 2010dalthough the country continues to face numerous
other challenges to its supply chains, including cartel-related
violence, natural disasters, and smuggling operations.
Theft data in Canada continued to be sparse in 2011, given the
lack of a central recording or information delivery system.
Anecdotal data, however, indicate that theft rates in the known
high-risk areas of the Greater Toronto Area, Montreal, Vancouver,
and Edmonton continued at high rates, requiring shippers to
apply additional security measures and protocols to ensure that
cargo reaches its destination safely.
United States
FreightWatch recorded 974 cargo theft incidents throughout
the United States in 2011dan 8.3% increase over 2010. This
represents the highest number of theft incidents per year on
record. With an average of 81.2 cargo theft incidents per month,
the U.S. supply chain sustained large-scale theft incidents (e.g.,
full-truckload/container
thefts,
warehouse
burglaries,
driver
thefts) at a rate of 2.67 incidents per day.
Of the 974 cargo thefts recorded, 853 (87.5%) were full-
truckload or
container thefts
and 34 (3.4%)
were
facility
burglaries. The year 2011 also saw a rash of pickups by deception
(ﬁctitious), with 38 recorded for the year. The 38 thefts accounted
for 4% of all incidents. Violence remained an insigniﬁcant
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 285

statistical portion of cargo theft incidents in the United States,
accounting for only 1% of the total incidents recorded for the
year.
Major Trends
One of the most noticeable trends in 2011 was the continued
decline in cargo theft incidents targeting the electronics sector. In
2006, this sector comprised 38% of all recorded supply chain theft
incidents in the United States, while in 2011 it recorded just 17%.
The most commonly targeted product type for the second year in
a row was food/drinks at 22%, followed by electronics at 17% and
building/industrial products at 14%.
Deceptive pickups continued to rise in 2011, increasing to 38
on the year, up from 29 in 2010. From April 20 through May 5,
eight deceptive pickups occurred across Indiana, Ohio, Kentucky,
and New York, involving goods across four different product
types. This is just one example of organized criminal gangs’
effective use of ambiguity in the supply chain process to obtain
productdand in this case have the victims literally hand over the
cargo to them.
While the rate of cargo theft has continued to climb annually,
the average value per incident dropped substantially in 2011,
decreasing by 31% for the year. Although numerous factors
contribute to the decline in the average loss value, the largest
factors include a lack of multiple $1 million-plus incidents,
a dramatic decrease in the average value of pharmaceutical thefts
and an increase in theft of lower valued product types, speciﬁcally
from the food/drinks industry.
The rate of incidents grew in the top six states for cargo theft in
2011. California, Florida, New Jersey, Texas, Georgia, and Illinois
all saw increases in the total recorded number of incidents for the
year. The rate of theft for these six states combined grew by 13.7%
in 2011.
The top six states for cargo theft in the United States
accounted for 75% of all recorded incidents. California, which
recorded 254 cargo thefts in 2011, claimed 26% of the nation’s
cargo theft incidents.
Illinois, which saw an increase from 33 theft incidents in 2010
to 53 incidents in 2011, overtook Tennessee as the sixth most
active state for cargo theft in the country.
The average value per incident in 2011 was $319,000, down
31% from the average 2010 value of $468,500.
The year 2011 also marked the ﬁrst year on record that the
pharmaceutical industry did not have the highest value per theft
286
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

incident. Instead, the electronics industry averaged just under
$1 million per theft for the year, while pharmaceuticals averaged
only $585,000.
The substantial decline in the total value of pharmaceuticals
stolen for the year is a signiﬁcant contributing factor to the overall
decrease in the loss value per incident. In previous years, the loss
per pharmaceutical theft averaged between $3.5 and $4 million,
but thefts in 2011 come in at just over a quarter of those ﬁgures.
Warehouse and facility burglaries/robberies in 2011 netted
criminal gangs an average of $2.92 million per incident. The
largest facility robbery occurred in Fremont, California, where
armed thieves made off with $37 million in microchips. The
largest facility burglary took place in Orlando, Florida, on January
16, 2011, when criminals stole an estimated $10 million in mobile
phones.
As cargo continues to be stolen while parked (or otherwise
stationary) and unattended, the predominant trend of weekend
cargo theft continues. As illustrated in the following chart, cargo
theft in the United States is largely centered around weekend
periods, with thefts discovered on Sunday evenings and Monday
mornings.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 287

The same is true for facility burglaries, as criminals generally
take advantage of weekends to have additional time to move the
stolen goods before the theft is discovered. In 2011, 24 of the 35
(69%) facility burglaries recorded occurred over a weekend.
Food and drinks were the most sought-after product type for
the second year in a row in 2011, accounting for 23%, or 221, of
the 974 recorded incidents. Electronics was second at 17%, while
building/industrial was third at 14%.
It should be noted that recorded thefts targeting building/
industrial products increased from 86 in 2010 to 137 in 2011,
a 59% jump. Forty-three of the 137 (31%) thefts recorded in this
product type for 2011 occurred in the state of Texas, speciﬁcally
in the Dallas/Fort Worth metroplex.
As mentioned previously, the rate of theft in the electronics
industry has declined as a total percentage of general cargo theft,
coming in at 17% in 2011, the lowest rate on record. At the same
time, however, the average loss per incident in the electronics
sector surged in 2011, increasing 95% from $512,000 per incident
in 2010 to $998,000 per incident in 2011.
Of the 166 recorded cargo thefts for the electronics sector in
2011, 63 occurred in the state of California, 22 in Florida, 17 in
New Jersey, and 12 in Georgia. The most targeted items in the
electronics sector were televisions, consumer electronics, and
cellular telephones.
One of the most notable trends for 2011 was not only the
decrease in the overall number of cargo theft incidents involving
pharmaceuticals (49 in 2010 vs 36 in 2011), but the dramatic
decrease in the average value per incident within the sector ($3.78
million in 2010 vs. $585,000 in 2011). With only two thefts valued
at more than $1 million, 2011 recorded the lowest overall value of
pharmaceutical thefts in the FreightWatch database dating back
to 2006.
The food/drinks industry has surged among cargo theft gangs
as the most predominantly targeted and stolen product type in
the United States. Accounting for just 13% in 2007, food/drinks
became the most stolen product type in 2010, at 21%, and grew to
23% in 2011.
Fifty-two thefts occurred in the state of Florida (accounting for
24% of all incidents in the product type), 47 in California, 27 in
New Jersey, and 20 in Texas. These four states (also the top four
states for cargo theft in general) accounted for 66% of all cargo
theft in the food/drinks industry. The most commonly stolen
products in this category included meat products, energy drinks,
cheese, candy, and sodas, with an average loss per incident of
$110,000.
288
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

Theft Type and Location
Cargo thieves in the United States continue to predominantly
target loaded trailers and containers that are stationary and left
unattended. Approximately 85% of all recorded thefts fell into this
category in 2011.
Deceptive pickups increased dramatically in 2011. In spring of
2011 more than eight deceptive pickups were recorded in just
over a week. While the thefts were related by modus operandi
(MO), the locations were spread out across the Midwest and
Eastern seaboard, with widely varying types of products targeted.
In 2011, 63% of all cargo theft incidents with a known location
occurred in unsecured parking areas. The major locations of this
type of theft were truck stops (33%), public parking (18%), drop
lots (11.5%), and facility lots (8.6%). Theft from secured lots
decreased from 23% of known locations in 2010 to 15% of known
locations in 2011.
Canada
Cargo theft in Canada is largely centered in the major cities
and hubs of the supply chain industry, most notably the Greater
Toronto
Area,
Montreal,
Edmonton,
and
Vancouver.
On
a national level, cargo theft reporting comes almost exclusively
from the regional police agencies covering the Toronto area. They
record theft rates that rival Los Angeles, Dallas/Fort Worth, and
the South Florida area of the United States.
The more rural areas of Canada report virtually no cargo theft
activity. This is not to say that all shipments are arriving
untouched, but rather that reporting in Canada is extremely
sparse, precluding a consistent data stream from which to
conduct analysis.
In areas of high cargo theft activity, product types targeted by
cargo theft gangs in Canada mirror those of the United States.
Food/drinks and building/industrial types topped the list of
targets in Canada in 2011, although the country experienced
a signiﬁcant number of thefts in the electronics category as well.
Cargo theft in the pharmaceutical industry has been increasing
steadily since 2009 in Canada, with more incidents involving
violence in this sector than any other.
The Greater Toronto Area, including Brampton and Mis-
sissauga, is known for having the highest rates of cargo theft in
Canada, rivaling the major supply chain crime areas of the United
States, including Los Angeles, Dallas/Fort Worth, and Miami. In
2011, Mississauga accounted for the majority of reported cargo
theft incidents in the province of Ontario. Theft in Brampton was
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 289

split evenly among auto/parts, building/industrial, clothing/
shoes, electronics, and food/drinks product types.
Also in the Greater Toronto Area, Brampton faces a high risk
of cargo theft. In general, trailer thefts in this area are divided
evenly between thefts from what are listed as secured lots and
thefts from unsecured lots, such as public parking and truck
stops. A large number of cargo theft gangs operate in Brampton
and hit the city on a weekly basis, causing this area of the
Greater Toronto Area to have the highest risk of cargo theft
anywhere in Canada.
Montreal, however, is known to Canadian law enforcement
and industry personnel as having cargo theft activity comparable
to the Greater Toronto Area, although theft data out of the area
are very limited. In January 2011, a container of pharmaceuticals
destined for Australia was hijacked from the Garﬁeld Transport
Yard in Montreal. Montreal also saw full-truckload thefts from
secured yards in the pharmaceutical and consumer care product
types. This occurs most often as cargo is in transit to and from the
port.
Modi Operandi
Organized crime: Cargo theft gangs will travel city to city to
follow important loads and even hire licensed commercial drivers
to transport lucrative cargo from one end of the country to the
other if a buyer can be lined up in advance.
Truck stops: Cargo thefts that occur at truck stops are often
carried out by opportunistic criminals. Drivers who leave their
cargo unattended and unsecured at these locations often fall
victim to cargo criminals.
Warehouse burglary: Criminals
target
high-value products
stored in warehouses. Cargo theft gangs often conspire with
employees at the facility or get one of their own gang members
hired at the targeted warehouse in order to obtain necessary
information on alarms, cameras, and other security measures in
place.
Case Studies
In May 2011, approximately ﬁve to six suspects forcibly
entered a logistics facility in Varennes, Quebec. The employees
were locked in a shipping container while the suspects stole
almost 4000 metric tons of nickel-molybdenum “nickel-moly”
cakes in large sacks. The incident loss was estimated at $1 million.
In July 2011, an unknown number of suspects entered
a secured drop lot in New Brunswick and stole a full truckload of
290
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

power tools and other building products valued at $1.5 million.
Police, suspecting the perpetrators were part of an organized
cargo theft gang that had been operating in the area for some
months, urged industry professionals to take increased security
precautions to avoid being victimized by the group.
Mexico
Double-digit increases in the annual rate of cargo theft over
the past half dozen years, coupled with the extreme nature of the
theft incidents themselves, make cargo theft one of the most
serious threats to the supply chain industry in Mexico. Today,
more than 10,000 hijackings occur each year on roads and high-
ways across the country, with losses reaching an estimated
$9 billion USD.
Steady cargo theft increases of roughly 20 to 40% per year from
2006 to 2010 created serious challenges for companies operating
in Mexico, jeopardizing the security of drivers, and increasing
transportation and security costs. Despite the annual growth
trends through 2010, FreightWatch data for 2011 indicate that
total cargo thefts rose only 13% for the year.
The top areas for cargo theft in 2011 were the State of Mexico,
the Federal District, and the states of Jalisco, Puebla, Veracruz,
and Nuevo Leon. The Federal District and the State of Mexico
together experienced a 9% decrease in cargo theft activity, while
Jalisco saw an 11% decrease. Theft rates increased in all the other
statewide hot spots for cargo crime: Puebla’s rate soared by 118%,
Veracruz’s jumped by 38%, while the rate in Nuevo Leon
increased by 27%.
With the exception of Puebla and the Federal District,
where the total loss value fell by 90 and 63%, respectively,
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 291

cargo theft losses increased in all the major hot spots. Losses
skyrocketed by 569% in Nuevo Leon, jumped by 54% in
Veracruz, and rose by 28 and 12%, respectively, in the State of
Mexico and Jalisco.
Within the top states for cargo theft, Mexico City and the
cities
of
Guadalajara,
Puebla,
Monterrey,
and
Veracruz
continued to experience the highest rates of theft in the nation.
Since 2006, Mexico City has suffered the highest cargo theft rates
in the country. In 2011, almost 50% of thefts recorded in Mexico
City occurred in the boroughs of Iztapalapa, at 30%, and Gustavo
A. Madero, with 18%. Moreover, the four highway routes
reporting the highest number of incidents in 2011 were
MexicoeQueretaro, MexicoePuebla, GuadalajaraeColima, and
PueblaeOrizaba.
The food/drinks industry was most targeted by cargo thieves
for the second year in a row, claiming 21% of all 2011 theft inci-
dents. Likewise, building/industrial, with 27%, and electronics,
with 17%, remained in second and third place. The products most
stolen in the three top categories were sugar, meat, milk, grains,
steel,
copper,
cellular
phones,
televisions,
and
household
appliances.
Overall, the average loss value per theft incident increased by
23% during the reporting period, from $154,000 USD in 2010 to
292
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

$189,510 USD in 2011. The product types that experienced the
largest increases in monetary loss were miscellaneous, which
grew by 848%, electronics at 137%, and food/drinks at 97%.
Showing moderate increases in loss value in 2011 were alcohol
at 38% growth, building/industrial at 29%, tobacco at 16%, and
clothing/shoes at 14%. Losses suffered by the pharmaceutical
industry grew by only 4% last year.
Certain product types, however, showed signiﬁcant decreases
in losses in 2011 compared with a year earlier. Home/garden
dropped by 98%, cash in transit by 57%, and auto/parts by 46%.
Consumer care and chemicals also experienced a decrease in the
amount of losses, at 15 and 7%, respectively.
As in previous years, the most common MO employed by
cargo thieves in 2011 was interception of the truck followed by the
kidnapping of the driver. Although hijackers are always armed,
they use the weapons mainly to intimidate drivers. In most
hijackings in 2011, however, thieves beat drivers with their ﬁsts,
but not to the point of causing serious injuries. The big exception,
however, involved armored vans transporting cash (cash in-
transit thefts) accompanied by security guards. In these cases, the
guards often confronted the thieves, resulting in death by gunﬁre
of either the guards or the gang members. The number of cash
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 293

in-transit thefts nearly tripled year on year, rising from 4 in
2010 to 11 in 2011. The loss value of these thefts, however,
dropped by 57%, from $227,360 USD in 2010 to $98,523 USD in
2011.
In 2011, 84% of loads were targeted while in transit. Trucks
parked by the roadside along Mexican highways were targeted 6%
of the time, while cargo thefts at truck stops comprise 5% of the
2011 total.
Major Trends in 2011
According to Mexico’s National Chamber of Freight and Auto
Transport, cargo theft gangs are increasingly targeting loads at
the request of clients. These “clients” often include the original,
legitimate purchaser of the goods, who makes a deal with the
thieves to buy the stolen load at a price lower than he would have
paid the company that sold the goods. This type of theft requires
planning, as thieves must follow the targeted loads from their
point of origin. Most of the time, thieves use GPS jammers or
disconnect tracking devices and take the stolen loads to their
warehouses before delivery.
Another notable trend for 2011 was the sharp increase in rail
thefts over 2010. Containers carrying metals (especially scrap
metal), textiles, grains, and electronics were the most targeted in
2011. The preferred MO of thieves targeting rail cars is to jump
onto the container in areas where trains are required to travel
294
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

slowly. The thieves then toss products from the load to the side of
the tracks, where other members of the gang load the goods into
vans or trucks. The states of Guanajuato, Nuevo Leon, Michoa-
ca´n, San Luis Potosi, and Sinaloa were the most affected by rail
theft.
Finally, Mexico’s state-owned petroleum company Petroleos
Mexicanos (Pemex) estimates losses resulting from stolen natural
gas condensate totaled $300 million USD from 2006 through
2011. Criminal organizations, both cargo theft gangs and drug
cartels, have been hijacking tank trucks carrying natural gas
condensate and selling it to so-called “ghost” companies,
unregistered companies that do not legally exist.
For additional or more speciﬁc information about cargo theft
in Mexico, please refer to FreightWatch’s Mexico annual cargo
theft report.
Central and South America
Cargo theft has intensiﬁed in most South American countries
since 2009, especially in large industrial cities such as Sao Paulo,
Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires, Bogota, and Caracas. In 2011,
Argentina and Brazil were the two top countries for cargo theft on
the continent.
Because cargo theft in South America always involves violence
or the threat of violence, and the attacks are carried out by
well-armed thieves, the majority of incidents are classiﬁed as
hijackings. Several of the hijackings reported in Peru, Brazil, and
Venezuela in 2011 resulted in the death of the drivers and/or
the security escorts hired to protect the load. Also, most of the
confrontations between police and cargo thieves began with car
chases and ended in shootouts that resulted in the injury or death
of ofﬁcers or criminals.
One of the most popular trends among South American cargo
thieves in 2011 was the use of the fake police MO. This method was
employed principally by large, organized gangs that tend to plan
out their hijackings and engage in preattack information gather-
ingdin these cases, collecting information to determine the best
locations along highways to place their fake security checkpoints.
Domestic and multinational companies transporting high-
value loads (mostly electronics, metals, or pharmaceuticals) are
increasingly utilizing state-of-the-art security technology in order
to protect their loads and ensure the security of their drivers. For
most loads valued in the million-dollar range and above,
companies are adding another layer of protection: armed security
escorts. This is especially the case in Brazil.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 295

Central America, ofﬁcially part of the North American conti-
nent but often associated more with South America, is the region
that pays the least attention to cargo crime. This historically has
made it difﬁcult to determine the region’s red zones for cargo
theft. In 2011, however, authorities and the media in Guatemala
provided enough data to make a determination on some of the
riskiest highways and states for cargo theft in this country.
Brazil
Although cargo theft is a serious concern in several Brazilian
states, nowhere is the situation worse than in Sao Paulo state, the
country’s primary industrial and economic engine. The Cargo
Transporters Union of Sao Paulo State (SETCESP) estimates that
more than half of all cargo crime in Brazil takes place in that state.
From January 1 to December 31, 2011, SETCESP recorded 6958
cargo theft incidents in Sao Paulo state aloneda slight 4.6%
decrease over the 7294 thefts recorded in 2010. On average, 579
thefts occurred per month in 2011, compared with an average of
607 thefts per month in 2010.
In Brazil, the southeast region presents the highest risk of
cargo theft. In 2011, the three states reporting the highest rate of
cargo theft were Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Minas Gerais.
Other states that experienced high cargo theft activities were
Bahia, Espirito Santo, Parana, Santa Catarina, and Rio Grande
do Sul.
296
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

Despite a total decrease in the number of thefts in Sao Paulo
state during 2011, the amount of cargo theft losses increased by
5.7%, from R$279.7 million ($162.3 million USD) in 2010 to
R$295.7 million ($171.6 million USD) in 2011. An average loss
value of R$24.6 million ($14.2 million USD) per month was
recorded in 2011 and R$23.3 million ($13.4 million USD) in
2010.
The most commonly targeted product type for the sixth year in
a row was food/drinks at 30%, followed by electronics at 16% and
less than truckloads (various products from two or more ship-
pers) at 14%. Within the food/drinks industry, agricultural
products such as grains, soybeans, and sugar were heavily tar-
geted, especially around port areas.
By value, the electronics industry experienced the greatest
losses in 2011, at R$85.3 million ($49.3 million USD).
According to SETCESP, 38% of all thefts, or 2673 incidents,
were loads valued at less than R$3000 ($1735 USD); 40%, or 2785
incidents, were loads worth R$3001 to R$30,000 ($1736 to $17,356
USD); 14%, or 997 thefts, involved losses of R$30,001 to R$100,000
Source: Cargo Transporters Union of Sao Paulo State (SETCESP).
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 297

($17,357 to $57,848 USD), and, ﬁnally, 7%, or 503 incidents, were
loads exceeding R$100,000 ($58,284).
Brazilian cargo theft is highly concentrated in Sao Paulo
state, with 52% of all incidents nationwide occurring in this one
state. Within the state, 58% of all thefts occur in the city of Sao
Paulo, 22% occur on the state’s highways, and 12% take place in
other cities in the Greater Sao Paulo area. Measuring cargo theft
outside of Sao Paulo state is challenging, as law enforcement
and other agencies in other states do not keep records on theft
incidents.
The three highways within Sao Paulo state reporting the
greatest number of thefts in 2011 were Anhanguera with 217
incidents, followed by Dutra with 185, and Regis Bittencourt with
140 thefts.
By day of the week, cargo theft activity intensiﬁed on Tues-
days and Wednesdays and started to drop heading into the
weekends. The fewest thefts occurred on Sundays but then
activity picked up signiﬁcantly beginning on Mondays. The
preferred time range for gangs to steal loads was between
10 a.m. and noon.
Source: Cargo Transporters Union of Sao Paulo State (SETCESP).
298
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

Major Trends in 2011
Two of the most noticeable trends in 2011 was the high
number of cargo theft gangs expanding their operations to other
states and the high volume of containers being targeted by cargo
theft gangs at Brazilian commercial sea ports.
Moreover, the fake police MO has been one of the most
popular methods used by thieves since 2009 in Brazil. Fake cops
set up fake police checkpoints and pull drivers over in order to
steal the merchandise. The thieves regularly move the fake
checkpoints to different highways when they suspect that police
have spotted them. Although the thieves’ main objective is to
steal the load, trucks are also stolen, dismantled, and sold as
parts.
Finally, cargo thieves in Brazil have been stealing loads,
most often textiles and grains in 2011, from rail cars while the
train is moving. Similar to cargo thieves in Mexico, the
preferred MO of Brazilian thieves is to jump onto the containers
in areas near train stations or small towns where trains are
required to reduce speed. The thieves toss the products to the
side of the tracks, where other thieves load the merchandise
into their vans.
For additional or more speciﬁc information about cargo theft
in Brazil, please refer to FreightWatch’s Brazil annual cargo theft
report.
Source: Cargo Transporters Union of Sao Paulo State (SETCESP).
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 299

Venezuela
Cargo crime does not receive the level of attention in
Venezuela that it gets in other South American countries such as
Brazil and Argentina. In Venezuela, high crime rates, corruption,
and an unstable political system appear to be higher priorities. As
a consequence, law enforcement and security companies rarely
provide cargo crime statistics, and even then the information is
outdated.
According to local media reports, locales with the highest
thefts rates in 2011 were the capital city of Caracas and the Capital
District and the states of Amazonas, Bolivar, and Apure. The
Central Regional Highway continued to be a red zone for cargo
theft, as it connects Caracas with the important cities of Maracay,
La Victoria, and Valencia. Most hijackings reported by local
newspapers during 2011 involved loads of grains, sugar, and milk
in the food/drinks product type; computers, appliances, and
cellular phones in the electronics category; and metals in the
building/industrial group.
In the southern states, highways close to the borders with
Brazil and Colombia were the most targeted by cargo thieves.
Another supply chain risk in southern Venezuela is the cross-
border, drug-related guerrilla violence between Colombia and
Venezuela. Additionally, as Venezuela’s borders with Brazil and
Colombia are quite porous, drug trafﬁckers and other criminals
roam these regions rather freely, hijacking cars or trucks to
transport drugs and committing other violent crimes.
The maritime ports that reported high numbers of cargo theft
in 2011 were Puerto Cabello in Carabobo state, Puerto Ordaz in
Bolivar state, and Puerto Maracaibo in Zulia state. Within these
300
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

ports, metals such as aluminum and steel were the most stolen
products.
Modi Operandi
Venezuela has numerous groups of well-armed thieves tar-
geting trucks whenever an opportunity arisesdand the level of
violence during these hijackings is very high. Similar to Brazil,
several incidents in 2011 ended in the killing of the drivers or
security guards. For instance, an incident involving an armored
truck carrying $1.7 million VEF ($400,000 USD) in cash occurred
early September 21 in Puerto Ordaz. The drivers and escorts
were at a restaurant having breakfast when they realized six
armed thieves were in the parking lot trying to steal the truck.
One of the escorts was killed and the other wounded during the
ensuing shootout, and the thieves escaped with the truck and
the cash.
As in other Latin American countries, Venezuelan cargo
thieves tend to kidnap the drivers and release them later in
remote locations after the loads have been secured. Confronta-
tions between police and cargo thieves tend to be very violent,
often beginning with long car chases and ending in shootouts,
with injury or death on one or both sides.
The fake police MO continues to be one of the most common
methods in the country, and some thieves employing this method
wear genuine police uniforms provided by corrupt police ofﬁcers.
On June 12, 2011, a gang used this MO to successfully carry out
two cargo thefts in one day on the CantauraeEl Tigre highway
near the town of Mapiricure, Anzoategui state. The ﬁrst truck,
loaded with cigarettes, was stolen in the morning and the second
truck, carrying pharmaceuticals, was stolen in the afternoon.
Case Studies
On February 9, 2011, a group of thieves hijacked a truck loaded
with consumer care products, mainly deodorants, body lotions,
and diapers, in the city of Barquisimeto, Lara state. The loss value
was $400,000 VEF ($93,023 USD). Moreover, the truck driver was
never seen again.
On October 7, 2011, ﬁve criminals intercepted an armored
truck escorted by two security guards near the small town of
Mucujepe, Merida state. One guard was shot and wounded
during the attack, and the thieves escaped with the truck and $1.8
million VEF ($418,605 USD) in cash. Once they reached the city of
El Vigia, also in Merida state, the thieves emptied the load and set
the truck on ﬁre.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 301

Later in 2011, two trucks transporting different types of loads
were hijacked by the same cargo theft gang within a 24-hour
period in the municipality of La Ceiba, Trujillo state. The ﬁrst
truck, loaded with sandals worth $120,000 VEF ($28,000 USD),
was stolen on December 21; the second, loaded with 240 boxes of
whisky bottles worth $1.5 million VEF ($348,837 USD), was stolen
the following morning. A police operation resulted in the recovery
of the two stolen loads and the arrests of gang members
responsible for the hijackings. Authorities said the gang had been
targeting trucks near La Ceiba for several months.
Argentina
Cargo theft in Argentina is centered in major industrial cities
with large distribution centers. According to Jose Luis Anselmi,
302
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

CEO of Assistcargo, an Argentina-based company specializing in
cargo theft prevention systems, 70% of all cargo theft activity in
Argentina takes place in the federal capital and Greater Buenos
Aires. Also reporting high rates of cargo theft in Argentina in
recent years are the provinces of Santa Fe, Cordoba, and
Mendoza.
Additionally, says Anselmi, 90% of thefts are premeditatedd
meaning these are rarely crimes of opportunitydand drivers are
involved with the gangs in 50 to 60% of all incidents.
Argentina’s La Nacion newspaper estimates that approxi-
mately 4000 cargo thefts take place each year in the country; most
of the crimes are never solved and merchandise rarely recovered.
Recent industry reports estimate an average loss value of $50,000
per stolen load.
Because the rate of cargo theft is impacted directly by ﬂuc-
tuations in economic activity, local supply and demand strongly
inﬂuence the rate of cargo theft in Argentina. The most targeted
product types tend to be those in highest demand at any given
time.
In addition to economic activity, the rate of cargo theft
increases over the holidays. According to Anselmi, the risk of
cargo theft also increases during election times. In October 2011,
Source: Assistcargo.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 303

cargo theft increased by 20% during the country’s presidential
election.
Assistcargo reports that cargo theft has been increasing since
2008 in Argentina. In 2011, an average of 146 incidents occurred
per month, a 22% increase from the 2010 average of 120 incidents
per month. Overall, February and March were the months with
highest cargo theft activity since 2008.
Trade barriers in place on imports in Argentinadthe result of
government attempts to protect local industriesdunwittingly
led to an increase in cargo theft activity near bonded ware-
houses in 2011. Thieves apparently were taking advantage of the
strict regulations and long inspection periods that cause some
loads to sit for weeks or even months in ports and bonded
warehouses.
Modi Operandi
As in most of Latin America, the most common MO in
Argentina continues to be driver kidnapping. This is when
thieves hold the driver captive for up to several hours while they
secure the stolen load or, in cases of theft by order, distribute the
load to an existing client. In most cases, the driver is released
later by the side of a road or highway. According to attorney
Gabriel Lezzi, a member of the Inter-Business Cargo Piracy
Board, no cargo theft incident has ended in death in Argentina
since 2008.
On July 6, 2011, a group of thieves hijacked an in-transit truck
loaded with 30 tons of grains in the city of San Andres de Guiles.
The driver was set free an hour after the theft in the nearby city of
Los Polvorines.
Most gangs operating in Argentina today are sophisticated,
experienced, and adept at preattack intelligence gathering.
Moreover, criminals’ use of GPS jammers is growing into a major
problem for companies operating in Argentina, as sophisticated
cargo thieves are increasingly making use of these devices. Today
it is relatively easy to purchase a GPS jammer online at prices
ranging from $175 to $700 USD.
Guatemala
The cities of Guatemala and Palin, in Escuintla Department,
reported the highest cargo theft activity in the country in 2011.
The Inter-American Highway (CA-9), the Paciﬁc Highway (CA-2),
and the Atlantic Highway (CA-9) continued to be hot spots for
cargo theft last year.
304
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

Industry reports indicate a rise in cargo theft activity during
the ﬁrst 6 months of 2011 compared with the same period in 2010
in western Guatemala and close to El Salvador’s border with
Guatemala.
Cargo Theft Trends and Techniques
Thieves’ most common MO in Guatemala is targeting trucks
while in transit; most thieves use weapons as a way to intimidate
drivers. Collusion among warehouse employees, drivers, and large
organized gangs is very common in Guatemala. Additionally, some
large gangs have established relationships with corrupt police,
making payoffs to the ofﬁcers for covering up cargo theft incidents.
In the vast majority of incidents reported in the news and
police reports in 2011, stolen trailers were found empty and
abandoned in rural areas or small towns. Like the year before,
small gangs in Guatemala continued to show interest in stealing
trucks both for their cargo and in order to negotiate the sale of
truck parts on the black market.
On October 11, 2011, a truck loaded with food products was
hijacked at the Port of San Jose, Escuintla Department. Although
a witness reported the incident immediately after the theft, the
truck was already dismantled when police found it at a facility
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 305

yard known to house stolen goods. The load of food products was
not found at the facility.
Case Studies
On November 11, 2011, two cargo thieves hijacked a truck
loaded with paint worth $30,000 USD in the city of Escuintla. On
this occasion the National Civil Police of Escuintla were able to
ﬁnd the truck in the municipality of Guanagazapa, Escuintla
Department, arrest the suspects, and recover the load.
On May 10, 2011, an escorted truck heading to Puerto Quetzal
and loaded with coffee for export was hijacked by a group of cargo
thieves in Antigua. The empty rig was found abandoned in the
city of Escuintla a day after the incident. Inside the trailer police
found weapons and cartridges apparently belonging to the escort
guard, who remains missing.
Colombia
As in most Latin American countries, cargo theft in Colombia
is concentrated in the major industrial centers. Thus, in 2011 the
306
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

cities of Cali, Medellin, and Bogota reported the highest rates of
cargo theft. Regions close to the borders with Ecuador and Ven-
ezuela and along the Pan-American Highway also continued to be
hot spots for cargo theft in Colombia.
On November 18, 2011, police in Bogota captured ﬁve
members of an organized gang specializing in cargo theft.
According to ofﬁcial reports, the thieves were apprehended while
attempting to steal a trailer (unknown load). Police conﬁscated
powerful weapons from inside the thieves’ van.
Colombian cargo theft gangs are increasingly recruiting
preteens and teenagers, some as young as 12 and 13 years old. On
November 10, 2011, police captured ﬁve suspects ranging in age
from 14 to 16 believed to be part of a large, organized cargo theft
gang that has been operating for several years in the municipality
of Pitalito, Huila Department.
One of the most popular MOs used by Colombian thieves in
2011 was the fake police method. Although pretending to be
police ofﬁcers proved quite successful in many instances,
authentic police did make some headway in 2011. On August
18, 2011, following an 18-month investigation, Bogota police
dismantled
a
locally based
cargo
theft
gang
whose MO
involved establishing fake police checkpoints, mainly along
highways in Santander and Tolima departments. Some of the
victims
reported
having
been
threatened
with
ﬁrearms,
kidnapped, tortured for several hours, and later released in
remote areas. This same gang also has been linked to ware-
house robberies in the same departments, and police have
discovered connections between the gang and employees of
the warehouses that were hit. Colombian police believe this
particular gang was responsible for at least 22 thefts since
2009.
The Port of Buenaventura, Colombia’s main port on the
Paciﬁc Ocean, continues to be a hot spot for cargo theft. On
November 28, 2011, police captured a cargo theft gang believed
responsible for at least seven theftsdinvolving 80 tons of
cargodfrom trailers and containers at the port. Police recovered
powerful weapons from the thieves’ vehicles.
On October 27, 2011, 14 suspected members of a cargo theft
gang hijacked a truck loaded with 32 tons of coffee worth $430
million COP ($220,796 USD) in the municipality of Caldas,
Antioquia Department. The driver was kidnapped and released
later in a rural area. A day after the incident, police located the
stolen truck traveling along the MedellineBogota highway,
recovering the load and eventually capturing 11 of the 14 sus-
pected thieves.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 307

Other Supply Chain Risks
Several trucker strikes on the Columbian side of the border
with Ecuador in autumn 2011 generated supply chain disrup-
tions and economic losses to the transportation industry in
both countries. During the protests, Colombian drivers blocked
highways leading into the country, preventing the passage of
trucks from Ecuador. In some case, this led to brawls between
the drivers, and several Ecuadorian drivers reported having
been bitten by their Colombian counterparts. Threatened with
further violence by the Colombians, the Ecuadorian drivers
returned to their country, failing to deliver loads to their ﬁnal
destination on time. The strikes, launched to protest perceived
inequalities such as less expensive diesel prices in Ecuador and
lower tariffs on goods coming into Colombia from Ecuador,
lasted about 50 days during the months of October and
November.
Drivers protesting poor highway conditions in Colombia also
caused supply chain disruptions in 2011. For instance, drivers
demanding road repairs and maintenance parked trailers across
main highways for several hours in the municipality of Villavi-
cencio on October 25.
Also causing major disruptions nationwide was an unusual
season of heavy rains beginning in September 2011. Severe
ﬂooding throughout the country damaged major transportation
routes, especially in central and southwestern Colombia. Heavy
rain on November 21 damaged a section of one of the country’s
most important highways, La Linea, preventing transit between
the Port of Buenaventura and the capital and other cities in the
interior of the country.
On December 7, 2011, authorities declared a state of emer-
gency in the city of Bogota due to the intensity of the rain and
ﬂooding of the Bogota River. Trafﬁc congestion and delays were
major problems due to landslides. Thousands of heavy trucks
circulating around the country were required to take alternative
routes.
Peru
Although there are no ofﬁcial statistics on cargo crime in Peru,
news and police reports indicate that the capital city of Lima
suffered the highest rate of cargo theft in 2011. Peru’s most
proliﬁc and powerful cargo theft organizations are extremely
violent and often are also involved in drug trafﬁcking.
In a June 11, 2011 incident, ﬁve armed thieves shot and seri-
ously wounded the two drivers of a truck transporting soft drinks
308
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

near Paijan District in northern Peruda hot spot for cargo and
vehicle theft. The thieves escaped with the truck and the load,
leaving the injured drivers by the roadside.
On July 2, 2011, a truck driver was killed in Los Olivos District,
Lima Province, after trying to prevent a group of thieves from
stealing his load of soccer balls. The driver, shot in the head, died
instantly.
Thieves employed the fake police MO in a great number of
hijackings reported in Peru during 2011. For instance, at
2:30 p.m. on August 18, a former police ofﬁcer working as
a security escort was shot to death by cargo thieves dressed as
police ofﬁcers in Villa El Salvador, a district on the outskirts of
Lima. The former ofﬁcer had confronted the gang of six thieves
as they attempted to steal a load of electronics from the trailer
he was escorting.
On June 26, 2011, six members of a cargo theft gang pre-
tending to be police ofﬁcers intercepted a truck loaded with two
tons of activated carbon destined for Lima. The thieves trans-
ferred the 44 sacks of carbon into another trailer and abandoned
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 309

the stolen trailer. The incident occurred along the Southern Pan-
American Highway (kilometer 203) close to Chincha Province in
the Ica Region.
On February 12, 2011, several armed cargo thieves hijacked
a truck in Lima. The incident began when one of the thieves,
riding a motorcycle and wearing a police uniform, instructed the
driver to pull over and step out of his vehicle to provide docu-
ments. According to the driver, once he left his truck, two other
armed thieves appeared and the three held the driver captive for
about 3 hours. Authorities later located the truck in the district of
San Juan de Lurigancho, apparently having been driven there by
a fourth thief.
Case Studies
On November 21, 2011, three armed thieves hijacked a truck
along the Fernando Belaunde Terry highway (kilometer 392) near
the city of Tarapoto, San Martin Province. The criminals inter-
cepted the truck, kidnapped the driver, and held him for several
hours. The following morning police found the abandoned truck
on the roadside in Soritor District.
On December 3, 2011, a well-organized cargo theft gang stole
30 tons of gold and silver from two trailers. The two drivers dis-
appeared and the load was never recovered. No further details on
the theft have been made available.
On February 25, 2011, a truck carrying laptop computers
worth $1 million USD was hijacked in the district of Los Olivos,
Lima Province. The thieves, who held the two drivers captive for
several hours, escaped with the entire load of laptops. No tracking
device or security escort had been utilized.
Other Supply Chain Risks
Violent protests by farmers against the $4.8 billion Conga
Mining Project in Peru’s Cajamarca Region caused major supply
chain disruptions in December 2011. Demanding the govern-
ment cancel the project to avoid potential environmental
impacts, such as water shortages and soil/water contamination,
farmers established roadblocks and set ﬁres on streets, causing
several businesses to close temporarily and some carriers to
suspend operations for a time. The protests reportedly led to food
shortages in the region. After the protests intensiﬁed on
December 4, Peruvian President Ollanta Humala declared a state
of emergency in Celendin, Cajamarca, Hualgayoc, and Con-
tumaza provinces.
310
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

Europe
Cargo theft incidents reported in Europe dropped consider-
ably in 2011, declining by almost two-thirds of those recorded in
2010. This is a direct result of multiple agencies no longer
reporting cargo theft incidents due to widespread budget cuts.
Thus, statistics indicating drops in theft activity are skewed by the
decrease in reporting. The logistics industry is keenly aware of the
difﬁculties faced by law enforcement agencies ﬁghting cargo theft
throughout Europe, a task that is increasingly difﬁcult under
budgetary constraints.
According to a 2011 study by the European Parliament,
however, the cargo theft situation remains serious throughout
Europe, with the value of goods stolen by cargo thieves
surpassing V8.2 billion ($10.6 billion USD). According to the
study, 90,000 attacks on truck drivers and their vehicles
occur each year on Europe’s highways, and cargo is stolen in
nearly 57,000 of the cases. If the numbers are accurate, that
is 156 successful cargo thefts per day within the European
Union (EU).
Over the past few years, cargo criminals in Europe have been
notably more skilled, organized, and aggressive in their tactics,
targeting loads at secured locations, inside facilities, and even on
moving trucks. Theft by fraud is another method by which
criminals are effectively stealing cargo and making off with
millions of euros in goodsdgoods the unwitting victims have
literally loaded into the cargo criminals’ trucks.
The United Kingdom, France, and the Netherlands continue to
be the focal point of cargo theft in western Europe, with Germany
and Italy also recording high rates of theft.
While data do not exist to show that Spain has a major cargo
theft dilemma, information suggests that the risk within the
country is growing quickly. Unlike in France and Italy, where
violence or the threat of violence during cargo thefts is
a growing trend, thieves operating in Spain rarely resort to
violence.
With the exception of Italy, the governments and law
enforcement agencies in these countries are working to combat
cargo crime and prosecute criminals. In some cases they are
cooperating with one another and with law enforcement in
eastern Europe as well.
The Europe and Africa portions of the Global Threat Assess-
ment are developed by FreightWatch, in partnership with the
Transported Asset Protection Association (TAPA) Europe, Middle
East, and Africa (EMEA).
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 311

About FreightWatch and TAPA EMEA
FreightWatch has collected cargo theft intelligence and
produced reports for the region since 2006. In November 2010,
the FreightWatch intelligence division was awarded the TAPA
EMEA IIS contract, expanding its intelligence function in the
region for TAPA members and partner organizations, including
law enforcement agencies.
TAPA represents businesses ﬁghting back against cargo crime
that want to use real-time intelligence and the latest preventive
measures to protect goods in the supply chain.
TAPA is a unique forum that unites global manufacturers,
logistics providers, freight carriers, law enforcement agencies,
and other stakeholders with the common aim of reducing losses
from international supply chains.
The association’s mission is to help protect its members’
assets by:
•
Exchanging information on a global and regional basis
•
Cooperating on preventative security
•
Increasing support from the logistics and freight industry and
from law enforcement agencies and governments
•
Promoting and enhancing TAPA’s globally recognized and
applied security requirements
United Kingdom
Truckpol,
the
United
Kingdom’s
national
freight
crime
intelligence unit, estimates that cargo theft on the nation’s
roads costs the U.K. economy up to £250 million ($386 million
USD) each year. Not all cargo theft is reported in the United
Kingdom, but the reporting is better than in most European
countries.
Although 2011 Truckpol reports suggest that cargo crime is on
the rise, it is important to mention that in 2010 this unit began
recording thefts of fuel from trucks, which inﬂuences its overall
results greatly. While it is true that fuel theft affects the trans-
portation industry directly, the Global Threat Assessment focuses
on the cargo crime phenomenon. Thus, discounting noncargo-
related fuel thefts, it appears that the number of cargo theft
incidents reported in the United Kingdom decreased in 2011
compared with the year before.
While the number of reported cargo theft incidents decreased
in 2011, the average value per theft continued to rise. This trend,
ﬁrst noted in 2010, indicates that thieves are seeking higher and
higher returns for their efforts.
312
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

In 2011, the United Kingdom continued its active involvement
in national and EU efforts to ﬁght cargo crime. The last phase of
an earlier initiative, the North Sea Freight Intelligent Transport
Solutions, was tested in late 2011 and further progress is expected
this year. The project aims to provide information to drivers
about secure parking locations, crime hot spots, and local
policing practices.
Another initiative, the “Keep it Locked” campaign, was
launched by the U.K. Border Agency and the Serious Organized
Crime Agency in summer 2011. Its goals are to increase driver
awareness of the cargo crime threat and to encourage drivers to
take steps to prevent and reduce thefts of trucks and/or loads.
The scarcity of secured parking areas continues to be a major
problem in the United Kingdom. According to a 2011 study by
the Department for Transport, the lack of secured parking areas
in the United Kingdom causes inefﬁciencies in the movement of
goods, increases the risk of driver involvement in accidents, and
puts drivers at risk of crime, as they are forced to park their
trailers and their valuable loads on roadsides or other unsecured
areas. A 2011 survey by the Logistics Security Network indicates
that only 30% of truck drivers park overnight in secure truck
stops.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 313

Cargo Theft Trends and Techniques
As in most of Europe, cargo crime in the United Kingdom is
most common on the road while loads are in transit. Theft from
trailer was the most reported type of incident in 2011, with most
thefts taking place in unsecured parking areas such as roadsides
and rest areas. Although this mainly occurred while trucks were
unattended, some thefts took place while the drivers were asleep
in their cabins. Facility burglaries were the second most reported
type of incident.
On May 22, 2011, burglars hit a warehouse on London’s east
side and stole approximately 400 cases of wine. According to
reports, the thieves disabled the facility’s alarms and security
cameras and then apparently used a forklift to load the wine
cases. Two men have been arrested in connection with the theft
and Scotland Yard authorities continue to investigate. The loss
value was estimated at £1 million ($1.6 million USD).
Reported thefts involving weapons and thefts by fraud both
increased by 3% in 2011, growing from 2% in 2010 to 5% percent
of the total last year. The following are two prime examples of
these kinds of thefts:
•
Around midnight on October 19, 10 men armed with
machetes broke into a Manchester warehouse, tied up the
security guards, and then spent about an hour loading three
pallets of powerful ﬁreworks into a getaway truck. After the
thieves ﬂed the scene, one of the security guards was able
to free himself and summon police. The loss value was not
disclosed.
•
In Felixstowe, east of England, on January 13, thieves posing as
legitimate drivers pulled off a multitrailer theft of ﬂat screen
TVs after they provided documents and pin numbers required
at the transport facility. The loss value was estimated at
$493,158 USD.
In the entire United Kingdom, 95% of all reported incidents in
2011 occurred in England, while 5% took place in Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales. This does not necessarily mean Ireland,
Scotland, and Wales have escaped the cargo theft scourge; rather
that thefts are signiﬁcantly underreported in those coun-
triesdand likely in Northern Ireland as well.
Intrusion is by far the MO preferred by cargo thieves in the
United Kingdom. Criminals using this method gain access to
loads by cutting the curtains of trailers or by breaking the door
locks. As in other European countries, trailers in the United
Kingdom tend to be soft-sided, making them easier to cut than
the more traditional hard-sided trailers. Instead of breaking locks
314
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

and seals, the thief simply has to cut through the material to gain
access to the load.
As in 2010, electronics was the product type most targeted by
thieves last year, with ﬂat screen TVs and DVD players among the
items most stolen. The building/industrial category occupied
second place, with thieves displaying an overwhelming prefer-
ence for metals. The clothing/shoes category was in third place,
with brand-name clothing as the main target.
In England, the East of England Regiondwith major highway
and rail routes, as well as Harwich International Port and three
international airportsdreported most of the cargo theft incidents
in 2011, at 20%. East Midlands, a bustling business/industrial
region crisscrossed by some 140,000 tractoretrailers each day,
accounted for 18% of the total thefts last year. Finally, prosperous
South East England, which claims the second largest regional
economy in the United Kingdom, was third, at 15% of total thefts.
Thus, more than half of all incidents reported in 2011 took place
in these three regions.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 315

316
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

Germany
In addition to having a modern transportation network and
one of the most developed economies in the EU, Germany is an
important transit hub for goods traveling through Europe and
beyond. This last factor, coupled with Germany’s sparse and
poorly lighted parking areas, however, is what makes it a prime
target for cargo thieves.
According to a 2011 study by the European Parliament, cargo
thefts in Germany alone add up to annual losses of V1.5 billion
($1.9 billion USD).
“Nowhere in Europe are more trucks on the road than on
German highways,” Frank Federau, superintendent of the Lower
Saxony State Ofﬁce of Criminal Investigation, was quoted as
saying in an article on the German website Autobild.de. This state
of affairs, Federau suggested, makes Germany particularly tar-
geted by thieves.
Not surprisingly, Lower Saxony was one of the four German
states most affected by cargo crime in 2011. The other states were
North Rhine-Westphalia, Brandenburg, and Bavaria.
Like other European countries most targeted by cargo crimi-
nals, Germany works actively to combat the problem. Early in
2011 German law enforcement joined with police in France,
Hungary, Romania, and Austria on an operation that resulted in
the arrest of 22 suspected cargo criminals in France, Hungary,
and Romania. The organization is accused of targeting trucks
parked along French highways. According to Europol, each
country played a speciﬁc role in the gang’s process:
•
France: Location of thefts of high-value products
•
Austria: Transit country from France to Hungary
•
Germany: Logistics operations and truck exchanges
•
Hungary: Storage of stolen goods
•
Romania: Country of origin of most members and the place
the criminal network likely was established
Another
initiativeda
joint
effort
by
freight
exchanges,
a private insurance company, and the state of Lower Saxonyd
provided brochures and checklists to drivers and dispatchers with
the goal of improving their security levels and thus preventing
thefts carried out via online freight exchange services.
Early in 2011 the General Association of German Insurers
(GDV) said in an article on the verkehrsrundschau.de web-
site that cargo crime executed through freight exchanges has
increased dramatically in recent years. Brokers and transport
insurers, GDV said, have reported a consistent increase in
the number of incidents in which truckloads were stolen by
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 317

fake transport companies that got the job through freight
exchanges.
Cargo Crime Techniques
The types of incidents reported most frequently in Germany
were theft from trailers, facility burglaries, and theft of trailers.
The majority of thefts from/of trailers occurred in unsecured
parking areas along highways.
In these cases the criminals take opportunistic thefts to the
next level by lying in wait at highway service stations and other
rest areas and then taking a peek at the cargo by cutting into the
soft-sided curtain. If the load is something they want, they wait
until the truck is left unattended or the driver falls asleep inside
the cabin before proceeding with the theft.
On the night of October 11e12, 2011, a truck driver traveling
from Poland to Great Britain parked overnight in an unsecured
parking area on the A-12 federal highway at Rauen, Brandenburg
Region. While the driver apparently was asleep in his cabin,
thieves made off with 420 computer monitors, about one-quarter
318
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

of the load. The loss value was estimated at $204,447 USD
(source: TAPA EMEA).
In late April 2011, a trailer loaded with tires headed to Den-
mark was emptied while the vehicle was parked over the weekend
at an unsecured parking area in Langenhagen, Lower Saxony. The
loss was valued at $45,722 USD.
Location and Modi Operandi
The majority of cargo theft incidents in Germany occur while
cargo is in transit, especially while the truck is stopped for the
night or the driver is at rest at unsecured parking areas along
highways. The high concentration of trucks along highways, the
scarcity of secured parking, and the poorly lighted parking spaces
make cargo thieves’ jobs easier. Thefts from facilities are not far
behind attacks on trucks. Burglaries of warehouses and other
facilities in Germany often involve thefts of metals, and thus
mostly involve metal processing companies, recycling compa-
nies, and metal trade facilities, as well as transportation and
storage facilities.
Twenty-nine tons of aluminum banding, stainless steel, and
copper were stolen from two motorcycle parts manufacturers
in Mylau, Saxony, sometime between 5:30 p.m. Friday and
11:45 p.m. Sunday, November 20, 2011. Authorities believe the
thieves used a forklift to load the metals into one or more of their
own trailers. The total loss value was estimated at $155,486 USD.
The MO reported most frequently in this region is intrusion
into trailers or facilities. However, thieves are increasingly setting
up fake transport companies or assuming the name of an existing
one in order to swoop in and steal cargo right out from under the
noses of shippers.
On May 25, 2011, an iron foundry in the Brandenburg town of
Ortrand unwittingly turned over a load of 31 pallets of gray iron
casting pipe. Like many similar cases around Europe, the driver
provided shipping documents that appeared to be signed and
stamped properly. The theft was discovered when the shipment
failed to reach its destination in Italy and efforts to locate the
truck failed. The loss was estimated at $56,305 USD.
While thefts targeting trucks or warehouse/facilities are the
more common types of theft events, from time to time incidents
at airports or on railways also are reported. For example,
employees of a ground handling agency apparently broke into
a container loaded with mobile phones at the Frankfurt-Hahn
Airport on August 6, 2011. CCTV showed the suspects placing
screens between the camera and the container and then several
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 319

individuals moving to and from the container behind the screen.
It was later discovered that about 900 mobile phones worth
$340,488 USD were missing from the container. The thieves had
stuffed the container with plastic and netting in an apparent
attempt to ﬁll up the empty space (source: TAPA EMEA).
Products in the building/industrial, food/drinks, and elec-
tronics categories were the most targeted by cargo criminals in
2011. Although soft drinks, wine, ﬂat screen TVs, mobile phones,
and laptop computers were among the items most stolen, copper
and other metals in the building/industrial category topped the
list. According to industry experts in Germany, at no time has it
been easier than the present for thieves to sell stolen metals. This
is because of soaring metal prices fueled by elevated demand for
metals in emerging markets.
France
The largest country in western Europe, France enjoys a very
high level of economic development and a geographic location
that makes it a prime crossroads for international trade by land,
rail, sea, and air. These factors, however, also make France one of
the perennial hot spots for cargo theft in Europe.
320
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

Cargo crime information in France is collected and distributed
by the central ofﬁce for the Fight Against Itinerant Delinquency
(OCLDI). Although ofﬁcial numbers for 2011 have not yet been
released, informal OCLDI updates provided to the media
throughout the year suggest that the number of cargo theft inci-
dents is remaining stable. Underreporting of cargo crime remains
a factor in France, but OCLDI updates help provide a fairly clear
picture of ongoing cargo theft activity.
If the ofﬁcial numbers, when they are released, do support the
theory that cargo crime is leveling off, much of the credit can go to
the French government and its law enforcement bodies. France,
in fact, is one of the European countries working most actively to
reduce crime targeting the transportation and logistics service
industry. Efforts to reduce cargo theft and put perpetrators
behind bars consistently result in arrests, the disbanding of theft
gangs, and the recovery of stolen goods.
In 2011, for example, France played a crucial role in an
international operation targeting sophisticated cargo criminals
operating on some EU highways. As a result, a total of 22 suspects
were arrested on April 5 in France, Hungary, and Romania. The
criminal gang is suspected of perpetrating at least 70 thefts
involving goods valued at more than V3 million ($4.15 million
USD) since 2010 in France alone. The operation was launched in
mid-2010 by law enforcement ofﬁcials in the French city of Tulle,
Correze Department, but it soon expanded to national and
European levels.
Cargo Crime Trends and Techniques
While cargo crime across the board may have leveled off in
France in 2011, a spike in the number of cargo theft incidents in
which weapons were involveddespecially around the Iˆle-de-
France Region (the Paris metropolitan area)dmade headlines in
the country and elsewhere in Europe. While violence or the threat
of violence was occasionally reported in 2010, this tactic was
reported in 25% of all reported incidents in 2011. The jump in the
number of incidents perpetrated by armed thieves was especially
noted during the last two quarters of the year, and into 2012 as
well. Although weapons are used to intimidate victims rather than
to harm them in most cases, this trend nonetheless has set off
alarm bells.
On September 30, 2011, a truck transporting a high-value load
of mobile phones was forced off the road by ﬁve to six armed
thieves traveling in two vehicles on the A-86 highway in Genne-
villiers, Iˆle-de-France. The perpetrators, wearing black clothing,
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 321

gloves, and hooded jackets, forced the driver into the back seat of
his truck and drove off in it. They released the driver a short while
later in Mitry-Mory and escaped with the truck and its load. The
truck was found later in Villiers Adam, but part of its loaddeight
pallets of phones valued at V1.2 million ($1.63 million USD)dwas
gone. The thieves had emptied the contents of a ﬁre extinguisher
inside the truck’s cabin, presumably to destroy evidence.
Sometime after dark in mid-October 2011, several thieves
armed with automatic weapons and wearing black clothing and
balaclavas broke into a facility owned by a transportation
company in Ferriers-en-Brie, Iˆle-de-France. After taking a secu-
rity guard by surprise, the robbers escaped with a large load of
smartphones and tablets valued at approximately V2.3 million
($3.2 million USD)(source: TAPA EMEA).
These are just two examples among many similar heists
carried out by a well-organized gang (or gangs) armed with
weaponsdhammers, handguns, shotguns, tear gas, and even
submachine guns have all reportedly been used. Also common
among thieves in these incidents was their dress: black clothing,
gloves, and the use of hoodies or balaclavas.
While
these
cargo criminals
continue
to
elude
French
authorities, there were some notable successes in 2011:
•
On October 18, following an OCLDI investigation of several
months, 15 suspected members of a cargo theft organization
were arrested in at least ﬁve different locations in the Iˆle-de-
France and Picardy regions. The organization, which used the
fake police MO to force drivers to pull over for “routine inspec-
tions,” is believed responsible for a series of cargo thefts,
mainly in the Iˆle-de-France and Centre regions. Targeting
high-value loads such as cigarettes, perfumes, and leather
products, the gang stole an estimated V2.5 to V3 million
($3.45 to $4.15 million USD) in goods. During searches of the
suspects’ properties, police recovered about V30,000 ($41,462
USD) in cash, as well as shotguns, cigarettes, and leather goods.
•
On July 25 in Autun, Bourgogne Region, gendarmes in Saone-
et-Loire foiled a major theft of 24 tons of copper. The incident
began after thieves broke into the yard of a transportation
company and drove off with a truckload of copper that had
been parked at the facility. Alerted to the theft, a gendarme
patrol located the stolen truck and began tailing it. However,
an accomplice driving another vehicle spotted the tail and
rushed in to render assistance. The driver of the stolen truck
then jumped into his accomplice’s vehicle and the two
managed to escape, leaving behind the stolen truck and its
load, valued at V200,000 ($287,140 USD).
322
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

By far the hottest spot for cargo theft in France from January 1
to December 31, 2011, was the Iˆle-de-France Region, as this area
claimed more than half of all reported thefts in the country. Iˆle-
de-France is the most populous and wealthiest of France’s 22
administrative regions and is home to many of the country’s
major logistics centers. The Provence-Alpes-Coˆte d’Azur and
Nord-pas-de-Calais regions not only placed a distant second and
third in the number of thefts, they did not experience the level of
violence seen especially around the Paris area.
Robberies and burglaries targeting warehouses or other facil-
ities, as well as hijackings, were the most common types of
incidents reported in France in 2011. In some cases, thieves
employed the fake police MO, posing as police or customs ofﬁ-
cials to get a truck driver to pull over. While incidents of
kidnapping during a hijacking were almost nonexistent in 2010,
this MO was employed more frequently last year.
Although the vast majority of cargo thefts in France last year
targeted trucks and warehouses, French media also reported
incidents affecting ports, airports, and railways. On the night of
July 7, 2011, for example, France’s southern coast was the scene
of an unusual, Wild West-style train heist on a Euro Cargo Rail
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 323

line between Marseille and Miramas. The incident began when
a group of about 20 masked thieves blocked the tracks with
shopping carts and wooden planks, causing a passenger train to
crash into the improvised barrier. Instead of robbing the
passengers, however, the gang made off with the cargo on
a freight train that was forced to stop because of the collision.
Neither the type of products stolen nor the loss value was
disclosed.
Building/industrial, electronics, and tobacco were the most
targeted product types in 2011, with copper, mobile phones,
laptop computers, and cigarettes the preferred products. Gold
and even rare metals, however, were also targeted in 2011.
On June 6, 2011, a group of burglars broke into a steel
company in Dunkerque, Nord-pas-de-Calais, tampered with the
security system, and stole 10 tons of niobium granules. This rare
metal is used particularly in the automotive industry, but also in
the manufacture of rockets and nuclear power plants. The loss
value was estimated at V350,000 ($512,365 USD)(source: TAPA
EMEA).
Other Supply Chain Risks
Strikes and demonstrations throughout 2011 caused major
transportation disruptions to supply lines in France, as noted in
reports from the FreightWatch intelligence center. Because of this
ongoing risk, companies transporting goods throughout France
should be ready to adjust their logistics operations quickly.
324
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

The Netherlands
One of the busiest trade locations in the world and a major
European transportation hub, the Netherlands teems with cargo
hurtling along its packed roads and railways and through its busy
ports. The Port of Rotterdamdthe largest port in Europe and the
fourth largest port in the world by cargo volumedis a key transit
point for goods moving to and from the rest of Europe and other
parts of the world.
The vast amount of cargo transiting through the country on
a daily basis makes the Netherlands one of Europe’s consistent
hot spots for cargo theft.
Given the importance of international trade to the Dutch
economy, however, the government takes its responsibility to try
to protect cargo quite seriously. Dutch authorities, in fact,
responded to the ongoing cargo crime problem in 2010 by, among
other measures, naming a special prosecutor whose sole job is to
ﬁght cargo crime and put perpetrators behind bars. The special
prosecutor said in 2011 that he is working to increase cargo crime
reporting in his country and to encourage those in the supply
chain industry to take preventive measures against theft.
Cargo Theft Trends and Techniques
According to a Netherlands National Police Agency crime
report for the ﬁrst three quarters of 2011, the theft of trailers
decreased from 199 incidents in 2010 to 94 in 2011. However,
thefts from trailers and deceptive pickups together increased
from 539 to 599 incidents over the same time period. Theft inci-
dents involving violence or the threat of violence are rare in the
Netherlands.
Electronics were the most commonly stolen product type last
year, with computers and audio/visual equipment among the
items taken. Food/drinks and clothing/shoes industries placed
second and third, respectively, in popularity among thieves in
2011. All of the products in these categories are fairly easy to sell
on the black market and, not surprisingly, are often targeted in
other regions of the world as well.
Most cargo theft in the Netherlands occurs in the southeast
and east, including North and South Holland, North Brabant, and
Limburg provinces. North and South Holland, located on the
English Channel, are home to some of the busiest ports in the
world. North Brabant and Limburg are vital access points to
Belgium, Germany, and the rest of Europe.
Cargo theft was at its lowest during July, August, and
September and at its highest during February, May, and June.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 325

This trend was also seen in thefts occurring in 2010, except that
February’s total was signiﬁcantly higher in 2011. Available reports
did not include the OctobereDecember quarter, but as trade
increased ahead of the holiday season, it is likely that cargo
thieves were also quite active during that time.
Theft in the Netherlands is most common in business areas
such as warehouses and distribution centers. Although the
Netherlands handles enormous amounts of cargo, it does not
manufacture many goods, so theft from manufacturing centers is
not a major concern. Theft is also common when goods are in
transit or parked along public roads.
Unsecured parking is another common theft location. In
Gelderland at the end of October a driver who brieﬂy walked away
from his truck after stopping at a rest area along the A-50 highway
returned to ﬁnd that thieves had broken the seal and stolen more
than 350 pairs of jeans and 3000 pairs of boxer shorts (source:
TAPA EMEA).
Other Supply Chain Risks
The Netherlands
suffers extensive
trafﬁc
problems and
congestion in major cities. What’s more, this fairly small country
already has a dense roadway system and little room for expansion.
This poses challenges as global trade increases and the Port of
Rotterdam remains an essential link in the global supply chain.
326
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

The government has taken some steps to try to reduce trafﬁc, such
as opening shoulders for trafﬁc during rush hours, but this is only
a short-term ﬁxdand trafﬁc is expected to grow even heavier.
Italy
Although cargo theft has been an issue in Italy for quite some
time now, efforts by lawmakers and public security forces to
combat these crimes are clearly less robust than those seen in the
Netherlands, Belgium, and even the United Kingdom. In those
countries, and a few others, efforts to ﬁght cargo crime are
unceasing and often creative, as lawmakers and law enforcement
experiment with new tactics, launch new operations, and
implement tougher measures.
Given Italy’s lackluster approach to ﬁghting cargo theft and
the soft punishments imposed on those who are caught and
convicted, this type of crime continues to ﬂourish.
Cargo Theft and Techniques
As in 2010, Italy’s northern Lombardy Region claimed the top
spot for cargo crime in 2011. With the regional and provincial
capital of Milan at its heart, and thriving industrial and services
sectors, Lombardy is the richest and most populous of the
country’s 20 regions. These factors, of course, are the likely reason
it attracts thieves. Within the area, most of the cargo theft inci-
dents were reported around Milan province.
Other regions reporting high levels of cargo theft in 2011 were
Puglia in the southeast, Veneto in the northeast, and Lazio in the
center. Along with Italians, Albanians and Romanians are among
those most suspected of involvement in cargo crime activities in
Italy.
Hijackings, facility burglaries, and thefts of trailer were the
types of incident reported most frequently in 2011. It is worth
noting that cargo thefts committed by means of deception or
deceptive pickup were also reported during the ﬁrst trimester of
the year, although the year-end tally of incidents carried out by
this method was modest.
A case on January 14, 2011, illustrates the theft by deception
method seen most often during the ﬁrst 4 months of the year. In
that case, a carrier contracted through a well-known freight
exchange website and hired to transport two loadsdin the food/
drinks and auto/parts product typesdturned out to be a fake,
even though the documentation appeared to be in order and the
loading was carried out normally. The deception was discovered
only after the loads failed to reach their destination in Denmark
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 327

and the hiring company attempted to track the freight. The loss
value of both loads was about $120,000 USD.
Even though intrusion is the most common MO employed by
cargo thieves in Italy, there nonetheless are a great number of
incidents involving violence or the threat of violence. For
instance, in the early morning hours of February 10, 2011,
a group of 10 armed and masked men attacked an in-transit
truck loaded with cigarettes worth $2.7 million USD. The inci-
dent took place in Stella di Monsampolo, Marche Region, where
the driver was forced to stop at gunpoint. The thieves then
attached the trailer to their truck and ﬂed the scene, leaving the
driver behind. He immediately reported the incident and police
were able to trace the stolen trailer, still bearing the load of
cigarettes, to an abandoned warehouse in Corropoli, Abruzzo
Region. Although the cargo was recovered, the thieves were able
to escape. The driver resumed his journey later that day, this
time escorted by police.
In Milan on November 9, 2011, a group of armed criminals
posing as police ofﬁcers forced a truck loaded with cellular
phones to stop for a “routine check.” The thieves then took
control of the truck, forced the truck drivers into another vehicle,
and sped away in both vehicles. The drivers were released
unharmed about an hour later, but the thieves escaped with the
entire load, worth $2.75 million USD (source: TAPA EMEA).
Early on June 29, 2011, in Cerignola, Apuglia Region, a gang of
armed criminals forced a truck loaded with sporting goods to stop
along the motorway near Foggia. The driver was kidnapped from
the scene in another vehicle and later released. The nearly empty
truck was located a few hours later in Ordona, about 14 miles
north of Cerignola. The thieves had escaped with goods valued at
nearly $358,000 USD.
The product categories most coveted by cargo thieves oper-
ating in Italy last year were food/drinks, with candies and frozen
foods as the most stolen products. This was followed by auto/
parts, with tires and engines the most popular. Building/indus-
trial goods, with metals being by far the main targets, rounded out
the top three.
According to reported incidents, the vast majority of thefts in
2011 involved organized, frequently armed gangs of thieves tar-
geting trucks in transit. In these cases, thieves forced trucks to
stop either by blocking the road or highway with vehicles or by
pretending to be police ofﬁcers engaged in routine inspections.
These thefts often appeared to have been planned carefully, the
target preselected, and the location and time of the attack
determined in advance.
328
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

In other words, 2011 saw a signiﬁcant shift away from the
opportunistic thefts from/of trailers discussed in the 2010 global
threat assessment. The trend in Italy in 2010 was for thieves to
attack trucks parked and left unattended overnight at service
areas or unsecured parking areas.
Success Stories
Although cargo crime is not a top priority for Italian law
enforcement, authorities nevertheless had some successes in
capturing thieves and recovering cargo in 2011. Examples include
the following:
•
During a routine inspection in the city of Gallo on October 28,
police intercepted a truck that turned out to have been stolen
the previous night from the premises of a company in Bologna.
Inside the truck were copper coils weighing a total of 20 tons
and estimated in value at $63,174 USD. As it turned out, the
copper had just been stolen from a company in Minerbio,
Bologna Province. The thief driving the truck was arrested
and the copper was returned to its owner.
•
In the city of Salerno, Campania Region, early on November
28, Carabinieri (Italian national police) arrested a 42-year-old
man believed to be one of four thieves who had hijacked
a truck loaded with toys and video game consoles a few
hours earlier. The incident began when thieves ﬁred shots
into the air, forcing the targeted truck to exit the A-30
highway (Salerno-Reggio Calabria) and stop in the nearby
countryside. The driver was beaten, tied up, and locked in
the trunk of the thieves’ car. Although he was freed around
4 a.m. in an isolated area of San Marzano sul Sarno, Campa-
nia Region, he was rescued promptly by a passing security
guard and taken to an area hospital. Notiﬁed of the incident,
police launched a search for the stolen truck, intercepting it
within an hour. Although the suspect was arrested, the
truck’s contents had already disappeared. The loss was
valued at $66,205 USD.
Spain
By all indications, cargo crime continues to increase in Spain,
even though underreporting and a lack of ofﬁcial numbers make
it difﬁcult to paint a clear picture of the current situation. Most of
the information released by Spanish authorities through the
media focuses on arrests of cargo criminals and/or recoveries of
stolen goods, with little reporting on the thefts when they occur.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 329

Even so, through reports on successes we learn of the crimes
themselves. In addition, anecdotal evidence from supply chain
professionals either in the country or doing business with Spain
suggests that cargo crime is on the rise.
In July 2011, the Spanish Confederation of Goods Transporters
(CETM) reportedly appealed to the country’s interior ministry to
launch a “special and urgent” effort to address the “enormous
increase” in attacks against and robberies of trucks and to bring
the perpetrators to justice. Noting “the international nature of the
gangs that specialize in this type of crime,” CETM also called for
coordinated action on the issue at the EU level.
While none of this is positive news, it is important to point out
that law enforcement, primarily the national police force Spanish
Civil Guard, is working actively to combat cargo crime in the
country, with some notable successes.
The regions mostly affected by cargo crime in 2011 were
Madrid, Aragon, Castilla and Leon, Andalusia, and Catalonia.
While Catalonia, Madrid, and Andalusia were the main regional
hot spots in 2010, Aragon and Castilla and Leon are new additions
for 2011.
Cargo Theft Targets and Types
Cargo theft gangs in Spain are very well organized and
sophisticated, with speciﬁc roles or tasks assigned to members.
These roles include locating targets; committing the thefts;
moving the stolen goods to storage in warehouses, industrial
parks, houses, and so on; selling the stolen product; and ﬁnally
moving the goods out of the country when necessary. Gang
members charged with locating targets in some cases will travel
330
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

milesdvisiting service stations, rest areas, and logistics centersd
in order to ﬁnd the products they desire.
The product categories reportedly most targeted in 2011 were
building/industrial, food/drinks, and auto/parts. This trend
differs from 2010, when electronics and clothing/shoes were
among the most coveted by thieves. In the building/industrial
category, metals were targeted most often, with copper being
especially popular among thieves. Meat products such as salami
and ham, as well as olive oil and candies, were among the
products most targeted in the food/drinks category.
The types of theft reported most frequently in Spain in 2011
mirror those seen the year before. Hence, theft of/from a trailer
remained by far the most popular type of theft in 2011. While
placing
second,
warehouse
burglaries
were
not
nearly
as
common as attacks against trucks.
Case Studies
Although the level of sophistication and versatility displayed
by many of these gangs makes the job of catching them quite
difﬁcult, operations by the Civil Guard and local police in 2011
and early 2012 led to major arrests and the dismantling of several
gangs.
On January 20, 2012, for instance, the Civil Guard and the
Catalan police crushed a criminal organization dedicated to the
theft and sale of metal products across the country. The lengthy
operation, launched in July 2011, culminated in the apprehension
of 27 suspects and the recovery of 20 tons of nickel, 35 tons of
copper, and three trucks, among other things. The investigation
was started after a Cadiz company reported the theft from its
facility of 24 tons of nickel worth approximately V400,000
($575,640 USD).
In March 2011, the Civil Guard broke up a band of cargo
thieves
operating
throughout
Catalonia
that
was
believed
responsible for more than 30 robberies and estimated losses of
more than V1.2 million ($1.69 million USD). In that operation,
launched in November 2010, 35 people were arrested and at least
6 people imprisoned, among them the leaders of the gang and the
major recipient of the gang’s stolen goods. The arrests took place
in Barcelona, Tarragona, Cubelles, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Ripon,
Sant Cugat del Valles, Badalona, and Sabadell. Twenty-one
searches in all, 13 at the detainees’ homes and 8 at industrial
parks, led to the recovery of 24 tons of copper valued at V200,000
($281,958 USD), 22 tons of steel, approximately 200 appliances,
950 car batteries, 18 trailers, and a tractor.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 331

In the municipality of Navatalgordo, Castilla and Leon Region,
local authorities arrested a thief and recovered a truck loaded
with sausages, hams, and other meats within days of the
September 27, 2011 theft. Notiﬁed shortly after the incident
occurred, police were able to locate the vehicle traveling on the
M-501 highway. The getaway driver, however, spotted the police
cruiser and managed to escape on a side road. A subsequent
investigation shortly thereafter, however, led police to the sus-
pected thief and the load (source: TAPA EMEA).
In early November 2011, police arrested 17 people on charges
of stealing cargo from service areas and transport logistics centers
throughout Madrid, especially near the national highways A-4
and A-42. Stolen goods worth more than V1 million ($1.3 million)
were recovered. As with most well-organized gangs, members of
this group had assigned tasks, ranging from locating targets to
selling the goods. This gang, however, took the rather unusual
precaution of using escort vehiclesdone in front and one behind
a stolen truckdto protect the cargo from rival groups as it was
moved to a secure location.
In another successful ending to a case, the Civil Guard in
Maracena on November 15, 2011, intercepted a truck carrying 54
cartons of toys that had been stolen earlier that day in Bailen.
Ofﬁcers arrested the thief driving the truck and recovered its load.
Further investigation and interrogation of the apprehended thief
led to the arrest of six more suspects 2 weeks later. All seven
suspects had criminal records stemming from thefts of cargo
from trucks parked at service areas in Granada, Cordoba, and
Jaen in the Andalusia Region.
Modi Operandi
Cargo theft gangs in Spain are considered among the most
versatile in Europe in that they are constantly evolving, trying out
new MOs and adapting to changing circumstances. Employing
escort vehicles to protect stolen cargo, for example, is not
a common tactic. However, unlike in France and Italy, where
violence or the threat of violence during cargo thefts is a growing
trend, thieves operating in Spain rarely resort to violence.
The fact that intrusion is the most popular MO in the country
suggests that thieves go out of their way to avoid confrontation. In
the intrusion method, thieves break into a trailer or cut its curtain
or they break into a warehouse in order to gain access to the
cargo. Thefts involving the intrusion MO most often take place at
night when loaded trucks are parked and unattended at service
areas or industrial parks. In warehouse burglaries, intruding
332
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

thieves also wait until a facility is closed before breaking into its
gated yard and stealing loaded and parked trailers, as well as any
metal products found in the yard. Thieves also will break into the
building itself in order to steal cargo and other goods.
Thefts from vehicles in motion, ﬁrst reported in the GTA for
2009, continued into 2011. Again, however, the Spanish Civil
Guard made some headway on this front. In February 2011, an
investigation by the Civil Guard resulted in the arrest of 10 people
of Romanian nationality. The operation was launched after
several transportation companies complained that cargo was
disappearing from their trucks, usually at night, while they trav-
eled along major roads.
To carry out a theft from a vehicle in motion, one of the
thieves’ vehicles moves in front of the target truck and then slows
down so that the truck also is forced to slow. Then, thieves trav-
eling closely behind the target truck in a pickup or similar vehicle
jump from the hood of their vehicle to the back door of the target
truck, where they saw or force open the lock. In some reported
cases in 2010, the thieves actually harnessed themselves to the
target truck.
The thieves then pass boxes from the target truck to their
accomplices in the cargo bed of the pickup, repeating this action
until several pickup trucks are loaded with the goods. These thefts
often are discovered only after the trucker arrives at his destination.
Russia
Although the true depth and complexity of Russia’s severe
cargo theft situation remained as murky as ever in 2011dthe
result, as always, of extremely limited ofﬁcial incident repor-
tingdthefts appear to have increased once again, based on
anecdotal evidence and available reports from police and insur-
ance companies.
A January 2012 report by the Moscow Police Criminal Inves-
tigations Department said police registered 373 more vehicle
thefts in 2011 than in the previous year. In addition, 304 trucks
(heavy vehicles) and 209 vehicles with special equipment were
stolen. These last two categories of vehicles are increasingly
gaining the attention of thieves, according to the report.
An insurance company report issued in July 2011 indicated
cargo theft increased by 30% in Russia during the ﬁrst semester of
the year, although the report did not provide numbers of inci-
dents. The report did suggest, however, that thieves are broad-
ening their theft techniques. In 2011, for example, an increase in
the number of thefts from vehicles in motion was registered. It is
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 333

still too early to say whether this MO is an emerging trend,
however.
Supply Chain Challenges
Nearly 70% of all cargo is moved by road and 15% by railway in
Russia. Although the country’s aging and overcrowded road
network continues to pose a serious threat to transporters and
logistics providers, a government plan to invest 1.3 trillion rubles
($41 billion USD) on the country’s road system by 2019 is a hopeful
sign. Some of the heavily used “M” highways (national roads
leading to and from Moscow) affected by this initiative are the M-1
to Belarus, the M-3 to Ukraine, the M-4 to southern Russia, and the
M-11, a 400-mile toll road from Moscow to St. Petersburg intended
as an alternative route to the heavily transited M-10. The ﬁrst stage
of the tollway is expected to open in 2013.
In addition to cargo crime and infrastructure deﬁciencies,
endemic corruption and the blurry lines between Russian orga-
nized crime and government remain as serious issues for
companies needing to ensure that supply lines run smoothly.
This remains the case even though 2011 saw some much-publi-
cized movement regarding Russia’s stance on bribery.
In May 2011, President Dmitry Medvedev signed legislation
that imposed higher monetary ﬁnes for bribery, including both
commercial bribery and bribery of foreign public ofﬁcials to gain
business advantages. Importantly, this step by Medvedev resulted
in an invitation for Russia to join the Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD) Anti-Bribery Convention.
(In February 2012, Medvedev signed into law Russia’s accession
to the convention).
The OECD invitation is likely one of the reasons Russia moved
up a few notches in Transparency International’s 2011 Corrup-
tion Perceptions Index. While Russia was ranked 154th out of 182
countries, with an abysmal score of 2.1 out of 10, in the 2010
index, it inched into 143rd place with a score of 2.4 last year.
Countries that score below 3 points, however, are considered
“highly corrupt” and, despite last year’s improvement, Russia’s
public sector is still considered the most corrupt of the world’s
major economies.
Cargo Theft Trends and Techniques
Cargo thieves in most European countries tend to employ
classic, nonconfrontational methods, such as theft of or from
trailers left attended at service stations, rest areas, or unsecured
parking areas, and warehouse burglaries achieved through
334
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

intrusion. Violence is rare in most of Europe, and there continues
to be a degree of opportunistic theft.
While Russian cargo thieves also target in-transit trucks and
warehouses, they most often are heavily armed and focused on
loads they have targeted in advance. The most common types of
incidents in Russia are armed hijackingsdwith driver kidnapping
often involveddand armed robberies. The fake police MO
(deceptive stop), in which criminals dress in police or customs
uniforms to get truck drivers to pull over on highways and roads,
is also very common. While Russian thieves will hit parked trucks,
they prefer to force drivers to stop.
Thefts from trailers in motion increased in Russia in 2011,
although this MO is not employed as frequently as others in
Russia. This method reportedly occurs along stretches of road
where one of the thieves can force a truck to slow to about 30 mph
by driving slowly in front of it. Then, other members of the cargo
theft gang commence their maneuvers at the rear of the trailer. As
in other countries where this MO is seen, the victimized drivers
discover the theft only after they arrive to deliver the cargo.
Even though cargo theft occurs throughout Russia, the areas
around Saint Petersburg and Moscow continue to be at highest
risk, following the 2010 trend.
Among the product types preferred by cargo thieves in Russia
are alcohol, electronics, and food/drinks. However, the pharma-
ceutical and the building/industrial categories also saw thefts in
2011, as the following two examples demonstrate:
•
On March 13, thieves posing as police ofﬁcers hijacked two
trucks after forcing the drivers to stop near the city of Veliky
Novgorod, which sits on the M-10 highway connecting Mos-
cow and St. Petersburg. The thieves kidnapped the drivers
and made off with an estimated $6 million USD in pharmaceu-
ticals, later releasing the drivers unharmed. Authorities even-
tually located the trucks, missing their loads and their
license plates, near St. Petersburg.
•
On Sunday morning, December 25, a gang of armed cargo
thieves wearing balaclavas broke into a Russian factory in
the southwestern city of Astrakhan. Once inside, they tied up
and gagged the security guards and made off with 42 sheets
of platinum worth approximately $5.7 million USD (source:
TAPA EMEA).
Africa
The African continent continues to pose major challenges to
the supply chain industry. Cargo theft, high rates of violence,
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 335

infrastructure deﬁciencies, corruption, poor service delivery, and
weak governance are among the problems faced regularly by
companies doing business in or with Africa.
The security situation on the continent differs from country to
country, and even from region to region within each country.
According to media reports and warnings issued by outside
governments, the most dangerous countries on the continent are
Libya,
Kenya,
Chad,
Somalia,
Niger,
Nigeria,
Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Cote d’Ivoire, Burundi, Eritrea, and
Republic of South Sudan, among others.
These countries are considered among the least safe places in
Africa for various reasons, including high crime rates, political
instability, banditry, and the risk of terrorist attacks or sudden
outbreaks of armed violence.
Recent reports suggest that security has improved to a certain
degree in some African countries, including Angola and South
Africa. In Angola, for instance, the overall security situation has
improved since the country’s 27-year civil war ended in 2002.
However, crime remains a serious problem, especially in North
and South Lunda provinces, Cabinda Province, and Luanda
Province, home of the nation’s capital city of Luanda. Meanwhile,
in South Africa, although police report a drop in crime levels,
crime rates remain high and violent incidents are still frequent in
townships and isolated areas.
South Africa, economically the most important country in
Africa and one of the major ports of entry onto the continent,
336
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

remains one of the continent’s principal hot spots for cargo
theft.
In 2011, piracy around Africa reached its highest levels in
history. It was estimated that piracy costs the world’s economies
$7 to $12 billion USD annually, and the enormous amount of
piracy occurring off of Africa’s coasts contributes greatly to the
high losses globally. Because of the growing problem, this year’s
Africa GTA includes an overview of the piracy situation.
Cargo Crime and Truck Theft
As in previous years, cargo crime data collection and incident
reporting remained extremely poor throughout Africa in 2011.
Although media report on the cargo crime situation from time to
time, most of the news releases issued by law enforcement tend to
highlight successful arrests or recoveries of stolen goods, with
little or no mention of incidents in which thieves escaped with the
goods.
According to an October 2011 news report out of Kenya, for
example, at least two cargo theft incidents involving trucks occur
nightly along the MombasaeMalaba highway, especially in the
areas of Naivasha and Eldoret. The head of the Kenya Transport
Association was quoted as saying authorities have not addressed
the lack of security adequately, while transportation companies
continue to suffer great losses and drivers’ lives are at constant
risk.
Slightly better than in most other countries is reporting from
South Africa, where statistics are occasionally released by the
South African Police Service (SAPS).
According to SAPS, 999 trucks were hijacked in South Africa for
the year running April 1, 2010, to March 31, 2011. That number
was considerably down from the 1492 reported hijackings for the
same period the previous year, according to SAPS ﬁgures.
Historically, Gauteng Province is by far the most affected by truck
hijackings and cargo theft. In fact, in the latest SAPS report, 600 of
the 999 incidents reported took place in this province. Mpuma-
langa, Kwazulu-Natal, and North West provinces are also areas
with high theft rates.
Overall serious crime in South Africa fell by 2.4% year on year,
according to the SAPS report for the year ending March 31, 2011.
The report says homicides and other serious crimes dropped
from just over 2.1 to 2.07 million in the reporting period. SAPS
claims that improvements in police intelligence, investigations,
and rapid response to crime have resulted in better arrest and
conviction rates.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 337

Modi Operandi and Product Types
Violence or the threat of violence is present in most cargo theft
incidents in Africa. As in previous years, the most common MOs
in 2011 were armed robberies and truck hijackings. Road block-
ages and theft by deception, in which thieves pose as police
ofﬁcers, were other methods used by thieves, although to a lesser
extent than hijackings and armed robberies. The constant
involvement of violence and the crude theft methods common in
Africa stand in stark contrast to cargo theft operations seen in
other parts of the globe, particularly Europe and the United
States, where violence is rare and thieves are constantly inventing
new ways to carry out their crimes.
The variety of products stolen is wide in Africa, although the
product categories most targeted were food/drinks, electronics
and building/industrial. This is quite similar to the trends seen in
some European countries.
Case Studies
On February 7, 2011, six thieves, all residents of Johannesburg,
were apprehended while trying to steal a load of mobile phones at
O.R. Tambo International Airport. Apparently one of the thieves
worked in the cargo section at the airport. The arrests took place
while the suspects were loading a truck with the stolen
merchandise. The value of the load was estimated at V162,173
($220,122 USD).
On March 9, 2011, In Nairobi, Kenya, a container loaded with
coffee was stolen by thieves who apparently managed to disable
the truck’s tracking system. The driver was suspected of
involvement in the incident. The empty truck was found later in
Naivasha. The loss value was not disclosed.
In South Africa, three men hijacked a truck loaded with
refrigerators in Dobsonville, Gauteng Province, on August 23,
2011. Thanks to a tip provided to law enforcement, however, the
offenders were arrested and the truck and its cargo were recov-
ered the following day.
On October 17, 2011, three cargo thieves were arrested in the
city of Germiston near Johannesburg, South Africa, for possession
of stolen copper cable worth $95,160 USD. According to SAPS,
once authorities spotted the stolen truck and closed in on it, the
thieves ﬂed, leaving the stolen cargo behind. All three suspects
were apprehended a short time later. The truck had been hijacked
in the nearby township of Daveyton (source: TAPA EMEA).
The driver of a petroleum transport truck was hijacked and his
cargo stolen on South Africa’s South Coast Road in Durban,
338
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

KwaZulu-Natal Province, in October 2011. The empty truck was
recovered a few days later on the N2 highway. The amount of the
loss was not released.
Also in October on the South Coast Road, the driver of a truck
transporting sugar valued at about V183,945 ($258,235 USD) was
kidnapped and his load stolen. Freed the day after the kidnapping,
the driver and his assistant reported the incident to authorities,
whose investigation led to the arrest of some members of the
gang. Further investigation led police to the recovery of 31 tons of
sugar in Clairwood, about 3 miles from the theft site.
Piracy in Africa
International governments are putting more pressure on their
African counterparts to enforce the punishment of pirates as
a method of deterring their activities. Although maritime security
in African waters is improving, and thus piracy success rates are
dropping, pirates are ﬁghting back by increasing the frequency of
attacks and by showing an increasing willingness to use force.
Armed confrontations at sea are more common nowadays
because pirates do not appear to be backing down when faced
with increasing and well-armed security patrols.
High-Risk Regions
Piracy off the coasts of Africa is at its highest rate in recorded
history. Attacks are most common off the continent’s eastern
coast, especially between the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean.
Other high-risk areas are the Arabian Sea and the Red Sea,
although pirate attacks have decreased slightly in the Red Sea
area. With improved transportation technology allowing Somali
pirates to expand their range, incidents of piracy are expected to
increase near Tanzania and Kenya in the coming years.
Although pirate attacks along Africa’s western coast, particu-
larly in the Gulf of Guinea, are notoriously underreported,
signiﬁcant attacks in this region are increasing, based on the
reports that do come in. As many of the countries in the Gulf of
Guinea are oil producers, the rising trend is likely to continue in
this region.
Piracy is particularly signiﬁcant off of the coasts of Nigeria and
Benin. The nations, however, have begun to patrol their waters
more heavily and have created a joint effort to target criminals.
Products Targeted and Means of Piracy
Ships operating along Africa’s western coast often are carrying
cargo the pirates covet, especially oil. Thus, oil tankers in
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 339

particular are heavily targeted for their cargo. However, because
the pirates’ goal is not ransom, they are more likely to harm the
crew. East coast pirates, however, are more likely to hijack a ship
for ransom. In many cases, pirates working these waters are not
even interested in a vessel’s cargo, but rather in the crew on
board.
Historically, piracy off of Africa’s eastern seaboard has been
the most prevalent following the monsoon season, which typi-
cally runs from June to September. This is because the criminals
typically operated from small skiffs that moved fast but could not
hold up in a heavy storm. However, pirates are shifting from
lightweight skiffs to larger and more powerful ﬁshing boats,
making seasonal storms less of a deterrent to determined pirates.
Case Studies
In early October 2011, pirates hijacked a chemical tanker in
the Gulf of Guinea and held the 20-member crew hostage for
5 days. It is believed the pirates’ target was the load, not the crew,
as they left the tanker after apparently transferring all of the cargo
and equipment that their own vessel could carry.
On October 31, 2011, Somali pirates in the Gulf of Aden
hijacked a Greek chemical tanker bound for India with a crew of
22 on board. As late as January 9, 2012, reports surfaced that the
pirates remained in control of the tanker and were likely planning
to use it as a base of operations to attack other vessels.
Ransom was believed to be the motive behind a December 27,
2011, attack by Somali pirates against an Italian tanker trans-
porting nearly 16,000 tons of caustic soda from the United Arab
Emirates to the Mediterranean. It was speculated that the pirates
intended to ransom the 18-member crew composed of six Ital-
ians, seven Indians, and ﬁve Ukrainians.
As of January 2012, it was believed that Somali pirates were
holding 13 different ships hostagedwith a total of more than 200
people on board.
Asia
When examining large-scale cargo theft on a global level, the
Asian continent is the safest of the seven, presenting moderate
levels of risk overall to supply chain operations. However, cargo
theft is prevalent, and difﬁcult to control, in some Asian countries
and regions. Malaysia and the Philippines both report frequent
incidents of in-transit cargo hijackings, with violence or the threat
of violence involved in the commission of crimes. In China,
340
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

however, small-scale pilferage of cargo is considered rampant
and intellectual property rights are at the core of multinational
business concerns. India is becoming increasingly noted for
large-scale theft incidents, including truck hijackings and ware-
house robberies.
As manufacturing and logistics functions continue to ﬂourish
in many areas of the continentdincreasing the appetite for less-
costly productsdthere is little doubt that cargo theft and supply
chain risk have increased throughout Asia. While this trend is
clearly of concern, it is important to note that the rate of theft
experienced throughout Asia is signiﬁcantly lower than the rates
seen in countries such as Mexico, Brazil, and South Africa.
The powerful earthquake and tsunami that struck Japan in
March 2011 is a prime example of factors other than cargo crime
that can seriously impact supply chain operations and security. In
addition to natural disasters, these other factors can include
infrastructure weaknesses, regulatory problems, worker strikes/
demonstrations, and government readiness and response issues.
While the FreightWatch intelligence division is focused primarily
on cargo theft, it is increasingly looking at these and other issues
that can lead to supply chain disruptions in order to provide
readers with a broader spectrum of information they can use to
help keep their cargo secure throughout the global supply chain.
China
China is the second-largest economy and the most-populated
country in the world, making it tremendously important for
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 341

business and trade. From January through November 2011,
China handled 50.3 billion tons of cargo by air, 25.5 billion tons
of cargo by highway, and 3.6 billion tons of cargo by rail.
Despite the obvious opportunities for thieves, China historically
has been a low-risk country for cargo theft. Companies doing
business in and with China, however, have seen an increase in
cargo
theft
in
recent
years.
Furthermore,
as
domestic
consumption among China’s growing middle class increases
demand for all kinds of consumer goods in the coming
years, cargo thieves can be expected to fully exploit the
opportunities.
Unprecedented urbanization has put enormous pressure on
China’s infrastructure, including roads and highways in and
around its major cities. Beijing and Shenzhen tied for second
place (behind Mexico City) on IBM’s 2011 global Commuter
Pain Index, which lists cities with the world’s worst trafﬁc.
When scores of Chinese cities have populations greater than 1
million (and a good number over 10 million), however, the
pressure on infrastructure is enormous. Heavy trafﬁc not only
takes an emotional and economic toll on Chinese commuters, it
forces cargo to sit idle for long periods of time, making it an
easy
target
for
thieves.
Although
China
is
developing
its
highway system, American-style multilane highways are still
uncommon outside of the major urban areas. Many roads
connecting the major cities are not well-paved and are riddled
with potholes.
Cargo Theft Trends and Techniques
Most cargo theft in China is of a nonviolent, nonconfronta-
tional nature, as it does not involve interaction with drivers or
employees. Facility burglaries from warehouses or ports/termi-
nals are the most commonly reported types of cargo theft. This
means it is vital that companies closely monitor cargo as it is
transported from manufacturing
facilities and
loaded into
containers for transport via ship, plane, rail, or truck. Theft of
trailers with full truckloads of goods also occurs, usually when
vehicles are left unattended. In one instance in December,
a driver parked his truck in an unsecured parking lot and fell
asleep in the cab. When he awoke, his trailer, ﬁlled with a load of
frozen chicken, was missing.
An MO seen in 2010 was also quite common last year. This is
thefts of loads while trucks are in motion. This type of theft is
frustrating for drivers because they rarely know the theft occurred
until they arrive to deliver their load.
342
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

As is the norm in China, employee pilferage continued in 2011
at ports, terminals, and other areas where workers have easy
access to cargo. Designer goods and other originals are especially
susceptible to pilferage, as they often are used to create the
counterfeit products that abound in China and many other global
markets.
Most of the theft in China takes place in coastal provinces in
China’s eastern and southern regions, including Guangdong,
Fujian, Shanghai, and Hong Kong. The food/drinks industry was
among those most targeted by thieves in 2011, as stolen
consumable products can be sold easily to stores. Consumer
electronics
produced
in
China
for
export
and
domestic
consumption are also popular among thieves. Clothing/shoes are
another commonly targeted product type because of the popu-
larity of these goods on the black market.
China’s rapid growth and industrialization has put metals of
all kinds in extremely high demand. As a result, cargo thieves in
China are increasingly targeting shipments of metals as well as
the rail lines themselves for the metals that can be removed.
Chinese railway police, while not always successful at stopping
thefts of this nature, scored a major success in early 2012,
apprehending a total of 343 suspects in various locations around
the country in connection with a series of thefts of track
components and other items from active rail lines. The thefts had
incapacitated some lines, forcing trains to stop for track repairs,
thus delaying the delivery of cargo. The suspects are believed to
be members of criminal gangs.
Interestingly, the extreme demand for metals in China has led
to a good number of thefts of copper and iron from railways in
Europedfor export to China.
Other Supply Chain Risks
Travel along the Lancang-Mekong River proved dangerous in
2011 as hundreds of ships were hijacked. This waterway passes
through China,
Myanmar, Thailand, Laos,
Cambodia,
and
Vietnam, making it a vital trade route for those countries. The
river, however, is increasingly rife with criminals, drug trafﬁckers,
and rebel groups that attack cargo and ﬁshing vessels. The killing
of 13 Chinese sailors in an October 5, 2011, attack against two
Chinese cargo ships on the Mekong prompted China to suspend
navigation until early December. At that time, Chinese police
launched joint patrols with police from Laos, Myanmar, and
Thailand with the goal of reducing cross-border crime and thus
restoring security along the river.
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 343

Malaysia
A middle-income country today, Malaysia is emerging as
a major trading partner in the global market. This is due in part to
Malaysia’s growing export sector as well as the country’s unique
geographical position on the Malay Peninsula and the Strait of
Malacca. Surging trade in the Asia-Paciﬁc region, particularly in
neighboring Singapore, greatly enhances Malaysia’s importance
as a trade route.
International trade increased by 29%, to $363.5 billion USD, in
2011, Malaysia’s deputy ﬁnance minister was quoted as saying in
January 2012. He further said Malaysia’s cross-border trade is
expected to increase 88% over the next 15 years. As trade soars,
however, so does international attentiondand with that will
come pressure on the government to address the severe problem
of cargo theft on roads and rails and at ports and airports.
The Malaysian government has taken some steps in recent
years to strengthen cargo security. For instance, it has ordered
police departments and customs ofﬁcials to work in closer
cooperation, requiring that they share information on potential
theft cases and suspicious individuals. Malaysia is also partici-
pating in and dedicating resources to a trial program with the
International Air Transport Association to improve airport secu-
rity and avoid bottlenecks. The goal is to help reduce the large
amount of thefts that occur in the air cargo sector.
Despite efforts to date to improve cargo security, law
enforcement rarely recovers loads or captures suspects, a fact that
has only served to embolden thieves to go after cargo of higher
and higher value.
In the Asia-Paciﬁc, only Hong Kong has had a higher rate of
cargo theft. What’s more, truck hijackings involving threats
against drivers are the most common form of cargo theft in the
country. Employee involvement in thefts, either directly in the act
344
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

or indirectly as a source of insider information for thieves, is
another major challenge to the supply chain industry.
Cargo Theft
Reports of cargo theft have decreased over the last couple
years in Malaysia, although theft remains a common and severe
problem. Making it more difﬁcult to pinpoint the degree of cargo
theft today is the trend among companies against reporting cargo
thefts. This apparently stems from the desire to avoid increases in
insurance premiums or the desire to protect a victimized com-
pany’s reputation. In some cases, it might also to be embarrassing
for a company to acknowledge the thief or thieves were on the
payroll.
Workers within the supply chain are thought to pose a signif-
icant challenge to cargo security throughout the country. Cargo
handlers, truck drivers, security guards, and other lower level
employees at ports, warehouses, and other facilities are believed
to be behind a good portion of the incidents that take place.
Furthermore, employee collusion with corrupt law enforcement
in some cases makes solving cases much more difﬁcult.
Cargo Theft Trends and Techniques
Malaysia’s supply chain suffers under the enormous burden of
corruption, crime, and violence. This situation is reﬂected in the
most popular MOs and the incidents of cargo theft in 2011.
Armed hijackings accounted for the majority of cargo theft during
the year. As in most other countries where hijackings occur
regularly, thieves in Malaysia usually block roads and highways
with vehicles, forcing trucks to a halt. Once at rest, the truck and
its driver become easy pickings for thieves.
Another MO used on roadways in 2011 was the fake police
method, in which thieves wearing police uniforms set up fake
checkpoints to force truck drivers to pull over and stop.
Weapons most often were used in hijackings just to threaten
drivers, so physical attacks were rare and no driver was reported
killed during a hijacking in 2011. Cargo thieves did act aggres-
sively toward drivers by tying them up and at times gagging them.
After hijacking, facility/warehouse burglaries were the se-
cond most common form of cargo theft in 2011. As with many
of the hijackings, thieves committing burglaries of warehouses
or other facilities either worked at the facility or had access to
inside information. By staging “inside jobs” or using insider
information, the thieves were able to target the products they
desired. Furthermore, knowledge of the security measures in
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 345

place at a speciﬁc location allowed many of these thieves to
avoid detection.
Product Type and Location
Thieves most often targeted the food/drinks product type in
2011, perhaps because these products are quite easy to sell to
vendors. Even though this category topped the list, it is likely that
many more thefts of foods and beverages went unreported
because these loads generally are lower in value than others. The
electronics industry, especially cell phones, microchips, and
computers, was the second most targeted sector in Malaysia in
2011. Because Malaysia’s economy is highly dependent on
exports of electronics, these goods are transported regularly
throughout the country, making them frequent targets for theft.
The building/industrial product type, especially copper, cement,
and steel, was a popular target for cargo thieves as well.
Rubber and palm oil, consistently valuable export products for
Malaysia, experienced soaring price increases of 72 and 71%,
respectively, from June 2010 to June 2011. As a result, these two
products, which fall under the miscellaneous product type, were
targeted increasingly by cargo thieves.
Most reported cargo thefts in 2011 occurred in the states of
Selangor, with 43% of all incidents, Penang with 21%, and
Malacca and Johor, both with 14%. Not surprisingly, these
states are located along the Strait of Malacca on the Malay
Peninsula, two of the world’s most important trade routes.
Trucks heading south from Ipoh on the NortheSouth Highway
were often targeted by cargo theft gangs based in Penang or
Kuala
Lumpur.
This
highway,
which
runs
from
northern
Malaysia to Singapore, is used quite extensively by thieves
transporting stolen goods.
Case Studies
In March 2011, Malaysian police reported the arrest of six
suspects and the recovery of more than 700,000 condoms from
a warehouse and a private home in northern Perak state. The
load, worth an estimated $1.5 million USD, had gone missing
while being shipped to Japan from Malaysia’s Port Klang
2 months earlier. Some of the suspects reportedly worked for the
company that transported the condoms from the factory to the
port, located in Selangor state.
A truck driver was arrested in Juru, Penang state, after falsely
claiming in April that his truck had been hijacked on the North-
South Expressway. The driver was accused of involvement in the
346
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

theft of his load, 300 laptops bound for a school. Police recovered
the laptops, valued at more than $100,000 USD.
A truck transporting a load of mobile phones valued at nearly
$500,000 USD was hijacked in August 2011 in Glenmarie, Selan-
gor state. The hijackers, who threatened the driver with hammers,
staged the attack around midnight while the driver was parked at
a convenience store. They escaped with the load.
Philippines
The Philippines, a traditionally agricultural society with
a growing industrial sector, is expected to emerge as a trade and
economic power in the coming decades. Although the industrial
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 347

sector is still in its infancy, cargo thieves already have discovered
the opportunities that present themselves when tradedand thus
the transportation of goodsdincreases.
Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index
ranks the Philippines as one of the most corrupt countries in
the Asia-Paciﬁc region. This state of affairs affects the supply
chain
industry
on
several
fronts:
First,
direct
or
indirect
involvement by police or other authorities in any given cargo
theft incident is a strong possibility. Second, rampant graft and
bribery within the public sector often create the need for
shippers,
manufacturers,
and
transportation
companies
to
“grease the wheels” to ensure that cargo is kept moving. Finally,
reporting of cargo theft incidents is affected because victims
don’t trust the system.
Serious infrastructure inadequacies in the Philippines also
affect the supply chain greatly. Not only do congested and clog-
ged roads, railroads, and ports cost the industry a fortune in
delays and other inefﬁciencies, major bottlenecks in the ﬂow of
goods make cargo easier to steal. In an effort to address infra-
structure deﬁciencies, the Philippine government announced in
2011 a plan to promote private investment in road and port
improvements. Additionally, $1.4 billion USD of the Department
of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) budget was dedicated to
building and expanding roads, highways, and bridges. Other
projects planned to begin in 2012 include building regional
airports, improving railways, and upgrading the Manila Interna-
tional Trading Terminal, which handles 90% of the country’s
imports. DPWH did complete many road projects in 2011, but the
major projects involving airports and the trading terminal have
yet to begin.
With
systemic
corruption,
poor
infrastructure,
and
the
increasing movement of goods, the Philippines is a high-risk area
for cargo theft.
Cargo Theft Trends and Techniques
The northernmost and largest Island, Luzon, experiences
almost all of the reported cargo thefts in the Philippines. Luzon is
the Philippines’ gateway to many of its major trading partners,
including Japan, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. The major regions
where theft occurs on the island of Luzon are Calabarzon, Central
Luzon, and the National Capital Region of Manila. All of these
regions have major ports, providing thieves plenty of opportunity
to steal imports and exports either in transit or at the cargo
terminals.
348
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

Philippine National Police reported a 26% decrease in
hijackings in 2011 compared with 2010. According to ofﬁcial
statistics, 34 hijackings occurred in 2011, down from the 46 cases
reported a year earlier. It is likely, however, that a good number of
hijackings go unreported. Regardless, hijacking was by far the
most common form of cargo theft reported in the Philippines. In
most cases the thieves forced drivers to stop by using vehicles to
block roads and highways. Thieves also have been known to use
the fake police MO, dressing in police uniforms to get drivers to
pull over and stop.
Thus, cargo moving by road in the Philippines is at a steady
risk of hijacking. Most often the theft gangs are armed with guns
or knives, although in large part the weapons are there to
intimidate truckers. This is not always the case, however. During
a hijacking in Manila in September, the perpetrators stabbed both
the truck driver and his partner, killing the driver and seriously
wounding the other. They then transferred the cargo, $20,000
USD worth of soap, shampoo, and detergent, to their own truck
and disappeared.
Violence also erupted in October after thieves hijacked a truck
transporting $57,000 USD in baking products in Calabarzon. In
that incident, a shootout ensued when pursuing police cornered
the armed suspects, and three of the suspects were killed.
While hijacking is the most commonly reported form of cargo
theft, other types of theft seen regularly in the Philippines in 2011
were warehouse/facility burglaries, thefts by driver, and thefts of
trailers. Employee theft, particularly by warehouse workers, is
another serious concern in the Philippines. Employees have been
implicated not only in the “theft by driver” category but in
hijackings, facility burglaries, and thefts of trailers as well.
After a truck loaded with $113,000 USD in pharmaceuticals
went missing in November 2011, police said they believed the
driver was responsible, since he disappeared along with the truck.
Another theft in Quezon on April 15 has been attributed to
a warehouse security guard who had recently been ﬁred. The
suspect, who is in police custody, is accused of stealing more than
$45,000 USD in car parts during the month he frequently returned
to the warehouse to visit his former co-workers. Authorities
suspect other employees were complicit in the thefts.
Philippines authorities did have some success capturing
thieves and recovering vehicles in 2011. In fact, the Philippine
National Police have said they intensiﬁed operations to counter
hijackings and intend to continue those efforts in 2012. In Laguna
in early November the Criminal Investigation and Detection
Group cornered and killed four members of the Ferrer hijacking
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 349

gang. The Ferrer gang was active in hijacking cargo trucks
throughout Cavite, Batangas, and Laguna.
The same month, authorities broke up the Sociro-Manlapaz
gang, arresting the gang’s leader and four other members, in
Cavite Province. Police captured the gang after its members
hijacked a truck ﬁlled with $45,000 USD in grocery items in the
Bulacan Province. Following the arrests, police recovered more
than $160,000 USD in goods stolen previously by the gang.
The product types stolen most often in the Philippines in 2011
were food/drinks, building/industrial, and electronics. These just
happen to be product types the country either exports or imports
to a large extent. Thus, food/drinks accounted for 42% of reported
stolen cargo, building/industrial products, including cement and
steel, accounted for 16%, while electronics accounted for 11%.
India
As India’s economy, population, and middle class continue to
grow, so too does international tradedand with increasing trade
comes increasing demand on the country’s fragile transport
infrastructure and associated services. According to the Indian
Ports Association, cargo tonnage at the country’s major ports
alone increased by 7.69% during the AprileDecember period of
2011 compared with the same period in 2010.
350
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

In an effort to reduce congestion at the ports, India’s
government has announced a 10-year, $110 billion USD program
to build new ports and upgrade others. The project isn’t sched-
uled for completion until 2020, meaning improvements will not
be seen for some time.
With more and more goods moving into, through, and out of
India, the risk of cargo theft is growing. India is vulnerable to
cargo criminals on virtually all transport fronts: roads and high-
ways, railroads, ports, and airports. Cargo traveling on the
county’s roadways is most at risk, however, particularly to theft
involving violence or the threat of violence. Given that 65% of
freight is moved via road in India, truckers and their cargo face
heightened risks. As in previous years, warehouses were also
frequent targets of cargo crime in 2011, especially during the
overnight hours.
The threat of cargo theft is fairly high throughout the country,
while recovery of stolen loadsdwith a notable exception at
midyeardremains very low.
Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, and Karnataka are
the states at highest risk of cargo theft, based on 2011 reporting.
Of those, Punjab state saw the highest increase in theft incidents
for the year. Rajasthan and Maharashtra states also reported
increases in cargo crime last year. Tamil Nadu on the southern tip
of India, home to the major Chennai Port, is another state at
signiﬁcant risk of cargo theft.
Not only did Punjab state experience an increase in cargo theft
in 2011, it saw the highest number of reported warehouse thefts
as well. Although Punjab took the No. 1 spot for thefts of this
nature, warehouse thefts continued to occur throughout the
country, particularly after dark when facilities are vacant.
Cargo Theft Trends and Techniques
Truck hijacking, at times combined with the fake police MO,
was the most commonly reported method of theft employed by
Indian cargo criminals in 2011. In some cases, thieves donned
police uniforms as a way of forcing unwitting drivers to pull over
and open their trailers. In nearly all kidnapping incidents last
year, the thieves came armed with guns or knives, and often with
rope for tying up the drivers. Hijackings often were carried out by
three or more members of the theft gang, while their partners in
crime waited at a designated location to unload the cargo and
dispose of the truck.
On National Highway 2 in Maharashtra state, a slew of
hijackings occurred during April, May, and June 2011. Authorities
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 351

eventually captured the gang responsible for many of the inci-
dents, but not before the highway earned a reputation as
a “kidnapping zone.” Many violent thefts and hijackings also
occurred in 2011 on India’s western coast in Goa and Karnataka
states.
Imports to India are frequently targeted for theft and pilferage
by contract employees at cargo handling agencies. Although the
likelihood of theft by these laborers is well known, they continue
to have easy access to cargo, providing them the opportunity to
pass stolen goods to third parties with little threat of exposure.
Unscrupulous employees working cargo bays have even more
chance of success when they steal from damaged crates, as they
can always claim a loss occurred by cargo falling out of the crate
during shipment.
Sitting railcars were another common target throughout India
last year, although these thefts tend to be crimes of opportunity
and the work of the country’s dire poor, as often in these cases the
culprits simply jump into the stopped railcars and make off with
as many items as they can carry.
While cargo theft in this country has long been primarily the
domain of opportunistic criminals who take advantage of isolated
trucks or loads left unattended, sophisticated gangs and members
of the Indian maﬁa operate in an organized manner. These gangs,
known to collude with corrupt police and/or employees of
warehouses or freight forwarding yards, were suspected in several
large-scale cargo thefts in 2011.
When pursued by authorities, Indian cargo theft gangs are
known to resort to violence, often with guns or machetes, and this
knowledge has served to make a good number of police ofﬁcers
think twice before attempting pursuit.
A notable exception occurred March 29, 2011, near Bangalore
in the town of Devanahalli shortly after a gang of seven cargo
thieves hijacked a truck carrying raw tobacco. Alerted to the theft,
police located the stolen truck, which was parked by the side of
the road, and moved in to apprehend the suspects. The thieves,
however, spotted the approaching ofﬁcers and sped off in the
truck, launching a 30-minute chase that ended when police
overtook the stolen truck. The thieves responded by attacking the
ofﬁcers with machetes, injuring two of them. The confrontation
ended when police ﬁred their weapons, wounding one of the
suspects.
The food/drinks industry was the most targeted by thieves in
2011, with products such as sugar, tea, and wheat among those
most stolen. Following closely behind food/drinks in popularity
were tobacco products, including cigarettes, and goods in the
352
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT

building/industrial category, especially metals such as copper,
aluminum, and iron. Other product types favored by thieves in
2011 include auto/parts, clothing/shoes, pharmaceuticals, and
electronics.
Update on Iron Thefts
The 2010 Global Threat Assessment addressed the outbreak of
thefts of iron, principally in the central Indian state of Uttar
Pradesh but on a national level as well. With the price of iron still
high in 2011, thefts of the product continued to be a problem
throughout the year. Although theft and pilferage of iron by
individuals are common, police focused their efforts on the gang
and maﬁa members believed to be responsible for large-scale
thefts of iron ore.
Indeed, on June 20, 2011, authorities arrested 23 suspected
maﬁa members accused of involvement in a series of iron ore
thefts over several years. The operation also resulted in the
seizure of more than 100 tons of iron ore from the forests of
Sundargarh District in the eastern state of Orissa. This major win
for law enforcement likely led to a reduction in iron ore thefts in
Orissa state and in neighboring West Bengal and Jharkhand
states.
Other Supply Chain Risks
India’s rapid growth has put extreme pressure on the coun-
try’s already fragile infrastructure. As such, the narrow roadways
and low trafﬁc capacity cause extreme congestion in cities, while
roads in rural areas are rarely paved and are not designed to
withstand the elements.
Trucker strikes at the Port of Chennai in June and July 2011
caused serious congestion, making sitting cargo an easy target for
thieves.
Contact
Dan Burges
Senior Director, Intelligence
512.532.0159
dan.burges@freightwatchintl.com
FREIGHTWATCH INTERNATIONAL GLOBAL THREAT ASSESSMENT 353

REFERENCES
Adams, D., 2011. 4 men get probation in theft of cargo in Botetourt County.
Retrieved July 14, 2011. www.roanoke.com. http://www.roanoke.com/news/
roanoke/wb/292856.
Aleccia, J., 2011. Half of hospitals buy back door drugs, new survey shows.
MSNBC. Retrieved September 8, 2011. http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/
44280296/ns/health-health_care/t/half-hospitals-buy-back-door-drugs-new-
survey-shows/#.TmjVEexvAZN.
Amerman, K., 2009. Upper Macungie warehouse supervisor gets probation for
formula theft conspiracy. Of the Morning Call July 2, 2009.
ASIS, 2004. Protection of Assets Manual.
Badolato, E., 1999. Cargo Security: Avoiding Theft & Loss in the New Millennium.
NCSC Presentation to Supply Chain Solutions ’99.
Blanchard, D., 2006. Protecting the global supply chain. Industry Week December
2006.
Burges, D., 2006. Cargo Theft: From Silent Crime to Violent Crime? Strategic
Forecasting Inc. September 25, 2006.
Burges, D., 2009a. Intercontinental risk. Cargo Security International 7 (3), 47e48.
Burges, D., 2009b. Global risk. Cargo Security International 7 (1), 46e47.
Burges, D., 2011. FreightWatch Annual US Cargo Theft Report. FreightWatch
International. January 2011.
Chavez, S., Tello, G., 2009. Mexico highway robberies boost costs. Retrieved June
4, 2009. The Latin Business Chronicle. http://www.latinbusinesschronicle
.com.
Cheah, E.T., Chan, W.L., Chieng, C.L., 2007. The corporate social responsibility of
pharmaceutical product recalls: An empirical examination of US and UK
markets. Journal of Business Ehtics vol. 76, 427e449.
Court, D., Elzinga, D., Mulder, S., Ole, J.V., 2009. The consumer decision journey.
McKinsely Quarterly. Retrieved July 1, 2009. http://www.mckinseyquarterly
.com/Marketing/Strategy/The_consumer_decision_journey_2373#.
Davidson, W., Worrell, D., 1992. Research notes and communications: The effect
of product recall announcements and shareholder wealth. Strategic
Management Journal vol. 3, 467e473.
Dean, D., 2004. Consumer reaction to negative publicity: Effects of corporate
reputation, response, and responsibility for a crisis event. Journal of Business
Communications 41 (2), 192e211.
DeBenedetti, C., 2011. The largest high-tech heist in Bay Area history was an
inside job. MercurityNews.com. Retrieved July 25, 2011. http://www
.mercurynews.com/ci_18537890?IADID¼Search-www.mercurynews.com-
www.mercurynews.com.
Dertouzos, J., Larson, E., Ebener, P., 1999. The Economic Costs and Implications
of High-Technology Hardware Theft. RAND Corporation.
Eiserer, T., 2008. Stolen cargo can be quite proﬁtable for all involved. The Dallas
Morning News. Retrieved June 23, 2009. http://www.swtsc.org/page14.
Evans, K., 2011. Intel needs an App for revenue growth. The Wall Street Journal
July 20, 2011.

Falkner, J., 2009. FTA angry over lack of truck stops. International Freight Weekly.
http://www.ifw-net.com Accessed July 21, 2009.
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2008. Bank Crime Statistics. Retrieved June 4,
2009. http://www.fbi.gov/publications/bcs/bcs2008/bank_crime_2008q1
.htm. http://www.fbi.gov/publications/bcs/bcs2008/bank_crime_2008q2
.htm. http://www.fbi.gov/publications/bcs/bcs2008/bank_crime_2008q3
.htm. http://www.fbi.gov/publications/bcs/bcs2008/bank_crime_2008q4
.htm.
Fennelly, L., 2004. Handbook of Loss Prevention and Crime Prevention. Elsevier.
Gale Group, 2005. Cargo theft on the rise despite increase in enforcement. http://
www.thefreelibrary.com/Cargo+theft+on+rise+despite+increase+
in+enforcement-a0133642961 Accessed July 27, 2009.
Gonzalez, R., 2009. Thieves have target set on big-rig cargos. San Gabriel Valley
News Group. Retrieved June 24, 2009. http://www.transportsecurity.com/
blog/index.php/2009/03/14/thieves-have-target-set-on-big-rig-cargos/.
Greene, R., Garcia, V., 2010. Smart Cargo. FreightWatch International.
Gu, T., 2007. Cargo theft: Easy come, easy go. Northeast-Export. http://www
.northeast-export.com/newsletter01/feature2.php Accessed June 8, 2009.
Hudson Reporter. Former leader of famed “Conrail Boyz” gang arrested in North
Bergen. June 03, 2010.
Hyslop, J. (2003) Sugarman, Marine. Master Minds: Conrail BoyzeTRU TV
Documentary, 2003.
Identity theft.com. http://www.identitytheft.com/identity-theft-punishment.
Kavilanz, P., 2011. Prescription drugs worth millions to dealers. CNN Money.
http://money.cnn.com/2011/06/01/news/economy/prescription_drug_
abuse/index.htm?hpt¼hp_t2 Accessed June 1, 2011.
Klara, R., 2009. Copying machines: Counterfeiting used to be called a nuisance.
Now, there’s a new word for it: epidemic. Brandweek. http://business.
highbeam.com/137330/article-1G1-203281123/copying-machines-
counterfeiting-used-called-nuisance Accessed March 9, 2011.
Lacey, D., Cuganesan, S., 2004. The role of organizations in identity theft
response: The organization-individual victim dynamic. Journal of Consumer
Affairs 38 (2), 244e261. Academic Search Premier, Harvard University Library,
Boston, MA.
Mento, P., 2004. C-TPAT and ISA, understanding the effectiveness of trade
partnerships for customs enforcement. lulu.com.
Morasch, C., 2008. Grand theft cargo. Land Line Magazine. http://www
.landlinemag.com/Archives/2008/Nov08/Cover/grand_theft.htm Accessed
June 8, 2009.
Palmer, J., 2009. The effects of cargo theft in a down global economy.
International In-house Counsel Journal 2 (8), 1169e1174.
Peral, M., 2003. It’s not always about the money. Journal of Criminal Law &
Criminology 94 (1) 40p Academic Search Premier, Harvard University Library,
Boston, MA. 26 May 2011 94 (1), 169e208.
Schmallyer, F., 2009. Criminal Justice Today. Pearson Prentice Hall.
Seraﬁne, D., Henderson, S., Seraﬁne, M., 2005. Cargo crime: The silent killer.
Security World International JanuaryeFebruary.
Smothers, R. (2003) 24 are indicted in ring that looted cargo trains. New York
Times. Section B; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; p. 5.
Swartz, N., 2005. ID thief gets 14 years. Information Management Journal Vol. 39
(Issue 2) Academic Search Premier, Harvard University Library, Boston, MA.
23 May 2011 39 (2), 16.
356
REFERENCES

Sweet, K.M., 2006. Transportation and Cargo Security: Threats and Solutions.
Prentice Hall. Upper Saddle River, NJ. 70e71.
Thomas, A., 2010. Supply Chain Security: International Practices and Innovations
in Moving Goods Safely and Efﬁciently, vol. 1, Praeger Security International,
Santa Barbara, CA. 21e24.
Tirschwell, P., 2003. The Bottom Line on Security. Journal of Commerce, 6.
January 27 e February 2.
Transportation Security Administration, 2011. Air cargo. Retrieved August 1, 2011.
http://www.tsa.gov/what_we_do/tsnm/air_cargo/index.shtm.
U.S. Department of Transportation, 2010. U.S. International Merchandize Trade
by Transporation Mode: 2009. Accessed July 29, 2011. http://www.ops.fhwa.
dot.gov/freight/freightanalysis/nat_freight_stats/docs/10factsﬁgures/
ﬁgure2_2.htm.
Van Zandt, C., 2009. Do crime rates soar in recession and how can we save our
youth from self-destruction? MSNBC.
Voss, M., Whipple, J., Closs, D., 2008. The role of strategic security: Internal and
external security measures with security performance implications.
Transportation Journal, 5e23. Spring 2008.
Zambito, T., 2009. Jersey gang busted in freight-train jobs. Daily News (New
York), 30 July 11.
REFERENCES 357

INDEX
Page numbers with “f” denote ﬁgures; “t” tables; “b” boxes.
A
Abbott Laboratories, 42, 116,
128
Access control, 182e183
Active monitoring, 221e227
administration of, 224
destination of, 223
geofencing, 224e225
georoutes, 225
impact on driver behavior,
222, 227
implementation of, 222
location tracking, 225
origin of, 223
recovery process, 226e227
route deviation or theft,
immediate notiﬁcation
of, 225e226
routing, 223e224
Active targeting, 99e101,
155e156
components of, 101e102
Administrative information, of
physical security, 175e176
Africa
cargo theft in, 85e86
case studies of, 340
high-risk regions, 339
modus operandi, 338
product types, 338
targeted products, 339e340
truck theft, 337
piracy in, 337, 339e340
Air cargo industry
government regulations of,
232e233
security considerations of,
229e235
shipments, 229e230
supply chain risk in, 31e32,
231
theft in, 231e232
Al Qaeda, 244
Alarms, 187e188
area protection, 188
object/spot protection, 188
perimeter protection, 188
Alton, Gary, 105e106
American Society for Industrial
Security (ASIS), 176
Anchoring, 65e68
Antiterrorism security versus
theft prevention, 15
Applicant screening, 178e179
Area protection, intrusion
detection systems, 188
Argentina
cargo theft in, 80e84
modus operandi, 304
Chamber of Commerce of
Logistics Operators, 83
stolen goods export in, 63
Asia
cargo theft in, 86e90
Technology Asset Protection
Association, 255
Asia Paciﬁc, trailor theft in, 19
Atlanta
cargo theft groups in, 18, 46
tractoretrailor theft in, 24
Attritional loss, see Pilferage
Australia, cargo theft in, 72
Auto/Cargo Theft Task Force
(ACTF) (Memphis), 252
B
Background investigations, 200
Bank robbery vs cargo theft,
36e38
electronics, 36
Bayer Pharmaceuticals, 116
Behavioral conditioning,
66e68
Biometric readers, 182
Black market, 6e8, 17e18, 20,
24, 30, 46, 55e56, 61e69,
72, 79e82, 85, 89,
109e113, 120, 154, 156,
174, 238e239, 248
anchoring, 65e68
e-fencing, 62e63
export of stolen goods, 63e64
recession, 68e69
secondary wholesale market,
64e65
Brand name trust, 139e140
Brazil
cargo theft in, 80e82
trends in, 299
stolen goods export in, 63
Brazil
hijacking in, 31
pharmaceutical theft in, 115
Broker(s/ing), 7e8, 18, 61e62,
101, 135e136, 195
freight, 20e21
purchasing of illicit products,
8
role of, 57e58
targeted products,
determination of, 8
C
California
California Highway Patrol
(CHP)
Cargo Theft Interdiction
Program, 247
California Trucking
Association, 251
cargo theft in, 46
pharmaceutical theft, 118
task forces, 249e251
Canada
cargo theft in, 284e285,
289e291
359

Canada (Continued)
case studies, 290e291
modus operandi, 290
pharmaceutical theft, 115
CDMA tracking device
applications in, 212
Card reader systems, 182
Cargo CATs (Los Angeles
County), 250
Cargo crime intelligence,
177e178
Cargo seal, 138
Cargo theft, 3e15
2006e2011, 46e57, 47f,
95e96
vs bank robbery, 36e38
electronics, 36
deﬁned, 17e18
vs identity theft, 38e40
reasons for, 35e36 see also
individual entries
Cargo Theft Interdiction
Program (CTIPs), 247,
250e251
Cargo Transporters Union of
Sao Paulo State
(SETCESP), 296, 296,
297e298
CargoNet, 257
cargo theft, tracking, 3e4
Carrier(s), 51, 143e144,
199e200
air, 31e32
liability coverage for, 145
LTL, 53
selection of, 22, 169
Casings, 216e217
Catastropic loss, 95e96,
141e142, 152
CDMA, 212
strengths and weaknesses of,
212
Cellphones, 111
Central America
cargo theft in, 80e85
supply chain risk in, 81
Central Ofﬁce for the Fight
Against Itinerant
Delinquency, 75
Chamber of Commerce of
Logistics Operators
(CEDOL) (Argentina), 83
Chicago
cargo theft groups in, 18
cargo theft in, 46, 57
China, cargo theft in, 72, 86e87
petroleum theft from
pipelines, 244
pilferage in, 87
supply chain risks, 343
trends and techniques,
342e343
Chip sets, 112e113
Chips, 112e113
Chubb Insurance
cargo theft, tracking, 3e4
Closed circuit television (CCTV),
25e26, 183e186,
191e192, 202
coverage of, 184e185
integration with physical
security program, 186
positioning of, 185
storage in, 186
Cluster of thefts, 100be101b
Coalition for Patient Safety and
Medicine Integrity, 128
Cohen, Mike, 126
Collaboration, 168
Colombia, cargo theft in,
80e82, 306e308
supply chain risks in, 308
Columbus
cargo theft groups in, 18
cargo theft in, 46
Compactors, 190
Computers, 112
Conrail Boyz (CBR), 238e240
Consumer care products, cargo
theft of, 120e121
Consumer electronics, 113
Contact persons, for security,
176e177
Corporate security, 165e166
Cost(s)
of creative criminals, 27be29b
inﬂation, associated with
cargo theft, 9
Costa Rica
cargo theft in, 80e81
export of stolen goods in, 63
Covert tracking, 211e212
strengths and weaknesses of,
212
see also Tracking
Craigslist, 62
Crime
data, prevailing, 158
drug-related, 79
intelligence, 177e178
nonviolent, 38, 72, 102
of opportunity, 42e43
organized, 53, 78, 151, 290
silent, 3, 5
violent, 5, 9e10, 31, 85e86
Customer(s)
retention of, 135
retrieval of, 135
Customs and border protection
(CBP), 12e13
compliance and validation
status, level of, 13e14
Importer Self-Assessment
program (ISA), 13
inspection loading
procedures, 14
CustomseTrade Partnership
Against Terrorism
(C-TPAT), 12e15
CustomseTrade Partnership
Against Terrorism and
Authorized Economic
Operator, 166
D
Dallas
cargo theft groups in, 18
cargo theft in, 7, 46, 55e56
pharmaceutical theft,
118e119
tractoretrailor theft, 24
demographics of, 158
Deceptive pickups, 286, 289
Demberger, Rick, 117
Demographics, 158
Dominican Republic, cargo theft
in, 80e81
360
INDEX

Driver(s)
behavior, active monitoring
impact on, 222, 227
controls, 196e199
error, 116
give-ups, 79
interview, 224
theft, 30e31
Drug Enforcement
Administration, 117
E
Eastern Region Transportation
Security Council, 259
ebay.com, 62
e-fencing, 62e63
see also Fencing
Egypt, petroleum theft from
pipelines in, 244
Electronic escorts, 209e211
Electronic monitoring,
209e211
Electronics theft, 279
Electronic-tracking, of cargo
theft, 10
Eli Lilly, 42, 128
Embedded tracking, 211e212
strengths and weaknesses of,
212
see also Tracking
Employee(s)
screening, 178e179
time and expense, 132e133
Enfora, 212
ENFORCER
adjustable lock, 213e214, 214f
air cuff lock, 216, 217f
landing gear lock, 214, 215f
see also Locks
Ericsson, 152
Europe, cargo theft in, 72e78
pharmaceutical theft,
66be68b
trailor theft, 19
Evolution of cargo theft, 6e7
Ex Works (EXW), 142
Exit searches, 155, 189, 191e192
Export of stolen goods, 63e64
F
Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI), 5, 35, 247e248, 253
Fencing, 179e180
deﬁned, 61
e-fencing, 62e63
geofencing, 224e225
Fictitious pickup, 30
Financial burden, of cargo theft
on society, 136e137
Florida
Florida Department of Law
Enforcement (FDLE), 248
Florida Department of
Transportation (FDOT),
248
Florida Highway Patrol (FHP),
248
pharmaceutical theft in, 118
Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), 117
Foods/drinks industry, cargo
theft in, 280e281
Forsaith, Chuck, 117, 256
Fort Worth
cargo theft groups in, 18
cargo theft in, 7, 55e56
pharmaceutical theft,
118e119
tractoretrailor theft, 24
France
cargo theft in, 72, 75
supply chain risks, 324
trends and techniques,
321e324
Central Ofﬁce for the Fight
Against Itinerant
Delinquency, 75
Freight forwarder, 10e11,
31e32, 81, 145, 231e232
FreightWatch International,
120, 155
analysis, of cargo theft
incidents, 21, 22f
cargo theft, tracking, 3e4
deﬁnition of cargo theft, 17
international global threat
assessment, 283e353
product targeting,
classiﬁcation of, 94
U.S. cargo theft report 2011,
271e282
by date, 274e275
by product type, 278e281
by state, 272e274
by theft type and location,
278e281
trends, 272
by value, 274e275
Full truckload, 124e126
counterfeit, 124e125
deception, 124e125
losses of, 4
secondary wholesale market,
125e126
theft, 19, 27, 29, 53, 72e73,
120
Fulﬁllment, 18, 23, 132, 189
G
General Association of German
Insurers, 317e318
Geofencing, 224e225
see also Fencing
Georgia
Georgia Bureau of
Investigation (GBI),
254e255
Motor Trucking Association,
254
Racketeer Inﬂuenced and
Corrupt Organizations
Act, 254
Georoutes, 225
see also Route(ing)
Germany, cargo theft in, 72e74
location of, 319e320
modus operandi, 319e320
techniques, 318e319
Ghan, Bob, 231e232
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), 42,
128
Global cargo theft risk, 283e284
Global positioning system
(GPS), 20, 82, 84, 210
Greene, Lenora, 134
INDEX 361

Greenwood, Don, 105
GSM/GPRS, 212
strengths and weaknesses of,
212
Guatemala
cargo theft in, 81, 84e85
case studies, 304e306
trends in, 305e306
criminal gangs in, 81
stolen goods export in, 63
H
Hauck, Tom, 127e128
High-tech industry, cargo theft
in, 105e114
2006e2010, 106e109
targeted items, 109e113
cellphones, 111
chip sets, 112e113
chips, 112e113
computers, 112
consumer electronics, 113
memory devices, 112e113
televisions, 111e112
High-value cage, 188e189
Hijacking, 31, 75
Home security, 11
Hong Kong, cargo theft in, 87
Hot spots, 240e241
I
Identity theft vs cargo theft,
38e40
Illicit products, purchasing
of, 8
India, cargo theft in, 72, 88e90
iron thefts, 353
supply chain risks, 353
trends and techniques,
351e353
Insurance, 141e146
companies, roles and
responsibilities of,
169e170
coverage, 141e142
investigations, 143e144
liability, 144
ownership, 142
premiums, 144e146
Intermodal transportation,
237e238
International cargo theft,
71e91
International Chamber of
Commerce, 142
International Commerce Terms
(INCOTERMS), 142
In-transit lanes, 13, 105e106
In-transit security, 4,
195e219
air cargo industry, 234
background investigations,
200
driver controls, 196e199
electronic escorts, 209e211
electronic monitoring,
209e211
factors affecting
crime data, prevailing,
158
identity information, 159
hardware, 211e217
limitations of, 217e218
locks, 213e217
tracking systems/devices,
211e212
uses of, 217e218
lack of, 11e12
overnight stops/drop trailer,
206e207
physical escorts, 208e209
policies and procedures of,
157e158
preloaded trailers, 201e202
in railroad system, 239e240
routing, 203
security awareness training,
200e201
security seals, 204e205
staged trailers, 201e202
stopping services, 205e206
supply chain security
company selection, 208
transportation provider
compliance, 207e208
transportation provider
selection, 199e200
trip duration, 203e204
In-transit theft, 8e9, 11, 31, 88,
171e172
Intrusion, 73
Intrusion detection systems,
see Alarms
Iron thefts, 353
Italy, cargo theft in, 72
recovery stories of, 329
trends and techniques,
327e329
J
Johnson & Johnson, 42, 128
Jones, Dow, 244
K
Kavilnaz, Parkia, 120
Key control, 183
King pin lock, 214, 215f
see also Locks
L
Latin America, trailor theft in,
19
Law enforcement, 171e172
Leakage, see Pilferage
Less-than-truckload (LTL),
18e19, 51
Lewis, Keith, 254e255
Liability, 144
Lighting, 186e187
Location tracking, 225
Locks, 213e217
ENFORCER
adjustable lock, 213e214,
214f
air cuff lock, 216, 217f
landing gear lock, 214, 215f
king pin lock, 214, 215f
seal guard lock, 214e216,
216f
sealock, 213, 213f
Logistics, 165e166
recessionary impact on,
68
Logistics Performance Index
(LPI), 74
Los Angeles
Cargo CATs, 250
362
INDEX

cargo theft in, 7, 54e55
pharmaceutical theft,
118e119
tractoretrailor theft, 24
demographics of, 158
Department and the
California Highway
Patrol, 21
hijacking in, 31
stolen goods export in, 63
see also United States
Loss control, 169e170
Loss prevention, 10e11
air cargo industry, 231
Louisville
cargo theft in, 46, 57
tractoretrailor theft, 24
demographics of, 158
Lund, Steve, 105
M
Malaysia, 344e347
cargo theft in, 71e72, 86e88
case studies of, 346e347
product type and location
of, 346
trends and techniques,
345e346
hijacking in, 31
Market share, cargo theft impact
on, 133e134
McDonnell, Mike, 251e252
Medvedev, Dmitry, 334
Memory devices, 112e113
Memphis
Auto/Cargo Theft Task Force
(ACTF), 252
cargo theft groups in, 18
demographics of, 158
pharmaceutical theft in,
118e119
TAMCATs, 252
tractoretrailor theft in, 24
Menzies Aviation, 231
Mexico
cargo theft in, 78e80
pharmaceutical theft, 115
pipeline theft, 244
trends in, 294e295
driver give-ups, 79
drug cartels and government,
conﬂict between, 79
drug-related violence in, 79
hijacking in, 31
Mexican Association of
Insurance Companies,
78e79
Miami-Dade County
Police Department, 248
Tactical Operations Multi-
Agency Cargo Anti-Theft
Squad, 247e249
tractoretrailor theft in, 24
Midwest Cargo Theft Unit,
252e254
Mode of transportation,
156e157
Modus operandi (MO), 19e21,
24, 30e31, 51e53, 72e73,
76, 80, 99e100
Mongon, Edward, 238e239
Monteiro, Bob, 117, 256
Motion detection, 181, 184, 186,
195
N
National Cargo Theft Task
Force, 256
National Insurance Crime
Bureau (NICB), 255e256
Netherlands, The
cargo theft in, 72
supply chain risks, 326e327
trends and techniques,
325e326
New Jersey
State Police (NJSP), 251e252
applicant/employee
screening, 178e179
cargo theft in, 53e54
tractoretrailor theft, 24
hijacking in, 31
stolen goods export in, 63
New York
applicant/employee
screening, 178e179
cargo theft in, 7, 53e54
stolen goods export in, 63
Nigeria, petroleum theft from
pipelines in, 244
Nokia, 152
Nonviolent crime, 38, 72, 102
see also Crime
North America, cargo theft in,
284e310
North Jersey, cargo theft in, 7
North Sea Freight Intelligent
Transport Solutions
project, 75
Novo Nordisk, 42, 128
O
Object/spot protection,
intrusion detection
systems, 188
Obriot, Kenneth, 116e117, 256
Ohio, cargo theft groups in, 18
Operational efﬁciencies, 157
through low-cost technology,
increasing, 263e264
Organization for Economic
Cooperation and
Development (OECD),
334
Anti-Bribery Convention, 334
Organized crime, 53, 78, 151
see also Crime
Organized criminal groups,
45e59
see also Gangs
Overnight stops/drop trailer,
206e207
see also Trailer(s)
Overt tracking, 211
strengths and weaknesses of,
212
see also Tracking
Ownership, 142
P
Palmer, Jared, 5
Paraguay
cargo theft in, 80e81
stolen goods export in, 63
Patriot Act, 5, 41
Pennsylvania, cargo theft in, 46
pharmaceutical theft, 118
INDEX 363

Perimeter protection, intrusion
detection systems, 188
Perimeter security, 179e180
Peru, cargo theft in, 308e310
case studies, 310
supply chain risks, 310
Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex),
295
Pharmaceutical Cargo Security
Coalition (PCSC), 117,
256e257
Pharmaceutical industry,
137e140
brand name trust, 139e140
cargo theft in, 115e129
2006e2010, 118e120
consumer care products,
120e121
history of, 116e117
full truckload, 124e126
counterfeit, 124e125
deception, 124e125
secondary wholesale
market, 125e126
product recall and
destruction, 140
product safety, 137e138
public relations, 139
reputation, 126e128
supply chain, risks in, 121
Philadelphia, tractoretrailor
theft in, 24
Philippines
cargo theft in, 72, 86
trends and techniques,
348e350
hijacking in, 31
Physical escorts, 208e209
Physical security, 173e193
access control, 182e183
administrative information of,
175e176
alarms, 187e188
area protection, 188
object/spot protection,
188
perimeter protection, 188
applicant/employee
screening, 178e179
closed circuit television,
see Closed circuit
television
contact persons for, 176e177
high-level, 174
high-value cage, 188e189
key control, 183
lighting, 186e187
low-level, 173e174
maximum, 174e175
maintenance and services of,
192
medium-level, 174
minimum, 173
perimeter security, 179e180
receiving, 190e191
risk assessments of, 177
shipping, 190e191
site security management, 176
trailer storage, 191e192
trash collection and disposal,
190
yard security, 191e192
Pilferage, 29e30, 87, 153,
231e234
Pipeline system, 243e244
cargo theft in, 32, 244e245
security considerations of,
243
Piracy, 339
Pomoni, Christina, 135
Pot luck, 99e101
Preloaded trailers, 201e202
see also Trailer(s)
Premiums, 144e146
Prevention of cargo theft, 4,
9e11
distinguished from
antiterrorism security,
15
Proactive monitoring, 105e106,
128, 139, 171e172
Product(s)
demand, 98e99
destruction, 140
recall, 140
replacement, 132
safety, 137e138
targeting, 93e103
active targeting,
components of,
101e102
rail system, 240
type and value of, 154e155
Public relations, 139
Q
Qualcomm, 211e212
R
Racketeer Inﬂuenced and
Corrupt Organizations
Act (Georgia), 254
Railroad system, 237e245
cargo theft in, 32, 238e240
hot spots, 240e241
product targeting, 240
security considerations of,
241e243
Rand Corporation, 136
Receiving, 190e191
Recession, 68e69
Recovery process, 226e227
Red zone, 144
Reputation, 126e128
Return on investment (ROI),
153, 164e165, 170
Risk assessments, 177
complexity of, 152e153
Risk determination, 151e161
Route(ing), 155e156, 223e224
deviation, immediate
notiﬁcation of, 225e226
georoutes, 225
in-transit security, 203
Russia
cargo theft in, 76e78
supply chain challenges,
334
trends and techniques,
334e335
hijacking in, 31
S
Sales loss, cargo theft impact on,
135e136
San Bernardino, cargo theft in,
54
364
INDEX

Seal guard lock, 214e216, 216f
see also Locks
Sealock, 213, 213f
see also Locks
Secondary wholesale market,
64e65
Security
awareness training, 200e201
corporate, 152e153
countermeasures, 79, 156,
175, 180e181
escorts, 295, 309
home, 11
in-transit, see In-transit
security
ofﬁcers, 189e190
patrol, 339
perimeter, 179e180
physical, see Physical security
seals, 204e205
supply chain, see Supply
chain:security
Sendum, 212
Sentencing, for cargo theft, 38,
40e41
guidelines of, 41e42
S.H. Bell Company, cargo theft
at, 98
Shipments, frequency of,
156
Shipping, 190e191
Silent crime, see Cargo theft
Site security management,
176
Site surveys, 159e161
Smith, John Raymond, Jr., 254
South Africa
cargo theft in, 85e86
hijacking in, 31
South America
cargo theft in, 80e85
supply chain risk in, 81
South Florida
cargo theft in, 7, 48e53, 50f
hijacking in, 31
stolen goods export in, 63
Spain, cargo theft in, 76
case studies of, 331e332
modus operandi, 332e333
targets and types of,
330e331
Spear, Alan, 169e170
Staged trailers, 201e202
see also Trailer(s)
Stopping services, 205e206
Stroud, Brandon, 143e144
Supply chain
challenges, 334
disruptions, 153
pharmaceutical, 121
risks, 81
in air cargo shipments, 231
security, 10, 163, 165
assessment of, 169
beneﬁts of, 261e262
collaboration, 168
company selection, 208
policies and procedures of,
166e168
Supply Chain Information
Sharing and Analysis
Center (SC-ISAC), 258
cargo theft, tracking, 3e4
Swissport International, 231
T
Tabor, John, 187
Tactical Operations Multi-
Agency Cargo Anti-Theft
Squad (TOMCATS),
48e49, 52, 247e249
TAMCATs (Memphis), 252
Targeting
cargo items, 7e9, 109e113
product, 93e104
active targeting,
components of, 101e102
rail system, 240
Tarnef, Barry, 141e142
Tarrant County, stolen goods
export in, 63
Tauro, Gioia, 237
Technology Asset Protection
Association,
see Transported Asset
Protection Association
(TAPA)
Televisions, 111e112
Tennessee, cargo theft in, 46
pharmaceutical theft, 118
Theft-to-order scenario, 8
Third-party security providers,
170e171
Tracking
covert, 211e212
embedded, 211e212
overt, 211e212
systems/devices, 211e212
tracking, 225
Tractoretrailor
crisscrossing, 7
GPS tracking systems in, 210
security, 206, 208
theft, 8, 14e15, 18e24, 31,
40, 254
location of, 23e24
timing of, 21e23
Trailer(s)
overnight stops/drop,
206e207
preloaded, 201e202
staged, 201e202
storage, 191e192
Transportation provider
compliance, 207e208
selection, 199e200
Transportation Security
Administration (TSA),
232e233, 243e244
Transported Asset Protection
Association (TAPA), 4,
106, 255
Europe, Middle East and
Africa (EMEA), 312
Trash collection and disposal,
190
Trespassing, 242
Trip duration, 203e204
Truck stops, 99e100
U
Uniform Crime Report (UCR), 5
United Kingdom (U.K.)
cargo theft in, 72, 74
trends and techniques,
314e316
TruckPol, 73e74
INDEX 365

United States (U.S.)
cargo theft in, 7
pharmaceutical theft,
66be68b
trends of, 286e288
type and location of, 289
CDMA tracking devices in,
212
Customs and Border
Protection, 248
V
Vendor compliance, 221e222
Venezuela
cargo theft in, 80e81
case studies, 301e302
modus operandi, 301
criminal gangs in, 81
stolen goods export in, 63
Violence, in cargo theft, 71, 73,
81e82, 84
Violent crime, 5, 9e10, 31,
85e86
see also Crime
W
Warehouse burglaries,
24e29
Weather, impact on in-transit
security, 158
“Whole man” concept, 179
Worlds Bank
Logistics Performance Index,
74
Y
Yard security, 191e192
366
INDEX

