
A u s t r a l i a
C a n a d a
M e x i c o
S i n g a p o r e
S p a i n
U n i t e d
K i n g d o m
U n i t e d
S t a t e s
CARING FOR
SCHOOL-AGE
CHILDREN
FIFTH EDITION
Phyllis M. Click
Jennifer Parker

Caring for School-Age Children,
5th Edition
Phyllis Click and Jennifer Parker
Vice President, Career Education SBU:
Dawn Gerrain
Director of Learning Solutions: John Fedor
Acquisitions Editor: Christopher Shortt
Managing Editor: Robert Serenka
Product Manager: Philip I. Mandl
Editorial Assistant: Alison Archambault
Marketing Director: Wendy Mapstone
Marketing Manager: Kristin McNary
Marketing Coordinator: Scott Chrysler
Production Director: Wendy Troeger
Production Manager: Mark Bernard
Content Project Manager: Jeffrey Varecka
Art Director: David Arsenault
Technology Project Manager: Sandy
Charette
© 2009 Delmar, Cengage Learning.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein
may be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means
graphic, electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying,
recording, scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks,
or information storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under
Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior
written permission of the publisher.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product,
submit all requests online at cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
Library of Congress Control Number: 2007942372
ISBN-13: 978-1-4283-1819-9
ISBN-10: 1-4283-1819-4
Delmar
5 Maxwell Drive,
CLIFTON PARK, NY 12065-2919
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with
office locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom,
Australia, Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at: international.
cengage.com/region
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
For your lifelong learning solutions, visit delmar.cengage.com
Visit our corporate website at cengage.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or perform any independent
analysis in connection with any of the product information contained herein. Publisher does not assume,
and expressly disclaims, any obligation to obtain and include information other than that provided to it by
the manufacturer. The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might be
indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By following the instructions
contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks in connection with such instructions. The publisher
makes no representations or warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of fitness for
particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with respect to the material set
forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility with respect to such material. The publisher shall not be
liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from the readers’ use of,
or reliance upon, this material.
Printed in the United States of America
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 12 11 10 09 08

iii
xv
Preface
xxi
About the Authors
xxiii
Acknowledgments
CHAPTER 1
3
CAREGIVERS: WHO ARE THEY?
3
What Do Children Really Need from Caregivers?
4
What Are the Adults Called?
4
Characteristics of the Effective Caregiver/Teacher
10
Education and Experience
11
The Caregiver’s Role in Children’s Development
13
Ethical Considerations
14
Ideals
14
Summary
CHAPTER 2
19
THE CHILDREN
19
Development of Self
21
Bullying
c
CONTENTS
SECTION I
THE PEOPLE IN CHILD CARE

CON TE NT S
iv
22
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
24
Peer Groups: “The Society of Children”
27
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
28
Overview of Developmental Stages
28
Five- to Seven-Year-Old Children
30
Eight- to Ten-Year-Old Children
31
Eleven- to Thirteen-Year-Old Children
33
Summary
CHAPTER 3
37
FAMILIES: WHERE CHILDREN ARE
NURTURED
37
The Changing Family
39
Effect of Home Environment on Children
44
Poverty
45
Helping Children and Their Parents
49
Summary
CHAPTER 4
57
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD:
PHYSICAL
57
Importance of Understanding Child Development
58
Development and Learning
59
Physical Development
59
Height and Weight
SECTION II
HOW CHILDREN GROW AND DEVELOP

CONTENTS
v
60
Obesity
61
Causes of Obesity
62
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
63
Health Conditions
64
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
64
Motor Skills
65
Gross-Motor Skills
65
Fine-Motor Skills
65
Differences in Motor Skills
66
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
66
Summary
CHAPTER 5
71
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD:
COGNITIVE
71
Cognitive Theories
72
Jean Piaget
74
Evaluation of Piaget’s Theory
75
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
76
Behaviorist Learning Theory
78
Evaluation of Behaviorism
78
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
79
Sociocultural Theory
79
Cross-Cultural Variation
79
Scaffolding
80
Language
80
Zone of Proximal Development
81
Evaluation of Sociocultural Theory
81
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
82
Intelligence and Learning

CON TE NT S
vi
82
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
83
Language
85
Second Language Development
86
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
87
Summary
CHAPTER 6
93
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD:
PSYCHOSOCIAL
93
Theories of Psychosocial Development
94
Psychoanalytic Theory and Sigmund Freud
95
Evaluation of Psychoanalytic Theory
96
Psychosocial Theory and Erik Erikso
97
Evaluation of Psychosocial Theory
98
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
99
Moral Development
100
Jean Piaget
100
Lawrence Kohlberg
102
Evaluation of Kohlberg’s Theory
102
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
103
Summary
CHAPTER 7
107
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP SOCIAL
COMPETENCE
107
Social Competence
108
Strategies
109
Activities
110
Conﬂict Resolution

CONTENTS
vii
112
Strategies
113
Activities
116
Self-Image
117
Strategies
117
Activities
120
Cooperation
121
Strategies
123
Activities
125
Changing Children’s Behavior
127
Strategies
129
Communications That Help Change Behavior
129
Acknowledge Children’s Feelings
129
Describe the Situation
130
Help Children Recognize How Their Behavior Affects
Others
130
Behaviors That Create Problems for the Individual or the
Group
131
The Overly Aggressive Child
132
The Quiet Child
133
The Overly Active Child
134
Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactive Disorder (ADHD)
135
The Child with Special Needs
138
The Child with Autism
139
Summary
CHAPTER 8
147
PROGRAM PLANNING
147
Developmentally Appropriate Practice
SECTION III
THE BACKGROUND

CON TE NT S
viii
151
Holistic versus Academic Approach
153
Planning for Cultural and Linguistic Diversity
155
Antibias Curriculum
157
The Importance of Planning
158
Integrated Curriculum
159
What Should Be Included in a Child Care Program?
162
Additional Guidelines for Planning
162
Organizing the After-School Program
163
Independent Projects
163
Group Activities
164
Interest Centers
164
Field Trips
165
Clubs
166
Spontaneous Activities
167
Community Involvement
168
Making a Schedule
169
Summer Programs
169
Involve Children in Planning
170
Rearrange the Environment
170
Long-Term Project
170
Sports
170
Field Trips
171
Gardening and Cooking
171
Allow Quiet Time
171
Read Aloud
171
Plan Special Events
171
Organize a Fund-Raising Event
172
Community Facilities
172
Summary

CONTENTS
ix
CHAPTER 9
177
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
177
How the Environment Enhances Development
178
Developing the Plan
179
Overall Design of Indoor Space
181
What Should Be Included?
183
When You Have to Share Indoor Space
185
Overall Design of Outdoor Space
187
Safety
189
What Should Be Included?
191
When You Have to Share Outdoor Space
192
Summary
CHAPTER 10
199
GAMES AND OTHER FUN THINGS TO DO
199
How Games Can Enhance Development
201
Games and Safety
202
Outdoor Games
202
Activities
208
Active Games That Can Be Played Indoors
208
Activities
212
Indoor Games
212
Activities
217
Guidelines for Having Fun with Games
SECTION IV
THE CURRICULUM

CON TE NT S
x
218
Computers
220
Guidelines for Caregivers
221
Summary
CHAPTER 11
225
IMAGINATION AND THE ARTS
225
Role of the Arts in Supporting Development
228
Visual Arts
228
Activities
235
Equipment to Have Available
235
Discussion
235
Music and Movement
236
Activities
238
Equipment to Have Available
238
Discussion
239
Drama
239
Activities
242
Equipment to Have Available
242
Discussion
243
Summary
CHAPTER 12
247
SCIENCE AND MATH
247
Role of Science and Math in School-Age Child Care
250
Children as Natural Scientists
253
Children as Natural Mathematicians
254
Math and Science Are Related
255
The Process and Content of Science
256
The Science and Math Environment
257
Role of the Leader in the Science Activity

CONTENTS
xi
261
Physical Science: How Can I Make It Move?
262
Activities
265
Additional Physical Science Activities
265
Chemistry: How Can I Make It Change?
266
Activities
267
Biological and Earth Science: How Do I Fit in and What
Is My Role?
269
Activities
274
Activities
276
Equipment to Have Available
277
Math in School-Age Child Care
278
Activities
280
Activities
283
Activities
284
More Math Activities
285
Equipment to Have Available
285
Guidelines for Child Care Staff Members
286
Summary
CHAPTER 13
293
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY
COMPETENCY
293
Role of Literacy in School-Age Child Care
295
The Development of Literacy
299
The Literacy Environment
301
Role of the Caregiver in Literacy Activities
307
Activities
316
Equipment to Have Available
316
Guidelines for Child Care Staff Members
317
Summary

CON TE NT S
xii
CHAPTER 14
321
PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE
321
Importance of Preparing Children for the Future
323
Helping Children Explore the Options
323
Activities
324
Equipment to Have Available
326
Equipment to Have Available
327
Equipment to Have Available
329
Equipment to Have Available
332
Equipment to Have Available
334
Equipment to Have Available
335
Equipment to Have Available
336
Equipment to Have Available
336
Guidelines for Child Care Staff Members
337
Summary
CHAPTER 15
341
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
341
How Healthy Are Our Children?
343
Activities
350
Equipment to Have Available
351
Getting Fit, Staying Fit
352
Activities
355
Equipment to Have Available
356
Guidelines for Child Care Staff Members
357
Summary

CONTENTS
xiii
CHAPTER 16
363
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
363
How Community Resources Can Support School-Age
Programs
364
Intergenerational Programs
364
Partnering with Seniors
365
Activities for Seniors and Children
369
Partnering with High School and College Students
371
Partnering with Community Facilities and Businesses
373
Partnering with Organizations and Agencies
374
Guidelines for Using Volunteers
376
Removing Barriers to Community Participation
377
Summary
CHAPTER 17
381
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
381
Changes in the Goals for Child Care
382
Child Care in the Twenty-First Century
384
Accreditation and Standards National After School
Association (NAA)
384
NAA Standards
387
National Association for the Education of Young
Children (NAEYC)
388
National Association for Family Child Care (NAFCC)
389
Credentials
389
Child Development Associate
390
National Institute on Out-of-School Time (NIOST)
SECTION V
RESOURCES AND REGULATIONS

CON TE NT S
xiv
392
Evaluation
392
School-Age Care Environmental Rating Scale
(SACERS)
394
Assessing Children’s Progress
395
Observation
396
Self-Assessment
396
Summary
401
Appendix A All About Me
407
Appendix B Internet Links for Information
409
Appendix C Art Lesson Plans
425
Glossary
431
Index

xv
This ﬁfth edition of Caring for School-Age Children is an easy-to-use
course of study for those who are preparing for a career in school-age
child care or a reference for those who are already employed as teachers,
aides, caregivers, leaders, or recreation supervisors.
It will also help those in administrative positions, such as directors,
principals, managers, or coordinators. In addition, parents of school-age
children will ﬁnd useful information for understanding their youngsters
and for participating in the operation of their children’s child care center.
The textbook can be used as the basis for a college or university course or
for a series of in-service training sessions sponsored by boards of educa-
tion or community agencies. It will also be useful for administrators of
out-of-school programs who wish to upgrade the skills of staff members
through in-service training sessions.
RATIONALE
At the time the ﬁrst edition of this book was written, there was little infor-
mation for those interested in before- and after-school programs. This
ﬁfth edition of Caring for School-Age Children reﬂects a continuing and
increasing national interest in providing quality programs for the large
numbers of children who spend their out-of-school time in a group set-
ting. Educators have a heightened awareness of the dangers that might
confront children when they have unsupervised hours after school,
whether they are home alone or out in neighborhoods. We ﬁrmly believe
that it is absolutely imperative that children should be able to be safe
during their after-school hours and that they obtain the education and
training they need to become happy, productive adults.
Therefore, information throughout this book is based on the most
recent information concerning developmentally appropriate practice
with school-age children and on the adult role as a professional. We both
have many years of experience teaching both adult and child learners.
p
PREFACE

PREFACE
xvi
Jennifer Parker currently teaches courses for early childhood profession-
als and is involved in developing quality programs for after-school care.
We both have brought our knowledge and experience to the writing of
this edition in order to help others achieve the goal of quality programs
for children through the education of caregivers and teachers.
ORGANIZATION
The order of the sections and chapters in this new edition remains the
same as in the previous edition and a chapter has been added on Helping
Children Develop Literacy Competence. Section I, The People in Child
Care, introduces the reader ﬁrst to the caregivers, then to the children,
and ﬁnally, to the families. The caregivers are portrayed in the ﬁrst chap-
ter because the reader either already is or may become a caregiver. We
discuss the characteristics of an effective caregiver, the education and
experience needed, and ways in which the adults affect children’s devel-
opment. Chapter 2 presents an overview of development of children ages
5 to 12, with an emphasis on how children develop relationships as well as
a discussion of children in groups. Chapter 3 is devoted to families, their
makeup, their culture, recent changes in conﬁguration, and the ways in
which these factors affect the children.
Section II, How Children Grow and Develop, presents information
about children’s stages of growth and the factors that affect their develop-
ment. Chapters 4, 5, and 6 contain extensive coverage of children’s physi-
cal, cognitive, and psychosocial development. Chapter 7 in Section II,
which is titled Helping Children Develop Social Competence, includes
strategies and activities to help children be more effective socially, resolve
conﬂicts, increase their self-image, and become more cooperative. This
chapter also covers speciﬁc behaviors or characteristics that create prob-
lems for children and includes ways to effectively guide children toward
acceptance of others and in changing their own behaviors.
Section III, The Background, includes chapters on program planning
and creating an environment. Section IV, The Curriculum, covers the
day-to-day activities of a child care program. Each chapter has a segment
on how that part of the curriculum contributes to or supports the develop-
ment of the children for whom it is designed. The activities begin with a
stated purpose and include a list of materials to have available. Chapter 12
reﬂects the newest thinking about children. This chapter, Science and
Math, views the child as a natural scientist and mathematician. It shows
how that approach can be used to plan exciting activities that engage
children in constructing knowledge about the world. Chapter 13, Help-
ing Children Develop Literacy Competency, focuses on helping the

PREFACE
xvii
professional develop a basic understanding of the process of learning to
read and write and how to engage children in meaningful, enjoyable activ-
ities that can support their literacy skill development.
The ﬁnal section, Section V, Resources and Regulations, includes a
chapter on using community resources and another that discusses quality
and standards for child care programs. Here the reader can learn about
the ways child care professionals are trying to upgrade the quality of expe-
riences children have in their out-of-school time. Accreditation, creden-
tialing, and evaluation are discussed.
FEATURES
There is a list of key terms at the end of each chapter and a glossary deﬁn-
ing those terms. Students will ﬁnd it helpful to test their knowledge by
answering the review questions and considering the questions following
the case study presented at the end of each chapter. One of the most
important features is extensive information about the use of the Internet
for researching further information.
The sequence of chapters provides the reader with a logical progres-
sion of topics that has been ﬁeld-tested by many instructors using the
book. Instructors can adopt the order as is or change it to suit the needs
of a particular setting. Review questions and activities at the end of each
chapter also make it applicable to a self-study plan by individual students.
Many chapters include appropriate Web sites, and at the end of the
book, Appendix B provides a complete list of Internet links for child care
information.
The authors and Delmar Cengage Learning afﬁrm that the Web site
URLs referenced herein were accurate at the time of printing. Each has
been checked for this edition. However, due to the ﬂuid nature of the
Internet, we cannot guarantee their accuracy for the life of the edition.
NEW TO THIS EDITION
As requested by reviewers, we have added new material to this edition.
Chapter 2 has an added discussion of bullying. Children sometimes test
their power in an effort to deﬁne their self-image by being aggressive
toward their peers. Boys take direct forms: hitting, teasing, and threaten-
ing. Girls use indirect forms such as gossiping, spreading rumors, or
enforcing social isolation. Chapter 2 suggests ways that children and
adults can deal with the problem so that children can become empowered
without hurting others in the process. In Chapter 7 we added a discussion

PREFACE
xviii
of general strategies for helping children with special needs. The reader is
cautioned to realize that each child is unique, including those with a dis-
ability. This topic, added to the strategies for helping children with spe-
ciﬁc disabilities, will help students learn to incorporate these children into
the group setting. A section on managing transitions has been added to
Chapter 8. The student will learn to have curriculum areas ready before
a transition is made and to minimize waiting. They will learn the impor-
tance of alerting children to an impending change and to involve the chil-
dren in making the transitions go smoothly. Also in this chapter there is a
discussion of summer programs. How is the curriculum different when
the children are in the group all day rather than just before and after
school? What are the things that make summers enjoyable for the chil-
dren? Chapter 13 correlates with one of the latest national issues of devel-
oping a more literate society. It provides a rationale as to why literacy
should be incorporated into after school child-care programs and dis-
cusses beginning acquisition of reading and writing skills. This chapter
gives many examples of how to intentionally enhance a variety of tradi-
tional school-age activities with literacy components as well as giving sug-
gestions for purposeful reading and writing activities.
ANCILLARIES
Online CompanionTM
An exciting feature is the student Online CompanionTM, which accompa-
nies Caring for School-Age Children. It is designed for use by the student
reader and provides a link to resources on the Internet. The Online Com-
panionTM contains many features to help focus your understanding of car-
ing for school age children:
Discussion Forum
For each of the sections, a short presentation of the issue is followed by
critical thinking questions students can consider and discuss with others
via e-mail or a chat room. Some examples are ethical considerations for
staff members, bullying among children, and organized, competitive
sports.
Case Studies
For each section there are case studies of children, caregivers, or parents.
Each will portray problems caregivers frequently encounter or an issue

PREFACE
xix
that is frequently discussed. Critical thinking questions are posed to help
students consolidate their learning.
The Online CompanionTM can be found at [http://www.earlychilded.
delmar.com].
Professional Enhancement Text
A new supplement to accompany this text is the Caring for School Age
Children Professional Enhancement handbook for students. This
resource, which is part of Delmar Learning’s Early Childhood Education
Professional Enhancement series, focuses on key topics of interest for
future early childhood directors, teachers, and caregivers. Becoming a
teacher is a process of continuing to grow, learn, reﬂect, and discover
through experience. The Professional Enhancement text helps tomor-
row’s teachers along their way. Students will keep this informational sup-
plement and use it for years to come in their early childhood practices.
For the Instructor
e-Resource Instructor CD-ROM
The new e-Resource component provides instructors with all the tools
they need in one convenient CD-ROM. Instructors will ﬁnd that this
resource provides them with a turnkey solution to help them teach by
making available PowerPoint® slides for each chapter, a Computerized
Test Bank, and an electronic version of the Instructor’s Manual.
The instructor’s manual is a chapter-by-chapter plan for organizing a
course using this textbook. Features include a brief statement of the focus
of each chapter, a chapter outline, classroom activities to enhance student
learning, additional case studies that can be used for discussion, assign-
ments to further learning, and guidelines for answering the review ques-
tions in the textbook. In addition, there is a midterm and ﬁnal exam
composed of multiple-choice and short-answer questions. A ﬁnal feature
of the instructor’s manual is a list of videos to enhance classroom activities.
The Computerized Test Bank can be used by instructors to create sample
exams for students. It contains multiple-choice, true/false, short answer,
and completion questions for each chapter. PowerPoint presentations are
also included for each chapter; instructors can use them to enhance class-
room lectures.

This page intentionally left blank 

xxi
Phyllis Click obtained her bachelor’s and master’s degrees from the Uni-
versity of California at Berkeley in psychology and child development.
Throughout a long career, her interest in providing the best possible envi-
ronment for young children led her to work in a variety of settings from
preschools to summer camps for older children as well as programs for
children with special needs. For several years she developed and taught
in a preschool for children diagnosed with autism. Later she began work-
ing with adults, teaching college students, administering grant programs,
and designing a curriculum for a private college for prospective teachers.
Now retired, she has been a consultant, helping others to start or
administer programs and has published extensively. Her publications
include another textbook for administrators of child care programs,
articles in professional journals, and ancillary materials for other authors’
textbooks. She has participated in research studies that are written up in
anthologies. She belongs to the National Association for the Education of
Young Children, the California School-Age Consortium, and the Associa-
tion for Childhood Education International.
Jennifer Parker is currently a professor teaching child development
classes at Moorpark College where she was instrumental in adding a
school-age component to the child development degree program. She is
currently working to expand the degree program to include a paraprofes-
sional certiﬁcate for students wishing to work as elementary classroom
aides. Her classes include students with diverse backgrounds and experi-
ence, ranging from beginning, entry-level to those who are currently
teaching in infant-toddler, preschool, and school-age programs. Her
course load also includes teaching master teachers skills in supervision
and mentoring. She coordinates a mentor teacher program in which she
selects and trains caregivers to mentor student teachers in their ﬁeld
placements.
She received her master’s degree from California State University,
Northridge, and has had extensive experience working with children,
families, and adults. She founded a support program for parents of infants
a
ABOUT THE AUTHORS

ABOUT TH E AUTH ORS
xxii
and toddlers in a developmentally appropriate environment, and she has
been a lead kindergarten teacher in an on-campus demonstration school
where she also ran a summer camp program. She is currently a member of
the Ventura County Planning and Implementation Committee for Pre-
school for All, consultant and collaborator with the county’s new state
funded afte-school programs, and a member of Ventura County Child
Care Planning Council and the California School-Age Consortium.

xxiii
Thanks to Erin O’Connor, Acquisition Editor, for continuing to support
this book through its various revisions. And thanks to Philip Mandl,
Developmental Editor, and all the other Delmar Learning staff members
who carried the project from one step to another until the ﬁnal pages were
put together.
Our special thanks go to the following reviewers who offered many
excellent suggestions for additions to previous editions and those who
reviewed the draft version of the updated edition. We appreciate their
thoughtful comments.

Patricia Weaver, M.Ed., Fayetteville Technical Community
College, North Carolina

Debby Everett, M.A., Yuba College, California

Susan M. Baxter, M.Ed., El Camino Community College,
California

Beverly Hugener, M.A., Reid State Technical College, Alabama

Bridget C. Ingram, M.Ed., Clark State Community College, Ohio

Lisa Fuller, Cerro Coso Community College, California

Claire Robinson, Ed.D., Virginia Union University, Virginia

Diane Flynn-Hahn, B.S., M.A., Schoolcraft College, Michigan

Emily Stottlemyre, B.S., M.A., McLennan Community College,
Texas
The authors hope that this new edition will help those who are con-
cerned for the welfare of the millions of children who spend their out-of-
school time in organized-care programs. Our children deserve the best.
a
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This page intentionally left blank 

Section
one
THE
PEOPLE
IN
CHILD
CARE

This page intentionally left blank 

Caregivers:
Who Are They?
3
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Describe the characteristics of an effective caregiver/teacher.
State education and experience requirements of a caregiver/teacher.
Relate children’s needs to a caregiver’s role.
WHAT DO CHILDREN REALLY
NEED FROM CAREGIVERS?
i
f you are already working in school-age child care, you may occasion-
ally question your choice of profession. Or if you are just considering
child care as a career, you may wonder if this is the right place for
you. Children can be tiring, frustrating, and demanding. They can also
be humorous, marvelously exciting, and fun. This chapter should help
you decide whether you are the right person for these children and for
the job.
First, try to answer the question “What do children need from care-
givers?” What did you want from the adults in your life? Children need
security—a feeling they can trust adults and be trusted. They want free-
dom to be independent, while at the same time they like clear limits that
deﬁne what they can or cannot do. They like adults who are ﬂexible and
can respond to new situations and interests with enthusiasm. They need
affection, caring, and acceptance of their individual differences. They
want to solve their own problems and to feel empowered, but they also
want to have an adult’s help available when needed. They want to be chal-
lenged to use their skills and abilities. Probably, most of all, they want to
feel competent and successful.
CHAPTER 11
OBJECTIVES

SECTION ONE
4
What Are the Adults Called?
Many different titles are used to designate the adults who spend time with
children in after-school programs. There is still no universally accepted
designation that satisﬁes the need to indicate the importance of this type
of work. Some adults prefer to be called teachers because they certainly
do teach. Others emphasize their caring role and therefore prefer to be
called caregiver or guide. This term may be unacceptable to many chil-
dren in after-school settings because they feel they do not need to be
“cared for.” Those who emphasize the recreational aspect of after-school
programs use recreational supervisor, or counselor. Still others use the
title of leader, aide, assistant, or child care worker. Daniel (1995) has sug-
gested using developmentalist, while Betty Caldwell, past president of
National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC), has
coined the term educare. Until a universally accepted new word is coined
reﬂecting the multifaceted aspects of working with school-age children,
each of the preceding should be acceptable.
Characteristics of the Effective
Caregiver/Teacher
If you want to be a caregiver or teacher of school-age children, you need
certain characteristics. Do not be discouraged if you do not have every
Children want to solve their own problems and to feel empowered, while
knowing an adult’s help is available when needed.
caregiver
name for an adult in child care when
the emphasis is on the caring role
recreational supervisor
name for an adult in child care when
the emphasis is on the recreational
aspects
developmentalist
name for an adult in child care who is
versed in the developmental aspects of
the child
educare
a name for an adult in child care
reﬂecting the multifaceted aspect of
working with school-age children

CHAPTER 1
CAREGIVERS: WHO ARE THEY?
5
single quality in the following list. You will acquire some of these attrib-
utes as you gain experience.
Someone Who Really Likes School-Age Children
Liking school-age children should certainly be the ﬁrst important charac-
teristic for a caregiver because few people relate well to children of all
ages. “Liking” school-age children means many things. It means being
interested in these children, enjoying conversations with them, and seek-
ing out time with them. It means appreciating each child’s unique qual-
ities and accepting their differences.
Someone Who Encourages Children to Be Independent
School-age children are striving to be autonomous. They want to do
things for themselves and to solve their own problems. Often adults
want children to be compliant and obedient. They may feel threatened
when children say, “I want to do it my way.” Others feel frightened
by what might happen when children are allowed to do what they
want. It is important that children develop a sense that they can do
things for themselves and that they be given the opportunity to grow in
independence.
Someone Who Understands Child Development
You should have a good knowledge of how children develop during
middle childhood. You need to know the characteristics of children at
each stage of development throughout the elementary years. What are
their physical abilities? What are they capable of learning? What do
these children need? How do they form their identities and acquire
moral values?
It is important to be aware of the causes of behavior so you can better
understand why a particular child responds the way he or she does. Why
does one child go along willingly with the group and another want to be
alone? Why are the six-year-olds in your group suddenly rebelling against
your ideas or directions? Why are some children easy to get along with
some days, but impossible on others? To understand the “whys” of behav-
ior, you need to know the emotional stresses most children go through at
various stages of childhood.
When you do understand child development, it is easier to realize that
often just the passage of time will change behavior. In other words, chil-
dren may just be going through an expected phase in their development.
Soon behavior will change as they move into the next stage. Beyond that,
what behaviors may create problems for children themselves? What are
the things that make it difﬁcult for them to have friends or to accomplish

SECTION ONE
6
what they want to do? Then—and this is the hard part—how can you
help each child change his or her behavior into more mature actions?
Knowledge of child development will help you ﬁnd the answers.
You need knowledge of child development to understand how to pro-
vide guidance and control in positive ways. How you control a toddler is
very different from how you treat a nine-year-old. Toddlers need clear,
ﬁrm limits to protect them from harm. Nine-year-olds must feel empow-
ered to control their own behavior. Therefore, you allow as much free-
dom as possible while teaching them to set their own limits. It is a subtle
kind of guidance that respects the child’s desire to be competent.
Understanding development is basic to planning any activities in
school-age child care. You need to know what children are capable of
doing or learning. With that knowledge you can plan age-appropriate
activities at which children are likely to succeed. Sometimes the children
themselves have ideas for projects that are way beyond their capabilities.
You must guide them to choose things they can do while challenging them
to progress to the next level of developmental abilities.
Someone Who Is a Good Role Model
Although parents still continue to be important, school-age children will
be looking to you as a model. They watch what you do and listen to your
words. They sometimes imitate you as they develop their own standards
for behavior. Therefore, you should have the characteristics you want
children to have. Honesty, dependability, fairness, and trustworthiness
are some of the traits you might consider. You could add ﬂexibility, caring,
tolerance, and patience. You could also include a happy disposition and an
optimistic outlook.
Whenever possible, child care groups should have both male and
female leaders. The majority of elementary school teachers are female.
Boys spend a large part of their day without a male role model. When
these children are being raised by single mothers, they are further
deprived. A male leader in child care can help to ﬁll the gap. Girls, too,
need male child care workers to help them develop their own identities in
relation to males. Both girls and boys need both genders to help them
learn to trust adults outside their own home.
Someone Who Has Lots of Interests
You should know a lot about many things. Your own curiosity and interests
should lead you to seek out information you can share with children. They
will be fascinated by what you know about stars, electricity, dinosaurs, or
many other topics. Know also where to look for answers to their questions.
Know how to ﬁnd information in your local library and have some ideas
about what is available in your community. You can also help children to

CHAPTER 1
CAREGIVERS: WHO ARE THEY?
7
use the Internet for research on subjects that interest them. When you
share children’s excitement about learning, you encourage rather than
discourage their own desire to discover.
You should be able to do a lot of things. Virtually any skill you have can
be shared. If you are adept at woodworking, you can teach children how to
use tools. If you know how to knit or crochet, children can learn those
skills as well. Learn how to do other things that could interest children.
There are many “how-to” books that will help you. You can also learn from
someone who already has these skills.
You should be willing to learn from children. Often there is more than
one way of doing things. A child may show you an approach you would not
have thought of yourself. But you have to be willing to consider alterna-
tives rather than feeling there is one absolute right way. Many children
have information and skills they can share with the group. Be willing to
listen to children and provide opportunities for others to listen as well.
Someone Who Allows Freedom While Setting Limits
School-age children are trying to move from dependence on adults to
independence. Consequently, they need the freedom to make their own
decisions, and to set their own rules. This freedom bolsters their self-
esteem. You have to be willing to give up or share control when it is appro-
priate. For instance, you may want to set rules that involve safety but allow
them to write their own code of conduct in the group.
On the other hand, when limits are needed, you have to be able to set
them ﬁrmly and consistently. You have to be able to say “no” and mean it.
That is not always as easy as it sounds. Children test how far they can go
before you stop them, and they want to feel secure in the knowledge that
you will not let them go too far. You should be clear that it is not all right to
run around the pool area, for example. Explain why the rule is necessary,
then enforce it. You will gain their respect and trust.
Sometimes you have to balance individual freedoms with group
rights. One child cannot be allowed to work at a noisy project alone
when the group is listening to a story. If a group of children wants to
play with blocks, one child cannot be allowed to take all the blocks. How-
ever, at other times individual rights must be considered. Some children
need to have exclusive use of materials or space for a period of time.
Others want to be able to choose another child as a partner for an activity.
You need a great deal of sensitivity to children to decide when to meet
individual or group needs.
Someone Who Has Good Communication Skills
Communication includes both the ability to convey messages and to
listen. You should be able to do both well. When you give children

SECTION ONE
8
directions, they should be stated clearly. There should be no ambiguity
about your meaning. “You have ﬁve minutes to ﬁnish what you are doing
before snack time” is a clear statement. “It will be snack time in a few
minutes” leaves room for confusion. What is a few minutes? Five?
Three? Ten? You should also be able to express your feelings honestly.
“I don’t like it when you call me names” lets a child know exactly how
you feel. In addition, good communication skills involve the ability to
write in an organized, concise manner. You may need to write out infor-
mation for children, for parents, or for other staff members.
The other side of communication is the willingness to listen. Children
often need to talk about school, their families, or their friends. You should
be willing to listen and be interested in what they have to say. Children are
not the only ones who appreciate a good listener. Parents and other staff
members occasionally need a “friendly ear.” There is one last reminder
about communication. It is important when you work with children not
to talk down to them. Use language that is appropriate for their develop-
mental level and ability to understand.
Someone Who Can Guide Children in Social Problem Solving
Children without social skills do not have friends, and that often leads to
either aggressive or passive behaviors. These are the children who
become bullies or who sit quietly in the background alone. They need
help to change their behaviors so they can make and keep friends. A sen-
sitive adult can help these children understand what is preventing them
from achieving their goals or making friends.
The most effective ways to help children learn the techniques that
allow them to have friends include discussing strategies in small groups
and modeling friendships among the adults. Individual children can be
coached. You can review the behaviors that led to the child’s being
excluded and then suggest alternative behaviors. Encourage the child to
practice the behaviors, and then evaluate the results. Sometimes it even
helps to set up a private signal system, such as a hand sign, a word, or a
phrase. If aggressive behavior has prevented the child from being part of a
group, signal him to remind him to try an alternate method. Conﬂict res-
olution is discussed further in Chapter 7.
Someone Who Enjoys Physical Activity
You should like to play active games and sports with children. Children
who attend elementary school spend a large part of their day sitting
down. When they come to child care, they need to be involved in activities
that allow them to move around. They want to be able to play games out-
doors, climb, run, jump, skate, or do whatever else is available. Both you
What characteristics do men
bring to after-school
programs?

CHAPTER 1
CAREGIVERS: WHO ARE THEY?
9
and the children will get a great deal of pleasure doing some of these
together. That takes a lot of energy and good health on your part.
Someone Who Cares about Families
All children you work with are part of a family. As described in Chapter 3,
these families will have many distinct characteristics. They may be like
your own family or very different. It is up to you to get to know family
members. Find out what they are like and what they want for their chil-
dren. Become familiar with their cultural values and the standards they
set for their family, then be supportive and avoid criticizing them. Find
ways to strengthen their role as parents. You should see child care as a
family service, not just a place for children.
You should be the kind of person parents can talk to. What parents
want most is an indication that you know their children and care about
them. They want to hear what their children did during the day and how
their children are getting along. Sometimes they may want to talk about
their children’s problems. Do not feel you have to have solutions, but just
be willing to listen. Often it is enough just to listen to a parent talk about
the difﬁculties of working and having time for children. They do not
always want advice, just understanding.
Someone Who Understands the Role of a Caregiver
You are both a parent and a teacher when you work in an after-school
program. Your job has aspects of both relationships. At times your role is
to be a listener. When children arrive at child care, they may need some-
one to talk to about their day or to discuss problems. At other times you
become a disciplinarian who sets limits or administers appropriate conse-
quences when limits are overstepped. You may have to see that they get
their homework done. These are things a parent does. At other times you
become an instructor. In the course of a day’s activities, you will often
teach them some of the same things they learn in school. They may need
help with math concepts when they work on projects. They may need help
reading a recipe while cooking a snack. You may encourage them to pur-
sue their interest in astronomy, then praise their accomplishments. You
explain instructions when they play a game. Your role, therefore, is a com-
bination of teacher and parent but your primary role is to see that children
are well cared for while their parents are at work.
Someone Who Is Able to Work as Part of a Team
You should be able to get along with other adults as well as you do with
children. Other staff members within your center depend on you or have
to coordinate their activities with yours. Therefore, you have to be willing

SECTION ONE
10
to share responsibilities, space, and materials. Sometimes you have to be
ready to do more than is expected of you. You should see working with
children as a profession, not just a job. When you do, you will respect
fellow workers and be respected by them.
Being part of a team may also mean working with elementary school
personnel. This can be difﬁcult because caregivers often seem to be invis-
ible, not seen as part of the school. When your center is within a school
system, you are likely to be housed on the school grounds. You will have to
work out the arrangements for sharing indoor and outdoor space. You
may have to order materials through the school ofﬁce. In order to foster
a good working relationship, initiate ways to inform school personnel
about your program. Let the principal know about any special activities.
Offer to put up a display of children’s artwork. Talk to parents at a PTA
meeting. Get to know the teachers and inform them of children’s activ-
ities in child care. A healthy relationship with school personnel is worth
the effort it takes to establish and maintain.
Education and Experience
Each child care center will have its own requirements for staff members.
Criteria for employment are usually based on guidelines mandated by
The ﬁnest caregivers enjoy positive relationships with parents.

CHAPTER 1
CAREGIVERS: WHO ARE THEY?
11
local or state licensing regulations as well as by the funding sources that
support the program. In addition, each situation will have demands based
on the needs of the program or the children to be served. In general, two
broad areas of education and experience are usually required in school-
age child care.
Some center directors look for personnel who have strong back-
grounds in early childhood education. Staff members must be knowledge-
able in the development of young children. Directors also want people
who have expertise and experience in planning a curriculum for “school-
agers.” Many caregivers who ﬁt these requirements have completed
courses in early childhood education and have worked in preschool
programs. In addition, they may have had the opportunity to work with
ﬁve- or six-year-olds. More and more colleges and universities are offering
courses in school-age child care.
Other directors seek personnel who have strong backgrounds in
recreation. These staff members know a lot of games suitable to this age
level. Staff members should be aware of activities that are safe for young
children. Caregivers with this kind of background probably have taken
courses in physical education and recreation. They may have had experi-
ence supervising playground situations or working in summer camps.
As you look at these two areas of background and experience, it prob-
ably occurs to you that a good caregiver needs both. You are absolutely
right. It would certainly be ideal if that were so. In most child care situa-
tions, however, the problem is resolved by hiring staff who have skills
that complement one another. In each group one person may have an
early childhood education background and one comes from recreation
programs.
To further achieve an ideal staff balance in a child care program, it
would be necessary to have a staff that is comparable ethnically to the
surrounding community. It also helps to have people of different age lev-
els. A staff member over the age of 30 will bring a different perspective to
the care of children than a 20-year-old.
By now you should have a picture of the kind of person who will make
a good teacher or caregiver of school-age children. Let us take one last
look at the role of a caregiver in children’s development.
THE CAREGIVER’S ROLE IN
CHILDREN’S DEVELOPMENT
In general terms, your role as caregiver is to foster all aspects of children’s
development. The ways in which you do that have been implied by
the description of characteristics needed for the job. However, look at it

SECTION ONE
12
in another way. Children have speciﬁc needs; your job is to help fulﬁll
them.

Children need security; you provide a secure environment.

Children need to trust themselves and others; you showyou can be
trusted and that you trust them.

Childrenneedtobeindependent;youallowfreedomwithinlimits.

Childrenneedtodevelopinterests;youencourageandfosterthose
interests.

Children need a positive self-image; you appreciate their similar-
ities and differences.

Children need to feel competent; you provide opportunities for
them to be successful.

Children need to acquire values; you offer a positive role model for
them to imitate.

Children need to belong to a group; you include each child and
encourage friendships.

Childrenneedtosolvetheirownproblems;youallowthemtosolve
their problems but help when needed.
As you can see, having a part in the development of young children is
an awesome task. But should you choose this as a career, you will ﬁnd it is
never boring, for you are constantly challenged. You will ﬁnd that children
force you to grow in order to keep up with their demands. It is certainly a
job that will keep you learning for many years into the future.
Children have speciﬁc needs; your job is to help fulﬁll them.

CHAPTER 1
CAREGIVERS: WHO ARE THEY?
13
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Whether you are experienced or just starting out, as an early childhood
educator you will be faced with situations that call for difﬁcult decisions.
For example, you suspect that a child in your class is being exposed to
sexually explicit experiences. Or a fellow teacher is taking home paper
and paint to use with her own child. How do you decide what the right
way is to respond to either of these situations—or even whether to do
anything at all? Your own personality or personal attributes will affect
how you react to situations, how you think, and what you feel. Early child-
hood educators tend to be caring, empathetic people who try to be fair.
The trouble is that these qualities are not always enough to guide you
when you are faced with ethical dilemmas.
Your values also play a part in helping to decide what to do. Values
are the qualities that people believe to be intrinsically desirable and that
they strive to achieve in themselves. Personal values are the basis for pro-
fessional values. However, not everyone has the same values, and others
may not understand the choices you make. A good example is the dilem-
ma you face when a parent asks you to discipline her child in a way that is
counter to your values. You may truly believe your way is the right way,
but the parent may have just as strong a conviction.
Your sense of morality also affects your decisions. Morality is the
perception of what is good or right. Morality also includes beliefs about
how people should behave and the kind of obligations they have to one
another. During the early years children are taught by their parents or
their religion that it is wrong to lie or to steal and that it is right to be
truthful and treat others kindly. This becomes the core of their moral
sense as adults.
However, as professionals caregivers need another standard by which
to decide how to resolve problems. They need a code of ethics that out-
lines responsibilities in ways that everyone can agree on. Ethics is the
study of right, wrong, duty, and obligation. Ethics and morality are closely
related and in fact are often used interchangeably, but ethics implies a
conscious deliberation regarding moral choices.
The National Association for the Education of Young Children
(NAEYC) has developed a Code of Ethical Conduct that “offers guide-
lines for responsible behavior and sets forth a common basis for resolving
the principal ethical dilemmas encountered in early childhood care and
education” (Feeney & Freeman, 1999). The code focuses on the daily
interactions with children from birth through age eight and their families
in preschools, child care centers, kindergartens, and primary classrooms.
The code consists of four sections, each addressing a particular area of
values
the qualities we believe to be
intrinsically desirable and that we strive
to achieve in ourselves
morality
our perception of what is good or right
ethics
a study of right, wrong, duty, and
obligation

SECTION ONE
14
professional relationships. The sections are (1) children, (2) families,
(3) colleagues, and (4) community and society. Each section addresses
responsibilities, ideals, and principles. The intent is to portray exemplary
professional practice and deﬁne practices that are required, prohibited,
and permitted.
A sample of paragraphs from Section I, Ethical Responsibilities to
Children, will give you a sense of the content of the Code:
Childhood is a unique and valuable stage in the life cycle. Our
paramountresponsibilityistoprovidesafe,healthy,nurturing,and
responsive settings for children. We are committed to supporting
children’sdevelopment,respectingindividualdifferences,helping
children learn to live and work cooperatively, and promoting
health, self-awareness, competence, self-worth, and resiliency.
Ideals
I-1.1 To be familiar with the knowledge base of early childhood care
and education and to keep current through continuing education
and in-service training.
I-1.2 To base program practices upon current knowledge in the ﬁeld
of child development and related disciplines and upon particular
knowledge of each child.
I-1.3 To recognize and respect the uniqueness and the potential of
each child.
I-1.4 To appreciate the special vulnerability of children.
The full text of the Code of Ethical Conduct can be found in Ethics
and the Early Childhood Educator listed in the references at end of this
chapter.
SUMMARY
School-age children have speciﬁc needs. To trust and be trusted, to be
independent, to have challenges, to be accepted for who they are, and to
be successful are a few.
Many different titles are used to designate the adults who spend time
with children in after-school programs: teacher, caregiver, guide, recrea-
tional supervisor, counselor, leader, aide, assistant, and child care worker.
All should be acceptable.
Those who care for school-age children should be people who

Like school-age children

Understand child development

CHAPTER 1
CAREGIVERS: WHO ARE THEY?
15

Are good role models

Have a lot of interests

Allow freedom while setting limits

Have good communication skills

Can guide children in social problem solving

Enjoy physical activity

Care about families

Understand the role of caregiver

Are able to work as part of a team.
Child care programs may require personnel who have a background
in either early childhood education or recreation. Both are helpful.
All should have knowledge of what is developmentally appropriate for
children.
In general, the role of a caregiver with school-age children is to foster
all aspects of children’s development. Caregivers sometimes have to make
decisions that require them to consider their own values or sense of what
is right or wrong. NAEYC has developed a Code of Ethical Conduct that
offers guidelines for responsible behavior.
KEY TERMS
caregiver
developmentalist
educare
ethics
morality
recreational supervisor
values
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Visittwodifferentkindsofschool-ageprograms.Choose,forinstance,
onethatisoperatedbyacityrecreationdepartmentandonethatispart
of a corporation. In what ways are the children’s activities the same or
different in these two programs?
2. Observe several child care teachers as they interact with children.
How do their styles differ? Describe the one you would use as your
own model for interactions with children.
3. Interview the director of a school-age child care program. What are
the qualities he or she looks for when hiring new staff members?
4. Inclassdo“QuickWrites.”Bepreparedtosharethemwithclassmates
whenﬁnished. Spendoneminute responding to “Oneteacher was my
favorite because ________.” Highlight three main characteristics and

SECTION ONE
16
then prioritize them. Finally, state why the ﬁrst priority item is the
most important.
5. Write an advertisement for the perfect school-age caregiver.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. List the reasons child care workers need a knowledge of child
development.
2. Describe the qualities of a good role model for school-age children.
3. Thischaptersuggestsachildcareteachershouldhavealotofinterests.
Explain the reasons for that statement.
4. Effective communication has two parts. What are they?
5. Describe ways to foster your relationship with parents.
6. Why isit important that caregivers be able to work together asa team?
7. What kinds of education and experience should be required to qualify
as a caregiver?
CASE STUDY
Alberto is nine and speaks with a slight accent because his home language
is Spanish. He is often the butt of teasing and does not seem to know how
to make friends. He frequently sits by himself in the reading area or at the
science table. The caregivers in the group tend to leave him alone because
he isn’t creating any problems, but they do intervene when the other chil-
dren tease him. They send the tormentors to a quiet place for a time-out.
One caregiver really wants to help Alberto make at least one friend but
doesn’t know how.
1. How could you help Alberto react in such a way as to stop the teasing?
2. Whatwouldbeamoreeffectivewaytohelptheteaserstochangetheir
behavior?
3. What are three things you could do to help Alberto make a friend?
REFERENCES
Daniel, J. (1995). Advancing the care and education paradigm: A case for
developmentalists. Young Children, 50(2), 2.
Feeney, S., & Freeman, N. K. (1999). Ethics and the early childhood edu-
cator: Using the NAEYC Code. Washington, DC: NAEYC.

CHAPTER 1
CAREGIVERS: WHO ARE THEY?
17
SUGGESTED READINGS
Bender, J., Flatter, C. H., & Sorrentino, J. M. (2000). Half a childhood:
Quality programs for out-of-school hours (2nd ed.). Nashville:
School-Age Notes.
CaliforniaState Departmentof Education.(1994).Kid’stime, aschool-age
program guide. Sacramento: Author.
Elicker, J., & Fortner-Wood, C. (1995). Adult-child relationships in early
childhood programs. Young Children, 51(1), 69–78.
Gratz, R., & Boulton, P. (1996). Erikson and early childhood educators:
Lookingatourselvesandourprofessiondevelopmentally. YoungChil-
dren, 51(5), 74–78.
Kaiser, B., & Rasminsky, J. S. (2003). Opening the culture door. Young
Children, 58(4), 53–56.
Musson, S. (1994). School-age care, theory and practice. Don Mills, Ont.:
Addison-Wesley.
Stapen,C.(1988).Caringforyourchild-careperson.WorkingWoman,13,
148.
Whitebook, M., Howes, C., Phillips, D., & Pemberton, C. (1989). Who
cares? Child care teachers and the quality of care in America. Young
Children, 45(1), 41–45.
WEB RESOURCES
http://www.ccw.org
CenterforChildCareWorkforce:Nonproﬁt,research, education,and
advocacy organization committed to improving child care teachers.
http://www.wheelockcollege.edu
WheelockCollege:Providesprogramsineducationandchildandfam-
ily studies.
http://www.naccp.org
National Association for Child Care Professionals: Goal is to improve
andstrengthenthecredibilityofthosewholeadthechildcareindustry.

This page intentionally left blank 

The Children
19
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the ways in which children develop friendships.
State the factors that are important to children’s sense of self.
State the ways child care leaders can help children form friendships
and develop a healthy sense of self.
Discuss bullying and ways to help both the bully and the victim.
DEVELOPMENT OF SELF
m
iddle childhood, between ages ﬁve and twelve, is an impor-
tant period when children develop a sense of who they are,
what they can do, and how others perceive them. It is a time
when the focus of their daily lives is on school and their self-esteem is
closely tied to school success. Most children enter kindergarten eager to
learn and are optimistic in their evaluation of self and their expectations
for academic success (Stipek & Maciver, 1989). When they ﬁrst begin
reading and writing, they have little idea of how successful they will be
and cannot accurately assess their own competency. Young children
assume they are successful because they put a lot of effort into their activ-
ities. As they get older and more experienced, they become more realistic.
They learn that different people have different abilities, enabling them to
achieve at varying levels. They may ﬁnd they are good at reading but not
so capable at math.
A second way children develop a sense of self is through their feelings
of power. One source of power is their status with their peers. They mea-
sure and compare themselves to others. Are they liked and looked up to?
Are they similar to their peers in appearance, dress, and abilities? If they
CHAPTER22
OBJECTIVES

SECTION ONE
20
answer in the afﬁrmative, they feel more powerful. A second source of
power is inner control over their own behavior—in other words, being
able to behave in ways that their parents and society view favorably.
They also have good self-esteem if they are accomplishing their goals
and expanding their skills.
At times, aggressive behavior turns into “rough and tumble play”
and is particularly prevalent in boys. To the outsider, the attacking, teas-
ing, threatening, pushing, or wrestling looks the same as hostile aggres-
sion. Caregivers can observe signs that distinguish rough and tumble
play from hostile aggression. Usually the children have positive facial
expressions or may be laughing. They do not use their full force and they
do not hit hard. They push just hard enough to make an impact on the
other child. They can be observed to alternate roles, each being on top
or being the aggressor. At the end of the play, they happily go on together
to participate in other activities.
A ﬁnal standard by which school-age children evaluate themselves is
in terms of good or bad behavior. In Chapter 6 Lawrence Kohlberg
(1963) describes moral behavior in middle childhood as being nice to
others, behaving in ways that others approve of, and obeying rules or
laws. Teachers and peers use these standards to label children as good/
nice or bad/not nice. Reputations acquired during middle childhood
may affect an individual’s behavior into adolescence and adulthood.
Race may also play a part in how children perceive themselves and
others. Holmes (1995) studied kindergarten children in several schools
in southern California. She found that the content of children’s self-
concepts and the way children perceive themselves and convey infor-
mation about themselves is linked to their cognitive maturation. At
the kindergarten level, children concentrated on speciﬁc, observable
Middle childhood is an important period when the
focus is on school and self-esteem is closely tied to
school success.
rough and tumble play
aggressive behavior, but the children
usually have positive facial expressions
or may be laughing

CH APTER 2
T HE CHILDREN
21
characteristics: gender, skin color, eye color, and language. The children
described themselves by saying, “I have brown skin” or “My eyes are
brown.” According to Holmes, older children at a higher cognitive level
will portray themselves as having personal preferences or personality
traits—“I’m pretty good at sports and have a lot of friends.”
Holmes found that socialization experiences were important factors
affecting children’s subjective feelings about themselves. Children who
had repeated negative experiences with others from a group different
from their own may incorrectly assume that the negativism was due to
their being African American or because they spoke Spanish rather than
English, for example.
In the same way, when children had limited interactions with others
from a group different from their own and those interactions were nega-
tive, they tended to categorize all persons from that group as being alike.
They saw the group as homogeneous even though their experience had
been with only a few members. One negative encounter led to a wrong
conclusion about the group, thus giving rise to stereotyping and prejudice.
Bullying
At times school-age children test their power and their place in a group by
bullying others. Bullying is unprovoked aggression that is intended to
inﬂict injury or discomfort on the victim, and can be either direct or indi-
rect. Boys more often use a direct form: hitting, teasing, threatening,
humiliating, mobbing, or taunting. Girls tend to engage in indirect meth-
ods such as gossiping, spreading rumors, or enforcing social isolation. Stu-
dents who engage in bullying behaviors often seem to care little for the
feelings of their victims.
The latest method of bullying others is online bullying or Cyber-
bullying. According to a survey done by the National Children’s Home
charity and Tesco Mobile, (National Children’s Home, 2005) 20% of chil-
dren between the ages of 11 and 19 said they had been bullied by elec-
tronic means. Almost three-fourths (73%) indicated they knew the bully
while 26% stated the harasser was unknown to them. The aggressor posts
information or photos using electronic devices such as e-mail, instant
messaging, text messaging, blogs, mobile phones, pagers, and Web sites.
This method is particularly destructive to the target, because the bullies
can remain anonymous and the information is available to large numbers
of persons. A particularly destructive example of Cyber-bullying is when
girls take locker-room pictures and post them on-line. Another example is
the on-line voting booth. Pictures and names of students are posted and
others are asked to vote who is the “hottest, the ugliest, the biggest geek,
the wimpiest fag.” (Bowman [2001] Retrieved March 2007 from www.
edweek.org) The bully can use temporary e-mail accounts, false names
bullying
unprovoked aggression that is intended
to inﬂict injury or discomfort on the
victim
Cyber-bullying
Use of electronic means to bully others

SECTION ONE
22
in chat rooms, and instant messaging programs to hide his identity. Thus,
the harasser does not have to be bigger or stronger and it takes less energy
and courage.
Children who are victims of bullying may be physically different from
their peers in size, race, and in the way they dress, and may be called in-
sensitive names such as “sissy” or “dork.” They often feel helpless, anx-
ious, insecure, cautious, and suffer from low self-esteem. They may also
display sadness and isolate themselves. Loss of appetite may be accompa-
nied by headaches and sleep deprivation. The effects of bullying carry
over to their schoolwork where they may have trouble concentrating
and have poor academic performance. Some become overly aggressive
themselves.
Bullies themselves are also hurt by the behavior. They do not learn to
manage their emotions or how to cope when difﬁculties arise. They fail to
develop empathy for others and don’t learn how to have real relationships
with other people. Instead they continue to blame others for their prob-
lems and never take responsibility for their own behavior. They may dis-
play physical aggression and disruptive behavior. They ridicule others by
constant teasing and encourage their peers to exclude others. These chil-
dren often challenge authority and are disrespectful.
The best way for children to deal with a bully is to stand up to him
or her or even sometimes to turn the situation into a joke. The bully
sees that the behavior is not getting the result intended. Victims of
Cyber-bullying can avoid chat rooms, change their e-mail address, and
use caller ID for their cell phones. If the victim is unable to stand up to
the bully, adults need to intervene and stop the behavior, immediately
following it by increased supervision to stop potential incidents before
they begin. Child-care personnel certainly need to monitor computer
usage and cell phone activity. Add activities to the curriculum that pro-
mote individual competencies, self-conﬁdence, and emotional manage-
ment techniques. Some of the activities outlined in Chapter 7, such as
“Fighting Fair,” “Getting to Know You,” and “Y’All Come Up” are a few
of the examples. Chapter 7 also contains suggestions for helping children
develop social competence in order to stand up to bullies. Caregivers
should emphasize respecting others and use their own behavior as a role
model. Finally, collaboration with parents will help to reinforce the anti-
bullying message.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Children’s feelings about themselves develop not in a vacuum but rather
within the context of their daily experiences and their contacts with
others. Many factors inﬂuence the development of self-esteem and social
competence. According to Katz and McClellan (1997), these factors are

CH APTER 2
T HE CHILDREN
23
“the children’s attachments to their primary caregivers within the family;
the modeling, guidance, and support of parents and teachers; the oppor-
tunity to observe peers and interact with them; and children’s relation-
ships with non-family adults involved in their care and education and
those involved in the neighborhood and community in which they spend
a large proportion of their time” (p. 13). Caregivers can encourage child-
ren’s positive feelings about themselves by

Providing authentic feedback to children rather than empty
praise. Help them to evaluate their own skills realistically and to
set feasible goals for themselves. “You were having a hard time
learning to use the saw, but you ﬁgured out how to do it. Look
how well you were able to cut a straight line for the side of your
birdhouse.”

Providing supportive intervention to children who have
been rejected or are having difﬁculty gaining acceptance
by their peers. Offer help to upgrade skills that bring acceptance
in the classroom or playground. Teach children how to be success-
ful.“Icanseethatyouwerehurtyouweren’tchosenfortheirteam.
Suppose I help you practice so that you will be able to play better.”
Or“Noteveryonecanbeagoodbasketball player.Rememberhow
great you are when we put on plays.”

Accepting children’s feelings rather than denying or belit-
tling their importance. Be a sensitive listener. “I can see you’re
If a child is unable to stand up to a bully, adults need to intervene and stop
the behavior immediately followed by increased supervision to prevent
incidents before they begin.

SECTION ONE
24
pretty mad about something today. If you feel like talking about it,
I’m ready to listen.”

Providing positive encounters with persons from different
racial or ethnic backgrounds.

Scheduling adult visitors who can talk about their culture or
experiences. Ask an adult to present a craft or music activity
representative of their culture.

Encouraging interracial groups to work together on activ-
ities that require cooperation and compromise. Invite chil-
dren from an ethnically different child care group to participate
in an activity such as a swim meet, a game, or a picnic. Expect
each group to work on planning for the activity.
PEER GROUPS: “THE SOCIETY
OF CHILDREN”
Beginning in the preschool period, when children ﬁrst understand the
meaning of the word “friend,” the need to have friends becomes increas-
ingly important. As children’s cognitive abilities change, so does their con-
cept of friendship and its purpose. At ﬁrst there is a mutual dependence
on friends to share activities, carry on conversations, and provide support
for attempts at independence from parents. Young school-age children
choose friends who are the same gender, have similar interests, and
share similar values. There is very little cross-gender fraternization and,
in fact, even some antagonism toward members of the opposite sex. Girls
pal around with girls, tell each other secrets, watch movies, and talk on the
“Mom, me, Dad, and Rascal, my dog.” Carissa, age 6.

CH APTER 2
T HE CHILDREN
25
telephone. The leader of a group of girls is chosen for her managerial
skills, for having new ideas, and for being thoughtful, friendly, and organ-
ized (Edwards, 1994). Boys get together to skateboard, play video games,
share a hobby, or compete in organized sports.
Older school-age children rely on friends for intimate conversations
about problems, dreams, and expectations. Friends are seen as people
who will remain loyal and can be relied on when life is difﬁcult. The circle
of friends gradually becomes smaller as children become more selective
about the qualities of a friend. Often, by age 10 both boys and girls have a
single best friend, although this exclusivity tends to occur more frequently
with girls. By the end of middle childhood, many girls have only one best
friend on whom they depend for all their social needs (Gilligan, Murphy,
& Tappan, 1990). By age nine everyone knows who is best friends with
whom and would not think of trying to disrupt the pair.
This fraternity of friend relationships makes it difﬁcult for children
who have not found a companion. It is also heart wrenching when one
of a pair becomes more mature than the other and moves on to other
alliances. The deserted partner experiences difﬁculty in ﬁnding a new
companion.
Middle childhood is also a period when children form themselves into
cliques, clubs, or gangs with the primary purpose of gaining independ-
ence from adults. Each group has its own vocabulary, dress code, rules,
and activities (Opie & Opie, 1959). The group provides a mutual support
system and a sense of solidarity as children learn to sharpen their social
School-age children choose friends who have the same
interests.

SECTION ONE
26
skills. Those who belong build self-esteem, but those who are excluded
have difﬁculties socially and often academically as well.
Adler and Adler (1998) followed 200 elementary-age children in their
community. They found that children were very aware of the importance
of cliques and the power they give the members who belong. Some of the
inﬂuence is positive, helping children learn appropriate social behavior
and the consequences of misbehavior. Clique members tend to have sim-
ilar characteristics. During middle childhood they have similar interests
or come from similar backgrounds. When the cliques continue into high
school, they are identiﬁed as the jocks, the nerds, the druggies, the artists,
or the intellectuals. Cliques provide children with a social identity and a
sense of belonging.
Adler and Adler (1998) found that cliques can be extremely limiting,
prescribing very speciﬁc ways of behaving, dressing, or associating with
others outside the group. Those outside the group can be derided for
wearing the wrong clothes, being of a different race or religion, or being
too studious. They may even carry on “negative campaigns” against chos-
en targets, heaping verbal abuse and humiliation on them. In order to stay
in the group and be accepted, as well as gain the feelings of power that
result, members go along with this behavior. The consequence is that big-
otry and racism become part of children’s value systems as well as increase
their need to conform to standards that may conﬂict with values they have
been taught at home.
In the case of gangs, the purpose may be even more negative. Not
only do gangs operate outside the realm of adults; they may even be anti-
social. The result is that members engage in vandalism or criminal activ-
ities that put them in legal jeopardy.
The need to form groups may be observed in the child care setting as
well as in the community. The number of individuals involved is usually
smaller than in school or in the neighborhood, but the same dynamics can
be seen. Friendships form and break up. Groups congregate and then
change. But the need to belong remains strong in all children, with those
who are not included feeling left out and unhappy.
Some children seem to make friends easily and are sought out while
others ﬁnd it extremely difﬁcult. Certain social skills are necessary and
may be in the formative stage during middle childhood. The ﬁrst is the
ability to understand that others may have views different from their
own. Younger children are egocentric, believing that they are the center
of the universe and that friends are there to satisfy them. “He’s my friend
because he plays with me” or “He’s my friend because he shares his toys
with me.” Older children begin to realize that others have needs and feel-
ings, too. In order to make and maintain a friendship, they must make
compromises to accommodate the other’s needs or feelings. They may
cliques
groups of children who have similar
characteristics and interests
gangs
groups of children who gather together
to be out of the realm of adults but also
to be antisocial

CH APTER 2
T HE CHILDREN
27
have to negotiate whether they want to go to a party or just hang out at the
mall if they want to be together.
A second essential skill for making friends is the ability to recognize
that others have separate identities and feelings of their own. Although
children tend to choose friends who are like themselves, each has differ-
ent characteristics and ways of reacting. It is a difﬁcult lesson to learn that
sometimes a best friend can be cross and want to be alone.
Finally, children have to understand that each encounter with others
is part of a relationship. They tend to isolate incidents and fail to see the
broader importance of their behavior in speciﬁc situations. If they lash out
at another child in anger, they do not immediately recognize that this
behavior will have consequences for their ability to form a friendship
with that person. They must learn that in order to have friends they
must curb certain behaviors.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Teachers and caregivers in after-school programs can have a signiﬁcant
impact on children’s ability to make friends and be part of a group.

Allow children opportunities to spend time with a friend without
the pressure of having to engage in an activity. Let them “just hang
out” in a corner of the room or an outdoor area.

Encourage children to take another’s point of view. Ask “How do
you think he feels when you call him that name?”

Help children recognize their own psychological characteristics
and that others can accept those qualities. An adult who says
“We’re best friends forever.”

SECTION ONE
28
“Thanksforhelpingmeunderstandthatsometimesyoujustwantto
be alone” does that.

Nurture children’s ability toexamine the basis forfriendship. Lead
discussions about what makes a good friend and how to maintain
friendships. Help individual children develop a plan to change
behaviors that interfere with friendships.

Discuss alternative ways of behaving, encourage the child to test
out the behavior, and then evaluate the results. Give honest
appraisal and positive feedback for desired outcomes. “When
you asked how you could help rather than just pushing into his
activity, he made a place for you.”

Discourageattemptstoexcludeindividualchildrenfromactivities.
Suggestwayseach cancontribute. “Evan hasgoodideas abouthow
to build a ramp. He can show you how to get the cars to the upper
level of your parking structure.”
OVERVIEW OF DEVELOPMENTAL
STAGES
The following summary of typical developmental characteristics of chil-
dren during middle childhood should provide further help in understand-
ing the children in your care. However, the list is merely a prediction of
when these behaviors will occur. There will be wide variations from child
to child, with some behaviors happening earlier in some children and later
in others.
Five- to Seven-Year-Old Children
Family Relationships

are more independent of parents, but still need rules

need assurance of being loved

have a sense of duty and take on family responsibilities

develop a conscience
Peers

begin to see others’ points of view

rely on their peer group for self-esteem

criticize differences in others

have two or three best friends
“This is me.” Sarah, age 6.

CH APTER 2
T HE CHILDREN
29

exhibit little interaction between boys and girls

can learn to share and take turns

can participate in organized games
School

want approval from teacher for achievement

are eager to learn and be successful in school

are inﬂuenced by a teacher’s attitudes and values
Emotions

begin to inhibit aggression and resolve problems with words

use humor, often expressed in riddles, practical jokes, or nonsense

learn to postpone immediate rewards for delayed gratiﬁcation

become sensitive to what others think

become concerned withissues of right and wrong or fair and unfair
Thinking

are usually clear about differences between fantasy and reality

can sustain interest for long periods of time

give more thought and judgment to decisions

have a good memory for concrete ideas and can remember two
things for short periods of time

can understand and abide by rules

have a natural curiosity and often ask “why” questions
Language

learn that words and pictures represent real objects

can remember and relate past and present events

sometimes use language aggressively

understand more language than they use in their communication

may tease others whose language is different from their own
Physical Development

are developing at different rates, girls faster than boys

have good small-muscle and eye-hand coordination

are able to handle simple tools and materials

have a high energy level

SECTION ONE
30
Eight- to Ten-Year-Old Children
Family Relationships

need parental guidance and support for school achievements

rely on parents for help in assuming personal and social
responsibilities
Peers

are overly concerned about conforming to peer-imposed rules

are competitive

become antagonistic toward the opposite gender, leading to quar-
rels or teasing

develop interests speciﬁc to their gender

form same-gender cliques

spend a lot of energy in physical game playing
School

are more competitive in school activities

still need teacher approval and attention

believe academic achievement is important
Emotions

react to feelings of others and are sensitive to criticism

look for friendly relationships with adults

make value judgments about their own behavior and set standards
for self

are aware of the importance of belonging

exhibit strong conformation to gender role

are independent and self-sufﬁcient

begin to develop moral values
Thinking

are capable of sustained interest; can make plans, then carry
them out

can begin to think logically about practical problems

begin to understand cause and effect

understand abstract concepts such as time and the value of money

CH APTER 2
T HE CHILDREN
31
Language

exhibit widely varying abilities to use language or to read

use language to communicate ideas, spend a lot of time in
discussion

can use more abstract words

often resort to slang and profanity
Physical Development

view physical skills as important in determining status and
self-concept

exhibit gender differences; girls are taller, stronger, and more
skillful in small-muscle activities

have a high energy level

begin a growth spurt in girls toward end of this period

take responsibility for their own personal hygiene
Eleven- to Thirteen-Year-Old Children
Family Relationships

ready to make their own decisions outside of the family

aware that parental inﬂuence is decreasing

sometimes rebellious but still need input on family values
Peers

rely on peer group to model and set standards for behavior

choose friends based on common interests

seek information about appropriate gender roles from peers

may conform rigidly to role assigned by peer group

place greater importance on team games

develop divergent interests based on gender

may develop crushes and hero worship

are often self-conscious and may become boisterous to cover
anxiety

are interested in the opposite gender; girls are more interested
than boys

arefacedwithdecisionsregardingbehavior:sex,drugs,andalcohol

SECTION ONE
32
School

worry when in a new school setting

begin to question adult authority, particularly in school

often focus on school for social experience

are reluctant to attend child care; are bored or think they can care
for themselves
Emotions

may lack self-conﬁdence, be shy or introspective

worry about what others think, especially peers

may be moody

may experience great stress caused by physical changes heralding
puberty

develop own value systems, although inﬂuenced by peers

seek self-identity, may result in rebellious behavior
Thinking

can now move from dependence on concrete thinking to abstract
concepts

can apply logic and solve problems

can consider more than one solution to problems

enjoy problem-solving games and puzzles
Language

have a good command of spoken and written language

can use language to discuss feelings, thus bringing about self-
understanding

are often argumentative and contradict adults
Physical Development

Boys begin adolescent growth spurt.

Adolescent growth peaks in girls, who experience changes in body
proportions.

In girls, secondary gender characteristics develop: breasts,
menstruation.

Early maturing is related to positive self-image.

CH APTER 2
T HE CHILDREN
33

Boys have improved motor development and coordination and
can excel at sports.

Girls and boys master physical skills that are necessary for playing
games.
SUMMARY
Middle childhood is an important period when children develop a sense
of who they are, what they can do, and how others perceive them.
Because the focus of their daily lives is school, their self-esteem is closely
tied to school success.
A second way children develop a sense of self is in terms of feelings of
power. One source of power is their status with their peers. Another is an
inner control over their own behavior.
Acceptance by their peers is a third way children reﬁne their sense of
self. School-age children can be aggressive as they test their own power
and use bullying or teasing to assert their dominance. The latest method
of bullying is on-line bullying or Cyber-bullying. This method of bullying
is particularly destructive since the bullies can remain anonymous. Chil-
dren who are often the target of bullying may be different from their
peers in size, race, and the way they dress. They may also display sadness,
isolate themselves, show a loss of appetite, and have trouble sleeping.
Their academic performance may suffer.
Bullies are hurt by their own behavior. They do not learn to manage
their emotions or how to cope with difﬁculties.
The ﬁnal standard by which school-age children evaluate themselves
is in terms of good or bad behavior. Often reputations acquired during
middle childhood may affect the individual’s behavior into adolescence
and adulthood.
Race also plays a part in how children perceive themselves and others.
Children ﬁrst describe themselves in terms of observable characteristics.
Socialization experiences are important factors affecting children’s sub-
jective feelings about group members.
Negative encounters with persons of a different race or ethnic back-
ground can lead to a belief that all persons of that group have similar char-
acteristics. This is the basis for stereotyping and prejudice.
Beginning in the preschool period, when children ﬁrst learn the
meaning of the word “friend,” the need to have a friend becomes increas-
ingly important. Young school-age children choose friends of the same
gender and age who have similar interests and values. Older children
rely on friends for intimate conversations about problems, dreams, and
expectations.

SECTION ONE
34
Children usually have one best friend by age nine, and everyone
knows who is best friends with whom. Later in middle childhood, children
form cliques, clubs, or gangs with the main purpose of gaining independ-
ence from adults.
Cliques provide children with a sense of belonging and a feeling of
power. Cliques can be limiting in that they prescribe speciﬁc ways of
dressing or behaving. In the case of gangs, the purpose may be to not
only operate outside the realm of adult supervision but even be antisocial.
They may engage in illegal activities.
However, the need to form friendships and to belong is strong. In
order to make friends, certain skills are necessary: the ability to under-
stand that others have different points of view, the ability to recognize
that others have separate identities, and the ability to understand that
each encounter is part of a relationship.
KEY TERMS
bullying
clique
Cyber-bullying
gang
rough and tumble play
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Observechildrenonaschoolplaygroundorinapark.Noticehowthey
group themselves. Are there mixed-gender or single-gender groups?
Howmanychildrenareineachgroup?Whataretheyplaying?Writea
short paper describing your observations, relating what you saw to the
information in this chapter. Compare your ﬁndings with those of your
classmates.
2. In small groups, discuss your own perceptions of the following:
a. an ethnic group different from your own
b. people who do not speak English
3. Describe the experiences that have led you to your perceptions. Were
some of your perceptions based on prejudices? What can you do to
change your beliefs?
4. Ask the children in your child care group to draw a picture of them-
selves.Bringthepicturestoclass.Choosetwotosharewithclassmates.
Show the pictures and tell what you think the pictures say about the
children’s self-esteem.
5. Write an article on bullying for your program’s parent newsletter.
Include information on the causes of bullying and advice on how to
help both the bully and the victim.

CH APTER 2
T HE CHILDREN
35
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Describe the changes that take place in children’s assessment of their
school achievement.
2. This chapter stated that children derive some of their sense of self
through feelings of power. What are the sources of that power?
3. Explain the importance of peers in determining children’s sense
of self.
4. Statethreewaysinwhichchildcareleaderscanhelpchildrenincrease
their self-esteem.
5. Compare the criteria for choosing friends among young school-age
children with those of older children.
6. What is the primary purpose of groups, clubs, and gangs? Are there
other purposes?
7. What are the positive aspects of belonging to a clique or group? What
are the negatives?
8. Listandexplainthethreeskillschildrenneedinordertomakefriends.
9. This chapter suggested that child care staff members allow children
opportunities to “just hang out” with a friend. Why is that important?
10. What would you say to a child to achieve the following:
a. encourage her to take another’s point of view
b. help him recognize his own psychological characteristics
c. evaluate her attempts to change behaviors that interfere with
friendships
CASE STUDY
Justin is an eight-year-old Vietnamese boy who was adopted by his Cau-
casian parents when he was only three months old. His two older siblings
had been born into the family before he was chosen. The siblings are both
boys and much larger than Justin, and they are both very involved in
school sports. Justin wants to follow in their footsteps but ﬁnds it difﬁcult
to match their success. In his after-school program, Justin loves to paint
and creates some beautiful watercolor paintings that his caregiver displays
on the bulletin board. However, Justin still longs to join in when the other
children are playing baseball. He is usually the last one to be chosen for a
team and is booed or called names when he strikes out. When this hap-
pens, he goes back to the bench and looks like he can hardly keep from
crying. He doesn’t cry but is reluctant to try again when it is his turn at bat.

SECTION ONE
36
1. What do you think are the causes of Justin’s lack of conﬁdence in his
own abilities? What are some things his caregiver can do to help him
feel better about himself?
2. Are there ways his family can help?
3. What group games could caregivers facilitate that would encourage
teamwork and ultimately help Justin feel a valued part of the team?
REFERENCES
Adler, P. A., & Adler, P. (1998). Peer power: Preadolescent culture and
identity. Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Bowman, D. H. (2001). Survey of students documents the extent of bully-
ing. Education Week on the Web, May 2, 2001.
Edwards, C. P. (1994). Leadership in groups of school-age girls. Develop-
mental Psychology, 30(6), 920–927.
Gilligan, C., Murphy, J. M., & Tappan, M. B. (1990). Moral development
beyondadolescence.InCharlesN.Alexander&EllenJ.Langer(Eds.),
Higher stages of human development. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Holmes, R. N. (1995). How young children perceive race. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Katz, L. G., & McClellan, D. E. (1997). Fostering children’s social compe-
tence. Washington DC: NAEYC.
Kohlberg, L. (1963). Development of children’s orientation towards a
moral order (Part 1), Sequence in the development of moral thought.
Vita Numana, 6, 11–36.
National Children’s Home. (2005) Putting U in the picture. Mobile Bully-
ingSurvey(2005).Retrievedfromhttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyber-
bullying, March 2007.
Opie, I., & Opie, P. (1959). The lore and language of children. New York:
Clarendon.
Stipek, D. J., & MacIver, D. (1989). Developmental change in children’s
assessment of intellectual competence. Child Development, 60,
521–538.
WEB RESOURCES
http://www.hhs.gov
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services antibullying pro-
gram. Click on Families and Children. In search slot, type Bullying.
http://www.pta.org
Click on Parent Resources. Search for Bullying.

Families: Where
Children Are Nurtured
37
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
State changing deﬁnitions of a family.
Describe family forms.
Discuss the effects of each family composition on children.
Review the role of caregivers in relation to parent.
THE CHANGING FAMILY
h
istorically, humans have always grouped themselves together in
tribes, clans, networks, or families. In her book Families,
Howard (1978) writes, “The trouble we take to arrange our-
selves in some semblance of families is one of the imperishable
habits of the human race.” Although people continue to group together,
as society changes, the deﬁnition of family changes. The meaning most
widely used by scholars in the past signiﬁed parents and their biological
children, whether dwelling together or not. Legal experts have also
stressed the biological relationships but broadened the deﬁnition to
include any persons related by blood. This deﬁnition is becoming less
meaningful in today’s surrogate parenting situations. Another deﬁnition
would include a group of kin and others living together day by day.
Some contemporary researchers broaden the deﬁnition even further.
They state that a family is an attitude—an identiﬁcation with and among
a group of individuals who support and nurture one another. Kevin and
Elizabeth, whose families are shown in the drawings that appear in this
chapter, even included their pets as important members of their families.
Families can also be deﬁned by their function. A well-functioning family
CHAPTER33
OBJECTIVES
Image not available due 
to copyright restrictions

SECTION ONE
38
supports its members in developing their full potential. The family nur-
tures children in the following ﬁve ways (Berger, 2000):

Meeting basic needs for food, clothes, and shelter.

Encouraging learning through guidance and motivation.

Developing self-esteem by helping children to feel competent.

Nurturing friendships with peers.

Creating an atmosphere of harmony and stability in the home.
When most of us hear the word family, we still think ﬁrst of the
nuclear (intact) family or the extended family. The nuclear family is
made up of mother, father, and children if any. The extended family has
these members plus grandparents, cousins, aunts, and uncles. The num-
ber of children who live in extended families has declined. According to
the 2000 census, the average family size in the United States is 3.14
members.
The single-parent family is headed by either the father or the
mother and is indicative of changes in family composition. In 2002, nearly
14 million children lived in a single-parent household headed by the
mother, and almost 3 million lived with the father only. The rapid rise in
this type of family is partially due to the number of children born to
unmarried women (U.S. Census Bureau, 2002).
Because many divorced couples remarry, many children live in a
reconstituted or blended family. Other terms that describe these
families are recoupled, refamilied, and binuclear. These terms designate
families that bring together children of one or both former marriages or
associations as well as children born of the new marriage. They are the
“his, hers, and ours” children.
An increasing number of households include grandparents, or are
headed by a grandmother or grandfather. In 2002, 5.6 million children
were living in a household where a grandparent was present (U.S. Census
nuclear (intact) family
mother, father, and children
extended family
members of nuclear family plus
grandparents, cousins, aunts, and
uncles
single-parent family
father or mother and children
reconstituted or blended
family
families that include children from
previous marriages plus those from the
present union
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

C H A P T ER 3
F A MIL I E S : W H E R E CH I LD R E N A R E NU R TU R E D
39
Bureau, 2002). These adults provide valuable assistance, particularly in
families that have experienced a divorce. They can emotionally support
children during difﬁcult times, perhaps add some income, and provide
child care. In some cases, grandmothers become the only adult in the
household if both parents are unable to care for the children.
Another family form that is becoming more visible is the interracial
family, where the parents come from different ethnic groups. In the past
few decades the number of these marriages has been on the rise. Some
people call them “rainbow families” because they mix persons of two or
more ethnic groups. In addition, interracial families are created when
parents choose to adopt a child from a racial or ethnic group different
from their own.
A fairly recent development is the single-gender family composed
of gay or lesbian couples. Some of the children in these relationships are
the result of previous marriages to heterosexual partners. More liberal
adoption laws have allowed some children to be adopted into these fami-
lies. Some children have been produced through artiﬁcial insemination.
In addition to understanding family forms, it is important to note that
existing families change as the members grow and develop, or as their
circumstances shift. The ﬁrst child may have grown up in a nuclear family,
but his sibling is being reared by a single parent. A child whose divorced
mother remarries may suddenly ﬁnd herself with several new siblings.
Whatever the form, the family is the ﬁrst and, therefore, the most impor-
tant determinant in children’s development.
EFFECT OF HOME
ENVIRONMENT ON CHILDREN
In the past it was assumed that the optimum environment for children’s
development was the two-parent family, one in which the father went to
work and the mother stayed home to care for the children. However,
social scientists are reexamining that idea because fewer families still ﬁt
that pattern. In many households both parents are working outside the
home.
Children in the United States live under a variety of family environ-
mental circumstances. The following are a few of the latest statistics
according to the U.S Census Bureau in 2002:

69% of children lived with both parents

23% of children lived with only their mother

5% of children lived with only their father

8% of children lived with a grandparent present
interracial family
marriage between two adults of
different races
single-gender family
two adults of the same gender plus
children
Many children grow up in a
household with either their
father or their mother.

SECTION ONE
40
Some research still seems to favor the intact, two-parent family as
providing for the optimum development of children (McLanahan, 1997;
Simons, 1996). Children who grow up with two loving parents who have
nurtured them from birth have fewer problems, do better in school, and
are less likely to use drugs or get arrested when they are teenagers. Other
research indicates that additional factors may inﬂuence student achieve-
ment, particularly parental expectations (Shim, Fenlenr, & Shim, 2000).
The advantages these children enjoy stem from the fact that two adults
share child-rearing tasks. Each can support the other parent or even
take on tasks that may be difﬁcult for one of them. Two-parent families
often have a ﬁnancial advantage over other family forms. In many, both
parents are wage earners, allowing them to provide better housing, health
care, and education for their offspring. When the mother is proud of her
work, children have a role model for making their own choices in adult-
hood. All of these positives for the intact family neither guarantee opti-
mum development of children nor eliminate the possibility that other
family forms can offer many of the same beneﬁts.
Children who attend child care have some advantages as well. They
can participate in supervised activities and have new experiences. They
can make friends within a wider circle than is available in their neighbor-
hood. They learn to get along with adults other than their parents. Chil-
dren who stay by themselves after school may also feel they have
advantages. Many relish the freedom to come home and do what they
want. They grow in independence and self-esteem as they master emer-
gency situations or do household chores.
In spite of the advantages, there remains concern over the tremen-
dous stress that many working parents feel. Their most frequently voiced
complaint is that they never have enough time. They do not have enough
time for housework, to spend with the children, or for each other. Fatigue
and stress may cause family friction or result in adults taking out their
frustrations on the children. Children may feel isolated because the adults
“Radio, Dad, me, brother, brother, Mom.” Kevin, age 5.

C H A P T ER 3
F A MIL I E S : W H E R E CH I LD R E N A R E NU R TU R E D
41
have little energy left for being parents. Children may also feel abandoned
or that their parents care more about work than about them. If children
do not attend child care but stay home alone after school, they may feel
lonely and sometimes frightened.
When parents divorce, another kind of stress is added to children’s
lives. Approximately 50% of children under the age of 18 are affected by
divorce. This can have a profound and lasting impact on their behavior.
These children may exhibit acting out behaviors such as aggression or
conﬂicts with authorities. Acting out may also be seen as withdrawal
from contact with others, depression, or anxiety. In addition to changes
in behavior, children of divorce often perform less well academically.
Their grades go down, and they are less motivated to achieve. A few stud-
ies show that boys have more difﬁculty adjusting to divorce than girls, but
multiple-gender studies ﬁnd that boys do less well than girls only in their
social adjustment (Amato & Rezac, 1994). There are also some age-
related differences in children’s development. Preschoolers are more
concerned about maintaining relationships with both parents. In middle
childhood, children tend to assume responsibility for the divorce and have
unrealistic expectations of their own ability to affect their parents’ behav-
ior. They may believe they can get their parents back together again. High
school children tend to relate the divorce to their own identity and their
ability to maintain relationships and make wise life choices (Kurdek,
1989). However, if contact is maintained with both parents these children
do as well as those in an intact family.
Children of single mothers can raise their own well-adjusted children,
but the odds are against fatherless children. These children are deprived
of the special kind of child-rearing fathers can provide and therefore do
not learn parenting skills. Kyle Pruett (1987), a professor of psychiatry at
Yale University and author of The Nurturing Father, says that whether
roughhousing with a ﬁve-year-old or disciplining a delinquent teen,
fathers have a different parenting style. Boys and girls both need fathers.
Boys need a role model. Girls need a father with whom they can practice
heterosexual relationships.
Probably the most serious difﬁculty for the single-parent family, espe-
cially when headed by the mother, is the low economic status. Women
still receive lower salaries than men, often causing these families to live
at or below the poverty level. Single parents often suffer from “role over-
load” as they try to nurture their children, offer sensible discipline, and
provide adequate ﬁnancial support. Stressors increase with more than
one child or when illness strikes.
Frequently, when the words “single parent” are used, people assume
that they apply to mothers. However, a growing number of men are
granted custody of children. According to a 2002 count by the U.S.

SECTION ONE
42
Bureau of the Census, there were 3,297,000 single-father households.
When fathers are motivated to provide a loving, nurturing environment,
both boys and girls in father-only families do as well as those living with
their mothers (Ebony, 1995). However, boys are placed more frequently
with their fathers than girls, and they seem to do even better in a father-
only family than if they lived with their mothers. Part of the reason may be
that fathers seek custody because they want to care for their children;
mothers are often given custody whether they want it or not. Another
reason that children do well in a father-headed household is that they
often respond well to the male as an authority ﬁgure and are less likely
to get into trouble. Finally, the income level of a father-led family is
more likely to be higher than that of a single mother. The children beneﬁt
from a higher standard of living.
Sometimes single parents resolve some of the problems of caring for
their youngsters alone by moving in with their own parents. Although
there are advantages to this arrangement, there are also additional
stresses on the adults and the children. One study surveying children in
various family conﬁgurations found that those living with both grandpar-
ents had more behavior problems—such as dependence, disobedience,
and aggression. They were also found to have poorer language skills
(Hawkins & Eggebeen, 1991). This is less true in cultural or ethnic groups
where the extended family structure is more commonplace. The adults in
these families ﬁnd ways to mitigate the problems of several generations
living under one roof.
When divorced adults ﬁnd new spouses, the remarriage and resulting
blended family are usually seen as an opportunity to start over and to
“My family.” Elizabeth, age 10.

C H A P T ER 3
F A MIL I E S : W H E R E CH I LD R E N A R E NU R TU R E D
43
resolve the difﬁculties of a previous union or of being a single parent. For
the children, the experience can be positive, negative, or mixed. If the
children have been living with their mother, the economic situation
improves. Boys are sometimes helped by the presence of a stepfather,
especially if he takes a personal interest in them. When the father remar-
ries, there may be a more equal sharing of household chores and routines.
Children in blended families often ﬁnd they have more models and
choices. In addition, they may have the opportunity to live in new places
and have new experiences. All of these are positives.
Many adjustments are difﬁcult, however, and vary with the ages of the
children. Younger children suffer more from loss of a close relationship
with both parents. Some children continue to have problems of identity
and self-worth in blended families. School-age children may go through a
period of lower academic achievement.
Although interracial families are becoming more accepted, some still
face difﬁculties. Many children are proud of their dual heritage and feel
good about themselves when they are young and their world consists
mostly of the home and family. Unfortunately, when they go to school or
out into the community, some are the target of discrimination. Where the
family lives may be a determinant. Many mixed families choose to live in
large urban areas or neighborhoods where they will be accepted. Small
towns and rural areas tend to be less tolerant of differences. The eco-
nomic status and educational background of the parents may also deter-
mine a family’s comfort in a particular community. It is easier if they ﬁt in
economically. More educated adults choose their friends to avoid people
who cause problems. There is also a growing number of magazines and
books that help parents raise children in a biracial family.
One of the biggest problems for children growing up in an interracial
family is developing their own identity. They must learn to deﬁne them-
selves as being of one group or another or even a melding of the two. They
may be pressured by parents or other adults to accept their identity as one
ethnic group. They are sometimes discouraged from associating with chil-
dren outside of one of their background groups. When these children are
encouraged to accept their biracial origins, they usually develop a positive
self-image. It also helps when parents teach them to appreciate the cul-
tural richness of both sides of their family.
Single-gender families may also be targets of discrimination. Al-
though homosexuality is no longer considered a pathological state, many
people still view these relationships with hostility. Children may feel
something is wrong with them when they are the targets of negative
attitudes. They may also consider themselves different from schoolmates
who have a “mom and a dad.” Despite these issues, a number of studies
show that children in these situations can and do adjust when given

SECTION ONE
44
adequate adult support. If children have an opportunity to seek out
additional role models, they have an easier time developing their own
identity.
Although family composition does have an effect on children’s devel-
opment, the essential ingredients for emotionally healthy children can be
found in any group. Successful families have the following common
characteristics:

They are affectionate. Members express their love and caring for
one another.

They have a sense of place. They either have a stable environment
or they have a commitment to their place of origin.

They pass on their cultural heritage.

They connect with posterity. They honor their elders.

They promote and perpetuate family rituals. Parents pass on tradi-
tions from their own past and encourage a sense of family
continuity.

They communicate with one another.

They respect differences among their members.
As you can see, the ingredients for an effective family can exist no
matter who makes up the group. Remember that as you work with chil-
dren and families in your child care center.
POVERTY
According to the Children’s Defense Fund (2004), one in six children
lived in families where the annual income is below the government pov-
erty level. The number rose from 11,600,000 in 1999 to 12,100,000 in
2002. Female-headed households are most likely to live in poverty, either
totally without child support from the father or receiving amounts that are
inadequate to bolster the family income. The impact of poverty on chil-
dren can be devastating, affecting them for the rest of their lives.
Children living in substandard conditions are likely to suffer from
malnutrition and disease, are subject to abuse or neglect, and are injured
or die more frequently from accidents than children in better environ-
ments. Poor children frequently live in housing where they are exposed
to lead poisoning due to drinking water from lead pipes or breathing lead
paint dust.
In addition to health risks, children in some low-income neighbor-
hoods are behind in academic achievement because their schools are
poorly equipped and maintained, class sizes are large, and teachers are
poorly paid and may be undermotivated.

C H A P T ER 3
F A MIL I E S : W H E R E CH I LD R E N A R E NU R TU R E D
45
Perhaps the most devastating of all is the toll that poverty takes on
children’s psychosocial development. Middle childhood is a time when
children become acutely aware of their circumstances compared to
those they see portrayed in movies or on television. When their own
neighborhoods are run-down and dangerous, they can develop feelings
of hopelessness and depression.
HELPING CHILDREN AND THEIR
PARENTS
Probably your most important function as a caregiver is to support the
bond between parents and their children. Working parents agonize over
how they can provide the best kind of upbringing for their children and
still earn a living. They are sad they cannot spend as much time with their
family as they would like. Many ﬁnd it hard to get back to being a parent at
the end of the day after the pressures of their job. You can help them
bridge the gap between their daytime activities and their role as parents.
The key word is Communicate! If you see the parents frequently, talk
with them. If you seldom see some parents, you will have to ﬁnd other
means to communicate. Parent handbooks or newsletters provide an
opportunity to present aspects of the program, make suggestions for
parent-child activities, or announce coming events. A bulletin board in
an entry area where all parents will see it can be used to give information
and also to display children’s artwork or show photos of children. Some
centers set up their own Web site and have e-mail addresses. Parents can
log on to the Web site to get information about the program, coming
events, or special services. Staff members can receive inquiries from
parents by e-mail and answer in the same way. You can also use telephone
“My family and TV.” Rachel, age 5.

SECTION ONE
46
calls to keep in contact with parents. It is important to take the time to ask
parents how they see their child’s experience in child care or to check on a
child that has been absent. Sometimes phone calls can be just a means to
say “Hello, I’ve missed seeing you for a while.” That may open up a dia-
logue that will be invaluable in your ongoing relationship with that parent.
Some centers have found a parent survey to be an effective way to
reach parents to determine their concerns or needs. Ask parents what
they need to know about the program or their children’s development.
Additional questions might determine other ways that the center could
support parents. Once the information has been gathered, staff can
decide on ways to respond. Parents appreciate knowing about any
changes in their children since they left them in the morning. They want
to know if the children are troubled or ill or are showing changes in behav-
ior. You and the parents can then work together to determine causes and
bring about needed change. And communication is not one way. Ask
parents to let you know when there are variations in the home situation
or when they see changes in their children.
Another means for keeping in contact with parents is through a family
journal. Every child is provided with a notebook in which both caregivers
and parents can write notes to one another. The caregiver can direct
inquiries such as “What has John been reading at home lately? He tells
me he loves to read at home” or “Tell me the favorite things your child
likes to do on weekends.” The notebook can become a valuable tool for
maintaining contact as well as providing a record of a child’s progress.
Schedule social events that allow parents to get to know staff mem-
bers and other parents in a relaxed, fun situation. Many parents would
welcome a potluck dinner on a Friday evening. They can meet their chil-
dren at the center and have dinner. As an added bonus, make it a multi-
cultural dinner, with everyone bringing a dish speciﬁc to his or her culture
or that has been a family tradition. As recipes are shared and traditions
discussed, everyone should gain an appreciation for how many families
are alike even though their backgrounds are radically different.
Help parents see their children’s behavior realistically. Working
parents often feel guilty about leaving their children in the care of others.
When problems arise, they immediately think, “If I didn’t have to work,
these things wouldn’t happen.” That may or may not be so. Help them to
understand that some behaviors are developmentally predictable. Chil-
dren will go through those stages whether the parent works or not.
Often, time alone will resolve the situation. Sometimes simple changes
within the family work miracles.
Encourage parents to use their own knowledge of their children to
bring about changes. Do not be too quick to offer advice based on your
own experiences. Your family and your own child may be quite different.

C H A P T ER 3
F A MIL I E S : W H E R E CH I LD R E N A R E NU R TU R E D
47
Instead, help parents to think through the problem and come up with
their own solutions. Discuss your observations of the behaviors, then ask
them what happens at home. Encourage them to consider the causes. Let
them suggest ways the problem might be alleviated. Obviously, if they
have no suggestions, you can voice your own.
Recognize that parents sometimes express anger toward you as an
outlet for their own fatigue. Try not to take it personally. The anger may
be a way of expressing guilt about not having more time or energy to
spend with their child. In addition, the cost of child care consumes a
large portion of one parent’s income. Parents may be feeling “I am paying
a lot of money for this care. The least you can do is to see that he gets his
homework done.” If you understand the reasons for the parents’ frustra-
tions, you can deal with them more easily. Recognition of the fatigue
helps. Most parents will respond to “It sounds like you have had a really
hard day” or “Yes, it is hard to get him to do his homework. Do you have
any suggestions as to how I can be any more successful?” Accept differ-
ences in family organizations. Examine your own prejudices about what
makes a family. If you grew up in a happy, intact family, you may see that
as the only alternative. Instead, be open to recognizing the strengths of
each family you work with. It will help if you increase your knowledge
about the changes that have taken place in the last decade by reading fur-
ther in the books listed at the end of this chapter.
Encourage families to share their cultural and ethnic traditions with
your center. This will be especially important to children in interracial
families. Visit the children’s community and talk to the residents. Learn
about the cultures through books, pictures, music, and observation.
Actively involve the parents by asking them to share stories, songs, draw-
ings, and experiences that portray important aspects of their culture. One
of the best times to involve parents is during holidays. Some parents may
be able to spend time in the classroom showing children the way they
celebrate. Others may be willing to bring you books, toys, or artifacts
that are typical of their background. Still others may welcome an oppor-
tunity to get together at a workshop to make presents or decorations for
the holiday.
Help all children to increase their own self-esteem. As you read ear-
lier parts of this chapter, you learned that this is more vital for children in
some families than in others. But caregivers know that children who feel
good about themselves have a better chance of getting along and of
becoming happy, functioning adults. So be aware of the ways you can let
children know they are liked and successful. A later chapter provides spe-
ciﬁc strategies and activities.
As a child care worker, you share the responsibility for children’s wel-
fare and education not only with parents but also with elementary school
It is important for teachers to
support the bond between
parents and their children.

SECTION ONE
48
teachers. In a model situation, each of you would have close contact with
the other. However, this does not always happen. Although you may see
parents daily when they deliver or pick up the child, you seldom have con-
tact with elementary school personnel. If your child care center is located
on a public school campus, it is easier to bring about a close working rela-
tionship. If your center is outside a school, it is harder to establish a liaison
with teachers. When it is impossible for you to work directly with teach-
ers, you can monitor the child’s progress in other ways. Ask parents how
their children are doing in school. Make sure you know what homework
children have each day and encourage them to get it done. Be aware of
when report cards come out and inquire how children did.
Know when to refer parents for outside help. Find out what is avail-
able in your community so that you can suggest resources. Make referrals
when the service needed is not something your center can provide. Medi-
cal or social services are examples. Make referrals when the problem with
the child or within the family is acute or long-standing.
Establishing a close relationship with parents can bring about
immense rewards for you and the families you work with. Parents will
ﬁnd they are not alone in trying to provide the best for their children.
You will ﬁnd that getting to know parents adds to your ability to help
their children.
Visit the children’s community and talk to the residents. Learn about
the cultures through books, pictures, music, and observation. Actively
Bulletin boards can provide important information for parents.

C H A P T ER 3
F A MIL I E S : W H E R E CH I LD R E N A R E NU R TU R E D
49
involve the parents by asking them to share stories, songs, drawings, and
experiences that portray important aspects of their culture.
SUMMARY
As society has changed, the deﬁnition of a family has evolved. Several
types of families are now recognized. The nuclear family consists of
mother, father, and children. An extended family includes other relatives.
Single-parent families make up a growing sector.
In some families, either the mother or the father cares for the child or
children either exclusively or for a large portion of the time. Reconsti-
tuted or blended families are another growing phenomenon.
Divorced parents remarry and combine their families, sometimes
conceiving additional children. Interracial families may combine persons
from widely different races or cultures.
Single-gender couples have been able to incorporate children into
their partnerships. The family is a system that affects children’s develop-
ment at every age level.
The nuclear family no longer always has a stay-at-home mother who
cares for the children while the father goes to work. Both parents fre-
quently work, leaving children to care for themselves or be cared for by
others.
Single-parent families are often compared unfavorably with two-
parent families. More recent information indicates that children can
adjust to the loss of daily contact with one parent.
Divorce can have a profound effect on children’s lives. These children
may exhibit acting-out behaviors such as aggression, conﬂicts with author-
ities, withdrawal from contacts with others, and depression or anxiety.
They may also perform less well academically.
Boys seem to have more difﬁculty than girls do in their social adjust-
ment. Age also determines the kinds of problems children exhibit. In
middle childhood, children tend to assume responsibility for the divorce,
while high school children relate the divorce to their own identity and
ability to maintain relationships.
Although adults see remarriage as an opportunity to start over, chil-
dren in blended families may experience some difﬁculties.
Children of mixed-race marriages and single-gender couples may be
the targets of discrimination.
Close contact between parent, school, and caregivers is vital. Working
parents suffer stresses and pressures. Caregivers can help by being under-
standing. Regular avenues of communication must be established.

SECTION ONE
50
KEY TERMS
extended family
interracial family
nuclear family
reconstituted or
blended family
single-gender family
single-parent family
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Prepareacollage depictingyourownfamily. Youcandothisonalarge
piece of poster board, using cutout pictures, words, and phrases from
magazines. Display this collage to your class. Ask class members to
discuss the family portrayed in the collage. Verify or refute your
classmates’ impressions.
2. Visit a child care center at the time parents are coming to pick up their
children. Write a short paper on your impressions of parent-teacher-
child relationships.
3. Bring to class an object that is meaningful to your family and
representative of some aspect of your culture. It can be a picture,
poem, or story, an article of clothing, or a handcrafted object. Show
it to classmates and discuss its signiﬁcance to you. Following the
completion of all the presentations, discuss what you have learned.
Have you learned something new about your own culture or about
another?
4. Interview a single parent and a family with both a mother and a father.
Ask them to describe the situations that create the most stress for
themselves and their children. Are there similarities between the two
families? What are the differences?
5. Invite several parents from different family conﬁgurations to discuss
their children’s child care arrangement. Ask the students to develop a
setofquestionstodeterminehowtheparentsseewhatishappeningin
thecaresetting.Thestudentsmightaskwhattheparentslikeaboutthe
program. Are there things they would like to see happen that are not
occurring? Summarize the ﬁndings at the conclusion of the activity.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. How has the deﬁnition of the word “family” changed?
2. List and describe three family forms.

C H A P T ER 3
F A MIL I E S : W H E R E CH I LD R E N A R E NU R TU R E D
51
3. What is the most serious difﬁculty for the single-parent family headed
by a woman?
4. What are the advantages to children when a parent remarries?
5. What are the problems faced by children in interracial families?
6. List three characteristics of an effective family.
7. What is your most important function as a caregiver?
8. What are the advantages for children who live with a father-only
household?
9. How does poverty affect children?
10. List some ways that child care staff members can share the respon-
sibility for children’s welfare with parents and elementary school
teachers.
CASE STUDY
For Mrs. Jolie and her family, the day begins long before it gets light.
She and her children are on early, tight schedules to get to their various
daytime commitments. Mrs. Jolie must travel 40 miles to her job as a
middle-school teacher and must leave the house at 6:45. Often her oldest
daughter leaves even earlier, at 6:30, for before-school activities at her
high school. Victor, age 10, is supposed to be picked up at 6:55 by the
transporter service his mother has hired. This morning when it doesn’t
arrive, he tries to reach his mother, but she is still en route to her school.
At 7:20 he calls the key leader at his child care center. Chris, the leader,
tells him not to panic and to keep cool, and they will work to contact his
mother. He assures Victor his mom will have a solution. Chris leaves a
message for Mrs. Jolie at her school’s ofﬁce. She returns his call immedi-
ately on arriving at her school and quickly arranges other transportation
for Victor.
Mrs. Jolie was really upset that this happened and said she felt guilty
she had to leave her children to go to work. She has been divorced for only
six months and knows that it has been hard on the children.
1. How would you assess the children’s ability to cope with a divorce
and a working mother?
2. Is there anything additional Mrs. Jolie can do to prevent another
upsetting incident like this?
3. What can you say to Mrs. Jolie?

SECTION ONE
52
REFERENCES
Amato, P. R., & Rezac, S. J. (1994). Contact with non-resident parents,
interparental conﬂict, and children’s behavior. Journal of Family
Issues, 15, 191–207.
Berger, K. S. (2000). The developing person through childhood and ado-
lescence (5th ed.). New York: Worth.
Children’s Defense Fund. (2004). The state of America’s children, 2004.
Washington, DC.
Hawkins, A. J., & Eggebeen, D. J. (1991). Are fathers fungible? Journal of
Marriage and the Family, 51, 958–972.
Howard, J. (1978). Families. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Kurdek, L. (1989). Relationship quality for newly married husbands and
wives: Marital history, stepchildren and individual predictors. Journal
of Marriage and the Family, 52, 1053–1064.
McLanahan,S.S.(1997).Parentabsenceorpoverty:Whichmattersmore?
InG.J.Duncan&J.Brooks-Gunn(Eds.).Consequencesofgrowingup
poor. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Pruett, K. D. (1987). The nurturing father: journey toward the complete
man. New York: Warner.
Shim, M. K., Felenr, R. D., & Shim, E. (2000). The effects of family struc-
tureonacademicachievement.PaperpresentedattheAnnualMeeting
of the American Educational Research Association. ERIC No.
ED455300.
Simons, R. L. (1996). Understanding differences between divorced and
intact families. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Single fathers: Doing it all. (1995). Ebony, 50, 60.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. (2002, March). Children’s living arrangements
and characteristics: Washington, DC.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Brand, S. (1996). Making parent involvement a reality: Helping teachers
develop partnerships. Young Children, 51(2), 76–81.
Kornbluh, K. (2008). Parent trap: Working parents have twenty-two fewer
hoursaweektospendwiththeirkidsthantheydidthirtyyearsago.The
Atlantic Monthly, 291, Jan-Feb. 2003.
McLanahan, S. (1994). Growing up with a single parent. Cambridge: Har-
vard University Press.
Miller,P.A.,Ryan, P.,&Morrison, W.(1999). Practical strategiesforhelp-
ing children of divorce in today’s classroom. Childhood Education,
75(5), 285–289.

C H A P T ER 3
F A MIL I E S : W H E R E CH I LD R E N A R E NU R TU R E D
53
Saracho, O. N., & Spodek, B. (1983). Understanding the multicultural
experience in early childhood education. Washington, DC: National
Association for the Education of Young Children.
Thompson, R. A., Scalora, M. J., Castrianno, L., & Limber, S. P. (1992).
Grandparent visitation rights: Emergent psychological and psychole-
gal issues. In D. K. Kagehiro & W. S. Laufer (Eds.), Handbook of psy-
chology and law. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Wallerstein, J. (1993). Children after divorce. Human development.
Guilford, CT: Duskin.
Wolpert, E. (1999). Start seeing diversity: The basic guide to an anti-bias
classroom. St. Paul, MN: Redleaf.
WEB RESOURCES
http://www.childadvocate.net
The Child Advocate serves the needs of children, families and profes-
sionals while addressing mental health, medical, education, legal and
legislative issues.
http://npin.org
NPIN.org provides educational software and services for middle
school, high school and college students. Includes creative, innovative
and interactive products that empower children of all ages.
http://iamyourchild.org
ParentsActionforChildren,formerlytheIAmYourChildFoundation
addresses issues of health, media, and culture and ways to empower
parents.

This page intentionally left blank 

Section
two
HOW
CHILDREN
GROW
AND
DEVELOP

This page intentionally left blank 

Development in Middle
Childhood: Physical
57
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the importance of understanding child development.
Distinguish between development and learning.
Relate major changes and variations in growth patterns among
children.
Describe ways in which child care leaders can enhance children’s
physical development.
IMPORTANCE OF
UNDERSTANDING CHILD
DEVELOPMENT
t
he years between ﬁve and 12 bring about changes in children that
make them more independent of adult assistance in the conduct of
their daily activities. Children master new physical skills fairly easily
when they have opportunities to practice those skills. Illnesses and death
occur less frequently than during infancy and preschool years or later in
adolescence.
Gender differences in physical development and ability are minimal.
Most children feel competent to manage their school and home lives and
want to perform in ways that earn recognition from adults.
A knowledge of the universal predictable stages of growth as well as
an understanding of individual patterns of timing are absolutely essential
for anyone involved in planning and operating a child care program. The
quality of a program may depend on a variety of factors, but a major deter-
minant is the extent to which activities and procedures are appropriate for
CHAPTER44
OBJECTIVES

SECTION TWO
58
the developmental level of the participating children. The learning envi-
ronment and program activities should be based on an assessment of
children’s cognitive, social, emotional, and physical abilities at each stage
of their development and also provide challenges to promote further
development. Knowledge of child development enables adults to choose
effective techniques for guiding an individual child’s behavior and plan-
ning strategies for group interactions. Further, an understanding of child
development enables child care leaders to communicate more effectively
with parents about a child’s progress.
DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING
The study of human development examines how individuals grow and
change over a lifetime, how they remain the same, and how some individ-
uals may vary from typical patterns. Several characteristics of individuals
are programmed by genetic makeup at the time of conception, whereas
others are the result of environmental conditions and experiences. The
relative importance of one over the other, known as “nature vs. nurture,”
is a topic for debate among developmental researchers.
Nature refers to a variety of characteristics such as eye color and
body type that are inherited from parents. Physical limitations and certain
diseases are also inherited, as well as some personality characteristics such
as activity level or verbal ability. Nurture refers to all the experiences and
What physical skills are these children using?
nature
a variety of characteristics that are
inherited from parents
nurture
all the experiences and inﬂuences
people are exposed to from the
moment of conception on throughout a
lifetime

CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PHYSICAL
59
inﬂuences people are exposed to from the moment of conception on
throughout a lifetime.
The dichotomy of inﬂuences on human development is also portrayed
as “maturation vs. learning.” Maturation indicates the progression of
changes that takes place as people age. Learning refers to the processes
by which environmental inﬂuences and experiences bring about perma-
nent changes in thinking, feeling, and behavior.
The basic question is the same no matter what labels are used. How
much of development and human behavior is the result of genetic inher-
itance, and how much is the result of all of life’s experiences? Most
developmentalists believe that both are important and that, in fact, the
interaction between them is the determining factor in a person’s pattern
of growth.
PHYSICAL DEVELOPMENT
Middle childhood is a time when children grow more slowly than they did
in the preschool years, and they will not experience another growth spurt
until they approach adolescence.
Height and Weight
Typically, children gain about 5 pounds per year and 2 1/2 inches. By the
time they are 10 years old, most will weigh 70 pounds and be 54 inches tall
School-age children master many physical skills.
maturation
progression of changes that takes place
as people age
learning
processes by which environmental
inﬂuences and experiences bring about
permanent changes in thinking, feeling,
and behavior

SECTION TWO
60
(Lowrey, 1986). Up to the age of nine, boys and girls are about the same
size, but then girls start to pull ahead in both height and weight. Around
age nine or 10 girls begin a growth spurt that precedes adolescence. By
the end of the elementary years, girls are generally taller and heavier
than boys. School-age children seem slimmer than they did during the
preschool years because their body proportions change, and they begin
to look more like adults. Their arms and legs get longer, their torsos
elongate, and their faces are thinner.
Yet there are wide variations in their appearance. Variations in body
size could be due to malnutrition. Children who are well nourished will be
taller than their contemporaries growing up in poverty. Genetics also
plays a large part in determining size as well as rate of maturity. Although
adults may understand that variations in size and timing of maturity are
normal, it is often difﬁcult for children to accept these differences. Physi-
cal development can affect peer relationships because children often
choose friends who have a pleasing appearance and are physically, aca-
demically, or socially capable (Hartup, 1983). Children who are shorter,
taller, or heavier than their peers, as well as those who are less capable,
may be rejected.
The onset of puberty and the beginning of menstrual periods affects
children’s self-image as well as how their peers perceive them. According
to Hayward (2003) some girls reach menarche as early as 12.2 years. An
article by Chumlea et al. (2003) reported that 10% of girls start to men-
struate before 11 years and 90% are menstruating by 12.43 years. This is
accompanied by physical changes such as the development of breasts
and the appearance of pubic hair. These girls report more emotional
problems such as depression, anxiety, and disruption of social interactions
with their peers.
Obesity
Obesity is a growing problem among children. It can seriously affect a
child emotionally as well as physically. The most recent study from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (for 1999 to 2000)
shows 30% of children between the ages of six and 19 are overweight
(CDC, 2002). Whether a child is overweight rather than just childishly
chubby can be determined by ﬁguring the ratio of weight to height, a
measure called body-mass index, or BMI. BMI is found by dividing
weight in kilograms by height in meters squared (BMI = kg/m2). At age
eight a child is overweight if his BMI is 18 and at age 12 if the BMI is 23
(Hubbard, 1995).
At least 10% of all children in the United States are 20 pounds above
the average for their peers. More exact measurements of the percentage
BMI
body mass index; a measure of the
ratio of weight to height

CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PHYSICAL
61
of body fat at various points of the body show that the percentage of
overweight children may be higher than 10% and has increased in the
last few years (Gortmaker, Dietz, Sobol, & Wekler, 1987). Overweight
children are subject to several health risks including higher blood
pressure and blood cholesterol levels. These children may also have
orthopedic or respiratory problems. The greatest risk is that they will
become overweight adults, prone to developing heart disease, diabetes,
high blood pressure, gallbladder disease, arthritis, and some forms of
cancer (Sothern & Gordon, 2003).
In addition, serious psychological distress can occur since these chil-
dren may be the object of teasing and rejection by their classmates. This
results in lowered self-esteem, depression, and various kinds of behavior
problems. Their unhappiness leads them to further curtail participation
with their peers and to overeat to compensate for their unhappiness
(American Dietetic Association, ADA, 1999).
Overweight children do not ﬁt in with their peers since they cannot
always wear (Obesity might keep them from wearing tight ﬁtting clothes
or bare midriffs.) clothes that are identiﬁed as popular. Being different
from their peers also results in their not being chosen to participate in
sports because they are unable to move swiftly or sustain energy. They
are further discriminated against by not being invited to attend parties.
Thus, patterns are established that carry over into adulthood; over-
weight children are frequently overweight adults (Serdula et al., 1993).
It is estimated that 60% to 80% of obese children become overweight
adults (Lucas, 1991). Stigmatization and discrimination against obese per-
sons has been documented in employment, and educational opportuni-
ties (Puhl & Brownell, 2001).
Causes of Obesity
There is no one cause of obesity; rather, it is an interaction between sev-
eral possible conditions. Patterns are often established in infancy and con-
tinue into adulthood.

Heredity. Several factors that contribute to obesity are inherited:
body type, height and bone structure, the amount and distribution
of fat, metabolic rate, and activity level.

Activity level. Children who are more active are less likely to be
overweight because they burn more calories. Although activity
level is inﬂuenced by heredity, an individual’s willingness to en-
gage in active play also affects weight. For some children, the
unavailability of safe places to play will also be a factor.

Television watching. Children younger than eight spend 2.5
hours a day watching TV Older children, ages eight and up,
A child who is overweight
rather than just childishly
chubby can be determined
by ﬁguring the ratio of weight
to height, a measure called
body mass index or BMI.

SECTION TWO
62
watch 4.5 hours of TV a day (Overweight and Obesity, 2007). Chil-
dren are not only inactive when they watch television but are also
bombarded with commercials for foods that are high in fat and
sugar. These are the foods they choose to snack on while they
watch television.

Sedentary activities. Some children spend a lot of their out-of-
school time playing video games or using the computer to e-mail
friends.

High-calorie foods. Overweight children are not necessarily
overeaters. However, much of the food they consume is high in
calories. Many children take in large quantities of high-calorie
soft drinks and chips, as well as high-fat hamburgers and French-
fried potatoes. Often, too, parents give in to demands from their
children for the high-calorie snack foods shown on television ads.

Attitudes toward food. In some families, children are encour-
aged to consume large portions of food as a measure of the family’s
prosperity or a parent’s love for their children. Often, too, food
becomesasymbolforloveandcomfort,causingchildrentoovereat
when under stress or unhappy. Parents who offer special foods as a
reward or comfort set up a lifelong habit that can lead to obesity.

Speciﬁc event. A traumatic event in a child’s life can be a precipi-
tating factor in the onset of increased weight gain. Hospitalization,
parental divorce, the death of someone close to the child, or even a
move to a new neighborhood can all cause distress and a need for a
substitute gratiﬁcation in the form of food.

Physiological problems. A small number of cases of obesity in
children can be traced to abnormalities in the growth process or
metabolism (Lowrey, 1986). The obesity is only one part of the
problem that usually includes disturbances in normal physical
and mental growth. Only about 1% of childhood obesity can be
attributed to this cause, however.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Within any group of school-age children, particularly if there is a wide age
span, there will be children of many sizes, shapes, and stages of develop-
ment. Children compare their own appearance with their peers and as a
result often think they are too tall, too little, too heavy, or too thin. In
addition, children who vary noticeably from their peers tend to get teased
and labeled with unﬂattering names. Differing from the norm can cause a
great deal of anguish and loss of self-esteem.

An important task for adults who have responsibility for children’s
welfareistoassurethemtheyareacceptednomatterhowtheylook

CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PHYSICAL
63
and to help their peers be accepting. Further, they need to know
that they will change as they grow and develop.

Caregivers should be especially sensitive to girls who have reached
early puberty. They may need to help these girls accept their
body differences as well as provide the equipment the girls may
require.

Obese children need special attention to help them change their
eating patterns and activity level. They can learn about good
nutrition and how to prepare good-tasting, low-calorie foods. See
Chapter 15 for ideas that can be used in child care. Although
increased activity is the best way to lose weight, obese children
have a difﬁcult time participating in active sports or games. They
areoftenrejectedasteammembersandareteasediftheytrytojoin
in games. It is important to encourage them to start somewhere:
walking to school, bicycling, or participating in the exercises sug-
gested in Chapter 15.

The children’s families need help to change the environment that
created the obesity, whether it lies in the foods they eat, in the
parental interactions, or in the kinds of activities children are
encouraged to engage in. Remember that talking about food and
weight is a sensitive issue for many parents. Therefore, in a non-
judgmental way,provideparents withinformationaboutnutrition.
Help them ﬁnd ways to discipline or reward their children other
than with food. Provide suggestions for active things the family can
do together.

Caregivers are responsible for planning and preparing nutritious
snacks that are not high in fat, salt, or sugar. Use the Food Guide
Pyramid as a basis for choosing.
HEALTH CONDITIONS
During middle childhood children may suffer from a variety of health
conditions. According to a 1992 study, 31% of children under age 18,
or 20 million children nationwide, have chronic health problems
(Newacheck & Taylor, 1992). Nine million children (12%) under 18
have asthma and it is most frequently diagnosed in boys. The most fre-
quently reported conditions are respiratory allergies, which are suffered
by 12% of children (Blackwell, Vickerie, & Wondimy 2003). Less
common are diabetes, sickle cell disease, and cerebral palsy.
Conditions that are not chronic but are prevalent during the school
years are communicable diseases and hearing, vision, or ambulatory limi-
tations. Early sexual behavior leads to preadolescent pregnancies and

SECTION TWO
64
sexually transmitted disease, including HIV and AIDS. Drug and alcohol
abuse are also occurring at the elementary school level.
Poverty contributes to the poor health status of many children.
According to the Children’s Defense Fund (2004), 12.1 million children
under age 18 were living in poverty in 2002. Nearly 14% of these
children have no health insurance coverage. Because of their living
conditions, they are subject to poor nutrition, inadequate prevention
care, and little treatment for chronic conditions.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Caregivers can do a great deal to help children learn to maintain a healthy
lifestyle as well as help parents be responsible for ensuring that children’s
health needs are met.

Help children evaluate the messages they receive from their envi-
ronment concerning health. Provide activities that encourage
them to question images of people having fun while smoking
cigarettes, eating “junk” foods, or consuming alcoholic beverages.

Include program activities that stress good nutrition. Allow
children to participate in choosing and preparing food.

Offer only nutritious meals and snacks. Offer supplementary
nutrition to children who may be undernourished.

Provide space within the physical facility for activities that
encourage health and ﬁtness.

Model behavior that demonstrates ﬁtness. Do not smoke or
consume non-nutritious foods.

Becomeinformedaboutcommunityhealthservicesandresources.
Refer parents to appropriate facilities.
MOTOR SKILLS
During the elementary school period children develop a wide variety of
motor skills, particularly when they have ample opportunities to practice
and are encouraged to try new things. Five-year-olds endlessly practice
running, jumping, and throwing. Gradually their timing and coordination
increase, enabling them to become noticeably more proﬁcient. They soon
learn to judge the time when they should swing a bat in order to hit a ball
or to estimate the distance a ball will travel when thrown in order to catch
it. Along with developing physical skills, children are also acquiring new
ways to get along with their peers and beginning to understand the impor-
tance of rules. The interaction of these developing abilities accounts for
the popularity of sports during middle childhood.

CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PHYSICAL
65
Gross-Motor Skills
Several skills that children acquire in middle childhood occur in play activ-
ities typical of this period. Developmentally appropriate practices for
school-age children should include opportunities to develop both gross-
and ﬁne-motor skills (Albrecht & Plantz, 1993).

Running. By age ﬁve or six most children have mastered the
form and power required to run. They have learned to start, stop,
and turn and can integrate these into their play activities.

Jumping. Jumping requires a complex set of skills including bal-
ance, maintenance of equilibrium, and form. Jumping is usually
not attempted by children until they have become fairly proﬁcient
in basic locomotion, but by age ﬁve most children have a good
mastery of jumping skills.

Throwing. At age ﬁve or six, there is a perceptible change in
children’s ability to throw. They learn to transfer their weight
from one foot to the other during throwing. This weight shift,
coupled with a horizontal movement of the arms and body, allows
children to efﬁciently propel a ball forward. Most six-year-olds are
able to perform an overhand throw.
Further practice and reﬁnement of gross-motor skills allow children
to participate in the popular activities of childhood: swimming, biking,
roller-skating, ice-skating, jumping rope, baseball, and basketball.
Fine-Motor Skills
During middle childhood, most children master a variety of tasks requir-
ing the use of small muscles. They learn to cut easily with scissors; draw,
write or print accurately; and sew or knit. As their coordination increases
further, they can learn to play musical instruments, engage in hobbies
such as model making, or play games such as jacks.
Differences in Motor Skills
Boys and girls are fairly equal in their physical abilities during the middle
childhood years except that boys have greater forearm strength and girls
have greater ﬂexibility. Boys are often better at baseball, while girls excel
in gymnastics. More and more girls are willing to try sports like baseball,
and when they are given ample opportunities to practice, they, too, can
catch and throw a ball accurately and hit well. Likewise, with training,
boys can do well in activities that require ﬂexibility, such as gymnastics.
“I like to play baseball.” Lark,
age 8.

SECTION TWO
66
Certain motor skills do not depend on the amount of practice a
youngster engages in. Some depend on body size, brain maturation, or
inherent talents. A good example of a skill dependent on brain maturation
is reaction time, the length of time it takes to respond to a particular
stimulus. An example is seen when a child is able to swing a baseball bat
in time to hit the ball. A child’s brain continues to mature into adoles-
cence; therefore, older children usually do better where this skill is
necessary.
Inherent traits are also important in determining how well a particular
child performs a motor skill. Body size, particularly height, gives some
children an advantage when playing basketball. Children also vary in
their ability to coordinate body movements. Some children ﬁnd it easy
to kick a soccer ball with accuracy while others ﬁnd it almost impossible.
Heredity accounts for children’s basic skill at these activities, but practice
and experience can increase their proﬁciency.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Middle childhood is a time when children want to feel competent at what-
ever they do. In school they must use small muscles to be successful, while
out of school they need well-developed gross-motor skills to participate in
the sports, vigorous games, and strenuous individual activities that are
so much a part of the school-age years. Because practice and experience
help children enhance their inherited abilities and acquire new skills, it is
extremely important that child care offer as many opportunities as pos-
sible. Child care leaders can

Provide a wide variety of activities requiring different skills and
skills at varying levels

Allow children ample time to practice and reﬁne new skills

Encourage both genders to participate in all activities

Offer children encouragement for their efforts rather than praise
their achievements

Encourage children to teach their skills to others

Discourage competition
SUMMARY
A knowledge of the universal predictable stages of growth, as well as an
understanding of individual patterns of timing, are essential for anyone
involved in planning and operating a child care program. The quality of
the program may depend to a large degree on the extent to which all
Girls typically have greater
ﬂexibility than boys.
With practice, children can
participate in difﬁcult sport
activities.

CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PHYSICAL
67
activities, procedures, and interactions are developmentally appropriate
for the children who participate.
Human growth is affected both by maturation and learning. Matura-
tion refers to a variety of abilities, characteristics, and limits that are inher-
ited from parents. Learning refers to processes by which environmental
inﬂuences and experiences bring about permanent change in thinking,
feeling, and behavior. Children grow more slowly during middle child-
hood than they did in the preschool years. They may gain 5 pounds and
2 1/2 inches. Boys and girls are about the same size up until age nine,
when girls begin a preadolescent growth spurt. Variations in size are due
to nutrition and heredity.
Obesity is a growing problem among children and can affect a child
emotionally as well as physically. Overweight children are often unhappy
because they are rejected or teased by their peers.
Causes of obesity are heredity, activity level, types of food consumed,
and attitudes toward food. In addition, speciﬁc events and psychological
problems can trigger overeating.
Child care leaders can help children accept the way they look and also
to understand that as they grow, they will change. Obese children need
special attention to encourage them to change eating habits and to be
more active.
School-age children may suffer from a variety of health conditions,
both chronic and nonchronic. Child care staff members can help children
and parents learn to be responsible for meeting their health needs.
During middle childhood, children rapidly acquire a variety of new
motor skills. Gross-motor skills include running, jumping, and throwing.
Fine-motor skills include the ability to cut easily with scissors, draw, write
or print accurately, and sew or knit. Boys and girls are fairly equal in their
physical abilities during middle childhood except that boys have greater
forearm strength and girls have greater ﬂexibility. With training and
opportunities to practice, the differences are lessened.
Child care leaders can provide many opportunities for children to par-
ticipate in a wide variety of activities requiring the use of large or small
muscles. Leaders should also allow plenty of time for children to practice,
encourage both genders to participate in all activities, encourage efforts
rather than achievements, and encourage children to teach their skills
to others.
KEY TERMS
BMI
learning
maturation
nature
nurture

SECTION TWO
68
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Ask the children in your child care group to draw pictures of them-
selvesandonebestfriend.Dotheyshowthemselvesastallerorshorter
than the friend? Is there any noticeable difference between the
attractiveness of their own image and that of the friend?
2. Write a paragraph describing your appearance when you were six.
Include the kinds of activities you engaged in during your out-of-
school time. Next, describe yourself when you were 11. In what ways
did your development follow the description in this chapter? In what
ways did it differ?
3. Watch two hours of Saturday morning children’s television programs.
Countandlistthecommercialsforfoodthatareshown.Howmanyare
for high-fat, high-sugar, or high-salt foods? Do they show children
having fun while consuming these foods? Discuss the impact these
commercials might have on children.
4. Survey the neighborhood near your home or child care center. Are
there places where children can play outdoors? How do you think the
environment affects the children who live there? What could be done
to increase opportunities for physical activities? Share your informa-
tion with your classmates.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why is it important for child care leaders to have a knowledge of
predictable stages of growth and an understanding of individual pat-
terns of timing?
2. Differentiate between maturation and learning.
3. Whatisanotherwaytodescribethedichotomyofinﬂuencesonhuman
development?
4. How much will an average well-nourished child gain in weight and
height per year? The typical 10-year-old will weigh _____ pounds and
be _____ inches tall.
5. Boysand girls areaboutthe same size forpartofthe middlechildhood
years. At what age do girls begin to increase in size faster than boys?
6. List the causes of obesity in children.
7. In what ways can child care personnel help children who differ from
the norm in body size or who are obese?

CHAPTER 4
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PHYSICAL
69
8. Listeightmotorskillsdevelopedbychildrenduringmiddlechildhood.
In what ways do children use these skills in their daily lives at school or
at home?
9. In what ways do the motor skills of boys and girls differ?
10. What can child care leaders do to help children enhance their inher-
ited abilities and acquire new skills?
CASE STUDY
Nine-year-old Ian is often called names by some of the other children.
They refer to him as “Tubby,” “Fatso,” or “Lardo.” He gets very angry
and starts hitting, although sometimes he ends up crying in frustration.
His caregiver has noticed that he seems to have an ample supply of snacks
that he carries in his backpack—often chips and candy bars. He wants to
have those for snack time rather than the food the center provides. When
his request is refused, he stomps away from the table and refuses to eat
anything. Occasionally he is seen sneaking food from his locker.
1. How would you respond when Ian stomps away from the table?
2. What can you say to his parents?
3. What can you do to help Ian change his eating pattern at child care?
REFERENCES
Albrecht, K., & Plantz, M. (1993). Developmentally appropriate practice
in school-age child care programs. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.
American Dietetic Association. (1999). Dietary guidance for healthy chil-
dren aged 2 to 11 years. Journal of the American Dietetic Association,
99, 93–100.
Blackwell,D.L.,Vickerie,J.I.,&Wondimy,E.A.(2003).Summaryhealth
statisticsforU.S.children.NationalHealthInterviewSurvey.National
Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Statistics 10, 213.
CDC (Center for Disease Control and Prevention). (2002). [http://www.
cdc.gov.]
Children’s Defense Fund. (2004). The state of America’s children, 2004.
Washington, DC: Author.
Chumlea, W. C., Schubert, C. M., Roche, A. F., Kulin, H. E., Lee,
P. A., Himes, J. H., & Sun, S. S. (2003). Age at menarche and racial
comparison in US girls. Journal of American Pediatrics, 111(1),
110–113.

SECTION TWO
70
Gortmaker, S. L., Dietz, W. H., Sobol, A. M., & Wehler, C. A. (1987).
Increasing pediatric obesity in the United States. American Journal
of Diseases of Children, 141, 535–540.
Hartup, W. (1983). Peer relations. In Paul H. Mussen (Ed.), Handbook of
child psychology: Vol. 4. Socialization, personality and social develop-
ment. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Hayward, Chris. (2003). Gender differences at puberty. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Lowrey,G.(1986).Growthanddevelopmentofchildren(8thed.).Chicago:
Year Book Medical.
Lucas,A.(1991).Eatingdisorders.InM.Lewis(Ed.),Childandadolescent
psychiatry:Acomprehensivetextbook.Baltimore:Williams&Wilkins.
Newacheck, P., & Taylor, W. (1992). Childhood chronic illness. Preven-
tion, severity, and impact. American Journal of Public Health, 82(3),
364–371.
Overweight
and
Obesity.
(2007).
Retrieved
from
[http://www.
revolutionhealth.com], October 2007.
Puhl, R., & Brownell, K.D., (2001). Bias, Discrimination, and Obesity.
Obesity Research, 9, 788–805.
Serdula, M., Ivory, D., Coates, R., Freedman, D., Williamson, D., &
Byers, T. (1993). Do obese children become obese adults? A review
of the literature. Preventive Medicine, 22, 167–177.
Sothern,M.,&Gordon,S.(2003).Preventionofobesityinchildren: acriti-
cal challenge for medical professionals. Clinical Pediatrics, 42,
101–111.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Gartrell, D. (2007). Guidance matters; “You really worked hard on your
picture.”Guidingwithencouragement.YoungChildren,62(3),58–59.
Hubbard,V.S.(1995).Futuredirectionsinobesityresearch.InLilianW.Y.
Cheung & Julius B. Richmond (Eds.), Child health, nutrition, and
physical activity. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
WEB RESOURCES
http://www.eric.ed.gov
ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education
(ERIC.EECE): digital based library of educational research.

Development in Middle
Childhood: Cognitive
71
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the major principles of several cognitive theories.
List the concerns expressed by critics of each theory as well as the
points of agreement.
Describe ways child care leaders can use each theory to enhance
children’s development.
Discuss the ways in which children develop and use language.
COGNITIVE THEORIES
c
ognitive theories are used to explain all the mental processes that
enable children to think or acquire knowledge and the way these
processes affect how they perceive and understand their experi-
ences. How individual children function depends partly on hereditary
factors and partly on their experiences. As children’s brains grow and
mature, they are able to use different cognitive skills to gather and process
information.
The thinking processes of school-age children are markedly different
from those of preschoolers. By middle childhood, children can selectively
focus on tasks; that is, they are able to screen out distractions and concen-
trate on the relevant parts of the information at hand. This capacity helps
them to remember and also to reason in logical steps in order to solve a
problem. School-age children also learn strategies for increasing memory.
These are called storage strategies. They rehearse the information,
organize it into memorable units, or use mnemonic devices such as
rhymes or mental images to aid in remembering. Language develops rap-
idly and is used to communicate ideas, interact with others, and develop
CHAPTER55
OBJECTIVES

SECTION TWO
72
competencies required by the society in which they live. All of these abil-
ities enable children to perform tasks beyond the reach of younger
children.
JEAN PIAGET
The Swiss psychologist Piaget was an important contributor to the under-
standing of how children think and learn. He began his work with children
by helping to develop the ﬁrst intelligence test. Piaget’s task was to inter-
view children and ﬁnd the age at which most children could answer the
test questions correctly. Instead, Piaget became curious about children’s
incorrect responses to items on the test and observed that children who
were the same age gave similar answers. This observation began a lifelong
search to understand children’s thought processes and how they change
with age. Piaget (1952) concluded that cognitive development follows
predictable patterns through four major stages. Each stage has certain
characteristics that form the basis for how children approach and process
intellectual tasks. Everyone proceeds through these stages at their own
rate, some slower, some faster, but everyone goes through them. Each
stage is built on the skills of the previous stage. Piaget called the period
from birth to two years the sensorimotor period. During this time,
Children’s thinking changes, and they are able to use logic to solve
problems.
storage strategies
methods children use to increase their
memory
sensorimotor period
Piaget’s ﬁrst period, in which infants
use all their senses to explore and
learn about the world around them

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
73
infants use all their senses to explore and learn about the world around
them. They put objects in their mouths, become attentive to sounds,
poke or pat objects, react to tastes, and follow out-of-reach objects with
their eyes. The information they gather is experience based; they can
understand only what they experience directly. Limited memory of an
object or experience is retained when the object is removed or the expe-
rience ended.
By contrast, preschool children, aged two to seven-years-old are in
the preoperational period in which they can begin to think symboli-
cally. They can remember experiences and objects independently of the
immediate encounter. This is evident in their rapidly developing ability to
use language. Words help them to remember past events or to talk about
an object. They also begin to engage in pretend play, not always needing
the real props to support the play. Preschool children can play out elabo-
rate scenarios in which they relive familiar interactions with parents or
with siblings.
Piaget observed that during the preoperational period children often
come to the wrong conclusions. He believed that this was because they
could not perform “operations.” By operations Piaget meant the ability to
internalize an action—that is, carry it out in the mind and understand it
can go in one direction or reverse into the opposite direction. The preop-
erational child cannot perform these operations.
Piaget observed the difﬁculty children had with one of his conserva-
tion experiments. He placed two identical cylinders with equal amounts
of liquid before four-year-olds. He then added two cylinders, one tall and
slim, the other short. He poured the liquid from one glass into the tall
cylinder and from the other into the short one. When asked which glass
had more, most children would indicate the taller one. They could not
mentally reverse the event to realize that when poured back into the origi-
nal containers, the amounts were equal. In addition to an inability to imag-
ine reversibility, children can focus on only one dimension of a form at a
time. In the case of the liquids, they focused on the height of the ﬂuid in
the glasses. Piaget called this centering.
Another characteristic of preoperational children is that they believe
everyone thinks and acts the same way they do. They are egocentric—
incapable of understanding how others think or feel.
Between the ages of seven and 11, children are in the concrete
operations stage. They begin to think symbolically and can imagine
reversing processes. The word “concrete” means that children can carry
out this process only when the information is presented concretely.
If a child is asked how many pieces of fruit there are if she has
two apples and a friend gives her one, she will be able to ﬁgure out the
answer. She can imagine two apples and then one additional one. She has
preoperational period
ability to begin to think symbolically
and to remember experiences and
objects independently of the immediate
encounter
centering
Piaget’s observation that young children
focus on only one dimension of a form
at a time
concrete operations
ability to think symbolically and to
reverse processes when information is
presented concretely

SECTION TWO
74
experienced apples, can imagine them, and execute the solution. It would
be somewhat more difﬁcult for her to ﬁgure out the answer to the ques-
tion “What is half of a dozen?”
During this period children become less egocentric and much more
social. Increased language skills enable them to interact more effectively
with their peers and to begin to understand the views of others. The need
to be a part of a group or to have friends requires discussion and negotia-
tions over play activities. In the process, children learn that others do not
always think or feel the same way they do.
Piaget’s last stage, formal operations, occurs between the ages of 11
and 15. During this period adolescents are able to consider hypothetical
problems without concrete examples. They are also not limited by having
to consider the here and now but can imagine situations they have not yet
experienced or that are abstract. Thus, adolescents begin to ponder ques-
tions about the effects of global warming or the importance of preserving
wilderness areas for future generations to enjoy. They question the
wisdom of using war as a way to resolve conﬂicts or what to do about the
starving peoples of less-developed countries.
Several general principles underlie the concepts of Piaget’s theory
and are important to fully understand his perception of how children
think and learn.

Children are active participants in the development of their own
intelligence. Piaget believed that children actually construct their
knowledge of the world through their activities. Experiences are
the raw ingredients from which they organize and structure their
knowledge, implying that the process takes place within the child
rather than being transmitted from the outside. Through experi-
menting with the objects and experiences in their environment,
children actually create their own intelligence.

The development of intelligence is the result of a progression
through stages. Each stage builds a foundation for the next stage.
Thereisnoﬁnitedivisionofthestagesbecauseeachstagemaycarry
vestiges of the previous period. Thus, school-age children may
function at a preschool level at times or in certain situations.

Duetodifferencesinmaturationrate,individualsprogressthrough
thestagesatdifferentrates.However,eachindividualgoesthrough
the same stages in the same order.
Evaluation of Piaget’s Theory
Piaget’s ideas changed the way children’s intellectual development is per-
ceived, focusing more on how children come to know rather than on what
formal operations
ability to consider hypothetical
problems without concrete examples

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
75
they know (Berger, 2000). Yet there are criticisms from those who point
to the formal nature of his experiments. These critics state that when chil-
dren are closely watched in everyday situations, different interpretations
of their abilities are possible. Some skills that Piaget relegates to later
stages are clearly present in earlier ones. Therefore, critics contend that
Piaget must have been wrong about just how early some cognitive skills
develop.
Another concern of those who have looked closely at Piagetian theory
is that children’s abilities are not homogeneous within a given stage. In
fact, each stage is entered gradually with vestiges of the previous stage
remaining for a period of time. Additional factors affect children’s ability
to think consistently at an expected level for their stage of development.
Hereditary differences in abilities and aptitudes, as well as timing of matu-
ration, play an important part. Environmental factors, such as the kinds of
experiences children are exposed to and the kind of education they
receive, also inﬂuence the rate of intellectual development.
The criticisms of Piaget’s theory do not negate the importance of his
ideas, however. It is commonly accepted that children proceed develop-
mentally from one stage to the next, changing their thinking processes as
their maturity and experiences dictate. They continue to learn, taking in
new information, organizing it, and deciding how it ﬁts in with previous
information.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Piaget never claimed to be an educator, yet his theory is widely used to
formulate educational programs for children. His theory provides a
framework from which appropriate learning experiences can be designed.
It enables educators to:

Provide many different objects and experiences for children to
explore so they can incorporate them into their symbolic thinking
process at a later time. There needs to be a balance between
unstructured materials and guided ones. Art materials, sand and
water, and building materials are examples of unstructured activ-
ities. Experiences such as cooking, in which children must follow a
recipe, and classifying or seriating a group of objects are guided
activities.

Plan activities that are age-appropriate for the level of ability of
mostmembersofthegroup.Inaddition,teacherscanaddactivities
that meet the needs of individual children.

Allow plenty of time for children to explore freely and engage in
play activities. Through play children have an opportunity to test
out their own ideas and ﬁnd out what is true and what is not.
Piaget believed that children
actually construct their
knowledge of the world
through their activities.

SECTION TWO
76

Provide experiences that allow children to solve their own prob-
lems and make decisions.

Set up situations in which children can exchange ideas, thus learn-
ing that others may think differently from themselves.
BEHAVIORIST LEARNING
THEORY
Watson (1967) saw the need for a more exact study of psychology. He
believed that in order to be a true science, hypotheses should be tested
and measured. The only way that could be done was to measure those
things that could be observed: behaviors and words rather than feelings
or thoughts. His concepts were popular because they were different from
the psychoanalytic theory prevalent at the time.
Watson studied Pavlov’s (1960) classical conditioning experiments
with animals and then used those ideas to formulate his own theory of
human conditioning. In classical conditioning, a stimulus (anything that
elicits a response, either a reﬂex or voluntary action) is repeatedly fol-
lowed by a speciﬁc response (behavior). Dogs salivate when they see
their food. Pavlov added a ringing bell along with the presentation of the
food. After several repetitions, the dogs would salivate when they heard
the bell. The result is a connection that allows the response to occur with-
out the need for the stimulus. An example is a person’s response to a
favorite food. When presented with that food, the sight and the smell
cause a person to salivate in preparation for tasting. When viewing pic-
tures of that food in a magazine or on television, the person often has
the same reaction—salivating.
Watson was also inﬂuenced by the writings of Locke (1959), who saw
human infants as a tabula rasa, a blank tablet on which life experiences
write a script. According to Watson, human behavior could be shaped by
controlling events children were exposed to and by offering rewards for
proper responses. Give children appropriate rewards and the desired
behavior will follow. A parent who says “You are being so patient waiting
while I pay for our groceries” is giving an appropriate reward to her child.
Skinner (1953) used both Watson’s and Locke’s (1959) ideas to for-
mulate his theory. He proposed that infants are “empty organisms” that
can be ﬁlled with carefully controlled experiences. He agreed that behav-
ior can be changed by conditioning, but saw another type of conditioning
that plays a larger role. He called it operant conditioning. Children play
an active part by operating or acting on their environment and are
reinforced for their behaviors. When a behavior is followed by a pleasant
classical conditioning
conditioning brought about by proximity
of stimulus and response
operant conditioning
the process by which children act upon
their environment and are reinforced for
their behaviors

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
77
response (reward), it is likely to be repeated. If the consequence of a
behavior is unpleasant, it is not likely to be repeated. Therefore, a system
of positive or negative reinforcers can be used to shape an individual’s
behavior. Teachers who tell children they have done a good job putting
away their materials are using a positive reinforcer. At the next cleanup
time, the children are more likely to go about the task willingly.
Bandura (1977) contributed another dimension to the understanding
of how learning takes place. He felt that some behaviors cannot be
explained as a simple conditioned response to a direct stimulus but
occur through less direct learning. He believes children observe others
behaving in given ways and then pattern their own behavior accordingly.
This type of social learning is more likely to occur when a person is uncer-
tain or unsure in a situation and when the object of observation is admired
or seen as powerful. Called modeling, it is a technique that parents and
teachers use to increase the likelihood of acceptable behavior in children.
In other words, parents model the behavior they expect of children. It
may also explain why four-year-olds pretend to be Superman or why teen-
agers want to dress like their favorite rock star. They are imitating the
behavior of people they admire.
Social learning changes as individuals mature. Children are attentive
to the behaviors of others, store the information for future retrieval, pos-
sibly mentally rehearse the behavior, and then use the information when
needed. The consequences of behaviors are also noted. Children can then
test out alternative behaviors and choose the one with the best outcome.
A school-age child observes that when she gets mad and leaves a game,
her friends do not ask her to play next time. She will try to curb her anger
in order to be included.
“Me doing my reading book.” Sarah, age 6.
modeling
adults exhibit the behaviors that are
expected of children

SECTION TWO
78
Evaluation of Behaviorism
Learning theories have contributed a great deal to the study of how
behaviors are shaped (Berger, 2000). The emphasis on the connection
between stimulus and the resulting observable response allows a different
interpretation of some kinds of behaviors. Previous notions that behavior
is the result of deep-seated emotional problems could be revised by
observing the environmental causes of some behaviors. Behavior can
then be changed by changing the environment’s response. As an example,
when adults praise children for acceptable behavior rather than focusing
on punishing unacceptable behavior, children can change. “Thank you for
sitting quietly at story time, Jamal” often is more effective than saying “Sit
down and be quiet or I’ll have to remove you from the story area.” After a
few repetitions, Jamal is likely to cease his disruption.
Learning theory has also contributed to a more scientiﬁc study of
human development. Researchers are pressured to reﬁne their hypothe-
ses, deﬁne their terms, devise replicable tests for their hypotheses, and
avoid reliance on concepts that they cannot test. Conversely, there are
valid criticisms of learning theory. The emphasis on observable behavior
and external inﬂuences does not take into account the inner life of chil-
dren. Some behaviors result from complex relationships between biologi-
cal maturation, an individual’s thought processes, and the struggle to
make sense of new experiences. Only considering observable behaviors
creates an incomplete picture of the wide range of inﬂuences on human
behavior.
When behaviorist learning theory was ﬁrst proposed, researchers
made claims that behavior modiﬁcation through a system of rewards and
punishments was manipulative. Present-day critics still voice the same
concerns and also object to the kinds of reinforcers that parents or teach-
ers sometimes use.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Behaviorist theory provides some speciﬁc guidelines for adults who work
with children.

Carefully arrange the learning environment. Because the impor-
tance of the environment is stressed in behaviorist learning theory,
anyonewhoworkswithchildrencanusethisinformationtoarrange
the setting to bring about positive responses. The placement of
furniture, the ways in which activities are presented, and the
ways in which adults interact with children all have to be carefully
considered with expected results in mind.

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
79

Use appropriate reinforcers to bring about desired results. Care-
fullyconsidertheimplicationsofreinforcers,andchoosethosethat
will enhance positive, rather than negative, behaviors.

Model the behavior that you expect of children.

Provideopportunitiesforsociallearningtotakeplaceamongpeers.
Children are powerful models and can have extensive inﬂuence on
one another.

Helpchildrenﬁndalternativebehaviorstothosethatgenerateneg-
ative responses from others.
SOCIOCULTURAL THEORY
Vygotsky (1978, 1987), writing in the early 1900s, was a pioneer in the
study of sociocultural inﬂuences on learning; only recently have his writ-
ings become available. Vygotsky’s theory assumes that social interaction
and children’s direct participation in authentic cultural activities is neces-
sary for their optimum development. Several main ideas follow this basic
assumption.
Cross-Cultural Variation
Cultures differ in the kinds of opportunities they provide children to
develop the competencies they need. Every culture has hopes and expect-
ations for the children growing up within that society. These expectations
are expressed in terms of competencies or things children need to know
or be able to do. A child in rural China will be encouraged to learn vastly
different skills from one living in a housing project in New York. Vygotsky
believed that knowledge and skills are taught by the older and more
mature members of a group. In daily interactions within families, school,
child care center, and neighborhood groups, children are constantly being
shown models or are being told directly. Children in rural China work
beside their parents, learning how to nurture the crops or perform the
daily tasks necessary for their existence. Children in New York are taught
by their parents how to behave within the neighborhood environment,
but they also learn from their friends as they play.
Scaffolding
Children constantly add to their knowledge and skills through learning
and play activities (Berk & Winsler, 1995). Vygotsky saw that this was pos-
sible because of the presence of a support system or scaffold in the form
scaffold
support system that supports children
as they move from one intellectual level
to the next

SECTION TWO
80
of the social environment. Both parents and teachers plan a series of activ-
ities from simple to more complex, thus allowing children to acquire the
knowledge and tools they need in manageable steps. The scaffold may
also be a suggestion or question. It might include encouragement to con-
tinue the task even though the child is frustrated. Another name for this
kind of learning is “guided participation” in which the adult is available to
encourage and suggest ways to move to the next level of learning. An
example can be seen in a child who cannot complete a difﬁcult puzzle.
The teacher may place a piece close to where it ﬁts or may suggest looking
for pieces that are a particular color. Another example is the parent who
helps a child learn to ride a two-wheeler bike. The adult puts on training
wheels, holds the handlebars, and runs beside the child. As the child’s
conﬁdence grows the adult lets go of the handlebars but continues to be
close by. The ﬁnal step may be removal of the training wheels.
Other family members may also provide the scaffold for learning new
skills. Children may watch older siblings performing a task, then try to
imitate the behavior. Sometimes the older brother or sister shows the
younger siblings how to do something, then encourages them to attempt
the task. When children go to child care or enter school, peers or older
children are often part of the cooperative learning environment support-
ing growth. When children work together on tasks there is an opportunity
for the less skilled child to learn from the more skilled participant.
Language
Language plays a crucial role in the development of cognitive abilities
because it is the basis for social interactions between adult and child or
between children. Through communication children can be guided to
acquire the practical skills needed in their society. Communication also
allows individuals to make mental contacts with others and provides a
means for interpreting, storing, and using social experiences.
Zone of Proximal Development
The zone of proximal development is the hypothetical environment in
which learning and development take place (Berk & Winsler, 1995). It
can be further described as the region between what children can learn
by themselves and what they can learn through the guidance and tutoring
of a more competent member of society. Through carefully chosen and
planned activities, children gradually move from assisted performance to
independent performance. Crucial to this process are sensitivity to each
child’s level of competence and a means to encourage them to move to
the next level. When teachers or parents help children acquire a new skill,
zone of proximal
development
the hypothetical environment in which
learning and development take place

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
81
they may begin with a demonstration, then carefully guide them through
the steps and encourage them as they perform on their own.
Evaluation of Sociocultural Theory
Sociocultural theory has added a new dimension to the study of children’s
development, particularly in understanding diversity (Berger, 2000). It
has increased knowledge of the ways in which cognitive development
varies depending on the values and makeup of different societies. It fur-
ther emphasizes the importance of understanding each culture’s values
and beliefs and their effect on children’s competencies. Some parents
prefer the teacher or caregiver to be in control and direct everything
that happens in the learning environment. Others are more comfortable
with allowing children to have more control over their own learning expe-
riences. (Gonzalez-Mena, 2001).
One limitation of sociocultural theory is that it does not take into
account developmental processes that are not social. Some processes are
the result of biological maturation.
Another limitation is that Vygotsky did not consider how much chil-
dren affect their own learning environment. According to Rogoff (1990),
children often choose their own activities or their mentors. They often
reject or resist help and support from parents or teachers.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Most child care centers serve children who come from more than one
cultural group and who, as adults, will live in an increasingly diverse soci-
ety. It is important, therefore, that they learn to function comfortably in a
multicultural environment without losing their identity within their own
group. Child care staff members can help them achieve that goal in the
following ways:

Learn more about different cultures and be sensitive to cultural
values, ways of interacting, and linguistic differences.

Include families, integrating their values and culture into teaching
and learning experiences.

Learn about their expectations for their children.

Encourage children to learn about and appreciate cultures other
than their own.

Help children to acquire the competencies that are important in
their culture as well as those that are necessary in broader society.

Carefully choose and plan activities that gradually move children
from assisted performance to independent performance.

SECTION TWO
82

Cultivate each child’s communication skills as an important tool of
learning.

Establish a meaningful relationship with every child because it is
throughtheinteractionbetweenadultandchildthatmuchlearning
takes place.

Encourage cooperative learning in small groups so children can
learn from each other.
INTELLIGENCE AND LEARNING
Attempts to understand and measure intelligence have existed for
many years. Tests were developed to try to quantify intelligence in rela-
tion to chronological age. Items on tests such as the Stanford-Binet focus
on general knowledge, reasoning ability, mathematical skill, memory,
vocabulary, and spatial perception. More recently, theories of multiple
intelligences have interested professionals who are concerned with the
education of young children. Sternberg (1996) delineates three types of
intelligence: academic (measured by achievement or IQ tests), creative
(measured by imaginative undertakings), and practical (seen in every-
day tasks and interactions). Gardner (1983) describes seven distinct
intelligences: body-kinesthetic, spatial, linguistic, logical-mathematical,
musical, interpersonal (social understanding), and intrapersonal (self-
understanding). Later, Gardner (1999) added naturalist intelligence, the
ability to recognize and classify features of the environment. Other intel-
ligences have been considered by Gardner and his colleagues, including
spiritual, existential, and moral intelligence. These were ultimately
excluded since they did not meet all his criteria. According to Gardner,
everyone has a basic aptitude for each of the intelligences, but most peo-
ple are stronger in one area than in other areas. One person may have
exceptional musical ability but have limited spatial skill and therefore
gets lost easily.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Theories of multiple intelligences are important to anyone who works
with children because they can help us understand why some children
do so well in some areas but have difﬁculty in others. It also explains
why learning experiences should provide children the opportunity to
use all their senses and to express their abilities in a variety of ways (Gard-
ner, 1991). Many schools focus primarily on the tasks measured by
standard tests of achievement. This does not allow children to develop
Which theorist said that
children learn from each
other?

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
83
other facets of intelligence. Child care personnel can encourage children
to develop more than one intelligence by implementing the following
suggestions:

Understand that each child is unique and may be gifted in one area
but not in others.

Let children choose their own methods of learning and work at
their own pace (intrapersonal).

Use cooperative learning that includes feedback from others
(intrapersonal).

Provide a variety of experiences that allows children to use their
senses in different ways (kinesthetic).

Encouragechildrentouselanguageinwordgames,crosswordpuz-
zles, or debates (linguistic).

Foster the ability to visualize by providing the opportunity to work
puzzles, draw maps, and work mazes (spatial).

Provide games that require strategy planning or resolving prob-
lems (logical-mathematical).

Help children use music in a variety of activities: writing songs,
playing instruments, and creating musical plays (musical).

Use the outdoors as another classroom by introducing science
projects, creating a nature area, or nurturing animals (naturalist).
LANGUAGE
Middle childhood is a time when the ability to use language to enhance
cognitive skills and to manipulate social situations increases rapidly. Chil-
dren acquire as many as 20 words a day, achieving a vocabulary of 40,000
words by the ﬁfth grade (Anglin, 1993). The list of words they understand
and use may include some they have not experienced directly but under-
stand through reading, conversation, television, and computers. They
deduce the meaning of a word through knowledge of the context in
which it is used.
School-age children deﬁne words differently from the way they did as
preschoolers. When asked to deﬁne a word, preschool children give
examples that are based on perceptions. “An orange is something to eat
that tastes good.” A school-age child will likely be more logical by saying
“It’s a fruit.” Preschoolers also deﬁne words by using action-based state-
ments, whereas older children analyze the relationship to other words. A
four-year-old will say, “Under something is where I hide my toys from my
brother.” A nine-year-old might say, “Under is the opposite of over”
(Holzman, 1983).

SECTION TWO
84
Children practice their language skills by trying to reﬁne grammatical
construction. By age six most children understand and use grammar cor-
rectly, but during middle childhood further improvement takes place.
Preschool children acquire new language constructions by adapting what
they have previously learned. They discover that “ed” is added to make a
verb past tense and therefore say, “He goed.” Gradually, school-age
children learn the variations of verb forms and use them correctly. Older
children may not always use correct grammar even though they know it.
In conversation with their peers, for instance, they may say, “Me and my
mom had a ﬁght.” In school they are able to correctly say, “My mom and I
had a ﬁght.”
School-age children become adept at pragmatic uses of language.
They choose words, modify sentences, or change voice inﬂections to ﬁt
the listener in a particular situation. They may use simpler words and
shorter sentences when talking to a younger sibling than they would
with their friends. The best example of pragmatic use of language is seen
in the jokes told by elementary school children. In order to be successful
humorists, they need to recognize what the listener will think is funny and
to remember the exact words (Yasilove, 1978).
Further indication that school-age children use language pragmati-
cally is the switch to different forms as the occasion dictates. When mak-
ing a request of possibly reluctant adults, they are careful to use a polite
form of request, “Could I please go to the movie with Rachel?” A more
extensive switch in language is called code-switching (Holzman, 1983;
Yoon, 1992). This means a complete change of form when addressing
adults and another when addressing cohorts. They may use elaborated
code in the classroom and change to a restricted code when they are on
the playground (Bernstein, 1971, 1973). Elaborated code has a more
extensive vocabulary, is correct grammatically, and is longer. In contrast,
restricted code is more limited and may rely on gestures and voice into-
nation to communicate meaning. Although they are required to use stan-
dard English in the classroom, children also learn the idiosyncrasies of
speech speciﬁc to their ethnic group or in common usage in their particu-
lar region of the country. Some forms differ in minor ways, such as
regional accents or colloquialisms in common usage. Certain speech pat-
terns or accents are so distinctive that they can identify the region where a
person lives or grew up. A Southern accent is easily distinguished from a
Texas drawl. Another variation is Black English, or Ebonics, which uses
double negatives: “Nobody couldn’t come to the party.” Children for
whom English is not their primary language face even greater problems.
These children are forced to use a language they may barely understand
and get behind in school. They may also be mercilessly teased by other
children for their accent or misuse of words.
code-switching
a complete change of language form
when addressing adults and when
talking to other children
elaborated code
a communication that uses a more
extensive vocabulary, is correct
grammatically, and is longer
restricted code
communications that are more limited
and may rely on gestures and voice
intonation to convey meaning
What skills do children
acquire while using a
computer?

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
85
SECOND LANGUAGE
DEVELOPMENT
The inﬂux of refugees and immigrants into the United States has rapidly
increased the number of children who are second language learners. They
speak a native language at home and are learning English in their out-
of-home experiences. Research points out the cognitive, cultural, and
economic advantages of bilingualism (Hakuta & Pease-Alverez, 1992).
Hence, children who have the opportunity to speak two languages should
be encouraged to maintain both. Cognitively, school-age children are able
to understand that others may perceive them as different if their language
is not that of the majority. They fear they will become the targets of teas-
ing, and this affects their self-concept.
Some basic principles have been drawn from theory and research on
second language acquisition (McLaughlin, 1995). The ﬁrst is that it is rare
for both languages to be perfectly balanced. As a child is learning a second
language, one language will be predominant. The more the second lan-
guage is used, the less the native (home) language is used, and hence both
languages may appear less proﬁcient. This is a temporary imbalance, and
most bilingual children will reach age-level proﬁciency in their dominant
language given adequate opportunities for use.
The second principle is that of the normalcy of code-switching. Young
children tend to insert single items from one language into the other
(McClure, 1977) primarily to resolve ambiguities and clarify statements.
The thinking processes of school-age children are markedly dif-
ferent from those of preschoolers.

SECTION TWO
86
A Spanish-speaking child might say, “My abuela [grandmother] came to
visit.” “Abuela” is the familiar word associated with the grandmother. By
around age nine, however, children tend to switch phrases or sentences.
They will switch languages to convey social meanings following the man-
ner in which they hear them switched at home and in the community. A
child may say “Hey, that’s cool, man” when talking to peers but when
addressing a teacher say “That’s really nice.” Third, there are different
cultural patterns in the use of language. The communication patterns of
some cultures do not encourage children to participate verbally in activ-
ities. Their home culture interprets this as calling attention to oneself or
showing one’s knowledge, which is regarded as an arrogant form of behav-
ior (Philips, 1972). Finally, children internalize a second language more
readily if they are asked to engage in meaningful activities that require
using the language. They also need good models for language use and
should be given opportunities to experiment with language as they learn
correct phrases and intonation.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
The importance of language in children’s development cannot be over-
estimated. Good language skills are essential for success in school, and
children who can communicate their needs and feelings clearly get along
better with their peers and adults. Perhaps even more important, good
language skills are needed for many of the jobs these youngsters will pur-
sue in the future.

Provide a wide variety of reading materials: books, magazines,
comic books, and newspapers.

Read to children frequently and encourage them to read alone or
with others.

Plan a variety of activities and experiences that help children
expand their vocabularies and their ability to communicate clearly
with others. Remember that listening is a part of communicating.

ModelcorrectEnglishwhenspeakingtochildrenandacceptchild-
ren’s forms of speech. Remember that the goal is for the child to
communicate, not adhere to rigid rules about language. Do not
correctgrammarorpronunciationwhenchildrenarecommunicat-
ing. Respond to the content of communication.

Use demonstrations, modeling, and role-playing to communicate
the meaning of language. The more visuals presented to limited
English speakers, the more likely they will comprehend what is
being presented to them.

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
87

Invite parents of children with different cultural backgrounds to
provide activities and information about their culture such as lan-
guage, food, and special customs.

Developbuddyandpeergroupsthatwillbesupportiveandprovide
feedback to the second language learner.

Provide opportunities for children to use their primary language in
waysthatenhancetheirself-esteem.Encouragethemtoteachuse-
fulwordsorphrasestoothers.Allowthemtousetheirspeechforms
in creative ways when writing stories, plays, or poetry.

Include written or oral language in culturally based activities.
SUMMARY
The thinking processes of school-age children are markedly different
from those of preschoolers. Swiss psychologist Piaget was a major con-
tributor to the understanding of how children think and learn. Piaget
believed that intelligence is the result of progression through four stages:
the sensorimotor period, from birth to two years, the preoperational
period, from two to seven years, the concrete operations period, from
seven to 11 years, and the formal operations period, from age 11 to 15
years. Another general principle of Piaget’s theory is that children are
active participants in the development of their own intelligence. A third
principle is that differences in the rate at which individuals pass through
the stages are due to variations in maturation rate.
Behaviorist theory grew out of a need for more precise studies of
human development and was proposed early in the twentieth century by
Watson. Watson’s ideas were based on the classical conditioning of Pavlov
and pointed to the connection between a stimulus and a response. When a
stimulus is followed by a pleasant response, the behavior is likely to be
repeated; if the response is unpleasant, the behavior may disappear. Skin-
ner started with Watson’s ideas but went a step further. He proposed
another type of conditioning—operant conditioning. He observed that
children operate on their environment and are reinforced. When the
reinforcer is pleasant, the behavior will be repeated, and when unpleasant
it is likely not to be repeated. Bandura also agreed with behaviorist ideas
but felt that some behaviors could not be explained by simple stimulus
and response mechanisms. He saw that some behaviors occur as a result
of less direct teaching, through observation of a model and then sub-
sequent imitation of that behavior.
Sociocultural theory, proposed by Vygotsky, has only recently been
widely disseminated. Vygotsky assumed that social interaction and

SECTION TWO
88
children’s direct participation in authentic cultural activities is necessary
for their optimum development. He pointed to the need to understand
cross-cultural variation—the kinds of tools and activities different soci-
eties use to help children develop the competencies they will need as
adults. Vygotsky believed that children construct themselves, adding to
their knowledge and skills; and pointed to the importance of the support
system or scaffold in the child’s environment. Vygotsky also recognized
the importance of language, which forms the basis of social interactions
between adult and child. According to Vygotsky, the zone of proximal
development is the hypothetical environment in which learning and
development take place.
More recent attempts to understand intelligence have brought theo-
ries of multiple intelligences. Sternberg delineated three: academic, cre-
ative, and practical. Gardner listed eight: body-kinesthetic, spatial,
linguistic, logical-mathematical, musical, interpersonal, intrapersonal,
and naturalist.
Middle childhood is a time when the ability to use language to
enhance cognitive skills and manipulate social situations increases rapidly.
Children acquire as many as 20 words a day, achieving a vocabulary of
40,000 words by the ﬁfth grade.
Children practice their language skills by trying to reﬁne grammatical
constructions. They are adept at pragmatic uses of language, choosing
words, modifying sentences, or changing inﬂections to suit particular sit-
uations. Children also demonstrate their pragmatic use of language when
they switch to different forms as an occasion dictate. Code-switching is a
complete change of form when addressing adults and another when
addressing peers.
Many children speak a non-English primary language in their home
and therefore are at various levels of proﬁciency in using English. Their
attempts at learning and using English as well as their primary language
should be encouraged. Caregivers should provide an enticing, language-
rich environment that supports reading, writing, and speaking English as
well as home languages.
KEY TERMS
centering
classical conditioning
code-switching
concrete operations
elaborated code
formal operations
modeling
operant conditioning
preoperational period
restricted code
scaffold
sensorimotor period
storage strategies
zone of proximal
development

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
89
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Observe a group of school-age children. Can you recognize any
models the children are using to pattern their own behavior? Are the
models real persons (familiar adults or their peers) or characters from
television, ﬁlms, or computer games? Why do you think they have
chosen these particular models? In small groups, share your obser-
vations with classmates. Discuss the preceding questions.
2. Visit an after-school program serving children from ages ﬁve to 11.
Record the number of times the adults use positive reinforcers. What
types of reinforcers seem to be most effective with this age level? Did
they encourage repetition of the behavior? What negative reinforcers
werealsoused?Didtheydiscouragethebehavior?Shareyourﬁndings
with classmates, and compile a list of responses that seem effective
when working with school-age children.
3. In small-group discussions, ask members to relate their own methods
of working with children to one of the theories described in this
chapter. Do they choose one theory over others? Or do they tend to
useeachofthetheoriesinaneclecticapproach,usingseveraldifferent
theories?
4. Plan two activities for a group of nine-year-olds that will help them
increase their vocabulary. Share your plans with classmates.
5. Present a demonstration of an activity using only visual gestures and
materials to convey your meaning. In small groups, discuss the difﬁ-
culties of learning concepts and instructions if there is no under-
standing of the language being spoken. (It would be ideal to have
someone who speaks another language, unknown by the majority of
the classmates, do this presentation in their native language followed
by small-group discussion.)
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why did Piaget observe that during the preoperational period chil-
dren often come to the wrong conclusions?
2. Between ages seven and 11 children progress to the stage of concrete
operations. What new abilities have they acquired?
3. State three applications of Piagetian theory in a school-age child care
setting.
4. How does operant conditioning, proposed by Skinner, differ from the
social learning theory of Bandura?

SECTION TWO
90
5. What are some criticisms of behaviorist theory?
6. How is behaviorist theory used when planning an appropriate envi-
ronment for school-age children?
7. What is meant by scaffolding?
8. What is meant by the zone of proximal development?
9. How can child care leaders use Vygotsky’s ideas in a multicultural
community?
10. State three ways child care leaders can help children increase their
language skills.
11. List the eight intelligences delineated by Gardner.
12. Describe the role of the caregiver as it pertains to children who are
learning English as a second language. Consider curriculum, peer
interaction on behalf of the second language learner, and your own
interactions with the child.
CASE STUDY
Angela and Jennine wanted to learn to knit so they could make scarves for
their dads. Their group leader, Nancy, promised to show them how since
she had been knitting since she was very young. She told them to buy
some #6 needles and a ball of yarn in the color they liked.
They came to the after-school program the next day, eager to get
started. Nancy cast on the stitches on each of their needles because she
felt it would be hard enough for them to learn the stitch without starting
with casting on. She demonstrated for each of them, then guided their
hands through several stitches. Angela was quickly ready to proceed on
her own, but Jennine was having trouble. She would forget which way to
wrap the yarn around the needle or how to pull the stitch through. Nancy
again guided Jennine’s hands, but she still had problems, and Jennine
became increasingly frustrated. Then, Nancy remembered that she had
a knitting instruction book in the cupboard that showed the step-by-step
process. She got it out and propped the page in front of Jennine. Jennine
studied it and then cautiously tried each step. Finally, she understood and
was exuberant that she was successful at last.
1. Why do you think Angela found the instructions Nancy gave her easy
to follow? Why was it difﬁcult for Jennine?
2. How would you describe the methods that Nancy used to teach the
girls?

CHAPTER 5
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: COGNITI VE
91
3. What does this tell you about other learning experiences that you
provide for the children in your group?
REFERENCES
Anglin, J. M. (1993). Vocabulary development: a morphological analysis.
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 58 (10,
Serial No. 238).
Bandura,A.(1977).Social learningtheory.EnglewoodCliffs,NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Berger, K. S. (2000). The developing person through childhood and ado-
lescence (5th ed.). New York: Worth.
Berk,L.E.,&Winsler,A.(1995).Scaffoldingchildren’slearning:Vygotsky
andearly childhoodeducation.Washington,DC:NationalAssociation
for the Education of Young Children.
Bernstein, B. (1971, 1973). Class, codes, and control. Vols. 1, 2. London:
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Gardner, H. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences.
New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1991). The unschooled mind: How children think and how
schools should teach. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the
21st century. New York: Basic Books.
Gonzalez-Mena, Janet. (2001). Multicultural issues in child care, third ed.
Mountain view, CA: Mayﬁeld Publishing Company.
Hakuta,K.,&Pease-Alvarez,L.(1992).Enrichingourviewofbilingualism
and bilingual education. Educational Researcher, 21, 4–6.
Holzman, M. (1983). The language of children: Development in home and
in school. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Locke, J. (1959). Essay concerning human understanding. Collated and
annotated by A. C. Fraser. New York: Dover.
McClure, E. F. (1977). Aspects of code-switching in the discourse of bilin-
gual Mexican-American children. (Tech. Rep. No. 44.) Cambridge:
Berancek and Newman.
McLaughlin, B. (1995). Fostering second language development in
young children: Principles and practices. Washington, DC: National
Center for Research on Cultural Diversity and Second Language
Learning.
Pavlov,I.(1960).Conditionedreﬂexes:Aninvestigationofthephysiological
activity ofthecerebral cortex.(G.V. Anrep,Ed. and Trans.) NewYork:
Dover.

SECTION TWO
92
Philips, S. (1972). Participant structures and communicative competence:
Warm Springs children in community and the classroom. In C. B.
Cazden, V. P. John, & D. Hymes (Eds.), Function of language in the
classroom. New York: Teachers College.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origins of intelligence in children. (M. Cook, Trans.).
New York: International Universities Press.
Rogoff, Barbara. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive develop-
ment in social context. New York: Oxford University Press.
Skinner,B.F.(1953).Scienceandhumanbehavior.NewYork:Macmillan.
Sternberg, R. J. (1996). Successful intelligence. New York: Simon &
Schuster.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psycho-
logical processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). Thinking and speech. (N. Minick, Trans.). New
York: Plenum.
Watson, J. B. (1967). Behaviorism (rev. ed.). Chicago: University of
Chicago Press. (Original publication dated 1924).
Yasilove, D. (1978). The effect of riddle-structure on children’s compre-
hension and appreciation of riddles. Doctoral dissertation. New York
University. Dissertation Abstracts International, 36, 6.
Yoon, K. (1992). New perspective on intrasentential code-switching: A
study of Korean-English switching. Applied Psycholinguistics, 13,
433–449.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Moore,T.(1999). Bringingdiversity intoyourcenter. ChildCareInforma-
tion Exchange, 126 (Mar/Apr), 35–37.
WEB RESOURCES
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_Intelligence]
Gardner’s Multiple Intelligences: Explanation of Gardner’s categories
of intelligence.
[http://www.cdi.org]
Child Development Institute: Information on child development,
parenting, family life, and learning.

Development in Middle
Childhood: Psychosocial
93
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the major principles of several theories of psychosocial
development.
List the concerns expressed by critics of each theory as well as the
points of agreement.
Develop strategies that enhance children’s psychosocial
development.
THEORIES OF PSYCHOSOCIAL
DEVELOPMENT
t
he world of children between the ages of ﬁve and 12 expands as
they enter school and begin to experience the environment out-
side their homes. Increased physical and cognitive skills allow
them more independence to explore their neighborhoods, visit friends’
homes, and use community facilities such as playgrounds or clubs. In the
process, they have many adventures and encounter new people. Parents
are often unaware of and have little control over the kinds of challenges
their children face as they maneuver in this new territory. How children
manage depends a great deal on how they feel about themselves and the
kinds of moral values they have learned within their families. Several the-
ories are used to explain how children develop their sense of identity and
learn to be successful members of a society.
CHAPTER66
OBJECTIVES

SECTION TWO
94
Psychoanalytic Theory and
Sigmund Freud
Freud (1938) was an Austrian doctor and the founder of the psychoana-
lytic theory of human behavior. While working with persons diagnosed as
“hysterics,” Freud evolved the theory that irrational behaviors have
underlying causes that come from unconscious sexual and aggressive
drives that he called libido. He saw the psyche as having three parts: the
id, the source of pleasure-seeking drives; the ego, or the rational aspect of
personality; and the superego, which controls behavior through the
development of a conscience. Freud also proposed that the id is present
at birth, whereas the ego and superego develop as one progresses through
stages of development. In the process, the ego functions as a mediating
force between the desire to seek pleasure and the need to yield to the
demands of parents and society. Each stage brings with it conﬂicts that a
child must resolve. How well a child is able to do this is determined by the
skills and competencies acquired along the way. Freud delineated ﬁve
stages of development: The ﬁrst two are the oral period and the anal
period. Both are concerned with children under the age of three. Freud’s
third stage, the phallic, begins at age three and covers school-age children
up to the age of six. The later two stages are latency and adolescence.
Increased physical and cognitive skills allow school age children the
independence to explore their neighborhoods, and use community
facilities such as playgrounds.
id
in psychoanalytic theory, the part of the
personality that is the source of
pleasure-seeking drives
ego
in psychoanalytic theory, the rational
aspect of personality
superego
in psychoanalytic theory, the part of the
personality that controls behavior
through the development of conscience
oral period
Freud’s term for the ﬁrst stage, in
which the infant gains pleasure through
sucking
anal period
Freud’s second stage, in which children
increase body awareness and focus of
attention is on the anus as a source of
pleasure

CHAPTER 6
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PSYCHOSOCIAL
95
Stage 3. Phallic: Third to Sixth Year
During the phallic period, the genital areas are the focus of pleasure,
and children become aware of physical differences between boys and
girls. It is also during this period that children develop attachments to
the parent of the opposite sex; boys are attracted to their mothers, and
girls to their fathers. Eventually they learn that they must control these
feelings and resolve the conﬂict by identifying with the parent of the
same sex. This leads to development of gender identity and sexual orien-
tation, as well as internalization of family moral values.
Stage 4. Latency: Seventh to Eleventh Year
The latency period, as the name implies, is a period of latent or quiet
feelings. Children’s sexual urges are unobtrusive, and energies are
directed toward school activities and sports. During this period children
develop competencies and reﬁne their self-images.
Stage 5. Adolescence: Twelfth Year to Adulthood
Adolescence brings changes in sexual organs and physical changes in
the appearance of both males and females. Strong sexual urges cause the
adolescent to struggle with how to satisfy those urges in socially accept-
able and safe ways. Moral values incorporated during earlier stages are
reexamined and tested against those of their peers, their religion, and
society.
Evaluation of Psychoanalytic Theory
Many of Freud’s ideas are so widely accepted that they are no longer
attributed to psychoanalytic origins (Berger, 2000). There is general
agreement that unconscious drives affect some behaviors, although the
source of those drives may not be attributed to sexual urges, as Freud
proposed. Modiﬁed aspects of psychoanalytic theory are evident in
research and popular writings about the importance of attachment
between mother and infant, gender identity, parental discipline, moral
development, and adolescent development.
Some facets of psychosexual theory, however, are no longer consid-
ered valid. There is little support for Freud’s belief that the way in which
conﬂicts during the oral and anal phases are resolved result in speciﬁc
personality traits. An even more important criticism of psychoanalytic
theory is that it was based on Freud’s experiences with white, middle-,
or upper-class patients. Present-day developmental theory emphasizes
that personality and behavior are affected more by a person’s heredity,
phallic period
Freud’s third stage, in which the genital
areas are the focus of pleasure and
children become aware of physical
differences
latency period
Freud’s fourth stage, in which children’s
sexual urges are unobtrusive and
energies are directed toward school
activities and sports
adolescence
Freud’s stage in which there are
changes to sexual organs and in
appearance accompanied by strong
sexual urges

SECTION TWO
96
life events, and the culture in which one lives rather than on conﬂicts that
occur in childhood. There is also little support for Freud’s belief in the
struggle between the id and the superego. The strongest criticism of
psychoanalytic theory is that it cannot be proven through controlled sci-
entiﬁc research. Freudian theory is very much a part of the historical pro-
cess of understanding human behavior and has affected much of modern
thinking about children’s development. However, the theory should not
be interpreted literally.
Psychosocial Theory and Erik Erikson
Erikson (1963) studied psychoanalytic theory with Anna Freud, the
daughter of Sigmund Freud. He later moved to Boston, where he started
a psychoanalytic practice. Erikson’s work included children from a wide
variety of backgrounds. Some were from middle-class, professional fami-
lies, others from poor families, and some were delinquent children. At
ﬁrst he found it difﬁcult to apply psychoanalytic principles to his work
with children who were not typically middle class, but eventually he
found that all children have some common characteristics. Erikson
expanded Freud’s stages of development to encompass the entire life
span, with each stage characterized by a challenge or developmental
crisis.
Erikson’s ﬁrst ﬁve stages of childhood are similar to those of Freud.
They are (1) trust vs. mistrust; (2) autonomy vs. shame and doubt;
(3) initiative vs. guilt; (4) industry vs. inferiority; and (5) identity vs.
role confusion. Erikson delineated three additional stages that follow
the childhood years and extend into adulthood: intimacy vs. isolation, gen-
erativity vs. stagnation, and integrity vs. despair. The signiﬁcant difference
between Freud and Erikson, however, lies in Erikson’s emphasis on a
person’s relationship to the social environment rather than on the body.
He called his ideas the psychosocial theory of development. At each stage
of development, the resolution of a crisis depends on the interaction
between the individual’s personality characteristics and the support and
guidance provided by the social environment. How successful or unsuc-
cessful a person is in resolving these crises depends a great deal on com-
petencies and the support and guidance that parents and society provide.
The ﬁrst two stages cover birth to age three, while Stage 3 includes school-
age children.
Stage 3. Initiative vs. Guilt: Third to Sixth Year
During this period children want to attempt many tasks they observe their
parents or other adults performing. They sometimes attempt activities
that are beyond their capabilities or are outside the limits set by their
parents. If given support and guidance by their caregivers, the result will
trust vs. mistrust
Erikson’s ﬁrst stage, in which babies
learn to trust that others will take care
of their basic needs and that others can
be depended upon
autonomy vs. shame and
doubt
Erikson’s second stage, in which the
focus is to become independent by
gaining control over bodily functions
initiative vs. guilt
Erikson’s third stage, in which children
attempt new activities that can result in
either pride (initiative) or guilt when
unsuccessful
industry vs. inferiority
Erikson’s fourth stage, in which children
expend all their energies on mastering
new skills at home, in school, on the
playground, and in their neighborhoods
identity vs. role confusion
Erikson’s ﬁfth stage, in which
adolescents search for their identity as
individuals in a society

CHAPTER 6
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PSYCHOSOCIAL
97
be feelings of success and pride in their own initiative. If they are unsuc-
cessful, they will be left with feelings of guilt.
Stage 4. Industry vs. Inferiority: Seventh to Eleventh Year
During this middle-childhood period children expend their energies on
mastering new skills at home, in school, on the playground, and in their
neighborhoods. When they are successful, they acquire the tools they will
need for important societal tasks such as getting a job and getting along
with others. When they are unsuccessful, feelings of inferiority set a pat-
tern for possible failure throughout life.
Stage 5. Identity vs. Role Confusion: Adolescence
This period is highlighted by adolescents’ search for identity as individuals
in a society. They must balance a desire to establish their own uniqueness
with a need to conform to the standards set by the society or culture in
which they live. Rebelliousness may lead to role confusion, and strict con-
formity to a stiﬂing of individuality.
Evaluation of Psychosocial Theory
Erikson’s perception of human development is more widely accepted
than psychoanalytic theory even though it is based on Freud’s ideas
(Berger, 2000). Erikson’s writings are more contemporary, not based on
Erikson’s emphasis is on a person’s relationship to the social environ-
ment rather than on the body.

SECTION TWO
98
the Victorian culture of Freud’s time. Many ideas taken from Erikson are
currently applied to issues regarding the care of infants, parenting prob-
lems, the care of children in groups, and the training of caregivers.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Two themes are present in both Freudian and Eriksonian ideas about
how children develop: the signiﬁcance of childhood stages in the forma-
tion of personality, and the importance of the manner in which adults
respond to children’s behavior during each of the stages. These concepts
lead to several speciﬁc implications for persons working with school-age
children:

Remember that adults are active participants in helping children
resolve the conﬂicts inherent in each of the stages of development.
Provide guidance and support so that the conﬂicts can be resolved
in ways that enhance children’s self-image.

Include families in decisions concerning a child’s problem behav-
iors. The behaviors have been formed within the context of family
interactionsandwillbemoreeasilychangedwithcooperationfrom
family members.
Approximate Age
Freud
Erikson
3–6
Phallic stage
Initiative vs. guilt
Oedipal situation
Attempt adult activities
Identiﬁcation with same-
sex parent
Gaining independence
Superego, conscience
Overstep parental limits,
feel guilty
7–11
Latency
Industry vs. inferiority
Quiet period, less sexual
tension
Becoming competent is
important
Psychic energy goes into
learning skills
Can feel inferior if
unsuccessful
Identity vs. role confusion
Adolescence
Genital
Considering own identity
Seeking sexual stimulation
and gratiﬁcation
Establishing ethnic and
career identities

CHAPTER 6
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PSYCHOSOCIAL
99

Support children’s need for competence by providing opportuni-
ties for them to acquire new social skills and to practice already
acquired skills.

Supporttheirneedtobeindependentbyallowingthemfreedomto
make choices and do things without adult intervention. Let them
plan and carry out many of their own activities. Also let them make
theirownruleswithinlimitsthatdonotinterferewithothers’rights.

Let children know their competence and responsibility are valued.
MORAL DEVELOPMENT
The process of acquiring and using moral values and attitudes continues
throughout life. At each step of development, children learn that certain
behaviors are acceptable, whereas others bring disapproval and rejection.
The years of middle childhood are particularly fertile grounds for learning
the lessons taught by the family, culture, and society for several reasons.
First, peer relationships become extremely important, sometimes taking
precedence over family. Children want to be part of a peer group, so they
learn to negotiate, compromise, and “play by the rules” in order to be
included. Second, they have already acquired cognitive skills that allow
them to think logically and even abstractly. They understand concepts of
right and wrong and can consider moral issues related to their own behav-
iors. Finally, their world has expanded beyond the family into the school
and the neighborhood. Toward the end of middle childhood, children
begin to look at broad moral issues that affect others: human rights,
destructiveness of war, ecological devastation, and global hunger.
Writing is an important societal task to be mastered.

SECTION TWO
100
Jean Piaget
As discussed in Chapter 5, Piaget’s (1932) primary concern was the cog-
nitive development of children, but he was also interested in how children
begin to understand justice and develop a respect for social order. He
believed that children’s understanding of rules goes through stages as
their thinking processes change. In the earliest stage, the preschool and
early school-age years, children believe that rules are created by an all-
powerful authority ﬁgure and that they are not to be changed. He called
this stage moral realism, in which justice is whatever the authority
decides at a particular time. By age seven or eight, children reach another
level. During this period they interact with their peers differently, often
with give-and-take reciprocity. They also change their ideas about author-
ity, recognizing that punishments may be fair or unfair, depending on the
transgression committed. As children approach adolescence, around age
11 or 12, a new stage emerges. Piaget called this stage moral relativism.
At this level, children are able to be more ﬂexible, change rules, and dis-
cuss moral issues.
Lawrence Kohlberg
The most complete theory of children’s moral development was proposed
by Kohlberg, who used Piaget’s theories as a starting point for developing
his own theory of moral development. Kohlberg (1963) believed that
children’s moral thinking developed in stages, along with the develop-
ment of cognitive skills. As cognitive processes changed, the ability to con-
sider moral questions also changed. To test his theory, he presented
children with a set of hypothetical stories about moral dilemmas that
required decisions involving human life, property rights, or human
needs. He examined children’s responses to these situations and con-
cluded that children proceed through the following three levels of moral
reasoning:
Level I. Preconventional: Emphasis on Punishment
and Rewards, Ages 4 to 10
Stage 1. Might makes right.
At this level behavior is labeled good or
bad based entirely on the consequences of an action. Children obey
authority in order to avoid punishment. “If you do that, you’ll get in
trouble.”
Stage 2. Satisfy your own needs.
People take care of their own needs
ﬁrst and occasionally the needs of others. Children believe that if they are
nice to others, others will be nice to them. “I’ll invite you to my birthday
party if you let me play with you.”
moral realism
a stage of moral development in which
children believe that rules are
determined by an authority ﬁgure and
they are not to be changed
moral relativism
a stage of moral development in which
children view punishments as fair or
unfair, are more ﬂexible in their
thinking, and can discuss moral issues
preconventional
Kohlberg’s ﬁrst stage of moral
development, in which there is an
emphasis on punishment and rewards

CHAPTER 6
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PSYCHOSOCIAL
101
Level II. Conventional: Emphasis on Social Rules of the
Individual’s Family, Group, or Nation, Ages 10 to 13
Stage 3. Interpersonal concordance.
Good behavior is behavior that
others approve of and reward. Approval is more important than any other
kind of compensation. Children value conformity to stereotyped images
of what majority behavior is. A signiﬁcant change occurs during this stage:
Children recognize intent that is attached to behavior. “He didn’t really
mean to ruin your building. He was just trying to help.”
Stage 4. Law and order.
Emphasis is on authority and obedience to
the laws set down by those in power in order to maintain social order.
Right behavior means doing one’s duty, showing respect for authority,
and recognizing the need to maintain social order. “It’s not right to take
things that don’t belong to you. Besides, you might get arrested.”
Level III. Postconventional: Emphasis on Universal
Moral Values and Principles, Age 13 and Older
Stage 5. Social contract.
People understand that laws and rules exist
to ensure individual rights. Right action is seen in terms of standards that
society has examined and agreed on. Aside from what has been demo-
cratically agreed on, right is also a matter of personal values and opinions.
Laws might be changed if a consensus can be reached: “I think we should
change the rules of this game so the little kids can play.”
Stage 6. Universal principles.
People behave according to universal
ethical principles. These principles are abstract, like the “golden rule,”
and involve a basic right for everyone to be treated equally and with dig-
nity: “I don’t think anybody should be discriminated against. Everyone
should be able to live where he wants or go to school where she wants.”
Kohlberg found that individuals progress through the moral hierarchy
very slowly. He found that most school-age children function at Stage 1 or
2. He believed that children must be at the cognitive level of adolescents
to make moral decisions comparable to Stage 3. Only then will they begin
to consider another person’s intent before judging behavior as right or
wrong. Once they reach that level of thinking, they may be able to go on
to question authority and laws in terms of faithfulness to maintaining basic
human rights. Each stage must be experienced before progressing to the
next level, and no level can be skipped.
Some individuals may become ﬁxed at a certain level and never move
on to a higher one.
conventional
Kohlberg’s second stage of moral
development in which there is an
emphasis on the social rules of the
individual’s family, group, or nation
postconventional
Kohlberg’s third stage of moral
development, in which there is an
emphasis on moral values and
principles

SECTION TWO
102
Evaluation of Kohlberg’s Theory
Although Kohlberg’s stages of moral development were originally
praised by developmentalists as a way of understanding moral education,
several researchers took a closer look.
Gilligan (1982) pointed to the fact that Kohlberg’s scheme was vali-
dated on a group of only males, ages 10, 13, and 16. When women were
tested, they scored lower than males; women on average were at Stage 3,
and men at Stage 4. Moral development at Stage 3 is an interpersonal
level, with emphasis on gaining approval for good behavior. Stage 4 is a
more objective acceptance of rules. Gilligan argues that girls develop
what she calls a morality of caring, whereas boys judge right and
wrong in terms of a morality of justice. Because they are socialized to
be caring and nurturing, girls are reluctant to judge right and wrong in
absolutes. When faced with making choices, boys immediately determine
what is right or wrong followed by a clear solution, whereas girls try to ﬁnd
a variety of alternatives.
One researcher tested Gilligan’s ideas and came to a different conclu-
sion. Walker (1988) found that during middle childhood, both boys and
girls tended to seek justice when faced with a moral dilemma. Older and
more mature subjects were more caring.
Turiel (1983; Turiel, Smetana, and Killen, 1991) pointed out the fact
that Kohlberg used hypothetical situations, not the daily circumstances
children typically confront. When Turiel used real test situations more
closely resembling children’s own experiences, he found children can rea-
son better about familiar settings. When playing games, for instance, they
function at a higher level of moral thinking. Turiel also found that when
children have a chance to discuss issues repeatedly, they make wiser
decisions.
A further criticism of Kohlberg’s theory is that his stages reﬂect
Western values and cannot be applied to other cultures. Reid (1984,
1989), studying Samoan and European families in New Zealand, found
that the needs of family members sometimes take precedence over
observing moral principles that apply to everyone.
Implications for Child Care Staff Members
Because middle childhood is a period when children are learning to ﬁnd
their way in the world outside their home, it is important to facilitate their
ability to live within society’s rules and to get along with others. They
should also be encouraged to develop their own moral compass that
helps them care about others and lays the foundation for the next stage
of moral development. Child care workers can play an important part by:
“Me.” Nicole, age 7.
morality of caring
Gilligan’s theory that girls are socialized
to be caring and nurturing and reluctant
to judge right and wrong in absolutes
morality of justice
Gilligan’s theory that boys will
determine what is right or wrong and
then follow it with a clear solution when
faced with making choices

CHAPTER 6
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PSYCHOSOCIAL
103

examiningtheirownmoralprinciplesandhowthesemayinﬂuence
the children in their care

providing children with both male and female caregivers

involving children in solving moral dilemmas that occur in their
everyday experiences, and giving them opportunities to discuss
the possible solutions to and the consequences of each deci-
sion—allowing them to ﬁnd new ways of approaching moral
dilemmas

providing children with opportunities to interact with children and
adults of different age groups, exposing them to higher levels of
moral functioning

creating an environment in which individual and family value sys-
tems are accepted. It is easy to accept value systems that are like
one’s own, but it takes more practice to accept those that are
different.

modeling the kind of behavior expected of children, and behaving
in ways that are fair and just rather than imposing arbitrary rules
that have no relation to values.

allowing the children to assist in forming the language of the pro-
gram rules.
SUMMARY
Freud’s psychoanalytic theory of development asserts that there are
hidden causes of behavior that originate in the unconscious. He also
believed that libido—general sexual or sensual energy—is the driving
force behind all human behavior. He saw the psyche as having three
parts: the id, the ego, and the superego. The mediating force of the ego
facilitates the struggle between the pleasure-seeking id and the con-
science-driven superego. Individuals go through ﬁve stages during this
process. Although many facets of Freud’s theory are widely accepted,
there are criticisms.
Erikson based his theory on psychoanalytic principles but felt that the
resolution of the conﬂicts between the id and the superego takes place in
the context of the social environment. How successful a person is in
resolving the crises of each stage depends on the support and guidance
of parents and society. Erikson delineated eight stages from birth to the
end of life. Erikson’s theory is more easily accepted than Freud’s because
it is not based on the Victorian culture of Freud’s time.
The process of developing moral values continues throughout life.
Piaget related moral development to the development of cognitive abil-
ities. He wrote of the stage of moral realism during the preschool and

SECTION TWO
104
early school-age years. By age seven or eight, children reach another level:
moral relativism. At this level children are able to be more ﬂexible, change
rules, and discuss moral values.
Kohlberg formulated the most complete theory of children’s moral
development. He used Piaget’s ideas as a starting point and related
moral development to the acquisition of cognitive skills. Kohlberg pro-
posed three levels of moral reasoning, with two stages at each level. He
found that individuals proceed through the stages slowly and that most
school-age children function at the ﬁrst level.
Criticism of Kolhberg’s theory comes from several researchers who
noted that his research focused only on preadolescent and adolescent
boys. Gilligan argues that girls develop a morality of caring, whereas
boys develop a morality of justice. Turiel contends that Kohlberg’s test
situations were hypothetical, not actual day-to-day dilemmas children
actually face and could understand. Further criticism is that his stages
reﬂect Western values and cannot be applied to all cultures.
KEY TERMS
adolescence
anal period
autonomy vs. shame and
doubt
conventional
ego
id
identity vs. role confusion
industry vs. inferiority
initiative vs. guilt
latency period
moral realism
moral relativism
morality of caring
morality of justice
oral period
phallic period
postconventional
preconventional
superego
trust vs. mistrust
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Ask several school-age children to discuss some moral dilemmas they
are likely to face in their everyday lives. The following are some pos-
sible scenarios, but you can make up your own.
a. You and your friend go to the store to buy some candy. You notice
thatyourfriendputsacandybarinhispocketbutpaysforapackage
of gum. What should you do?
b. Your friend’s little sister wants to play a game with the two of you,
but you know that it will be too difﬁcult for her. What will you do?
Write down the responses the children make and then put them
into one of Kohlberg’s stages. Share the results with your class-
mates during your next class.
2. Ask your parents how they handled the following situations when you
were growing up:

CHAPTER 6
DEVELOPMENT IN MIDDLE CHILDHOOD: PSYCHOSOCIAL
105
a. Questions about gender differences
b. Sibling rivalry
c. Adolescent relationships
3. Were their methods inﬂuenced by psychoanalytic thinking? If so, in
what way?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Freud saw the psyche as having three parts. List and deﬁne each.
2. How is Erikson’s theory related to Freud’s ideas, and how is it
different?
3. Brieﬂy describe children’s development according to Erikson during
the following stages: initiative vs. guilt industry vs. inferiority identity
vs. role confusion
4. State some criticisms of psychoanalytic theory.
5. What are some ways child care leaders can apply Freudian and
Eriksonian theory to their work with children and families?
6. Piaget cited two stages in children’s development of a sense of justice
and respect for social order. What are they?
7. Kohlbergproposedthreelevelsofmoral reasoning.HecalledLevelI,
age four to 10, preconventional. State and describe Stages 1 and 2 at
this level.
8. Why did Kohlberg believe that school-age children would ﬁnd it
difﬁcult to make moral decisions having to do with a person’s intent
behind a behavior?
9. What was the basis for Gilligan’s criticism of Kohlberg’s theory?
10. Anotherresearcherwhocriticized Kohlberg’sﬁndingsisTuriel.What
were his concerns?
CASE STUDY
Joaquin is a caregiver of a group of eight-year-olds. He would like to
change the way some children react when there are problems among
the children. Danisha, the youngest boy in the group, never does anything
wrong, but when someone else does, he loudly says, “You’re going to get
in trouble for that.” Emily maintains control over her two friends by
threatening, “I won’t invite you to my birthday party if you don’t do what
I want.”

SECTION TWO
106
1. Why are the children reacting in this way?
2. Joaquin wants to reinforce the importance of rules but also wants to
help the children move on to a higher level of morality. What could he
say to the children?
3. When you are faced with helping children make decisions about
good/bad behavior, what is it you want them to learn?
REFERENCES
Berger, K., & Thompson, R. (2000). The developing person through child-
hood and adolescence (4th ed.). New York: Worth.
Erikson,E.H.(1963).Childhoodandsociety(2nded.).NewYork:Norton.
Freud,S.(1938).ThebasicwritingsofSigmundFreud.(A.A.Brill,Ed.and
Trans.). New York: Modern Library.
Gilligan, C. (1982). In a different voice: Psychological theory and women’s
development. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Kohlberg, L. (1963). Development of children’s orientation towards a
moral order (Part 1). Sequence in the development of moral thought.
Vita Humana, 6, 11–36.
Piaget, J.(1932). The moral judgment of the child. (M. Gabin, Trans.). New
York: Free Press.
Reid, B. V. (1984). An anthropological reinterpretation of Kohlberg’s
stages of moral development. Human Development, 27, 56–74.
Reid,B.V.(1989).Socializationformoralreasoning:Maternalstrategiesof
SamoansandEuropeansinNewZealand.InJaanValsiner(Ed.),Child
development in cultural context. Toronto: Hogrefe and Huber.
Turiel, E. (1983). The development of social knowledge: Morality and con-
vention. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Turiel, E., Smetana, J., & Killen, M. (1991). Social context in social cogni-
tive development. In William M. Kurtines & Jacob L. Gewirtz (Eds.),
Handbook of moral behavior and development: Vol. 2, Research. Hill-
sdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
WEB RESOURCES
For more information about each of the theorists: [http://wikipedia.com];
[http://Ask.com]

Helping Children Develop
Social Competence
107
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss strategies for helping children make and keep friends.
State the steps used to help children resolve conﬂicts.
Describe behaviors that create problems for individuals and the
group.
Discuss verbal and other strategies for helping children change their
behavior.
SOCIAL COMPETENCE
m
aking and keeping friends is of major importance to chil-
dren during middle childhood. Those who lack social skills
do not have friends, may become bullies, exhibit aggressive
or passive behavior, have difﬁculties in school, and have emotional prob-
lems. On the other hand, children who have good social skills have lots of
friends, get better grades, and will probably function more effectively as
adults (Hartup, 1991). Middle childhood is an optimal time for helping
children develop the skills they need to get along with others. At this
stage, they have begun to develop empathy and can consider how others
think and feel. At times they are willing to give up gratiﬁcation of their
own needs in order to do what a friend wants. They are learning self-
control and take responsibility for behaving in ways that do not conﬂict
with others’ rights. Child-care professionals are in a unique position to
help children develop positive behaviors.
In the past, teaching relationship skills was left to the family, but now
it is included more often in the curriculum of schools and child care
CHAPTER77
OBJECTIVES

SECTION TWO
108
programs. In fact, some professionals believe it should be the fourth “R”
along with reading, writing, and arithmetic. There are several reasons for
this change. Many families do not communicate with one another because
everyone is so busy and on different schedules. The parents put in long
hours at work; the children have school and extracurricular activities or
are in after-school care. Families may be separated, or they move fre-
quently, losing neighborhood stability. The models for how to work out
long-term relationships are not readily available. Many marriages end in
divorce, and grandparents who are still married may live far away. The
child care setting is an ideal place to help children learn how to make
and keep friends. The atmosphere is less structured and more relaxed
than that in the school classroom. There is time for group discussions or
individual conversations. Learning activities can be organized into games
or other fun things to do.
Strategies

Identify social strengths and weaknesses in children. What are the
waystheyinteractsuccessfullywithothersandwhatdotheydothat
results in rejection?

Coach children to ﬁnd more effective ways of behaving toward
friends. Ask what behavior causes friends to dislike or reject
them. Discuss alternative behaviors and urge them to try them.

Praise children for times they are successful while interacting with
others.

Teach children how to react to others who are mean to them, or
bullyorteasethem.Children canstaycalm,ignorethebehavior,or
use appropriate comebacks.

Modelgoodsocialskillsasyouinteractwithcolleaguesandparents.
The children will observe you and want to use you as a model for
their own behavior.

Discuss with children the characteristics that foster friendships.
Encourage them to discuss a time they had fun with a friend and
what made it enjoyable. How did they and their friend act toward
each other?

Talk about the meaning of respect and how it is important in
relationships.

Take part in plays and other dramatic activities that help them
understand what it feels like to be bullied.

Use games to teach social skills. The following section provides
several suggestions.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
109
Activities
Make a Friend
Purposes:

practice interaction skills

demonstrate approaches to other children
Facilitate mini-dramas of role-playing, in which each child plans what
he or she would do to make a friend. Play out the scene. At the end of the
scene, discuss what happened and how the participants might have felt.
Possible scenarios are the following:

Youareplayingagameofbasketballwithyourfriends,andakidyou
donotknowstandsatthesidewatching.Yourfriendsthinkheistoo
little to play.

A new girl comes into your classroom. She has just moved into the
neighborhood from another part of the city. Your best friend whis-
pers that she is “kinda ugly ’cause she’s too fat.”

A new family moves into the house next door to yours. You see that
they have twins who look about your age. You are a little shy but
would like to have somebody next door to play with.
OK, We’ll Do It
Purposes:

develop negotiation skills

learn to postpone personal gratiﬁcation

practice making joint decisions
Divide the children into groups of three. Tell them to pretend their
group can choose to do one of the following: see a movie, go out for pizza,
or buy a new computer game. Ask each to relate reasons for choosing one
over the others. They can choose only one, so they will have to decide
which it will be. When each group has made a choice, ask them to discuss
how well their group worked together. What was the most difﬁcult part of
the process? How did they ﬁnally reach a decision?
Best Friends Are ______
Purposes:

identify characteristics of friendships

practice communicating

appreciation for friends

SECTION TWO
110
At group time, tell the children that the topic for discussion is “What
makes a friend?” You might relate that when you were their age, you had a
best friend, and one of the things you liked about that person was ____.
Encourage them to tell one thing they like about one of their friends.
Write down the characteristics they describe either on a chalkboard or a
piece of paper. Encourage each child to add to the discussion while the
rest of the group listens. Read the list and ask them to think about how
many of the characteristics they have themselves. Conclude the discus-
sion with ways they can become more like the best friend they want for
themselves.
CONFLICT RESOLUTION
Children are growing up in a world where they witness violence almost
every day. They learn ways of dealing with conﬂict by watching the adults
they see at home, in their neighborhoods, on TV, and at school. Often
adults behave in ways they really do not want children to imitate. Yet,
children often “try on” behaviors they observe in others and only gradually
learn to resolve conﬂicts in more effective ways. Preschool children will
call on adults to intervene in resolving disputes. School-age children
gradually learn to negotiate a compromise, bargain, or use humor to
lessen angry feelings. However, at times those strategies do not work,
and children resort to ﬁghting. The ﬁghting may escalate, and children
may be seriously hurt or even killed. According to the Children’s Defense
Fund (2004), each day eight children and teens die from gunﬁre.
Between 1979 and 2001, gunﬁre killed nearly 93,000 children and teens.
What do you think is happening between these children?

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
111
Violence is a confrontational and harmful way of settling disputes.
The act can be physical, verbal, or emotional. These methods of settling
disputes are counterproductive. Violence often escalates until serious
injury or death results. However, violence is only one of the styles people
use to resolve conﬂicts. Avoidance is frequently used. When confronted
with a difﬁcult situation, the person turns away, withdraws completely,
or is silent. This method does not resolve the conﬂict but only internalizes
the angry feelings. After repeated incidents, the anger may intensify
until it erupts either in violent behavior or displays of anger out of
proportion to the particular situation. The most effective way of dealing
with conﬂicts is problem solving, yet many people, both adults and chil-
dren, ﬁnd it difﬁcult to do. Child care leaders can help children go
through the steps necessary to resolve their conﬂicts so that each feels
validated and empowered. All parties should be satisﬁed that they have
been heard, that their feelings have been considered, and that the solu-
tion is mutually agreeable. When all parties are gathered, the adult can
facilitate a discussion that takes the children through the following steps:
1. Decide to resolve the conﬂict. All the children involved in the dispute
must agree to solve the problem. “I am willing to try to settle this
argument.” Set some ground rules:

Each is committed to solving the problem.

Name-calling and put-downs are not permitted.

Each will be truthful.

An option is for each child to have a cooling-down period at the
peace table where they draw pictures of the participants in the
conﬂict and what happened.
2. Each child tells what happened.

Use “I” messages. “I get mad when you . . . ” “I am unhappy
when . . .” “I feel sad when . . . ”

Describe exactly what happened.

Relate how each felt about the incident.

Listen to what the other person has to say.
Example “I was waiting for my turn at the tape player, but she grabbed
it. I got mad because she does that all the time.” “I had been waiting
a long time, and I didn’t know she was, too. I was surprised she got so
mad at me.”
3. Each child states what he or she needs to resolve the conﬂict.

Be speciﬁc; use “I” messages.

Listen to the other person’s needs.

SECTION TWO
112
Example “I just want to have a turn so that I can play the music I like.”
“I don’t always want to hear what she likes.”
4. Explore possible ways of solving the conﬂict.

Brainstorm options.

Evaluate the suggestions.

Decide which will be satisfactory to both parties.
Example “Let’s think of ways to solve this problem.” “Will that solu-
tion satisfy both of you?”
5. After an interval, get the children together to determine whether the
solution is working or whether a new approach should be considered.
Example “How has it been working to have a sign-up sheet and a timer
forusingthetapeplayer?”Theadultsinanafter-schoolprogramcanbe
powerful motivators tohelp children change their behavior so they can
become part of a group, feel good about themselves, and achieve their
personal goals. The process may be difﬁcult along the way, but it helps
to remember that change takes time and effort.
Strategies
Reading nonverbal cues, seeing another person’s point of view, and prac-
ticing conﬂict negotiation are additional skills that children can learn in
addition to the steps for conﬂict resolution. Adults can use various strate-
gies, such as the following, to help children learn these additional skills.

Increase children’s ability to read nonverbal cues from others.
Sometimes a look or gesture is misinterpreted, and an argument
ensues. When an altercation takes place, encourage the partici-
pants to discuss what they saw and what they thought it meant. If
there has been a misunderstanding, help them to clarify their
meaning. Does ignoring an invitation to play just mean “I didn’t
hear you,” or does it mean “I don’t want to play right now. Go
away”? Does an angry look mean, “He’s mad at me about some-
thing” or just that he had a bad day at school?

Help children to see that others may have a different view. Use
discussions to let all children express their own perspectives or
state their own needs. One way to accomplish this is to involve
children in planning parts of the program. They may all have
good ideas based on their own interests or what is most important
to them. Each contribution should be accepted and valued even
though it may not be put into action.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
113

Provide many opportunities for children to learn by trial and error.
They have to practice conﬂict negotiation and ways to cooperate
with one another.

Encouragechildren whoarehavingfrequent conﬂict difﬁculties to
draft a conﬂict plan. The plan might include a description of the
kindsofconﬂicts,theirusualbehavior,andwaystheymightchange
their behavior. The plan’s ﬁnal statement should include a future
date to evaluate how it is working. A conﬂict plan might look
like the following drawn up by John. “I sometimes get mad when
other kids won’t let me play. When that happens, I start calling
them names. Next time I will try to remember to either suggest
how I can be a part of their play or ﬁnd someone else to be with.
I will try these methods then look at how successful they’ve been in
two weeks.”
Activities
Silent Stories
Purposes:

practice in reading nonverbal cues

increase understanding that others have different points of view
Have children work in pairs. Tell them to use nonverbal ways to tell
their partner something about themselves. For instance, they can use
gestures to tell their age or things they are interested in. Facial expres-
sions can be used to indicate something that makes them mad or sad.
Set a time limit of ﬁve or ten minutes. At the end of that time, each child
tries to relate to the other what has been learned. Have them clarify any
misinformation and discuss another way they might have conveyed the
information.
Cultural Scenes
Purposes:

practice observational skills

understand the similarities and differences in the ways families
carry out familiar routines

appreciate the similarities and differences in cultures
Ask three or four children from the same culture to enact a typical
scene from their culture. Allow them time by themselves to talk about
what they will do. Examples might be a dinnertime routine, a visit from
grandparents, or a birthday celebration.

SECTION TWO
114
The remainder of the group observes the enactment, paying attention
to procedures and the things people say. When the enactment is ﬁnished,
allow them time to ask questions of the participants.
Lead a discussion of their observations, focusing on how some of the
audience saw things the others did not and how actions or words were
interpreted differently.
Shopping Trip
Purposes:

practice in working together as a group

develop decision-making skills

resolve conﬂicts effectively
Divide your class into groups of three. Give each group a catalog. Tell
them they have $100 to spend buying presents for a boy and girl who are
both nine years old. Explain that they all must agree on what to buy. Set a
time limit. When they make their decision, they can cut out the pictures
and paste them on a sheet of paper.
Have each group share their choices. Ask children about the prob-
lems they encountered and how they resolved them. Why did they make
the choices they did?
Build a Tower
Purposes:

cultivate creativity

develop leadership qualities

encourage verbal and nonverbal communication
Divide your class into groups of three or four. Pass out 20 pieces of
heavy paper and a roll of tape to each group. Tell them they are to con-
struct a tower using only these supplies.
(You can add another dimension by telling them they cannot talk
while working on the project.) Set a time limit of 10 or 15 minutes.
Let each group show their tower. Discuss how they managed to com-
plete their tower. Was one person the leader? Did anyone feel excluded?
What kinds of nonverbal communications did they use? Is it easy or difﬁ-
cult to understand nonverbal messages?
Brainstorming
Purposes:

foster divergent thinking skills

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
115

strengthen ability to negotiate conﬂicts

amplify group cohesiveness
Tell children that many great inventions are the result of a group of
people getting together to create something new. You might remind them
that it takes numerous scientists and engineers to design and build space
vehicles. Divide them into groups of four. Tell them they are going to
invent a new bicycle. Give each group a piece of paper, and tell them to
designate one member to write down ideas. When they have several
designs, ask them to choose one that should be built. Set a time limit of
10 minutes.
Let each group relate their ideas to the entire group. Discuss the
value or difﬁculties of creating as a group. How did they decide on the
design that should be built?
Picture Problems
Purposes:

increase ability to understand (decode) nonverbal communica-
tions in pictures

recognize and accept others’ points of view

practice in group decision making
Glue pictures of people in a problem situation onto the front of a large
manila envelope. You can ﬁnd pictures in magazines, coloring books, dis-
carded books, and posters. Have children work in groups of three. Give
each group a picture and some paper. Ask them to reach an agreement
about the problem portrayed in the picture, then write it down. Tell them
to put their paper into the envelope and then pass it on to the next group
until all groups have looked at all the pictures. Allow three minutes for
each picture.
Collect the envelopes. Read each of the descriptions. Discuss how
different groups saw the problem differently.
Fighting Fair
Purposes:

practice resolving conﬂicts effectively

foster independence

expand self-esteem
When two children start to ﬁght or argue, send them to a quiet
corner of the room. Tell them they are to have a three-minute time-out.
During that time they are to work out a solution to their conﬂict. Set a

SECTION TWO
116
three-minute timer. When the timer goes off, ask them to tell you their
solution and then implement it. Praise them for success.
Role-Playing
Purposes:

resolve conﬂicts

develop understanding of others’ feelings

evaluate solutions to conﬂicts
Set the stage by describing a situation that creates conﬂicts. The prob-
lem may be between two boys or two girls, a male and a female, or child
and adult. Assign children to the roles. Tell them to act out the situation,
then reverse their roles. The male takes the female part, the child takes
the adult part.
Stop the play before a resolution is reached and ask the rest of the
children to suggest a solution. Continue the play as the actors ﬁnd a sol-
ution, possibly using one suggested by the audience. Ask the actors to
discuss their feelings while the action was taking place. Talk about the
play after it is ﬁnished, discussing whether the problem could have been
prevented or whether the solution was satisfactory to both parties.
SELF-IMAGE
Self-image has two components: our perceptions of ourselves and the
perceptions conveyed to us by others. Throughout a lifetime, self-image
changes as physical abilities evolve, as cognitive functions change, and as
interactions with others are reﬁned. During middle childhood, self-image
is tied closely to feelings of competence. Children compare themselves to
their contemporaries in terms of physical abilities, academic success,
ability to manage behavior, physical appearance, or popularity with their
peers. Their evaluations of themselves are sometimes realistic and at
other times radically unrealistic. In addition, adult attitudes and behaviors
play a signiﬁcant role in how children feel about themselves. When adults
react positively to them, children feel they are valued and therefore have
self-worth.
How children feel about themselves has a direct effect on their behav-
ior. If they like themselves and see that others react positively to them,
they behave in ways that gain further approval. If children have negative
perceptions of themselves, they may use unpopular tactics to gain atten-
tion or to satisfy their needs. This solidiﬁes their perception of themselves
as someone who is unlikable or who cannot succeed. Therefore, it is
essential that anyone who works with children convey attitudes that
Children who have a good
self-image behave in
acceptable ways.
self-image
our perception of ourselves plus the
perceptions conveyed by others

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
117
help, rather than hinder, children in the development of their identity and
self-esteem.
Strategies

Develop a genuine interest in every child. Find opportunities to
spend time with children individually. Get to know them, listen to
them, and try to understand their concerns. Offer help when
needed, but also support their ability to ﬁnd their own solutions
to problems.

Recognize every child’s unique qualities and respect their differ-
ences. Eliminate prejudice or bias in your own thinking or in the
behaviors of the children. Ensure that all activities are nonracist
and nonbiased.

Supportself-esteembyinvolvingchildreninintrinsically meaning-
fulactivities.Planchallengingprojectsinwhichchildrenandadults
worktogetherandinwhichchildrendevelopskills,andgainknowl-
edge. As they acquire skills and feel more competent, children’s
belief in their own self-worth increases.

Conduct group meetings that allow all children to ask questions,
express concerns, discuss problems, or make plans. During group
meetings,thereshouldbeafreeexchangewithnoput-downs.Each
contribution should be shown respect and consideration, and chil-
dren should learn to consider all sides of an issue.

Provide many ways for children to be successful. Offer a variety of
activities appropriate for children at different developmental lev-
els.Inthatway,allchildrenwillbeabletochoose,accordingtotheir
needs, some activities that are easy for them and others that offer a
challenge. Writingand illustrating asimple story isa fairly easy task
for nine- or ten-year-olds. Older children might tackle the more
difﬁcult task of writing a play complete with dialogue.
Activities
Greetings
Purposes:

foster respect and recognition of each child’s unique qualities

develop a feeling of belonging to a group
Welcome each child who comes into your group. Every day, when
children enter your room, greet them and spend a minute or so chatting.
If any children enter during a group time, stop, greet them, and then help
them ﬁnd a place in the group. Tell them what the group has been doing.
Continue the contacts when children are ill. Telephone them at home to
ﬁnd out how they are feeling and when they will return.

SECTION TWO
118
Interior Decoration
Purposes:

cultivate students’ feelings of responsibility for and control over
their environment

strengthen ability to negotiate differences in ideas, needs, and
preferences
In a group meeting, discuss plans for making the room their own. Ask
for ideas about what they want to have in “their room.” Write down all the
ideas either on a chalkboard or a large piece of paper. If needed, suggest
some additional ideas they might like to add: a class mural, a rearrange-
ment of the furniture, a room sign or logo, or decorative containers for
storage. Ask for discussion of the most important or the most feasible
ideas, then vote on the ones to implement. Tell them that they will
reevaluate the plan at a speciﬁc time in the future.
Getting to Know You
Purposes:

develop friendship skills

increase awareness of similarities and differences between people
Encourage children to get to know others in the classroom. Make a
class roster with children’s names and pictures. Or make a class book with
a page for each child. Information on the page can include a picture, the
names of family members, the child’s birthday, the child’s likes and dis-
likes, or whatever she chooses to say about herself. Leave the book in a
place where classmates and parents can look through it.
For a more extensive project, have the children make an individual
book all about themselves. The purpose of this book is to provide helpful
information for the adults who work with these children. (See Appendix A
for reproducible pages that can be used for this purpose.)
Puppet Talk
Purposes:

foster development of language skills

increase organizational skills

provide an outlet for the expression of ideas and feelings

explore fairy tales and stories from other cultures
Set up a puppet stage. Provide books of fairy tales, fables, or stories
from other cultures. Assist children in writing scripts using the stories

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
119
from the books as the framework, or a story of their own devising. Make
available materials and instructions for making puppets.
Chapter 11 has some suggestions for making puppets.
TV Talk
Purposes:

foster development of language skills

increase each child’s feelings of self-worth
Provide a setting where children can interview their classmates.
Secure a microphone. Or make one, using a piece of wooden dowel for
the handle. Make two slits in the form of a cross on a tennis ball. Slip the
ball over the end of the dowel. If you wish, you can spray it with black
paint. When the “microphone” is ready, help the children structure an
interview. Suggest a few questions they can ask, then allow them to devise
their own format. It may also help if you suggest they watch television
interviews. If a tape recorder is available, have them tape their own inter-
view, then play it back. Ask them to evaluate the interview. What did they
ﬁnd out about the person being interviewed? What other questions might
have been asked?
Silhouettes
Purposes:

strengthen their ability to work together

develop appreciation for similarities and differences

increase feelings of self-esteem
Have children work in pairs. Tape large pieces of paper onto a wall.
Darken the room and provide a bright light. (A strong, steadily held ﬂash-
light or a high-intensity lamp will work.) Ask one person to sit sideways in
front of the paper while the partner outlines a facial silhouette. Children
can sign and color their silhouette. Display the portraits.
Getting to Know Me
Purposes:

increase self-esteem

understand how people are alike and different

communicate each person’s uniqueness to others

develop appreciation for others’ individual traits
Ask children to bring things from home that are special to them and
that represent who they are. These may be things they like to collect,

SECTION TWO
120
photos of special people, or mementos of special occasions in their life.
The objects must be small enough to ﬁt into a shoe box.
Provide each child with a box, and distribute materials they can use to
decorate their box. Wallpaper pieces, wrapping paper, construction
paper, collage materials, paint, marking pens, and pictures from maga-
zines are examples.
Allow time at group meetings to have each child show the items from
his box and explain why they have special meaning to him.
Family Tree
Purposes:

increase self-esteem

develop appreciation for family differences

increase communication with family members

develop pride in one’s family
Instruct children to gather as much information as possible about
their family. Who are their parents’ parents? How about their grandpar-
ents’ parents? How many aunts, uncles, and cousins can they discover?
Help them to draw up a family tree. They can include names or pictures
of the people.
Older children can use the computer software program listed at the
end of this chapter to gather family information. Caregivers should be
sensitive to the fact that some children may live with foster parents. If
so, this is not an appropriate activity for the group.
COOPERATION
Cooperation with others does not come easily to children. As infants, tod-
dlers, and young preschoolers, they are intensely egocentric. During
those years their main concern is satisfying their own needs and achieving
their own goals with little focus on the needs of others.
Gradually, during middle childhood, cognitive development enables
children to see others more clearly, and they begin to understand that
others have needs, too. When others’ needs conﬂict with their own, they
learn to compromise and cooperate in order to have friends. They also
ﬁnd they can achieve common goals by working together. Key factors in
helping children to learn cooperative behaviors are supportive parents
and well-qualiﬁed staff members in child care.
“My dad.” Vince, age 7.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
121
Strategies

One of the most powerful strategies adults can use for teaching
children to be more cooperative is modeling, or what parents call
“settingagoodexample.”Whenchildrenseeadultshelpingothers,
being kind or compassionate, and assisting others to achieve their
goals, they see how it can be done. They have a model to follow
when confronted with situations in their own daily activities. Con-
versely, children also imitate selﬁshness, cruelty, and uncoopera-
tive behaviors they observe in adults.

Anotherimportantstrategyisemphasizingcooperationratherthan
competition. During middle childhood, children are striving to
succeed at whatever they attempt and constantly compare them-
selves to others. They want to be “the best, the ﬁrst, or the fastest.”
Somecompetitivenessisinevitablebecausemanyofthesportsthat
are popular among youngsters are based on someone winning and
someone losing. It cannot be avoided, but it can be minimized by
child care staff members. Each child can be recognized for his or
her participation during the game, rather than praising only the
winner. In addition, there should also be games that do not involve
someone emerging as the winner. Several of the games described
in Chapter 10 require cooperation and there is no real victor.
Space for school-age child care should be designed to accommodate
groups of varying sizes.

SECTION TWO
122

Space for school-age child care should be designed to accommo-
date groups of varying sizes. When children play in proximity to
others, they are forced to compromise or to engage in negotiations
concerning the use of space or materials. Space should not be so
limited, however, that children feel crowded, for that causes ten-
sion and squabbling. Within the workspace, materials should be
close at hand, adequate in number for all to share, and stored in
anunclutteredmanner.Inthisway,childrencanworkcomfortably
and with fewer conﬂicts.

Staff members can help children develop more cooperative be-
havior by leading discussions about sharing, fairness, taking
turns,and negotiating when workingtogether.Theycan use exam-
ples from daily occurrences or hypothetical situations. As an exam-
ple, fairness is an important issue for school-age children, and
conﬂicts occur frequently. A sensitive child care leader uses
these situations to discuss what happened, why a situation may
have seemed unfair, or what they can do differently next time. It
is also important to help children become aware of the fact that
sometimes one child or another has needs that may seem to take
precedence over her own. Equity does not always mean fairness
but implies that each child’s needs are met to the greatest extent
possible. Equity should be part of the philosophical approach to
school-age care.

In child care groups where children are of different age levels
or have special needs, there are many opportunities to help chil-
dren be more cooperative. Capable children can be encouraged to
take on responsibilities commensurate with their abilities for
helping younger or special-needs children with activities, games,
projects, or even homework. Both children and adults gain from
this arrangement.

Include activities that require children to work cooperatively
toward a common goal. A good example is the production of a
play. An entire group could work on this kind of project with
some children writing the script, others making costumes, taking
roles, designing stage sets, or directing the ﬁnal presentation.
Another example is producing a newsletter. Children have to
work together to gather news, write articles, decide on format,
print, and distribute the paper. Both of these projects require
a great deal of discussion, negotiation, and compromise and
can be effective techniques for helping children to develop those
skills.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
123
Activities
Sculpture
Purposes:

provide opportunity for sharing ideas

increase ability to work under time pressure

strengthen problem-solving skills
Divide the class into groups of three. Give each a pile of toothpicks,
some glue, a piece of Styrofoam, and some small corks. Tell them they are
to make a single sculpture. The ground rules are that they each get to help
decide what to make and to participate in the construction. Set a time
limit. (You can also use other objects: clay, Tinkertoys, beads, recycled
materials, etc.) Have each group share their experience in creating the
sculpture.
Discuss how they decided what to make. What were the problems
they encountered? How did they resolve the problems?
Storytelling
Purposes:

develop language skills, both talking and listening

create a group fantasy with a beginning, a middle, and an end
Tell the children they are going to write a story together. Use a tape
recorder to record it. Designate one child to start the story with a few
sentences, then point to another child to continue. Allow any child to
pass if he or she chooses not to add to the story. Set a time limit for bring-
ing the story to an end.
Rewind the tape and listen to the story. Ask the children what they
thought of their tale. Would it have been different if just one person
had told it? If so, how? Transcribe the story, ask the children to do some
illustrations to accompany the printed pages, then put it together in
book form. Place it in the reading area so children can read the story
themselves.
Y’All Come Up
Purposes:

increase awareness of others’ feelings

foster group cohesiveness

practice problem solving

SECTION TWO
124
This game is the opposite of “King of the Hill” in which the object is to
keep others from getting to the top of the hill. One child stands at the top
of a hill, then one by one asks others to join. The purpose is to get every-
one onto the hill without anyone falling off. (If no hill is available, use a
very low table.)
Discuss what they had to do to keep everyone together at the top of
the hill. How did it make them feel to be included? How did it make them
feel if they fell off and could not be included?
Class Caring Project
Purposes:

increase cooperative behavior

foster feelings of empathy for others
Involve the entire class in planning and implementing a caring pro-
ject. It can be raising money for a worthy cause, getting involved in a com-
munity cleanup drive, or visiting a retirement home. Allow them to
research community needs, then choose a project. Have them plan ways
to implement their ideas. Encourage them to assign tasks and coordinate
ways to follow through. When the project is completed, evaluate what
they learned and what they might have done differently.
These are some of the ways you can encourage children to feel better
about themselves and learn to function effectively in a group. However, in
Hitting or hurting another person is never an acceptable response to
anger.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
125
spite of all your efforts, you may ﬁnd that some children are still trouble-
some to themselves and their peers. These children may need extra
thought and care.
CHANGING CHILDREN’S
BEHAVIOR
Helping children reverse recurring cycles of behavior that inter-
fere with reaching the goals they set for themselves is one of the most
important tasks for teachers in before- and after-school programs. The
task is twofold: to stop harmful or destructive behaviors and to encourage
children to act in ways that others approve of, thus enhancing their
self-esteem.
Stopping destructive behavior begins with a clear understanding by
both children and adults about which behaviors are acceptable and
which are not. Adults must state their demands clearly, including what
the child can do and cannot do, when, and how often. “You may never
hit. Use words to tell him how you feel or what you want.” Another exam-
ple is “I expect you to put away your materials where they belong each
time you use them. Do not leave anything on the ﬂoor to get stepped
on or broken. ”A parent might say, “I want you to take out the trash and
put it in the outside can without spilling any. Do it every Friday before it
gets dark.”
Avoid cliche´ statements of expectations. “Shape up,” “Try harder,”
and “Get a life” are examples of cliche´s that have no real meaning to chil-
dren. How do they shape up? What can they do to try harder? How can
they get a life?
Making an unspeciﬁc demand is a similar mistake adults frequently
make. “I want you all to behave when we go to the museum.” Children
may have concepts of what behaving means that are very different from
those of the adult who made the statement. It is more helpful if adults
state exactly what kinds of behavior they expect and why the behavior is
important. “I want you all to stay together with the group so that no one
gets lost.”
Expectations may also be stated in the form of rules. Both families
and child care programs have rules that they expect children to abide by.
There are three kinds of rules. First, there are the things that are non-
negotiable rules, not open for discussion or negotiation. Mandatory
rules apply to actions that can be harmful to others or destructive to prop-
erty. An example might be “No hitting.”
non-negotiable rules
rules that are used for actions that can
be harmful to others or destructive to
property and that are not open for
discussion

SECTION TWO
126
Second, there are negotiable rules that offer choices. The child is
given the option of choosing one of a limited number of alternatives.
“You can choose to do your homework now or as soon as we ﬁnish dinner
and before any TV.” When using this strategy, it is important to be sure
the child is mature enough to make the decision.
One teacher conﬁgured negotiable and non-negotiable rules differ-
ently. She deﬁned a line of acceptable and unacceptable behaviors.
Acceptable was above the line and unacceptable below. Acceptable be-
haviors could allow children choices, while unacceptable behaviors were
forbidden. If necessary, the adult can offer help in considering the
possible consequences of each choice. A discussion with a child who
uses unacceptable behavior will help him to make better choices in the
future.
Finally, optional rules are the things that children can reasonably
control themselves. An example might be that the parent wants the child
to ﬁnish her homework before dinner, but the child wants to rest ﬁrst and
do homework later. If the child has shown responsibility in other situa-
tions, she should be allowed to choose the time for doing homework as
long as it gets done before she goes to bed.
Every infraction must be dealt with every time the behavior occurs if
it is to be effective. When misbehavior occurs, restate the rule or expect-
ation ﬁrmly and in a way that shows that you mean it. “The rule is no hit-
ting when you are mad at somebody. I expect you to use words to tell him
how you feel.” Sometimes it is tempting to ignore infractions because of
fatigue or discouragement. However, ignoring misbehavior sends the
wrong message to a child. Behaviorist theory teaches that intermittent
response to misbehavior is a positive reinforcement, increasing the pos-
sibility that the behavior will increase, or at least it will not decrease.
A time-out is a frequent response to children who exhibit unaccept-
able behavior, such as aggression, toward another child. The child is
removed from an activity area and expected to sit by himself for a speci-
ﬁed period of time. He is allowed to cool off and told to think about what
he has done. The advantage to this method is that the child is prevented
from further harming another child and does not get attention for his
behavior, thus reinforcing it. The disadvantage of this method is that the
child is left alone while he is experiencing strong emotions, and may
become more resentful toward both adults and other children. Time-
outs alone do nothing to help the child learn to express his emotions
more effectively, resolve conﬂicts, or build relationship skills.
To be effective, a time-out has to be followed by a discussion with an
adult. The child should be asked to describe what started her behavior and
to explore what she was feeling at the time. Further discussion can help
negotiable rules
rules that are based on choices
optional rules
things that children can reasonably
control themselves

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
127
her to ﬁnd alternative ways of either preventing similar situations in the
future or reacting to them differently should they occur.
Another method of changing children’s behavior is to follow misbe-
havior with a logical consequence. This does not mean punishment. A
logical consequence is intended to help the child learn, whereas punish-
ment is a forceful way to stop behavior. To be an effective tool for chang-
ing behavior, this method has to be related to the speciﬁc misbehavior.
If a child deliberately makes a mess while painting, it is logical to expect
him to clean it up. The consequence for misbehavior should be stated
in a calm but ﬁrm way that emphasizes the child’s ability to be responsible
for his own actions. “I expect you to clean up all that paint you have
just poured onto the ﬂoor. You can get a bucket of water and a sponge
in the kitchen. You might bring some paper towels, too, in case you need
them.”
Reinforcing positive behavior is another method of changing child-
ren’s behavior. This method is based on behaviorist theory, which says
that when behaviors are followed by a pleasant response, the behavior is
likely to be repeated. Therefore, when children are observed behaving in
ways that are expected by adults, they should be rewarded.
The rewards can be extrinsic, coming from the environment in the
form of a treat, better grades, or a special privilege. Verbal praise and
positive feedback are even more effective because they enhance child-
ren’s intrinsic interest. When the praise and feedback are later removed,
children continue to show interest in work (Cameron & Pierce, 1994).
Intrinsic rewards come from within the individual and include feeling
good about oneself or feeling capable of achieving a goal.
Positive reinforcers are most effective when children are ﬁrst trying
out new ways of functioning. The reinforcer should immediately follow
the desired behavior every time the action is observed. When the behav-
ior seems to be fairly well established, rewards can be applied less fre-
quently. Eventually, the reward will not be needed. An example
frequently used by both parents and teachers is “I appreciate the way
you helped with the cleanup today. It really helps me to get it done
more quickly.”
Strategies
Children want to behave in acceptable ways but often ﬁnd their
conﬂicting emotions or lack of experience cause them to act in ways that
elicit negative responses from others. If they do not learn another way
of behaving, they may be labeled as “bad, naughty, or mean.” They may
even take on that label themselves and wear it as a badge of importance.
logical consequence
a tool for changing behavior, in which
the result of a child’s misbehavior is
related to the behavior
“Me, when I’m mad.” Ricky,
age 9.

SECTION TWO
128
“I can be the baddest of the bad.” Adults reverse this process by trying to
understand why a child is acting in a particular way and then ﬁnding ways
to help her use more acceptable ways to get what she wants or needs.
Child care staff members can

try to understand the motivation behind troubling behavior. Is the
child trying to get attention? Is he feeling insecure? Is he attempt-
ing to boost his self-esteem? Once the behavior is understood,
appropriate measures can be taken to bring about changes. Find
ways to give attention, offer support to an insecure child, and ﬁnd
acceptable ways to boost self-esteem.

help children develop an honest sense of their own competence.
Point out their special abilities and help them to accept the things
they may not do so well.

help children learn to praise themselves. “You should feel proud of
yourself for telling Kevin how you felt when he ruined your block
building instead of hitting him.”

allow children to express their feelings in ways that are not hurtful
to others. Some children may not be able to put their feelings into
words. A discussion with a caring adult sometimes helps them to
ﬁnd acceptable ways to relieve the feelings. Some children may
need active ways to relieve feelings, particularly anger. Provide
them with pillows to pound or a place to run.

model acceptable behavior toward other adults and toward chil-
dren. Adults who are sensitive to others’ needs show children
how to behave in similar circumstances. Caregivers who help
coworkers or express empathy when another is having difﬁculty
demonstrate appropriate ways to interact and the positive results
that follow.

help children devise additional ways to act on their feelings of
empathy by discussing possible ways to behave. Their own limited
experiences may not be enough for them to know what to do, and
fear of failing may prevent them from acting. “Let’s think of some
ways to help a friend who is having a difﬁcult day.”

encourage children to put their feelings into words. They may not
have acquired the vocabulary to describe feelings, or may not have
been encouraged to express emotions with words. “Tell her it
makes you feel really bad when she calls you names.”

create a nonaggressive environment. Physically, provide plenty of
spaces to play and enough age-appropriate materials so that chil-
dren can engage in activities with minimal conﬂict. Socially, adults
and children should focus on supporting and respecting others,
offering encouragement when needed. Wherever possible, make
it clear that aggressive behavior gets negative results.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
129

be consistent. Staff members need to communicate with each
other on how behaviors are to be handled.
COMMUNICATIONS THAT HELP
CHANGE BEHAVIOR
The ways in which adults respond verbally to children’s behavior can
either increase the likelihood of repetitions or bring about changes in
behavior. It is normal to become exasperated with children’s behavior,
particularly at the end of a difﬁcult day. The tendency is then to respond
with anger, generalizations, or labeling. At one time or another most
adults have made comments such as, “Jason, why are you always getting
into ﬁghts?” or “Rachel, you’re such a loudmouth.” These kinds of verbal
responses may momentarily relieve the adult’s angry feelings, but they do
nothing to help the child change. In fact, they may bring about the oppo-
site, a tendency for the child to repeat the behavior. The child knows how
to irritate the adult and takes pleasure in doing it again or may feel the
negative label gives him status with his peers. Child care leaders can
learn to respond in ways that are appropriate to the situation and that
will help children gradually change their behavior.
Acknowledge Children’s Feelings
Often adults respond to children’s expressions of their feelings by denying
their existence or trying to change the feelings. Constant denial of feelings
or a rush to change them makes children distrust their own inner senses.
Example Jennifer has been lying on the book area pillows since getting off
the bus from school. Her child care leader wants her to get involved and
asks why she does not ﬁnd something to do. Jennifer answers by saying:
“Can’t you see I’m tired?”
Inappropriate response:
Adult:“Howcanyoubetiredwhenyouhaven’tdoneanythingyet?”
An appropriate response might be:
Adult:“Yes,Iknowsomedaysatschoolaretiring.Youdecidewhen
you’re rested and ready to do something.”
Describe the Situation
Children are sometimes unaware of all aspects of a situation. They
are concentrating on achieving their own goals and are oblivious to any-
thing else.
Can you tell if these girls are
ﬁghting or playing?

SECTION TWO
130
Example It is cleanup time before a ﬁeld trip, and there are still materials
that have not been put away.
Inappropriate response:
Adult: “You guys haven’t ﬁnished cleaning up, so maybe you won’t
be ready to go on the trip. Why are you always such slobs?”
An appropriate response might be:
Adult:“Icanstillseesomepuzzlesonthetableandsomepaintsthat
needtogointothesink.Thebuswillbehereinﬁveminutes,solet’s
all be ready.”
Help Children Recognize How Their
Behavior Affects Others
Until children reach a stage of maturity at which they are less egocentric,
they often fail to understand that what they do affects others.
Example Two girls are beginning to dress up with some costumes that are
kept in a large trunk. Shari pulls out a white dress and says that she wants
to be a princess and wear it. Leanne looks at her and tells her she can’t be a
princess because she is too fat.
Inappropriate response:
Adult: “Hey, you girls. No name calling.”
An appropriate response might be:
Adult: “Shari, how did it make you feel when Leanne said you
couldn’t be a princess because you’re too fat?”
Another appropriate response:
Adult: “Leanne, when you call Shari fat it really hurts her feelings.
Did you notice how she quickly put away the dress and looked like
she was about to cry?”
BEHAVIORS THAT CREATE
PROBLEMS FOR THE INDIVIDUAL
OR THE GROUP
Even with knowledge of child development and good intentions, child
care staff members often ﬁnd they are bafﬂed by the behavior of one or
more children in their group.
These are the children who exhibit similar behaviors to other chil-
dren, but what they do has increased intensity and is therefore potentially

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
131
harmful. There may be a child who is not just aggressive when the situ-
ation warrants it but who bullies other children seemingly for no reason at
all. Another child may spend a good portion of her time alone and resist
any attempts to be included in group activities. Still another may be in a
perpetual whirl of motion, hardly stopping long enough to have contact
with either adults or children. Each of these children desperately needs,
and probably wants, help to become a part of the group and to be
accepted by others.
The Overly Aggressive Child
Nearly every group has at least one child who seems to be angry all the
time and who dislikes both children and adults. Although he often com-
plains that others are picking on him, in reality he is usually teasing other
children. At times he may resort to outbursts of physical aggression or
verbal attacks. This may be a child who has experienced many failures.
He may be feeling powerless and feel good only when he is bullying
others. He may also come from a family background that is harsh and
punitive and that provides very little nurturing.
Child care leaders can become the signiﬁcant adults in this child’s life,
helping him to change his behavior. They can

win his trust by showing him they care about him.

make sure he understands the rules and standards for behavior in
the child care setting.

beconsistentwithdisciplinaryactions.Alwaysfollowunacceptable
behaviorwithanappropriateactionsuchastimeoutorremovalofa
privilege.

try to anticipate situations that are likely to cause his outbursts.
Suggest alternative actions, activities, or situations.
“I am mad when my mom spanks me.” Kevin, age 5.

SECTION TWO
132

acknowledge and reinforce acceptable behavior whenever pos-
sible. Do not overdo, but when praise is warranted, give it. Include
a description of the behavior to be repeated. “I’m happy to see that
you were able to wait your turn without pushing.”

encourage intrinsic motivation for appropriate behavior. “You
should feel proud of yourself for solving your problem with Juan
by listening to what he had to say and working out a solution.”
The Quiet Child
The quiet or withdrawn child is often overlooked in a group because she is
hardly noticed. She does not create problems, does what she is told, but
stays by herself. Sometimes she may appear to be depressed or anxious.
Behind this behavior the child may just be shy or may feel she is not com-
petent to do the things others do. She may also be afraid of rejection by
other children. Child care staff members can

capitalize on her interests, initially allowing her to pursue them in
seclusion. Gradually encourage her to talk about her interests with
one other child, then with two children. From there, it may be
possible to move her into related activities in a small group of
children.

involve her in puppetry either alone or with a small group.She may
be able to participate behind the stage or by acting through the
puppet.

practicepretend telephone conversations. Start by engagingher in
aconversation withyou.Choose atopic that islikelytointerest her.
“Iknowyouhave adogathomenamedGeorge.Icertainly likethat
name. Tell me about him.” Encourage further conversation by
additional prompting. “What are some of your favorite things
you and George do together?” Encourage her to practice with
another child. Suggest topics for the conversation, such as telling
one another about favorite things they do on weekends or their
favorite movie.

plan activities that will allow this child to be successful. Acknowl-
edgeherachievementsbydescribingthebehaviorthatallowedher
to succeed. “You were really creative when you ﬁgured out how to
make a curtain for the puppet theater. That was good thinking!”

make speciﬁc suggestions about things to say to other children or
things she can do to enter into group activities. Acknowledge her
efforts when she is successful, pointing out what she did that
worked.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
133
The Overly Active Child
The overly active child creates a lot of problems for teachers and care-
givers. During group times, he ﬁdgets, talks loudly, or pokes whoever
sits next to him. He never settles down to an activity but moves randomly
from one to another. His path through the room may be marked by a trail
of destruction. When asked to wait his turn for a snack or during games,
he gets very angry. He has a hard time making or keeping friends because
he is often argumentative or manipulative. This may be acting-out behav-
ior due to stress factors in his life, such as a disrupted family life or not
enough attention from his parents.
Some of these children may be classiﬁed as suffering from attention
deﬁcit hyperactive disorder (ADHD). When attempts to moderate the
behavior are unsuccessful, it is important to encourage the parents to get
a professional evaluation. Before referring an overly active child, how-
ever, some behavior changes can help him control his own behavior.
Child care staff members can

be consistent about rules. Make sure the child understands the
rules, then enforce them after every misbehavior.

anticipate unstructured times that are likely to create problems.
Examples of these times are when the group moves from indoors
tooutdoorsorinthetransitionbetweenanactivity-orientedperiod
to snacks. Give plenty of warning that one period is ending and
another will begin. Assign this child a speciﬁc task during the
time; have him help prepare the snack, then pass it out or let him
hold the door while the other children go outside.

give this child plenty of support. Seat him nearby at group times,
accompany him to an activity, and help him get started.

help him acquire social skills. Suggest ways he might enter into
others’ play. Remind him of expected behavior while with other
children.

praise him for times he is able to exercise impulse control. “I saw
that you were able to stop yourself that time. You must be proud of
yourself for that.”

avoid using negative statements whenever possible. Say “You can
build your buildings over here” rather than “Don’t knock down
Sean’s block building.”

encouragephysicalexercisetouseupexcessenergy.Physicalactiv-
ity also helps to stimulate beneﬁcial hormones that bring about
greater calmness.

simplify your environment. Consider whether there are ways you
can eliminate clutter and disorder in the classroom. Are materials

SECTION TWO
134
easily accessible without having to pull out other materials? Do
materials get put back in their place so they are available the next
time they are needed?
Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactive Disorder
(ADHD)
Children with true hyperactive disorders display many of the same behav-
iors as children who are classiﬁed as merely overactive. The difference
may lie in the intensity or frequency of the behaviors. Although many
times the diagnosis is based primarily on observation of the child’s behav-
ior, a more reliable method is now available. Brain scans measure the
number of dopamine transporters in the brain. Dopamine transporters
send signals from one brain cell to another by releasing dopamine. A
group of researchers at Harvard Medical School have found that ADHD
sufferers have 70% more dopamine transporters than their counterparts
who are unaffected by ADHD (Fischman et al., 1999). It still is not cer-
tain, however, whether the increased number of dopamine transporters is
a cause or an effect of the disorder.
In addition to brain scans, observation and evaluation of a child’s
behavior are still necessary to make an accurate diagnosis. The behaviors
most frequently seen in ADHD children are distractibility, impatience,
impulsivity, and a short attention span. They may also perform acts with-
out an awareness of the consequences or risks.
ADHD is diagnosed six times more often in boys than in girls (Arcia &
Connors, 1998; Safer & Krager, 1994). This is partly due to the fact that
girls who have ADHD daydream whereas boys act up or talk loudly during
class. Girls just don’t interrupt class routines the ways boys do.
The most frequent treatment is the use of several drugs, most often
Ritalin. Dexedrine and Cylert are also used. These medications increase
the production of the neurotransmitters dopamine and norepinephrine,
which results in increased attention and less restlessness. It may also be
effective to decrease the amount of food additives in children’s diets.
Some diagnosticians also recommend the addition of vitamin B1 and mag-
nesium. The suggestions made for managing the behavior of overly active
children given in the previous section apply as well to the child with
ADHD and are not repeated here. In addition, child care staff members
can

refer the family to reliable sources for testing and diagnosis.

ifmedicationisprescribedasatreatment,makesurethechildtakes
it as recommended.

maintaincloseandsupportivecontactwiththefamilytocontinueto
evaluate the child’s progress and condition.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
135

give positive reinforcement for the child’s attempts to control
behavior.
The Child with Special Needs
Child care leaders may encounter a wide range of special needs when
working with children. Certainly a child who comes to the before- and
after-school program after a night of intense parent ﬁghting at home,
has had no breakfast, or is temporarily on crutches for a sprained ankle
has special needs. This discussion about children with special needs
refers, however, to the child who has a diagnosed disability that interferes
signiﬁcantly with his or her development. Some children have learning
disabilities that impact their ability to be successful in the school setting
when doing reading, writing, or math activities. Others may have a physi-
cal problem such as cerebral palsy; which forces them to walk with a limp,
wear a brace, or even walk with a walker. There are many diagnosed dis-
abilities, far too many to mention in this textbook. This discussion will be
of a more general nature on how to work with children with disabilities. It
may be necessary for a caregiver to receive specialized knowledge and
training about speciﬁc disabilities when children with disabilities are
enrolled in the child care program.
The child care leader should realize that each child is unique, includ-
ing those with disabilities. For example, children with autism may share
some common characteristics. However, for each child there is some
uniqueness. The severity of the disability and how he manages the chal-
lenge of it varies from one child to the next.
Historically children with disabilities were not given an education in
the traditional school setting and consequently were not a part of the tra-
ditional before- and after-school child care program. In recent years, chil-
dren with disabilities are fully included in regular classrooms whenever
possible. Consequently, these children are being more fully included in
child care programs. Inclusion refers to placing children with diagnosed
disabilities in settings with same age peers. Sometimes children who are
fully included in the school setting are given supports through the use of
classroom assistants. Often these same supports do not exist for the child
in the nonacademic setting. Consequently this may pose additional chal-
lenges for child care leaders.
An effective child care leader learns about each individual child. He
learns about the child’s interests, about the child’s basic temperament,
and how to work with the child. The same basic skills of learning about
and working with typically developing children—that is, children with-
out disabilities—also apply to working with children with special needs.
inclusion
placing children with disabilities in
settings with same-age peers
typically developing
children without disabilities

SECTION TWO
136
Therefore, the ﬁrst skill needed by the child care leader working with
children with special needs is to develop a positive attitude about
the child. The leader must think of this child as if she or he were any
other child in the child care program. Think of the child ﬁrst, then the
disability.
When adults model openness and acceptance of children with disabil-
ities, they have a positive inﬂuence on the attitudes of other children in
the child care program. School-age children may be blunt and ultimately
hurtful with their comments as they notice physical differences in chil-
dren who look or act in a way that differs from the majority. Children
may exclude the child with disabilities and may even taunt or tease the
child. There should be a zero tolerance attitude on teasing. Caregivers
can help children gain understanding and acceptance of children who
are different from them in a variety of ways. Leaders can teach children
that different does not mean bad and that it is okay to be curious but not to
be mean. The strategies described earlier for helping children develop
their identity and self-esteem are also effective for children with special
needs. In addition, caregivers can use the strategies listed for helping chil-
dren learn cooperative behaviors.
A second skill used by an effective child care leader is that of estab-
lishing a working relationship with the parents and to be a part of the
parent-teacher-caregiver team that supports the child. Assure parents of
conﬁdentiality regarding the information they share about their child’s
disability. Consider the following questions to discuss with parents about
a child’s abilities and needs:
What are the child’s current abilities related to movement, cogni-
tion, communication, and social interaction?
What motivates the child to explore his environment and interact
with others?
What children in the program have similar interests to the child and
could play in cooperative learning groups?
What tends to overstimulate or even frighten the child?
What barriers currently exist that impede the child’s access to mate-
rials, equipment, and peers?
What are the parent’s current goals for the child in the before- and
after-school program?” (Flynn & Kieff, 2002).
This information will be helpful to the child care leader when plan-
ning activities and in thinking about the speciﬁc accommodations to
make in order to take care of the child and help the child feel successful.
Children with identiﬁed special needs will have an Individualized
Education Plan (IEP) with speciﬁc goals and objectives. The goals
represent what a team of professionals and the parents think the child
accommodations
changes that are necessary when
planning activities to include special-
needs children
Individualized Education
Plan (IEP)
set of goals determined by a team of
professionals and parents to reﬂect
what the child should accomplish within
a year’s time

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
137
can accomplish in his areas of disability in a year’s time. Objectives are
more speciﬁc, measurable tasks that show the child’s progress towards
the goal. The IEP is developed for the child in the educational setting
but many of these objectives may apply to the child care setting. A goal
may be for the child to give eye contact when someone is talking to him.
Another goal might be to follow through 80% of the time when being
given verbal instructions. A social goal may be to take a role in cooperative
play situations.
Accommodations are the modiﬁcations that are made to activities and
routines in order to meet the needs and goals of the child with special
needs. These accommodations may be related to the child’s IEP goals. A
child with autism may not be able to pick up on instructions given to the
entire group or nonverbal cues that it is time to transition to another activ-
ity. An accommodation would be to have cue cards that can be handed to
the child to read, or to enlist the help of a peer to guide the child in tran-
sition. A child with a physical impairment may not be able to run while
playing a game of soccer with the other teammates. An accommodation
would be to involve the child in keeping score or perhaps she could be the
person that throws the ball back onto the ﬁeld when it goes out of bounds.
Once children get to know the strengths and challenges of the child with
disabilities, they can be involved in developing accommodations. They
may decide to change how the game of soccer is played so that all people
can be included. The leader may have to start this problem solving. “Sylvia
really is interested in playing soccer. How can we change the game so she
can use her walker on the ﬁeld and still play?”
It will be important to determine whether the child’s needs match the
program goals and objectives. Under the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (1997), a child with disabilities must be included in your
program unless

the child’s condition poses a direct threat to the other children, or
your staff, and the direct threat cannot be eliminated through rea-
sonable accommodations.

the child’s condition would require architectural changes that can-
not readily be achieved.

the child’s requirement for special equipment or services would
impose an undue burden or would fundamentally alter the nature
of the program and there were no reasonable alternatives.

the child’s condition would require changes in policies, practices,
or procedures that would fundamentally alter the nature of the
program.
A third skill for leaders to be effective when working with children
with disabilities is consistency. Most children, typical and atypical, do

SECTION TWO
138
best when the daily routine is consistent. Routines give structure and
stability to children who may not be very adaptable or who struggle with
self-regulation and need to know what to expect. Create consistency by
learning how challenges or difﬁcult behaviors are handled at home and
in school.
The Child with Autism
One of the disabilities that caregivers of school-age children may encoun-
ter in a before- and after-school program is autism. Autism is a complex
set of disorders that affect about one-half million people in the United
States today. About two to 10 out of every 10,000 people, depending on
the diagnosis criteria used, will be diagnosed with the disease. Boys are
four times more likely to be affected than girls are. The term autism is
sometimes used to describe several related disorders that are included
under the heading of pervasive developmental disorder (PDD). The
term is also used to refer to a child who cannot be speciﬁcally diagnosed
but has severe impairment in behaviors. The standard reference Diagnos-
tic and Statistical Manual (DSM) (2000) lists the following categories.
Autistic Disorder
Limited social interaction, language, and imaginative play observed in
children usually before the age of three. There may also be stereotyped
interests and repetitive behaviors.
Asperger’s Disorder
Impaired social interactions, restricted interests and activities. No signiﬁ-
cant general delay in language. Test in the average or above-average
intelligence.
Childhood Disintegrative Disorder
Normal development in the ﬁrst two years, then loss of previously
acquired skills. Children who fall within the general spectrum of pervasive
developmental disorders may seem relatively normal for the ﬁrst two
years or so, then parents or caretakers notice changes that may include a
delay in speech or inappropriate use of words. As an example, many of
these children refer to themselves by their name, rather than “I.” Or
they may repeat the words of TV commercials without seeming to attach
any signiﬁcance to them. Often these children do not want to be held or
cuddled and avoid eye contact with others. They seem incapable of spon-
taneous play and do not initiate pretend games. Their behavior ranges
from overactive to very passive and may include aggression toward others
or themselves. Changes in routine often bring on temper tantrums.
However, children with autism can be widely different with their
own unique characteristics and personalities. Some may be only mildly
What are some possible
physical accommodations
to fully include this child?

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
139
affected, for they make eye contact, display a variety of emotions, and
have the ability to communicate. Their abilities to learn may ﬂuctuate
from day to day, depending on external stimuli and the level of anxiety
the child is feeling. These children may also process information in unique
ways, perhaps using mental images rather than words to process and
remember information. They may have above-average verbal or memory
skills but have great difﬁculty engaging in any imaginative activities with
others. As autistic children grow older, some learn to compensate for and
cope with their disability, becoming productive adults who can earn col-
lege degrees, obtain meaningful work, and establish families.
Caregivers can help children with autism and their families if they

referparentstoprogramsthatcanprovideevaluationandinterven-
tionmeasures.Thereisevidencethatearlyintervention(duringthe
preschool years) is the most effective, but even later intervention
can help children learn to live with their disability. Some children
with autism need to be in a small, specially designed program,
whereas others beneﬁt from inclusion in regular programs.

provide a structured environment for children with pervasive
developmental disorder. They need to know what to expect in
terms of routines and be given time to manage transitions.

understand and make use of each child’s unique way of learning.
Design learning activities that allow each individual to process
information in his own way. For instance, use pictures as well as
words to describe a process to be followed for an activity.

use positive reinforcement. This helps children understand what
they are doing that is right and increases their self-esteem.

are ﬂexible and willing to change approaches. Evaluate what you
are doing on a regular basis, and ﬁnd an alternative approach if one
is needed to achieve the desired results.

usegoodcommunication skillsyourself,and encouragechildrento
use words. Sometimes helping a child to use even a single word to
express a need or emotion can lead to greater ability.

support parents. Living with a child who has autism can be
extremely stressful, and parents need to be able to talk to others
abouttheirconcerns.Bewillingtolistenwithoutbeingjudgmental.
Parents also may need help in ﬁnding more effective ways to man-
age their child at home through educational services or support
groups.
SUMMARY
During middle childhood, children want to have friends. Those who lack
social skills have a difﬁcult time and may be either aggressive or passive,

SECTION TWO
140
perform poorly academically, and have emotional problems. Those who
have good social skills will have lots of friends, get better grades, and prob-
ably function effectively as adults.
Children learn to resolve conﬂicts by observing adults at home, in
their neighborhoods, in movies, on TV, and at school. They witness
others’ violent ways and imitate their actions until they acquire more
effective methods. The most effective way of dealing with conﬂicts is
problem solving, yet many adults and children ﬁnd it difﬁcult. Child care
leaders can help children resolve conﬂicts in ways that allow each party to
feel validated.
Role-playing is a way to help children resolve conﬂicts, develop an
understanding of others’ feelings, and evaluate solutions to conﬂicts.
Self-image has two parts: our perceptions of ourselves and the per-
ceptions conveyed to us by others. Throughout a lifetime, self-image
changes as physical abilities evolve, as cognitive functions change, and as
interactions with others are reﬁned. How children feel about themselves
has a direct effect on behavior. Adults can strengthen children’s self
esteem by a variety of methods.
Cooperation with others does not come easily to children. Gradually,
during middle childhood, they learn that others have needs and that they
must compromise and cooperate in order to have friends. Children’s
behavior can be changed when adults state their expectations clearly,
including what children can and cannot do. Expectations may also be
stated as rules. Misbehavior should result in time-outs or logical conse-
quences. Positive reinforcers also help to change behavior.
The ways adults respond verbally to children’s behavior can either
increase or decrease the likelihood of repetitions and bring about changes
in behavior. Some children exhibit behaviors that are similar to those of
other children but are more intense or potentially harmful to the individ-
ual or the group. Both the overly aggressive child and the quiet or with-
drawn child can be helped. The overly active child may be suffering from
ADHD and should be evaluated. Children with special needs are some-
times fully included in before- and after-school programs. Caregivers in a
full inclusion program should learn about the child ﬁrst to learn about his
interests and personality. Then, the caregiver can look at the challenges of
the disability. The leader should have an attitude of openness and under-
standing. He should develop a relationship with the parent and learn how
to best care for the child so the child can be successful in the inclusive
setting. Caregivers can employ many of the same strategies that they
would use to help any child develop abilities to cooperate, to be accepted
by others, and to build positive self-esteem. The Americans with Disabil-
ities Act gives child care centers parameters for determining if they are
legally required to take care of children with special needs.

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
141
Autism is one of the disabilities child care leaders may encounter in
children in the before- and after-school child care program. The term
“autism” covers a complex set of disorders, sometimes also called perva-
sive developmental disorders. Symptoms include limited social interac-
tion and imaginative play plus limited language and communication
skills.
KEY TERMS
accommodations
inclusion
Individualized Education
Plan (IEP)
logical consequence
negotiable rules
non-negotiable rules
optional rules
self-image
typically developing
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. In class, practice problem solvingusing thesteps listedin this chapter.
Work in pairs, with each member of the pair assuming one side of a
controversy. Choose one of the following situations or describe one
from your own experience.
a. Two caregivers share a room. One never cleans up thoroughly
when an activity is ﬁnished, so at the end of the day, the room is
in chaos.
b. Onthe playground, onecaregiver spends a lotof time withindivid-
ual children rather than supervising the group. The other adult is
left to intervene when altercations occur, stimulate additional
activities, and generally manage a large group of children. Share
theresultswithclassmates.Wastheprocesseasyordifﬁcult?Were
you able to use “I” messages when telling what happened? Did
each of the partners feel satisﬁed with the resolution?
2. Work with one of your classmates to determine whether your per-
ceptionofyourselfisthesameasordifferentfromhowothersseeyou.
First,writedownﬁvewordsthatdescribeyourpartner.Next,writeﬁve
words that describe you. Compare your partner’s list with your own.
Dideachof youagreewhendescribing theother? How close was your
self-evaluation to the way your partner described you? How does this
activity contribute to your understanding of the complexity of self-
image in children?
3. Interview a caregiver. What methods does he or she use to promote
children’s ability to cooperate with one another?
4. Imagine that you have just enrolled a ﬁrst grade child with autism in
your program. Develop a plan for learning about the child and his

SECTION TWO
142
disability. What strategies will you use to make sure the child is
includedinsmallgroupactivitiesand isacceptedand respectedbythe
other children?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. State four reasons why professionals advocate teaching children how
to relate to others.
2. List and explain the steps in problem solving.
3. State three strategies for helping children learn to resolve conﬂicts
effectively.
4. List ﬁve things an adult can do to help children increase their
self-esteem.
5. What are some causes of overaggressive behavior in children?
6. Describe the behavior of an overly active child. What might be the
cause of this behavior?
7. Thischaptersuggeststhatreinforcingpositivebehavioriseffectivefor
changing how children relate to others. Describe this method.
8. One of the strategies for helping children increase their self-esteem is
to involve them in projects where children and adults can work
together. How does this affect how they feel about themselves?
9. Why is it important to help children increase their ability to read
nonverbal cues?
10. Describe one activity that you could use to foster social competence.
11. What are three things that are important to learn about a child with
disabilities entering the program?
12. What is the difference between learning about the child with disabil-
ities and learning about the disability?
CASE STUDY
The room where Rowan’s child care group meets has only one computer,
which is much sought after by all the children. This afternoon Mei wants
to e-mail her friend in China and is eager to get started. Three other chil-
dren are clamoring to get online as well. They each have urgent things
they want to do. Emily has a homework assignment, Gregory wants to
ﬁnish a game he started the day before, and Xavier just wants to explore

C H A PT E R 7
HE L PI N G CH I L D R EN DEV EL O P SOC I A L C O M P ET E N C E
143
some information about stars, his newest interest. They all begin squab-
bling, each declaring he or she should be ﬁrst. Rowan is so tired of the
ﬁghting over the one computer that she would like to just get rid of it
but knows the children beneﬁt by using it. Her assistant thinks they
should all be told that no one can use the computer until they learn to
share.
1. Do you agree with the assistant’s advice that none of them should be
allowed to use the computer until they learn to share? If you disagree,
why?
2. If you were Rowan, what would be the ﬁrst thing you would do to
resolve the problem?
3. Can you think of a plan that would prevent problems like this in the
future?
REFERENCES
Americans with Disabilities Education Act (ADA), 1997.
Arcia,E.,&Conners,C.K.(1998).Genderdifferences inADHD?Journal
of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 19(2), 77–83.
Cameron, J., & Pierce, W. (1994). Reinforcement, reward, and intrinsic
motivation: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, Fall
1994, 6(43), 363–423.
Children’s Defense Fund. (2004). The state of America’s children, 2004.
Washington, DC: Author.
DMS-V-TR.(2000).Diagnosticandstatistical manualofmentaldisorders,
4th ed. American Psychiatric Association, Washington DC: American
Psychiatric Press.
Fischman, A. J., Daugherty, D. D., Bonab, A. A., Spencer, T. J., Rauch,
S. L., & Madras, B. K. (1999). Dopamine transporter density in
patients with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Lancet, 34,
91–96.
Flynn, L. L., & Kieff, J. (2002). Including everyone in outdoor play. Young
Children, 57(3), 20–26.
Hartup, W. W. (1991). Having friends, making friends, and keeping
friends: Relationships as educational contexts. In Early Report.
Minneapolis: Center for Early Education and Development, Univer-
sity of Minnesota.
Safer, D. J., & Krager, J. M. (1994). The increased rate of stimulant treat-
ment for hyperactive/inattentive students in secondary schools. Pedi-
atrics, 94, 462–464.

SECTION TWO
144
SUGGESTED READINGS
Akin,T.,Cowan,D.,Dunne,G.,Palomares,S.,Schilling,D.,&Schuster,S.
(1990). The best self-esteem activities for the elementary grades.
Torrance, CA: Innerchoice.
Coloroso, B. (2003). The bully, the bullied, and the bystander. New York:
HarperCollins.
Crary, E. (1990). Pick your socks and other skills growing children need.
Seattle: Parenting Press.
Faber, A., & Mazlish, E. (1980). How to talk so kids will listen and listen so
kids will talk. New York: Avon.
Frankel, E. B. (2004). Supporting inclusive care and education for young
children with special needs and their families: An international per-
spective. Childhood Education, 80(6), 310–316.
Honig, A. S., & Wittmer, D. S. (1996). Helping children become more
prosocial: Ideas for classrooms, families, and communities. Young
Children, 51(2), 62–70.
Pirtle, S. (1998). Linking up. Cambridge: Educators for Social
Responsibility.
Rohnke, K., & Butler, S. (1995). Quicksilver. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/
Hunt.
Wittmer, D. S., & Honig, A. S. (1994). Encouraging positive social de-
velopment in young children. Young Children, 49(5), 4–12.
Computer Software
Family Tree Maker 2005: Broderbund/Banner Blue Advanced.
WEB RESOURCES
[http://www.usdoj.gov]
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). Click on Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA) information.
[http://www.autismsociety.org]
Autism Society of America. Multiple links to information for helping
children with autism.
[http://www.naar.org]
National Alliance for Autism Research. A nonproﬁt organization dedi-
cated to ﬁnding the causes, prevention, treatment, and ultimately a
cure for the autism spectrum of disorders.

Section
three
THE
BACKGROUND

This page intentionally left blank 

Program Planning
147
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Describe developmentally appropriate practice.
Discuss reasons for planning.
List the components of an effective program.
Plan a program.
DEVELOPMENTALLY
APPROPRIATE PRACTICE
b
redekamp and Copple (1997) ﬁrst outlined the components of
developmentally appropriate practice in educational programs
serving children from birth through age eight for the National
Association for the Education of Young children (NAEYC).
Albrecht and Plantz (1993) expanded those components in Project
Home Safe. Their intent was to develop guidelines speciﬁcally for school-
age child care programs. Because research on school-age care is still lim-
ited, Albrecht and Plantz sought input from school-age child care experts.
They also reviewed research studies on the development of school-age
children.
Developmental research leads to the conclusion that the most suc-
cessful programs for young children are based on the premise that an
active child in an active environment constitutes the optimal conditions
for bringing about developmental changes. Studies done by both Piaget
(1952) and Vygotsky (1978) pointed to the importance of children’s inter-
actions with their environment and the impact of the social environment
on development. Piaget stressed the predictable stages of qualitative
changes in a child’s thinking that allow him to construct knowledge
CHAPTER88
OBJECTIVES

SECTION THREE
148
through interactions with his environment. Vygotsky believed that think-
ing changes as a result of instruction or support (scaffolding) from the
environment and as language skills increase. Therefore, according to
Albrecht and Plantz (1993), developmentally appropriate school-age
child care programs should be tailored to the developmental character-
istics and needs of the children they serve. Quality programs must address
the fact that children change tremendously in middle childhood and there
are great variations in the rate and type of change in all developmental
areas. Even within an individual child there is great variation from
one stage to another or within a stage of development. Bredekamp and
Copple (1997) wrote of two dimensions of developmental appropriate-
ness: age appropriateness and individual appropriateness.
Age appropriateness means that programs are planned according
to a knowledge of the universal, predictable growth and changes that
occur in children. As an example, during middle childhood children
have increased gross-motor coordination but may still have difﬁculty
with ﬁne-motor skills. Therefore, it is important to provide them with
opportunities to further reﬁne their motor skills, while not expecting
them to be equally competent at both gross- and ﬁne-motor coordination.
Middle childhood is also a period in which children are becoming inde-
pendent of parents and increasingly want to be accepted by their peers.
Program planners need to provide opportunities for children to develop
friendships, learn social skills, and to function cooperatively in a group.
Individual appropriateness refers to each child’s unique pattern
and timing of growth. Although every child goes through predictable
stages, each does so at different rates. Two children who are the same
age may vary tremendously in their abilities, appearance, language, and
thinking processes. Child care programs must recognize individual differ-
ences and provide opportunities for all children to develop at their own
pace and according to their own needs. As an example, one child may be
tall for her age, have well-developed gross-motor skills but ﬁnd it difﬁcult
to carry out logical processes when resolving problems. She certainly
should be allowed to practice her physical aptitudes but should also have
supportive guidance to think through solutions to problems.
The guidelines listed for Project Home Safe (Figure 8–1) address all
areas of an effective before- and after-school program for school-age chil-
dren beginning with the role of staff. Qualiﬁcations of child care leaders
have been discussed in Chapter 1, but we should emphasize here that
child care leaders should play a supportive role to children. As young peo-
ple strive for independence from their parents, they look to other adults to
guide them through the process of adjusting to the outside world.
Albrecht and Plantz (1993) also discuss the importance of adjusting inter-
actions with children according to their age and stage of development.
age appropriateness
programs are planned according to
universal, predictable growth and
changes that occur in children
individual
appropriateness
refers to each child’s unique pattern
and timing of growth

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
149
The needs of children who are ﬁve to seven years of age differ from those
who are approaching adolescence. The youngest children may need more
direction and motivators. The oldest children want more autonomy and
adultlike responsibilities. The guidelines also indicate the importance of
peer relationships as children move toward independence.
Project
HOME SAFE
A Program of the American Home Economics Association
Principles of Developmentally Appropriate Practice in 
School-Age Child Care Programs
Developmentally appropriate school-age child care programs are tailored to the developmental
characteristics and needs of the children they serve. Programs are mindful that children and youth
change greatly during the school-age years and that the rate and nature of change vary
considerably, both among children and youth and across developmental areas within the same
child or youth. Programs approach these developmental realities as opportunities, rather than as
problems.
1.
Developmentally appropriate school-age child care programs provide resourceful, caring
staﬀ who understand the changing role adults play in school-agers’ lives.
2.
Developmentally appropriate school-age child care programs recognize the increasing
importance of peers to school-age children and youth.
3.
In developmentally appropriate school-age child care programs, both mixed-age grouping
and same-age grouping are used to facilitate the development of peer relations and social
skills.
4.
Self-selection, rather than staﬀ selection, of activities and experiences predominates in
developmentally appropriate school-age child care programs.
5.
Developmentally appropriate school-age child care programs. Schedules allow great
ﬂexibility for children and youth. Required participation in activities and experiences is
limited.
6.
Environments in developmentally appropriate school-age child care programs are arranged
to accommodate children and youth individually, in small groups, and in large groups, and
to facilitate a wide variety of activities and experiences.
7.
Activities and experiences oﬀered in developmentally appropriate school-age child care
programs contribute to all aspects of a school-ager’s development.
a.
Activities and experiences foster positive self-concept and a sense of independence.
b.
Activities and experiences encourage children and youth to think, reason, question,
and experiment. 
c.
Activities and experiences enhance physical development and cooperation and
promote a healthy view of competition.
d.
Activities and experiences encourage sound health, safety, and nutritional practices,
and the wise use of leisure time.
e.
Activities and experiences encourage awareness of and involvement in the community
at large.
FIGURE 8–1 Project Home Safe Guidelines.
[From “Principles of Developmentally Appropriate Practice in School-Age Child Care Programs” by Kay M.
Albrecht and Margaret C. Plantz in Developmentally Appropriate Practice in School-Age Child Care Programs,
1993. Courtesy of American Association of Family and Consumer Services.]

SECTION THREE
150
Friendships with one or two others and a sense of belonging to a
group are essential to children’s self-esteem. Adults can facilitate peer
relationships by supporting children’s developing social skills. Staff mem-
bers can also initiate activities that encourage children to discuss the
causes of conﬂicts and ways to resolve them. Additionally, developmen-
tally appropriate child care programs use both mixed-age and same-
age grouping to help children develop relationships with their peers
according to their own developmental needs. Staff members should use
positive guidance strategies to help children achieve inner control and
self-discipline. Adults need to encourage children to resolve their own
differences, and listen to children and encourage them to verbalize their
feelings. Positive guidance also means that staff can help children behave
productively by describing problem situations and encouraging group
problem solving.
Developmentally appropriate programs include space for a wide vari-
ety of activities for individual children or small and large groups. The pro-
gram should include more self-selected activities than staff-selected
activities in order to provide a balance to the child’s after-school time,
which follows the more structured content of their school day.
The last items on the list address the need to plan activities and expe-
riences that meet children’s desire to be competent in all aspects of their
development: psychosocial, cognitive, and physical. A developmentally
appropriate program provides activities and experiences that help chil-
dren develop their self-concept and need for independence. Children
want to feel successful and gain control over their own actions. This
sense of success can be achieved by allowing children to direct their own
activities and having supportive staff who allow independence but offer
guidance as needed.
Children should also be challenged to increase their cognitive abil-
ities. Caregivers should provide varied and interesting activities that are
neither too easy nor too difﬁcult for their developmental level. Those
planning developmentally appropriate programs should not overlook the
importance of physical competence and well-being. Children should have
a wide variety of activities in which they can practice skills requiring both
large- and small-muscle coordination. A developmentally appropriate
program encourages children to develop sound attitudes and practices
to ensure their own health and safety. Children should have opportunities
to learn what constitutes ﬁtness, how to maintain health, and what to
include in a healthy diet.
The last item on Albrecht and Plantz’s list is a statement concerning
children’s awareness of and involvement in their neighborhood or com-
munity, the world beyond their families, and even beyond the child care
setting. As children become more aware of others and less egocentric,

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
151
they are ready to explore their community and to grapple with societal
issues. This is also an opportunity to understand diversity and develop
attitudes that respect differences. The youngest children can read books
and experience the arts from different cultures. The oldest children may
be ready to discuss global issues such as ecological conservation or social
ills such as discriminatory practices. They may even become involved in
activities to resolve some of these problems.
HOLISTIC VERSUS ACADEMIC
APPROACH
A current debate among early childhood professionals asks the question
“Which is better, an academic or a holistic approach?” An academic
approach to programming involves determining outcomes that can be
measured, and then planning a program to help children reach those
goals. A holistic approach allows the curriculum to evolve based on
children’s individual and group abilities and interests. This approach
does not mean that the curriculum is unplanned, but that it includes a
basic structure from which many possible variations can emerge; this is
also called an emergent curriculum. The structure is formed through
the knowledge caregivers have of children’s abilities and interests,
through having a wide variety of materials and activities available for use
as needed, and through encouraging children to be involved in planning.
We, the authors, believe that after-school time should be different from
Children should have opportunities to choose their own activities.
academic approach
an approach to programming that
involves determining outcomes that can
be measured and then planning a
program to help children achieve those
goals
holistic approach
a curriculum that evolves from
children’s individual and group abilities
and interests
emergent curriculum
activities that are planned as a result of
caregivers noting the current interests
of children or that develop as children
play

SECTION THREE
152
in-school time even though some school districts are pressuring their
child care centers to use their time to bring test scores up to an expected
level. An academic approach may be suitable for a school environment,
but a holistic approach should be used in child care.
One of the best ways to design a curriculum is to gather together
everyone who has a stake in program outcomes. These stakeholders may
be staff members, parents, community agency personnel, and school per-
sonnel. Organize a dialogue around the question “What do children need
to learn in this setting?” The conclusion will probably include opportuni-
ties for children to explore cultural and gender issues, get assistance with
homework, acquire social competence skills, pursue their own interests,
and learn to appreciate good nutrition and ﬁtness. Other questions might
ask whether any of these goals are being met in other environments such
as the home, school, church, temple, or community. Participants in this
discussion should also decide which goals should take priority and
whether the child care center has the resources to meet the goals. Finally,
question how the goals can complement what is going on in other places
in the children’s lives or how they can compensate for what is not happen-
ing. The National Institute on Out-of-School Time (Loosi, 2000) has
listed the following components to consider when planning a balanced
program:

the importance of developing genuine relationships with children

different learning styles of different children: how to work these
into an integrated program

the strengths of arts-based programming

the importance of culturally relevant programming

gender-based needs, especially for adolescents

ways to help children build literacy skills

homework time and support

ways to help children develop social competence

nutritious snacks, exercise, and time for breaks

opportunities to pursue interests in science, math, and technology

links with families

knowledge of limits: linking with community experts and seeking
outside help

the importance of service projects
Additionally, the institute suggests that caregivers use “teachable
moments” to develop curriculum ideas or projects. These moments
come when children’s excitement over something they have learned or
experienced suggests the possibility of planning a new activity or project.
If a wide variety of materials is available, caregivers can help children
explore these ideas. The emphasis is on developing and broadening the

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
153
children’s expressed interests. For example, group time might include a
discussion about seeing a news broadcast of the effects of a hurricane on a
small island off the Florida coast. Then, possible learning experiences that
caregivers could develop from this topic are the following:

using weather instruments to predict weather locally

researching careers in which knowledge of weather is important:
meteorologists, pilots, ﬁreﬁghters, mariners, postal employees,
forest rangers

charting weather data and calculating differences in temperatures
and rainfall

reading literature in which weather is an important factor

reading weather reports and predictions in the local newspaper,
then calculating the rate of accuracy

loggingontotheNationalWeatherServiceInternetsitetoseehow
weatherischartedthroughsatellitesattheirWebsite:[http://www.
nws.noaa.gov]
The preceding ideas are only a few of the possibilities for using teach-
able moments to create a curriculum. Each center and group of children
will have different needs or interests. If you can learn to use this method
for planning a curriculum, you will encounter few problems keeping chil-
dren interested and involved.
PLANNING FOR CULTURAL AND
LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY
In addition to recognizing that each child is unique and has an individual
pattern of growth, remember also that children come from varied back-
grounds and cultures. Children’s sense of self-worth stems partly from
their experiences within the family and their community and their ability
to master the skills expected of them in those settings. They will learn best
if the expectations and values of their school or child care are congruent
with those of the family and community. As an example, children who can
communicate well with their family or neighborhood friends in a language
other than English may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to be understood or to learn in
other environments. To this end, the NAEYC has published a position
statement entitled “Responding to linguistic and cultural diversity—Rec-
ommendations for effective early childhood education” (1996). It states
that developmentally appropriate programs should recognize that all chil-
dren are cognitively, linguistically, and emotionally connected to the lan-
guage and culture of their home.

SECTION THREE
154
In “Developmentally Appropriate Practice in Early Childhood Pro-
grams” (Bredekamp & Copple, 1997), statements about diversity have
been broadened to recommend that programs develop a positive climate
for learning within a democratic community.
Examples of how caregivers can create this climate includes knowing
each child well and taking into account individual differences and devel-
opmental level. It also means bringing each child’s culture and language
into the school setting so children can feel they belong. Children learn
through reading books about other cultures, reading about current events
relating to other cultures, and discussing cultural values. Teachers can
also group children ﬂexibly in small cooperative groups to work on proj-
ects so they can learn through discussions in which they share information
or expertise. A democratic community also means that children with dis-
abilities are included as members of the group.
Another aspect of cultural and linguistic diversity is embodied in the
1996 NAEYC statement:
Acknowledge that children can demonstrate their knowledge and
capabilities in many ways.
This statement recognizes that children have acquired many cognitive
skills and knowledge before entering school or child care. They should be
able to demonstrate those skills using their own language and then begin
Children’s sense of self-worth stems partly from their varied backgrounds
and cultures.

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
155
to build on that base while learning a second language. They may be able
to learn a second language, but learning more complex cognitive skills
requires an integrated approach. They need a learning environment in
which to build on the skills they acquired in their ﬁrst language while gain-
ing new skills in the second. Children learn more easily when they are
given instruction in their primary language.
Additional recommendations focus on families. NAEYC suggests that
parents be actively involved in the early learning program, that teachers
help parents become knowledgeable about the cognitive value of knowing
more than one language, and that programs support the family’s cultural
values.
Recommendations for programs and practice in these guidelines
recognize the importance of respecting and supporting children’s home
language
Recognize that children can and will acquire English even when
their home language is used and respected.
Children should be able to build on cognitive skills they have al-
ready acquired using their home language. When children have lots of
opportunities to read and be read to in their home or in a group setting,
they will develop literacy in a second language more easily (Krashen,
1992).
The recommendations also suggest supporting and preserving child-
ren’s home language. This can be done by an adult speaking the language
and also by providing many examples of the language within the environ-
ment. Books, bulletin boards, tape recordings, labels on materials, and
signs are all ways to incorporate the home language into the environment.
If the caregivers do not speak the child’s language, in addition to creating
an environment, they can learn words and phrases from that language. In
addition to designing the environment to reﬂect different languages, chil-
dren who speak the same language can be grouped together at times to
work on speciﬁc projects. However, it is important to ensure that these
children do not become isolated and are incorporated into other groups
as well.
Antibias Curriculum
“(a) Antibias curriculum incorporates the positive intent of
multicultural curriculum and uses some similar activities, while
seeking to avoid the tourist approach. At the same time, antibias
curriculumprovidesamoreinclusiveeducation:Itaddressesmore
than cultural diversity by including gender and differences in
antibias curriculum
a curriculum that addresses cultural
diversity by including gender and
differences in physical differences; is
based on children’s developmental
tasks as they construct identity and
attitudes; directly addresses the impact
of stereotyping, bias, and discriminatory
behavior in young children’s
development and interactions

SECTION THREE
156
physical abilities; (b) it is based on children’s developmental tasks
as they construct identity and attitudes; and (c) directly addresses
the impact of stereotyping, bias, and discriminatory behavior in
young children’s development and interactions.” (Derman-
Sparks, 1989, pp. 7–8; boldface added.)
The preceding is a quotation from Anti-bias Curriculum, Tools for
Empowering Young Children by Derman-Sparks. The “tourist approach”
teaches children about diversity through holiday celebrations, ethnic art
activities, and cooking ethnic foods. In contrast, an antibias approach
takes into account children’s developmental levels, their interests, and
their concerns. At an early age children become aware of differences
among people. Four-year-olds notice and begin to ask about the differ-
ences between boys and girls, why one child has dark skin, why another
speaks with an accent, or why another cannot walk and has to be in a
wheelchair. By the time they reach middle childhood, they may stop ask-
ing the questions because adults are embarrassed or do not know how to
answer them. The result can be the development of prejudices or stereo-
types. In a bias-free environment, Derman-Sparks says, “children should
be free to ask questions about any subject, to use their own ideas in prob-
lem-solving, to engage in real dialogue with adults, to make choices, and
to have some say in their daily school life” (p. 8).
Some of the ways to create an antibias curriculum is to start with the
child care environment by including

photos of children and families that reﬂect the racial and ethnic
makeup of the group

images of both men and women doing a variety of jobs, not just
those that are typically associated with a gender

images of people with disabilities doing jobs or interacting with
others in recreational settings

toys and materials that include books reﬂecting diversity of gender
roles and ethnic differences as well as people with disabilities;
books that include different languages, either through stories or
alphabets; dramatic play materials that encourage children to
engage in common everyday tasks without concern for gender
roles; implements and tools used by different ethnic groups such
as cooking equipment, holiday decorations, clothes, or personal
objects; art materials that can be used to depict people of different
skintonesorarerepresentativeofdifferentcultures;smalltoysand
manipulatives that depict racial diversity

opportunities for children to see or hear different languages
through signs, labels, story tapes, or songs

music activities that include music from other cultures

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
157
THE IMPORTANCE OF PLANNING
If you think of yourself as a spontaneous and ﬂexible person, you may
wonder whether you really need to plan. Nevertheless, when you work
with children, looking ahead is absolutely essential. Without it, a day can
lead to chaos, unhappy children, and irritable adults.
Planning ensures you can provide a variety of play opportunities that
will attract and stimulate children and enhance their development.
Curriculum is a plan of activities that accomplishes the goals of a pro-
gram. Caregivers should provide a balance between old and new activ-
ities. Some should be familiar things children like to do over and over
again. Others should be new things to spark their interest.
Planning ahead allows you to gather the materials needed to carry out
an activity. Knowing a day or week in advance what you will need gives you
time to ﬁnd, purchase, or prepare whatever you will require. When chil-
dren have to wait while you collect supplies, they get restless. Then, when
you are ready, they may no longer be receptive.
Planning lessens the number of conﬂicts between children. A group
of children can engage in free play for periods of time, but eventually dif-
ferences arise. During the three hours or so that children are in after-
school care, some free play, along with planned activities, keeps children
busy and involved. Petty arguments and irritability will decrease.
Planning ensures that you can provide a variety of play opportunities that
will attract and stimulate children and enhance their development.
curriculum
a plan of activities that accomplishes
the goals of a program

SECTION THREE
158
Plans allow staff members to divide responsibilities. Everyone should
know speciﬁcally what they will be required to do during a period of time.
Some may have responsibility for playground supervision and others for
setting up activities in the classrooms. Every step of the day—including
transitions, activities, snack, and free play—should be planned ahead
of time.
The most important function of program planning is to ensure that
both the short- and long-term goals of the program are met. Short-term
goals are those that can be achieved during a single day, a week, or even,
perhaps, a month. Long-term goals are those that will not be achieved
until a fairly long period of time has passed. This span may cover several
months or even a school year. Children need to feel successful through
the completion of short projects or at the end of a single activity. But they
also should be learning to carry through activities that will not bring
rewards until a considerable period of time has passed.
Planning also helps staff members to apply the guidelines for devel-
opmentally appropriate practices. As each day’s activities are decided,
they can be measured against the guidelines. Will they allow children to
develop their physical skills? Are there opportunities for creative expres-
sion? Is there a balance between staff-initiated activities and time for
child-initiated ones? Are there activities at different levels of difﬁculty so
that children at diverse developmental levels can participate and feel
successful?
Plans allow you to keep parents and the school administration in-
formed of program activities. Make written plans so this information is
readily accessible. Post your plans on a bulletin board for parents. Provide
copies for the administrative person at your school or center.
INTEGRATED CURRICULUM
Planning an integrated curriculum is one approach to meeting the goals of
school age childcare program. An integrated curriculum is the linking
of two or more subject areas such as literacy and math, or linking an aca-
demic subject to the community or vocations. This is accomplished by
providing meaningful experiences that allow children to develop a variety
of skills and knowledge that lead to the understanding of the relationships
and how things ﬁt together. A school-age program is an ideal place to pro-
vide children with such meaningful experiences because it can allow for
the necessary time for integration. An integrated curriculum activity has
two or more primary goals. For example, an art activity could have a goal
of teaching children painting techniques. Another goal would be to link
the activity with someone in the community who paints pictures. The
integrated curriculum
the linking of two or more subject areas
such as literacy and math, or linking an
academic subject to the community or
vocations

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
159
artist could visit the classroom and paint alongside of the children. This
activity can be further integrated with a literacy goal of doing research
about the techniques of a speciﬁc artist such as Jackson Pollock or Vincent
van Gogh. Often it requires more than one child care leader to implement
an integrated curriculum. In this example, one caregiver might be respon-
sible for the art activity and eliciting an artist while a second caregiver
could plan the artist research activity. One resource for research would
be [http://www.gettingtoknow.com]. A key component to integrated cur-
riculum is that children make connections between one subject and
another. In this example, literacy, art, and the community are connected.
Children can experience how research, personal techniques and creativ-
ity, and local and historical artists are connected.
WHAT SHOULD BE INCLUDED IN
A CHILD CARE PROGRAM?
Start with the routine things you and the
children do everyday
Plan who will pick up children at their schools, and know what the chil-
dren will do when they ﬁrst arrive at their after-school setting. Decide
who will take roll, when you will have the snack, who will supervise the
playground, and what activities will be ready. These activities may seem
trivial, but they are not. Children enjoy a predictable environment. Care-
fully planning your schedule makes the day run more smoothly for both
adults and children.
Capitalize on children’s interests
Some children may want to continue themes they are working on at
school, whereas others may have some current interests unrelated to
school.
Holidays, too, create excitement that can generate ideas. Television
or movies may also pique interests you can use. Sometimes one child has a
special interest that can be shared with others. Use this child to generate
enthusiasm in other children as they work together on projects.
Increase children’s awareness of and
respect for cultural diversity
Plan activities to help children embrace that they live in a society that
includes peoples of many races, colors, and religions. This philosophy

SECTION THREE
160
can be conveyed through books, holiday celebrations, art activities, toys,
building projects, games, and festivals. Make these topics an integral part
of your program, not just something you do on special occasions. Ask
parents for help. Use the children as resources for customs that are
representative of their culture.
Include opportunities for language-minority children to share their
language with others.
An example might be to have one child read or tell a story with anoth-
er child translating as the tale progresses. Learn and use words from the
minority language during the day’s activities.
Foster children’s desire to
become competent
Let them help with daily routine tasks that allow them to use real
tools. Teach them to cut up fruit for snack time. Let them answer the
telephone and take messages. Include them in the maintenance of your
environment.
Plan projects that use tools. Show them how to use a saw, hammer,
and drill for woodworking projects. Let them measure with a T square, a
tape measure, or a yardstick.
Encourage children’s natural
play interests
Keep a store of props that inspire music, drama, and dancing. Help them
also to be more competent with fads that sweep through groups of chil-
dren. Yo-yos, roller skates, and skateboards are not just “time wasters” but
allow children to develop their skills. Use these interests to foster their
physical development and greater self-esteem.
Plan a balance of activities
Include both group and individual activities. Have quiet times inter-
spersed with active play. Allow times for activities the children themselves
initiate and conduct as well as those you choose and direct.
Have enough choices so all children
can ﬁnd something to do
Variety will allow for different interests and levels of capability.

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
161
Include some activities that will re-create
everyday experiences
Remember that children who spend after-school hours in child care will
miss these kinds of experiences. Take children with you to do the shop-
ping for snacks or for a special art project. Arrange trips to local busi-
nesses. Take walks around your community.
Allow time to meet the special needs
of school-age children
Let them be alone or give them time to do what they want. Provide oppor-
tunities for them to make new friends or spend time with existing friends.
Some children may even need time to rest or just do nothing.
Plan how transitions will be accomplished
Transitions are those times when all or part of the group change places or
activities. The morning arrival and end-of-the-day departure are also tran-
sitions. Each of these transitions should be thoughtfully planned in order
to prevent chaos and to help children develop self-control and self-
direction. Plan ahead by having curriculum areas set up so the next activity
is ready as soon as the children move. For instance, when going from
group time to individual activities, tell the children what is available and
have them choose what they are going to do before they leave the group
Plan a balance of activities that can include individual
and group play.

SECTION THREE
162
area. In that way, they can move directly to an activity. Minimize waiting
time or times when children have nothing to do. Provide books, videos, or
tapes for those times when children have to wait for others to be ready to
move to the next activity or when a parent is late for pickup. Alert the
children that a change will be taking place, allowing them time to ﬁnish
whatever activity or task they have been engaged in. “You have ﬁve
minutes to ﬁnish up your project, then it will be time for cleanup.”
Involve the children in cleanup. Assign areas to be responsible for and
give them guidelines of what needs to be done. “Put all the blocks back on
the shelf, matching the sizes and shapes.” “The leftover snacks can go into
the refrigerator, wipe off the tables, and throw away the paper cups and
napkins.”
Suggest an activity to avoid boredom on ﬁeld trips. Sing songs, play
games, or provide a snack. Children will ﬁnd the time less stressful when
they are occupied.
Additional Guidelines for Planning
Be sure that all activities are developmentally appropriate. Know what
children are capable of doing. Plan activities that allow success but also
offer a challenge.

Vary the settings for activities. Try painting outdoors or put on a
play under a tree.

Be ﬂexible. If your plans are not working, change them. Or allow
children to decide they want to do something different from what
you had planned.

Encourage adult/child and child/child interactions. Sometimes set
up activities so you can be involved with children. At other times,
encourage children to work together.

Helpchildren changetheirattitudes aboutmale/femalestereotyp-
ing.Bewareoffallingintothetrapofunconsciouslyplanningdiffer-
ent activities for boys and for girls. Encourage them instead to try
all activities.
ORGANIZING THE AFTER-
SCHOOL PROGRAM
There are several approaches to organizing the program for your after-
school group. The following are types that have proved successful in
different situations. No one is more effective than the other. The appro-
priateness of each depends on many factors: your goals, the children
involved, the physical layout of your space, the materials available to

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
163
you, and the ratio of children to adults. You may even use several types for
greater variety, so try what works for you.
Independent Projects
Many children have abundant ideas about what they want to do. Their
own enthusiasms lead them to be involved in reading, making maps, con-
structing models, or collecting. These children will work diligently by
themselves. Some children want to continue alone on a project they
began with a group. They may follow a group project to grow crystals
with a study of how crystals are used in tools, industrial equipment, or
even jewelry.
Often you will initiate an idea for a project based on the interests or
needs of a particular child. A child may talk about a visit to a local plan-
etarium with her grandparents. You can suggest a variety of activities
about stars and the solar system. Another child may need encouragement
to use language. Begin with making simple puppets, then a puppet the-
ater. Few children will be able to resist staging their own plays.
It is important to allow as much freedom to pursue individual inter-
ests as possible. Children should feel they can still do the kinds of things
they might do if they were home. All you have to do is allow enough time,
provide the materials, and offer guidance when needed.
Group Activities
In order to foster group unity, at times you want all the children to engage
in the same activity. A group may work on a single project that has many
parts. Each part will be completed by small groups of children. An exam-
ple might be preparation for a drama to present at a parent meeting.
Some children can write the script, some make costumes, some the sce-
nery. Then, new groups can be formed to delegate acting parts, rehearse,
change scenes, and arrange lighting. This is a typical example of a long-
term project that might be many months in the making.
Sometimes limitations on space or equipment may dictate your deci-
sion to have all children doing the same thing at the same time. If you have
limited space indoors for extensive projects, you may have to divide your
group with some children on the playground while others work in the
classroom. Some child care facilities have one room set aside for a speciﬁc
activity such as arts and crafts. In this case, children may have to sign up to
use the room, or groups might be scheduled for designated times.
Groups may have a variety of conﬁgurations. Some may consist of
children who are close to one another in age or abilities. Others may
have a mixture of ages and proﬁciencies. When there are wide differences
“Me doing a magic trick.”
Vince, age 7.

SECTION THREE
164
in ages such as from ﬁve- to twelve-year-olds in a class, plan some things
for the younger children and others for those approaching adolescence.
Each age level has different developmental needs and interests. At other
times, a mixed group allows opportunities for the older children to help
the younger ones. This can add to the older children’s self-esteem and to
the competence of the younger ones.
Whatever the reason for grouping children together for an activity,
make sure these activities build on previous skills or interests. Also make
certain these experiences further the goals of your program.
Interest Centers
An interest center is a space carefully arranged to accommodate the activ-
ity for which it will be used. A variety of interest centers throughout the
room allows children to move freely from one to another. This encourages
exploration in different areas of the curriculum. Typical interest centers
found in child care environments are block building, science, art, reading,
music, cooking, computers, dramatic play, and games. Within each of
these areas, basic materials are always available to the children. Some
materials are changed from time to time to add new interest and stimula-
tion. A block area might contain a selection of standard wooden blocks,
animals, cars, or signs. At times you might add people, trees, boats, air-
planes, or colored blocks. Styrofoam sheets, ﬂat wood pieces, or metal
forms also invite new kinds of play. Stock an art area with paper, crayons,
marking pens, scissors, and paste. For variety, add different colors,
sizes, or shapes of paper. Consider using paper punches, staplers, and
templates.
Field Trips
Field trips can be a simple walk around the block or an all-day trip to the
beach. Both should be planned carefully, although obviously a walk takes
less planning than an all-day excursion. Start by deciding the purpose of
the trip. A walk can reinforce a project to map your neighborhood or
collect material for a nature collage. A trip to the beach can include col-
lecting shells or studying wave patterns as the tide changes. As with all
other activities, ﬁt this into the overall pattern of activities.
Plan each detail so both you and the children know what to expect.
Obtain permission slips from parents for car or bus trips. Arrange for
lunch and transportation. Make sure there are enough adults to properly
supervise the children. Discuss the arrangements with your administrator
and other staff members. Tell the children where they are going, what
they will do, and what the rules will be. (Make sure you visit the site
ahead of time so you will know what to expect and can plan appropriately.)

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
165
Have the children wear recognizable clothing such as a special T-shirt or a
large name tag with program information.
Plan further with the children so they will get maximum beneﬁt from
the trip. For instance, if they are going to the beach to gather shells for a
collection, prepare ahead. Read books, look at pictures, and talk about
different kinds of shells they might ﬁnd. If you are fortunate to have a
video camera, take it along to record interesting ﬁnds and to document
where the shells were found or what the children saw in tide pools.
Do a follow-up when you return to the center at the end of the day or
when they come back to the center on the following day. Ask children to
share what they collected and tell about what they saw. They should also
be encouraged to relate what they learned from the trip, what they liked
best, and perhaps even how would they change the trip if they went again.
You can then create a book documenting the ﬁeld trip by having each
child draw a picture and brieﬂy write about the trip.
Clubs
Clubs are ongoing groups organized around common interests of the par-
ticipants. When they belong to a club, children have the opportunity to
pursue a topic or an interest in depth. They learn to set goals for them-
selves, solve problems, and cooperate with others on common goals.
Some club activities may require them to do extensive research and then
to communicate their ﬁndings to others, thus developing skills that are
part of scientiﬁc endeavors. Typical topics are photography, calligraphy,
cooking, magic, collecting (shells, rocks, or stamps), stitchery, space,
drama, or sports. Within any group of children, there are likely to be
other ideas as well. A leader for the group is appointed, either a staff
member or an outside volunteer. Sometimes you can ﬁnd a parent, com-
munity resident, or senior citizen with a special interest who will be willing
to share information with the club. Many high school students need to
participate in service learning as part of their curriculum. They would
make good leaders for a group. Decide how many the group can accom-
modate, and ask the children to sign up.
Clubs can provide children with the experience of making a long-term
commitment. When they sign up for a club, they state they are willing to
spend a speciﬁed period of time with the group. This may be as short as
one month or as long as four to six months.
Clubs also give children the chance to be a part of a small unit within
the larger daycare group. This can foster friendships built on a mutual
interest. In addition, club participation helps children learn to govern
themselves as they set rules and elect ofﬁcers for their organization. This
is particularly important to the older children, the 12- to 14-year-olds.

SECTION THREE
166
At the end of the period, encourage children to share what they have
learned with others. This can be in the form of an exhibit, a presentation,
or a demonstration. Whenever possible, invite parents to participate in
these events. Schedule a presentation for a parent meeting. Draw their
attention to a display when they come to pick up their children. The chil-
dren can also write about the club’s activities for your center’s newsletter.
Spontaneous Activities
You should have a store of activities ready that can be used for unexpected
situations. One of your aides calls in sick, the weather turns cold and rainy,
another group
stays
too
long
on the
playground,
or
the
CD
player breaks down. All of these and many other emergencies will hap-
pen, so it helps to be well prepared.
Know some games you can use to keep a group occupied. “Twenty
Questions” is an old standby that everyone enjoys. Learn some others as
well. Every caregiver should have a store of songs children like to sing.
They often want the same ones over and over again, but occasionally
introduce a new one. You might consider learning some stories or making
up your own. Tell these with appropriate dramatics.
Have some materials you can bring out for rainy or snowy days when
you have to be indoors. These materials should be a selection of things
you do not put out every day. A new game, special books, or unusual art
Have a store of activities ready that can be used when unexpected
situations occur.

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
167
materials are some of the possibilities. Indoor days could also allow chil-
dren to spontaneously organize activities such as dramatizing a familiar
story or dancing to music.
Some spontaneous activities will be child-initiated. In order for child-
initiated activities to occur, adults have to be willing to follow children’s
lead, and the environment must have a variety of easily accessible materi-
als. This kind of play is most often seen in the dramatic play center, where
children engage in elaborate imaginary or real-life scenarios.
A wide selection of costumes and accessories affords children the
opportunity to work through troublesome feelings, learn social skills,
and increase their ability to communicate clearly. Dramatic play also
takes place with blocks and with additions such as animals, human ﬁgures,
cars, airplanes, and rockets. Children also engage in spontaneous activ-
ities outdoors, but here too, they need time and materials to allow them
to fully explore their fantasies. The adventure playgrounds seen in some
public parks capitalize on this idea by providing boards, boxes, hammers
and nails, and pipes. Children can use these to construct objects they need
for their play.
Community Involvement
You can use community resources to provide children with a wider range
of activities. Instead of duplicating classes or facilities that are available
elsewhere, use these to enrich your program. This kind of reaching out
also gives children less of a feeling of isolation from the kinds of experi-
ences their school friends might be having.
Some of the possible situations are the following:

A Girl or Boy Scout troop could meet at your site so your children
could attend.

Alocalswimmingpoolmightofferreducedratesforchildrenwhen
they are supervised by their own teachers or caregivers.

A nearby volunteer nature center might offer to sponsor activities
your children could attend.

Have resources come to the center. For example, organizations
that train dogs for the blind will come and talk and bring a dog.

Your children could attend community classes sponsored by the
local school district or recreation department in return for having
an extra adult to supervise.
Join other sites within your child care organization for some activities.
Involvement in the community may include service learning projects.
For instance, your children could get involved in beautifying their
neighborhood. They can grow plants from seeds, make them available to

SECTION THREE
168
residents, and even offer to plant them if needed. Recycling is also a popu-
lar cause. Children can set up bins for receiving materials and then take
them to a redemption center. A local rest home for elderly patients may
appreciate visits from the children. They can collect toys for less fortunate
children to be distributed at holiday time. Do not forget the possibility of
children lobbying their governmental representatives over issues affect-
ing children. They can write letters, make posters, distribute ﬂyers, or
appear at hearings. Service learning is a valuable participation experience
for children and should not be missed just because they are in child care.
MAKING A SCHEDULE
A good program is more than just a series of activities. The structure of
those activities within the context of the day allows children to enjoy their
time in child care. Allow plenty of time for each activity but not so much
that children get bored.
From reading the previous pages you know what goes into a typical
day with children. Start by writing down the speciﬁcs for your program.
Include everything you do each day, then add things that have to be done
less frequently. Next, estimate how much time to allow for each activity.
As you put your schedule into effect, you will probably revise it a few
times.
A typical schedule for a before- and after-school program may look
like the following:
6:00 AM
Children arrive individually. Breakfast is available for children who
are hungry. Some children may want to ﬁnish homework, others
ﬁnish a project from a previous day. Still others may want to work
quietly at an art center or read. A few may be wide awake and need
to run off energy outdoors.
8:15 AM
Children complete whatever they are doing and prepare to go to
school.
8:30 AM
Children board the bus for their elementary schools.
When children return to the center at the end of the day, they may
follow this schedule:
3:00 PM
Children arrive in a group on the bus. Some may be hungry and
need a snack. Others may want to rest a bit before joining activities.

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
169
Still others may need to spend time with their caregiver to talk
about what happened at school.
3:15 PM
Most children want to be outdoors after a day of sitting in school.
Schedule outdoor free play, exercises, organized games, or sports.
4:00 PM
Group time, music, planning, discussions, problem solving.
4:15 PM
Indoors for a variety of activities: homework, clubs, individual proj-
ects, reading, cooking, or talking with friends.
5:30 PM
Finish activities, straighten environment, and collect belongings.
Children may read alone or in a group until parents arrive.
Your job as a teacher or child care worker should be enjoyable and
exciting. Planning helps to avoid many of the frustrations that make that
difﬁcult to achieve.
SUMMER PROGRAMS
Summer brings about a variety of changes in a child care program. Staff
members may change, additional people may be needed, or the number
of hours they work might be longer. The number and ages of children can
also change, particularly if the program has been sharing space with a
Head Start program or public school. The weather changes and that
affects what happens. In some locales, it is too hot, too rainy, or too
smoggy for the children to engage in certain activities. Perhaps the most
important change is that there is more time to participate in activities so
the schedule can be more relaxed. There should be no need to rush chil-
dren from one activity to another. Therefore, the summer curriculum
should not be a duplicate of the rest of the year, but add new dimensions
to the program. The following are some suggestions for an all-day summer
program.
Involve Children in Planning
The children may have wonderful ideas about how to use the longer days
of summer. They may want to establish clubs, plan weeks around a theme,
or suggest an overnight camping trip. Set up a suggestion box so that they
can share their ideas about ways to make the program more interesting.

SECTION THREE
170
Conduct a survey during group time. Print out short questions such as
“What is your favorite thing to do?” or “What is one thing you would really
like to add to our program?” Allow the children time to think about their
answers and reply in writing. Collect the responses, then report back
about what they suggested. Choose several to implement during the
summer.
Rearrange the Environment
A project to spruce up the environment is a good project for when the
weather is too hot to play outdoors. Spend group time discussing ways
the children would like to change the room arrangement. Choose a plan,
then assign groups of children to work on speciﬁc areas. When the chil-
dren have had time to function in the new surroundings, evaluate the
plan. Revise it if necessary.
Long-Term Projects
Blocks of time can be set aside for projects that take place over days,
weeks, or even the entire summer. A group of children can write a script
for a play or adapt an existing story. Some can make costumes, others,
design and construct the sets, and some can learn the lines and practice
the play. An integrated curriculum approach can be applied to a puppet
play—from writing the play, constructing the stage, and making puppets.
What makes this different from the same activity during the school year is
that it can be done at a leisurely pace so that children can enjoy the pro-
cess at each step.
Sports
If the weather permits children can have time to practice and reﬁne their
skills at a favorite sport. Find a volunteer who can coach them on ways to
improve. Schedule games with neighboring child care or summer camp
programs. Have children plan and present a sports fair with demonstra-
tions of equipment, accessories, and games. If a pool is available have
them design and produce a water ballet.
Field Trips
Summer is the perfect time for ﬁeld trips. What better time to spend the
whole day at the beach exploring tide pools, making sand castles, or cool-
ing off in the surf? Other suggestions for all-day ﬁeld trips appear in pre-
vious pages, but the difference in the summer is that more time can be
allowed for the visit. A trip to the zoo can include a picnic lunch planned
and prepared by some of the children. A trip to the museum may include
time to watch a ﬁlm on a particular artist.

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
171
Gardening and Cooking
Plant a garden with summer vegetables and herbs. Some plants, like car-
rots or radishes, grow fairly quickly, but others can be speeded up by using
already sprouted plants from a nursery. Have the children research the
growing time for each variety, then choose plants that will have different
times for harvesting. When the plants have matured, the children can pick
a few at a time, then incorporate them into recipes to be served at lunch or
snack time. Provide cookbooks and gardening guides to be used for the
necessary research.
Allow Quiet Time
The long stimulating days of a summer program can cause some children
to become fatigued. Therefore, it is important to allow time for them to
read quietly by themselves, spend time with friends talking, or “hanging
out.” Make certain the environment has inviting places for these activities:
a cozy reading corner or secluded places where several children can be
together.
Read Aloud
Choose a long book that all the children will enjoy and read it aloud to the
group. Choose a stopping place each day that will create some suspense.
Ask the children what they think is going to happen next. At the beginning
of the next day’s session, ask them to recall what had just happened in the
book when the reading ended.
Plan Special Events
Include the children in planning for a special event. This may entail mak-
ing costumes, decorating the environment, ﬁnding equipment, and invit-
ing parents or others to participate. Some ideas for special events are the
following: carnival, scavenger hunt day, mystery day requiring detective
skills, kite ﬂying, olympics, and backwards day. Each of these can take
several days of preparations and should include assessment of the success
following the day.
Organize a Fund-Raising Event
Ask the children to decide the kind of event to be planned, how much
money they might bring in and whether it is within the school or out in
the community. When ﬁguring potential proﬁt, they have to consider the
cost of any materials they might need. Suggestions for fund-raisers are
selling popcorn, cookies, or unused toys or games brought from home.

SECTION THREE
172
After completing the event, let the children ﬁgure out the proﬁt, decide
what to purchase, and then take them shopping.
Community Facilities
Take advantage of community facilities to enrich the children’s summer
program. Many libraries having reading programs. Participating children
are encouraged to read a speciﬁed number of books and to receive an
award for doing so. The library may also have group reading times that
the children can attend.
Museums may also have summer discovery programs that children
can attend. Some have classes in science, astronomy, archeology, biology,
and art that children where children can have hands-on experiences.
The children may take classes (for additional fees) at local riding sta-
ble, dance studios, swimming pools, tennis courts, or art studios.
SUMMARY
Developmentally appropriate practices are those that are tailored to the
developmental characteristics and needs of the children and youth they
serve. Age appropriateness means that programs are planned according to
a knowledge of the universal, predictable growth and changes that occur
in children. Individual appropriateness refers to each child’s unique pat-
tern and timing of growth.
Guidelines for developmentally appropriate practices address all
areas of an effective child care program for school-age children. They
include the role of staff members, provision for the development of peer
relationships, the use of positive guidance, an environment that accom-
modates small and large groups, and activities that are geared to the
developmental level of the children.
A current debate among early childhood professionals concerns
which is better, an academic or a holistic approach to programming.
The academic approach is based on predetermined, measurable goals. A
holistic approach allows the curriculum to evolve based on children’s indi-
vidual or group abilities and interests. One approach is to provide experi-
ences through an integrated curriculum in which goals of speciﬁc content
areas are combined into the presentation of one activity.
The NAEYC has made recommendations for working with children
whose home language is other than English. Adults should recognize the
importance of children’s home language and acknowledge that children
can demonstrate their knowledge and capabilities in many ways. Learning
a second language can be difﬁcult, and children need to be able to build
on their cognitive skills using their home language. They will then be able
to move on and gain new skills in the second language.

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
173
NAEYC recommends that programs support children’s home lan-
guage by providing examples of the language in the environment. Books,
bulletin boards, tape recordings, labels on materials, and signs are all ways
to incorporate the home language into the child care environment. Adults
should also learn some words and phrases from the children’s home lan-
guage. When several languages are spoken by children in a group, it helps
if those who speak a common language work together at times.
An antibias curriculum incorporates the positive intent of multicul-
turalism and uses similar activities and materials. In addition, it allows
children freedom to ask questions about differences, is based on develop-
mental tasks, and directly addresses the impact of stereotyping, bias, and
discriminatory behavior.
Planning is essential to a good child care program. It ensures that a
variety of interesting activities and needed materials will be ready. Con-
ﬂicts between children will be less frequent. Staff members can share
responsibilities. You can implement both short- and long-term goals.
Parents and administrative personnel can be kept informed.
Everyone who is involved should be included in planning: all staff
members, children, and parents.
When planning activities for your child care group, capitalize on
children’s interests. Increase their awareness of cultural differences.
Foster children’s desire to be competent by teaching them how to do
real jobs using real tools. Encourage their play interest and provide
enough choices of things for them to do. Try to balance activities between
group and individual, quiet and active, child-initiated and adult-initiated.
Include everyday experiences such as a trip to the grocery store or a walk
around the block. Allow time to meet each child’s needs. Do not forget to
plan for transition times.
Transitions, those times when all or part of the group moves from
one activity to another, should be planned as carefully as other parts
of the curriculum. Minimize waiting time by having the next activity
ready, and/or provide books, videos, or tapes to keep children occupied.
Alert children before the change is to take place and involve them in
cleanup.
There are several ways to present activities: independent projects,
group activities, interest centers, ﬁeld trips, clubs, spontaneous activities,
and community projects.
Draw up a schedule by ﬁrst listing everything you do each day.
Allow adequate time for each activity but not so much that children get
bored.
Summer programs mean changes in personnel and the number or
ages of children. The longer days allow for a variety of activities that may
be similar to those during the rest of the year, but have the new dimension
of added time.

SECTION THREE
174
KEY TERMS
academic approach
age appropriateness
antibias curriculum
curriculum
emergent curriculum
holistic approach
individual appropriateness
integrated curriculum
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Talk to a group of school-age children. Find out what they are inter-
ested in by asking what they do after school, what they read, or what
they watch on television. Is there a difference between boys’ interests
and girls’ interests? Are there age-level differences?
2. Write a short paragraph about what you liked to do when you were
between six and ten years old. How did you get started with these
interests? Did your parents encourage them? Did your friends?
3. Survey your community to ﬁnd out what resources are available that
mightbeusedbyaschool-agechildcaregroup.Isthereawidevariety,
or are there limited choices?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Deﬁne developmentally appropriate practice. What is the difference
between age appropriateness and individual appropriateness?
2. What is the primary role of staff members in a child care program?
Howshouldtheyadjusttheirinteractionstotheyoungestchildrenand
then to the oldest?
3. State ﬁve reasons for careful planning when you work with school-age
children.
4. Defendthestatement“Staffmembersshouldhavepaidplanningtime
each day.”
5. How can you include children in your planning?
6. In what ways can parents help you to plan a good program?
7. Suggestthreeactivitiesyoucanincludetoincreasechildren’sdesireto
become competent.
8. List three approaches to presenting activities.
9. In what ways can ﬁeld trips be used to enhance a child care
program?

CH APTER 8
PROGRAM PLANNING
175
10. How can children who attend child care be more involved in their
community?
CASE STUDY
Francois and Marissa have both been assigned to a group of 10- to 12-
year-olds in a YMCA after-school program. Marissa had been a preschool
teacher and has a degree in early childhood education. Francois worked
for many years as an assistant teacher in a fourth-grade classroom. They
have widely differing opinions about how their program should be
planned. Marissa believes they should rely to a great extent on what the
children want to learn or do and develop the curriculum from there.
Francois has read the curriculum guidelines of the local school district
and thinks they should be reinforcing what the schools teach. He points
to the fact that at the nearby school many of the children attend, reading
and math scores are extremely low. He says it is their job to help the chil-
dren increase their academic skills so they will be able to go on to the next
grade level.
1. How would you describe their different approaches to curriculum
planning?
2. How can they resolve their differences so they can work together and
the children gain the maximum beneﬁt?
3. Can you think of a way to combine the two approaches?
REFERENCES
Albrecht, K. M., & Plantz, M. C. (1993). Developmentally appropriate
practice in school age child care programs (2nd ed.). .
Derman-Sparks, L. (1989). Anti-bias Curriculum: Tool for Empowering
Young Children. Washington DC: NAEYC.
Krashen, S. (1992). Fundamentals of language education. Torrance, CA:
Laredo.
Loosi, S. E. (2000). Making an impact on out-of-school time. Wellesley,
MA: National Institute on Out-of-School Time.
NAEYC position statement: Responding to linguistic and cultural
diversity—Recommendations for effective early childhood education.
(1996). Young Children, 51(2), 4–12.
Piaget, J. (1952). The origin of intelligence in children. (M. Cook, Trans.).
New York: International Universities Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psycho-
logical processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

SECTION THREE
176
SUGGESTED READINGS
Bergstrom, J. M. (1990). School’s out. Berkeley: Ten Speed.
Boutte, G., Van Scoy, I., & Hendley, S. (1996). Multicultural and nonsexist
prop boxes. Young Children, 52(1), 34–39.
Cech, M. (1991). Globalchild—Multicultural resources for young chil-
dren. New York: Addison-Wesley.
Katz,L.G.,Evangelou,D.,&Hartman,J.A.(1990).Thecaseformixed-age
groupinginearlyeducation.Washington,DC:NationalAssociationfor
the Education of Young Children.
Lewis,B.(1995).Kid’sguidetoserviceprograms.Minneapolis:FreeSpirit.
WEB RESOURCES
[http://naeyc.org]
National Association for the Education of Young Children: full text of
Developmentally Appropriate Practice.

Creating an Environment
177
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Describe ways in which the physical environment enhances
development.
State general guidelines for planning indoor and outdoor space.
Draw a plan for a child care room with an adjoining playground.
Discuss ways to adapt the environment when space must be shared.
HOW THE ENVIRONMENT
ENHANCES DEVELOPMENT
t
he physical environment is the basic component of a child care
program—the foundation for everything that happens there. The
very best program activities, materials, or equipment are less effec-
tive if the physical setting does not meet the needs of the children for
whom it is designed. The physical setting should be developmentally
appropriate, supporting and enhancing all areas of children’s develop-
ment: physical, cognitive, emotional, and social. The environment should
encourage children to participate in activities that will further their devel-
opment, not discourage them.
Earlier chapters indicated that children’s physical development is
proceeding rapidly during middle childhood, although ﬁne-motor control
lags slightly behind gross-motor control. Indoor areas can be planned to
provide children opportunities to increase both these skills. To develop
ﬁne-motor control, they need space where they can work puzzles, do
art projects, build with small blocks, or construct models. There should
also be space for dancing or active games that will increase gross-motor
CHAPTER99
OBJECTIVES

SECTION THREE
178
control and eye-hand coordination. Outdoor areas provide many oppor-
tunities for gross-motor activities such as running, jumping, and throwing.
Child care leaders should provide a variety of activities that progressively
enhance physical development. As children become more adept at using
their large muscles, they should have a place where they can play hop-
scotch, baseball, or soccer and swim, bike, or skate. Space can also be
provided for activities that increase small-muscle control. Planting seeds
in a garden bed, doing nature collages, and modeling with clay are some
examples.
A developmentally appropriate child care environment provides
many places where children can enhance their cognitive abilities. In
Chapter 5, you read that Piaget and Vygotsky believed that children
need to be active participants in the development of their own intelli-
gence. In order to do that, the environment must invite participation
and offer a wide variety of choices. Children must be free to explore and
discover, to hypothesize and experiment, in order to increase their knowl-
edge about the world around them. Each area must include space for
children to work comfortably and to have their materials close at hand.
You need storage space to keep ongoing projects safe or to display
their work. Social skills and language are also components of cognitive
development. Work areas should be conducive to verbal interactions
among the children. Round tables for some activities and enclosed spaces
for others encourage children to talk to one another. Comfortable places
for reading also encourage children to increase language skills.
During middle childhood, peer relationships and a sense of belonging
to a group become extremely important. Children will usually ﬁnd places
where they can get together, but an effective child care environment will
structure places that foster both a group rapport and friendships between
children. The setting needs to have a space where all of the children can
gather at one time for activities or discussions. The environment should
also include places where two friends can just hang out and talk. Spaces
for clubs also allow children to form relationships and share interests with-
in a small group.
DEVELOPING THE PLAN
The originators of child care centers seldom have the luxury of choosing
or building a facility that ﬁts the program they envision. Most often after-
school programs are housed in extra classrooms, multipurpose rooms,
cafeterias, or gyms. However, within any physical space, it is possible to
create an environment that welcomes children and makes them feel safe

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
179
and secure and enhances their development. It just takes more thought
and ingenuity in some situations than in others.
If you are not sure where to start, get a feel for how children play.
Watch them playing in your neighborhood, at a park, or on a school play-
ground. Note how the children group themselves. Do they all play in one
large group or do two or three children do something together? You prob-
ably will see that the groups are small and that children tend to stake out
their own territory. They meet in speciﬁc places each day, and then con-
tinue play activities together. Watch, also, how they change their space
whenever they can. Many will use boxes for forts, some will build tree
houses from scrap lumber, while others will pitch tents so they can be
alone. Some children add materials to already existing structures to suit
their own needs. They place a wide board on the jungle gym to make a
platform for their space ship or enclose a climbing structure with large
packing boxes for a clubhouse.
Consider the characteristics of your particular group of children.
Their diversity should be reﬂected in your environment. Look at their
age level. Are they all about the same age or do ages vary? What skills
and abilities do they have in common? What are their interests? Is there
a predominant ethnic group? Do some children have special needs? Each
of these factors should be considered when planning your environment.
Next, think of the goals of your program. Your space should allow
children to do the things stated in your goals. If you want children to be
able to work independently, you have to provide a place where they can
do that. If you want to encourage a group feeling, you need space where
the whole group can gather or do things together. If your goal is for chil-
dren to develop their physical skills, you must provide space and equip-
ment where that can happen.
When you have followed the preceding suggestions, you should have
a fairly good idea of your constituents—the children who will use your
environment. In addition, your goals tell you what you want these children
to be able to do. It is up to you to set the stage where children and activ-
ities can mesh. The following general considerations will guide you in
planning both indoor and outdoor space.
OVERALL DESIGN OF INDOOR
SPACE
Make the indoor space attractive and homelike. Add color. Place ﬂowers
on a shelf or table and hang artwork done by the children on the walls.
Paint some of the furniture an interesting color. Put a colorful rug in

SECTION THREE
180
a corner to set off that space with a touch of brightness. Try changing the
lighting. A harsh light is somewhat jarring and distracting. A softer light
might create a more relaxed atmosphere.
Set up boundaries for activities. A corner of the room invites privacy.
Make it more secluded with a free-standing rack for books. A table and
shelves can deﬁne space where individual projects are to take place. A rug
tells children this is a place for ﬂoor activities. A large space that is left
open can accommodate group meetings.
Areas should be used consistently for the same purpose. The block
area should be used for block building, not active games; the quiet area
for reading or quiet talking, not loud music activities. That is not to say
these can never be changed. Change them when the need arises. If a
space is not working as planned, discuss it with the children, then be
open to their suggestions as to how the area can be rearranged.
Leave pathways for easy access to all activities and to entrances and
exits. Look at the most likely trafﬁc patterns children might use to move
around the room or from indoors to outdoors. Arrange work areas so they
are undisturbed by children tramping through them.
Make each area readily identiﬁable by children, staff members, and
parents. The kinds of materials you place there, the furniture, or the
arrangement should inform everyone of the purpose. Some programs go
so far as to place signs at these areas. A good idea, perhaps, but purpose
can be conveyed just as effectively by the materials and equipment.
Well-planned indoor space allows for both individual and group activities.

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
181
Remember that some activities go well together and can be placed
next to one another. Others clash and diminish the usefulness of each.
Dramatic play may be incorporated into block building; these two activity
areas can be in proximity. On the other hand, children trying to read qui-
etly in a corner will be disturbed by noisy construction projects. These two
areas should be some distance from one another.
Minimize crowding in activity areas by allowing enough space for
large group functions and by limiting the number of children who can
work comfortably at other areas. An open area where the entire group
can meet should be spacious enough so that children are not pushing
right up next to one another. In the activity areas, avoid crowding by mak-
ing it clear that only a speciﬁed number can participate at an activity at any
one time. Four chairs at a table indicate that four people can sit there. The
children may attempt to add chairs but can be reminded of the limitation,
then directed to another area.
What Should Be Included?
There should be enough space that children can move about
safely. Check the licensing regulations in your state to determine
the number of square feet per child you will need.
Add enough tables, chairs, shelves, and cabinets to accommo-
date your program. Leave enough room so children do not bump
into furniture or trip on equipment.
Include places where children can work on individual or
group projects. They will probably need a table, some chairs, and
a place to keep their work until it is completed.
This area may also include a place where completed work can be
displayed.
Have a place where the children can keep their belongings.
Children will be coming to you from school carrying backpacks,
lunch pails, and jackets. Everyone should have a cubby, shelf, or
box in which to deposit these articles until they are ready to go
home.
Make room for messy activities near a water supply. Many art
projects such as clay, painting, or papier-m^ache´ will require a ready
supply of water. Cooking projects, too, tend to be messy. These
two areas can be right next to each other and share a sink for water.
Set aside an area for quiet reading, resting, or just talking
with friends. An enclosed corner as just described will serve this
purpose. Furnish it with a low sofa, beanbag chairs, large pillows,
and a soft rug. Add books and magazines.
Keep distance between
activities that clash, such
as reading and noisy
construction activities.

SECTION THREE
182
Leave an open area where your whole group can be together
at times. Many schools leave the center of a room for this purpose.
This space can also be used for large-muscle activities indoors
when you cannot go outside. You can dance or do exercises or gym-
nastics when the space is unobstructed.
Remember to arrange a place where children can complete
their homework. Have computers and printers available for
homework. Provide access to the Internet. A table and chairs in a
quiet area of the room are needed. Make sure the lighting is
adequate so children can see well. Some children will be able to
work together at one table, whereas others may need their own
work place. You may have to set up a small individual table for the
child who needs to work alone.
If you can, provide high spaces and low spaces. Many centers
with limited ﬂoor space resort to a double-decker approach. Imag-
ine a climbing structure that could serve as a dramatic play area in
the upper level with a quiet hideaway underneath. The upper level
might even become a stage for dramatic productions.
Designate places to hang artwork, display photographs, or
feature news items. This area can be a bulletin board near the
entrance so parents can also enjoy it. If you do not have a bulletin
board, use picture gum or masking tape to attach items to the wall.
Provide adequate storage. This area should include both closed
cupboards and some that are accessible to the children. Use closed
cupboards for the things you do not use all the time.
Examples are special art or project supplies, games, table activ-
ities, or books. Some materials should be on open shelves or cup-
boards so children can use them as they wish. Always keep a basic
assortment of art materials readily available. Change these periodi-
cally with those you have stored away.
If your curriculum includes club activities, arrange a place for
children to meet. Let the children decorate the space and add a
sign with the club name. Furnish the club area with whatever is
needed for their particular activity. A collector’s club will need a
table and chairs. A drama club could use a stage and a place to
store props.
If your group includes some older children (children between
the ages of 10 and 13) design a special place for them. A sepa-
rate room would be best, but if you cannot provide that, set up a
corner for them. Make it their special place in which younger
children are not allowed. The equipment might include a tape
recorder/radio, model kits and games, beanbag chairs, or large

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
183
pillows. If the room size permits, add a Ping-Pong, air hockey, or
pool table.
Do not forget the adults when you design your indoor space.
Arrange a place where you can prepare materials and keep any
records that are required by the program administrators.
In addition, you will need a cupboard or drawer where you can
keep your personal belongings.
Parents, too, must be considered. Provide a place for sign-in/
sign-out sheets and mailboxes for notes to individual families. In
addition, you might install a bulletin board where you can post
schedules, pictures of the children, reminders of upcoming events,
or any other items of interest to all the parents. Designate a space
for lost and found articles.
Now that you know what must be included, you can conceptualize the
placement of activity areas. Try using a scale drawing of your room. Mark
the doors and windows, then designate areas. Check that you have
included an area for each activity in your program plan. Try to imagine
yourself and the children living in the space. When you actually place fur-
niture and storage cabinets in the environment, walk through it again,
thinking about how it will function. If you are satisﬁed, try it with your
group of children. After a period of time, evaluate your arrangement and
get input from the children. Do not be afraid to change it, however. As
long as everything is movable and not built-in, you can reorganize it. Be
ﬂexible.
When You Have to Share Indoor Space
You may not have the luxury of a space that can be set up and left intact at
the end of each day. It can be overwhelming to have to arrange your envi-
ronment at the beginning of each day, but with a bit of preplanning and
some imagination, it can be done. If you use adaptable materials and have
movable cabinets, your task can be managed. The following are some sug-
gestions that have worked for other programs, but each space may require
you to devise your own strategies.
Set up interest centers each day. This process will be easier if you plan
ahead by having all the materials you will need in a basket, a large box,
ice-cream cartons, or shoe boxes. Carry them to the table or area where
children will use them.
Install large casters or wheels on cupboards, bulletin boards, or divid-
ers used to designate areas. Sometimes it helps to label these to specify
their use. Put locks on the cupboards.

SECTION THREE
184
Design furniture that can be taken apart when it must be put away at
the end of the day. Buy or construct modular furniture made from sturdy,
lightweight building material such as tri-wall. Add large vinyl pillows and
vinyl beanbag chairs to be used in reading or listening areas.
A large pegboard on wheels is adaptable for many uses. It can be a
convenient place to hang woodworking tools or art supplies. It can also
divide one work area from another. (You can divide spaces with folding
screens, sheets, or blankets, as well.) Have some shelves that are also
equipped with casters. Use these for art materials, games, block accesso-
ries, and science materials.
Use plastic stackable containers for the children’s belongings.
Carpet squares can deﬁne an activity area if there is no rug. This will
make the ﬂoor more comfortable as well as designate a space. Carpet
pieces can often be obtained inexpensively from carpet stores or carpet
installers.
Allow children to rearrange the indoor environment. They may be
able to see possibilities that adults have not considered. Before starting,
however, discuss with them the kinds of activities that must be provided
for, then have them offer suggestions. Compile their suggestions, then let
them vote on the ones to be implemented. Draw up a plan and execute
the changes. Evaluate how the plan is working after a trial period.
Work together with other occupants of your space so that everyone
has an understanding of what can be done and what cannot. Meet with the
Designate places to hang artwork, display photographs, or feature news
items.

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
185
principal or building administrator on a regular basis to reinforce mutual
commitments to serving children and their families and to resolve any
problems that arise. Maintain contact with teachers to determine ways in
which the goals of the child care center can complement those of the
school. Set up an agreement with school secretaries about use of ofﬁce
equipment and the telephone. Have an explicit understanding with the
janitors about who is responsible for cleaning and taking out the trash
and who will clean up when others use the space.
OVERALL DESIGN OF OUTDOOR
SPACE
It is rare that child care staff members are able to design a new play-
ground. Most have to adapt an existing facility to suit the needs of their
program and the children they serve. Whether starting from scratch or
adapting an existing playground, it helps to visit other child care centers,
parks, or schools to see how others have planned play spaces for children.
Note how the children use both the open spaces and any permanent
equipment. Are some not used at all? What kinds of equipment attract
the greatest number of children or hold their interest the longest? What
kinds of play occur? What do children do in the open spaces? This valu-
able information will be useful when planning child care outdoor areas.
Children use both open spaces and permanent equipment to play.

SECTION THREE
186
The next step is to take an inventory of everything in the outdoor
space that will be available to the center. Map out areas that cannot be
changed, and indicate the places that are open. Brainstorm ideas for the
space with other staff members. If children are already enrolled in the
center, get their input. They may have wonderful suggestions for what
they would like to have. Make a priority list of what will be needed, and
ﬁgure the cost of each item. If ﬁnancial resources are limited, plan to pur-
chase ﬁrst items that are likely to be used the most or that have the great-
est capability for multiple uses. Are there things that staff members or
parents can build or install, thus decreasing the cost?
Clarify program goals that will be supported by the outdoor environ-
ment. What is it you want children to be able to do as a result of using the
space? Remember that outdoor space is not just for helping children to
develop physical skills but can help them grow cognitively and socially as
well. Outdoor play can involve problem solving, investigating, observ-
ing, listening, matching/naming objects, and predicting, to name just a
few cognitive skills. Socially, outdoor play can help children learn to
cooperate, share, develop friendships, engage in group fantasy play, and
foster a group cohesiveness.
A playground should be based on a knowledge of child development.
Review the chapters on development at the beginning of this textbook to
remind you of what school-age children are like. They are extremely
active and like to have lots of space to run, jump, and throw. They want
to be competent at any activities that require physical agility and need
places where they can practice their skills. They want to have places
where they can be with their peers, either one-on-one or with a group.
Design your space with children’s special needs in mind. If the group
includes children with physical limitations, include spaces to which they
“Me on the bars.” Mariah, age 10.

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
187
will have access. Some possibilities are to include paved pathways that are
wide enough for a wheelchair, a raised sandbox or a sand table, wheel-
chair-accessible areas for throwing balls, and climbing equipment with a
transfer station, allowing a child to go from chair to climber. Many play-
ground equipment companies will offer advice on how to adapt their
pieces to ﬁt the needs of children with disabilities.
Safety
Children’s safety is a top priority for all child care centers and is therefore
treated here as a separate subject to consider when planning or renovating
outdoor play areas. The process should begin with a survey of the area to
be used. Do a safety audit of existing structures by comparing them to
standards, guidelines, and laws set by federal and state agencies. Informa-
tion can be obtained from the following sources:
United States Consumer Product Safety Commission: Handbook for
Public Playground Safety (1988)
4330 East-West Highway
Bethesda, Maryland 20814-4408
Phone: 301-504-6816
FAX: 301-504-0124 or 301-504-0025
[http://www.cpsc.gov] Email: info@cpsc.com
National Program for Playground Safety
University of Northern Iowa
Cedar Falls, Iowa 50614-0614
Phone: 800-544-PLAY or 319-273-2416
FAX: 319-273-7308
Email: playground-safetyuni.com
Pamphlets and videos and can answer questions.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) — the Americans
with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG)
Phone: 800-514-1301 (voice)
800-514-0383 (TTY)
[http://www.ada.gov]
American Alliance for Health, Physical Education, Recreation and
Dance (AALR)
1900 Association Drive
Reston, VA 22091-1598
Phone: 800-213-7193
[http://www.aahperd.org]
safety audit
survey of all playground structures in
comparison to standards, guidelines,
and laws set by federal and state
agencies
ADA
Americans with Disabilities Act

SECTION THREE
188
American Society for Testing & Materials (ATSM)
100 Barr Harbor Drive
West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959
Phone: 610-832-9585
FAX: 610-832-9555
[http://www.astm.org]
Information on playground site and surfacing testing materials.
Check also with your state-licensing bureau for regulations affecting
playground space and equipment. Your state may also have laws pertain-
ing to playground safety. California, Michigan, Texas, North Carolina,
New Jersey, and Connecticut all have such laws. Others have proposals
in process. Familiarize yourself with these laws before making a ﬁnal play-
ground audit. Information about laws can be obtained from your state
attorney general’s ofﬁce.
Additional guidelines you can use for planning a safe outdoor environ-
ment for children follow:

Make sure the equipment is appropriate for the age of the children
who will be using it. Your knowledge of developmental stages and
abilitiesshouldhelptodeterminewhetherequipmentistooeasyor
too difﬁcult.

Do a daily environmental inspection, looking for bottles, cans,
animal waste, standing water, or anything else that may create a
Children’s safety is a top priority for child care centers.

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
189
hazard.Includeasurveyofequipment,lookingforrust,splintering
wood, or exposed bolts.

Choose cushioned surfaces for beneath equipment as a fall zone.
Asphalt, black top, grass, packed dirt, and concrete should not be
used. Choose pea gravel, sand, or hardwood ﬁber/mulch. The
height of the equipment will determine the depth of the material
used. Usually 12 inches of loose ﬁll will be adequate for equipment
up to 8 feet in height. If synthetic material is used, the manufac-
turer will recommend the depth.

Make sure all climbing equipment meets consumer safety stan-
dards. Steps on ladders should be in good condition, and handrails
should have appropriate grip sizes. Protective barriers should be at
least 38 inches high for school-aged children.

Swingsshouldhavesoft seats,andonlytwo shouldbeplacedinone
framework.Theyshouldbepositionedatleast24inchesapartatthe
base of the seats and 30 inches from any supports.

Thereshouldbeacushionedfallzone20feet infrontand 20feet in
back of the pivot height of the swing. The cushioned zone should
also extend 6 feet to each side of the support structure.

Slides should be securely anchored. The steps should have ﬁrm
handrails and provide good traction. Drainage holes in the steps
will prevent moisture that makes them slippery. Make sure there
is no space between the slide platform and the bed where strings
from clothing can catch. If the slides are metal, they should be in a
shaded area.

Seesaws should be designed with secure handles of a size that
school-age children can grip easily. There should be a soft bumper
under the seat, and all pivot points should be covered.

Be sure that all areas with potential hazards are easily supervised
and can be seen from various vantage points. Be sure no trees or
other structures block your view.

All entrances to the playground should have secure, self-latching
gates.

Always provide adequate supervision when children are using
playground equipment. You must have an adult nearby who is
attending to what the children are doing. That person must be
aware of the rules for using the equipment and be capable of
enforcing the rules when necessary.
What Should Be Included?
Include both single-purpose and multipurpose equipment.
Most children love the old standbys: swings, jungle gyms, climbing

SECTION THREE
190
rope, and a sandbox. Swings are single purpose equipment: they
can be used only for swinging. A climbing structure can be
multipurpose equipment, having many different kinds of play
possibilities. A sandbox seems to be single purpose on ﬁrst glance.
You immediately think that it is just for digging, but children can
ﬁnd almost endless ways to incorporate other kinds of play into this
area. They will build dams, cook elaborate foods, and search for
dinosaur bones, to name just a few.
Add some materials so children can construct their own
equipment. Large blocks, boards, cartons, cable spools, and
sawhorses present interesting possibilities. Consider using tires,
inner tubes, logs, and sheets of wood or cardboard. These are
materials for “adventure playgrounds” that are actually available in
some parts of the country. Children can be marvelously inventive
in what they can devise.
As needed, bring out equipment to stimulate new play ideas.
Balls, racquets, hoops, hockey sticks, jump ropes, tumbling mats,
and horseshoes are just a few choices. (Do not forget a pump for
rejuvenating deﬂated balls.) Chalk for sidewalk games, yo-yos, and
batons might be added depending on the interests of the children.
In different kinds of weather there are additional items to use.
When it is hot, bring out a hose, buckets, sprinklers, a small pool,
and boats. For areas that get snow, provide shovels, sleds, and
snow saucers.
Include areas where children can have some privacy. A play-
house, park bench, tree house, or even a secluded corner under a
tree can be a place where children can gather to chat with a friend
or just be alone.
Allow spaces for special activities, some protected from
inclement weather. Some games need a hard surface, others dirt.
Set aside a safe place away from pathways where children can prac-
tice skateboarding or roller-skating. Use a covered area for art or
table activities that can be enjoyed when the sun is hot or even
when it rains.
Have a variety of surfaces on your playground. Include grass,
dirt, cement or asphalt, sand, or wood chip areas for added interest.
In addition to these surfaces, it is nice to leave some planted areas
in the yard. Trees, ﬂowers, shrubs, or a garden area add a pleasing
touch to any yard.
Provide an opportunity for children to learn about and gain
respect for their natural environment. Growing urban areas
have almost obliterated any wild and natural places for children to
play. As a result, many children today have little contact with the
single purpose
equipment
play equipment that can be used for
only one kind of play
multipurpose equipment
equipment that has many possibilities
for play activities

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
191
outdoors, and many even express fears of insects, snakes, and
plants (Bixler et al., 1994). The playground of a child care center
can allow children to explore the outdoors within a relatively safe
setting. Create an area that contains unmanicured grass, bushes,
plants, some rocks, a small hill, some trees, and a birdbath and
feeder. Add a garden where children can grow vegetables or ﬂow-
ers, plant ﬂowers that will attract butterﬂies or hummingbirds, and
include wild grasses or plants native to the area. In addition, allow
children to construct their own play spaces or private hideaways
with tree limbs, boards, boxes, and large tires. Children will
strengthen their appreciation of the outdoors if they share respon-
sibility for maintaining the area.
Remember to have a water outlet in the yard, both a drinking
fountain and hose faucet. Active children get thirsty, and water
is needed for many art projects. If hoses are added, children will be
able to build dams in the sandbox, learn how water sculptures any
area where it runs freely, maintain a garden, or observe how sun-
light shining through sprinkler spray makes a rainbow.
The outdoor area of a child care center may be the only opportu-
nity some of today’s children have to engage in free, active play.
Many live in apartments or areas where they cannot play outside
their houses because it is not safe. In addition, many will get home
after dark. Therefore, you should put as much thought into the
kinds of activities you provide for children outdoors as you do for
inside time. Play outdoors is not just a chance to run around and let
off steam but also an opportunity for additional learning and the
acquisition of skills.
When You Have to Share Outdoor
Space
If you have to share outdoor space with other programs or with neighbor-
hood children, you have an additional challenge. You probably will not be
able to change the environment, but you can add your own movable play
equipment. Bring out easels and painting materials, a box of balls or other
sports equipment, digging tools in a crate, or games to play on the grass.
You will have to look at the possibilities of the space available and add
whatever you can.
Allow your children to mingle with others using the space. It would be
difﬁcult if your children felt different from neighborhood youngsters in a
park just because they were in child care. Establish clear rules about
where they can go and what they can do, but allow as much freedom of
movement as you safely can.

SECTION THREE
192
Environment affects us all in subtle ways. A good atmosphere will
encourage children to be relaxed and engage in productive play. Poor
conditions may result in upset children who cannot settle down to sus-
tained activities. Design your child care space with thought, and be willing
to change it as needed. You and your children will be glad you did.
SUMMARY
The physical environment is the basic component of a child care program,
the foundation for everything that happens there. A developmentally
appropriate environment will support and enhance all areas of children’s
development: physical, cognitive, and social. Few child care staff mem-
bers have the luxury of designing a facility that exactly ﬁts the program
they envision. Most have to adapt space in unused or dual-use spaces
within another facility. With thought and ingenuity, it can be done,
however.
Some overall guidelines help you plan indoor space. Make it home-
like, adding such things as color or soft lighting. Delineate boundaries for
activities, and use these spaces consistently for the same purpose. Leave
pathways to doorways as well as to all classroom areas. Each area should
be easily identiﬁable as well as exist comfortably with adjacent spaces.
Children’s safety should be a top priority for all child care centers.
Planners should obtain guidelines, regulations, and laws that govern
The playground of a child care center can allow children to explore the
outdoors within a relatively safe setting.

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
193
playgrounds. Make sure the equipment is age appropriate and has cush-
ioned surfaces beneath potential fall areas. Climbing equipment should
meet consumer safety standards, swings should have soft seats, and all
equipment should be securely anchored into the ground.
Include in your indoor environment the following:

enough space to meet licensing requirements

a place for individual or group projects

a cubby for each child to keep his or her belongings

a water supply for messy activities

an area for reading, resting, or talking

an open area for large gatherings or active games

a place for children to do homework

high places and low places

a bulletin board for art, notices, and parent information

adequate storage

a club area

a special place for older children

a place for caregivers and parents
When you have to share indoor space, you can organize materials in
easy-to-carry boxes or crates, install casters on all furniture, use shelves or
pegboards to divide work areas, use carpet pieces to delineate a space,
allow children to set up the environment, and work with other occupants
to avoid misunderstandings.
Before you begin to draft a design for a playground, visit a variety of
places where children play: other child care centers, school playgrounds,
or parks. Your playground should reﬂect what you know about children.
All outdoor areas should be safe but also offer some challenges to chil-
dren. If you have children with special needs in your group, you will
have to do additional research to know how to meet their needs.
Include in your playground the following:

both single-purpose and multipurpose equipment

some materials children can use to construct their own equipment

balls, hockey sticks, jump ropes, etc.

space for special activities

a variety of surfaces

a water outlet

a natural, unstructured space
When you have to share outdoor space with other programs, add
movable equipment, allow children to mingle with others using the area,
and establish clear rules about what children can and cannot do.

SECTION THREE
194
KEY TERMS
ADA
multipurpose equipment
safety audit
single purpose equipment
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Obtain several catalogs from companies that supply playground
equipment. Select a climbing apparatus and three other articles for a
school-age playground. In class, explain your choice in a group of two
other students. Compile the list of choices from each group member,
then negotiate and agree on buying only three items.
2. Visit three child care sites that are under different auspices: church,
recreation program, school district, community organization, or pri-
vately owned. Record the kinds of furniture and equipment available
in their indoor space. Share your ﬁndings with your classmates.
3. Draw a ﬂoor plan of an ideal indoor space for a group of 20 children
from ages six to 11. Use the list of things to include in an indoor envi-
ronment discussed in this chapter. How might you have to adapt your
plan to accommodate a child in a wheelchair?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Listﬁvegeneralguidelinestorememberwhenplanningindoorspace.
2. Indicate which of the following activities can be placed next to one
another: block building, music, art, science, cooking, karate club,
homework, drama practice, woodworking, wood sculpting, reading,
table games.
3. State ﬁve things to be included in indoor space.
4. List three possible storage containers for children’s belongings. Can
you suggest any others?
5. Describe the arrangement of an art area.
6. What are the requirements for a space where children can do their
homework?
7. What is meant by single-purpose and multipurpose equipment? Give
examples of each.
8. Why is it important to provide wild spaces for children in an outdoor
play area?

CH APTER 9
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT
195
9. List some equipment you might take outside to stimulate new play
ideas.
10. Inwhat wayscanyouadaptbothindoorandoutdoor equipmentwhen
you have to share space with other programs?
CASE STUDY
Dion and Hazel have been hired to be co-leaders in a new child care
center in an upscale urban area. As they start to plan, they realize they
have quite different ideas about what should be in the room. In addition,
the director tells them she wants the room to convey the high academic
standards she believes in. The parents who have already enrolled their
children are well educated and want their children to be successful in
school.
1. If you were responsible for planning this environment, where would
you start?
2. How can you take into consideration the differing ideas of the two
caregivers, the concerns of the director, and the demands of the
parents?
3. Is there a way to make the environment ﬂexible so that it can be
changed if needed?
REFERENCES
Bixler, R. D., Carlisle, C. L., Hammitt, W. E., & Floyd, M. F. (1994).
Observed fears and discomforts among urban students on ﬁeld trips
to wildland areas. Journal of Environmental Education, 26(1), 24–33.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Clemens, J. B. (1996). Gardening with children. Young Children, 51(4),
22–27.
Haas-Foletta, K., & Cogley, M. (1990). School-age ideas and activities for
after school programs. Nashville: School-Age Notes.
Herman,M.L.,Passineau,J.F.,Schimpf,A.L.,&Treuer,P.(1991).Teach-
ing kids to love the earth. Duluth: Pfeifer-Hamilton.
Marotz, L. R.,Cross, M. Z.,&Rush, J.M. (2004).Health, safety, andnutri-
tion for the young child (6th ed.). Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Delmar
Learning.
Morris, L., & Schultz, L. (1989). Creative play activities for children with
disabilities: A resources book for teachers and parents. Champaign:
Human Kinetics.

SECTION THREE
196
Nabhan, G. P., & Trimble, S. (1994). The geography of childhood: Why
children need wild places. Boston: Beacon.
Rivkin, Mary S. (1995). The great outdoors, restoring children’s right to
play outside.Washington, DC: National Association for the Education
of Young Children.
Sutterby, J., & Frost, J. (2002). Making playgrounds ﬁt for children and
children ﬁt for playgrounds. Young Children 57(3), 36–41.
Wardle, F. (1997a). Outdoor play: Designing, building, and remodeling
playgrounds for young children. Early Childhood News, 9(2), 36–42.
Wardle, F. (1997b). Playgrounds: Questions to consider when selecting.
Dimensions, 25(1), 9–15.
Wilson, R. A., Kilmer, S. J., & Knauerhase, V. (1996). Developing an envi-
ronmental outdoor play space. Young Children, 51(6), 56–61.
WEB RESOURCES
[http://www.uni.edu/playground]
National Program for Playground Safety: Guidelines for safe play-
grounds, online training for child care professionals.
[http://www.NSC.org]
National Safety Council: List of safety recommendations.

Section
four
THE
CURRICULUM

This page intentionally left blank 

Games and Other
Fun Things to Do
199
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss why games should be part of a child care curriculum.
Plan and implement a variety of games for outdoor and indoor play.
List some guidelines for making games fun.
HOW GAMES CAN ENHANCE
DEVELOPMENT
g
ames offer children a change of pace after a day in school. Their
choice of activity in the after-school hours, though, will depend on
their energy level and personality. Some have a lot of energy after
sitting down all day and need to be active. Others are tired and want
to rest. Some children are gregarious and ready for playing in
groups. Others want to be by themselves and choose activities they can
do alone. Fortunately, games offer a wide variety of options. They can
be intensely vigorous or played quietly. Participants can be in large or
small groups, or one child can play alone.
Games provide many opportunities for children to practice their
physical skills. Although boys and girls have just about equal motor skills,
boys have greater forearm strength and girls greater overall ﬂexibility.
Their body size, coordination, and inherited talent will also affect their
agility. As a result, they often select games at which they can excel; boys
often prefer basketball or volleyball, and girls choose gymnastics. Encour-
age them to try new activities by emphasizing the fun of participating, not
the degree to which they are successful.
Children learn to work together when they play games. By middle
childhood, most understand that rules are for everyone and that they
CHAPTER1010
OBJECTIVES

SECTION FOUR
200
must abide by the rules to be a part of a group. Typically, they often spend
more time discussing and negotiating the rules of a game than they do
actually playing. In the process, however, they learn about fairness, how
to take turns, and to accept that each person can be a leader or a follower.
In addition, they experience the fun of a group effort.
Games reinforce and extend children’s cognitive skills. They are using
logic when they have to plan the next move in checkers or a series of strat-
egies in chess. “If I do this . . . then next I do that . . . this will happen.”
Many games involve problem solving as well. A marvelous example is a
game called Jenga®. The game begins with a completed tower, 18 levels
with three blocks at each level. Each player removes one block and places
it on the top of the tower without toppling the structure. It takes a great
deal of looking, thinking, and predicting before deciding which block can
be safely removed. Trivial Pursuit® encourages children to remember
facts. Dice games such as Yahtzee® require math skills.
Children can gain an appreciation for their own or other cultures by
playing the games of different countries. They learn that games are often
played as part of celebrations, for holidays, or to bring groups of people
together in a common activity. They will also ﬁnd that in some cultures,
games teach children skills they need for survival. Figure 10–1 on page
206 and Figure 10–2 on page 215 are two examples of ethnic games. The
Multicultural Game Book, by Orlando (1994), lists many more.
Some children will view games as an opportunity to win or to be the
best in order to enhance their self-esteem. You may not be able to entirely
eliminate this tendency toward competitiveness because it is so much a
part of their environment at school, on television, and in the news. How-
ever, you can minimize this tendency by including games that are non-
competitive and encourage creativity. Also, reinforce children for their
efforts and their skills, rather than being best or ﬁrst. A poem by Matt
Zwerling, published in the January 1991 issue of Young Children,
addresses the matter of competition. He wrote:
Child’s Play
I watched the relay races today,
First grade recess
Filled with teachers’ whistles and students’ squeals,
With shouts and seeming delight.
The winning team screamed and jumped,
Gave high-ﬁves and handslaps just like on t.v.
One winner clenched his ﬁsts and put on a game face,
Almost grim, Will Clark in the Series
Giving high-ﬁsts and raising arms in triumph.

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
201
The other team slowly walked away;
And I thought this really is the beginning.
Surely, surely, there is a better way.
How can there be losers in children’s play?
GAMES AND SAFETY
A section on planning a safe outdoor environment is found in Chapter 9,
but some speciﬁcs need to be considered when children are engaged in
games or other outdoor activities. School-age children often overestimate
their competence and attempt feats that are beyond their capabilities.
They also compare themselves with their peers and want to be the best
at whatever they do. Watch a group of boys on skateboards and observe
the risks they take. The following guidelines will help to prevent serious
accidents to the children in your care:

Set clear rules for using all equipment, and make sure the children
know the rules. Ensure that the rules are vigorously enforced.

Never allow children to use equipment in inappropriate or unsafe
ways or engage in an activity that is potentially injurious.

Before planning any vigorous activity, consider all the ways chil-
dren might get hurt, and eliminate the most serious hazards.
When the activity is introduced, make the children aware of the
possible hazards, ask them to suggest ways to prevent injury, and
add additional cautionary measures if necessary.

Provide appropriate safety equipment with sports activities—such
as knee and elbow pads, helmets, and catcher’s mitts.

Have enough adults to supervise the activities and maintain the
required ratio of adults to children. Train staff to position them-
selves where they can see the widest area under their supervision
and to be vigilant at all times.

Appriseeverystaffmemberofthecenter’spoliciesandprocedures
formanagingaccidents.Thereshouldbeawrittenstatementeasily
accessible to every classroom that includes procedures for dealing
with an accident, telephone numbers for nearby emergency serv-
ices, and information regarding notiﬁcation of parents.

All staff members should know ﬁrst-aid procedures. They should
be able to treat minor injuries such as scrapes or bruises as well as
recognize when an injury requires medical attention.

Staff members should carry out a follow-up after an accident,
reviewing the causes and making suggestions for preventing a sim-
ilar mishap in the future.

SECTION FOUR
202

Do a follow-up with the children. Children may be upset by the
accident and need to be comforted. They may want to know what
happenedandwhy.Makesurethediscussionswithchildrenarelow
key but factual and honest, focusing on ways to prevent the same
kind of injury in the future. Never tell children the accident would
not have happened “if John had only listened to me when I told
him to stop.” Honestly describe what happened. “John was going
too fast around the skateboard area and wasn’t able to make
the turn.”
OUTDOOR GAMES
Generations of children have played outdoor games. If you look at pic-
tures painted several centuries ago, you are likely to ﬁnd children playing
some of the same games they still play today. Pieter Brueghel’s paintings
done in the sixteenth century, for instance, include children playing blind-
man’s buff, hide-and-seek, and drop the handkerchief. The street games
played on the sidewalks of New York and other large cities have been
passed down from parent to child, with each generation adding its own
variations. Most of these games are noncompetitive but are designed to
test the player’s skills. This section will remind you of some of the old
favorites as well as provide you with some new ideas.
Activities
Jump Rope
Purposes:

develop physical coordination

promote cooperation to maintain rhythm

enhance language development, especially for children learning a
second language
Jumping rope is often done to a rhythmical song or chant. The beat
sets the timing for jumps and counts the number of times the individual
jumps before making an error.
In other chants, words direct the individual to perform different
motions while continuing to jump.
Cinderella,
Dressed in yellow,
Went upstairs to kiss a fellow,
Set clear rules to enforce
safety and make sure
children know all the rules.

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
203
By mistake, she kissed a snake,
How many doctors did it take?
1,2,3, . . .
Teddy bear, teddy bear, touch the ground,
Teddy bear, teddy bear, turn around,
Teddy bear, teddy bear, jump real high,
Teddy bear, teddy bear, pat your thigh.
Hopscotch
Purposes:

develop balance and large-muscle strength

encourage play by traditional rules

increase eye-hand coordination necessary for aiming
A hopscotch board can be seen on the ﬂoor of the forum in Rome,
indicating that generations of children have played the game. In Italy,
the game is called “heaven and earth,” earth being the starting point,
and heaven the ﬁnish.
Draw the traditional pattern for hopscotch. Vary the rules by hopping
with the stone held on the back of the hand. Or hop without the stone, but
with the eyes closed.
Instead of the usual rules for hopscotch, try some variations. Set up a
set of six squares, three on each side. Number them from one to six. Have
Hopscotch
Hopscotch Variation
5
6
4
3
1
2
Hopscotch.
Hopscotch Variation.

SECTION FOUR
204
children jump through the squares in sequence with a stone held between
their shoes. They must jump with both feet together like a kangaroo. If
the stone is dropped, that player’s turn is lost.
Sock Ball
Purposes:

develop eye-hand coordination

reinforce playing by rules
Push a tennis ball or sponge ball into the toe end of a tube sock. Tie a
knot close to the ball. Children can toss this ball back and forth holding the
open end. Vary the throws: twirl the sock before throwing, toss it under-
hand. To make catching more difﬁcult, especially for older children, rule
that they can catch the ball only by the tail.
Leapfrog Race
Purposes:

foster trust in others and group cohesiveness

develop large-muscle coordination
Have the children line up single ﬁle in two separate lines. When the
starting signal is given, the ﬁrst player in each line crouches down on
hands and knees. The next player jumps over his back and then becomes
a second back. The third player then must leap over two backs before
becoming the third back. This continues until all players have had a turn.
When the ﬁrst player has jumped over all his teammates’ backs and is at
the head of the line again, he stands up. Each player at the end of the line
follows the same procedure until all players are standing. The ﬁrst team to
have all players standing is the winner.
Catch the Dragon’s Tail
Purposes:

promote group cooperation

practice being leaders and followers

increase gross-motor skills
Eight or ten children line up, one behind the other. The last person in
the line tucks a handkerchief in the back of his belt. At the start signal, the
dragon begins chasing its own tail. The object is for the person at the head
of the line to snatch the handkerchief. When the head ﬁnally gets the
handkerchief, she becomes the tail. The second in line then becomes
the new head.

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
205
A version of this game is played in China, where the dragon is a sym-
bol of good fortune. The game is often played at Chinese New Year cele-
brations. In the Chinese version, the children line up, putting their hands
on the shoulders of the person in front. The ﬁrst person is the head and
the last one the tail. The tail calls out: “1, 2, 3, dragon.” The head leads,
running and twisting, trying to catch its tail. If the body of the dragon
breaks, the dragon dies. The head then moves to the end of the line and
Stalker
Place of Origin: Botswana
Skills: Large motor and listening skills
Ages: 7 and older
Players: 7 or more
Materials: Two scarves for blindfolds; watch or timer
About the Game
The springbok is an animal similar to a gazelle, but it is found only in
southern Africa. Like many games from this region, this one is about a
real-life skill: hunting. For centuries children have played this game imi-
tating adult Bushmen stalking a springbok. Through play, children learn
the lifelong skills of good hunters: patience, concentration, eye-hand
coordination.
Playing the Game

Have all the players form a circle. Choose two players to start the
game: one will be the HUNTER, the other the SPRINGBOK. Blind-
fold them both and then spin them around. Have one player
announce for the hunt to begin.

Moving quietly within the circle, the HUNTER tries to catch the
SPRINGBOK, while the SPRINGBOK tries to avoid the HUNTER.
Players forming the circle can either remain silent or make animal
noises to distract the HUNTER and SPRINGBOK. No one is
allowed to touch the HUNTER and SPRINGBOK.
Ending the Game
After a set period of time, if the HUNTER fails to catch the
SPRINGBOK, the “animal” wins and a new HUNTER is brought out. If
the SPRINGBOK is caught, two new players take over.
From The Multicultural Game Book by Louise Orlando. Copyright
1994 by Scholastic Inc. Reproduced by permission.

SECTION FOUR
206
becomes the tail. The game continues with a new head leading until
everyone is too tired to play.
PomPom Paddle Ball
Purposes:

develop eye-hand coordination

provide practice in pair cooperation
Make paddles using ﬁve-inch lengths of broom handle or dowel. Drill
a hole in one end of the handle. (Do this with the wood securely held in a
vise.) Using wire cutters, cut the hook off a wire coat hanger just below the
twisted part. Shape the remaining wire into a triangle. Pull a knee-high
nylon stocking over the triangle. Secure the end with a bit of tape. Push
the two ends of the wire into the handle.
Make a pompom by looping yarn around a six-inch piece of card-
board. Use enough yarn to make a small ball. Slip the yarn off the card-
board, then secure the middle with a piece of yarn. Clip all the ends and
shape into a ball.
Children can play in pairs, tossing the pompom back and forth. Vary
the game by having children form into two lines facing each other. A
group of six children works best. Have them toss the pompom back and
forth between one team and the other.
Obstacle Course
Purposes:

develop gross-motor skills

foster self-conﬁdence by presenting increasingly difﬁcult tasks
Set up an obstacle course using whatever equipment you have avail-
able. Place a sign showing the number at each station so children can
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
207
proceed in sequence. Start with easy tasks and make them increasingly
difﬁcult. However, be sure that all activities are safe and that all the chil-
dren can complete most of the tasks. Some suggestions are:

walk through a ladder that is lying ﬂat on the ground

crawl through a tunnel made of tables or large cardboard cartons

balance on a balance beam or walk on the edging of a sandbox

jumpinandoutofastaggeredseriesoftireslyingﬂatontheground

jump from wooden packing boxes of several heights

swing from a knotted rope

climb a rope net

shinny down the ﬁreman’s pole of a jungle gym
Snake
This game is played by children in Ghana, where there are many different
kinds of snakes.
Purposes:

develop coordination

provide practice in cooperating with others

increase gross-motor skills
One person is chosen to be the snake. The snake goes to his home, an
area that is large enough to ﬁt several children.
When given a signal (blow a whistle), the snake comes out of his home
and tries to tag other players. Anyone who is caught holds hands with the
snake and tries to catch others.
The original snake is the head and determines who is to be tagged
next. The end person, or “tail,” can also tag players.
If the snake’s body breaks, the group must return to its home and start
again. Free players can try to break the snake’s body, forcing the snake to
return home.
The game ends when all the players have been caught or when every-
one is totally out of breath.
Tug of War
At one time, tug of war was a portrayal of the battle between the forces of
good and evil. In Burma, the battle represents the natural occurrences of
rain or drought. The custom is to allow rain to win.
In Korea villagers play the game to determine which village will have
the best harvest.
This version is played in Afghanistan.
Purposes:

develop gross-motor skills

increase coordination

SECTION FOUR
208

provide practice in balancing

increase the ability to plan strategies
Provide the players with a 3-foot-long piece of doweling.
The players draw a line on the ground and stand on opposite sides.
Each player clutches the dowel. The object of the game is to pull the
other person across the line.
The Hunter
This is a game often played in Saudi Arabia and is like hide and seek but
with a variation.
Purposes:

develop gross-motor skills

develop a sense of cooperation
The game is played by ﬁve or ten children, with one person chosen to
be the hunter (it).
The hunter counts to ten with his or her eyes closed so that the others
can run and hide. Then the hunter starts searching. When someone is
found the child tries to escape and the hunter chases him. The hunter
has to catch all the children or can say “clear,” and start over. If the hunter
catches all the children he joins the other children and the last one caught
becomes the hunter.
Sardines
This game is frequently played in Germany.
Purposes:

increase observation skills

develop the ability to cooperate with others
Any number of children can play.
The person who is “it” has to hide while the others have their eyes
closed, then the others try to ﬁnd him. Whenever a child ﬁnds the person
who is “it,” he or she hides with the “it.”
Soon only one person is left to look for the others. That person
becomes the next “it.”
ACTIVE GAMES THAT CAN BE
PLAYED INDOORS
You should know a few active indoor games children can play when the
weather prohibits outdoor play. Even on warm days, children sometimes

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
209
need to be moving around while inside. The following are some games
that can be played indoors, but you can set them up outdoors if you wish.
Activities
Beanbag Bowling
Purposes:

practice in taking turns

cooperation needed to set up pins after each turn
You will need one or two beanbags and four to ten tall, slim cans.
Pringles® cans work best, but you can also use tennis ball cans. In addition,
you need a smooth, shiny ﬂoor or a long piece of plastic carpet cover.
Place the cans in one of the conﬁgurations shown below. Each child
sits at the end of the “alley,” then slides the bean bag toward the pins.
Children can keep score, adding the number of pins knocked down at
each turn.
For a variation of this game, use cylindrical ﬂoor blocks for the pins
and a soft ball. Players roll the ball, knocking over as many pins as possible.
String Ball Bowling
Purposes:

increase eye-hand coordination

increase ability to reproduce a pattern when resetting the pins

increase math skills

develop teamwork and cooperation
A version of this game was played in France many years ago. It was
brought to the United States by Dutch settlers and developed into the
modern game of bowling.
Use a hollow ball, either a tennis or racquet ball. In addition, you will
need duct tape, string, and cans or plastic bottles. Cut a small slit in the
Bowling
Bowling Variation
Bowling.
Bowling Variation.

SECTION FOUR
210
ball. Have children knot one end of a six-foot length of string, then push
the knot into the slit. Tape the string to the top of a doorway, letting the
ball clear the ﬂoor by about three inches. Find ten plastic bottles of the
same size. Spray paint them all the same color. Pour 1½ inches of water
into each. Replace their caps securely. Set the bottles in a triangle, leaving
space on either side of the doorway. Players swing the ball around the pins
on either side and hit them from the back.
Beanbag Shufﬂeboard
Purposes:

practice motor skills of throwing, pushing

improve math skills: writing numbers, adding

taking turns, scorekeeper and player
Use masking tape or chalk to mark off a court on an area of smooth
ﬂoor. The court should be a large triangle, sectioned into six segments.
Number each segment, giving the smallest segment the highest score.
Children sit on the ﬂoor at the large end of the triangle and slide their
beanbag along the ﬂoor. Each has two turns. Each can keep his or her
own score, or a scorekeeper can be appointed. After a set number of
turns, the scores are totaled.
In a variation of this game, a broomstick or long dowel can be used as a
shufﬂeboard stick. Instead of sitting, children stand, then push the bean-
bag with the stick.
Shuffleboard
1
2
3
4
5
6
Shufﬂeboard.

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
211
Ping-Pong Jai Alai
Purposes:

reﬁne eye-hand coordination

encourage cooperation when working in pairs
Provide a Ping-Pong ball and tall can for each child. A Pringles® can,
tennis ball, or large frozen juice can is suitable. Children drop or toss the
ball with one hand, then try to catch it in the can. You can vary the game by
suggesting they let the ball bounce twice or three times before catching it.
Children might also work in pairs, with one child releasing the ball
while the other catches. The catcher then puts the ball in play for her
partner.
Indoor Basketball
Purposes:

strengthen eye-hand coordination

rehearse turn-taking
You will need the inner ring of an eight-inch embroidery hoop, heavy
tape, and a Nerf® ball. Have children tape the hoop to the wall as high as
their arms can reach. To play the game, each player gets three chances per
turn to make a basket.
Box Marble Shoot
Purposes:

develop small muscles of hands and ﬁngers

increase math skills: number recognition and addition
For this game you need a shoe box, felt marking pens, scissors, and
marbles. Draw ﬁve arches on one side of the box. Make one large arch,
two medium, and two short. Mark number values above each arch. Cut
out the arches. Each player gets three marbles and several turns to com-
plete the game. Players shoot their marbles, trying to get them through
the slots. At the end of a set number of turns, each player totals her score.
Kulit K’rang
Children in Indonesia play this game with small shells.
Purposes:

develop eye-hand coordination

increase reaction time

predict where pieces will fall

SECTION FOUR
212
The players sit in a circle around a bowl. Each player is given an equal
(10–16) number of playing pieces (dried beans, peanuts, pebbles, or sea-
shells). Leave about 20 pieces in the bowl. Each player places his pieces
on the ﬂoor in front of him.
The ﬁrst player puts a piece on the back of his hand, then tosses it in
the air. He must grab another piece from his pile, then catch the falling
piece.
If he has successfully caught the falling piece, he takes one piece from
the bowl. If unsuccessful, he must put one piece in the bowl.
Play continues until the bowl is empty or all the players are out of
pieces. The player who then has the most pieces wins the game.
INDOOR GAMES
There are many commercial games you can use in child care. Ask the chil-
dren what they like to play at home. Remember the games you enjoyed
when you were a child. Visit toy or game stores to ﬁnd games that are
appropriate for school-age children. In addition to the commercial
board games, there are some that you and the children can make. Also,
encourage the children to think of their own ideas for games. Once you
begin, new ideas will be generated.
Introduce children to simple card games; they are inexpensive
because they require only a deck of cards. Some are described here, but
you can ﬁnd others in the books suggested at the end of this chapter.
Activities
Three-Dimensional Tic-Tac-Toe
Purposes:

develop ability to recognize spatial relationships

use deduction; predict results when moves are made
Mark off a 99-inch square on a piece of tag board. Leave a small
border around the edges. Divide the square into nine 3-inch squares.
Cut a toilet paper tube into ﬁve ¾-inch rings. Cut the heads off ten
wooden matches. Glue or tie pairs of matches together in the shape of
an X. Children can use felt markers to color the tube circles one color
and the match Xs another. Players take turns, one using the Xs and the
other the Os. Each places his token on a square. The purpose is to get
three of his tokens in a row down, across, or diagonally.

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
213
Memory Game
Purposes:

practice the ability to match like symbols

develop the ability to remember placement of objects in space
Find 20 pairs of pictures. You can use playing cards from two decks or
secure your own matching pictures. Use identical photos or glue matching
magazine pictures to cards. They should all be the same size and with no
identiﬁable marks, patterns, or colors on the back. Two to four children
can play this game.
Mix the cards, then place them face down on a table. Players take
turns selecting two cards at a time. The cards are shown to the other play-
ers. If the cards are a matching pair, the player keeps them. If not, they are
placed back in their original spot. The next player then has a turn. The
game ends when all the pictures have been picked up. The player with
the most pairs is the winner.
Twenty Pairs
Purpose:

practice ability to match like pairs

accept that it is all right to lose
This game can be played by three or more and requires a pack of 52
cards.
Remove one queen from the deck, then deal the remainder to the
players. The goal of the game is to get rid of one’s cards by getting
matched pairs and laying them on the table.
Each player picks up and examines his cards. He can discard any
matching pairs by placing them face down on the table. If he has three
cards of the same value, he can discard only two of them.
To begin the game, the player to the left of the dealer fans out his
cards and offers them face down to the next player on his left. That player
takes one card and incorporates it into his hand. If he now has a pair, he
places it face down on the table. He, in turn, offers his cards to the next
player. The procedure continues around the table until all the players
have managed to pair and discard their cards. One person is left holding
the odd queen.
Rotation Dice
Purposes:

practice in taking turns

enhance math skills: set recognition, adding

SECTION FOUR
214
Two or more players can play the game, and all you need is a pair
of dice.
Each player takes turns trying to get a speciﬁed number on each
throw. There are 11 rounds to the game.
In the ﬁrst round each player tries for a 2. In the second, each tries for
a 3. In the third round, each tries for a 4. Succeeding rounds follow the
sequence to the last round when the sum of both dice must be 12.
If a player succeeds in throwing the number she is trying for, she gets
that number of points. For instance, if she is trying for a 5 and succeeds,
she can add ﬁve points to her score. If she does not succeed in throwing
the number she needs, she ends that turn with no points. At the end of
the eleventh round, the scores are totaled, and the player with the most
points wins.
Tic-Tac-Toe Dice
Purposes:

strengthen math concepts: writing numbers, number recognition,
adding
Two or more players can play. You need two dice, a scorecard, and
pencil for each child. The score grid can be drawn on a piece of paper or
a 35-inch card. Each grid should have 12 squares.
In each of the spaces, write the numbers from 1 to 12. Start with the
upper-left square with one proceeding down the ﬁrst column. Write 5 at
the top of the second column, go down to 8. Write 9 at the top of the last
column with 12 at the bottom-right corner.
Each player throws the dice only once each turn. On each play players
cross out a number or numbers on the scorecard. They can cross out a
total or each of the two numbers. Players also can cross out any combina-
tion of numbers that equals the total on the dice. As an example, if a 5 and
a 2 are thrown, the following combinations can be crossed out: 6 and 1, or
5 and 2, 4 and 3, or 1, 2, and 4. The ﬁrst person to cross out all the numbers
is the winner.
Solitaire
Card games that one plays alone are called “solitaire” In the United States.
In England these games are called “patience.”
Purposes:

increase ability to concentrate

reinforce ability to count accurately

practice recognition of symbols for suits
Tic-Tac-Toe
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Tic-tac-toe.

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
215
Shufﬂe a deck of cards. Deal out seven cards in a line, with the ﬁrst
card face up and the others face down. Deal out the line again with the
second card face up and the others face down. Follow this pattern starting
consecutively with the third, fourth, ﬁfth, sixth, and seventh cards.
If an ace is showing, remove it and put it above the line of cards. Turn
over the card under it, or if it was the ﬁrst card, replace it with one from
Nim
PLACE OF ORIGIN: China
Skills: Counting, creative thinking and planning skills
Ages: 8 and older
Players: 2
Materials: 21 toothpicks, beans, or other small markers
About the Game
This is the thousand-year-old Chinese game of nim. It doesn’t have
any set patterns or rules. Here, however, is one way it might be played.
Playing the Game

Players will need 21 toothpicks or other small game pieces.
Arrange the sticks in one row as shown in the picture.

Taking turns, the players pick up 1, 2, or 3 sticks at a time.
Winning the Game
The player to pick up the last stick, loses.
From The Multicultural Game Book by Louise Orlando. Copyright
1994 by Scholastic Inc. Reproduced by permission.
Image not available due to copyright restrictions

SECTION FOUR
216
the deck. The object of the game is to ﬁll each of the suits from the ace to
the king in a line (pile) above the game line.
Remove three cards at a time from the remainder of the deck, looking
only at the top card. Play a black card on a red card, sequencing the num-
bers from largest to smallest. Cards can be removed from one pile to place
on another, thus freeing the bottom card. The game ends when all four
suits have been ﬁlled or no more plays can be made from the remaining
deck cards.
Ajaqaq
During the dark winters Canadian Eskimos play a variety of games to pass
the time. At one time they believed that playing this game would make the
sun return earlier.
Purposes:

develop ﬁne-motor skills

increase eye-hand coordination
Give each player a curtain ring or similar weighted ring about 2 inches
in diameter, an 8-inch stick, and 20 inches of string. Tie one end of the
string to the ring and the other around the end of the stick. Hold the stick
in one hand. Flip the ring in the air, then try to catch it on the end of the
stick.
All Ears
Purposes:

develop listening skills

associate sound with familiar objects

discriminate similar sounds from one another
This is a game for a group of children. All you need are several objects
that make a sound.
Sit where you cannot be seen by the children (behind a shelf or a
hanging bedsheet). Make a sound with each of the objects. Players guess
what the object is or what action made the sound.
Some ideas for making a sound:

shake a rattle

bounce a ball

pour water

cut a piece of paper with scissors

staple two pieces of paper together

open a can of soda that has a pull tab

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
217

snap your ﬁngers

crumple a piece of cellophane

blow up a balloon until it pops

rub two pieces of sandpaper together

saw a piece of wood

pound a nail into a piece of wood

bite an apple

unwrap a candy bar

rotate a hand eggbeater

jingle some coins together
At the end of the game, ask the children to think of other objects that
can make a sound. Add some of those to your next game.
GUIDELINES FOR HAVING FUN
WITH GAMES
Before introducing any game to children, play it yourself. Know how the
game is started and how the ﬁrst player is determined. Although you want
children to read the rules of a game, you should be familiar with them.
Introduce new games periodically. Although children like to play the
same games over and over, they also need to keep extending themselves.
Once they master a game, there may be little challenge. Therefore, look
for new games. Talk to other caregivers to get ideas.
Encourage children to invent their own games. All games start with an
idea of something that would be fun. Let them make their own board
games, develop new ways to play outdoor games, and think of new ways
to use available materials.
Help children feel competent when they gain new skills. Provide
authentic feedback by describing their real accomplishments. Praise
their efforts to improve their own performance, for being able to solve a
problem, or for being a committed team player.
Encourage children to share their own favorite games with the group.
Suggest that they bring games that are part of their cultural background.
Encourage youngsters to try increasingly difﬁcult tasks. Once they
have mastered one task, they are often more willing to try harder ones.
Encourage them to do so, but do not pressure them. Praise them for
their efforts.
Stress cooperation rather than competition. You cannot avoid having
a winner and a loser when playing some games. Children need to learn
they do not win all the time. Some of the challenge in playing certain
games is to see who can be ﬁrst or fastest. However, you do not want
authentic feedback
a description of a child’s real
accomplishments

SECTION FOUR
218
children to have winning as the primary focus of games. Therefore, do not
set up contests or give prizes. Instead, praise all children for their partici-
pation, their sportsmanship, and their efforts.
Be ﬂexible about rules. Many games have an accompanying set of
rules. However, young children like to change rules or develop their
own. Allow them to do so when all the players agree. Enjoy physical activ-
ity yourself. Feel the joy children experience when they run, catch balls,
or shoot baskets.
Remember the games you especially enjoyed in childhood. Teach the
children how to play them. Your enthusiasm will be contagious.
Enjoy the challenge of indoor games. Sit down and play solitaire. Try
Trivial Pursuit® with some friends. Try some of the other games described
in this chapter. Above all, have fun.
COMPUTERS
Computers and access to the Internet are very much a part of daily lives in
the workplace, at home, and in schools. Adults will need to have strong
computer skills to be successful. It makes sense, then, to have computers
available in the child care setting since children spend so much time
there. However, questions arise about how available the computer should
be—any time the children want or at scheduled times. Should the newer
hand-held devices and video games also be allowed? Who will monitor
computer use is another question that professionals frequently ask.
There is a lot of support for the use of computers as adjunct learning
tools or additional means that are not a part of traditional reading pro-
grams. The Internet and educational software can offer multimedia pre-
sentations that enhance children’s literacy. Children hear a book read
while viewing the words along with pictures or animations. These may
motivate reluctant readers to improve their listening skills as well as
their ability to read words. There are some excellent Web sites available.

Story Place is available both in English and Spanish and for pre-
school and elementary levels.
[http://www.storyplace.org]

The Kennedy Center Storyline shows the book along with the text.
This encourages children to read along.
[http://www.kennedy-center.org/multimedia/storytimeonline]
A computer is a marvelous research tool when children have an
assignment from school, when they are interested in a particular topic,
adjunct learning tools
additional ways to learn that are not
part of traditional curriculum activities

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
219
or when they just want to ﬁnd out information. With the click of a mouse,
they have a wealth of information available to them. Sometimes there is so
much that children become overwhelmed. There are speciﬁc search
engines geared to elementary-age children with age-appropriate material
including graphs, diagrams, and charts they can understand.

Yahooligans has wonderful slide shows and news articles for
children.
[http://www.yahooligans.com]

The Internet Public Library for Kids allows children to ask ques-
tions and then discover the answers.
[http://www.ipl.org/div/kidspace]

A Math Dictionary For Kids is an interactive dictionary that
explains over 500 common mathematical terms. It also allows chil-
dren to manipulate objects in order to understand concepts.
[http://www.amathdictionaryforkids.com]

The Exploratorium Online covers a wide variety of topics.
[http://www.exploratorium.edu/explore/online.html]

Ben’s Guide to U.S. Government For Kids has interesting infor-
mationandactivitiesabouttheU.S.governmentpresentedinaway
that is attractive to children.
[http://bensguide.gpo.gov]
One important reason for including computers in after-school
programs is that some children may not have any other access to this tech-
nology. In afﬂuent communities computers are likely to be in every class-
room, and children may very well have their own computer at home. For
children in poorer neighborhoods, the after-school program may be the
only source for learning how to use this tool. Even though a school district
may have computers, after-school programs might be able to allow chil-
dren more open-ended computer time than in the classroom. Girls lag
signiﬁcantly behind boys in computer use, and free exploration time
could allow them to feel more at ease.
The question of Internet safety should be carefully considered. Curi-
ous children who are adept at “surﬁng the net” can get into Web sites that
give them misinformation or put them in dangerous positions. Software
programs can ﬁlter Internet access to sites you do not want children to
explore. Children should also be cautioned not to reveal information
about themselves, such as their home address, phone number or e-mail

SECTION FOUR
220
address to anyone on-line. Children should be told not to order games or
buy anything on-line without permission of parents. All sources of infor-
mation should be screened by a staff member as a reliable source for chil-
dren to use. You should also solicit active participation from staff, parents,
and children to decide the kinds of access that will be available to children
and ways to prevent problems.
Choose software programs carefully, reviewing them before intro-
ducing them to the children. So many of the games available for com-
puters either are violent or teach children values you may not want to
promote. In a 1996 position statement, NAEYC stated that principles of
developmentally appropriate practice should be applied. NAEYC
believes that “in any given situation, a professional judgement by the
teacher is required to determine if a speciﬁc use of technology is age
appropriate,
individually
appropriate,
and
culturally
appropriate”
(NAEYC, 1996). You can also ﬁnd reviews of software and help in choos-
ing appropriate programs on the Internet at the following Web sites:
Superkids™Educational Software Review
Reviews new software. Includes games to increase vocabulary and
increase logic and reasoning.
[http://www.superkids.com]
A site designed primarily to provide easy e-mail access to children
and includes interactive games.
[http://www.juniornet.com]
Knowledge Adventure© has a wide range of software from different
sources as well as a special page for educators. Includes product
reviews and demonstration programs that can be downloaded.
[http://www.knowledgeadventure.com]
Guidelines for Caregivers
Although this section on computers has been placed in the chapter titled
“Games and Other Fun Things to Do,” that should not be construed as
meaning that computers are not an important tool for learning. Com-
puters can be a vital element of learning if they are integrated into the
total curriculum. Teachers and child care personnel often use the term
integrated learning to describe the use of interrelated disciplines such
as language, math, or science to achieve a goal. This can be seen most
often in a project approach where children work on self-initiated projects
individually or in a group. The explorations to complete the project may
Computers can be a vital
element of learning if they
are integrated into the total
curriculum.
integrated learning
the use of interrelated disciplines such
as language, math, or science to
achieve a goal

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
221
entail the use of a word processor to write letters, stories, poems, or
reports. Even children who are just learning to write can be adept at this
because they can delete and rewrite easily, without the difﬁculties that
come with laboriously handwriting words. The Internet can be used to
research information to include in a report or to follow additional areas
of interest.
In order for children to make the most effective use of computers,
teachers or caregivers must play several roles depending on the level of
competence of the children.
Instructor: When computers are ﬁrst brought into the program, chil-
dren will need time to become familiar and comfortable with the hard-
ware (the computer) and software (the programs). At this time teachers
must take the most active role, guiding the children through the various
steps necessary to explore the new medium.
Coach: As children gain experience, the adult can begin to withdraw
active participation, allowing children to work independently or to rely on
peers to provide help as needed. The adult becomes a facilitator, provid-
ing support when needed or ensuring appropriate behavior.
Model: Children will more likely use computers as an important tool
for learning if they see teachers or caregivers using them. The adult can
demonstrate the ease with which a story can be recorded on the computer
or classroom materials and charts can be produced.
SUMMARY
Children need a change of pace after long hours at school. Some like to be
active while others need to rest. Some are ready for socializing, but others
want to be alone.
Games allow children to practice motor skills and to work together.
Games also reinforce and extend cognitive skills.
Some children will view games as an opportunity to win, but you can
minimize this tendency by including noncompetitive games.
Always be aware of safety. Know the laws and guidelines governing
child care settings. Set clear rules and enforce them consistently. Have
enough adult supervision. Staff members should have ﬁrst-aid training.
Many popular outdoor games have been played by generations of
children.
Active games that can be played indoors allow children to work off
energy.
Although there are many commercial games children like to play,
there are others you can make.

SECTION FOUR
222
Games should be fun. Guidelines for enjoying games with the chil-
dren in your child care center are:

introduce new games periodically

help children feel good about themselves when they acquire new
skills

encourage children to try increasingly difﬁcult tasks

stress cooperation rather than competition

be ﬂexible about rules

enjoy physical activity yourself

remember the games you played as a child, and teach them to the
children

enjoy the challenge of indoor games

have fun
Computers can be an important addition to the after-school program.
Children can work at their own pace writing stories or poems and re-
searching information for school projects. The child care center may be
the only place some children will have access to a computer.
Questions regarding the safety of the Internet and appropriateness of
software programs must be considered. Adults must take several roles
while helping children to become knowledgeable about computer use:
an instructor who actively participates, a coach who provides support as
children work independently, and a model who demonstrates how to use
computers in a variety of ways.
KEY TERMS
adjunct learning tools
authentic feedback
integrated learning
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Visitanafter-school program. Interviewtwo children ontheirfavorite
games. Ask them the following questions:
a. What is your favorite game?
b. What do you like best about that game?
c. What do you dislike about it?
2. Summarize your ﬁndings. Were there any games mentioned by sev-
eral children? Why do you think those games were popular? Share
your ﬁndings with the class.
3. Choose one of the indoor or outdoor games listed in this chapter.
Teachthegametoagroupofschool-agechildren.Wasitsuccessful?If
not, why?

CH APTER 10
GAMES A ND OTH ER F UN T HING S T O DO
223
4. Make one of the games described in this chapter. Try it out with a
group of adults and children together. Did both adults and children
enjoy the game? How do you think the participants beneﬁted from
playing the game?
5. Interview a senior citizen. Ask him or her to describe a favorite
childhood game. Why was it a favorite?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. What are the factors that affect children’s choice of active games?
2. What are the best materials to use for cushioning surfaces under a
swing?
3. What should be done to ensure the safety of children when they
engage in vigorous outdoor play?
4. Name three academic skills that are reinforced when children play
table games.
5. List four outdoor games.
6. Name three indoor games that allow children to move around.
7. Brieﬂy describe how twenty pairs is played.
8. List eight guidelines for having fun with games.
CASE STUDY
Ryan, Joel, and Trevor were playing on the outdoor climbing structure.
They were pretending they were on a spaceship heading to Mars. They
went up and down one of the ladder sections, saying they needed to check
on the equipment. Trevor and Joel were rushing to be ﬁrst down the lad-
der, pushing and shoving each other. Trevor lost his footing and fell to the
ground. Although there was a ground cover of safety mats, Trevor was
momentarily unconscious and had a cut on his forehead where he hit
something as he fell. The cut was bleeding, but Trevor wasn’t crying.
Their caregiver, Anthony, knelt over Trevor without moving him and
waited for him to recover consciousness. It took only a few seconds, but
all the children were standing around looking very anxious. When it was
safe to do so, Anthony picked up Trevor and took him to the ofﬁce so his
mother could be called and the director could take care of the cut on his
forehead.
1. Is there a way this accident could have been prevented?
2. What would you say to Joel?

SECTION FOUR
224
3. How would you explain the accident and Trevor’s injuries to the
children?
REFERENCES
National Association for the Education of Young Children. (1996, Novem-
ber). NAEYC position statement: Technology and young children—
Ages three through eight. Young Children, 51(6), 11–16.
Orlando, L. (1994). The multicultural game book. New York: Scholastic
Professional.
Zwerling, M. (1991). More food for thought, Child’s play. Young Children,
46(2), 82.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Brandeth, G. (1981). The world’s best indoor games. New York: Pantheon.
Chipman, G., & Chipman, J. (1983). Games! Games! Games! Salt Lake
City: Shadow Mountain.
Collis, L. (1989). Card games for children. Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s Edu-
cational Series.
Haugland, S. W. (1999, November). What role should technology play in
young children’s learning? Young Children, 54(6), 26–34.
Johnstone, M. (1988). Card games. London: Ward Lock.
Sackson, S. (1992). A gamut of games. Mineola, NY: Dover.
Stassevich, V., Stemmler, P., Shotwell, R., & Wirth, M. (1989). Ready-to-
use activities for before and after school programs. West Nyack, NY:
The Center for Applied Research in Education.
WEB RESOURCES
[http://www.sikids.com]
Sports Illustrated on-line magazine for kids. Information about teams
and athletes, plus games and activities to increase interest in sports.
[http://www.exploratorium.edu]
How knowledge of science can increase sports skills. Hands-on activ-
ities and answers to frequently asked questions.

Imagination and the Arts
225
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the importance of art, music, and drama to children.
Plan and implement appropriate activities for art, music, and drama.
ROLE OF THE ARTS IN
SUPPORTING DEVELOPMENT
w
atch a group of children as they paint at easels, dance with
scarves, or listen to music. Notice their expressions of concentra-
tion, joy, or relaxation. You cannot help but conclude that cre-
ative activities satisfy children in a way few other experiences can.
Children enjoy the arts because everyone can be successful. There is no
right or wrong answer or just one way of doing things. They also ﬁnd it is a
way to communicate things they might not be able to put into words. They
can use bright colors when they are happy or subdued colors to show
sadness. They often feel more relaxed after they pound, roll, or cut clay
to release pent-up emotions. They learn what their bodies can do when
they dance to music. They relive and remake their own experiences with
puppets or in plays.
Art can be shared with others or experienced privately. Painting alone
lets a child express feelings or ideas that might not be easy to put into
words. Group painting on a mural entails planning, compromise, sharing,
and cooperation—all of which are important social skills. Listening to
music alone can be a way to release tension and achieve a sense of inner
peace, experience emotions vicariously, or just enjoy the sounds and
rhythms. Even dancing can be enjoyed alone and offers opportunities to
increase physical abilities such as large-muscle control and coordination.
CHAPTER1111
OBJECTIVES

SECTION FOUR
226
Group dancing can be a social activity requiring sensitivity to a partner or
to the group. Patterned dances necessitate remembering sequences, an
important cognitive skill.
Art, music, and drama can help children from diverse cultural and
ethnic backgrounds gain a greater appreciation for their own culture as
well as share their heritage with others. Children can view art done by
prominent artists from different countries, or they can use the same mate-
rials. Some cultures use sand for painting, others paint with brilliant
colors, while still others use only black on white paper. Music can tell
stories about a people, convey values or ideas, or use a rhythm that can
be identiﬁed with a way of life. Children can dramatize a folktale, write
their own plays, or use puppets from different countries. Through each of
these media, children learn how others live their lives. The result should
be a greater tolerance for differences and a greater appreciation of simi-
larities from one country to another.
Very young children use art experiences simply to try out materials. In
preschool, children use all their senses to investigate the properties of art
materials. They want to ﬁnd out how colors mix together, how a paint-
brush works, and how clay feels. They seldom know ahead of time what
they are going to create. In kindergarten, children still enjoy just trying
out materials for the pleasure of the experience, but they are beginning
to realize they can express feelings and past occurrences as well. They
sometimes decide to portray something speciﬁc, as Ryan did in his draw-
ing shown below. “I’m going to draw a picture of me when I get in trouble
“I’m getting in trouble ’cause I’m jumping on my mom’s
bed.” Ryan, age 7.

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
227
for jumping on my mom’s water bed.” By the end of the elementary years,
they can set goals for themselves and want recognition for their accom-
plishments. “I want to learn how to paint with oil paints.”
The arts can provide children with a lifelong interest in all creative
media. When children view others’ creations, they are introduced to
new ways of expressing ideas and feelings. When they study paintings or
sculpture, they appreciate how artists use color and form to create
something beautiful. While they listen to music, they hear how other
people express emotions. When they watch a play, they share in others’
experiences.
An important function of the arts is the opportunity to use both sides
of the brain. There are two distinct hemispheres of the brain that serve
different functions. This division or lateralization is most often associ-
ated with adults, but studies of children show that even though there is
an early tendency toward specialization; children’s brains are still malle-
able (Brooks & Obrzut, 1981). The left side of the brain specializes in
language and in logic, uses deductive thinking, and is associated with
science and mathematics. The right side of the brain uses an intuitive
approach associated with creative processes. Traditional education, and
even society, tends to value left-side thinking, but children should be
encouraged to use creative thinking as well. The arts present the perfect
opportunity to do just that.
Most important of all, art is a perfect medium for helping children
develop divergent thinking and convergent thinking. Divergent
thinking is a process of thought or perception that involves considering
alternatives, taking a line of thought that is different from the usual. In
art there are no right or wrong answers and there is no single way to
accomplish a creative task. So children can ask themselves “What if I
used a different kind of paper for my picture?” or “I wonder if this
would sound better in a different key or another instrument?” Conver-
gent thinking is just the opposite. It means to narrow down many ideas
to a single, focused point. A child may want to express a feeling generated
from a past experience. His thinking process will consider the many ways
in which this could be done: through a painting, a sculpture, a piece of
music, and a dance. Through a process of considering and eliminating,
he will decide which will serve his purpose most effectively.
When you plan any creative activities, start ﬁrst with children’s inter-
ests. Capitalize on these to formulate your program. Allow them to
expand their interests or ﬁnd new ways to express them. Find out also
what they are learning in history or social studies at school. Plan activities
that complement these school experiences. For some children, the cre-
ative activities they experience in child care will be all they have. Cutbacks
in school districts’ money or personnel are often felt ﬁrst in school art
lateralization
specialization in function of the two
hemispheres of the brain
divergent thinking
a process of thought or perception that
involves considering alternatives, taking
a line of thought that is different from
the usual
convergent thinking
a process of thought that narrows down
many ideas into a single focused point

SECTION FOUR
228
programs. For these children, your program will become an even more
important part of their lives. Let them enjoy one or more of the arts every
single day.
The most effective art program will meet the needs of both the
youngest children and the older ones. Younger children want plenty of
opportunities to freely explore what they can do with materials. They
should have lots of materials available at all times and time to use them
in any way they want. The result of their efforts should be less important
than the experience. As children get a little older, approaching the end of
the elementary years, they become more critical of what they produce.
They want to learn how to use real tools to enhance their efforts. They
appreciate the opportunity to learn techniques from real artists or people
who have special skills.
VISUAL ARTS
There are so many art activities youngsters enjoy that this chapter can give
you ideas for just a few. Read the books listed at the end of this chapter,
investigate what is available at your local library, and talk to other teachers
or caregivers. Attend workshops sponsored by NAEYC or other profes-
sional organizations. Look around you at all the possible materials chil-
dren can use to construct, paint, or draw. Save anything that might
become part of your art program. You can also ask parents to donate
materials that they might discard.
Activities
Clay and Other Kinds of Modeling Media
Purposes:

develop ﬁne-motor coordination

enhance understanding of spatial relationships

transform an idea into a three-dimensional object—from symbolic
to concrete
Gray or terra cotta clay.
Easy to use and can be dried in a kiln if one is
available. Provide plastic forks or knives, small combs, garlic presses, and
small pieces of sponge for varying the texture of sculptures. Add real
sculpting tools for further interest.
Display pictures of Native American pottery. Tell children pottery
bowls can be made using long coils of clay. Demonstrate how to roll the
clay into a long coil, then start winding a tight circle for the bottom.

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
229
Continue winding, building on the base circle. Keep the bowl shape.
When the desired height has been reached, the outside of the bowl can
be smoothed with a sponge dipped in water. Allow the bowls to dry, then
provide glazes so the children can paint on designs. Fire the bowls. Dis-
play the bowls.
Polymer clay.
Readily available but tends to be difﬁcult to soften and
work with. It comes in a variety of colors. Will not harden for a permanent
sculpture.
Dough.
Fairly inexpensive, you can vary the texture. (See Figure 11–1
for recipes.)
Flour and Salt
4 cups ﬂour
1 cup salt
Food coloring
Water to moisten
Mix the dry ingredients together. Add food coloring to water. Add water to dry
mixture to achieve the desired texture. This dough will dry hard in the air and
then can be painted. If a reusable dough is desired, add two tablespoons of
cooking oil.
Sawdust Dough
2 cups sawdust
Liquid starch
1 cup ﬂour or wheat paste
1 tablespoon glue (if ﬂour is used)
Mix until the dough has a pliable consistency. Can be air dried and then painted.
Cornstarch Clay
1 cup cornstarch
1/3 cup vegetable oil
2/3 cup ﬂour
Put cornstarch in a bowl and add oil. Mix well until starch has been absorbed.
Gradually add ﬂour until the mixture is thick and the desired consistency. Knead
well for several minutes. Store in an airtight container.
Cooked Dough
1 cup ﬂour
1/2 cup salt
2 teaspoons cream of tartar
1 cup water
1 tablespoon oil
1 teaspoon food coloring
Combine dry ingredients in a saucepan. Mix liquids and gradually add to dry
ingredients. Cook over medium heat, stirring constantly until a ball forms. Remove
from the heat and knead until the dough is smooth. (This is a very pliable dough
that lasts for a long time.)
FIGURE 11–1 Variations of play dough.

SECTION FOUR
230
Papier-m^ache´.
Paper strips or pieces plus liquid starch. Use a balloon
for a base. (Caution: young school-agers may need adult help to blow up
the balloon.) Dip the paper in the starch, and then lay it on the surface of
the balloon. Overlap the pieces and make at least two layers. Let it dry
thoroughly, and then prick the balloon. You should have a fairly solid
round sphere. (Finished product can become the head or body of an ani-
mal. Use paper towel tubes as the legs and neck. This can also be used as a
puppet head.)
For added interest, bring a Mexican pi~nata to class. Show the children
that it has been made of a papier-m^ache´ sphere similar to the ones they
have made. Encourage them to make their own pi~natas with balloons and
papier-m^ache´. When the papier-m^ache´ is dry, prick the balloon. Help the
children cut a slit at the top of the sphere so that the pi~nata can be ﬁlled
with candy if desired. Pull out the balloon. Provide tissue paper in a vari-
ety of colors, scissors, a small brush, and liquid glue. Show the children
how to cut fringed strips from the tissue paper. Brush the sphere with the
glue. Tell them to lay the strips evenly on the sphere, each strip slightly
overlapping the previous one. Remember to leave the slit visible if the
pi~nata is to be ﬁlled.
Construction
Purposes:

reinforce divergent thinking through exploring possibilities in
found objects

enhance understanding of spatial relationships

develop ﬁne-motor coordination
Styrofoam and pipe cleaners.
Use Styrofoam meat trays or packing
pieces, heavy cardboard, or cork board as a base. Cut pipe cleaners into
different lengths. Add additional peanut-shaped, round, or square Styro-
foam package ﬁllers for further interest.
Toothpicks, natural or colored.
Combine with small corks, drinking
straws cut in different lengths, or small wooden beads. Lengths of copper
or colored wire can be added. This sculpture can be freestanding or
pushed into a base of Styrofoam.
Wood.
Use a ﬂat piece of wood or heavy cardboard as a base. Add lum-
ber scraps cut into interesting shapes, wooden beads, wooden buttons,
tongue depressors, wood stir sticks, wood lathe scraps. (Many interesting
shapes can be obtained from a furniture manufacturer or a high school
woodworking class.) Furnish white glue. For a variation, add pieces of
tree bark, small twigs, or seed pods.
Look around for all different
kinds of materials that can
be used to construct, paint,
or draw.

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
231
Recyclable cans.
Create “can creatures” using clean soda or juice
cans. Provide construction paper in assorted colors, ﬂuorescent paper,
markers, scissors, white glue, and assorted objects (yarn, buttons, beads,
feathers, etc.). Encourage children to imagine a “creature” with the can as
the body. They can cut out feet or arms from the paper. Make “hair” from
fringed pieces of paper or yarn. Buttons or beads can become eyes or
clothing decorations. Display the “creatures” when they are ﬁnished.
A variation of this type of construction uses chopsticks. Explain to the
children that people in Asia use chopsticks instead of forks. (This activity
might follow preparation of a Chinese or Japanese meal.) Give each child
a chopstick and a piece of polymer clay for a base. Provide feathers, yarn,
construction paper, scraps of fabric, small movable plastic eyes, felt-
tipped markers, scissors, and white glue. Encourage the children to use
their imaginations to create interesting “people.”
Sand casting.
Use a ﬂat cardboard box ﬁlled with slightly damp sand
for a mold. Mix a batch of plaster of Paris in a bucket. Children can make a
free-form depression in the sand.
Pour in plaster of paris and let it set. For a variation, let them press
shells or other objects into the sand. Remove the objects to leave an
imprint before pouring the plaster.
Collage
Purposes:

increase appreciation of the natural environment

enhancesensitivitytodifferencesincolor,texture,andappearance
of different materials

develop ﬁne-motor skills
Nature collage.
Have children collect natural objects outdoors or on a
walk: leaves, twigs, bark, dried grass, seed pods, acorns, pinecones, feath-
ers, rocks. Give each child a base of heavy paper, tagboard, Styrofoam, or
wood. Provide white glue.
Paper collage.
Small pieces of paper: wallpaper, gift wrap, greeting
cards, paper doilies, construction paper, aluminum foil, or cellophane.
Give each child a base of cardboard, heavy textured paper, or thin box
top (from stationery or shoe box). Provide white glue.
Fabric.
Small pieces of fabric: felt, lace, ribbon, yarn, buttons, colored
beads, small silk ﬂowers, and dried or paper ﬂowers. Give each child a
base of colored tagboard, construction paper, or a thin box top. Provide
white glue.

SECTION FOUR
232
Shapes.
Provide children with a piece of drawing paper on which has
been drawn one of the following shapes: a square, a triangle, a rectangle, a
circle, an oval, or a parallelogram cut from construction or other kinds of
paper. Challenge the children to create a picture with the shape as the
base. Provide marking pens, paints, an assortment of paper and fabric
pieces, scissors, and white glue.
Seeds.
Provide an assortment of seeds in different colors and shapes.
Give each child a piece of heavy paper, cardboard, tagboard, or wood for a
base. Provide white glue and a small brush. Encourage them to create a
picture using the seeds.
To stimulate interest in seed collage, display pictures of the New
Year’s Day parade ﬂoats in Pasadena, California. Explain that many of
the colors that are seen on the ﬂoats are made from millions of seeds
that are glued on to the base.
African Kente Cloth
Kente cloth is used for shirts, ties, and hats in many African countries.
Display pictures of the cloth or obtain samples. Point out that the cloth
is made up of simple geometric patterns on square or rectangular shapes.
Supplies needed: construction paper of assorted colors, rulers, scis-
sors, crayons, or marking pens. Display the cloths when they are ﬁnished
along with pictures of Kente cloth.
Large Masks
Masks have been used for ceremonies to bring power and spiritual forces
to the people who wear them. They often have intricate designs or
carvings. Display pictures of ceremonial masks, or visit a museum that
displays them.
Supplies needed: large pieces of tree bark or palm frond bases (large
pieces of corrugated cardboard can also be used), scissors, white glue,
construction paper in assorted colors, found objects. Remind the children
they can build up parts of their masks with construction paper pieces or
add found objects to make the masks scarier.
Painting and Drawing
Purposes:

increase language—new words relating to artistic endeavors

provide opportunity to move from one intellectual level to another
in a nonthreatening environment (scaffolding)

increase awareness of cultural differences and similarities through
appreciation for ethnic art
Provide a variety of colors so
children can choose their
own palette.

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
233
Crayon rubbings.
Use any thin white paper over ﬂat stones, leaves,
sandpaper, corrugated paper, cardboard shapes. Use the ﬂat side of a
crayon to cover the entire sheet of paper, picking up the design
underneath.
Chalk painting.
Cover a sheet of paper with a thin layer of liquid
starch. Provide several colors of chalk, either sharpened to a point for a
thin line, or blunted for a thick line. Use a rag, piece of paper towel, or
ﬁngers to mute or brush colors together.
Melted crayons.
Use pieces of crayons without paper coverings. Allow
children to smash crayons in a heavy bag with a mallet. They can then
sprinkle crayon bits onto a piece of paper, cover it with a second sheet.
Let them press the paper with a warm iron. Peel off the top sheet. A varia-
tion can be achieved by sprinkling crayon bits on paper, then set it in the
hot sun to melt.
Tempera paint.
Provide a variety of colors so children can choose their
own palettes. Give them a choice of brushes: thin, fat, stiff, or soft. Pro-
vide a variety of textures of paper: rice paper, grocery bags, parchment,
newsprint, or wallpaper. Try changing the shape of paper: long, thin rec-
tangle; large or small oval; large or small square; triangle, hexagon. For
added interest, let them paint outdoors, on the ﬂoor, at table easels.
Textile paint.
Provide a variety of colors of textile paint (obtain from a
fabric store). Give children a choice of fabrics of different colors, textures,
and sizes.
Crepe paper paint.
Use paper with a slick ﬁnish (ﬁnger paint paper or
butcher paper). Provide each child with lengths of crepe-paper streamers.
Give each a squirt bottle of water. They can tear the crepe paper, lay it on
the paper, then spray it with water. The colors will fade onto the paper,
running together. If the paper is tilted, the colors will run down the paper.
Paint with different tools.
Provide toothbrushes, feathers, roll-on
deodorant bottles, small sponges, cotton balls, sponge-top bottles, cotton
swabs, foam swabs (used for cleaning audio and video equipment), ﬂexi-
ble spreaders (used in cake decorating), or squeeze bottles.
Oil-like paint.
Mix one part powdered tempera with two parts liquid
dishwashing detergent. Mix well until the mixture becomes thick and
creamy. Use a small palette knife or craft stick to spread the paint on
paper.
Field trip.
Visit an artist’s studio. Ask the artist to demonstrate some
techniques to the children. Point out the safety precautions the artist uses.

SECTION FOUR
234
Museum visit.
Visit a museum. Request a tour with a docent who can
tell the children about the exhibits. Children will enjoy seeing how artists
painted people, landscapes, or abstract designs. As a variation, visit an art
gallery to see special exhibits.
Display ethnic and cultural arts.
Obtain paintings, sculptures, folk
art, and illustrated books from different cultures. In conjunction with
the displays, provide children with art materials that use the same colors
or materials. Encourage them to produce their own ethnic art.
Example 1: Display Asian landscape paintings. Provide the children with
long sheets of white paper and the subtle colors typical of these paintings:
pale greens, tans, black, creamy beige, white, and orange or red for
accents. Supply brushes with slim bristles. Encourage children to make
their own landscapes of an imaginary view or of a place they have been
to. (To add interest to this activity, play some Asian music while the chil-
dren paint.) When they are ﬁnished, mount the pictures with a piece of
bamboo at the top. Tie a black string to the bamboo and display the
pictures.
Example 2: Display pictures of Native American sand paintings. Tell chil-
dren to look at the designs that were used. Supply them with square
pieces of cardboard, colored sand (obtain from pet stores or make your
own by mixing powdered tempera with the sand), white glue, and small
brushes. Instruct the children to draw a design on the paper, then paint
glue on a part of the design that will be one color. Sprinkle the sand on
that portion, and let it dry brieﬂy before painting another section. Contin-
ue in this manner until the painting is complete. Display the paintings
when they are completely dry.
Example 3: Show children paintings done by Mexican artists. Tell them to
observe the vibrant colors and color mixes that these artists use. Provide
“Prince, ballerina, and the kids. They’re at a dance.” Stephanie,
age 5.

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
235
some bright paint: orange, red, yellow, pink, purple, black. Tell children
to create their own picture, perhaps portraying an experience from their
own lives. Display the pictures.
Equipment to Have Available

aprons or old shirts

brushes—various sizes and shapes

boards for clay—Masonite, plastic, or wood

drying racks

easels—ﬂoor and table

matting knife

paper cutters—for single sheets and for large rolls of paper

craft sticks, palette knives

rags and towels for cleanup

reproductions of ﬁne art

rulers, measuring tape

scissors—assorted sizes, left- and right-handed

sculpting tools, garlic press

sponges—large and small, natural and manufactured

staplers
Discussion
Enhance children’s experience by helping them learn more about art.
Discuss the following topics with them:

how things look: light, texture, color, position

effect of using contrasting colors: light and dark, bright and dull

two-dimensional surfaces: forms, variations in size and shape

drawing techniques: line drawings, imaginative and decorative
styles

painting techniques: dry or wet brush, stippling, ﬁnger painting,
color mixing

new words: colors—ivory, crimson, burnt sienna, hot or cold,
primary

professions: painter, sculptor, ceramist, illustrator, cartoonist,
designer, museum director
MUSIC AND MOVEMENT
When children enter kindergarten, most are able to sing simple songs,
although they may not always be on pitch. They have favorite songs and
seem especially attuned to music with a pronounced rhythm. Given a few

SECTION FOUR
236
simple instruments, they will imitate rhythms they have heard or create
their own. They also like to move to music, using their whole bodies or just
their hands or feet. By the end of elementary school, most children have
developed a good sense of rhythm and beat. They can remember and sing
a large selection of songs and have added the new skill of being able to sing
in harmony. Some are able to play instruments, and a few will be able to
write down simple musical patterns or songs.
Music should be a part of every day. It does not have to be at a formal
music time but can be integrated into the daily routine. Start the day with
a few songs, then have instruments available for children to use when they
wish.
Take instruments outdoors on occasion so children can play or dance
in a different environment. Occasionally play records or tapes during
activity times.
Activities
Purposes:

increase physical coordination

develop listening skills

provide an outlet for expression of feelings

enhance appreciation of ethnic contributions to the arts
Musical styles.
Play different kinds of music: classical, lullaby, folk music, marches,
gospel, rock, or jazz. Have the children identify each style, then ask
them to compare two styles. How are they alike or different? Provide
many opportunities to hear music, encouraging the children to really
“Me dancing.” Rachel, age 5.

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
237
listen to how the music is formed. Place tapes or CDs in a listening corner
for children to enjoy at leisure.
As an added interest, play selections of music from different countries
and cultures. Select reggae from Jamaica, opera from Italy, a mariachi
band from Mexico, sitar music from India, balalaika music from Russia,
ﬂute music from the Andes, or Native American drum music. Ask the
children to compare the sounds of the music. Why do they think the
music is representative of the country?
Paint to music.
Play different kinds of music as children paint. Suggest they paint what
they hear. Include ethnic music.
Dancing with props.
Add props to enhance movement: scarves, balloons, hoops, colored rope,
streamers, or dress-up clothes.
Mirroring.
Provide a scarf for each child. Group them in pairs. Have one child act as
leader, making movements using the scarf. A second child mirrors those
movements. After a short period, change places.
Instruments.
Provide a variety of simple instruments: autoharp, drums, rhythm sticks,
shakers, castanets, tambourines, bells. Allow children to experiment with
the sounds.
Provide the materials for children to make their own instruments.
[See Anders, Making Musical Instruments (1975), listed at the end of
this chapter.]
Listening corner.
Set up a listening corner with a tape recorder or CD player and
earphones.
Provide a selection of tapes. Change them periodically.
Musical statues.
Play a tape or CD while children dance. Instruct them to “freeze” in what-
ever position they are in when the music stops. Stop and start the music
several times.
Shadow dancing.
On a sunny day, take the tape or CD player outdoors. Encourage children
to dance, watching their own shadows as they move.
Set up a listening corner with
a tape recorder or CD player
and earphones.

SECTION FOUR
238
Video.
Let children view a video of dance segments. (Check your library or watch
for television shows you can tape.) Discuss the kind of dance portrayed,
then encourage children to dance to the video.
Visitor.
Invite a musician to your center to demonstrate techniques. If possible,
allow children to try out the instrument. Include musicians who play
instruments that are typical of a particular ethnic group or are repre-
sentative of a country.
Equipment to Have Available

autoharp(s)

banjo

blank tapes for recording

books—song, poetry

dance props—tap shoes, tutus, scarves, streamers, canes, hoops,
ropes

earphones for listening center

ethnic musical instruments—maracas, bongo drums, Chinese
temple blocks

guitar

piano

tape or CD player—assortment of tapes or CDs; select all kinds of
music including ethnic and holiday pieces

recorders

selection of percussion instruments—drums, rhythm sticks, shak-
ers, castanets, tambourines, bells

television monitor and videotape player
Discussion
Some concepts to discuss with children to enhance their learning:

musical terms: tempo, pitch, dynamics (loud/soft)

movement: walking, running, swaying, balance

dance forms: ballet, folk, tap, interpretive, jazz

instruments: names, how they produce sound, care of instruments

listening: differentiating sounds, following musical directions or
beat

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
239
Drama
From a very early age children engage in dramatic play. Toddlers charm
their parents by imitating actions or situations they observe around them.
Preschoolers use dramatic play to try out what it feels like to be a grown-
up. They play at being mom or dad, doctors, ﬁreﬁghters, or teachers. As
they get a little older, dramatic play becomes a way to conquer feelings of
being scared or helpless. Four-year-olds and young “school-agers” play at
being monsters, Superman, or the current popular TV ﬁgure. During the
middle childhood years, youngsters use dramatic play to consolidate and
understand what they are learning in school and at home.
Although they may still dress up and act out situations, they also use
small toys, blocks, or other materials to replay a trip to the ﬁre station or
other community facilities. They may also reenact what they see happen-
ing on television news or familiar shows. Older children take a more
organized approach to dramatic play. They want to write their own scripts,
assign parts, make costumes, and stage plays. This activity provides a vari-
ety of opportunities to practice skills that youngsters are trying to develop
during this period of their childhood. Writing a script entails listening to
how people talk during conversations, writing words, and organizing a
story line. Negotiations and compromise are necessary to be certain that
all participants have an opportunity to contribute according to their own
skills or interests.
The best kinds of dramatic play occur when children can play what-
ever they wish. Allow children many different opportunities to use their
imaginations in both spontaneous and organized activities. Make materi-
als available as their interests dictate.
Activities
Purposes:

provide practice in negotiating and compromising during a group
effort

enhance the ability to set long-term goals and to postpone
gratiﬁcation

increase the ability to portray ideas, feelings, and experiences
through drama or using blocks
Puppets.
Design and make different kinds of puppets. Try shadow, ﬁnger, stick,
papier-m^ache´, or sock puppets. Read about how puppets are constructed
and used in other countries. (See Figure 11–2 for ideas.)

SECTION FOUR
240
Puppet theater.
Permanent or impromptu. Older children can make a permanent theater
using carpentry tools and plywood. Make a theater from a large appliance
box. An impromptu stage can also be as simple as a table covered with a
blanket or a wall of large blocks.
Produce a puppet play.
Have children write a simple script or use a favorite story. Let them make
the puppets and plan the production.
Papier-mâché Puppet
Materials needed:
dried papier-mâché sphere made on a balloon
length of cardboard tubing from paper towel roll
felt and cloth scraps
yarn, ribbons, buttons
marking pens
tempera or acrylic paint, small brushes
scissors, glue
Directions:
Cut a small opening in one side of the sphere. Gently push the cardboard
tubing into the opening. Paint the face with ﬂesh tones. Let the face dry
overnight before adding features. Use yarn for making hair. Cut fabric or felt
scraps for clothing, making it large enough to cover the child’s hand.
Decorate clothing with ribbons or buttons.
Sock Puppet
Materials needed:
clean sock, can be white or colored
buttons
eyes (you will ﬁnd these in a hobby shop)
felt, fabric scraps
yarn, pipe cleaners, ribbons
scissors, glue
Directions:
Show children how to ﬁt the sock over their hand and then make a moving
mouth with thumb and ﬁngers. Let them glue scrap materials onto puppet to
create a face.
Shadow Puppets
Materials needed:
cardboard strips or craft sticks
construction paper
scissors
marking pens
staple gun
Directions:
Have children draw a ﬁgure on the construction paper, then cut it out. Staple
the ﬁgure to the cardboard strip or craft stick.
FIGURE 11–2 Puppets.

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
241
Drama kits.
Collect a variety of props children can use for dramatic play. Store them in
related sets for different jobs: beautician, doctor, mechanic, or astronaut.
(Listen for children’s interests, then provide additional props for play.)
Makeup.
Provide makeup (theatrical makeup, if possible) and mirrors. Allow chil-
dren to try out ways to use makeup. Have tissues and cold cream for
cleaning up when they are ﬁnished.
Blocks.
Provide both small and large blocks. Add accessories as children’s
interests dictate: cars, airplanes, boats, people, animals, trees, signs. Add
additional materials: cardboard packing forms, Styrofoam pieces, ply-
wood, or cardboard tubes.
Play.
Have children write and produce a play. They can also adapt a book or use
a published play. (Check the library for suitable plays.)
Tell stories.
Encourage the children to tell their own stories that have a beginning, a
middle, and an end. During group time, have one child start a story with
a few sentences. The next child takes up the story line and continues with
a few more sentences. Each child must listen to all the previous storytell-
ers in order to remember the gist of the story before continuing.
The last child has the most difﬁcult part because she must bring
closure to the story. As a variation, tape the story as the children tell it.
Place the tape in the listening corner so that children can hear it again.
Read folktales.
Folktales are stories that once were told by parents, grandparents, or
community storytellers. Originally they were not written down but passed
on from generation to generation. Read folktales at group times or
encourage small groups or pairs of children to read to one another.
Invite an adult storyteller to visit.
Ask the adult to tell the children a story that was a favorite when he or she
was a child. Encourage stories that have been part of a family tradition or
culture.
Blocks give children the
ability to portray ideas and
experiences.

SECTION FOUR
242
Field trip.
View a puppet play or children’s drama. Look for professional perfor-
mances at theaters or amateur performances at schools, community cen-
ters, or libraries.
Equipment to Have Available

blocks—wooden ﬂoor blocks, large hollow blocks, small colored
blocks

block accessories—cars, boats, airplanes, people, animals, trees,
signs

boxes, shelves, racks for storing props

carpentry tools—saw, measuring tape, yardstick, hammer, sander,
nails

dress-up clothes—skirts, dresses, capes, shoes, hats, wigs, scarves

ﬂoor lights—standing lamps, spotlights

mirrors—individual makeup mirrors, full-length mirrors

puppet theater or materials for construction

sewing tools—needles, thread, pins, scissors

tape recorder

window shade or curtains
Discussion
Some concepts to discuss with children:

imagination: new ways to tell a story or express feelings

props: how to make props and costumes for their productions

scripts: books, poems, ﬁlms, TV shows

skills: skills needed to produce a drama

puppets or marionettes: which one ﬁts a particular character

manipulating puppets to create a story
Not all children are going to grow up to be painters, sculptors, actors,
musicians, or playwrights. However, you want them to learn that when
they go out into the sometimes harried world of adulthood, the arts will
provide continuing pleasure and relaxation. By having a variety of art
activities available, all children can ﬁnd one that suits their own individual
needs and abilities. So, make art of all kinds an integral part of your day.
Both you and the children will reap boundless beneﬁts.

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
243
SUMMARY
Creative activities satisfy children in a way no other experiences can. This
is because they all can be successful. They can communicate nonverbally
and release emotions. They learn about themselves and can relive or
remake their own experiences.
An additional bonus is that art can be shared with others or experi-
enced alone.
Creative activities should be based on children’s interests. Some form
of art activity should be part of every day.
Very young children use all their senses to explore the properties of
art materials. By kindergarten age, they learn that their feelings and expe-
riences can be portrayed symbolically. Art activities provide the media for
doing so. By the end of middle childhood, children set goals for them-
selves and want recognition for their accomplishments.
The most effective art program will meet the needs of both the
youngest children and the older ones.
Kindergarten children can sing simple songs and like to imitate
rhythms they have heard or create their own. By the end of elementary
school, most children have a good sense of rhythm and beat. They can
remember many songs and even sing in harmony. Some can play instru-
ments or compose music.
From an early age, children engage in dramatic play. Toddlers imitate
what they see.
Preschoolers try out adult roles. During middle childhood, young-
sters use dramatic play to consolidate learning. Older children want to
write their own scripts and produce their own plays.
Art of all kinds should be an integral part of the child
care day.

SECTION FOUR
244
The arts will provide continuing pleasure for children into their adult
years. Art of all kinds should be an integral part of the child care day.
KEY TERMS
convergent thinking
divergent thinking
lateralization
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Visit a library, museum, community center, and theater in your com-
munity. Ask about programs or resources they might have that would
interest school-age children. Prepare a list to share with your
classmates.
2. Plan and implement one of the activities suggested in this chapter.
Write an evaluation of the experience. Were there things you could
have done differently? If so, how?
3. Talk to teachers and caregivers in three different child care groups.
Ask which creative activities their children most enjoy. Find out why
they think those activities are so popular.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. This chapter stated that “creative experiences satisfy children in a way
fewotherexperiencescan.”Givethreereasonswhythatstatementwas
made.
2. Inwhatwaydoesapreschooler’suseofartmaterialsdifferfromthatof
a child approaching adolescence?
3. Giveﬁveexamplesofartactivitiesappropriateforschool-agechildren.
4. List three musical concepts to discuss with children in order to
enhance their learning.
5. Youwanttoencouragechildreninyourchildcaregrouptoenjoymore
music. What kinds of equipment should you have available?
6. Relate the developmental steps in children’s dramatic play from tod-
dlers to older middle children.
7. List some accessories children might use with blocks for dramatic
play.
CASE STUDY
Hannah is a lively six-year-old. Her favorite activity is using whatever art
materials are available each day, and she spends most of her inside time in

C H A P TE R 1 1
I M A G I NA T I O N A ND TH E A RT S
245
the art area. However, she constantly wants reassurance and praise for her
efforts. She will ﬁnish an interesting collage, then run to Susan wanting
her to look at it. She will ask, “Do you like my picture? Do you think those
colors go together?”
1. How would you respond to Hannah’s “Do you like my picture”?
Explain why you would answer in that way.
2. How would you react to her “Do these colors go together”?
3. Hannah spends most of her time at this one activity. Would you do
anything to broaden her interests? If so, what?
REFERENCES
Anders, R. (1975). Making musical instruments. Minneapolis: Lerner.
Brooks, R. L., & Obrzut, J. E. (1981). Brain lateralization: Implications for
infant stimulation and development. Young Children, 36(3), 9–16.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Bernstein, B., & Blair, L. (1982). Native American crafts workshop. Bel-
mont, CA: David S. Lake.
Bruchac, J. (1991). Native American stories. Golden, CO: Fulcrum.
Carlson, L. (1990). Kids create! Charlotte, VT: Williamson.
Carlson, L. (1993). EcoArt. Charlotte, VT: Williamson.
Cherry,C.(1990).Creativeartforthedevelopingchild(2nded.).Belmont,
CA: David S. Lake.
Corwin, J. (1990). African crafts. New York: Franklin Watts.
Gomez, A. (1992). Crafts of many cultures. New York: Scholastic
Professional.
Gutwirth, V. (1997). A multicultural family study project for primary.
Young Children, 52(2), 72–78.
Haas, C., & Friedman, A. (1990). My own fun—Activities for kids ages
7–12. Chicago: Chicago Review Press. (Available from School-Age
Notes, Nashville).
Kohl, M., & Potter, J. (1993). Science arts: Discovering science through art
experiences. Bellingham, WA: Bright Ring.
Milford, S. (1990). Adventures in art, art and craft experiences for 7- to 14-
year-olds. Charlotte, VT: Williamson.
Ringenberg, S. (2003). Music as a teaching tool: Creating story songs.
Young Children, 58(5), 76–79.
Ryder, W. (1995). Celebrating diversity with art, thematic projects for
every month of the year. Glenview, IL Scott Foresman: .
Sierra,J.(1991).Fantastictheater,puppetsandplaysforyoungperformers
and young audiences. New York: H. W. Wilson.

SECTION FOUR
246
Computer Software/Video
Children’s Songs around the World (Laserdic VHS). Baldwin, NY: Educa-
tion Activities. Primary.
China: Home of the Dragon (Mac Windows CD-ROM). Orange Cherry/
New Media Schoolhouse. Intermediate, Advanced.
Let’sVisit Mexico (Mac IBM CD-ROM). Fairﬁeld,CT:Queue. Advanced.
Meiko: A Story of Japanese Culture (MPC CD-ROM). Novato, CA: Bro-
derbund/Digital Productions.
Thinkin’ Things Collection 1 (Mac IBM Windows MPC CD-ROM). Red-
mond, WA: Edmark. Primary, Intermediate.
Thinkin’ Things Collection 2 (Mac IBM Windows MPC CD-ROM). Red-
mond WA: Edmark. Primary, Intermediate, Advanced.
Thinkin’ Things Collection 3 (Mac MPC CD-ROM). Redmond, WA:
Edmark. Intermediate, Advanced.
WEB RESOURCES
[http://www.bestchildrensmusic.com]
Best children’s music: list of best children’s music, musical books, links
to music education Web sites.
[http://www.si.edu]
Smithsonian Museum site for educational resource guides, lesson
plans, programs, and other resources.
[http://www.moma.org]
Museum of Modern Art in New York has several click-on related sites.
Education site offers programs and publications for children, their
families, and their schools.
[http://www.artsedge.kennedy-center.org]
Kennedy Center in New York supports art education for grades K–12.
Includes ideas and lesson plans.
[http://www.getty.edu]
Getty Museum in Los Angeles has a variety of programs for teachers
and children including guided visits to the center.
[http://www.eduplace.com]
Puzzles and activities to increase reading and comprehension skills.
[http://www.exploratorium.edu]
On-line exhibits and ﬁlms that explore the science of music.
[http://www.ucalgary.ca]
Book titles from the “Children’s Book Awards” and “Year’s Best
Books.”

Science and Math
247
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the importance of science and math in a school-age child care
program.
Discuss how investigative science and math activities enhance cog-
nitive development and increase scientiﬁc literacy.
Plan and implement appropriate science and math activities using the
process approach.
Recognize the science and mathematics processes children use.
Discuss the leader’s role in supporting children’s cognitive develop-
ment through facilitation of science and math activities.
ROLE OF SCIENCE AND MATH IN
SCHOOL-AGE CHILDCARE
s
chool-age programs have a unique opportunity to support the sci-
ence and math learning of children. Children at this age are natu-
rally inquisitive and they seem to have an insatiable thirst for
knowledge. They are trying to understand the world around them as
they spontaneously do things like trying various strategies for tossing
rocks, stopping to investigate a slithering worm, or wondering why their
crayons melted. Physically and cognitively they are developmentally at a
stage where they can act more intentionally on their environment as they
question and test out their ideas and communicate their discoveries.
Unlike the preschool-age child, school-age children are now able to
engage in divergent thinking and can think of alternative strategies and
possibilities. School-age children are concrete learners—meaning they
need hands-on experiences with real materials to learn.
CHAPTER1212
OBJECTIVES

SECTION FOUR
248
All types of school-age programs can be arenas for children to learn
about math and science. A summer park and recreation program can have
science investigations in the outdoor environment. A sports program can
incorporate physics and math as children discover strategies for moving a
ball through space, track distances and keep score. Center-based before-
and after-school programs can have dedicated space and time for ongoing
science investigations.
Science is a constant part of children’s daily life. They experience con-
cepts of science as they move their bodies through space standing, walk-
ing, or riding a bicycle, as they breathe and digest their food or notice that
their shadows change. The environment in which children experience sci-
ence inﬂuences the theories they may form and the concepts they may
learn. A child in the Midwest may learn to count the number of seconds
between when he sees lightning and when he hears the resulting thunder.
He can then calculate how far away the lightning is. He notices that ﬁre-
ﬂies only ﬂy at a certain time of evening and only during the summer
months. These phenomena are not typical experiences to a child in
Southern California where there are no ﬁreﬂies. A child in Southern Cal-
ifornia may notice what happens as waves crash onto the beach as the tides
move in and out, or notice the changed activity level of snails in the garden
when the garden is watered. These experiences are not available to the
child who has never been to an ocean and who lives in a region where
garden snails are not common. In addition, children in school-age child
care come to their caregiving situation equipped with the daily learning
experiences of the school’s math and science curriculum. One aspect of
caregiving is to support the personal and educational experiences of chil-
dren. Learning does not happen only during the school hours. Programs
for school-age children are ideal places for children to expand their
Six-year-old Skylar was frequently seen with a stick in his
hand. He would swing it like a bat to knock a ﬂower from its plant,
drag it in the dirt to make a path, or use it like a golf club to move
small rocks. On one particular day he found a second stick. Both
sticks were about 1 inch in diameter, one was about 2 feet long and
the length of the other one was about 12 inches. As Skylar walked
along, he began tapping the long stick with the shorter one. He
tapped near his hand, at the middle of the stick and at the end. “Hey,
look! This makes a different sound when I hit it in different places!”
He then began systematically tapping up and down the stick
checking and noting the differences in the sounds.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
249
understanding of what they learn in school and experience in their daily
lives.
The American Association for the Advancement of Science, the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, and the National Academy
of Sciences worked collaboratively with educators and established a set of
standards in mathematics and science. They believed that teaching and
learning math and science is not solely the responsibility of teachers and
schools. Science and math have relevance in everyday life, and members
of these organizations contended that it is time to stop the stereotype of
the crazy genius working in isolation in a laboratory. An overall goal was
for children to become scientiﬁcally literate. (National Science Board,
1999). The scientiﬁc literacy standards are an attempt at that goal as
they are educational outcomes that deﬁne what it is that children should
know and be able to do. When people have knowledge of basic scientiﬁc
facts, concepts, and vocabulary, they are better able to follow news-
related reports in the media and discuss science-related issues. Some of
the science-related issues of today are global warming, becoming ecologi-
cally friendly, and the stem cell research debate. As children become sci-
entiﬁcally literate they are developing skills to help them understand how
ideas are investigated, analyzed, and evaluated. They are developing skills
and attitudes about science and how it inﬂuences their personal lives
(Maienschein, 1999). Scientiﬁc literacy develops over a person’s lifetime.
The attitudes and values established toward science in the early years will
shape a person’s development of scientiﬁc literacy as an adult. Caregivers
in school-age programs have the opportunity to support and advance
children’s scientiﬁc literacy.
The National Science Educations Standards (National Research
Council, 1996) describes the abilities of someone who is scientiﬁcally lit-
erate. A school-age child developing scientiﬁc literacy

asks, ﬁnds, or determines answers to questions derived from curi-
osity about every day experiences.

hastheabilitytodescribe,explain,andpredictnaturalphenomena.
Child care staff members should be able to engage in the more
advanced skills of scientiﬁc literacy and be able to

read and understand articles in the press and discuss the validity of
the conclusions.

evaluate the quality of scientiﬁc information on the basis of its
source and the methods used to generate it.
There may be opportunities when working with school-age children
to model these more advanced skills. For example, you might read an
scientiﬁc literacy
knowledge and understanding of
science concepts and process

SECTION FOUR
250
article about the importance of becoming more conscious of the environ-
ment, its preservation, and potential consequences. This could lead to a
discussion with children in which they relate to the ideas of being environ-
mentally friendly in their own lives and debate the conclusions drawn in
the article.
CHILDREN AS NATURAL
SCIENTISTS
Children are often exposed to the traditional careers of ﬁreﬁghter,
teacher, doctor, and so on, but rarely are they introduced to the idea of
being a scientist or mathematician. The nation’s future workforce needs
indicate an increased demand for workers who are literate in science and
technology, yet fewer students are pursing advanced college degrees in
science, math and engineering. (National Science Board, 2003). Children
can easily grow up with the stereotype of the mad scientist and determine
that being a scientist isn’t a career choice for them. Yet, children already
actively engage in these roles using the skills scientists and mathemati-
cians employ.
What do scientists do? They explore, investigate, observe, record
data, make hypotheses, develop theories, and draw conclusions. Scientists
use mathematics as they measure quantities, volume, and distances. They
make quantitative and qualitative comparisons, classify information, and
make charts and graphs of their ﬁndings. From very early ages, children
naturally explore and investigate, observe, ask questions (hypothesize),
and draw conclusions. They try to make sense out of what they see and
to solve the problems they encounter. They develop their own theories of
how the world works. According to Piaget, this is known as constructing
knowledge. They come to know concepts (construct knowledge) as a
result of their own experiences and their own thinking about those
experiences.
During middle childhood, children’s ability to develop more logical
theories increases as they shift from preoperational thinking into more
During summer camp, child care leader Kevin presented the
children with a crayon-melting experiment by saying, “Today we are
going to be scientists. Seven-year-old Josh, with a worried look on his
face stated, “First you become a bully, then you become a geek,
then you become a scientist. I don’t want to be a bully, a geek, or
a scientist!”
constructing knowledge
children develop their own theories
about how the world works

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
251
concrete thinking where they see cause-and-effect relationships more
realistically. The ﬁve-year-old sees relationships and draws conclusions
but has difﬁculty grasping concepts such as reversibility or recognizing
that quantities of matter remain unchanged. As children’s cognitive
abilities mature, they realize that things can change physical form
and be transformed again, such as water becoming ice and again becom-
ing water.
Children’s construction of knowledge is greatly enhanced by what
Vygotsky refers to as scaffolding. Recall from Chapter 5 (sociocultural
theory) that children can experience cognitive development when they
are supported by a skilled peer or adult who has the abilities to scaffold
their experiences. Scaffolding may be through speciﬁc questioning that
provokes thinking or guided participation that in turn helps the learner
through the steps of a process and encourages the learner to think. Con-
sider the activity, “Is it liquid or solid?” When left to their own devices and
thinking, children may only explore the sensory aspects of the materials
and may never explore the substance form the perspective of thinking
about it being liquid or solid. Through the scaffolding process, a knowl-
edgeable peer or adult can discuss the characteristics of solids and liquids
and guide the science participants to more in-depth exploration and sub-
sequent understanding.
Seven- or eight-year-olds are able to understand that something
can change from one form to another, and they enjoy the process of
making this happen. They seem to investigate the world by asking, “How
can I make it change?” or “How can I make it move?” As they actively
engage with materials, they hone their observation and investigative skills.
They continue to construct, test, and reﬁne their theories. They are, in
Six-year-old Ethan approached Leader Parisa holding plastic
farm animals in his hands, “Parisa, I think that everything that is
plastic ﬂoats and if it’s not plastic it will sink.” Parisa replied, “ Ethan,
how could you test your theory?” He replied that he could ﬁll the sink
with water and he promptly walked to the sink. Once the sink was
ﬁlled with water, he tested his theory. He discovered that the items he
had selected did ﬂoat and concluded that his hypothesis was correct.
Parisa, noticing this, said, “I wonder about other plastic things. Are all
plastic things made the same way? Do they ﬂoat also?” Ethan
looked around the room and gathered a variety of plastic items to
again test and reﬁne his theory. He eventually concluded that some
things made of plastic had air inside of them and that is what made
them ﬂoat.

SECTION FOUR
252
Piagetian terms, “constructing their own knowledge.” Constructing per-
sonal knowledge about the world continues at all ages (even throughout
adulthood). Child care leaders will construct their own knowledge about
how children use scientiﬁc inquiry skills as they provide opportunities for
children to make investigations.
Science activities allow children freedom to explore materials and
carry out experiments in a nonthreatening atmosphere. Not only do they
increase their scientiﬁc inquiry skills, but they also gain conﬁdence in
seeking solutions to problems. This investigative environment allows chil-
dren the opportunity to take risks. They try new things, make mistakes,
learn from their mistakes, and continue trying out new ideas.
Science activities also allow children to work together as they dis-
cover concepts of physics, chemistry, biology, and other sciences such as
“Is it liquid or solid?” helps children gain new perspec-
tives on scientiﬁc exploration.
Is it liquid or solid? (Messy but
easy to clean up!)
Mix equal parts water and cornstarch on small trays. Encourage the
children to investigate with their ﬁngers. Be prepared to provide
utensils, such as spoons, plastic knives, or spatulas, for further
investigation. Discuss with the children the characteristics of a solid
(holds its own shape) and characteristics of a liquid (pourable, wet,
takes the shape of its container). Encourage children to hypothesize
and form theories about the mixture and to then continue investi-
gating to see if they can discover an answer to their question.
Hint: It is both. The cornstarch remains a solid. It does not dis-
solve in the water, but its particles are suspended in the water.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
253
geology, environmental science, and physiology. They share ideas. They
each bring their personal experiences and knowledge to the investigative
process and thereby help one another as they brainstorm to develop the-
ories, hypotheses, and strategies for experimentation and exploration.
CHILDREN AS NATURAL
MATHEMATICIANS
Children are naturally provided with opportunities to use mathematics on
a daily basis and they will seek mathematical answers to their questions.
Spontaneous activities occur such as when children need to add scores
when playing games or when they have to ﬁgure out how to divide a set
of materials so everyone has an equal share. Preoperational children are
found counting everything in sight once they learn how to count. They
don’t yet understand that the quantity of a set of objects stays the same
when the objects are moved. According to Piaget this is a lack of conser-
vation of number. Yet children enjoy the task of counting. Children
between the ages of ﬁve and seven are in transition from preoperational
thinking to concrete operations. Children in concrete operations are bet-
ter able to conserve number if they are given ample opportunity to work
with materials and count. Through scaffolding children can be given guid-
ance in counting correctly.
How many are there? (A test of
number conservation)
Make a collection of 30 items that may be of interest to children,
such as a jar of marbles or coins. The objects should all be the same
size. The child care leader can put the objects in two rows of 15 so
that each row takes up the same amount of space.
Ask a ﬁve- or six-year-old how many objects are in each row.
Then, invite the child to move the objects in one of the rows outward.
Again ask the child how many are in each row. The child who can
conserve number (knows that the quantity of objects stays the
same even though their arrangement may change) will merely say
there are 15 in each row. The nonconserving child will recount the
objects.
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

SECTION FOUR
254
Life presents many opportunities for children to note physical char-
acteristics such as color, size, and shape. Children consider these charac-
teristics to sort the objects into categories. According to Piaget, this
sorting is called classiﬁcation. At home it is seen when children put all
the socks together in one place in a dresser drawer or sort the silverware
into the appropriate places when helping parents put away clean dishes.
In classrooms it may be identifying the various shapes and sizes of blocks
and reshelving them in their appropriate place, or putting all the markers
together, pencils in their own place, and scissors in another. Children may
group together objects when investigating science. For example they may
group together objects that sink and others that ﬂoat in a sink-and-ﬂoat
activity.
Children in preoperational thinking (nonconservers) can manipulate
small quantities of objects and solve problems. If a child is allowed to have
ﬁve crackers for snack and only has taken four, the child can ﬁgure out
how many more crackers he would need. Children in concrete operations
can think about numbers and manipulate them to solve problems. When
given a large group of items to count, they may group them in piles of tens
and then count by tens to determine the total number of objects. Children
given the task of setting the tables for snack can now recognize that there
is a relationship between the number of tables, the number of chairs per
table and the total number of children. How many children are here for
snack today? How many tables will we need to set up? We have eight
tables with six chairs at each table; is that enough? How can we ﬁnd out?
Using advanced mathematics, they can further think about how to solve
the problem if snack is served in shifts of three groups of children.
MATH AND SCIENCE ARE
RELATED
Science, by its very nature, provides a rich opportunity for children to use
their developing math and problem-solving skills. They use basic math
skills such as comparing, classifying, and measuring while engaged in
exploratory science activities. Children use these skills to help organize
and further their science discoveries. They may compare the sizes of
earthworms, categorize animals according to their habitats, or measure
ingredients when exploring the reaction of mixing vinegar and baking
soda. Children use the language of math to communicate their ideas and
discoveries to each other. Key vocabulary such as “more,” “bigger,”
“heavier,” “faster,” and “longer” can be heard from children engaged in
discovering the world around them. Think again about the activity, “Is it
liquid or solid?” Children can be given the opportunity to measure their
own ingredients. They can calculate how much cornstarch and water will

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
255
be needed for the entire group. Once given the materials, they will have
conversations that can’t help but include mathematical language as they
investigate and compare their cornstarch goop to that of others. They may
want to predict what will happen if they add another teaspoon of water or
cornstarch and then experiment to discover the answer. Child care lead-
ers can guide children in organizing their discoveries in the form of charts,
tables, and graphs. They can document their hypotheses and discoveries
by writing in their science journals. The mathematical skills of counting,
noting attributes, and classifying can be integrated in nearly every science
activity.
THE PROCESS AND CONTENT
OF SCIENCE
Children are incredibly curious about the world around them. Some chil-
dren verbalize their thinking, whereas others simply act on their thoughts
Are you ready to absorb?
Provide the children with a tray lined with a piece of wax paper. Using
eyedroppers, drop droplets of colored water onto the wax paper.
(Color water with food coloring. Use the three primary colors: red,
blue, and yellow.) Encourage them to count the number of droplets
of each color. Older children can measure the diameter of the
droplet. When the children have ﬁnished experimenting with dropping
the colors, ask “Are you ready to absorb?” Have the children lay an
absorbent paper towel onto the droplets. Children can measure the
diameter of the absorbed liquid and note changes. Provide children
with different types of absorbent materials. Listen to what the children
say and watch as they investigate the materials. What are the pro-
cesses that the children are engaged in? What scientiﬁc literacy skills
are being developed? What is the science content they are learning
as a result of their actions? What do you think they would have
learned if you had demonstrated the process and not given them the
materials to manipulate? Questions to scaffold learning could include
“Do you remember how many drops of liquid you used to get that
color of green? I notice that this area of absorbed liquid is larger than
the other one. Why do you think that happened?” Scientists write their
discoveries in some form of journal so the information can be
shared with others. Encourage children to write in their science
journal.

SECTION FOUR
256
by experimenting as they search for answers. The process of science
involves inquiry, experimentation, observation, and hypothesis testing.
What if we raise the pendulum higher to try to knock down the block?
How can we make the cars turn when they get to the end of the ramp?
How can we make a river in the sandbox? Can we dig to China? What kind
of magnet is the strongest? Why do some things ﬂoat and others sink?
What would happen if we mix all these colors of paint together? As chil-
dren work to formulate answers to their questions, they are discovering
the content of science—the scientiﬁc facts. These discoveries by children
can be enhanced with the encouragement of the use of mathematics.
How high is the pendulum? What is the elevation of the ramp? Does it
make a difference in how far a car will travel? Is there a difference in the
weight of the things this magnet attracts compared to this other magnet?
How could we make a chart to record the discoveries of what happens
when we mix paint? Recall that learners must construct their own knowl-
edge about the world (see Chapter 5, principles of Piagetian theory).
School-age children are concrete learners. This requires them to be active
participants in the process. They are thinking of questions and manipulat-
ing materials to gain understanding of scientiﬁc principles. Although chil-
dren can memorize those facts, they do not gain a true understanding
without having an actual hands-on experience.
THE SCIENCE AND MATH
ENVIRONMENT
Science can be a part of outdoor play, a ﬁeld trip, a guided small- or whole-
group time, an interactive display often known as an interest center, or a
speciﬁc science and math area of the classroom. Science investigations
can happen in a parks and recreation program, summer camp, a daily
before- and after-school program or any type of program where there
are school-age children. Ideally, science and math materials are always
available for children to explore as they work to expand their knowledge.
An interest center can house the many treasures children bring to share,
be it an insect, a special rock or shell, or the acorns that fell from their
neighbor’s tree. Often children will ﬁnd something such as a praying man-
tis or walking stick on the playground and want to share it with other
children.
When the child care facility has a center devoted to science and
math, then science experiments, observations, the recording of science
ﬁndings, and other science and math activities can be a part of the daily
choices. An area designated for science and math gives children and
parents the message that science and math are important, integral parts
of the curriculum. Plants, pets, and books add a visual, inviting appeal to

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
257
such a center. Have standard math and science tools readily available to
encourage children’s spontaneous investigations. Rulers, meter sticks,
measuring tapes, balances or scales, stopwatches, magnifying glasses,
and insect containers are a few items that could be included in the center.
Children’s science journals and materials to record information on are
other standard materials for the science center. Make clipboards with
paper easily available.
The materials in the center can change from time to time to provide
different learning opportunities. It is not necessary to spend large
amounts of money on science and math equipment. You can use a variety
of recycled materials. For example, disposable plastic containers can be
used for collecting insects, and small water bottles with the bottoms cut
off make great funnels. Save old jars, wires, clocks, cardboard tubes, plas-
tic bubble wrapping, and so on. In fact, anything that is called junk may be
of use in an experiment. You might also ask parents if they have any of
these materials they would be willing to donate to your program. As you
read about the various areas of science that follow, you will ﬁnd that the
activities suggested present many opportunities for children to investigate
and that the materials used are minimal in cost.
ROLE OF THE LEADER IN THE
SCIENCE ACTIVITY
The most important component of the science environment is the child
care leader. An adult who takes an interest in the children’s science
Computers can add to children’s ability to research information.

SECTION FOUR
258
discoveries and explorations validates what they are learning. The leader
can ask divergent questions. These are questions that have no speciﬁc
answer and require the child to think critically. For example, in a pendu-
lum activity, a tennis ball is attached to the end of a hanging rope. The
children experiment with placement of boxes and try to knock them
down. Some divergent questions might be “How can you stack these
boxes so the ball can knock them down?” “What do you think would hap-
pen if you stacked them in a different way?” “What would happen if you
put them in a different place?” This type of questioning encourages the
children to think critically, to act on their thinking, to form their own
questions, to problem solve, and ultimately to construct knowledge and
develop theories and conclusions. Be sure to give children time to men-
tally process the questions and to discover their own answers. Avoid giving
them the answers.
The leader can also ask questions that encourage children to integrate
mathematical thinking with their science discoveries. An extension of the
pendulum activity would be to measure the distance of the pendulum
from the ﬂoor and the height of the objects to be knocked over. Children
can measure and record their measurement, then experiment. As they
change the placement of objects, they can measure again. The leader
can ask children to predict what they think will happen. Having com-
pleted an activity, children can be encouraged to write down what they
have discovered in their science journals.
Recall from Chapter 5 (sociocultural theory by Vygotsky) that chil-
dren acquire new skills and knowledge via scaffolding and interactions
with more skilled peers or adults. This interaction may be verbal prodding
to encourage thinking. It may be actually modeling how to measure a dis-
tance, or providing assistance in completing a task such as creating a graph
to record information. Leaders must be careful not to take the lead in
the discoveries, but rather to follow the lead of the children. Let children
do the thinking and experimenting. When the adults take an interest in
the activities and interests of the children, the children get the message
that what they are doing is worthwhile. Remember that the children are
in the Eriksonian stage of industry versus inferiority (see Chapter 6).
They are forming opinions about themselves. They are forming an opin-
ion about themselves as learners, as critical thinkers, as scientists, and as
mathematicians.
When planning a science activity, the child care leader should have
some ideas about the knowledge possibilities of the activity. Piaget iden-
tiﬁes three types of knowledge: social, physical, and logicomathematical.
Social knowledge is the information children cannot construct for them-
selves. What is its name? (e.g., magnet, iron) What are the scientiﬁc
terms? (magnetism, repel, attract). Physical knowledge refers to how
divergent questions
questions that have no speciﬁc answer
and require a child to think critically
social knowledge
information children cannot construct
for themselves
physical knowledge
how objects behave as a result of their
characteristics

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
259
objects behave as a result of their characteristics. This is information that
the children learn as they explore. What does it do? How does it change?
What does it feel or sound like? Logicomathematical knowledge
refers to how objects compare to one another. This is also knowledge
that children must construct as they discover similarities and differences,
noting attributes. How are these objects alike? This knowledge enables
children to classify and categorize information.
The science leader should have access to background information
about an activity to guide children’s thinking. Internet access can give
some immediate information in the child care setting. When searching
Web sites, look for links such as education, educators, kids, or activities.
See the list of helpful Web sites at the end of this chapter. Books from the
library can also be made available. Often parents can be a resource for
background information, or they may be willing to get involved in the
information-discovery process through their own Internet search or
exploration.
Caregivers can also look for outside resources within the community
such as guest speakers or ﬁeld trip opportunities (see Chapter 16).
Parents and grandparents may be able to provide support to your science
and math programs by sharing what they do in their workplace or as a
hobby. For example, a person who gardens can provide children and
staff members with information about such things as the importance of
worms in a garden or how to test for soil acidity. Consider how trades-
people such as carpenters, electricians, or plumbers use concepts of sci-
ence in their daily work and what they could share with the children in
your program. Look for community resources such as museums, manu-
facturers, machine and welding shops, bakeries, and farmer’s markets.
Six-year-old Chanelle had just entered ﬁrst grade. She had
seen a news report about seal pups struggling in an oil spill and
asked her child care leader, Michelle, about oil spills. Michelle set up
an experiment with water and a small amount of dark motor oil on
top so Chanelle could investigate what happens to things in the water.
Chanelle choose several small, plastic animals to place in the water.
She was surprised to see the oil cling to the animals. Her curiosity
about seal pups continued when she returned home. That evening
Chanelle and her father learned about seal pups on the Internet. The
next day, Chanelle excitedly entered her child care program with a
stack of papers in her hand, eager to tell Michelle all she had learned
about seal pups with her dad.
logicomathematical
knowledge
how objects compare to one another

SECTION FOUR
260
Help children investigate the role of science in these various places and
careers.
The caregiver can also create a science library. Science books, ency-
clopedias, journals, and magazines provide opportunities to peak child-
ren’s curiosity. Have materials with a variety of reading levels including
those for adults. Children can read to themselves or to each other and
ideally adults will read to children as well. Most book stores and libraries
carry The National Audubon Society ﬁeld guides. Each guide is about a
speciﬁc type of wildlife in North America, such as insects and spiders,
birds, trees, etc. Children’s magazines can be ﬁlled with age-appropriate
factual literature for school-age children. The National Wildlife Federa-
tion publishes Ranger Rick for children aged seven and older and Your
Big Backyard is published for children aged three to seven. Children
will often gravitate to literature that gives them real life information
about things in the world. Books on bats, spiders, termites, frogs, etc.
can provide a vast amount of background information and can increase
the scientiﬁc knowledge of both children and the child care leaders.
Adults who take time to read science-related materials to children
model their love of reading, model the value of seeking information
through printed materials, and provide opportunities for meaningful con-
versations with children.
School-age children not only have curiosity about the world around
them, they are cognitively able to recognize that other people share their
same curiosities and have their own ideas and theories. The astute care-
giver is aware of these common interests and can help children develop
science clubs. These clubs can be formed around science explorations
such as investigating insects in the playground or examining what happens
when they mix various substances with water to discover what dissolves in
water. Children can name their clubs, plan their strategies, and execute
their ideas.
The science leader must also be a careful observer. By carefully
observing children’s interactions with their environment, the adult can
facilitate children’s further learning by presenting additional materials
and information. For example, a child working with a pendulum trying
to knock down blocks may be unsuccessful because she consistently stacks
the blocks out of the reach of the pendulum. The child tries many tech-
niques in releasing the pendulum but with no success. When told, “I won-
der if there is another place to stack the blocks,” the child will most likely
rethink the situation and make changes in the placement blocks.
A ﬁnal step to facilitating children’s science experiences is for the
leader to help them record their ﬁndings. True scientists record their
ﬁndings, draw diagrams, and write about their experiments so they can
share the information with others. In a school-age program, children can
be encouraged to draw pictures and write (or dictate) what they have

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
261
learned. They can write about their strategies, observations, and new
theories and hypotheses. These discoveries can be posted on a bulletin
board so parents, other children, and guests will be able to see what chil-
dren are learning. Drawings and written accounts can also be collected
and made into a book for display. Incorporating reading and writing,
along with science, takes the child care program another step beyond
just babysitting.
Documentation makes learning visible so that parents and others
know what is going on at the center. So often the only thing a parent has
to judge what happens in the program is the piece of paper (artwork) that
comes home in the child’s hand. They do not see the vast effort put into a
block structure or the trial and error of a science activity. This also gives
parents something to talk to their child about. Rather than, “What did you
do today?” the parent might say, “I see that you are experimenting with . . .
Tell me about it.”
There are additional ways to document children’s experiences. You
can use a large piece of easel paper to write comments the children
made during the exploration process or when working in a small group.
This is modeling the process of gathering information and documenting
it. This documentation can be posted for parents to see. Children can
have personal science journals that they draw and write in. Science activ-
ities can be reported in a monthly newsletter. The use of technology can
aid in tracking children’s scientiﬁc inquiry process. Digital cameras and
video camcorders can be used to document each step of the process
from the gathering of evidence, the setting up of experiments, the trials
and errors, and the outcomes of children’s actions. Signs can be made to
aid the documentation. Older children can incorporate photos and video
clips into a computerized reports or PowerPoint® presentations. Consider
eliciting the help and equipment of parents if the cameras, computers,
and camcorders are not available to your program.
PHYSICAL SCIENCE: HOW CAN
I MAKE IT MOVE?
On an adult level, physics is deﬁned as “the science of dealing with the
properties, changes, and interactions of matter and energy.” Children
construct knowledge of physics by acting on the principle, “How can I
make it move?” For example, a group of ﬁrst graders could use a variety
of balls for rolling and a variety of objects to knock down such as empty
cans, milk cartons, or plastic bottles. The children can learn about the
distance from the objects or weight of the ball being rolled and of
the objects being knocked over. They can experiment with placement of
the objects. Math tools such as a scale and a meter stick will be valuable in

SECTION FOUR
262
making the connection between the science- and math-related concepts.
To learn physics principles, children use actions such as pushing, sliding,
rolling, tilting, pounding, and throwing and materials such as sand, pen-
dulums, magnets, balls, wheels, pulleys, marbles, paint, and water. Their
manipulations cause immediate action that is visible and comprehensible.
As children create movement, they can observe the results of their
actions, continue the action so as to gain mastery, formulate theories,
make changes in actions, and reﬁne their original theory or formulate
additional theories. These activities give children an opportunity to apply
math through measurement of length or distance, speed, and weight.
Physical science activities tend to hold children’s interest the longest and
have a vast amount of learning possibilities. Children are actively involved
with the materials, can vary their actions, and the results of those actions
are immediate.
Activities
Physical Science
Purposes:

develop the scientiﬁc skills of observing, experimenting, and
theorizing

predict outcomes and formulate conclusions

interact with materials and develop theories about physical
phenomena

develop a personal conﬁdence as a scientist
Experiment with pendulums.
Suspend a cotton clothesline rope with
a ball attached to the end of it from the ceiling, a doorway, or a swing set.
Children can stack plastic cups, cardboard boxes, or blocks and try to
knock them down by swinging the pendulum. They will naturally experi-
ment with placement of the blocks and the positioning of the pendulum.
Various sizes and weights of balls can be provided for additional explora-
tion. They may discover the relationship between the length of the pen-
dulum swing and its ultimate force as it collides (or fails to collide) with the
blocks.
A variation on the pendulum would be to attach other things to the
end of the rope. Try attaching a paintbrush. Place a large piece of card-
board under the pendulum, and discover what happens when the pendu-
lum swings. Remove the bottom of a half–gallon plastic milk jug. Poke one
hole in the middle of two opposite sides, near the bottom edge. Thread
the rope through the holes and tie. The milk jug should now be hanging
upside down on the end of the rope. Fill the jug with sand. Remove the
cap and let the pendulum swing. (Great to do outdoors!)

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
263
Explore inclined planes.
Rain gutters cut into lengths of three, ﬁve,
or 10 feet make great ramps for balls, marbles, water, and toy cars. Pro-
vide other materials for children to discover concepts about things that
slide and roll. Incorporate Legos® for children to build cars. Have a
scale available for children to weigh the load of the cargo of their cars
and a meter stick for measuring the height and length of the incline as
well as the distance the various objects travel. Children can discover the
relationships between the height of the incline, its length, and the weight
of the objects traveling down the plane.
Additional things may be used for inclined planes. Cove molding can
be found in the wood trims and molding department of your local home
improvement store. Cut it into various lengths and add it to the block
center, or use it as an outdoor activity to provide children ample opportu-
nity for ongoing exploration of incline planes. Cardboard tubes from
wrapping paper or mailing tubes can also be used as inclined planes.
Large durable ones can be obtained from businesses that lay carpeting.
(Carpet is rolled up on them.)
Discover propelled objects (target practice).
Provide balls of dif-
ferent kinds and sizes and materials for the target such as cardboard
blocks, milk cartons, cardboard cylinders from paper rolls, and large
juice cans. Children work indoors or outdoors as they discover the rela-
tionship between the placement of target objects, the kind and size of ball
used, and the physical force with which it is propelled. Keep in mind that
science discoveries are related to math concepts so be sure to also have
measuring tools and paper and pencils for children to write down the out-
comes of their experimenting.
Additional discoveries can be made with ping-pong balls with Velcro®
attached and a fabric target such as felt. Children learn best when they can
clearly see where their propelled ball has landed.
Try a ﬂoor target with beanbags to toss on it.
Simple catapults can provide additional discoveries. Make them with
a plastic spoon and a wooden ruler. Attach the handle of the spoon ﬁrmly
to the end of the ruler by wrapping a rubber band tightly around it. Small
pom-pom balls placed in the bowl of the spoon can be propelled to a
target. Children will use them by pulling back on the bowl of the spoon
with one hand, holding the ruler with the other hand, and releasing the
spoon.
Explore magnetic force.
Magnets can be another staple for your sci-
ence center. Wand and horseshoe magnets can be purchased from toy
stores. Small, inexpensive (but not very durable) circular magnets are
available at stores that sell electronic equipment. Strong internal magnets
can be purchased from a store that sells products for large farm-animal

SECTION FOUR
264
care. (Internal magnets are used inside a cow to collect pieces of metal
that the cow may ingest.) Children can work with a variety of magnets
and incorporate measurement as they notice and record the distance
between the magnets when they visibly repel or attract each other. Addi-
tional activities could include encouraging children to use the magnets to
Marble Rollways
Brief description:
Children will work in teams to create a structure that they can roll marbles through.
Science concepts explored:
Children will learn about the relationship between the slope of a surface and the velocity of a rolling
object. They will discover where a rolling object is propelled to.
Materials:

thin cardboard in pieces of various sizes

paper cups

paper towel and/or toilet-tissue cardboard tubes

paper

masking tape

yarn or string

berry baskets, juice cans, or small plastic containers

marbles

other recycled materials as available

scissors, rulers, pencils, markers
Procedure:
Materials are displayed on a table. Entice the children by asking a divergent question, “How could you
use these materials to create a structure that will let the marbles ﬂow through it?” Divide children into
teams to create their structure. (Hint: Create teams with a variety of ages. An older child can be a leader
for the younger ones.)
Role of the leader:

Set up the work environment.

Give children adequate time (30 minutes or more).

Provide children with a space to display their ﬁnished product

Make comments about what you see, and encourage children to verbalize what they are doing.
“I notice that you decided to put this tube here. What do you think will happen?”

Encourage further exploration by asking divergent questions or making comments. “How far do you
think the marble will roll after it drops through the tube?” Be sure to have tape measures or meter
sticks available.

Guide children in writing and drawing about their structure and their discoveries.

Guide children in creating a note to parents telling about the work they are doing.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
265
drag through the sand looking for particles of iron, to investigate a variety
of metal-looking objects to determine which contain iron, or to use
around the classroom, looking for metal with iron. (Use caution when
investigating the room. Computer components, CDs, or computer pro-
grams can be damaged when magnets are placed on or near them.) Devel-
op a collection of small items such as bolts and paper clips that are
attracted to a magnet. Use this collection with the large magnets that are
found on the inside of stereo speakers to build temporary sculptures that
are held together by magnetism.
Another way to use magnets is for moving objects. Place magnetic
wands, or internal magnets under the table or under a piece of Plexiglas®.
Place lightweight objects such as paper clips on top of the table or Plexi-
glas®. Use the magnet to move the objects. Encourage children to see
what happens when they place magnets on top of the table and move
magnets underneath.
Additional Physical Science Activities
Other physical science activities could focus on:

spatial awareness (ﬁtting objects in, out, through, under, etc.)

air (fans, blow dryers, homemade fans)

construction (wood with hammers, nails, saws, screws, screw
drivers, and hand drills)

pulleys and wheels

kitchen tools (scoops, basting bulbs, sifters, beaters, gadgets)

opticals (binocular, magnifying glasses, kaleidoscopes)

making, listening to, and identifying sounds

light and shadows
CHEMISTRY: HOW CAN I MAKE
IT CHANGE?
Chemistry deals with the properties, composition, and transformation of
substances. Many chemical experiments require skills, equipment, and
knowledge too advanced for the school-age child. Yet, chemical explora-
tion opportunities can be provided that are age appropriate and enable
children to learn concepts of chemistry and further their scientiﬁc skills
of theorizing, observing, and experimenting.
Keep in mind that school-age children are concrete learners (see
Chapter 5, Piaget) and therefore must be able to act on their environment
and see the results of their actions. Observations of the physical character-
istics of substances and explorations that create transformations are very

SECTION FOUR
266
appropriate chemistry for this age group of children. For example, chil-
dren can explore transformation by mixing substances such as vinegar and
baking soda, baking cookies or biscuits, or adding water to sand. The
child’s natural tendencies are to respond to the internal question, “How
can I make it change?”
Activities
Chemistry
Purposes:

further develop scientiﬁc skills of observation, hypothesizing, and
drawing conclusions

observephysicalcharacteristics ofsubstancesandphenomenathat
change those characteristics

acquire awareness of chemistry in our everyday lives
Exploration of nature’s tie-dyeing.
Provide various substances that
can be combined with water to make a medium for dyeing fabrics. The
spice turmeric makes a yellow-orange, coffee and tea make browns, and
cabbage or beets cooked in water create a reddish color. Children can also
draw from their experiences of things that stain their clothing such as
mustard, chocolate, and grape juice. Give the children various containers
to explore substances that could dye fabrics. Provide strips of muslin or
some white, cotton fabric such as old T-shirts. Use a timer and track how
the colors change over time.
An extension of this activity would be to try various types of fabrics.
(Be sure to provide the children with smocks to protect their clothing
when doing this investigation!)
Experience the effects of heat on food.
Cooking projects provide a
great opportunity for children to experience transformations. Children
can wash, cut, and prepare vegetables such as carrots, potatoes, or green
beans. With adult supervision, they can cook them, noting the effect of
heat on the taste, consistency, texture, and color of the vegetables. Chil-
dren can use a timer to measure speciﬁc amounts of cooking time and
notice what happens. Observe changes after 1 minute of cooking time, 3
minutes of cooking time, 5 minutes, and so on. These discoveries can be
written in a chart format and later shared with parents or posted in the
classroom. Other cooking activities might include melting cheese for
nachos or in grilled cheese sandwiches or cooking eggs in a variety of
styles (scrambled, poached, hard-boiled, over-easy).

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
267
Investigate substances that make foods rise.
Making things such as
bread, biscuits, cookies, and pancakes gives children the opportunity to
experience the effect of using substances such as yeast, baking soda, or
baking powder. Additional beneﬁts to cooking activities are the math
and reading experiences that they provide as children read recipes and
measure ingredients. Investigate heat as a means of transformation. The
sun is a natural way to use heat and see its effects. Guide children in an
experiment melting leftover stubs of crayons. They can discover what
time of day the sun is most effective in melting, or what location in their
play yard is the warmest. They can further investigate by putting crayons
in various containers that would reﬂect heat, limit air circulation, or con-
tain heat. The effects can also be seen on discarded videos, CDs, and
cassette tapes.
Other chemistry transformations to explore:

condensation and evaporation (breathing on cold glass, investigat-
ing a puddle over time, or melting ice over time)

effects of freezing various liquids (ice cubes made of various sub-
stances, salted water)

absorption (materials that do and do not absorb water)

dissolving (substances that do and do not dissolve in water)

color mixing
BIOLOGICAL AND EARTH
SCIENCE: HOW DO I FIT IN AND
WHAT IS MY ROLE?
Environmental science and biology involve the study of plants and ani-
mals. Earth science studies elements of the earth. Because all of these
are intertwined, it is impossible to study one without investigating the
others at least on some level. They may include an aspect of chemistry or
physical science. When learning about plant life, it is also necessary to
investigate soil, the sun, and water. Earth science investigations involve
phenomena such as shadows, the heat of the sun, properties of water,
weather, and compositions of rocks. You may recall that the effects of
heat were considered in an activity in the chemistry section of this chap-
ter. An investigation of shadows may more appropriately fall under the
physical science section because it addresses the question “How can I
make it move?” An investigation of weather that is interesting for children
would require that the children be actively involved in learning how the
weather affects them; they would discover the role they can take in under-
standing the weather and adapting to its impact on them. The key to

SECTION FOUR
268
successful earth and biological activities is to develop them in such a way
as to provide children opportunities to act on the materials, observe char-
acteristics, make predictions, and develop theories.
Learning about the care of plants, animals, and the environment
should not encourage experimentation that would cause harm to some-
thing living. A goal would be for children to develop a knowledge base
about environmental issues and an understanding about their role in the
Oil and Water Rolling
Brief description:
Children try to combine oil and colored water in an attempt to make them mix.
Science concepts explored:
Children can discover that oil and water do not mix and that paper absorbs oil differently than water.
Materials:

small container of vegetable or corn oil

small container of water colored with a small amount of tempera paint (preferably a color such as
blue that contrasts with the yellow of the oil)

spoons (one for each container)

construction paper, wax paper, foil

tray to hold construction paper

spoons for mixing
Procedure:
Children should ﬁrst predict what they think is going to happen when they put the two liquids
together. Place the paper, foil, or wax paper on a tray. Drop a spoonful of oil and one of colored water
onto the paper. Notice how each liquid stands out on the paper. Tip the tray, causing the liquids to run
toward each other on the paper, and try to get them to mix. After exploration, encourage the children to
think of something they can use to mix the liquids. Allow the children to mix. Encourage them to wait
and see what happens.
Divergent questions:
What do you think will happen when the two liquids meet each other? How could you make them
mix without using a spoon? What do you think would happen if you used a different kind of paper for
the liquids?
Role of the leader:

Set up the work environment. Be sure to test the liquids before presenting them to children to be
sure the water isn’t too thick with the added paint.

Ask divergent questions, and be prepared to have materials ready to allow children to further
explore to test their ideas.
Do the activity with the children, showing your enthusiasm for discovery.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
269
care of living creatures and their life-support systems. Learning about the
human body and its functions and care, including nutrition, is also
included in this aspect of science (see Chapter 15). Children have a natu-
ral sense of wonder about the world. Biology and some earth science dis-
coveries are focused on answering the question, “How do I ﬁt in and what
is my role?”
Activities
Biological Science
Purposes:

develop an understanding of the natural environment

acquire the ability to nurture and care for living creatures

observe the life cycles of plants and animals

cultivate awareness of endangered species and the need to pre-
serve them
Let children care for live animals.
A bird, gerbil, guinea pig, ham-
ster, rabbit, snake, ﬁsh, salamander, lizard, or tortoise are common
choices. Ask children to help choose the animal to be added to their
classroom. Before introducing the animal, have children research what
the animal eats or drinks, what kind of environment it needs, and how
to care for the animal. Consult with a local pet store and check with a
Biology involves the study of plants and animals. Earth science studies
elements of the earth.

SECTION FOUR
270
veterinarian. Guide children in Internet searches to further their knowl-
edge. Construct a habitat appropriate for that animal.
To stimulate scientiﬁc inquiry, encourage children to observe the ani-
mal. For instance, a hamster can generate questions about what kinds of
vegetables the animal will eat. Let them predict, then test out various
choices by offering a selection of lettuce, carrots, celery, and spinach.
Note which the hamster prefers. Which will it not eat?
Older children can add to this activity by creating imaginary animals.
Stimulate their imaginations by reading aloud Dr. Seuss’s If I Ran the Zoo
(1950) (see Suggested Readings). Set up a display of the animals when
they are ﬁnished.
Let children observe the life cycle of frogs.
Get some frog eggs or
tadpoles from a stream, pond, or lake. Put them in an aquarium with
plenty of pond water and a few pond plants. Feed the tadpoles extra
food: boiled spinach or other leafy green vegetables. Observe their
growth.
Encourage children to predict how long it will take for the tadpoles to
turn into frogs. Let them chart the growth, noting the decrease in size of
the tadpoles’ tails and the appearance of legs. How close were they in their
predictions?
Cultivate a garden outdoors.
Involve the children in a discussion of
whether they want a vegetable or ﬂower garden. Provide seed catalogs,
books on plants, or magazines that have a gardening section. Take a trip
to a local nursery.
Have children measure the amount of space that can be allotted to the
garden, and research the type of plants that can be grown at different
seasons of the year. Have them draw a plot plan, spacing the various plants
according to what they have learned about plant requirements. Plant the
garden.
Invite further inquiry by asking the children to keep track of which
plants come up ﬁrst. If they have planted vegetables, which are ready for
harvesting the earliest?
Play Twenty Questions to encourage children to use their senses in
identifying fruits, vegetables, or parts of aromatic plants. Choose ﬁve or
more examples that have distinctive odors. Punch holes in the sides of a
corresponding number of paper bags. Place each item in a separate bag
and fasten it shut. Code each bag with a number on the outside. Prepare a
card with the code numbers and a space for naming the contents. Allow
each child to smell the bags and write down what they think it is. When
every child has had a turn, open the bags and let them check their
answers.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
271
Keep potted plants in the classroom.
Include a variety of plants:
those grown from seeds, from cuttings of mature plants, and from pits or
tubers (avocado pits or sweet potatoes). Research plant requirements for
growth. How much water do different kinds of plants need?
What kind of food do plants require? Why do some plants grow better
in shade than in bright sunlight? Ask children to prepare a bulletin board
showing different plants that grow in the shade and those that require a lot
of sunshine. Suggest that they draw pictures of the plants, use seed pack-
ets, or cut out pictures from magazines to show the plants.
To further encourage scientiﬁc inquiry, tell the students they can per-
form an experiment to determine how much sunlight a plant needs. Have
them plant a bean seed in each of 10 plastic cups ﬁlled with sterile potting
soil. Place half of the cups at various distances from a window light source
but not in direct sunlight. Cover the other cups or place them in complete
darkness. Keep the soil in all the containers wet, but be careful not to
overwater. Compare the growth of the two sets of plants once a week
and chart their progress. Record the height and condition of the plants
in each container. As a conclusion to the experiment, discuss what they
have learned about plant requirements for sunlight.
Growing mold.
Pour a thin layer of canned soup into a ﬂat dish. Have
children place bits of dirt, bread crumbs, or ﬂoor dust onto the soup.
Cover with a plastic wrap and put in a warm place. Within a few days
mold spores will begin to grow. Provide a magnifying glass or microscope
so children can examine the different “plants.”
To stimulate further inquiry, do a second experiment to observe
molds growing on other materials. Rub a piece of bread on the kitchen
ﬂoor, sprinkle it with a little water, and place it in a sealed jar. Place a
piece of cheese in another jar and a fruit peel in a third jar. Seal the jars
and place all three in a dark location. Observe the changes periodically,
noting the different times it takes molds to grow on the three media. Pro-
vide a microscope or magnifying glass so children can see the molds. Are
the molds that grow on bread, cheese, and fruit peels the same as or dif-
ferent from those on the soup?
Teacher safety notes: Most molds of this type are harmless, but do not
take any chances. Keep the lid on the jars, and the plastic wrap on the ﬂat
dishes. In addition, have children wash their hands if any moldy items are
touched; do not sniff molds (check for mold allergies among students):
and when the activity is completed, throw away all mold gardens, without
opening them, in a tightly sealed bag.
Learn about endangered species and what can be done to prevent
total extinction of these plants and animals.
Contact National

SECTION FOUR
272
Create a Worm Environment
Brief description:
Children will create a temporary worm environment to learn about their tunneling behaviors.
Science concepts explored:
Characteristics of worms such as their bodies, their habitat, and their diet.
Materials:

tall, thin jar (preferably no more than 5 inches in diameter)

sand, soil, and water

ruler

magnifying glasses

worms (can be obtained from a bait shop)

½ apple

½ onion

knife and cutting board

two containers for mixing

factual books about worms such as It Could Still Be a Worm by Fowler (see Suggested Readings)
Procedure:
Place soil in container and mix with enough water to make the soil damp. In another container mix
sand with water, making the sand damp enough to clump together. Layer the soil and sand in the tall
thin jar in 1-inch layers. Place the worms on top of the top layer. Handle them with care and respect
them as living things. Watch what the worms do. Cut onion and apple in ½-inch pieces. Put these on
top of the soil. Place the container in a box, making sure no light can enter the box. Leave for four days.
During that time, read about worms and predict what they will do while they are in the box. After four
days, take the container out of the box and examine the tunnels. Use magnifying glasses before or
after the activity to examine the structure of the worms. Be sure to keep the workspace moist. Worms
don’t like to be in the light, so examinations will have to be brief. Return worms to a safe place in a
garden when ﬁnished with examination.
Divergent questions:
What do you think the worms will do when you put them on top of the soil? What will they do while
they are in the jar in the box? What do you think worms like to eat? How could we ﬁnd out?
Role of the leader:

Set up the work environment. Be sure to have ample literature available for children to further their
investigations.

Use a search engine on the Internet to ﬁnd information about worms.

Investigate with the children.

Encourage the children to draw and write about their experiment and ﬁndings.

Remind children to handle worms with care and respect them as living things.
With the children create a display for parents.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
273
Geographic, the National Wildlife Federation, or the Sierra Club to ﬁnd
out if they have videotapes, magazines, speakers, or other sources of infor-
mation about endangered species. Guide children in an Internet search of
the World Worldlife Fund to learn about endangered species.
Visit other Web sites.
World Wildlife Fund
1250 Twenty-fourth Street, N.W.
Washington D. C., 20090-7180
Phone: 202-293-4800
[http://www.worldwildlife.org]
The Nature Conservancy
Worldwide Ofﬁce
4245 North Fairfax Drive, Suite 100
Arlington, VA 22203-1606
Phone: 800-629-6860
[http://nature.org]
National Wildlife Federation
11100 Wildlife Center Drive
Reston, VA 20190-5362
Phone: 800-822-9919
[http://www.nwf.org]
The Sierra Club National Headquarters
85 2nd Street, Second Floor
San Francisco, CA 94105
Phone:415-977-5500
FAX 415-977-5799
[http://www.sierraclub.org]
If there is a wildlife preservation area in your vicinity, schedule a ﬁeld
trip. Observe and record the plants and animals found at the preserve.
Follow the visit with a discussion of why it is important to save these plants
and animals from extinction.
Older children can explore what is happening to the rain forests
throughout the world.They can write to:
RainForest Action Network
221 Pine Street, Suite, 5th ﬂoor
San Francisco, CA 94104
Phone: 415-398-4404
FAX 415-398-2732
[http://www.rain.org]

SECTION FOUR
274
Provide books, journals, and magazines for children to read on their
own. Some excellent sources are At Home in the Rain Forest by Willow
and Jacques (1992); The Rainforest by Goodman (1991); and What’s in
the Rainforest? by Ross (1991). See the Suggested Readings section for
more information. Place the books in the reading corner, and allow time
during the day for the children to read. Place a map of the world on a
bulletin board, and ask children to color in rain forest areas as they discov-
er them in their reading.
Activities
Earth Science
Purposes:

cultivate curiosity about the Earth and the solar system

encourage scientiﬁc inquiry

provide practice in predicting outcomes

increase knowledge of the principles of earth sciences
Explore the solar system.
Obtain posters or photos taken during
space explorations. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA) has views of the Earth taken from outer space; pictures of astro-
nauts at work; and photos from space probes of Mars, Venus, Mercury,
and Jupiter. The Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California, and
the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum in Washington, DC, are also
sources of materials. Your local library may have books, cassette tapes,
or videos as well. Set up a bulletin board display. Obtain books on space
that children can read or browse through in the book corner. Provide a
tape recorder or CD player and earphones if tapes or CDs are available.
To stimulate children’s interest in space and space travel, ask them to
draw or paint a picture of what they would ﬁnd if they were actually on
one of the other planets. They might do another picture of things they
would take with them on their trip to the planet. Display the pictures,
and ask children to discuss their choices and explain why certain items
would be necessary or desired.
Help students understand the principle that allows a rocket ship to
enter space by explaining that it is based on Isaac Newton’s third law of
motion (for every action there is an opposite and equal reaction). Provide
each child with a balloon. Tell them to blow up the balloon and hold their
ﬁngers tightly around the neck to keep air from escaping. Let the children
release their balloons, one at a time. Do they know what happens? Dis-
cuss with the children how they think Newton’s law applies? (The balloon
pushes air backward as it is released through the neck. The escaping air

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
275
pushes the balloon forward.) The children can also consider which bal-
loons went the farthest and why. Is there any way they might control
where the balloon rocket goes? You might want to do an Internet search
so that you and the children can learn more about this phenomenon.
Visit a planetarium, if possible. Your community may have one, but
also ﬁnd out if a nearby college or university has one.
Chart the weather for a month.
Provide a calendar form for each
child or a large one for a bulletin board. Obtain a thermometer that
records both temperature and barometer readings that can be placed out-
doors. Have children record daily temperatures, barometer readings, and
weather conditions. Ask them to bring weather reports and predictions
from daily newspapers. Have them keep track of how many times the pre-
dictions are correct. Can they predict the weather based on a given day for
the following day?
Have children write for more information about weather predicting
and tracking. Good sources are:
American Meteorological Society Headquarters
45 Beacon Street
Boston, MA 02108-3693
Phone:617-227-2425
FAX 617-742-8718
[http://www.ametsoc.org]
U.S. Dept. of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
14th Street & Constitution Ave. N.W.
Room 6217
Washington, D.C. 20230
Phone: 202-482-6090
FAX 202-482-3154
[http://www.noaa.gov]
There is also a bimonthly magazine:
Weatherwise
Heldref Publications
1319 18th Street NW
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: 202-296-6267
[http://www.weatherwise.org]
Have children make a rain gauge.
You will need a clear plastic tube
that is sealed at one end (jewelry beads often come in this kind of tube), a

SECTION FOUR
276
ruler, masking tape, a pencil, and a piece of clay. Attach the tape along the
entire length of the tube. Calibrate by placing the ruler against the tape,
then (starting from the bottom) mark off 1 inch, 2 inches, and so on, to the
top of the tube. Set the tube into the clay, making sure it stands straight.
Place the gauge outdoors where it will collect rain. Add rainfall records to
the weather charts.
Tell children they can make “lightning.” Provide each child with a
balloon. Inﬂate the balloons, then darken the room. Tell children to rub
their balloon on the carpet or on their wool clothing. Have pairs of chil-
dren hold their balloons end to end, almost touching. If the room is dark
enough, they will see an electrical spark jump between the balloons.
Equipment to Have Available

animal habitats, an incubator for hatching eggs

ant farm with a supply of ants

aquarium with books on tropical ﬁsh

binoculars and bird identiﬁcation books

insect house, insect-capturing containers, butterﬂy net

calculators, computers, software programs

collections of shells, rocks, and fossils

ﬂashlights

hair dryer, small vacuum, bicycle pump

household scales or simple balance with weights

levers, inclined planes, pulleys, wheels

magnets: bar and horseshoe, assorted sizes

magnifying glasses, insect collections

measuring cups

microscope with prepared and blank slides

mirrors, plain and ground

prisms, eyeglasses, gyroscopes, color wheels

PVC pipe lengths, rain gutters, wood planks, wood blocks

rock-polishing equipment, jewelry tools

rulers, meter stick, T squares, tapes, protractor

tripod

sun-sensitive papers and outlines

telescope, books on astronomy, a globe, compass

terrarium, seeds, potting soil, small pots

indoor and outdoor thermometers

computer

VCR, selected cassettes or CDs, tape or CD player, earphones

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
277
MATH IN SCHOOL-AGE
CHILDCARE
Keep in mind that a primary function of a school-age program is to sup-
port children as they gain tools for living. Math is one of those tools. Recall
earlier in Children as Natural Mathematicians, that there are everyday,
real-life problems that provide the opportunity for children to experience
and understand math concepts. When children manipulate, count, and
measure real objects, they develop concepts that they can eventually
relate to numerals and equations. They need to hold objects in their
hands, weigh, or count them so that the concepts of size and number are
evident. The caregiver of school-age children will most likely be able to
recall some of the math concepts he or she learned in school. Basic num-
ber computations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, as
well as concepts related to money, time, temperature, geometry, and
measurement of lengths, volume, and weight are generally the concepts
that will most likely come to mind. Real-life situations provide opportuni-
ties to problem-solve by using math computations, including working with
fractions and percentages. Children develop strategies for solving these
problems. Additionally, children are taught to organize their math think-
ing and to communicate in the language of math to express their ideas. It
is noteworthy to point out that appropriate math in before- and after-
school child care programs is not about the mechanics of the pencil-and-
When children count objects, they develop concepts that can eventually
relate to numerals and equations.

SECTION FOUR
278
paper math practiced in school. It is about incorporating math in everyday
life and giving children an opportunity to construct their own knowledge
about mathematical concepts while supported by the child care leader.
Activities
Number Concepts and Computation
Purposes:

strengthenabilitytocountand carryoutmathematicalcalculations

increase ability to use math concepts in new situations

organize quantities according to common attributes

recognize how we use math in everyday life
Games that involve math.
A quality school-age program should
include a variety of age-appropriate math and reasoning games of varying
difﬁculties. In addition, Children who are more experienced with games
should be encouraged to teach others new games. (Harms, Jacobs, &
White, 1996). Monopoly® comes in a version for children from age nine
and up, Monopoly Junior® is for ages ﬁve to eight. Yahtzee®, ages nine and
up, involves counting, addition, money, and the exploration of probability.
Scrabble® for ages eight and up requires addition and multiplication in
the score-keeping process. Battleship® is a two-person game that teaches
children about coordinates and is for ages seven and up. Visit your local
toy stores for games that involve math concepts of counting and keeping
score. When children have to keep score they are given opportunities to
use addition and subtraction.
Eat a fraction snack.
Involve children in the preparation of sand-
wiches or foods that involve fractions. Cut the food into halves and
fourths. Discuss these fractions and notice that the fractional parts come
together to make the whole sandwich. Encourage children to notice such
things as how many whole sandwiches can be made from eight fourths
(8/4). Cut apples, oranges, celery, and carrots into sections. When eating
snacks, children can be given half of an apple. Have them cut it again in
half (½ divided by 2). Talk about the fractions they are using. Write them
for the children to see. Encourage them to write their own fractions.
Dividing up a plate of food.
Children can be involved in the daily
division of food for snack. Create a “Math Team” to count the available
items and ﬁgure out how many can be given to each child. Another
approach would be to have the team calculate how many of an item will
be needed for the entire class. For example, if there are 35 children and
each one can have four crackers, how many crackers will be needed all
together?

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
279
Read the label.
Packaged foods provide a variety of information on
their labels. Each label indicates how many servings are in the package.
Give a team of two children a label to read and food to divide into the
indicated servings. For example, a package of pretzels may serve three
Cracker Division
Brief description:
Children will use math strategies to ﬁgure out how to divide up a plate of food at the snack table.
Children should work in groups of three of four.
Math concept explored:
Children will use the problem-solving strategies and math communication abilities to count, divide,
create equal quantities, and notice possible remainders as a result of the division process.
Materials:

The Doorbell Rang by Hutchins (1989) (see Suggested Readings)

counters (small objects such as beans or buttons that can represent crackers, a minimum of the
same number of crackers)

crackers (enough for the group of children to count and divide)

tongs (for moving crackers)

napkins (one for each child)
Procedure:
Read The Doorbell Rang. Give children an opportunity to discuss the problem in the story and their
ideas about how the problem was solved. Then, pose the problem of having a plate of crackers and
not knowing how to divide it so every child has an equal amount. “What ideas do you have about how
we could divide these crackers?” Give children counters to simulate crackers to count and move
around as they explore the division process. Once children have ﬁgured out a solution to the problem,
they can use their strategy to divide up the plate of crackers. How many will each one receive? As
children become proﬁcient at this, provide an unequal amount of food that would require them to have
remainders.
Let them problem-solve what to do with the remainders.
Divergent questions:
Is there another way you can divide up the crackers? What would happen if there was one more
person in your group?
Role of the leader:

Set up the environment.

Be sure to have ample counters and crackers available for children to experience the division
process.

Listen to the children’s ideas and facilitate each child having a turn to express and work with his or
her ideas.

SECTION FOUR
280
and a half people. The children can discuss how to divide the pretzels. An
additional task would be to determine how many packages would be
needed to serve the entire class, or to ﬁgure out how many people could
be served with ﬁve packages, 10 packages, etc.
Classify objects according to common characteristics.
Collect a
variety of objects and scraps that are made of either natural or synthetic
materials. Include cotton balls and synthetic sponges, wool and synthetic
fabrics, wood and vinyl ﬂooring materials, plastic and wooden toys, paper
and plastic ofﬁce supplies, newspaper, and cellophane. Tell children to
decide what each material is made of, and to sort the materials into piles
for natural or synthetic. Once the objects are grouped, children can count
and compare the quantities of the various sets of objects.
In autumn, collect an assortment of leaves to be sorted according to
colors and shape. Provide an assortment of small objects with a variety of
tools to pick them up. Include beads, buttons, seeds, small animals, minia-
ture cars, and so on. Have children use tweezers, tongs, strawberry hull-
ers, or needle-nose pliers to pick up the objects and place them in small
boxes, egg cartons, or partitioned boxes. Let children develop their own
rules for sorting. They may match the objects according to color, size, or
category of the objects. Can some objects be placed in more than one
category?
Activities
Measurement
Purposes:

increase vocabulary and understanding of concepts related to
measurement

practice using various tools of measurement

increase ability to see how measurement is used in everyday life
Weigh a variety of objects.
Set up a center with different types of
scales: balance, electronic, and spring. Include many different objects
the children can weigh or balance. Ask children to weigh the objects and
record their weights. Are the weights the same on different scales? Which
objects are the heaviest? Are the heaviest objects also the largest?
Encourage them to experiment with the balance. How many objects
of one kind on one side of the balance does it take to counterweight
objects on the other side? After a few experiments with this activity, pro-
vide different objects and ask the children to estimate their weight before
putting the object on the scale. How accurate were they?
Provide a bathroom scale so children can weigh themselves. Include a
basket of large stones. After determining their own weights, how many

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
281
stones does it take to equal that amount? Make a wall chart of children’s
weights and the equivalent number of stones. Ask children to sort objects
according to their weight. Let children weigh a collection of rocks,
then sort the rocks into groups. To simplify the activity, tell them to put
together those that weigh one pound or less, then between two and three
pounds, and so on.
Measure length.
Secure a measuring tape to the ﬂoor or use two
yardsticks, end to end. Tell children to look at the divisions on the tape,
pointing out the inch and feet marks. Have children lie down next to the
tape. Ask one child to record each child’s height in feet and inches.
Provide children with meter sticks and have them measure again, this
Construct a Hopscotch
Brief description:
Children will use measuring tools to make a hopscotch board on the playground. (See Chapter 10,
Games and Other Fun Things to Do.)
Math concept explored:
Children will explore the concepts of length and width, and the attributes of squares and develop
skills in linear measurement.
Materials:

rulers, meter sticks, tape measure (kind used in construction)

protractor (to measure 90-degree angles)

pencils and paper for recording information

clipboards for holding papers

sidewalk chalk
Procedure:
Show children a drawing of the hopscotch game board. Put the children into teams of two to four
to decide how they can make one. Children will need to practice jumping and measuring the distance
of their jumps. They can use that information to determine what size squares they will need to draw.
Children can record their measurements on paper, then use those measurements to make a drawing
of their hopscotch.
Role of the leader:

Learn the steps before presenting the project to children by practicing making squares with a
protractor and something with a large straight edge.

Scaffold drawing squares by using a protractor to make 90-degree angles.

Model how to use measuring tools.

Be with the children to scaffold the process when needed, but be sure to let children make dis-
coveries, including mistakes, on their own.

SECTION FOUR
282
time in centimeters. Discuss how the meter sticks and the yardsticks are
the same and different.
The youngest children can reinforce the concepts of feet and inches
by making a string showing their own height. Use colored yarn, Cheerios
for the inches, and colored beads to signify feet markings. Older children
could make a chart of all the group members to add to the weight chart
just described.
Tell children they can measure a friend with a different kind of “feet.”
Supply each child with a piece of white construction paper, and ask each
one to trace a friend’s foot. Cut out the foot shape. Have children take
turns lying down while another child uses the foot pattern to measure
how many it takes. Show them how to turn the pattern end over end
each time so that they start from the correct place each time the foot is
moved. Record the number of “feet” it takes to go from foot to head.
Measuring time.
Stopwatches, digital clocks, and clocks with hour and
minute hands, and calendars are some of the tools used everyday to mea-
sure time. Involve children in the daily monitoring of the schedule. Use a
clock or stopwatch to measure how much time is used for such things as
outdoor time, for taking turns while playing games, or for measuring how
long until time for snacks. Children can record the time of day along with
the number of children present. Remember to have clipboards, paper,
and pencils readily available so children can record the information.
Involve children whenever possible in using the calendar. If children are
At summer camp there was an old concrete swimming pool that
had been converted to a sandbox. Seven-year-olds Josh and Kevin
questioned the camp counselor, “Jennifer, how deep is the sand in
the sandbox?” She replied, “I don’t know. How could you ﬁnd out?”
The decided they could dig a hole and measure the depth of the
hole. The afternoon was spent digging. After a while they came to a
bed of rock. Jennifer supplied them with a yardstick and the boys
concluded the sand was 17 inches deep. The next day, Josh
approached Jennifer. “O.K. I know that the sand was 17 inches deep
where we dug. Is it 17 inches deep everywhere?” She replied, “I don’t
know. What is your prediction? How could you ﬁnd out?” He pre-
dicted that it was different in other parts of the sandbox because a
swimming pool is deeper at one end than the other. The boys dug a
hole at the other end of the sandbox.. It too was 17 inches deep. The
boys concluded that the depth of the sand was the same in the
entire sandbox.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
283
given jobs, they can be recorded on a calendar. Let the children post spe-
cial events on the calendar. Make a large calendar each month out of
poster board for the children to use.
Older children can make these monthly calendars. The leader should
be only a guide in the process, letting the children do all the work. The
children can be encouraged to use the calendar to ﬁnd out how many days
until the guest speaker is to arrive or how long until the ﬁeld trip. Talk
every day about the days of the week. Make certain that the use of the
calendar revolves around how they are used in our everyday lives. Chil-
dren will learn these concepts when they see that they are relevant to
everyday life. There is no need to have a boring calendar time as a part
of a whole-group time where children recite, “Today is Monday, June 6,
2005.”
Measuring temperature.
Children can use a large outdoor thermom-
eter such as found in a gardening store to measure temperature. Use dif-
ferent colors of masking tape to place on the edge of each 10-degree
section of the thermometer. For instance, the 40s might have blue tape,
the 50s green, the 60s yellow, the 70s orange, and the 80s red. Young
children can read the thermometer by noting which color the needle
points to. They can use a calendar or other chart format to record the
temperature at different times of the day. The measurement of temper-
ature can be combined with measuring time by recording the tempera-
tures at different times of the day. As the children progress in their skills,
the tape can be removed and children can be taught about the increments
between each of the sections on the thermometer. This math activity can
be coupled with a science investigation on melting or evaporation so chil-
dren can discover the correlation between the temperature and its affect
on these two science concepts.
Measuring volume.
Children use measuring cups and spoons of a
variety of sizes when they are involved in food preparation (see recipes
in Chapter 15) or in making various doughs. These measuring implements
can be used in play as children work with materials such as birdseed, sand,
or water in the water table.
Activities
Working with Money
Purposes:

strengthen ability to count money

experience real-life applications of the planning for the use of
money

SECTION FOUR
284

increase vocabulary and understanding of concepts related to
money
Creating snack menus.
Provide children with the USDA guidelines
for nutrition (see Chapter 15). Give them paper to chart their daily food
intake so they can match it with the guidelines. With adult guidance,
children can be given the responsibility of developing the snack menus
along with the shopping lists and an approximate budget and cost per
child.
Work with money in dramatic play.
Children will often create their
own grocery stores, pet stores, or restaurants. These play scenarios are a
perfect setting for children to work with concepts of money. They can
price items, purchase items, use cash registers, count money, and give
change. Make menus, coupons, and grocery ads to also incorporate
literacy.
More Math Activities
Snack patterns.
To help children practice the skill of recreating a pattern, have them pre-
pare kabobs. Older children can use serrated knives to cut fruits and
cheese into equal-sized chunks. (Younger children may require help
from an adult, or an adult can do this part.) Supply one bamboo skewer
per child. The adult makes a pattern using alternating pieces of different
fruits interspersed with cheese. Ask the children to form like kabobs for
themselves.
Pizza Fractions.
Provide several large pizza shells. (These can be found in the frozen-food
section of the market.) Supply the necessary toppings: mozzarella cheese,
parmesan cheese, pepperoni, sliced mushrooms, and so on. When the
pizzas have been baked, ask the children to count the number of children
in the group and decide how many pieces to cut each pizza into.
How many are there? Estimating.
Estimate numbers by guessing how many objects are in a jar. Obtain a
large (16 oz.) clear glass or plastic jar. Fill the jar with pretzels, crackers,
jelly beans, or other small snack items. Place the jar in front of a chart
labeled “Weekly Food Estimates.” Provide small cards or slips of paper
near the jar and a marking pen. Ask children to write down their name
and an estimate of how many objects there are in the jar. Use pushpins
to attach the cards to a bulletin board. At the end of the week, ask a “Math

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
285
Team” of several children to open the jar and count the items. (Remem-
ber to use health practices of washing hands and using food-handling
gloves.) A next math step would be to have a team decide how to divide
the snack among the entire group of children. You can also have the group
count the items together. Encourage the children to group the items in
quantities of 10. Who guessed the closest to the actual number? Have the
children write the actual count on their own cards. Place the cards in an
envelope and save them. After repeating this activity over several weeks,
are they getting better at estimating?
Double the recipe.
Cooking with school-age children provides an opportunity to work with
fractions. They use measuring cups to measure ingredients and learn
about fractions of a cup such as one-fourth, one-third, and two-thirds.
They can discover what quantities are needed when a recipe is doubled.
Provide children with measuring practice by giving them measuring cups
and containers with materials that can be poured and measured—such as
water, corn meal, or bird seed. Adults can scaffold individual children’s
learning in these activities as they listen to and observe the mathematical
thinking of each child.
Equipment to Have Available

baskets, boxes, egg cartons

collectionsofsmallobjects:beads,buttons,seeds,animals,cooking
equipment

rulers, meter sticks, tape measures, calculators

scales: balance, spring, electronic

table games

tweezers, tongs, needle-nose pliers

thermometers

pretend money

stopwatches, timers, traditional and digital clocks
Guidelines for Child Care Staff Members
There are some guidelines to help child care leaders plan activities that
allow children the maximum opportunity for learning. They are:

Give children many chances to explore and experiment on their
own. Set up learning centers or have materials easily available for
children to use when they wish.

Provide enticing materials that will encourage them to participate.
Listen to the children to ﬁnd out what they are interested in, and

SECTION FOUR
286
thensupplythemwiththemeanstopursuethoseinterests.Inaddi-
tion, stimulate them to explore new interests.

Do not give answers too readily. Ask questions that stimulate chil-
dren to hypothesize, predict, or think of other possibilities. “What
wouldhappenifyou...?”“Whatcanyoudodifferentlynexttime?”

Listen to the children to ﬁnd out what they already know or what
they are thinking. Help them to correct any misinformation or add
to the knowledge they already have. Design appropriate activities
that will lead them to a higher level of understanding.

Make a special effort to encourage girls to enjoy science. Many
young women believed at an early age that science was not for
them. Girls need to hear about successful female scientists such
as Madame Curie, Rachel Carson, Lt. Col. Eileen Collins (the
ﬁrst woman space shuttle commander), Dian Fossey, and Dr.
Myra Logan (the ﬁrst woman to perform open-heart surgery).
Girls also need to experience the joy of discovery themselves.

Maintain a questioning attitude and a sense of wonder yourself. Be
alertto anypossibilities forexploration,and you willprobably learn
along with the children.

Document children’s work and learning. By making learning vis-
ible, administrators, parents, and the children themselves can
readily see that the activities children engage in cause them to
think critically and develop cognitively.
SUMMARY
School-age children’s curiosity about the world around them combined
with their physical and cognitive skills result in their being natural scien-
tists and mathematicians. Their scientiﬁc literacy increases as they use
inquiry skills of observing, investigating, predicting, drawing conclusions,
and developing theories about everything they encounter. Many of child-
ren’s discoveries require the use mathematical skills of comparing, meas-
uring, and classifying. They must use the vocabulary of math to explain
their discoveries to others. The goal of a science and math program is to
provide opportunities for children to develop these skills. Because they
are concrete learners, school-age children need to have active involve-
ment with materials. By directly working with materials, formulating
their own questions, and developing their own ideas, they are “construct-
ing their own knowledge.” It is this process of science and math that
enhances cognitive development.
The science and math environment and an interested leader provide a
setting for children to investigate their world. The adult leader, providing

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
287
additional information and materials when needed, has a role in providing
children with divergent questions to encourage children’s critical think-
ing. Suggested activities focus on the children’s natural inclinations as
they ask “How can I make it move? How can I make it change? How do
I ﬁt in and what is my role?” Adult sciences of physics, chemistry, earth
science, environmental science, and biology fall into these three more
simplistic categories that recognize how children work in the environment
to construct knowledge.
A before- and after-school program can provide children with many
opportunities to use and reinforce math concepts they are learning in
school and to experience the use of math in everyday life. This can be
done with both spontaneous and planned activities. Spontaneous activ-
ities occur when children play games or prepare snacks. Planned activities
can be designed so children manipulate, count, and measure real objects.
In this way, children can further their sense of the number system and
how it works.
Guidelines for staff members to help in planning activities that allow
children maximum opportunities for learning are:

Give children lots of opportunities to explore freely.

Provide enticing materials.

Do not give answers too readily, but encourage children to ﬁnd
answers to their questions.

Listen to children to ﬁnd out what they already know, then help
them to correct any misconceptions.

Maintain a questioning attitude and a sense of wonder yourself.
KEY TERMS
constructing knowledge
divergent questions
logicomathematical
knowledge
physical knowledge
scientiﬁc literacy
social knowledge
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Plan one of the activities described in this chapter, and implement it
with a group of school-age children. Record your observations of the
children as they participate in the activity: What did they do and say?
Bringthematerialsandyourobservationstoclassandsharethemwith
your fellow students.
2. Plan a ﬁeld trip for agroup of school children to a local site of scientiﬁc
interest. The power-generating station, the beach, an observatory, a
nature reserve, a museum, and a radio or television station all provide

SECTION FOUR
288
insightsintohowscienceisbasictocivilization.Followupthetripwith
discussions about what the children learned. Describe the trip to your
classmates. Were there things you would do differently next time?
3. Visit your local library to ﬁnd some background information about an
aspect of science. (Hint: Books written for juveniles are easily
understood by the science novice and can also be taken back to the
childcarefacilityasaresourceforthechildren.)Findatleasttwobooks
on a subject, and develop an age-appropriate, exploratory activity for
school-age children. Bring the books and an activity plan outlining an
activity that you can share in class.
4. Plan a snack menu for a week for a group of 35 school-age children.
Develop a grocery list and cost of the food per child. Design a plan to
implement involving children in this process and share your project
with the class.
5. Visit at least three of the Web sites listed at the end of this chapter and
give a presentation to the class as to their usefulness to the school-age
child care leader.
6. Consider the scenario in which you are required to bring all the
materials each day into an elementary classroom or a school
gymnasium. Evaluate the science activities in the text and determine
what ones you could use, or modify to use, in this setting.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Children are natural scientists and mathematicians. Explain this
statement and how it relates to the development of scientiﬁc literacy.
2. What are the skills necessary for scientiﬁc inquiries?
3. Explain how science and math are related.
4. Explain what it means to construct one’s own knowledge.
5. Explain the difference between the process of science and the content
of science.
6. Explain why the child care leader is considered the most important
component of the science environment.
7. Brieﬂy describe three physical science activities.
8. What kinds of activities can children engage in that help them answer
the question, “How can I make it change?”
9. Explain how you can structure biological science activities to actively
involve children.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
289
10. Listﬁveinexpensiveitemsorpiecesofequipmentthatcan beusedfor
science experiments.
11. Name three unplanned or spontaneous situations in which children
must use math.
12. Planned math activities can be designed to help children progress to
the stage that Piaget called concrete operations. Explain what this
means.
13. List ﬁve pieces of equipment that can be used for math exploration
14. Describe two math activities.
15. The text presents guidelines for staff members when planning and
implementing math activities. What are they?
16. Describe how children can document science discoveries.
CASE STUDY
Olivia and Juanita, both age eight, have been watching two slightly older
boys work with a combination of rain gutters and blocks to create a race-
way for their cars. The boys abandoned their work to play a game with
some other friends. Nicole, the child care leader, noticed that the girls
appeared interested in the boys’ exploration.
1. What questions could Nicole ask that would cause the girls to think
about the inclined plane exploration and ultimately entice the girls to
explore the gutters?
2. What science and math concepts could the girls learn from working
with gutters and cars?
3. How could the girls document the scientiﬁc concepts they learned?
How could Nicole document their work?
REFERENCES
Harms, T., Jacobs, E. V., & White, D. R. (1996). School-age environment
rating scale. New York: Teacher’s College Press.
Maienschein, J. (1999). Commentary: To the future. Argument for scien-
tiﬁc literacy. Science Communication, 21(1), 75–87.
National Research Council. (1996). National science education standards:
an overview. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Science Board. (1999). Preparing our children: math and science
education in the national interest. Arlington, VA: National Science
Foundation.

SECTION FOUR
290
National Science Board. (2003). The science and engineering workforce:
realizing America’s potential. Arlington, VA: National Science
Foundation.
SUGGESTED READINGS
General Science Books
Blaw, L. (1994). Super science. Bellevue, WA: One from the Heart Educa-
tional Research.
Churchill, E. R. (1991). Amazing science experiments with everyday mate-
rials. New York: Sterling.
Friedhoffer, R. (1990). Magic tricks, science facts. New York: Franklin
Watts.
Kim, H. (1994). Showy science. Glenview, IL: GoodYear.
Lind, K. K. (2000). Exploring science in early childhood education. Clifton
Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning.
Moomaw, S., & Hieronymus, G. (1997). More than magnets. Beltsville,
MD: Gryphon House.
Tolman, M. N. (2002). Hands-on science activities for grades K-2. Indian-
apolis, IN: Jossey-Bass.
VanCleave,J.(1996).202oozing,bubbling,drippingandbouncingexperi-
ments. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Wheeler, R. (1997). Creative resources for elementary classrooms and
school-age programs. Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning.
Biological Science
Alan, G. (1992). Jack and the beanstalk. New York: Doubleday Books for
Young Readers.
Challand, H. J. (1986). Plants without seeds. Chicago: Children’s Press.
Dr. Seuss. (1950). If I ran the zoo. New York: Random House.
Fowler, A. (1997). It could still be a worm. New York: Children’s Press.
Goldenberg, J. (1994). Weird things you can grow. New York: Random
House.
Goodman, B. (1991). The rainforest. New York: Tern Enterprise.
McVey, V. (1993). Sierra Club kids guide to planet care and repair. San
Francisco: Sierra Club.
Ross, S. (1991). What’s in the rainforest? 106 answers from a to z. Los
Angeles: Enchanted Rainforest Press.
Tolman, M. N., & Morton, J. O. (2002). Hands-on life science for grades
K-8. Indianapolis, IN: Jossey-Bass.
Unwin, E., & Edom, H. (1993). Science with plants. Danbury CT:
Scholastic Library.
Willow, D., & Jacques, L. (1992). At home in the rain forest. Watertown,
MA: Charlesbridge.

CHAPTER 12
SCIENCE AND MA TH
291
Zike, D. (1993). The earth science book, activities for kids. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Chemistry
Hauser, J. F. (1999). Super science concoctions: 50 mysterious mixtures for
fabulous fun. Charlotte, VT: Williamson.
Johnstone, L., & Levine, S. (2003). Kitchen Science. New York: Sterling.
Physical Science
All About Science I (Mac IBM CD-ROM). Fairﬁeld, CT: Queue.
Adley, N. (1991). The science book of electricity. Orlando: Harcourt.
DeVries, R., Zan, B., Hilderbrandt, G., Edmiaston, R., & Sales, C. (2001).
Developing constructivist early childhood curriculum: practices and
principles. New York, NY: Teachers College.
Hauser, J. F., & Kline, M. (1999). Gizmos & gadgets: Creating science
contraptions that work (& knowing why). Charlotte, VT: Williamson.
New A+ Science (Mac IBM Windows). Oklahoma City: American Educa-
tion Corporations.
Tolman,M.N.,&Morton,J.O.(2002).Hands-onphysicalscienceactivities
for grades K–8. Indianapolis, IN: Jossey-Bass.
Earth Science
Everything Weather (Mac MPC CD-ROM). Princeton, NJ: Bureau of
Electronic Publishing (Thynx).
Exploring Our Solar System (Mac Windows CD-ROM). Chatsworth, CA:
AIMS.
Tolman, M. N., & Morton, J. O. (2002). Hands-on earth science activities
for grades K–8. Indianapolis, IN: Jossey-Bass.
SpaceShuttle(MacMPCCD-ROM).Novato,CA:MindscapeEducational
Software.
Stars and Planets (GS IBM). Mill Valley, CA: Advanced Ideas.
Weather:AirinActionSeries(MacWindowsCD-ROM).Chatsworth,CA:
AIMS.
Math
Baroody, A. J. (1987). Children’s mathematical thinking: A developmental
framework for preschool, primary, and special education. New York:
Teacher’s College Press.
Briziula, B. (2004). Mathematical development in young children: Explor-
ing notions. New York: Teacher’s College Press.
Hands-On Math (Apple II Mac IBM). Grover Beach, CA: Ventura Educa-
tion Systems.
Hutchins, P. (1989). The Doorbell Rang. New York: William Morrow.
Kamii, C., & Housman, L. B. (2000). Young children reinvent arithmetic:
Implications of Piaget’s theory, 2nd ed. New York: Teacher’s College
Press.

SECTION FOUR
292
Millie’s Math House (Mac IBM Windows CD-ROM). Redmond, WA:
Edmark.
WEB RESOURCES
[http://www.smithsonianeducation.org]
Source of information on science and nature
[http://www.spaceplace.nasa.gov]
Information from the Endeavor space shuttle on a mission to map the
Earth
[http://www.jpl.nasa.gov]
Link to NASA information about earth, solar system, stars and galaxies
[http://www.noaa.gov]
National Weather Service provides forecasts, data, and maps. Links to
regional ofﬁces and general meteorological information
[http://www.letstalkscience.uwo.ca/]
A database of earth, life, and physical hands-on science activities for all
ages and abilities
[http://www.aimsedu.org]
Sample activities from AIMS (Activities Integrating Mathematics and
Science)
[http://www.lawrencehallofscience.org]
Activities from the Lawrence Hall of Science
[http://www.ScienceU.com]
Science U includes interactive models and activities using geometric
formulasandfacts,onlinesimulations,graphicsoftware,andalibraryof
reference materials.
[http://mathforum.org/dr.math]
Ask Dr. Math provides a forum for answering children’s math ques-
tions. It also includes searchable archives for additional information.
Click on “Ask Dr. Math.”
Activities for students and teachers using math and aeronautics.
[http://www.planemath.com]
Click on “Geometry Center (Science)”
[http://www.eduref.org]
Science and math lesson plans from the Educator’s Reference Desk
[http://www.nctm.org]
Interactive,age-appropriatemathactivitiesfromTheNationalCouncil
of Teachers of Mathematics

Helping Children Develop
Literacy Competency
293
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the importance of literacy in a school-age child care program.
Articulate the skills that lead to reading comprehension and writing.
Explain how intentionally planned activities in school-age child care
enhance children’s development in complex language, reading, and
writing.
Plan and implement developmentally appropriate activities with
intentionality that include complex language, reading, and writing
components.
ROLE OF LITERACY IN
SCHOOL-AGE CHILD CARE
i
t is widely recognized that literacy—being able to read and write—
is necessary for success in school and later in life. Today’s society
requires more advanced levels of reading proﬁciency as more jobs
require employees to communicate through e-mail, faxes, and the Inter-
net. Historically, these communications were done verbally over the
telephone or in person. By third grade, literacy skills are necessary for
children to fully engage in reading various subjects such as science, his-
tory, and mathematics, and they are necessary for continued learning
throughout life.
Literacy plays a part in out-of-school programs whether they have a
philosophy of enrichment or a philosophy of care. It can have a role if
children are housed in a center where there is dedicated time and
space for reading- and writing-related activities. If the program is in a
gymnasium, the caregiver can read to a group of children in a corner.
CHAPTER1313
OBJECTIVES

SECTION FOUR
294
Bleachers can be used to sit on while playing reading-related games. If
child care is provided in a regular elementary classroom and children are
unable to use any of the materials of the classroom, caregivers can bring in
a chapter book to read to the entire group and materials for fun activities
that are meaningful and involve literacy. An outdoor program can have a
bucket of materials such as paper, markers, and clipboards for children to
use in a grassy area under a tree. A blanket and a board game or a basket
of books can be used to create an inviting outdoor area that promotes the
literacy interests of children. Literacy can be a part of any kind of school-
age program such as summer camp, a recreational program, a program
with limited hours, or one with sporadic attendance by children.
Children come to their school-age child care setting as young as four
years, nine months and may have a wide range of early exposure to read-
ing and writing in their daily lives. They also come to their school-age pro-
gram with reading and writing experiences and homework requirements
from their regular school day. Many children are exposed to literacy from
birth. Their parents and caregivers read to them and encourage children
to have conversations. These adults also model purposeful reading and
writing in their everyday life.
Other children, typically those living in poverty, have little or no expo-
sure to the written word and have possibly never seen their own name in
printed form. Some have never been read to or held a book, never had a
pencil, crayon, marker, or paint brush in their hand to make a squiggle
that represents writing; they have been told that children are to be seen
and not heard, to “be quiet!” Some children have not been exposed to the
value of literacy because they have never had an adult model reading and
writing for them. Yet, all of these children come to an elementary school
experience where there are uniform academic expectations in language,
reading, and writing. The children who are chronologically young or lack
an early foundation in literacy soon feel behind and unsuccessful, and as a
result reading becomes a task and a negative experience.
These same children of such varied experiences are also in school-age
child care settings, and all of them need support from caregivers in their
academic development. In most school-age child care programs, this sup-
port happens when caregivers help children with homework. Caregivers
can provide additional support by intentionally incorporating meaningful
literacy components into the daily activities. Speciﬁc literacy activities can
also be planned that can be enjoyable, encouraging, and empowering to
children while enhancing their literacy skills.
There is signiﬁcant evidence that school-age caregivers should
embrace literacy-related activities as a part of their curriculum. The
importance of literacy in the ﬁeld of child care was highlighted when the
International Reading Association (IRA) partnered with the National
Association for the Education of Young Children and developed a joint
literacy
being able to read and write

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
295
position statement, entitled Learning to Read and Write: Developmen-
tally Appropriate Practices for Young Children (NAEYC & IRA, 1998).
Their premise is that all teachers of young children, including those in
child-care programs, have a responsibility to promote children’s literacy
development and to use the most current knowledge of how children
learn to read and write. Young children are deﬁned by NAEYC as those
from ages birth through eight. This includes school-age children from
kindergarten through second grade.
In January of 2002, the No Child Left Behind Act was passed and
signed into law by the President of the United States. This legislation,
referred to as NCLB, is intended to ensure that every child has the funda-
mental knowledge and skills to read by the end of third grade. NCLB also
states that reading instruction is to happen in high-quality and literacy-
rich environments with strategies that are research based. NCLB cites
the importance of programs to include language development in conjunc-
tion with the other developmental domains. While this task falls on the
shoulders of the elementary school systems, it has implications for
school-age child care programs. Caregivers nurture the development of
the whole child (physically, cognitively, linguistically, socially, and emo-
tionally) and support the child’s school experiences.
Keep in mind that children want to feel empowered, competent, and
successful and that the caregiver is committed to promoting these feel-
ings, which build positive self-esteem and emotional development. How-
ever, statistics indicate that only 31% of fourth-grade children performed
at or above the proﬁcient level, and 37% performed below the basic level
in reading in 2003 (U.S. Department of Education). These statistics indi-
cate that many children need support in reading. These children may not
feel competent or successful and perhaps not empowered. A lack of moti-
vation to read is cited as one of the barriers to children becoming skilled
readers (Snow et al., 1998). This lack of motivation may in turn be a result
of being unsuccessful in reading. The lack of success is seen speciﬁcally in
children who lack sufﬁcient emerging literacy skills—that is, reading-
related skills that children obtain prior to actually reading and writing.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF
LITERACY
Learning to read and write is a developmental milestone in our society. It
was once believed that the language and the literacy skills of reading and
writing would simply develop when the child was ready. Children typically
learn to walk and talk on their own when they have matured enough to be
physically ready, but literacy skills do not come that easily. Children need
direct instruction and practice. They need encouragement to practice
emerging literacy skills
reading-related skills that children
obtain prior to actually reading and
writing
Motivation is very important
in children developing
strong literacy skills

SECTION FOUR
296
complex language skills and to experience how those skills translate to the
written word. School-age children need meaningful experiences that help
them relate literacy skills to events in their everyday lives. School-age
child care should support the educational experiences of children by pro-
viding opportunities for children to practice what they are learning in
school, by enhancing what they are experiencing in their daily life, and
by giving children additional opportunities to see the relevancy of reading
and writing as lifelong skills.
Children have daily opportunities to experience reading and writing
within their communities. Stores have names and are ﬁlled with products
with printed labels. Magazines are found in many of these stores. There
are street signs, ﬂyers, and advertisements providing various kinds of
information and sometimes in languages other than English. Restaurants
provide menus. The mailman delivers items that can be read. Adults write
notes and letters to communicate with one another. Some families have
newspapers delivered to their house every day. Libraries and bookstores
are ﬁlled with books for personal reading pleasure and for gaining knowl-
edge. Many homes have computers that are used for communication with
others, for writing, or for gathering information.
Children move from emergent literacy to conventional literacy.
Emergent literacy refers to reading-related behaviors and skills that pre-
cede formal reading and writing—which is conventional literacy. Typi-
cally this emergent level of literacy is seen in many children through ﬁrst
grade. Beginning reading and writing includes several phases and usually
occurs between the ages of ﬁve and eight.

Emergent readers and writers: pre-kindergarten through ﬁrst
grade

Early readers and early writers: ﬁrst through second grade

Early ﬂuent/ﬂuent readers and writers: second through third
grade.
The grade levels associated with each phase are only approximate.
Within each grade level there will likely be children in all phases. There
isn’t a clear distinction between skills learned during the preschool years
and those learned during school-age years. Development appears to be a
result of exposure to literacy, brain development, and maturation rather
than as a result of chronological age.
A review of the research (Lonigan, 2006) indicates that the three most
signiﬁcant emergent literacy skills are print knowledge, phonological
awareness, and complex oral language skills (see Figure 13–1). Ideally,
these skills are developing before the child enters the elementary school
system and continue to develop in the early grades. Print knowledge is
having knowledge about the alphabet, letter sounds, and concepts of
print. Concepts of print include knowing the difference between a
emergent literacy
reading-related behaviors and skills that
precede formal reading and writing
conventional literacy
formal reading and writing
print knowledge
knowledge about the alphabet, letter
sounds, and concepts of print
print
concepts of the difference between a
word, a syllable, and a letter,
recognizing that print moves from top
to bottom and left to right on a page,
and that there are forms of punctuation
to end a thought

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
297
word, a syllable, and a letter, recognizing that print moves from top to
bottom and left to right on a page, and that there are forms of punctuation
to end a thought. Phonological awareness is the ability to hear pho-
nemes, beginning, middle, and ending sounds in words, syllables, and
rhyming sounds. Phonemes are the smallest sounds of our speech
stream. Complex oral language, also known as language compre-
hension, refers to the child’s vocabulary as well as to his or her ability to
understand and use those words to convey thoughts.
The development of these three literacy skills is key to preparing the
child for conventional reading. Evidence suggests that the two primary
components necessary for successful reading are decoding and language
comprehension skills. (Torgesen, 2002) Decoding is sounding out words
by breaking them apart into their letter sounds. Understanding the
printed word(s) is reading comprehension. Successful reading requires
that readers be able to decode and have sufﬁcient oral language skills to
know the meaning of the words and the thoughts they convey.
Initially emergent skills are evident when children recognize familiar
logos and connect the logo with a store or restaurant name. If they have
had frequent opportunities to see their own name in print, they may say,
“There is an R like in my name!” These children are beginning to make
the connection between symbols and what they represent. Recall that not
all children enter elementary school with these emergent skills. A care-
giver working with these children can use scaffolding to help them devel-
op the emergent literacy skills of relating alphabet letters to sounds,
acquire more complex language skills, and develop phonemic awareness.
The development of children’s writing skills is correlated with their
understanding of reading and is dependent on their ﬁne-motor-skill
development. They must have the physical abilities to hold and control a
pencil. The precision of this skill comes with practice and time. Most
kindergarten children have adequate ﬁne-motor skills for writing; how-
ever their ﬁnger coordination and muscles are not developed sufﬁciently
for them to write perfectly. If children have been exposed to literacy
they imitate the writing of the older children and adults in their life. Ini-
tially they start with scribbles. Soon these emergent writers learn that the
Print knowledge
Phonological awareness
Decoding
Reading Comprehension 
Complex oral language
FIGURE 13–1 Development of literacy skills is key to preparing the child
for conventional reading
phonological awareness
the ability to hear phonemes, beginning,
middle, and ending sounds in words,
syllables, and rhyming sounds
phonemes
the smallest sounds of our speech
stream
complex oral language
the child’s vocabulary as well as his or
her ability to understand and use those
words to convey thoughts; also known
as language comprehension
language
comprehension
the child’s vocabulary as well as to his
or her ability to understand and use
those words to convey thoughts; also
known as complex oral language
decoding
sounding out words by breaking them
apart into their letter sounds
reading comprehension
Understanding the printed word(s)

SECTION FOUR
298
scribbles represent some form of communication and they engage in pre-
tend writing. This pretend writing varies from child to child as it may
include various letter forms, strings of letters, and a combination of zigzag
writing that follows the directionality of conventional writing. For exam-
ple, the conventional direction used when writing in English is from left to
right across the page and from the top of the page to the bottom of the
page. The next developmental writing step is for children to begin writing
words or letters that represent words. Often they write someone else’s
name or “Mom” or “Dad.” Children who have had sufﬁcient literacy expo-
sure during the preschool years are usually writing their ﬁrst name and
several other letters when they enter kindergarten. Children who enter
kindergarten without these emerging writing skills begin their formal
schooling developmentally behind their peers.
Children must understand that the purpose of writing is for commu-
nication in order for them to develop the motivation to write. Emergent
writers use pretend writing to represent their names or ideas and often
ask, “How do you spell ____?” These children have some alphabetic
knowledge. As they begin to understand that writing has meaning and is
for communication, they begin to communicate through invented
spelling. This is writing with some letter-sound relationships, but it
does not generally represent accurately spelled words. “Iwntuthprk”
could be a child’s writing of “I went to the park.” They have learned
that writing is speech written down. They may not have the idea that
there are spaces between words. By ﬁrst grade, children are using more
conventional writing and will still use invented spelling. It isn’t until the
Children begin writing with invented spelling.
invented spelling
writing with some letter-sound
relationships, but not generally
representing accurately spelled words

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
299
later grades when children are ﬂuent writers that they can reﬁne their
writing by proofreading, editing, and revising. In these early writing
stages, the process of writing is more important than the product—that
is, the end result. The goal is to motivate children to want to write and to
make their own decisions about what to write. The following example
demonstrates how Mark’s knowledge of the concepts of print were con-
nected to his motivation to write, making him feel successful.
THE LITERACY ENVIRONMENT
There are many ways that the school-age child care environment can sup-
port children’s literacy development. The intent is to expand children’s
experiences and extend their learning. For programs that are already
housed in their own space or center, this may only require some minor
adjustments and the intentional addition of designated centers for read-
ing and writing. For other programs, it will require more creative think-
ing. Programs that are outside because of a lack of classroom space, are in
a school cafeteria, or share space with a regular classroom typically have
very little storage space. (The storage space they have may be currently
dedicated to crafts, projects, games and outdoor equipment.) The chal-
lenge will be to decide how to integrate reading and writing activities
into the course of the day. As already described, some activities, such
as playing with sound, don’t necessarily require additional space; they
require awareness of literacy development, intentionality, and planning
on the part of the caregiver. Maybe there isn’t space to store a lot of
books, so consider how you could have a few books in a basket or small
container that can be rotated frequently with other books. The caregiver
can carefully evaluate the games that are used to determine if they include
a literacy component such as including items that need to be read. Per-
haps other games should be made available. Consider the craft materials.
Mark resisted writing. He just wasn’t interested. He could easily
write his name, and he knew the alphabet and many of the letter
sounds, yet he would put minimal effort into his homework assign-
ments. He said that he didn’t like writing. One day near the end of
October, Teacher Kevin brought a stack of advertisements for toys
from the newspaper to add to the writing center. Mark spent time that
day looking through the ads. The next day he came in, went straight
to the writing center, grabbed a piece of paper and announced, “I am
going to make my Christmas list.” He spent time every day for a
week writing his list. (Demonstrates: motivation, concepts of print)

SECTION FOUR
300
Think about how they can serve a dual purpose for writing activities. Writ-
ing implements, paper, staplers, and hole punches are versatile materials
that easily serve both purposes.
One of the subscales of the School-Age Care Environment Rating
Scale (Harm, Jacobs, & White,1996) is language/reading activities. (This
assessment tool is further discussed in Chapter 17.) For this subscale, the
authors of the SACERS recommend the following practices for quality
care of school-age children:

Ataminimumchildren shouldberead age-appropriatestories by a
ﬂuent reader or told stories on a weekly basis.

An environment that supports developmentally appropriate care
includes many books and age-appropriate language games.

Thestaffengagesinlanguagegameswithchildrenandchildrenare
encouraged to use reading and writing in practical situations.

In a high-quality setting, the child care staff takes the children to
the library to borrow books on a weekly basis.

Children are encouraged to bring books from home to share with
others.

The staff is involved in helping children write stories, poems, and
the class newspaper.
When school-age child care is housed in a center or dedicated
school-age child care classroom, it can more easily promote literacy
through centers that are speciﬁcally designed to promote and encourage
reading and writing. A reading center should have a variety of books
for various reading competency levels. There should be ﬁctional books
with engaging stories that have no violence. Informational books would
include books about speciﬁc subjects that appeal to boys and girls as well
as a picture dictionary, a typical elementary school dictionary, and a set
of encyclopedias.
Provide a cozy space for reading that is well lit, quiet, and away from
noisy activity areas. Set it up in a place that protects individuals from
intrusion by others. Place the writing center near the reading center. It
should include a variety of writing implements, adequate amounts of
Provide a reading space that
is well-lit, quiet, and away
from distractions.
Six-year-old Elizabeth approached me one day holding the P
encyclopedia, “Teacher Jennifer. I can’t ﬁnd Picasso. Would you ﬁnd
him and read it to me? (Demonstrates: alphabetic knowledge,
reading comprehension, motivation)

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
301
paper, and items for binding child-made books—such as a hole punch and
yarn, tape, blank homemade books, and a stapler. The alphabet chart can
be displayed somewhere close to the writing center.
The reading and writing centers often complement each other. A
child writing a book may decide to retrieve a book to see how the title
page is set up. A child reading about snakes may decide to make a snake-
shaped bookmark for his book or make his own book about his adventure
of seeing a snake in his backyard.
The environment should also be rich with functional print—print that
encourages both reading and writing. Functional print is print that has
a purpose. Labeling the various items around the classroom—such as
door, clock, and table—has no purpose. On the other hand, a sign that
says, “Needed: 4 children to help prepare snack. Sign up here” has a pur-
pose. Have individual mailboxes in the room to encourage children to
communicate with one another in writing. Provide clipboards with paper
and pencils in the other areas such as blocks and dramatic play. You never
know when children will want to make a list or write a note.
ROLE OF THE CAREGIVER IN
LITERACY ACTIVITIES
It is important for school-age caregivers to recognize that their role is not
to be the reading and writing teacher but rather to support each child in
developing mastery in his or her level of literacy developmental through
developmentally appropriate practices in a quality setting. The discussion
thus far is merely an introduction to the intricacies of the process of how
children learn to read and write and provides caregivers with some basic
knowledge of some of the factors that inﬂuence this process.
It is imperative that caregivers themselves have sufﬁcient reading and
writing skills in English. Caregivers cannot model, guide, and support
children in the development of skills that they do not themselves possess.
Five-year-old Ethan, a kindergartner, approached me one
day. “Teacher Jennifer, how do you make an H?” My response was,
“Ethan, can you think of a place in our room where we could ﬁnd the
letters of the alphabet?” He looked around the room, spotting the
chart on the wall. As he approached it he sang, “A, B, C, D, E, F, G,
H.” and pointed to the letters as he sang each one. When he reached
the H, he shouted with delight, “H! H! H! There is the H!” (alphabet
knowledge)
functional print
print that has a purpose

SECTION FOUR
302
Caregivers have daily opportunities to provide meaningful experiences
with reading and writing. They should be intentional about guiding chil-
dren in literacy skill development. As a rule of thumb, children should
have daily opportunities to

have reading modeled for them.

have writing modeled for them.

explore literature or read something of personal interest.

express themselves through writing.
When caregivers plan with intentionality, they know what they are
doing, why they are doing it, and can articulate the purpose to other care-
givers, administrators, and most importantly to parents.
Caregivers should enthusiastically model reading. They should daily
model reading for pleasure, information, and communication. Values are
caught not taught. If you want children to value reading, you should
model valuing it. Read books for information and have them available
for children. You will be surprised at the number of children who seek
out books about things such as spiders, termites, volcanoes, or dinosaurs.
Other children are drawn to books about famous people like Benjamin
Franklin, Abraham Lincoln, or Picasso. Your local librarian can be very
helpful in ﬁnding great read-a-loud books that are meaningful and engag-
ing. The Professional Enhancement supplied with this textbook has an
extensive chapter on books for children. The Read-aloud-Handbook, by
Jim Trelease (2006) provides a current and comprehensive list of books
for a variety of ages as well as reading strategies and techniques to consid-
er. If your program is closely tied to the local elementary program, you
can learn about and perhaps borrow books that relate to what the children
are doing in school.
In addition to picture books, caregivers should carefully select engag-
ing chapter books to read to children. This form of reading takes several
sittings and requires children to remember what has previously been
read. Chapter books expose children to a broader vocabulary and a rich
sentence structure, and they may be written at a reading level that is more
advanced than the reading level of the child. They do not have pictures in
them so the children are challenged to listen attentively and to create
mental pictures about the story and the characters. Select books that are
not familiar to children or books that follow the story line of television
programs or movies. Unfamiliar books will help maximize children’s
imagination and interest level. In addition to the literary beneﬁts, reading
chapter books to children creates predictability in your program, some-
thing for children to look forward to. In a before- and after-school pro-
gram, reading to children is a great technique to settle children down in
the morning before sending them off to class.

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
303
Reading to children is an opportunity to build complex language
skills. Research has identiﬁed dialogic reading as the most effective
method of reading to children so they can increase their complex oral lan-
guage skills (Lonigan, 2007). Dialogic reading ﬁrst teaches children the
vocabulary of the book and then expands on the story itself. Ideally, you
will read to a small group of children, no more than eight, and all children
should sit so everyone can see the book at the same time. Each child
needs to be able to talk during the reading session in order to practice
language skills. Start by looking at the cover of the book. Ask, “What do
you think this story is about?” Give children time to study the cover and
respond. This strategy, known as the ﬁve-second wait time, is useful
whenever you ask children a question. They need time to process the
question and to formulate their response. You could do a “book walk” by
thumbing through some of the pages and talking about the pictures. It is
important to point out to children that the pictures give us ideas about the
story but it is the words that actually tell us the story. The ﬁrst time you
read a story, you don’t want any signiﬁcant interruption while you read so
you should do most of the talking yourself. Point out the names of things
children may not know and brieﬂy deﬁne new vocabulary. A child may ask
what a word means and it is important to answer that kind of question to
help the child understand the story. Take time for follow-up questions
that encourage children’s recall of the story, engage their memories, and
encourage them to talk with complex language. “What happened to the
Reading to children is an opportunity to build complex language skills.
dialogic reading
ﬁrst teaches children the vocabulary of
the book and then expands on the story
itself

SECTION FOUR
304
boy in this story?” “Wh” questions (What? Why? When? Where?) engage
children’s thinking and encourage them to give more than a simple “yes”
or “no” response. Respond to children’s answers in a way that encourages
further conversation. This dialogue, as a part of the reading process, helps
children understand concepts of print, increase their vocabulary, and
increase their complex oral language skills.
Caregivers should model writing everyday so children can see it as an
important means of communication. Children need to witness a purpose
to writing and see the conventional forms of writing letters, words, sen-
tence structure, and punctuation. They should be involved in purposeful
writing themselves. Initially, it might be putting their name on their
paper. This helps to establish ownership of the paper. You will ﬁnd that
many children come to school knowing how to write their names. In time
children will want to communicate by writing notes to their friends or
letters to their parents. Caregivers scaffold this by actually writing as the
child dictates a message or perhaps helping the child sound out words to
write the message herself. The child or the caregiver can read it back to
the child and the child can make the correlation between writing and
reading. In time the child writes messages independently. At the kinder-
garten level, a child might write a sign that says, “Dont nok dwn blks.” This
invented spelling means, “Don’t knock down my blocks.” Connect read-
ing and writing whenever possible by empowering children to make lists,
notes, etc. More early and ﬂuent writers may come to you wanting to read
what they have written. Take time to listen and encourage them. This is
not a time to correct children’s writing and insist on perfection. Remem-
ber, you are also building on self-esteem and empowering children to see
themselves as writers.
Caregivers should keep in mind that the goal is to motivate and
encourage children to engage in purposeful writing. They should be
aware of the various developmental stages of writing, how to identify
each child’s developmental level, and how to help the child develop mas-
tery at that level. Adults should also scaffold learning for the child who is
emerging to a new skill level. Do not insist that children practice writing.
The drill of practicing letter formation or accurate spelling in an attempt
to develop skills will surely kill the child’s intrinsic motivation. Avoid drill,
skill, and kill.
Reading and writing can be incorporated into many aspects of your
day with children and in a variety of settings. It is necessary for the care-
giver to develop an awareness of the opportunities for infusing literacy so
as to be more intentional. Consider the following examples of empower-
ing children and providing meaningful literacy experiences:

You are getting ready to put a CD in the CD player and you
are looking for a certain song. Give the CD to a child and ask

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
305
for help in locating the song on the album. The child with emerg-
ing skills may use the ﬁrst letter sound to locate the song.
(alphabetic knowledge, phonemic awareness. decoding, reading
comprehension)

You are planning snack for next week and need to make a grocery
list. Encourage a group of children to be the snack team to work
with you to create the snack schedule. You can provide them with a
list of acceptable snacks. Older children can be given nutritious
guidelines to follow when planning. Children can write the shop-
ping list and write the snack schedule for the week. (vocabulary,
decoding, writing)

Your class is forming teams for a volleyball game. The youngest
of the children can help make team lists by sorting preprinted
names into piles to represent the teams. (decoding, alphabetic
knowledge)

Your class needs additional art supplies and you must place an
order. Dictate your supply order to a group of children. Be pre-
pared to help scaffold the spelling of some of the words. (vocabu-
lary, decoding, phonemic awareness, writing)

Your class has developed a new class rule about name-calling.
This calls for a new sign in the room. Develop a rotating “sign-
maker” job in the classroom. As the caregiver you will provide
the appropriate amount of support to encourage the child to
write the sign as independently as possible and to be successful.
(vocabulary, reading comprehension, decoding, phonemic aware-
ness, writing)

Youare awarethat thecustodian whocleans your child-care center
consistently does a wonderful job caring for your center. Create a
“Thank You” book from you and the children to the custodian. You
and each child should include a personal “thank you” note in the
book. (vocabulary, phonemic awareness, decoding, reading com-
prehension, writing).
The caregiver sets the stage for children to gain background
knowledge. This is knowledge that is learned through experiences,
reading, movies, and television. Think of this as placing hooks in the
child’s brain so that when the child later reads about this topic, he has a
hook to hang the new knowledge on. He can connect with the reading.
The larger the child’s experience base (background knowledge), the more
mental hooks the child has to help him understand what he reads. Con-
sider the child who has helped plant and harvest a garden. She learns
about root vegetables by planting radishes and onions and vegetables
that grow on bushlike plants such as beans and tomatoes. Later when
the child hears the story Tops and Bottoms by Janet Stevens, she has an
Caregivers should motivate
children to engage in pur-
poseful writing.
background knowledge
knowledge that is learned through
experiences, reading, movies, and
television

SECTION FOUR
306
experience that she can draw upon so she can relate to the story. Reading
comprehension is much easier if you have some knowledge of the subject
you are reading about. Caregivers have more ﬂexibility in the curriculum
they provide for children than do elementary school teachers. They can
listen to and expand upon the interests of children. The curriculum chap-
ters in this textbook are ﬁlled with ideas to help children build background
knowledge about the world they live in.
Caregivers must be intentional about guiding children in the develop-
ment of complex language skills. Developmentally appropriate practices
indicate that caregivers should create small groups of children to work
together on common activities that provide the basis for communication
and interaction (Bredekamp & Copple, 1997). Forming small groups is
one strategy for promoting complex language skills. Children’s abilities
to reason, understand other people’s ideas, and consider several aspects
of a situation are strengthened by these conservational opportunities. One
of your key roles as a caregiver is to facilitate discussion among children by
making comments and soliciting children’s opinions and ideas (Brede-
kamp & Copple, 1997).
The caregiver must develop a conversation style that encourages chil-
dren to develop their complex language skills. Try these discussion start-
ers with children (and remember the ﬁve-second rule: wait ﬁve seconds
for children to think about your question and respond.):

What’s happening?

How can you ﬁnd out . . . ?

What would happen if . . . ?

What do you think the problem is?

Tell me how you did that.

How would you feel if . . . ?
One of the children at group time said, “Eskimos live in Igloos.” My
immediate response was, “Yes, they do.” Fortunately, Teacher
Michele quickly thought about it and realized that this was her ster-
eotype and she actually had limited knowledge of Eskimos. She told
the children she would bring her E and I encyclopedias the next day.
The children were then able to learn about Eskimos and Igloos.
Teacher Michele realized that as a caregiver, she didn’t have to know
all the knowledge but rather she had to know how to ﬁnd the infor-
mation and how to guide the children into ﬁnding answers to their
questions in books. (motivation, reading comprehension)

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
307

What do you notice about . . . ?

What else can you use?

Can you think of another way?

What do you need to do next?
Caregivers should help children develop and enhance their phonemic
awareness by playing with sound themselves and encouraging children to
play with sound. Children love to make up silly words and languages that
they think adults don’t understand. You might remember some of these
games from your own childhood. Share them with the children you work
with. Activities like tongue twisters, rhyming games, and “knock, knock
who’s there” jokes cause children to focus on sounds. Encourage children
to play with sound through the songs, raps, chants, and bebop.
Activities
Activities that give children the opportunity to learn more about literacy
and to practice their skills should always be enjoyable to children. This
requires the caregiver to be intentional about activity planning with liter-
acy in mind, to provide activities that increase children’s motivation to
read and write, and to provide activities that give reading and writing a
purposeful function within the school-age program. The following activity
ideas can be implemented in varying degrees depending on the level of
ﬂuency of the children in your care. Some children will be able to do these
tasks independently while others will only be able to do part of the activity
and will need your help through scaffolding. Provide a variety of activity
options so children can engage in the things that are of most interest to
them.
Reading for a Purpose
Purposes:

increase understanding of reading as an important life skill

develop motivation to read

practice decoding and reading comprehension skills
As you set up activities, think of how you can provide written instruc-
tions for children to read. Fluent readers can help less skilled readers.
How to garden.
Your science activity involves children planting seeds
and bulbs. Write the step-by-step instructions on a large piece of paper
and post them on a wall or easel next to the science table. Early readers
will need you to read the directions prior to planting. Fluent readers can
be encouraged to read the instructions themselves.
Provide written instructions
for children to read.

SECTION FOUR
308
Cooking from a recipe.
You are planning a cooking activity in which
children are making bean burritos. Create step-by-step recipe cards to
place on the table. Each step requires the child to read and complete a
speciﬁc task. Each step can include a picture of the task.
Step 1: Wash hands
Step 2: Take a paper plate and put your name on it
Step 3: Put one tortilla on your plate and put one large spoonful of
beans on the tortilla
Step 4: Sprinkle cheese on top of the beans
Step 5: Fold the tortilla over the beans and cheese
Bring the bottom up ﬁrst, then fold in each side, then fold down
the top.
Step 6: Place plate in microwave and heat for 1 ½ minutes.
Step 7: Eat your burrito
Washing hands routine.
You have noticed that the children aren’t fol-
lowing the steps for proper hand washing and you frequently have to give
them verbal reminders. Take photographs of a child in the various steps of
hand washing. Mount the pictures on a long strip of paper or posterboard.
Invite the children to help write the captions for each photograph and
hang the instructions near the sink. You will ﬁnd that children will refer
to the pictures and read the words to themselves and to each other.
You’ve got mail!
Write notes to the children and put them in a place
that you have designated for mail. This might be cardboard boxes with
compartments that sit on a counter, individual cubbies, or perhaps a hang-
ing shoe bag. Each child should have a place with his or her name on it to
receive mail. These notes can be brief. “We missed you yesterday when
you were sick.” “I see that you have been working hard at jumping rope!”
“Thank you for your ideas for next week’s cooking project.” Children can
also be encouraged to write notes to each other.
Extra! Extra! Read all about it!
The older, more ﬂuent writers in
your care may want to form a writers club. Encourage them to write a
weekly newsletter announcing to children the events of the week. It
could include a calendar, short articles of activities going on in the child
care center, and any announcements you want to make. Post a new activ-
ity schedule and snack schedule in the room for children to read.
Writing for a Purpose
Purposes:

practice writing skills of concepts of print

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
309

increase awareness of the purposes of writing

develop motivation to write
Sign up list.
Children frequently want a turn to do such things as work
on the computers, do an art activity, or play handball. Provide a white-
board, clipboard, or some other regular place for children to sign up for
a turn. Younger children can write their ﬁrst name. As children become
more skilled you can alter this writing task by encouraging them to write
ﬁrst and last names, include their middle name, or write just initials. For
fun, children can create nicknames. This will give them an opportunity to
ﬁgure out how to spell a different name.
Write those feelings.
Every day presents itself with opportunities for
children to express strong feelings. Children can be encouraged to tell
their story to a caregiver. The caregiver can write the dictation and read
it back to the child. Often just stating what has happened and having it be
acknowledged helps a child feel like they have been heard. Some children
may want to write their story themselves.
Say it with a sign.
The environment is ﬁlled with many types of signs.
There are signs that give directions, others that advertise products, and
signs that tell us the names of businesses. Have a discussion with the chil-
dren about the purpose of signs and how they help communicate informa-
tion. Provide materials on an ongoing basis for children to make signs of
Children should be encouraged to express strong feelings.

SECTION FOUR
310
their own. As children come to you with thoughts they want to convey to
others, lead them into making a sign.
It is special! Remember it with words!
Children do many things that
you as a caregiver think are special. These are times when you can validate
children by encouraging them to document their ideas and work. Help
children document things they do by writing down their thoughts, inven-
tions and creations.
Play Production.
Help the children in your program plan and present
a play. This can be as simple as role-playing a few ﬁnger plays, acting out
a favorite story, or actually scripting a play. Children’s authors such as
Jan Brett have Web sites that provide supplemental materials you can
download and print. For example, the Web site provides masks you can
print and use to play the characters in The Mitten (Brett, 1987). You
Elizabeth was sad that her big brother was going away to college
and that she wouldn’t see him for four months. Caregiver Kevin
asked her if she would like to write a letter to her brother. She
seemed excited about the idea and told Kevin that she didn’t know
how to write all those words. Kevin gave her a choice of writing the
letter with his help or telling him the words to write. Elizabeth chose to
tell him the words. Kevin wrote Elizabeth’s thoughts exactly as she
said them. When she was ﬁnished, Kevin read it to her. Elizabeth then
took the paper and said, “Now, I am going to write my letter myself!”
She sat down and copied the letter. When she was ﬁnished, she
asked Kevin to read it to her again. Then she put it an envelope,
sealed it and put it in her backpack to take home.
Yesterday Josh, Kevin, and Joe spent much of their time looking
at a large book about the Titanic. Often they asked their caregiver
Parisa to read parts of it to them. Today, they spent the majority of
their day in the block area. After ﬁnishing their structure, they excitedly
approached Parisa, “We don’t want our Titanic knocked down!”
Parisa suggested, “You could make a sign so other people will know
about your ship and how you want it treated.” Josh grabbed a piece
of paper saying, “‘Don’t knock down this Titanic.’ Parisa, How do you
spell ‘Don’t’?” Parisa scaffolded the making of the sign with the boys
and it was carefully placed on the block structure with a piece of
masking tape. Parisa took a picture of the boys with their Titanic to
put into the class book of block structures.
Play production is an exam-
ple of writing with a purpose.

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
311
can guide children in writing scripts or cue cards, creating advertisements,
and developing a program for their production. Encourage them to inter-
view the main characters and write an article for your center’s newsletter.
Write and send home announcements to parents and invite them to
attend the production of the play.
Personal Writing
Purposes:

practice writing skills for the purpose of preserving personal ideas

increase phonemic awareness in writing

encourage application of print knowledge to personal writing

engage in reﬂective thinking
Calendar journaling.
This activity encourages children to reﬂect on
their day and write about events that are important to them. Provide chil-
dren with a calendar for a week or a month. Establish a routine for
children to think about their favorite part of the day or week, something
they want to remember. Encourage each child to write it on his calendar.
Give children materials to create a cover for their personal calendars and a
place for them to be stored. Model this activity for the children. Brain-
storm with the children the events of the day or the week. Write on the
whiteboard or on a large piece of paper. You may need to model this by
thinking out loud about the joys of your day and what you would want to
remember. Model writing on your own calendar. Be aware that some chil-
dren will want to copy what you have written. They may believe that what
you think is important to you should be important to them. If this should
happen, you will want to empower children to write what is important to
them.
Play plans.
Children often come to their child care setting with ideas
about the things they want to do. Some children need help getting settled
Caregiver Raul overheard Chris singing to himself as he was
building with blocks. “Chris, it sounds like you have a new song.” “I
made it on the piano,” Chris replied. Raul encouraged him to sing it
again. Chris sang, “Kick, kick kick. Kick, kick, kick the ball. Kick, kick,
kick the ball. Kick, kick, kick, the ball very fast.” “Would you like to
write that down?” asked Raul. “I can’t write it. I’m just in kindergarten. I
can only play it on the piano. Raul continued to tell Chris about
composers and wrote Chris’s song on paper as Chris sang it again.
Chris watched as Raul wrote. “I want to make a song book!”

SECTION FOUR
312
and making play decisions. Writing play plans is a strategy that guides
children to think about their goals as well as a way to help them with
their literacy skills. This is also an opportunity for you to let children
know that their ideas are important. As an added bonus, play plans serve
as documentation of children’s progress and as a tool to help you stay
tuned into children’s interests. You can plan more meaningful and enjoy-
able activities for children when you know about their interests and
capabilities.
When children arrive, give them a half sheet of paper. If your pro-
gram is small and you have enough adult help you can have children
write daily play plans or you may have children write them only once or
twice a week. Children are to draw a picture on the top half of the paper to
illustrate what they want to do in child care. The bottom of the page is the
space to write a sentence about what they want to do. Kindergarten chil-
dren who are not yet writing can draw lines to symbolize each word. They
simply draw a horizontal line for each word across the page. For example,
“I want to play with blocks” would be symbolized by a line for the word
“I,” another line for the word “want,” and so forth. You will have to model
this technique. You may have to draw the lines while the child dictates his
thoughts. Next, write the child’s words on the lines. As the children gain
more alphabetic knowledge, they will begin writing the ﬁrst sounds of
some of the words, use invented spelling, and write familiar words such
as “the” or “play.” More skilled writers will be able to write independently
and should be encouraged to talk to you about their play plan. Let each
child date their work with a date stamp. Be sure to ﬁnd time during the
day to talk with children about their plans and their progress. Your desire
to hear children’s ideas is validating and gives them a sense of self-worth.
Help children organize their play plans in an individual notebook or
folder.
Diary journaling.
Introduce children to the concept of journaling as
part of one’s profession or for a personal purpose. Have a discussion about
people who must write journals to document their work. Scientists keep
track of various aspects of their experiments. Pilots keep ﬂight logs. Doc-
tors make notes about their patients. Children may have knowledge of
journaling that their parents do. You might tell them about keeping a
diary of your own when you were their age. Do you journal now as an
adult? If so, what are the ideas you choose to write about? Is it to remem-
ber the events of the day or for writing down your feelings? Perhaps you
like to write poems or stories. Share your writing passion with children.
Help them generate thoughts about their own interests and what they
might want to write about. Older children can do this independently.
Younger or less skilled writers can use the play plan strategy as previously
described or can dictate their words to you while you do the actual writing.

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
313
Keep in mind that this should be one of several activities that children can
choose from. You will have some children who simply are not interested in
this activity.
Enhanced Dramatic Play
Purposes:

enhance awareness of reading and writing in daily lives

provide opportunities to role play meaningful reading and writing
Dramatic play easily can be augmented to include reading and writ-
ing. School-age children enjoy pretending to be adults in various occupa-
tions. Consider how you can add reading- and writing-related materials to
dramatic play areas. Whenever possible, involve the children in making
the literacy-related play props.
Doctor’s Ofﬁce.
Provide manila folders, clipboards, and paper for
children to write prescriptions and notes about a patient’s condition. Post-
ers can be hung on the wall and the environment can include health-
related pamphlets. Include an area for a pretend waiting room that has
books and magazines.
Restaurant.
Provide menus for patrons to use when ordering their
food. Many take-out restaurants have paper menus they will give to you.
You can easily make your own menus by cutting pictures out of the
newspaper ads, mounting them on paper, and adding captions. Include
language that encourages the development of new vocabulary such as
“entre´es.” Waiters and waitresses will need order pads, cooks will have
to read the orders. Patrons will need their bill so they can pay for their
food.
Pet store.
Literacy items in a pet store would include a variety of signs,
books about pets, packages of pet food, and other pet-related items. The
store could have a sign (made by the children of course) that stated the
stores’ hours of operation. Include pretend order forms on clip boards.
Post advertisements from newspapers of local pet stores.
Six-year-old Allison discovered the joy of writing. Every day
after school she would go to a desk in the corner of the room and
write. She would say, “When I get big, I am going to be a writer!” Alli-
son was also interested in science and said she wanted to be a
scientist and then she struggled with her dilemma of also wanting to
be a writer. One day Allison came bouncing into the room, “Teacher
Jennifer! I got it. I am going to write about science!”

SECTION FOUR
314
Ofﬁce.
Old computer keyboards, telephones, telephone books, paper,
envelopes, and pencils are key literacy-related items for a pretend ofﬁce.
Play with sound
Purposes:

enhance children’s phonemic awareness

empower children to play with language
Silly songs.
One way to present sounds to children is through songs.
Many familiar tunes can be used to create songs that allow children to
play with sounds.
Example 1: To the tune “The farmer in the Dell.” Use a child’s names, the
ﬁrst letter of the name and the sound the letters makes to create this song.
Sammy starts with S
Sammy starts with S
Si, so, si, serio
Sammy starts with S.
Barbara starts with B
Barbara starts with B
Bi, bo, bi berio
Barbara starts with B.
Example 2: To the tune “B-I-N-G-O.” Use the children’s names to focus
on syllables. Clap the syllables as you sing. In this example you would clap
once for “Char” and once for “vin.”
There was a class that had a friend
And Charvin was his name-o
Char-vin
Char-vin
And Charvin was his name-o.
Example 3: To the tune “The More We Get Together.” Choose any letter
for this song and use the names of the children in your program or other
words that start with that sound. Produce the sound of the letter when you
see it underlined in the song. When making the sound of the letter sound
be sure that you don’t inadvertently add an extra vowel sound to it, such
as “da.”
Did you ever hear a “d” sound, a “d” sound, a “d” sound.
Did you ever hear a “d” sound go “d. d. d. d, d”
There’s “d” as in David, and “d” as in Daniel
There’s “d” as in Mallard and “d” as in Merced.
Did you ever hear a “d” sound go “d, d, d, d”?

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
315
Play languages.
Some of you may remember speaking pig latin when
you were elementary school age. You take the ﬁrst letter of every word
and place it at the end of the word with a long “a” vowel sound. Yes,
would be es-ya. Tomorrow would be omorrow-ta. “Esya, omorrowta,
ewa oga ota etha arkpa” is “Yes, tomorrow we go to the park.”
Egg Language is an even more challenging way of speaking. Insert
the word “egg” before every vowel in the words. Yes, would be “Yeggs,
Teggomeggoreggow wegge geggo teggo thegge peggark.”
While play languages are fun, keep in mind that they may be defeating
for your English language learners. They are already struggling to learn
the meaning and pronunciation of words in English. They do not have the
ability to distinguish between a play word such as “yeggs” or “esya” and the
actual word “yes.” Learning English is difﬁcult enough without you mak-
ing it more difﬁcult by introducing nonsense words.
Bookmaking
Purposes:

enhance motivation to read and write

provides creative expression of writing

increase application of print knowledge
Recipe book.
Develop recipe books made from the recipes the chil-
dren use in their cooking projects.
Block structures.
Take photographs of children’s block structures and
their architects (the children who built the structure). Invite the children
to write a brief description and story about their structure. Collect these in
a class book.
Bookmaking enhances motivation to read and write.

SECTION FOUR
316
A book of my own.
Provide materials for children to make their own
books. Once they begin to understand the parts of books, children often
enjoy becoming authors and writing about their own ideas. Staples, tape,
or yarn can be used for binding the pages of the book together.
Predictable class books.
There are many predictable books that help
children to read. A predictable book is one that has text that repeats itself.
Children in your care can write a predictable book. Each child is given a
paper with a written phrase such as “I played on the playground and I
played with ___.” The child is asked to ﬁll in the blank with an idea. She
can illustrate her page with a picture. An alternative would be to take pic-
tures of the children as they play and use them as the illustrations for the
book. Put the pages in a notebook in plastic sleeves for protection. Read
the book to the class and then keep it in your library. It is a book the chil-
dren will read again and again.
Equipment to Have Available

dramatic play props such as writing pads, clipboards, magazines,
posters, pamphlets

paper, markers, and clipboards in all centers of the classroom

wipe-off white boards with dry-erase markers

chalkboards and chalk

writing materials outside for score keeping or note taking

overhead projector, blank transparencies, and transparency
markers

tape recorder and blank cassette tapes for recording children’s
songs and stories

large variety of books including both ﬁction and nonﬁction

CD Player and music that encourages playing with sound

materials for binding books such as yarn, hole punches, tape
GUIDELINES FOR CHILD CARE
STAFF MEMBERS
Keep in mind that the more children understand the purposes for reading
and writing, the greater their motivation and the more likely they will be
to want to be readers and writers. The more they read, the better readers
they will be come. Your role is not to be the teacher of reading and writing
but to enhance and support the work that children do. You will scaffold
learning when appropriate and provide purposeful activities. You are the
role model for the children as you model your own love of reading and

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
317
writing. There are a several key guidelines for caregivers of school-age
children to keep in mind as they are enhancing children’s development
of their literacy skills.

Be intentional. As you plan each part of your program, think about
how you can intentionally add literacy. Planning with literacy in
mind will ensure that you integrate print knowledge, phonemic
awareness, oral language skills, and writing into your daily
curriculum.

Plan enriching activities that will increase children’s knowledge of
their world and build background knowledge.

Listen to and talk with children to increase their complex language
skills.

Model reading and writing.

Create meaningful, purposeful opportunities for children to prac-
tice their reading and writing skills.

Read to all children of all ages.

Use dialogic reading techniques when you read.

Be sure that children have opportunities to read every day.

Rotate the books in the library so there are new and interesting
books for children to read and explore.

Design a cozy, inviting reading area that is prominent in the room.

Create scenarios for children to write something every day.

Show interest in things children write and read.

Provide adequate space, materials, and daily time for reading and
writing.

Provide children with a variety of activity choices.
SUMMARY
Children enter their school years with a wide range of emerging literacy
skills and experiences. Research shows that 37% of fourth grade children
are performing below the basic reading level. School-age child care is a
place for children to be supported in their development of reading and
writing through developmentally appropriate activities. Caregivers do
not replace classroom teachers as reading and writing teachers but they
do have opportunities to help children practice their print knowledge,
phonological awareness, and complex oral language skills. These are skills
that children need to be successful readers.
Caregivers create an environment that motivates children and sup-
ports purposeful reading and writing. Time, space, and adequate materi-
als are made available for children to practice these skills. Caregivers are
intentional about literacy components in how they design the environ-
ment, the activities they plan and implement, and the support they

SECTION FOUR
318
provide to children. Print in the classroom is functional print and serves
the purpose of communicating information. Literacy skills are presented
within the context of other curriculum areas and in daily routines.
Caregivers model reading and writing every day so children can come
to understand that these are important life skills. Children are given daily
opportunities to engage in reading and writing activities that are mean-
ingful and serve a purpose. Children are read to frequently in small
groups so they can ask questions and discuss what has been read.
Caregivers plan activities than help children develop background
knowledge and complex language skills. They are skilled at asking open-
ended questions that encourage children to think and give a complex
response. This is all done within the context of rich activities that provide
children opportunities to learn about their world around them.
KEY TERMS
background knowledge
complex oral language
conventional literacy
decoding
dialogic reading
emergent literacy
emerging literacy skills
functional print
invented spelling
language comprehension
literacy
phonemes
phonological awareness
print
print knowledge
reading comprehension
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Plan and implement one literacy writing activity with a group of
school-age children. Record your observations of the children.
Evaluate your observations of at least two of the children and deter-
mine the child’s developmental level of writing.
2. Create a ﬁle of songs and chants appropriate for school-age children
that encourage children’s phonemic awareness.
3. Write a letter to parents explaining how you are supporting children’s
literacy development in your child care program.
4. Planandimplementastorytimewithagroupoffourtoeightchildren.
Decide how you will read the story, what new vocabulary you will
discuss,andthefollow-upquestionsyouwillasktoencouragecomplex
language skills. Write a report of your experience and share it with
the class.
5. Engage in a conversation with children using at least one of the dis-
cussion starters presented in this chapter. Remember to use the
ﬁve-second waittime rule. Analyze your experience and determine its
effectiveness and share it with the class.

CHAPTER 13
HELPING CHILDREN DEVELOP LITERACY COMPETENCY
319
6. Plan and implement one activity that will help children build back-
groundknowledge.Identifythekeyconceptsthatyouexpectchildren
willbeexposedtoandhowyouwillpresenttheminadevelopmentally
appropriate way.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Deﬁneemergentliteracyskills.Whyaretheyimportanttothereading
success of children?
2. Describe the role of the school-age caregiver in supporting children’s
literacy development.
3. Identify at least ten literacy-related materials that could be in a child
care program.
4. Explain why the process of writing is more important that writing
letters perfectly with accurate spelling.
5. What are ﬁve phrases that can be used as discussion starters?
6. Why are complex language skills important to the development of
reading and writing skills?
7. Giveatleastthreeexamplesofhowcaregiverscanmodelwritingdaily.
8. Explain dialogic reading.
9. Give at least three examples of how literacy can be incorporated in a
child care program that is in a cafeteria after school.
CASE STUDY
Ethan is a kindergartner with little knowledge of print. He has just started
writing his name and the only other word he knows how to write is Mom.
He loves dinosaurs and is very interested in the science activities you have
been presenting in class. Cassandra, a ﬁrst-grade child, is already reading
chapter books. She carries a book with her wherever she goes. She is often
very quiet and chooses quiet activities such as art and the computers. Jua-
nita is in second grade and you are aware that she is in the lowest reading
group in her class. She struggles with decoding words and has already told
you that she hates to look at books. She particularly enjoys spending time
outside with her friends jumping rope or playing handball.
1. How would you plan activities that support each of these three
children’s reading abilities?
2. What writing activities could you plan that would be motivating and
meaningful for each of these children?

SECTION FOUR
320
3. Whatisanactivitythatyoucouldplanthatmightbeinterestingtothese
three children and give them background knowledge?
REFERENCES
Bredekamp, S., & Copple, C. (1997). Developmentally appropriate prac-
ticeinearlychildhoodprograms.(Rev.ed.)Washington,DC:National
Association for the Education of Young Children.
Brett, J. (1987). The Mitten. New York: G. P. Putnam Sons.
Harms, T., Jacobs, E. V., & White, D. R. (1996). School-age care environ-
ment rating scale. New York: Teachers College.
Lonigan, C. J. (2006). Development, assessment, and promotion of preli-
teracy skills. Early Education and Development, 17(1), 91–114.
Lonigan, C. J. (2007). Development and promotions of early language
and literacy skills in young children. Research Series Presentation
at California Preschool Instructional Network, January 25, 2007,
Sacramento, CA.
NAEYC & IRA. (1998). Learning to read and write: Developmentally
appropriate practices for young children. Young Children, 53(4),
30–46.
Snow, C. E., Burns, M. S., & Grifﬁn, P. (Eds.). (1998). Preventing reading
difﬁculties in young children. Washington, DC: National Academy
Press.
Stevens, J. (1995). Tops and bottoms. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Torgesen, J. K. (2002). The prevention of reading disabilities. Journal of
School Psychology, 40, 7–26.
Trelease, J. (2006). The Read-aloud handbook. 6th ed. New York, NY:
Penguin
U.S. Department of Education. Institute of Education Sciences. National
Center for Education Statistics. The Nation’s Report Card: Reading
Highlights 2003, NCES 2004-452, by P. L. Donahue, M. C. Daane,
and W. S. Grigg. Washington, DC: 2003.
WEB RESOURCES
[http://www.janbrett.com]
Children’s author Jan Brett shares many downloadable materials to
accompany her books.
[http://www.dancrow.com]
Music resource for songs that play with sound from Dan Crow, former
speech therapist, turned children’s musician.

Planning for the Future
321
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Explain the importance of preparing children for future adult roles.
List skills future workers will need.
Plan and implement experiences that help children explore a variety
of jobs and workplaces.
IMPORTANCE OF PREPARING
CHILDREN FOR THE FUTURE
t
here is a revolution taking place in the workplace, says Tofﬂer
(1990) in his book Powershift: Knowledge, Wealth, and Violence
on the Edge of the 21st Century. Most people accept Tofﬂer’s
premise that tomorrow’s workers will have to master new techniques in
order to manage complex technology. In addition, Tofﬂer says the whole
character of the workplace will have to change in order to take advantage
of the new tools. Workers will be expected to take a more active role in
decision making. They will need to resolve problems and challenge
preconceived assumptions. He predicted there would be few places for
uneducated people or those without the required characteristics and
skills.
High school or college is too late to begin preparing young people for
their future employment. It is a process that begins in early childhood and
continues throughout the school years. While it is impossible to know
what kinds of jobs will be developed in the future, we do know, however,
that many future career opportunities will involve literate, educated work-
ers. In order to help children be prepared, children must be encouraged
to be motivated learners who retain and use what they have studied.
CHAPTER1414
OBJECTIVES

SECTION FOUR
322
They must have meaning-based experiences that emphasize thinking,
cooperative problem solving, decision making, and an opportunity to
challenge preconceived ideas. Many of the activities throughout this
book stress just those skills.
In addition to acquiring skills for the future, children should have an
opportunity to experience the real world of work. At each stage of devel-
opment, children differ in their ability to think about the future and their
own role as adults. As they grow and have more experience, their ideas
change. Tai, whose drawing is shown in Figure 14–1, wants to be a baby-
sitter. At age seven, being grown up may mean being a teenager who
can take care of younger children as her sister does. Ten-year-old Eliza-
beth, whose drawing appears in Figure 14–2, already knows she is going
to be a zoologist. She has developed an engrossing interest in animals and
has a large collection of pets. She may very well continue this focus, but
she could also branch out into other areas as she learns more about the
adult world.
The school-age period is a good time to introduce children to adult
jobs and workplaces. Although you may not have the equipment or
resources to introduce children to advanced technology, you can help
them experience a variety of jobs. Start with their interests. Listen to
their conversations, watch their play, and observe what they draw. Imple-
ment their ideas through the use of theme units or special-interest clubs.
Plan visits to local workplaces.
FIGURE 14–2 “Feeding my bird.” Elizabeth, age 10.
meaning-based
experiences
learning experiences that emphasize
thinking, cooperative problem solving,
decision making, and an opportunity to
challenge preconceived ideas
Image not available due 
to copyright restrictions

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
323
HELPING CHILDREN EXPLORE
THE OPTIONS
The following activities are only a small sample of careers or job opportu-
nities that might interest children. Use them as a starting point from
which to develop experiences that will spark the enthusiasm of your par-
ticular group of youngsters. Have children work in small groups and share
their results.
Activities
Map Maker (Cartographer)
Purposes:

providepracticeinportrayingconcreteobjectsassymbolsonamap

encourage cooperative problem solving

increase awareness of spatial relationships

reinforce math concepts of area, distance
Set up an interest center with a globe, an atlas, and maps of the
area surrounding your school. Prepare activity cards asking the children
Prepare activity cards asking children to ﬁnd speciﬁc places on the map.

SECTION FOUR
324
to ﬁnd speciﬁc places on the globe or map. Sample directions might
include:

Find the country we live in.

Outline the state where our city is situated.

Find our school on the map.

Find your street on the map.

Mark a route from your home to school.

Howmanyblocksisitfromyourhousetoschool?Howmanymiles?

How long does it take to drive from home to school? How long
would it take if you were to walk?

Where do your grandparents live? How many miles away?

How long would it take to get to your grandparents’ house in a car?
By airplane?
Map your neighborhood. Provide children with notepads and pencils.
Take them on a walk around the school neighborhood. Instruct them to
write down distances in blocks. Tell them to note where buildings are
located. When you return to school, have the children draw a map of
your neighborhood on a large piece of paper.
Construct models of the buildings in your neighborhood to place on
the map.
Equipment to Have Available

atlas, maps

cardboard

compass

glue

map maker

marking pens

paper, variety of sizes

pencils

rulers, measuring tape

scissors

T square

tape
Place the neighborhood map in the block area. Encourage children to
use blocks to construct the buildings.
Obtain a plot plan of the area around your center. (Call the planning
ofﬁce at your city hall.) Discuss the kinds of information shown on the
print and how it is used.

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
325
Provide map puzzles. There are wooden and jigsaw puzzles of the
United States. Look for them in toy stores or contact your local history
museum.
Construction Worker
Purposes:

increase vocabulary to include words related to construction
projects

practice ability to translate an idea into a concrete object

strengthen decision-making skills

provide opportunities to work together cooperatively

learn to use a variety of tools safely
Let children plan and organize a workshop area.
Discuss common
tools needed to construct objects from wood. Supply the suggested tools,
and then demonstrate how each is used.
Stress the safety precautions that must be observed. Ask the children
to draft a set of rules for the care and use of tools.
Build an object from wood.
Provide different kinds of wood: soft
pine, balsa, plywood, doweling. Encourage the children to develop their
own ideas about what to construct. Show them how to plan a project by
making a drawing of the ﬁnished product. Provide rulers to make exact
measurements, emphasizing how important it is to understand math-
ematical concepts in order to have a good ﬁnished product. Have them
list the materials they will need, and then let them implement their
project. Some possibilities are boxes for storing small items, a puppet the-
ater, games. They might also build boats, trucks, cars, airplanes, and a
diorama setting for their models. Coordinate a woodworking project
with map making by building a model of your neighborhood with wooden
stores and houses.
Make a replica of a construction project.
Discuss different kinds of
construction projects: home building, ofﬁce complexes, freeway con-
struction. Collect and display pictures of construction projects in progress
and of ﬁnished buildings. Provide toy replicas of equipment needed to
construct areas of a city: earth movers, trucks, cement mixers. Encourage
children to create a city in progress in the sandbox using houses from their
woodworking projects.
Children enjoy using real
tools related to carpentry or
construction.

SECTION FOUR
326
Invite a carpenter to visit your class.
Ask him or her to bring special
tools used on construction projects. Discuss the use of each of the tools.
Allow children to ask questions. They might ask: What are the qualiﬁca-
tions for the job? What do you have to know to be able to do the job? What
do you like about your job? What do you do each day?
Equipment to Have Available

assorted nails and screws

awl

C clamps

hammers (11 to 13 ounces)

level

miter box, miter saw

planes

pliers

rasp

rulers, measuring tape, T square

safety glasses

sand paper, assorted grades

sawhorses

saws (coping, crosscut, rip)

screwdrivers (slot and Phillips)

vise

wood pieces, assorted sizes and shapes

wood glue

workbench
Chef’s Club
Purposes:

provide opportunities to explore career options

work cooperatively to prepare and serve a snack for the group

strengthen group decision-making skills

practice measuring using fractions and whole numbers
Develop a bulletin board of people cooking at home and in restau-
rants.
Ask children to contribute pictures of their family cooking
together or pictures that they have found in magazines. Encourage them
to discuss what is needed to prepare a meal for a family or for the patrons
of a restaurant.
Visit a restaurant.
Talk to the chefs. Tell children to observe the pro-
cesses for preparing meals. What is done ahead of time? What are the
Chef’s Club members can
work cooperatively to pre-
pare a snack for the group.

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
327
kinds of things that have to be done just before serving a meal? Ask the
chefs how or where they learned to cook. What do they have to know to be
a chef? What are the qualiﬁcations for the job? What is the hardest part of
their work? What do they like best?
Visit a bakery or factory that produces large quantities of a food
product.
Tell children to notice the kinds of equipment needed to
automate food production. Find out if computers are used to program
the machinery. Interview a worker or supervisor. What are the qualiﬁca-
tions for the job?
Prepare pizza for a snack.
Set up an assembly line to prepare the
pizzas. Use frozen bread dough, canned biscuits, English mufﬁns, or
bagels for the crust. At station one, the bread dough or canned biscuits
are rolled into rounds and placed on a cookie sheet. At station two, seas-
oned tomato sauce is spread on the rounds. (There are several kinds of
pizza sauce available at any supermarket.) Station three, grate the cheese
and sprinkle it over the tomato sauce. Station four can add additional top-
pings such as olives, mushrooms, pepperoni, or cooked sausage. Station
ﬁve is responsible for putting the pizzas in the oven and watching them
until done.
If large rounds of bread dough were used as the crust, the ﬁnal sta-
tion, six, must ﬁgure how many pieces to cut each pizza into in order to
serve the group.
Prepare a snack from a recipe that requires measuring.
In Chap-
ter 15, Figure 15-2 is a recipe for Navajo fry bread. Also, look for cook-
books with simple recipes. The NAEYC book More Than Graham
Crackers listed at the end of Chapter 15 has many recipes that are
designed for children.
Set up a restaurant and kitchen.
Have children arrange an area of
the room with a table and chairs plus a kitchen area where food can be
prepared. They can create signs for the restaurant, decorate the table with
ﬂowers, and write a menu. Supply them with aprons and chef’s hats. Add
tableware and some cookware. Some children can role-play being the
chef while others can be the waitstaff and the patrons.
Equipment to Have Available

aprons, chef’s hats

baking pans

blender

chopping boards

SECTION FOUR
328

electric frying pan

ice cream maker

knives

measuring cups and spoons

mixer, food processor

mixing bowls

oven

pictures of food and food products

popcorn popper

pot holders

recipe books

rolling pins

sponges, buckets for cleanup

spoons

spatulas

tableware

trays

vegetable scrapers
Space Travel and Communication
Purposes:

foster curiosity about the solar system

increase knowledge about the U.S. space program

challenge preconceived ideas about outer space

strengthen the ability to think creatively
Design a space alien.
Research which planets have conditions that
might support life. As an example: Venus has an atmosphere that is
brownish yellow and is made up primarily of carbon dioxide gas with
clouds of sulfuric acid. The temperature is around 880° Fahrenheit
(470° Celsius). Design a space alien who could live in those conditions.
Either draw a picture of the alien or construct one from papier-m^ache´
or other materials.
Explore communication between astronauts and the ground.
Have children research the technology used to make Earth-to-space com-
munication possible. Sources where children can write for information
are cited in Chapter 12. Obtain pictures of a communication room at
Cape Canaveral. Provide used circuit boards, computer equipment, and
telephones. Encourage children to set up a communication center where
they can role-play interactions between earth and a spaceship.
Build a space shuttle or spaceship.
Provide children with large
pieces of cardboard or large packing boxes. Encourage them to design

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
329
and build a spaceship. They can paint the outside and equip the inside
with places for the astronauts to work. Place the spaceship near the com-
munication center so the children can talk back and forth.
Brainstorm space travel in the future.
Ask children to imagine what
space travel will be like in the future. Will people go into space as easily as
they ﬂy across the country? Will spaceships land and stay for a period of
time on other planets? What part would they like to play in the space
travel of the future? Ask them to write down their thoughts or draw a
picture. Display the various responses.
Equipment to Have Available

aluminum foil

balloons

books, posters, photos from NASA

cardboard pieces

colored marking pens, crayons, art paper

duct tape

glue

old computers, keyboards

packing boxes

paint and brushes (black, silver, white)

papier-m^ache´
Have children brainstorm what space travel will be like in the future.

SECTION FOUR
330

plastic tubing

ruler, yard stick, tape measure

telephone, microphones

wires
Environmental Conservationists
Purposes:

develop awareness of environmental issues

strengthen ability to plan and carry through a long-term project

practice cooperative problem solving

increase ability to communicate ideas
Create a bulletin board showing environmental issues.
Examples
are images of burning rain forests, soil erosion because of logging, and
polluted streams or lakes. In conjunction with a study of weather, inves-
tigate how these practices affect not only the immediate environment but
also the global environment. Ask children to brainstorm alternatives to
these harmful practices. Write down their responses, and include that
information on the bulletin board.
Increase pollution awareness.
Have children write to companies
that have the potential for polluting their communities. What are they
currently doing to eliminate pollution? Are there additional plans as
It is important to develop awareness of environmental issues in
children.

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
331
information becomes available and technology advances? What would
the children do when they are adults to prevent environmental pollution?
Start an ecology club.
Let the children choose interest areas concern-
ing the environment: ozone layer, smog, greenhouse effect, nuclear
waste, solar energy, lasers, and sound waves. Have them research what
these elements might be doing to the environment and what is being
done to prevent further damage.
Compile a scrapbook.
Have children collect newspaper or magazine
articles on the destruction or preservation of natural resources: rivers, for-
ests, lakes, wilderness areas, animal habitats. Classify the information
according to the kind of resource. Compile a large scrapbook of the
articles, and leave it in the reading corner for children to browse at leisure.
Analyze food packaging for potential harm to the environment.
Examples are candy wrappings that contain a plastic wrap inside a card-
board box. All sorts of foods are sold or packaged in Styrofoam, which
does not biodegrade. When the Styrofoam breaks up, it can be eaten by
wildlife. Plastic rings that hold six packs of drinks can strangle birds and
ﬁsh. Have children write to companies that make the products or publish
an article in the child care center newspaper.
Concerned Consumers
Purposes:

increase ability to infer results based on previous information

think creatively when ﬁnding new uses for household objects

communicate information and ideas to others
Survey packaging materials that are biodegradable or nonbiode-
gradable.
Explain to the children the meaning of the words biode-
gradable and nonbiodegradable. Biodegradable refers to those objects
that will disintegrate over time such as paper, food scraps, and garden
clippings. Nonbiodegradable refers to objects that will not disintegrate
such as plastic, metal, and Styrofoam. Ask the children to think of things
they have at home that ﬁt the two categories. Group them in twos or
threes and tell them that each group will survey an aisle in the grocery
store. Take a trip to a nearby store. (Get permission from the store man-
ager before planning this trip.) Provide children with paper, pencils, and
clipboards or other ﬁrm surfaces to write on. Assign each group an aisle of
the store. Tell them to go slowly through the items on the shelves, noting
things that are packaged in biodegradable and nonbiodegradable packag-
ing. Discuss the information they have gathered when they are back at the
center. Can they think of better ways to avoid ﬁlling the environment with
trash that will still be there many years into the future?
biodegradable
objects that disintegrate over time
nonbiodegradable
objects that will not disintegrate over
time

SECTION FOUR
332
Sort items into biodegradable and nonbiodegradable.
Collect
items and ask children to bring in empty boxes, bags, or other materials
that were used to package goods. Have them sort them into piles accord-
ing to their degradability.
Survey the trash at the child care center.
Have children collect the
contents of the classroom wastebaskets into plastic bags. Sort the contents
according to those that could be reused and those that can be sent to a
recycling center. Ask for their suggestions on how to decrease the amount
of trash. Have them prepare a list of suggestions to distribute to the
school.
Test the biodegradability of several items.
Have children dig one
hole for each item in an unused part of the playground. Pour some water
in the hole and let it soak into the ground. Place one object in each hole,
then cover it with dirt. Mark the places with small signs to show what is
buried there. Some suggestions for items to bury are newspaper, egg
carton, tin can, plastic food carton, paper bag. Have them predict
which items will deteriorate. Dig up the objects at the end of 30 days.
How accurate were their predictions? Would some of the items degrade
if left longer?
Recycle household objects.
Ask children to bring one object from
home that would have been thrown away. Place all the objects on a
table, and ask children to think of things that could be done with each.
Provide any additional materials they need to make useful items from
the objects. Some things children might make are sand shovels from plas-
tic bottles; a paint applicator from roll-on deodorant bottles; a rocket from
an oatmeal box; towers from painted cans of all sizes to add interest to
block buildings. A large variety of objects can also be used to create sculp-
tures or other art projects.
Equipment to Have Available

bulletin board

computer

cups, bowls

glue

newspapers, magazines

paper, pencils

scale, balance or digital

scissors

scrapbooks

shovels, buckets

tape: masking, duct, cellophane

tape recorder

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
333
Advertising
Purposes:

develop critical thinking skills

evaluate and challenge preconceived ideas

increase ability to observe objectively

communicate information to others
Develop children’s awareness of how television shapes our buying
habits.
Ask children to think about commercials they remember from
their television viewing. Talk about the claims made by the ads. Discuss
the purpose of the ads. Did the ads make them want to buy the product?
To further children’s awareness, tape a half-hour children’s television
show, then view it with the children. Have them keep track of the number
of commercials and the amount of time devoted to them. Discuss their
reactions to the commercials. Do they want to buy the product? Why or
why not? Do they believe the claims? Are there distortions in the way the
product is shown? Discuss how television creates illusions when showing
products.
Ask children to bring from home something they bought or had their
parents buy after seeing a television ad. Ask them to write an ad that is
honest but would make people want to buy the product. Have them
read their ads, then post them on a bulletin board.
Children need to learn a variety of ways to communicate ideas and infor-
mation to others.

SECTION FOUR
334
Set up a product testing lab.
Bring in several products that would be
found in most households. Allow children to test and compare different
brands of the product. For example, test two brands of paper towels, each
claiming to absorb more water and to be the strongest. Ask children to
decide how they can test those claims. (Pour the same amount of water
on each and pull the edges.) Which held up without tearing? Another
example: Certain cereals claim to contain more raisins per serving. Select
two brands and pour out the contents into two large bowls. Have children
count the number of raisins in each. Yet another example: two brands of
chocolate chip cookies claim to have more chips per cookie. Ask the chil-
dren how they can test that claim. (Dissolve the cookie in water, then
extract the chips for counting.) Ask the children for other possibilities
for testing, then implement those ideas.
Taste-test products children are familiar with through advertising.
Select one product to compare such as crackers, cola, or canned fruit.
Choose several brands of the product. Cover the outside of each of the
items so they cannot be identiﬁed. Label each with a number or letter.
Provide children with a cup, a bowl, and a spoon. You will also need a
serving spoon for fruit or other products that need to be spooned. Ask
the children to take small portions of each item, then rate each product.
Use a numerical scale or Best, OK, Not Good to show their assessment of
each. Did they all agree which one was best, or were there differences?
Solicit ads for newspaper publication.
Ask children to survey other
adults at the center or their parents to see if they want to place an ad in the
center’s newspaper. Have the children write the ad copy and include any
appropriate artwork. If a computer is available, there is a lot of clip art that
can be used for this purpose. They can also cut and paste pictures on their
ads for later photocopying.
Equipment to Have Available

computer, word-processing program, clip art

bowls, spoons

paper

pens, pencils

videotape player, television
Newspaper Publication
Purposes:

work cooperatively on a common task

increase decision-making skills

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
335

plan and organize a series of tasks

increase writing and communication skills
Write, edit, and publish a newspaper.
Have the children plan the
various tasks: reporter, editor, photographer, illustrator, cartoonists, and
production staff. Discuss the length of the paper and when it will be pub-
lished. Have them set a schedule for completing tasks. They can interview
adults in the center, obtain interesting stories from other children, gather
information from their parents, or write an editorial on a topic pertinent
to the center. Produce the paper and distribute it to other classrooms.
Plan a trip to a local newspaper ofﬁce.
Arrange to visit a newspaper
ofﬁce, and schedule interviews with several employees. Prepare children
by asking them to think of questions they would like to have answered.
They might want to know how someone becomes a reporter or what the
most exciting parts of the job are. How are other jobs they see being per-
formed important to the ﬁnal product? What are the best and most difﬁ-
cult parts of any of the job categories? Follow up the visit with a discussion
of the complex process of producing a newspaper and what kinds of jobs
they might like to prepare for.
Equipment to Have Available

camera

colored marking pens

computer, word-processing program, printer, scanner

newspapers

paper (printer and drawing)

tape recorder
Scientist
Purposes:

increase awareness of the different ﬁelds of scientiﬁc study

develop familiarity with research devices

provide experience in using a variety of scientiﬁc tools

stimulate curiosity about the sciences
Scientist for a day.
Provide a variety of tools that scientists use, such as
a microscope and prepared slides, telescope, metal detector, compass,
barometer, or rain gauge. Teach the children how to use the devices,
then allow them to experiment freely. Ask them to imagine the kind of
Encourage children to
develop familiarity with
research devices.

SECTION FOUR
336
scientists who would use the devices and what kinds of information they
may be able to ﬁnd.
Visit a site where scientiﬁc devices are used.
Examples are a weath-
er station, a university research lab, a water-treatment plant, a company
that has a research component, or any other appropriate site in your com-
munity. Arrange to have an employee at the site tell the children how the
devices ﬁt into the overall purposes of the facility and the qualiﬁcations for
workers.
Equipment to Have Available

barometer

compass

metal detector

microscope, prepared and blank slides

telescope
GUIDELINES FOR CHILD CARE
STAFF MEMBERS
As children participate in curriculum activities, encourage them to prac-
tice the skills suggested by Tofﬂer. He said workers of the future will need
to take an active role in decision making, resolve problems, and challenge
preconceived assumptions. The following list includes Tofﬂer’s sugges-
tions as well as some additional ones.
Future workers will probably need to be able to:

solve problems

work cooperatively

make decisions

understand spatial relationships

think creatively

read and speak ﬂuently

practice safety procedures

plan for use of time and materials

operate complex and technological equipment

use a variety of tools

be accurate and precise

be able to be retrained for a new career

evaluate and challenge preconceived ideas

have a college degree or advanced specialty training

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
337
When you invite speakers to visit your center, prepare the speaker by
suggesting topics that are of special interest to the children. Set a time
limit. Ask the presenter to bring visual materials whenever possible: pic-
tures, videos, tools, or instruments are some examples. Ask the children to
think of questions they might want answered.
Plan just as carefully for visits to community workplaces. Visit the site
yourself, and determine what will be of interest to your group. Talk to the
person in charge to plan exactly what the children will see. Prepare the
children by describing what will happen on the visit. Follow up with a
discussion when you are back at your center.
One of the exciting aspects of working with school-age children is
that they are such avid learners. They want to explore the world outside
of their own families, schools, or neighborhoods. They are eager to be
competent and will work diligently to accomplish difﬁcult tasks. You can
capitalize on these characteristics when you plan your curriculum. In
addition, you are helping to prepare these young people for their future
as adult workers in a complex global society.
SUMMARY
Future workers will have to manage complex technology. In addition,
they will need skills that allow them to take an active role in what happens
Concepts of industrial technology can best be presented to the school-
age child through relatively simple activities.

SECTION FOUR
338
at their work site. They will need to be able to solve problems, work
cooperatively, make decisions, understand spatial relationships, practice
safety procedures, plan for use of time and materials, operate complex
equipment, use a variety of tools, be accurate and precise, and challenge
preconceived ideas. Practice in these skills can be built into the activities
in a child care center.
The theoretical concepts of industrial technology can best be pre-
sented to the school-age child through relatively simple activities.
Invite speakers to visit your center to talk about their jobs. Prepare
ahead of time by suggesting topics, limiting time, and asking children to
think of questions to be answered.
Arrange ﬁeld trips to community workplaces. Visit the sites yourself,
and plan what the children will see. Prepare the group by telling them
what will happen. Follow up the visit with a discussion.
KEY TERMS
biodegradable
meaning-based
experiences
nonbiodegradable
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Survey your child care group concerning what they want to be when
they grow up. Are their interests similar to or different from those
discussed in this chapter?
2. Visit your community library. List available resources you could use in
planning this curriculum area. Besides books, do they have videos,
ﬁlms, or recordings?
3. Plan a ﬁeld trip to a work site in your community. Choose a company
that uses computers to automate their production.
4. Discuss with your parents and grandparents any changes they have
seen during their lifetime in regard to modes of travel and commu-
nication or advances in science or medicine. Find out what their lives
were like without these technological advances. Share this informa-
tion with a group of children.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Why is it important to expose children to a variety of adult work roles?
2. When do children begin developing ideas about what they will be
when they grow up?

CHAPT E R 14
PL ANNING FOR T HE FUT UR E
339
3. List several activities that are related to map making.
4. Describe how to set up a production line for the preparation of pizza
for a snack.
5. Name two activities that will help children become aware of
decreasing the amount of trash they accumulate.
6. List ﬁve characteristics future workers will need.
7. Do you agree with Tofﬂer’s premise that future workers will have to
take a more active role? Write several sentences supporting your
answer.
8. List guidelines for planning and implementing a ﬁeld trip to a com-
munity workplace.
CASE STUDY
During group time, the children in Vera and John’s room were discussing
what they wanted to be when they grew up. Amy declared she wanted to
be a nurse. Seth said he wanted to be a gardener and take care of people’s
yards like his dad did. Evan loudly declared that those were “dumb” jobs
and that he was going to be a doctor so he could make a lot of money.
1. Would you respond in any way to Evan’s choice of a job based on the
amount of money he could make? If so, what would you say?
2. What could you say to Amy and Seth?
3. How could you help each of these children to broaden their thinking
about their future?
REFERENCES
Tofﬂer,A.(1990).Powershift:Knowledge,wealth,andviolenceontheedge
of the 21st century. New York: Bantam.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Blaw, L. (1994). Super science. Bellevue, WA: One from the Heart Educa-
tional Research.
D’Amico, J., & Drummond, K. (1996). The science chef travels around the
world—Fun food experiments and recipes for kids. New York: John
Wiley & Sons.
Doan, D. (1983). Teaching problem-solving strategies. Menlo Park, CA:
Addison Wesley.

SECTION FOUR
340
Douglas, F. (1991) A carpenter. New York: Greenwillow. Primary.
Douglas, F. (1992) A chef. New York: Greenwillow. Primary.
Gardner, R. (1994). Science projects about chemistry. Springﬁeld, NJ:
Enslow.
Horenstein, H. (1994). My mom’s a vet. Cambridge: Candlewick.
Advanced.
Kalman, B. (1991). Reducing, reusing, and recycling. Canada: Crabtree.
Kenda, M., & Williams, P. (1992). Science wizardry for kids. Hauppauge,
NY: Barron’s Educational Series.
McVey, V. (1993). Sierra club kids’ guide to planet care and repair. San
Francisco: Sierra Club.
Vitkus-Weeks, J. (1994). Television. Parsippany, NJ: Crestwood House,
Silver Burdett. Advanced.
Computer Software
Career-O-Rama (Mac MPC CD-ROM). Brunswick, ME: Wintergreen/
Orchard House. Intermediate, Advanced.
Job City Series (Mac IBM Laserdisk). Altamonte Springs, FL: Techware
Corp. Intermediate, Advanced.
Jobs for Me! (Mac IBM). Ontario: Logicus. Advanced.

Getting Fit, Staying Fit
341
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the physical health of children in the United States.
Plan and implement age-appropriate nutritional activities.
Plan and implement age-appropriate ﬁtness experiences.
State suggestions for caregivers when implementing a ﬁtness
program.
HOW HEALTHY ARE OUR
CHILDREN?
h
ealth-care providers, teachers, and child care workers fre-
quently see children who are obviously in poor health or who
do not get needed medical treatment. These children are often
listless and cannot concentrate. Some are thin, whereas others
are overweight. Many cannot keep up with their peers during active play
or games. Child care professionals know that good health and overall ﬁt-
ness are essential to children’s development and achievement. Yet many
children are not healthy! Let’s look at some of the facts about the status of
children in the United States.
In Chapter 4 you read that 15.6% of American children between the
ages of 12 and 19 are obese. Overweight children are at higher risk for a
variety of health problems: increased blood pressure, and blood choles-
terol levels. These children may also have orthopedic or respiratory
problems.
The Children’s Defense Fund (2004) has published some shock-
ing statistics about children’s oral health. Their information indicates
CHAPTER1515
OBJECTIVES

SECTION FOUR
342
that more than half of all children ages six to eight and 78% of all
seventeen-year-olds have untreated dental problems. Dental problems
should be taken seriously because they can progress into infections and
abscesses. Some children fail to consume adequate diets because their
teeth hurt.
As you read in Chapter 3, approximately 14 million children live in
families with incomes below the poverty level. Many of these children
have no health insurance coverage and consequently suffer from a variety
of conditions (Children’s Defense Fund, 2004). In 2002 one in eight chil-
dren in the United States had no health insurance. Many have inadequate
nutrition, have poor academic performance, and suffer from chronic
physical conditions.
Asthma is a chronic health condition that affects almost ﬁve
million children (Children’s Defense Fund, 2004). This illness can
be mild or life-threatening, ranging from mild shortness of breath
to chest pain and inability to breathe requiring a visit to an
emergencyroom.Inadditiontoasthma,manychildrensufferfrom
respiratory allergies and repeated ear infections. Although these
seem mild, the fact that they are recurring interferes with
children’s total health and their ability to progress in school. Other
healthconcernsinyoungchildrenincludecommunicablediseases,
hearing and vision limitations, and ambulatory limitations. Among
teenagers, early sexual behavior that leads to pregnancy has
decreased. The Center for Disease Control (www.cdc.gov)
reported that in the period between 1999 and 2000 the number
of births in women aged 15–19 decreased from 48.8 per 1,000 to
47.7 per 1,000. The National Institute on Drug Abuse reported
thatbetween2001and 2004therehasbeen a17percent declinein
drugabuseamongteens.(www.nida.nih.gov)However,that same
report indicates an increased use of inhalants that are easily
accessible in the form of glue, shoe polish, and gasoline.
You can do little about some of these problems other than advocating
more and better health-care resources in your community. However, you
can have an impact on the small group of children in your child care
group. Provide them with experiences that foster attitudes and practices
that will improve their well-being. You can also give them knowledge that
will enable them to continue these throughout their lifetimes.
Because snack time is already a part of every session in after-school
child care, it is a good place to start. Teach children what their bodies
need to stay healthy.
Help children plan to make changes in their food habits. Ask them to
decide on one change, making it as speciﬁc as possible. They may decide
to change the kinds of snacks they consume rather than eliminating all
chronic health condition
recurring allergies or infections

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
343
snacks. Take responsibility for providing nutritious snacks each day that
are not high in fat or sugar. This may involve being creative at times but
will be worth the effort. Fruits, vegetables, whole-grain breads, cottage
cheese or yogurt, whole-grain cereals, and nuts or nut butters can all
make ﬂavorful and nutritious snacks.
Activities
Good Food, Good Health
Purposes:

increase ability to make informed decisions about food choices

expand knowledge of nutritional requirements

encourage participation in planning food for snacks
Teach children what their bodies need to stay healthy. Prepare a
bulletin board that shows the food guide pyramid with its new name
MyPyramid. This latest version highlights the inclusion of personalized
food plans for adults, children, and the elderly. MyPyramid for Kids has
information and games speciﬁcally geared to school-aged children.
(MyPyramid.gov) Encourage the children to consider their own diet.
How many food groups did they have for breakfast? How many are in
today’s snack? What are some things they could have for a snack that
would be nutritious? The food guide pyramid is shown in Figure 15–1.
Health and overall ﬁtness are essential to children’s growth and
development.
food guide pyramid
U.S. Department of Agriculture guide to
healthy food choices and number of
servings per day
MyPyramid
new name for food guide pyramid

SECTION FOUR
344
Navajo Fry Bread
Purposes:

increase cultural awareness

practice math concepts by measuring ingredients

foster cooperation
Prepare a snack of Navajo fry bread. This is a snack that is repre-
sentative of a culture and can be prepared fairly quickly by hungry chil-
dren. Assign two or three children to do the initial measuring and mixing.
Divide the dough in half, allowing two more children to roll it out and cut
it. Two more children can be assigned to fry the ﬁnished squares.
CAUTION: Be sure to set up the preparation area to allow maximum
safety. Place the electric frying pan on a table. Extend the cord from
the pan to a convenient wall outlet, then push the table against the wall.
The cord will be out of the way, and children will not trip on it. Caution
the children not to touch the hot pan and to use long-handled tongs to
turn the bread. Supervise carefully when frying is taking place. See Figure
15–2 for the recipe.
Fancy Five Sandwiches
Purposes:

reinforce knowledge of foods from the food guide pyramid

expand experiences with different foods

communicate information about choices to others
FIGURE 15–1 The U.S. Department of Agriculture Food Guide
Pyramid.

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
345
Provide the following foods from the MyPyramid:

Bread:whole-wheatbread,wheatpitabread,whole-wheattortillas

Fruits and vegetables: cucumbers, tomatoes, bananas, raisins,
apples, sprouts

Meats and meat substitutes: peanut butter, hard-cooked eggs,
sliced turkey

Milk:low-fat Swisscheese, low-fatcheddar cheese, low-fat cottage
cheese

Fats: low-fat mayonnaise or margarine.
Group the foods on trays labeled with their group name. Allow each
child to make a sandwich using as many of the food groups as possible.
During snack time have each child describe his or her sandwich and
name the groups.
Taste Trip
Purposes:

increase cultural awareness and appreciation

expand food preferences
Select food from several different countries. Set them out on trays
with labels indicating where they are from. Encourage children to taste
several items, and then write their reactions. The following are some sug-
gested foods, but visit your local supermarket to ﬁnd others.

From Haiti: mango; peel, slice, and add to fruit cups

From Central and South America: burro banana; add to salads or
fruit cups

From Hawaii: papaya; cut in half, seed, peel, and slice

From Japan: Asian pear; eat raw or bake
1 cup whole wheat ﬂour
1 teaspoon baking powder
1/2 teaspoon salt
1/2 cup lukewarm water
8 to 10 tablespoons salad oil for frying
Sift the ﬂour, baking powder, and salt together into a bowl. Stir in the water, then
use your ﬁngers to ﬁnish the mixing. Knead the dough with the heel of your hand,
dusting it with ﬂour if it gets sticky.
Roll out the dough to 1/4 inch thickness. Cut it into squares.
Pour the oil into an electric skillet. (Use just enough to coat the bottom of the pan.)
When it is hot, but not smoking, quickly fry the squares of dough a few at a time.
Using a long-handled slotted spoon, brown one side, then turn them over and brown
the other. When browned and puﬀed up, remove from the pan and place them on a
paper towel. Serve them with honey or jam.
The recipe makes about 24 fry bread squares.
FIGURE 15–2 Navajo fry bread recipe.

SECTION FOUR
346

From Mexico: cactus pears; peel and eat or add to salads

From New Zealand: feijoa, also called pineapple guava; peel and
slice

From New Zealand: kiwi fruit; serve in thin slices peeled or
unpeeled

From New Zealand: passion fruit; scoop out pulp and serve over
yogurt

From China: lichee fruit; buy in cans at most supermarkets

FromMexico:jicama;peelandslice,servewithaseasonedcottage-
cheese dip

From East Indies or Mexico: mango; peel and slice

FromSouth AmericaorHawaii:pineapple;peel, core, andcutinto
chunks
Menu Planning
Purposes:

expand ability to make cooperative decisions

practice mathematical calculations when determining how much
to buy

use food pyramid to make food choices
Plan snacks for a week. Appoint a committee to plan nutritious snacks
for a week. Instruct them to include items from at least two food groups.
When they have completed their menu, ask them to make a shopping list
of required ingredients. They may have to consult cookbooks or ask some-
one to help them determine quantities. If you have a cook at your center,
Plan nutritious snacks that include items from at least two
food groups.

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
347
he or she would be a good resource person. Schedule a trip to the super-
market to purchase the food. See the reading list at the end of this chapter
for books that contain recipes. Also, a list of scrumptious snacks can be
found in Figure 15–3.
Ice Cream in a Bucket
Purposes:

observe the physical changes that take place when the mixture
freezes

participate in a group effort to achieve a goal
Make ice cream in a bucket. Most children have never had the oppor-
tunity to make homemade ice cream, and this is a unique experience. The
recipe shown in Figure 15–4 gives the directions.
As a variation to this method, use one of the ice-cream makers that are
on the market. Several types are electric and one operates with a handle
that must be turned. The hand-operated freezer is ideal for making frozen
yogurt. Merely mix crushed fresh fruit with plain yogurt. Add a small
amount of sugar or honey, then pour into the container. Freeze according
to the machine’s directions.
Parent Demonstration
Purposes:

increase awareness of cultural meanings of food preferences

expand food experiences to include those from other countries
Making ice cream in a bucket allows children to participate in
a group effort to achieve a goal.

SECTION FOUR
348
Invite a parent to cook a favorite recipe that is representative of his or
her culture. Demonstrate how the food is prepared and cooked. Let chil-
dren taste the ﬁnal product. Note: discuss the food with the parent before
the presentation. Remind the person that it has to be something simple
and that can be quickly prepared. Hungry children will not want to wait
too long before tasting. Consider also the constraints of your facility.
Where will the food be prepared? Will it be safe? Do you have an oven,
a frying pan, or whatever else will be required? Ask the parent to choose a
food that is enjoyed by children. Have the parent explain whether this is a
dish the family might eat frequently or if it is served on special occasions.
Some possibilities are:

An Asian stir-fry dish. Provide chopsticks and ask the parent to
demonstrate to the children how to use them.

Mexican burritos with homemade salsa

Japanese noodles and vegetables

Jewish potato latkes or cheese blintzes

Indian puri

Spanish sopapillas
Apple slices, peanut butter, raisins
Assorted raw vegetables with seasoned cottage-cheese dip
Banana slices-dip in honey, roll in nuts
Celery stuﬀed with peanut butter or cheese spread
Cheese balls—form balls with softened cheese, roll in chopped nuts
Cottage cheese with fruit
Deviled eggs—add yogurt, mustard, salt and pepper to the yolk
Fresh fruit gelatin—any fruit in season; do not use kiwi or fresh pineapple
Fruit kabobs—banana wheels, pineapple chunks, cherries, strawberries, orange
wedges
Fruit shakes—blend fruit and nonfat dry milk in blender with a few ice cubes
Graham crackers, peanut butter, and applesauce
Granola or Grape-nuts® sprinkled on yogurt
Ice cream with fruit—in milk shakes or in make-your-own sundaes
Nachos—tortilla wedges, refried beans, cheddar cheese. Heat in microwave oven
until cheese melts
Nut bread with cheese spread
Peanut butter on whole wheat bread with raisins, dates, apples, banana,
applesauce, chopped celery, shredded carrots
Pizza—use pizza dough or English muﬃns, add pizza sauce, cooked ground meat,
cheese, tomatoes, mushrooms, chopped bell peppers, olives
Tacos or burritos—ﬁll with cheese, leftover meat, sliced tomatoes
Tiny meatballs made with ground meat, rice, and seasoning
Wheat toast with tuna salad or cheese, broiled to melt
Yogurt with fruit
FIGURE 15–3 Scrumptious snacks.

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
349
Cookbook
Purposes:

cooperative effort to achieve a goal

increase reading and writing skills

plan and carry out a long-term project
Compile a book of the children’s favorite recipes. The children may
have to consult a cookbook or ask their parents for help with this. Use a
computer or typewriter to type the recipes. Make copies for each of the
children in your group. Let each of them make a cover for their book.
Cook, Cook, Cook
Purposes:

reinforce knowledge of nutritional requirements for health and
ﬁtness
You need: 
a large plastic bucket
a one-pound coﬀee can with a plastic lid
2 cups of rock salt
Beat together in the coﬀee can:
1 egg
1/4 cup honey
Add 1 cup milk
1/2 cup cream
1 teaspoon vanilla
dash of salt
Be sure the coﬀee can is only half-full or the ice cream will spill over the sides as you
freeze it.
Put a layer of ice in the bottom of the pail. Crushed ice freezes faster, but cubes will
work also. Sprinkle the ice with part of the salt. Put the lid on the coﬀee can and set
the can on top of the ice. Pack more salt and ice in the pail around the sides of the
can. Sprinkle layers of ice with salt as you ﬁll the bucket. When the ice is almost to
the top of the can, take oﬀ the plastic lid.
Stir the ice-cream mixture around and around with a big wooden spoon, letting the
can turn too. Keep on stirring and watching. Let the children take turns with stirring
because it will take from 15 to 30 minutes for the ice cream to freeze to mush. You
will probably want to eat it right away while it is soft. If you want to wait until it
hardens, put more ice and salt around the can and let it sit for an hour or two.
This recipe will serve four to ﬁve children. You will probably want to make more than
one batch. Also if you are concerned about possible salmonella bacteria in the raw
egg, you can coddle it. Heat water to 140 degrees. Pour enough water into a cup to
completely cover the egg. Let it stand for one minute. Any bacteria will be killed and
the egg will not cook.
FIGURE 15–4 Ice cream in a bucket.

SECTION FOUR
350

practice in decision-making skills

experience foods from different cultures
Involve children in cooking projects often. Each experience is an
opportunity to reinforce good nutrition and the importance of making
appropriate food choices. It is also an opportunity for children to broaden
their tastes and to experience foods from different cultures.
Japanese Rice Balls
1 cup short-grain white rice
1 ½ cups water
salt
pickled Japanese plum
seaweed (optional)
Put rice in a saucepan and add water. Soak for 30 minutes, then cook
until all the water is absorbed. Let the rice cool with the pan covered for
about 5 minutes or until it is cool enough to handle (already cooked, cold
rice can be used if no stove is available). Tell children to wet their hands,
then take a scoop of rice. Form the rice into a ball and make a hole in the
middle. Place a pickled Japanese plum in the hole. If desired, the ball can
be wrapped with a piece of nori (seaweed).
Flour Tortillas
4 cups whole-wheat ﬂour
1 teaspoon salt
1⁄3 cup vegetable oil
approximately 1 cup warm water
Mix the ﬂour and salt: add oil, mix together with ﬁngers. Stir in
enough water to make a ﬁrm ball. Knead the dough until it is smooth,
then let it rest for 20 minutes. Pinch off a golf-ball size piece of the
dough. Roll it out on a ﬂoured board until it is 4 inches in diameter.
Cook on an unoiled griddle for about 2 minutes on each side.
Equipment to Have Available
You will need some equipment for food preparation or cooking. If your
center has a kitchen, most items will be available there. If not, accumulate
the basics, then add to them as your children become more involved in
their culinary projects. The number of each item that you require will
depend on the size of your group of children.

bottle and can opener

bowls, several sizes for mixing ingredients

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
351

cake pans, both sheet pans and layer pans, mufﬁn tins

colander, strainer, ﬂour sifter

cookie cutter, cookie sheets

cutting boards, plastic or wooden, large boards and individual size

eggbeaters, scrapers

fork, tongs, both long-handled

gelatin molds, both single and individual

grater, four-sided is best for children to hold

hot plate

knives, serrated for greater safety (if ends are pointed, round them
with a tool grinder)

measuring spoons, liquid and dry measuring cups

pancake turner, spatula, wooden and slotted spoons

pastry brushes

potato masher

saucepans

rolling pin (you can also use pieces of dowel)

skillet (electric)

timer

vegetable peeler, apple corer
When you can, add the following:

corn popper

electric blender and mixer

electric food processor

ice-cream freezer

portable bake oven
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
The kinds of outdoor play experiences children have today are vastly dif-
ferent from those of the past. Many children live in urban areas in apart-
ments where there is no space to play. Even in residential areas where
there are yards, many children do not go outdoors because of fear for
their safety or because they would rather sit indoors watching television.
Even when children are outdoors, studies show they are not active
enough to raise their heart rates for very long periods of time (Gilliam et
al., 1981, 1982). Increased heart rate is one indicator of ﬁtness.
Although an after-school child care program provides a safe place
where children can play outdoors, there is still a need to institute an exer-
cise regimen. The ﬁtness statistics described at the beginning of this chap-
ter indicate that children are far from ﬁt. Many children do not conform to
the standard of ﬁtness described by the American Alliance for Health,
Schedule exercise sessions
before snack time.

SECTION FOUR
352
Physical Education, Recreation, and Dance (AAHPERD) (1995). They
describe ﬁtness as a physical state of well-being that allows people to:

perform daily activities with vigor

reduce their risk of health problems related to lack of exercise

establish a ﬁtness base for participation in a variety of physical
activities
Their standards address several components: aerobic endurance,
body composition (proportion of fat and lean), muscular strength, and
ﬂexibility. A good ﬁtness program will address all of these. In addition,
exercise can also relieve some of the tensions children feel because of
the pressures of school or family problems.
Schedule exercise sessions before snack time. Always begin with
warm-up activities. Warm-up serves two purposes: It limbers up the
muscles in preparation for exercise and prevents possible injuries or
strains. In each of the following lists of exercises, the ﬁrst ones are the
easiest. Start with a few from each category. Gradually add others or
move on to more difﬁcult exercises when the children have increased
their ﬁtness. Above all, make the sessions fun. Adding music at times
helps to keep the pace going and increases the enjoyment. Finally, end
the session with stretching exercises.
In all of the exercises, an adult leads the exercise and models the prop-
er movements.
Activities
Warm-up
Purposes:

prepare for exercise in order to prevent injuries or strain

foster a sense of well-being that will increase the likelihood of con-
tinuing a ﬁtness regimen
Start exercises with a warm-up. Do the following:

Headtilt.Standwithfeetapart,handsonsides.Dropheadforward,
then arch head back as far as possible.

Headtilt,sidetoside.Standwithfeetapart,handsatsides.Keeping
shoulders stationary, drop head to one side then the other. Touch
ear to shoulder.

Head turn. Stand with feet apart, hands at sides. Turn head to right
as far as possible, then to the left.

Shoulder shrugs. Stand with feet apart, arms at sides. Tighten
abdominal muscles while raising shoulders up to ears. Lower
them and repeat.
AAHPERD
American Alliance for Health, Physical
Education, Recreation, and Dance:
develops standards for aerobic
endurance, muscular strength, and
ﬂexibility that indicate ﬁtness

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
353

Kneebends.Standwithfeetapartandarmsoutstretchedatshould-
erheight.Tightenabdominalmuscles.Bendrightkneewhilekeep-
ingtheotherlegstraightouttotheside.Reverse,bendingleftknee.

Torso bend. Stand with feet apart, hands at side. Keep legs straight
whileleaningtooneside,thentheother.Lethandslidedownthigh.
Stand straight, then repeat.
Arm and Hand Exercises
Purposes:

increase strength in arms and hands

develop awareness of muscle action
Stand with legs together, bring left arm forward and up. Swing right
arm back. Reverse process.
Stand with legs apart. Hold both arms together. Swing them down,
then up, in a semicircle.
Go from left to right, then from right to left.
Stand with legs apart, arms stretched out at shoulder level. Rotate
arms in circles, ﬁrst in one direction, then the other.
Stand with legs apart. Grasp a yardstick or three-foot-long piece of
dowel at each end.
Keep the legs straight while swinging arms from side to side.
Warming up before exercising prevents injuries or strains.

SECTION FOUR
354
Extend one arm from the elbow, keeping upper arm close to the
body. Place a small rubber ball in the extended hand. Squeeze as hard as
possible while counting to four. Change to other hand and repeat. As
strength increases, continue the count up to eight.
Leg Exercises
Purposes:

increase strength in leg muscles

cooperate with a partner

develop group cohesiveness
Squat with feet ﬂat and palms touching the ﬂoor. Push one leg straight
back. Hold for a few seconds, then reverse.
Run in place, raising knees as far off the ﬂoor as possible. Vary this
exercise by telling the children to jump, then land in a squat when they
hear you clap. Another clap is a signal to jump and continue running in
place.
Stand with feet together, hands extended to the front at shoulder
height. Raise one leg at a time, trying to touch each hand.
Sit on the ﬂoor. Grasp one foot with both hands and pull it up to the
nose. Repeat with other foot.
Lie on the ﬂoor on one side. Rest on the elbow and forearm with legs
outstretched. Lift and lower one leg, keeping toes pointed straight. Turn
to other side and repeat.
Lie on right side, body propped up by right elbow. Put left hand on
the ﬂoor in front of body. Lift left leg a few inches, then swing it forward.
Repeat several times. Turn to other side and repeat.
Squat on ﬂoor, with hands ﬂat on the ﬂoor. Jump with both legs,
extending feet straight out back. Return to a squatting position.
Sit on ﬂoor with legs straight and apart. Point toes toward ﬂoor while
clasping left knee with both hands. Push body forward toward knee as far
as possible. Push several times, then straighten to sitting position again.
Repeat with other leg.
Form children into pairs for this exercise. Each player places a large
exercise ball on the ground or ﬂoor behind her. Partners join hands. One
player in each pair sits on her ball while the other remains standing. As the
seated player stands up, the partner lowers herself onto her ball. Alternate
sitting several times.
A group of ﬁve or more children can participate in this exercise. Play-
ers stand in a circle, all facing in the same direction. The ﬁrst player passes
a ball over his head to the player behind him. The second player has to
reach up for the ball, then pass it through his legs to the next player.

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
355
Continue this alternation several times around the circle. You can also use
two balls so each player has more turns to reach or bend.
Torso Exercises
Purpose:

increase torso ﬂexibility and strength

work with a partner to achieve a goal
Lie on the stomach with hands outstretched to the side. At the same
time, raise legs and hands while arching back. Hold for a few seconds,
then lie ﬂat again. Repeat.
Two children can work together on this one. One child lies on the
ﬂoor with hands clasped behind the head. Raise the knees, but keep feet
ﬂat on the ﬂoor. The second child holds her partner’s feet ﬁrmly on the
ﬂoor. The partner tightens her abdominal muscles and pulls to a sitting
position. Hold for a count of ﬁve, then slowly lower to a prone position
again. They then change places.
Stand with feet apart. Stretch arms out to the side. Bend over and
touch right foot with left hand. Keep right arm stretched up in the air.
Return to standing position, then repeat with the other arm.
Equipment to Have Available
In addition to exercises, there are some simple pieces of equipment that
will encourage children to participate in physical activities. They are not
expensive and in fact may already be in your school.

Jump ropes. Have several so more than one child can jump at a
time. Have at least one that is long enough for two children to
hold while others jump.

Beach balls, gigantic balls. Children can throw or roll on balls.

Nerf balls. Use with paddles described in Chapter 10 (PomPom
Paddle Ball). Imagine a volleyball game played with a Nerf ball
and nylon paddles!

Hoops. Children can jump in and out. They can be laid in patterns
on the ﬂoor so that children have to hop or jump from one to the
other

Frisbees®. Can be played by two or more children.

Balance beam. You can ﬁnd a low beam in many school equipment
catalogs. They are also simple to make. Children can walk across
with eyes open or closed. Have them try to walk across holding a
plastic or wooden egg in a spoon.
Allow children to choose an
activity according to their
developmental capabilities
or ﬁtness level.

SECTION FOUR
356
GUIDELINES FOR CHILD CARE
STAFF MEMBERS
Remember that cooking and eating food should be fun. Do not pressure
children to taste unfamiliar foods. If you keep offering interesting vari-
eties, their curiosity will probably get the better of them. Also, they will
see that others try out those strange things you bring to class, and they
may want to get involved.
Set up a cooking environment with maximum safety in mind. Position
the cooking table against a wall, with the electrical cord behind the table
and out of the way. Teach children the rules and how to accomplish the
tasks safely. They are quite capable of cutting up vegetables without get-
ting hurt and using an electric frying pan without getting burned. (We, the
authors, have used both knives and frying pans with preschoolers without
mishap.) Supervise closely and never leave an area where children are
cooking.
Try not to impose your own food likes and dislikes on children. If you
really hate a particular food, then do not include it. You may think you will
be able to hide your dislike from the children, but they will sense it.
Be a good role model. Do everything you can to be healthy yourself.
Demonstrate good eating habits by bringing only healthful foods to
school.
Equipment can encourage children to par-
ticipate in physical activities.

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
357
Provide a variety of activities and materials that encourage active
play. Tag games, ball games, jump rope, follow-the-leader, and obstacle
courses are all possible physical activities that can be incorporated into the
daily program.
Allow children to choose an activity according to their develop-
mental capabilities or ﬁtness level. A vertical ladder leading to a high
piece of climbing equipment may be too difﬁcult or intimidating to
the youngest children. They might be able to master a short ladder
leading to a low platform. Young children can hit a ball on a support,
while older children may be ready to try hitting a ball when it is pitched
to them.
Set up active play stations indoors and outdoors. Chapter 10 includes
suggestions for active games to be played indoors. Begin with those and
then add others of your own design. Install basketball hoops outdoors at
different heights, and provide places to toss balls at a target, a place to
jump from, or cement areas for skating.
Allow ample opportunities for children to practice skills. This means
having more than one ball or organizing activities for a small number of
children. Only-one-ball or large-team games entail waiting idly for a turn
with little chance to participate and practice.
Enjoy exercising yourself and children will enjoy it. Avoid any com-
parisons or competition.
This is not a time to see who can do the most sit-ups or jump the high-
est. Be careful not to use phrases such as “Let’s see who can keep the ball
in the air the longest.” Simply say “Keep the ball in the air as long as
possible.”
Encourage parents to use health-care resources for themselves and
their children. Find out what is available in your community, then share
this information with parents.
Be an advocate for good health programs and policies for children.
Join professional organizations that will lobby for health programs.
Speak or write to local government ofﬁcials about the need to protect
children.
Volunteer for health-related events in your community. Include your
child care group when you can. Health fairs, running, or bicycling events
are some examples.
The health of children is too important to be overlooked.
SUMMARY
Health-care providers, teachers, and child care workers all see children
who are in poor health or need medical treatment. Many children are
overweight and are at higher risk for increased blood pressure and

SECTION FOUR
358
cholesterol levels. Chronic health conditions include asthma, allergies,
and ear infections. The rate of pregnancies and drug abuse among teean-
agers has decreased, but there has been an increase in the use of easily
accessible inhalants such as glue, shoe polish, and gasoline. One-quarter
of children have decayed or missing teeth.
As a child care worker, you can provide children with experiences that
foster attitudes and practices to improve their health. You can also give
them knowledge that will enable them to continue to be healthy through-
out their lives.
One way to develop health consciousness is to begin with the foods
children eat. Introduce them to the MyPyramid for Kids, and help them
plan and prepare nutritious snacks. Expose them to new foods and differ-
ent methods of cooking.
Although children who are in child care spend time each day playing
outdoors, there is still a need to focus on ﬁtness. The AAHPERD deﬁni-
tion of ﬁtness includes performing daily activity with vigor, reducing the
risk of health problems related to lack of exercise, and establishing a ﬁt-
ness base for participation in physical activities. In order to achieve this
degree of ﬁtness, children and adults need to exercise.
A variety of exercises for speciﬁc parts of the body are described. In
addition, there are some simple pieces of equipment that encourage chil-
dren to engage in physical activity.
There are some suggestions for caregivers as you institute a good
food program. Cooking and eating should be fun, so do not pressure chil-
dren. Keep maximum safety in mind. Do not impose your own food likes
or dislikes on children. Be a good role model by eating only healthful
foods.
There are some additional guidelines for helping children to achieve
ﬁtness. Enjoy exercising yourself. Encourage parents to use health-care
resources for themselves and their children. Be an advocate for good
health programs in your community. Participate in health-related com-
munity events.
KEY TERMS
AAHPERD
chronic health condition
food guide pyramid
MyPyramid
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Make either Navajo fry bread or ice cream in a bucket at home. Invite
yourfamilyorfriendstotaste-testtheresults.Didtheylikethefood?If
not, why not? Were there any difﬁculties you encountered that were

CHAPTER 15
GETTING FIT, STAYING FIT
359
not provided for in the recipe? How can you change the procedure to
eliminate the problem?
2. Make a list of your own favorite foods. How many are healthful and
how many are unhealthful?
3. Buy or borrow one of the pieces of equipment listed in this chapter.
Try it out. How many activities can you think of to do with this
equipment?
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Name two agencies that have done studies on ﬁtness of American
children. What were their conclusions?
2. Name the food groups in the MyPyramid for Kids. State the recom-
mended daily servings of each.
3. Describe an activity a parent might conduct in a child care center.
4. Describe two activities that encourage children to try new foods.
5. Name 10 pieces of equipment that you need for food preparation.
6. Deﬁne ﬁtness.
7. Describe three exercises that strengthen leg muscles.
8. List four pieces of equipment that will encourage children to be
active.
CASE STUDY
Holly and Louisa are 11 years old and are beginning to look and act like
teenagers. They sit together for long periods of time looking at teen mag-
azines that Holly brings in her school backpack. They talk about the
clothes, the models, and the ﬁlm stars that are featured in the magazines.
At snack time, they often refuse the food, saying that it will make them fat.
An assistant caregiver in their group thinks the magazines should be
banned from the program.
1. Do you agree or disagree with the position of the assistant? Explain
your reasoning.
2. What would you say to the girls?
3. Can you think of some activities to include in your program that might
help them to have a more realistic image of young girls and women
than is portrayed in teen publications?

SECTION FOUR
360
REFERENCES
AAHPERD. (1995). Moving into the future, national physical education
standards. Reston, VA: The American Alliance for Health, Physical
Education, Recreation, and Dance.
Children’s Defense Fund. (2004). The state of America’s children. Wash-
ington, DC: Author.
Gilliam, T. B., Freedson, P. S., Greenen, D. L., & Shahraray, B. (1981).
Physicalactivitypatternsdeterminedbyheartratemonitoringinsix-to-
seven-year-old children. Medicine and Science in Sport, 13(1), 65–67.
Gilliam, T. B., MacConnie, S. E., Greenen, D. L., Pels, A. F., & Freedson,
P. S. (1982). Exercise programs for children: A way to prevent heart
disease? The Physician and Sports Medicine, 10(9), 96–108.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Gianciolo, S., with R. Trueblood-Noll & P. Allingham. (2004) Health con-
sultations in early childhood setting. Young Children, 59(2): 56–61.
Cook,D.(1995). Kids’multicultural cookbook.Charlotte, VT:Williamson.
Harrison, J. (1993). Hooked on ﬁtness—Physical conditioning games and
activities for grades K-8. West Nyack, NY: Parker.
Hedges, S. (1995). Multicultural snacks. Everest, WA: Warren Publishing
House.
Newacheck, P., & Taylor, W. (1992). Childhood chronic illness: Preven-
tion, severity, and impact. American Journal of Public Health, 82(3),
364–371.
Rowland, T. W. (1990). Exercise and children’s health. Champaign:
Human Kinetics.
Wanamaker, N., Hearn, K., & Richarz, S. (1979). More than graham
crackers. Washington, DC: National Association for the Education
of Young Children.
Warren, J. (1992). Super snacks. Everett, WA: Warren. (Available from
School Age Notes.)
WEB RESOURCES
[http://www.mypyramid.gov]
MyPyramid for Kids. Click on “Food and Nutrition”
[http://www.cspinet.org]
Center for Science in the Public Interest
[http://www.eatright.org]
American Dietetic Association
[http://www.kidshealth.org]
Children’s Health Information

Section
ﬁve
RESOURCES
AND
REGULATIONS

This page intentionally left blank 

Using Community
Resources
363
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using community
resources.
Describe a variety of activities appropriate for seniors and children.
List activities for which teen volunteers are suited.
Describe ways to use resources outside the child care center.
State ways to make a volunteer program effective.
HOW COMMUNITY RESOURCES
CAN SUPPORT SCHOOL-AGE
PROGRAMS
s
chool-age children are ready and eager to learn about the world
outside their immediate environment. When they go to kindergar-
ten, they take that ﬁrst step away from their home and out into the
community. Most ﬁnd it a fascinating place and are eager to ﬁnd their own
place out in the world. Developmentally they are ready. They have good
muscular control and want to try out their skills in new ways. Cognitively,
they have a good memory and a much longer interest span than at earlier
ages. Coupled with this, they can postpone rewards, allowing them to
work on projects that take a long time to complete. They are ready to
consider different ways of thinking or doing things. They ﬁnd not every-
one lives or thinks as they do. When presented with alternatives, they like
to consider the options. In addition to all these characteristics, school-age
children have a high energy level. They need lots to do and challenges to
meet. The opportunity to be involved in service-learning projects helps
CHAPTER1616
OBJECTIVES

SECTION FIVE
364
young people to become engaged in their communities and helps them to
reach a new awareness of how they can make a difference in their own
lives and the lives of others.
One of the ways to involve children in the community is to invite res-
idents or representatives from agencies and organizations to participate in
activities at your center. This method has a distinct advantage in that it
eliminates transportation problems and does not entail travel time. An
added advantage is that the school becomes known and this may be help-
ful when fund-raising is necessary. What is most important, however, is
that both children and outside adults beneﬁt from this relationship.
INTERGENERATIONAL
PROGRAMS
Intergenerational programs are one way to bring the community into
the child care center. These programs use older persons and young adults
or teenagers as volunteers. Older persons especially are often looking for
meaningful ways to share their energies. At the same time, some children
either do not know or do not live close to grandparents. Both can beneﬁt
from the relationship. The adults will feel they can still make a difference
in someone else’s life. The children will enjoy increased self-esteem
because there is someone who listens to and cares about them. Both can
learn to appreciate the similarities and differences that exist between the
generations.
Partnering with Seniors
Child-care centers can use the talents of older adults who come from a
variety of jobs and professions. Artists, teachers, musicians, scientists, gar-
deners, veterinarians, and cooks are just a few who have knowledge and
skills that can be shared with children. These people can do what grand-
parents do: plan special activities, demonstrate how to do things, go on
outings together, and celebrate holidays and special occasions.
Recruit older persons through the following:

active living centers

community centers

groups for active seniors

parks and recreation departments

senior centers

retirement communities

churches
intergenerational
programs
child care programs that utilize older
persons and young adults or teenagers
as volunteers

CHAPTER 16
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
365

special-interest groups: hobby clubs or computer users

subsidized housing complexes for persons over 55

senior citizens service agencies (county or city)

notices in volunteer information columns of newspapers
You can also write to organizations for seniors to ﬁnd groups in your
community. Try:
American Association of Retired Persons
909 K Street NW
Washington, DC 20049
Gray Panthers
215 South Juniper Street, Suite 601
Philadelphia, PA 19107
Activities for Seniors and Children
The following is a list of just a few things older adults can do with children.
You can develop others based on the needs of your particular center or
the talents of the adults available to you.
Tutoring
Assist Individual Children with Math, English, or Homework.
Many retired teachers want to maintain contact with children but do not
want the structure of a classroom setting. They might ﬁnd helping in a
child care center to their liking. Children will appreciate help with school
work or someone who will listen while they practice conversing in
English.
Science Experiences
Demonstrate scientiﬁc phenomena: electricity, chemistry, weather.
Plan and conduct hands-on science activities for the children. Sched-
ule hands-on activities to follow a demonstration. Any of the activities
described in Chapter 12 or contained in the books on the reading list for
that chapter would be suitable.
Share an interest in exotic plants (orchids, cacti, tropical plants, etc.).
Work with children to make exhibits for a school science fair. Invite
other school groups and parents to see the results.
Cultural Awareness
Demonstrate musical instruments speciﬁc to a culture. Let children
play them.
Children and senior citizens
can both beneﬁt from inter-
generational relationships.

SECTION FIVE
366
Cook and taste ethnic foods. Use traditional cooking pots and
implements.
Teach dances of native peoples. Make costumes and plan a perfor-
mance of dances.
Prepare a list of greetings in different languages around the world.
Encourage the children to use them when greeting friends or family.
Display toys and games used by children in different cultures. Tell
how they are used. Let children try them out.
Read children’s books from different countries in the native language,
then translate into English.
Discuss how the stories reﬂect life in that country.
Show children folk arts or crafts. Teach children how to create some
typical folk art.
Share with children the ways holidays and special occasions are cel-
ebrated in other countries.
Develop a network of pen pals from different countries. Help chil-
dren write letters to a pen pal.
Encourage children to use the Internet to ﬁnd pen pals in other
countries.
[http://www.epals.com].
Collections
Share special collections: rocks, shells, fossils, insects, stamps. Work with
children to classify and organize their own collection.
Act as an adviser to a club based on collections.
Set up displays of collections.
Chess, Checkers
Teach children how to play and organize chess or checkers tournaments.
Be an adviser for a club. Plan and conduct a tournament. Consider a tour-
nament between adults and children.
Cooking
Prepare a variety of foods with children: bread, ice cream, mufﬁns.
Share favorite recipes or recipes passed down from family members.
Prepare holiday specialties.
Help children put together a book of recipes for foods they and their
families especially enjoy.
Share recipes speciﬁc to a particular culture or ethnic group.
Reading
Read stories to children. Children love hearing stories read to them in
groups or one on one.

CHAPTER 16
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
367
Listen while children read. Discuss the story or ask questions about
the story. “What happened when…?” or “What if…?”
Take individual children on a trip to the library. Browse together,
then choose books to take back to the center.
Puppet Making
Help children make puppets and then put on a puppet show. This can be a
long-range project beginning with writing a script, making the puppets,
planning the production, and then performing.
Life Stories
Older adults can tell children about their own childhoods. Many children
cannot conceive of a world without the modern conveniences they take
for granted. A good storyteller can paint a picture of life in “the old days.”
Share photo albums of their own childhood with children. Show
themselves as babies, as “school-agers,” and as teens.
Help children compile their own life story using a computer. Show
them how to insert photos they bring from home.
Younger children can portray their life story through photographs and
drawings or collages. Add the narration for those who cannot do it
themselves.
Art Projects
Work on special art projects. Teach children new techniques for creating
art: airbrush painting, mold making, charcoal drawing. Accompany chil-
dren on a tour of the studio of an artist who uses one of these techniques.
Help children plan and paint a mural. This can either be a child-only
project or a joint project between adults and children. Each could contrib-
ute something to the ﬁnished product.
Field Trips
Accompany children on trips to museums, plays, or factories. Extra adults
provide better supervision and can share their knowledge with children
as well.
Woodworking
Teach children proper use of power tools and hand tools. Supervise
woodworking projects.
Accompany children to a furniture-manufacturing site.
Computer Assistance
Help children use the computer in new ways. Work with them to set up an
e-mail newsletter to their parents or print copies for those without e-mail.
Discuss the kinds of topics they think their parents would want to know

SECTION FIVE
368
about. Help them set up a format that can be used each month as they
update the information. Guide them in writing articles and inputting
them into the computer. They will also have to obtain e-mail addresses
from the parents so they can set up an address list. Print copies can be
distributed through parent mail boxes at the child-care center.
Play computer games with the children. Be sure to check the content
before introducing them to a new game since so many have content that
would not be appropriate for children.
Help children develop a pen pal network with children in other child
care settings or even in other countries. See the Internet site
[http://www.epals.com]
or type “pen pals” in the search engine of the computer to choose
other pen pals options.
Gardening
Teach children the basic needs of plants. Help them to prepare, plant, and
maintain a garden.
Plant a vegetable garden and harvest vegetables. Prepare vegetables
for a snack: raw vegetables and a dip, or zucchini bread.
Bicycle Maintenance
Teach children how to repair and maintain their own bikes.
Teach safety rules to observe when riding a bike.
Adults provide extra supervision and share their knowledge with children
on ﬁeld trips.

CHAPTER 16
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
369
Photography
Teach children the basics of using a camera. If possible, help children to
develop their own pictures.
Help children put together an exhibit of their photographs for a
parent bulletin board.
Needlework
Teach children how to knit or crochet. Help them create simple gar-
ments: scarves, hats, small blankets.
Teach children embroidery stitches. Help them to create pillow cov-
ers, place mats, wall hangings.
Help children make a simple hand loom. Teach them how to weave
place mats, wall hangings, pot holders.
Accompany children to needlework shops to see the variety of mate-
rials available. Purchase materials needed for a project.
Partnering with High School and
College Students
Although many young people can do the things suggested for older per-
sons, they may have a different approach. They may also be better suited
for some activities. The following are some activities young people may be
especially suited for.
High-school- and college-age students often have a different approach to
activities than older persons.

SECTION FIVE
370
Sports
Teach children proper techniques for playing popular sports: tennis,
basketball, baseball, soccer, golf, swimming, or gymnastics. Practice with
individual children who need help in perfecting their skills.
Organize a game with another child care center, possibly at a near-
by park.
Drama
Work with children to write, produce, and perform a play. Children can
make their own costumes, design and construct scenery, or set up proper
lighting.
Dance
Teach children how to dance ballet, tap, clogging, or current popular
dances.
Help children choreograph a dance. Perform for other children or
parents.
Conversation
Talk with and listen to children. Teens may be able to help children
express their worries or fears or to discuss their problems.
Field Trips
Accompany children on active ﬁeld trips: park, zoo, beach, nature walk.
Exercise
Teach children some basic exercises such as those suggested in
Chapter 15.
Cultural Awareness
High-school exchange students from other countries can tell about life in
their homeland: their play activities, school, their family.
Games
Play table or language games with children. Children and teens enjoy
Monopoly®, Clue®, Trivial Pursuit®, Scrabble®, Life®, or card games.
Teens will contribute their own enthusiasms for language games such as
telephone, taking a trip, twenty questions, or charades.

CHAPTER 16
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
371
Partnering with Community Facilities
and Businesses
You may decide you do not want volunteers who come to your school
but would rather schedule periodic activities that use facilities in your
community. Nearly every area will have some resources that would
interest children. Check your neighborhood, call government ofﬁces,
and talk to other caregivers. If you have lived in the area for a long time,
where did your parents take you when you were a child?
Museums
Natural history museums are an excellent source of persons to do presen-
tations or conduct tours of the museum. Consider presentations on local
history, plants, or animals indigenous to the area.
Children’s discovery museums are marvelous places for a ﬁeld trip.
These are places where children can touch, manipulate, and participate
in a variety of activities.
Art museums may conduct tours, specially designed for children.
Most large museums have a docents program, volunteers who know a
great deal about the art in the galleries. Sometimes a tour is followed by
a session in which the children can create their own art.
Museums are an excellent place for children to learn from seeing
demonstrations and participating in a variety of activities.

SECTION FIVE
372
Library
Many libraries have a children’s librarian who will help children choose
books. They may also have reading incentive programs: a reward for chil-
dren who read a speciﬁed number of books.
Libraries often have ﬁlm series or other activities that are suitable for
young children.
Ask whether the library can supply or recommended storytellers. Ask
the storyteller to visit the program to tell about the art of storytelling and
then tell a story.
Businesses
Some businesspeople may be willing to conduct a tour of their facility and
then answer questions or tell children how to prepare themselves for that
line of work. A newspaper ofﬁce, dairy, radio station, or a computerized
ofﬁce might interest children. Check with parents of the children to ﬁnd
other possibilities.
Fire Station
Take a tour of the facility. Discuss requirements for becoming a
ﬁreﬁghter.
Some departments have ﬁre-prevention programs featuring Smokey
the Bear and could do a presentation.
Police Station
Take a tour of the facility. Discuss requirements for qualifying to be a
member of law enforcement.
Some departments have drug prevention programs and could do a
presentation.
Wildlife Refuge
A few communities have areas set aside for endangered animal species
or plants. Some conduct nature walks. Others may have plant propaga-
tion workshops where children help plant seeds or transplant native plants
or trees.
Parks or Other Amenities
Find out whether your children can use a local riding stable, swimming
pool, or public tennis courts.
Some ﬁre departments have
ﬁre-prevention programs
and will do presentations for
children.

CHAPTER 16
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
373
Partnering with Organizations and
Agencies
Many national and global organizations as well as governmental agencies
provide Web sites with information about service-learning projects and
activities that are ideal for school-age children.
Environmental Protection Agency
[http://www.epa.gov]
Provides questions about the environment and the work of the
agency. EPA’s Explorer’s Club Web site for children features infor-
mation about recycling, pollution, and endangered plants and ani-
mals. The Web site includes interactive games and information to
captivate young audiences.
Environmental Protect Agency
[http://www.epa.gov/water/kids/you.html]
Provides Web sites written for children suggesting activities to pre-
serve wetlands, reduce waste by recycling, conserve water in the
home, and prevent pollution of water resources.
Earth 911
[http://www.earth911.org]
Earth 911 is a Public and Private Sector Partnership that is guided
by information from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
and other federal, state, and local agencies to empower commun-
ities to improve their quality of life. Their Web site includes links
to information about recycling centers, energy conservation, safe
disposal of household waste, composting, and environmental edu-
cation for children.
USA Freedom Corps
[http://www.usafreedomcorpskids.gov]
A volunteer service started by President George W. Bush is an effort
to expand the ways that young people can give back to their com-
munities. The Web site has links to projects and games that teach
citizenship concepts.
Start a Recycling Center
Explore the immediate environment of the child-care center, collecting
any materials that can be recycled. Collect the items in separate bins, then
contact the center’s trash service to obtain a schedule for pickup.
Survey the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the center, picking
up items that can be recycled. Add these to the center’s bins.

SECTION FIVE
374
Adopt a Wetland Area
Visit a wetland area in your community. Pick up any trash that may endan-
ger indigenous wild life such as plastic pieces, discarded tires, bottles,
plastic bags, etc.
Provide a Habitat for Butterﬂies or Birds
Plant an area of the center’s outdoor area with plants that attract butter-
ﬂies or hummingbirds. Consult a garden book for your environment for
speciﬁcs. Some plants that attract butterﬂies are: agapanthus, armeria,
cosmos, echinacea, buddleia, lantana, and honeysuckle. Hummingbirds
will seek out: columbine, lupine, azalea, bottle brush, buddleia, cape
honeysuckle, dahlia, and lavender.
GUIDELINES FOR USING
VOLUNTEERS
It is important to have an organized method of managing those persons
from your community who participate in your program—your volunteer
corps. They should see themselves as an integral part of what you are
trying to achieve. To begin with, they will be more valuable if they know
what they are expected to do, if they are trained and supported as they
Volunteers who are trained and supported as they work with you will
contribute to your curriculum.
volunteer corps
group of older adults and young
persons or teenagers who volunteer in a
child care center

CHAPTER 16
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
375
work with you, and if they know they are appreciated. Time and effort
spent in setting up this kind of program will pay off in the long run. Your
volunteers are more likely to stay with you longer. They will contribute to
your curriculum rather than being an additional burden.
Prepare a booklet of information that clearly states expectations for
volunteers. Spell out what their job is and what their hours will be. Let
them know who will be supervising them and to whom they can go when
problems arise.
Check your local licensing requirement regarding ﬁngerprinting vol-
unteers. If necessary, tell volunteers where it can be done.
Assign volunteers to simple, speciﬁc tasks at ﬁrst. Start with having
them work with one child alone at an activity. As you learn more about
each person’s abilities and strengths, you can gradually allow greater
responsibility.
Plan and conduct an orientation for each volunteer. Develop a pro-
gram that gives a general overview of your center and its goals and phi-
losophy. Suggest ways of interacting with children. State rules that apply
to the children and to themselves.
Ask for a speciﬁc time commitment from each volunteer. Because a
lot of effort goes into making a volunteer program successful, it is impor-
tant to avoid constant change in its members. Have each volunteer say
how much time and for how long a period they can commit themselves
to your program.
Provide ongoing supervision and training. Additional training as vol-
unteers become more familiar with your program will enhance their
self-esteem and make them more committed.
Evaluate and provide feedback periodically. Remember that volun-
teers are not getting paid for their time. To make it worthwhile, they
must feel they are appreciated and that they are learning.
Have realistic expectations for your volunteers. Remember that they
may not always be available when you need them. Older persons some-
times have health problems, and young people have many other demands
on their time.
You may have to make some adaptations to your environment in
order to foster an effective intergenerational program. Consider the fol-
lowing changes to accommodate both older adults and teenagers in your
setting.

Placesmallsofasorwidearmchairsinaquietcorner.Thiswillinvite
an adult or teen and one or two children to sit together to read
or talk.

Install an extra-wide swing in the playground. The favorite place
for many children of past generations was in the porch swing

SECTION FIVE
376
with grandpa or grandma. Not many have that experience today,
but a wide swing can bring a little of that atmosphere to your
playground.

Provide at least one table high enough for an adult or a teenager.
Letchildrensitonstoolssotheycanworkwiththeadultatthistable
on art projects, science experiments, writing, or whatever they
wish.

Provide a place where children can leave a message for the adult
or teenager. Most volunteers are not there on a daily basis, but
children may want to write them a note about something that
happened or just leave a special drawing. This can be an important
avenue for developing a relationship.

Provide a place where the adults or teens can keep their own
belongings.

Plan a means for thanking volunteers. Write a letter at the end of a
speciﬁedperiodoftimeorgiveanaward.Youcanalsohaveaspecial
meeting or dinner to recognize the contribution that volunteers
have made to your program.
REMOVING BARRIERS TO
COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
At the beginning of this chapter, we indicated that many caregivers have
mixed reactions to the use of community resources. They cite a variety of
reasons. Here are some solutions that other programs have found
successful:

Walk to places that are close to the child care center.

Rent or use donated buses and vans from churches (these are usu-
ally not used by the church during the week).

Take small groups at a time, using public transportation or pri-
vate cars.

Divide groups according to age levels of children and take trips to
different sites.

Useseniorvolunteerstotakesmallgroupsorindividualchildrenfor
a walk into the community.

Have parents pick up their children at the place being visited—
park, swimming pool, library.
REMINDER: Before you take any children on trips outside your
child care facility, you must obtain written permission from their parents.
You should also check with your insurance agent to be certain that the
form of transportation you will use is covered by your policy.

CHAPTER 16
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
377
Intergenerational contact is not a new concept. In past generations
young children were often cared for by older brothers and sisters, aunts,
uncles, and grandparents. Each age level contributed to the child’s knowl-
edge of what growing up means. Each age level was a model children
could imitate. Today’s children, who live in nuclear and mobile families,
may miss that experience. Using volunteers can re-create that kind of
environment. It is well worth the effort in terms of beneﬁts to the children
and to the volunteers themselves.
SUMMARY
Teachers and caregivers are sometimes reluctant to use community
resources. They say the problems are difﬁculty in recruiting and training
volunteers, transportation problems, the short time children spend at the
center, and the fact that children are at such different age levels.
One way to involve children in the community is to invite individuals
or representatives of agencies to visit the center. Using older persons as
volunteers is one method that has been successful in some programs. A
variety of activities for seniors and children is possible depending on the
talents and interests of the volunteers.
Teenage volunteers can do many of the same things older persons
can, but there may be some for which they are better suited. Teens can
participate in more active experiences such as sports, dance, and exercise.
Community agencies, organizations, and businesses may have resour-
ces for activities that will interest children. Museums, libraries, police, and
ﬁre departments may have programs. Businesses might be willing to con-
duct tours of their facilities.
An organized method of managing volunteers will make the program
more effective. Prepare a manual of information, and start volunteers
doing simple, speciﬁc tasks with children. Have an orientation, provide
ongoing supervision, and give volunteers feedback about performance.
It is also important to have realistic expectations for your volunteers.
You may have to alter your physical environment to make the most
effective use of volunteers. Have places where adult and child can sit
together and a high table that is comfortable for an adult. Provide a
place where children can leave messages for volunteers and where adults
can keep their belongings.
Remove barriers to community participation by using public trans-
portation or walking to nearby sites. Rent church-owned vehicles that
are unused during the week. Take small groups at a time. Use senior vol-
unteers to take individual children into the community. Have parents pick
up children at the place being visited.

SECTION FIVE
378
KEY TERMS
intergenerational
programs
volunteer corps
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Talktoan olderpersoninyourfamily abouthisor herchildhood.How
different was it from your own growing years? In what ways might this
information help you to understand that older person better?
2. Visit a senior center in your community. Find out whether they have
any volunteer programs. If they do, ask what seniors hope to get out of
participating in their community. If the center does not have a vol-
unteer program, ask why.
3. Plan one activity either a teenager or older person could do with a
group of nine-year-olds. List the materials that they would need and
describe any special procedures.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Caregivers are often reluctant to use community resources. List the
reasons discussed in this chapter.
2. State ﬁve places to recruit senior volunteers.
3. Describe ﬁve activities in which seniors can share their cultural
heritage with children.
4. Name two activities that are especially suited for teens and school-age
children.
5. State the resources that are often available through museums.
6. This chapter listed seven things you can do to make a volunteer
program more effective. What are they?
7. In what ways can you change the environment of a child care center to
make it easier for volunteers to interact with the children?
8. This chapter stated seven ways to remove barriers to community
participation. What are they?
CASE STUDY
Bob Wolf is 67 and retired two years ago from a computer software com-
pany. He has seven grandchildren whom he loves to be with and decided

CHAPTER 16
USING COMMUNITY RESOURCES
379
he wanted to volunteer to work with young children. He found that the
director and caregivers at a local business-sponsored program welcomed
him with open arms. He came twice a week to the center, taught the chil-
dren woodworking techniques, and spent a lot of time showing them how
to use the computer. Most of the children looked forward to his days, but
three boys never participated in the activities he organized. When he was
not there, they sometimes imitated the way he walked and made fun of
the fact that he was almost bald.
1. WhatshouldbedoneabouttheattitudeofthethreeboystowardBob?
2. Is there something Bob could do to help the boys feel more com-
fortable with him?
3. Canyouthinkofanactivitythatwillhelpchildrentobemoreaccepting
of older people?
SUGGESTED READINGS
Horsfall, J. (1999). Welcoming volunteers to your child care center. Young
Children 54(6), 35–36.
Kaplan,M.,Duerr,L.,Whitesell,W.,Merchant,L.,Davis,D.,&Larkin,E.
(2003). Developing an intergenerational program in your early child-
hood care and education center. Penn State University: Penn State
University.
Kazemek, F., & Logas, B. (2000). Spiders, kid curlers, and white shoes.
Telling and writing stories across generations. The Reading Teacher,
53(6), 446–451.
Lierman,H.W.,&Mosher-Ashley,P.M.(2002).Strategiestoexpandapen
pal program from simple letters into a full intergenerational experi-
ence. Educational Gerontology, 28, 337–345.
Seefeldt, C., Warman, B., Jantz, R., & Galper, A. (1990). Young and old
together. Washington, DC: National Association for the Education of
Young Children.
Smith, B.J., & Yeager, A. (1999) Intergenerational communities: Where
learning and interaction go hand-in-hand. Child & Youth Services,
20(1/2), 25–32.

This page intentionally left blank 

Quality and Standards
381
After studying this chapter, you should be able to:
Discuss changes in the goals for school-age child care.
State the methods used to upgrade the quality of programs.
Relate the progress that has been made toward developing a
credential.
Discuss evaluation of programs.
CHANGES IN THE GOALS FOR
CHILD CARE
f
ive years ago, school-age child care was seldom included as a topic
for workshops and presentations at many conferences organized
by the professionals in early childhood education. Now it is fre-
quently discussed at professional gatherings. According to the
Web site www.childstats.gov, in 2002 in 78% of families with
children under age 18, both parents worked outside the home.
The need has brought about rapid proliferation of programs.
However, the increase in numbers must be accompanied by attention to
quality.
Research studies show that children who attend quality programs
beneﬁt in other aspects of their life. A survey by the California Depart-
ment of Education (1996) found that children in quality programs were
less likely to be retained in a grade or placed in special education pro-
grams and were also less likely to have behavior problems or become
involved in vandalism around their school.
CHAPTER1717
OBJECTIVES

SECTION FIVE
382
Public perception of school-age child care has also changed. Early
generations of after-school programs were found in settlement houses,
with the purpose of caring for the children of poor or indigent families.
Some were set up to offer a safe haven for children who lived in high-
crime neighborhoods, to foster self-esteem, or to overcome academic
deﬁcits (Halpern, 1992). The adults were seen as supervisors or babysit-
ters and little training was required or encouraged.
Early models for the curriculum were the traditional day camp or rec-
reational prototype. During World War II, centers were set up to provide
care for children of families who were working in the war industries. The
centers were seen as a safe, exciting place led by activity directors and
supervisors of play. Questions were being asked about what constituted
quality in child care, and some workshops and technical school classes
were available. Often space had to be shared with other facilities for chil-
dren. At present, school-age care is recognized as an important part of
services for children. It is now seen as a place for growth, nurturing, and
learning life skills. The role of the adult is as a facilitator of positive devel-
opment through healthy interactions. Questions about quality focus on
the kinds of adult-child interactions that promote growth. Degree and
credential programs are available for training, and child care staff mem-
bers are working collaboratively with school personnel.
A critical need—if quality is to be promoted and maintained—is the
involvement of all those who are concerned with the education and care of
children in a community. Involving such a wide range of people means
there has to be communication between parents and programs and
between programs and community agencies. There should also be some
coordination between the various types of programs. To address the
coordination issue, some communities have developed child care
councils made up of representatives from the various factions of the
child care community. Their meetings and discussions focus on the
needs of the community, policies regarding quality, ways to facilitate com-
munications, and ways to affect legislative actions. More recently, state
and federal departments of education are seeing the need to become
involved.
CHILD CARE IN THE
TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY
Former Secretary of U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Donna Shalala gave the keynote address at the Annual State Child Care
Administrators Meeting in Washington, DC, on July 29, 1998. She
opened her address with a discussion of quality. She expressed her
child care councils
groups of representatives from the
various factions of the child care
community

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
383
admiration for caregivers, calling them “heroes,” but said that even heroes
need a helping hand sometimes. She challenged state and county admin-
istrators across the country to provide support as well as ﬁnancial incen-
tives. She pointed to the challenge made by President Clinton’s Child
Care Initiative and his commitment to providing quality care for all chil-
dren. To that end, the Child Care Bureau was created, and in turn the
bureau has set up a National Child Care Information Center that shares
trends and ideas with states and communities. Money has been added to
the new welfare law to promote quality care.
Secretary Shalala listed what she believes constitutes quality care:

good interaction between the provider and parents

a continuous improvement strategy that remains current on child
development research

strong and meaningful relationships with families, based on trust
and sharing information about children

teaming up with health experts and building a system where child-
ren’s health is monitored

supportive directors who respond to staff needs but also demand
accountability

good working conditions for all providers—meaning decent pay,
leave, and family friendly policies as well as good working space
Shalala further urged her audience to involve the community. She
pointed to the wisdom and experience of teachers, parents, clergy, busi-
nesses, and law enforcement. She said they should all be a part of deci-
sions about funding, safety, training, eligibility, and access.
On January 8, 2002, President George W. Bush signed legislation put-
ting into effect his policy “No Child Left Behind (NCLB).” The NCLB
Act expands the federal government’s role as outlined in the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) of 1965. The NCLB is aimed at
disadvantaged students and sets strict requirements and deadlines for
participation. There are four main points to NCLB:

accountability measured by frequent testing

more ﬂexibility in how states, school districts, and schools use the
federal funds

more options for parents of children from disadvantaged
backgrounds

more use of teaching methods based on scientiﬁcally proven
research studies selected by government agencies
In addition, the act guarantees that every classroom is staffed by
qualiﬁed teachers and that the gap between advantaged and disadvan-
taged children, as reﬂected in test scores, is narrowed. Although this

SECTION FIVE
384
program does not directly affect what happens in after-school programs, it
is important that child care personnel be aware of what is happening in
schools. Some aspects of this program are controversial and are being
questioned by teachers and professional organizations. More information
about the No Child Left Behind policy can be found at the following Web
site:
[http://www.ed.gov/nclb].
Accreditation and Standards: National
AfterSchool Association (NAA)
Several years have gone into developing the standards that NAA uses.
The pilot statement was drafted in 1995 after several years of research
and ﬁeld testing but revised in 1997. The latest version grew out of dis-
cussions with personnel from pilot sites and school-age care professionals
as well as review by the NAA Accreditation Advisory Board. The stan-
dards reﬂect the best practices for children between the ages of ﬁve and
14. They are meant to be used in group settings where children attend on
a regular basis. Programs can use the guidelines for a self-study leading to
accreditation.
The professionals who developed NAA standards believe there is a
need for an accreditation and improvement process that speciﬁcally
addresses school-age care. Some of the unique characteristics of pro-
grams that serve this population are the following:

They usually serve a wide range of ages, from age ﬁve to 14.

Theyoftensharefacilitieswithotherprograms,preschools,recrea-
tional buildings, and elementary schools.

Staff members may work at other jobs as well as caregiving.

They often must organize their calendar around school schedules.

A unique combination of skills is needed to do the work well.
NAA also believes that there is a need for a system that raises public
awareness of the importance of out-of-school care and its impact on the
future development of children. It was their intent to develop a process
whereby centers could use the guidelines to improve quality whether they
eventually applied for accreditation or not. Experience has shown that
most programs continue to work toward improving quality even after
they have completed the accreditation process.
NAA Standards
The standards are divided into six sections. The following paragraphs
present a brief summary of each of those sections.
NAA
National AfterSchool Association has
developed standards for the best
practices for children ages ﬁve to 14

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
385
Human Relationships
Interactions between staff and children should be positive and appropri-
ate to the needs of the children. This guideline includes sensitivity to each
child’s interests and abilities as well as his or her culture and home lan-
guage. Interactions should help children to make choices, become more
responsible, and learn the skills they need to be successful. Staff members
should use positive guidance techniques that encourage children to
resolve their own conﬂicts and to interact with one another in positive
ways. This section also has statements about including families and ways
that staff should work well together to meet the needs of children.
Indoor Environment
Indoor space should meet the needs of the children a program serves,
including space for all program activities. The space should be arranged
so that a variety of activities can take place and allow children to partici-
pate without disruption. Indoor space encourages children to explore
their own interests by providing convenient places to store and retrieve
materials. Work space should reﬂect the children’s interests.
Outdoor Environment
The outdoor environment meets the needs of school-age children and
allows them to be independent and creative. There should be at least
Indoor space should meet the needs of the children served and be
arranged so that a variety of activities can take place.

SECTION FIVE
386
30 minutes of outdoor play for every three-hour block of time, during
which children can use a variety of equipment or participate in a variety
of activities.
Activities
The daily schedule is ﬂexible, allowing transitions to be smooth and chil-
dren to go at their own pace. There should be time enough for children to
choose from a variety of activities that reﬂect the mission of the program.
There should be enough materials to support those activities.
Safety, Health, and Nutrition
The safety and security of children are of utmost importance. All observ-
able hazards are secured, and systems are in place to protect children
from harm. The environment should enhance the health of children,
and staff members are responsive to individual health needs. Chil-
dren are supervised in such a way as to maintain safety at all times and in
accordance with children’s ages, abilities, and needs. All foods served at
the facility should be healthy and appropriate for the ages and sizes of
the children.
Administration
The number of staff members should vary according to group size, the
ages of the children, and the complexity of the activity. There should be
a staff plan for maintaining adequate supervision of children at all times.
Policies are in place to keep parents informed and support their involve-
ment in the program. Administrative policies should foster cooperation
with schools and the community. Administration guidelines also include
statements regarding qualiﬁcations of staff and the establishment of poli-
cies that encourage ongoing training and adequate working conditions.
With the current increase in the need for care for young children
when the school day is ﬁnished, this seems an optimum time for looking
at ways to increase the quality of that time. The NAA standards are cer-
tainly one way to achieve that.
The full text of the standards can be obtained from:
National AfterSchool Association
529 Main Street, Suite 214
Charlestown, MA 02129
800-617-8242
617-778-6020
FAX: 617-778-6025
[http://www.naaweb.org]

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
387
National Association for the Education
of Young Children (NAEYC)
NAEYC is a large national professional association that provides a service
for accrediting programs that serve children from birth through the
elementary years. The system is voluntary and involves a three-step pro-
cess: self-study by the director, staff members, and parents; validation vis-
its by trained professionals; and an accreditation decision by a team of
early childhood experts. Schools can pace the length of time involved in
completing the process, but it usually takes from four to 18 months.
The critical step in the process is the self-study. The program admin-
istrator pays a fee and then receives an accreditation manual. The direc-
tor, staff, and parents use the manual to rate the quality of the program in
10 different categories. When the study is completed, a ﬁnal report is pre-
pared and sent to the academy. Academy personnel review the materials
to determine whether the information is complete or whether further
information is needed.
Accreditation covers the following categories of center operations:

interactions among staff and children

curriculum

staff/parent interactions

staff qualiﬁcations and development
Self-study by a committee of staff members and parents is the ﬁrst step
in the accreditation process.
NAEYC
National Association for the Education
of Young Children, a large professional
organization that accredits programs for
children from birth through the
elementary years

SECTION FIVE
388

administration

stafﬁng patterns

physical environment

health and safety

nutrition and food service

evaluation process
When all materials are ready, the academy appoints one or more val-
idators, and they in turn schedule a visit. The purpose of the visit is to
observe the day-to-day operations to verify that they are as described in
the report. The ﬁnal step involves an accreditation commission consisting
of three professionals. The commission reviews the information provided
by the validators and decides to grant accreditation or defer it until further
improvements are made. Deferred centers can appeal the decision.
Accreditation is valid for three years, during which time centers must
submit annual reports. Before expiration, the accreditation process must
be repeated. Further information about accreditation can be obtained
from:
National Association for the Education of Young Children
1313L Street NW Suite 500
Washington, DC 20005
800-424-2460/202-232-2777
E-mail: NAEYC@naey.org
[http://www.naeyc.org/accreditation]
National Association for Family Child
Care (NAFCC)
According to NAFCC, one million family child care providers care for
four million children, some of whom are elementary-school ages. Along
with the move to professionalize all child care settings, NAFCC felt it
important to develop a process for accrediting home-based child care.
Their quality standards for NAFCC accreditation were developed in
conjunction with the Family Child Care Project at Wheelock College,
Boston, Massachusetts.
The provider reviews the accreditation workbook and identiﬁes areas
that need improvement. The next step is to design a professional develop-
ment plan followed by improvements. When the provider is ready, she
notiﬁes NAFCC to schedule a visit. The provider receives an observer
visit packet, including a self-observation form to complete before the
observer visit. The visit is scheduled. The observer scores the visit. If
NAFCC
National Association for Family Child
Care; has developed quality standards
for accreditation

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
389
standards are met, accreditation is awarded for three years. If the score is
not high enough, accreditation can be deferred until the conditions can be
corrected. If a provider moves, the new site must be reaccredited.
The categories used to score a setting for accreditation follow:

relationships that convey a sense of belonging to children, parents,
provider’s family, and community

a welcoming environment with enough materials to engage chil-
dren and support their interests

activities that are both child directed and adult directed

developmental learning goals that are appropriate for the ages of
the children

policies and procedures that ensure the safety and health of
children

professional and business practices that reﬂect concern for ethics
and legality as well as time for professional activities
NAFCC Quality Standards for Accreditation, 1999 edition, can be
obtained from:
The National Association for Family Child Care
5202 Pinemont Drive
Salt Lake City, UT 84123
800-359-3817
FAX: 801-268-9507
E-mail: nafcc@nafcc.org
[http://www.nafcc.org]
CREDENTIALS
Child Development Associate
Upgrading the quality of programs can also be accomplished through
training and credentialing of teachers. The Child Development Associate
(CDA) credential is a nationally recognized credential for early childhood
teachers and has been used in preschools, child care, and in Head Start
programs. The curriculum for attaining the credential was designed by
the Council for Early Childhood Professional Recognition and contains
a set of goals and a series of graduated experiences. The goals are

to establish and maintain a safe, healthy learning environment

to advance physical and intellectual competence
CDA
Child Development Associate, nationally
recognized credential for early
childhood teachers and caregivers

SECTION FIVE
390

tosupportsocialandemotionaldevelopmentandprovideguidance

to establish positive and productive relationships with families

to ensure a well-run, purposeful program responsive to partici-
pant needs

to maintain a commitment to professionalism
These graduated experiences are divided into three phases. Phase I is
ﬁeldwork with students participating in the daily activities of a program.
They are also required to prepare written work, complete exercises, and
read. During Phase II, students attend courses or seminars offered by
local colleges, universities, or postsecondary institutions. The ﬁnal
phase, Phase III, is meant to integrate and evaluate the student’s experi-
ences. During this period, the student returns to working with children
while also completing a series of exercises. The last step in the process is
interviews with a council representative in which all the documents are
reviewed. If the representative’s review is positive, the candidate receives
a Child Development Associate credential that is valid for life.
For information about the CDA credential, contact:
Council for Early Childhood Professional Recognition
2460 16th St. NW
Washington, DC 20009-3575
202-265-9090
800-424-4310
FAX: 202-265-9161
[http://www.cdacouncil.org]
National Institute on Out-of-School Time
(NIOST)
Formerly called the School-Age Care Project, NIOST has been work-
ing to improve the quality of out-of-school time for 20 years. Their focus
has been on ﬁve areas: education and training, community development,
consultation, research, and public awareness. Their target population
has been parents, program staff members, community leaders, and
government ofﬁcials.
NIOST began a project to evaluate innovative approaches to both
the care of children and preparation and training of staff. They called
the project MOST (Making the Most of Out-of-School Time). Three
cities (Boston, Chicago, and Seattle) spent three years implementing
and evaluating the project. A consulting ﬁrm, Nilsen Associates, was
commissioned to write a report on one of the most important questions
raised by the MOST initiative (Nilsen, 1999), that of staff preparation and
NIOST
National Institute on Out-of-School
Time; focuses on education and
training, community development,
consultation, research, and public
awareness

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
391
credentialing. The report uses the deﬁnition of a credential proposed by
Morgan (1998) that a credential is a “formal certiﬁcate, permit or docu-
ment that certiﬁes that an individual has mastered a set of skills and has
demonstrated competence in caring for children.” Colleges and univer-
sities issue credentials, as do some professional associations. Community
organizations and even employers sometimes award a credential or cer-
tiﬁcate to those who complete speciﬁed requirements. The question is
being raised among school-age care professionals about who is best suited
to establish the criteria for a credential.
A national survey conducted by Nilsen found that half of the states
already have a credential, are doing a pilot study, or are planning one.
About one-third do not have a credential and are not planning one.
There were 21 credentialing programs from 17 states that had the follow-
ing common characteristics:

Almost half were offered by a college.

Entry requirements were minimal.

About 75% offer college credit.

Most require the candidate to pay a fee.

The program took an average of two years to plan.

Many community entities participated in the development.

Most have some paid staff.
The Nilsen survey found that some credentials require little invest-
ment in time, from as little as a day, while others take up to two years.
Many states are using the CDA credential even though it is speciﬁcally
designed for caregivers of children under ﬁve years of age. Therefore,
the question of what components should comprise a credential is being
discussed among child care professionals across the United States.
Report Recommendations
The report made recommendations to both local and national leaders
about ways to expedite credentialing efforts for school-age care. The fol-
lowing list is a brief summary of those recommendations.
Locally

Planning efforts should include as many community individuals
and organizations as possible.

If it is at all possible, there should be a source of funding for the
planning process.

Planners should think creatively about the relationship with a state
licensing agency.

SECTION FIVE
392
Nationally

Information should be gathered about who the recipients of cre-
dentials are and what the impact on quality outcomes is.

Some in the school-age child care (SAC) community advocate that
NationalSchoolAgeCareAlliance(NSACA)takeoncredentialing
in the same way that the Council for Early Childhood Professional
Recognition has done. That would require tremendous resources
and would conﬂict with some of the innovative programs that are
already in place.

Thereisan expressedneed tosetguidelinesorstandardsforwhat a
credential should include, such as the following:
• core competencies or bodies of knowledge
• number of hours to spend on training
• qualiﬁcations of instructors
• evaluation methods
• alternative ways to demonstrate knowledge or competence
• provisions for ensuring access to a diverse population in the
workforce
The report also recommended that standards be tied to the Advanc-
ing and Recognizing Quality (ARQ, Assessing School-Age Quality self-
study) and the accreditation process NSACA uses (described in a previous
section).
The full Nilsen Associates report and the ASQ can be obtained from:
National Institute on Out-of-School Time (NIOST)
Center for Research on Women
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481-8203
781-283-2547
FAX: 781-283-3657
E-mail: niost@wellesley.edu
[http://www.wellesley.edu]
EVALUATION
School-Age Care Environmental Rating
Scale (SACERS)
Developed by Thelma Harms and her two Canadian colleagues Ellen
Jacobs and Donna White, the SACERS grew out of a need to have a
NSACA
National School Age Care Alliance
SACERS
School-Age Care Environmental Rating
Scale, a method of rating programs that
serve children ﬁve to 12
Trained observers use the
School-Age Care Environ-
mental Rating Scale (SAC-
ERS) to provide a method for
rating programs that serve
the ﬁve to 12 year age range.

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
393
method of rating programs that serve the ﬁve-to-12-year age range.
Harms, Jacobs, and White drew from a number of sources, starting with
the criteria for developmentally appropriate practice. They also used
research studies done in Canada and the United States (Galambos &
Garbarino, 1983; Vandell & Corasanti, 1988; Vandell, Henderson, &
Wilson, 1988). The SACERS is also an adaptation of an earlier rating
scale, the Early Childhood Environment Rating Scale, done by Harms.
Specially trained observers use a numerical scale to perform the
assessment. Each of the seven categories is rated on a scale of one to
seven based on written criteria for each item. The following is a brief
description of the items listed in each category.
Space and Furnishings, Indoor Space
The scale assesses whether there is sufﬁcient space for gross-motor activ-
ities as well as space for privacy. The room arrangement should have
adequate space for all activities: homework, routine care, and learning
and recreation. Furnishings should allow for children’s relaxation and
comfort and gross-motor activities. There should be easy access to the
host facility and space for staff.
Health and Safety
This section examines the health policies and practices. Emergency and
safety procedures must be in place. Attendance is monitored, and depar-
tures are managed to bring about maximum safety for the children. Meal
times are planned as a learning experience, and personal hygiene is part of
the educational program.
Activities
Eight types of activities are described in this section: arts and crafts, music
and movement, blocks and construction, drama/theater, language/read-
ing, math/reasoning, science/nature, and cultural awareness. Assessment
is made on the basis of frequency, variety of materials and equipment
available, and age-level appropriateness. The cultural-awareness category
includes ways that staff encourage acceptance of differences.
Interactions
This section on interactions refers to staff interactions with children, with
parents, and with one another. Interactions with children should support
autonomous behavior and convey feelings of respect and interest. Staff
should also talk to children about ideas related to play activities, helping
children to extend their ideas. Parents are informed about policies

SECTION FIVE
394
concerning discipline and also receive information on parenting, health
care, sports, and cultural activities for families. Parents are included in
decision making as well. The program should promote positive interac-
tions among staff members and classroom teachers.
Program Structure
The schedule of the day should allow smooth transitions and time for chil-
dren to make choices of activities. Community resources should be used
to plan ﬁeld trips or special occasion activities. The director and key staff
member meet on a regular basis with the host of the program to discuss
and resolve any problems.
Staff Development
Staff should have opportunities and support to attend professional confer-
ences or workshops. Staff meetings include planned opportunities for
participants to share new ideas and materials. Self-evaluation by staff is
an ongoing process.
Special Needs Supplementary Items
This section is used in conjunction with the preceding items when
children with special needs are included in the program. Items address
objectives to bring about individualization, appropriate learning opportu-
nities, efforts to promote peer interactions, and ways that staff promote
communication.
The full text of this rating scale can be obtained from:
Teachers College Press
Columbia University
1234 Amsterdam Avenue
New York, NY 10027
212-678-3929
FAX: 212-678-44149
E-mail: tcpress@tccolumbia.edu
[http://www.tcpress.com]
ASSESSING CHILDREN’S
PROGRESS
An important part of evaluating the overall quality of a program should
also include an assessment of individual children. According to Lilian

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
395
Katz (1997), “Assessment should serve one of the following purposes:
to determine progress on signiﬁcant developmental achievements; to
make placement or promotion decisions; to diagnose learning and teach-
ing problems; to help in instruction and curriculum decisions; to serve
as a basis for reporting to parents; and to assist a child with assessing
his or her own progress.” Child care leaders do not need to make de-
cisions concerning children’s promotions from one grade level to the
next, but all of the other purposes Katz stated are pertinent to the child
care setting.
Observation
There are several ways to assess children’s progress by observing and
recording behaviors. One of these is the anecdotal record. The child is
observed in a variety of situations while the adult writes down what he
does and what he says. This may not be the most accurate picture of a
child’s behavior because only a small portion of what is happening can
be written down. What is there is what the adult decides is important
and may present an incomplete picture. It is also true that two people
looking at the same situation may see entirely different actions (Click,
2004). Another form of observation is event recording. The observer
chooses a speciﬁc situation in which to observe and record behavior.
For instance, if the adult wants to ﬁnd out how a child reacts dur-
ing group times, then an observer must see the child in that situation
several times.
The time or duration sampling looks at behavior at intervals of
time and for a speciﬁed period of time, such as every half hour for
ﬁve minutes. This kind of observation may show the presence or absence
of certain behaviors. The method can be especially helpful in detecting
the frequency of aggressive outbursts, determining whether a child
spends more time alone or with other children, or observing a child’s
attention span.
The most accurate observation occurs when the adult uses a video
camera or tape recording. This method is especially useful because
more than one person can observe behavior and make the assessment.
Further discussion among the observers can yield more pertinent
information.
A checklist can also be used to assess a child’s behavior. This is a list
of predetermined behaviors to be observed. The observer checks off one
of several choices indicating whether the behavior occurred or not. The
following is a sample of a checklist regarding a child’s interactions with
other children.
anecdotal record
written observations of a child in a
variety of situations
event recording
observer chooses a speciﬁc situation in
which to observe a child
time or duration
sampling
observation of a child’s behavior at
intervals of time and for a speciﬁed
period of time
video camera or tape
recording
most accurate methods of observation
checklist
a list of predetermined behaviors to be
observed

SECTION FIVE
396
Self-Assessment
Children should be encouraged to assess their own progress using a self-
assessment. A conference between the adult and child can result in a list
of goals to be reached. What is it that the child wants to improve or what
does he need to concentrate more on? Is it his ability to hit more balls
during baseball games, or is it his ability to curb aggressive behaviors in
order to make friends? These should come from the child with support
from the adult to clearly deﬁne the goals. Most children, once they reach
the school-age years, can be fairly realistic about what they can and cannot
expect to do. Katz (1995) also says “In principle, unless children are con-
sulted about their own views of their own progress, they cannot learn to
assume some responsibility for it.”
Additional information about assessment can be found at the follow-
ing Web sites.
Center for the Study of Testing, Evaluation, and Educational Policy:
position papers and policy statements.
[http://www.csteep.bc.edu]
Project Spectrum: lists articles on assessment.
[http://pzweb.harvard.edu]
SUMMARY
The perception of school-age care has changed from only providing a safe
place for children to one that offers growth, nurturing, and life skills. The
role of the adult as babysitter has changed to that of a facilitator of positive
development. There is a critical need for ways to ensure quality. To that
end, in 1998 President Clinton enacted his Child Care 2000, a Vision for
the Children. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
established the Child Care Bureau, which in turn set up a National
Usually
Sometimes
Never
Approaches others
Uses appropriate
language to enter a
play situation
Disrupts the play
Is cooperative
self-assessment
a list of goals that children can use to
assess their own progress

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
397
Child Care Information Center. Secretary Shalala of the Department
established a set of quality guidelines.
The National School Age Care Alliance (NSACA) developed stan-
dards that it uses for accreditation or to upgrade programs. The standards
are divided into sections: human relationships; indoor environment;
outdoor environment; activities; safety, health, and nutrition; and
administration. The National Association for the Education of Young
Children (NAEYC) also developed a set of standards that can lead to
accreditation. The process involves a self-study plus evaluation by profes-
sionals. Categories used for the study are the following: interactions
among staff and children; curriculum; staff/parent interactions; staff qual-
iﬁcations and development; administration; stafﬁng patterns; physical
environment; health and safety; nutrition and food service; and evaluation
process.
Family child care providers can also be accredited by the National
Association for Family Child Care (NAFCC). The provider designs a pro-
fessional development plan followed by any necessary improvements.
This is followed by an observation visit, after which the provider can be
accredited. The categories used are relationships that convey a sense of
belonging, an environment that is welcoming, activities that are both child
directed and adult directed, developmental learning goals that are age
appropriate, policies and procedures that ensure safety, and professional
business practices.
A credential is another way to upgrade quality through the training
and education of staff. The Council for Early Childhood Professional Rec-
ognition designed the Child Development Associate credential that is
used in preschools, child care, and Head Start programs. The credential
is based on the following goals: establishing and maintaining a safe learn-
ing environment; advancing physical and intellectual competence;
supporting social and emotional development; establishing positive rela-
tionships with children; ensuring a well-run, purposeful program; and
maintaining a commitment to professionalism. To obtain the credential,
the student must complete ﬁeldwork, do written work, attend courses or
seminars, apply knowledge in a setting with children, and participate in
interviews with evaluators.
National interest in improving quality has prompted the National
Institute on Out-of-School Time (NIOST) to focus on becoming an advo-
cate for credentialing or certiﬁcation. The activities of the organization
target local, state, and national sources for developing a credential that
will speciﬁcally meet the needs of child care professionals.
The last method of upgrading quality discussed in this chapter is
evaluation. Thelma Harms and two colleagues developed the School-
Age Care Environmental Scale (SACERS). Evaluators use seven catego-
ries on which to rate programs: space, indoor space and furnishings,

SECTION FIVE
398
health and safety, activities, interactions, program structure, and staff
development. A supplementary section applies to programs that include
children with special needs. Assessment of individual children should be
part of evaluating overall quality of a program. There are several methods
that can be used. Observation is frequently the method of choice, and
includes anecdotal records, event recording, time or duration sampling
and a checklist. A video camera or tape recorder can also be used to
make a record of behaviors and situations. Children should be encour-
aged to assess their own progress.
KEY TERMS
CDA
NAA
NAEYC
NAFCC
NIOST
NSACA
SACERS
anecdotal record
checklist
child care councils
event recording
self-assessment
time or duration sampling
video camera or tape
recording
STUDENT ACTIVITIES
1. Copy pages from the NSACA standards. Work with other students in
smallgroupstodiscussoneofthesections.Ifacenterwheretheywork
or are doing practice teaching were applying for accreditation by this
organization, what would it be like? Describe the environment, both
indoors and outdoors.
a. Delineate ways that interactions would be fostered.
b. Describe what is being done to foster good health and nutrition.
c. What administrative procedures are in place?
2. Ask students to ﬁnd out which centers in their community are
accredited and by whom. Assign small groups to interview selected
center directors. Have them ask the following:
a. How difﬁcult was it to go through the process?
b. Which people were the most helpful in achieving your goal?
c. How long did it take?
d. What has the result been?
e. Was the effort worth it?
3. Have each group report to the class on their ﬁndings.
REVIEW QUESTIONS
1. Discuss the ways public perception of after-school care has changed.
2. What has NSACA done to upgrade standards for out-of-school time?

CHAPTER 17
QUALITY AND STANDARDS
399
3. Describe the accreditation process NAEYC uses.
4. Can family child care providers be accredited? If so, by whom?
5. ListthegoalsonwhichtheChildDevelopmentAssociatecredentialis
based.
6. How has NIOST worked toward increasing quality in child care?
7. WhatisthenameoftheratinginstrumentthatThelmaHarmsandher
colleagues developed?
8. List the seven categories Harms used.
CASE STUDY
The director/owner of the Little Oaks Child Care Center has already
achieved accreditation for her preschool program. She is very proud of
this fact and believes it has helped to ﬁll her enrollment and even to gen-
erate a waiting list. She has just returned from a conference where she
heard about the National School-Age Care Alliance. She learned that
the alliance has developed a set of standards for school-age programs
that can lead to accreditation and has obtained a copy of their material.
She wants very much for her after-school staff members to review the
standards and start the process leading to accreditation. Most of the care-
givers are eager to start, but several are resistant, saying they don’t think
they need a stamp of approval on their program.
1. Whydoyouthinksomestaffmembersresisttheideaofaccreditation?
2. What would you do about the attitude of the resistors?
3. How can the director help them to be more positive toward the
process?
REFERENCES
CaliforniaDepartmentofEducation.(1996).SchoolagecareinCalifornia.
Sacramento: Child Development Division.
Click, P. (2004). Administration of programs for young children (6th ed.).
Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning.
Galambos, N., & Garbarino, J. (1983). Identifying the missing links in the
study of latchkey children. Children Today, 13, 2–4.
Halpern, R. (1992). The role of after-school programs in the lives of inner
city children. Child Welfare 71, 215–230.
Katz, L. G. (1995). Talks with teachers of young children: A collection.
Norwood, NJ .

SECTION FIVE
400
Katz, L. G. (1997). A developmental approach to assessment of young
children. ERIC Digest ED407172.
Morgan, G. (1998). Credentialing in out-of-school time programs.
Wellesley, MA: National Institute on Out-of-School time, Center
for Research on Women.
National School-Age Care Alliance. (1998). The NSACA standards for
quality school-age care. Boston: Author.
Nilsen, E. A. (1999). On the road to SAC professionalism, emerging
models,trends,andissuesincredentialing:Aworkingpaper.Wellesley
College, Wellesley, MA: National Institute on Out-of-School Time.
Vandell, D. L., & Corasanti, M. A. (1988). The relations between third-
graders’afterschoolcareandsocial,academic,andemotionalfunction-
ing. Child Development, 59(4), 868–875.
Vandell, D. L., Henderson, V. K., & Wilson, K. S. (1988). A longitudinal
study of children with day-care experiences of varying quality. Child
Development, 59(5), 1286–1292.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Marion, M., & Mindes, G. (2004). Resources on assessment. Young Chil-
dren, 59(1), 54–55.
NAEYC. (2004). Where we stand on curriculum assessment, and program
evaluation. Young Children, 59(1), 51–53.
Vandell, D. L., & Su, H. (1999). Child care and school-age children. Young
Children, 54(6), 62–71
WEB RESOURCES
[http://www.naaweb.org]
National After-School Association
[http://www.naeyc.org/naeyc]
National Association for the Education of Young Children
[http://www.nafcc.org]
National Association for Family child Care
[http://www.cdacouncil.org]
Council for Early Childhood Professional Recognition
[http://www.wellesley.edu/WCW/CRW/SAC]
National Institute on Out-of-School Time

401
All About Me
NAME
Full name:
________________________________________________________________
I want to be called:
________________________________________________________________
Parent(s):
________________________________________________________________
Address:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
Phone number:
________________________________________________________________
VITAL STATISTICS!
THEN
Date of birth:
________________________________________________________________
Place of birth:
________________________________________________________________
(city, state)
________________________________________________________________
Adapted from material written by JoAnn Kosko Simmons.
A
APPENDIX A

APPENDIX A
402
(hospital)
________________________________________________________________
Weight at birth: _____ pounds, _____ ounces. Length at birth: _____ inches
Hair color at birth: _________________________________________________
Eye color at birth: __________________________________________________
NOW
Height now: __________ feet __________ inches
Hair color now: __________ Eye color now: __________
ABOUT MY FAMILY . . .
Members of my family include:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
I am told that I look like:
________________________________________________________________
Here are some pictures of:
ME
MY FAMILY
MY FRIENDS
The person I consider my best friend is: ________________________________
My newest friend is: ________________________________________________
The qualities that I admire in friends are: _______________________________
MY MEMORIES
My ﬁrst memory of my childhood was:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
The ﬁrst birthday that I remember was:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
My ﬁrst memories of school include:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

ALL ABOUT ME
403
Some of the things that I would like you to know about me are:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
I think I am:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
THOUGHTS ABOUT SCHOOL
What is your favorite school subject?___________________________________
What is your least favorite subject? ____________________________________
Do you like to read? Why or why not? __________________________________
________________________________________________________________
What do you like to read?____________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
What is the best book you ever read or had read to you? ____________________
Do you usually have homework assignments every day? ____________________
How much time do you usually need to spend completing your homework?
________________________________________________________________
Do you occasionally need help with some subjects? _______________________
Do you have any special interests or things you like to do? __________________
Would you be willing to share your interests with your classmates? ___________
If you could plan a day in your after-school program, what would be included?
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
If you could invite two famous people to join our class for a day, they would be:
_______________________________and______________________________
FAVORITE THINGS
Favorite food: _____________________________________________________
Favorite meal: ____________________________________________________
Prepared by: ______________________________________________________
Favorite color: ____________________________________________________
Second favorite color:_______________________________________________
Favorite group (musical): ____________________________________________
Favorite song: ____________________________________________________
Favorite board game: _______________________________________________
Favorite sport to play: ______________________________________________
Favorite sport to watch: _____________________________________________
Favorite TV show: _________________________________________________
Second favorite TV show: ___________________________________________

APPENDIX A
404
Favorite hobby: ___________________________________________________
Favorite season: ___________________________________________________
MY GOALS
This year I want to be able to: _________________________________________
FOR PARENTS
Some things that I would like you to know about my child include:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
He/She has the following talents:
________________________________________________________________
He/She has the following strengths as a student:
________________________________________________________________
He/She has experienced some difﬁculty with the following subject(s) in school:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
My child learns best by:
________________________________________________________________
My thoughts on homework are:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
Other information you should know about my child:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
A funny/amusing anecdote I would like to share about my child would be the
time that:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
I would be willing to share my talents/skills with the class for the purpose
of enrichment.
My talents/skills include:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
I would like to get involved with my child’s after-school experience in the
following way(s):
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
The most convenient time(s) for me to do so are: _________________________

ALL ABOUT ME
405
Should a problem arise with my child, I would like you to handle it in the
following manner:
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
If you need to contact me, the best time to do so would be:
_______ at work _____- _______-_______ between _______ and _______
_______ at home _____- _______-_______ after _______ no later than _______
(signature)
________________________________________________________________
(date) ______________

This page intentionally left blank 

407
Internet Links for Information
INTERNET DISCLAIMER:
The authors and Delmar Cengage Learning afﬁrm that the Web site
URLs referenced below were accurate at the time of printing. However,
due to the ﬂuid nature of the Internet, we cannot guarantee their accuracy
for the life of the edition.

ADA and Disability Information: [http://www.ada.gov]

Administration for Children and Families: [http://www.acf.
dhhs.gov]

Afterschool.gov: [http://www.afterschool.gov]

The American Academy of Pediatrics: [http://www.aap.org]

Association for Childhood Education International: [http://www.
acei.org]

Bureau of Labor Statistics: [http://www.bls.gov]

Center for the Child Care Workforce: [http://www.ccw.org]

Center for Disease Control and Prevention: [http://cdc.gov]

Child Care Bureau: [http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/ccb]

Children’s Defense Fund: [http://www.childrensdefense.org]

The Council for Exceptional Children: [http://www.cec.sped.org]

Day Care Provider’s Beginner Page: [http://www.oursite.net/
daycare/home.htm]

ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood
Education (ERIC/EECE): [http://www.eric.ed.gov]

Food and Nutrition Information Center: [http://www.nal.usda.
gov/fnic]

Frank Porter Graham Child Development Center: [http://www.
fpg.unc.edu]

General Accounting Ofﬁce (GAO) Reports: [http://www.access.
gpo.gov]
B
APPENDIX B

APPENDIX B
408

Harvard Family Research Project, Harvard University: [http://
www.gseweb.harvard.edu/~hfrp/index.html]

Head Start Bureau: [http://www.acf.dhhs.gov]

Health & Human Services: [http://www.hhs.gov]

I Am Your Child Public Engagement Campaign: [http://www.
iamyourchild.org]

Labor Project for Working Families: [http://www.socrates.
berkeley.edu/~iir/workfam/home.html]

Library of Congress: [http://www.loc.gov]

Military Child Development Program: [http://military-
childrenandyouth.calib.com]

National Association for the Education of Young Children
(NAEYC): [http://naeyc.org]

National Association for Family Child Care: [http://www.nafcc.
org]

National Association of Child Care Professionals: [http://www.
naccp.org]

National Center for Health Statistics: [http://www.cdc.gov/nchs]

National Child Care Information Center: [http://nccic.org]

National Information Center for Children and Youth with Disabil-
ities: [http://www.nichcy.org]

National Institute on Out-of-School-Time: [http://www.niost.org]

National Network for Child Care: [http://www.nncc.org]

National Parent Information Network: [http://npin.org]

National Program for Playground Safety: [http://www.uni.edu/
playground]

National Resource Center for Health and Safety in Child Care:
[http://nrc.uchsc.edu]

National SAFEKIDS Campaign: [http://www.safekids.org]

National School Age Care Alliance: [http://www.nsaca.org]

Public Private Partnerships: [http://nccic.org]

Quality Care for Children: [http://qualitycareforchildren.org]

School-Age Notes: [http://www.schoolagenotes.com]

The Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Network: [http://www.
foodallergy.org]

The Future of Children: [http://www.futureofchildren.org]

The Urban Institute: [http://www.urban.org]

U.S. Census Bureau: [http://www.census.gov]

U.S. Department of Education: [http://www.ed.gov]

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: [http://www.os.
dhhs.gov]

U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce (GPO): [http://access.gpo.gov/
index.html]

Work/Family Directions: [http://www.workfamilydirections.com]

409
Lesson Plans
A R T L E S S O N P L A N S
Newspaper Sculptures
Brief description: Firmly rolled newspapers are taped together randomly
to create a three-dimensional structure.
Materials:
j
½† dowels, 3¢ long (at least 4)
j
newspaper
j
masking tape
j
large piece of cardboard for the base of the structure
Procedure: Lay newspaper ﬂat. Place dowel on one corner of the paper at
an angle. Roll paper tightly around dowel rolling from one corner to the
opposite corner. Secure with a small piece of tape. Slide dowel out from
paper. Continue making paper rolls (50 or more will be needed).
Begin constructing the sculpture by taping one end of each news-
paper roll to the cardboard base. The other end will be taped to other
rolls in whatever manner the children decide.
Role of the leader: Gather materials. Most of these can be brought in by
children or donated by parents. Dowels can be purchased at your local
hardware store. Dedicate ample space for the ongoing sculptures.
Encourage children to work in teams.
Extension: Paint the sculpture when completed.
C
APPENDIX C

APPENDIX C
410
Craft Dough Sculptures
Brief description: Children will make free-form sculptures that can be
dried and painted.
Materials:
j
1 cup cornstarch
j
2 cups baking soda (1 lb. box)
j
11⁄4 cups water
j
tempera paint
j
small paintbrushes
j
wax paper
Procedure: Combine cornstarch, baking soda, and water and cook until
thickened to a dough-like consistency. Turn mixture out onto a pastry
board and knead. Cover with damp cloth or keep in plastic bag. Children
will mold pieces of dough to desired results. Place sculptures on wax
paper. Let air-dry. (May take several days.) Children can paint sculptures
when dried.
Role of the leader: Dough must be prepared and cooled prior to use by
children. Be available to scaffold for children who struggle implementing
their ideas. They may need techniques to use. Encourage children to
share their techniques with one another.
Extensions: Experiment with other types of doughs. Advance to model-
ing clay. Introduce tools used for working with clay. Use tools such as
toothpicks, the end of straws, combs, scissors, etc. to make details in
dough.
Tissue Paper Art
Brief Description: Children will explore books by Eric Carle to see how he
uses tissue paper in his illustrations. They will make their own creations by
cutting and layering tissue paper pieces.
Materials:
j
Several colors of tissue paper (cut into pieces about 4† square)
j
12† x 18† white drawing paper
j
scissors
j
thinned white glue
j
containers to hold thinned glue
j
½- to 1†-wide paintbrushes
j
books by Eric Carle

LESSON PLANS
411
Procedure: Children will examine pictures in Eric Carle books, notice the
colors used, and make predictions about how they are layered. Children
will cut tissue paper into desired shapes. Thinned white glue will be
painted onto paper in areas where tissue paper will be placed. Tissue
paper shapes will be laid onto the glue to create designs or pictures.
Role of the leader: Prepare materials. Search Internet Web sites for infor-
mation about Eric Carle’s illustrations made from tissue paper. Experi-
ment with making tissue paper art to determine how much to thin the
glue.
Extensions: Learn about other illustrator techniques used in children’s
books. Try some of them and determine if any are appropriate for child-
ren’s use.
Salt Painting
Brief description: Children will paint a picture or design then sprinkle salt
onto the wet paint. The salt gives a unique sheen to the ﬁnished painting.
Materials:
j
variety of brightly colored tempera paint
j
variety of sizes of easel paintbrushes
j
12† x 18† black construction paper
j
salt in saltshakers
Procedure: Children will paint desired picture or design on paper. When
ﬁnished they will sprinkle salt onto paint. Finished paper will be placed on
a ﬂat surface in the sun for drying.
Role of the leader: Provide ample materials and drying space for painting.
Involve children in setup and cleanup of materials, including the washing
of paintbrushes.
Extensions: Paint on different colors of construction paper. Sprinkle glit-
ter, sand, or soap ﬂakes onto wet paint.
Printing
Brief description: Children will make their own stencil, paint it, and make
a print of their stencil.
Materials:
j
clean Styrofoam™meat trays (run them through the dishwasher
for disinfecting prior to use)
j
blunt pencils

APPENDIX C
412
j
small paint rollers
j
two to three colors of tempera paint placed in Styrofoam trays
j
plain newsprint cut into pieces slightly larger than the meat trays
Procedure: Children will use blunt pencil to press into the bottom of the
meat tray making a design or picture. Press only hard enough to indent
into the Styrofoam creating an imprinted design. Use the paint roller to
apply a thin layer of paint to the entire bottom of the tray. Place a piece of
paper on top of the paint, press, then lift off. It should be a print of the
design. Children will have to work at the technique of getting the right
amount of paint to produce a clear stencil.
Role of leader: Leaders will collect materials. Parents can be asked to
donate Styrofoam meat trays. Pour a small amount of paint into a Styro-
foam tray and spread with a paint roller to get the roller ready for painting.
Involve children in cleanup of activity.
Extension: Paper can be placed over stencils and rubbed with the side of
crayons to make crayon rubbings.
M U S I C L E S S O N P L A N S
Foot Conducting
Brief description: Children will use instruments to make music by follow-
ing the directions of a conductor who conducts with his feet.
Materials:
j
at least four kinds of instruments
j
hoops approximately 2¢ in diameter (These can be made from yarn
ortapeontheﬂoor;needonehoopforeachkindofinstrument,that
is, ﬁve kinds of instruments requires ﬁve hoops.)
j
instrumental music and CD or record player
Procedure: Children sit in a circle (or semicircle) with the conductor
placed in the middle. Distribute instruments to children so that children
with the same kind of instrument are sitting next to each other. Place the
hoops on the ﬂoor, one in front of each group of musicians. The conductor
will step in and out of the circles to direct the musicians. Children will
accompany the instrumental music by playing their instruments when
the conductor has his or her foot in the hoop in front of them.
Role of the leader: Gather instruments and select a variety of instrumen-
tal music. The leader will need to model the process of conducting. Select
children to take turns conducting the musicians. The leader should con-
tinue to facilitate the activity even though children are conducting.

LESSON PLANS
413
Extensions: Children can learn how to conduct using their hands. Visit a
local school band practice or performance.
Who Stole the Cookie Jar Chant
Brief description: Children will work together to clap in rhythm and
accompany clapping with a chant.
Materials:
None
Procedure: Children will sit in a circle. Leader will begin clapping rhythm
(clap, then slap hands on thighs, clap, slap, etc.). Everyone claps and
chants throughout the entire chant. Once class is in rhythm, the leader
begins the chant.
“Who stole thecook-ie from thecook-iejar?” (Clap and slap onthe
underlined words and syllables.)
“(Child’s name) stole the cookie from the cookie jar!”
Child responds: “Who me?”
Leader: “Yes, you!”
Child: “Couldn’t be!”
Leader: “Then who?”
That child continues with the chant naming another child. The same
rhythm continues throughout the chant. Chant continues until all chil-
dren have been called on to play. The last child responds, “Leader’s
name stole the cookie from the cookie jar.”
Leader: “I stole the cookie from the cookie jar.”
Role of the leader: Organize children into a circle. Model the chant and
explain the rules. Begin and end the chant.
Extensions: Change the rhythm of the chant. Change the body move-
ments to stomping and ﬁnger snapping. Let children chose the body
movements or make up new words for the chant.
Stories of Music
Brief description: Children use their imaginations to draw pictures that
tell a story based on the music they hear.

APPENDIX C
414
Materials:
j
colored markers, one set per child
j
drawing paper, one piece per child
j
instrumental music of varying tempos and instruments
j
CD or record player for playing music
Procedure: Children will close their eyes and listen to segments of the
music. Leader will ask what the music makes them think of. Leader will
play another segment and again ask what it makes the children think of.
Then, the children will be given paper and markers to draw what they are
thinking as they listen to the entire piece of music. Children will share
their stories with the group.
Role of the leader: Choose music and facilitate children’s thinking as they
listen. The leader will also facilitate children’s storytelling to the entire
group, in small groups, or with one other person.
Extensions: Listen and draw to different kinds of music, especially music
from other cultures. Children can move according to how they feel
instead of drawing what they think.
Composing to the Beat
Brief description: Children will work in groups of three or four and create
rhythm patterns. They will write their rhythms pictorially on paper and
play them on instruments. Rhythms can be recorded on a tape player.
Materials:
j
instruments, one per child
j
paper and pencils or markers
j
tape recorder
Procedure: Leader will introduce the idea of a four-beat rhythm in music
and model a few rhythms with an instrument. Children will repeat the
rhythms with their instruments. The leader then should elicit ideas from
the children about how to pictorially represent the rhythm. The leader
can write one of these ideas as an example. Children will be divided into
teams to create their own rhythms. They will be encouraged to write their
rhythm in whatever manner makes sense to them. The team will practice
their rhythm following their written plan. Lastly they will play their
rhythm and record it on a tape player.
Role of the leader: Gather enough instruments so everyone has an instru-
ment. Facilitate this activity by modeling and playing rhythms, encourag-
ing children to repeat the rhythms. The leader further facilitates the

LESSON PLANS
415
activity by managing groups as they work on rhythms. Some groups may
need additional scaffolding.
Extensions: Children can be exposed to the formal method of recording
rhythms by use of whole notes, half notes, etc. Make rhythms with differ-
ent numbers of beats. Children can listen to patterns in music and try to
repeat them.
Bottles of Music
Brief description: Children will experiment with various levels of water in
glass containers to make music.
Materials:
j
glass bottles or large water glasses (ﬁve or more)
j
pitcher of colored water (use small amount of food coloring)
j
spoon
j
measuring cup
j
funnel (to assist in ﬁlling the bottles if necessary)
Procedure: Children, working in teams of two, will ﬁll containers with
different amount of water. One may have 1⁄4 cup, ½ cup in the next, ¾
cup in the next, and so on. Children should note the different levels of
water in the glasses and put them in sequential order. Children tap on
the side of the containers with a spoon to make musical tones. Children
can use the glasses to tap out various known tunes such as “Happy Birth-
day” or make up their own tunes.
Role of the leader: Leaders will gather materials. It may be possible for
parents to donate the bottles. The leader can scaffold the measuring of
the liquid for children not yet familiar with the measuring of liquid. Lead-
ers will facilitate the activity asking divergent questions to guide children’s
observations and discovery. “Which container gives the highest tone?
Why? What would change the tone?
Extensions: Find other items that can be used for making music such as
pan lids, metal bowls, etc. Children can sequence these other items from
high to low sounds and again try to make music.
M A T H L E S S O N P L A N S
Bubble Math
Brief description: Children will make bubbles to explore counting, addi-
tion, and measurement.

APPENDIX C
416
Materials:
j
liquid dish soap (1⁄3 cup to each gallon of water)
j
water
j
container to hold bubble mixture
j
small containers for individual children’s bubbles (such as empty
yogurt containers)
j
bubble wands
j
paper and pencil
j
measuring tape (as used in construction)
Procedure: Make bubble mixture the day before it is to be used. Pour
bubble mixture into individual containers for each child. Children will
use bubble wand to blow bubbles. They will work in teams of two to com-
plete the following math tasks:
j
Eachteammemberwillblowbubblesandhispartnerwillcountthe
number of bubbles and record the information on paper. Each
person will blow bubbles ﬁve times. The bubble scores will be
added to get a total number of bubbles for each person.
j
Each team member will blow bubbles and the team will watch and
follow the bubbles to see which one travels the farthest. The team
will measure the distance from where the bubbles were blown to
where it was when it disappeared. The distance will be recorded.
Each person will blow and measure at least two times.
Role of the leader: Some children may not have had any distance-meas-
uring experience and will need the task scaffolded for them.
Extensions: Other instruments can be used to blow bubbles. Children
can determine if there is a relationship between the size of the bubble
maker and the number of bubbles that can be blown. Other bubble mak-
ers might include the plastic rings that hold soda cans together, small
hoops, or some other item with a hole in it.
Build a School
Brief description: Children will work together using blocks and cardboard
to replicate the length, height, and perimeter of their classroom and the
school.
Materials:
j
unit blocks of various sizes
j
random sizes of cardboard
j
cardboard scissors
j
clipboards, paper, and pencils

LESSON PLANS
417
Procedure: Children will work in teams to examine their classroom and
draw it on paper. They will then build it with blocks and cardboard. This
process will involve discussion about where doors and windows are placed
in relationship to the size of walls. Once children understand the process
of examining and replicating the classroom, they can move on to larger
spaces such as building a model of the entire school or even the city block.
Role of the leader: The facilitation of this activity will require the leader to
be available to listen to children as they brainstorm ideas and to provide
needed materials. The leader will introduce new vocabulary such as
length, width, and perimeter. This activity will take several days, so
space will need to be dedicated to this work.
Extensions: Create a model on a smaller scale using Popsicle™sticks and
wood glue with cardboard as a base. Bring in blueprints of a building for
children to examine. Visit a construction site.
Catapults
Brief description: Homemade catapults will be used to launch objects and
measure distances of trajectory.
Materials:
j
wooden rulers
j
rubber bands
j
plastic spoons
j
small paper balls (crumpled newspaper densely squashed into a
spherical shape)
j
crayons
j
yard sticks or measuring tapes
j
masking tape or sidewalk chalk
Procedure: Children will construct the catapults and paper balls. To
construct the catapult, lay a plastic spoon onto a wooden ruler with the
bowl of the spoon with about 1† of the handle beyond the end of the
ruler. Face the bowl of the spoon toward the ruler. Secure with a rubber
band tightly wrapped around the spoon handle and ruler. Cut newspaper
into pieces about 8† square. These will become the paper balls. Color the
newspaper with the crayon with large scribble like lines. (Each child will
need his or her own crayon color.) Crumple the newspaper as compactly
as possible. To play the game, children will place a paper ball in the bowl
of their spoon on the catapult. Holding the spoon and the ball, pull back
on the spoon slightly then let go of the spoon. The paper ball will be
launched onto the playing ﬁeld. The playing ﬁeld consists of an area that
is marked off with parallel lines of masking tape every foot. Children can

APPENDIX C
418
launch ﬁve paper balls and then measure the distance of their ﬂights.
Additional rulers may be used to measure exact distance between the
lines. Children can record their scores on their clipboards.
Role of the leader: The leader will construct the playing ﬁeld by placing
rows of masking tape on the ﬂoor one foot apart. Use sidewalk chalk to
make the lines on concrete or blacktop. The leader should experiment
with the catapults to determine the depth of the playing ﬁeld. The leader
will also need to determine the rules, where children will stand, and when
there is a no-launch time so children are safe while measuring distances.
Extensions: Experiment with other objects such as cotton balls for
launching. Read about catapults.
Pattern Prints
Brief description: Children will design their own pattern and print it on
paper.
Materials:
j
variety of rubber stamps
j
ink for stamps (preferably more than one color)
j
drawing paper
Procedure: Children will review the concept of patterns. Each child will
create a pattern on the border of his paper. Paper can be used as invita-
tions or placemats. It can serve as the background paper for displaying
another piece of artwork in the classroom. Children can be encouraged
to print patterns in other ways on their paper. Children will verbalize their
patterns (such as frog, frog, snake, frog, frog, snake).
Role of the leader: The leader will need to facilitate a discussion about
patterns. Scaffolding may be necessary for some children who aren’t
familiar with patterns.
Extensions: Examine patterns in wallpaper and have children make their
own wallpaper pattern. Examine patterns in wrapping paper. Then
encourage children to make patterns on easel paper to be later used as
wrapping paper. Use paint or markers to make the patterns.
Sink the Ships
Brief description: Children will play this game in teams of two while they
learn about using coordinates. The goal of the game is to ﬁnd and sink
each other’s ships.

LESSON PLANS
419
Materials:
j
graph paper
j
pencils (one per child)
j
marker (one per child)
Procedure: Each child will make his game card in the following manner.
(Younger children may need the playing card made for them.) Each play-
er has his own playing graph. To begin, each player places his ships on the
graph by letters in the spaces. The letter B is for battleship, C for cruiser,
D for destroyer, and S for submarine. Each player will place four battle-
ships (B), three cruisers (C), two destroyers (D), and one submarine (S).
Each kind of ship must be in a line vertically, horizontally, or diagonally as
displayed in the example. Children play in teams of two. For example,
Susie will begin play by calling out coordinates, such as G4. Lena looks
to see if that coordinate corresponds to the placement of one of her
ships. If it is a hit, the Lena tells what has been hit. “You hit one of my
cruisers.” Lena will put a large X on the cruiser that had been hit. Susie
will write “C” in the G4 space on her paper. Children take turns calling out
coordinates until all of one person’s ships have been sunk.
Role of the leader: The leader may want to make the game cards ahead
of time. These can be easily made on a computer and printed.
Extensions: The coordinate system can be changed to more closely
match that used in geometry. Instead of a column of letters, the column
could be numbers. The submarine in the above example is at point (3,2).
More advance children can use an X-Y axis system that incorporates neg-
ative numbers.
J
B
B
B
B
I
H
C
G
C
F
C
D
D
C
D
B
S
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

APPENDIX C
420
S C I E N C E L E S S O N P L A N S
Interactive Inventions
Brief description: Children will work in teams to explore objects and
their properties to determine how they interact to move objects through
the air.
Materials:
j
dishpans (one for each team of three to four children)
j
objects to interact: cotton balls, clay or dough, clothespins, straws,
rubber bands, Popsicle sticks, paper clips, corks, pipe cleaners,
plastic gears, string, plastic spoons, scissors, berry baskets, and
any other materials available (“found materials”)
j
easel paper and markers or science journals
Procedure: The leader will introduce the idea of inventions by highlight-
ing that inventions happen as a result of inventor’s ideas and that everyone
has ideas. Children will work in teams to explore the materials in their tub.
The focus of this free exploration is to see how objects can work together
to move objects through the air. After a predetermined length of time,
teams will work together to report their ideas and discoveries either on a
piece of easel paper or in their science journals.
Role of the leader: The leader will gather materials and elicit donations
from parents. The leader sets the stage for exploration by talking about
inventors and how inventions start. The scope of exploration is further
guided by the leader clearly stating the goal of determining how materials
work together (interact). The leader will monitor children’s progress and,
if needed, guide their explorations with questions or personal thoughts
such as “I wonder what would happen if . . .”
Extensions: Children implement their invention ideas and test them by
propelling an object such as a cotton ball or dough through the air. Chil-
dren can read about various inventors.
Solutions and Emulsions
Brief description: Children will experiment with a variety of materials to
experience what combinations of matter and water become solutions and
what combinations are emulsions.
Materials:
j
small clear plastic cups
j
teaspoon

LESSON PLANS
421
j
stirring sticks
j
pitcher of water
j
things to mix with water: vegetable oil, vinegar, sand, salt, sugar,
baking soda, ﬂour, cornstarch
j
science journals
Procedure: The child will pour a plastic cup half full of water. The child
will put one teaspoon of one of the other materials in the cup and gently
stir to the count of 15. Let the mixture settle and observe what happened
to the matter that was added. If it disappeared, the mixture has become a
solution. If it is cloudy or separates, the mixture is an emulsion. The mix-
ture is then dumped into a large container and the experimenter again
pours the cup half full of water and tests another material. Each child
can record his ﬁndings in his science journal after completing the project.
Role of the leader: The leader must have a basic understanding of solu-
tions and emulsions. The leader will explain these two new vocabulary
words to children and model the process by pouring a cup half full of
water and measuring out a teaspoon of salt. The leader will then ask the
children to predict what they think will happen. The leader will elicit a few
responses, then put the salt back into the salt container encouraging chil-
dren to be scientists and make those discoveries themselves.
Extensions: Children can continue exploration of solutions by adding
another teaspoon of matter and stirring. If the water is again clear, anoth-
er teaspoon can be added. Keep adding until no more will dissolve. This
means that the solution has reached the saturation point.
Melt the Crayons
Brief description: Children will devise experiments to see what helps
crayons melt when placed in the sun.
Materials:
j
crayon pieces
j
items to place under the crayons: small disposable pie pans, black
construction paper, white construction paper, foil, and wax paper.
Procedure: Children will make predictions about what material will help
crayons melt the fastest. They will put a crayon piece on ﬁve different
substances and place them in the sun outside. (Be sure they are placed
on a surface that will not be harmed if the crayon melts.) Children will
observe their science project every 15 minutes for the next two hours
and record their observations in their science journals.

APPENDIX C
422
Role of the leader: The leader should be prepared by having completed
the activity herself to determine which brand of crayons melts the easiest.
This will help set up the children for success. Be watchful of the weather
and do this on a sunny, warm day.
Extensions: Melt ice cubes in a similar fashion using items that may
absorb or reﬂect the heat. Discuss heat reﬂection and absorption as it
pertains to clothing.
Shadows in Time
Brief description: Children will work in teams to explore how their
shadow changes throughout the day.
Materials:
j
sidewalk chalk
j
measuring tapes
j
clipboards, paper, and pencils
Procedure: Children will work in teams of two tracing each other’s shad-
ows. Begin this activity in the morning of a sunny day. Children must work
in a place where there is adequate blacktop or concrete to outline the
shadows. Trace around the person’s shoes and shadow. Measure the dis-
tance from the heels of the shoes to the farthest point on the shadow.
Record the measurement and the time of day. Children will return to
the shadow tracings every one to two hours and stand in their traced foot-
prints. Each time the children will trace the shadows, measure their
lengths and record the new measurements. Near the end of the class
day (and before the sun goes down), children will trace and measure the
last time. Children will examine their tracings of the day and draw
conclusions.
Role of the leader: The leader should anticipate the changes in the shad-
ows and be certain that children have enough space between their shad-
ows to allow for the changes. The leader should facilitate the activity by
asking children divergent questions to encourage critical thinking. “Why
does the shadow change size? Where do you think the shadow will be this
afternoon?”
Extensions: Children can do this activity at different times of the year and
notice how their shadows change. Further study can help them under-
stand the tilt of the earth on its axis and how it changes the placement of
the sun in the sky.

LESSON PLANS
423
Feed the Ants
Brief description: Children will create an experiment to try to determine
attracts ants.
Materials:
j
ant trail (found outside)
j
paper plate divided into eight pie-shaped sections (one per team)
j
very small portions of food (sugar, vegetable oil, bread, candy,
meat, cheese, fruit, vegetables, etc.)
Procedure: On the ﬁrst day, lead children in a discussion about ants. Who
has had them in their house? Why do they come in? What food do they go
after? Divide children into teams of four to further discuss what foods
they think ants would like. Each team will make a list of the foods. Chil-
dren are to be encouraged to bring in very small portions of food from
home for the experiment. Each team will decide what eight foods they
want to offer the ants and place a different type of food on each section
of the paper plate. Teams will then search for an ant trail outside and place
their paper plate near the trail. Children will observe the plates through-
out the day and record any ant activity in their science journals.
Role of the leader: Leaders should gather some background knowledge
of ants. They will have to work with each team to be certain that team
members have access to needed food items.
Extensions: Children can be encouraged to do Internet searches to learn
about different kinds of ants. Other outdoor insects can be explored in a
similar fashion.

This page intentionally left blank 

425
A
AAHPERD—American Alliance for Health, Phys-
ical Education, Recreation, and Dance: devel-
ops standards for aerobic endurance, muscular
strength, and ﬂexibility that indicate ﬁtness
academic approach—anapproachtoprogram-
ming that involves determining outcomes that can
be measured and then planning a program to help
children achieve those goals
accommodations—changes that are necessary
when planning activities to include special-needs
children
ADA—Americans with Disabilities Act
adjunct
learning
tools—additional ways to
learn that are not part of traditional curriculum
activities
adolescence—Freud’s ﬁfth stage in which there
are changes to sexual organs and in appearance,
accompanied by strong sexual urges
age appropriateness—programs are planned
according to universal, predictable growth and
changes that occur in children
anal period—Freud’ssecondstage,inwhichchil-
drenincreasebodyawarenessandfocusofattention
is on the anus as a source of pleasure
anecdotal record—written observations of a
child in a variety of situations
antibias
curriculum—a curriculum that ad-
dresses cultural diversity by including gender and
differences in physical differences; is based on
children’s developmental tasks as they construct
identity and attitudes; directly addresses the impact
ofstereotyping,bias,anddiscriminatory behaviorin
young children’s development and interactions
authentic feedback—a description of a child’s
real accomplishments
autonomy vs. shame and doubt—Erikson’s
second stage, in which the focus is to become inde-
pendent by gaining control over bodily functions
B
background knowledge—knowledge that is
learned through experiences, reading, movies, and
television
biodegradable—objects that disintegrate over
time
BMI—body mass index; a measure of the ratio of
weight to height
bullying—unprovoked aggression that is intended
to inﬂict injury or discomfort on the victim
g
GLOSSARY

GLOSSARY
426
C
caregiver—name for an adult in child care when
the emphasis is on the caring role
CDA—Child Development Associate, nationally
recognized credential for early childhood teachers
and caregivers
centering—Piaget’s observation that young chil-
drenfocusononlyonedimensionof aformata time
checklist—alistofpredeterminedbehaviorstobe
observed
child
care
councils—group of representa-
tives from the various factions of the child care
community
chronic health condition—recurring allergies
or infections
classical conditioning—conditioning brought
about by proximity of stimulus and response
clique—groups of children who have similar char-
acteristics and interests
code-switching—a complete change of lan-
guage form when addressing adults and when talk-
ing to other children
complex oral language—the child’s vocabu-
lary as well as his or her ability to understand and
use those words to convey thoughts; also known as
language comprehension
concrete operations—ability to think symboli-
cally and to reverse processes when information is
presented concretely
constructing
knowledge—children develop
their own theories about how the world works
conventional—Kohlberg’s second stage of moral
development in which there is an emphasis on
the social rules of the individual’s family, group, or
nation
conventional
literacy—formal reading and
writing
convergent thinking—a process of thought that
narrows down many ideas into a single focused
point
curriculum—a plan of activities that accom-
plishes the goals of a program
Cyber-bullying—use of electronic means to bully
others
D
decoding—sounding out words by breaking them
apart into their letter sounds
developmentalist—name for an adult in child
care who is versed in the developmental aspects of
the child
dialogic
reading—ﬁrst teaches children the
vocabulary of the book and then expands on the
story itself
divergent questions—questions that have no
speciﬁc answer and require a child to think critically
divergent thinking—aprocessofthoughtorper-
ception that involves considering alternatives, tak-
ing a line of thought that is different from the usual
E
educare—anameforanadultinchildcarereﬂect-
ing the multifaceted aspect of working with school-
age children
ego—in psychoanalytic theory, the rational aspect
of personality
elaborated code—a communication that uses a
more extensive vocabulary, is correct grammati-
cally, and is longer
emergent
curriculum—activities
that
are
planned as a result of caregivers noting the current
interests of children or that develop as children play
emergent literacy—reading-related behaviors
and skills that precede formal reading and writing

GLOSSARY
427
emerging literacy skills—reading-relatedskills
that children obtain prior to actually reading and
writing
ethics—a study of right, wrong, duty, and
obligation
event recording—observer chooses a speciﬁc
situation in which to observe a child
extended family—members of nuclear family
plus grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins
F
food
guide
pyramid—U.S. Department of
Agriculture guide to healthy food choices and
number of servings per day
formal operations—ability to consider hypo-
thetical problems without concrete examples
functional print—print that has a purpose
G
gang—groups of children who gather together to
be out of the realm of adults but also to be antisocial
H
holistic approach—a curriculum that evolves
from children’s individual and group abilities and
interests
I
id—in psychoanalytic theory, the part of the per-
sonality that is the source of pleasure-seeking drives
identity vs. role confusion—Erikson’s ﬁfth
stage, in which adolescents search for their identity
as individuals in a society
inclusion—placing children with disabilities in
settings with same-age peers
individual appropriateness—refers to each
child’s unique pattern and timing of growth
Individualized Education Plan (IEP)—set of
goals determined by a team of professionals and
parents to reﬂect what the child should accomplish
within a year’s time
industry vs. inferiority—Erikson’s fourth stage,
in which children expend all their energies on mas-
tering new skills at home, in school, on the play-
ground, and in their neighborhoods
initiative
vs.
guilt—Erikson’s third stage, in
which children attempt new activities that can
result in either pride (initiative) or guilt when
unsuccessful
integrated curriculum—the linking of two or
more subject areas such as literacy and math, or
linking an academic subject to the community
or vocations
integrated
learning—interrelated disciplines
such as language, math, or science to achieve a goal
intergenerational programs—child care pro-
grams that utilize older persons and young adults or
teenagers as volunteers
interracial family—marriage between two adults
of different races
invented spelling—writing with some letter-
sound relationships, but not generally representing
accurately spelled words
L
language
comprehension—the child’s vo-
cabulary as well as his or her ability to understand
and use those words to convey thoughts; also known
as complex oral language
latency period—Freud’s fourth stage, in which
children’s sexual urges are unobtrusive and ener-
gies are directed toward school activities and sports
lateralization—specialization in function of the
two hemispheres of the brain

GLOSSARY
428
learning—processes by which environmental
inﬂuences and experiences bring about permanent
changes in thinking, feeling, and behavior
literacy—being able to read and write
logical
consequence—a tool for changing
behavior in which the result of a child’s misbehavior
is related to the behavior
logicomathematical
knowledge—how ob-
jects compare to one another
M
maturation—progression of changes that takes
place as people age
meaning-based
experiences—learning ex-
periences that emphasize thinking, cooperative
problem solving, decision making, and an opportu-
nity to challenge preconceived ideas
modeling—adults exhibit the behaviors that are
expected of children
moral realism—a stage of moral development in
which children believe that rules are determined by
an authority ﬁgure and they are not to be changed
moral relativism—a stage of moral development
inwhichchildrenviewpunishmentsasfairorunfair,
are more ﬂexible in their thinking, and can discuss
moral issues
morality—our perception of what is good or right
morality of caring—Gilligan’s theory that girls
are socialized to be caring and nurturing and reluc-
tant to judge right and wrong in absolutes
morality of justice—Gilligan’s theory that boys
will determine what is right or wrong and then fol-
low it with a clear solution when faced with making
choices
multipurpose
equipment—equipment
that
has many possibilities for play activities
MyPyramid—new name for the food guide
pyramid
N
NAA—National
AfterSchool
Association
has
developed standards for the best practices for
children ages ﬁve to 14
NAEYC—National Association for the Education
ofYoungChildren,alargeprofessionalorganization
that accredits programs for children from birth
through the elementary years
NAFCC—National Association for Family Child
Care;
has
developed
quality
standards
for
accreditation
nature—a variety of characteristics that are inher-
ited from parents
negotiable
rules—rules that are based on
choices
NIOST—National
Institute
on
Out-of-School
Time; focuses on education and training, commu-
nity development, consultation, research, and pub-
lic awareness
nonbiodegradable—objects that will not disin-
tegrate over time
non-negotiable rules—rules that are used for
actions that can be harmful to others or destructive
to property and that are not open for discussion
NSACA—National School Age Care Alliance
nuclear (intact) family—mother, father, and
children
nurture—all the experiences and inﬂuences peo-
ple are exposed to from the moment of conception
on throughout a lifetime
O
operant conditioning—the process by which
children act upon their environment and are rein-
forced for their behaviors
optional rules—things that children can reason-
ably control themselves
oral period—Freud’s term for the ﬁrst stage, in
which the infant gains pleasure through sucking

GLOSSARY
429
P
phallic period—Freud’s third stage, in which the
genital areas are the focus of pleasure and children
become aware of physical differences
phonemes—the smallest sounds of our speech
stream
phonological awareness—the ability to hear
phonemes, beginning, middle, and ending sounds
in words, syllables, and rhyming sounds
physical knowledge—how objects behave as a
result of their characteristics
postconventional—Kohlberg’s third stage of
moral development, in which there is an emphasis
on moral values and principles
preconventional—Kohlberg’s
ﬁrst
stage
of
moral development, in which there is an emphasis
on punishment and rewards
preoperational
period—ability to begin to
think symbolically and to remember experiences
and objects independently of the immediate
encounter
print—concepts of the difference between a word,
a syllable, and a letter, recognizing that print moves
from top to bottom and left to right on a page, and
that thereare forms of punctuation to endathought
print knowledge—knowledge about the alpha-
bet, letter sounds, and concepts of print
R
reading comprehension—understanding the
printed word(s)
reconstituted
or
blended
family—families
that include children from previous marriages
plus those from the present union
recreational supervisor—name for an adult in
child care when the emphasis is on the recreational
aspects
restricted code—communications that are more
limited and may rely on gestures and voice intona-
tion to convey meaning
rough and tumble play—aggressive behavior,
but the children usually have positive facial expres-
sions or may be laughing
S
SACERS—School-Age
Care
Environmental
Scale, a method of rating programs that serve
children ﬁve to 12
safety audit—survey of all playground structures
in comparison to standards, guidelines, and laws set
by federal and state agencies
scaffold—support system that supports children
as they move from one intellectual level to the next
scientiﬁc literacy—knowledge and understand-
ing of science concepts and process
self-assessment—a list of goals that children
can use to assess their own progress
self-image—our perception of ourselves plus the
perceptions conveyed by others
sensorimotor period—Piaget’s ﬁrst period, in
which infants use all their senses to explore and
learn about the world around them
single-gender family—two adults of the same
gender plus children
single-parent
family—father or mother and
children
single purpose equipment—play equipment
that can be used for only one kind of play
social knowledge—information children can-
not construct for themselves
storage strategies—methods children use to
increase their memory
superego—in psychoanalytic theory, the part of
the personality that controls behavior through the
development of conscience

GLOSSARY
430
T
time or duration sampling—observation of a
child’s behavior at intervals of time and for a speci-
ﬁed period of time
trust vs. mistrust—Erikson’s ﬁrststage, in which
babieslearntotrustthatotherswilltakecareoftheir
basic needs and that others can be depended upon
typically
developing—children
without
disabilities
V
values—the qualities we believe to be intrinsically
desirable and that we strive to achieve in ourselves
video camera or tape recording—most accu-
rate methods of observation
volunteer
corps—group of older adults and
young persons or teenagers who volunteer in a
child care center
Z
zone of proximal development—the hypo-
thetical environment in which learning and devel-
opment take place

431
A
Academic approach, 151
Accommodations, 136
Accreditation, 384–389
National After School Association (NAA),
384–386
National Association for Family Child Care
(NAFCC), 388–389
National Association for the Education of Young
Children (NAEYC), 387–388
ADHD (attention deﬁcit hyperactive disorder),
133–135
Adjunct learning tools, 218
Adler, P., 26
Adler, P. A., 26
Adolescence, 94, 95
Aeronautics and space, 274–275, 328–330
Age appropriateness, 148
Aggressive children, 131–132
Albrecht, K., 65, 148–151
American Alliance for Health, Physical Education,
Recreation and Dance (AAHPERD), 187,
351–352
American Association for the Advancement of
Science, 249
American Association of Retired Persons (AARP),
365
American Dietetic Association (ADA), 61
American Society for Testing and Materials, 188
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA),
Accountability Guidelines, 187
Anal period, 94
Anecdotal record, 395
Annual State Child Care Administrators Meeting,
382–383
Antibias curriculum, 155–156
Arcia, E., 134
Arts, the, 225–244
music and movement, 235–238
visual. See Visual arts
Asperger’s disorder, 138
At Home in the Rain Forest (Willow and Jacques),
274
Audubon Society, 260
Auglin, J. M., 83
Authentic feedback, 217
Autism, 138–141
Autistic disorder, 138
Autonomy vs. shame and doubt, 96
B
Background knowledge, 305
Bandura, A., 77
Behavior, changing, 125–129
and communication, 129–130
strategies, 127–129
i
INDEX

INDEX
432
Behaviorist theory, 76–79
and behavioral change, 125–129
evaluation of, 78
implications for child care staff, 78–79
Behaviors, problem, 130–139
aggressive, 131–132
observing, 395–396
overactivity and ADHD, 133–135
quiet and withdrawn, 132
Ben’s Guide to U.S. Government for Kids
website, 219
Berger, K., 95, 97
Berger, K. S., 37–38, 78, 81
Berk, L. E., 79
Bernstein, B., 84
Bilingualism, 85
Biodegradable, 331
Biological sciences, 267–276
Blackwell, D. L., 63
Blended families, 38–39
BMI (body mass index), 60
Board games, 200
Body mass index (BMI), 60
Books, making, 315–316
Bowman, D. H., 21
Bredekamp, S., 148, 153, 306
Brownell, K. D., 61
Bullying, 21–22
Bush, George W., 383
Businesses, community, as resources, 372
C
California Department of Education, 381–382
Careers,
exploring, 321–340
advertising, 333–335
chef, 326–328
environmental conservation, 330–333
guidelines for child care staff, 336–337
scientist, 335–336
Caregivers, 4
characteristics of effective, 4–10
as role models, 6
role of, 9
Cartography (mapmaking), 323–325
Census Bureau, 38–39, 39, 41–42
Center for the Study of Testing, Evaluation, and
Educational Policy website, 396
Centering, 73
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), 342
National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey, 60
Checklist, 396
Chef’s club, 326–328
Chemistry, 265–267
Child care
advantages of, 40–41, 381–382
goals of, 381–382
Child Care 2000, 396
Child Care Bureau, 383, 396
Child care councils, 382
Child Development Associate (CDA), 389–390
Childhood disintegrative disorder, 138–139
Children’s Defense Fund, 44, 64, 110,
341–342, 342
Childstats.gov (website), 381
Chronic health conditions, 63–64, 342–343
Chumlea, W. C., 60
Classical conditioning, 76
Click, P., 395
Clinton, Bill, 383, 396
Cliques, 26
Clubs, 165–166
Code-switching, 84, 85–86
Cognitive development, 71–92, 86
behaviorist theory, 76–79
and intelligence, 82–83
and language, 83–88
Piaget’s theory, 72–76
sociocultural theory, 79–82
College students, 369–371
Communication
and behavior change, 129–130
with children, 7–8

INDEX
433
journals, 46
with parents, 45–47
via e-mail, 45–46
Community involvement, 167–168
Community resources, 363–379
facilities and businesses, 371–374
intergenerational programs, 364–371
removing barriers to, 376–377
volunteers, 374–376
Complex oral language, 297
Computers, 218–221
guidelines for caregivers, 220–221
Concrete operations, 73
Conﬂict resolution
activities for, 113–116
strategies, 112–113
Connors, C. K., 134
Conservation, environmental, 330–333,
373–374
Constructing knowledge, 250
Conventional, 101
Conventional literacy, 296
Convergent thinking, 227
Cooperation, 120–125
activities, 123–125
strategies, 121–122
Copple, C., 148, 153, 306
Corasanti, M. A., 393
Council for Early Childhood Professional
Recognition, 390
Co-workers, 9–10
Credentials, 389–392
National School Age Care Alliance
(NSACA), 392
Cultural diversity, and planning, 152–156
Culture, and cognitive development, 79
Curriculum
deﬁnition, 157
group activities, 163–164
independent projects, 162–163
integrated, 158–159
plan for, 159–162
Cyber-bullying, 21–22
D
Dance and movement, 235–238
Decoding, 297
Dental problems, 342
Department of Agriculture, 344
Department of Health and Human Services,
382–383, 396
Derman-Sparks, L., 155–156
Development
caregiver’s role in, 11–12
cognitive. See Cognitive development
and environment, 177–178
physical. See Physical development
and play, 199–201
psychosocial. See Psychosocial development
of self, 19–24
understanding of, 5–6
Developmental stages, 28–33
eight-to-ten-year-olds, 30–31
eleven-to-thirteen-year-olds, 31–33
ﬁve-to-seven-year-olds, 28–29
Developmentalists, 4
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM), 138
Dialogic reading, 303
Diet and nutrition, 342–351
Disabilities. See Health conditions; Special needs
children
Divergent questions, 258
Divergent thinking, 227
Divorce, 41
and remarriage, 42–43
Drama, 239–243
and literacy, 311–312, 313–314
Duration sampling, 395
E
Earth 911 website, 373
Earth science, 267–276
environmental conservation activities, 330–333
resources, 273–274
Ebonics, 84
Ebony magazine, 42

INDEX
434
Educare, 4
Educational criteria, for employment, 10–11
Edwards, C. P., 25
Eggebeen, D. J., 42
Ego, 94
Elaborated code, 84
Elders, community, 364–369
Elementary and Secondary Education Act
(ESEA), 383
E-mail communication, 45–46
Emergent curriculum, 151
Emergent literacy, 296
Emerging literacy skills, 295
Employment criteria, 10–11
Environment, creating, 177–196
indoor space, 179–185
outdoor space, 185–192
Environmental conservation activities, 330–333,
373–374
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 373
Erikson, Erik,
psychosocial theory of, 96–99
evaluation of, 97–98
implications for child care staff, 98–99
Ethical considerations, 13–14
Ethics, deﬁnition, 13
Evaluation
of child care programs, 392–396
of children’s progress, 394–396
Event recording, 395
Exercise, 351–360. See also Games, active indoor;
Games, outdoor
guidelines for child care staff, 356–357
Exploratorium Online, 219
Extended families, 38
F
Families, 37–53. See also Parents
blended (reconstituted), 38
extended, 38
interracial, 39
nuclear, 40
nuclear (intact), 38
single-gender, 39
single-parent, 38, 41–42
supporting, 9, 45–48
well-functioning, 37–38
Fathers
importance of, 41
single, 41–42
Field trips, 164–165, 376–377
Fine-motor skills, 65–66
Fire and police stations, as resources, 372
Fischman, A. J., 134
Flynn, L. L., 136
Food guide pyramid, 343
Food service activities, 326–328
Formal operations, 74
Freud, Anna, 96
Freud, Sigmund,
psychoanalytic theory of, 94–96, 98
implications for child care staff, 98–99
Functional print, 301
G
Games
active indoor, 208–212
board, 200
and development, 199–201
guidelines for, 217–218
indoor, 208–217
outdoor, 201–208
and safety, 201–202
Gangs, 26
Gardner, H., 82
Gay parents, 39, 43–44
Gillam, T. B., 351
Gilligan, C., 25, 102
Gonzalez-Mena, Janet, 81
Gordon, S., 61
Gortmaker, S. L., 61
Grandparents, 42
Gray Panthers, 365
Gross-motor skills, 65
Group activities, 163–164

INDEX
435
H
Hakuta, K., 85
Halpern, R., 382
Handbook for Public Playground Safety (United
States Product Safety Commission), 187
Handicapped children. See Health conditions;
Special needs children
Harms, T., 300, 393
Hartup, W., 60, 107
Harvard Medical School, 134
Hawkins, A. J., 42
Hayward, Chris, 60
Health and nutrition, 342–351
Health conditions, 63–64, 341–343
Henderson, V. K., 393
High school students, 369–371
Holistic approach, 151
Holmes, R. N., 20–21
Holzman, M., 83
Home environment, effect on children, 39–44
Homosexual parents, 39, 43–44
Hubbard, V. S., 60
I
Id, 94
Identity vs. role confusion, 96
Illnesses, 63–64
Inclusion, 135
Independence, 5
Independent projects, 162–163
Individual appropriateness, 148
Individual Education Plan (IEP), 136–137
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, 137
Indoor games
active, 208–212
Indoor space
designing, 179–185
sharing, 183–185
Industry vs. inferiority, 96
Initiative vs. guilt, 96
Intact (nuclear) families, 38
Integrated curriculum, 158–159
Integrated learning, 220
Intelligence, 82–83
Interest centers, 164
Intergenerational programs
high school and college, 369–371
seniors, 364–369
Internet, 218–221
Internet Public Library for Kids, 219
Interracial families, 39
Invented spelling, 298
J
Jacobs, E. V., 300, 392–396
Journals, communication, 46
K
Katz, L. G., 22–23, 394–395, 396
Kennedy Center Storyline website, 218
Kieff, J., 136
Knowledge Adventure software, 220
Kohlberg, Lawrence,
theory of moral development, 100–101
evaluation of, 102–103
implications for child care staff, 102–103
Krager, J. M., 134
Krashen, S., 155
Kurdek, L., 41
L
Language
bilingualism, 84–86
and cognitive development, 80, 83–88
English, as second, 84–86
play languages, 315
Latency, 94, 95
Lateralization, 227
Learning, 59
Lesbian parents, 39, 43–44
Libido, 94
Library, using, 372

INDEX
436
Limit-setting, 7
Linguistic diversity, and planning, 152–156
Literacy, 293–294
caregiver’s role in, 301–316
development of, 295–298
and drama, 313–314
guidelines for child care staff, 316–317
and music, 316
play languages, 315
Literacy competency, 293–320
emerging literacy skills, 295
Literacy environment, 299–301
Locke, J., 76
Logical consequence, 127
Logicomathematical knowledge, 259
Lonigan, C. J., 301
Loosi, S. F., 152
Lucas, A., 61
M
MacIver, D., 19
Maps, making, 323–325
Marketing, exploring careers in, 333–335
Math, 247–292, 277–286
children as natural mathematicians, 253–254
environment, 256–257
relation to science, 254–255
Math Dictionary for Kids website, 219
Maturation, 59
McClellan, D. F., 22–23
McClure, E. F., 85
McLanahan, S. S., 40
McLaughlin, B., 85
Meaning-based experiences, 322
Modeling, 77
Moral development, 98–103
Moral realism, 100
Moral relativism, 100
Morality, 13
Morality of caring, 102
Morality of justice, 102
Morgan, G., 391
MOST project (Making the Most of Out-of-School
time), 390–391
Motor skills, 65
Multicultural Game Book, The (Orlando), 200
Multipurpose equipment, 190
Murphy, J. M., 25
Museums, 371–372
Music
and literacy, 313–314
and movement, 235–238
MyPyramid, 343–344
N
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
(NASA), 274
National After School Association (NAA), 384–386
contact information, 386
National Association for Family Child Care
(NAFCC), 388–389
National Association for the Education of Young
Children (NAEYC), 152, 153, 154, 155, 220
accreditation, 387–388
Code of Ethical Conduct, 13–14
contact information, 388
National Child Care Information Center, 383
National Children’s Home, 21
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 249
National Geographic, 271, 273
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(CDC), 60
National Institute on Drug Abuse, 342
National Institute on Out-of-School Time
(NIOST), 152, 390–392
National Program for Playground Safety,
University of Northery Iowa, 187
National School Age Care Alliance (NSACA), 392
National Science Board, 249, 250
National Science Education Standards (National
Research Council), 249
National WildlifeFederation publications, 260,273
Nature Conservancy, 273
Nature vs. nurture, 58–59

INDEX
437
Needs of children, 3
Negotiable rules, 126
Newacheck, P., 63
Nilsen, E. A., 390–391
Nilsen Associates, 391–392
No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB), 383–384
Nonbiodegradable, 331
Non-negotiable rules, 125
Nuclear families, 38
beneﬁts of, 40
Nurturing Father, The (Pruett), 41
Nutrition and health, 342–351
O
Obesity, 60–63, 341
consquences of, 61–62
implications for child care staff, 62–63
Observation, for evaluation, 395–396
Online tools, 218–221
Operant conditioning, 76–77
Opie, I., 25
Opie, P., 25
Optional rules, 126
Oral period, 94
Orlando, L., The Multicultural Game Book, 200
Outdoor space, 185–192
designing, 185–192
safety, 187–189, 201–202
sharing, 191–192
Overactive children, 133–135
Overweight. See Obesity
P
Parents, 44–45
communicating with, 45–46, 183
Pavlov, I., 76
Pease-Alvarez, L., 85
Peer groups, 24–28
and caregivers, 27–28
cliques, 26
gangs, 26
Phallic stage, 94, 95
Philips, S., 86
Phonemes, 297
Phonological awareness, 297
Physical development, 57–70
height and weight, 59–60
motor skills, 65–66
and nature vs. nurture, 58–59
Physical ﬁtness, 8–9, 351–360. See also Games;
Games, active indoor; Games, outdoor
guidelines for child care staff, 356–357
Physical knowledge, 258–259
Physical science, 261–263
Piaget, Jean,
developmental theory of, 72–76, 250, 253
evaluation of, 74–76
implications for child care staff, 75–76
and moral development, 100
Planning
antibias curriculum, 155–156
and cultural diversity, 152–156
importance of, 157–158
Plantz, M., 65, 148–151
Play
and development, 199–201
Playgrounds. See Outdoor space
Police and ﬁre stations, as resources, 372
Postconventional, 101–102
Poverty, 41, 44–45
Powershift (Tofﬂer), 321
Preconventional, 100–101
Preoperational period, 73
Print, 297
Print knowledge, 296–297
Problem-solving, 8
Project Home Safe, 148–151
Project Spectrum website, 396
Pruett, Kyle, The Nurturing Father, 41
Psychoanalytic theory,
of Sigmund Freud, 94–96
evaluation of, 95–96
Psychosocial development, 93–106
Erikson’s theory of, 96–99
Freud’s theory, 94–96, 98
Puhl, R., 61

INDEX
438
Q
Quality and standards, 381–400
accreditation, 384–392
evaluation, 392–396
Quiet children, 132
R
RainForest Action Network, 273
Rainforest, The (Goodman), 274
Ranger Rick magazine, 260
Read-Aloud Handbook (Trelease), 302
Reading. See Literacy
Reading comprehension, 297
Reconstituted families, 38–39
Recreational supervisors, 4
Reid, B. V., 102
Restricted code, 84
Rogoff, Barbara, 81
Role models, 6
Rough and tumble play, 20
S
Safer, D. J., 134
Safety
games and, 201–202
outdoor, 187–189, 201–202
Safety audit, 187
Scaffolding, 79–80, 251
Schedule, making, 168–169
School-Age Care Environment Rating Scale
(SACERS), 300, 392–393
Science, 247–292
activities, for careers in, 335–336
biological, 267–276
earth, 267–276
environment, 256–257
leading activities in, 257–261
physical, 261–263
process and content, 255–256
relation to math, 254–255
Scientiﬁc literacy, 249
Self, development of, 19–24
Self esteem, encouraging, 23–24
Self-assessment, 396
Self-image, 116–120
activities for, 117–120
deﬁnition, 116
strategies for, 117
Senior citizens, community, 364–369
Sensorimotor period, 72–73
Serdula, M., 61
Shalala, Donna, 382–383
Sierra Club contact information, 273
Simons, R. L., 40
Single-gender families, 39
Single-parent families, 38, 41–42
Single-purpose equipment, 190
Skinner, B. F., 76–77
Social competence, 107–144
activities for, 109–110
and conﬂict resolution, 110–116
strategies, 108
Social knowledge, 258
Social skills, 8
Sociocultural theory, 79–82
cross-cultural variation, 79
evaluation of, 81
implications for child care staff, 81–82
Software, computer, 220
Sothern, M., 61
Space and aeronautics, 274–275, 328–330
Special needs children, 133–141
Spontaneous activities, 166–167
Standards and quality, 381–400
Sternberg, R. J., 82
Stipek, D. J., 19
Storage strategies, 71–72
Story Place website, 218
Summer programs, 169–172
Superego, 94
Superkids Educational Software Review, 220

INDEX
439
T
Tape recording, 395
Tappan, M. B., 25
Taylor, W., 63
Teachers College Press, 394
Teamwork, 9–10
Tesco Mobile, 21
Time sampling, 395
Time-outs, 126–127
Tofﬂier, Alvin, Powershift, 321
Torgesen, 297
Trelease, Jim, The Read-Aloud Handbook, 301
Trust vs. mistrust, 96
Turiel, E., 102
Typically developing, 135
U
United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission, Handbook for Public
Playground Safety, 187
University of Northern Iowa, National Program for
Playground Safety, 187
USA Freedom Corps website, 373
V
Values, 13
Vandell, D. L., 393
Vickerie, J. I., 63
Video camera recording, 395
Visual arts, 228–235
activities, 228–234
discussing with children, 235
equipment for, 235
Volunteer corps, 374
Volunteers, using, 374–376
Vygotsky, L. S., 79–81, 251
W
Walker, 102
Watson, J. B., 76
Weather studies, 275–276
Websites, as resources, 218–221
Weight, 59–63
obesity, 60–63, 341
What’s in the Rainforest? (Ross), 274
White, D. R., 300, 392–396
Wilson, K. S., 393
Winsler, A., 79
Wondimy, E. A., 63
Writing, 308–314, 311–313
Y
Yahooligans website, 219
Yasilove, D., 84
Yoon, K., 84
Young Children, 200
Your Big Backyard magazine, 260
Z
Zone of proximal development, 80–81

