
HOME     SKILLS
An IntroductIon to SAwIng, drIllIng, ShApIng & JoInIng wood
Carpentry
MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA


contents
Introduction .........................................................4
Prying Tools .........................................................7
Tape Measurers .................................................10
Handsaws ........................................................... 18
Hammers ............................................................ 20
Clamps & Vises ................................................ 24
Sharpening Chisels & Plane Blades .......... 26
Planes & Surface Forming Rasps ............... 28
Jigsaws ................................................................. 30
Circular Saws .................................................... 32
Straightedge Guides ....................................... 38
Power Miter Saws ............................................ 39
Table Saws .......................................................... 47
Drills & Bits ....................................................... 53
Sanders ................................................................ 56
Pneumatic Nailers ........................................... 60
Powder-Actuated Tools ................................. 64
Routers ................................................................ 66
tools, Materials & skills

Lumber ................................................................ 70
Plywood & Sheet Goods .................................74
Trim Moldings ...................................................76
Nails ..................................................................... 78
Screws & Other Hardware ........................... 80
Glues & Adhesives ........................................... 82
Basic Carpentry
Anatomy of a House
Reference Charts ...........................................126
Index ..................................................................127
References
Partition Walls ................................................. 90
Door Frames for Prehung Doors ................ 94
Framing a Window ......................................... 96
Door & Window Casings ............................ 100
Base Molding .................................................. 106
Storage Strategies .......................................... 110
Pegboard ........................................................... 114
Sawhorses ......................................................... 118
Workbench .......................................................120
Workshop

4
Introduction
FundAMentAl cArpentry SkIllS are a real 
must-have for anyone who wants to be moderately 
self-sufficient. On the easy end are the projects that 
stump so many but are so rudimentary—assembling 
a pre-fab shelving unit, hanging artwork, or easing a 
stuck door. With your collection of basic carpentry 
tools and an understanding of how to use them 
correctly, you will know which tool to use, how to 
locate studs, and how to sand or plane a door so it 
stops sticking. 
Beyond the basics is a whole world of carpen-
try that you can do yourself. From birdhouses, 
doghouses,  and sheds to your own house, knowing 
how to measure, cut, shape, assemble, and secure 
lumber, trim, and sheet goods is priceless. Even if 
you never attempt a major construction project like 
building partition walls, it is beneficial to know 
what the skeleton of your home looks like.
Throughout the book are Skillbuilder exercises. 
These are little activities to help you learn how to use 
a tool or material. If you didn’t spend your  childhood 
in the garage experimenting with every piece of 
scrap wood and every tool, you need to spend some 
playtime experimenting and developing skills. The 
more you practice on small projects, the better your 
big, serious projects will turn out. Remember, you 
may need to experience failure with tools and  
materials to understand how to achieve success. 
Homeskills: Carpentry is a valuable resource on 
your road to self-reliance. Here you will find all the 
most common carpentry tools—photographs so you 
know what they look like, buying tips so you know what 
to look for, and technique tips to perfect your method-
ology. Use this book as a launch point to adventures 
in home repair and home improvem-ent, or use it as a 
handy reference to augment your hardware knowledge.

prying tools ..........................................7
tape Measures ....................................10
plumb Bobs, chalk lines  
& Stud Finders ....................................12
levels .................................................14
Squares ...............................................16
handsaws ...........................................18
hammers .............................................20
clamps & Vises ...................................24
Sharpening chisels & 
plane Blades .......................................26
planes & Surface-forming rasps .......28
Jigsaws ...............................................30
circular Saws .....................................32
Straightedge guides ...........................38
power Miter Saws ...............................39
table Saws ..........................................47
drills & Bits ........................................53
Sanders ...............................................56
pneumatic nailers ...............................60
powder-Actuated tools .......................64
routers ...............................................66
toolS, 
MAterIAlS  
& SkIllS

6
IF you wAnt your proJectS to look theIr 
best, they need to be level, plumb, true, and square. 
Achieving this state requires the proper tools—and 
attention to detail. Fortunately, measuring tools 
are some of the least expensive tools to purchase. 
At minimum, your toolbox should contain a tape 
measure, torpedo level, and a Speed square, and 
probably a studfinder. Plumb bobs and chalklines are 
necessary for framing and other larger construction 
jobs. Longer levels and various types of squares will 
come in handy as you build your skills. 
Cutting accurately is as important as measuring 
accurately. A variety of hand and power tools are 
available to cut and shape wood. The circular saw 
is a power tool that most home carpenters should 
own. A good hand saw or two can also come in 
handy. Both power miters and table saws get less 
expensive every year.
Of course, once cut, all that lumber needs  
to be assembled. Hammers and power drills/drivers 
are also on the must-have list. Not all hammers  
are created the same, so we show you what to  
look for.
When acquiring your tool collection, purchase 
the highest quality you can afford. Sure, those 
hundred-piece tool kits for $19.99 are a great deal, 
but are they a good value? When the screwdriver 
bends on the first hard twist or the hammerhead 
flies off the handle on the first dry day, you will wish 
you had spent a bit more wisely. 
One way to economize is to look for used  
tools at garage sales. Many hand tools have a 
lifespan of decades, and many older tools were 
built to last. For power tools, look for recondi-
tioned models offered by the manufacturer. If you 
have handy relatives, they might be an excellent 
resource for secondhand tools. Many do-it-
yourselfers upgrade their tools regularly. They  
may be happy to give you their old torpedo level if 
you ask. 
You absolutely do not need pneumatic tools to be a home carpenter—but don’t let them intimidate you. They are 
actually a lot of fun to use. 

7
pryIng toolS
Prying tools are an essential part of any carpenter’s 
tool arsenal, because many carpentry projects start 
with the removal of existing materials. With the right 
tools, you can often remove nails without damaging 
the lumber, so that it can be used again.
Pry bars are available in many sizes. Choose 
quality pry bars forged from high-carbon steel in a 
single piece. Most pry bars have a curved claw at one 
end for pulling nails and a chisel-shaped tip at the 
opposite end for other prying jobs. You can improve 
leverage by placing a wood block an inch or two away 
from the material you’re trying to pry loose.
A quality prying tool is an essential part of any 
homeowner’s tool kit. A flat prybar like the one seen 
here (sometimes called a wonderbar) is a very useful 
tool. 
Demolition is an important part of many carpentry 
projects. And just like building, it’s all about the tools.

8
Prying tools include wrecking bars for heavy demolition work, cat’s paws for removing nails, and a brad puller. Flat 
bars are made of flattened steel and come in a variety of sizes for light- and heavy-duty use.
A cat’s paw has a sharpened claw for removing 
stubborn nails. Use a hammer to drive the claw into the 
wood under the nail head, then lever the tool to pull up 
the nail.
Use the right tool for the job. A wrecking 
bar, sometimes called a crowbar, is a rigid tool 
for demolition and heavy prying jobs. As its 
name implies, it is good for wrecking. If you are 
removing trim, use a thin, flat pry bar. The claw 
on a claw hammer is meant for light-duty nail 
removal. If you will be pulling many nails, use a 
one piece flat bar or cat’s paw so you don’t ruin 
your hammer.
wrecking bar
cat’s paws
Brad puller
Flat bars

 
 
A
B
C
9
reMoVIng trIM MoldIngS
A 
 Trim moldings are often layered composites. Begin by removing the base shoe or outermost layer first. Use a wide 
drywall or putty knife to initiate the prying and make room for a flat pry bar.
B 
 Use large flat scraps of wood to protect wall and floor surfaces from damage. For base trim, which may be nailed 
both into the wall and the floor, insert one bar beneath the trim and work the other between the base and the wall. 
Force the pry bars in opposing directions to work the molding away from the wall.
C 
 Remove nails from trim by using an end nippers to grab the pointed end of the nail and pull the nail through the 
back side of the trim. This causes the least amount of damage to the front face of the trim. Use the rounded head of 
the end nippers to “roll” the nail out of the molding.

10
tApe MeASureS
The first step in any carpentry 
project is the taking of accurate 
measurements. Even though it 
seems big, buy a 25-foot steel 
tape measure with a 3⁄4-inch-wide 
blade for general use. Most tape 
measures are retractable, so 
the tape returns easily. Make 
sure your tape has a locking 
mechanism, so you can keep it 
extended to a desired length. A 
belt clip is also essential. 
Wider tapes normally have a 
longer standout—the distance  
a tape can be extended before 
it bends under its own weight. 
A long standout is an extremely 
useful feature when you’re 
measuring without a partner to 
support the far end of the tape. 
Open a tape in the store and 
extend it until it bends. It should 
have a standout of at least 7 feet.
Tape measures are commonly 
set in 1⁄16-inch increments 
along the top edge and 1⁄32-inch 
increments for the first six inches 
across the bottom. Select one 
with numbers that are easy to 
read. “Easy reader” tapes feature 
a fractional readout for people 
who have difficulty reading a 
measurement calibrated with 
dash marks. Most tape measures 
feature numbers that are marked 
or labeled every 16 inches for easy 
marking of studs. A high-quality 
tape measure also has a two- 
or three-rivet hook to control 
the amount of play in the tape, 
ensuring your measurements are 
as accurate as possible.
Buy a 25-ft. retractable steel tape for general carpentry projects. If you 
are working on a large project like a deck, patio, or retaining wall, consider 
purchasing a 50-ft. reel-type tape.

Skillbuilder
The end hook on a tape measure has between 1/16 
and 1/8" of play so that the hook pushes in for taking 
an inside measurement and pulls out for taking an 
outside edge measurement. The hook end should not 
be used when an extremely accurate measurement is 
required. For precise measurements, use the 1" mark 
as your starting point (called burying an inch), then 
subtract 1" from your reading. Using the hook end, 
measure 5" from the end of a board. Then measure by 
burying an inch (shown).
Use only one tape measure, if possible, while working 
on a project. If you must work with two tapes, make 
sure they record the same measurement. Different 
tape measures do not always measure equally. A slight 
difference in the end hooks can create an error of 1⁄16" 
or more between two tapes, even if they are of the same 
brand and style.
Check for square when building frames, boxes, 
cabinets, drawers, and other projects where fit is 
important. Hold a tape measure across the diagonals 
of the workpiece (A-C, B-D). The measurements will be 
identical if the workpiece is square.
11
A
B
c
d

12
pluMB BoBS, chAlk lIneS  
& Stud FInderS
The plumb bob is a simple, yet extremely precise tool 
used to establish a line that is plumb—or exactly 
vertical. Plumb bobs are commonly used to find 
marking points to position a sole plate when building 
a wall. Plumb refers to a hypothetical line running to 
the exact center of the earth. Think of it as a line that 
is exactly perpendicular to a level surface. 
The chalk line is a tool used to mark straight lines 
on flat surfaces for layout or to mark sheet goods and 
lumber for cutting. Typical chalk lines contain 50 to 
100 feet of line wound up in a case filled with chalk. 
Always tap the box lightly to fully coat the line with 
chalk before pulling it out. To mark a line, extend it 
from the case, pull it taut, and snap it using the thumb 
and forefinger. Chalk lines have a crank that is used to 
reel in the line when the job is complete and a locking 
mechanism to help keep the line taut during marking. 
Most of today’s chalk lines (sometimes called 
chalk boxes) double as plumb bobs for general use (see 
photos, opposite page, bottom). A chalk box isn’t quite 
as accurate as a plumb bob for establishing a vertical 
line. However, if you don’t own a plumb bob, using a 
chalk box is an easy alternative. 
Studfinders are battery-powered electronic 
devices that analyze wall density. They can help you 
locate wall framing and even electrical wires, depend-
ing on the model.
Buy powdered chalk refills of blue or red chalk. 
In most cases blue is a better choice because it is less 
permanent. Red is used mostly by professionals whose 
lines need to be visible for inspectors. 
Use a studfinder to locate wall studs or ceiling 
blocking. These devices locate the edges of framing so 
you can determine the center of studs and joists.
tip 
When driving nails or screws into studs, the 
fastener must not penetrate more than 1" into the 
stud. Why? Electrical and plumbing lines run 
through the middle of studs. The finish layer of 
drywall is 1/2" thick on walls, so a 11/4" fastener is 
the safest length. 

13
To snap a chalk line over a very short distance, pin the 
string down with the edge of your palm, then use your 
thumb and forefinger on the same hand to snap the line. 
When snapping lines to mark stud locations, make sure 
you snap over the center of the studs, so you will know 
where to drive screws or nails.
To position a sole plate, hang a plumb bob (or chalk 
box, as shown) from the edge of the top plate so that 
it nearly touches the floor. When it hangs motionless, 
mark the floor directly below the point of the plumb bob. 
Repeat the process at each end of the new wall space to 
determine the proper sole plate position.
Skillbuilder
Practice this skill in a closet, 
finished garage, or basement 
where rows of holes won’t be 
noticed. Use the studfinder to 
find a stud. Mark the edges of 
the stud, then confirm framing 
locations by driving a finish 
nail through the wall in a line 
between and beyond the marks. 
To find neighboring studs, 
measure from the center point  
of the confirmed stud in 16" 
or 24" intervals. Use the nail 
to verify. This exercise also 
acquaints you with the feeling of 
driving a nail through wall finish 
into a stud (good) or through 
wall finish into air (bad).
top plate
Sole plate

14
leVelS
Levels are essential to virtually every carpentry project. 
They help you build walls that are perfectly vertical 
(plumb), shelves, countertops, steps that are level, and 
roofs that incline at a correct and consistent pitch. 
Take care of your levels. Unlike some other tools 
that can be tossed into a tool bucket without damage, 
a level is a finely tuned instrument that is easily 
broken. Before you buy a level, test it on a level surface 
to make sure the vials are accurate (opposite page).
Most levels contain one or more bubble gauges—
sealed vials with a single small air bubble suspended 
in fluid—that indicate the level’s orientation in space 
at any moment. As the level is tilted, the bubble shifts 
its position inside the vial to reflect the change. This 
type of level is sometimes referred to as a spirit level 
because of the use of alcohol inside the gauge. There 
are also several types of electronic levels that offer 
digital readouts instead of using a bubble gauge.
You should own at least two levels: a 2-foot carpenter’s level for checking studs, joists, and other long construction 
surfaces, and a 8 to 9" torpedo level that is easy to carry in a tool belt and is perfect for checking shelves and other small 
workpieces. A 4-ft. version of the carpenter’s level is most useful for framing projects. 
Most carpenter’s levels contain three gauges: one 
for checking level (horizontal orientation), one for 
plumb (vertical orientation), and one for 45° angles. 
Some levels include pairs of gauges with opposing 
curves to improve readability.
Laser levels project highly accurate beams of light 
around rooms or along walls. Many styles automati-
cally establish their own level orientation.
Skillbuilder
Use your level to level all the appliances in your 
house. Many appliances have threaded leveling 
feet that screw in and out. Remember, righty tighty 
(clockwise), lefty loosey (counter-clockwise). 
However, that’s if you are on the screw side facing 
the receiver. Since you will be looking down 
onto the lifter feet, if you want to elevate twist 
clockwise, and to lower twist counter-clockwise. 
Level the appliances front to back and side to side. 

15
Laser levels project a beam  
of light to create a level line all 
around a room or for level lines  
of longer lengths. A laser can 
eliminate the need for snapping 
chalk reference lines.
Make sure your level is accurate. 
Hold one side of the level against a 
flat, even surface (top photo), mark 
the location, and read the bubble 
gauge carefully. Pivot the level 180º 
(bottom photo) and read the gauge 
again. Next, flip the level over and 
read the gauge. The bubble should 
give the same reading each time.  
If not, adjust the mounting screws  
to calibrate the bubble, or buy a  
new level.
Battery-powered digital levels 
represent the latest advance in level 
design. Digital levels provide very 
accurate digital readouts, so you 
don’t have to trust your eye when 
judging bubble position within a 
vial. Digital levels also measure 
slope and offer rise/run ratios, 
which are useful when building 
stairs. The electronic components 
are contained in a module that  
can be used alone as a torpedo  
level or inserted into frames of 
varying lengths.

16
SquAreS
Squares come in many shapes and sizes, but they are 
all designed with one general purpose: to help you 
mark lumber and sheet goods for cutting. 
A drywall T-square is large—it has a 4-foot arm so 
that you can make or mark straight cuts across a 
sheet of drywall or other sheet goods. A try square is 
great for marking crosscuts on 2 × 4s, but it is fixed, 
not adjustable like a combination square. A rafter 
square (also speed square) or a framing square is best 
for marking angles on rafters. Using the right tool 
will make your work more efficient and improve the 
accuracy of your cuts.
Familiarize yourself with the different types of 
squares and their uses so you can choose the right 
tool for the job.
A drywall T-square simplifies the task of marking 
and cutting straight lines on sheets of drywall. The top 
of the T hooks over the edge of the drywall, while the leg 
is used as a straightedge. A T-square is also handy for 
marking cutting lines on plywood and other sheet goods. 
Some models have an adjustable T that can be set to 
common angles.
A framing square is commonly used to mark right 
angles on sheet goods and other large surfaces, but it can 
also be used to establish other angles by using different 
measurements along the body (long arm) and the tongue 
(short arm). The tool has gradations marked in tiny 
increments, and many come with detailed tables to help 
you make angles.
The chart above shows the markings to use on the 
framing square to obtain commonly required angles. 
If you want to make a line at a 30° angle, mark the 
workpiece at 12" on the tongue and 207⁄8" on the body,  
and connect the marks with a straight line.
45°
30°
80°
12"
21⁄8"
207⁄8"
12"
tip
If you are only going to buy one square, buy a 
large 10" or 12" polyethylene rafter square. They 
are inexpensive and very handy for marking and 
making crosscuts, the most common carpentry 
cuts you will make.
common Framing Square Angles
Angle
Tongue 
Body
30°
12"
207⁄8"
45°
12"
12"
60°
12"
615⁄16"
70°
12"
43⁄8"
75°
12"
37⁄32"
80°
12"
21/8"

 
 
A
B
C
A
B
C
17
uSIng A rAFter SquAre
A 
 To mark a board for crosscutting, hold the square against the edge of the workpiece with the head locked, then use 
the edge of the blade to guide your pencil. Use the handle’s 45° edge to mark boards for miter cuts.
B 
 To mark a line parallel to the edge of a board, lock the blade at the desired measurement, then hold the tip of the 
pencil along the end of the blade as you slide the tool along the workpiece. This is useful when marking reveal lines 
on window and door
C 
 To check for square, set the blade of a square flush with the end of the workpiece (and set the head flush with one 
edge). If the end is a true 90°, there will not be a gap between the blade and the workpiece.
A 
 To mark angle cuts, position the rafter square’s pivot point against the edge of the workpiece, and set the tool so the 
desired angle marking is aligned with the same edge. Scribe a line to mark the angle on the workpiece. Flip the tool 
over to mark angles in the opposite direction.
B 
 To mark crosscuts, place a rafter square’s raised edge flush with one edge of the board, and use the perpendicular 
edge to guide your pencil. On wide boards, you’ll need to flip the square to the board’s other edge to extend the line 
across the board.
C 
 To guide a circular saw when making crosscuts, first align the blade of the saw with your cutting line. As you cut, 
hold the raised edge of the square against the front edge of the workpiece and the perpendicular edge flush with the 
foot of the saw.
uSIng A coMBInAtIon SquAre

18
hAndSAwS
It’s possible that you could do almost all your 
carpentry projects using a circular saw, power miter 
saw, or jigsaw and never miss a handsaw. However, 
there are times when using a handsaw is easier, more 
convenient, and produces better results. Handsaws 
also provide the do-it-yourselfer a cost-effective 
alternative to the higher price of power tools.
For every power saw available today, there is a 
handsaw available that was originally used to make 
the same type of cut. 
There are many differences between handsaws. 
When you shop for a saw, look for one that’s 
designed for the type of cutting you plan to do. 
Differences in handle design and the number, shape, 
and angle (set) of the teeth make each saw work best 
for specific applications.
For general carpentry cuts, use a crosscut saw 
with 8 to 10 teeth per inch. Crosscut saws have 
pointed teeth designed to slice through wood on  
the forward stroke and to deepen the cut and remove 
sawdust from the kerf on the back stroke.
Always use a handsaw for its intended purpose. 
Misuse of a handsaw will only damage the tool, dull 
the blade, or lead to injury.
When saw blades become dull, take them to a 
professional blade sharpener for tuning. It’s worth  
the extra cost to ensure the job is done right.
Making a cutout by hand requires a saw with a narrow, 
tapered blade that fits into confined spaces. Use a 
keyhole saw for making cutouts in plywood, paneling, 
and other thin materials and a drywall saw for making 
fixture cutouts in drywall.
Handsaws are less important today than they were 
a couple of generations ago. But keeping a few at hand 
is a good idea. A basic set includes a hacksaw, a coping 
saw, and a crosscut saw (preferably one that fits in your 
toolbox). A backsaw and miter box will expand your skills. 
Backsaw
crosscut Saw
coping Saw
hacksaw
keyhole Saw
drywall Saw

 
 
A
B
C
D
19
A 
 A crosscut saw comes in handy for single-cut projects or in confined spaces where power tools won’t fit. At the end 
of a cut, saw slowly, and support waste material with your free hand to prevent splintering.
B 
 A backsaw with a miter box cuts precise angles on moldings and other trim. Clamp or hold the workpiece in the 
miter box and make sure the miter box is securely fastened to the work surface.
C 
 A coping saw has a thin, flexible blade designed to cut curves. It is also essential for making professional-looking joints 
in trim moldings. The blade of a coping saw breaks easily when under heavy use, so have extra blades on hand.
D 
 A hacksaw has a flexible, fine-tooth blade designed to cut metal. Carpenters use hacksaws to cut plumbing pipe or 
to cut away stubborn metal fasteners. To avoid breaking the blade, make sure the blade is stretched tightly in the 
frame before cutting.
chooSIng the rIght hAndSAw

20
hAMMerS
The standard hammer is a 16-ounce, curved-claw 
finish hammer. It is designed for driving, setting, and 
pulling nails. Choose a hammer with a smooth finish, 
a high-carbon steel head, and a quality handle made 
of hickory, fiberglass, or solid steel. Less expensive 
steel handles often have hollow cores that are not 
as efficient at transmitting force to the head. This is 
a tool that needs to feel comfortable, so heft all the 
finish hammers available before purchasing. 
Straight-claw framing hammers—usually with 
a 20-ounce or heavier head—are used for framing 
walls and other heavy-duty tasks. The extra weight 
helps drive large nails with fewer swings. Most 
framing hammers are too heavy for finish carpentry, 
where control is of primary importance.
A mallet with a non-marking rubber or plastic 
head is the best tool for driving chisels without 
damaging the tools. Mallets are also useful for 
making slight adjustments to a workpiece without 
marring the surface of the wood.
A sledgehammer or maul is effective for 
demolishing old construction or adjusting the 
position of framing members.
A hammer is not a one-size-fits-all tool. For most 
homeowners, a finishing hammer with a claw will be the 
hammer most often used, but it’s beneficial to have on 
hand a mallet, sledgehammer, and large framing hammer 
if you will be tackling large carpentry projects.
Framing hammers vary in size, length, and handle 
material. Handle types include fiberglass, solid steel, 
hollow core, and wood. Hammers typically range in 
length from 14 to 18". Most framing hammers have a head 
weighing at least 20 oz., but lighter and heavier models 
are available. Some heads feature a waffle pattern across 
the face that increases the hammer’s hold on the nail for 
more efficiency and accuracy. Framing hammers have 
straight claws for prying boards.
Finishing hammer
Mallet
Sledgehammer
Framing hammer
Skillbuilder
Buy a box of 2" common or box nails. Grab 
some scrap 2× lumber (construction sites have 
lots of these) and facenail the pieces together. 
Drive lots and lots of nails, from both sides. 
Drive the nails with the lumber on a solid 
surface (cement floor). Drive the nails with 
the lumber on a springy surface (upholstered 
furniture). Notice a difference?  Use the nail-
encrusted boards as a doorstop.
Fiberglass
Solid Steel
hollow core
wood

21
Use a sledgehammer to demolish wall framing and to 
drive spikes and stakes. Sledgehammers vary in weight 
from 2 to 20 lbs., and in length from 10 to 36".
A mallet with a rubber or plastic head drives 
woodworking chisels. A soft mallet will not damage  
fine woodworking tools.
The strongest wooden tool handles have wood grain 
that runs parallel to the tool head (left). Handles with the 
grain running perpendicular to the tool head (right) are 
more likely to break. Check the end grain before buying 
a new tool or tool handle. Tool handles that are cracked 
or loose should be replaced. Wood handles absorb more 
shock than fiberglass or metal.
A new hammer may have a very smooth face that 
tends to slip off the heads of nails. Rough up the face 
with sandpaper to increase friction between the hammer 
and the nail. You can also use fine sandpaper to remove 
wood resins and nail coatings that build up on the face of 
your hammers. For finish hammering, you may want to 
stick with a smooth-face hammer.
Strong
weak
pulling nails with a hammer
To pull nails with a claw hammer, place a block of wood under the 
hammer head for added leverage and to avoid damage to the workpiece.  
If you are pulling large nails or many nails, use a pry bar or cat’s paw.

22
drIVIng nAIlS wIth A hAMMer
Hold the hammer with a relaxed grip: Take advantage of 
the hammer’s momentum and weight by releasing your 
wrist at the bottom of the swing as if you were throwing 
the head of the hammer onto the nail. Hit the nail squarely 
on the head, repeating the motion until the nail head is 
flush with the work surface.
To set a finish nail below the surface, position the tip  
of a nail set on the nail head and strike the other end with 
a hammer.
Use the proper nailing technique for the task. Endnailing is used to attach perpendicular boards when moderate 
strength is required. Toenail at a 45° angle for extra strength when joining perpendicular framing members. Facenail to 
create strong headers for door and window openings. Blindnail tongue-and-groove boards to conceal nails, eliminating 
the need to set nails and cover them with putty before painting or staining. Locknail outside miter joints in both 
directions on trim projects to prevent gaps from developing as the trim pieces dry.
endnailing
locknailing
Facenailing
toenailing
Blindnailing

23
ScrewdrIVerS
Every carpenter should own several Phillips and slotted screwdrivers. 
Even though the drill-mounted screw bit has become the standard for 
large projects, screwdrivers are still essential for a variety of carpentry 
tasks. Look for quality screwdrivers with hardened-steel blades  
and handles that are easy to grip. Other features to look for include 
insulated handles to protect against electrical shock and oxide-coated 
tips for a strong hold on screw heads. For working in tight spots, a 
screwdriver with a magnetic head can also be helpful.
Cordless power screwdrivers save time and effort. For small projects, 
they are an inexpensive alternative to a cordless drill or screw gun. Most 
models include a removable battery pack and charger, so you can keep 
one battery in the charger at all times. Cordless power screwdrivers have 
a universal 1⁄4" drive and come with a slotted bit and a #2 Phillips bit. 
Other bits, such as Torx and socket bits are also available. 
Other driving options include 
square-drive and Torx-drive screws. 
Square-drive screwdrivers are 
gaining popularity because square-
drive screws are difficult to strip. 
Torx-drivers are used on electronics, 
tools, and automotive applications.
Use a screwdriver or screw bit 
that closely matches the screw 
head. A tip that’s too big or too 
small will damage the screw and 
the driver, and it will make the 
screw hard to remove later. This 
screwdriver is too small for the 
screw—the blades should fit all  
the way into the screw head.
Common screwdrivers include: slot screwdriver with insulated handle, 
Phillips screwdriver with insulated handle and oxide tip for better control, spiral 
ratchet driver with interchangeable bits, offset screwdriver for driving in tight 
places, and cordless power screwdriver with battery pack and pivoting shaft.
Skillbuilder
Using #8 by 11/4" Phillips head wood screws and a scrap 
of 2× lumber, drive a screw (by hand) without drilling a 
pilot hole. Then drill 1/16", 3/32", 1/8", 5/32", and 3/16" pilot holes. 
Drive a screw into each hole. Notice that it is difficult to 
drive the screw so that it is flush with the wood surface. 
That’s because wood screws have a shank and a straight 
taper. Drill a 5/32" to a depth to match the screw shank.  
 
Then extend that hole with a 1/16" bit. This is called 
countersinking. Drive a screw into this hole and it is 
easier to make the head flush. Special countersink-pilot 
hole drill bits are available to repeat this process as one 
step. Bugle head screws countersink themselves, as they 
have no shank and a fluted head. See page 55 Common 
Drill Bits for more information on drilling.

24
clAMpS & VISeS
Vises and clamps are used to hold workpieces in 
place during cutting or other tasks and to hold pieces 
together while glue sets.
Your workbench should include a heavy-duty 
carpenter’s vise. For specialty clamping jobs, a wide 
variety of clamps are available, including C-clamps, 
locking pliers, handscrews, web clamps, or ratchet-
type clamps. 
For clamping wide stock, use pipe clamps or bar 
clamps. The jaws of pipe clamps are connected by a 
steel pipe. The distance between the jaws is limited 
only by the length of the pipe.
Use handscrews to hold materials together at various 
angles while glue is drying. Handscrews are wooden 
clamps with two adjusting screws. The jaws won’t 
damage wood surfaces.
Use C-clamps for clamping jobs from 1 to 6". To 
protect workpieces, place scrap wood blocks between the 
jaws of the clamp and the workpiece surface.
Use ratchet-type clamps to clamp 
a workpiece quickly and easily. 
Large ratchet-type clamps can span 
up to 4 ft. and can be tightened 
with one hand while supporting the 
workpiece with the other hand.
Hold large workpieces with pipe 
clamps or bar clamps. Bar clamps 
are sold with the bars. Pipe clamp 
jaws are available to fit 1/2" or 3⁄4" 
diameter pipe of any length.
Mount a sturdy bench vise on 
the end of your workbench to 
hold workpieces securely. Select a 
vise that adjusts easily and has a 
minimum jaw opening of about 4".

 
 
1
2
3
25
chISelS
A wood chisel consists of a sharp 
steel blade beveled on one face 
and set in a wood or plastic 
handle. It cuts with light hand 
pressure or when the end of the 
handle is tapped with a mallet. A 
wood chisel is often used to cut 
hinge and lock mortises.
When creating deep cuts, 
make several shallow cuts instead 
of one deep cut. Forcing a chisel to 
make deep cuts only dulls the tool 
and can damage the workpiece. 
Sharpen the blades of your 
chisels often (see following pages). 
Chisels are easier and safer to use 
and produce better results when 
they are sharp.
Types of chisels include (from left to right): a framing chisel, used for 
rough trimming of lumber; a mortise chisel, for framing hinge and lock 
mortises; a small wood chisel, for light-duty wood carving; cold chisel that is 
made of solid steel and is used for cutting through metal; and a mason’s chisel, 
for cutting stone and masonry.
chISelIng A MortISe
1 
 Cut the outline of the mortise. Hold the chisel bevel-side-in and tap the butt end lightly with a mallet until the cut has 
reached the proper depth.
2 
 Make a series of parallel depth cuts 1/4" apart across the mortise, with the chisel held at a 45° angle. Drive the chisel 
with light mallet blows to the handle.
3 
 Pry out waste chips by holding the chisel at a low angle with the beveled side toward the work surface. Drive the chisel 
using light hand pressure.

1
2
3
26
ShArpenIng chISelS & plAne BlAdeS
It is a good idea to sharpen chisels and plane  
blades before each use, even if the tools are brand 
new. The factory edges on new blades are sharpened  
by machine and are not as sharp as hand- 
sharpened blades.
Sharpening a tool blade is a two-step process. First, 
the tool is rough-ground on an electric bench grinder, 
then it is finish-honed on a fine-grit sharpening stone. 
If you do not have a bench grinder, you can use a 
coarse-grit sharpening stone to rough-grind the blade.
ShArpenIng chISelS & plAne BlAdeS on A grInder
1 
 Inspect the cutting edge for nicks. Before the blade can be honed on a sharpening stone, any nicks in the steel must 
be completely removed by grinding.
2 
 Grind off nicks, using a bench grinder with a medium-grit wheel. Hold the tool on the flat portion of the tool rest, 
with the beveled side facing up. Hold the tip against the wheel and move it from side to side. Make sure the cutting 
edge remains square, and cool the blade frequently in water.
3 
 Rough-grind the cutting edge by turning the blade so that the beveled side is down. Rest the blade on the angled 
portion of the tool rest. Move the blade from side to side against the wheel to grind the tip to a 20° bevel, checking 
often with an angle gauge. Cool the metal frequently in water while grinding.
tools & Materials
Bench grinder or coarse-
grit sharpening stone
Work gloves
Fine-grit  
sharpening stone
Cup of water
Light machine oil
tip: Sponge Bath
One way to keep the blade cool when grinding is to hot-glue a piece of sponge to 
the back of the blade near the cutting edge. Dip the blade in water. The sponge 
holds water against the back of the blade to draw off heat. When the sponge gets 
warm, wet it again.

1
2
3
4
 
 
27
1 
 Finish-hone the cutting edge on a fine-grit 
sharpening stone. Place a few drops of light machine 
oil on the stone to lubricate the steel and to float 
away grit and filings. Hold the blade at a 25° angle 
so the bevel is flat against the stone.  Draw it several 
times across the stone, lifting it away after  each 
pass. Wipe the stone often with a clean rag, and 
apply oil after each wiping.
2 
 Put a “micro-bevel” on the blade by lifting it slightly 
so only the tip touches the stone. Draw the blade two 
or three times across the stone, until a slight burr 
can be felt along the back of the blade.
3 
 Turn the blade over. Holding the blade flat, draw it 
across the stone one or two times to remove the burr.
4 
 Examine the cutting edge of the blade. The fine 
micro-bevel should be about 1⁄16" wide. The micro-
bevel gives the chisel its razor-sharp edge.
ShArpenIng A BlAde By hAnd
tip: keep your temper
Keep a container of cool water close by when 
grinding a tool blade. Dip the blade in water 
frequently to prevent heat from ruining the 
temper of the steel. When the beads of water on 
the blade evaporate, it should be dipped again.

28
plAneS &  
SurFAce-ForMIng rASpS
Planes are designed for removing shavings of material from lumber when 
a saw would cut off too much material and sanding would remove too 
little. A hand plane consists of a razor-sharp cutting blade, or iron, set in 
a steel or wood base. Adjusting the blade requires some trial and error. 
After making an adjustment, test the plane on a scrap piece before using 
it on your workpiece. Usually, the shallower the blade is set, the better 
the plane cuts.
The blade on a surface-forming rasp can’t be adjusted, but 
interchangeable blades are available for fine and rough work. Surface-
forming rasp blades have a series of holes stamped in the metal, so 
shavings seldom become clogged in the tool’s blade. 
If you plan on planing many large workpieces, consider purchasing 
a power planer. A power planer does the job more quickly than a hand 
plane and with equally fine results.
Common carpentry planes include: a jack plane, for trimming framing 
lumber, doors, and other large workpieces; a power planer, for removing lots 
of material quickly; a block plane, for shaving material from trim and other 
narrow workpieces; and surface-forming rasps, for trimming flat  
or curved surfaces.
Use a block plane for common jobs, 
like trimming end grain, planing the 
edges of particleboard and plywood, 
and trimming laminates.
Skillbuilder
Buy a short 1 × 4 pine board, poplar board, and maple 
or oak board. (Yes, expensive!). Clamp the pine into 
a vise. Operate the plane so the wood grain runs 
“uphill” ahead of the plane. Grip the toe knob and 
handle firmly, and plane with long, smooth strokes. 
To prevent overplaning at the beginning and end 
of the board, called dipping, press down on the toe 
knob at the beginning of the stroke and bear down 
on the heel at the end of the stroke. Try planing the 
other direction. Repeat with the other two boards. 
Try planing on the face of the board—you will need to 
secure it below the surface of the wood so it doesn’t 
move and the plane can move freely.

29
To change power planer blades, remove the screws 
and gib bars that hold the blades in place and carefully 
remove the dull blade. Wear gloves to protect your hands. 
For double-edged blades, flip the blade to the fresh edge 
and reinstall. Tighten the gib screws securely.
power planer overview
Traditional hand planes are still used by both 
carpenters and woodworkers, but it takes practice to 
sharpen, adjust, and use them properly. If you’re not 
experienced with hand planes, a power planer may be 
a better choice for your carpentry projects. It’s much 
easier to set up and operate, and it will generally 
plane away material more quickly than a hand plane.
Typical power planers have two narrow blades 
mounted in a cylindrical-shaped cutterhead. The 
cutterhead spins at high speeds to provide the 
planing action. Power planer blades are made of 
carbide, which stays sharp much longer than a 
conventional steel plane blade. When the blades dull, 
they do not need to be resharpened. Instead, you 
simply remove them from the cutterhead and replace. 
Most power planers have double-edged blades, so you 
have a second sharp edge to use before it’s necessary 
to buy new blades.
To use a power planer, set the depth of cut by 
turning a dial on the front of the tool. This raises 
the front portion of the planer’s sole to expose the 
cutters. Limit your cutting depth to not more than 
1⁄8" on softwood and 1⁄16" on hardwoods like oak or 
maple. If possible, connect the planer to a dust bag 
or shop vacuum to collect the planer shavings; these 
tools make considerable debris quickly. Start the 
planer and slide it slowly along the wood to make 
the cut, keeping the sole of the tool pressed firmly 
against the workpiece. Push down on the front of the 
planer as you begin the cut, then transfer pressure to 
the rear of the planer as you reach the end of the cut. 
If you are planing both across the grain and along it, 
make the cross-grain passes first, then finish up with 
long-grain passes. This will allow you to plane away 
any tearout or chipping that occurs on the cross-
grain passes.
Turn the planer’s cutting depth dial to set the 
amount of material you’ll remove with each pass. Limit 
cutting depth to 1/8" or less to prevent overloading the 
motor and to ensure a smooth cut.
Draw layout lines on your workpiece to mark the 
amount of material you need to plane away. Make 
repeated passes with the planer until it reaches the 
layout lines. Keep an eye on your layout lines as you work 
to make sure the planer removes material evenly.
As you make each pass, apply more hand pressure on 
the front of the tool to begin, then transfer pressure to 
the rear as you end the cut. Slide the tool smoothly and 
slowly so the motor doesn’t labor in the cut.

30
JIgSAwS
The jigsaw is a very good portable power tool for 
cutting curves and internal cutouts. The cutting 
capacity of a jigsaw depends on its power and the 
length of its blade stroke. Choose a saw rated to cut 
2-inch-thick softwood and 3⁄4-inch-thick hardwood 
stock. Many jigsaws have a pivoting baseplate that 
can be locked so you can make bevel cuts as well.
A variable-speed jigsaw is the best choice, 
because different blade styles require different 
cutting speeds for best results. In general, faster 
blade speeds are used for cutting with coarse-tooth 
blades and slower speeds with fine-tooth blades.
Jigsaws vibrate more than other power saws 
because of the up-and-down blade action. However, 
top-quality jigsaws have a heavy-gauge steel 
baseplate that reduces vibration to help you hold the 
saw tightly against the workpiece for better control. 
Because jigsaw blades cut on the upward stroke, 
the top side of the workpiece may splinter. If the 
wood has a good side to protect, cut with this 
surface facing downward.
Jigsaw blades come in an array of designs for cutting 
different materials. Choose the right blade for the job. 
With fine-tooth blades that have 14 or more teeth per 
inch, set the saw at a low speed. Coarse blades require 
faster blade speeds.
Do not force blades. Jigsaw blades are flexible and may 
bend or break if forced. Move the saw slowly when cutting 
bevels or tough material like knots in wood.
Skillbuilder
Buy a 2 × 4 ft. 1/2" piece of plywood. Use a compass 
or various round shapes to trace circles on the 
board ranging from 2" to 10". Drill a 1/4" hole along 
the inside edge of the line, but not crossing to the 
outside. Insert the jigsaw into the hole and cut 
out the circle. Cut out a circle with the workpiece 
clamped to a solid surface. Cut out another circle 
without clamping. When you have cut out all the 
holes, add legs to your holey board and use it as a 
bean bag toss game!
coarse wood-cutting blade
hollowground blade for smooth wood cuts
Metal-cutting blade
Scroll-cut blade for tight curves
knife blade for leather, vinyl
Flush-cut blade

31
Make plunge cuts by tipping 
the saw so the front edge of the 
baseplate is held firmly against the 
workpiece. Start the saw, and slowly 
lower it to a horizontal position, 
letting the blade gradually cut 
through the workpiece.
Cut metals with a fine-tooth 
metal-cutting blade and select a 
slow blade speed. Support sheet 
metals with thin plywood to 
eliminate vibration. Use emery 
paper or a file to smooth burred 
edges left by the blade.
The jigsaw is designed to cut 
curves, but tight curves can cause 
the blade to bind. An easy way to 
avoid this problem is to make a 
series of relief cuts through the 
surrounding waste material and up 
to the curved cutting line. This way 
you can break up a tight curve into 
smaller sections rather than one 
long cut.
tip
To get the best possible cut with a jigsaw, clamp your workpiece 
securely to a solid work station. Even though the saw is meant to 
be held with one hand, it usually works better to use both hands for 
guidance. And remember, don’t force it! 

32
circular saws
A portable circular saw has 
become the most frequently used 
cutting tool for do-it-yourselfers. 
With the right set of blades, you 
can use a circular saw to cut 
wood, metal, plaster, concrete, 
or other masonry materials. 
An adjustable baseplate lets 
you set the blade depth for your 
workpiece, and it also pivots from 
side to side for bevel cuts.
Most professional carpenters 
use a 71⁄4-inch-blade circular 
saw. For home carpentry, 
71⁄4-inch-blade and 61⁄2-inch-blade 
models are the most popular. A 
smaller blade means a smaller, 
lighter saw body, but bear in 
mind that a smaller saw is 
usually less powerful and is 
limited when cutting bevel cuts 
or material that is thicker than 
2× stock. 
Cordless circular saws have 
53⁄8-inch-wide blades—wide 
enough to cut through sheet 
goods or to make square cuts on 
2× lumber. Cordless models are 
useful in situations where a power 
cord gets in the way. However, 
most cordless circular saws aren’t powerful enough to be the primary 
cutting tool for big projects. 
Because circular saw blades cut in an upward direction, the top 
face of the workpiece may splinter. To protect the finished side of the 
workpiece, mark measurements on the back side and place the good side 
down for cutting. 
Get the most out of your saw by inspecting your blade regularly  
and changing it as needed (page 34). You can also improve your results 
with a straightedge guide (page 38), which makes it easier to cut long 
stock precisely. 
Common types of circular saws include: (A) 71⁄4"-blade, standard-drive 
saw. Standard-drive circular saws are the most popular choice among do-it-
yourselfers and are widely used by professional carpenters. This model has a 
sawdust-release pipe that connects to a collection bag. (B) 71⁄4"-blade, worm-
drive saw. Some carpenters prefer the worm-drive saw for heavy-duty cutting. 
Worm-drive saws offer more torque at any given speed. As a result, they are 
less likely to slow, bind, or kick back when subjected to a heavy load.  
(C) 61⁄2"-blade, standard-drive saw. Do-it-yourselfers looking for a lightweight 
saw may want to consider a standard-drive saw with a 61⁄2" blade. This model 
has a convenient window for an easy view of the line while cutting. (D) 
53⁄8"-blade, cordless trim saw. Cordless trim saws are convenient for cutting 
trim and other thin stock, especially when the work site is outdoors or away 
from an electrical receptacle.
Tip  
Using your circular saw to  
cut masonry is possible, but 
probably not the best idea.  
If you need to cut masonry 
(pavers, concrete, stone) rent  
a dedicated masonry wet saw. 
A wet saw uses a small stream 
of water to make the cutting 
easier and keep down the dust. 
A masonry saw has the power 
to handle this tough material.
a
B
c
D

33
circular saw Blade Options
To get full use from your circular saw, you’ll need an 
assortment of blades designed for specific cutting 
tasks. Your collection should include at least one 
general-purpose combination blade with carbide teeth. 
In addition to cutting wood and sheet material, you 
can also use a circular saw to cut masonry and thin 
metal with the appropriate abrasive blade. Here are the 
main types of circular saw blades:
• Remodeling blade: Designed to make both ripcuts 
and crosscuts in construction lumber that may also 
be embedded with nails or screws. It will have a 
low tooth count and tall shoulders behind the teeth 
to prevent them from cutting too aggressively or 
breaking on metal. It’s a good choice for opening 
wall cavities or removing exterior or floor sheathing.
• Ripping/general framing blade: Higher tooth counts 
than a remodeling blade, usually ranging from 
16 to 24 teeth. A suitable blade for fast rip cuts in 
construction plywood and general crosscuts in 
framing lumber. Fewer teeth will produce more 
splintering, so this is not a blade for finish cutting.
• General-purpose blade: The workhorse blade of 
most circular saws, these blades will have 30 to 40 
teeth and are good choices for fast, semi-smooth 
wood cutting in any direction. 
• Fine crosscutting blade: A 40- to 60-tooth blade 
designed to make smooth crosscuts in veneered 
plywood with minimal splintering. 
• Masonry or metal-cutting blade: A toothless blade 
made of special abrasives for cutting cinder block, 
concrete, and both ferrous and non-ferrous metal. 
Be sure to wear a dust mask when using these 
blades; abrasive particles and masonry dust are 
hazardous to breathe.
cross-cutting 
blade
General-purpose rip-
cutting blade
Fine-tooth 
blade
Metal-cutting blade
(bonded abrasive)
skillbuilder
Use a combination or rafter square to mark 45° 
miters across the faces of four 2 × 4 or 2 × 6 pieces 
of lumber to make four equal-length pieces.  
The miters need to be opposing, not parallel. 
Make the miter cuts. Glue, clamp, and locknail or 
screw the pieces together to make a square. You’ve 
made a heavy duty picture frame! Repeat the 
process, except this time set the saw blade at 45° 
and bevel across the ends of the boards. Assemble 
these pieces into a square. If your measuring 
and cutting were accurate, your squares should 
actually be square. For future reference, miter 
usually means cutting an angle across the face 
(broad side) of a piece, and bevel means shaving or 
cutting along an edge or end of a board. 
Tip
You can keep a blade in good condition and prolong 
its life by using it only for the material it’s designed 
to cut and cleaning it when the teeth become dirty. 
Wipe the blade with kerosene or blade cleaner 
and steel wool, then dry the blade and coat it with 
silicone spray or machine oil to prevent rust. Replace 
blades that are dull or have cracked or missing teeth.

1
2
1
2
3
34
seTTinG The BlaDe DepTh
chanGinG a circular saw BlaDe
1 
 The blade on a circular saw does not move when you set the blade depth. Instead, on most circular saws, the saw 
baseplate pivots up and down, changing the amount of blade that is exposed. Unplug the saw, then pull out the 
depth adjustment lever and slide it up or down to adjust the blade depth.
2 
 Pull up on the blade guard lever to expose the blade, then position the blade flush with the edge of the workpiece 
to check the setting. The blade should extend beyond the bottom of the workpiece by no more than the depth of a saw 
tooth. Release the knob to lock the blade. Note: Some saws have a baseplate that drops rather than pivots. When the 
knob is pulled out, the entire baseplate can be moved up or down.
1 
 Unplug the saw and inspect the blade, wearing gloves to protect your hands. Replace the blade if you find worn, 
cracked, or chipped teeth. Remove the blade for cleaning if sticky resin or pitch has accumulated.
2 
 To loosen the blade, first depress the arbor lock button or lever to lock the blade in position, then loosen the bolt 
with a wrench and slide the bolt and washer out of the assembly. On older models with no arbor lock, insert  
a wood block between the blade and baseplate to keep the blade from turning as you loosen the bolt.
3 
 Install a new blade. Or, if the old blade is soiled but in otherwise good condition, clean and reinstall it. Use the 
directional markings on the side of the blade as a guide when attaching a blade. Insert the bolt and washer, then 
tighten the bolt with a wrench until the bolt is snug. Do not overtighten.

 
 
 
 
1
2
1
2
35
MakinG crOsscuTs
MakinG plunGe cuTs
1 
 Support the workpiece by clamping it down on sawhorses. Clamp a 2 × 4 on the edge as a guide. Retract the blade 
guard and position the saw so the front edge of the foot, not the blade, is against the workpiece.
2 
 Hold the saw with two hands as you make the cut. Start the saw, and slowly lower the blade into the workpiece, 
keeping the baseplate against the 2 × 4.
1 
 Secure the workpiece with clamps and position the baseplate with the blade approximately 1" from the edge. Align 
the guide mark with the cutting line. The saw will remove a small amount of material on each side of the blade. If 
your project requires exact cuts, make your first cut in the waste area. You can make a second pass with the saw, as 
necessary, to remove more material.
2 
 While holding the saw with two hands, squeeze the trigger and guide the blade into the workpiece, following 
the cutting line with the guide mark and applying steady pressure as you push the saw forward. The guide mark 
on every saw is different. If you will be cutting material with someone else’s saw, make a few practice cuts to 
familiarize yourself with the new saw.

A
B
36
MakinG rip cuTs
A 
 Attach a commercial straightedge guide to the baseplate of your circular saw. Generally, straight-cutting guides 
that mount to the saw are accurate enough but they are not precise. For maximum precision, try clamping cutting 
guides to your work surface.
B 
 It’s much safer to cut up full-sized, heavy sheets of plywood with a circular saw than a table saw. Lay the sheet 
over several pieces of framing lumber to provide room for the blade underneath. Set the blade depth so the teeth 
protrude about 1⁄4" below the plywood. Once the sheets are cut into manageable sizes, you can make finish cuts on 
the table saw. Clamp a straightedge guide to the workpiece.
Tips for circular saw success
Circular saws are powerful, heavy, and potentially 
dangerous. To get the best possible results, take the time 
to use the saw correctly. Use a stable base to saw on, and 
clamp the workpiece down so it does not move. Do not 
hold a piece of wood against your thigh and saw off the 
end! Not only are you endangering your limbs, you will 
not get a quality cut. 
Maintaining a steady travel speed is important. 
When making long rip cuts, make sure both sides of 
the material are supported so the blade does not get 
pinched. Make sure you have the room to maneuver 
during the cut, and that the cord is long enough to make 
the cut. 
Finally, circular saws are noisy dust makers--protect 
your eyes, nose, and ears. 

 
 
 
 
1
2
1
2
MakinG Bevel cuTs
1 
 Loosen the bevel adjustment knob and slide the knob to the required 
setting. Some models have a setscrew for common angles such as 90° (no 
bevel) and 45°. Tighten the knob.
2 
 Position the baseplate of your saw on the workpiece. As you cut, sight 
down the blade to ensure it remains aligned with the cutting line on the 
waste side of the workpiece.
1 
 To cut dadoes with a circular saw, set the blade depth to 1⁄3 the desired depth of the dado, and mark the outside 
edges where you want the dado. Secure the workpiece with a clamp and cut the outside lines using a straightedge. 
Make several parallel passes between the outside cuts, every 1⁄4".
2 
 Clean out the material between the kerfs with a wood chisel. To avoid gouging the workpiece, apply hand 
pressure or tap the chisel with the bevel side up using a mallet. For more information on chisels, see page 25.
cuTTinG DaDOes
37
Tip
Copy existing angles with 
a T-bevel. Transpose the 
cutting line to your workpiece 
and adjust the angle of your 
circular saw to cut on the line.

1
2
3
38
sTraiGhTeDGe GuiDes
Making straight and accurate rip cuts or cutting long 
sheets of plywood or paneling is a challenge. Even 
the best carpenter can’t always keep the blade on the 
cutline, especially over a longer span. A straightedge 
guide or jig solves the problem. As long as you keep 
the saw’s baseplate pressed against the cleat as you 
make the cut, you’re assured of a straight cut on  
your workpiece. 
For accurate cutting, the cleat must have a 
perfectly straight edge. Ask at the lumber yard if they 
will cut the cleat using their panel saw. 
A straightedge guide overcomes the difficulty of 
making square rip cuts and other square cuts on long 
workpieces. The guide’s flat edge ensures that any cuts 
made with it will be flat as well.
BuilDinG a sTraiGhTeDGe GuiDe
1 
 Apply carpenter’s glue to the bottom of the 3⁄4" plywood cleat, then position the cleat on the 1⁄4" plywood base, 3" from 
one edge. Clamp the pieces together until the glue dries.
2 
 Position the circular saw with its wide foot tight against the 3⁄4" plywood cleat on the wide side of the plywood. Cut 
away the excess portion of the plywood base with a single pass of the saw to create a square, flat edge. Repeat on the 
other side with the narrow foot.
3 
 To use the guide, position it on top of the workpiece, so the guide’s flat edge is flush with the cutting line on the 
workpiece. Clamp the guide in place with C-clamps. Typically you will only use the wide side, but at times you may 
need to use the narrow side.
Tools & Materials
C-clamps
Pencil
Circular saw
1⁄4" finish plywood base 
(12 × 96")
3⁄4" plywood cleat 
(2 × 96")
Carpenter’s glue

39
pOwer MiTer saws
Power miter saws are versatile, portable tools that are 
used to cut angles in trim, framing lumber, and other 
narrow stock.
The blade assembly of a power miter saw swivels 
up to 45° in either direction, allowing it to make 
straight, mitered, and beveled cuts. However, when 
the assembly is turned to a 45° angle, the cutting 
depth is considerably shortened. 
If you are considering buying or renting a power 
miter saw for a specific project, such as building a deck, 
don’t assume that every saw will have the capacity to 
cut wider boards at a 45° angle. Ask the salesperson 
about the maximum cutting capacity for each saw at a 
45° angle, and make sure the saw you choose can make 
clean cuts through the stock you use most frequently.
A compound miter saw (opposite page, top) has 
a second pivot point on the blade assembly that 
makes it possible to cut a bevel and miter angle at the 
same time. This option is useful when cutting cove 
moldings. See page 46, for more information about 
compound miter cuts.
The biggest limitation of a power miter saw 
is cutting extra-wide stock. A sliding compound 
miter saw (opposite page, bottom) eliminates this 
limitation. The entire blade assembly is mounted 
on a sliding carriage, giving the saw a much  
greater cutting capacity than a standard or 
compound miter saw. For tips on cutting extra-
wide boards without a sliding compound miter 
saw, see page 44.
The power miter saw has evolved from a new and relatively rare tool just a generation ago into the workhorse tool 
found in most home workshops today. It combines speed, accuracy, and fast set-up time, and as it’s become more 
popular, it’s become quite affordable.

40
A sliding compound miter saw has all the components 
of a regular compound miter saw, with the addition of a 
sliding blade assembly that makes it possible to cut much 
wider stock.
A compound miter saw cuts bevels and miters at the same time. The miter and bevel scales make it easy to set the 
saw quickly for precise angles. Before cutting, make sure the material is flush with the guide fence. Otherwise, the angle 
you cut will be incorrect. Extension arms provide a safe way to hold longer materials in place. Some models also offer 
stock clamps that secure workpieces to the saw table. Always remove debris or small wood scraps that may be blocking 
the kerf board before beginning any cut, and remember to empty the dust collection bag regularly.
sliding 
carriage
Dust collection bag
Bevel clamp
Trigger
Blade guard
Bevel 
scale
kerf board
Guide fence
extension arm
Miter scale
saw bed
Miter clamp
skillbuilder
Repeat the Skillbuilder exercise from the circular 
saw section (page 33) using the miter saw instead.

 
 
1
2
3
41
power Miter saw Blades & Their applications
The quality of the cut produced by a power miter saw 
depends on the blade you use and the speed at which 
A 16-tooth carbide-tipped blade cuts quickly and is 
good for rough-cutting framing lumber.
A 60-tooth carbide-tipped blade makes smooth 
cuts in both softwoods and hardwoods. It is a good all-
purpose blade for general carpentry work.
the blade is forced through the workpiece. Let the 
motor reach full speed before cutting, then lower the 
blade assembly slowly for the best results. 
1 
 Unplug the saw and inspect the blade; check for dull or damaged teeth.
2 
 If the blade is dull or is the wrong type for the material you want to cut, depress the arbor lock button and turn the 
arbor nut on the blade clockwise to remove it.
3 
 When the nut is free, carefully remove the blade and slide the new blade into position. Tighten the arbor nut until 
snug. Do not overtighten the nut.
chanGinG The BlaDe On a pOwer MiTer saw

1
2
42
1 
 Anchor the saw to a stationary workbench, using C-clamps. To support long moldings or other stock, build a 
pair of blocks the height of the saw table, using 1× lumber. Align the blocks with the saw fence and clamp them  
to the workbench.
2 
 Position the adjustable fence to support the workpiece, then tighten the fence clamp.
seTTinG up a pOwer MiTer saw
 Option: Consider building a cutting table with a recessed 
area the same depth as the saw bed. The table will 
support longer stock, eliminating the need for support 
arms.
Option: Rent or buy a portable power miter saw table 
for extensive cutting of long stock. Or, use a portable 
workbench and a roller-type support stand to support 
your saw and workpieces.

 
 
A
B
C
D
43
cuTTinG wiTh a pOwer MiTer saw
A 
 It’s easy to make precise crosscuts on a miter saw with this simple procedure. First, lower the blade so the edges of 
the teeth meet your cutting line. Make sure the blade will cut on the waste side of the line.
B 
 Hold the workpiece securely against the saw table and fence, and raise the motor arm to its highest position. Start 
the saw and pivot the blade slowly into the wood to make the cut.
C 
 To cut multiple pieces of stock to the same length, clamp a stop block to your support table at the desired 
distance from the blade. After cutting the first piece, position each additional length against the stop block and 
the fence to cut pieces of equal length.
D 
 Lock the saw assembly in the down position when storing or moving it or when you won’t be using it for a long 
period of time.
stop-block

1
2
1
2
3
44
1 
 Make a full downward cut. Release the trigger and let the blade come to a full stop, then raise the saw arm.
2 
 Turn the workpiece over and carefully align the first cut with the saw blade. Make a second downward cut to  
finish the job.
cuTTinG exTra-wiDe BOarDs
1 
 Sliding miter saws will cut with a plunge stroke, like a conventional miter saw. For wide workpieces, however, the 
saw’s sliding arm allows it to also cut on a push stroke. First pull the saw toward yourself and align the blade with  
the cutting line. Start the saw to begin the cut, pivoting the blade down into the workpiece.
2 
 Push the blade carriage forward slowly until the workpiece has been cut through. Do not force the cut or the saw 
may kick back.
3 
 Once the piece is cut in two, stop the saw and wait until the blade stops before lifting it out of the workpiece.
usinG a sliDinG MiTer saw
Blade guard 
removed for clarity
Blade guard 
removed for clarity

 
 
 
 
1
2
45
miter-Cutting Case moldings 
1 
 Mark cutting lines on each piece of molding or other material you plan to cut. On window and door casings, mark  
a line across the front face of the piece as a reference for the cutting direction. Remember: Only the beginning of the 
cutting line should actually be used to line up the saw blade. The freehand line across the face of the molding is a 
directional reference only.
2 
 Lay door and window casing stock flat on the saw bed and set the blade to match the cutting line. If you have a 
compound saw, set the bevel adjustment to 0°. Hold the casing with your hand at a safe distance from the blade, 
leaving the waste piece unsecured.
Mark a cutting line along the top edge of baseboards 
to indicate the starting point and direction for each cut. 
Baseboards and moldings that run the length of a  
wall are cut by standing the stock on-edge against  
the saw fence.
Join molding pieces for longer spans by mitering the 
ends at 45° angles. The mitered joint (scarf) cannot open 
up and show a crack if the wood shrinks.
Cutting baseboards

1
2
46
MakinG cOMpOunD MiTer cuTs
1 
 On a non-compound miter saw, cove moldings must be positioned at an angle for cutting. Position the molding 
upside-down so the flats on the back of the molding are flush with the saw bed and fence.
2 
 Set the blade at 45° and cut the molding. To cut the molding for an adjoining wall, swivel the miter saw to the 
opposite 45° setting, and make a cut on the second piece that will fit with the first piece to form a corner.
Flats
Option
To miter cove molding on a 
compound miter saw, lay the 
molding flat on the saw bed and 
set the miter and bevel angles.  
For cove moldings, the standard 
settings are 33° (miter) and 
31.62° (bevel). On many saws, 
these settings are highlighted 
for easy identification. If the 
walls are not perpendicular, you 
will need to experiment to find 
the correct settings.
Miter scale
Bevel scale

47
TaBle saws
For any serious do-it-yourself 
carpenter, a table saw is one of 
the most useful of all tools. Table 
saws make miter, rip, cross, and 
bevel cuts. They can also produce 
dadoes, dovetails, rabbets, and 
tenon joints for countless carpen-
try projects.
Several handmade accessories 
can improve your results and 
minimize the risk of injury when 
using a table saw. Pushsticks 
(page 49) make it easier to push 
stock through the blade’s path 
while keeping your hands at a 
safe distance. Featherboards help 
keep your stock flat against the rip 
fence and table during cutting.
If you want to add a table saw 
to your workshop but don’t have 
the money or enough space for a 
full-sized model, consider buying a 
portable table saw. Although they 
are smaller, these saws have most 
of the capabilities of a full-sized 
table saw. 
For general carpentry work, 
use a combination blade. If you 
plan to do a lot of ripping or 
crosscutting and want the most 
accurate cuts possible, switch to 
a blade that’s designed exclusively 
for that purpose. 
The table saw is a versatile, highly accurate cutting tool. With virtually 
unlimited jigs and accessories available, such as this taper-cutting jig, there 
are very few cuts a table saw cannot make.
safety Tip
Using a table saw requires extra caution because of the exposed 
position of the blade. Remember that your hands and fingers are 
vulnerable, even with a safety guard in place. Read the owner’s manual 
for specific instructions on how to operate your saw. In the following 
photos, the blade guard and splitter have been removed for clarity.

1
2
1
2
3
48
usinG a TaBle saw
1 
 Learn what the parts and accessories of a table saw do before operating one. This contractor table saw includes: blade 
guard; rip fence, for aligning the cutting line on the workpiece with the blade; blade height adjuster and bevel angle 
scale; on/off switch; bevel tilt adjuster; and miter gauge, for setting miter angles.
2 
 Use a roller stand to hold long pieces of stock at the proper height when cutting them on a table saw. A roller stand 
allows you to slide the material across the table without letting the workpiece fall to the floor.
seTTinG up a TaBle saw
1 
 Check the vertical alignment of a table saw blade by adjusting the bevel to 0° and holding a try square against it. 
The blade and square must be flush. If not, adjust the blade according to the instructions in the owner’s manual.
2 
 Check the horizontal blade alignment by measuring the distance between the blade and the rip fence at both 
ends of the blade. If the blade is not parallel to the fence, it may cause binding or kickback. Adjust the saw 
according to the owner’s manual.
3 
 Set the blade so it extends no more than 1⁄2" above the surface of the workpiece. This minimizes strain on the motor 
and produces better cutting results.
splitter with 
antikickback pawls
rolling saw base
Miter slot
Motor
saw base
leg set
extension 
wing
Blade guard
Fence locking lever
Miter gauge
Blade tilt handwheel
rip fence
extension 
wing
Blade height adjuster
Blade tilt scale
On/off switch
Table
roller stand

 
 
1
2
3
 
 
1
2
49
chanGinG a TaBle saw BlaDe
1 
 Unplug the table saw. Remove the blade guard and the table insert, then turn the blade height adjustment knob 
clockwise to raise the blade to its maximum height
2 
 Wearing gloves, hold the blade stationary with a piece of scrap wood. Loosen and remove the arbor nut. (An arbor 
wrench is supplied with most saws).
3 
 Carefully remove the old blade, and install the new blade so the teeth curve toward the front of the saw. Don’t 
overtighten the arbor nut. Replace the table insert and the blade guard.
usinG pushsTicks & FeaTherBOarDs
1 
 Pushsticks are essential safety items during rip cuts. They keep your hands clear of the blade.
2 
 Featherboards in various styles hold workpieces against the saw table or rip fence. They’re especially useful for 
ripping long stock, where control can be difficult. Never use them on the outfeed side of the blade.

1
2
3
4
5
50
1 
 Start a rip cut by standing to the left of the workpiece, placing your left leg against the corner of the saw with your 
hip touching the front fence rail.
2 
 Feed the workpiece into the blade with your right hand while pressing the board against the fence with your 
left hand. 
3 
 As you near the end of the cut, use a pushstick to feed the board past the blade.
4 
When the board is cut in two, a waste piece will be left next to the blade. Don’t reach for it by hand. Turn the saw off.
5 
With the workpiece clear of the blade, use the pushstick to slide the waste piece away from the blade.
rip-cuTTinG wiTh a TaBle saw

 
 
1
2
3
4
51
1 
Align the blade carefully with the layout line before starting the saw and making the cut.
2 
 With the workpiece held firmly against the miter gauge, slide both past the blade to make the cut. Stand behind the 
miter gauge so your body is clear of the waste piece.
3 
 Push the miter gauge past the blade until the workpiece is cut in two and the workpiece is clear.
4 
 Slide the waste piece away from the blade with a pushstick. If it is too small to reach easily, turn off the saw first.  
Do not remove short waste pieces by hand with the saw running.
crOsscuTTinG wiTh a TaBle saw

1
2
3
52
using a Table saw to rip sheet Goods
A table saw is a good choice for making clean, 
accurate cuts in plywood. Generally, it will produce 
better results than a circular saw. However, full-sized 
sheets of plywood can be unwieldly to handle and 
hard to lift up onto the saw table. The safest approach 
for cutting up large sheets is to cut them into smaller 
pieces first with a circular saw. Smaller sections will 
be much easier and safer to maneuver over the saw. 
Use extreme caution if a table saw is your only option 
for cutting up a full-sized sheet. To set up the cut, 
position a sturdy roller stand or shop table behind 
the saw to catch the plywood as it exits the blade. 
Make sure the outfeed support is slightly shorter 
than the saw table height to keep it from catching on 
rippinG sheeT GOODs On a TaBle saw
1 
 If a plywood panel is too large to handle easily, cut it into smaller pieces with a circular saw first. Cut just outside 
the final layout lines so you can make the finish cuts on the table saw.
2 
 Start the cut by standing behind the rear corner of the sheet and pushing with your right hand. Keep the material 
pressed firmly against the rip fence with your left hand. Slowly walk the sheet into the blade.
3 
 As the cut progresses, move your body behind the sheet to support the rear edge. Eventually, your right hand should 
push the material between the fence and blade all the way through the cut.
workpieces during cutting. Install a general-purpose 
or fine-cutting blade. Set the blade height about 1⁄4" 
higher than the plywood’s thickness, and lock down 
the rip fence clamp.
Start the saw and tip the sheet up onto the saw 
table, making sure a long edge is flush against 
the rip fence. Stand along the opposite edge of the 
sheet near the back corner and push it into the 
blade. When the cut is underway, walk the sheet 
slowly into the blade and move around behind it 
to support the rear edge. Keep your hands clear as 
you complete the cut, pushing the section against 
the rip fence all the way past and clear of the blade. 
Turn off the saw and wait for the blade to stop 
before removing the workpieces.

53
Skillbuilder
Using a cordless drill with an adjustable clutch, 
drive a series of drywall or deck screws fully into 
scrap lumber. Drive the first screw with the clutch 
set at the lowest setting. Increase the clutch setting 
with each screw until you reach the highest. Drive 
a screw with the clutch set on drill. If you have 
a corded variable speed drill, repeat the same 
exercise with the corded drill. Notice how the lack 
of a clutch leads to stripping out more screwheads.
D
A
E
C
B
G
F
DrillS & BitS
The power drill is one of the most popular and 
versatile power tools. Thanks to a host of improve-
ments in its design, today’s drills have many more 
functions than just drilling holes. Most have variable 
speed and reverse, making them convenient for 
driving and removing screws, nuts, and bolts, as 
well as for drilling, sanding, and stirring paint. A 
keyless chuck makes it easy to swap bits or quickly 
convert a drill into a grinder, sander, or paint mixer. 
Newer models allow you to adjust the drill’s clutch 
for drilling or for driving into various materials, so 
the clutch will automatically disengage before screw 
heads strip or sink too far into the material.
Drills are commonly available in 1⁄4-inch, 3⁄8-inch, 
and 1⁄2-inch sizes. The size refers to the maximum 
diameter of the bits and other accessories that 
the drill will accept. A 3⁄8-inch drill is standard for 
carpentry projects because it accepts a wide variety 
of bits and accessories and runs at a higher speed 
than 1⁄2-inch models. 
Cordless technology has made drills more 
portable than ever. But it’s important to understand 
the strengths of corded and cordless designs before 
deciding which one you should own. Most cordless 
drills operate at slower speeds and with less torque 
than corded models. Yet, cordless models are 
convenient because they allow up to several hours 
of operation between charges and eliminate the 
need for extension cords. Top-of-the-line cordless 
drills generate about 1,200 rpm. Corded drills weigh 
significantly less because they don’t require battery 
packs, and some operate at more than 2,000 rpm. 
For most jobs, a cordless drill’s slower speed is not 
a problem, but as the battery wears down, drilling 
becomes difficult and more of a strain on the motor. 
Spare battery packs can offset this problem. If you 
own both types of drills, keep your corded model on 
hand as a backup.
Shopping for Drills
When shopping for a drill, remember that the most 
powerful tool is not necessarily the best one for the 
job. This is especially true of cordless drills, because 
higher voltage ratings usually require heavier batteries. 
A more powerful cordless model is useful for heavy-
duty drilling, when extra power will allow you to drill 
holes in thick timbers or masonry more quickly and 
easily. For driving screws and for light-duty drilling, 
a medium-voltage cordless model or a corded drill is 
a better choice. A drill in the 12- to 14.4-volt range is 
usually sufficient for most tasks. Try out several drills 
so you can compare the feel of the tools under load.
You’ll also appreciate having two battery packs to 
minimize waiting for recharging. Most good-quality 
cordless drills come with one-hour chargers.
Drills include: (A) Clutch adjustment dial, (B) Variable 
speed switch, (C) Screw bit holder, (D) Keyless chuck, (E) 
Trigger lock and reversing switch, (F) Voltage rating, (G) 
Battery pack.

54
Corded drills are still widely available because they 
can generate lots of torque and operate at speeds of 2,000 
rpm or more. If you want a fast, powerful, lightweight 
drill, a corded drill may be the right tool for you.
A hammer drill combines the rotary motion of a 
conventional drill with the impact action of a hammer. 
It can drill holes in masonry much faster than a regular 
drill. Hammer drills can also be set for rotary motion only, 
making them useful for general drilling applications.
Drill bits include: a magnetic drive guide, twist bit set, screwdriver and nut driver set, plug cutter, glass and tile 
bits, spade bit set, hole saw bits, and adjustable counterbore bit. These accessories are often sold with a drill or are 
available separately.
Twist bit set
screwdriver 
and nut 
driver set
hole saws
Mandrel
counterbore bit
Magnetic 
drive guide
spade bit set
Glass and 
tile bits
plug 
cutter

A
B
 
 
C
D
E
F
55
cOMMOn DrillinG TOOls
A 
 An auger bit is designed with a screw-like tip and deep threads. It bores raceway holes for wiring quickly and easily 
by self-feeding through the wood.
B 
 Twist bits are used for general hole boring. In hardwood, drill a pilot hole first. The extra step will prevent binding 
and splintering as the larger bit cuts through the wood.
C 
 Use an adjustable counterbore bit to drill pilot, countersink, and counterbore holes with one action. Loosen the 
setscrew to match the bit to the size and shape of the screw.
D 
 Drill holes for door knobs and cylinders with a hole saw. To prevent the door from splintering, drill until the hole 
saw pilot (mandrel) just comes through the other side of the door. Complete the hole from the opposite side. 
E 
 A spade bit is used for larger diameter holes in wood. Use a backerboard when drilling holes in hardwood and finish 
plywood or any time you want to prevent blemishes. A backerboard placed on the bottom of the workpiece prevents 
splintering as the bit breaks through.
F 
 Remove a broken screw by drilling a pilot hole in the top of the screw and removing it with a properly sized, reverse-
thread extracting bit. 

56
sanDers
Power sanding tools shape and smooth wood and 
other building materials in preparation for painting 
and finishing. Carpenters also use them for removing 
small amounts of material. Finish sanders (opposite 
page, top) are best for light to medium sanding and 
for achieving very smooth surfaces. Belt sanders 
(opposite page, bottom left) are suitable for most 
work involving rough, fast removal of material. For 
very small, intricate, or contoured areas, sand by 
hand with folded sandpaper or a sanding block, or 
use drill-mounted sanding accessories (opposite 
page, bottom right).
When sanding a rough workpiece that requires a 
fine finish, begin sanding with a lower-grit sandpaper. 
Slowly move up to a higher grit to achieve the finish 
you want. Medium sanding jobs normally consist of 
three sanding steps: coarse, medium, and fine. 
Sanding is painstaking work. Take your time and 
do it right the first time. If you attempt to cut corners 
when sanding a project, you will see it in the end result.
Use a power sander to remove unwanted material and create a smooth finish. This random-orbit sander is used 
in general applications that require medium to heavy sanding. The orbital motion combines a circular pattern with 
side-to-side motion. Unlike disc sanders, random orbit sanders leave no circular markings, and there’s no need to follow 
the grain of the wood. Sanding discs are available with hook-and-loop fasteners or pressure-sensitive adhesive. Sponge 
applicators and accessories are also available for buffing.
Tip
 Sanders create airborne particles of material. Consider buying a sander that has a dust collection bag, and 
always wear a dust mask and eye protection.

57
Finish sanders are designed for jobs that require medium- to light-duty sanding to achieve a fine finish. Types of 
finish sanders include: (A) 3-in-1 sander for finish sanding, medium material removal, and detail work; (B) traditional 
finish sander for finishing larger areas; (C) palm sander for detail work; and (D) detail sander for smaller-scale finish 
work and easy corner access. The palm sander is also ideal for polishing and scrubbing jobs when fitted with the 
appropriate accessories.
Remove material from large areas quickly with a belt 
sander. Disposable belts are available ranging from 36 
(extra-coarse) to 100 (fine) grit. Most belt sanding is done 
with the grain. However, sanding across the grain is an 
effective way to remove material from rough-hewn lumber.
Sanding accessories for power drills include 
(clockwise from top right): disc sander for fast 
sanding, sanding drums, and flap sanders to smooth 
contoured surfaces.
c
a
B
D

A
B
D
F
E
C
58
usinG sanDers
A 
 Sanding station. A disk sander’s flat table and miter gauge make it helpful for sanding edges flat and square. Tip the 
miter gauge to refine angled workpieces, such as mitered trim. For best accuracy, sand up to a marked layout line.
B 
 Drum sander. It’s possible to sand broad curves using a belt or random-orbital sander, but use a drum sander 
mounted in a drill press or power drill for sanding tight curves.
C 
 Clean sandpaper with a stiff-bristle brush to remove sawdust and grit that can clog the sandpaper and reduce 
its effectiveness.
D 
 It’s often faster to start heavy stock removal with a coarse rasp, then switch to a sander when most of the stock is 
filed away. A rasp will not create airborne sawdust, so it is also a cleaner tool to use. Wear gloves if you need to hold 
the rasp by the blade. Notice that a rasp cuts on the push stroke only.
E 
 A sanding block is helpful for smoothing flat surfaces. For curved areas, wrap sandpaper around a folded piece of 
scrap carpeting or 2 × 4.
F 
 When sanding the edge of a board with a belt sander, clamp it between two pieces of scrap lumber to prevent the 
belt sander from wobbling and rounding off the edges.

 
 
A
B
D
C
59
selecTinG The prOper sanDpaper 
A 
 Use 60-grit coarse sandpaper on hardwood flooring and to grind down badly scratched surfaces. 
B 
 Use 100-grit sandpaper for initial smoothing of wood. Move the sander in the direction of the wood grain to achieve 
the smoothest surface.
C 
 Use 150-, then 180-grit fine sandpaper to put a smooth finish on wood surfaces. Fine sandpaper will prepare wood 
surfaces for staining or smooth drywall joints.
D 
 Use 220-grit extra-fine sandpaper to smooth stained wood before staining. Use 400-grit and higher sandpaper 
between coats of varnish.

60
pneuMaTic nailers
Nail guns use compressed air, other gas, or a battery 
to drive nails into wood. The air-powered—or 
pneumatic—nail guns offer many advantages over 
hand-nailing, for both novices and professional 
carpenters alike. For one, the guns are simple and 
efficient to use. Rather than swinging a hammer 
several times to drive and set a nail, a nail gun 
completes the whole task in one trigger squeeze. 
Position the gun’s tip where you want the nail to be, 
press down the safety on the nailing tip, and squeeze 
the trigger to fire the nail. The process is the same, 
whether you’re driving a tiny brad or a 3-inch framing 
nail. Most professional carpenters use nail guns 
because large framing or trim carpentry jobs can be 
completed in much less time than hand-nailing.
Nail guns will help improve your nailing accuracy. 
You’ll never need to worry about a glanced hammer 
blow denting the wood or bending a nail. Air nailers 
never miss the nail head. As long as you choose 
the correct nails for the application and set the air 
compressor pressure properly, a pneumatic nailer will 
drive and set nails reliably, time after time.
Nail guns are made in various sizes to suit differ-
ent carpentry applications. Framing nailers are 
designed to drive large-shank nails through framing 
lumber. Brad nailers drive smaller, casing-sized 
nails for installing trim moldings. Roofing nailers 
tack shingles in place using long coils of collated 
nails, sometimes with washers on the shanks. 
There are even nail guns made for attaching metal 
joist hanger hardware and strapping. Most styles 
are available for rent if you only need a nail gun for 
occasional projects.
When using a nail gun, you’ll usually need a 
tank-style air compressor to supply the air. Set the 
air pressure correctly for the gun you’re using. Most 
nailers require around 60 to 100 psi of continu-
ous pressure to operate. Use the correct style and 
sizes of nails for the gun—some nail styles are not 
interchangeable from one nailer to the next. Also, 
add a few drops of nail gun oil into the air nozzle 
to lubricate the internal drive mechanism if your 
gun requires it. Always wear ear and eye protection 
when operating a nail gun.
Unlike some other pneumatic 
tools, nail guns don’t require a large 
air compressor or high volume of 
air to operate properly.  A 4-gallon 
compressor is generally adequate. 
Compressors are made in several 
styles, including single tank, twin-
tank, and pancake varieties. Some 
are equipped to power more than  
one nailer at a time.

61
Framing nailers are ideal for assembling wall, floor, and roof framework. They’re the largest nail guns for home 
carpentry, capable of driving 2 to 4" framing nails.
Brad nailers are designed for attaching baseboard, 
wall moldings, and window and door casings. Some 
styles have angled magazines that make it easier to work 
in tight spaces and corners.
Coil roofing nailers install shingles or wall sheathing 
quickly and easily. The round magazine stores longer 
clips of nails than a straight magazine for improved 
efficiency. These guns can be fired repeatedly by holding 
the trigger and tapping the gun along the work surface.

62
Pneumatic nails are made in a variety of styles, sizes, and compositions to suit specific tasks. Clips are either straight 
or angled, and framing nail heads can be round or clipped. You can buy uncoated or galvanized nails as well as nails 
designed for use with treated lumber or marine applications.
To prepare a nail gun for use, 
slide a clip of nails down into the slot 
in the magazine and close the cover. 
Add a few drops of oil into the air hose 
nozzle, if necessary, before each use.
roofing nail coil
clipped head framing nails
Finish nails
Brads

63
Adjust the air compressor’s 
regulator to achieve the 
recommended air pressure for 
the gun you’re using. Incorrect air 
pressure will cause the nailer to 
either overdrive the nails or stop 
them short of setting properly.
Drive a nail by positioning the 
gun’s nailing tip where you want the 
nail to be and pushing the safety tip 
against the workpiece. Hold the gun 
firmly and squeeze the trigger. Lift 
the gun off to re-engage the safety.

Powder-ActuAted tools
Occasionally, your carpentry projects may involve 
fastening wood to metal or concrete, such as attach-
ing wall sole plates to concrete floors. You may even 
need to fasten metal plumbing straps or conduit clips 
to steel I-beams. In these situations, you could use 
hardened screws for fastening, but that involves lots of 
tedious drilling and usually a few broken or stripped 
screw heads. An easier alternative is to use small 
charges of gunpowder to drive hardened nails into 
metal or concrete with a powder-actuated nail gun.
Powder-actuated nailers look and work a bit like 
a pile driver or handgun. A steel barrel holds specially 
designed, hardened nails called drive pins. The nails 
are equipped with a plastic sleeve to keep them 
centered in the barrel. Driving force is delivered by a 
small gunpowder charge, called a power load, which 
looks like a rifle shell with a crimped tip. The power 
loads fit into a magazine behind the barrel on the tool. 
Squeezing the tool’s trigger, or hitting the end with 
a hammer (depending on the tool style), activates a 
firing pin that ignites the gunpowder. The expanding 
gasses drive a piston against the nail at great force. 
Powder-actuated nailers can drive only one fastener 
at a time, but some styles will hold a clip of multiple 
power loads for faster operation.
Power loads are made in a range of color-coded 
calibers to suit different nailing applications and 
drive pin sizes. Follow the manufacturer’s recommen-
dations carefully to choose the correct load and 
fastener for your task. Generally, the safest method is 
to start with the lowest energy load that will work for 
your nailing situation and see if it’s sufficient to fully 
drive the nail. Use the next stronger load, if necessary.
Powder-actuated nailers are easy to use for do-it-
yourselfers and safe for indoor projects, provided 
you wear hearing and eye protection and follow all 
manufacturer’s instructions. Most home centers sell 
the nail guns and supplies, or you can rent these tools.
Powder-actuated nailers offer the quickest and 
easiest method for fastening framing to block and 
concrete.
Powder-actuated nail guns (PATs) are designed in 
two styles. Plunger types are activated by hitting the end 
of the shaft with a hammer, while trigger styles function 
like a handgun. With either type, the barrel must be 
depressed against the work surface to release a safety 
before a drive pin can be fired.
64

 
 
1
2
3
65
Powder loads contain various amounts of gunpowder 
inside a crimped shell. Color coding ensures that you’re 
using the right amount of charge for your drive pin size 
and the materials you’re fastening together. Follow the 
color charts carefully, starting with a low-powder charge.
PATs use hardened nails, called drive pins, in a range 
of sizes. A plastic finned sleeve centers the drive pin in 
the tool barrel.
using a Powder-actuated tool
1 
 To prepare a PAT for use, slide a drive pin into the barrel first. Push it in until the nail tip is flush with the end of the 
barrel. Be sure there’s no powder load in the magazine.
2 
 Slide the magazine open and insert a powder load into the barrel. A rim on the load shell ensures that it can only be 
loaded one way. Close the magazine.
3 
 Press the end of the barrel firmly against the work surface to release the safety. Squeeze the trigger or strike the end 
of the tool sharply with a hammer to fire the drive pin. Once the pin is fired, slide open the magazine to eject the 
spent load shell.
tip
Occasionally, your first powder load selection won’t completely set the nail. 
In these situations, use a hand maul to drive it in the rest of the way. Choose a 
stronger powder load for driving subsequent fasteners.

66
routers
Among workshop tools, the router is the undisputed 
king of versatility. With a router, you can cut, shape 
edges, build joints, create decorative inlays, and even 
drill holes. More research and development goes into 
router innovations each year than virtually any other 
woodworking tool. And for all these various capabili-
ties, routers don’t cost a fortune. A good-quality 
router is worth every cent you pay.
The two main types of routers for general 
workshop use are fixed-base and plunge. A third type, 
called a trim router, is a much smaller tool primarily 
used to trim plastic laminate. 
Fixed-base routers are the standard-issue tools of 
the router family. They have a motor that’s adjusted 
up or down on its base and is fixed in place for the 
routing operation. Standard fixed-base models range 
in power from 11⁄2 to 21⁄4 horsepower and are suitable 
for most handheld and table routing jobs. Large fixed-
base tools, with 3 horsepower or more, are called 
heavy-duty, or production, routers and are used for 
heavy work with large bits. They also make excellent 
table routers.
Plunge routers have a special base that allows 
the motor to travel up and down while under power. 
This feature lets you plunge the spinning router bit 
down into the workpiece, move the tool sideways for 
a horizontal cut, then retract the bit from the wood at 
the end of the cut. Plunge routers can do everything 
standard fixed-base routers can do but are especially 
useful for inside cuts, such as mortises. 
The plunge router (left) and fixed base router (right) are the two main types of routers for general workshop use.  
A trim router (center) is smaller and used primarily for trimming plastic laminate.

67
Router Kits. Many manufacturers now make router kits 
that consist of a motor and both plunge (left) and fixed  
(right) bases.
Plunge Routers. For some router operations, like 
cutting hinge mortises or template routing, a plunge 
router offers more convenience than a fixed-base router.
A flush-trimming bit with a bottom bearing rides 
along a template placed below the workpiece.
To cut a dado with a router, use a straight bit the 
same diameter as the dado width. Clamp a guide block 
to the work piece and make the cut in several passes of 
increasing depth. 

lumber ................................................70
Plywood & sheet goods ......................74
trim Moldings .....................................76
nails ....................................................78
screws & other Hardware ..................80
glues & Adhesives ..............................82
BAsic cArPentry

69
oBviously, Adding A second floor to your home 
is an advanced project that most homeowners are 
not going to attempt. However, finishing a basement 
is a fairly common do-it-yourself project. To do so 
you’ll need to know how to build a partition wall, 
frame a door, and perhaps trim a window. All it 
takes is a set of clear instructions, a little patience, 
and practice.
The medium of carpentry is lumber, so it is 
good to know what is available and how to use it. 
Dimensional lumber, sheet goods, and trim are all 
covered in the following chapter. In addition, the 
fasteners and adhesives needed to put it all together 
are shown.
Contact your local building inspector to see if 
your project requires a permit. 

70
luMBer
Lumber for structural applications such as walls, 
floors, and ceilings is usually milled from strong 
softwoods and is categorized by grade, moisture 
content, and dimension.
Grade: Characteristics such as knots, splits, and 
grain slope affect the strength of the lumber and 
determine the grade (chart, opposite page).
Moisture content: Lumber is also categorized 
by moisture content. S-DRY (surfaced dry) is the 
designation for lumber with a moisture content of 
19 percent or less. S-DRY lumber is the least likely to 
warp or shrink and is a good choice for framing walls. 
S-GRN (surfaced green) means the lumber contains a 
moisture content of 19 percent or more.
Exterior lumber: Lumber milled from redwood 
or cedar is naturally resistant to decay and insect 
infestation and is a good choice for exterior 
applications. The most durable part of a tree is the 
heartwood, so specify heartwood for pieces that will 
be in contact with the ground.
Treated lumber: Lumber injected with chemicals 
under pressure is resistant to decay and is generally 
less expensive than decay-resistant heartwoods such 
as redwood and cedar. For outdoor structures like 
decks, use treated lumber for posts and joists and more 
attractive redwood or cedar for decks and railings.
Dimension lumber: Lumber is sold according to 
its nominal size, such as 2 × 4. Its actual size (chart, 
page 73) is smaller. Always use actual sizes for 
measuring and estimating.
Check lumber visually before buying it. Take the time 
to choose the boards with the fewest defects, even if they 
will be hidden behind wall surfaces.
the steel-Framing Alternative
Lumber is not the only material available for framing walls. Metal studs and 
tracks offer an attractive—if less common—choice for new construction. 
Steel-framed walls can be installed faster than wood stud walls—the parts are 
attached by crimping and screwing the flanges—and the channels are precut 
to accommodate electrical and plumbing lines. Steel framing is also lighter 
in weight, easy to recycle, fireproof, and comparable in price to lumber. If you 
are interested in using steel framing for a new wall in a wood-framed home, 
consult a professional for information about electrical, plumbing, and load-
bearing safety precautions. Steel framing is available at most home centers.

luMBer grAding cHArt
Much of today’s lumber is still fairly wet when it is sold, 
so it’s hard to predict how it will behave as it dries. But 
a quick inspection of each board at the lumberyard or 
home center will help you disqualify flawed boards. 
Lumber that is cupped, twisted, or crooked should not 
be used at full length. However, you may be able to cut 
out good sections for use as blocking or other short 
framing pieces. If a board is slightly bowed, you can 
probably flatten it out as you nail it. Checks, wanes, 
and knots are cosmetic flaws that seldom affect the 
strength of the board. The exception is a knot that is 
loose or missing. In this case, cut off the damaged  
area. Sections with splits should also be cut off.  
Splits are likely to spread as the wood dries.
Grade stamps provide valuable information about a 
piece of lumber. The lumber’s grade is usually indicated 
by the largest number stamped on the wood. Also 
stamped on each piece of lumber are its moisture 
content, species, and lumber mill of origin.
cup
Bow
twist
crook
split
Knot
check
wane
Grade
Description, uses
Clear
Free of knots and defects
SEL STR or Select 
Structural
Good appearance, strength, 
and stiffness
1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3 grades indicate  
knot size
CONST or  
Construction
Both grades used for  
general framing
STAND or Standard
Good strength and 
serviceability
STUD or Stud
Special designation used 
in any stud application, 
including load-bearing walls
UTIL or Utility
Economical choice for 
blocking and bracing
71

72
selecting tHe rigHt luMBer For A Project
Picking the right wood for a project is a decision 
that will affect the durability and attractiveness 
of the final product. Some woods are more prone 
to warping than others, some are more resistant 
to decay, and some are superior when it comes 
to accepting a coat of paint. Matching styles and 
wood varieties will help to create a common theme 
throughout your home.
Lumber sizes such as 2 × 4 are nominal 
dimensions, not actual dimensions. The actual size 
of lumber is slightly smaller than the nominal size. 
When it is originally milled, lumber is cut at the 
nominal size; however, the boards are then planed 
down for a smoother finish, producing the actual 
dimensions you buy in the store. See the chart on the 
opposite page for nominal and actual dimensions. 
Softwood
Description
Uses
Cedar
Easy to cut, holds paint well. Heartwood resists decay.
Decks, shakes, shingles, posts, 
and other decay-prone surfaces.
Fir, larch
Stiff, hard wood. Holds nails well. Some varieties are hard to cut.
Framing materials, flooring, 
and subflooring.
Pine
Lightweight, soft wood with a tendency to shrink. Holds nails 
well. Some varieties resist decay.
Paneling, trim, siding, and 
decks.
Redwood
Lightweight, soft wood that holds paint well. Easy to cut.  
Heartwood resists decay and insect damage.
Outdoor applications, such as 
decks, posts, and fences.
Treated  
lumber
Chemically treated to resist decay. Use corrosion-resistant 
fasteners only. Wear protective eye wear and clothing to avoid 
skin, lung, and eye irritation.
Ground-contact and other 
outdoor applications where 
resistance to decay is important.
Hardwood
Description
Uses
Birch
Hard, strong wood that is easy to cut and holds  
paint well.
Painted cabinets, trim, and plywood.
Maple
Heavy, hard, strong wood that is difficult to cut  
with hand tools.
Flooring, furniture, and countertops.
Poplar
Soft, light wood that is easy to cut with hand  
or power tools.
Painted cabinets, trim, tongue-and-groove 
paneling, and plywood cores. 
Oak
Heavy, hard, strong wood that is difficult to cut  
with hand tools.
Furniture, flooring, doors, and trim.
Walnut
Heavy, hard, strong wood that is easy to cut.
Fine woodwork, paneling, and mantelpieces.

73
Type
Description
Common  
Nominal Sizes
Actual  
Sizes
Used in framing of walls, 
ceilings, floors, rafters, 
structural finishing, 
exterior decking, fencing, 
and stairs.
Used in framing of walls, 
ceilings, floors, rafters, 
structural finishing, 
exterior decking, fencing, 
and stairs.
1 × 4
1 × 6
1 × 8
2 × 2
2 × 4
2 × 6
2 × 8
3⁄4" × 31⁄2"
3⁄4" × 51⁄2"
3⁄4" × 71⁄4"
11⁄2" × 11⁄2"
11⁄2" × 31⁄2"
11⁄2" × 51⁄2"
11⁄2" × 71⁄4"
1 × 2  
1 × 4
3⁄4" × 11⁄2"
3⁄4" × 21⁄2"
Used in wainscoting and 
full-length paneling of 
walls and ceilings.
5⁄16" × 4 
1 × 4 
1 × 6 
1 × 8
Varies, depending 
on milling process 
and application.
Used in trim, shelving, 
cabinetry, and other 
applications where a fine 
finish is required.
1 × 4 
1 × 6 
1 × 8 
1 × 10 
1 × 12
3⁄4" × 31⁄2" 
3⁄4" × 51⁄2" 
3⁄4" × 71⁄2" 
3⁄4" × 91⁄2" 
3⁄4" × 111⁄2"
Composed of layers of 
lumber laminated to form 
a solid piece. Used for 
beams and joists.
4 × 10 
4 × 12 
6 × 10 
6 × 12
31⁄2" × 9 
31⁄2" × 12 
31⁄2" × 9 
31⁄2" × 12
Composed of thin layers 
glued together for use in 
joists and beams.
4 × 12
31⁄2" × 113⁄8"
dimensional lumber
Furring strips
tongue-and-
groove Paneling
Finished Boards
glue laminate
Micro-lam

74
Plywood & sHeet goods
There are many different types of sheet goods, but 
plywood is the most widely used. Plywood is an 
extremely versatile sheet material that is made up 
of thinly sliced layers or plies of wood. Plywood is 
available in thicknesses ranging from 3⁄16" to 3⁄4" and 
is graded A through D, depending on the quality 
of the wood in its outer plies. It is also graded 
for interior or exterior usage. Classifications for 
plywood are based on the wood species used for 
the face and back veneers. Group 1 species are the 
strongest and stiffest, Group 2 is the next strongest.
Finish plywood is graded either A-C, meaning it 
has a finish-quality wood veneer on one side and a 
utility-grade ply on the other side, or A-A, indicating 
it has a finish veneer on both sides.
Sheathing plywood is graded C-D with two 
rough sides and features a bond between plies that 
is waterproof. Plywood rated EXPOSURE 1 is for 
use where some moisture is present, and plywood 
rated EXTERIOR is used in applications that 
are permanently exposed to weather. Sheathing 
plywood also carries a thickness rating and a roof 
and floor span index, which appear as two numbers 
separated by a diagonal slash. The first number, for 
roofing application, indicates the maximum spacing 
The finish plywood 
grading stamp shows the 
grade of face and back 
veneers, species group 
number, and a moisture 
exposure rating. Mill 
numbers and product 
numbers are for the 
manufacturer’s use.
Finish plywood
Particleboard
waferboard
Plastic laminate (bonded 
to particleboard)
strandboard
sheathing plywood
trademark
species group 
number
Moisture  
exposure rating
Mill number
Back  
veneer
Face  
veneer 
Product number

75
for rafters. The second number specifies the joist 
spacing when plywood is used for subflooring. Some 
plywood is stamped “sized for spacing.” This means 
that the actual dimensions are slightly smaller than 
4 × 8 feet to allow space for expansion between 
sheets after installation. 
Plastic laminates make durable surfaces for 
countertops and furniture. Plastic laminates are 
sometimes bonded to particleboard for use in 
shelving, cabinets, and countertops.
Strand-, particle-, and waferboard are made from 
waste chips or inexpensive wood species and are 
used for shelving and floor underlayment.
Foam insulating board is lightweight and serves 
as insulation for basement walls.
Water-resistant drywall is used behind ceramic 
wall tiles and in other high-moisture areas.
Drywall, also known as wallboard, Sheetrock, 
and plasterboard, comes in panels 4-feet wide, 2-,  
4-, 8-, 10-, or 12-feet long, and in 3⁄8-inch, 1⁄2-inch,  
and 5⁄8-inch thicknesses.
Pegboard and hardboard are made from wood 
fibers and resins bonded together under high 
pressure and are used for tool organization with a 
workbench and as shelf backing.
The sheathing 
plywood grading 
stamp shows thickness, 
roof or floor span 
index, and exposure 
rating, in addition to 
the manufacturer’s 
information.
Plastic foam 
insulating board
Hardboard
Pegboard
drywall
water-resistant 
drywall
trademark
thickness
Moisture  
exposure 
rating
Mill number
roof/floor span 
ratings in inches 
Product number

76
triM Moldings
Trim moldings give character and definition 
to many carpentry projects. In addition, you 
can sometimes use them to cover up carpentry 
mistakes, such as hiding small gaps in wall corners 
when the drywall hasn’t been cut perfectly. 
It’s important to measure and cut moldings 
precisely so that when installed, they fit together 
snugly without gaps. Predrilling moldings is 
recommended, especially when hardwoods such as 
oak are used. Predrilling makes hand nailing easier, 
reduces splitting during installation, and makes it 
easier to set nails cleanly. There’s no need to predrill 
when using a pneumatic nail gun.
Most moldings should be painted or stained 
before installation. Cove moldings and wainscoting 
can be purchased with a factory coat of white paint. 
Pine and poplar are good choices if you plan to 
paint. For stained surfaces, use a hardwood with  
a pleasing grain, such as oak.
Decorative moldings give a finished appearance to walls, doors, windows, and cabinets.
tip
Use the same wood species whenever possible 
in selecting trim materials for walls, doors, 
and windows. Even when painted, oak shows a 
distinct grain pattern that painted poplar does 
not have. 

77
Trim moldings are both 
functional and decorative. 
They can be used to conceal 
gaps at the base and around 
the sides of a carpentry 
project, to hide the edges of 
plywood surfaces, or simply 
to add visual interest to the project. 
Moldings are available in dozens of styles, but the 
samples shown here are widely available at all home 
improvement centers.
Synthetic trim moldings, available in many styles, are 
less expensive than hardwood moldings. Synthetic moldings are 
made of wood composites (A) or rigid foam (B) covered with a 
layer of melamine.
Baseboard molding (C) is used to trim the bottom edge of 
a wall along the floor line. Choosing molding that matches the 
baseboard elsewhere in your home helps your project fit in with  
its surroundings.
Hardwood strips (D) are used to construct face frames for 
carpentry projects and to cover unfinished edges of plywood 
shelves. Maple, oak, and poplar strips are widely available in 1 × 2,  
1 × 3, and 1 × 4 sizes.
Crown moldings (E, F) cover gaps between the top of a wall and 
the ceiling. They can also add a decorative accent to other projects.
Cove molding (G) is a simple, unobtrusive trim for covering gaps.
Ornamental moldings, including spindle and rail (H) and 
embossed moldings (I, J), give a distinctive look to many projects. 
Door-edge molding (K), also called cap molding, is only available 
in specialty stores in some areas. It is used with finish-grade plywood 
to create panel-style doors and drawer faces.
Shelf-edge molding (L), also called base cap molding, provides a 
decorative edge to plywood shelves or can be used to create a wider 
baseboard molding.
Base-shoe molding (M) covers gaps around the top, bottom, and 
sides of a wall. Because it bends easily, base-shoe molding works well 
to cover irregular gaps caused by uneven walls and loose floors.
A
B
c
M
l
K
j
i
H
g
F
e
d

78
nAils
The wide variety of nail styles and sizes makes it 
possible to choose exactly the right fastener for each 
job. Nails are identified by their typical purpose, such 
as casing, flooring, or roofing nails; or by a physical 
feature, such as galvanized, coated, or spiral. Some 
nails come in both a galvanized and non-galvanized 
version. Use galvanized nails for outdoor projects 
and non-galvanized indoors. Nail lengths may be 
specified in inches or by numbers from 4 to 60 
followed by the letter “d,” which stands for “penny” 
(see “Nail Sizes,” opposite page). 
Some of the most popular nails for carpentry 
projects include:
• Common and box nails for general framing work. 
Box nails are smaller in diameter, which makes 
them less likely to split wood. Box nails were 
designed for constructing boxes and crates, but 
they can be used in any application where thin, dry 
wood will be nailed close to the edge of the piece. 
Most common and box nails have a cement or vinyl 
coating that improves their holding power. 
• Finish and casing nails, which have small heads and 
are driven just below the work surface with a nail 
set. Finish nails are used for attaching moldings and 
other trim to walls. Casing nails are used for nailing 
window and door casings. They have a slightly larger 
head than finish nails for better holding power. 
• Brads, or small wire nails sometimes referred to as 
finish nails. They are used primarily in cabinetry, 
where very small nail holes are preferred.
• Flooring nails, which are often spiral-shanked for 
extra holding power to prevent floorboards from 
separating or squeaking. Spiral flooring nails are 
sometimes used in other applications, such as 
installing tongue-and-groove paneling on ceilings.
• Galvanized nails, which have a zinc coating that 
resists rusting. They are used for outdoor projects. 
• Drywall nails, once the standard fastener for 
drywall, are less common today because of the 
development of Phillips-head drywall screws that 
drive quickly with a screw gun or drill and offer 
superior holding power (page 80).
types of nails
Box nail for light work or edge nailing
cement-coated sinker nail for outside sheathing
common nail for heavy-duty framing
drywall nail
duplex nail for temporary construction
self-sealing galvanized roofing nail for metal roofs
galvanized roofing nail
Aluminum cedar fence nail
Aluminum cedar siding nail
galvanized spiral siding nail
galvanized ring-shank siding nail
cement nail for fastening wood to concrete
Finish nail for fastening wood trim
galvanized casing nail for outside trim
spiral flooring nail for subflooring
Masonry nail for brick and concrete

79
The pennyweight scale that manufacturers use to size 
nails was developed centuries ago as an approxima-
tion of the number of pennies it would take to buy 
100 nails of that size. The range of nail types available 
today (and what they cost) is much wider, but the scale 
estimating nail Quantities
Estimate the number of nails you’ll 
need for a project, then use the chart 
to determine approximately how 
many pounds of nails to purchase. 
Note: Sizes and quantities not  
listed are less common, although 
they may be available through  
some manufacturers.
is still in use. Each pennyweight refers to a specific 
length (see chart, below), although you will find slight 
variations in length from one nail type to the next. For 
example, box nails of a given pennyweight are roughly 
1⁄8" shorter than common nails of the same weight.
nAil siZes
Pennyweight
2d
3d
4d
5d
6d
7d
8d
10d
12d
16d
20d
Length (in.)
1
11⁄4
11⁄2
15⁄8
2
21⁄8
21⁄2
3
31⁄4
31⁄2
4
Common 
870
543
294
254
167
 
101
66
61
47
29
Box 
635
473
406
236
210
145
94
88
71
39
 
Cement-coated
 
 
527
387
293
223
153
111
81
64
52
Finish
1350 880
630
535
288
 
196
124
113
93
39
Masonry
 
 
155
138
100
78
64
48
43
34
 
Nails per lb.
sizes  
(Penny ratings)
wire brad lengths
wire 
brad 
gauge
4d
5d
6d
8d
10d
16d
20d
19
18
17
½”
½”
¾”
1”
1¼”
1½”
1¼”
1”
¾”
5∕8”

80
screws & otHer HArdwAre
The advent of the screw gun and numerous types of 
driver bits for drills have made screws a mainstay  
of the carpentry trade. With literally hundreds of 
different screws and types of fastening hardware 
available, there is a specific screw for almost every 
job. But, for most carpentry jobs you will only need 
to consider a few general-purpose types. Although 
nails are still preferred for framing jobs, screws 
have replaced nails for hanging drywall, installing 
blocking between studs, and attaching sheathing and 
flooring. Screws are also used to attach a workpiece 
to plaster, brick, or concrete, which requires an 
anchoring device (opposite page, top).
Screws are categorized according to length, 
slot style, head shape, and gauge. The thickness of 
the screw body is indicated by the gauge number. 
The larger the number, the larger the screw. Large 
screws provide extra holding power; small screws 
are less likely to split a workpiece. There are various 
styles of screw slot, including Phillips, slotted, and 
square. Square-drive screwdrivers are increasing in 
popularity because they grip the screw head tightly, 
but Phillips head screws are still the most popular.
Easily recognizable by their bugle-shaped heads, 
drywall screws are designed to dimple the surface of 
the drywall without ripping the facing paper.
Most screws are now designed to be driven with a 
power screwdriver. They don’t require pilot holes in soft 
wood, and the bugle-shaped heads allow the screws to 
countersink themselves. Use drywall screws for general-
purpose, convenient fastening indoors. Deck screws are 
corrosion-resistant screws made specifically for outdoor 
use. Use deck screws with the correct  
coating for the lumber being used.
Use protector plates where wires or pipes pass 
through framing members and are less than 11⁄4" from  
the edge. The plates prevent drywall screws or nails from 
puncturing wires or pipes.

 
 
A
B
A
B
C
D
81
Metal framing connectors may be required in some communities, especially in areas prone to high winds or 
earthquakes. Metal joist hangers (A), stud ties (B), connector straps (C), and post-and-beam saddles (D) all provide extra 
reinforcement to structural joints. Wood joints made with metal connectors are stronger than toenailed joints. Metal 
connectors must be installed with approved fasteners.
using MAsonry & wAll AncHors
A 
 Use wall anchors to attach hardware or lumber to plaster, concrete, or brick. Choose an anchor that is equal in 
length to the thickness of the wall’s surface material. Plastic plugs are used for anchoring in hollow walls.
B 
 To install a wall anchor, drill a pilot hole equal in diameter to the plastic anchor. Insert the anchor in the hole and 
drive it flush with the wall surface. Insert the screw and tighten it; as the anchor expands, it will create a tight grip.

82
glues & AdHesives
When used properly, glues and adhesives can be 
stronger than the materials they hold together. 
Use hot glue in lightweight woodworking projects, 
carpenter’s glue for wood joints, and carpentry 
adhesive for preliminary installation of thin panels 
and lumber. Panel adhesive, a thinner formula that 
can be applied from a tube or with a brush, is used to 
install paneling, wainscoting, and other lightweight 
tongue-and-groove materials. Masonry adhesive is 
used for securing top courses of interlocking blocks.
Caulks are designed to permanently close joints, 
fill gaps in woodwork, and hide subtle imperfections. 
Different caulks are made of different compounds 
and vary greatly in durability and workability. Most 
caulk is applied with a caulk gun, but some types 
are available in squeeze tubes for smaller applica-
tions. While silicone caulks last longer, many are 
not paintable and are difficult to smooth out. Latex 
caulks are less durable than silicone, but are much 
easier to work with, especially when used to hide 
gaps. Caulks are available for bond to masonry, 
glass, tile, metals, wood, fiberglass, and plastic.  
Read the label carefully to choose the right caulk  
for the job.
Carpentry adhesives include (clockwise from top right): clear adhesive caulk, for sealing gaps in damp areas; 
waterproof construction adhesive, for bonding lumber for outdoor projects; multi-purpose adhesive, for attaching 
paneling and forming strong bonds between lumber pieces; electric hot glue gun and glue sticks, for bonding small 
decorative trim pieces on built-ins; wood glues and all-purpose glue, for many woodworking projects.

 
 
A
B
C
D
83
A 
 Strengthen floors and decks and reduce squeaks with joist and deck adhesive. For outdoor applications, make sure 
you choose a waterproof adhesive.
B 
 Construction adhesive adds strength to carpentry and woodworking joints. It also has two advantages over glue.  
It has high initial tack, so parts don’t slide apart, and it retains some flexibility after drying.
C 
 Exterior-grade construction adhesive fortifies the bond between wood structural members and the masonry house 
foundation. Additional fasteners, such as powder-actuated nails, are still needed.
D 
 Specialty molding and trim glue has a thicker formulation than standard wood glue to resist running and dripping 
on vertical surfaces. It is tackier than regular glue, which helps hold ceiling trims in place when they are positioned, 
creating a small amount of time for you to fasten them with nails.
using AdHesives And glues

Partition walls ....................................90
door Frames for 
Prehung doors ....................................94
Framing a window ..............................96
door & window casings ....................100
Base Molding ....................................106
AnAtoMy  
oF A House

85
Anatomy details
Many remodeling projects, like adding new doors or 
windows, require that you remove one or more studs 
in a load-bearing wall to create an opening. When 
planning your project, remember that new openings 
require a permanent support beam called a header, 
above the removed studs, to carry the structural  
load directly.
The required size for the header is set by local 
building codes and varies according to the width of 
the rough opening. For a window or door opening, 
a header can be built from two pieces of 2-inch 
dimensional lumber sandwiched around 3⁄8-inch 
plywood (chart, right). 
When a large portion of a load-bearing wall (or an 
entire wall) is removed, a laminated beam product 
can be used to make the new header.
Door opening: The structural load above the door is 
carried by cripple studs that rest on a header. The ends 
of the header are supported by jack studs (also known 
as trimmer studs) and king studs that transfer the load 
to the sole plate and the foundation of the house. The 
rough opening for a door should be 1" wider and 1⁄2" 
taller than the dimensions of the door unit, including 
the jambs. This extra space lets you adjust the door unit 
during installation.
Window opening: The structural load above the 
window is carried by cripple studs resting on a header. 
The ends of the header are supported by jack studs and 
king studs, which transfer the load to the sole plate 
and the foundation of the house. The rough sill, which 
helps anchor the window unit but carries no structural 
weight, is supported by cripple studs. To provide room for 
adjustments during installation, the rough opening for a 
window should be 1" wider and 1⁄2" taller than the window 
unit, including the jambs.
If you will be removing more than one wall stud, 
make temporary supports to carry the structural 
load until the header is installed.
recommended Header sizes
Rough  
Opening WIdth
Recommended  
Header Construction
Up to 3 ft.
3⁄8" plywood between two 2 × 4s
3 ft. to 5 ft.
3⁄8" plywood between two 2 × 6s
5 ft. to 7 ft.
3⁄8" plywood between two 2 × 8s
7 ft. to 8 ft.
3⁄8" plywood between two 2 × 10s
Header
top plate
jambs
cripple 
studs
jack 
stud
King stud
sole plate
Header
top plate
jambs
cripple 
studs
jack 
stud
King 
stud
sole plate
rough 
sill

86
BeFore you stArt A do-it-yourself carpentry 
project, you should familiarize yourself with a few 
basic elements of home construction and remodel-
ing. Take some time to get comfortable with the 
terminology of the models shown on the next few 
pages. The understanding you will gain in this 
section will make it easier to plan your project, buy 
the right materials, and clear up any confusion you 
might have about the internal design of your home.
If your project includes modifying exterior or 
load-bearing walls, you must determine if your 
house was built using platform- or balloon-style 
framing. The framing style of your home determines 
what kind of temporary supports you will need to 
install while the work is in progress. If you have 
trouble determining what type of framing was used 
Platform framing (photos, above and left) is identified 
by the floor-level sole plates and ceiling-level top plates 
to which the wall studs are attached. Most houses built 
after 1930 use platform framing. If you do not have access 
to unfinished areas, you can remove the wall surface at 
the bottom of a wall to determine what kind of framing 
was used in your home.
Platform Framing
A House with Platform Framing
skylight header
top plate
King stud
jack stud
load-
bearing wall
Header
rough sill
Header
rim joist
joist
sole plate
studs
support 
posts
support 
beam
subfloor
joist
Foundation
rafter
ridge board
shingles
roof sheathing

87
Balloon Framing
Balloon framing (photos, right and above) is identified 
by wall studs that run uninterrupted from the roof to a 
sill plate on the foundation, without the sole plates and 
top plates found in platform-framed walls (page 88). 
Balloon framing was used in houses built before 1930, 
and it is still used in some new home styles, especially 
those with high vaulted ceilings.
in your home, refer to the original blueprints, if 
you have them, or consult a building contractor or 
licensed home inspector.
Framing in a new door or window on an exterior 
wall normally requires installing a header. Make 
sure that the header you install meets the require-
ments of your local building code, and always install 
cripple studs where necessary. 
Floors and ceilings consist of sheet materials, joists, 
and support beams. All floors used as living areas 
must have joists with at least 2 × 8 construction. 
There are two types of walls: load-bearing and 
partition. Load-bearing walls require temporary 
supports during wall removal or framing of a door or 
window. Partition walls carry no structural load and 
do not require temporary supports. 
A House with Balloon Framing
ridge board
rafter
shingles
roof sheathing
Main beam
Foundation
still plate
jack stud
rough sill
Bracing
Fire blocks
support 
posts
subfloor
cripple 
studs
King stud
load-
bearing wall
joist
studs
Header

88
Enlarging an existing opening 
simplifies the framing. In many 
cases, you can use an existing king 
stud and jack stud to form one side 
of the new opening.
Framing a new opening is the 
only solution when you’re installing 
a window or door where none 
existed or when you’re replacing a 
unit with one that is much larger.
Using an existing opening avoids 
the need for new framing. This is a 
good option in homes with masonry 
exteriors, which are difficult to alter. 
Order a replacement unit that is 1" 
narrower and 1⁄2" shorter than the 
rough opening.
Framing options for window & door openings (new lumber shown in yellow)
wall Anatomy
Load-bearing walls carry the structural weight of 
your home. In platform-framed houses, load-bearing 
walls can be identified by double top plates made from 
two layers of framing lumber. Load-bearing walls include 
all exterior walls and any interior walls that are aligned 
above support beams.
Partition walls are interior walls that do not carry the 
structural weight of the house. They have a single top 
plate and can be perpendicular to the floor and ceiling 
joists but are not aligned above support beams. Any 
interior wall that is parallel to floor and ceiling joists is  
a partition wall.

89
Floor & ceiling Anatomy
Joists carry the structural load of floors and ceilings. The ends of the joists rest on support beams, foundations, or 
load-bearing walls. Rooms used as living areas must be supported by floor joists that are at least 2 × 8 in size. Floors 
with smaller joists can be reinforced with sister joists.
Sister joists also are used to help support a header 
when ceiling joists must be cut, such as when framing a 
skylight shaft.
Floors with 2 × 6 joists, like those sometimes found in 
attics, cannot support living areas unless a sister joist is 
attached alongside each original joist to strengthen it. This 
often is necessary when an attic is converted to a living area. 
Floor shown cut away for clarity
support beam
joists
sister joists
sister joists
Header
skylight shaft
ceiling joists

Partition walls
PArtition wAlls Are non-load-bearing walls 
typically built with 2 × 4 lumber, but they can also  
be built with 35⁄8-inch steel studs. Walls holding 
plumbing pipes can be framed with 2 × 6 lumber.  
On a concrete floor, use pressure-treated lumber for  
the bottom plates. 
This project involves building a wall in place, rather 
than framing a complete wall on the floor and tilting 
it upright, as in new construction. The build-in-place 
method allows for variations in floor and ceiling levels 
and is generally much easier for remodeling projects.
If your wall will include a door or other opening, 
see pages 94 to 99. Check the local building codes 
tools & Materials
Protective eyewear
Chalk line
Circular saw
Framing square
Plumb bob
Powder-actuated nailer
T-bevel
2 x 4 lumber
Blocking lumber
16d and 8d common nails
Concrete fasteners
Drywall screws
A typical partition wall consists 
of top and bottom plates and 2 × 4 
studs spaced 16" on-center. Use 2 × 6 
lumber for walls that will hold large 
plumbing pipes (inset).
for requirements about fireblocking in partition 
walls. And after your walls are framed and the 
mechanical rough-ins are completed, install metal 
protector plates where pipes and wires run through 
framing members.
Nail guns will help improve your nailing 
accuracy. You’ll never need to worry about a 
glanced hammer blow denting the wood or 
bending a nail. Air nailers never miss the nail  
head. As long as you choose the correct nails for 
the application and set the air compressor pressure 
properly, a pneumatic nailer will drive and set nails 
reliably, time after time.
90
cripple 
stud
jack 
stud
top plate
Header
wall 
studs
King 
stud
sole plate

 
 
91
91
vAriAtions For FAstening toP PlAtes to joists
When a new wall is perpendicular to the ceiling or 
floor joists above, attach the top plate directly to the 
joists, using 16d nails.
When a new wall falls between parallel joists, install  
2 × 4 blocking between the joists every 24". If the new wall 
is aligned with a parallel joist, install blocks on both sides 
of the wall, and attach the top plate to the joist (inset).
vAriAtions For FAstening BottoM PlAtes to joists
If a new wall is aligned with a joist below, install the 
bottom plate directly over the joist or off-center over the 
joist (inset). Off-center placement allows you to nail into 
the joist but provides room underneath the plate for pipes 
or wiring to go up into the wall.
If a new wall falls between parallel joists, install 2 × 6 
or larger blocking between the two joists below, spaced 
24" on center. Nail the bottom plate through the subfloor 
and into the blocking. 
Bottom plate
subfloor
joist
Bottom plate
joist
Bottom plate
joist
joist
blocking

4
2
3
1
92
92
Building PArtition wAlls
1 
 Mark the location of the leading edge of the new wall’s top plate, then snap a chalk line through the marks across 
the joists or blocks. Use a framing square, or take measurements, to make sure the line is perpendicular to any 
intersecting walls. Cut the top and bottom plates to length.
2 
 Set the plates together with their ends flush. Measure from the end of one plate, and make marks for the location of 
each stud. The first stud should fall 15 1⁄4" from the end; every stud thereafter should fall 16" on center. Thus, the first 
4 × 8-ft. drywall panel will cover the first stud and “break” in the center of the fourth stud. Use a square to extend 
the marks across both plates. Draw an X at each stud location. 
3 
 Position the top plate against the joists, aligning its leading edge with the chalk line. Attach the plate with two 16d 
nails driven into each joist. Start at one end, and adjust the plate as you go to keep the leading edge flush with the 
chalk line.
4 
 To position the bottom plate, hang a plumb bob from the side edge of the top plate so the point nearly touches the 
floor. When it hangs motionless, mark the point’s location on the floor. Make plumb markings at each end of the top 
plate, then snap a chalk line between the marks. Position the bottom plate along the chalk line, and use the plumb  
bob to align the stud markings between the two plates.

5
7
6
C
B
A
93
93
5 
 Fasten the bottom plate to the floor. On concrete, use a powder-actuated nailer or masonry screws, driving a pin or 
screw every 16". On wood floors, use 16d nails driven into the joists below. 
6 
 Measure between the plates for the length of each stud. Cut each stud so it fits snugly in place but is not so tight 
that it bows the joists above. If you cut a stud too short, see if it will fit somewhere else down the wall.
7 
 Install the studs by toenailing them at a 60° angle through the sides of the studs and into the plates. At each end, 
drive two 8d nails through one side of the stud and one more through the center on the other side.
Framing corners (shown in cutaways)
A 
 L-corners: Nail 2 × 4 spacers (A) to the inside of the end stud. Nail an extra stud (B) to the spacers. The extra 
stud provides a surface to attach drywall at the inside corner.
B 
 T-corner meets stud: Fasten 2 × 2 backers (A) to each side of the side-wall stud (B). The backers provide a 
nailing surface for drywall. 
C 
 T-corner between studs: Fasten a 1 × 6 backer (A) to the end stud (B) with drywall screws. The backer 
provides a nailing surface for drywall. 
end 
stud
B
A
B
A
A
A
B

1
Door frames for prehung doors start with king 
studs that attach to the top and bottom plates. Inside 
the king studs, jack studs support the header at the top 
of the opening. Cripple studs continue the wall-stud 
layout above the opening. The dimensions of the framed 
opening are referred to as the rough opening.
In non-load-bearing walls, the header may be a  
2 × 4 laid flat. A built-up header is constructed of two 2×  
pieces of lumber glued and screwed around a piece  
of 1⁄2" plywood.
door Frames for Prehung doors
1 
 To mark the layout for the door 
frame, measure the width of 
the door unit along the bottom. 
Add 1" to this dimension to 
determine the width of the 
rough opening (the distance 
between the jack studs). This 
gives you a 1⁄2" gap on each side 
for adjusting the door frame 
during installation. Mark the 
top and bottom plates for the 
jack and king studs.
FrAMing For PreHung doors
Built-up Header
construction adhesive
½” plywood
Header
cripple 
studs
King stud
jack stud
Bottom 
plate
extra ½”
jack stud marking
extra ½”
jack stud marking
door unit width
King stud marking
King stud marking
94

6
5
4
3
2
95
95
2 
 After you’ve installed the wall plates (see page 92), cut the king studs and toenail them in place at the  
appropriate markings.
3 
 Measure the full length of the door unit, then add 1⁄2" to determine the height of the rough opening. Using that 
dimension, measure up from the floor and mark the king studs. Cut a 2 × 4 header to fit between the king studs. 
Position the header flat, with its bottom face at the marks, and secure it to the king studs with 16d nails.
4 
 Cut and install a cripple stud above the header, centered between the king studs. Install any additional cripples 
required to maintain the 16" on-center layout of the standard studs in the rest of the wall.
5 
 Cut the jack studs to fit snugly under the header. Fasten them in place by nailing down through the header, then 
drive 10d nails through the faces of the jack studs and into the king studs, spaced 16" apart.
6 
 Saw through the bottom plate so it’s flush with the inside faces of the jack studs. Remove the cut-out portion of the 
plate. If you’re finishing the wall with drywall, hang the door after the drywall is installed.

 
Framing a Window
Many WindoWs Must be custom-ordered several 
weeks in advance. To save time, you can complete the 
interior framing before the window unit arrives, but be 
sure you have the exact dimensions of the window unit 
before building the frame. Do not remove the outside 
wall surface until you have the window and accesso-
ries and are ready to install them.
Follow the manufacturer’s specifications for the 
rough opening size when framing for a window. The 
listed opening usually is 1-inch wider and 1⁄2-inch 
taller than the actual dimensions of the window unit. 
The following pages show techniques for woodframe 
houses with platform framing.
If your house has balloon framing (built before  
the 1930s) consult a professional. 
tools & Materials
Tape measure
Pencil
Combination square
Hammer
Level
Circular saw
Handsaw
Pry bar
Nippers
Drill
Reciprocating saw
Stapler
Nail set
Caulk gun
10d common nails
5d galvanized roofing nails
Shims
2× lumber
1⁄8" plywood
Building paper
Drip edge
10d galvanized casing nails
8d casing nails
Fiberglass insulation
Paintable silicone caulk
If your house has masonry walls or if you are 
installing polymer-coated windows, you may want 
to attach your window using masonry clips instead 
of nails.
96
tip
Most garages don’t have windows—partly for 
security and partly because of the expense. This 
is a great project for adding windows to a garage 
to allow natural light into your work space while 
building your carpentry skills.

 
 
1
2
3
4
97
97
FraMing a WindoW opening
1 
 Prepare the project site and remove the interior wall surfaces. Measure and mark the rough opening width on the 
sole plate. Mark the locations of the jack studs and king studs on the sole plate. Where practical, use the existing 
studs as king studs.
2 
 Measure and cut the king studs, as needed, to fit between the sole plate and the top plate. Position the king studs 
and toenail them to the sole plate with 10d nails.
3 
Check the king studs with a level to make sure they are plumb, then toenail them to the top plate with 10d nails.
4 
 Measuring from the floor, mark the top of the rough opening on one of the king studs. This line represents the 
bottom of the window header. For most windows, the recommended rough opening is 1⁄2" taller than the height  
of the window frame.
continued

5
6
7
8
5 
 Measure and mark where the top of the window header will fit against the king stud. The header size depends on 
the distance between the king studs. Use a carpenter’s level to extend the lines across the old studs to the opposite 
king stud.
6 
 Measure down from header line and mark the double rough sill on the king stud. Use a carpenter’s level to extend 
the lines across the old studs to the opposite king stud. Make temporary supports (page xx) if removing more than 
one stud.
7 
 Set a circular saw to its maximum blade depth, then cut through the old studs along the lines marking the bottom 
of the rough sill and along the lines marking the top of the header. Do not cut the king studs. On each stud, make an 
additional cut about 3" above the sill cut. Finish the cuts with a handsaw.
8 
 Knock out the 3" stud sections, then tear out the old studs inside the rough opening, using a pry bar. Clip away any 
exposed nails, using nippers. The remaining sections of the cut studs will serve as cripple studs for the window.
FraMing a WindoW opening continued
98
98
cripple stud
top of header
Bottom of sill
King stud
old stud
top of header
King stud
old stud
double sill
Bottom of sill

9
10
11
9 
 Cut two jack studs to reach from the top of the sole 
plate to the bottom header lines on the king studs. 
Nail the jack studs to the king studs with 10d nails 
driven every 12". Note: On a balloon-framed house, 
the jack studs will reach to the sill plate.
10  Position the header on the jack studs, using a 
hammer to tap it into place if necessary. Attach the 
header to the king studs, jack studs, and cripple 
studs using 10d nails.
11  Build the rough sill to reach between the jack studs 
by nailing a pair of 2 × 4s together. Position the rough 
sill on the cripple studs, and nail it to the jack studs 
and cripple studs with 10d nails.
99
King stud
Jack stud
Header
cripple stud
rough 
opening

100
100
Door & Window Casings
Tools & Materials
Tape measure
Pencil
Combination square
Nail set
Level
Straightedge
Power miter saw or miter box and 
backsaw
Hammer
Casing materials
4d and 6d finish nails
Wood putty
Door anD WinDoW Casings proviDe an  
attractive border around doors and windows. They 
also cover the gaps between door or window jambs 
and the surfaces of surrounding walls. Install door 
and window casings with a consistent reveal between 
the inside edges of the jambs and casings, making 
sure the casings are level and plumb. 
In order to fit casings properly, the jambs and 
wallcovering must lie in the same plane. If either 
protrudes, the casings will not lie flush. To solve this 
problem, you’ll need to remove some material from 
whichever surface is protruding.
options for installing Door & Window Casings
Add corner blocks, also known as rosettes, at the ends 
of the head casing. Attach the corner blocks once the side 
casings are in place, then cut the head casing to fit. Set 
the nails, using a nailset, after all pieces are installed.
Backband molding can dress up butted window 
casings. Install the back band around the perimeter of the 
window, mitering the joints at the corners. Nail the back 
band in place with 4d finish nails or pneumatic brads.

1
2
3
4
5
6
101
101
installing Mitered casing on doors & WindoWs
1 
 On each jamb, mark a reveal line 1⁄8" from the inside edge. The casings will be installed flush with these lines. On double-
hung windows, the casings are usually installed flush with the edge of the jambs, so no reveal line is needed.
2 
 Place a length of casing along one side jamb, flush with the reveal line. At the top and bottom of the molding, mark the 
points where horizontal and vertical reveal lines meet. (When working with doors, mark the molding at the top only).
3 
 Make 45° miter cuts on the ends of the moldings. Measure and cut the other vertical molding piece using the  
same method.
4 
 Drill pilot holes spaced every 12" to prevent splitting, and attach the vertical casings with 4d finish nails driven through 
the casings and into the jambs. Drive 6d finish nails into framing members near the outside edge of the casings.
5 
 Measure the distance between the side casings, and cut top and bottom casings to fit, with ends mitered at 45°.  
If the window or door unit is not perfectly square, make test cuts on scrap pieces to find the correct angle of the 
joints. Drill pilot holes and attach with 4d and 6d finish nails.
6 
 Locknail the corner joints by drilling pilot holes and driving 4d finish nails through each corner, as shown. Drive all 
nail heads below the wood surface, using a nail set, then fill the nail holes with wood putty.

1
4
2
3
102
102
installing Butted door casings
1 
 On each jamb, mark a reveal line 1⁄8" from the inside edge. The casings will be installed flush with these lines.
2 
 Cut the head casing to length. Mark the centerpoint of the head casing and the centerpoint of the head jamb.  
Align the casing with the head jamb reveal line, matching the centerpoints so that the head casing will either align 
with the outer edges or extend evenly beyond both side jamb casings. Nail the casing to the wall at stud locations and 
at the jamb.
3 
 Hold the side casings against the head casing and mark them for cutting, then cut the side casings to fit.
4 
 Align the side casings with the side jamb reveal lines, then nail the casings to the jambs and framing members.  
Set the nails, using a nail set. Fill the nail holes with wood putty.

1
2
3
4
5
installing stool & apron WindoW triM 
1 
 Cut the stool to length, with several inches at each end for creating the horn returns. With the stool centered at the 
window and tight against the drywall, shim it to its finished height. At each corner, measure the distance between 
the window frame and the stool, then mark that dimension on the stool.
2 
 Open a compass so it touches the wall and the tip of the rough opening mark on the stool, then scribe the plane of 
the wall onto the stool to complete the cutting line for the horn.
3 
 Cut out the notches for the horn, using a jigsaw or a sharp handsaw. Test-fit the stool, making any minor 
adjustments with a plane or a rasp to fit it tightly to the window and the walls.
4 
 To create a return at the horn of the stool, miter-cut the return pieces at 45° angles. Mark the stool at its overall 
length and cut it to size with 45° miter cuts. Glue the return to the mitered end of the horn so the grain wraps 
around the corner. Note: Use this same technique to create the returns on the apron (step 13), but make the cuts 
with the apron held on edge, rather than flat.
5 
 Where extensions are needed, cut the head extension to its finished length—the distance between the window side 
jambs plus the thickness of both side extensions (typically 1× stock). For the width, measure the distance between 
the window jamb and the finished wall at each corner, then mark the measurements on the ends of the extension. 
Use a straightedge to draw a reference line connecting the points. Build a simple cutting jig, as shown.
continued
103
Horn
cut lines
45°
45°
return
scrap
return
Width at 
top left 
corner
1× 
lumber
Width at top 
right corner
Jig

6
9
7
8
6 
 Clamp the jig on the reference line, then rip the extension to width using a circular saw; keep the baseplate tight 
against the jig and move the saw smoothly along the cut. Reposition the clamp when you near the end of the cut. 
Cut both side extensions to length and width, using the same technique as for the head extension (step 5).
7 
 Build a box frame with the extensions and stool, using 6d finish nails and a pneumatic nailer. Measure to make sure 
the box has the same dimensions as the window jambs. Drive nails through the top of the head extension into the 
side extensions and through the bottom of the stool into side extensions.
8 
 Apply wood glue to the back edge of the frame, then position it against the front edge of the window jambs. Use wood 
shims to adjust the frame, making sure pieces are flush with window jambs. Fasten the frame at each shim location, 
using 8d finish nails driven through pilot holes. Loosely pack insulation between framing members and extensions.
9 
 On the edge of each extension, mark a 1⁄4" reveal at the corners, the middle, and the stool. Place a length of casing 
along the head extension, aligned with the reveal marks at the corners. Mark where the reveal marks intersect, then 
make 45° miter cuts at each point. Reposition the casing at the head extension, and attach using 4d finish nails at 
the extensions and 6d finish nails at the framing members.
installing stool & apron WindoW triM continued
104
104

10
13
11
12
10  Cut the side casings to rough length, leaving the ends slightly long for final trimming. Miter one end at 45°.  
With the pointed end on the stool, mark the height of the side casing at the top edge of the head casing.
11  To get a tight fit for side casings, align one side of a T-bevel with the reveal, mark the side extension, and position the other 
side flush against the horn. Transfer the angle from the T-bevel to the end of the casing, and cut the casing to length.
12  Test-fit the casings, making any final adjustments with a plane or rasp. Fasten the casing with 4d finish nails at the 
extensions and 6d finish nails at the framing members.
13  Cut the apron to length, leaving a few inches at each end for creating the returns (step 4). Position the apron tight 
against the bottom edge of the stool, then attach it using 6d finish nails driven every 12".
105
105

1
2
106
106
Base Molding
tools & Materials
Pencil
Tape measure
Power miter saw
T-bevel
Coping saw
Metal file set
Pneumatic finish nail gun & compressor
Moldings
Pneumatic fasteners
Carpenter’s glue
Finishing putty
BaseBoard triM is installed to conceal 
the joint between the finished floor and the wallcov-
ering. It also serves to protect the drywall at the floor. 
Installing plain, one-piece baseboard such as ranch-
style base or cove base is a straightforward project. 
Outside corner joints are mitered, inside corners are 
coped, and long runs are joined with  
scarf cuts. 
The biggest difficulty to installing base is dealing 
with out-of-plumb and nonsquare corners. However, 
a T-bevel makes these obstacles easy to overcome.
Plan the order of your installation prior to cutting 
any pieces and lay out a specific piece for each 
length of wall. It may be helpful to mark the type of 
cut on the back of each piece so you don’t have any 
confusion during the install. 
Locate all studs and mark them with painter’s 
tape 6 inches higher than your molding height. 
If you need to make any scarf joints along a wall, 
make sure they fall on the center of a stud. Before 
you begin nailing trim in place, take the time to 
pre-finish the moldings. Doing so will minimize the 
cleanup afterward.
installing one-piece Base Molding 
1 
 Measure, cut, and install the first piece of baseboard. Butt both ends into the corners tightly. For longer lengths, it is 
a good idea to cut the piece slightly oversized (up to 1⁄16” on strips over 10 ft. long) and “spring” it into place. Nail the 
molding in place with two nails at every stud location.
2 
 Cut the second piece of molding oversized by 6” to 10” and cope-cut the adjoining end to the first piece. Fine-tune 
the cope with a metal file and sandpaper. Dry-fit the joint, adjusting it as necessary to produce a tight-fitting joint.

3
4
5
6
107
107
3 
 Check the corner for square with a framing square. If necessary, adjust the miter cut of your saw. Use a T-bevel to 
transfer the proper angle. Cut the second piece (coped) to length and install it with two nails at each stud location.
4 
 Adjust the miter angle of your saw to cut the adjoining outside corner piece (3). Test-fit the cut to ensure a tight 
joint (inset photo). Remove the mating piece of trim and fasten the first piece for the outside corner joint.
5 
 Lay out any scarf joints by placing the piece in position so that the previous joint is tight and then marking the 
center of a stud location nearest the opposite end. Set the angle of your saw to a 30° angle and cut the molding at  
the marked location.
6 
 Nail the third piece in place, making sure the outside corner joint is tight. Cut the end of the fourth piece to match 
the scarf joint angle and nail it in place with two nails at each stud location. Add the remaining pieces of molding, 
fill the nail holes with putty, and apply a final coat of finish.

storage strategies ............................ 110
pegboard ........................................... 114
sawhorses ........................................ 118
Workbench ........................................120
WorKsHops

109
once you Begin to acquire tools and materials for 
carpentry projects, you will find that organization is 
a must. Lumber and sheet goods are bulky, and you 
will probably have leftover pieces that you want to 
keep—but where? This section gives you pointers on 
where and how.
Using pegboard is a classic way of organizing that 
still works great as an infinitely adjustable storage 
system. Nicely framed pegboard will enhance any 
shop space.
Work surfaces are also important. A pair  
of heavy duty sawhorses and a piece of plywood 
make a great temporary table. Directions for 
building the sawhorses are included, and are a  
good practice project for developing your new 
carpentry skills.
A sturdy workbench, if you have the room,  
is a complement to any garage or basement. Plans 
for a sturdy, durable, and simple to build workbench 
are included. 

110
storage strategies
Your stored tools and supplies should be well 
organized, easy to access, and out of the way. This is 
the best way to ensure your work surfaces are clean 
and ready for the next phase of a project. Depend-
ing on the type of work you do, you’ll probably need 
plenty of open space to facilitate large projects as 
needed, or to temporarily reconfigure the shop to 
accommodate materials that need to be cut down 
to a manageable size, etc. If this requires the use of 
shared spaces—for example, making room in the 
garage by pulling the car into the driveway—it helps 
to have tools and work surfaces that are easily moved 
or can be set up and knocked down quickly. 
Here are some of the key strategies that help make 
an integrated shop work with its surroundings: 
For storage, think volume, not just floor space. 
Shelving units that rise from floor to ceiling make 
better use of floor space than shelves that stop at 
a convenient, reachable height. The upper shelves 
can be filled with seldom-used items. Also look for 
opportunities where overhead storage can help keep 
the floor area and work surfaces clear. Open stud 
cavities in an unfinished garage or utility room offer 
free space for small shelves or long, thin material 
stored on end. 
For work that involves multiple stages or tool 
operations, plan for mobility and adaptability. Work 
benches, materials racks, and even large station-
ary tools can be outfitted with heavy-duty locking 
casters so you can roll them out when you need them 
and roll them back when you’re done. You can build 
your own caster bases or shop around for compat-
ible manufactured versions. Some power tools are 
designed for use with specific portable bases or come 
with their own folding stands, so check with the 
manufacturers of your tools.
Plan workstations for double duty: a permanent 
bench or work table is already taking up floor 
space, so why not use the space above and below for 
storage? For example, a lumber rack above a saw table 
makes it easy to grab stock as you go. Rolling carts or 
pull-out bins and drawers beneath a bench can hold 
other tools plus blades or bits for the station’s main 
tool. Small woodworking shops can save space by 
combining a saw table or extension wing with  
a router table. 
Consider using outdoor spaces for work and 
storage. Rolling tool bases and portable worksta-
tions simplify setup outdoors. Cutting sheet goods 
(especially MDF and particleboard) outdoors helps 
keep dust down in garage shops and simplifies 
transport of materials into basement workspaces. 
A simple lean-to shed built against the back wall of 
the house or garage is a great way to keep materials 
out of the elements and out of the way. A permanent 
outdoor workbench made with weather-resistant 
materials is handy for rough-cutting materials or 
finishing projects in nice weather. Here are some 
other tips for saving space in a small shop: 
• Cover garage or basement walls with plywood for 
hanging tools, bins, or cabinets wherever you need 
them. Paint the plywood a light color for better  
light reflection. 
• Store lumber, sheet goods, and other large materials 
on a rolling cart or rack for easy access and to facili-
tate unloading and transport from your vehicle.
• Build custom cubbies or shelving for storing 
frequently used equipment, like portable power 
tools, without their bulky cases. Incorporate 
tote-away boxes or sliding trays for blades, bits,  
and accessories.
• Keep a trash barrel or bin underneath one or both 
ends of workstations for discarding scrap material 
as you work. 
• In a basement shop, store clamps and similar 
devices by clamping them to the floor joists above 
(secure bar clamps to only one joist; clamping 
across joists can pull them together, thus releasing 
other clamps)
• For a lightweight, portable work table, use a hollow-
core door finished with polyurethane (or other 
varnish) laid over foldup metal sawhorses.

111
A utility shop. This compact shop area was made with 
inexpensive utility cabinets and a plywood work top.
You can build this space-saving lumber rack with a few 
2 × 4 studs and some steel pipe: drill matching holes in 
all of the studs, then fasten one to the side of every other 
garage-wall stud. Add a plywood shelf or two for storing 
small pieces. Don’t use garage wall studs as the pipe 
supports; the holes would weaken the studs too much.
Magnetic bar strips, typically used for holding knives in the kitchen, are just as handy for storing chisels, files, awls, 
and other metal tools in the workshop.

112
Metal drill and router bits have finely honed cutting edges that can be ruined if the bits bump against each other 
inside a toolbox or workbench drawer. To protect tool bits from damage, make a storage block by boring holes in 
a scrap piece of lumber. Attach screw eyes to the top of the block so it can be stored on pegboard hooks and taken 
down when a bit is needed.
Lengths of plastic plumbing pipe or cardboard carpet-
roll tubes make a safe and handy home for dowels, rods, 
and fine trim pieces. Gang the cylinders together with 
strapping or duct tape to create a freestanding storage unit.
Build a Bench Buddy. Create more storage space 
by attaching pieces of pegboard to the sides of the 
workbench with drywall screws and finish washers.

113
Add storage space in an unfinished utility area by 
covering the studs with panels of pegboard. These panels 
are ideal for storing drywall framing squares, levels, 
garden tools, and other large items.
Pegboard hooks frequently fall out when an item is 
removed. End this aggravating problem by gluing the 
hooks to the pegboard with a hot glue gun. If you need 
to reposition the pegboard hooks, heat them for a few 
seconds with a heat gun until the glue softens.
Store long materials in the space between open 
ceiling joists in an unfinished utility area. Attach ¾" 
plywood furring strips across the joists with 21⁄2" drywall 
screws or lag screws. Space the strips no more than 36" 
apart to provide adequate support. Make sure to avoid 
any electrical cables or fixtures located between the 
ceiling joists. Some homeowners attach boards across 
the bottom of the ceiling joists to make out-of-the-way 
storage shelves for small cans and other shop items.
skillbuilder
Use leftover pieces of plywood or 1" lumber to build 
sturdy storage boxes for heavy hardware. Assemble 
the boxes with 11⁄4" drywall screws and glue. Try to 
build each box the exact same size. Organize the 
storage boxes on utility shelves for easy access. If 
you wish, attach metal handles to the boxes. 

pegboard
tools & Materials
Work gloves
Eye protection
Tape measure
Level
Circular saw or jigsaw
Drill with bits
Stud finder 
Clamps
1 × 2" furring strips
Caulk gun
Drywall screws (1", 21⁄2")
Panel adhesive
Picture frame molding (optional)
Paint roller
Varnish or primer and paint
Pegboard
pegBoard, also called perforated hardboard 
or perfboard, is one of the simplest and least 
expensive storage solutions for hanging tools and 
other lightweight objects. When mounted to the wall 
and outfitted with metal hooks, pegboard provides 
a convenient way to keep items from getting lost in 
the back of a drawer or the bottom of a tool chest. 
Pegboard also makes it easy to change the arrange-
ment or collection of your wall-hung items, because 
you can reposition the metal hooks any way you like 
without measuring, drilling holes, or hammering nails 
into the wall. In fact, pegboard has served as a low-cost 
storage option for so long that there are a multitude of 
different hooks and brackets you can buy to accommo-
date nearly anything you want to hang. Any home 
center will carry both the pegboard and the hooks.
You need to install pegboard correctly to  
get the most value from it. If your garage walls  
have exposed studs, you can simply screw  
pegboard to the studs. The empty bays between  
the studs will provide the necessary clearance  
for inserting the hooks. On a finished wall, however, 
you’ll need to install a framework of furring strips 
behind the pegboard to create the necessary 
clearance and provide some added stiffness.  
It’s also a good idea to build a frame around  
your pegboard to give the project a neat,  
finished appearance.
If your garage tends to be damp, seal both faces 
of the pegboard with several coats of varnish or 
primer and exterior paint; otherwise it will absorb 
moisture and swell up or even delaminate. 
Pegboard systems are classic storage solutions for garages and other 
utility areas. Outfitted with a variety of hangers, they offer flexibility and 
convenience when used to store hand tools and other small shop items.
114
114

115
115
pegBoard & Hanger HardWare styles 
Hanger hardware comes in many shapes and sizes, 
from the basic J for hanging a single tool to double-prong 
hangers for hammers and even shelf standards. You 
can buy assorted hangers in kits or stock up on the type 
you’re likely to use the most.
Two common thicknesses for pegboard hangers 
are 1⁄8"-dia. and 3⁄16"-dia., both of which fit into 
standard pegboard hole configurations. The thicker 
the hanger, the more it can handle. Both types rely on 
the mechanical connection with the pegboard and can 
fail if the holes in the board become elongated. The 
pegboard must have furring strips on the back side  
to create a recess for the hangers.
Furring strip
Pegboard is a single-purpose sheet good material. It is used to create a wall surface with storage functionality 
(occasionally it may be used as a cabinet back where ventilation is desired). Although it comes in 1⁄8"-thick panels, avoid 
them in favor of 1⁄4" thick material. Most larger home centers carry it unfinished and in prefinished white. Wood grain 
and other decorative panels can be found, and you can also buy metal pegboard panels. The standard size holes are 1⁄4" 
dia. and spaced in a 1" on center grid.
115
tempered 
hardboard
Hardboard with  
white melamine finish
Metal pegboard
Hardboard

2
1
3
116
116
installing a pegBoard storage systeM
1 
 Cut your pegboard panel to size if you are not install-
ing a full sheet (most building centers sell 2 × 4 ft. and 
4 × 4 ft. panels in addition to the standard 4 × 8 ft.) If 
you are cutting with a circular saw, orient the panel 
face up to prevent tearout on the higher-grade face. If 
cutting with a jigsaw, the good face of the panel should 
be down. If possible, plan your cuts so there is an even 
amount of distance from the holes to all edges.
2 
 Cut 1 × 2 furring strips to make a frame that is 
attached to the back side of the pegboard panel. The 
outside edges of the furring strips should be flush with 
the edges of the pegboard. Because they will be visible, 
cut the frame parts so the two side edge strips run the 
full height of the panel (36" here). Cut a couple of filler 
strips to fill in between the top and bottom rails.
3 
 Attach the furring strips to the back of the panel 
using 1" drywall screws and panel adhesive. Drive 
the screws through countersunk pilot holes in 
the panel face. Do not drive screws through the 
predrilled pegboard holes. Use intermediate furring 
strips to fill in between the top and bottom. These 
may be fastened with panel adhesive alone.
option
Make a frame from picture frame molding  
and wrap it around the pegboard to conceal  
the edge grain and the furring strips. If you  
can’t find picture frame molding with the correct 
dimensions, mill your own molding by cutting  
a 3/8”-wide by 1”-deep rabbet into one face of  
1 × 2 stock.

5
4
7
6
117
117
4 
 Paint or top coat the pegboard. You can leave the pegboard unfinished, if you prefer, but a coat of paint or varnish 
protects the composite material from nicks and dings and hardens it around the hole openings so the holes are less 
likely to become elongated. A paint roller and short-nap sleeve make quick work of the job.
5 
 Locate and mark wall studs if your garage wall has a wall covering. Make sure the marks extend above and below 
the pegboard location so you can see them once the pegboard is positioned on the wall.
6 
 Tack the pegboard and frame to the wall in the desired location. Drive one 21⁄2" screw partway through the top 
frame at the center of the pegboard. Place a long level on the top of the pegboard and adjust it to level using the 
screw as a pivot point.
7 
 Drive a drywall screw through the top and bottom frame rails at each wall stud location. Drill countersunk pilot 
holes first. Double-check for level after driving the first screw. Insert hangers as desired.

sawhorses
tools & Materials (for one sawhorse)
Circular saw
Tape measure
Screw gun or cordless screwdriver
(4) 8-ft. 2 × 4s
21⁄2" drywall screws
(2) Vertical braces, 15 1⁄2"
(2) Top rails, 48"
(1) Bottom brace, 48"
(2) Horizontal braces, 11 1⁄4"
(4) Legs, 26"
saWHorses provide a stable work surface to 
support materials during marking and cutting. They 
can also form the base for temporary scaffolding to 
use while installing drywall or ceiling panels. A wide 
top is best for supporting large loads. Small break-
down sawhorses are a good choice if storage space is 
limited.
easy-storing sawhorse options
For scaffolding, place straight 2 × 10s or 2 × 12s across 
a pair of heavy-duty sawhorses.
Light-duty metal sawhorses can be folded and hung on 
the workshop wall when they are not in use.
Buy brackets made from fiberglass or metal, and cut 
a 48" top rail and four 26" legs from 2 × 4s. Disassemble 
sawhorses for storage.
118
118

2
1
4
3
119
119
Building a Heavy-duty saWHorse
1 
 Measure and cut the vertical braces, top rails, and bottom brace to the lengths specified in the Material List 
(opposite page) using a tape measure and a circular saw.
2 
 Set a circular or miter saw to a 17° bevel angle. (Bevel cuts will match the angle shown above.) Cut the ends of the 
horizontal braces with opposing angles. Cut the ends of the legs with similar angles.
3 
 Attach the top rails to the vertical braces, as shown, using 21⁄2" drywall screws.
4 
 Attach the horizontal braces to the vertical braces, using 21⁄2" drywall screws. Attach a pair of legs to the horizontal 
braces and then to the brace at each end. Complete the sawhorse by attaching the bottom brace  
to the horizontal braces.
Horizontal braces
legs
top rail
Bottom 
brace
Horizontal 
brace
vertical 
brace
leg

Workbench
Tools & Materials
Circular saw
Carpenter’s square
Drill and bits, including  
screwdriver bits
Ratchet or adjustable 
wrench
Hammer
Nail set
Drywall screws (15⁄8", 21/2", 
and 3")
Lag screws 
(11/2" and 3")
4d finish nails
(6) 8-ft. 2 x 4s
(1) 5-ft. 2 x 6
(1) 4 x 8-ft. sheet of 3/4" 
plywood
(1) 4 x 8-ft. sheet of 1/2" 
plywood
(1) 4 x 8-ft. sheet of 1/8" 
hardboard
This Workbench has heavy-
duty legs to support big loads 
and a sturdy double-layer top to 
withstand pounding. Cover the 
top with a hardboard surface 
that can be removed when it 
becomes damaged. Build a shelf 
below the work surface for storing 
power tools. If desired, mount 
an all-purpose vise on top of the 
workbench.
120

Key
Pieces
Size and Description
A
1
1/8" hardboard top, 24 × 60"
B
2
3/4" plywood top, 24 × 60"
C
4
2 × 4 crosspieces, 21"
D
4
2 × 4 legs, 19 3/4"
E
4
2 × 4 legs, 34 1/2"
F
4
2 × 4 legs, 7 3/4"
Cutting List
WorkbenCh CuTTing DiagraM
Key
Pieces
Size and Description
G
3
2 × 4 braces, 54"
H
1
2 x 6 front (top) brace, 57"
I
1
1/2" plywood shelf, 14 × 57"
J
1
1/2" plywood shelf back, 19 ¼" × 57"
K
1
1 × 4 backstop, 60"
a
k
b
b
C
g
J
e
e
C
D
D
F
F
C
e
e
D
D
F
C
F
h
g
g
i

2
1
4
3
122
122
Building a WorKBencH
1 
Cut two pieces of C, D, E, and F for each end of the bench. Assemble them with 21⁄2" drywall screws.
2 
Attach both 2 × 4 rear braces (G) inside the back legs of the assembled ends using 21⁄2" drywall screws.
3 
 Attach the 2 × 4 front lower brace (G) inside the front legs of the assembled ends. Secure the bottom shelf (I) and 
workbench back (J) to the assembled 2 × 4 frame using 21⁄2" drywall screws.
4 
Drill pilot holes and join the 2 × 6 front upper brace (H) outside the front legs with 3" lag screws.

5
6
7
8
9
123
5 
 Center the bottom layer of the ¾" plywood work surface (B) on top of the frame. Align the plywood with the back 
edge, draw a reference line for driving the nails, and fasten it in place with 4d nails.
6 
 Align the bottom and top layers of the plywood work surface (B), and draw a reference line at least 1⁄2" closer to the 
edge to avoid the nails in the first layer. Drive 3" drywall screws through both layers and into the bench frame.
7 
Nail the hardboard work surface (A) to the plywood substrate with 4d finish nails. Set the nails below the surface.
8 
 Position the vise at one end of the bench. On the bench top, mark holes for the vise base. Bore 1⁄4" pilot holes into the 
bench top.
9 
 Attach the vise with 11⁄2" lag screws. Attach the backstop (K) to the back of the bench top with 21⁄2" drywall screws.
123

124
Metric equivalent
Inches (in.)
1⁄64
1⁄32
1⁄25
1⁄16
1⁄8
¼
3⁄8
2⁄5
½
5⁄8
¾
7⁄8
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
36
39.4
Feet (ft.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
3
31⁄12
Yards (yd.)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1
11⁄12
Millimeters (mm) 0.40 0.79
1
1.59 3.18 6.35 9.53
10
12.7 15.9 19.1 22.2 25.4 50.8 76.2 101.6 127
152
178
203
229
254
279
305
914
1,000
Centimeters (cm)
 
 
 
 
 
 
0.95
1
1.27 1.59 1.91 2.22 2.54 5.08 7.62 10.16 12.7 15.2 17.8 20.3 22.9 25.4 27.9 30.5 91.4
100
Meters (m)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.30
.91
1.00
to convert:
to:
Multiply by:
Millimeters
Inches
0.039
Centimeters
Inches
0.394
Meters
Feet
3.28
Meters
Yards
1.09
Kilometers
Miles
0.621
Square centimeters
Square inches
0.155
Square meters
Square feet
10.8
Square meters
Square yards
1.2
Cubic centimeters
Cubic inches
0.061
Cubic meters
Cubic feet
35.3
Cubic meters
Cubic yards
1.31
Liters
Pints (U.S.)
2.114 (lmp. 1.76)
Liters
Quarts (U.S.)
1.057 (lmp. 0.88)
Liters
Gallons (U.S.)
0.264 (lmp. 0.22)
Grams
Ounces 
0.035
Kilograms
Pounds
2.2
Metric tons
Tons
1.1
converting Measurements
to convert:
to:
Multiply by:
Inches
Millimeters
25.4
Inches
Centimeters
2.54
Feet
Meters
0.305
Yards
Meters
0.914
Miles
Kilometers
1.609
Square inches
Square centimeters
6.45
Square feet
Square meters
0.093
Square yards
Square meters
0.836
Cubic inches
Cubic centimeters
16.4
Cubic feet
Cubic meters
0.0283
Cubic yards
Cubic meters
0.765
Pints (U.S.)
Liters
0.473 (lmp. 0.568)
Quarts (U.S.)
Liters
0.946 (lmp. 1.136)
Gallons (U.S.)
Liters
3.785 (lmp. 4.546)
Ounces 
Grams
28.4
Pounds
Kilograms
0.454
Tons
Metric tons
0.907
converting temperatures
Convert degrees Fahrenheit (F) to degrees Celsius (C) by following 
this simple formula: Subtract 32 from the Fahrenheit temperature 
reading. Then, multiply that number by 5/9. For example, 77°F - 32 
= 45. 45 ×  5/9 = 25°C.
To convert degrees Celsius to degrees Fahrenheit, multiply the 
Celsius temperature reading by 9⁄5. Then, add 32. For example, 
25°C × 9⁄5 = 45. 45 + 32 = 77°F.
Fahrenheit
Celsius
55°
50°
45°
40°
35°
30°
25°
20°
15° 
10°
5°
0°
Freezing
-15°
-10°
-5°
0°
5°
10°
15°
Metric plywood panels
Metric plywood panels are commonly available in two sizes: 
1,200 mm × 2,400 mm and 1,220 mm × 2,400 mm, which is 
roughly equivalent to a 4 × 8-ft. sheet. Standard and Select 
sheathing panels come in standard thicknesses, while 
Sanded grade panels are available in special thicknesses. 
standard sheathing grade
sanded grade
7.5 mm 
(5⁄16 in.)
6 mm 
(4⁄17 in.)
9.5 mm 
(3⁄8 in.)
8 mm 
(5⁄16 in.)
12.5 mm
(1⁄2 in.)
11 mm 
(7⁄16 in.)
15.5 mm
(5⁄8 in.)
14 mm
(9⁄16 in.)
18.5 mm
(3⁄4 in.)
17 mm
(2⁄3 in.)
20.5 mm
(13⁄16 in.)
19 mm
(3⁄4 in.)
22.5 mm
(7⁄8 in.)
21 mm
(13⁄16 in.)
25.5 mm
(1 in.)
24 mm
(15⁄16 in.)
liquid Measurement equivalents
1 Pint
= 16 Fluid Ounces
= 2 Cups
1 Quart
= 32 Fluid Ounces
= 2 Pints
1 Gallon
= 128 Fluid Ounces
= 4 Quarts
reference charts

125
drill Bit guide
Twist Bit
Self-piloting
Spade Bit
Adjustable Counterbore
Hole Saw
lumber dimensions
nominal-u.s.
actual-u.s. (in inches)
Metric
1 × 2
3⁄4 × 11⁄2
19 × 38 mm
1 × 3
3⁄4 × 21⁄2
19 × 64 mm
1 × 4
3⁄4 × 31⁄2
19 × 89 mm
1 × 5
3⁄4 × 41⁄2
19 × 114 mm
1 × 6
3⁄4 × 51⁄2
19 × 140 mm
1 × 7
3⁄4 × 61⁄4
19 × 159 mm
1 × 8
3⁄4 × 71⁄4
19 × 184 mm
1 × 10
3⁄4 × 91⁄4
19 × 235 mm
1 × 12
3⁄4 × 111⁄4
19 × 286 mm
11⁄4 × 4
1 × 31⁄2
25 × 89 mm
11⁄4 × 6
1 × 51⁄2
25 × 140 mm
11⁄4 × 8
1 × 71⁄4
25 × 184 mm
11⁄4 × 10
1 × 91⁄4
25 × 235 mm
11⁄4 × 12
1 × 111⁄4
25 × 286 mm
nominal-u.s.
actual-u.s. (in inches)
Metric
11⁄2 × 4
11⁄4 × 31⁄2
32 × 89 mm
11⁄2 × 6
11⁄4 × 51⁄2
32 × 140 mm
11⁄2 × 8
11⁄4 × 71⁄4
32 × 184 mm
11⁄2 × 10
11⁄4 × 91⁄4
32 × 235 mm
11⁄2 × 12
11⁄4 × 111⁄4
32 × 286 mm
2 × 4
11⁄2 × 31⁄2
38 × 89 mm
2 × 6
11⁄2 × 51⁄2
38 × 140 mm
2 × 8
11⁄2 × 71⁄4
38 × 184 mm
2 × 10
11⁄2 × 91⁄4
38 × 235 mm
2 × 12
11⁄2 × 111⁄4
38 × 286 mm
3 × 6
21⁄2 × 51⁄2
64 × 140 mm
4 × 4
31⁄2 × 31⁄2
89 × 89 mm
4 × 6
31⁄2 × 51⁄2
89 × 140 mm
counterbore, shank & pilot Hole diameters
screw size
counterbore diameter 
for screw Head
clearance Hole for 
screw shank
pilot Hole diameter
Hard Wood
soft Wood
#1
.146 9/64
5/64
3/64
1/32
#2
1⁄4
3/32
3/64
1/32
#3
1⁄4
7/64
1/16
3/64
#4
1⁄4
1⁄8
1/16
3/64
#5
1⁄4
9/64
5/64
1/16
#6
5/16
5/32
3/32
5/64
#7
5/16
5/32
3/32
5/64
#8
3/8
11/64
1⁄8
3/32
#9
3/8
11/64
1⁄8
3/32
#10
3/8
3/16
1⁄8
7/64
#11
1⁄2
3/16
5/32
9/64
#12
1⁄2
7/32
9/64
1⁄8
abrasive paper grits - (aluminum oxide)
very coarse
coarse
Medium
Fine
very Fine
12-36
40-60
80-120
150-180
220-600

126
index
A
adhesives, 82–83
B
balloon framing, 87
base molding, installing, 106–107
baseboards, 106–107
 
cutting, 45
bench buddy, building, 112
bevel cuts, 37
bits, 53–55, 112, 125
blades
 
care of, 33
 
changing, 34, 41, 49
 
for miter saws, 41
 
setting depth of, 34
 
sharpening, 26
butted door casings, installing, 102
C
case moldings, miter-cutting, 45
casings. See under doors; windows
ceilings, 89
chalk lines, 12–13
chiseling mortises, 25, 27
chisels, 25–27
 
sharpening, 26
circular saws, 32–38
clamps, 24
compound miter cuts, 46
conversions
 
metric, 124
 
temperature, 124
corners, framing, 93
crosscuts, 35, 51
cutting
 
bevel cuts, 37
 
compound miter cuts, 46
 
crosscuts, 35, 51
 
dadoes, 37
 
plunge cuts, 35
 
with power miter saw, 43
 
rip cuts, 36, 52
 
with table saw, 51
 
wide boards, 44
D
dadoes, cutting, 37
demolition, 7
doors
 
casings for, 100–102
 
framing for, 94–95
 
openings for, 85, 88
drills, 53–55
F
featherboards, 49
floors, 89
framing
 
balloon, 87
 
platform, 86
 
steel, 70
framing corners, 93
G
glues, 82–83
grading chart, lumber, 71
grinders, 26
H
hammers, 20–21
handsaws, 18–19
header sizes, 85
J
jigsaws, 30–31
joists, 89, 91
L
levels, 14–15
liquid measurement  
 
equivalents, 124
load-bearing walls, 88
lumber
 
dimensions, 124
 
grading chart, 71
 
overview, 70–73
 
selecting, 72
 
storage, 111
M
masonry
 
anchors for, 81
 
cutting, 32
metric conversions, 124
miter cuts, compound, 46
mitered casing, installing, 101
molding
 
base, 106–107
 
case, 45
 
trim, 9, 76–77, 112
mortise, chiseling, 25, 27
N
nails
 
driving, 20, 22
 
pulling, 21
 
quantity, 79
 
sizes, 79
 
types, 78

127
P
partition walls, 88, 90–93
 
building, 92–93
pegboard, 112, 113, 114–117
pegboard storage system,  
 
installing, 116–117
planes, 28–29
 
sharpening, 26
platform framing, 86
plumb bobs, 12
plunge cuts, 35
plywood, 74–75, 124
pneumatic nailers, 60–63
powder-actuated tools, 64–65
power miter saws, 39–46
prying tools, 7–8
pushsticks, 49
R
rip cuts, 36, 52
routers, 66–67
S
sanders, 56–59
sandpaper, 59, 125
sawhorses, building, 118–119
saws
 
circular, 32–38
 
handsaws, 18–19
 
jigsaws, 30–31
 
power miter, 39–46
 
sliding miter, 44
 
table, 47–52
screwdrivers, 23
screws, 80–81
sharpening, 26
sheet goods, 52, 74–75
Skillbuilders
 
drills, 53
 
driving nails, 20
 
levels, 14
 
miter saws, 40
 
planing, 28
 
sawing, 30
 
screwdrivers, 23
 
squares, 33
 
storage, 113
 
studs, 13
 
tape measures, 11
sliding miter saws, cutting with, 44
squares, 16–17
steel framing, 70
stool and apron window trim,  
 
installing, 103–104
storage
 
building bench buddy, 111
 
building lumber rack, 111
 
ideas for, 111–113
 
installing pegboard system,  
 
 
116–117
 
overview of, 110
straightedge guides, building, 38
stud finders, 12
surface-forming rasps, 28
T
table saws, 47–52
tape measures, 10–11
temperature conversions, 124
Tips
 
circular saws, 36
 
cutting masonry, 32
 
grinding, 26, 27
 
jigsaws, 30
 
powder-actuated tools, 65
 
sanders, 56
 
saw blades, 33
 
squares, 16
 
studs, 12
 
table saws, 47
 
trim moldings, 76
trim moldings
 
overview, 76–77
 
removing, 9
 
storage, 112
V
vises, 24
W
walls
 
load-bearing, 88
 
partition, 88, 90–93
wide boards, cutting, 44
windows
 
casings for, 100–101, 103–105
 
framing for, 96–99
 
openings for, 85, 88
workbenches, building, 120–123

128
First published in 2013 by Cool Springs Press, an imprint of the Quayside Publishing Group,  
400 First Avenue North, Suite 400, Minneapolis, MN 55401
© 2013 Cool Springs Press
All rights reserved. With the exception of quoting brief passages for the purposes of review, no part of this 
publication may be reproduced without prior written permission from the Publisher.
Cool Springs Press titles are also available at discounts in bulk quantity for industrial or sales-promotional use. 
For details write to Special Sales Manager at Cool Springs Press, 400 First Avenue North, Suite 400, Minneapolis, 
MN 55401 USA. To find out more about our books, visit us online at www.coolspringspress.com.
                Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Homeskills. Carpentry : an introduction to sawing, drilling, shaping, & joining wood.
       pages cm
  Includes index.
  ISBN 978-1-59186-579-7 (softcover)
 1.  Carpentry--Amateurs’ manuals.  I. Title: Home skills. Carpentry. II. Title: Carpentry.
  TH5606.H78 2013
  684’.08--dc23
                                                            2013004053
Design Manager: Cindy Samargia Laun 
Design and layout: Kim Winscher 
Cover and series design: Carol Holtz
Printed in China 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
NOTICE TO READERS 
For safety, use caution, care, and good judgment when following the procedures described in this book. The 
publisher cannot assume responsibility for any damage to property or injury to persons as a result of misuse of 
the information provided.
The techniques shown in this book are general techniques for various applications. In some instances, 
additional techniques not shown in this book may be required. Always follow manufacturers’ instructions 
included with products, since deviating from the directions may void warranties. The projects in this book vary 
widely as to skill levels required: some may not be appropriate for all do-it-yourselfers, and some may require 
professional help.
Consult your local building department for information on building permits, codes, and other laws as they 
apply to your project.
Digital edition: ISBN 978-1-61058-849-2
Softcover edition: ISBN 978-1-59186-579-7


