INTRODUCTION
Introduction 
The Cisco Designing for Cisco Internetwork Solutions (DESGN) exam
is the required exam for the Cisco Certified Design Associate (CCDA)
certification. Objectives for the DESGN exam include the following:
n Describe a systematic and modular approach to design.
n Design enterprise campus, enterprise data center, enterprise edge,
and remote modules.
n Assign an appropriate IP addressing scheme.
n Select an appropriate routing protocol.
n Specify security solutions.
n Provide support for voice traffic.
n Offer a solution for basic wireless connectivity.
These Quick Reference Sheets summarize the main topics presented on
the DESGN exam. The information presented represents the content
covered on exam number 640-863.
[ 3 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace

CHAPTER 1
Strategic Network Design
This section introduces you to the Cisco Service-Oriented Network
Architecture (SONA) framework for network design. In addition, you
learn how to examine characteristics of an existing network, while
determining design requirements. Finally, this section discusses Cisco’s
top-down approach to network design.
Cisco Service-Oriented
Network Architecture
Cisco recently updated its Architecture for Voice Video and Integrated
Data (AVVID) design approach to the Intelligent Information Network
(IIN). IIN is a complete architecture that is more all encompassing than
AVVID.
The three phases of constructing an IIN are as follows:
n Integrated transport—Voice, data, and video are all converged
onto a single transport.
n Integrated services—Services, such as VoIP or storage network-
ing, rely on the underlying network transport mechanisms.
n Integrated applications—Applications (for example, Cisco IP
Communicator) leverage services (for example, VoIP), which rely
on the network transport.
[ 4 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
The Cisco architectural approach to designing an IIN is their SONA
framework. Figure 1-1 shows individual IIN components and how those
components are categorized by SONA’s three layers: networked infra-
structure layer, infrastructure services layer, and application layer.
FIGURE 1-1
SONA layers.
SONA offers the following benefits to a network design:
n Functionality
n Scalability
n Availability
n Performance
n Manageability
n Efficiency
Application
Layer
Interactive
 Services 
Layer
Adaptive
Management
Services
Networked 
Infrastructure
Layer
Application Networking Services
Infrastructure Services
Business Applications
Collaboration Applications
Campus
Server
Storage
Clients
Branch
Data Center
WAN/MAN
Teleworker

CHAPTER 1
Identifying Design
Requirements
Cisco categorizes a network’s life cycle into six phases identified with
the acronym PPDIOO. The components of PPDIOO are as follows:
1. Prepare—This phase involves determining the network’s require-
ments, formulating a network strategy, and suggesting a concep-
tual architecture of the network.
2. Plan—This phase compares the existing network with the
proposed network to help identify tasks, responsibilities, mile-
stones, and resources required to implement the design.
3. Design—This phase clearly articulates the detailed design 
requirements.
4. Implement—This phase integrates equipment into the existing
network (without disrupting the existing network) to meet design
requirements.
5. Operate—This phase entails the day-to-day network operation,
while responding to any issues that arise. 
6. Optimize—This phase gathers feedback from the Operate phase
to potentially make adjustments in the existing network. Changes
might be implemented to address ongoing network support issues.
PPDIOO’s life-cycle approach offers the following benefits:
n PPDIOO reduces total cost of ownership (TCO).
n PPDIOO improves network availability.
[ 5 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n PPDIOO allows business networks to quickly respond to changing
needs.
n PPDIOO accelerates access to network applications and services.
Designing a network in conjunction with the PPDIOO approach
involves three steps:
1. Identify customer requirements.
To identify customer requirements, obtain the following pieces of
information:
n Network applications
n Network services
n Business goals
n Constraints imposed by the customer
n Technical goals
n Constraints imposed by technical limitations
2. Identify characteristics of the current network.
To identify characteristics of the current network, perform the
following tasks:
n Collect existing network documentation (with the understand-
ing that the documentation might be somewhat dated and 
unreliable), and interview organizational representatives to 
uncover information not available in the documentation.

CHAPTER 1
n Conduct a network audit to identify information such as 
network traffic types, congestion points, and suboptimal 
routes.
n Supplement the information collected in the two previous 
tasks by performing a network traffic analysis with tools such
as Cisco Discovery Protocol (CDP), Network Based 
Application Recognition (NBAR), NetFlow, Cisco CNS 
NetFlow Collection Engine, Open Source Cacti, Network 
General Sniffer, WildPackets EtherPeek and AiroPeek,
SolarWinds Orion, Wireshark, and Remote Monitoring 
(RMON) probes.
3. Design the network topology.
Using information collected in Steps 1 and 2, you are ready to
begin your network design. Although designing a network can be
a daunting task, Cisco’s recommended top-down design approach
assists the designer by breaking the design process into smaller
and more manageable steps. The term top-down refers to begin-
ning at the top of the OSI reference model (that is, the application
layer) and working your way down through the underlying layers,
as shown in Figure 1-2.
[ 6 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 1-2
Top-down design strategy.
Using a top-down design strategy as opposed to a bottom-up design
strategy (that is, where the design begins at the physical layer of the
OSI model and works its way up) provides the following benefits:
n Does a better job of including specific customer requirements
n Offers a more clearly articulated “big picture” of the desired
network for both the customer and the designer
n Lays the foundation for a network that not only meets existing
design requirements but provides for scalability to meet future
network enhancements
Application
OSI Model
Presentation
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
Design begins here
Remaining design
considerations
sequentially address
lower layers of the OSI
model

CHAPTER 1
When using the OSI reference model in the top-down design
approach, the designer should determine what design decisions, if
any, are required for each of the seven layers. For example, when
considering the application layer, the designer might determine
that voice applications such as the Cisco IP Contact Center and the
Cisco Unity converged messaging system are applications needed
for the design.
Network layer design decisions might include the selection of a
routing protocol (for example, Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing
Protocol [EIGRP] or Open Shortest Path First Protocol [OSPF]).
Also, when analyzing the network layer, the designer might need
to determine an appropriate IP addressing scheme for the network
(for example, the use of private versus public IP addresses and
subnet masks to be used) to provide for future network scalability.
Physical layer and data link layer design decisions might involve
the selection of LAN/WAN technologies (for example, Gigabit
Ethernet, Fast Ethernet, Frame Relay, ATM, or PPP) to provide for
media transport.
With the multitude of design decisions required in larger networks,
network designers often benefit from network design tools such as
the following:
n Network modeling tools—Generate suggested configurations
based on input information, which can then be further customized
(for example, adding redundancy or support for additional sites)
[ 7 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Strategic analysis tools—Enable a network designer to experi-
ment with various “what-if” scenarios and observe resulting
network effects
n Decision tables—Record design decisions based on network
requirements
n Simulation and verification tools/services—Verify design deci-
sions in a simulated environment to reduce the need to implement
a pilot network
Even with the availability of simulation tools, some network
designs still benefit from building a small prototype network to
serve as a proof of concept. Such prototype networks are
commonly known as pilot networks.

CHAPTER 2
Modular Network Design
For many years, Cisco recommended a three-layer network design
model: access layer, distribution layer, and core layer. However, to
provide for enhanced scalability and flexibility, Cisco later introduced
the Cisco Enterprise Architecture, which categorizes enterprise
networks into six modules. The three layers of the Cisco Service-
Oriented Network Architecture (SONA) can be found in each of these
six modules. Specifically, each module can contain its own network
infrastructure, services, and applications. This section explores the
design considerations surrounding the modules that comprise the Cisco
Enterprise Architecture.
Designing the Network
Hierarchy
Traditionally, Cisco prescribed a three-layer model for network designers.
Those three layers, as shown in Figure 2-1, are as follows:
n Access layer—Typically, wiring closet switches connecting to
end-user stations
n Distribution layer—An aggregation point for wiring closet
switches, where routing and packet manipulation occur
n Core layer—The network backbone where high-speed traffic
transport is the main priority
[ 8 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 2-1
Three-layer hierarchical model.
Core
Distribution
Access

CHAPTER 2
Modularizing Network Design
The three-layer hierarchical approach suffers from scalability limitations.
For today’s enterprise networks, Cisco developed the Cisco Enterprise
Architecture. The functional areas that comprise the Enterprise
Architecture, as illustrated in Figure 2-2, include the following:
n Enterprise campus—The portion of the network design providing
performance, scalability, and availability that defines operation
within the main campus
n Enterprise edge—An aggregation point for components at the
edge of the network (for example, Internet and MAN/WAN
connectivity) that routes traffic to and from the Enterprise Campus
functional area
n WAN and Internet—The portion of the network made available
by a service provider (for example, Frame Relay or ATM)
n Enterprise branch—Remote network locations that benefit from
extended network services, such as security
n Enterprise data center—A consolidation of applications, servers,
and storage solutions (similar to a campus data center)
n Enterprise teleworker—A collection of small office/home office
(SOHO) locations securely connected to the enterprise edge via an
Internet service provider (ISP) or public switched telephone
network (PSTN)
[ 9 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 2-2
Cisco Enterprise Architecture.
When designing the enterprise campus functional area, as diagramed in
Figure 2-3, in the enterprise architecture, four primary areas need to be
addressed:
n Building access—Connects end-user devices to the network
n Building distribution—Aggregates building access switches and
performs Layer 3 switching (that is, routing) functions
n Campus core—Provides high-speed, redundant connectivity
between buildings
n Server farm and data center—Consolidates application servers,
e-mail servers, domain name servers, file servers, and network
management applications
Building Access
Enterprise Campus
Building Distribution
Campus Core
Server Farm and Data
Center
ISP(s)
WAN and Internet
Frame Relay/ATM/MAN
PSTN
E-Commerce
Enterprise Edge
Internet Connectivity
WAN and MAN
Remote Access and
VPN
Enterprise Branch
Enterprise Data 
Center
Enterprise
Teleworker

CHAPTER 2
FIGURE 2-3
Enterprise campus.
The enterprise edge connects the enterprise campus with the WAN and
Internet functional area. The four modules comprising the enterprise
edge are as follows:
[ 10 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n E-commerce—Contains the servers used to provide an 
e-commerce presence for an organization, including the following:
Web servers
Application servers
Database servers
Security servers
n Internet connectivity—Provides Internet-related services, includ-
ing the following:
E-mail servers
Domain Name System (DNS) servers
Public web servers
Security servers
Edge routers 
n WAN and MAN site-to-site VPN (virtual private network)—
Interconnects a main office with remote offices over various trans-
port technologies, such as the following:
Frame Relay
ATM
PPP
SONET
Campus
Backbone
Server Farm 
and Data 
Center
Server
Server
Network
Management
PC
PC
Building
Distribution
Building
Access

CHAPTER 2
n Remote access and VPN—Provides secure access for remote
workers (for example, telecommuters) or remote offices and
includes components such as the following:
Dial-in access concentrators
VPN concentrators
Cisco Adaptive Security Appliances (ASA)
Firewalls
Intrusion detection system (IDS) appliances
The WAN and Internet modules are sometimes referred to as service
provider modules. These modules are the areas of the Enterprise
Composite Network module not explicitly designed because the service
provider modules are designed, owned, and operated by a service
provider. However, the enterprise network designer can specify the 
type of connection to use in connecting to the service provider(s).
Specifically, the service provider modules include the following types
of connectivity:
n Frame Relay
n ATM
n Point-to-point leased line
n SONET and Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH)
n Cable modem
n Digital subscriber line (DSL)
n Wireless bridging
[ 11 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Enterprise locations are supported via the following previously
described modules:
n Enterprise branch
n Enterprise data center
n Enterprise teleworker
Identifying Infrastructure
Services
Layered on top of an enterprise’s network infrastructure are infrastruc-
ture services, which enable business applications. Examples of these
infrastructure services include the following.
Security
The security service helps protect a network from both internal and
external attacks. These threats might vary depending on the attack
target (for example, the campus core or the e-commerce module).
Therefore, security threats should be evaluated on a module-by-module
basis.
Security services in enterprise edge can mitigate many attacks originat-
ing outside the enterprise network. However, some attacks might get
through, and some attacks might originate internally. Therefore, critical
devices in the enterprise campus need to be independently protected.

CHAPTER 2
Examples of attacks that originate from outside the network include the
following:
n IP spoofing
n Password attacks
n Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks
n Application layer attacks
n High-availability attacks
Today’s enterprise networks often carry mission-critical traffic.
Therefore, one of your design goals should be to include a degree of
redundancy in a design, such that traffic can continue to flow through
the enterprise network even if there is a link or component failure.
However, adding redundancy (for example, redundant WAN links) not
only adds to the complexity of the network, but it can also dramatically
increase the cost to implement the design. With these factors in mind,
consider which specific areas of the network would benefit most from a
redundant design.
Approaches to providing redundancy include the following:
n Adding redundant devices—You could add redundant
switches/routers to your design, as demonstrated in Figure 2-4, so
that traffic continues to flow even if a router or switch fails.
[ 12 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 2-4
Redundant devices.
n Adding redundant physical connections to end stations—In a
server farm, for example, you could have more than one network
interface card (NIC) for each server. Each NIC could be connected
to a different switch. Therefore, the server maintains network
connectivity in the event of a single switch failure.
n Advertising multiple routes to reach a destination network—
When you include physical redundant paths in your design, those
routes should be advertised by a routing protocol with fast conver-
gence (for example, Open Shortest Path First Protocol [OSPF] or
Enhanced Interior Gateway Routing Protocol [EIGRP]).
n Adding redundant links for load balancing and to accommo-
date for a link failure—You can add more than one link between
switches/routers, as depicted in Figure 2-5. These redundant links
can not only improve network availability, but also provide load
balancing for increased throughput.

CHAPTER 2
FIGURE 2-5
Redundant links.
Voice
Modern enterprise network designs need to support the transmission of
voice traffic. This voice traffic can come from both analog phones
(much like the phones typically found in homes) and IP phones, which
are Ethernet devices that transmit voice IP packets. Because the analog
phones cannot generate IP packets, they connect to analog gateways
(such as Cisco routers), which convert the analog waveforms into IP
packets.
The term Voice over IP, or VoIP, is used to describe the transmission of
voice over a network using voice-enabled routers. However, the term IP
telephony refers to the use of IP phones and a call-processing server
(for example, Cisco Unified CallManager).
Figure 2-6 shows the basic components of an IP telephony network.
[ 13 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 2-6
IP telephony network.
n IP phone—Provides IP voice to the desktop.
n Gatekeeper—Provides call admission control (CAC), bandwidth
control and management, and address translation.
n Gateway—Provides translation between VoIP and non-VoIP
networks, such as the PSTN. A gateway also provides physical
access for local analog and digital voice devices, such as tele-
phones, fax machines, key sets, and PBXs.
n Multipoint control unit (MCU)—Mixes audio/video streams,
thus allowing participants in multiple locations to attend the same
conference.
n Call agent—Provides call control for IP phones, CAC, bandwidth
control and management, and address translation.
Redundant links between devices
IP Phone
V
Ethernet
Switch
Gateway/Gatekeeper
Gateway
PBX
Analog
Phone
MCU
Unified
Messaging
Server
Videoconference
Station
Call
Agent
V
IP WAN
PSTN
V

CHAPTER 2
n Application server—Provides services such as voice mail, unified
messaging, and Cisco CallManager Attendant Console.
n Videoconference station—Provides access for end-user participa-
tion in videoconferencing. The videoconference station contains a
video capture device for video input and a microphone for audio
input. The user can view video streams and hear the audio that
originates at a remote user station. Cisco targets its VT Advantage
product at desktop videoconferencing applications.
Other components, such as software voice applications, interactive
voice response (IVR) systems, and softphones, provide additional serv-
ices to meet the needs of enterprise sites.
Wireless
Not all devices in an enterprise network are necessarily wired into the
network. Today, wireless connectivity is growing in popularity, allow-
ing users to roam throughout the enterprise with their wireless device,
such as a laptop.
However, because wireless networks send data through radio waves,
as opposed to using physical cabling, security becomes a concern.
Improper wireless designs might have the radio waves extended out of
the building, into neighboring buildings or a parking lot. This type of
radio frequency coverage provides an opportunity for attackers to infil-
trate the enterprise network.
[ 14 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
These Quick Reference Sheets address wireless design considerations
in much more detail in a different section. However, for now, under-
stand that wireless LANs are made up of four primary components:
n End devices—For example, laptops and PCs that have a wireless
network adapter
n Wireless access points—Devices that act much like a shared hub
for wireless clients and serve as an interconnection between the
wireless and wired networks
n Existing routed and switched wired network—The enterprise
network to which wireless access points connect
n Wireless LAN controller—A device that adds management and
support capabilities to a wireless LAN, in addition to services (for
example, roaming)
Application Networking
Application Networking Services (ANS) can use caching and compres-
sion technologies to make LAN-like responsiveness available to appli-
cation users at remote offices. For example, when a web page is
downloaded to a remote office, the images that make up the web page
can be locally cached. Then, if a subsequent request is made for that
web page, the initially downloaded graphics can be retrieved from the
local cache, providing better response time and less demand on the
WAN bandwidth. Also, security services validate application requests
and provide confidentiality through encryption.

CHAPTER 2
Primary components of a Cisco ANS network include the following:
n Cisco Wide Area Application Engine (WAE)—An appliance that
provides LAN-like responsiveness to enterprise applications and
data
n Cisco Wide Area Application Services (WAAS)—Software that
provides high-performance access to centralized applications,
servers, and storage resources
n Cisco 2600/3600/3700 Series Content Engine Module—A
module installed in certain Cisco router platforms that contributes
to WAN bandwidth optimization
Specifying Network
Management Protocols and
Features
When designing a network, remember to include network management
protocols and features to allow network administrators to monitor their
network devices, network connections, and network services. A
network management solution can contain the following elements:
n Network Management System (NMS)—An NMS is a server that
runs some sort of network management software, such as
CiscoWorks.
[ 15 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Network Management Protocols—Commonly used protocols
that support network management functionality include the follow-
ing:
Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP)—SNMP acts
as the protocol used to transfer network management information
between a managed device and a network management server.
SNMP uses an SNMP agent that stores statistical information
about a managed device inside of a Management Information Base
(MIB). The three most popular implementations of SNMP are
SNMPv1, SNMPv2c, and SNMPv3. The latest incarnation of
SNMP (that is, SNMPv3) adds additional security levels.
Management Information Base (MIB)—A MIB defines specific
types of information about a device that an SNMP server can
retrieve using a network management protocol, such as SNMP.
Remote Monitoring (RMON)—RMON extends the information
available in a MIB. Specifically, RMON collects and stores infor-
mation locally on a device, and this information can be retrieved
by an NMS to, for example, provide trend analysis.
Many network devices support two levels of RMON, named
RMON1 and RMON2. RMON1 only provides information about
the physical and data link layers, whereas RMON2 can collect
upper-layer information, as shown in Figure 2-7.

CHAPTER 2
FIGURE 2-7
RMON levels.
Managed network elements include the following:
n RMON—RMON extends the information available in a MIB.
Specifically, RMON collects and stores information locally on a
device, and this information can be retrieved by an NMS.
n Managed device—A managed device is an endpoint (such as a
server) that can be monitored, and perhaps controlled, by an NMS.
n Management agent—A management agent is a piece of software
that runs on a managed device. Management agents include both
SNMP agents and RMON agents.
n Management information—Data stored in MIBs are commonly
referred to as management information.
[ 16 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Other applications that can assist in network management include the
following:
n NetFlow—The Cisco NetFlow technology offers another approach
to monitoring network statistics. NetFlow can store information
about network flows, which are unidirectional communications
paths between two devices. This stored information can then be
exported to a network management collector, such as a NetFlow
Collection Engine. Because of the way NetFlow analyzes specific
flows, its information gathering places minimal overhead on a
router’s processor. Also, the data collected by NetFlow provides
more detailed information than the data collected by RMON.
NetFlow data can be used by various applications, such as
n Billing applications based on network usage
n Applications used for network planning
n Security monitoring applications
n Applications that need to know the network’s quality of
service (for example, amount of delay and percentage of
dropped packets)
n Cisco Discovery Protocol (CDP)—Another protocol that can
provide visibility into a network’s topology is CDP. CDP functions
at Layer 2 of the OSI model and can dynamically discover adja-
cent Cisco devices. For example, a Cisco router could discover
information about Cisco Catalyst switches connected to that
router. Because CDP is a Layer 2 technology, adjacent devices do
not need to have a Layer 3 IP address to be discovered.
Application
OSI Model
Presentation
Session
Transport
Network
Data Link
Physical
RMON Level 2
RMON Level 1

CHAPTER 2
n Syslog—Network managers can also benefit from the System
Message and Error Reporting Service, commonly known as
syslog. Cisco’s network devices can generate syslog messages to
log various events to a syslog server. Each of these syslog
messages contains a severity level and a facility.
The severity level provides a measure of how serious an event is
considered to be. For example, the debugging severity level (that
is, Level 7) causes syslog messages to be sent for all routine oper-
ations, which can generate a large amount of output. However, a
severity level of emergency (that is, Level 0) only generates a
syslog message for the most serious events.
A syslog facility identifies the service associated with the event.
Examples of syslog facilities include IP, OSPF, and IPsec.
[ 17 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace

CHAPTER 3
Exploring Basic Campus
and Data Center
Network Design
The multilayer design strategy uses a modular approach, which adds
scalability to a design. This section examines how the multilayer design
approach can be applied to both the enterprise campus and the enter-
prise data center.
Understanding Campus Design
Considerations
As illustrated in Figure 3-1, an enterprise campus might be composed
of multiple buildings that share centrally located campus resources.
Enterprise campus design considerations fall under three categories:
n Network application considerations—A network’s applications
might include the following:
n Peer-to-peer applications (for example, file sharing, instant
messaging, IP telephony, videoconferencing)
n Client/local server applications (for example, applications
on servers located close to clients or servers on the same
LAN)
[ 18 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 3-1
Enterprise campus.
n Client/server farm applications (for example, e-mail, file
sharing, and database applications)
n Client/enterprise edge server applications (for example,
Internet accessible web and e-commerce applications)
to Enterprise Edge
Modules
Campus
Backbone
Server Farm 
and Data 
Center
Server
Server
Network
Management
PC
PC
Building
Distribution
Building
Access

CHAPTER 3
n Environmental considerations—Network environmental consid-
erations vary with the scope of the network. Three scopes are as
follows:
n Intrabuilding—An intrabuilding network provides connec-
tivity within a building. The network contains both building
access and building distribution layers. Typical transmission
media includes twisted pair, fiber optics, and wireless 
technology.
n Interbuilding—An interbuilding network provides connec-
tivity between buildings that are within two kilometers of
each other. Interbuilding networks contain the building distri-
bution and campus core layers. Fiber optic cabling is typi-
cally used as the transmission media.
n Remote Buildings—Buildings separated by more than two
kilometers might be interconnected by company-owned fiber,
a company-owned WAN, or by service provider offerings (for
example, metropolitan-area network [MAN] offerings).
Common transmission media choices include the following:
n Twisted pair
1000-m distance limit
10-Gbps speed limit
Low cost
[ 19 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Multimode fiber (as illustrated in Figure 3-2)
n 2-km distance limit (Fast Ethernet) or 550-m distance limit
(Gigabit Ethernet)
n 10-Gbps speed limit
n Moderate cost
FIGURE 3-2
Multimode fiber.
NOTE
The core diameter in a multimode fiber is large enough to
permit multiple paths (that is, modes) for light to travel. This
might cause different photons (that is, light particles) to take
different amounts of time to travel through the fiber. As
distance increases, this leads to multimode delay distortion.
Therefore, multimode fiber has a distance limitation of
approximately 2 km.
Cladding
Core
Paths of Light
(Modes)

CHAPTER 3
n Single-mode fiber (as illustrated in Figure 3-3)
n 80-km distance limit (Fast Ethernet or 10 Gigabit Ethernet)
n Speed limit of 10-Gbps or greater
n High cost
FIGURE 3-3
Single-mode fiber.
NOTE
The core diameter in a single-mode fiber is only large enough
to permit one path for light to travel. This approach elimi-
nates multimode delay distortion, thus increasing the
maximum distance supported.
n Wireless
500-m distance limit (at a rate of 1 Mbps)
Speed limit of 54 Mbps
Moderate cost
[ 20 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Infrastructure device considerations include the following:
n When selecting infrastructure devices, Layer 2 switches are
commonly used for access layer devices, whereas multilayer
switches are typically found in the distribution and core layers.
n Selection criteria for switches include the need for QoS, the
number of network segments to be supported, required network
convergence times, and the cost of the switch.
Understanding the Campus
Infrastructure Module
When designing the enterprise campus, different areas of the campus
(that is, building access, building distribution, campus core, and server
farm) require different device characteristics (that is, Layer 2 versus
multilayer technology, scalability, availability, performance, and per-
port cost).
n Building access best practices
Limit the scope of most VLANs to a wiring closet. A VLAN is a
single broadcast domain.
If you use the Spanning Tree Protocol (STP), select Rapid Per
VLAN Spanning Tree Plus (RPVST+) for improved convergence.
When using trunks to support the transmission of traffic from
multiple VLANs across a single physical link, set both ends of the
Cladding
Core
Light Path
(Mode)

CHAPTER 3
trunk to desirable, which causes the switches at each end of the
link to send Dynamic Trunk Protocol (DTP) frames in an attempt
to negotiate a trunk. Also, set the DTP mode to negotiate, to
support DTP protocol negotiation.
Remove (that is, “prune”) unneeded VLANs from trunks.
Set the VLAN Trunking Protocol (VTP) mode to transparent
because a hierarchical design has little need for a VLAN to span
multiple switches.
When using an EtherChannel, set the Port Aggregation Protocol
(PAgP) mode to desirable to cause both sides of the connection to
send PAgP frames, in an attempt to create an EtherChannel.
Consider the potential benefits of implementing routing at the
access layer to achieve, for example, faster convergence times.
n Building-distribution considerations
Switches selected for the building distribution layer require wire-
speed performance on all their ports. The need for such high
performance stems from the roles of a building distribution layer
switch: acting as an aggregation point for access layer switches
and supporting high-speed connectivity to campus core layer
switches.
The key roles of a building distribution layer switch demand
redundant connections to the campus core layer. You should
design redundancy such that a distribution layer switch could
perform equal-cost load balancing to the campus core layer.
However, if a link were to fail, the remaining link(s) should have
[ 21 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
enough capacity to carry the increased traffic load. Redundancy
technologies such as Stateful Switchover (SSO) and Nonstop
Forwarding (NSF) offer failover times in the range of one to three
seconds. Also, some platforms support the In Service Software
Upgrade (ISSU) feature, which allows you to upgrade a switch’s
Cisco IOS image without taking the switch out of service.
Building distribution layer switches should support network serv-
ices such as high availability, quality of service (QoS), and policy
enforcement.
n Campus core considerations
Evaluate whether a campus core layer is needed. Campus core
layer switches interconnect building distribution layer switches,
and Cisco recommends that you deploy a campus core layer when
interconnecting three or more buildings or when interconnecting
four or more pairs of building distribution layer switches.
Determine the number of high-speed ports required to aggregate
the building distribution layer.
For high-availability purposes, the campus core should always
include at least two switches, each of which can provide redun-
dancy to the other.
Decide how the campus core layer connects to the enterprise edge
and how WAN connectivity is provided. Some designs use edge
distribution switches in the core to provide enterprise edge and
WAN connectivity. For larger networks that include a data center,
enterprise edge and WAN connectivity might be provided through
the data center module.

CHAPTER 3
n Server farm considerations—Determine server placement in the
network. For networks with moderate server requirements,
common types of servers can be grouped together in a separate
server farm module connected to the campus core using multilayer
switches. Access control lists (ACL) in these multilayer switches
offer limited access to these servers.
All server-to-server traffic should be kept within the server farm
module and not be propagated to the campus core.
For large network designs, consider placing the servers in a sepa-
rate data center. This data center could potentially reside in a
remote location.
Consider using network interface cards (NIC) in servers that
provide at least two ports. One NIC port could be active, with the
other port in standby mode. Alternatively, some NICs support
EtherChannel, which could increase the effective throughput
between a server and the switch to which it connects.
For security, place servers with similar access policies in the same
VLANs, and then limit interconnections between servers in differ-
ent policy domains using ACLs on the server farm’s multilayer
switches.
Understand the traffic patterns and bandwidth demands of applica-
tions deployed on the servers. Some applications (for example,
backup applications or real-time interactive applications) place a
high bandwidth demand on the network. By understanding such
[ 22 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
application characteristics, you can better size the server farm
uplinks to prevent oversubscription.
Understanding Enterprise Data
Center Considerations
An enterprise data center’s architecture uses a hierarchical design,
much like the campus infrastructure. However, there are subtle differ-
ences in these models. Large networks that contain many servers tradi-
tionally consolidated server resources in a data center. However, data
center resources tended not to be effectively used because the
supported applications required a variety of operating systems, plat-
forms, and storage solutions. These diverse needs resulted in multiple
application silos, which can be thought of as separate application
“islands.”
Today, the former server-centric data center model is migrating to a
service-centric model. The main steps in this migration are as follows:
1. Use virtual machine software, such as VMware, to remove the
requirement that applications running on different operating
systems must be located on different servers.
2. Remove network storage from the individual servers, and consoli-
date the storage in shared storage pools.
3. Consolidate I/O resources, such that servers have on-demand
access to I/O resources, to reach other resources (for example,
other servers or storage resources).

CHAPTER 3
The Cisco enterprise data center architecture consists of two layers:
n Networked Infrastructure Layer—The Networked Infrastructure
Layer contains computing and storage resources, which are
connected in such a way to meet bandwidth, latency, and protocol
requirements for user-to-server, server-to-server, and server-to-
storage connectivity design requirements.
n Interactive Services Layer—The Interactive Services Layer
supports such services as Application Networking Services (ANS)
(for example, application acceleration) and infrastructure enhanc-
ing services (for example, intrusion prevention).
Data centers can leverage the Cisco enterprise data center architecture
to host a wide range of legacy and emerging technologies, including 
N-tier applications, web applications, blade servers, clustering, service-
oriented architecture (SOA), and mainframe computing.
An enterprise data center infrastructure design requires sufficient port
density and L2/L3 connectivity at the access layer. The design must
also support security services (for example, ACLs, firewalls, and intru-
sion detection systems [IDS]) and server farm services (for example,
content switching and caching). Consider the following design best
practices for an enterprise data center’s access, aggregation, and core
layers:
n Data center access layer design best practices
Provide for both Layer 2 and Layer 3 connectivity.
Ensure sufficient port density to meet server farm requirements.
[ 23 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Support both single-attached and dual-attached servers.
Use RPVST+ as the STP approach for loop-free Layer 2 
topologies.
Offer compatibility with a variety of uplink options.
n Data center aggregation layer design best practices
Use the data center aggregation layer to aggregate traffic from the
data center access layer.
Provide for advanced application and security options.
Maintain state information for connections, so that hardware
failover can occur more rapidly.
Offer Layer 4 through 7 services, such as firewalling, server load
balancing, Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) offloading, and IDS.
Provision processor resources to accommodate a large STP
processing load.
n Data center core layer design best practices
Evaluate the need for a data center core layer by determining
whether the campus core switches have sufficient 10-Gigabit
Ethernet ports to support both the campus distribution and data
center aggregation modules.
If you decide to use a data center core, use the separate cores (that
is, the campus core and the data center core) to create separate
administrative domains and policies (for example, QoS policies
and ACLs).

CHAPTER 3
If you decide that a data center core is not currently necessary,
anticipate how future growth might necessitate the addition of a
data center core. Determine whether it would be worthwhile to
initially install a data center core, instead of adding one in the
future.
Designers commonly use modular chassis (for example, Cisco Catalyst
6500 or 4500 series switches) in an enterprise access layer. Although
this design approach does offer high performance and scalability, chal-
lenges can emerge in a data center environment. Server density has
increased thanks to 1RU (one rack unit) and blade servers, resulting in
the following issues:
n Cabling—Each server typically contains three to four connec-
tions, making cable management between high-density servers and
modular switch more difficult.
n Power—Increased server and switch port density requires addi-
tional power to feed a cabinet of equipment.
n Heat—Additional cabling under a raised floor and within a
cabinet can restrict the airflow required to cool equipment located
in cabinets. Also, due to higher-density components, additional
cooling is required to dissipate the heat generated by switches and
servers.
[ 24 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
One approach to address these concerns is just to not deploy high-
density designs. Another approach is to use rack-based switching, with
1RU top-of-rack switches, which allows the cables between the servers
and switches to be confined within a cabinet. If you prefer to use
modular switches, an option is to locate modular switches (for
example, Cisco Catalyst 6500 series switches) much like “bookends”
on each end of a row of cabinets. This approach reduces administration
overhead because you have fewer switches to manage compared to
using multiple 1RU switches.

CHAPTER 4
Remote Connectivity
Design
Remote office locations, such as branch offices or the homes of tele-
workers, connect to the enterprise campus via the enterprise edge and
enterprise WAN. When selecting an appropriate WAN technology to
extend to these remote locations, design considerations include owner-
ship (that is, private, leased, or shared ownership) of the link, reliability
of the link, and a backup link if the primary link were to fail. This
section explores various WAN technologies and provides guidance for
designing the enterprise WAN and the enterprise branch.
Considering WAN Technology
Options
In the Cisco Enterprise Architecture, the enterprise edge allows the
enterprise campus to connect to remote offices using a variety of WAN,
Internet access, and remote-access technologies (for example, secure
virtual private network [VPN] access). A WAN spans a relatively broad
geographical area and a wide variety of connectivity options exist.
Therefore, designing a WAN can be a complex task. To begin a WAN
design, first understand the following network characteristics:
n Service level agreement (SLA)—This document is an agreement
between a customer and service provider that specifies acceptable
levels of bandwidth, latency, and packet loss across a WAN.
[ 25 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Cost and usage—Understanding how the WAN will be used can
help determine a cost-effective technology to meet the design
requirements.
The primary goals of WAN design include the following:
n The WAN must achieve the goals, meet the characteristics, and
support the policies of the customer.
n The WAN must use a technology to meet present requirements, in
addition to requirements for the near future.
n The expense of the WAN (one-time and recurring expenses)
should not exceed customer-specified budgetary constraints.
Today’s WAN designer can select from a plethora of technologies.
Consider the characteristics of the following modern WAN technologies:
n Time-division multiplexing (TDM)—A TDM circuit is a dedi-
cated point-to-point connection that is constantly connected. T1
and E1 circuits are examples of TDM circuits.
n Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN)—ISDN uses digital
phone connections to support the simultaneous transmission of
voice, video, and data. ISDN is considered to be a circuit-switched
technology because an ISDN call is set up much the same way a
telephone call is set up.
n Frame Relay—Frame Relay is considered to be a packet-switched
technology, which uses the concept of permanent virtual circuits
(PVC) and switched virtual circuits (SVC) to potentially create
multiple logical connections using a single physical connection.

CHAPTER 4
n Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS)—MPLS is considered
to be a label-switching technology, where packets are forwarded
based on a 32-bit label, as opposed to an IP address. Service
providers often use MPLS to engineer traffic through the network
based on an initial route lookup, quality of service (QoS) classifi-
cation, and application bandwidth requirements.
n Metro Ethernet—Metro Ethernet uses Ethernet technology to
provide high-speed, yet cost-effective, links for some metropoli-
tan-area networks (MAN) and WANs.
n Digital subscriber line (DSL)—DSL provides high-bandwidth
links over existing phone lines. A variety of DSL implementations
exist. The most popular type of DSL found in homes is asynchro-
nous DSL (ADSL), which allows home users to simultaneously
use their phone line for both high-speed data connectivity and
traditional analog telephone access.
n Cable—Cable technology leverages existing coaxial cable, used
for delivery of television signals, to simultaneously deliver high-
speed data access to the WAN, and optionally to the public
switched telephone network (PSTN), as illustrated in Figure 4-1.
n Wireless—Wireless technologies use radio waves to connect
devices, such as cell phones and computers. As an example of a
wireless application, wireless bridges can connect two buildings
that are less than 1 mile apart and have a line-of-site path between
them, as shown in Figure 4-2.
[ 26 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 4-1
Data and voice over cable.
FIGURE 4-2
Wireless bridges.
Phone
TV
Coaxial
Cable
Point-to-Point
over Ethernet
Protocol
Customer
Premises
Headend
(Operated by Cable Company)
Cable Modem
Termination
Equipment
Cable
Modem
PC
PSTN
WAN
Office A
Office B
Wireless
Bridge
Wireless
Bridge
Less than 1 Mile

CHAPTER 4
n Synchronous Optical Networking (SONET) and Synchronous
Digital Hierarchy (SDH)—SONET and SDH both use TDM
technology to provide services over an optical network, as demon-
strated in Figure 4-3. Thanks to the optical transport used by these
technologies, relatively high-bandwidth solutions are available.
Some of the popular SONET/SDH access speeds include 155
Mbps and 622 Mbps, with a maximum bit rate of 10 Gbps.
FIGURE 4-3
SONET network example.
[ 27 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Dense wavelength division multiplexing (DWDM)—DWDM
increases the bandwidth capacity of an optical cable by sending
multiple traffic flows over the same fiber, with each flow using a
different wavelength.
When selecting a WAN technology, be aware that provisioning a circuit
can require 60 days or more. Therefore, sufficient lead time must be
built in to the schedule. Also, Metro Ethernet coverage is limited
compared to other technologies. Be sure to negotiate an SLA that meets
your design requirements, and be conscious of the contract period.
Typically, WAN contract periods are in the range of one to five years.
Enterprise edge design uses the PPDIOO approach discussed earlier.
Specifically, you should do the following:
n Determine network requirements—Network requirements are
influenced by the volume and patterns of traffic generated by
networked applications.
n Evaluate existing network technology—When documenting
current network technology, include not only the types of equip-
ment connected to the network (for example, hosts and servers),
but also the location of the equipment.
n Design the network topology—The network topology design
should preserve the customer’s existing investment by leveraging
existing technology, with the understanding that upgrades might
be required. Also, the proposed topology should accommodate not
only existing traffic patters, but projected traffic patterns.
Optical
Transport
Router
Optical
Services
Router
IEEE 802.1Q Trunk
Gigabit Ethernet
Switch
OC-192 SONET Ring
Ethernet over
MPLS

CHAPTER 4
When you are designing networks to traverse the WAN, a primary
design consideration is making the most efficient use of the relatively
limited WAN bandwidth. Fortunately, Cisco provides a variety of QoS
mechanisms that can help:
n Compression—By compressing the header/payload of a packet,
that packet requires less bandwidth for transmission across a
WAN. Therefore, compressing traffic is much like adding WAN
bandwidth. However, there is a drawback. Compression requires
processing resources from the router. Therefore, although more
information can be sent across the same link speed, the router’s
processor bears an additional burden.
n Link aggregation—Cisco routers support the bonding together of
physical links into a virtual link. For example, if you have two
serial interfaces, each running at a speed of 256 kbps, you can use
a technology such as Multilink PPP (MLP) to create a virtual
multilink interface running at a speed of 512 kbps.
n Window size—TCP traffic uses the concept of a “sliding
window.” A window is the number of segments that a TCP sender
can transmit before receiving an acknowledgment from the
receiver. Network delay can be reduced by increasing the window
size (that is, sending more TCP segments before expecting an
acknowledgment). However, on unreliable links that suffer from
high error rates, the number of retransmissions could increase
dramatically.
n Queuing—When a router is receiving traffic (for example, from a
LAN interface) faster than it can transmit that traffic (for example,
[ 28 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
out of a WAN interface), the router delays the excess traffic in a
buffer called a queue. To prevent bandwidth-intense applications
from consuming too much of the limited WAN bandwidth, various
queuing technologies can place different types of traffic into
different queues, based on the traffic priority. Then, different
amounts of bandwidth can be given to the different queues, allow-
ing more important applications to receive the bandwidth they
need, as illustrated in Figure 4-4.
FIGURE 4-4
Queuing.
n Traffic conditioning—To prevent some types of traffic (for
example, music downloads from the Internet) from consuming too
much WAN bandwidth, a traffic conditioner called policing can be
used to set a “speed limit” on those specific traffic types, and drop
1
Priority Queue
Output Interface Queue
Business Queue
Application Queue
2
3
4
2
3
4
3
4
4
4
2
1
3
2
3
1
1
4
Best Effort Queue

CHAPTER 4
any traffic exceeding that limit. Similarly, to prevent a WAN link
from becoming oversubscribed (for example, oversubscribing a
remote office’s 128 kbps link when receiving traffic from the
headquarters that is transmitting at a speed of 768 kbps), another
traffic conditioner, called shaping, can be used to prevent traffic
from exceeding a specified bandwidth. With shaping, compared to
policing, excessive traffic is delayed and transmitted when band-
width becomes available, instead of being dropped. Unlike
shaping, policing mechanisms can also re-mark traffic, giving
lower-priority QoS markings to traffic exceeding a bandwidth
limit. Policing mechanisms include Committed Access Rate
(CAR) and class-based policing; examples of shaping mechanisms
include Frame Relay Traffic Shaping (FRTS) and class-based
shaping.
Performing the Enterprise 
WAN Design
When considering design elements for the enterprise WAN, be aware of
possible WAN design choices. Consider the following WAN design
categories:
n Traditional WAN design—Most traditional WAN designs could
be categorized under one of three options:
n Leased Lines—A leased line is a point-to-point connection
that provides a reserved amount of bandwidth for a customer.
[ 29 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
An example of a leased line WAN is a T1 link between two
sites using PPP.
n Circuit switched—A circuit-switched design uses circuits
that are brought up on an as-needed basis and then torn
down. ISDN falls under the category of a circuit-switched
network.
n Packet/cell switched—A packet-switched (for example,
Frame Relay) or cell-switched (for example, ATM) network
can use permanent virtual circuits (PVC) and switched virtual
circuits (SVC) to connect multiple sites. These networks can
leverage a variety of topologies, such as full mesh or hub and
spoke.
n Remote-access network design—Remote-access networks allow
remote employees (for example, telecommuters or traveling sales-
people) to access the corporate network. Besides data, a remote-
access network might also need to support voice calls. Typical
technologies offering remote access include dial-up (using a tradi-
tional modem or an ISDN connection), DSL, cable, and wireless.
n Virtual private network (VPN) design—A VPN can provide
security to a remote connection by creating a virtual tunnel
through which all traffic is sent, even though the connection might
be traversing an untrusted network. One type of VPN is a site-to-
site VPN, which might connect a remote office with the headquar-
ters office over the publicly accessible Internet. In such a design,
each site typically has hardware to terminate each end of the VPN
tunnel. Another option is to have VPN client software on a user’s

CHAPTER 4
PC, allowing them to connect to the headquarters’ VPN equipment
and set up a secure VPN connection, by providing credentials,
such as a username and password. Figure 4-5 shows sample
topologies of these VPN types.
FIGURE 4-5
VPN types.
n WAN backup design—WAN links tend to be less reliable than
LAN connections. Therefore, a good WAN design provides for
fault tolerance in the form of a WAN backup. Consider the follow-
ing options:
n Dial Backup Routing—Dial backup routing uses dial-up
technologies, such as modem and ISDN technologies, to
bring up a backup link if the primary link fails.
n Redundant WAN link—Instead of having a backup link that
comes up only when needed, a secondary WAN link can be a
[ 30 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
permanent link. One option for using this permanent second-
ary link is to use a floating static route, or a routing protocol,
to send traffic over that secondary link only when the primary
link is unavailable.
Another option is to leverage the extra bandwidth provided 
by the secondary link and perform load balancing across both
links, when both links are available. Then, if one link goes 
down, the other link can carry all the traffic.
n Shadow PVC—A shadow PVC is made available by your
service provider, typically at an extra charge. This shadow
PVC becomes active only if your primary PVC becomes
unavailable.
n IPsec tunnel—Because most networks already have Internet
access, in addition to WAN links that connect office loca-
tions, the Internet can act as a backup WAN link. However,
because the Internet is a public network, security becomes a
concern. IPsec tunneling can alleviate that concern by
protecting sensitive corporate traffic inside a secure VPN
tunnel.
At this point, you understand remote connectivity requirements, and
you have been exposed to various WAN architectures. You are now
ready to select an appropriate WAN architecture for your design.
Following are design considerations for the enterprise WAN architecture:
n Network growth—Your design should not only accommodate
existing bandwidth requirements but should also allow the
customer to grow their network along with their business.
HQ
Remote
Office
Internet
HQ
Telecommuter
Internet
Site-to-Site
User-to-Site

CHAPTER 4
n Availability—A common availability design goal is for the
network to be up 99.999 percent of the time. This metric is
commonly referred to as “the five nines of availability.” The five
nines of availability translates into only five minutes of downtime
per year. A key design factor that influences availability is redun-
dancy. Redundancy should be built in to the design, such that no
major component (for example, a router or a WAN link) represents
a single point of failure. In addition to equipment and link
backups, also consider a power backup. Do you have sufficient
UPS (uninterruptible power supply) and generator equipment in
your design to sustain key network components if an extended
power outage occurs?
n Recurring expenses—Companies pay regular subscription fees to
their service provider for their WAN service. This type of recur-
ring expense (in addition to equipment leases) can influence your
decision in selecting a WAN technology. For example, Frame
Relay and ATM WANs usually cost more than using an IPsec VPN
over the public Internet. However, performance trade-offs might
come with cost savings. For example, if you select an IPsec VPN
over the Internet, as opposed to a Frame Relay network, your
network might suffer from QoS issues.
n Network complexity—Your customer might have their own IT
staff for maintaining their WAN connection. Therefore, you need
to understand the skill set of the IT staff and their ability to work
with complex network designs, because different WAN technolo-
gies require differing levels of technical expertise.
[ 31 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Multimedia support—Determine whether the customer is going
to use the WAN link to transmit voice/video. If these types of
multimedia applications are going to be transmitted over the
network, your design must include QoS mechanisms to ensure
appropriate treatment for these latency-sensitive traffic types.
n Migration expense—Migrating one MAN/WAN technology to
another MAN/WAN technology often necessitates a significant
initial investment (for example, to cover the expenses of the new
equipment, installation labor, and employee training). However,
this initial investment might very well be recovered from future
cost savings. Therefore, your design should include a return on
investment (ROI) calculation for your proposed expenditures.
n Network segmentation—Instead of having multiple autonomous
networks, having a single network that is logically segmented can
reduce the expenses (for example, equipment and maintenance
expenses) of supporting multiple physical networks. The single
physical network can be logically segmented into multiple
network segments, thus providing security between the different
segments.
After identifying the remote connectivity requirements and architecture
for a design, the next step is to select the specific WAN components to
be used in the design. This step involves the selection of hardware and
software components:

CHAPTER 4
n Hardware selection—When selecting hardware for your design,
examine the product documentation looking for such product
specifics as port density, throughput, enhanced capabilities, and
redundancy.
n Software selection—Cisco IOS Software supports a wide variety
of features, services, and platforms. For example, consider the
following “trains” of IOS Software:
n T Train—T train Cisco IOS Software supports IP services
such as IP communications, security, and mobility. Such serv-
ices are well suited for the enterprise core and service
provider edge.
n S Train—S train Cisco IOS Software is appropriate for high-
end enterprise core networks. The S train offers various IP
services and infrastructure features such as MPLS, video, and
multicast.
n XR Train—XR train Cisco IOS Software is appropriate for
large-scale networks. The XR train offers high availability
features such as in-service software upgrades.
When selecting an appropriate Cisco IOS version, you might need
to select from various IOS feature sets. As a reference, Table 4-1
provides a sampling of features included in various feature sets.
[ 32 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
TABLE 4-1
IOS Feature Sets
ATM,
IOS
VoIP
VoATM,
AppleTalk
Firewall,
Feature
Data
and
and
IPX, IBM
IDS, and
Sets
Connectivity
VoFR
MPLS
Protocols
VPN
IP Base
X
IP Voice
X
X
Advanced 
X
X
Security
Enterprise 
X
X
Base
SP Services
X
X
X
Advanced  
X
X
X
X
IP Services
Enterprise 
X
X
X
X
Services
Advanced 
X
X
X
X
X
Enterprise
Services

CHAPTER 4
Performing the Enterprise
Branch Design
The Cisco enterprise branch architecture seeks to extend enterprise
services (for example, voice, video, and security services) to smaller
branch locations. An employee’s residence can also serve as a branch
office.
Following are devices commonly found in enterprise branch architectures:
n WAN routers
n LAN switches
n Security appliances
n Wireless access points
n Call-processing servers for voice/video calls (for example, Cisco
Unified CallManager)
n Endpoints (for example, IP phones and computers)
When designing the enterprise branch, consider the following issues:
n Total number of branch locations
n Total number of connected devices
n Anticipated growth
n Level of required security
[ 33 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Server farm requirements
n Location of network management system
n Impact of wireless networking (if used)
n Available budget
While a branch office is considered to be a “smaller” remote office,
different degrees of smallness exist. Specifically, branch offices can be
categorized as one of the following:
n Small branch office—A branch office is considered small if it has
fewer than 50 users. The network supporting a small branch office
is typically a single-tier design, as opposed to a hierarchical
design. Therefore, Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) design is not an
issue, although STP should be enabled to prevent the accidental
creation of a Layer 2 switching loop. Design recommendations
might include the integration of switch ports into an Integrated
Services Router (ISR) or a multiservice router, using a Cisco
EtherSwitch module.
n Medium branch office—A branch office is considered medium
sized if it supports 50 to 100 users. This type of network can
benefit from a two-tier design. Therefore, STP becomes a design
issue. Because of the increased number of devices to be supported
on the network, instead of integrating switch ports into a router,
external stackable switches might be used.

CHAPTER 4
n Large branch office—A branch office is considered large if it
supports at least 100 users, but no more than 200 users. With this
number of users, the network design can start to benefit from a
three-layer hierarchical design. Redundant components (for
example, redundant distribution layer switches and redundant
WAN routers running Hot Standby Router Protocol [HSRP]) can
improve the network’s availability. Access layer switches tend to
be higher-density stackable switches, whereas distribution layer
switches might run enhanced Cisco IOS images to support, for
example, multiple routing protocols and policy-based routing.
Other than the small, medium, and large sized branch offices, some
networks support teleworkers, which are sometimes considered to be a
“branch of one.” Enterprise teleworkers, however, can be distinguished
from typical telecommuters in that enterprise teleworkers enjoy access
to networking services typically available to clients of a corporate
network (for example, VoIP, videoconferencing, and real-time collabo-
ration applications). These services are usually available to teleworkers
over a secure VPN connection because the link between a teleworker’s
home and the corporate office is via the public Internet. Access to the
Internet leverages widely available broadband services, such as DSL
and cable. If the broadband link becomes unavailable, a traditional dial-
up modem can be used as a backup link.
[ 34 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace

CHAPTER 5
IP Addressing and
Routing Protocols
Efficiently assigning IP addresses to your network is a critical design
decision, impacting the scalability of the network and the routing proto-
col that can be used. This section reviews IP Version 4 addressing,
introduces IP Version 6 addressing, and analyzes characteristics of
various routing protocols.
IP Addressing
Before discussing design decisions surrounding IP addressing, first
review the following characteristics of Internet Protocol Version 4
(IPv4) addressing:
n IPv4 addresses are 32 bits in length.
n IPv4 addresses are divided into various classes (for example, Class
A networks accommodate more than 16 million unique IP
addresses, Class B networks support more than 65 thousand IP
addresses, and Class C networks permit 254 usable IP addresses).
Originally, organizations applied for an entire network in one of
these classes. Today, however, subnetting allows a service provider
to give a customer just a portion of a network address space, in an
attempt to conserve the depleting pool of IP addresses. Conversely,
service providers can use supernetting (also known as classless
[ 35 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
interdomain routing [CIDR]) to aggregate the multiple network
address spaces that they have. Aggregating multiple network
address spaces into one reduces the amount of route entries a
router must maintain.
n Devices, such as PCs, can be assigned a static IP address, by hard-
coding the IP address in the device’s configuration. Alternatively,
devices can dynamically obtain an address from, for example, a
DHCP server.
n Because names are easier to remember than IP addresses, most
publicly accessible web resources are reachable by their name.
However, routers must determine the IP address with which the
name is associated to route traffic to that destination. Therefore, a
Domain Name System (DNS) server can perform the translation
between domain names and their corresponding IP addresses.
n Some IP addresses are routable through the public Internet,
whereas other IP addresses are considered private and are intended
for use within an organization. Because these private IP addresses
might need to communicate outside the local network, Network
Address Translation (NAT) can translate a private IP address into a
public IP address. In fact, multiple private IP addresses can be
represented with a single public IP address using NAT. This type
of NAT is called Port Address Translation (PAT) because the
various communication flows are identified by the port numbers
they use to communicate with outside resources.

CHAPTER 5
When beginning to design the IP addressing for a network, determine
the following:
n The number of network locations that need IP addressing
n The number of devices requiring an IP address at each location
n Customer-specific IP addressing requirements (for example, static
IP addressing versus dynamic IP addressing)
n The number of IP addresses that need to be contained in each
subnet (for example, a 48 port switch in a wiring closet might
belong to a subnet that supports 64 IP addresses)
Proper address planning can minimize the number of entries in a
routing table through the use of aggregation. For example, suppose that
Building 1 has a network address space of 10.1.1.0/24 (that is, 10.1.1.0
with a 24-bit subnet mask) and Building 2 has a network address space
of 10.1.2.0/24. Instead of advertising both of those networks separately
to the core layer, a distribution layer switch or router could aggregate
those two addresses into a single route advertisement of 10.1.0.0/16
(that is, 10.1.0.0 with a 16-bit subnet mask). This approach to aggregat-
ing routes is called route summarization.
Figure 5-1 illustrates how subnets within individual buildings can be
summarized by distribution layer switches before the routes are adver-
tised to a core switch. In the figure, even though there are a total of
four building subnets, the core switch maintains only two entries in its
routing table for those four networks.
[ 36 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
NOTE
In the preceding example, the summarized route of
10.1.0.0/16 encompassed more networks than the two being
discussed. Therefore, a more appropriate subnet mask might
have been chosen for a real-world design. However, the actual
calculation of variable-length subnet masks (VLSM) is
beyond the scope of the DESGN course, and as a result, only
classful subnet masks (that is, 8-bit, 16-bit, or 24-bit subnet
masks) are used for the examples in these Quick Reference
Sheets.
FIGURE 5-1
Route summarization.
Building 1
Access
Distribution
Core
Building 2
10.1.1.0/24
10.1.1.0/16
172.16.0.0/16
10.1.2.0/24
Building 3
Building 4
172.16.1.0/24
172.16.2.0/24

CHAPTER 5
A major challenge with IPv4 is the limited number of available
addresses. A newer version of IP, specifically IPv6, fixes this concern.
An IPv6 address is 128 bits long, compared to the 32-bit length of an
IPv4 address.
To make such a large address more readable, an IPv6 address uses
hexadecimal numbers, and the 128-bit address is divided into eight
fields. Each field is separated by a colon, as opposed to the four fields
in an IPv4 address, which are separated by a period.
As an example, consider the following IPv6 address:
4071:0000:130F:0000:0000:09C0:D76A:9801
Notice the use of hexadecimal numbers and the eight colon-separated
fields.
To further reduce the complexity of the IPv6 address, leading 0s in a
field are optional, and if one or more consecutive fields contain all 0s,
those fields can be represented by a double colon (that is, ::). A double
colon can be used only once in an address; otherwise, it would not be
possible to know how many 0s are present between each pair of colons.
To illustrate these techniques, consider the IPv6 address presented in
the previous example. There are three fields consisting of all 0s:
4071:0000:130F:0000:0000:09C0:D76A:9801
Because a double colon can be used only one time, you want to replace
the two consecutive all 0s fields with the double colon:
4071:0000:130F::09C0:D76A:9801
[ 37 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Next, the remaining field that contains all 0s can be represented with a
single 0, because leading 0s are optional:
4071:0:130F::09C0:D76A:9801
By the same reasoning, the leading 0 in the 09C0 field can be removed,
leaving a resulting IPv6 address of
4071:0:130F::9C0:D76A:9801
Consider some of the benefits offered by IPv6:
n IPv6 dramatically increases the number of available addresses
(that is, approximately 3.4 * 1038 addresses).
n Hosts can have multiple IPv6 addresses, allowing those hosts to
multihome to multiple Internet service providers.
n Other benefits include enhancements relating to quality of service
(QoS), security, mobility, and multicast technologies.
Unlike IPv4, IPv6 does not use broadcasts. Instead, IPv6 uses the
following methods of sending traffic from a source to one or more
destinations:
n Unicast (one-to-one)—Unicast support in IPv6 allows a single
source to send traffic to a single destination, just as unicast func-
tions in IPv4.
n Anycast (one-to-nearest)—A group of interfaces belonging to
nodes with similar characteristics (for example, interfaces in repli-
cated FTP servers) can be assigned an anycast address. When a

CHAPTER 5
host wants to reach one of those nodes, the host can send traffic to
the anycast address, and the node belonging to the anycast group
that is closest to the sender will respond. For example, imagine a
company has replicated FTP servers in countries throughout the
world. A host in the United States can send a packet out to the
anycast address (which all the FTP servers are associated with),
and an FTP server in the United States will respond, rather than an
FTP server in Japan, for example, because the United States FTP
server is the closest server.
n Multicast (one-to-many)—Like IPv4, IPv6 supports multicast
addressing, where multiple nodes can join a multicast group. The
sender sends traffic to the multicast IP address, and all members of
the multicast group receive the traffic.
Migrating an IPv4 network to an IPv6 network can take years because
of the expenditures of upgrading equipment. Therefore, during the tran-
sition, IPv4-speaking devices and IPv6-speaking devices need to peace-
fully coexist on the same network. Consider three popular solutions for
maintaining both IPv4 and IPv6 devices in the network:
n Dual stack—Some systems (including Cisco routers) can simulta-
neously run both IPv4 and IPv6, allowing communication to both
IPv4 and IPv6 devices.
n Tunneling—To send an IPv6 packet across a network that only
uses IPv4, the IPv6 packet can be encapsulated and tunneled
through the IPv4 network.
[ 38 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Translation—A device, such as a Cisco router, could sit between
an IPv4 network and an IPv6 network and translate between the
two addressing formats.
Enterprise Routing Protocols
Routing protocols fall under one of two major categories:
n Distance vector—Distance vector routing protocols, such as
Routing Information Protocol (RIP), RIPv2, and Interior Gateway
Routing Protocol (IGRP), make routing decisions based on infor-
mation learned from neighbors. Therefore, distance vector routing
protocols are said to use “routing by rumor.” Most distance vector
routing protocols advertise their entire routing table to their neigh-
bors on a periodic basis (with the exception of RIPv2 which uses
triggered updates). Slow convergence is another common charac-
teristic of these protocols. Therefore, distance vector routing
protocols are not appropriate for large enterprise networks.
n Link state—Link-state routing protocols cause a router to flood
information about itself (that is, the state of its links) to all the
other routers in a network, or routers in part of a network (for
example, an area). Based on the information received, each router
can independently calculate what it believes to be the shortest path
to a given destination network. Examples of link state routing
protocols include Open Shortest Path First Protocol (OSPF) and
Integrated Intermediate System-to-Intermediate System Protocol
(IS-IS).

CHAPTER 5
A network under a single administrative control is said to be an
autonomous system. Routing protocols running within an autonomous
system are called interior gateway protocols (IGP). However, routing
protocols are also needed to connect autonomous systems. For example,
you might use OSPF as your IGP within an enterprise network, but you
might need a separate routing protocol to connect your enterprise
network to your service providers. This type of routing protocol that
connects different autonomous systems is called an exterior gateway
protocol (EGP). The only EGP in widespread use today is the Border
Gateway Protocol (BGP).
The most popular routing protocols found in today’s enterprise
networks are as follows:
n Enhanced IGRP (EIGRP)—EIGRP is a Cisco-developed routing
protocol that is considered to be an advanced distance vector
protocol, because it is based on IGRP but also has link-state char-
acteristics. Unlike some distance vector routing protocols, EIGRP
uses triggered updates (as opposed to periodic updates). EIGRP
uses a topology table to keep track of all the routes received from
its neighbors. VLSM is supported, in addition to multiple network
layer protocols, including IPv4, IPv6, AppleTalk, and IPX. EIGRP
also offers fast convergence times if a router or link fails.
n OSPF—Like EIGRP, OSPF is well suited for enterprise networks
due to its fast convergence and VLSM support. OSPF also uses the
concept of areas to limit the number of route advertisements sent
through the network. Specifically, OSPF has a backbone area (that
is, Area 0), and all other areas must connect to Area 0. If you 
allocate IP addresses appropriately, the routers sitting at the
[ 39 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
borders between the Area 0 and the nonbackbone areas can
summarize the routes within their area and send summary route
information into Area 0. Figure 5-2 shows an example of an OSPF
network. Notice that an Autonomous System Boundary Router
(ASBR) connects the OSPF network with an external autonomous
system.
FIGURE 5-2
OSPF network example.
n IS-IS—Similar to OSPF, the IS-IS routing protocol is a link-state
routing protocol that uses the concept of network areas. With IS-
IS, the backbone area is called a Level 2 area and a nonbackbone
area is called a Level 1 area. Routers that sit at the border between
Backbone Area (Area 0)
Area Border
Routers
(ABRs)
Autonomous System Boundary
Router (ASBR)
IP WAN
Area 1
Area 2

CHAPTER 5
the backbone and a nonbackbone area are called Level 1/Level 2
(L1/L2) routers. IS-IS offers support for VLSM. However, IS-IS
usually is deployed in service provider networks rather than enter-
prise networks.
n BGP—BGP is the routing protocol used on the Internet to connect
different autonomous systems (for example, connecting an enter-
prise network’s autonomous system to a service provider’s
autonomous system). However, some large enterprises use BGP to
connect their network locations.
BGP is highly tunable, allowing network administrators to influ-
ence BGP’s path selection. For example, if your enterprise
network connects to two service providers, each at different
speeds, BGP could be manipulated to prefer the higher speed
route. Figure 5-3 shows an example of a BGP network.
FIGURE 5-3
BGP network example.
[ 40 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Notice that the enterprise network contains routers R1 and R2.
Within the enterprise network, OSPF is used as the IGP. The
enterprise network connects with two service providers (that is, to
routers BB1 and BB2) via BGP. The enterprise has an autonomous
system number of 65001. The autonomous system numbers of the
service providers are 65002 and 65003.
Routing Protocol Deployment
Enterprise network design requires quick convergence. Therefore,
network designers often choose either OSPF or EIGRP, as previously
described, for their IGP. Before selecting one routing protocol over the
other, consider the following limitations:
n OSPF requires a hierarchical design, with all areas connecting to
the backbone area. OSPF areas should map to a hierarchical
addressing scheme. These requirements might not be practical or
possible in all circumstances.
n EIGRP is a Cisco proprietary protocol. Therefore, EIGRP might
not be appropriate in a mixed-vendor environment.
AS 65002
Service Provider Routers
AS 65003
AS 65001
Enterprise Routers
OSPF
BB1
R1
R2
BB2

CHAPTER 5
In addition to routing protocol selection, network designers should
evaluate the following route manipulation techniques for their
networks:
n Route redistribution—Route redistribution allows one routing
protocol (for example, OSPF) to communicate its route informa-
tion to another routing protocol (for example, EIGRP). As an
example, this approach could support a mixed-vendor environment
with Cisco routers using EIGRP and third-party routers using
OSPF.
n Route filtering—Cisco routers support the filtering of selected
routes in their routing updates. In some circumstances, route filter-
ing can prevent routing loops and help provide optimal routing. In
addition, a design might require that specific routes not enter a
certain area of the network.
n Route summarization—The more routes a router must maintain
in its routing table, the more router resources are consumed.
Fortunately, route summarization can combine (that is, aggregate)
multiple network addresses into a single network advertisement.
For example, instead of advertising the individual networks
10.1.1.0/24, 10.1.2.0/24, and 10.1.3.0/24, these routes could be
summarized as a single advertisement for network 10.1.0.0/16,
which encompasses all the individually listed networks.
[ 41 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace

CHAPTER 6
Network Security
An enterprise network design must include security measures to miti-
gate network attacks. Fortunately, with the modularity of the Cisco
Enterprise Architecture, you can address security concerns on a
module-by-module basis. This section introduces the concept of a secu-
rity policy, reviews various types of network attacks, discusses the
elements of the Cisco Self-Defending Network, and helps you select
appropriate security design components for the various locations in an
enterprise network.
Network Security Concepts
Organizational requirements and potential threats drive the scope of a
security design. At its essence, network security measures should not
only defend against attacks and guard against unauthorized access,
these measures should also prevent data theft and comply with security
legislation, industry standards, and company policy.
Consider the following threats and risks facing today’s enterprise
networks:
n Threats:
n Reconnaissance—A reconnaissance attack gathers informa-
tion about the target of an attack (for example, the customer’s
network). For example, a reconnaissance attack might use a
port-scanning utility to determine what ports (for example,
Telnet or FTP ports) are open on various network hosts.
[ 42 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Gaining system access—After attackers gather information
about their target, they often attempt to gain access to the
system. One approach is to use social engineering, where
they convince a legitimate user of the system to provide their
login credentials. Other approaches for gaining access include
exploiting known system vulnerabilities or physically access-
ing the system.
n Denial of service (DoS)—A DoS attack can flood a system
with traffic, thereby consuming the system’s processor and
bandwidth. Even though the attacker does not gain system
access with a DoS attack, the system becomes unusable for
legitimate users.
n Risks:
n Data confidentiality—Companies should ensure that sensi-
tive data on their systems is protected against theft. Without
such protection, the company might be subject to legal liabili-
ties and damage to the organization.
n Data integrity—Besides stealing data, attackers could also
modify sensitive data. Therefore, security measures should
only allow authorized users to alter data.
n Data availability—As previously mentioned, a DoS attack
could make a system (and therefore the system’s data) inac-
cessible by legitimate users. Therefore, security measures
should be used to maintain system and data availability.

CHAPTER 6
When designing a network security solution, realize that although hosts
are the primary targets of an attack, other potential network targets also
need protection. Other potential attack targets include routers, switches,
DHCP/DNS (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol/Domain Name
System) servers, user PCs, IP phones, and IDS/IPS (intrusion detection
system/intrusion prevention system) devices, in addition to the band-
width available in the network infrastructure.
To guide security design decisions and provide a guideline to future
security enforcement, organizations need to formulate a security policy.
A security policy is a documented set of rules that specify how people
are allowed, or not allowed, to access an organization’s technology and
data.
Other considerations in a security design include the following:
n Business needs—Determine what the organization wants to
accomplish with their network.
n Risk analysis—Determine the risk/cost ratio for the design.
n Industry best practices—Evaluate commonly accepted industry
best practices for securing a network.
n Security operations—Define the process for monitoring security,
performing security audits, and responding to security incidents.
In addition to a security policy, organizations might need to prepare the
following documents to address specific risk categories:
n Network access control policy—This document defines levels of
data security (for example, confidential or top secret) in the
[ 43 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
network and outlines procedures for gaining access to different
security levels.
n Acceptable-use policy—This document should be distributed to
all end users and be clear for what purposes a user is allowed to
use the system and what types of data can be retrieved by the user.
n Security management policy—This document describes how an
organization manages its network security.
n Incident-handling policy—For when security incidents occur,
this document describes an orderly set of procedures for respond-
ing to the incident or an emergency situation.
The previously described security policy is a continually evolving
document that changes in response to technology and organizational
requirements. Like the continually evolving security policy, the process
of securing the network is also continuous. Specifically, designers use
the following four steps to continually secure the network, as illustrated
in Figure 6-1:
n Secure—Securing the network involves such measures as author-
izing and authenticating users, filtering unwanted traffic, encrypt-
ing data, and providing secure remote access using virtual private
networks (VPN).
n Monitor—Monitoring the network involves the use of detection
mechanisms (for example, IDSs) to send notifications if a security
incident occurs.

CHAPTER 6
n Test—Testing the network involves proactive verification of the
network’s security capabilities. For example, administrators might
periodically perform vulnerability scanning on the network.
n Improve—Based on newly emerging security risks and analysis of
the network’s current ability to mitigate attacks, improved security
measures are instated.
FIGURE 6-1
Network security process.
Cisco Self-Defending Network
Security needs to be fully integrated into a network to combat data
theft. Fortunately, Cisco has defined the concept of the Self-Defending
Network to leverage the security abilities of network components to
protect the network from both internal and external threats. Network
security integration consists of three components:
[ 44 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Trust and identity management—Access is limited based on a
user’s access level. The three components of trust and identity
management are as follows:
n Trust—Defines how two or more network entities are
allowed to communicate.
n Identity—Validates the user accessing network resources.
Identity can be proven by means such as passwords, tokens,
or certificates.
n Access control—Limits access to specific resources by
specific users. The main concepts of access control are
authentication (which determines the identity of the user)
and authorization (which defines what a user is allowed to
do on a network).
n Threat defense—Security breaches are minimized and mitigated
through three primary approaches:
n Physical security—Limits physical access to network
resources.
n Infrastructure protection—Takes measures to ensure
network devices are not accessed or altered by an attacker.
n Threat detection and mitigation—Threat detection and
mitigation use technologies that provide proactive notification
of suspicious network traffic patterns.
Security
Policy
Secure
Test
Monitor
Improve

CHAPTER 6
n Secure connectivity—Cryptography features provide the follow-
ing protections for data flowing across a network:
n Privacy—Privacy provides confidential communication
through the network. The cryptographic service that offers
confidentiality is encryption. Encryption scrambles data such
that if an attacker were to intercept the data, the data would
not be readable. However, the legitimate recipient of the data
can decrypt the data into a readable form.
n Data integrity—Cryptography mechanisms such as hashing
algorithms and digital signatures can verify data was not
manipulated in transit.
The Cisco Self-Defending Network is based on an underlying secure
network platform (for example, Cisco routers, Cisco Catalyst switches,
and Cisco Adaptive Security Appliances [ASA]). Layered on top of the
network platform are advanced security technology and services. The
use of these technologies is then governed by security policies and
security management applications. These security management applica-
tions are used by network administrators to monitor and control the
network.
If you properly plan security measures to protect your network archi-
tecture, the primary security risk is an error in security policies.
Network managers and administrators must be intimately familiar with
security policies and predefined procedures to respond to a security
breach. A thorough understanding of these policies can help provide
efficient incident response.
[ 45 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Cisco offers a suite of security management solutions, including the
following:
n Cisco Router and Security Device Manager (SDM)—SDM
offers a graphic user interface (GUI) to Cisco router configuration
for features such as VPNs, quality of service (QoS), IPS, and
Cisco IOS Firewall.
n Cisco Adaptive Security Device Manager (ASDM)—ASDM
offers security management and monitoring features for devices
such as the Cisco ASA 5500 series, Cisco PIX 500 series security
appliances, and the Cisco Catalyst 6500 series Firewall Services
Module (FWSM).
n Cisco Intrusion Prevention System Device Manager (IDM)—
IDM is a Java application that supports the configuration and
management of intrusion prevention sensors (IPS) through a web-
based interface.
n Management Center for Cisco Security Agents—The Cisco
Security Agent (CSA) is a Host Intrusion Prevention System
(HIPS) that runs on hosts’ machines, such as servers and personal
workstations. The Management Center for Cisco Security Agents
allows hosts to be classified into different groups and have differ-
ent policies applied to the different groups.
n Cisco Secure Access Control Server (ACS)—Cisco Secure ACS
is an application that supports identity-based services for a wide
range of Cisco devices (for example, routers, switches, and fire-
walls). For example, instead of creating a username entry in every

CHAPTER 6
router in the network for a newly hired administrator, the adminis-
trator could simply have an account added in an ACS server,
which could be referenced by all routers in an organization.
n Cisco Security Manager—The Cisco Security Manager is a GUI-
based application that aids in the configuration of firewalls, VPNs,
and IPS policies on a variety of Cisco devices (for example,
routers, switches, and firewalls).
n Cisco Security Monitoring, Analysis, and Response System
(Cisco Security MARS)—Cisco Security MARS is a network
appliance that allows network administrators to monitor, identify,
contain, and combat network attacks.
The Cisco Self-Defending Network consists of three layers:
n Integrated security—Security technology is built in to network
components such as routers, switches, and wireless devices.
n Collaborative security systems—Network security elements
work in a collaborative fashion to enable the network as a whole
to meet the goals of an organization’s security policy.
n Adaptive threat defense—Behavior-recognition tools defend
against emerging security threats and dynamic network conditions.
These tools can defend against threats such as worms, viruses,
spyware, and distributed DoS (DDoS) attacks.
Figure 6-2 shows an example of a network containing many of the
elements of a Cisco Self-Defending Network.
[ 46 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 6-2
Cisco Self-Defending Network example.
Network Security Solutions
To secure a network, integrate security solutions into all parts of the
network. Consider how the following network elements integrate secu-
rity solutions:
n Cisco IOS router—Depending on the feature set, a Cisco IOS
router can act as a firewall/IPS. Also, a router can be used to set
up an IPsec tunnel. Trust and identity solutions include authentica-
tion, authorization, and accounting (AAA), public key infrastruc-
ture (PKI), Secure Shell Protocol (SSH), and Secure Sockets
Layer (SSL).
ISP
Router
Internet
NetFlow
Router
(Can detect an
increase in
network load
and identify
type of attack)
PIX
Firewall
(Can block a 
network
attack)
Network
IPS
(Can
recognize the
signature of a 
“well-known”
attack)
Cisco
Security
MARS
(Helps
aggregate
collected data
and presents
the data in a 
usable format)
Campus
Network

CHAPTER 6
n VPN concentrator—Cisco VPN 3000 series concentrators are
appliances that can be used for remote-access VPNs. For example,
remote offices can use VPN concentrators to provide secure
connectivity between a remote office and an organization’s head-
quarters, as depicted in Figure 6-3.
FIGURE 6-3
Site-to-site VPNs using VPN concentrators.
n PIX Security Appliance—A Cisco PIX Security Appliance is at
its essence a firewall, which can provide application and protocol
inspection to traffic flowing through the device.
[ 47 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Adaptive Security Appliance (ASA)—Cisco ASA provides PIX-
like firewall features, in addition to application security and
support for advanced integration modules (for example, Cisco
WebVPN Services Modules and Advanced Integration Modules
[AIM]).
n Intrusion Prevention System (IPS)—Cisco offers a series of
sensor appliances (for example, IPS 4215, 4240, 4255, and 4260
sensors) to provide IPS or IDS services. IPS works inline with
data, and can stop suspicious traffic before the traffic reaches its
destination. However, IDS is passive and receives a copy of
network traffic, which it can analyze.
n Cisco Catalyst Service Modules—The Cisco Catalyst 6500 series
switch is a modular switch offering support for a wide variety of
service modules that can help enhance network security. Examples
of these modules include Cisco Firewall Services Module
(FWSM), Cisco Intrusion Detection System Services Module
(IDSM-2), and the Cisco SSL Services Module.
n Cisco Security Agent (CSA)—CSA is software that can be
installed on a host to defend against known and unknown (that is,
“day zero”) attacks. For example, CSA can protect a host from
spyware and adware, in addition to protecting the integrity of the
host’s underlying operating system.
Headquarters
VPN
Concentrator
Branch B
VPN
Concentrator
Internet
Branch C
VPN
Concentrator
Branch A
VPN
Concentrator

CHAPTER 6
The Cisco Self-Defending Network allows network designers to specify
security features throughout the network. Consider typical security
solutions for the following enterprise network modules:
n Enterprise campus—The enterprise campus can benefit from the
following security measures:
n Identity and access control—802.1x, Network Access
Control (NAC), access control lists (ACLs), and firewalls
n Threat detection and mitigation—NetFlow, syslog, Simple
Network Management Protocol (SNMP), Cisco Security
MARS, Network IPS (NIPS), and Host IPS (HIPS)
n Infrastructure protection—AAA, SSH, SNMPv3,
Interior/Exterior Gateway Protocol (IGP/EGP) message
digest 5 algorithm (MD5), and Layer 2 security features
n Security management—Cisco Security Manager and MARS
n Enterprise data center—Similarly, the enterprise data center can
leverage these security technologies:
n Identity and access control—802.1x, ACLs, and firewalls
n Threat detection and migration—NetFlow, syslog, SNMP,
Cisco Security MARS, NIPS, and HIPS
n Infrastructure protection—AAA, SSH, SNMPv3, IGP/EGP
MD5, and Layer 2 security features
n Security Management—Cisco Security Manager and Cisco
Security MARS
[ 48 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Enterprise edge—The enterprise edge module can benefit from
such security measures as
n Identity and access control—Firewalls, IPsec, SSL, VPN,
ACLs
n Threat detection and mitigation—NetFlow, syslog, SNMP,
Cisco Security MARS, NIPS, and HIPS
n Infrastructure protection—AAA, Control Plane Policing
(CoPP), SSH, RFC 2827 (an approach for defeating DoS
attacks that use IP source address spoofing), SNMPv3, and
IGP/EGP MD5
n Security management—Cisco Security Manager and Cisco
Security MARS

CHAPTER 7
Identifying Voice
Networking
Considerations
Many of today’s enterprise network designs must accommodate the
transmission of voice traffic in addition to data traffic. The transmission
of voice over a data network is often referred to as Voice over IP
(VoIP). The inclusion of VoIP in a network design typically requires
integration with existing telephony services and connectivity into the
public switched telephone network (PSTN). Therefore, this section
reviews existing telephony networks, discusses traffic engineering, and
offers design guidance for VoIP networks.
Reviewing Traditional Voice
Architectures and Features
Before recommending VoIP network design solutions, a designer
should first become familiar with traditional telephony networks. A
fundamental concept in traditional telephony networks is the conversion
of human speech into a digital signal.
When you speak into an analog phone, your voice is converted into an
analog waveform. However, telephony networks cannot maintain voice
quality when sending analog waveforms over long distances. Therefore,
[ 49 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
telephony networks convert analog waveforms into digital signals,
which can be transmitted over great distance.
The steps for converting an analog waveform into a digital signal
include the following:
n Filtering—Approximately 90 percent of the frequencies required
to understand human speech are in the range of 300 Hz to 3400
Hz. Therefore, to filter out extraneous noise, a coder-decoder
(codec) filters out frequencies greater than 4000 Hz.
n Sampling—Based on the Nyquist theorem, which says an analog
waveform needs to be sampled at a rate that is at least double the
highest frequency being sampled, the analog waveform is sampled
at a rate of 8000 samples per second (that is, twice the highest
frequency of 4000 Hz), as shown in Figure 7-1.
FIGURE 7-1
Sampling an analog waveform.
n Digitizing—When the analog waveform is sampled, the amplitude
(that is, the volume) of each sample is represented as a number.
This process is called quantization. However, because each possible
Analog
Phone
Foreign
Exchange
Station (FXS)
Port
8000 Samples per Second
V

CHAPTER 7
amplitude does not have an associated number, the measure of
each amplitude is rounded off to the nearest number on a scale.
For example, consider Figure 7-2, which shows how these ampli-
tudes are rounded off on a linear scale. This rounding off can
cause quantization noise.
FIGURE 7-2
Linear quantization.
Instead of using a linear scale, quantization typically uses a loga-
rithmic scale, so that more accurate measurements can be made at
lower volumes. Accuracy at lower volumes is more important than
accuracy at higher volumes because most samples have lower
volumes, and higher volumes tend to mask the noise. The methods
for constructing the logarithmic scale are called companding (that
is, compressing and expanding) types. The two primary compand-
ing types in use today are a-law, which is most popular in Europe,
and mu-law (sometimes written as u-law), which is most popular
in North America and Japan.
[ 50 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Just as a router can make decisions about how packets should be
forwarded through a network (for example, based on an IP address), a
telephone switch makes call routing decisions (for example, based on a
dialed telephone number) for forwarding a voice call through a teleph-
ony network. Although the PSTN contains a series of telephone
switches (sometimes referred to as central office [or CO] switches),
organizations can have their own telephone switches. An example of a
privately owned switch is a Private Branch Exchange (PBX). Although
a PBX does not scale to the degree a PSTN switch does, a PBX does
offer enhanced telephone features to organizations (for example, call
hold, conferencing, transferring, music on hold, call forwarding, call
park, and voice mail). Also, PBX vendors often use their own propri-
etary call signaling protocols, whereas PSTN switches use standards-
based signaling protocols.
Figure 7-3 demonstrates how telephone switches are connected with the
following trunk types:
n Tie trunk—Tie trunks interconnect PBXs.
n PBX-to-CO trunk—PBX-to-CO trunks (sometimes just called
“CO trunks”) connect an organization’s PBX to the PSTN.
n Interoffice trunk—Interoffice trunks connect the CO switches
that make up the PSTN.
n Local loop—A local loop is the connection from a CO switch to a
telephony device at the subscriber’s location (for example, an
analog phone in a residence).
3
2
1

CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-3
Trunk types.
Telephone switches use various forms of signaling to set up, maintain,
monitor, and tear down calls. The three fundamental categories of
signaling are as follows:
n Supervisory signaling—Supervisory signaling allows, for
example, a telephone switch to determine whether an attached
phone is in the on-hook or off-hook condition. Sending ringing
voltage to a phone is another example of supervisory (also called
“supervision”) signaling.
n Address signaling—Address signaling is used to transmit dialed
digits (for example, dual-tone multifrequency [DTMF] tones
generated when you press keypad buttons on a phone).
n Information signaling—Information signaling provides feedback
about the state of a call to the caller. For example, if you call
someone and hear a busy signal, the busy signal is information
signaling letting you know that the called party is not available.
[ 51 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Signaling information can be communicated over analog or digital
connections. Common types of analog signaling include the following:
n Loop start signaling—A traditional home phone is an example of
a phone that uses loop start signaling. When you pick up the
handset, loop current begins to flow, telling the telephone switch
that the phone is off-hook. However, loop start signaling can suffer
from glare, where someone is calling you and you pick up the
handset to place a call before you hear the phone ring. You expect
to hear dial tone, but instead you hear the calling party. Although
this might occur infrequently in a home environment, because a
PBX shares lines, the use of loop start signaling could lead to
excessive glare in PBX environments.
n Ground start signaling—Ground start signaling prevents glare.
Therefore, ground start signaling is preferred for PBXs, as
opposed to loop start.
n E&M (ear and mouth)—E&M signaling (sometimes called
“recEive and transMit” or “earth and magneto”) is used to connect
PBXs. Whereas both loop start and ground start each use two
wires (that is, tip and ring) to carry both voice and signaling,
E&M uses separate wires (that is, the E & M wires) for signaling,
while still using the tip and ring wires to carry voice.
Although analog connections might be appropriate for lower port densi-
ties, if you need many connections coming into a PBX or between
CO Switch
CO Switch
Home Phone
Company PBX
PBX-to-CO
Trunk
Tie Trunk
Company PBX
Interoffice
Trunk
Local
Loop

CHAPTER 7
PBXs, digital circuits often offer a more cost-effective alternative. The
two main types of digital signaling are as follows:
n Channel-associated signaling (CAS)—Consider a T1 circuit. A
T1 is a digital circuit with 24 64-kbps channels. With CAS, all 24
channels can be used to carry voice traffic. The signaling informa-
tion is transmitted by using specific framing bits, which are not
needed because most T1s send 24 T1 frames together in what is
called a superframe. Because these unneeded framing bits are used
for signaling instead of framing (that is, to indicate the beginning
of a frame), CAS is sometimes called “robbed bit signaling.”
n Common channel signaling (CCS)—With CCS, one or more
channels in a digital circuit (for example, a T1) are used solely to
carry signaling information. Therefore, with most T1 CCS imple-
mentations, the T1 circuit can carry 23 voice calls, with the
twenty-fourth channel used to carry signaling information. ISDN
is an example of CCS. ISDN sends voice, data, and video traffic in
bearer channels (that is, B channels), with the signaling being
carried in a D channel.
Some PBX vendors use their own proprietary signaling protocols.
Therefore, connecting PBXs in a mixed-vendor environment can be a
challenge. However, many PBX vendors support the Q Signaling
protocol (that is, QSIG), which allows PBXs from different vendors to
communicate with one another. Similarly, CO switches also have a
common signaling protocol, called Signaling System 7 (SS7).
[ 52 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Just as data networks can benefit from hierarchical IP addressing,
telephony networks often benefit from a hierarchical numbering plan. A
numbering plan is a set of rules that dictate how telephone numbers
are assigned and how voice calls are routed. For example, consider the
North American Numbering Plan (NANP). NANP numbers use a
numbering format of NXX-NXX-XXXX, where N can be any digit from
2 through 9 and X can be any digit from 0 through 9. Notice the first
NXX. In North America, this digit pattern is an area code. The next
NXX pattern represents the local office code, and the final XXXX pattern
represents the subscriber’s number. Notice that in North America,
neither an area code nor an office code can begin with a 0 or a 1.
Integrating Voice Architectures
Packet telephony network designers must familiarize themselves with
new terms and standards not typically encountered in data network
design. Specifically, designers need understanding of integrated voice
architecture concepts, standards, and design challenges.
Traditionally, organizations kept their voice, data, and video networks
separate. As a result, a data burst on the data network had no adverse
effect on voice traffic. However, with the advent of higher bandwidth,
more reliable, quality of service (QoS)-enabled networks, network
designers are beginning to see the wisdom of combining voice, data,
and video on the same converged network.

CHAPTER 7
The two primary approaches of sending voice over a data network are
as follows:
n VoIP—VoIP networks allow traditional telephony devices (for
example, analog phones, PBXs, key systems, and the PSTN) to
attach to a voice-enabled router. The router packetizes the voice
and signaling traffic from the traditional network and transports
that traffic over an IP network.
n IP telephony—An IP telephony network, like a VoIP network,
transmits voice and signaling traffic in IP packets. However, the
distinction between an IP telephony network and a VoIP network
is an IP telephony network includes IP-based voice devices (for
example, IP phones that contain an Ethernet port and connect
directly to a network).
Both VoIP and IP telephony networks require gateways to convert voice
and signaling information between the traditional telephony environ-
ment (such as a PBX or the PSTN) and the IP environment. These gate-
ways communicate using gateway control protocols (sometimes called
call control protocols).
The most mature of the gateway control protocols is H.323. The H.323
standard not only defines a suite of protocols, but it also includes hard-
ware specifications for physical components in an H.323 network.
Among the H.323 protocols used for call setup are the following:
n H.225.0—The H.225.0 protocol (often written as H.225) has a
couple of functions. H.225.0 can use TCP to send the initial call
[ 53 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
setup message between a couple of H.323 endpoints. Also,
H.225.0 can use User Datagram Protocol (UDP) for communica-
tion with an H.323 gatekeeper (which can be used to resolve
phone numbers to IP addresses and grant or deny a call to be
placed, based on bandwidth availability).
n H.245—When the H.225.0 protocol initiates the call setup process
between two H.323 endpoints, the H.245 protocol negotiates the
parameters of the call (for example, how the voice will be encoded
and which UDP ports to use when sending voice traffic).
H.323 hardware specifications include the following:
n Terminal—An H.323 terminal acts as an endpoint in a call (for
example, a user’s PC running H.323-enabled software).
n Gateway—An H.323 gateway converts voice and signaling infor-
mation between different environments (for example, the tradi-
tional telephony environment and the IP environment).
n Gatekeeper—Two of the most important jobs of an H.323 gate-
keeper are the following:
n Number resolution—H.323 uses IP addresses to set up calls.
However, users typically dial phone numbers rather than 
specify IP addresses. The gatekeeper can perform phone 
number to IP address resolution.
n Admission control—If too many calls are simultaneously 
placed over an IP WAN, the quality of all calls suffers. 

CHAPTER 7
Fortunately, an H.323 gatekeeper can be used to reject a call 
attempt if that call would oversubscribe the IP WAN’s avail-
able bandwidth.
n Multipoint control unit (MCU)—H.323 networks support
conference calls. However, processing power is required to mix
together multiple audio streams. An H.323 MCU can perform that
mixing.
An IP telephony network, such as the one pictured in Figure 7-4, has
the following core components:
n Infrastructure—An IP telephony network runs on an underlying
infrastructure composed of network layer switches and voice-
enabled routers.
n Call processing—Cisco Unified CallManager software (available
for either a Windows 2000 or Linux platform) performs PBX-like
functions (for example, call routing) for an IP telephony network.
n Applications—Other than basic call setup, IP telephony networks
can offer a wide variety of applications, such as unified messag-
ing, interactive voice response, Cisco Unified Contact Center, and
Auto Attendant.
n Client devices—Users interface with an IP telephony network via
client devices such as Cisco IP Phones. However, a client device
could be a software-based phone, such as Cisco IP Communicator.
[ 54 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 7-4
IP telephony network.
Because many organizations have multiple locations, their IP telephony
networks might span those locations. When determining how IP teleph-
ony components should be deployed, consider the following deploy-
ment models:
n Single-site deployment—If an IP telephony network is contained
within a single location, as illustrated in Figure 7-5, and has fewer
than 30,000 phones, a single-site deployment model is often
appropriate.
V
IP WAN
PSTN
Gateway/Gatekeeper
Voice Mail
Ethernet Switch
with Digital
Signal
Processor
(DSP)
Resources
Cisco IP Phone
Cisco
Unified
CallManager
V

CHAPTER 7
FIGURE 7-5
Single-site deployment.
n Multisite WAN with centralized call processing deployment—
Some organizations might have smaller remote sites that do not
contain enough IP phones to justify the purchase of UCM servers
for those locations. In those instances, the UCM servers could be
located at the headquarters, and IP phones at the remote offices
could then register with the centralized UCM servers over the IP
WAN. If there is an IP WAN outage, IP phones could register with
the local Survivable Remote Site Telephony (SRST) routers
located at each remote site, for basic call processing functionality.
Figure 7-6 shows an example of this multisite WAN with central-
ized call processing deployment model. 
[ 55 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
FIGURE 7-6
Multisite WAN with centralized call processing deployment.
n Multisite WAN with distributed call processing deployment—
When designing a large IP telephony network with multiple loca-
tions, the expense of placing UCM servers at each location might
be justified. As an example, Figure 7-7 provides a sample IP
UCM Cluster
V
Public Switched
Telephone
Network (PSTN)
CCM Cluster
SRST
Remote Office A
UCM Cluster
Headquarters
Public Switched
Telephone
Network (PSTN)
V
SRST
Remote Office B
V
IP WAN

CHAPTER 7
telephony topology using the multisite WAN with distributed call
processing deployment model.
FIGURE 7-7
Multisite WAN with distributed call processing deployment.
[ 56 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Although H.323 is a very popular gateway control protocol for IP
telephony and VoIP networks, consider some of the other protocols you
might encounter in IP telephony or VoIP networks:
n Real-time Transport Protocol (RTP)—Voice packets are carried
inside of RTP segments. RTP is a Layer 4 protocol that is encap-
sulated inside UDP segments.
n Skinny Client Control Protocol (SCCP)—By default, Cisco IP
Phones use SCCP to exchange signaling messages with Cisco
Unified CallManager. Unlike H.323 (which is considered a 
peer-to-peer protocol), SCCP is considered to be a client/server
protocol.
n Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)—SIP is a peer-to-peer gateway
control protocol that is popular in many mixed-vendor environ-
ments. When you are adding Cisco IP telephony components to an
existing third-party IP telephony network, SIP might serve as an
appropriate gateway control protocol.
n Media Gateway Control Protocol (MGCP)—MGCP is a
client/server gateway control protocol. In a Cisco IP telephony
environment, a Cisco Unified CallManager server acts as the
“server,” and a port on a router (for example, an analog Foreign
Exchange Station [FXS] port) acts as the “client.”
UCM Cluster
UCM Cluster
Public Switched
Telephone
Network (PSTN)
V
V
UCM Cluster
IP WAN
V

CHAPTER 7
Identifying the Requirements
of Voice Technologies
When designing a network to accommodate voice traffic, consider what
could impact the quality of the voice and which mechanisms might be
used to maintain voice quality.
When voice and data traffic are contending for limited bandwidth, the
following quality issues might arise:
n Delay—The ITU G.114 recommendation for voice traffic specifies
a maximum one-way delay of 150 ms for voice traffic. Some types
of delay are considered fixed, in that they do not change during a
phone call. Examples of these fixed delay components include
propagation delay (the time it takes a packet to traverse a network
link), serialization delay (the time it takes to send a frame out of a
serial link), and processing delay (the time required by the router
to encode/decode, compress/decompress, and packetize voice).
n Jitter—Variable delay might vary during a phone call. One
example of variable delay is jitter. Specifically, jitter is the uneven
arrival of packets at a destination router. Cisco routers use dejitter
buffers to help smooth out packet playout, thus concealing the
jitter experienced by those packets. Another type of variable delay,
which can contribute to jitter, is queuing delay. Queuing delay is
the amount of time a packet must spend in a queue as it waits to
be forwarded out of an interface. 
[ 57 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Packet drops—If an interface’s output queue fills to capacity,
newly arriving packets might be dropped. This occurrence is
called tail drop. Although digital signal processors can correct a
maximum of approximately 30 ms of lost voice, additional voice
packet drops can severely compromise voice quality.
Although not related to limited bandwidth, echo causes another serious
problem for voice quality. You experience the symptom of echo when
you speak and hear your own voice reflected back to you, or when you
speak and the other party hears your voice twice. The issue of echo
typically stems from an impedance mismatch in a two-wire to four-wire
circuit, which can be found in an analog phone or in telephony switch-
ing equipment.
To combat echo, Cisco voice-enabled routers can use echo
cancellation, which allows a voice port to “memorize” waveforms
being sent out of the interface for a period of time (typically 8–32 ms).
If the voice port sees the same waveform coming back in the interface
within that period of time, the voice-enabled router can cancel the echo
waveform by superimposing the same waveform, which has been
phase-shifted 180 degrees. Silence results from playing the same wave-
form twice, when those waveforms are 180 degrees out of phase.
However, because most quality issues on IP telephony and VoIP
networks result from limited bandwidth, network designers use a

CHAPTER 7
variety of approaches to make the best use of this limited bandwidth,
such as the following:
n Codec selection—One approach is to use a codec requiring less
bandwidth per call. For example, the G.711 codec does not
perform any compression, and it requires 64 kbps of bandwidth
(not including overhead) for a single voice call. However, over an
IP WAN, where bandwidth is at a premium, Cisco networks often
use the G.729a codec, which only requires 8 kbps of bandwidth
(not including overhead). Because G.729a performs compression,
whereas G.711 does not, voice quality is somewhat compromised
when using G.729a.
n The mean opinion score (MOS)—The MOS metric is used to
measure voice quality, on a five-point scale, with larger numbers
representing better quality. The G.711 codec has an MOS score of
4.1; G.729a’s MOS score is 3.9. This slight, and barely percepti-
ble, quality difference is often an acceptable trade-off to reduce
bandwidth demand.
n RTP header compression (cRTP)—When using G.729a, voice
packets contain 20 bytes of voice payload, while the packet
contains 40 bytes of header information. However, because most
information in these headers is identical (for example, the same
source/destination IP address/UDP port numbers and the same
RTP payload type), cRTP does not send this redundant header
information in each frame. Therefore, cRTP reduces the 40-byte
header down to only 2 or 4 bytes, allowing more calls to be placed
over the same link speed.
[ 58 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Voice activity detection (VAD)—Statistics show that approxi-
mately 35 percent of all voice calls are silence. Instead of consum-
ing bandwidth to send “the sound of silence,” VAD can detect the
silence and suppress the transmission of silence.
Because network designers are concerned with bandwidth use, they
must understand how to calculate required bandwidth. The following
formula shows how to calculate a network’s required voice bandwidth:
Bandwidth = ((Layer 2 header) + (IP/UDP/RTP header)) * (Codec
bit rate) / (Voice payload size)
When working with this formula, make the following assumptions:
n IP/UDP/RTP header = 40 bytes
n With cRTP, the header = 2 or 4 bytes
n A WAN’s Layer 2 header = 6 bytes
n An easier, and more detailed, bandwidth calculation can be
performed using the Cisco Voice Codec Bandwidth Calculator,
available at
http://tools.cisco.com/Support/VBC/do/CodecCalc1.do.
NOTE
Your Cisco.com account must have appropriate access
permissions to reach the Voice Codec Bandwidth Calculator
URL.

CHAPTER 7
To combat the quality issues described earlier, you can implement
various QoS mechanisms available on Cisco routers and switches. For
example, on wiring closet Catalyst switches, voice and data traffic can
be placed in separate queues. Also, these Catalyst switches can be
configured not to trust priority markings originating from a PC
connected to a Cisco IP Phone.
Router QoS mechanisms include the following:
n Classification and marking—Classifying traffic recognizes char-
acteristics of traffic and categorizes that traffic. As an example,
access control lists (ACL) can be used to classify traffic. Once
categorized, the traffic can be marked by, for example, altering
bits in a packet’s header to indicate the packet’s relative level of
priority.
n Congestion management—Congestion management defines the
queuing algorithm used by an interface’s output queue. The
queuing algorithm can specify which type of traffic receives prior-
ity treatment (that is, forwarded out of the interface ahead of other
traffic) and how much bandwidth is available to various traffic
types during periods of network congestion. Cisco’s recommended
queuing mechanism for voice networks is low-latency queuing
(LLQ).
n Congestion avoidance—To prevent an interface’s output queue
from filling to capacity, after which newly arriving packets are
discarded, routers can use a congestion avoidance mechanism
(such as weighted random early detection [WRED]) to increase
[ 59 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
the probability that lower-priority traffic will be discarded as the
queue begins to fill.
n Traffic conditioning—Traffic-conditioning mechanisms (for
example, policing and shaping) limit the amount of bandwidth that
can be consumed by specific traffic types.
n Link efficiency—Link-efficiency mechanisms, such as link frag-
mentation and interleaving (which fragments larger packets and
interleaves voice packets in among the fragmented data packets,
thus reducing the serialization delay experienced by the voice
traffic) and RTP header compression, attempt to make the most
efficient use of limited WAN bandwidth.
As mentioned earlier, if too many simultaneous calls are sent across an
IP WAN, and the IP WAN becomes oversubscribed, all calls experience
poor voice quality. Therefore, IP telephony and VoIP networks require
call admission control (CAC) tools to prevent this oversubscription.
One approach to CAC is to use the previously described gatekeeper.
Another approach is to use the Resource Reservation Protocol (RSVP).
With RSVP, a Cisco voice-enabled router, or a Unified CallManager
server (Version 5.0 or later), can reserve network bandwidth for a voice
call that no other application can encroach on, thus preventing IP WAN
oversubscription.
Because most QoS issues described result from insufficient bandwidth,
a network designer needs to provision enough bandwidth to support
projected traffic loads during a network’s busiest hour of the day. The
process of calculating the required amount of bandwidth is called

CHAPTER 7
traffic engineering. The concept of traffic engineering dates back to
PBX design, where designers needed to calculate the number of trunks
between a PBX and the local CO. With IP telephony and VoIP
networks, you take traffic engineering a step further by converting the
calculated number of trunks into a bandwidth amount.
Although the mathematics behind traffic engineering can be quite rigor-
ous, the following steps present a simplified approach:
1. Determine the grade of service (GoS).
Because designing a voice network with enough trunks to prevent
any incoming calls from receiving a busy signal is typically not
cost effective, the designer must determine what percentage of
calls can be rejected (that is, receive a busy signal) during the
busiest hour of the day for an organization’s telephone system.
This percentage is called the grade of service, or GoS. Most
designs use a GoS of 1 percent, which is written P(.01).
2. Determine the busy hour traffic (BHT).
The call volume experienced by an organization’s telephone
system (for example, a PBX) is measured in Erlangs, where an
Erlang equals one solid hour of phone usage. Statistically, the
number of Erlangs a corporate phone system experiences during
the busiest hour of the day can be approximated by getting the
number of hours of phone use during the previous month from
your organization’s telephone bill and using the following
formula:
Busy hour Erlangs = [Monthly_call_hours / 22] * .15
[ 60 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
3. Calculate the number of required trunks.
Usually, after you have determined the GoS and the number of
Erlangs experienced during an organization’s busiest hour of the
day, you can use an Erlang B table to determine the number of
required trunks (that is, simultaneous connections). You can refer
to an Erlang B table to calculate the number of required trunks, or
you can use a web-based Erlang B calculator, such as the one
available at http://erlang.com/calculator/erlb.
4. Convert the number of required trunks to the amount of required
bandwidth.
Use the Cisco Voice Codec Bandwidth Calculator, as described
earlier, to convert the number of required trunks into the amount
of required bandwidth.

CHAPTER 8
Identifying Wireless
Networking
Considerations
Wireless networks are experiencing widespread growth because of their
availability, flexibility, and service offerings. This section introduces
the Cisco unified wireless network architecture. Specifically, after an
introduction of the Cisco unified wireless network, this section exam-
ines network controller technologies and presents guidelines for wire-
less network design in enterprise networks.
Introducing the Cisco Unified
Wireless Network
Wireless local-area networks (WLAN) offer network access via radio
waves. Wireless clients (such as a PC or PDA) access a wireless access
point, using half-duplex communication. The wireless access point
allows a wireless client to reach the rest of the network.
Traditional WLANs use an access point in autonomous mode, where
the access point is configured with a service set identifier (SSID), radio
frequency (RF) channel, and RF power settings. However, having an
autonomous access point tasked with all these responsibilities can limit
scalability and can hinder the addition of advanced wireless services.
[ 61 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Five primary components comprise the Cisco unified wireless network
architecture:
n Clients—A wireless client device is typically an end-user device
(such as a PC) that accesses a wireless network.
n Access point—Wireless access points offer network access for
wireless clients.
n Network unification—To offer wireless clients access to an orga-
nization’s resources, the wireless network must be integrated (that
is, unified) with the wired LAN.
n Network management—Just as enterprise LANs benefit from
network management solutions, a wireless LAN can also use
network management solutions to enhance security, reliability, and
to offer assistance in WLAN deployments. An example of a wire-
less network management solution is the Cisco Wireless Control
System (WCS).
n Mobility—Wireless mobility services include security threat
detection, voice services, location services, and guest access.
Aside from autonomous mode, Cisco unified wireless networks can
alternatively operate in split-MAC mode. With split-MAC operation, an
access point is considered to be a “lightweight” access point, which
cannot function without a wireless LAN controller (WLC).
Specifically, a wireless LAN client sending traffic to the wired LAN
sends a packet to a lightweight access point, which encapsulates the

CHAPTER 8
packet using the Lightweight Access Point Protocol (LWAPP). The
encapsulated traffic is sent over an LWAPP tunnel to a WLC. LWAPP
sends packets in a Layer 2 frame with an Ethertype of 0xBBBB.
LWAPP data traffic uses a destination port of 12222; LWAPP control
traffic uses a destination port of 12223.
The lightweight access point, as shown in Figure 8-1, performs func-
tions such as beaconing, packet transmission, and frame queuing; the
WLC assumes roles such as authentication, key management, and
resource reservation.
FIGURE 8-1
LWAPP architecture.
[ 62 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
The operation of the wireless access point discussed thus far is referred
to as local mode. However, several other access point modes exist:
n Remote edge access point (REAP) mode—REAP allows an
access point and a WLC to be separated by a WAN, as opposed to
being connected on the same LAN.
n Rogue detector mode—Route access points can be monitored by
a wireless access point operating in rogue detector mode.
n Monitor mode—Wireless access points can be set to a receive-
only mode, called monitor mode, and act as sensors for location-
based services (LBS).
n Sniffer mode—Wireless access points operating in sniffer mode
can act as a protocol sniffer and capture packets, which are
forwarded to a PC running the AiroPeek software.
n Bridge mode—Geographically separated wireless access points
can be connected using a high-bandwidth, cost-effective wireless
link, by running in bridge mode.
After a wireless client, such as a PC, associates with its access point,
the access point only allows the client to communicate with the authen-
tication server until the client successfully logs in and is authenticated,
as illustrated in Figure 8-2. The WLC uses the Extensible
Authentication Protocol (EAP) to communicate with the authentication
server. Cisco Secure Access Control Server (ACS) could, for example,
act as the authentication server.
Wireless
Client
Split-MAC Architecture
LWAPP Tunnel
Lightweight
Access Point
Wireless LAN
Controller
Ethernet
Switch
To Wired
Network

CHAPTER 8
FIGURE 8-2
Wireless authentication.
Supported EAP types include the following:
n EAP-Transport Layer Security (EAP-TLS)—Wireless clients
and authentication servers mutually authenticate using digital
certificates.
n EAP-Protected EAP (EAP-PEAP)—The authentication server
(that is, a RADIUS server) is authenticated over a Transport Layer
Security (TLS) tunnel using a digital certificate; wireless clients
are authenticated via EAP-GTC or EAP-MSCHAPv2.
[ 63 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n EAP Tunneled Transport Layer Security (EAP-TTLS)—The
RADIUS server is authenticated over a TLS tunnel using the
server’s certificate, and wireless clients authenticate using user-
name and password credentials.
n Cisco Lightweight Extensible Authentication Protocol
(LEAP)—Cisco developed LEAP as an early and proprietary 
EAP method. However, LEAP’s vulnerability to a dictionary
attack represents a major LEAP weakness.
n Cisco EAP-Flexible Authentication via Secure Tunneling
(EAP-FAST)—Cisco proposed EAP-FAST to address LEAP’s
weaknesses.
Designers should understand the following three WLAN controller
components:
n Ports—A port on a WLAN controller physically connects the
WLAN controller to the wired network (for example, to a Cisco
Catalyst switch port).
n Interfaces—An interface of a WLAN controller logically maps to
a VLAN on the wired network.
n WLANs—A wireless LAN can be configured with security
features, quality of service (QoS) mechanisms, and other wireless
network parameters. Also, a WLAN associates an SSID to a
WLC’s interface.
EAP
Client
Lightweight
Access Point
802.1X WLC
EAP/RADIUS
Tunnel
802.1X Authentication
Key Management
Key Distribution
Secured Data
Supplicant
Authenticator
Authentication
Server

CHAPTER 8
Cisco offers an array of WLCs. Different controllers support a different
number of access points, as shown in Table 8-1.
TABLE 8-1
Access Point Support for WLCs
Number of Supported 
WLC Model
Wireless Access Points
Cisco 2000 series WLC
6
Cisco WLC module for ISRs
6
Cisco Catalyst 3750G integrated WLC
Up to 50
Cisco 4400 series WLC
Up to 100
Cisco Catalyst 6500 series 
Up to 300
wireless services modules
Understanding Wireless
Network Controller
Technologies
Lightweight access points do not require direct configuration and are
therefore considered to be zero touch devices. After installing a light-
weight access point, the access point goes through the following
discovery process to discover a WLC:
1. The lightweight access point sends a DHCPDISCOVER request to
dynamically obtain an IP address, unless it already had a statically
configured IP address.
[ 64 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
2. The lightweight access point broadcasts an LWAPP discovery
message in a Layer 2 LWAPP frame, if the access point supports
Layer 2 LWAPP transport mode.
3. If step 1 was unsuccessful or if the access point lacks Layer 2
LWAPP transport mode support, the access point attempts Layer 3
LWAPP WLC discovery.
4. If all steps were unsuccessful, the process begins again.
Based on the results of the discovery process, the lightweight access
point selects which WLC to join. During the join process, the WLC
validates the access point, and an encryption key is derived. This key is
then used to encrypt and decrypt messages exchanged between the
access point and the WLC.
Next, the lightweight access point and WLC perform the following
steps:
1. The WLC configures the lightweight access point with an SSID,
security parameters, QoS settings, and other such parameters.
2. Periodically, the WLC checks the status of the access point via
query messages.
3. Every 30 seconds the access point transmits an LWAPP heartbeat,
and if no acknowledgment is received after five attempts, the
access point seeks a new WLC to join.

CHAPTER 8
Wireless networks offer users mobility, where the users can physically
move throughout a campus. As the users move, their wireless clients
update their access point association to the most appropriate access
point, based on location.
Low-quality roaming requires that wireless clients obtain a new IP
address (via DHCP), and potentially receive new security settings, as
the clients move through the WLAN. This type of wireless environment
can suffer from noticeable delays during the reassociation period,
which makes such a solution inappropriate for voice calls.
High-quality roaming (that is, the mobility feature) does not require
wireless clients to obtain a new IP address or update their security
settings, thus providing seamless roaming. Mobility requires the seam-
less roaming experience to be maintained even if the access points,
between which a client roams, are associated with different WLCs. The
mobility feature also needs to support Layer 2 or Layer 3 roaming.
With Layer 2 roaming, the WLCs with which the access points associ-
ate are in the same subnet. However, with Layer 3 roaming, the access
points associate with WLCs on different subnets.
When a wireless client associates with a new access point, the new
access point’s WLC exchanges mobility messages with the old access
point’s WLC. The client entry is not moved from the client database of
the old WLC to the new WLC. Instead, the old WLC marks the client
with an anchor entry, and the database entry is copied to the new WLC
client database where it is marked as a foreign entry.
[ 65 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
Wireless mobility groups allow WLCs in a network to form peering
relationships. These peering relationships allow a mobility group to
support seamless roaming between WLCs, wireless access point load
balancing, and WLC redundancy. Keep the following requirements in
mind when designing a mobility group:
n The management interfaces of all WLCs must be able to reach
each other via IP.
n All WLCs in a mobility group must be configured with the same
mobility group name, which is case sensitive.
n The same virtual IP address must be configured on all WLCs.
n The MAC addresses and IP addresses of all mobility group
members must be configured on all WLCs.
n WLCs must be able to communicate with one another using UDP
port 16666 for unencrypted messages or using UDP port 16667
for encrypted messages.
When designing a wireless network to support roaming, consider the
following recommendations from Cisco:
n Use roaming only when necessary.
n Ensure the route-trip time between WLCs is less than or equal to
10 ms.
n When possible, use Layer 2 roaming rather than Layer 3 roaming.
n Implement Proactive Key Caching (PKC) or Cisco Centralized
Key Management (CCKM) to help speed up and secure the
roaming process.

CHAPTER 8
Because a WLC could become a single point of failure, when designing
WLANs, consider adding WLC redundancy. WLCs support either
dynamic or deterministic redundancy. Specifically, an access point
selects a WLC using the following sequence:
n Deterministic—An access point can be preconfigured with a
primary, secondary, or tertiary WLC. The access point can then
attempt to join those controllers in the specified order. Consider
the following deterministic redundancy designs:
N + 1—One controller backs up N controllers.
N + N—N controllers back up N controllers.
N + N + 1—N controllers back up N controllers as secondary, and
one controller backs up all N controllers as tertiary.
n Initializing—Typically used only for the initial access point
deployment, the WLC can attempt to join the WLC configured as
a master controller.
n Dynamic—The access point uses a decision making algorithm to
select a WLC based on the greatest availability for access point
associations. Dynamic WLC redundancy uses LWAPP to perform
load balancing across WLCs and to provide backup WLC infor-
mation to the access points. This approach is often appropriate for
a design where WLCs are clustered together at a central location.
The number of devices supported by an access point varies depending
on the application being used. For example, Cisco recommends no
more than seven or eight voice over WLAN (VoWLAN) devices be
associated with the same access point, because of the likelihood of
[ 66 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
collisions and the issue of dropped voice packets not being retransmit-
ted. However, as many as 20 data devices (for example, PCs) could be
associated with the same access point, because most data applications
can retransmit dropped packets and are more tolerant of latency, as
compared to voice.
Be aware that WLAN performance depends on the structure and mate-
rials used in a building’s construction, which impacts how radio waves
are propagated throughout the building. These building characteristics
can impact connection speeds and error rates. Fortunately, Cisco’s
Radio Resource Management (RRM) allows Cisco wireless devices to
monitor RF conditions and dynamically make adjustments to access
point power and channel configurations to help accommodate for issues
such as channel interference and signal coverage.
Specifically, a designer can specify an RF group, which defines a
cluster of WLCs that coordinate their RRM calculations. RF groups are
created via the following process:
n Access points transmit neighbor messages, which include the
access points’ WLC IP addresses and hashed message integrity
checks (MIC).
n Access points validate each other using the MIC, and an RF group
is formed when access points on different WLCs hear validated
neighbor messages at a signal strength of –80 dBm or stronger.
n The RF group members or controllers then elect an RF group
leader, which is responsible for maintaining a master power and
channel scheme for the group.

CHAPTER 8
Cisco access points also support self-healing. With self-healing, a
WLC uses RRM to adjust access point power levels, to accommodate
for the failure of a neighboring access point. 
Designing Wireless Networks
with Controllers
When designing a wireless network, one of the first steps in the design
process is to conduct an RF site survey. A site survey provides the
designer with a better understanding of an environment’s RF character-
istics (for example, coverage areas and RF interference). Based on the
results of the RF site survey, the designer can strategically position the
wireless infrastructure devices.
Conducting an RF site survey involves these procedures:
n Determine the number of customer devices to be supported, the
required service level, and peak traffic-level requirements.
n Acquire a structural building diagram, which can be used to iden-
tify potential RF obstacles.
n Perform an on-site inspection, looking for structural components
(for example, metal racks or elevator shafts) that might impair the
wireless signal.
n Specify preliminary locations for access points, keeping in mind
that the access points need power and access to the wired network.
[ 67 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Conduct the actual RF site survey, which maps out RF coverage
areas. A tool such as the Cisco WCS can import a floor plan and
graphically display RF coverage areas and signal strengths. This
type of composite graphic is often referred to as a heat map.
n Document the results of the RF site survey. The documentation
should include information such as the access point models used,
locations of access points, signal strength levels, and bandwidth
available at the outer boundaries of the coverage areas.
Many wireless networks also need to support connectivity for guests,
without permitting guests full access to network resources. One
approach to guest access is to isolate guest traffic on a separate VLAN.
However, in large enterprise environments, this approach might not be
deemed adequately secure.
Therefore, another option is to use a Layer 2 tunnel to send all guest
traffic to a controller dedicated for guest use. This controller is located
in a demilitarized zone (DMZ), which uses a firewall to separate the
guest network from the organization’s internal network.
Wireless network design might also need to address outdoor wireless
connectivity (for example, wirelessly interconnecting buildings).
Traditionally, buildings were wirelessly interconnected using point-to-
point bridging or point-to-multipoint bridging.
A newer approach is wireless mesh networking, as illustrated in Figure
8-3. An outdoor mesh uses multiple access points which interconnect,
thus providing numerous redundant connections between nodes. These

CHAPTER 8
access points can dynamically discover one another and select an
optimal path through the mesh.
FIGURE 8-3
Outdoor wireless mesh.
The Cisco unified wireless network, which is the basis of the wireless
mesh network, is composed of the following elements:
n Cisco Wireless Control System (WCS)—WCS provides a graph-
ical user interface (GUI) for networkwide policy configuration.
[ 68 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace
n Cisco Wireless LAN Controller (WLC)—WLCs manage multi-
ple access points, manage wireless network security, and offer
Layer 3 mobility features.
n Rooftop access point (RAP)—Typically located on a rooftop, the
RAP provides wireless connectivity into a wired network.
n Pole-top mesh access point (MAP)—A MAP is typically located
on a pole, such as a lamp post, and serves as an access point for
wireless clients.
Although the connection from a MAP a RAP can support eight hops,
Cisco recommends four or fewer hops. Also, be aware that a RAP can
connect up to 32 MAPs, but Cisco recommends that a RAP connect no
more than 20 to 25 MAPs.
When designing a wireless network for an enterprise campus, a
designer should determine the following:
n The number of required access points
n The location of the access points
n The power source for the access points
n The number of required WLCs
n The location of the WLCs
Some of these same design considerations (for example, the number of
access points needed) are also relevant for branch office wireless
Point-to-Point
Bridging
Root Mesh
Access Point
Point-to-
Multipoint
Bridging
Wireless Mesh
Bridging

CHAPTER 8
networks. However, branch offices might not be able to justify the
expense of separate lightweight access point and WLC devices. One
approach for branch offices is to use local MAC, which supports full
802.11 functionality in the access point.
Another option is to point the branch access points back to a central-
ized controller. If a centralized controller is used, the round-trip time
(RTT) between an access point and its controller should not be greater
than 200 ms. Also, designs using centralized controllers should imple-
ment one of the following technologies:
n Remote Edge Access Point (REAP)—REAP extends LWAPP
control timers, thus offering more compatibility for branch offices.
Although control traffic is still encapsulated using LWAPP and
sent to the centralized WLC, data is locally bridged. However,
IEEE 802.1Q trunking is not supported by REAP, and REAP
requires that all WLANs terminate on a single local VLAN or
subnet.
n Hybrid REAP (H-REAP)—Unlike REAP, H-REAP allows wire-
less network administrators to configure and control two or three
access points, located in a branch office, over the IP WAN. Also,
H-REAP access points have the ability to locally switch data
traffic and locally authenticate clients if connectivity to the WLC
is lost.
[ 69 ]
© 2007 Cisco Systems Inc. All rights reserved. This publication is protected by copyright. Please see page 70 for more details.
CCDA Quick Reference Sheets by Kevin Wallace

