
Cisco Press 
800 East 96th Street 
Indianapolis, IN 46240
CCNA 
Cloud 
CLDADM 210-455
Official Cert Guide
CHRIS JACKSON, CCIE NO. 6256 
HANK PRESTON, CCIE NO. 38336 
STEVE WASKO

ii  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455  
Official Cert Guide
Chris Jackson 
Hank Preston  
Steve Wasko 
Copyright© 2017 Cisco Systems, Inc.
Published by: 
Cisco Press 
800 East 96th Street  
Indianapolis, IN 46240 USA
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage 
and retrieval system, without written permission from the publisher, except for the inclusion of 
brief quotations in a review.
Printed in the United States of America
First Printing November 2016
Library of Congress Control Number: 2016952324
ISBN-13: 978-1-58714-453-0
ISBN-10: 1-58714-453-0
Warning and Disclaimer
This book is designed to provide information about the CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 
certification. Every effort has been made to make this book as complete and as accurate as 
possible, but no warranty or fitness is implied.
The information is provided on an “as is” basis. The authors, Cisco Press, and Cisco Systems, 
Inc. shall have neither liability nor responsibility to any person or entity with respect to any loss 
or damages arising from the information contained in this book or from the use of the discs or 
programs that may accompany it.
The opinions expressed in this book belong to the author and are not necessarily those of  
Cisco Systems, Inc.
Trademark Acknowledgments
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been 
appropriately capitalized. Cisco Press or Cisco Systems, Inc., cannot attest to the accuracy of this 
information. Use of a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any 
trademark or service mark.
Special Sales
For information about buying this title in bulk quantities, or for special sales opportunities 
(which may include electronic versions; custom cover designs; and content particular to your 
business, training goals, marketing focus, or branding interests), please contact our corporate 
sales department at corpsales@pearsoned.com or (800) 382-3419.
For government sales inquiries, please contact governmentsales@pearsoned.com.
For questions about sales outside the U.S., please contact intlcs@pearson.com.

Feedback Information
At Cisco Press, our goal is to create in-depth technical books of the highest quality and value. Each 
book is crafted with care and precision, undergoing rigorous development that involves the unique 
expertise of members from the professional technical community.
Readers’ feedback is a natural continuation of this process. If you have any comments regarding 
how we could improve the quality of this book, or otherwise alter it to better suit your needs, you 
can contact us through email at feedback@ciscopress.com. Please make sure to include the book 
title and ISBN in your message.
We greatly appreciate your assistance.
iii
Editor-in-Chief: Mark Taub
Product Line Manager: Brett Bartow
Business Operation Manager, Cisco 
Press: Ronald Fligge
Executive Editor: Mary Beth Ray
Managing Editor: Sandra Schroeder
Development Editor: Ellie Bru
Senior Project Editor: Tonya Simpson
Copy Editor: Bill McManus
Technical Editors: Blair Hicks, Mike Tokarz
Editorial Assistant: Vanessa Evans
Cover Designer: Chuti Prasertsith
Composition: Studio Galou
Indexer: Ken Johnson
Proofreader: Chuck Hutchinson

iv  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
About the Authors
Chris Jackson, CCIE No. 6256, is a Distinguished Systems Engineer working in world-
wide sales training and enablement and the author of Network Security Auditing (Cisco 
Press, 2010). Chris is focused on all aspects of Cisco data center and cloud, not only in 
a technology perspective but through thought leadership in helping Cisco and custom-
ers better leverage the business transformational aspects these technologies provide. He 
holds dual CCIEs in security and routing and switching, CISA, CISSP, ITIL v3, seven 
SANS certifications, and a bachelor’s degree in business administration. Residing in 
Franklin, Tennessee, Chris enjoys tinkering with RC drones, robotics, and anything else 
that can be programmed to do his bidding. In addition, he is a black belt in Taekwondo 
and a rabid Star Wars fan, and has a ridiculous collection of Lego. His wife, Barbara, 
and three children, Caleb, Sydney, and Savannah, are the true joy of his life and proof 
that not everything has to plug into a wall outlet to be fun.
Hank Preston, CCIE No. 38336, has been with Cisco for five years, starting as a systems 
engineer and then moving into a data center and cloud architect–focused position work-
ing with large enterprise customers on developing their cloud strategy. Prior to Cisco, 
Hank spent much of his career with partners designing and implementing solutions across 
IT, not just networking. In fact, before deciding to focus and specialize in the networking 
space, Hank was a programmer and database designer, spent a good amount of time as a 
sysadmin managing Microsoft, VMware, and Citrix-based solutions, and has worked in 
many IT areas. This well-rounded experience gives him a great foundation to work from 
when discussing “The Cloud,” as like few other technology trends, the cloud touches all 
areas of IT. Prior to moving into IT, Hank worked in the entertainment industry running 
lights and sound for musicals, stage plays, and concerts. Having never lost the love of the 
stage, he still spends time in community theatre productions when time allows.
Steve Wasko is a systems engineer at Pure Storage, one of the fastest-growing companies 
in Silicon Valley. Combining his years of experience with enterprise applications, 
networking, and compute gives him a unique perspective at Pure Storage. Prior to Pure 
Storage, Steve spent the previous 11 years at Cisco involved in application networking, 
storage networking, cloud, unified computing, and data center virtualization solutions. 
His recent work there over the past decade led to dozens of large, complex, enterprise 
implementations of UCS as well as multiple UCS Central deployments and private cloud 
implementations.
Before Cisco, Steve spent seven years at Microsoft as a senior product manager in the 
Windows Server division as well as time as a senior technology specialist in the Microsoft 
Enterprise field. Before that, Steve spent time at IBM and EDS. Past certifications include 
CNE, MCSE, CCNA, and ITIL. In his spare time, Steve enjoys his family, CrossFit, 
hunting, and technology. 

About the Technical Reviewers v
About the Technical Reviewers
Blair Hicks is an Orchestration and Automation specialist with over 15 years of expe-
rience managing solutions for application service providers and global financial solu-
tions. He has served as a technical lead for both VMware and Cisco, helping to enable 
large enterprise and service providers to adopt data center orchestration practices. He 
loves the diverse challenges that arise from designing new ways to automate core opera-
tions in cloud provisioning and consumption. When he is not in front of a computer 
keyboard, he enjoys motorcycling, ORVs, and bicycling. Follow his sporadic tweets  
@tuxdbird.
Mike Tokarz is a consulting systems engineer for data center technologies at Cisco 
Systems. He has been working in the data center space for 15 years, most recently focus-
ing on cloud and automation. Mike attended Northern Illinois University, where he 
majored in theoretical computer science. In his free time, he runs long distance and back-
packs in the mountains.

vi  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Dedications
Chris Jackson: This book is dedicated to my family, those with me and those who are 
not. Any success I have in life is on the shoulders of those who have shaped, supported, 
encouraged, and driven me to follow my passions. Special thanks to my lovely wife and 
wonderful children, who sacrificed and gave me the time to get things done. Wouldn’t 
have happened without you.
Hank Preston: This book is dedicated to my always-supportive wife, Charity, and children, 
Natalie and Alex. You make me strive to excel in everything I do and live up to the love 
you give me. Taking on projects like writing this book impact us all, and you are always my 
biggest champions.
Steve Wasko: To the incredible woman who walks this crazy world with me and gives me 
the strength and motivation to succeed, I dedicate this book to Vanessa, and to my fam-
ily, Thomas, Raegan, and Luke. To my wife, I wouldn’t be where I am today without your 
love, kindness, and support. To my kids, aim high and never settle for anything but the 
best—you guys deserve it!

Acknowledgments vii
Acknowledgments
Chris Jackson: Writing a book is like having children. The first one is a crash course in 
understanding the definition of patience, commitment, and love. The second one only 
happens when you have given yourself enough time to forget how hard the first one was! 
If it wasn’t for Hank and Steve, this book would have never been published. You guys are 
fantastic and it has been wonderful working with professionals of your caliber. I am hon-
ored to have been a part of your first book. 
The Cisco Press crew are the best in the industry. They are patient, but know how to crack 
the whip when necessary. Denise Lincoln, Mary Beth Ray, and Ellie Bru were a joy to 
work with through this process. We will always have Vegas! 
Our tech editors had their hands full for sure. Blair Hicks and Mike Tokarz gave great 
advice and truly cared about the final product. Feedback is a gift and you two beat us 
over the heads with your gifts. Thanks for all of your hard work.
To my management team, Chris Gaito and Linda Masloske, thank you so much for all of 
your support and encouragement over the years. This book would not have been possible 
without you. To my co-workers in WWSPT, Laura Tilton and David Whitten, thanks for 
picking up the slack while I continue to bite off more than I can chew. You are the best 
and I feel blessed to work with you on a daily basis.
Barbara, Caleb, Sydney, Savannah, and my neurotic cat Pip deserve a medal for putting up 
with me. I love you guys more than words can convey. Yes, I am finished and can come 
outside and play. 
Hank Preston: First I must thank my co-authors, Chris Jackson and Steve Wasko. This 
is my first book and I am glad to have had their partnership to learn the way. Chris’s 
experience as a published author was very helpful to get started writing. And Steve, we’d 
tackled so many projects together already, having our names together on this book is a 
great addition. 
I would also like to thank the many members of the Cisco Press team that worked with us 
to pull the book together. We weren’t an easy bunch to corral, but you all stuck with us 
and kept us moving forward. 
Blair Hicks and Mike Tokarz, you both had the thankless job of going through our 
material and keeping us honest and accurate. Though I may have cursed you both at least 
once, your work made this book better in so many places. 
I didn’t start my career in IT at Cisco, but joining the company was one of the best 
decisions I made. I would like to thank Eric Knipp for seeing something in me worth 
taking a bit of a risk on. You’ve been the most supportive friend, mentor, and leader I’ve 
ever had the opportunity to work with. 
Finally, to my family… Whether it was writing this book, preparing for a certification 
exam, or creating content for a class or presentation, you’ve all been there and 
understanding when I’ve had to spend late nights and weekends working. Charity, you are 
the best partner I could ask for. You are my world. 

viii  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Steve Wasko: Similar to Hank’s acknowledgments, I would also like to thank Hank 
Preston and Chris Jackson. Writing a book is a pretty awesome experience and you guys 
have been great to work and collaborate with. I wish you both the best success at Cisco or 
wherever the winds of opportunity send you.
Mike Tokarz and Blair Hicks, who did the technical editing on this book, deserve 
a massive amount of credit. As a former technical editor for the Cisco Press title 
Application Acceleration and WAN Optimization Fundamentals, I know it’s a difficult 
and tireless job, and this book will be better because of your efforts. Thank you.
Also thank you to the entire Pearson Cisco Press crew for hanging with us. I know we 
were a challenge, but your professionalism and structure made this a great project.
Cisco is one of the greatest places I have worked in my IT career, and even though I’ve 
moved on to Pure Storage, I regard my time at Cisco as one of the highlights of my 
career. Cisco is like a huge family and I want to thank some of my key mentors there: Bob 
Hlavacek, Glenn Graber, Tim Fiedler, Kevin Williams, and Greg Gilley. We changed the 
face of the data center market and you guys made me reach for more than I ever thought 
was possible.
Most importantly, my family is my rock and where I draw my strength from. To Thomas, 
you’ve exceeded every expectation I’ve ever had and will do great at anything you choose. 
To Raegan, you have taught us the most important lessons in life and you have a beautiful 
future in front of you—your strength is awe inspiring. To Luke, you are everything a dad 
could ever ask for and the world is yours for the making! And to Vanessa, thank you for 
this incredible life and family. I love you all.

ix
Contents at a Glance
Introduction xxiv
Part I Cloud Admin Fundamentals
Chapter 1 
An Introduction to Cloud 2
Chapter 2 
Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT 20
Chapter 3 
The Cloud Operation Journey 42
Part II Cloud Technologies
Chapter 4 
Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  62
Chapter 5 
Cisco Prime Service Catalog  88
Chapter 6 
Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  126
Part III Cloud Administration and Operations
Chapter 7 
Managing Users and Groups  160
Chapter 8 
Virtual Machine Management  196
Chapter 9 
Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  244
Chapter 10 
Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director  286 
and Prime Service Catalog 
Chapter 11 
Deploying Virtual Application Containers  318
Chapter 12 
Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting  348
Part IV Cloud Management, Monitoring, and Reporting
Chapter 13 
Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  384
Chapter 14 
Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud  428
Chapter 15 
Final Preparation 454
 
Glossary 460
Appendix A 
Answers to the “Do I Know This Already?” Quizzes 469
Appendix B 
Memory Tables 472
Appendix C 
Memory Tables Answer Key 476
 
Index 480
Online Elements
Glossary 
Appendix A  Answers to the “Do I Know This Already?” Quizzes 
Appendix B Memory Tables 
Appendix C Memory Tables Answer Key
Appendix D Study Planner

x  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Reader Services
Register your copy at www.ciscopress.com/title/9781587144530 for convenient access 
to downloads, updates, and corrections as they become available. To start the registration 
process, go to www.ciscopress.com/register and log in or create an account*. Enter the 
product ISBN 9781587144530 and click Submit. Once the process is complete, you will 
find any available bonus content under Registered Products.
*Be sure to check the box that you would like to hear from us to receive exclusive 
discounts on future editions of this product.

xi
Contents
Introduction xxiv
Part I 
Cloud Admin Fundamentals
Chapter 1 
An Introduction to Cloud 3
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 3
Foundation Topics 6
What Is Cloud? 6
History of Cloud 6
Mainframe Computing 6
The Rise of the Virtual Machine 7
Virtual Private Network 8
Application Service Providers 8
Amazon Web Services 8
Cloud Computing Today 9
NIST Definition 9
Essential Characteristics 10
Service Models 11
Deployment Models 12
SDN and Cloud 13
An SDN Definition 13
The Challenges SDN Solves 13
SDN Is a Cloud Enabler 14
Applications and Cloud 15
Traditional Applications 15
Virtualized Applications 16
Cloud-Native Applications 17
Chapter 2 
Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT 21
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 21
Foundation Topics 24
IT Operations, Past, Present, and Future 24
Waterfall 24
Lean 26
Agile 27
Moving Faster 28
The Future of IT Operations 29
IT as a Broker of Services 30

xii  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The Rise of DevOps 30
Service Catalog 36
Self-Service Portal 39
Chapter 3 
The Cloud Operation Journey 43
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 43
Foundation Topics 46
Embracing Cloud 46
Shadow IT 46
The Journey Starts Here 48
Cisco Domain Ten 49
Domain 1: Unified Infrastructure 50
Domain 2: Abstraction and Virtualization 50
Domain 3: Automation and Orchestration 51
Domain 4: User Portal (Self-Service Portal) 53
Domain 5: Service Catalog 54
Domain 6: Financials 55
Domain 7: Platform and Data 56
Domain 8: Applications and Analytics 56
Domain 9: Security and Compliance 57
Domain 10: Organization, Governance, and Operations 57
Part II 
Cloud Technologies 
Chapter 4 
Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites 63
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 63
Foundation Topics 66
Cisco Cloud Solutions 66
Automated Service Delivery 66
Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite 68
Cisco Intelligent Automation for Cloud 69
Cisco OpenStack Solutions 70
Introducing UCS Director 72
UCS Director Architecture 73
How UCS Director Works 75
Installation Components of UCS Director 76
Multinode Deployment 76
UCS Director Self-Service Portal 77

Contents xiii
Orchestration with UCS Director 78
UCS Director Orchestrator 79
Workflow Designer 80
Building a Workflow 80
Triggers 81
Activities 81
Validating Workflow 81
Approvals 82
Rollback 83
UCS Director Baremetal Agent 83
How BMA Works 85
Exam Preparation Tasks 87
Review All Key Topics 87
Define Key Terms 87
Chapter 5 
Cisco Prime Service Catalog 89
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 89
Foundation Topics 92
Introducing Prime Service Catalog 92
Managing Requests for IT Services 93
On-Demand Service Delivery 94
Prime Service Catalog Concepts and Components 96
End-User Storefront 97
Stack Designer 97
Portal Designer 98
Service Designer 101
UCS Director 102
RabbitMQ 102
Puppet 103
Intercloud Fabric for Business 103
Navigating the End-User Storefront 103
Logging In 103
Locating Services 105
Browsing for Services 105
Searching for Services 107
Service Overview 109
Ordering a Service 110
Viewing Order Status Details 111

xiv  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Stack Designer 113
Stack Designer Templates 113
Configuring an Application Template with Stack Designer 116
Heat Orchestration 123
Exam Preparation Tasks 125
Review All Key Topics 125
Define Key Terms 125
Chapter 6 
Cisco Cloud Infrastructure 127
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 127
Foundation Topics 130
How Automation and Orchestration Relates to Infrastructure 130
Physical Switching 131
Nexus Series Switches 131
The Nexus 2000 Series Fabric Extenders 132
Cisco Nexus 3000 Series Switches 135
Cisco Nexus 4000 Series Switches 135
Cisco Nexus 5000 Series Switches 136
Cisco Nexus 6000 Series Switches 136
Cisco Nexus 7000 Series Switches 137
Cisco Nexus 9000 Series Switches 138
Cisco Cloud Programmability of Nexus Switches 138
Introduction to Application Centric Infrastructure 139
Application Network Profiles and How They Work 140
Infrastructure Automation and UCS Director 142
Virtual Switching 143
Virtual Switching Overview 143
Nexus 1000V 144
AVS Architecture and Components 145
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS) 146
VACS Containers 148
VACS 3-Tier Internal Container Template 149
VACS 3-Tier External Container Template 150
Building a VACS Container with Gateway of Choice 151
Intercloud Fabric 152
Why Hybrid 153

Contents  xv
How It Works 155
Intercloud Fabric for Business 155
Intercloud Fabric for Providers 155
Secure Network Extender 155
Secure Network Extension to the Public Cloud 156
Exam Preparation Tasks 158
Review All Key Topics 158
Define Key Terms 158
Part III 
Cloud Administration and Operations
Chapter 7 
Managing Users and Groups 161
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 161
Foundation Topics 164
Overview of Users and Groups 164
Prime Service Catalog 164
Managing Connections Between Prime Service Catalog 172
UCS Director 173
Local Users in UCS Director 173
Local Groups in UCS Director 176
LDAP Integration for UCS Director 178
Default Roles in UCS Director 183
Configuring a New User with a Single Role 188
Exam Preparation Tasks 194
Review All Key Topics 194
Define Key Terms 194
Chapter 8 
Virtual Machine Management 197
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 197
Foundation Topics 200
Understanding VM Virtualization in Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite 200
Overview of End-User VM Operations in UCS Director 203
Adding a Virtual Hypervisor to UCS Director 203
Installing PowerShell Agent 205
Standard VM Operations 207
Advanced or Custom VM Operations 210
Custom VM Action Policies 212
Setting VM Options for End-User Selection 230

xvi  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Understanding Common Administrative Workflows on VMs in UCS Director 232
Prime Service Catalog VM Integration 235
Linking UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog 236
Exploring “My Stuff” 239
Taking VM Actions in Prime Service Catalog 240
Exam Preparation Tasks 243
Review All Key Topics 243
Define Key Terms 243
Chapter 9 
Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director 245
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 245
Foundation Topics 248
UCS Director Policies, Pools, and Virtual Data Centers 248
Virtual Data Center and Policies 248
System Policy 250
Computing Policy 252
Network Policy 253
Storage Policy 255
Cost Model 256
Action Policies  257
vDC Categories  259
IP, Subnet, and VLAN Network Pools 259
Static IP Pool Policy  260
IP Subnet Pool Policy 261
VLAN Pool Policy 262
Physical Infrastructure Policies  262
UCS Policies 262
UCS Director Orchestration  265
Workflows 265
Workflow Properties  266
Workflow Designer  269
Workflow Creation Walkthrough  270
Extending Orchestration 275
Cloupia Script  275
Custom Tasks  276
Custom Approval Task 276
Custom Workflow Input 277
Cisco Community  277

Contents  xvii
UCS Director Service Requests 278
Service Request Actions  281
Reservations  283
Exam Preparation Tasks 284
Review All Key Topics 284
Define Key Terms 284
Chapter 10 
Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and 
Prime Service Catalog 287
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 287
Foundation Topics 290
UCS Director Catalogs 290
Standard Catalog 290
Advanced Catalog 295
Service Container Catalog 296
VDI Catalog 297
Prime Service Catalog Fundamentals  297
The Showcase 298
Categories  299
Services 300
Connecting and Importing to Prime Service Catalog  300
Customizing Auto-Created Services  303
Ordering a Service with Prime Service Catalog  304
Finding Services and Their Details  305
Placing an Order  307
Checking and Monitoring Status of an Order  309
End-User Order Management in Prime Service Catalog 309
Administrator Service Request Management in UCS Director  311
Accessing and Managing New Resources  311
Managing “My Stuff” Within Prime Service Catalog  312
Using the UCS Director End-User Portal  313
Exam Preparation Tasks 316
Review All Key Topics 316
Complete Tables and Lists from Memory 316
Define Key Terms 316
Chapter 11 
Deploying Virtual Application Containers 319
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 319
Foundation Topics 322

xviii  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Understanding UCS Director Application Containers 322
Types of Application Containers 323
Fenced Virtual Container  324
VACS Container 325
Container Template Setup 327
Fenced Virtual Containers  327
VACS Containers  335
Creating Container Catalogs  343
Managing Deployed Containers  344
APIC Containers 346
Exam Preparation Tasks 347
Review All Key Topics 347
Complete Tables and Lists from Memory 347
Define Key Terms 347
Chapter 12 
Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting  349
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 349
Foundation Topics 353
UCS Director Reporting 353
Cloud Infrastructure Reports 353
Physical Infrastructure  356
Virtual Infrastructure  363
CloudSense Analytics  368
UCS Director Chargeback 372
Cost Models  373
Chargeback Reports 377
Budget Policy 379
Exporting Metering Data for External Integration 381
Exam Preparation Tasks 382
Review All Key Topics 382
Define Key Terms 382
Part IV 
Cloud Management, Monitoring, and Reporting
Chapter 13 
Cloud Performance and Capacity Management 385
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 385
Foundation Topics 389
Performance Management in UCS Manager 389

Contents  xix
Monitoring Hosts/Blades 389
Monitoring Bandwidth 389
Monitoring CPU/Memory 391
Monitoring Other Components 392
Monitoring Infrastructure 392
Monitoring Ethernet Bandwidth 393
Monitoring Fibre Channel Bandwidth 395
Performance/Capacity Management in UCS Central 396
Seeing Available Host Capacity 397
Statistics and Reporting 398
Standard Reports 398
Custom Reports 400
Capacity Management in UCS Director 404
Dashboard Statistics 404
CloudSense Reporting 404
CloudSense Reports in UCS Director 405
CloudSense Assessments in UCS Director 406
CloudSense Report Builder in UCS Director 407
Performance Management in UCS Performance Manager 410
Dashboard  410
Dashboard Topology 411
Monitoring Infrastructure 412
Application Groups 414
Available Reports in UCS Performance Manager 416
Cisco UCS Capacity Reports 416
Cisco UCS Reports 416
Enterprise Reports 417
Performance Reports 417
Configuring Serviceability Options 418
Syslog 418
Network Time Protocol 420
Domain Name Service 422
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol 423
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol 425
Exam Preparation Tasks 427
Review All Key Topics 427
Define Key Terms 427

xx  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Chapter 14 
Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud  429
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz 429
Foundation Topics 432
UCS Director Dashboards  432
Dashboard Widgets 432
Infrastructure Summary Dashboards 433
System Dashboard 435
Fault Severities and States  438
Cloud Monitoring  439
Infrastructure Event and Fault Monitoring  439
Performance Monitoring  440
Service Request Monitoring  441
Visibility and Troubleshooting Through Logs  444
UCS Director Logs 444
Prime Service Catalog Logs 446
Backing Up the Cloud  448
Backups in UCS Director  449
Backups in Prime Service Catalog  450
Foundation Topics 452
Exam Preparation Tasks 452
Review All Key Topics 452
Complete Tables and Lists from Memory 452
Define Key Terms 452
Chapter 15  Final Preparation  455
Tools for Final Preparation  455
Pearson Cert Practice Test Engine and Questions  455
Install the Software  455
Activate and Download the Practice Exam  456
Activating Other Exams  457
Premium Edition  457
The Cisco Learning Network  457
Memory Tables  457
Chapter-Ending Review Tools  458
Suggested Plan for Final Review/Study  458
Using the Exam Engine  458
Summary  459

Contents xxi
Glossary 461
Appendix A 
Answers to the “Do I Know This Already?” Quizzes 469
Appendix B 
Memory Tables 473
Appendix C 
Memory Tables Answer Key 477
Index 480
Online Elements
Glossary 
Appendix A  Answers to the “Do I Know This Already?” Quizzes 
Appendix B Memory Tables 
Appendix C Memory Tables Answer Key
Appendix D Study Planner

xxii  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Icons Used in This Book
Employee/
Accounting and Sales
Branch Office
End User
Running
Person
Network Clouds
Web
Server
PC
Laptop
CiscoWorks
Workstation
Newton
Mainframe
File Application
Server
Database
UCS 5108 Blade
Chassis
UCS C-Series
Nexus
7000
Workgroup
Switch
Nexus
5000
Nexus 2000
10GE
10GE
Nexus 2000
Fabric Extender
Router
Nexus
1KV VSM
Cisco ASA
5500
System
Controller
Multilayer
Switch
Bridge
Firewall
FC Storage
Server Load
Balancer
Wide Area
Application
Engine
Nexus
1000
Cisco MDS 
Multilayer
Director
Cisco MDS Multilayer
Fabric Switch
UCS 6200 Series
Fabric Interconnect
MUX
10GE/FCoE

Command Syntax Conventions  xxiii
Command Syntax Conventions
The conventions used to present command syntax in this book are the same conventions 
used in the IOS Command Reference. The Command Reference describes these 
conventions as follows:
■ Boldface indicates commands and keywords that are entered literally as shown. In 
actual configuration examples and output (not general command syntax), boldface 
indicates commands that are manually input by the user (such as a show command).
■ Italic indicates arguments for which you supply actual values.
■ Vertical bars (|) separate alternative, mutually exclusive elements.
■ Square brackets ([ ]) indicate an optional element.
■ Braces ({ }) indicate a required choice.
■ Braces within brackets ([{ }]) indicate a required choice within an optional element.

xxiv  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Introduction
Welcome to the CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide. The CCNA 
Cloud certification is designed to validate associate-level knowledge of successful 
deployment and operation of cloud technologies. Cloud administration represents the 
operational aspect of cloud, which is one of the most challenging components of realizing 
the promise of cloud for your business. While technology is a crucial building block, how 
you use it, and ultimately how you map your company’s business needs, processes, and 
workflows to those cloud technologies, is the difference between success and failure in a 
cloud deployment. Utilizing various cloud product suites from Cisco, along with ruthless 
standardization and workflow optimization, can enable a company to achieve substantial 
operational efficiencies, agility, and a level of flexibility never thought possible. A CCNA 
Cloud Administrator can be that “guiding light” for their organization as they embark on 
their cloud journey. 
The CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide is a self-study guide covering 
all of the topics from the corresponding Cisco exam blueprint. This book delves into 
the many operational and administrative processes and tasks that would be required to 
successfully operate a Cisco cloud environment. 
This book is broken up into four parts. Part I starts with foundational topics that present 
the key concepts and background necessary to provide context on why cloud is important 
to transform an organization into an agile, flexible, and operationally efficient business. 
Part II provides an overview of the Cisco technology and software suites relevant to the 
exam. Part III delves into cloud administration and operations concepts such as deploying 
virtual machines and application containers, managing role-based access control, services 
catalogs, and reporting and chargeback systems. Part IV closes out the book by exploring 
cloud monitoring, capacity planning, and remediation methodologies.
We hope you enjoy this book and find it a useful exam preparation resource. Good luck 
on your test! 
Goals and Methods
Obviously, the primary objective of this book is to help you pass the CCNA Cloud 
CLDADM 210-455 exam. However, as previously mentioned, it is also designed to 
facilitate your learning of foundational concepts underlying cloud computing that will 
carry over into your professional job experience; this book is not intended to be an 
exercise in rote memorization of terms and technologies.
With the intention of giving you a holistic view of cloud computing and a more rewarding 
learning experience, the order in which we present the material is designed to provide 
a logical progression of explanations from basic concepts to complex architectures. 
Notwithstanding, if you are interested in covering specific gaps in your preparation for 
the exam, you can also read the chapters out of the proposed sequence.

How This Book Is Organized  xxv
Each chapter roughly follows this structure:
■ A description of the business and technological context of the explained technology, 
approach, or architecture
■ An explanation of the challenges addressed by such technology, approach, or 
architecture
■ A detailed analysis that immerses you in the main topic of the chapter, including its 
characteristics, possibilities, results, and consequences
■ A thorough explanation of how this technology, approach, or architecture is applicable 
to real-world cloud computing environments 
Who Should Read This Book?
CCNA Cloud certification candidates are the target audience for this book. However, it 
is also designed to offer a proper introduction to fundamental concepts and technologies 
for engineers, architects, developers, analysts, and students that are interested in cloud 
computing.
Strategies for Exam Preparation
Whether you want to read the book in sequence or pick specific chapters to cover 
knowledge gaps, we recommend that you include the following guidelines in your study 
for the CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 exam each time you start a chapter:
■ Answer the “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions to assess your expertise in the 
chapter topic.
■ Check the results in Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.” 
■ Based on your results, read the Foundation Topics sections, giving special attention to 
the sections corresponding to the questions you have not answered correctly.
■ After the first reading, try to complete the memory tables (where applicable) and 
define the key terms from the chapter, and verify the results in the appendixes. If 
you make a mistake in a table entry or the definition of a key term, review the related 
section.
Remember: Discovering gaps in your preparation for the exam is as important as address-
ing them.
How This Book Is Organized
In times where blog posts and tweets provide disconnected pieces of information, this 
book intends to serve a complete learning experience, where order and consistency 
between chapters do matter.

xxvi  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
For such purpose, Chapters 1 through 14 cover the following topics:
■ Chapter 1, “An Introduction to Cloud”—The term cloud is used so readily in the 
industry that it’s often difficult to nail down a solid definition. Is cloud a place? Is 
cloud something I swipe a credit card and purchase? Is it a managed service with a 
slew of four-letter acronyms? This chapter introduces the three primary cloud models, 
public, private, and hybrid, and also introduces you to a bit of history and the players 
in this space. The intent is to show you that the true value of cloud is in enabling a new 
paradigm for managing and consuming IT services.
■ Chapter 2, “Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT”—Traditional IT operating mod-
els are very expensive and resource intensive. Cloud provides a way to reduce much of 
the operating expense, duplication of efforts, and redundancy through automation. To 
take advantage of automation, it’s important to understand how IT organization struc-
tures fit into this new model. No longer can groups within IT work alone in their silos; 
cloud busts down those silos and provides a common set of tools and technologies 
through which standards and templates can drive new levels of efficiency and speed in 
deploying new applications and services.
■ Chapter 3, “The Cloud Operation Journey”—You are buying into all of the “cloud 
talk”? Awesome! Now, where do you start? Not every business is ready to jump into 
cloud with both feet. For those that want to dip their toe in, or maybe wade in a bit, it 
helps to think of cloud as a journey. There are numerous things that have to be in place 
for a cloud operating model to be successful. This chapter provides a roadmap for the 
operational side of cloud and describes the many lessons learned along the way.
■ Chapter 4, “Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites”—Cloud orchestration 
and automation suites provide the framework that enables the logical abstraction of 
the underlying hardware and software that make up network, compute, and storage 
in the data center. For the Cisco CLDADM exam, UCS Director and Cisco Intelligent 
Automation for Cloud (CIAC) are the two platforms that are tested. This chapter 
will dive into both platforms and describe their architecture, components, and 
functionality.
■ Chapter 5, “Cisco Prime Service Catalog”—Prime Service Catalog is a platform that 
provides an easy-to-use portal that enables anyone within an organization to access 
and request applications and services from their cloud environment. This product takes 
standardized application packages and serves them up in a shopping cart–like format 
that automates the delivery of new services and applications to a company’s lines of 
business. What used to take weeks and hundreds of phone calls and emails can now be 
accomplished in minutes!
■ Chapter 6, “Cisco Cloud Infrastructure”—The underlying physical and virtual 
infrastructure is the “pool of resources” controlled by a cloud automation and 
orchestration suite. It is important to understand how these pieces fit together and the 
types of services they can offer. This chapter covers Cisco Virtual Application Cloud 
Segmentation (VACS), Nexus 1000V, Virtual Security Gateway (VSG), Cloud Services 
Router (CSR), and Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI) specifically from a cloud 
management and orchestration perspective.

 How This Book Is Organized  xxvii
■ Chapter 7, “Managing Users and Groups”—Role-based access control is the 
foundation for both security and segmentation of operational responsibilities. This 
chapter covers the aspects of creating multiple user types, privileges, and profiles for 
cloud users and administrators.
■ Chapter 8, “Virtual Machine Management”—The care and feeding of virtual 
machines in a cloud environment is covered in this chapter, with emphasis on the 
most common tasks that a typical cloud administrator needs to know how to perform. 
Editing VM parameters, migrating VMs from host to host, and managing VM snap-
shots are all tasks described in detail in this chapter.
■ Chapter 9, “Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director”—At the founda-
tion of any cloud is a layer of infrastructure that needs to be managed and configured 
through automation. UCS Director provides an infrastructure automation platform for 
rapidly developing policies for deploying storage, network, compute, and virtualization 
resources. 
■ Chapter 10, “Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and 
Prime Service Catalog”—After you provision a service in Prime Service Catalog, you 
must ensure that everything works as expected. This chapter covers how to prepare and 
test a user portal and service catalog in PSC and UCS Director, and how your users will 
place orders, verify that the orders were provisioned successfully, and access the VMs 
and applications provisioned.
■ Chapter 11, “Deploying Virtual Application Containers”—Application containers 
logically separate different tenants from each other and enable each tenant to specify 
their own security and application services (like load balancers and firewalls). This 
chapter covers the deployment of the different virtual container options within UCS 
Director, including the VACS product.
■ Chapter 12: “Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting”—A chargeback system is often 
put in place to “pay for” IT services consumed by the company’s lines of business. 
Implementing a cost structure and chargeback policy is a crucial mechanism to assign a 
value to the utilization of a shared resource. This chapter covers these aspects of cloud 
administration and provides an overview of the reporting system that shows cloud 
utilization and the billing records associated with each tenant.
■ Chapter 13, “Cloud Performance and Capacity Management”—When do I add 
capacity? How healthy is my cloud environment? These are questions that cloud 
administrators better be able to answer! This chapter shows you how to utilize various 
serviceability options to get visibility into the underlying hardware and components 
of the cloud infrastructure. In addition, this chapter demonstrates how to use UCS 
Performance Manager for capacity management and bandwidth monitoring.
■ Chapter 14: “Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud”—Looking at 
the cloud stack as a whole, this chapter shows how to leverage Prime Service Catalog 
and UCS Director to manage the cloud environment from the top down through 
custom monitoring and health dashboards.
■ Chapter 15: “Final Preparation”—This chapter lists a series of tasks that you can use 
for your final preparation before taking the exam.

xxviii  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Certification Exam Topics and This Book
Although this certification guide covers all topics from the CCNA Cloud CLDADM  
210-455 exam, it does not follow the exact order of the exam blueprint published by 
Cisco. Instead, the chapter sequence is purposely designed to enhance your learning 
through a gradual progression of concepts.
Table I-1 lists each exam topic in the blueprint along with a reference to the book chapter 
that covers the topic.
Table I-1 CLDADM Exam 210-455 Topics and Chapter Cross References
CLDADM 210-455 Exam Topic
Chapter(s) in Which 
Topic Is Covered
1.0 Cloud Infrastructure Administration and Reporting 
Chapters 6, 7, 8, 11
1.1 Configure users/groups and role-based access control in the 
portal, including basic troubleshooting 
Chapter 7
1.1.a Describe default roles 
Chapter 7
1.1.b Configure new user with single role 
Chapter 7
1.1.c Describe multirole user profiles 
Chapter 7
1.1.d Configure a user profile 
Chapter 7
1.2 Perform virtual machine operations 
Chapter 8
1.2.a Configure live migrations of VMs from host to host 
Chapter 8
1.2.b Edit VM 
Chapter 8
1.2.c Configure VM snapshots 
Chapter 8
1.2.d Describe reverting a VM to a snapshot 
Chapter 8
1.3 Deploy virtual app containers 
Chapters 6, 11
1.3.a Provide basic support and troubleshoot app container with 
firewall, networking, and load balancer 
Chapters 6, 11
2.0 Chargeback and Billing Reports 
Chapter 12
2.1 Describe the chargeback model 
Chapter 12
2.1.a Describe chargeback features 
Chapter 12
2.1.b Describe budget policy 
Chapter 12
2.1.c Describe cost models 
Chapter 12
2.1.d Describe adding a cost model to a tenant 
Chapter 12
2.2 Generate various reports for virtual and physical accounts 
Chapter 12
2.2.a Execute billing reports 
Chapter 12
2.2.b Execute a system utilization reporting 
Chapter 12
2.2.c Execute a snapshot report 
Chapter 12

Certification Exam Topics and This Book  xxix
CLDADM 210-455 Exam Topic
Chapter(s) in Which 
Topic Is Covered
3.0 Cloud Provisioning 
Chapters 6, 8, 9, 10
3.1 Describe predefined Cisco UCS Director-based services within 
the Cisco Prime Service Catalog 
Chapters 6, 10
3.1.a Describe the configuration of service names and icons 
Chapter 10
3.1.b Describe order permissions 
Chapter 10
3.1.b (i) RBAC 
Chapter 10
3.1.c Describe template formats 
Chapters 6, 10
3.1.c (i) Storage 
Chapter 10
3.1.c (ii) Compute 
Chapter 10
3.1.c (iii) Network 
Chapters 6, 10
3.1.c (iv) Virtualization 
Chapters 6, 10
3.2 Describe provisioning verification 
Chapters 8, 10
3.2.a Describe how to place an order for a service from the Cisco 
Primer Service Catalog as an end-user 
Chapter 10
3.2.b Verify that provisioning is done correctly 
Chapter 10
3.2.c Access VMs and applications that have been provisioned 
Chapters 8, 10
3.3 Deploy preconfigured templates and make minor changes to the 
service catalog offerings that do not affect workflows or services 
Chapters 6, 9
3.3.a Describe the deployment of templates: storage, compute, 
network, and virtualization 
Chapters 6, 9
3.3.b Describe differences between the templates 
Chapter 9
3.3.c Describe the need to convert between templates 
Chapter 9
4.0 Cloud Systems Management and Monitoring 
Chapters 4, 5, 13, 14
4.1 Identify the components of Cisco Prime Service Catalog 
Chapter 5
4.1.a End-user store front 
Chapter 5
4.1.b Stack designer 
Chapter 5
4.1.c Heat orchestration 
Chapter 5
4.2 Describe the components of Cisco UCS Director 
Chapter 4
4.2.a Describe infrastructure management and monitoring 
Chapter 4
4.2.b Describe orchestration 
Chapter 4
4.2.c Describe the portal 
Chapter 4
4.2.d Describe the Bare Metal Agent 
Chapter 4

xxx  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
CLDADM 210-455 Exam Topic
Chapter(s) in Which 
Topic Is Covered
4.3 Describe Cisco UCS Performance Manager 
Chapters 5, 13, 14
4.3.a Describe capacity planning 
Chapters 5, 13, 14
4.3.b Describe bandwidth monitoring 
Chapters 5, 13, 14
4.3.c Describe how host groups facilitate dynamic monitoring 
Chapters 5, 13, 14
4.4 Describe the components of Cisco IAC 
Chapter 4
4.4.a Describe Cisco Process Orchestrator 
Chapter 4
4.4.b Describe Cisco Prime Service Catalog 
Chapter 4
4.4.c Describe Cisco Server Provisioner 
Chapter 4
4.5 Perform cloud monitoring using Cisco Prime Service Catalog, 
Cisco UCS Director, Cisco Prime infrastructure 
Chapters 13, 14
4.5.a Describe fault monitoring 
Chapters 13, 14
4.5.b Describe performance monitoring 
Chapters 13, 14
4.5.c Describe monitoring of provisioning outcomes 
Chapters 13, 14
4.6 Create monitoring dashboards 
Chapters 13, 14
4.6.a Configure custom dashboards 
Chapters 13, 14
4.6.b Configure threshold settings 
Chapter 14
5.0 Cloud Remediation 
Chapters 13, 14
5.1 Configure serviceability options 
Chapter 13
5.1.a Configure syslog 
Chapter 13
5.1.b Configure NTP 
Chapter 13
5.1.c Configure DNS 
Chapter 13
5.1.d Configure DHCP 
Chapter 13
5.1.e Configure SMTP 
Chapter 13
5.2 Interpret Logs for root cause analysis 
Chapters 13, 14
5.2.a Analyze fault logs 
Chapters 13, 14
5.2.b Analyze admin logs 
Chapters 13, 14
5.2.c Analyze application logs 
Chapters 13, 14
5.3 Configure backups 
Chapters 13, 14
5.3.a Configure database backup 
Chapters 13, 14
5.3.b Configure database restore 
Chapters 13, 14

Exam Registration  xxxi
The CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 exam may have topics that emphasize different 
functions or features, and some topics may be rather broad and generalized. The goal 
of this book is to provide the most comprehensive coverage to ensure that you are well 
prepared for the exam. Although some chapters might not address specific exam topics, 
they provide a foundation that is necessary for a clear understanding of important topics. 
Your short-term goal might be to pass this exam, but your long-term goal should be to 
become a qualified cloud professional.
It is also important to understand that this book is a “static” reference, whereas 
the exam topics are dynamic. Cisco can and does change the topics covered on 
certification exams often.
This exam guide should not be your only reference when preparing for the certification 
exam. You can find a wealth of information available at Cisco.com that covers each topic 
in great detail. If you think that you need more detailed information on a specific topic, 
read the Cisco documentation that focuses on that topic.
Taking the CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Exam
As with any Cisco certification exam, you should strive to be thoroughly prepared before 
taking the exam. There is no way to determine exactly what questions are on the exam, 
so the best way to prepare is to have a good working knowledge of all subjects covered 
on the exam. Schedule yourself for the exam and be sure to be rested and ready to focus 
when taking the exam.
The best place to find out about the latest available Cisco training and certifications is 
under the Training & Events section at Cisco.com.
Tracking Your Status
You can track your certification progress by checking http://www.cisco.com/go/
certifications/login. You must create an account the first time you log in to the site.
Cisco Certifications in the Real World
Cisco is one of the most widely recognized names in the IT industry. Cisco Certified 
cloud specialists bring quite a bit of knowledge to the table because of their deep 
understanding of cloud technologies, standards, and designs. This is why the Cisco 
certification carries such high respect in the marketplace. Cisco certifications demonstrate 
to potential employers and contract holders a certain professionalism, expertise, and 
dedication required to complete a difficult goal. If Cisco certifications were easy to 
obtain, everyone would have them.
Exam Registration
The CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 exam is a computer-based exam, with around 55 
to 65 multiple-choice, fill-in-the-blank, list-in-order, and simulation-based questions. 
You can take the exam at any Pearson VUE (http://www.pearsonvue.com) testing center. 
According to Cisco, the exam should last about 90 minutes. Be aware that when you 

xxxii  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
register for the exam, you might be instructed to allocate an amount of time to take the 
exam that is longer than the testing time indicated by the testing software when you 
begin. The additional time is for you to get settled in and to take the tutorial about the 
test engine.
Companion Website
Register this book to get access to the Pearson IT Certification test engine and other study 
materials plus additional bonus content. Check this site regularly for new and updated 
postings written by the authors that provide further insight into the more troublesome 
topics on the exam. Be sure to check the box that you would like to hear from us to 
receive updates and exclusive discounts on future editions of this product or related 
products.
To access this companion website, follow the steps below:
1. Go to http://www.pearsonITcertification.com/register and log in or create a new 
account.
2. Enter the ISBN: 9781587144530.
3. Answer the challenge question as proof of purchase.
4. Click the Access Bonus Content link in the Registered Products section of your 
account page, to be taken to the page where your downloadable content is available.
Please note that many of our companion content files can be very large, especially image 
and video files.
If you are unable to locate the files for this title by following the preceding steps, 
please visit http://www.pearsonITcertification.com/about/contact_us and select the Site 
Problems/Comments option in the Select a Topic drop-down menu. Complete and sub-
mit the form with your issue described in the Comments/Issues/Feedback field and a cus-
tomer service representative will assist you.
Pearson IT Certification Practice Test Engine and 
Questions 
The companion website includes the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test engine—
software that displays and grades a set of exam-realistic multiple-choice questions. Using 
the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test engine, you can either study by going through 
the questions in Study Mode, or take a simulated exam that mimics real exam conditions. 
You can also serve up questions in a Flash Card Mode, which will display just the question 
and no answers, challenging you to state the answer in your own words before checking 
the actual answers to verify your work. 
The installation process requires two major steps: installing the software and then 
activating the exam. The website has a recent copy of the Pearson IT Certification Practice 
Test engine. The practice exam (the database of exam questions) is not on this site.

Pearson IT Certification Practice Test Engine and Questions  xxxiii
Note The cardboard case in the back of this book includes a piece of paper. The paper 
lists the activation code for the practice exam associated with this book. Do not lose 
the activation code. On the opposite side of the paper from the activation code is a 
unique, one-time-use coupon code for the purchase of the Premium Edition eBook and 
Practice Test.
Install the Software 
The Pearson IT Certification Practice Test is a Windows-only desktop application. You 
can run it on a Mac using a Windows virtual machine, but it was built specifically for the 
PC platform. The minimum system requirements are as follows:
■ Windows 10, Windows 8.1, or Windows 7
■ Microsoft .NET Framework 4.0 Client
■ Pentium-class 1-GHz processor (or equivalent)
■ 512 MB RAM
■ 650 MB disk space plus 50 MB for each downloaded practice exam
■ Access to the Internet to register and download exam databases
The software installation process is routine as compared with other software installation 
processes. If you have already installed the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test software 
from another Pearson product, there is no need for you to reinstall the software. Simply 
launch the software on your desktop and proceed to activate the practice exam from this 
book by using the activation code included in the access code card sleeve in the back of 
the book.
The following steps outline the installation process:
1. Download the exam practice test engine from the companion site.
2. Respond to Windows prompts as with any typical software installation process.
The installation process will give you the option to activate your exam with the activation 
code supplied on the paper in the cardboard sleeve. This process requires that you 
establish a Pearson website login. You need this login to activate the exam, so please do 
register when prompted. If you already have a Pearson website login, there is no need to 
register again. Just use your existing login.
Activate and Download the Practice Exam
Once the exam engine is installed, you should then activate the exam associated with this 
book (if you did not do so during the installation process) as follows:
1. Start the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test software from the Windows Start menu 
or from your desktop shortcut icon.
2. To activate and download the exam associated with this book, from the My Products 
or Tools tab, click the Activate Exam button.

xxxiv  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
3. At the next screen, enter the activation key from the paper inside the cardboard sleeve 
in the back of the book. Then, click the Activate button.
4. The activation process will download the practice exam. Click Next, and then click 
Finish.
When the activation process completes, the My Products tab should list your new exam. 
If you do not see the exam, make sure that you have selected the My Products tab on the 
menu. At this point, the software and practice exam are ready to use. Simply select the 
exam and click the Open Exam button.
■ To update a particular exam you have already activated and downloaded, display the 
Tools tab and click the Update Products button. Updating your exams will ensure that 
you have the latest changes and updates to the exam data.
■ If you want to check for updates to the Pearson Cert Practice Test exam engine 
software, display the Tools tab and click the Update Application button. You can  
then ensure that you are running the latest version of the software engine.
Activating Other Exams
The exam software installation process, and the registration process, only has to happen 
once. Then, for each new exam, only a few steps are required. For instance, if you 
buy another Pearson IT Certification Cert Guide, extract the activation code from the 
cardboard sleeve in the back of that book; you do not even need the exam engine at this 
point. From there, all you have to do is start the exam engine (if not still up and running) 
and perform Steps 2 through 4 from the previous list.
Assessing Exam Readiness
Exam candidates never really know whether they are adequately prepared for the exam 
until they have completed about 30 percent of the questions. At that point, if you are 
not prepared, it is too late. The best way to determine your readiness is to work through 
the “Do I Know This Already?” quizzes at the beginning of each chapter and review the 
foundation topics and key topics presented in each chapter. It is best to work your way 
through the entire book unless you can complete each subject without having to do any 
research or look up any answers.
Premium Edition eBook and Practice Tests
This book also includes an exclusive offer for 70 percent off the Premium Edition eBook 
and Practice Tests edition of this title. Please see the coupon code included with the 
cardboard sleeve for information on how to purchase the Premium Edition.

This page intentionally left blank 


CHAPTER 1
An Introduction to Cloud
You have to start somewhere, right? Defining the cloud is not as easy a task as it would 
appear at first glance. Depending on your point of view, that definition can vary widely. 
To many people the cloud is a managed service or application; to others it is a new spin 
on virtualization; and to some it is a brand new operational model for IT. Regardless of 
which camp you are in as it pertains to cloud, it is important to have a common vernacular 
to describe what your business is trying to accomplish with this whole cloud thing. This 
chapter is intended to provide a high-level overview of what a cloud is, the history of cloud, 
types of cloud services, and the role of software-defined networks (SDN) and applications 
as they pertain to a cloud operational model. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly. If you are in doubt about your answers to these questions or 
your own assessment of your knowledge of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 1-1 
lists the major headings in this chapter and their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” 
quiz questions. You can find the answers in Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This 
Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 1-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
What Is Cloud
1
NIST Definition of Cloud
2–4
SDN and Cloud
5, 6
Cloud Applications
7–10
Caution The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chapter. 
If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, you 
should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving yourself 
credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might pro-
vide you with a false sense of security.

4  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. What are two areas in which cloud impacts how a business leverages IT?
a. 
Consumption of IT services
b. Credit card use in purchasing services
c. 
Operation of IT service delivery
d. Outsourcing of IT
2. Launching the public cloud is attributed to which company?
a. 
Cisco
b. SalesForce.com
c. 
Amazon
d. Google
3. What are two attributes of cloud computing?
a. 
Broad network access
b. Free trial periods
c. 
Payment by credit card
d. Measured service
4. What does PaaS stand for?
a. 
Protocol as a Service
b. Pascal as a Service
c. 
Python as a Service
d. Platform as a Service
5. What is the name of the type of cloud that resides on both a private cloud and a pub-
lic cloud provider?
a. 
Hybrid cloud
b. Community cloud
c. 
Intermediate cloud
d. Public cloud
6. SDN was developed to address which of the following? (Choose two.)
a. 
Control and data plane separation
b. Box-by-box configuration
c. 
Hardware cost reduction
d. Operational complexity
7. Name three ways in which Cisco offers SDN. (Choose three.)
a. 
Overlays
b. Agents and APIs
c. 
Yang 
d. ACI

1
Chapter 1: An Introduction to Cloud  5
8. Which two of the following best describe a traditional application? (Choose two.)
a. 
Monolithic application architecture
b. Microservice-based architecture
c. 
Client/server access model
d. Cloud scale access model
9. What is the primary purpose of server virtualization?
a. 
Increase power consumption on a single server
b. None, because virtualization has nothing to do with servers
c. 
Sharing compute resources among multiple workloads
d. Simplifies server administration
10. Which best describes a cloud-native application?
a. 
A distributed application that is built in a modular fashion such that individual 
components can be added or subtracted based on application load
b. Any workload in the cloud
c. 
A monolithic application that is built in a modular fashion such that individual 
components can be added or subtracted based on application load
d. A myth used to sell consulting services

6  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
What Is Cloud?
The cloud has permeated almost every facet of life. It has become central to how we inter-
act with our friends, buy things, watch TV and movies, and even run our businesses. So what 
is it really? Well, that is a very subjective question that has to take into account your own 
personal perspective. If you were to ask five people what the term “cloud” means in the 
context of IT, you would probably get eight different answers. Nearly half of all business 
meetings about cloud, when it was in its infancy, were spent determining what it is. Is it a 
service? Is it a product? Is it something magical that will solve all of our business problems? 
The biggest problem with this line of thinking is in trying to call cloud a “thing” in the first 
place. Cloud really gives us a new way of operating IT, allowing it to be fast, agile, and able 
to align better to the goals of the business. From this perspective, cloud can help transform 
manual and inefficient processes into something that the business can leverage as a competi-
tive advantage and a way to better serve its customers. 
To gain a bit of perspective, it often helps to look at history to see how we got to where we 
are today. 
History of Cloud
While the term “cloud” is relatively new to the IT world, the underlying concepts that 
make cloud computing possible are not. The reality is, the core tenants and concepts that 
support a cloud environment have been around for many years; it just took time for tech-
nology, software, and ubiquitous network access to evolve to a point where organizations 
could share resources, provide rapid scalability, and automate service delivery regardless 
of physical location. This evolution didn’t happen overnight, and much of what we see 
today in a modern cloud architecture has its roots in technologies all the way back to the 
1950s. With that in mind, let’s take a quick trip down memory lane to when this whole 
cloud concept started.
Mainframe Computing
In the 1950s, mainframe computing was all the rage. Large businesses were investing in these 
warehouse-sized monsters in a big way. There was a business need to provide access to com-
puting resources to more people within the company. These computers cost a fortune, and 
it was not practical or even physically possible for companies to buy a mainframe for each 
team. The solution to this resource dilemma was to share access to the computer through 
much lower cost “dumb” terminals that were “slaved” to the mainframe computer. This 
concept of shared access was very effective and responsible for supporting everything from 
manufacturing and distribution to missions to the moon.
Unfortunately, many of these mainframes were like islands onto themselves, with only the 
largest institutions having them linked through expensive private line connections. In the 
early 1960s, J.C.R. Licklider, the first director of the Information Processing Techniques 

1
Chapter 1: An Introduction to Cloud  7
Office at the Pentagon Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), imagined a day when 
computers would be networked together to create an “electronic commons open to all, and 
the main and essential medium of information interaction for governments, institutions, 
corporations, and individuals.” Being an early SciFi nerd, Licklider called it the Intergalactic 
Computer Network. His role and vision at ARPA led to the development of the ARPANET, 
which was the precursor to our modern Internet.
John McCarthy is attributed as making one of the earliest references to the concept of 
computing as a utility and consumed through a “pay and use” model. In a speech delivered 
at MIT in 1961, he said, “If computers of the kind I have advocated become the computers 
of the future, then computing may someday be organized as a public utility just as the tele-
phone system is a public utility... The computer utility could become the basis of a new and 
important industry.” This concept of a utility model of cloud computing is the core premise 
of many of the cloud services we know today. 
The Rise of the Virtual Machine
It should be pretty apparent that the 1950s and 1960s were important from a comput-
ing standpoint. The advent and adoption of the mainframe also led to some other notable 
advances that have driven cloud. In 1959, Christopher Strachey published a paper titled 
“Time Sharing in Large Fast Computers” that got people thinking about how better to use 
these massively expensive mainframes that businesses had invested in. The idea of the vir-
tual machine grew out of this “time sharing” concept, leading to technological advances 
that enabled multiple users to use the same computer concurrently. To the application that 
the user was running, it appeared that it had full access to the computer’s resources, but in 
reality the computer was switching between multiple applications in time slices. During the 
time in which the application was active, it got to use the resources it needed. When the 
application was idle between processes, the application was suspended in memory and a dif-
ferent application was executed. To manage this application juggling act, the management 
and allocation of time slices was conducted by a controller that operated independently of 
the applications the user ran. This controller abstracted the underlying hardware from the 
application, which is the basis for full hardware virtualization we see today in the modern 
virtual machine.
The virtual machine first appeared in the IBM mainframe in 1972 and was extremely popu-
lar. In the 1980s, general-purpose desktop PCs hit the scene and became the platform of 
choice. There were lots of early software emulators that ran on top of existing operating 
systems, but they were often horribly slow. Virtualization on the desktop didn’t really start 
to become feasible until the late 1990s when Intel began offering more powerful proces-
sors. In 1997 the Disco project at Stanford published a paper detailing the creation of a 
virtual machine monitor for the Iris operating system on an x86 processor. Why did the 
researchers name their project Disco? Because they were trying to bring back the virtual 
machine monitor introduced in the ’70s, which also happened to be the height of the disco 
dance craze. So, in effect, they were bringing back disco. (Who said computer geeks don’t 
have a sense of humor?)

8  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Three of the four researchers behind Disco boogied their way to forming a company called 
VMware, and in 1999 they released the 1.0 version of VMware Workstation. This gave end 
users the ability to run other operations systems on top of their native operating system 
with usable performance. While Workstation had its uses, the team had set its sights on 
building a server-based virtualization platform, and in 2001 VMware ESX and GSX servers 
were released. GSX allowed users to run virtual machines on top of an existing operating 
system (like Microsoft Windows or Linux), also known as a type-2 hypervisor. ESX, on the 
other hand, was a type-1 hypervisor that did not require a host operating system and had its 
own kernel (vmkernel) and file system (VMFS). The release of ESX enabled huge improve-
ments in performance and portability and mainstreamed the use of virtual machines in the 
modern data center. 
Virtual Private Network
In the late 1990s, virtual private networks (VPN) began to be offered by network service 
providers as a reduced-cost alternative to expensive dedicated connections. A company 
could get the same level of service for a fraction of the cost, because the service provider 
would be able to share network resources among multiple customers instead of having to 
build out massive amounts of infrastructure. From a customer’s perspective, they could use 
a single physical connection to the service provider and logically segment it just as if they 
had a dedicated circuit. The use of the Internet as a connectivity mechanism to remote 
branch offices and other data centers became a reality. The VPN in effect provides a way 
to connect any service regardless of location and is often used today to connect to public 
cloud services so that applications can communicate directly and securely.
Application Service Providers
Application service providers first emerged in the late 1990s, riding on this new wave 
of network access. Instead of buying software, installing it, patching it, securing it, 
and maintaining it, a company could contract with an ASP, letting the ASP handle the 
operational burden, and simply pay the ASP for the use of the software. This became 
a very attractive model for businesses that didn’t have the staff or desire to own the 
software, but still wanted to use its benefit. The term ASP has since evolved to Software 
as a Service (SaaS), but for practical purposes the terms mean the same thing. Salesforce.
com was founded in 1999 and took this software model to the next level by building its 
application in a multitenant model that could scale to massive numbers of customers. 
Salesforce’s CRM application is an example of one of the first SaaS offerings and has 
had a meteoric rise in popularity. Salesforce has since branched off into multiple product 
software offerings outside of CRM and is the largest SaaS provider in the world.
Amazon Web Services
Imagine you work for a retail business, and every year you go through four months of 
craziness during the holiday season. How do you keep your applications from being over-
whelmed from the spike in business? You could overbuild your infrastructure to address 

1
Chapter 1: An Introduction to Cloud  9
those busy months, but you would end up using just a portion of that capacity the rest of 
the year. Hardly an efficient model. This problem was not a trivial one for Amazon back in 
2000 as it had experienced explosive growth in its online retail business and had built up 
some significant infrastructure, 90 percent of which was sitting idle during nonpeak time. 
What did Amazon do? Chris Pinkham, an engineer in charge of global infrastructure in the 
early 2000s, had an idea to decentralize the infrastructure in such a way as to allow for bet-
ter services for development teams. Partnering with another engineer named Benjamin Black, 
they authored a paper for Amazon’s CEO outlining the plan to offer an “infrastructure for 
the world.” Clearly, it was well received. In 2002 Amazon launched Amazon Web Services 
(AWS), which provides virtualized computing resources over the Internet, and quickly saw 
that there was an appetite in the market for just such a service. In 2006 Amazon launched 
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2). This platform was wildly successful, and by 2008 
more than 330,000 customers had signed up. Since then, AWS has continued to grow and 
evolve into multiple offerings used by the likes of Netflix, Adobe Systems, and Pinterest. 
Cloud Computing Today
Today Amazon, Google, Microsoft, Cisco, and others all offer cloud services. Many start-
ups are building their applications and services completely in the cloud. Why would start-
ups choose to do this? Because cloud computing offers lower initial startup costs, faster 
time to market, vast scalability, and a global presence. You can also try out a new business 
idea without being stuck with huge amounts of infrastructure if the idea doesn’t pan out. 
Uber, for example, has completely transformed the transportation service industry through 
a cloud-based application that allows anyone to easily find an Uber-approved driver willing 
to pick them up and take them were they want to go. Square has transformed credit card 
processing by allowing anyone with a smartphone and an inexpensive hardware add-on to 
swipe a credit card as payment. The growth of cloud services like these will continue at a 
steady pace, forcing businesses to rethink how they engage with their customers and oper-
ate business-critical services. 
NIST Definition
To define cloud, we need a common taxonomy, and for that (and the purposes of the 
CLDADM exam) we will turn to the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), which is a US government agency responsible for standardizing weights, measure-
ments, and technology standards and practices. NIST Special Publication 800-145, “The 
NIST Definition of Cloud Computing,” was written to solve the “what is cloud” dilemma. 
NIST defines cloud computing as such: “Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiqui-
tous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing 
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly 
provisioned and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.” 
While 800-145 is a rather short document, it hits on all the major aspects of cloud and is 
testable material on the CLDADM exam. Figure 1-1 shows the NIST map that defines the 
core elements of a cloud. 

10  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Broad
Network Access
Software as a 
Service (SaaS)
Infrastructure as a
Service (IaaS)
Platform as a
Service (PaaS)
Rapid
Elasticity
Measured
Service
On-Demand
Self-Service
Resource Pooling
Public
Private
Hybrid
Community
Essential
Characteristics
Service
Models
Deployment
Models
Figure 1-1 NIST Cloud Definition
NIST defines cloud through the following categories:
■ Essential characteristics
■ Service models
■ Deployment models
These three categories are detailed further in the following sections.
Essential Characteristics
The essential characteristics describe the core requirements of any cloud:
■ Broad network access: Services are available over the network and accessed via standard 
protocols and communications technologies on any type of client device (mobile phone, 
tablet, desktop, etc.).
■ Rapid elasticity: Capacity can be automatically provisioned and decommissioned to 
scale the service to demand. 
■ Measured service: Cloud systems measure resource utilization (compute, storage, 
network) and charge for those services accordingly. Utilization can be monitored, con-
trolled, and reported on, allowing transparency for the service provider and customer. 
■ On-demand self-service: The cloud consumer can provision compute, storage, and 
network services as needed, without human interaction, through automation or self-
service portals.
■ Resource pooling: A provider’s infrastructure is a common pool of resources that can 
serve multiple customers at the same time. Customers do not interact with the underlying 
hardware, and their workloads can be moved within the cloud provider’s environment 
based on demand without their knowledge or involvement.

1
Chapter 1: An Introduction to Cloud  11
Service Models
The three cloud computing service models presented in NIST SP 800-145 and listed next are 
examples of the most common cloud offerings today, with the biggest difference between 
each being how much control over resources the cloud customer has and how much admin-
istration the cloud customer needs to perform. Unlike the traditional IT service model (still 
one of the most common operating models IT departments use today), in which you are 
responsible for all aspects of installing, deploying, managing, and maintaining your applica-
tion, the cloud service models unburden you of some or all of those responsibilities depend-
ing on which service model you choose. Figure 1-2 shows this comparison in more detail.
Traditional IT
You Manage
Applications
Data
Runtime
Middleware
Operating System
Virtualization
Servers
Storage
Networking
Infrastructure
(as a Service)
You Manage
Applications
Data
Runtime
Middleware
Operating System
Virtualization
Servers
Storage
Networking
Platform
(as a service)
You Manage
Delivered as a Service
Delivered as a Service
Delivered as a Service
Applications
Data
Runtime
Middleware
Operating System
Virtualization
Servers
Storage
Networking
Software
(as a Service)
Applications
Data
Runtime
Middleware
Operating System
Virtualization
Servers
Storage
Networking
Figure 1-2 Comparison of NIST Cloud Computing Service Models and Traditional IT Model
■ Software as a Service (SaaS): The service provider hosts, manages, and controls an appli-
cation and offers it to the customer to use. The customer does not interact at all with the 
underlying infrastructure, operating systems, storage, or network. There may be some cus-
tomization capabilities, but they are usually limited to application-specific configuration. 
■ Platform as a Service (PaaS): The provider supplies a software platform composed of a 
predefined set of application programming interfaces (API), libraries, software development 
kits (SDK), and/or other tools and services, that the customer can integrate with their own 
applications. The customer can program their application in any way they choose and cus-
tomize it directly to their own workflow as long as they work within the parameters of the 
service provider’s offering. The customer will not have any management responsibilities for 
the underling infrastructure. 
■ Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS): The provider offers the ability for the customer to provi-
sion compute, storage, and networking to run any combination of software and operating 
systems. The customer has no control over the underlying cloud platform, but they have 
full control over what software and services they deploy within the cloud. The customer 
is also responsible for the maintenance of the software they deploy and also patching and 
upgrading.  

12  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Deployment Models
Cloud can be deployed in a number of ways. The choice of deployment models really 
comes down to whether you want to own the cloud, rent the cloud, or a mixture of both. 
That choice is guided by a multitude of factors, such as concerns about protecting sensi-
tive data, economics, availability, and speed, all of which need to be weighed in making the 
choice between deployment models. 
■ Private cloud: A private cloud is provisioned for a single organization, which may have 
multiple service consumers within its business units or groups. The organization may own 
the private cloud or lease it from another entity. The cloud infrastructure does not have 
to reside on the organization’s premises and may be in another facility owned and oper-
ated by a third party. The following are the key characteristics of a private cloud: 
■ Dedicated resources for a single organization
■ Connectivity through the Internet, ﬁber, or a private network
■ May be on premises or off premises
■ Public cloud: A public cloud is provisioned for open utilization by the public at 
large. Anyone with a credit card can gain access to a public cloud offering. A public 
cloud exists solely on the premises of the cloud provider. The following are the key 
characteristics of a public cloud:
■ Publicly shared resources
■ Supports multiple customers
■ Connectivity over the Internet
■ Billed by usage
■ Hybrid cloud: A hybrid cloud is composed of one or more cloud deployment models 
(private and public, for example) and is used to extend capabilities or augment capac-
ity during peak demand periods (called cloud bursting), as shown in Figure 1-3. The key 
characteristics of a hybrid cloud are 
■ The combination of public and private cloud
■ On-premises and off-premises resources
■ Orchestration between the two clouds
Private
Cloud
Public
Cloud
Cloud Bursting
Secure Connection
Figure 1-3 Hybrid Cloud
■ Community cloud: A community cloud is unique in that it is provisioned for the 
sole utilization of a specific community of customers. This could be a school district, 
for example, or multiple government agencies. Basically, any group of entities with 
a common interest in policy, security, compliance, or mission can join together and 
implement a community cloud. The following are key characteristics:

1
Chapter 1: An Introduction to Cloud  13
■ Collaborative cloud effort that shares infrastructure between several similar organiza-
tions with common needs
■ Can be owned, managed, and operated by one or more members of the community or 
a third party
■ May reside on or off premises
SDN and Cloud
Software-defined networking (SDN) and cloud aren’t the same thing, but they definitely 
share a lot of the same goals: to streamline and speed up the deployment of new applica-
tions and to reduce the cost of operations. There is often confusion about what SDN is 
and how it applies to a cloud environment. Some IT organizations look at SDN as simply 
another name for network management, while others think it is all about technologies like 
OpenFlow or Virtual Extensible LAN (VXLAN). Still others buy in to the SDN hype and 
think it is going to solve all of the world’s problems with the touch of a button, like some 
kind of magical spell. The truth is, SDN is simply another way to control and provision the 
network in an automated fashion.
An SDN Definition
A widely accepted definition of SDN, much like that of cloud, is a challenge to pinpoint. 
Part of the reason for this is that IT vendors have liberally sprinkled the term SDN into 
many of their product names. For example, what used to be a management application for 
the network is now an “SDN controller.” Marketing has had a field day plastering everything 
with the SDN moniker. How do you discern marketing fluff from something real that your 
business can benefit from? It comes down to SDN’s value and utility in your environment.
SDN is a software-centric approach to networking that reduces capital and operational 
expense of network infrastructure, by abstracting the complexity of building the network in 
favor of simplifying the utilization of the network. In other words, the business benefit of 
SDN truly revolves around reducing the many manual inefficiencies in delivering new ser- 
vices to the business. It’s about being faster, more flexible, and better able to react to 
changing requirements. By software enabling the control and provisioning of network 
elements, you can move from slowly rolling out new services over months to being able to 
do it in minutes at a scale you simply could not accomplish with manual provisioning. SDN 
capabilities can be automated and scripted, which can greatly reduce how long it takes to 
deploy network services.
The Challenges SDN Solves
SDN can be used to solve three primary problems facing network administrators:
■ Box-by-box configuration: Traditional network devices need to be configured and 
deployed individually. That means if you have 100 switches, you need to configure 
each one before it can be added into production. If you need to upgrade software on 
the device and it takes you 20 minutes per device, you can quickly see how much of an 
operational bottleneck this can be. By leveraging SDN, you turn on the device and it is 
then added to the pool of resources and gets its configuration from the network itself 
automatically.  

14  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ Applications and services tied to network elements: For the most part, network devices 
in a traditional networking model are inexplicably intertwined with the services they 
offer. If you need to provide quality of service (QoS), for example, that capability is 
dependent on the hardware and software available to your device. This makes it difficult 
to make changes to network topology without a major undertaking. In an SDN environ-
ment the underlying networking hardware is treated as a common pool of resources, and 
the configuration and features are logically separated through the use of a controller. 
The SDN controller is the brain, and the hardware acts like a muscle giving you the abil-
ity to deploy network capabilities (intelligence) anywhere without being tied to a specific 
router or switch in your network. 
■ Operational complexity: Let’s face it, networks are complex. There are hundreds of 
protocols running between devices and through devices every second. All of this activity 
adds to operational complexity and difficulty in troubleshooting problems when they 
arise. SDN can help to solve this by simplifying the network topology and treating the 
network as a system instead of individual components. Need to make a configuration 
change to many devices at the same time in your network? That could be a multiweek 
project depending on how many devices you have. With SDN you can do it with the 
click of a button, which saves time, and a significant amount of headache. 
SDN Is a Cloud Enabler
Why all of this talk about SDN in a Cloud CCNA exam book? Recall from the NIST defini-
tion of a cloud that rapid elasticity and resource pooling are requirements. Compute and 
storage are fairly easy to automate through virtualization, but without SDN the physical net-
work provisioning and configuration management become a stumbling block to speed and 
agility. Virtual networking is great for providing connectivity within a hypervisor, but ulti-
mately the network traffic will need to exit the server and cross a physical switch. Although 
SDN is not a hard and fast requirement for cloud, the ability SDN provides for automating 
physical network provisioning is essential in delivering a modern cloud environment. 
Cisco offers numerous ways to deliver SDN; many of the technologies are described in this 
book and in the CCNA Cloud CLDFND 210-451 Official Cert Guide. Cisco offers the 
following SDN technologies that you need to be aware of:
■ APIs: Cisco has enabled application programming interfaces across the vast majority of 
the product line. These APIs can be used to customize the operation of network ele-
ments and to provide a control point for other software (such as cloud orchestration 
software). An API is simply a standard and documented way to programmatically con-
trol a piece of hardware or software. For example, you can write a script/application in 
Python, Java, Ruby, or any other programming language that supports REST APIs and 
parse JSON or XML output to make changes to these devices quickly. APIs are a crucial 
integration point and should be a requirement for any device you place in the network to 
support a cloud environment. 
■ Plug-ins: Plug-ins are pieces of software that allow for integration into other systems. 
For example, Cisco has an OpenStack plug-in for the Nexus switch line that enables 
OpenStack to directly control the configuration and provisioning of these switches from 
within the cloud platform. 

1
Chapter 1: An Introduction to Cloud  15
■ Agents: An agent is a piece of software that resides on a networking device and enables 
integration with other technology platforms like OpenFlow, Puppet, and Chef. Agents 
can be used to automate network configuration and create templates you can use to stan-
dardize deployments.
■ Cisco Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI): ACI is the most complete SDN plat-
form in the market today. It provides a turnkey solution that delivers all of the value 
promised by SDN for both the physical environment and virtual environment. ACI 
integrates with all major hypervisor vendors and provides a common policy domain that 
allows them to work together seamlessly.
■ Network virtual appliance: A network virtual appliance is a software variation of a 
hardware-based network element. These appliances run as virtual machines and can be 
firewalls, load balancers, switches, routers, and any other network function you want to 
add to support your applications. Cisco has a full suite of these products as well as a rich 
ecosystem of partners that ensure tight integration.
Ultimately, SDN concepts are becoming intertwined with cloud and represent a fairly sig-
nificant component of maximizing operational efficiency. After all, isn’t that what cloud is 
all about?
Applications and Cloud
What is IT’s value to the business if you boil it down to the simplest aspect? IT is charged 
with supporting and maintaining applications that the business relies upon. No one builds a 
network first and then looks for applications to stick on it. Instead, the network is built to 
connect the applications to employees and customers. The application has become an essen-
tial way in which customers are acquired, retained, and engaged. The value of the applica-
tion to the business and the competitive pressure for rapid development and continual 
enhancement have made flexibility and speed afforded by a cloud environment even more 
important. Unfortunately, not all applications fit easily into the cloud based on application 
architecture and/or backend service requirements. Understanding some of the different 
ways in which applications are deployed will arm you with knowledge you can use to iden-
tify which applications in your environment are good candidates for migrating to the cloud. 
Traditional Applications
The traditional application stack is fairly well known. It’s how the vast majority of 
applications have been deployed over the past 30 years. As Figure 1-4 shows, traditionally, 
one server is devoted to the task of running a single application. This one-to-one 
relationship gives the application dedicated access to all of the resources of the server 
it is running on. If you need more memory or processing capability, however, you must 
physically add new memory or a CPU, or transfer the application to a whole new server. 

16  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Server
Single Server
Single Application
App
Figure 1-4 Traditional Application Stack
Although the traditional application stack is an effective way to isolate applications and get 
consistent performance characteristics, it’s very inefficient. In fact, many of these traditional 
server deployment models result in enormous amounts of waste in regard to power and 
cooling of servers when they are not under load. It is not uncommon to find a server during 
nonpeak hours using less than 10 percent of its capacity. Not very cost effective.
Some applications work best on a dedicated server where they can utilize all of the 
resources available. An application that is memory, CPU, or I/O intensive or that depends 
on custom hardware often will not perform as well in a shared environment as it does in a 
dedicated server. These workloads can consume 100 percent of the resources of the server, 
making them poor candidates for virtualization.
Virtualized Applications
Virtualization was developed to address the problems of traditional one-to-one server 
deployments where the server capacity was poorly utilized. The objective of virtualization is 
to build one large server and then run more than one application on it. Sounds simple, right? 
As discussed earlier, many of the techniques from the days of the mainframe were lever-
aged to create an environment where the underlying server hardware could be virtualized. 
The hypervisor was created to handle all of the time slicing and hardware virtualization. This 
made it possible to run various applications and operating systems at the same time and reap 
the benefit of better utilization of resources. Figure 1-5 shows this concept. 

1
Chapter 1: An Introduction to Cloud  17
Server
Single Server
Many Applications
App
App
App
App
App
App
App
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
Hypervisor
Figure 1-5 Virtualized Application Stack
Virtualizing hardware has other benefits too. The ability to make applications portable 
and not tied to a single server allows for mobility in the data center. If a server needs to be 
worked on, you simply move the running virtual machine to another server and never need 
to take the application down. You also can create common deployment packages for new 
virtual machines and applications, which gives administrators the ability to quickly provision 
a new server in a consistent and secure manner.
The virtualized application is a key aspect of cloud, but they are not synonymous. 
Configuring a cloud environment to automate the deployment of a physical server could 
be accomplished just as easily as configuring it to automate the deployment of a virtual 
machine. Conversely, just because you have a virtualized infrastructure doesn’t mean you 
have a cloud, either. 
Cloud-Native Applications
Cloud-native applications are the further intersection and evolution of virtualization and a 
cloud environment. As virtualization became more popular, application developers started 
to ask themselves why they needed a full operating system to run their applications on top 
of. All of the patching, driver, and configuration requirements don’t go away just because 
you load a virtual machine. These requirements still need to be attended to. What if applica-
tions could be written as simpler packages that do not need a hypervisor or full-blown oper-
ating system to function? That’s exactly what happened. Developers created microservices, 
which are small, stateless applications that can run on any server in the data center. These 
applications are lightweight and independent of each other, allowing for massive scalability 
and built-in resiliency. As Figure 1-6 shows, cloud-native applications run on multiple serv-
ers in parallel with each other. 

18  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Many Servers
App
Single Application
Figure 1-6 Cloud-Native Applications
If a server goes bad in a cloud-native application environment, no one worries, because the 
application is distributed across many servers in the data center. If you need more capac-
ity, just add a new server and it is added to the server pool automatically. The application 
orchestration function within the cloud will deploy the application onto the new server, 
instantly increasing capacity. If load decreases, the cloud orchestration can shut down 
unused nodes automatically to save money. Large-scale cloud applications such as Facebook 
and Twitter all operate in this fashion, which is why they appear to have infinite capacity 
from the user’s perspective.

This page intentionally left blank 


CHAPTER 2
Cloud: A New Operations Model 
for IT
Thanks to a lot of new and exciting technology, a cloud operational model is possible 
within businesses of all sizes. While virtualization, automation, and software-defined net-
working are components that can be used in building a cloud, the most valuable aspect is 
not the technology itself, but how the technology can be used to streamline and accelerate 
the delivery of applications and services that the business can leverage to meet its goals and 
objectives. The point of this chapter is to discuss the operational benefits and capabilities 
that cloud offers and to give the context needed to better understand the types of ques-
tions you may see on the CCNA Cloud Administration exam. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly. If you are in doubt about your answers to these questions or 
your own assessment of your knowledge of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 2-1 
lists the major headings in this chapter and their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” 
quiz questions. You can find the answers in Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This 
Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 2-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
IT Operations Past, Present, and Future
1, 2
The Rise of DevOps
3–5
Service Catalog
6–8
Self-Service Portal
9, 10
Caution The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chapter. 
If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, you 
should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving yourself 
credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might pro-
vide you with a false sense of security.

22  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. What challenges does a waterfall development approach have? 
a. 
Problems roll down hill.
b. It is a sequential development model that doesn’t handle change well.
c. 
It is a parallel development model that doesn’t handle change well.
d. It has no challenges.
2. What is Agile based on?
a. 
Toyota Production System
b. ITIL
c. 
SCRUM
d. Lean manufacturing
3. What is IT’s role in cloud evolving into?
a. 
Irrelevance, because all workloads will move to the public cloud
b. Broker of services
c. 
Service provider
d. Advisor to the business
4. Which of the following best describes DevOps?
a. 
Development and operations working together
b. A culture of sharing
c. 
Automation and measurement
d. All of the above
5. What is continuous integration? 
a. 
Software package delivery mechanism for releasing code to staging for review 
and inspection
b. Relies on CI and CD to automatically release code into production 
c. 
Merging development code into a software versioning system for automated test-
ing and build
d. All of the above
6. Which of the following are principles used in developing a service catalog?
a. 
Repeatability
b. Standardization
c. 
Self-service
d. Static environment

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  23
2
7. Which Cisco products provide a service catalog?
a. 
Prime Service Catalog
b. Prime Infrastructure
c. 
UCS Director
d. UCS Manager
8. Which of the following items are included as part of defining a service catalog?
a. 
Service description
b. Service cost
c. 
Service decommissioning
d. BYOD
9. What is a self-service portal?
a. 
Web-based central repository for ordering IT service offerings
b. REST-based interface for interacting with a cloud platform
c. 
IT ticketing system replacement
d. Internal IT-facing view of the service catalog
10. Which of the following is a benefit of the self-service portal?
a. 
Lower-cost switches
b. Higher operational cost
c. 
Loads VM faster
d. Better operational efficiency

24  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
IT Operations, Past, Present, and Future
The pace of change in IT has always been something of a roller coaster ride. The twists, 
turns, and speed are part of why many people choose technology as a career field. It simply 
doesn’t get boring. While change has been a constant factor, the volume of change seen in 
the last ten years has been incredible. If anything, it’s just gaining momentum. Cloud has 
become one of the most influential shifts and is touching every part of business operations. 
No longer are you stuck with a single model of buy and build to add new IT resources and 
services. As a technologist, you now have a very wide range of consumption models that 
you can choose from to deliver to your end users. It’s almost like being a stock broker, 
where you can pick the best choice based on the needs and requirements of your customer, 
lines of business, or business function. 
The challenge for the IT admin is to manage their technology offerings in such a way that they 
can be efficiently consumed following the cloud principles. In-house managed IT services are 
no longer the only game in town, and as such they must compete with public cloud, SaaS, and 
other types of technology services. Your users now demand upfront guidance on the cost, 
capabilities, and delivery of IT services. If in-house managed offerings cannot meet those 
demands, customers will seek alternatives. 
Choice and flexibility are great, but the burden now rests on the shoulders of the IT pro-
fessional to help the end user navigate the various cloud options to deliver a solid solution 
that minimizes risk and maximizes return. An IT professional requires a wide view of the 
various ways in which you can solve business requirements with cloud solutions. To do that 
successfully, you need to understand the evolution of IT operations. The following sections 
describe that evolution.
Waterfall
Back in the 1950s, when large companies started to purchase large mainframe computers 
to crunch numbers, there was no existing model for how to run an IT organization. It really 
wasn’t anything that had been done before, and for the most part computers were really 
understood only by an elite group of scientists. Programming the mainframe needed struc-
ture and a process. This caused a problem for businesses looking to tap into the capabilities 
of these new systems because there wasn’t a well-known method to create business applica-
tions. So what did they do? They looked around at other industries for guidance.
The construction industry was booming in the 1950s, and early software engineers recog-
nized that the complexity of designing and constructing a building was similar to that of 
creating software applications. The construction industry followed a rigid process where 
every step along the way was dependent on the completion of the previous step in the pro-
cess. If you expect your building to not tumble over or look like an M.C. Escher drawing, 
you can’t start construction until you have a plan and analyze the requirements of the new 
tenants. This thought process mapped nicely to software development. The waterfall model 
became one of the more popular software development lifecycle (SDLC) approaches. Figure 
2-1 shows a graphical representation of waterfall development.

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  25
2
Requirements/Analysis
Design
Coding
Testing
Maintenance
Figure 2-1 Waterfall Approach
Waterfall is a serial approach to software development. Each part of the process is divided 
into these phases:
■ Requirements/analysis: Software features and functionality needs are cataloged and 
assessed to determine what the necessary capabilities of the software are. 
■ Design: The software architecture is defined and documented.
■ Coding: Software coding begins based on the previously determined design. 
■ Testing: Completed code is tested for quality and customer acceptance.
■ Maintenance: Bug fixes and patches are applied.
Although this approach has worked successfully over the years, it has a number of short-
comings that have proven to be weaknesses in many scenarios. First, the serial nature of the 
waterfall approach, while easy to understand, means that the scope of a software project 
is fixed at the design phase. Just like in construction, making changes to the first floor of 
a building after you have begun on the fifth floor is extremely difficult, if not impossible, 
to accomplish without basically knocking the building over and starting from scratch. In 
essence, the waterfall approach does not handle change well at all. For example, if you 
finally get to the coding phase of the application development process and you learn that 
the feature you are building isn’t needed anymore or a new way of accomplishing a design 
goal has been discovered, you are limited in deviating from the predetermined architecture 
without redoing the analysis and design. This is like being halfway finished with building a 
bridge over a river that becomes unnecessary and no one needs anymore. Do you just stop 
and tear down the bridge or keep going? Unfortunately, it is often more painful and waste-
ful to start over than to keep building. 
The second shortcoming of the waterfall approach is apparent when you factor in time to 
value. Why do we write software? To automate some business function or capability. Value 
is realized only when the software is in production and producing results. With the waterfall 
approach, value is not achieved until the end of the whole process. Although you may be 50 
percent finished with the project, you have 0 percent usable code or value back to the busi-
ness. Figure 2-2 shows this concept.

26  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Before Agile Methodologies
Time
Analysis
Design
Code
Halfway finished?
50% Complete
100% Unusable Code
Compressed
Due to Time
Test
Figure 2-2 Non-Agile Development Methods
The third shortcoming of the waterfall approach is that quality may be compromised. 
As previously mentioned, time is the enemy when it comes to delivering value. If we had 
unlimited time, we could create perfect software every time, but we simply don’t live in that 
world. When software developers run out of time, testing often suffers or is sacrificed in 
the name of getting the project out the door. 
The preceding shortcomings of the waterfall approach led to demands for a new approach 
to creating software that would be faster, better, and more adaptive to a rapidly changing 
environment.
Lean
After World War II, Japan was in desperate need of rebuilding. Most of Japan’s produc-
tion capabilities had been destroyed, one of which was the auto industry. The necessity to 
rebuild the auto industry not only prompted new architectural designs for the buildings 
and infrastructure but also provided a spark to approach production differently. Out of this 
effort, the Toyota Production System (TPS) was born. Created by Taiichi Ohno, Sakichi 
Toyoda, Kiichiro Toyoda, and Eiji Toyoda (founders of Toyota), this management and 
manufacturing process has a focus on the following:
■ Elimination of waste: If something doesn’t add value to the final product, get rid of it. 
It’s wasted work.
■ Just in time: Don’t build something until the customer is ready to buy it. Excess inven-
tory wastes resources.
■ Continuous improvement: Always improve your processes with lessons learned and 
communication.
While these approaches seem glaringly obvious, and practical, TPS was the first imple-
mentation of these principles as a management philosophy. TPS was the start of the more 
generalized lean manufacturing approach that was introduced to the Western world in 
1991 through a book written by Womack, Jones, and Roos: The Machine That Changed 
the World. This book was based on the results of a five-year study conducted by MIT on 
the Toyota Production System and has been attributed to the development of lean concepts 
and processes beyond the auto industry. 

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  27
2
You may be asking yourself, “Why spend this time talking about moldy old management 
books?” Because lean was the impetus for Agile software development, which has served as 
an instigator of change for IT operations. 
Agile
Agile is an implementation of lean principles as it pertains to software development. Many 
of the lessons learned optimizing the manufacturing process could be directly applied 
to the discipline of creating software. In 2001, 17 software developers converged on the 
Snowbird resort in Utah to discuss new lightweight development methods. Tired of missing 
deadlines, endless documentation, and the inflexibility of existing software development 
practices, these Agile pioneers (self-named The Agile Alliance) created the Manifesto for 
Agile Software Development (aka “Agile Manifesto”), an attempt to codify the guiding 
principles for Agile development practices. The following 12 principles are the core of the 
Agile Manifesto:
■ Prioritize customer satisfaction through early and continuous delivery of valuable soft-
ware.
■ Embrace changing requirements to help the customer achieve a competitive advantage, 
even late in the development cycle.
■ Deliver working software frequently in as short a time frame as possible (weeks rather 
than months).
■ The business leaders and developers must work together daily throughout the project.
■ Build software projects around motivated individuals that you trust to get the job done, 
and give them the support and environment to make it possible. 
■ Effectively share information through face-to-face conversation within the development 
team.
■ Working software is the principal measure of progress and success.
■ Agile promotes sustainable development where the sponsors, developers, and users can 
maintain a constant pace throughout the project and don’t get overwhelmed.
■ Pay continuous attention to technical excellence and good design to increase agility.
■ Focus on simplicity to ensure that unnecessary work is not introduced into the project.
■ The best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self-organizing teams.
■ On a regular basis the development team adjusts its behavior to become more effective.
These core tenants were the main spark of the Agile movement. Mary and Tom 
Poppendieck wrote Lean Software Development: An Agile Toolkit in 2003 based on the 
12 principles of the Agile Manifesto and their many years of experience developing soft-
ware. This book is still considered one of the best on the practical uses of Agile.
Developing software through Agile results in a very different output than developing via 
the slow, serial manner of the waterfall approach. With waterfall, you have to wait until the 
end to have a “finished” project that could be deployed. With Agile, you move to a model 
where the time frame for outputs is changed to two-week increments, or sprints in the 
Agile world. These sprints encompass the full process of analysis, design, code, and test but 

28  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
on a much smaller aspect of the applications. The goal is to finish a feature or capability for 
each sprint, resulting in a potentially shippable incremental piece of software. In this way, 
if from a time perceptive you are 40 percent complete with the project, you will have 100 
percent usable code that can go into production. Figure 2-3 shows how this process looks 
on a timeline. 
Benefits of Agile Development
Time
40% Complete
100% Usable Code
Short Sprint
Analysis
Design
Code
Test
Figure 2-3 Agile Development Practices
By leveraging Agile, you can keep adding value immediately and be nimble at adapting to 
change. If you discover a new capability is needed in the software, or a feature that was 
planned is determined to no longer be necessary, the project can pivot quickly and make 
those adjustments. 
Moving Faster
This is a book about cloud administration, right? Why all of the talk about application 
development? To be brutally honest, IT only exists to support business applications. You 
don’t build networks and then look for applications to stick on top of them. Instead, you 
have applications that you need to connect together. Applications have always been impor-
tant to IT, but we have begun to see a significant elevation of the application from some-
thing that ran our businesses to a vehicle for interacting with customers and transforming 
how businesses operate. Think of companies such as Uber or Amazon. The application is 
central to their business model. With Uber, you can use an application on your smartphone 
to immediately gain access to transportation anywhere. Not only that, but you can see in 
real time where your driver is, and the driver can see where you are, connecting supply and 
demand in a very transformational way. Amazon took a primarily brick-and-mortar busi-
ness model and morphed it into an online marketplace where you can buy and sell anything 
imaginable. What is the common theme here? The criticality of the application. In these 
instances, the application is the businesses. 

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  29
2
All of these applications are serving to digitize more and more traditional business functions 
and models. The only problem is, these new types of applications require business to move 
faster than they ever have before. No longer can a company wait six months to a year for 
a new software package to be built and delivered. They need it now, or their competitors 
will beat them to the punch. Applications are expected to add new features and function-
ality continuously, in a consistent delivery. Can you imagine rolling out new applications 
or updates to your company’s applications many times a day? That’s the new expectation. 
Faster wins the race.
The Future of IT Operations
Unless you are working for a startup, IT operations, for the most part, are a result of orga-
nizational history and organic growth, and as such, the way in which you do things today 
is often directly related to seeds that were planted long ago. What does the future of IT 
operations look like? While no one knows with 100 percent certainty, IT operations will 
definitely require a different model than the manual, slow, and inflexible ways that orga-
nizations have operated for many years. Agile is a great first step along this path, but you 
can’t just throw out everything and start from scratch; it would simply be too disruptive to 
the business. To address this disconnect between innovation and keeping traditional systems 
and processes in place, companies have started to look at ways to implement both. Gartner, 
which is an IT technology research organization, took up this challenge and developed an 
operational model called Bimodal IT. 
Bimodal IT describes two distinct modes, or speeds, that IT functions operate at. Mode 1 
is focused on traditional IT operations related to business processes and applications that 
are crucial to the business. Mode 1 is all about maintaining stability and not introducing 
undue risk into the mix. Mode 2, on the other hand, is all about innovation, agility, speed, 
and experimentation. You can think of Mode 1 as being like a marathon runner, trained 
for endurance and distance. Mode 2 is more like a sprinter, able to move extremely fast at 
short distances. Both have their place depending upon the race being run. Figure 2-4 shows 
Gartner’s view of Bimodal IT.
Bimodal IT – Rate of Change
Change
Governance
Systems of Innovation
e.g., Social Media, Big Data
Systems of Differentiation
e.g., CRM, E-Commerce Portal
Systems of Record
e.g., Financial, HRIS, Inventory
Mode 2
Mode 1
Figure 2-4 Gartner Bimodal IT (Photo Credit Gartner, Inc.)

30  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
One of the first things you will notice about Bimodal IT is that the two modes are really 
focused on handling change in core IT functional areas. Change is often looked at as the 
enemy of stability, and what Bimodal IT is attempting to do is to provide a better way to 
manage the rate of change in applications and the infrastructure, by segmenting applications 
that need a traditional operating model from those that need a faster, more agile model (i.e., 
lots of changes and modification) while minimizing unforeseen issues that could damage 
mission-critical systems. 
The following classifications outline the types of IT applications that fall within the three 
application categories as identified by Gartner:
■ Systems of record: Packaged or custom applications that support the core foundation of 
the business. These applications have minimal changes and mature operational processes. 
Examples include financial, HR, and inventory applications.
■ Systems of differentiation: Applications that are unique to the business and represent 
a competitive differentiator. The applications in this class support moderate levels of 
change to accommodate a changing business environment. Examples include CRM and 
e-commerce applications.
■ Systems of innovation: New applications built as needed to capitalize on new business 
needs or opportunities. Applications in this category have very high levels of change 
with significant experimentation used to uncover new business opportunities. Examples 
include social media and big data applications.
IT as a Broker of Services
In a cloud operational model, IT will need to increase its role as a broker for various services 
the business needs. While IT has always been in the business of contracting services for the 
business, the advent of cloud has increased the breadth and scope of the types of services 
available. Many organizations are moving to cloud as a means to outsource expensive ser-
vices that they once ran internally. Email is a prime example of this trend, as many busi-
nesses either have moved or are moving to cloud-based email services. IT would “broker” 
and manage the service instead of all of the technology and servers. The economics are 
much more enticing, and resources can be diverted to activities that generate more revenue. 
Ultimately, IT becomes a services dealer, with a portfolio of offerings that is composed of 
both services offered in house and services outsourced to a cloud provider.
The Rise of DevOps
Agile has dramatically changed the landscape of software development, by introducing a 
more efficient and faster way of delivering software and value to the business. Much of 
the improvement in the development process has been focused on delivery speed. You can 
have as much agile development as you want, but if you can’t get the software deployed in 
a timely manner, you can’t take advantage of its capabilities. Agile software developers have 
embraced public cloud infrastructure because it enables them to provision their software 
easily and frequently. Non-cloud infrastructure, on the other hand, is not as quickly provi-
sioned, which results in developer dissatisfaction. 

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  31
2
Traditionally software was built and tested by the developers, and if it worked on their 
laptops or test systems, they gave it to IT operations to deploy. When things did not go as 
smoothly as planned, there was a significant amount of troubleshooting and finger point-
ing that would ensue, with the developers claiming that the software worked fine in testing 
on their laptops, and that the infrastructure must be broken. The operations teams would 
lament about the buggy and poorly written software that was stressing their environment 
and creating all kinds of extra work. While both groups were working hard to accomplish 
the goals of the business and get things up and running, they were coming from very differ-
ent perspectives and simply were not coordinated.
In addition, the two groups often have very different expectations and metrics for suc-
cess. Developers care about writing code, working code, APIs, libraries, services, and Agile 
sprints. Success to them means that software works on their laptops and in testing, and 
that they finish their latest sprints in time. Operations, on the other hand, cares about the 
environment being stable, standards, templates, and, perhaps most importantly, not getting 
woken up at 2:00 a.m. to go fix a problem. Success to operations means that software and 
applications are stable, backup and restore processes work, and all systems are operating 
within defined thresholds. Developers want to drive innovation and create new features and 
capabilities in their software to meet the goals of the business. In other words, change is a 
constant in a developer’s world, whereas operations are primarily looking to maintain stabil-
ity and uptime in their environment. 
If you take a calendar view of the two organizations, as shown in Figure 2-5, a major chal-
lenge becomes very apparent. How can you possibly deploy new features and capabilities 
added every two weeks as part of an Agile sprint, when your operational maintenance win-
dow is only open every six months? 
Dev
Completed Software Sprint
Ops
Change Windows
Change
Stability
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Figure 2-5 Dev and Ops Calendar Comparison
Traditional IT service delivery is slow, manual, and often prone to errors. The infrastruc-
ture is a shared resource and, as such, one change can have a ripple effect that could break 
other, unrelated systems. The fragile nature of the infrastructure makes it very hard to 
anticipate issues that can arise. To combat this, many IT organizations create layers upon 
layers of approval process. While this sounds like a rational way to protect the business 

32  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
from downtime, the real effect is to slow down new deployments to a glacier-like pace. 
Figure 2-6 shows the traditional, burdensome waterfall approach to operations. 
Requirements
• Define strategy
 and required
 features.
Architecture
• Ensure service
 updates are
 aligned with
 enterprise
 architecture.
Development
• Write software/
 integrate
 underlying
 services.
QA and BAT
• Test that
 software works.
OPS
• Push updates to
 production and
 manage service.
Figure 2-6 Operational Waterfall Approach
The rise of DevOps occurred relatively recently. In 2009, two employees at Flickr (an 
image-sharing site), John Allspaw and Paul Hammond, delivered their “10+ Deploys Per 
Day: Dev and Ops Cooperation at Flickr” presentation to a bunch of developers at the 
O’Reilly Velocity Conference. The point of this presentation was to make the case that the 
only way to build, test, and deploy software was for development and operations to be 
integrated together. The sheer audacity of being able to deploy new software so quickly 
fueled the launch of the DevOps concept. Over the years since 2009, DevOps has moved 
from being exposed by a small group of zealots and counterculture types to becoming a 
very real and quantifiable way to operate the machinery of software creation and release. 
The key takeaway from Flickr’s presentation was that they didn’t decide to make a change 
to how they handled software innovation on a whim, but in direct response to constantly 
evolving customer demands and increased competition in the file-sharing space. They had 
to change their model to differentiate their business. The vast majority of companies that 
do software development are looking for ways to capture the efficiencies of this model to 
give them a competitive edge, and be better able to adapt to change from a customer and 
industry perspective. 
What is DevOps? It is a culture of sharing where developers and operations are one unit, 
that rise and fall together. It is the practical applications of both lean and agile. The goal of 
DevOps is to be a real-time business enabler by removing wasted effort and bureaucracy 
from getting in the way of better addressing the needs of the customer. To this end DevOps 
has five guiding principles:
■ Culture: For DevOps to work, organizational culture must change. This culture shift must 
occur across the whole organization, not just the Dev and Ops teams. It is by far one of 
the most difficult aspects to embrace, but it’s the single most important factor for suc-
cess. DevOps requires a culture of sharing that.
■ Automation: While DevOps is more than just a set of software tools, automation is the 
most easily identifiable benefit. When you leverage automation techniques, the deploy-
ment process is greatly sped up, defects are caught and corrected earlier, and repetitive 
tasks no longer need human intervention.

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  33
2
■ Lean: Reducing wasted efforts and streamlining the process are the goals of lean. It’s a 
management philosophy of continuous improvement and learning. 
■ Measurement: Without measuring your results, you can never improve. Success with 
DevOps requires the measurement of performance, process, and people metrics as often 
as is feasible. 
■ Sharing: Feedback and sharing of information is the kind of culture that is needed for 
DevOps to flourish. Breaking down silos and creating an inclusive, shared-fate environ-
ment is the ultimate goal.
Figure 2-7 shows the core components of DevOps and how they are interrelated.
Lean Business Practices
Culture
Automate
Measure
Share
OPS
DEV
Figure 2-7 DevOps Core Components
Introducing DevOps into your organization breaks down into two major aspects: practices 
and tools. 
Practices cover not only development and operations methodologies but also interactions 
between the two teams and their reporting structures. Often one of the first things you see 
new DevOps teams do is add operations engineers to the software project team. This rein-
forces the fact that the two are not separate but part of a value chain, with the result being 
a successful software release. Operations engineers will participate in project meetings, 
develop infrastructure configuration scripts, and support infrastructure integration with 
automated software testing tools. 
The tools of DevOps include the various components that will be used to automate soft-
ware testing and deployment. Selecting the appropriate tools is a joint effort between Dev 
and Ops and is essential to a functioning environment. The DevOps tool landscape is very 
large, with new components being added all of the time. To make selecting tools simpler, 
you should think of the major function of each tool and how it fits into the software devel-
opment to release pipeline. The tool categories include
IaaS: Infrastructure as a Service is the foundation for DevOps. Without a flexible and 
programmable underlying architecture, you would not have the dynamic pooling of 
resources or rapid scalability that cloud can offer. IaaS can be private, public, or a combi-
nation (hybrid). Examples include Cisco Metacloud, OpenStack, Amazon EC2 Container 
Service (ECS), and Amazon Web Services.

34  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
PaaS: The Platform as a Service layer is how many developers prefer to integrate their 
software development activities too, because it simplifies and abstracts the complexity of 
the underlying infrastructure so that they can focus on building their software. Network, 
storage, and compute resources are handled by the PaaS orchestration tools. Some exam-
ple services are Kubernetes, Pivotal Cloud Foundry, Apprenda, and Cisco Mantl.
Source control: Source control (also called version control) tools provide a place for 
developers to store current and past versions of software code. These tools allow visibil-
ity into who is working on what parts of the software and provide change control. Some 
examples are GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket, and Apache Subversion (SVN). 
Image control: Image control tools provide a place to store finished software that is 
ready for deployment. Developers call finished software packages or components arti-
facts. An image control tool is similar to a source control system, but instead of managing 
software code, it manages the versioning of software builds. Some image control exam-
ples are Docker, Quay, and Artifactory.
Collaboration: DevOps collaboration tools are essential to keeping everyone in sync with 
the status of software builds and software feature completion. These tools often integrate 
with other components in the DevOps pipeline to receive and archive various activities of 
the software development and release process. They often include chat, file sharing, con-
ferencing, and project management features. Some examples are Cisco Spark, Jive, Slack, 
and Trello. 
Configuration management: Configuration management tools are responsible for trans-
forming the deployment of infrastructure components into a descriptive language that 
can be automated. Often referred to as infrastructure as code, these tools provide much 
of the automation necessary to perform on-demand software testing in DevOps. Some 
examples are Puppet, Chef, Ansible, and SaltStack.
Continuous integration: Continuous integration tools are the brains behind the DevOps 
pipeline. They monitor source control systems and, when a change is made to source 
code, can kick off automated testing and building of the new software code. Through 
integration with configuration management tools, they can also launch the deployment of 
infrastructure as well. Some examples are Jenkins, Travis CI, Drone, and TeamCity.
Figure 2-8 shows how these tools would work together in a real-world environment, the 
steps of which are described here:

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  35
2
GitLab
MANTL
Jenkins
Developer
pulls
latest code.
Source
Control
System
1
2
Developer
pushes
commits.
Make incremental changes
on local environment and
unit tests. 
3
4
7
If tests pass,
deploy code to
artifact repository.
8
Changes kick off
test build
environment
(Puppet, Chef, etc.).
5
CIS Runs
Multiple
Software Tests
6
Continuous
delivery.
Production
Docker
Registry
Reports back test
results.
Continuous
Integration Server
Cisco Metacloud
Test Environment
9
Figure 2-8 DevOps Tool Pipeline
Step 1. 
A developer pulls the latest code from the source control system to her local 
laptop. 
Step 2. 
The developer makes changes to the code on her local laptop, and then sub-
mits the modified code back to the source control system.
Step 3. 
The developer submits a code commit to the versioning control system, signal-
ing that new code is ready to build.
Step 4. 
The continuous integration server sees that there is code waiting to be built via 
its integration with the versioning control system and pulls down the new com-
mitted code and builds the software.
Step 5. 
The continuous integration server initiates an infrastructure build to create a 
test environment through a configuration management tool such as Puppet or 
Chef. 
Step 6. 
The continuous integration server then runs multiple tests against the built soft-
ware to ensure that it works as expected. The results of these tests are reported 
back to the developer and archived.
Step 7. 
The continuous integration server sends the test results and whether or not the 
software tested successfully to the developer’s collaboration tool so that every-
one can see the current build status.
Step 8. 
Once the software has passed testing, the continuous integration server sends 
the working code to the image control (artifact) repository. 
Step 9. 
The code is ready to be deployed to production either automatically or after 
further testing and approval.

36  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
There are three primary stages that are often attributed to implementing DevOps within 
your organization. They follow a natural progression that leads to a fully automated soft-
ware coding to production deployment operational model. These stages are additive and 
build upon the previous one. The stages are
■ Continuous integration: Merging of development work with the code base constantly so 
that automated testing can catch problems early.
■ Continuous delivery: Software package delivery mechanism for releasing code to staging 
for review and inspection.
■ Continuous deployment: Relies on the previous stages of Continuous Integration and 
Continuous Deployment to automatically release code into production as soon as it is 
ready. Constant flow of new features into production.
The purpose of going through all of this software development and Agile “stuff” is to give 
some context and background to the types of forces that are driving cloud adoption today. 
It comes down to moving faster and delivering value to the customer quicker. The primary 
goal is to go from a new business idea to monetization of that idea faster. Figure 2-9 shows 
how lean, Agile, and DevOps fit together to achieve the business expectations. 
Lean Business Principles
Agile Development
Operations
DevOps
$
Figure 2-9 From Idea to Money Streamlined
The next two sections cover two very important concepts that are fundamental to under-
standing modern cloud operations. The service catalog and self-service portal are tightly 
connected but serve different functions in cloud. 
Service Catalog
Imagine going to a restaurant and trying to order a meal without the help of some type 
of menu. You would have to guess or exhaustively interrogate restaurant staff as to what 
ingredients the restaurant had available, what type of equipment was in the kitchen, and 

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  37
2
the chef’s experience with the type of meal you wanted. You would never know what to 
expect, or have any clue how long it would take. For the restaurant, there would be no way 
to control inventory because they would never know what the customer was going to order. 
The restaurant would not be able to staff appropriately or even know what to charge for a 
meal. The menu is not just a list of predetermined items to be offered, but is directly tied to 
the success or failure of the business. This example applies to IT and the difficulty business 
users have in requesting new services from IT without a menu of services to choose from. 
For a cloud environment, the service catalog is just as important. Without it, you are stuck 
with manual processes and no standardization, both of which result in long delivery times 
and unhappy customers. In effect, a service catalog is not just a nice-to-have administrative 
exercise, but provides a way to define essential characteristics of cloud, such as on-demand 
self-service and metered services. Without a service catalog of some sort, it’s hard to imag-
ine an effective cloud environment. 
A service catalog is a central concept for administering a cloud environment. The various 
items that IT offers are “services” the business units and segments can consume. A service 
catalog can be defined as a curated collection of technology-enabled services an organiza-
tion provides to its customers, employees, or business functions. Think of the service cata-
log as a tangible representation of the operational capabilities of IT. It includes information 
about the various offerings, costs, contact points, ordering, and request processes. A prop-
erly architected service catalog can mean the difference between an IT group that is strug-
gling to keep up and one that is exceeding expectations. Some examples of service catalog 
items are
■ Communication services: Ordering a phone for a new employee, moving a phone to a 
new desk, upgrades, and replacements
■ Business applications: Standard line of business applications, middleware, platforms, etc.
■ Personal software: Personal software applications and licensing
■ Laptops/desktops: Personal computing hardware lifecycle management and ordering
■ Network: Network access requests and services
■ Compute: Compute provisioning, support, and maintenance
■ Storage: Storage access and support
■ Mobile devices: Mobile device network access, ordering, and support
A service catalog is crucial to cloud for a number of reasons. First, it aligns the services IT 
offers to the business and end users. This is one of the more valuable aspects of the service 
catalog, because it takes the guesswork and inconsistency out of offerings. Second, it can 
help optimize and streamline service delivery by defining the process and workflow needed. 
This will help accelerate delivery and responsiveness, which can go a long way toward 
ensuring happier end users. A service catalog will also help to reduce support costs by giv-
ing better visibility into the services most often requested and the true cost to deliver those 
services. In addition, a service catalog can help to centralize request management for “one-
stop ordering” of services. 

38  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Service catalog software is used to document the service packages and automate the request 
management and service delivery process and life cycle. It will often integrate with vari-
ous systems in your organization, such as accounting, helpdesk, and purchasing systems, to 
facilitate service delivery. Cisco Prime Service Catalog is an example of just such a software 
package (as covered in much greater depth in Chapter 5). Service catalog software will often 
provide the following:
■ Service description: What the service is/offers and how it can be delivered 
■ Service-level agreements: Expectations and guarantees of expected service availability, 
security, and performance
■ Service cost: How much the service costs on a recurring or one-time basis to the depart-
ment or cost center
■ Compliance: Ensure compliance with governance and standards through default configu-
rations and preapproved services
A service catalog is built by taking business requirements and aligning them to infrastructure 
capabilities. End-user requirements and business needs are itemized and analyzed, with the 
resulting list becoming the basis for the catalog. Infrastructure capabilities, platforms, and 
systems will also be assessed to determine scale and capacity available. The results of these 
exercises will produce a detailed menu of services that can be input into the service catalog 
with the corresponding details. This process is by no means as simple as just described and, 
depending on the size of your organization, could take significant effort. The point is to 
look at everything IT does as a regular “offering” to the business, quantify it, create a work-
flow, and publish it to the catalog. As new technologies and services become available, they 
can simply be added to the list, providing a great way to introduce new technologies and to 
enforce corporate standards, governance, and budgeting.
A cloud service catalog should be built with the following guiding principles in mind:
■ Repeatable: A service catalog item should be standardized and able to be offered to 
multiple customers at the same time.
■ Measurable: Service catalog items should be quantifiable measures to ensure accurate 
cost accounting for the purposes of chargeback or showback.
■ Comprehensive: The catalog should provide as wide a range of common offerings as 
possible so that an organization would not need to deviate to a custom build. 
■ Scalable: Services should be capable of scaling up or down easily through automation 
based on service utilization.
■ Flexible: New technologies and capabilities can be added quickly to address new busi-
ness requirements.
The service catalog can also provide a tangible link between what IT offers and what the 
business is expecting. One of the benefits of creating a service catalog is in monitoring how 

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  39
2
the organization is operating and what services are used or not used. These metrics give 
many insights into the supply and demand aspect of cloud delivery. Some of the key per-
formance indicators that can be tracked are
■ Services that are used the most and the least
■ Successful and unsuccessful service delivery
■ Number of customers requesting each service type
■ Which group or individuals are using the most or fewest services
■ Time to approve service requests
■ Financial governance; how much is spent on each service by type
As you can see, the service catalog is a key component of offering a cloud operational 
model. The next section describes the end-user interface to the service catalog, the self-
service portal.
Self-Service Portal
A cloud self-service portal is a web-based central repository for ordering all of the applica-
tions, systems, and infrastructure components standardized on by an organization. Just like 
going to their favorite online retail site, end users can browse the self-service portal to pick 
and choose what they want and then “check out” at the end, with the price of the items 
listed and terms of delivery. The mechanics of how end users’ requests get delivered to 
them is not something they need to concern themselves with as recipients of the products 
or services. They get it on demand and in the amount they need. That’s the benefit of cloud 
offered by an organization to its users. The benefit to the organization is that consistent ser-
vice and ordering can be automated and delivered at a much lower cost. 
A self-service portal is the end-user/line-of-business interface to the IT service catalog. 
Instead of having to custom build every new service, there is an easy-to-access list of 
common offerings that the end user can simply select from. No more waiting for manual 
intervention, or committee meetings to get a new application deployed; you just click a 
button and in a few minutes the system is up and running and waiting for you to use it. 
Streamlining this process through backend automation reduces an enormous amount of 
operational burden, which helps IT run more efficiently and results in much more satisfied 
customers. 
A self-service portal should have the ability to handle user entitlement and role-based access 
control (RBAC). Not every user in the organization may have the business need or even the 
technical understanding to provision certain services or applications. The self-service portal 
software needs to be able to provide differentiated access to users to address what things 
they can and cannot order. In addition, RBAC features will allow for the monitoring, audit-
ing, and management of the self-service portal system. In the case of Cisco Prime Service 
Catalog, all of these capabilities are built in to the application with a high degree of custom-
ization. Figure 2-10 shows the self-service cloud portal for Prime Service Catalog.

40  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 2-10 Cisco Prime Service Catalog E-Store
Policy-based approvals allow an organization to automate the approvals process to stream-
line ordering and fulfillment of new service requests. If an employee requests a new laptop, 
for example, there should be a process in place to request manager and/or financial analyst 
approval before the order is forwarded on to purchasing. These checks and balances may be 
done in a manual way today, but with a self-service portal it can all be automated and docu-
mented by the system.
Services have a life cycle, from initial creation to modification, updating, and ultimately 
decommissioning of the service when no longer needed. In addition, you can automate the 
approval process for service catalog items that fall below a certain cost or other threshold. 
All transactions are documented, so there is a complete audit trail if needed. A self-service 
portal can provide end-user access to self-service support and management of the full life 
cycle of their applications. End users can deploy, modify, and decommission their own ser-
vices. Through web-based forms, the end users can handle much of these activities by them-
selves without having to involve IT.
IT service and applications are not free and must be accounted for. To address that need, 
the self-service portal can be customized with cost-accounting and demand-management 
capabilities. You can define how much a service costs for initial setup, ongoing resource 
consumption, and utilization. 

Chapter 2: Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT  41
2
One of the greatest capabilities of the self-service portal is the automation of repetitive 
tasks. Once a service is defined, you can leverage integrated automation functionality to 
initiate the service delivery itself. Everything from the creation of a virtual environment to 
provisioning a new user account on an internal system can be automated through the self-
service portal. 
The key benefits of a self-service portal are
■ Reduction in manual errors in the ordering process
■ Integration with orchestration software to automatically fulfill service requests
■ Faster IT service delivery
■ Greater agility and flexibility
■ Better operational efficiency
■ Lower cost
In subsequent chapters we will go into Prime Service Catalog and UCS Director self-service 
portal capabilities in greater detail. You will be expected to know these concepts for the 
CCNA Cloud Administration exam. 


CHAPTER 3
The Cloud Operation Journey
Over the last few chapters we have covered what cloud is, and how it changes IT opera-
tional and consumption models that businesses have become accustomed to. Unless you are 
starting a brand new business, it is very difficult to flip the switch and move to a fully auto-
mated and orchestrated cloud environment. More than anything, the adoption of cloud is 
both a journey and a process. In this chapter we will discuss some good practices and tactics 
that are necessary to implement to start benefiting from cloud today.
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly. If you are in doubt about your answers to these questions or 
your own assessment of your knowledge of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 3-1 
lists the major headings in this chapter and their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” 
quiz questions. You can find the answers in Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This 
Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 3-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Embracing Cloud
1–5
Cisco Domain Ten
7–10
Caution The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chapter. 
If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, you 
should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving yourself 
credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might pro-
vide you with a false sense of security.

44  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. What is shadow IT?
a. 
Unauthorized use of public cloud resources for corporate software development 
purposes
b. IT services that have been compromised by an attacker
c. 
Authorized use of public cloud resources that is charged via a credit card
d. A public cloud offering
2. What are some of the issues with shadow IT?
a. 
Higher costs
b. Data privacy
c. 
Compliance and security
d. All of the above
3. What best describes the difference between cloud automation and orchestration?
a. 
Automation is easy and orchestration is hard.
b. Automation is focused on tasks and orchestration is focused on processes.
c. 
None of the above.
d. All of the above.
4. What is the value of standardization for cloud offerings?
a. 
Consistency
b. Lower total cost
c. 
Speed
d. All of the above
5. Which item best describes workflow from a cloud perspective?
a. 
Workflow is the execution and automation of business process.
b. Workflow must have flow charts and solid documentation to function.
c. 
Workflow should be loosely coupled to process for maximum agility.
d. None of the above.
6. The role of culture is crucial in cloud because:
a. 
Culture is not an issue for cloud.
b. A rigorous culture is necessary for success in cloud.
c. 
A fun culture is important. 
d. Cloud changes how people and systems interact.
7. What is Cisco Domain Ten?
a. 
The next version of Domain Nine
b. A framework that is useful in guiding an organization in its cloud transformation
c. 
A marketing plan to help business leaders understand cloud
d. None of the above

Chapter 3: The Cloud Operation Journey  45
3
8. At what level is virtualization addressed in Domain Ten?
a. 
Domain 3
b. Domain 5
c. 
Domain 2
d. All of the above
9. Which domains are the user portal reliant upon being in place?
a. 
Domains 3 and 4
b. Domains 1 and 5
c. 
Domains 5 and 6
d. All of the above
10. Automation and orchestration are covered in which domain? 
a. 
Domain 3
b. Domain 6
c. 
Domain 7
d. None of the above

46  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
Embracing Cloud
The business climate today requires businesses to continually innovate and move faster 
than they ever have before. Your company has to find a way to get closer to customers, 
lower costs, and deliver a better service than your competitors. For many companies that 
means they have to reinvent themselves on a continual basis to maintain relevance. The 
disruption caused by new and nimbler competitors has proven to be a real threat for even 
the largest and most established companies. A small company with a hot new application 
can capture a surprising amount of market share in a very short time. This threat of digital 
disruption is requiring a very different way of thinking when it comes to IT and applica-
tions. Implementing a cloud operational model and technologies can allow your company 
to compete in a business environment that rewards speed to market. Ultimately, fast always 
wins the race. 
It is important to recognize at the beginning that cloud is a different IT delivery model from 
the traditional one that many companies follow. Cloud requires a shift in thinking away 
from a device-centric approach to application delivery, to one that is focused on the offer-
ing of a service. Do your users care which server their application sits on? Do they know if 
it’s in your data center or sitting in someone else’s out on the Internet? The use of the ser-
vice is what really matters to your business, and regardless of how the service is delivered, it 
must be high quality and reliable. The service can reside within your data center, where you 
maintain and operate it, in a public cloud provider, where you leverage their infrastructure, 
or as a Software as a Service (SaaS) application that you simply use. This services-centric 
approach is one of the reasons why more and more businesses are turning to SaaS to reduce 
the complexity and cost of maintaining some applications.
The SaaS consumption model can satisfy business and user needs while netting the saving 
from a provider’s lower cost model. Consider email, for example. It is an expensive applica-
tion to run, not only from a compute and storage perspective, but also in terms of the man-
power needed just to keep it operating. With all of the security patching, operating system 
updates, database maintenance, and configuration requirements, those tasked with keeping 
email up and running have little time for anything else. Email is a crucial tool for business, 
no doubt about it, but the cost of offering this service is fairly high. By outsourcing email 
to a SaaS cloud provider, companies no longer have to dedicate so much time, energy, and 
resources to delivering the service. The business gets the service it needs, but at a lower cost. 
Engineers can now work on new projects that help the business serve its customers better.
Shadow IT
More and more we are seeing services that were traditionally run in house moving to a 
cloud provider. Lines of business have found it quicker to just contract for a service them-
selves and bypass traditional IT. Why? Because in many cases it is faster than waiting for 
a traditional IT shop to get a new application rolled out. IT is inundated with a backlog of 
work from just keeping existing systems up and running, often preventing IT from moving 

Chapter 3: The Cloud Operation Journey  47
3
as fast as the business needs. This disconnect has caused numerous problems and tension 
within the business. Delays rolling out new projects that allow the business to generate more 
revenue have caused lines of business to go out on their own and embrace external cloud 
service providers. With all of the advances in self-service offerings and on-demand access to 
resources and capabilities, it is little wonder that businesses are struggling with “shadow IT,” 
where internal IT is bypassed entirely. While this may seem like a quick fix, it really exacer-
bates the problem. Some of the major issues of shadow IT are
■ Compliance and governance: Complying with PCI, SOX, HIPAA, and the rest of the 
alphabet soup of regulations that IT organizations have to ensure they are compliant with 
can be a real challenge in a shadow IT world. Lack of compliance can be very costly, and 
if you aren’t in full control of your IT environment, it can be easy to run afoul of these 
regulations. Without the appropriate data protection controls in place, your business can 
be at considerable risk from shadow IT. 
■ Technology and management silos: Who manages the service? In a shadow IT situation, 
it becomes the responsibility of the part of the organization that signed up for the ser-
vice. It’s not a full-time job and often the people responsible for managing the service are 
not trained to do it properly. Things like single sign-on and other services also will not be 
available without getting IT involved, so you will have separate account access and pass-
words that need to be managed.
■ Application portability: Moving your application from one cloud provider to another 
can be very difficult or, in some cases, impossible without rewriting parts of the applica-
tion. Many cloud providers have lots of advanced features that you can use as a service 
within your application, but those services are only available if you are their customer. 
This can act as a lock that will prevent you from negotiating better rates, or finding a dif-
ferent provider. Lines of business may not understand this impact when building applica-
tions in the cloud on their own.
■ Data privacy: Who can see the data, and where is it stored? This has always been a major 
concern for businesses considering a move to the cloud. They are still responsible for 
keeping information safe, but now they don’t get full visibility into the data protection 
controls that their provider has implemented. 
■ Higher cost: Shadow IT can get expensive really fast. One of the benefits of having a 
centralized purchasing process is that you can leverage volume discounts and track and 
monitor overall usage costs. By going off on their own, each department will be a sepa-
rate “customer” to the provider, resulting in serious duplication of effort and less optimi-
zation of resources. 
■ Lack of consistency: If the accounting department needs project management software, 
for example, they will go out and get whatever they feel meets their needs. If another 
group, like HR, needs the same software, they will not be privy to the fact that account-
ing already has an application that they could simply use. Instead, HR may pick a differ-
ent platform, which may be more expensive and totally incompatible. This lack of con-
sistency can interfere with business logic and make it harder for different groups within 
the same business to work together.

48  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The Journey Starts Here
To stay relevant and help the business better achieve its goals, an IT organization is going 
to have to embrace a mixture of public, private, and hybrid services. Some applications will 
be better suited for running on premises and others will work fine in a public cloud. There 
will also be a need for applications that are in a private cloud and a public cloud for scal-
ing and better geographic performance. The key is to catalog the capabilities and require-
ments of existing and new applications and match them to the delivery model that makes 
the most sense. In this way IT becomes a broker of services and can begin to embrace cloud 
as a business enabler, as discussed in Chapter 2, “Cloud: A New Operations Model for IT.” 
Through this approach, IT becomes a better business partner and can be a driving force for 
better business results. IT has to move away from being just a cost center and become a new 
business-acceleration engine.
Unfortunately, there is no magic cloud bean that you can plant in your data center. 
Realistically, you need to expect a multiyear journey as you change how you operate IT 
services and implement a robust cloud infrastructure. That’s not to say that your company 
can’t benefit today from cloud capabilities; it is just not going to happen all at once. How 
fast your organization can transition to cloud depends on its size and appetite for change. A 
large enterprise with thousands of applications will take longer than a small organization to 
transition due to the complexity of the environment of a large business. You must consider 
the fact that you are in effect rewriting the rule book for how you deploy, maintain, and 
operate business applications. You also must consider the various departments and divisions 
that will need to be included to ensure that they are not unduly impacted by the move to 
the cloud. Regardless of the size of the organization, it is wise to start your cloud journey 
on small, focused areas of the business that can handle the changes that cloud will require. 
In Chapter 1, “An Introduction to Cloud,” you were introduced to IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS as 
deployment models for cloud services. There are many existing applications and services 
in your business for which you can find opportunities to take advantage of cloud practices 
and deployment models. Some good areas to look at are
■ Collaboration applications: These applications allow for internal collaboration between 
employees and external collaboration with customers. There are numerous SaaS offerings 
as well as cloud-friendly private options like Cisco Spark.   
■ Business support applications: These apps are important to the business but often are 
expensive to run and require dedicated expertise. Examples include email, marketing, 
CRM, and sales apps.
■ Customer-facing web applications: Dynamic scaling and availability can all be increased 
by moving these services to a cloud environment.
■ Branch office infrastructure services: Telephony, Wi-Fi, and networking can all be 
moved to the cloud to simplify management and support. Cisco Meraki is a prime exam-
ple of leveraging the cloud to reduce cost and ease administrative burden.
■ Disaster recovery services: You certainly could build a dedicated backup site, but it 
often makes more sense financially to use a cloud provider to handle these services. 

Chapter 3: The Cloud Operation Journey  49
3
■ Development test environments: This is one of the most useful areas to use cloud. 
Developers need access to test environments that closely resemble production, and they 
often need these test beds on demand. Implementing cloud can help keep them from 
trying to solve this need themselves (shadow IT).
■ File storage: File storage is a necessity for every one of your users. With good Internet 
access, a centrally managed cloud storage solution is a very effective way to provide this 
service at a lower overall operational cost. 
In the next section we discuss Domain Ten, a full framework for cloud adoption that 
Cisco has built. It is a fantastic resource for planning and developing your own journey to 
the cloud. 
Cisco Domain Ten
Domain Ten is a framework that can be useful in planning an organization’s cloud trans-
formation. It consists of ten key elements that cover everything from the infrastructure 
all the way to organization and governance. The intent of the framework is to map 
businesses-specific desires and outcomes to the cloud capabilities IT can offer, which can 
be very valuable in creating a road map for planning a transition to a public, private, or 
hybrid cloud. The best part of Domain Ten is that it builds capabilities in a natural way, 
from the infrastructure components to operations and governance. By ensuring each 
domain is adequately cared for, you will minimize gaps that often cause cloud projects to 
fail. Cisco even offers a fee-based assessment service that will map your environment and 
give you recommendations on what you need to do next. Figure 3-1 shows a graphical 
representation of the Domain Ten framework.
Abstraction • Virtualization
IaaS
Organization • Governance • Operations
Security • Compliance
Applications • Analytics
SaaS
Platform • Data 
PaaS
Unified Infrastructure
Compute
Storage
Network
Service 
Catalog
5
Financials
6
Automation • Orchestration  
User Portal
4
Adopt
Optimize
Consume
3
10
9
8
7
2
1
Figure 3-1 Domain Ten

50  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Domain 1: Unified Infrastructure
There are two primary components of Domain 1: infrastructure, which includes the serv-
ers, network, and storage, and environment, which consist of the space, power, and cooling 
capabilities within the data center. The infrastructure forms the foundation for the resource 
layer on top of which your cloud environment will be built. The goal is to standardize on 
hardware components to make it simpler to add capacity and maintain the data center in as 
much of a plug-and-play fashion as possible. If you need more compute, simply add another 
server and add it to the pool of resources at the infrastructure layer. The same thing applies 
to both network and storage. It’s just easier and often more cost effective to manage a con-
sistent set of hardware components. While a single set of standard components may not be 
feasible, the goal is to minimize the number of unique components as much as possible. By 
doing this you are able to more easily pool like resources, which is an essential foundation 
for virtualization and allows for dynamic provisioning. In addition, it is important to have 
infrastructure that is designed from the ground up to operate as a system, which will help 
simplify operations, lower overall costs, make virtualization and automation less complex, 
and help transition legacy systems to a modern architecture.
Environmental factors dictate the amount of resource you can host within your data center. 
Network infrastructure takes up space, needs power, and has to be kept cool to operate 
adequately. You must plan out your growth strategy to take these factors into consider-
ation. High-density computing requires less space but significantly better cooling, and your 
existing data center design can easily become overutilized. 
Domain 2: Abstraction and Virtualization
Virtualization allows for better utilization of data center resources by enabling you to 
run on a single server multiple workloads that in the past would require a dedicated 
server for each. Most organizations have made the shift to virtualization technologies 
in their data centers, and it is not uncommon to see 70 to 90 percent virtualization of 
applications. The benefit of virtualization is that it allows a common set of resources to 
be used in very efficient ways. Server virtualization has driven advances in storage and 
network virtualization as well. Storage virtualization combines physical storage from 
numerous storage devices to appear as one device, with scalable capacity. Network virtu-
alization combines available network resources into a single pool of resources that can be 
redeployed in real time to meet user demand. CPU, memory, network, and storage can be 
added or subtracted as the application needs it, either with the click of a button or auto-
matically. The flexibility, scalability, and resource pooling afforded by virtualization are 
core tenets of building a cloud infrastructure.
Abstraction provides a logical representation of the physical hardware underneath. By mak-
ing this separation, you remove the traditional dependencies of specific hardware such as 
drivers and low-level device control code. Anyone who has had to load server-specific driv-
ers in an operating system knows how painful it is if you have to move that application to 
a new server (even from the same vendor). Abstraction removes those problems and allows 
the application and operating system to be very portable. The independence from the hard-
ware enables an organization to be flexible and to support many different types of internal 
customers. Users don’t care which server their application is running on in the data center. 
They just want it to be fast and always available. 

Chapter 3: The Cloud Operation Journey  51
3
There are many different technologies that you can choose to enable virtualization. 
Microsoft, VMware, KVM, and Docker containers are all viable platforms to run your virtu-
alized environment on. Each has its own specific pros and cons. It is important to standardize 
as much as possible to simplify the administrative burden. A multi-hypervisor environment 
doesn’t have to be a bad thing, but you have to plan for the differences in architecture for 
things like QoS, policy, security, and metrics. 
Another important aspect of Domain 2 is understanding the types of virtualized workloads 
that are going to be required. Some applications work very well in a virtual environment, 
whereas others require all of the CPU and memory a server can supply and, as such, work 
best on a dedicated physical server. Will your organization be virtual only in your cloud 
offerings, or offer bare metal as an option as well? In the public cloud you often must use 
virtualization in a cost-effective manner. These decisions will impact the types of offerings 
your organization will be able to provide within the service catalog. 
Figure 3-2 shows Domains 1 and 2 and their functional relationship in the Domain Ten 
framework.
Abstraction • Virtualization
IaaS
Organization • Governance • Operations
Security • Compliance
Applications • Analytics
SaaS
Platform • Data 
PaaS
Unified Infrastructure
Compute
Storage
Network
Service 
Catalog
5
Financials
6
Automation • Orchestration  
User Portal
4
Adopt
Optimize
Consume
3
10
9
8
7
2
1
Figure 3-2 Domains 1 and 2 of the Domain Ten Framework
Domain 3: Automation and Orchestration
What is the difference between automation and orchestration? While they are similar 
concepts, their scope is ultimately where the core difference lies. Automation is accom-
plished on a task or a function without human intervention. When you open your garage 
door, the light comes on automatically and shuts off after a period of time. While this 
is a very simple example of automation, it highlights one of its most important val-
ues. It is great for repetitive and monotonous activities. If you had unlimited money, 
you could hire someone to flip on the light switch and then turn it off when you went 
in to the house. Could you even imagine how boring and wasteful that job would be? 
Unfortunately, there are a lot of similar activities that you must endure today within 
IT. From a speed perspective, a human being could never accomplish the same task as 

52  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
quickly as a computer. Computers are excellent at executing repetitive tasks quickly and 
consistently. Human beings, on the other hand, do a poor job with repetitive tasks, often 
introducing inconsistencies, which prevents standardization. The speed you get from 
automation is substantial. Automation technologies also don’t have to take days off for 
vacations. They work around the clock, on holidays, and on weekends without getting 
tired, like the good robots that they are. 
Orchestration is the sequential coordination and direction of automated processes. 
Continuing our garage light example, orchestration is a layer above automation that takes 
inputs from tasks and acts on the bigger picture. Using orchestration, I can detect that the 
garage door light automatically came on and infer that the owner of the home was com-
ing inside. That trigger from the light could be used to kick off a workflow that lowers the 
temperature in the home (in summer), turns on the hallway light, and plays some music. 
Orchestration is the “brains” behind cloud, and is used to translate complex workflows into 
something actionable. It also is the mechanism used to tie business logic to technology.  
Domain 3 is where IT begins the cloud journey in earnest. What starts as a desire to make 
managing all of the complexity of a traditional data center easier can turn into a need for 
automation technology that can remove as much manual work as possible. It doesn’t take 
long to figure out that many IT processes are filled with repetitive tasks that don’t add value 
and suck up way too much time and energy. If you are manually provisioning infrastructure 
today, using automation technologies will seem like magic. 
In simple terms, orchestration is the logical sequencing of automated tasks. Think of a con-
ductor of an orchestra, responsible for ensuring that a melody is created from the sound 
generated by each of the instruments. Orchestration applies workflow and business logic to 
automation technologies to produce the same effect in IT. The full life cycle of an applica-
tion can be orchestrated from provisioning, patching, and decommissioning without a single 
human being having to touch the infrastructure underneath.
Orchestration requires customization to be truly effective. While there are many good 
products from Cisco to help right off of the shelf, the real power comes from mapping IT’s 
workflow into instructions that the automation/orchestration tools can follow. This means 
that you have to understand and document the various processes you want to automate. It’s 
time consuming but worth it. You simply can’t have a functioning cloud environment with-
out this step.
Figure 3-3 shows Domain 3 in the Domain Ten framework.

Chapter 3: The Cloud Operation Journey  53
3
Abstraction • Virtualization
IaaS
Organization • Governance • Operations
Security • Compliance
Applications • Analytics
SaaS
Platform • Data 
PaaS
Unified Infrastructure
Compute
Storage
Network
Service 
Catalog
5
Financials
6
Automation • Orchestration  
User Portal
4
Adopt
Optimize
Consume
3
10
9
8
7
2
1
Figure 3-3 Domain 3 of the Domain Ten Framework: Automation and Orchestration
Domain 4: User Portal (Self-Service Portal)
The user portal is the way in which your internal customers will interact with IT in a func-
tional cloud environment. There are typically two main components: the customer portal 
itself, which is a web page that allows for the ordering of IT services, and the workflow and 
backend systems that are responsible for delivering the requested services through automa-
tion. The user portal is the face of IT and, as such, needs to be easy to interact with and 
request services from. It’s essential that the interface be built from the user’s perspective 
and hide as much of the backend complexity as possible. Bob in accounting doesn’t need 
to know what VLAN his accounting server needs to be in, for example; the system should 
automatically determine that as part of the service delivery.
Role-based access control is another important aspect of this domain. Who can access 
what services? If you are a developer, you need access to different services than those an 
office administrator needs access to. Is there an approval process and, if so, who needs to 
be part of that process? How is software licensing handled? You could easily run out of 
licenses without a way to automate the delivery and reclamation of unneeded applications. 
All of these types of questions need to be explored for the customer portal to be effective. 
(Domains 9 and 10, discussed later, cover security and governance in more detail and from a 
top-down perspective.)
Domain 4 is tightly coupled with Domains 5 and 6 because it can be thought of as a pre-
sentation of the service catalog and financial chargeback/showback models in use. The 
self-service portal is responsible for providing cost estimates, delivery times, and service 
operational status. The user simply needs to know what their requirements are so that they 
can select the best offering from the service catalog.

54  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Domain 5: Service Catalog
The service catalog is a map for your cloud. It will describe all of the various services IT 
will offer. It is like a menu in a restaurant; whatever is in the catalog is something that the 
end user can order. As mentioned in the prior section, the self-service portal is where this 
information will be displayed, and it may also include details about the financial obligation 
tied to the service. The concept of the service catalog was covered in Chapter 2. Domain 
5 is about the creation of an effective service catalog, in which one of the most important 
aspects is the standardization of IT offerings.
The service catalog needs a ruthless level of standardization to be effective. Without stan-
dardization you simply cannot offer a viable self-service cloud offering. An easy way to bet-
ter understand the role of standardization is to look at the construction industry. There are 
two types of home builders: custom builders and spec home builders. Both will build you 
a house, but in very different ways. The custom builder offers the most options. If you can 
draw it on paper, the custom builder can potentially build it for you. You will get exactly 
what you want, from the type and brand of hardwood floor to the color of the bathroom 
toilet paper holder. It is completely customizable. It can also become very expensive really 
quickly. That Italian marble you want might be very difficult to attain and be at a premium 
price because it is not as commonly bought. The builder is going to pass that cost on to 
you, inflating your ultimate bill. A custom home will also take longer to build. All of the 
detail work requires extra time and added labor to complete. These builders don’t often 
build a large number of homes in a year, so they need to make as much as possible on the 
ones they do build, which inflates the cost even further. 
The spec home builder, on the other hand, has a very different business model. They typi-
cally have a limited set of floor plans, with four or five models at most, which makes build-
ing each home simpler. They also offer a specific set of customized options (colors, carpet 
types, tile, etc.) that are pre-priced and able to be added to the home easily. These builders 
are looking to minimize the variability between homes so that they can build them faster, 
taking advantage of consistency to drive down the cost of building. All of these factors give 
the spec home builder the ability to better anticipate their potential profit and build a larger 
number of homes. 
Traditional IT processes build custom apps, whereas the cloud model looks to deliver spec 
apps for all the same reasons that spec home builders choose to deliver spec homes. It is less 
costly and faster to deliver something that you can replicate, where all of the nuances of the 
platform and configuration are already worked out in advance for you. If you want to move 
fast, you have to be ruthless in defining the standard offerings within your service catalog. 
If you remove as much variability as possible, the process of accounting for the true cost of 
the offering is dramatically simpler.
Standardized offerings are also much easier to automate. Automation can handle some vari-
ability, but the more you add, the more complex the logic becomes and the more potential 
that exists for failures to creep into the equation. Complexity is what you are trying to 
remove with cloud, not add it back in. The service catalog isn’t just a one-time exercise, but 
rather needs to change based on new technologies and services being offered. The self-
service portal represents the service catalog to the end user and should enable easy changes 
to service details and map back to the associated workflows necessary for delivery.

Chapter 3: The Cloud Operation Journey  55
3
Domain 6: Financials
The financials domain is the area in which you define the mechanism and cost structure for 
usage-based IT chargeback and showback. This will allow your users to pay for the services 
and resources that they request from the user portal. Because cloud is based predominantly 
on a utility model, just like electricity, you are charged for the amount you use.
In cloud you pay for the CPU, storage, and bandwidth used by your applications. The hard 
part of creating these cost models is to define a realistic “cost” for the service. You have to 
factor in the cost of hardware, power and cooling, network infrastructure, and software, as 
well as any labor or administration costs associated with provisioning the service itself. Even 
if the service is fully automated, there is a cost associated with building and maintaining the 
service that needs to be accounted for. 
Chargeback is important to pay for a service, but what about the question of whether or 
not a service needs to be in house or moved to the public cloud? This almost always comes 
down to a question of cost and risk. Is the security risk sufficiently high to justify the addi-
tional cost of hosting the service within your own data center, or is it so much cheaper in 
the public cloud that it is worth the risk of not having complete control over the application? 
To answer this, you need to have a solid understanding of the real costs of the application or 
service, as detailed earlier, to get an apples-to-apples comparison. You can, of course, choose 
a hybrid approach, in which case you should have a strategy that supports the coexistence of 
private and public cloud solutions. This way, a workload or application can be appropriately 
placed based on its technical and business requirements, and taking into account any trade-
offs in flexibility, security, and costs.  
Domains 1 through 6 are the foundation of a cloud environment, and are what is needed 
to provide Infrastructure as a Service. IT is opened up like an online retailer, enabling 
users to consume services as if they were buying books or toasters. A private cloud 
doesn’t have to be the only service offered; you can augment with public cloud services 
and capabilities too. Figure 3-4 shows Domains 4 through 6 as the combined user portal.
Abstraction • Virtualization
IaaS
Organization • Governance • Operations
Security • Compliance
Applications • Analytics
SaaS
Platform • Data 
PaaS
Unified Infrastructure
Compute
Storage
Network
Service 
Catalog
5
Financials
6
Automation • Orchestration  
User Portal
4
Adopt
Optimize
Consume
3
10
9
8
7
2
1
Figure 3-4 Domains 4 Through 6: User Portal Components

56  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Domain 7: Platform and Data
Platform in cloud refers to the selection of software elements that sit on top of the infra-
structure and run the applications themselves. There are typically three components that 
make up the platform domain:
■ Operating systems
■ Middleware
■ Database
All of these components are provisioned through the user portal and built on demand. If a 
developer needs an operating system and a database for her new application, she can simply 
select it from the catalog and provision the infrastructure and software needed for it auto-
matically. This capability is in essence a Platform as a Service.
The platform domain is one of the most important to create strong standards for. If IT cus-
tomers can choose any OS combination, with any CPU or storage requirement they see fit, 
then the ability to automate simply disappears. You have to decide what you will and will 
not support so that you can provide consistent and replicable offerings. The benefit is the 
ability to move away from manual and custom provisioning into a highly automated cloud 
environment. 
Domain 8: Applications and Analytics
Applications are what run and support the business, and it is IT’s job to make sure they are 
available and operating as they should. An application can be a home-grown custom app, an 
off-the-shelf commercial app, or a SaaS app. The goal of this domain is to build an applica-
tion strategy to determine the best deployment model that meets the needs of the business. 
All applications need to be assessed for cloud readiness. Many legacy applications are just 
not a good fit for a cloud environment because they were not developed to take advantage 
of cloud infrastructure and may need to be rewritten (modernized) or upgraded.
Many businesses are still reluctant to host the most sensitive of data in the public cloud and, 
as such, tend to keep applications used in HR and accounting, for example, in house. Really, 
any application that stores personally identifiable information (PII), doesn’t have a web 
front end, or needs direct access to backend processing/mainframe will need special atten-
tion when considering a move to a public cloud. 
Beyond the security concerns of data privacy, there are a number of application characteris-
tics that need to be considered before moving into a cloud environment. First and foremost, 
was the application built to allow for portability? Older applications were conceived and 
architected before virtualization was a viable option. Their inherent architectures just don’t 
do well when virtualized. 
Maybe some of the components are looking for specific pieces of hardware, like a crypto 
card, meaning they will continue to need dedicated hardware until they are rewritten or 
retired. 
Where data is stored can also be a challenge for legacy applications. If your application 
needs data access to production systems, this could be problematic if hosted in a public 

Chapter 3: The Cloud Operation Journey  57
3
provider. The application would have to either replicate the data over the Internet or pull 
the data directly from the production data store. Both of these can be design nightmares if 
not properly planned for. 
Hosting the application yourself, migrating to the public cloud, or using a SaaS offering 
are a few of your choices. This analysis of your applications is the first step in determining 
the viability of migrating an app to the cloud. Figure 3-5 shows the Domain 7 (PaaS) and 
Domain 8 (SaaS) layers.
Abstraction • Virtualization
IaaS
Organization • Governance • Operations
Security • Compliance
Applications • Analytics
SaaS
Platform • Data 
PaaS
Unified Infrastructure
Compute
Storage
Network
Service 
Catalog
5
Financials
6
Automation • Orchestration  
User Portal
4
Adopt
Optimize
Consume
3
10
9
8
7
2
1
Figure 3-5 Domains 7 and 8: PaaS and SaaS
Domain 9: Security and Compliance
While cloud security and compliance sit in Domain 9, they apply to the entire cloud stack. 
Securing the provisioning process and safeguarding the various components of the cloud 
environment must be planned out and implemented. Every industry has specific regulations 
and laws that businesses need to comply with. Documenting and implementing the neces-
sary security controls and safeguards keep data safe, and your CEO out of the newspapers. 
Domain 10: Organization, Governance, and Operations
Organization, governance, and operations comprise the tenth and final domain of the 
Domain Ten framework. This domain details how the business will structure IT groups and 
departments, the safeguards and enforcement of corporate standards, and operational pro-
cesses and procedures. Because you don’t operate a cloud the same way you do a traditional 
IT environment, your staffing and skill requirements will be different. Do you train exist-
ing resources, or hire someone new? Governance issues will always pop up as you embrace 
cloud. Who gets access to what? What services should be put in the service catalog? Last 
but not least is the need for strong operational models that fit cloud. Ideally you will have 
significant automation within your cloud, because manual processes just don’t work in a 
cloud model.

58  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The role of culture and organizational structure in cloud is very important to its success. 
Cloud changes how applications, data center infrastructure, and devices interact with each 
other, but it also changes how people interact with IT as well. Automation is king and 
manual interaction is avoided at all costs. This is a very different environment than many 
people and IT organizations are used to. When you move to a cloud operational model, you 
just can’t continue doing things like you used to. Change is hard and can be difficult for an 
organization to embrace. Do you rip off the bandage or pull it off slowly? That’s up to the 
individual organization to decide. While change often is easy to implement, making it stick 
can be very difficult if your own people are resistant to it. 
The various teams that have been built up over time in an IT organization are often in their 
own silos. Developers, security groups, storage administrators, and infrastructure teams are 
insulated from the needs of the other groups within IT. Cloud changes all of that, by break-
ing down many of those barriers. People have to work together because the systems are 
integrated.  
A workflow is the execution and automation that follows a specific set of procedures and 
activities in order to accomplish a business process task. Think of all of the processes you 
follow on a daily basis. From brushing your teeth to making breakfast. More than likely you 
follow a routine that you have developed over time. This routine is a workflow. In IT there 
are many different workflows used to keep the lights on and the data center infrastruc-
ture running. When building a cloud environment, the goal is to leverage automation and 
orchestration as much as possible to accelerate activities and minimize the amount of effort 
needed. In order to automate your cloud environment, you have to document and codify 
your workflow processes. 
A workflow is not just a combination of technical steps, but is also inclusive of the busi-
ness process. Deploying a new server would include purchasing and acquiring the server, 
asset tagging, and depreciation accounting in addition to loading software and physically 
installing it. Complete workflow documentation is essential to successful cloud automa-
tion because it provides you all of the details necessary to implement the workflow in your 
cloud orchestration software, such as UCS Director. Workflows help you build the automa-
tion rules for your self-service user portal.
When you document a workflow, the goal is to leverage the lean techniques discussed in 
Chapter 2 to identify the minimum set of instructions necessary to achieve the desired out-
come of the workflow. Simplification and optimization can be the benefit of this process, 
because they will also remove excess complexity in your automation scripts, which means 
less to troubleshoot.
When documenting the workflow, you start at the beginning and finish at the end result. In 
the middle will be all of the steps needed to move your process along to its desired result. 
You may also have decision questions that occur throughout the process that cause you to 
need to accomplish different activities. For example, say you want to document the process 
of mailing a letter. Your first step is to write the letter, the second step is to put it in an 

Chapter 3: The Cloud Operation Journey  59
3
envelope, the third is to put a stamp on it, and the fourth is to drop it in the mailbox. Pretty 
simple, right? What if you don’t have stamps? Step 3 could then represent a decision step 
where you first check if you have stamps. If yes, then you put a stamp on the envelope. If 
no, then you need to create another set of steps for acquiring stamps. This is the same meth-
odology that you will use to create automation workflows within UCS Director. Figure 3-6 
shows an example workflow decision tree.
Begin
End
End
Step 1
Yes
No
Step 2
Step 3 (Yes)
Step 3 (No)
Step 4 (Yes)
Decision
Question
Figure 3-6 Workflow Decision Tree
By automating workflows, you can greatly reduce the time it takes to process the task and 
also reduce the potential for errors that could be introduced in a manual process. The best 
part of a workflow is that it provides a level of visibility and assurance that every step in the 
process is followed consistently every single time. From a security and compliance perspec-
tive, this is a fantastic benefit, because so many security issues occur from people just not 
following standard practices. With automation, you can build the level of security required 
into the workflow itself, making it easier to pass security audits.
Figure 3-7 shows the final two domains.

60  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Abstraction • Virtualization
IaaS
Organization • Governance • Operations
Security • Compliance
Applications • Analytics
SaaS
Platform • Data 
PaaS
Unified Infrastructure
Compute
Storage
Network
Service 
Catalog
5
Financials
6
Automation • Orchestration  
User Portal
4
Adopt
Optimize
Consume
3
10
9
8
7
2
1
Figure 3-7 Domains 9 and 10 of the Domain Ten Framework
Cisco Domain Ten is a good high-level framework that can help ensure all of the right com-
ponents are in place to have a successful cloud environment. Each organization will have 
different cloud needs, so Domain Ten should not be looked at as a one-size-fits-all solution. 
Maybe IaaS is all you are interested in deploying today. The most important thing is that 
to get there, you need all of the first six domains in place. By focusing on thinking through 
and developing the right foundation for the next building block, you will greatly increase 
your chances for success.

This page intentionally left blank 

This chapter covers the following topics:
4.0 Cloud Systems Management and Monitoring
4.2 Describe the components of Cisco UCS Director
4.2.a Describe Infrastructure Management and Monitoring
4.2.b Describe Orchestration
4.2.c Describe the Portal
4.2.d Describe the Bare Metal Agent
4.4 Describe the components of Cisco IAC
4.4.a Describe Cisco Process Orchestrator
4.4.b Describe Cisco Prime Service Catalog
4.4.c Describe Cisco Server Provisioner

CHAPTER 4
Cisco Cloud Automation/
Orchestration Suites
The previous chapters have been about providing context and background to better under-
stand the topics you will find on the CCNA Cloud Admin exam. As mentioned previously, 
the exam focuses very heavily on the operational aspects of the day-to-day running of a 
cloud environment. This chapter provides an overview of Cisco automation and orchestra-
tion suites and introduces the UCS Director platform, which you will be expected to know 
for the exam. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 4-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 4-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Cisco Cloud Solutions
1–2
Introducing UCS Director
3–5
Orchestration with UCS Director
6–8
UCS Director Baremetal Agent
9–10
Caution The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chapter. 
If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, you 
should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving yourself 
credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might pro-
vide you with a false sense of security.

64  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. What are three components of Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite? (Choose three.)
a. 
Prime Service Catalog
b. UCS Director
c. 
UCS Manager
d. Intercloud Fabric
2. What are two Cisco OpenStack offerings? (Choose two.)
a. 
Metacloud
b. Nova
c. 
UCSO
d. Cloud Foundry
3. Which hypervisors does UCS Director support? (Choose three.)
a. 
Microsoft Hyper-V
b. VMware vSphere
c. 
Red Hat KVM
d. Xen
4. What are the two primary components of UCS Director? (Choose two.)
a. 
Bare Metal Support
b. Baremetal Agent
c. 
UCS Director Virtual Machine
d. UCS Director License
5. How many service nodes are installed for a small deployment of USCD?
a. 
One
b. Six
c. 
Two
d. None of the above
6. What is the purpose of Workflow Designer in UCS Director?
a. 
Graphical interface for constructing automation workflows
b. A workflow execution engine
c. 
Integration with OpenStack
d. None of the above
7. How is a trigger used in UCS Director?
a. 
Create an abstraction layer for workflow implementation details
b. Automation tool
c. 
A workflow variable
d. None of the above 

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  65
4
8. Which of the following best describes a task?
a. 
UCS Director workflow
b. A technical term for automation
c. 
Smallest atomic (self-contained) action
d. None of the above
9. What protocols does the BMA use to bootstrap a server?
a. 
TFTP
b. DHCP
c. 
PXE
d. All of the above
10. How is Baremetal Agent deployed? 
a. 
A separate virtual machine that must be integrated with UCS Director
b. Licensed in UCS Director and deployed as a module
c. 
As part of ACI
d. None of the above

66  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
Cisco Cloud Solutions
The CCNA Cloud Admin exam focuses heavily on testing your understanding of the core 
components of Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite, which are UCS Director, Prime Service 
Catalog, Intercloud Fabric for Business, and Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation 
(VACS). In addition, you are expected to know the basic components of Cisco Intelligent 
Automation for Cloud (CIAC). In addition to these cloud stacks, Cisco also offers solutions 
based on OpenStack, which is an open source cloud management suite. While you are not 
expected to know the OpenStack offerings for the exam, it is important that you see how 
these various solutions and bundles fit into the Cisco cloud portfolio.
Automated Service Delivery
As mentioned in Chapter 3, “The Cloud Operation Journey,” IT is undergoing some signifi-
cant changes to meet the needs of the business. The business is demanding faster and more 
cost-effective services. The business expects IT to be more than a cost center by becoming 
a competitive differentiator that enables new ways to reach customers and take advantage 
of new market opportunity. In short, IT needs to evolve past its traditional operation model 
and embrace a new way of delivering services and value back to the business.
This shift from the old IT model to the new IT model will leverage cloud in a very signifi-
cant way. To this end, Cisco cloud management suites are built to facilitate this opera-
tional change. Cloud can become the change agent that allows the IT organization to 
evolve. Table 4-2 shows some of the differences between the two IT models. 
Table 4-2 Old IT Versus New IT
Old IT
New IT
Customized services and applications
Ruthless standardization
Manual provisioning of services
Fully automated infrastructure and business services
Costly management and maintenance 
Time and cost savings
Inflexible and fragile infrastructure 
Agile and flexible infrastructure
Poor predictability for projects
Predictable and consistent projects
Small number of highly scalable service 
offerings
Smaller number of scalable service offerings
Why does it take so long for IT to deliver a new service or offering? To figure that out, 
you have to take a look at the service delivery process. When a new project is initiated, 
there is a very sequential and time-consuming chain of events that occurs. The first step 
is to gather the requirements and architect a solution. After the architecture is deter-
mined, the design process begins, where you map the requirements of your architecture 
to a technical platform. The next question is, where do you put the new hardware? Is 
there enough rack space, power, and cooling? Once that is sorted out, then the manual 

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  67
4
procurement of hardware, installation, configuration, and security happen. Once every-
thing is finally up and running, then the new application and underlying hardware need 
to be tested. By the time all of this is finished, the application can finally be put into 
production. Weeks or months have passed before the business can benefit from the new 
application at all. Figure 4-1 shows the traditional service delivery process.
Architect
Design
Where Can
We Put It?
Procure
Install
Configure
Secure
Is It Ready?
Manual
Figure 4-1 Traditional Service Delivery Process 
To embrace this new IT model, the service delivery process needs to shift from a linear 
approach to one that is streamlined and automated. In this model, when a new project is 
initiated, a solution is architected based on the application requirements. From there the 
design process occurs, utilizing standard pretested software packages. Operating systems, 
databases, and other components are standardized on and used for new applications instead 
of building everything from scratch. At this point automated self-service provision is initi-
ated, giving you the platform you need for your new application in minutes instead of 
weeks. In Figure 4-2 you can see how much simpler the process is to deploy a new applica-
tion in an automated service delivery environment. Much of the manual process associated 
with determining where an application will go in the data center, the provisioning process 
itself, and validating that the application is up and running will all be handled by the cloud 
management software. 
Architect
Design
Automated
Self-Service
Provisioning
From Weeks
to Minutes
Capacity
on Demand
Policy-Based
Provisioning
Adaptive
Figure 4-2 Automatic Service Delivery Process
Some of the key benefits of automated service delivery are
■ On-demand resource access
■ Standardized provisioning
■ It’s better able to adapt to the needs of the business
■ Faster deployment times
■ Integrated pretested security
■ Flexibility and agility

68  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Cisco has brought to market a number of platforms to facilitate on-demand automated ser-
vice delivery. In the next section you will be introduced to the main cloud software suites 
that Cisco currently offers. For the exam, you will need to know Cisco ONE Enterprise 
Cloud Suite and Cisco Intelligent Automation for Cloud. Cisco’s OpenStack solutions are 
mentioned as well to round out the portfolio view.
Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite
Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite is a modular set of products that enables automated 
on-demand delivery of IT infrastructure, applications, and services. Cisco ONE Enterprise 
Cloud Suite is designed to automate the delivery of compute, network, storage, and applica-
tions across both virtual and physical pools of resources. It uses automation to fulfill infra-
structure requests and can ensure security and policies are followed. The self-service portal 
approach enables users within the organization to request their own services, freeing up 
resources and speeding up the delivery process of new applications. The portal includes
■ A modern storefront for ordering services based on your business policies and  
governance requirements
■ Role-based access to service catalog items, such as virtual machines, and application  
templates
■ Full pricing and chargeback models to allow lines of business to “pay” for IT services
■ Tracking and monitoring of service usage
■ Prebuilt templates for enterprise applications
■ A customer application stack designer
Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite consists of the following four primary components, as 
shown in Figure 4-3:
Windows Azure
Amazon
Web Services
Cisco
Powered
Ecosystem of
Service Providers
Cisco
Cloud Services
Cloud Operations (Cloud Assurance) (Third-Party
Billing, Assurance, Resource Mgmt.)
Cisco Prime Service Catalog Self-Service Portal 
Integrated Infrastructure Management
Cisco UCS Director
Cisco Virtual Application 
Cloud Segmentation
Hybrid Cloud
Management
Cisco Intercloud
Fabric
Multivendor Computing, Network, Storage, and Virtualization  
ACI
APIC
Figure 4-3 Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  69
4
■ Cisco Primes Service Catalog: End-user storefront for IT and data center services
■ UCS Director: Converged infrastructure management (compute, storage, and network), 
automation and orchestration of service catalog items
■ Intercloud Fabric for Business: Hybrid cloud management that supports virtual machines 
on Amazon Web Services, Microsoft Azure, and Cisco Intercloud partners
■ Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS): Provides secure application segmenta-
tion and provisioning of virtualized security services
Cisco Intelligent Automation for Cloud
Cisco Intelligent Automation for Cloud (CIAC) is a bundled cloud solution along the same 
lines as Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite in that it includes a number of components that 
work together to deliver a comprehensive cloud management platform. The primary dif-
ference between the two solutions comes down to the level of customization and integra-
tion you are looking to achieve with your existing backend management systems. Cisco 
ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite is designed to work out of the box with Cisco and third-party 
products, but you are limited to a finite set of tested integration components. With CIAC 
you have functionality out of the box, but can extend it to support a much wider range of 
systems that you may have in your environment. CIAC is also built with multiple-cloud and 
multitenant capabilities. Most organization that have deployed CIAC have customized it to 
match their own workflows and backend systems to support complex IaaS use cases. For the 
purposes of the CCNA Cloud Admin exam, you will need to know the core components of 
CIAC at a high level, but will not be expected to know all of the nuances and details of how 
the various components are configured. 
CIAC is a suite of products, or “software stack,” that includes the following core components:
■ Cisco Prime Service Catalog: This is the same self-service portal and IT service catalog 
that is bundled with Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite and serves the same function as 
well. Chapter 5, “Cisco Prime Service Catalog,” and other parts of this book cover this 
component in great detail.
■ Cisco Process Orchestrator (CPO): CPO performs the automation of IT process and end-
to-end service delivery across the entire IT landscape. CPO is the brains behind CIAC and 
is highly extensible and customizable with over 500 extension points. It has more than 
800 prebuilt workflows and offers consistency with industry best practices such as IT 
Information Library (ITIL). Through the use of automation packs, CPO can support practi-
cally any IT service your organization may want to offer. In addition, it includes extensive 
reporting and auditing capabilities.
■ Cisco Server Provisioner: Cisco Server Provisioner is built to provide similar capabili-
ties as the Baremetal Agent (BMA) with UCS Director in that it allows for automating 
the provisioning, cloning, bare-metal recovery, initial configuration, and software 
installation of a server through the Preboot Execution Environment (PXE) boot process. 
The PXE boot process is covered in more detail later in this chapter through the discus-
sion of UCS Director’s BMA. As of this writing the Cisco Server Provisioner is no longer 
sold by Cisco or included in the latest version of CIAC. It is mentioned here because it 
is still part of the CCNA Cloud Admin exam blueprint. Figure 4-4 shows an expanded 
functional view of CIAC.

70  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Cisco Prime Service Catalog
Self-Service Portal and ITSM Catalog
Cisco Process Orchestrator
Workflow Automation and Integration Framework
Policy-Based 
Compute
OS/Bare 
Metal Provisioning
Policy-Based 
Network
Cisco 
UCS Manager
Cisco Server 
Provisioner
SSH/Prime Network
Services Controller
Cloud Content
Image/
Config Mgmt
Email
Monitoring
Service
Desk/CMDB
LDAP/Active
Directory
Billing/  
Chargeback
Storage Mgmt
Network Mgmt
Virtualization Mgmt
Compute Mgmt
Virtualized Multiservice Data Center Architecture
Cloud Service
Providers
Figure 4-4 Expanded Functional View of CIAC
Cisco OpenStack Solutions
OpenStack is an open source software platform that can be used for cloud computing. It is 
not one piece of software, but numerous connected modules that operate together to con-
trol data center infrastructure. It can be managed through a web-based dashboard, through 
the command line, or by programming it through RESTful APIs. The OpenStack community 
is very active, with many large companies (Cisco included) contributing to the project regu-
larly. The main components of OpenStack are as follows:
■ Compute (Nova): This component is responsible for managing and automating pools of 
computer resources and is designed to work with many different virtualization technolo-
gies and bare-metal systems too. 
■ Image service (Glance): The image service handles the discovery, registration, and deliv-
ery services associated with disk and server images. These images can be used as tem-
plates for virtual machines or containers that can be called from a service catalog. Glance 
does not store the actual images themselves, but acts as a catalog for finding and retriev-
ing them. 
■ Object storage (Swift): Swift is a scalable storage service that writes objects and files 
across multiple hard disks throughout the data center. Swift handles the data replication 
and integrity within the server clusters, allowing the addition of more capacity by simply 
adding a new resource to the cluster. If a hard disk fails, Swift will write that hard disk’s 
data to another part of the cluster automatically. 
■ Dashboard (Horizon): Horizon is the graphical user interface to OpenStack for provi-
sioning and automation of cloud resources. This interface can be customized and inte-
grated with third-party products to add more functionality. 

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  71
4
■ Identity service (Keystone): Keystone is a central directory of users and provides an 
authentication system that maps users to the services they are allowed access to. It can 
also integrate with existing LDAP directory services and support various methods of 
authentication, from standard username and password combinations to token-based 
systems. 
■ Networking (Neutron): Neutron is the part of OpenStack that manages networking and 
IP address assignment. Neutron has a plug-in architecture that allows integration with 
third-party hardware and software as well. Cisco has a Neutron plug-in for the Nexus 
9000 line of switches for direct integration.
■ Block storage (Cinder): Cinder provides block storage for compute instances within 
OpenStack. It handles creating and attaching storage devices to servers and detaching 
them from servers. It supports a wide range of storage platforms. 
■ Orchestration (Heat): Heat provides orchestration capabilities to OpenStack through 
Heat templates. These templates allow OpenStack to launch various components of a 
composite cloud application together. Heat also provides programmable APIs to enable 
integration with third-party or custom cloud management applications.
■ Telemetry/metering (Ceilometer): Ceilometer provides counters and monitoring capa-
bilities for chargeback and billing systems to pull usage data from OpenStack. 
Figure 4-5 shows a graphical representation of the components within OpenStack.
Horizon
Nova
Neutron
Glance
Cinder
Swift/Ceph
Ceilometer
Heat
Keystone
Figure 4-5 OpenStack Components
Cisco has two ways in which OpenStack can be implemented. For those customers who 
want to build their own environment from the ground up, there is the UCS Integrated 
Infrastructure with Red Hat OpenStack Platform. While that may be the longest solution 
name ever, it also gives the most flexibility for a customer that has the resources and exper-
tise to build and deploy OpenStack on their own. This solution is a Cisco Validated design 
and reference architecture that can help take the guesswork out of how to build and deploy 
OpenStack on Cisco servers. UCS Integrated Infrastructure with Red Hat OpenStack plat-
form benefits are
■ Reduced OpenStack deployment complexity and risk
■ The ability to maintain the flexibility of your own cloud environment
■ Reduced cloud operating costs and accelerated return on investment through pretested 
and validated architecture

72  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
For those who have come to the conclusion (and rightly so) that OpenStack is a great plat-
form, but they simply don’t want to manage or deal with the complexity of getting it work-
ing, nor the ongoing care and maintenance of the platform, Cisco Metacloud is the right 
choice. Metacloud gives a customer the benefit of OpenStack without the headache of run-
ning it. Cisco does it for you on your own gear within your data center. When a new update 
comes out, the Metacloud platform is upgraded for you. Metacloud is really OpenStack as 
a service and offers the following core benefits:
■ 24×7 cloud operations and support
■ Infrastructure capacity planning
■ Monitoring and error detection
■ SLA guarantees
■ Platform and security updates
■ Cloud design and deployment support
This section gave an overview of the Cisco cloud software suites and cloud portfolio. The 
next section will dive deeper into the components and architecture of UCS Director, which 
is the primary orchestration platform that you are expected to know for the CCNA Cloud 
Admin exam.
Introducing UCS Director
UCS Director was built to provide a platform that enables automated on-demand delivery 
of IT services and infrastructure. The reality of most data centers today is that they are 
highly siloed environments that create an enormous amount of inefficiency between the 
groups and organizations that are responsible for deploying applications for the business. 
You will often see the following groups and their responsibilities when deploying a new 
application:
■ Server: Set up servers, bare-metal provisioning, configure server, create storage re-
sources, create VLAN, add VLAN to profile
■ Network: Create VLANs, update switch configuration, create network profiles, create 
UCS service profiles, configure SAN zoning
■ Storage: Create IP space (for SAN access), create vFilters, add vFilters to groups, map 
storage LUN, create storage policy, UCS Blade Server power on
■ Security: Map application connectivity needs, create access control lists, deploy ACLs to 
network devices, validate security controls
Looking through the previous list of activities and the amount of coordination it requires, 
it becomes pretty obvious why a new application can take so long to roll out. The high 
operational cost of this model makes it very expensive and inefficient. UCS Director was 
created to address this issue head on by creating an automation platform that can provide 
end-to-end infrastructure automation and lifecycle management. All of the steps outlined 
previously can be mapped into an automation workflow that ensures consistency, speed, 
and security.

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  73
4
UCS Director provides the following benefits to an IT organization:
■ Delivers infrastructure resources faster
■ Discovers and maps your existing environment
■ Allows you to create workflows based on organizational policies and standard practices
■ Automates the workflow and delivers the requested capabilities to the requestor
■ Easy automation, provisioning, and management of infrastructure resources and services
■ Reduced operational complexity because of support of multivendor environments
Figure 4-6 shows UCS Director as a turnkey solution. 
VM
VM
Bare
Metal
Virtualized and Bare-Metal
Policy-Driven
Provisioning
Physical Compute
Network and Services
A
B
C
Tenant
A
Tenant
B
Tenant
C
Linux
Linux
OS
App
OS
Linux
Linux
OS
Linux
Linux
OS
App
OS
DB
OS
Network
Compute VMs Storage
Service
Delivery
Team
Figure 4-6 UCS Director Turnkey Solution
UCS Director Architecture
UCS Director is the leading automation and orchestration engine of the Cisco cloud stack. 
It relies on a catalog of over 2200 out-of-the-box prebuilt workflows that are designed to 
allow the end user to quickly search for and find common IT tasks that can then be auto-
mated and orchestrated. Figure 4-7 shows a graphical representation of UCS Director’s 
functional architecture.

74  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Self-Service Infrastructure Portal
Service Catalog
Model-Based Infrastructure
Orchestrator
Dynamic Capacity Management
Metering and Chargeback
Management and Administration
Configuration Management
Reporting
Enterprise Integration 
(LDAP/AD, XML Export – CMDB, Metering Data, SSO (SAML))
IT Operations
Open API
UCS
Director
IT Admins
End Users
Physical Infrastructure
Network
Compute
Storage
Virtual Infrastructure
Figure 4-7 UCS Director Functional Architecture
UCS Director is designed to work in a multivendor and multi-hypervisor environment,  
providing flexibility and interoperability across a number of hardware and software  
components. UCS Director unifies network, compute, and storage into a single system  
and supports the following hypervisors:
■ VMware vSphere
■ Microsoft Hyper-V
■ Red Hat KVM
From a physical infrastructure perspective, UCS Director has native integration with Cisco 
data center gear for easy deployment and automation. It also works well in a multivendor 
environment and includes support for many of the leading compute and storage platforms. 
For a complete list of supported devices, please see the Release Notes for UCS Director at 
Cisco.com. 
There are nine core components that make up UCS Director:
■ Self-service infrastructure portal: A built-in web-based interface geared toward internal 
IT, for ordering infrastructure resources from the services catalog
■ Service catalog: List of prebuilt hardware and software items available for consumption 
by lines of business or end users
■ Model-based infrastructure orchestrator: Workflow execution engine for provisioning 
and lifecycle management of items in the service catalog
■ Dynamic capacity management: Trigger-based automatic actions in response to capacity 
and resource constraints
■ Metering and chargeback: Full consumption and resource chargeback mechanism to 
ensure service costs are accounted for

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  75
4
■ Management and administration: Web-based platform management and administration 
interface
■ Infrastructure configuration: Automated infrastructure configuration component that 
enables dynamic provisioning 
■ Reporting: Full health, usage, and capacity reporting capabilities
■ Enterprise integration: Integration into LDAP/Active Directory. XML export to other 
systems, change management database integration, single sign-on (SAML) support, and a 
robust programmable API for custom software integration.
The next section digs deeper into how UCS Director works. 
How UCS Director Works
UCS Director abstracts the configuration of hardware and software into programmable 
tasks that are mapped together to provision compute, network, and storage. Just like the 
conductor of an orchestra takes the sounds made by individual instruments to create a 
symphony, UCS Director is the conductor for your data center. Model-based orchestration 
allows each subject matter expert in your organization to add their piece to the mix, creat-
ing an automation workflow that can be replicated as many times as the business needs. 
Once the policy is defined and added to the service catalog, it can be provisioned with the 
click of a button. Under the hood, UCS Director takes that workflow and executes the vari-
ous parts to create the desired system automatically. Figure 4-8 shows the process used to 
provision a new server under UCS Director.
Server Policy…
Storage Policy…
Network Policy…
Virtualization Policy…
Application Profiles…
1
2
Subject Matter Experts
Define Policies
3 Provision Physical and
Virtual Infrastructure
Server Name
UUID, MAC, WWN
Boot Information
LAN, SAN Config
Firmware Policy
SAN Zoning
Create and MAP LUN
4
System Is
Ready for Use
VI
SME
Storage
SME
Server
SME
Network
SME
Policies Used to
Create Service
Profile SAN and
Storage
Virtual Infrastructure
Configuration
Server Name
UUID, MAC, WWN
Boot Information
LAN, SAN Config
Firmware Policy
Network
Configuration
Storage
Configuration
vSwitch
Nexus 1000v
Figure 4-8 How UCS Director Works

76  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
When you first install UCS Director, it maps your existing infrastructure hardware and 
software into programmable tasks. These tasks can be pulled from over 2200 preconfigured 
tasks, and linked together into a powerful automation workflow through the drag-and-drop 
Workflow Designer. Provisioning of data center resources is then just a matter of linking 
those tasks and workflows together.
Installation Components of UCS Director
The installation and deployment of UCS Director starts with the two primary components 
in virtual machine format. The simplest install consists of two VMware-compatible OVF 
files or Microsoft-compatible VHD files that contain the virtual UCS Director appliance 
and the Baremetal Agent. Baremetal is a term used to describe a server with little to no con-
figuration and no software installed (i.e., operating system or hypervisor). The UCS Director 
virtual machine can be installed as a single, self-contained instance of UCS Director with all 
of the core functionality in the same virtual machine. This setup can support between 2000 
and 5000 virtual machines depending on the RAM and CPU resources you allocate to the 
virtual machine. 
The Baremetal Agent (great name for a heavy metal band!) virtual machine is installed if you 
want to support provisioning of bare-metal servers. In other words, if you want to be able 
to rack up a new server and automate the provisioning of server hardware, then you will 
need to install this capability as well. 
The BMA works by providing PXE boot capabilities to your servers through Dynamic Host 
Configuration Protocol (DHCP) options. The BMA will also act as a software image reposi-
tory, enabling the server to load its base operating system software automatically. 
Multinode Deployment
If you want to support more than 5000 virtual machines, you will need to deploy UCS 
Director as a multimode installation. A multimode UCS Director installation will include the 
following virtual machines:
■ One primary node
■ One or more service nodes (up to six)
■ One monitoring database
■ One inventory database
Figure 4-9 shows how a multinode environment topology is constructed.

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  77
4
Inventory
DB
Primary
Node
Monitoring
DB
PXE
VLANs
Bare-metal
Appliances
Storage
Systems
Compute
Systems
Virtualization
Platforms
Network
Devices
UCSD
Service Nodes
Figure 4-9 UCS Director Multinode Topology
All multinode deployments require one primary node, one monitoring node, and one inven-
tory node. The difference in scale comes down to the number of service nodes attached. 
As always, review the official documentation for more details and any changes between 
releases. The multinode setup will allow you to scale UCS Director up to 50,000 VMs in the 
increments shown in Table 4-3.
Table 4-3 UCS Director Multinode Deployment Sizes
Deployment Size
Number of VMs Supported
Number of Service Nodes 
Small 
5,000 to 10,000
2
Medium
10,00 to 20,000
3
Large
20,000 to 50,000
6
UCS Director Self-Service Portal
UCS Director includes a built-in self-service portal, designed to provide an interface for 
more technical users to access automation workflows and service catalog items. The biggest 
difference between what is offered with Prime Service Catalog and the one native within 
UCS Director comes down to ease of use and extensibility. Prime Service Catalog can be 
used to provision infrastructure, software, and other business services like mobile phones. It 

78  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
is much simpler for a nontechnical person to navigate. You can open Prime Service Catalog 
up to your entire company. UCS Director’s portal, on the other hand, is not really designed 
for the same use case. Think of it as more of an interface built for IT administrators and 
staff and not your general user population. Figure 4-10 shows UCS Director’s self-service 
portal.
Figure 4-10 UCS Director Self-Service Portal
Orchestration with UCS Director
Today, many IT tasks are done manually on an ad hoc basis. For example, new business 
requirements are often brought to the IT team. As a member of either the storage, net-
work, compute, or virtualization team, you then have to make a variety of decisions. See 
Figure 4-11. Do we have the capacity on hand today or do we need to order additional 
gear? What team needs to do their part first? How long will a project to meet these 
requirements take? What other projects am I currently working on that may impact my 
ability to accomplish this new project? 
Identify Business
Application
Requirements
IT
Planning
Add Users
and Groups
to the
Project
Define
Project
Cost
Models
Identify
Approval 
Chains
Business 
Process
IT Process
Server Admins
Set Up Servers
Bare-Metal
Provisioning
Configure
Servers
Create LUNs
Create VLANs
Add VLAN to
Service Profile
6
3
1
2
Storage Admins
Create IP Space
Create Storage
Group
Add Client WWPN
to Storage Group
Create LUNs
Add LUN to
Storage Group
Add Zones to
MDS and Activate
4
Network Admins
Create VLANs
Update Trunks
Bind VLANs to
vNIC Template
Create
Network Policy
Add VLAN
to DVS
5
Figure 4-11 Sample IT Workflow Without Automation

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  79
4
In addition to adding new projects and capabilities, you are often faced with having to make 
daily small adds and changes to your existing infrastructure. Some of these tasks are trivial. 
Others, such as adding a VLAN across a data center campus, can be fairly daunting in nature 
due to the high likelihood of human error or misconfiguration. Who hasn’t missed a switch 
configuration on a device or two during a change control window at 2:00 a.m.?
The main goal of automation and orchestration is to allow you, the administrator or archi-
tect, to accomplish common tasks quickly and easily, the same way, time after time. Think 
of automation and orchestration as a very similar concept to a hopefully not too distant 
in the future concept. How great would it be if you could travel to a remote destination 
simply by hopping into your autonomous vehicle, inputting a destination address, and let-
ting your vehicle drive you safely and reliably to your destination, giving you the chance to 
read, surf the web, talk on the phone, or simply attend to other tasks during the driving por-
tion of your journey? All the while, you would have complete control to step in and take 
over if necessary to adjust your route, respond to an unforeseen situation, etc.
IT automation and orchestration are much like the previously described scenario. You 
have a mountain of tasks that you face daily in your job. Some are simple, one-step tasks. 
Others are compound tasks that are fairly order specific and complex. With automation 
and orchestration, much like the autonomous vehicle, you program in the tasks you want 
to accomplish and the vehicle takes care of the rest. In a cloud infrastructure, UCS Director 
is your vehicle. You program it to automate simple or complex IT tasks. You do this in 
conjunction with members of your organization from the other areas of infrastructure man-
agement discipline. The end results are great. You have taken a task or set of tasks that is 
manual in nature, time consuming, and prone to error and you’ve automated them with a 
few mouse clicks. More importantly, if there is a problem, you have the ability to roll back 
these changes immediately.
So to get your mind around the power of automation and orchestration, look at the list of 
daily/weekly tasks or projects that you face in IT and ask, “Is this something that I could 
automate? If I automated it, would it save time and allow me to work on more exciting proj-
ects?” If the answer to those questions is yes, congratulations, you are well on your way to 
bringing the power of Cisco Cloud to your organization!
UCS Director Orchestrator
UCS Director’s orchestration capabilities are one of the most powerful aspects of UCS 
Director. Through the Orchestrator you can automate the vast majority of data center tasks, 
saving you time and money operating your IT infrastructure. The Orchestrator has the fol-
lowing capabilities and benefits:
■ Visual construction of workflows through a graphical user interface
■ Automation of manual operational and maintenance tasks
■ Alerting and responding to predefined conditions or workflows
■ Simplification of IT management by automating complex tasks
By being able to connect automated tasks together in an Orchestration workflow, such 
as the provisioning of a virtual machine, you can gain significant time savings, reduced 
downtime and recovery, and the ability to ensure security controls are in place to meet 
compliance requirements. 

80  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
You can automate a number of IT processes through UCS Director Orchestration: 
■ Infrastructure provisioning: Bare-metal, compute, storage, and network
■ Virtual machine automation: Provisioning, scale up, scale down, snapshots, and consoli-
dation of VMs
■ Service delivery approvals: Request and approval tracking system
■ Disaster recovery: Backups, recovery on failure
All of these things are accomplished through the Orchestrator’s 2200-task built-in library, 
and by creating your own workflow with the Workflow GUI designer.
Workflow Designer
The Workflow Designer GUI makes it easy to construct or edit complex tasks and processes 
that UCS Director can automate. It allows you to drag and drop common tasks and con-
struct your own advanced automation functions without having to be a software developer. 
From the start point you connect your first task, second task, and so on until you get to the 
end of the workflow with either a success or failure in execution. The interface can help 
you create some really complex workflow, with the goal of customization and mapping the 
technology to your individual or organizational standards. Figure 4-12 shows the drag-and-
drop interface of Workflow Designer.
Drag and Drop
Workflow Designer
Figure 4-12 Workflow Designer
Building a Workflow
A task is the smallest atomic (self-contained) action or operation that can be accomplished 
at once, like starting a virtual machine. A workflow is an organized set of tasks that can be 
executed on demand or in response to a predefined trigger. Workflows can automate and 

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  81
4
orchestrate both the physical and virtual environment. The smallest functional workflow is 
simply two joined tasks. Tasks are executed in the logical order in which they are defined 
in the workflow. The output of one task can also feed the input of another task, such as the 
assigning of a name or IP address to a virtual machine in a workflow.
Triggers
A trigger will execute a workflow based on meeting a predefined set of conditions. A trig-
ger can be either stateful or stateless. A stateful trigger records data and executes actions 
only when there is a change in the recorded state. A stateless trigger is checked based on 
a frequency selected at the time of creation. If a VM power status is being monitored, for 
example, and someone shuts down the VM, then the trigger would respond. 
Triggers are extremely useful in automation. Say you want to automatically increase the 
amount of memory in a virtual machine if utilization reaches 80 percent. With a trigger, 
once you go over your threshold, a workflow can be kicked off to dynamically increase the 
memory and then also send you an alert that it happened. This kind of capability can help 
avoid problems that might require someone to get out of bed in the middle of the night 
because an application crashed. 
Activities
Activities are a way to create an abstraction layer by being a placeholder for workflow 
implementation details. In this way a single activity can call multiple workflows based on a 
set of variables. With an activity, you can create a generic task and then associate the activ-
ity to one or more workflows. An example of this would be creating data stores on more 
than one type of SAN appliance. If you have a NetApp appliance and an EMC appliance, 
they have different workflows for creating a data store. You can use an activity as a way to 
associate both of those workflows together. The activity will look at input conditions to 
determine which workflow to follow. If it is EMC, then the EMC create data store work-
flow would execute, and likewise for the NetApp appliance. 
Validating Workflow
Once you’ve built your workflow, UCS Director can execute a process that validates the 
workflow to ensure that it is constructed correctly, and all of the various input and output 
parameters each task needs are properly connected. It allows for testing to ensure that the 
data bindings and connections between task elements in a workflow are functioning as they 
should. 
Many common errors can be identified quickly with the workflow validation process. The 
following are some of the items checked:
■ Mapping mismatches
■ Missing mandatory fields for tasks
■ Task handler not found
■ Missing admin or task inputs after task import or upgrade

82  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 4-13 points out the Validate Workflow button in the Workflow Designer GUI.
Figure 4-13 Workflow Designer Validation
Approvals
An approval process is often used in IT to ensure that a change that is being made to the 
infrastructure has the correct level of visibility by an administrator who can validate the 
request before submitting it. This way, errors and outages can be minimized. Within UCS 
Director there is a built-in approval process that prevents a workflow from being executed 
until approved by an administrator. You can also create Custom Approval Tasks that can 
allow the administrator to input values at the time of approval. For example, you could sub-
mit a request to resize the data store of a particular virtual machine, but require the adminis-
trator to input the resulting data store size. Figure 4-14 shows the approval request page.
Figure 4-14 Approval Request Page

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  83
4
Rollback
Rollback is the ability to “undo” a workflow that might have been launched in error, a work-
flow that is not functioning as it should be, or a workflow that includes an application or 
infrastructure component that an administrator needs to decommission. The operating state 
is returned to the same as it was before the workflow was executed. All tasks in a workflow 
are executed in the order in which they are listed. Rollback works because each task has 
two scripts attached to it. One of them performs the actions of the task, and the other exe-
cutes the action in reverse. All rollbacks create a new service request that is separate from 
the original. This way you can store state information on previous values before the work-
flow was executed, such as the memory size of a virtual machine. A workflow can partially 
succeed, with some of the tasks failing to complete, requiring you to undo the workflow. It 
is important to note that while you can roll back a workflow starting at any task, you cannot 
partially roll back a single task. Tasks are “atomic” and cannot be divided into subactions. 
Figure 4-15 shows a rollback request.
Figure 4-15 Rollback Request
UCS Director Baremetal Agent
The Baremetal Agent (BMA) within the UCS Director product set is a separate installed vir-
tual appliance. When joined properly to UCS Director, the BMA allows you to build PXE 
installation tasks into infrastructure workflows, allowing for the installation of supported 
operating systems to bare-metal hosts.
The BMA virtual appliance provides the following services:
■ A PXE boot service
■ DHCP 
■ An image repository of operating systems 

84  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol)
■ TFTP (Trivial File Transfer Protocol)
To add a previously configured Baremetal Agent to UCS Director, after it has been 
installed, navigate to Administration > Physical Accounts and click the Baremetal Agents 
tab, and then click the Add button. You will need to provide the following mandatory 
information in order to connect to a previously configured BMA virtual appliance:
■ Account Name
■ Management/PXE Address
■ Login ID
■ Password
■ Database Address
Figure 4-16 shows the UCS Director Baremetal Agent integration form.
Figure 4-16 UCS Director Baremetal Agent Integration

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  85
4
Note that once all information has been provided correctly, the Reachable column for the 
BMA will show a status of YES, as shown in Figure 4-17. You can also click on Service 
Status in the menu bar to get a status of the connection and services running on the BMA.
Figure 4-17 UCS Director Baremetal Agent Reachability Status
How BMA Works
Once installed, the Baremetal Agent will automate the deployment of new servers in the 
data center. Once you have it integrated into UCS Director, it will share the UCS Director 
console and database, meaning all of the configuration is done within the GUI of UCS 
Director. There are a few requirements that you should be aware of:
■ The Baremetal Agent must be able to reach UCS Director over the network
■ UCS Director must be able to reach the Baremetal Agent over the network
■ Servers and Baremetal Agent must also be on the same network
■ In versions prior to 5.2 you can have only one Baremetal Agent per UCS Director  
installation
Figure 4-18 shows the process of adding a new server in a data center that is running the 
Baremetal Agent to automate provisioning. 

86  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
HTTP
TFTP
DHCP
PXE
Image
Repo
BMA
Mgmt
VLAN
PXE
VLAN
PXE Record
MAC Address
Mgmt VLAN
IP Address
Network Mask
Hostname
Gateway
DNS
Root Password
Time Zone
OS Type
Bare-Metal
Server
1
PXE Record
DHCP Request
DHCP (ext’d) Response
OS Installer/Image
PXE Boot
UCS Director
2
4
5
3
Figure 4-18 UCS Director and BMA with New Server
The process occurs as follows:
Step 1. 
UCS Director sends a PXE record to the Baremetal Agent for the new server.
Step 2. 
The new server is connected to the network and makes a DHCP request.
Step 3. 
BMA provides the IP address, DHCP options that inform the server of the 
TFTP location used to house the base operating system for PXE boot to  
function.
Step 4. 
PXE boot is initiated on the server.
Step 5. 
BMA provides the operating system image via HTTP server or redirects to an 
image repository to boot the server.

Chapter 4: Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites  87
4
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test.
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 4-4 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 4-4 Key Topics for Chapter 4
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Section
Cisco Intelligent Automation for Cloud
69
Paragraph
UCS Director architecture
73
Section
Installation Components of UCS Director
76
Section 
Orchestration with UCS Director
78
Paragraph
UCS Director Orchestrator
79
Paragraph
How BMA Works
85
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
UCS Director, virtual data center (vDC), vDC categories, workflow, service request, 
Rollback, Prime Service Catalog, service catalog, Stack Designer, UCS Director, 
Workflow Designer, application containers, Baremetal Agent (BMA), Custom Approval 
Task, chargeback

This chapter covers the following topics:
4.0 Cloud Systems Management and Monitoring
4.1 Identify the components of Cisco Prime Service Catalog
4.1.a End user store front
4.1.b Stack Designer
4.1.c Heat Orchestration

CHAPTER 5
Cisco Prime Service Catalog
This chapter provides an introduction to Cisco Prime Service Catalog, a platform that incor-
porates an easy-to-use portal with a shopping cart checkout process that is similar to the 
process used by popular online retailers. The portal enables anyone within your company 
to request applications and services from your cloud infrastructure. Prime Service Catalog 
automates the delivery of these applications and services quickly, and removes the burden 
of coordinating the various complex interactions within IT that would take hundreds of 
phone calls and emails and take weeks or months to get your application deployed. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 5-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 5-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Introducing Prime Service Catalog
1
Prime Service Catalog Concepts and Components
2–4
End-User Storefront
5, 6
Stack Designer
7, 8
Heat Orchestration
9, 10
Caution The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chapter. 
If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, you 
should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving yourself 
credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might pro-
vide you with a false sense of security.

90  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. What is the role of Prime Service Catalog in delivering cloud services?
a. 
Orchestration engine
b. Part of UCS Director
c. 
Help desk software
d. Web-based front end that provides self-service provisioning of IT services
2. What is Stack Designer used for?
a. 
Nexus 9000 switch management software
b. Design of orderable application software and infrastructure stack templates
c. 
Nothing in the Cisco Enterprise Cloud Suite
d. Billing module in Prime Service Catalog
3. What protocol does RabbitMQ use to communicate?
a. 
REST
b. AMQP
c. 
TCP port 2342
d. BOCCE
4. Where in Prime Service Catalog can you change email notification templates?
a. 
You can’t
b. SendMail
c. 
Service Designer
d. Portal Designer
5. How can you find services in the end-user storefront of Prime Service Catalog?
a. 
Search for keywords
b. Browse the catalog
c. 
Click Service Items on the main page
d. All of the above
6. Where can you see a list of service items that you have provisioned under your 
account?
a. 
Stuff
b. Completed orders
c. 
My Stuff
d. None of the above

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  91
5
7. How do you change the graphical image of the application template in the service 
catalog?
a. 
Edit the application template and input a new URL with the image you want  
displayed
b. Upload a new image to the end-user storefront
c. 
Use the camera in your laptop to take a picture and then import it via email
d. All of the above
8. What functions can you perform in Service Designer?
a. 
Create authorization flows
b. Order cellular service
c. 
Drag and drop application components together
d. Create bundled offerings
9. When you click Build Service within Stack Designer, what template is generated?
a. 
Heat
b. CFN
c. 
Service Catalog Template
d. Cloud Pivot
10. Which open source project uses Heat?
a. 
OpenDaylight
b. Apache ZooKeeper
c. 
OpenStack
d. Snort

92  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
Introducing Prime Service Catalog
IT service requests can come from anywhere within a business, and to deal with the various 
activities generated, most IT organizations have some form of help desk to triage and man-
age those requests. The bottleneck this generates slows down service delivery and often 
frustrates the end user, who has no idea of the complexity their request may involve. Prime 
Service Catalog was built to address this aspect of IT service delivery, through the automa-
tion of the request process and the ultimate provisioning of services, reducing inefficiencies 
and human intervention. 
Prime Service Catalog accomplishes the goal of automating service delivery by allowing 
the user to self-provision common service offerings. When a user needs an IT service, or to 
make changes to a service already in production, they can log in to Prime Service Catalog 
and request the new service or change directly from the service catalog. As mentioned in 
previous chapters, the service catalog is really just a prepared menu of offerings or tem-
plates. By exposing this menu to the user, the whole process of provisioning services is 
greatly streamlined. Prime Service Catalog’s self-service portal provides the following:
■ Easy-to-use interface: The interface is simple and familiar, not unlike that of your favor-
ite online retailer.
■ Comparison of standard options: You can view multiple offerings side by side to deter-
mine which best meets your requirements.
■ Rich interactive web forms: The user can choose from fully HTML5-based ordering 
forms that enable the creation of simple but sophisticated offerings. You can prepopu-
late values or ask for direct input from the user. 
■ Policy control and governance: IT policy and governance are built in to the system to 
ensure that security and resource allocation is managed in real time.
■ Ordering and approvals: The ordering system includes cost and billing mechanisms as 
well as a built-in order approval workflow if needed for costly resources.
■ Online status updates: A built-in status system can provide real-time updates on the pro-
visioning status of your application or service. 
Figure 5-1 shows Prime Service Catalog’s role in managing IT service requests.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  93
5
End Users
Self-Service Portal
Service
Requests
Easy-to-Use
Interface
Compare
Standard
Options
Rich
Interactive
Forms
Policy
Control and
Governance
Ordering and
Approvals
Online Status
Updates
Service Catalog
Role-Based
Access Control
Figure 5-1 Prime Service Catalog and Managing IT Service Requests
Managing Requests for IT Services
Prime Service Catalog is the main portal for end-user interaction. The Service Catalog mod-
ule is based on HTML5 and provides users with a shopping cart experience very similar to 
that of many mobile app stores or e-commerce sites. Its main function is to enable IT as a 
service (ITaaS), which is a term used to describe an operational model that is focused on 
providing IT services to the business in a user-friendly, simplified, and standardized manner. 
Although ITaaS is not an official NIST cloud service model, it is an effective way for busi-
ness to reduce costs and increase IT customer satisfaction. The main Service Catalog module 
included with Prime Service Catalog provides
■ A home page that can be customized using custom style sheets either for the entire site 
or by different organizations, each of which may brand their IT experience in the catalog
■ Individual Showcase sections of the home page that can be defined by setting up service 
categories using concepts such as hierarchy, service name, or service description
■ Options to search for a service or browse through categories on the screen
■ A Manage My Stuff tool to help IT consumers manage subscriptions or orders
■ A Notification icon that lists all open orders and open authorizations for the user
■ A shopping cart where you can see ordered items and check out, similar to many popular 
e-commerce sites
■ A Home button to return to the home page at any time

94  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 5-2 shows the home page view of Prime Service Catalog.
Figure 5-2 Prime Service Catalog Home Page
Again, the main goal of Prime Service Catalog is to provide a self-service portal into the 
IT service catalog for full lifecycle management of IT services that allows the users in your 
organization to order those services with a pleasant “consumer of IT” shopping experience. 
Prime Service Catalog offers very advanced functionality, such as employee onboard-
ing (processes such as ordering business cards, as a business process portal to order new 
employee laptops, and much more), but for the purposes of this book, we will focus on the 
use case of Prime Service Catalog as a tool for ordering Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and 
Platform as a Service (PaaS).
In addition to the portal, Prime Service Catalog also includes the following:
■ Service Designer: Used to build a category-structured list of orderable service items that 
can consist of physical hardware, virtual services, account setup, or any other class of ser-
vice that IT offers
■ Stack Designer: Used to build application stack templates that can consist of physical or 
virtual infrastructure and software
■ Portal Designer: Used to create and modify the layout of the web portal for organiza-
tional customization
On-Demand Service Delivery
The main interface for Prime Service Catalog is both intuitive and simple to understand 
at a glance. The end user can browse through the various categories and select the types 
of services they are looking for. Looking through the catalog, you can see the service 
offered, a description of the service itself, and even a user rating system. Figure 5-3 
shows the catalog view.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  95
5
Figure 5-3 Prime Service Catalog Service Offering View
When you click an offering, you are presented with a detailed description of the service itself 
and any details you may need to know about what you should expect from the service. There 
can be videos, tutorials, and links to other web resources that the user may find valuable. 
In addition, you can find other user “reviews” of the service, including their comments and 
lessons learned. Figure 5-4 shows the bring your own device (BYOD) service description.
Figure 5-4 BYOD Service Description

96  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Under the My Stuff section of the main interface, you can see all of the services that are 
currently provisioned for your account. This view will show the service status, when it was 
provisioned, and other information about the service itself. You can also make changes to 
your services from here. Figure 5-5 shows the My Stuff view.
Figure 5-5 My Stuff View
Prime Service Catalog Concepts and Components
Prime Service Catalog (PSC) is a user interface for businesses that want to deliver IT services 
in an automated manner. By using standard services that are displayed as a catalog of items a 
user can choose from, it can become the front-end “face” of IT. Prime Service Catalog con-
sists of a number of core components that allow it to automate and orchestrate the complex 
process of service provisioning and delivery. The following is an overview of the parts that 
make up PSC.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  97
5
End-User Storefront
The end-user storefront is the primary interface for interacting with the system. It is built on 
an HTML5 graphical user interface that will run in any browser without the need for plug-
ins. The end-user storefront is shown in Figure 5-6.
Figure 5-6 End-User Storefront
Stack Designer
Stack Designer allows you to develop standardized application offerings and publish them 
to the Prime Service Catalog portal. The Stack Designer uses the concepts of templates and 
services. Using Stack Designer, an application stack template can be constructed and pub-
lished as an orderable service. Templates are created by adding application components, 
such as web servers and databases, into infrastructure logical containers through a graphi-
cal interface that makes it easy to visualize how the application components interact. Stack 
Designer also ships with many predefined templates. Services are the end result of publish-
ing a container in the service catalog as a service that can be ordered, used, and consumed 
by a Prime Service Catalog end user. A service can be an application such as Microsoft 
SharePoint or a J2EE middleware server. 

98  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Stack Designer makes it easy to create application templates and publish them as a service in 
the service catalog. Stack Designer not only lets you visualize the logic connectivity of the 
application but also allows you to drag and drop application components into the applica-
tion stack. Figure 5-7 shows the infrastructure view of Stack Designer.
Figure 5-7 Stack Designer Infrastructure View
Portal Designer
The Portal Designer lets you design and manage the pages and portal content displayed 
as part of Prime Service Catalog to the end user. It allows an administrator granular role-
based access control of service content by user or group. Portal Designer can help create a 
highly customized user interface that affords control over the appearance and functionality 
of Prime Service Catalog. To access Portal Designer from the Prime Service Catalog home 
page, choose admin > Switch To > Portal Designer from the menu, as shown in Figure 5-8.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  99
5
Figure 5-8 Accessing Portal Designer
Figure 5-9 shows the main page for Portal Designer, which gives you access to all of the 
customization capabilities for how Prime Service Catalog’s user portal looks and operates. 
Figure 5-9 Portal Designer

100  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The front-end portal exposes access to services, service items, standards, and offerings 
through portlets, which are small pieces of software that provide access to the technical 
underpinnings of a service. You can replace these portlets with your own custom code, 
enabling you to build your own interface. Portlets can be built in JavaScript/HTML, ad hoc 
lists, or third-party compliant portlets.
With Portal Designer you can do the following:
■ Create portlets from external or third-party sources
■ Create portlets to highlight common services
■ Create portlets to show users what they already own, with links to services related to 
those items
■ Show announcements, video, or other types of media
■ Leverage RBAC to create a flexible user interface that is at once simple for casual users 
and advanced for power users
With Portal Designer you can build a feature-rich, consumer-of-IT interface that matches 
how your own organization operates and is structured. While PSC is intuitive and easy to 
use out of the box, the ability to create a unique experience for your end users may be 
a requirement for your organization. Cisco uses Prime Service Catalog internally (called 
eStore) and has customized its look and operation. Figure 5-10 shows Cisco’s implementa-
tion of Prime Service Catalog.
Figure 5-10 Cisco’s Internal eStore
Note Portal Designer is a separately licensed addition to PSC, and is beyond the scope of 
what you need to know to pass the CCNA Cloud Admin exam. 

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  101
5
Service Designer
Service Designer is the module in Prime Service Catalog where you can configure and 
design service packages for end-user consumption from the service catalog. Service Designer 
allows you to do the following:
■ Create categories and keywords that end users may use to search for a particular service
■ Design the look and behavior of service forms, the interactive web page, determining 
which service requisitions are ordered and tracked in Prime Service Catalog
■ Construct request or service fulfillment plans
■ Configure authorization flows for service delivery
■ Configure service ordering permissions
■ Link email templates with processes that require email notifications
The Service Designer module is shown in Figure 5-11. The various tabs on the left side of 
the web interface are used to construct or modify a service, as described here:
■ Services: Create and modify service groups and their service definitions, including the 
delivery plan and presentation of the service. It also includes any active form compo-
nents that are used in the service form. You can configure service order permissions, 
configure authorization flows for service delivery approval, and link email templates with 
processes that need email notification.
Figure 5-11 Service Designer Interface

102  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ Dictionaries: Create and modify the dictionaries that specify the data fields required in 
a service. Dictionaries, a basic building block of a service form, include a group of data 
elements (fields) that allow users and service performers to enter and view data required 
to fulfill the service request. 
■ Active Form Components: Create and modify reusable form components, which specify 
both the service’s look (via the configuration of previously defined dictionaries) and 
feel (via the definition of rules that can dynamically adjust both the form’s appearance 
and behavior). The appearance and behavior of a service form is determined by how 
the dictionaries and their component fields are configured as part of the active form 
components that are used in the service definition. Active form components provide 
the potential for reusability across service forms. With careful and thoughtful design, a 
designer may create an active form component from a commonly used dictionary, or set 
of dictionaries, and configure it only once. Then this form component can be included in 
as many services as necessary, with no additional configuration.
■ Scripts: Write JavaScript functions to supplement the rules defined in active form com-
ponents and maintain JavaScript libraries.
■ Categories: Specify how services and service categories are displayed in the Service 
Catalog module. Customers may use categories to search for a particular service.
■ Keywords: Define and manage the keywords used in the service catalog search engine. 
Customers may use keywords to search for a particular service.
■ Objectives: Define and manage the measurable service delivery objectives defined in the 
Service Definition Offer tab.
■ Extensions: Define custom attributes for services and categories and manage the presen-
tation of categories on the landing page of the Service Catalog module.
■ History: Track the service design change history and view the details based on the entity 
type or filter by the username.
UCS Director
UCS Director plays a crucial role in provisioning services through Prime Service Catalog, 
and is used for infrastructure provisioning and management. The supported components 
that can be orchestrated through PSC are Standard Catalog, Service Container 
Catalog, Fenced Container Template, Cisco VACS, and Cisco APIC (the brains of Cisco 
Application Centric Infrastructure). In addition, all of UCS Director users and groups are 
mapped to Prime Service Catalog directly, removing the need to manage multiple user 
accounts. If the organization uses LDAP, however, PSC (and UCS Director) will use those 
accounts instead. Chapter 4, “Cisco Cloud Automation/Orchestration Suites,” discusses 
UCS Director in more detail. 
RabbitMQ
RabbitMQ is an open source application message broker that allows applications to 
exchange information in an asynchronous manner. Modern distributed applications must be 
able to exchange data reliably and flexibly, especially in a work environment where auto-
mation and orchestration can dynamically add and remove components of an application 
on-the-fly as scaling needs change. RabbitMQ handles the communication of those types of 

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  103
5
applications using an open standard called Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP). 
RabbitMQ is included in PSC to enable open interaction with other systems and orchestra-
tors that speak AMQP.
Puppet
Puppet is an open source configuration management tool that enables a standard method 
for delivering and managing software and the underlying hardware. Configuration manage-
ment is different from just writing a script that performs some task or another. Configuration 
management is a process that systematically handles changes to a system while maintain-
ing the integrity of the system as a whole. Puppet uses a modeling language that describes 
the desired state and then uses automation to add software or change configuration of the 
infrastructure to achieve that state. The concept of infrastructure as code is derived from this 
process where the modeling language (or code) configures the infrastructure dynamically at 
run time from a pool of resources. 
Puppet uses an easy-to-read modeling language built on Ruby (a programming language) 
that allows you to deploy and provision software and hardware as needed. Puppet operates 
in a client/server model with the Puppet master as the server and the Puppet agent as the 
client. Puppet is model driven and very popular among organizations leveraging DevOps 
practices. Prime Services Catalog does not bundle a full Puppet implementation, but it does 
include a Puppet master to communicate with a Puppet environment if it is used to auto-
mate application or infrastructure deployment within IT. Cisco has a number of infrastruc-
ture platforms, such as the Nexus 9000 Series, that have a Puppet agent built in. Puppet is 
just one more way to interoperate with existing systems.
Intercloud Fabric for Business
Prime Service Catalog has built-in support for the Cisco hybrid cloud solution Intercloud 
Fabric for Business. Intercloud Fabric enables you to offer services that extend from your 
private cloud environment into the public cloud. Intercloud Fabric handles the provisioning 
and deployment of your application automatically just like any other service catalog item, 
allowing for consistent security and policy implementation regardless of where the actual 
workload resides. 
Navigating the End-User Storefront
As mentioned previously in this chapter, the end-user storefront is the main interface that 
your users will see when ordering a service from IT. It is essential that you are comfortable 
with the process of ordering a service and verifying its successful delivery as part of your 
preparation for the CCNA Cloud Admin exam. 
In this section you will see how to navigate the Prime Service Catalog interface, order a ser-
vice from within it, and validate that your service is up and running. 
Logging In
Step 1. 
At the Cisco Prime Service Catalog login page, shown in Figure 5-12, enter 
your username and password and click Log In. 

104  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 5-12 Login Screen 
Step 2. 
Your home page will be displayed. You will see in the upper left of the page 
the home button (looks like a small house) and a Browse Categories drop-down 
link to browse categories of service catalog items, as shown in Figure 5-13. If 
they are configured, you can also see commonly ordered services with a direct 
link at the bottom of the page. 
Figure 5-13 Prime Service Catalog Home Page

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  105
5
Locating Services
Before you can order a service, you must locate the service you want to order. In Prime 
Service Catalog the various services and offerings are grouped into categories. You can 
locate a particular service either by browsing through the categories or searching for 
keywords. 
Browsing for Services
Step 1. 
On the home page, click the Browse Categories button and select a category 
name or its icon from the drop-down list. Prime Service Catalog displays the 
subcategories and services in that category, as shown in Figure 5-14 for Cloud 
Computing Services. In addition, you can click Browse All to get a complete 
list of all catalog items.
Figure 5-14 Browse Categories

106  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 2. 
If there are additional subcategories within a category, continue to click 
through each subcategory until you locate the service you want. In Figure 5-15 
you can see the two subcategories Application Platforms and Private Cloud 
IaaS, with Application Platforms selected.
Figure 5-15 Category List
Step 3. 
Once you have found the service you are looking for, do either of the 
following:
Click the name of the service to view a complete description of the service, 
cost structure, and any other pertinent information. 
OR
Click Order to fill in the order form and order the service.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  107
5
Searching for Services
Step 1. 
On the Prime Service Catalog home page, click the Search icon to open the 
search box (see Figure 5-16), enter a word or phrase in the search box, and 
then press Enter. Service Catalog displays an alphabetical list of services that 
match your search criteria, as shown in Figure 5-17.
Figure 5-16 Search Field

108  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 5-17 Search Results
You can also perform a wildcard search by using the options shown in  
Table 5-2. Search parameters are not case sensitive.
Table 5-2 Wildcard Search Methods
Wildcard (*) Search Criteria
Search Results
Enter the * symbol alone
All services in the system. You must enter the 
wildcard alone to see all possible selections. (The full 
list of options does not necessarily appear by default.)
Enter * before the service name or * after 
the service name (with no spaces; for 
example, *service or service*)
All services with something either in front of the 
service name or after the service name that match the 
search entry.
Enter * before and after the service name 
(with no spaces; for example, *service*)
All services that have something in front of the 
service name and after the service name that match 
the search entry.
Step 2. 
Once you have found the service you are looking for, do either of the  
following:
Click the name of the service to view a complete description of the service, 
cost structure, and any other pertinent information. 
OR
 
Click Order to fill in the order form and order the service.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  109
5
Service Overview
When you click the name of a service in the search results, the service overview that appears 
describes the service and provides summary information about pricing and service delivery, 
as shown in Figure 5-18.
Figure 5-18 Service Description
The service description can include some or all of the following information as seen in 
Table 5-3.
Table 5-3 Service Overview
Service Item
Description
Standard Duration
Amount of time, usually in business days, in which IT has 
committed to delivering the service, after any required 
authorizations have been approved
Service Level Description
Description of the service
Price
Price, if any, for this service, which is used for showback/
chargeback purposes
Price Type
Type of pricing, such as Fixed pricing or Time & Materials, for 
this service
Price Description
Brief description or explanation of the pricing for the service

110  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Ordering a Service
Once you have located the service you want to order, understand how much it will cost 
you, and are ready to initiate the order, your next step is to complete the order form itself. 
Once you click the Order button for the service, you will be presented with an interactive 
form that you will need to fill out. 
Step 1. 
Click Order and complete the order form (see Figure 5-19).
Figure 5-19 Order Form
Mandatory fields on the order form are indicated by a red asterisk (*) and 
require you to fill them out before continuing. The information that you input 
on the order form is used by reviewers, authorizers, and service performers 
during the services delivery process. Whenever possible, Service Catalog will 
prefill information about you from your LDAP or local PSC profile. 

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  111
5
Step 2. 
Once you complete the order form, click Submit. You will then see your order 
on the My Cart page, as shown in Figure 5-20. 
Some of the items you can order immediately. With others you can add 
multiple items to the shopping cart and order them all together.
Figure 5-20 My Cart
Step 3. 
Click Place Order on the My Cart page to order the service and finish the 
ordering process.
Viewing Order Status Details
The requisition status page displays details about the status of a single request, along with 
all the services in the request. You can create and view comments, as well as attach and view 
documents.
To view order status details:
Step 1. 
Go to Service Catalog > Manage My Stuff > Open Orders; example results 
are shown in Figure 5-21.

112  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 5-21 Open Orders
Step 2. 
Click the requisition number to view the order details shown in Figure 5-22. 
As shown in the box on the right, three different views are available: Summary, 
Comments & History, and Attachments.
Figure 5-22 Summary View

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  113
5
The Summary view of the requisition displays the following sections:
■ 
Requisition: Provides customer and initiator information, overall status 
of the requisition, and create/submit dates.
■ 
Services: Lists the name of each service in the requisition, along with its 
current status, standard duration, and cost information. Click the service 
name to view the completed order form.
■ 
Delivery Process: Lists the milestones (the major tasks of reviewers, 
approvers, and service performers) in the service delivery process, along 
with the due date for each milestone and its current status. The possible 
Status column values are
■ 
TBD: The due date will be determined when any required 
authorizations have been completed.
■ 
Approximate: The due date forecast has been approximated based 
on the calendar of the task’s default delivery team.
■ 
Estimated: The due date forecast estimate has been based on the 
duration of scheduled tasks when the order is submitted.
■ 
Completed: A task in a service delivery plan has been successfully 
completed. 
The Comments & History view displays the comments of reviewers, 
authorizers, and performers who work on the service request. It also displays 
a history of actions, such as automated email and task completions, that are 
logged by the system. To add a comment, enter it in the Add Comments field 
and then click Add. Your comment will be visible to all users who can view the 
requisition.
The Attachments view enables you to view and attach documents associated 
with the requisition. To associate a document to the requisition, click Browse, 
locate and choose the file you wish to attach to the requisition, and click Add.
Stack Designer
Stack Designer allows you to create application templates that include the application and 
infrastructure components as one complete unit. You can dynamically assemble application 
components and infrastructure in a graphical interface that can then be reused. Once the 
stack is defined, it can then be published to the catalog and provisioned by end users.
Stack Designer Templates
When you launch Stack Designer, you are presented with predefined application templates 
that you can use as is, or clone and modify. If you want to create a new application, you 
can do that as well by clicking Add New Template. Figure 5-23 shows the Stack Designer 
Application Templates page.

114  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 5-23 Stack Designer Application Templates
In addition to Application Templates, Stack Designer has tabs for Infrastructure Templates, 
Global Parameters, and Target Types. 
Infrastructure templates are imported from UCS Director and, if installed, Cisco Virtual 
Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS) and Intercloud Fabric for Business. The types of 
services available from UCS Director are container templates, container catalogs, and stan-
dard catalog virtual machines. These infrastructure templates include networking configu-
ration, virtual machine images, and topology. From VACS, Prime Service Catalog imports 
the following templates: Cloud Services Router virtual machine, Virtual Security Gateway 
virtual machine, and application virtual machines. Figure 5-24 shows the Infrastructure 
Templates tab.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  115
5
Figure 5-24 Stack Designer Infrastructure Templates
The Global Parameters tab, shown in Figure 5-25, stores commonly used configuration 
parameters needed for application provisioning. These can be added here or as part of the 
application stack building process.
Figure 5-25 Stack Designer Global Parameters

116  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Target types are integration points that the application stack can be built against. The 
default target type for Enterprise Cloud Suite is UCS Director. Figure 5-26 shows the Target 
Types tab.
Figure 5-26 Stack Designer Target Types
When a user orders an application template, Prime Service Catalog begins the process of 
managing the fulfillment of the request. PSC starts off by processing any required approval 
steps. Once the request is approved for execution, PSC determines if any UCS Director–
managed infrastructure provisioning must take place. If so, PSC makes a remote call to UCS 
Director and initiates the requisite workflow. PSC can also initiate external actions via inter-
nal scripts, integration with Cisco Process Orchestrator, and other external components. As 
PSC moves into the application configuration element of the request, it leverages its internal 
Puppet service and Heat templates to complete the application deployment.
Configuring an Application Template with Stack Designer
The following steps detail how to configure an application template with Stack Designer.
Step 1. 
Log in as an administrator in Prime Service Catalog.
Step 2. 
Choose admin > Switch To > Stack Designer (see Figure 5-27).
Step 3. 
In Stack Designer, click Create a New Template (see Figure 5-28).

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  117
5
Figure 5-27 Switching to Stack Designer Module
Figure 5-28 Creating a New Template

118  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 4. 
Enter basic information about your application, as shown in the Catapp  
example in Figure 5-29.
Figure 5-29 Application Information
Step 5. 
Click Add Image to select an image that will be displayed in the service  
catalog.
Step 6. 
Enter the URL for the image location (see Figure 5-30) and click Save.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  119
5
Figure 5-30 Enter URL for Image
Step 7. 
Select an infrastructure template. Figure 5-31 shows the result of selecting the 
template for a two-tier application.
Figure 5-31 Infrastructure Template Selected

120  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 8. 
Add software components and input required service parameters, similar to the 
example shown in Figure 5-32.
Figure 5-32 Adding Software Components
Step 9. 
Click the Build Service button.
Step 10. After you click the Build Service button, the Edit Service window will appear. 
Click Include to select the folder categories under which the new service will 
appear when searching or browsing through the catalog (see Figure 5-33).
Step 11. Click the Permissions tab of the Edit Service window, and then click the Add 
Permission drop-down arrow to select who in the organization can see the new 
template (see Figure 5-34).

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  121
5
Figure 5-33 Select Categories Dialog Box
Figure 5-34 Selecting Permissions

122  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 12. You will be notified when the service has been saved successfully, as shown in 
Figure 5-35. Click Save and then Close.
Figure 5-35 Save and Close
Step 13. Return to the list of applications and you will see the new application listed, as 
shown for Catapp in Figure 5-36.

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  123
5
Figure 5-36 New App Template
Heat Orchestration
Prime Service Catalog utilizes Heat orchestration as its embedded orchestration service 
along with OpenStack Keystone and RabbitMQ server. Heat is an OpenStack project 
whose main goal is to allow administrators to describe complex cloud-based applications 
in a logical modeling language text file. These text files, referred to as templates, then 
get interpreted by the Heat engine for execution. This service allows you to orchestrate 
a large number of components as a single unit. Keystone handles identity management, 
while RabbitMQ is responsible for passing service requests from Prime Service Catalog 
to the orchestrator for provisioning via the AMQP protocol. 
Heat is exclusively used in Prime Service Catalog to orchestrate application model  
templates that are built with Stack Designer. These templates can be constructed in the 
Heat Orchestration Template (or HOT) format and allow for interoperability because Heat 
is a nonproprietary open source technology. HOT is often written in YAML (Yet Another 
Markup Language) and is easy to read. These templates have become a common way to  
provide Heat resource plug-ins that allow Heat to orchestrate UCS Director and Puppet.  

124  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The goal of Heat is to create a stack that represents a collection of virtual machines and their 
configurations, including networks, security groups, and other parameters. A Heat Template 
file is made up of four sections:
■ Resources: This has the details of the stack you are building and includes the objects that 
will be created and/or modified when Heat orchestration executes. Resources can be 
virtual machines, data store volumes, security groups, IP addresses, or any other object 
within UCS Director.
■ Properties: Properties are the variables within your template and can either be hard 
coded (i.e., a specific virtual machine image) or can be placeholders that the user is 
prompted to input. 
■ Parameters: Parameters are the actual property values that must be passed when execut-
ing the Heat template. 
■ Output: Output includes the return values sent to the user or Prime Service Catalog upon 
execution of the template.
Example 5-1 shows a HOT file example written in YAML.
Example 5-1 Output of a HOT File Example Written in YAML
{
  "heat_template_version" : "2013-05-23",
  "parameters" : {
    "CreateServiceName" : {
      "type" : "string",
      "description" : "Create Service name"
    },
  },
  "resources" : {
    "container" : {
      "type" : "Cisco::ServiceCatalog::Service",
      "properties" : {
        "createservice" : {
          "Ref" : "CreateServiceName"
        },
        "deleteservice" : {
          "Ref" : "DeleteServiceName"
        },
        "customerloginname" : {
          "Ref" : "CustomerName"
        },
        "sections" : {
          "UCSD_ContainerInformation" : {
            "Name" : {
              "Ref" : "ContainerName"

Chapter 5: Cisco Prime Service Catalog  125
5
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test.
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 5-4 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 5-4 Key Topics for Chapter 5
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Section
Identify the components of Prime Service Catalog
96
Steps
Understand the end-user storefront and how to order a service 
103
Table 5-2
Wildcard search methods
108
Steps
Process for ordering a service 
110
Paragraph
Understand Stack Designer
114
Steps
Configure an application template with Stack Designer
116
Paragraph
Understand Heat orchestration
123
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
Prime Service Catalog, service catalog, lifecycle management, BYOD, templates, Portal 
Designer, Service Designer, Stack Designer, AMQP, RabbitMQ, Heat orchestration, 
OpenStack, Keystone, YAML

This chapter covers the following topics:
1.0 Cloud Infrastructure Administration and Reporting
1.3 Deploy virtual app containers
1.3.a Provide basic support and troubleshoot app container with firewall,  
networking, and load balancer
3.0 Cloud Provisioning
3.1 Describe predefined Cisco UCS Director-based services with the Cisco Prime 
Service Catalog
3.1.c Describe template formats
Task 3.1.c(iii): Network
Task 3.1.c(iv): Virtualization
3.3 Deploy preconfigured templates and make minor changes to the service catalog 
offerings that do not affect workflows or services
3.3.a Describe the deployment of templates: storage, compute, network, and  
virtualization

CHAPTER 6
Cisco Cloud Infrastructure
As you have seen in previous chapters, a cloud infrastructure is composed of a variety of 
components, from physical switches, storage arrays, and compute node to many virtual 
appliances. Each of these has a key function in the operation and administration of a cloud 
infrastructure, and this chapter looks at both the virtual and physical components necessary 
to build a cloud infrastructure suited for automation and orchestration.
This chapter starts with an overview of the main Cisco and third-party products that can be 
connected into a Cisco Powered cloud for automation and orchestration. The main virtual 
and physical components that make up an on-premises cloud infrastructure will be reviewed. 
The major sections provide an overview of the physical and virtual switches, the virtual 
appliances, the compute components, storage, and Cisco Intercloud Fabric. We’ll then sum-
marize how these components can be joined together to work in a Cisco Powered cloud.
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 6-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 6-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Physical Switching
1–3
Virtual Switching
4–6
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS)
7–9
Intercloud Fabric
10
Caution The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chapter. 
If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, you 
should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving yourself 
credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might pro-
vide you with a false sense of security.

128  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. You can connect using SSH into which of the following switches to manage them? 
(Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Nexus 1000V Series
b. Nexus 2000 Series
c. 
Nexus 5000 Series
d. Nexus 7000 Series
e. 
Nexus 9000 Series
f. 
All of the above
2. FEX stands for:
a. 
Fabric Enhanced Extension
b. Fabric Ethernet Extension
c. 
Fabric Extender
d. Fiber Extender
3. The Nexus 9000 line of switches supports which of the following GE port speeds?
a. 
1/10
b. 1/10/100
c. 
10/100
d. 1/10/25/40/50/100
e. 
10/50/100
4. What are the main components of the Nexus 1000V? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Virtual Ethernet Module
b. Logical Ethernet Module
c. 
Logical Supervisor Module
d. Virtual Supervisor Module
e. 
Application Policy Connector
5. AVS stands for:
a. 
Application Velocity System
b. Application Virtual System
c. 
Application Virtualized System
d. Application Virtual Switch
6. For an ACI-enabled network, which would be the best product to use to deliver  
virtual switching services?
a. 
VMware NSX
b. Nexus 1000V
c. 
VMware DVS
d. Application Virtual Switch

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  129
6
7. Which of the following are not benefits of VACS? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Easy installation within UCS Director
b. Port-based firewall
c. 
Zone-based firewall
d. Hardware-based load balancing
e. 
All the above are benefits of VACs
8. Choose all the valid VACS container types.
a. 
2 Tier 
b. n Tier
c. 
3 Tier Internal
d. 3 Tier External
9. Which of the following can be a VACS container gateway of choice? (Choose all that 
apply.)
a. 
The built-in virtual gateway, the CSR 1000V
b. A physical gateway such as one from Palo Alto Networks
c. 
A logical gateway within the application tier of an n-tier software application
d. Another virtual gateway such as the ASAv, vGW, or vPAN
e. 
None of the above
10. What level(s) of encryption is supported by Intercloud secure network extension? 
(Choose all that apply.)
a. 
AES 128 bit
b. AES 256 bit
c. 
AES 512 bit
d. AES 1024 bit
e. 
None of the above

130  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
How Automation and Orchestration Relates to 
Infrastructure
The underlying physical and virtual infrastructure within your private on-premises data cen-
ter is the “pool of resources” that you can control by a cloud automation and orchestration 
suite. It is important to understand how automation and orchestration relates to infrastruc-
ture (whether physical or virtual) and how all the pieces fit together to help you deliver the 
types of services required by your organization. This chapter discusses products and tech-
nologies such as the Cisco Nexus Series Switches, Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI), 
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS), Nexus 1000V, Virtual Security Gateway 
(VSG), Cloud Services Router (CSR), and more. 
Today, many IT tasks are done manually on an ad hoc basis. For example, new business 
requirements are often brought to the IT team. As a member of either the storage, net-
work, compute, or virtualization team, you then have to make a variety of decisions. See 
Figure 6-1. Do we have the capacity on hand today or do we need to order additional 
gear? What team needs to do their part first? How long will a project to meet these 
requirements take? What other projects am I currently working on that may impact my 
ability to accomplish this new project? 
Identify Business
Application
Requirements
IT
Planning
Add Users
and Groups
to the
Project
Define
Project
Cost
Models
Identify
Approval 
Chains
Business 
Process
IT Process
Server Admins
Set Up Servers
Bare-Metal
Provisioning
Configure
Servers
Create LUNs
Create VLANs
Add VLAN to
Service Profile
6
3
1
2
Storage Admins
Create IP Space
Create Storage
Group
Add Client WWPN
to Storage Group
Create LUNs
Add LUN to
Storage Group
Add Zones to
MDS and Activate
4
Network Admins
Create VLANs
Update Trunks
Bind VLANs to
vNIC Template
Create
Network Policy
Add VLAN
to DVS
5
Figure 6-1 Sample IT Workflow Without Automation 
In addition to adding new projects and capabilities, you are often faced with having to make 
daily small adds and changes to your existing infrastructure. Some of these tasks are trivial. 
Others, such as adding a VLAN across a data center campus, can be fairly daunting in nature 
due to the high likelihood of human error or misconfiguration. Who hasn’t missed a switch 
configuration on a device or two during a change control at 2:00 a.m.?

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  131
6
The main goal of automation and orchestration is to allow you, the administrator or archi-
tect, to accomplish common tasks quickly and easily, the same way, time after time. Think 
of automation and orchestration as a very similar concept to a hopefully not too distant 
in the future concept. How great would it be if you could travel to a remote destination 
simply by hopping into your autonomous vehicle, inputting a destination address, and let-
ting your vehicle drive you safely and reliably to your destination, giving you the chance to 
read, surf the web, talk on the phone, or simply attend to other tasks during the driving por-
tion of your journey? All the while, you would have complete control to step in and take 
over if necessary to adjust your route, respond to an unforeseen situation, etc.
IT automation and orchestration are much like the previously described scenario. You 
have a mountain of tasks that you face daily in your job. Some are simple, one-step tasks. 
Others are compound tasks that are fairly order specific and complex. With automation 
and orchestration, much like the autonomous vehicle, you program in the tasks you want 
to accomplish and the vehicle takes care of the rest. In a cloud infrastructure, UCS Director 
is your vehicle. You program it to automate simple or complex IT tasks. You do this in 
conjunction with members of your organization from the other areas of infrastructure man-
agement discipline. The end results are great. You have taken a task or set of tasks that is 
manual in nature, time consuming, and prone to error and you’ve automated it with a few 
mouse clicks. More importantly, if there is a problem, you have the ability to roll back these 
changes immediately.
So to get your mind around the power of automation and orchestration, look at the list of 
daily/weekly tasks or projects that you face in IT and ask, “Is this something that I could 
automate? If I automated it, would it save time and allow me to work on more exciting 
projects?” If the answer to those questions is yes, congratulations, you are well on your 
way to bringing the wonderful benefits of a Cisco Powered cloud architecture to your 
organization!
Physical Switching
Founded in 1984, Cisco has a rich history in LAN switching. From the groundbreaking 
Catalyst series of switches that put Cisco on the map as an enterprise switching contender 
to the new Nexus and ACI products, Cisco’s expertise and history in switching have made 
it one of the most widely deployed switching products in most organizations today. For 
the purposes of this book, we will focus on the Nexus product line and Application Centric 
Infrastructure as products and concepts.
Nexus Series Switches
Starting with the Cisco Catalyst Series Switches as its current offering, Cisco set out to cre-
ate its next generation of enterprise-class switches for the data center. Building on many 
of the concepts and the architecture of the extremely popular MDS (Multilayer Director 
Switch) Fibre Channel switch, Cisco introduced the Nexus Series Switches in 2008 with 
the introduction of the Nexus 7000. Since that time, Cisco has continued to round out the 
portfolio of offerings, covering a gamut of Ethernet connectivity options from 10 Mbps 
to 100 Gbps. Architecturally speaking, the Nexus product line runs Cisco NX-OS (Nexus 
Operating System), which was derived from SAN-OS, which powered Cisco’s Fibre Channel 

132  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Series Switches previously. Whereas Ethernet products historically had moved megabits of 
traffic, the Cisco MDS had a proven track record of moving megabytes of Fibre Channel 
payloads through many organizations. The entire switch lineup can be seen in Figure 6-2.
Open
APIs/Open Source/Application
Policy Model 
Operational
Simplicity
Architectural
Flexibility
Open/
Programmable 
Resilience
and Scale
Investment
Protection
High-Performance Fabric
1/10/40/100 GE
Scalable Secure Segmentation
VXLAN
Cisco
Nexus
1000V
Cisco
Nexus
2000
Cisco
Nexus 5000
Cisco
Nexus 7000
Cisco Nexus 9000
APIC* ACI
Cisco
Nexus 3000
Figure 6-2 Nexus Switch Lineup
Let’s take a look at the Cisco current switching portfolio.
The Nexus 2000 Series Fabric Extenders
Marking a significant departure from previous products, the Cisco Nexus Fabric Extenders 
(FEX) don’t operate as a switch per se, but rather as a remote linecard to a parent switch. 
Prior to Fabric Extenders, management functions were typically all located within the con-
fines of a single chassis. For example, switches were either large (modular) or small (fixed), 
but configuration happened on just that switch. In many designs, large switches were lo-
cated in the middle of a data center row or in the end of a data center row and used to 
aggregate connections from multiple smaller switches. Configurations had to be applied to 
both the large switch and the smaller switches. See Figure 6-3.

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  133
6
Row 1 (End of Row)
Linecard 1
Row 2 (Top of Rack)
Access Switch
Row 3 (Top of Rack)
Access Switch
Row 4 (Top of Rack)
Access Switch
Linecard 2
Primary Supervisor
Standby Supervisor
Linecard x
• Configurations Applied to Four Switches
• Cabling Required from all Top-of-Rack Switches
 
to the End-of-Row Switch
• Complex Design
• Limited Scalability
Figure 6-3 Traditional End-of-Row Switching with Top-of-Rack Switches
This led to multiple challenges:
■ Increase in cabling between switch rows
■ Increased requirements for firmware management
■ Increased port and switch management 
■ Less scalability
With the advent of the Nexus 2000 Fabric Extender, the Nexus 2000 device acts like a 
remote linecard to a central Nexus switch. All configuration for all ports gets applied to 
the single central switch. Also, multiple FEXs are supported per central Nexus switch. This 
leads to multiple benefits:
■ Decrease in cabling between switches in rows
■ Decreased number of firmware management points (because FEX firmware is managed 
from the parent switch it is connected to)
■ Decreased port and switch management (one device as opposed to many devices)
■ More scalability and density
A Fabric Extender gets managed from its parent switch. This makes management much sim-
pler, as shown in Figure 6-4.

134  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Row 1 (End of Row)
Linecard 1
Row 2 (Top of Rack)
Fabric Extender 1
Row 3 (Top of Rack)
Fabric Extender 2
Linecard 2
Primary Supervisor
Standby Supervisor
Linecard x
• Top of Racks Are Like Remote Linecards
 to End of Row Nexus
• Configuration Applied to One Switch at
 End of Row or Middle of Row
• Cabling Reduced 
• Less Complex Design
• More Scalable; Easier to Manage
Managed Like a Single Switch at the End of the Row
Row 4 (Top of Rack)
Fabric Extender 3
Figure 6-4 Nexus Fabric Extender Design
As of the writing of this book, Cisco has the following FEX models available (see  
Figure 6-5):
■ 100/1000 BASE-T: Nexus 2224TP, Nexus 2248TP (48 ports), and Nexus 2248TP-E  
(48 ports with extended buffers)
■ 10GBASE-T Fabric Extender: Nexus 2232TQ, 2348TQ, 2348TQ-E, 2232TM-E, and 
2232TM
■ 10G SFP+ Fabric Extender: Nexus 2348UPQ, 2248PQ, and 2232PP
Figure 6-5 Nexus 2000 Fabric Extenders
Fabric Extenders can be mixed and matched in different types to create the connections 
and port densities required. Be sure to check with the configuration limits of each parent 
switch to ensure you don’t try to connect to many Fabric Extenders in a topology.

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  135
6
Cisco Nexus 3000 Series Switches
The Cisco Nexus 3000 Series Switches are designed for top-of-rack 1/10/25/40/50/100-GE 
connectivity with extremely low latencies and densities ranging from 24 to 128 ports. In 
addition, the Nexus 3000 Series supports Virtual Extensible LAN (VXLAN) for mobility 
and tenant isolation as well as accessibility via common scripting tools such as Python (see 
Figure 6-6).
Figure 6-6 Cisco Nexus 3000 Series Switches
Cisco Nexus 4000 Series Switches
Purpose built for the IBM BladeCenter chassis, the Nexus 4000 is a high-speed 10-GE 
switch that supports both 1/10-GE uplinks (see Figure 6-7).
Figure 6-7 Cisco Nexus 4000 Series Switch

136  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Cisco Nexus 5000 Series Switches
Designed for low oversubscription of 1/10/40/100-GE top-of-rack access deployments or 
as a consolidation point for multiple Nexus 2000 Series Fabric Extenders, the Nexus 5000 
Series of switches supports up to 128 fixed ports. However, with support for 24 to 48 total 
Fabric Extenders connected to the parent Nexus 5000 (depending on Nexus 5000 model), 
the total number of ports managed under a single Nexus 5000 can be extremely dense (see 
Figure 6-8).
Figure 6-8 Nexus 5000 Series Switches plus Fabric Extenders
In addition, the Nexus 5000 line supports both Fibre Channel over Ethernet (FCoE) and 
Fibre Channel (FC) in 1/2/4/8/16-Gbps speeds (support and speed vary per switch model). 
As of the time of this writing, Cisco had six Nexus 5000 switches available: Nexus 5672UP, 
5672UP-16G, 56128P, 5624Q, 5648Q, and 5696Q.
Cisco Nexus 6000 Series Switches
The Nexus 6000 lineup is designed for access- and space-constrained aggregation 
deployments, offering up to 384 ports of 10 GE or 96 ports of 40 GE and up to 160 uni-
fied ports supporting FCoE. It also supports Fabric Extenders. The chipset has been opti-
mized and tuned for faster 10-GE and 40-GE traffic as opposed to Gigabit network flows 
(see Figure 6-9).

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  137
6
Figure 6-9 Nexus 6000 Series Switch
Cisco Nexus 7000 Series Switches
The Nexus 7000 switch was the first Nexus switch released in the product family in 2008. 
Ideal uses include data center access, aggregation, and core deployments. With the advent 
of virtual device contexts (VDC), the Nexus was the first switch in its class to allow switch 
virtualization and separation of services, allowing the collapsing (in many networks) of the 
access and aggregation layers, resulting in less complex, extremely scalable fabrics. With 
support for in-service software upgrades (ISSU), Fabric Extenders, and speed options from 
1/20/40/100 GE, the Nexus 7000 is designed as a true enterprise-class workhorse for the 
most demanding networks (see Figure 6-10).
Figure 6-10 Nexus 7000 Series Switch

138  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Cisco Nexus 9000 Series Switches
The Nexus 9000 Series Switch marks the next exciting evolution in the Cisco Nexus switch-
ing products. The Nexus 9000 can operate in two modes. For compatibility with existing 
networks, the switch can run in NX-OS standalone mode. This allows the Nexus 9000 to 
be introduced into existing fabrics in place of other platforms, such as the Nexus 5000 
or Nexus 7000. However, for those with an eye on the next level of programmability and 
centralization of management in an enterprise network, the Nexus 9000 line can also be 
put into ACI mode, which will be described in detail in the next section on ACI. Offering 
speeds of 1/10/25/40/50/100 GE and a deep set of switch- and fabric-level software-
defined programmable features, the Nexus 9000 line is helping Cisco usher in the area of 
software-defined networking (SDN). See Figure 6-11. 
Figure 6-11 Nexus 9000 Series Switch
Cisco Cloud Programmability of Nexus Switches
Now the great news. Everything that you can accomplish as a network administrator using 
the command-line interface (CLI) or with scripts can also be accomplished in a Cisco 
Powered cloud deployment. Tasks that are time consuming, mundane, and prone to error 
can now be automated and orchestrated within UCS Director and executed predictably, 
repeatedly, and easily with UCS Director automation and orchestration tasks and work-
flows. Take just one simple scenario: adding a new VLAN to a large enterprise data center 
fabric. Imagine that your fabric has 60 switches. If you’re a network administrator, you 
know the tension and tedious nature of such a change as you ready a window (usually in the 

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  139
6
middle of the night on a weekend) to perform this operation over and over on each switch 
in the entire fabric. If you miss one, traffic can be dropped and problems can arise. With 
UCS Director, you could create an automation task that predictably and repeatedly rolls out 
a new VLAN across all switches in the data center campus, with literally just a few clicks. 
Unlike a network administrator relying on caffeine and pizza during a 2 a.m. change win-
dow, UCS Director will apply this to all the switches without missing a single switch. And 
if there is a problem? One-button rollback on some or all of the fabric is a core feature of 
UCS Director. 
Introduction to Application Centric Infrastructure
As mentioned previously in this chapter, Cisco recognizes that as fabrics become larger 
and as layers of virtualization via hypervisors (in compute) and virtualized network services 
(in the fabric) add more functionality, the previous method of configuring on a device-by-
device basis is no longer feasible. If we recap the progression of administration, the Catalyst 
line of products required administrators to touch every single platform. The Nexus line, 
with Fabric Extenders, consolidated management onto fewer devices, while technologies 
such as VDCs allowed further consolidation still. However, as fabrics continue to grow in 
size and complexity, a better way is needed to program both virtual and physical network 
resources. Enter Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI). ACI allows the rapid deployment 
of applications onto networks with scale, security, and full visibility, whether those net-
works are physical or virtual (see Figure 6-12).
Hypervisor
VMware
Hypervisor
Microsoft
Hypervisor
Red Hat
ACI
Fabric
Figure 6-12 Application Centric Infrastructure
The concept behind ACI is simple yet powerful. Using a set of redundant Application 
Policy Infrastructure Controllers (APICs), you can define and apply network policy in a 
single location to literally hundreds or thousands of devices all across your network. Once 
defined at the APIC level, that policy can easily be deployed across a variety of physical 
(bare-metal) network ports as well as ports within a variety of hypervisors such as VMware 
ESX, Microsoft Hyper-V, and Red Hat KVM (see Figure 6-13).

140  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Hypervisor
VMware
App
Web
App
Web
Web
Web
Hypervisor
Microsoft
Hypervisor
Red Hat
ACI
Fabric
Application Policy
Infrastructure
Controller
APIC
DB
DB
DB
DB
Figure 6-13 Cisco Application Policy Infrastructure Controller
These policies are defined as high-level application connectivity/security needs, but instead 
of tightly coupling them with a large network the way you previously did on a per physical 
or virtual port basis, these policies can now be abstracted from the complicated details of a 
large network topology and then easily applied where needed. 
Application Network Profiles and How They Work
At the top level, ACI is an object model built on a concept of one or more tenants. Tenants 
in the ACI model can include something like a particular department within your organiza-
tion, a business unit, an application group, etc. A service provider hosting multiple custom-
ers may have dozens of tenants, whereas your organization may simply have one tenant, the 
name of your company. 
Underneath the concept of the tenant in ACI there exists a context. A context can be 
thought of as a set of rules for separate IP spaces or virtual routing and forwarding in-
stances. A context is simply a further way to segment and separate forwarding requirements 
within a tenant. A tenant can also, hierarchically, have multiple contexts.
Within the context you will find a series of objects that define actual applications on the 
network called endpoints (EPs) and endpoint groups (EPGs) as well as the policies that 
define the relationships between the EPs and EPGs. These policies are not only access con-
trol lists (ACL), but also inbound and outbound filters, quality of service (QoS) settings, 
marking rules, redirection rules, and other settings that define specific L4–L7 interactions 
between the EPGs (see Figure 6-14).

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  141
6
Context
EPG
EPG
EPG
Application A
EPG
EPG
EPG
Application C
Context
EPG
EPG
EPG
Application A
EPG
EPG
EPG
Application B
EPG
EPG
EPG
Application C
Tenant
EPG
EPG
EPG
Application B
Application B
Policy
Policy
EPG
EPG
EPG
Figure 6-14 ACI Logical Object Model
Now that we have a frame of reference for how objects are referenced within an ACI envi-
ronment, we can look at how application network profiles (ANP) work. An ANP can be 
used to define permissible (or denied) interactions between EPGs. For example, if we imag-
ine a three-tier application of Web, App, and Database, each tier would exist as an EPG and 
potentially contain endpoints. We will discuss a theoretical application that has five web 
servers, two app servers, and one database server (see Figure 6-15):
■ Web EPG, consisting of five web EPs
■ Application EPG, consisting of two app EPs
■ Database EPG, consisting of one database EPs
Application Network Profile
Web EPG
EP 1
EP 2
EP 3
EP 4
EP 5
App EPG
EP 1
EP 2
Database EPG
EP 1
Figure 6-15 Three-Tier Application Network Profile

142  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Once you have an idea of how you need the application tiers to interact, you would create 
the EPGs per tier, then create the policies to define connectivity between EPGs (such as log, 
mark, redirect, permit, deny, copy, etc.), and then create the connection between the EPGs. 
These connections between EPGs are known as contracts.
The ANP therefore is composed of a contract or contracts between multiple EPGs contain-
ing one or more EPs per EPG. 
As your organization transitions from traditional NX-OS and CLI-based administration to 
an ACI-based network, UCS Director once again can provide a tremendous amount of value 
to you as many of the ACI- and APIC-related functions that you would perform on a daily 
basis are available within UCS Director as tasks that can be chained together into workflows 
to help create self-service capabilities for an ACI-enabled network.
Infrastructure Automation and UCS Director
Once the main components of a Cisco Powered cloud (Prime Service Catalog and UCS 
Director) have been implemented, they need to connect to various components in your data 
center to do automation and orchestration (see Figure 6-16). Some of the devices that can 
be attached to UCS Director for automation and orchestration include:
■ Physical Ethernet switches such as those in the Cisco Nexus family and Catalyst family 
as well as various third-party switches
■ Virtual Ethernet switches such as the Cisco Nexus 1000V or Application Virtual Switch 
(AVS), as well as various third-party virtual switches, including the VMware Distributed 
Virtual Switch (DVS)
■ Nexus 9000 APIC, which enables the UCS Director administrator to issue automation 
and orchestration commands against a Nexus 9000 Application Programmable Interrupt 
Controller
■ Other Ethernet network physical and virtual appliances such as Cisco VACS, Cisco CSR 
1000V, ASA 1000V, and third-party physical and virtual networking appliances such as 
an F5 BIG-IP load balancer
■ Fibre Channel switches including Cisco MDS and Brocade Fibre Channel switches
■ Fibre Channel and IP-based storage arrays, including many popular arrays from Pure 
Storage, EMC, NetApp, IBM, and others
■ Compute platforms including support for Cisco UCS Central, Cisco UCS Manager, 
Standalone UCS C-Series rackmount servers (utilizing Cisco Integrated Management 
Controller, or CIMC), as well as third-party servers such as those from HP, Dell, and IBM 
through standards like IP Management Interface (IPMI)

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  143
6
Heterogeneous Physical and
Virtual Infrastructure Automation
Across Compute, Network,
and Storage
Extensible REST API for Integration
with Northbound Orchestration Systems  
Wizard-Driven Rapid Deployment
of UCS-Integrated Infrastructure
(FlexPod, Vblock, VersaStack, VSPEX) 
Cisco UCS Manager
Controllers
Storage
VM
Network with
L4-7 Services
Storage
Storage
Web
APP
DB
Resource
Needs:
  • Quantity
  • Capacity
  • Quality
Application
Instantiation
vCenter/SCVMM
NetApp EMC
APIC
Compute
2 VMs,
High IO
8 VMs,
10 GB
2 B-Metal,
50 GB
Web
Appl.
DB
Storage
Web
DB
Appl.
Cache Locally
Primary Storage
• IOPS
• Mirrored
• 2 High IOPS
• Data Mirroring
Network
Stateful
FW and LB
L4-L7 Services
• Stateless FW
Connection
to Appl.
Web
Tier
APP
Tier
DB
Tier
VM
VM
VM
CISCO
UCS
Director
Application
Profile
Compute
Network
Storage
F/W
L/B
DB
L/B
Web
APP
Web
Appl.
DB
Figure 6-16 Infrastructure Automation with UCS Director
Virtual Switching
According to Moore’s law, processor transistor capacity approximately doubles on average 
every two years. This hypothesis was first posited in 1965 by Gordon Moore, one of Intel’s 
cofounders. To date, it has largely held true. In the mid-to-late 1990s, realizing that most 
bare-metal operating systems and applications were consuming only a fraction of available 
CPU and memory capacity, vendors started to introduce hypervisors in the server space to 
help more efficiently use the excess memory and CPU capacity that had been created as 
processors continued to become faster, denser, and more capable over time.
Before servers were virtualized, life was much simpler for network and server administrators. 
One (physical) server usually ran one application and consumed one (physical) network port. 
With the advent of the hypervisor, IT administrators also entered a new chapter in their 
careers, where multiple servers and applications, each with potentially different connectiv-
ity requirements, started to intermingle on a single physical host with a hypervisor installed, 
such as VMware ESX. With these changing requirements, the days of having a single host 
with a single application connected to a single switch port were gone. IT simply needed 
more flexibility. This brings us to the advent of the virtual switch.
Virtual Switching Overview
In the simplest terms, a virtual switch acts much like a physical switch, only it’s made in 
software as opposed to being a physical/tangible switch that you could pick up and hold 
with your hands. A virtual switch is software that sits within a hypervisor on a physical host 
to provide VM-to-VM communication within that single host and also VM communication 
with other endpoints (such as a user running a query from their desktop against a database 

144  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
running on a virtual server) elsewhere on the network. In addition, virtual switches rely on 
the generic capabilities of the x86 processor and consume some CPU and memory overhead 
from that processor (that is therefore not available to the rest of the compute functions in 
the cluster). By contrast, physical switches, such as the Cisco Nexus 9000, use purpose-built 
ASICs in the hardware that are designed specifically for high-speed switching and packet 
processing.
As virtualization continued to grow in popularity, the industry started moving beyond 
the capabilities of a single virtual switch on a single physical host. As multiple physical 
hosts were joined together into more powerful clusters, the concept of having a single 
virtual switch tied to a single virtual host was no longer practical because every time a 
new hypervisor-based host was added to the network, another virtual switch had to be 
configured. 
This led to the advent of the distributed virtual switch (DVS). A DVS sits within the hypervi-
sor of multiple physical hosts, providing distributed networking services between multiple 
hosts in a cluster. As clusters have grown in size from 2 hosts to now up to 32 or more 
hosts, having a DVS is no longer a luxury; it is a necessity.
Cisco has two offerings in the DVS category: Nexus 1000V and the Application Virtual 
Switch. Let’s take a quick look at each. 
Nexus 1000V
The Cisco Nexus 1000V was created with the main Nexus product family during the advent 
of the Nexus 2000/5000/7000 product line and is geared mainly for traditional Nexus net-
working environments. It works very much like a virtual version of a Nexus 5000 or Nexus 
7000 (with Nexus 2000 Fabric Extenders) architecture. 
In the physical switching world, the main Nexus 5000 device acts as the management and 
configuration plane for building the switch configuration and services. Ports on a Nexus 
2000–connected FEX receive their port configuration from the Nexus 5000.
A Nexus 1000V architecture (see Figure 6-17) typically has three main components:
■ A Virtual Supervisor Module (VSM)
■ A Virtual Ethernet Module (VEM)
■ Integration with a virtual management console such as VMware Virtual Center or 
Microsoft SCVMM
In this model, you log in (usually via SSH/CLI) to the VSM and create a port 
configuration(s) for a virtual machine (called a virtual Ethernet, or vEthernet, interface). 
Those configurations then get pushed out from the VSM to VEMs that should receive that 
configuration.
The Nexus 1000V is fully integrated with UCS Director and comes with many prebuilt tasks 
required for administering and managing the Nexus 1000V within automation tasks.

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  145
6
Virtual Supervisor 
Module
VEM: Virtual Ethernet
Module
Network
Admin
SCVMM,
OpenStack,
VC
Cloud/Server
Admin
Server 1
VEM-1
Server 2
VEM-2
Server 3
VEM-N
Any Hypervisor (ESX, Hyper-V, KVM)
VSM
Figure 6-17 Nexus 1000V Architecture
AVS Architecture and Components
With the advent of the Cisco Nexus 9000 Series Switches, the Application Policy 
Infrastructure Controller (APIC), and the Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI), you no 
longer have to go to separate physical and virtual devices to apply network policy and con-
figuration. In a Nexus 9000 environment in ACI mode, configuration happens one time at 
the APIC level and that configuration can then be applied to physical network ports as well 
as to virtual network ports using the Application Virtual Switch (AVS).
Similar in concept, the use case for AVS differs from Nexus 1000V as highlighted in Table 6-2.
Table 6-2 Comparison of Nexus 1000V and the Application Virtual Switch
Nexus 1000V Virtual Switch
Application Virtual Switch
Target Network Fabric
Traditional Nexus 2000–7000 
or 9000 running in standalone 
or non-ACI mode as well as 
Dynamic Fabric Automation
Application Centric 
Infrastructure (ACI)
Single Point of 
Management
To each Virtual Supervisor 
Module (VSM) needing 
configuration
Application Policy Infrastructure 
Controller (APIC) for both 
physical and virtual networking
Hypervisor Support
vSphere, Hyper-V, KVM/Xen
vSphere, Hyper-V, KVM/Xen
So while materially similar, the AVS is targeted for ACI-enabled networks, whereas the 
Nexus 1000V is the right tool of choice for non-ACI-enabled networks.

146  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Architecturally, AVS has two major components (see Figure 6-18):
■ The AVS-DVS (Distributed Virtual Switch) on vCenter
■ An AVS kernel module on each ESXi host that is ACI enabled
VMware vCenter
Hypervisor Manager
• AVS Has Two Major Components:
  
• AVS-DVS (Distributed 
  
 Virtual Switch) on vCenter
  
• AVS Kernel Module on
  
 ESXi Host
• OpFlex Agent Runs on AVS ESXi
 Host Inside AVS Kernel Module
• Increased Control Plane Scale
 Through APIC Cluster and Leaf Node
AVS DVS
OpFlex Agent
Leaf
Spine
AVS
AVS
Spine
Leaf
Leaf
VM
VM
VM
VM
EXSi
ACI
APIC
OpFlex Agent
VM
VM
VM
VM
EXSi
Figure 6-18 AVS Architecture and Components
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS)
The entire purpose of building a Cisco Powered cloud is so that you can quickly provision 
complete Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and Platform as a Service (PaaS) offerings for 
your internal users. In the previous section, we saw how ACI using the AVS with Nexus 
9000 and APIC can offer rich L4–L7 network services for virtual machines.
In situations where ACI may not yet be deployed but the need still exists for rich network-
ing services to be deployed alongside virtual machines, Cisco Virtual Application Cloud 
Segmentation (VACS) can be a great fit (see Figure 6-19). VACS offers the following:
■ Easy installation within UCS Director for automated provisioning and orchestration
■ Load balancing
■ Routing (using the Cisco CSR 1000V)
■ Edge firewall capability (using Cisco CSR 1000V)
■ Zone-based firewall (using Cisco Virtual Security Gateway)
■ Virtual fabric (using Cisco Nexus 1000V)

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  147
6
Enforced by Best-
in-Class Services
Built on Flag Ship
Cisco NXOS and IOS SW
Enterprise
Apps
Automated Provisioning and
Orchestration—UCS Director
Routing—CSR 1000V
Edge FW—CSR 1000V
Zone-Based FW—
Virtual Security Gateway
Virtual Fabric—Nexus 1000V 
Platform for Distribute FW
Figure 6-19 Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation
With deep integration into UCS Director, this allows secure segmentation and rapid deploy-
ment of applications in virtual data centers by helping to consolidate physical assets onto a 
single infrastructure that can then be virtualized to provide deep security and network services. 
In addition, VACS brings all the products previously mentioned into a single unified license, 
making it easy to deploy, license, and manage all the components included within VACS.
When you are allocating L4–L7 network services physically for virtual machines, service times 
typically increase as complexity increases and many points of management have to be con-
figured in a solution. For example, if a particular virtualized server and application are using 
network load-balancing services as well as firewall services that are physical, you would be 
required to not only procure, rack, stack, and configure those physical devices, but also create 
configurations for your virtual services on each independent device (see Figure 6-20).
Current Physically
Segmented Architecture
Virtual Segmentation
with VACS
vCenter
vCenter
VACS
VACS
Physical Segmentation
Results in Longer
Provision Time and
Underutilized Resources
Procure, Rack, Stack,
and Provision Individual
Devices
Virtual Segmentation;
Independent of 
Physical Topology
Enforced by Best-in-Class
Virtual Networking
and Security Services
php php
S
S
php php
S
S
Figure 6-20 Secure Segmentation on Shared Infrastructure

148  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Alternatively, leveraging virtual segmentation with VACS allows single-click installation 
within the Cisco Powered cloud framework (within UCS Director) and allows you to focus 
on one place to go to set up best-in-class virtual networking and security services. This is 
accomplished easily with wizards (see Figure 6-21).
Current Provisioning Model
Provisions 
Subnet/NAT/
Routing 
Provisions 
VIP
Provision
FW Rules
/GW
vCenter
No longer have to configure
individual components; 
VACS does it for you.
Wizard-Based Provisioning
Model with Full Lifecycle Mgmt
of Virtual Services
vCenter
VACS
php
php
S
php
php
S
Figure 6-21 Simplified Virtual Networking and Security on Shared Infrastructure
VACS Containers
Within VACS, there is a concept known as a container. Containers are defined by the fol-
lowing:
■ Virtual network and security services templates for application workloads
■ Topology configurations designed for logical secure isolation and compliance
■ Exposed through the UCS Director GUI to allow rapid and consistent provisioning of 
secure applications and rich L4–L7 services
Containers can be thought of as situation-specific templates that govern connectivity, 
security, and services in a multitiered virtualized application environment. Again, using 
our previous example of a three-tier application consisting of a web tier, an application 
tier, and a database tier, let’s look at two different types of VACS containers, the VACS 
3-tier internal container template and the 3-tier external container template (see Figure 
6-22). A third example would be a VACS custom container template, which won’t be  
covered here.

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  149
6
VACS
3 Tier: Internal Container
VACS
3 Tier: External Container
VACS
Custom Container
Figure 6-22 Types of VACS Logical Container Templates
VACS 3-Tier Internal Container Template
Let’s assume the business has a requirement for you to deploy a three-tier application inter-
nally. They want to ensure that only authorized users, authenticated from the web tier, can 
access this application. If you were to build this manually, it would require (at a minimum):
■ Deploying virtual web servers and configuring the application layers of the VMs
■ Deploying virtual application servers and configuring the application layers of those 
VMs
■ Deploying virtual database servers and configuring the application layers of those VMs
■ Deploying a physical firewall and configuration application connectivity policies 
between the web tier, app tier, and database tier of the preceding three virtual systems 
■ Determining the best way to route traffic securely through each application tier into the 
firewall and applying the appropriate firewall rules to each step of the application
■ Inserting load-balancing services in front of the web tier to provide proper load balancing
This would be quite a bit of configuration, just to get that one instance of the three-tier 
application up. Whenever another application owner came along with the same request, 
you would find yourself completing the same steps yet again (and again as more application 
requirements came to you from the business side of your organization).
Using one of the defined VACS 3-tier internal container templates, you could simply click 
the container template and create a new container for the application. All the proper rules 
for firewalling, load balancing, and routing would be predefined within the 3-tier internal 
container template via policy (see Figure 6-23).

150  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
VACS: 3 Tier App
Container
(Internal)
Web Zone
HA Proxy
HTTP(s) LB 
App Zone
DB Zone
Upstream Router
Routing–EIGRP or OSPF or Static
CSR 1000V
VLAN 1/
VXLAN 101
• NAT (Optional)
• L3 Routing – EIGRP or
 OSPF (P2) 
• Edge FW
• Monitoring Features
VSG
Zone-Based FW
Figure 6-23 VACS Containers: 3-Tier Internal
As you can see, given that security requirements are not quite as tight for this internal appli-
cation, connectivity from the Virtual Security Gateway (VSG) zone-based firewall flows 
toward the web zone’s load balancer and, from there, to the app zone and DB zone. Now 
you have a template that you can predictably and repeatedly invoke whenever a new three-
tier application requirement comes your way.
VACS 3-Tier External Container Template
If the application requires greater security and increased firewall use for security or com-
pliance purposes, the 3-Tier External Container Template, shown in Figure 6-24, provides 
additional security because the firewall is in the communication path between all layers of 
the three-tier application. 

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  151
6
VACS: 3 Tier App
Container
(External)
Web Zone
HA Proxy
HTTP(s) LB 
App Zone
DB Zone
Upstream Router
Routing–EIGRP or OSPF or Static
CSR 1000V
VLAN 1/
VXLAN 101
• NAT (Optional)
• L3 Routing – EIGRP or
 OSPF (P2) 
• Edge FW
• Monitoring Features
VSG
Zone-Based FW
Figure 6-24 VACS Containers: 3-Tier External
As previously mentioned, it is also very straightforward to create custom VACS 
Container Templates for one-tier, two-tier, three-tier, or n-tier applications and define 
communication, security, load balancing, and other requirements between the different 
zones in the VACS custom container template. Saving this template will then give you a 
quick way to consistently and predictably deploy similar application services should the 
need arise in the future.
Building a VACS Container with Gateway of Choice
Often, existing standards in the environment may dictate using an existing technology as the 
default gateway for a VACS container. Within VACS, there is an option and the flexibility 
to combine both VACS services with standard deployed services in the environment.
For example, as shown in Figure 6-25, VACS can use
■ The built-in virtual gateway, the CSR 1000V
■ A physical gateway, such as one from Palo Alto Networks or Checkpoint, or a  
Cisco ASA
■ Another virtual gateway, such as the Cisco Adaptive Security Virtual Appliance (ASAv), 
Juniper Virtual Gateway (vGW), or Virtual Palo Alto Networks (vPAN)

152  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Built-In GW
Virtual GW
CSR 1000v
VM
VM
VM
VACS
Physical Gateway
Physical GW
ASA/Checkpoint, PAN
VM
VM
VM
VACS
Other Virtual Gateway
External Virtual GW
ASAv, vGW, vPAN
VM
VM
VM
VACS
Figure 6-25 Building VACS Container with Gateway of Choice
When you’re deploying VACS and choosing the gateway of choice, it’s important to know 
how to operationalize this choice. You will need the gateway IP and you will get it installed 
as part of the VACS report after you spin up a VACS container from a template. You can 
use this information to program in any device (physical or virtual) of your choice as men-
tioned in the previous list. 
Intercloud Fabric
As we’ve looked at the core components of a Cisco Powered cloud, we’ve focused a lot of 
discussion on the components that exist on premises. However, many IT workloads are also 
taking advantage of public cloud offerings such as Microsoft Azure, Amazon Web Services, 
or other Cisco Powered cloud ecosystem providers (see Figure 6-26).
Therefore, any good cloud solution should not only address multiple clouds (on premises 
and public as well as hybrid), but also different capabilities for configuration of an on-
premises or public cloud infrastructure across a wide variety of public cloud services. 
Such is the role of Intercloud Fabric. 
As with any strategy, the decision on where to host IT infrastructure (on premises or in the 
public cloud) boils down to a variety of factors. Some of them may be regulatory (such 
as needs around data sovereignty), or economic (workloads that are highly elastic or only 
needed during a short period of time each month/quarter/year). Figure 6-27 shows some 
of the criteria that go into choosing where to host a particular workload in a hybrid cloud 
deployment.

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  153
6
Windows Azure
Amazon
Web Services
Cisco
Powered
Ecosystem of
Service Providers
Cisco
Cloud Services
Cloud Operations (Cloud Assurance) (Third-Party
Billing, Assurance, Resource Mgmt.)
Cisco Prime Service Catalog Self-Service Portal 
Integrated Infrastructure Management
Cisco UCS Director
Cisco Virtual Application 
Cloud Segmentation
Hybrid Cloud
Management
Cisco Intercloud
Fabric
Multivendor Computing, Network, Storage, and Virtualization  
ACI
APIC
Figure 6-26 Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite
DC/Private Clouds
Striking the Perfect Balance
Public
Provider
Clouds
Hybrid
Fixed
Workloads
Elastic
Workloads
Scale
Control
Speed
Security
Economics
Data
Sovereignty
Choice to Build/Rent Across Providers 
Workload Portability 
Consistent Security
Figure 6-27 Why Hybrid?
Why Hybrid
Intercloud Fabric uses a similar architecture to that of distributed virtual switches such 
as the Nexus 1000V, as discussed earlier in the chapter. In a modular switch such as a 
Nexus 7000, the supervisors and linecards all exist in one modular chassis (unless using 
“distributed linecards” such as a Fabric Extender). In Intercloud Fabric, you interact with 
the on-premises component of the virtual “supervisor” while linecards are distributed 
throughout various public cloud services (see Figure 6-28).

154  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
IT
Admin
Intercloud
Supervisor 1
Supervisor 2
Linecard 1
Linecard 2
…
Linecard N
Modular Switch
Network
Admin
Linecards
Intercloud Fabric Switch
Intercloud
Fabric for
Business
Intercloud
Fabric Switch
Intercloud
Fabric Switch
Intercloud
Fabric Switch
Figure 6-28 Intercloud Fabric Analogy of a Switch
This gives you the ability to address public cloud resources in much the same way opera-
tionally as you do your internal private cloud resources. Hybrid really provides the best of 
both worlds. Host-critical or latency-sensitive applications and virtual machines on premises 
“burst or flex” less important (or seasonal) workloads out into the public cloud. This pro-
vides many benefits:
■ Layer 2 IP addressing used within your organization can be securely extended into vari-
ous public cloud spaces, allowing VMs to use similar IP addresses as they would use 
internally.
■ It enables integration with Prime Service Catalog to allow IT to become the broker 
for public cloud services. Today your IT team may be largely unaware of the extent 
and use of public cloud services. With Intercloud Fabric, you become aware of public 
cloud projects and can quickly and securely offer these services to your internal con-
sumers of IT.
■ Security and policy can be set within the organization and applied/enforced into public 
cloud services.
■ Virtual machine portability and the ability to move virtual machines from on premises to 
public cloud providers and back.
■ Automation, including complete VM lifecycle management, automated operations, and 
an open API for easy programmatic access.
Let’s look at how this is accomplished.

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  155
6
How It Works
Architecturally, Intercloud Fabric has two different products that are used to address both 
the on-premises and public portions of the cloud.
Intercloud Fabric for Business
Intercloud Fabric for Business is the enterprise portion of the solution that you install on 
premises. It allows you to transparently extend your internal VLANs and Layer 2 segments 
securely from within your private cloud infrastructure out to public cloud services while 
keeping the same level of security and policy across both the private and public environ-
ments. It is composed of two different components:
■ Cisco Intercloud Fabric Director
■ Cisco Intercloud Fabric Secure Extender
Cisco Intercloud Fabric Director is used to provide workload management in your hybrid 
cloud environment by allowing you to not only create, manage, and extend network ser-
vices between private and public clouds, but also offer policy and a self-service IT portal 
that makes it easy for you to define and provide services (such as virtual machines and the 
secure network policies associated with them) to your end users. This allows you to publish 
catalogs to your internal end users that will rapidly allow them to request, for instance, dif-
ferent virtual machine types in different public cloud providers. 
Intercloud Fabric for Providers
This is the portion of the architecture that exists in provider cloud environments and  
provides the “receiving end” of the end-to-end components that stretch from your  
private on-premises cloud out into a public cloud provider. Getting into more detail  
on Intercloud Fabric for Providers is beyond the scope of this book, but you can easily 
research it in greater detail on Cisco.com.
Secure Network Extender
To extend portions of your private, on-premises cloud infrastructure out into a public 
cloud provider, you use the Intercloud Fabric Secure Extender. This provides an AES 256-
bit encrypted tunnel between your data center and the public cloud, securely extending 
VLANs and Layer 2 spaces out into the public provider cloud. This allows policy, security, 
and connectivity to be defined within the DC/private cloud infrastructure (as endpoints) 
while being enforced on any virtual machines created in the public cloud through Intercloud 
Fabric Director (see Figure 6-29).

156  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Application
Data
VM
DC/Private
Cloud
Application
Provider Network Switch
Data
VM
Provider
Cloud
1
2
3
Enterprise Virtual Switch
Intercloud Secure Extender
IC Driver
Intercloud
Fabric
Director
Intercloud Fabric
for Business
Intercloud
Extender
Intercloud
Switch
Outer MAC/
IP/UDP
Tunnel
L2X
Data
Outer MAC/
IP/UDP
Tunnel
L2X
Data
Enterprise Ports
Enterprise VM
Access Port 
Tunnel Port
Trunk Port 
Figure 6-29 Secure Network Extension
Secure Network Extension to the Public Cloud
Once you have secure tunnels connected between your private data center cloud and cer-
tain public cloud providers, you will realize many benefits. Having a secure network exten-
sion to the public cloud with Intercloud Fabric can help with the following challenges in 
your organization:
■ Shadow IT: In many cases you don’t have visibility into public cloud resources being 
used by your organization.
■ Compliance: Your job of securing access to different resources gets obfuscated once 
workloads move from your purview/control on premises to public cloud infrastructures.
■ Different IP/VLAN/Layer 2 address ranges: If, for example, an application is rapidly 
prototyped externally in a public cloud space, how would you easily bring it back on 
premises to move it from dev/test into production?

Chapter 6: Cisco Cloud Infrastructure  157
6
Intercloud Fabric solves these and many other challenges you face in interacting with public 
cloud services. For example, Intercloud Fabric provides these solutions (see Figure 6-30):
■ Secure Layer 2 network extension from on premises to dozens of public cloud providers
■ Automated workload mobility to and from public cloud providers
■ The ability for you to manage both on-premises and public cloud resources through a 
single management console
Problem
• Shadow IT: Security and compliance at risk when
 public clouds accessed directly. 
• No easy solution to expand private DC capacity
 to public cloud.
Solution
• L2 secured network extension from Private DC to
 customer’s choice of public cloud.
• Automated workload mobility from Private
 to Public and back.
• Manage both on-prem and public cloud resources
 through a single pane of glass.   
Business Outcomes
• Meet Enterprise compliance policy mandates
 across private/public cloud resources.
• Choice of provider cloud: no cloud vendor lock in.
Windows
Azure
Cisco Intercloud
Partners
Cisco Cloud
Services
Private DC
Amazon
Web
Services
Figure 6-30 Secure Network Extension to Public Cloud
In the end, this helps you meet enterprise compliance more easily because secure network-
ing and policy get extended into a myriad of public cloud offerings. Additionally, this gives 
you and your organization freedom of public cloud provider choice and prevents cloud 
provider vendor lock-in.

158  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test.
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 6-3 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 6-3 Key Topics for Chapter 6 
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Section
Cisco Nexus 9000 Series Switches
138
Paragraph
Explanation of ACI
140
Paragraph
Explanation of application network profiles (ANPs)
141
Paragraph
Infrastructure Automation and UCS Director
142
Paragraph
Description of virtual switching
143
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
Application Policy Infrastructure Controller (APIC), Application Centric Infrastructure 
(ACI), Catalyst, Nexus, Fibre Channel over Ethernet (FCoE), Multilayer Director 
Switch (MDS), Fabric Extender (FEX), virtual device context (VDC), in-service software 
upgrade (ISSU), ACI tenant, ACI endpoint group (EPG), ACI contract, Virtual Supervisor 
Module (VSM), Virtual Ethernet Module (VEM), Application Virtual Switch (AVS), 
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS), software-defined networking (SDN), 
Nexus 1000V (N1KV), Virtual Security Gateway (VSG), Cisco Adaptive Security Virtual 
Appliance (ASAv), Juniper Virtual Gateway (vGW), Virtual Palo Alto Networks appliance 
(vPAN)

This page intentionally left blank 

This chapter covers the following topics:
1.0 Cloud Infrastructure Administration and Reporting 
1.1 Configure users/groups and role-based access control in the portal, including basic 
troubleshooting 
1.1.a Describe default roles
1.1.b Configure new user with single role
1.1.c Describe multirole user profiles
1.1.d Configure a user profile

CHAPTER 7
Managing Users and Groups
In all systems, it is important to ensure that users as well as administrators within the organi-
zation have proper access to the private cloud. Ensuring that your organization’s end users 
are able to perform the necessary functions when interacting with Cisco ONE Enterprise 
Cloud and that various administrators have the proper rights to perform their duties is para-
mount to a successful private cloud project.
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 7-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 7-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Overview of Users and Groups
1–5
Default Roles in UCS Director
6–8
Configuring a New User with a Single Role
9, 10
Caution The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chapter. 
If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, you 
should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving yourself 
credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might pro-
vide you with a false sense of security.

162  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. To set up directory services integration in Prime Service Catalog, you should:
a. 
From the main portal, click Browse Categories and select User Administration.
b. From the main portal, click the Search icon and search for directory integration.
c. 
From the main portal, click your username and choose Switch To > Service 
Manager.
d. From the main portal, click your username and choose Switch To > 
Administration.
2. Prime Service Catalog integrates with which of the following directory services? 
(Choose all that apply.)
a. 
OpenLDAP Server
b. NetIQ eDirectory
c. 
Sun ONE Directory
d. Microsoft Active Directory
e. 
IBM Tivoli Directory Server
f. 
Only a and d above
g. Only c and e above
3. Prime Service Catalog can connect to various directory services using which of the 
following protocols or methods? (Choose all that apply.) 
a. 
Netbind
b. MS-RPC
c. 
LDAP
d. NetBEUI
e. 
None of the above
4. Configuring UCS Director with local users and local groups can be considered a best 
practice. Select the best answer regarding this statement.
a. 
True.
b. False; only configuring UCS Director with local users is a best practice.
c. 
False; only configuring UCS Director with local groups is a best practice.
d. False; neither configuring UCS Director with local users nor configuring UCS 
Director with local groups is a best practice.
5. UCS Director integrates with which of the following directory services? (Choose all 
that apply.) 
a. 
OpenLDAP Server
b. NetIQ eDirectory
c. 
Sun ONE Directory

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  163
7
d. Microsoft Active Directory
e. 
IBM Tivoli Directory Server
f. 
Only a and d above
g. Only c and e above
6. UCS Director ships with ______ default roles.
a. 
10
b. 11
c. 
12
d. 15
e. 
20
7. Which role in UCS Director has the highest-level permissions?
a. 
IS Admin 
b. MSP Admin 
c. 
All Policy Admin 
d. Group Admin 
e. 
System Admin 
8. Custom roles created within UCS Director can be which of the following types? 
(Choose two.)
a. 
Operator
b. Policy Administrator
c. 
End User
d. Admin
e. 
Supervisor
9. True or False. Users can belong to more than one role.
a. 
True
b. False 
10. Which of the following statements is correct?
a. 
Custom roles can be embedded within default system roles.
b. Custom roles cannot be embedded within default system roles.
c. 
Custom roles can be embedded within default system roles only if the custom 
role has less restrictive permissions than the default system role.
d. Custom roles can be embedded within default system roles only if the custom 
role has more restrictive permissions than the default system role.

164  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
Overview of Users and Groups
With the ability to integrate into directory services such as Microsoft Active Directory 
for user and group authentication and authorization, both Prime Service Catalog and UCS 
Director give you a flexible framework for ensuring both end users and administrators of 
your private cloud have proper access. This section looks at the process for each in turn.
Prime Service Catalog
Prime Service Catalog offers rich integration with a variety of directory services such as 
Microsoft Active Directory, Sun ONE Directory, and IBM Tivoli Directory Server. This 
allows you to tie into existing enterprise directories for the purpose of user and group  
mapping.
To do this, you first have to switch from the default portal view of Prime Service Catalog to 
the Administrator’s view. Perform the following:
Step 1. 
Log in as an administrator and, in the upper-right corner of the Prime Service 
Catalog screen, choose username > Switch To > Administration as shown in 
Figure 7-1.
Figure 7-1 Prime Service Catalog Main Menu Screen

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  165
7
Step 2. 
On the Home screen of the Administration view, click the first box in the 
upper left titled Link to Directories (see Figure 7-2).
Figure 7-2 Prime Service Catalog Administration Home Screen
Step 3. 
On the Directories screen for creating a new directory connection from Prime 
Service Catalog, click the Add button on the Datasources page, as shown in 
Figure 7-3.
Figure 7-3 Prime Service Catalog Add Directories Option

166  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 4. 
The screen expands to display the Datasource Configuration form, which 
includes the following sections (see Figure 7-4):
■ Add or Edit a Datasource
■ Select protocol and server product
■ Connection Information
■ Security Certiﬁcate Information
■ Referral Datasource
Figure 7-4 Prime Service Catalog Directories Screen
In the Add or Edit a Datasource section, enter a name in the Data Source 
Name field.
Step 5. 
Expand the Select Protocol and Server Product section. Notice that the only 
protocol available is LDAP, but for Server Product, you have the following 
choices (see Figure 7-5):
■ Sun One Directory
■ MS Active Directory
■ IBM Tivoli Directory Server
Step 6. 
Choose the server product you intend to use. 
Step 7. 
Expand the Connection Information section, as shown in Figure 7-6.

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  167
7
Figure 7-5 Prime Service Catalog Directory Options
Figure 7-6 Prime Service Catalog Connection Information Settings

168  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 8. 
Open the Authentication Method drop-down list and choose one of the  
following options (see Figure 7-7):
■ Simple
■ Anonymous
■ SASL Authentication
Figure 7-7 Choosing the Prime Service Catalog Authentication Mechanism
Step 9. 
For the Mechanism field, choose SSL or Non SSL.
Step 10. For the directory service you chose in Step 6, enter the bind DN in the 
BindDN field, the directory service hostname in the Host field, the port  
number in the Port Number field, a password, and the user base DN in  
the User BaseDN field.
Note Bind DN refers to the user in the LDAP server who is permitted to search the LDAP 
directory within the defined search base. Base DN refers to the location in LDAP where a 
server will start its search for users.
Step 11. Expand the Security Certificate Information section and click Add 
Certificate, as shown in Figure 7-8. Input the requested information for  
the certificate.

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  169
7
Figure 7-8 Prime Service Catalog Security Certificate Information Settings 
Step 12. Expand the Referral Datasource section and click the Add Referral button 
(see Figure 7-9.) Enter names in the Data Source Name and Mapping Name 
fields. 
Figure 7-9 Prime Service Catalog Add Referral Button

170  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 13. Click the Update button at the bottom of this form. At the top of the 
Directories screen, you will now see an option to test the directory connection 
you just created. Select the data source name you just created, and click the 
Test Connection button shown in Figure 7-10.
Figure 7-10 Testing the Directory Connection
Step 14. Click the Mappings tab to the far right of the Directories screen, as shown in 
Figure 7-11, to open the Mapping Configuration page.
Figure 7-11 Switching from the Datasources Page to the Mapping Configuration Page 

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  171
7
Step 15. In the Add or Edit a Mapping Name section, shown in Figure 7-12, enter a 
name in the Mapping Name field.
Figure 7-12 Prime Service Catalog Mapping Configuration Page
Step 16. Expand the Configure Mapping Attributes section and fill out all of the 
required fields, also shown in Figure 7-12, and then click on the Update but-
ton. This will create an LDAP mapping for a particular user.
Step 17. Repeat this process as necessary to create additional mapping names in Prime 
Service Catalog.
Step 18. Back to the far right of the Directories screen, as referenced previously in 
Figure 7-11, click the Events tab. On the Events page, you can enable or disable 
the directory connection for the following actions, as shown in Figure 7-13:
■ Login 
■ Person Lookup for Order on Behalf
■ Person Lookup for Service Form
■ Person Lookup for Authorization Delegate

172  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 7-13 Prime Service Catalog Events Page
As you have seen, it is very easy to tie Prime Service Catalog into existing directory sources 
within your organization to create custom authentication and authorizations for your orga-
nization’s users.
Managing Connections Between Prime Service Catalog
Now that you have completed the Link to Directories activity, you are ready to look at how 
to link Prime Service Catalog to other products such as UCS Director. On the Home screen 
of the Administration view, notice the Manage Connections option as shown in Figure 7-14. 
Choosing this option will allow you to connect Prime Service Catalog to UCS Director. 
Details on how to manage this connection can be found in Chapter 7, “Managing Users and 
Groups.”

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  173
7
Figure 7-14 Prime Service Catalog Manage Connections Option
Now let’s look at how we can create users and groups and connect to external directories in 
UCS Director.
UCS Director
Similar to Prime Service Catalog, UCS Director offers rich integration with directory ser-
vices. This allows you to leverage an existing enterprise directory, such as Microsoft Active 
Directory, when tying your organization’s user population into UCS Director. Local users 
and groups are also supported in the case where you do not wish to leverage an enterprise 
directory service with UCS Director.
We’ll first look at how to create local users and groups within UCS Director, and then 
explore how to tie UCS Director into directory services. For purposes of demonstration, 
the configuration examples assume Microsoft Active Directory is the directory service 
being utilized for directory integration.
Local Users in UCS Director
If your organization doesn’t require external directory services, users can be created directly 
within the UCS Director virtual appliance and will reside locally within the virtual appliance. 
This is less than ideal because passwords for cloud users have to be maintained separately 
from their enterprise directory credentials. It is highly recommended that when you inte-
grate UCS Director into your organization you take advantage of LDAP integration. For 
those of you who wish to forge ahead with UCS Director for one reason or another, this 
section covers local user creation.

174  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
After logging in to UCS Director as an administrator, perform the following steps:
Step 1. 
Choose Administration > Users and Groups, as shown in Figure 7-15.
Figure 7-15 UCS Director Administration Options Menu
Step 2. 
On the Users and Groups screen, click the Users tab; then click Add as shown 
in Figure 7-16.
Figure 7-16 Adding Users in UCS Director

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  175
7
Step 3. 
In the Add User dialog box, click the User Role drop-down list box and 
choose a user role, as shown in Figure 7-17. (User roles are covered in more 
detail later in the chapter in the section “Default Roles in UCS Director.”) 
Next, do the following: 
■ Select a login name (follow the recommendations for special characters).
■ Select and conﬁrm the user’s password.
■ Enter the user’s email address in the User Contact Email ﬁeld.
■ Optionally, ﬁll out the remaining ﬁelds on the form shown in Figure 7-17.
Figure 7-17 UCS Director Add User Dialog Box
Step 4. 
Click Add to add the user and return to the main Users tab. Notice in the 
example shown in Figure 7-18 that the local user CCNA has been created 
and that the Source column identifies CCNA as Local (created locally within 
UCS Director as opposed to being imported from Active Directory or another 
directory service).

176  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 7-18 UCS Director User Principal Name and Source Columns
Local Groups in UCS Director
Just as local users can be created within UCS Director, local groups can also be created. 
Again, the same caution applies to using local groups as applies to using local users. Best 
practices are to leverage your enterprise Active Directory (or other directory service) infra-
structure within UCS Director. If that is impractical or not needed, though, follow the steps 
presented next to create local groups.
Step 1. 
From within UCS Director, log in as an administrator and choose 
Administration > Users and Groups (refer to Figure 7-15).
Step 2. 
On the User Groups tab, click the Add button as shown in Figure 7-19.
Figure 7-19 Adding User Groups in UCS Director Administration

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  177
7
Step 3. 
In the Edit Group dialog box, shown in Figure 7-20, choose a name for the 
group and enter a contact email. All other fields are optional. The contact 
email is used for system-generated messages that result as actions are taken by 
members of the group, such as an approval email going to a particular group.
Figure 7-20 UCS Director Edit Group Dialog Box
Step 4. 
Click Save; then notice that the group has been created as a local group  
as opposed to an external group (being imported from Active Directory or  
another directory service). See Figure 7-21. Click Save.
Figure 7-21 Successfully Created Local Group

178  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
LDAP Integration for UCS Director
As mentioned previously, LDAP directory integration with UCS Director is the preferred 
deployment mechanism in that it simplifies the administrative steps required to manage user 
and admin access to UCS Director by quickly and easily allowing you to add existing Active 
Directory (or other directory service) user accounts into groups. This streamlines the man-
agement and administrative functions required for you, the private cloud owner. To set up 
LDAP integration, follow these steps:
Step 1. 
From within UCS Director, log in as an administrator and choose 
Administration > Users and Groups (refer to Figure 7-15).
Step 2. 
Navigate to the LDAP Integration tab and click the Add button, as shown in 
Figure 7-22.
Figure 7-22 UCS Director Add LDAP Integration Option
Step 3. 
Fill out the following fields on the LDAP Configuration page of the LDAP 
Server Configuration wizard (see Figure 7-23):
■ Account Name: The name you want to call this particular connection.
■ Server Type: Choose Microsoft Active Directory or OpenLDAP, as 
appropriate to your environment. 
■ Server: Enter the fully qualiﬁed domain name (FQDN) or IP address of the 
directory server you want to create a connection to. Check the Enable SSL 
check box if a secure connection is required.

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  179
7
■ Port: Enter the port used for the connection. The default port number for a 
non-SSL-enabled LDAP connection is 389.
■ Domain Name: Enter the domain name of your organization.
■ Username and Password: Enter the combination for the connection that 
will be used to connect to the directory server.
■ Synchronization Frequency: Set the interval at which the UCS Director 
virtual appliance will poll the directory server for changed/updated user/
group information. Setting this to 1 hour will ensure that changes made (user 
or group adds) will synchronize quickly with UCS Director. Note that users 
or groups in UCS Director are imported if they do not exist. If they do exist, 
UCS Director will ignore them and the “changes” will never take place.
Figure 7-23 UCS Director LDAP Server Configuration Wizard
Step 4. 
Click Next. On the LDAP Search Base page, shown in Figure 7-24, click the 
Select button to select the LDAP search base to the OU (organizational unit) 
where you want to look for UCS Director users and groups. Note the message 
stating that “The page may take a while to load depending on the number of 
OUs in the Domain.” It isn’t uncommon for this operation to take many sec-
onds to a few minutes in very large directory services implementations.

180  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 7-24 UCS Director LDAP Search Base Wizard Page
Step 5. 
After you click the Select button, you can filter or query for keyboards in the 
upper right of the Select dialog box. In the example shown in Figure 7-25, the 
search is for the keyword Demo to limit the number of objects shown in the 
Search Base selection screen to only those containing the word “Demo.” Click 
Select to return to the LDAP Search Base page, and then click Next.
Figure 7-25 UCS Director Searching and Selecting a Base DN 

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  181
7
Step 6. 
On the Configure User and Group Filters page, shown in Figure 7-26, the 
default, setting cn (container name) with an Operator value of equals, will suf-
fice in mapping users and groups in the previous OU to UCS Director. Note 
that at least one of the Group/User filters must be configured. The purpose of 
these filters differs. The User filter will limit users imported from the base OU 
selected in Step 5 and show only those that match the User filter. The same 
rules apply for the Group filter. The Group filter will limit groups imported 
from the base OU selected in Step 5 to only those that match the Group filter.
Figure 7-26 UCS Director LDAP Configure User and Group Filters Wizard Page
Step 7. 
Click Next. On the LDAP User Role Filter page, set user role filters for any 
groups you want to map from within your directory service to UCS Director. 
In the example shown in Figure 7-27, Cloud Admins in the directory service 
maps to the Admin (User) user role in UCS Director, while Cloud Users in the 
directory service maps to the Regular (User) user role in UCS Director. Note 
that by default, imported users are created as Service End Users. However, by 
specifying a user role filter, users matching that filter will be created with the 
specified user role, such as System Admin, Compute Admin, and so on. 

182  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 7-27 UCS Director LDAP User Role Filter Wizard Page
Step 8. 
Finally, back on the LDAP Integration screen, click the Test Connection but-
ton to ensure that everything is working properly (see Figure 7-28). Assuming 
all is configured properly, you’ll be presented with a dialog box stating “LDAP 
Connection test successful.” See Figure 7-29.
Figure 7-28 UCS Director LDAP Integration Test Connection Button

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  183
7
Figure 7-29 UCS Director Test LDAP Connectivity Dialog Box
Next, we’ll discuss the purpose of roles in UCS Director. All users of UCS Director, whether 
created locally or being imported externally from a properly configured directory service, 
will be assigned a role. 
Default Roles in UCS Director
Roles in UCS Director provide a very flexible framework for assigning rights and permis-
sions to end users and administrators within the private cloud infrastructure. This flexibility 
allows you as the administrator to ensure that users have the permissions they need but are 
kept away from areas to which they shouldn’t have access. Note that a user can only be part 
of one role.
By default, UCS Director comes preconfigured with one system default role (system admin) 
and ten custom roles. The roles are listed here, along with a brief description of the permis-
sions enabled for each role:
■ System Admin: Role has admin/superuser permissions to do all tasks within UCS 
Director
■ All Policy Admin: Role is able to administer most policies within UCS Director
■ Billing Admin: Role designed for doing chargeback, budgeting, accounting, and resource 
limit reporting 
■ Computing Admin: Role designed for working with physical and virtual servers and com-
pute policy
■ Group Admin: An end user with the privilege of adding users to a group or groups
■ IS Admin: Role is able to assign VMs to vDCs, create new vDCs, create new catalogs, 
create/modify Deployment Policy and SLA Policy, and perform orchestration

184  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ MSP Admin: Role is able to create virtual computing, VM labels, and service group ser-
vice requests
■ Network Admin: Role is able to handle most aspects of networking within the private 
cloud as well as add physical and virtual network resources, apply budgets and resource 
accounting to networks, and see chargeback for network resources 
■ Operator: Role can create VM labels and assign VMs to vDCs
■ Service End User: Role can only view and use the self-service portal
■ Storage Admin: Role is able to handle most aspects of storage within the private 
cloud as well as add physical and virtual storage resources, apply budgets and resource 
accounting to networks, and see chargeback for storage resources
The permissions by role are listed in their entirety in Figure 7-30. Note that the table in 
Figure 7-30 shows only ten roles, because the system admin role is a system default role 
that cannot be disabled and that has read/write access to all permissions and roles within 
UCS Director.
Figure 7-30 Table of UCS Director User Roles and Permissions

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  185
7
In addition to the system-generated roles within UCS Director, there exists support for 
a maximum of 48 total system roles (including default roles). This will allow you as the 
administrator of the private cloud solution to create custom roles with custom Read/Write 
permissions for scenarios that aren’t addressed by the 10 default roles included.
To create a custom role, use the following steps:
Step 1. 
Log in with administrator credentials, choose Administration > System; then 
navigate to the User Roles tab, as shown in Figure 7-31.
Figure 7-31 UCS Director User Roles Tab
Step 2. 
The User Roles tab lists the default system roles that have been created within 
UCS Director. Notice that the fourth column is labeled Default Role and, 
because this is a new installation, all of the roles show Yes, indicating that 
they’re system default roles.
Step 3. 
To add a custom role, click the Add button.
Step 4. 
On the User Role page of the Add User Role wizard, shown in Figure 7-32, 
give the role a name. In the example shown, we are creating a user role named 
Custom-CCNA-Role.

186  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 7-32 UCS Director Add User Role Wizard User Role Page
Step 5. 
For Role Type, select either Admin or End User.
Step 6. 
Optionally give the role a description. Click Next.
Step 7. 
On the Menu Settings page, shown in Figure 7-33, select one or more menus 
that will be exposed to users that will be assigned to the new Custom-CCNA-
Role. In the example shown, Catalog and Accounting are selected. Click Next.
Figure 7-33 UCS Director Add User Role Menu Settings

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  187
7
Step 8. 
On the User Permissions page, shown in Figure 7-34, select the following per-
missions that will be exposed to users that will be assigned to the new Custom-
CCNA-Role:
■ Read – Virtual Computing
■ Read – Resource Accounting
■ Read – Catalogs
Figure 7-34 UCS Director Add User Role Wizard User Permissions Page
Step 9. 
Click Submit. After you acknowledge the role creation and are returned to 
the User Roles tab of the Administration System screen, shown in Figure 7-35, 
note that the new role created appears at the bottom of the User Role column 
and that the Default Role column shows a value of No (indicating that this is a 
custom role and not one of the system default roles). 

188  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 7-35 UCS Director Custom-CCNA-Role User Role
This section introduced you to the UCS Director system default roles and showed you 
how to create custom roles. This gives you great flexibility in designing roles and permis-
sions for your private cloud infrastructure that can match nearly any use case and ensure 
that the proper users have the proper permissions required to browse service catalogs, 
order resources, create resources, report on resources utilized, consume resources, etc. 
The next section describes the process of creating a new user and assigning that user to the 
custom role that was created in this section.
Configuring a New User with a Single Role
Roles cannot be embedded within other roles. For example, you aren’t allowed to cre-
ate a custom role and embed that role within a default system role. That shouldn’t pose a 
problem, however, because you can create multiple custom roles, up to 48 total (as men-
tioned previously in this chapter), which gives you tremendous flexibility to design roles 
with just the right level of access for users and administrators within your organization. 
Additionally, within the default system roles, you can modify both the menu settings 
presented and the user permissions granted. Please note however that a best practice is to 
clone a default system role and then make changes to the copy, as opposed to modifying 
the default system roles. 
The previous section showed how to create a new custom role called Custom-CCNA-Role. 
Now, let’s create a new user, CCNA User, and assign it to this role. You will then log in to 
that role and see how the permissions applied in the previous section affect the end user’s 
visibility and actions they can perform in the service catalog.

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  189
7
Step 1. 
Starting out from the main login screen while signed in as an administra-
tor within UCS Director, choose Administration > Users and Groups (see 
Figure 7-36).
Figure 7-36 UCS Director Admin, Users and Groups Menu
Step 2. 
Navigate to the Users tab and click the Add button, as shown in Figure 7-37.
Figure 7-37 UCS Director Add Users Button

190  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 3. 
Complete the Add User dialog box as listed here and shown in Figure 7-38:
■ User Role: Custom-CCNA-Role
■ User Group: Default Group
■ Login Name: CCNA
■ Password: C1sc0123
■ Conﬁrm Password: C1sc0123
■ User Contact Email: user@purestorage.com
■ First Name: CCNA
■ Last Name: User
■ Phone: Optional
■ Address: Optional
■ Set user disable date: Check the box and set a date 24 hours from now
Figure 7-38 UCS Director Add User Dialog Box

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  191
7
Step 4. 
Click Add. As shown in Figure 7-39, the user now appears at the top of the 
Users list, the Access Level column shows Custom-CCNA-Role (the role cre-
ated in the previous section), and the Source column shows Local.
Figure 7-39 UCS Director Custom CCNA User
Step 5. 
Log out of UCS Director by clicking Log Out at the top of the window, as 
shown in Figure 7-40.
Figure 7-40 Logging Out of UCS Director 

192  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 6. 
Log in as user CCNA with a password of C1sc0123 (see Figure 7-41).
Figure 7-41 Logging In to UCS Director as Custom User
Step 7. 
As shown in Figure 7-42, your newly created CCNA user with the custom 
role of Custom-CCNA-Role can see two top-level menu options: Catalog and 
Accounting. Recall from the previous section that we created a very restricted 
user role with just the ability to see virtual machine resources and with read-
only permissions to Catalogs and Accounting information. 
Figure 7-42 UCS Director CCNA User Service Catalog View

Chapter 7: Managing Users and Groups  193
7
Step 8. 
Explore what rights (very few!) your newly created user with this custom role 
has; then click Log Out to log out of user CCNA.
Custom roles are a great tool to use when the default system roles provided with UCS 
Director don’t quite grant the proper level of access desired to achieve a particular end 
result. As many organizations have different approval, reporting, and consumption levels 
internally, custom roles give you as the private cloud administrator a very powerful set of 
capabilities to ensure proper access under a wide variety of organizational scenarios. 

194  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test.
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 7-2 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 7-2 Key Topics for Chapter 7
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Section
Understand local users in UCS Director
173
Section
Understand local groups in UCS Director
176
Section
Understand default roles in UCS Director
183
Section
Configure a new user with a single role
188
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
UCS Director, virtual data center (vDC), Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP), 
user role, user groups, fully qualified domain name (FQDN), LDAP search base, base DN, 
bind DN

This page intentionally left blank 

This chapter covers the following topics:
1.0 Cloud Infrastructure Administration and Reporting
1.2 Perform virtual machine operations
1.2.a Configure live migrations of VMs from host to host
1.2.b Edit VM
1.2.c Configure VM snapshots
1.2.d Describe reverting a VM to a snapshot
3.0 Cloud Provisioning
3.2 Describe provisioning verification
3.2.c Access VMs and applications that have been provisioned

CHAPTER 8
Virtual Machine Management
As of the writing of this book, many organizations are well on their way to virtualizing 
workloads within their environments. In the experience of the authors working with many 
organizations, nearly all of our customers tell us they are over 75 percent virtualized in their 
x86 compute workloads.
Many organizations have a guiding principle of “virtualization first” whereby new business 
requirements and projects that are brought to IT are immediately assumed to be candidates 
for virtualization unless a very compelling business case (performance, throughput, critical-
ity, scale, etc.) can be made for that application to reside on bare metal. By approaching 
workloads and projects in this way, many organizations have come to rely on x86 server vir-
tualization as one of the core tenants of provisioning new compute workloads in their data 
centers and remote locations.
The Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite stack offers a comprehensive set of products and 
tools to help you handle the challenges of managing virtualization as a service within your 
organization. This chapter provides an overview of virtualization and why automating it 
is important. It describes the idea of a service catalog as being paramount to the end-user 
experience when ordering and consuming virtual assets. It discusses both the end-user and 
administrator experiences available within Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite.
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 8-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 8-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Understanding VM Virtualization in Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite
1, 2
Overview of End-User VM Operations in UCS Director
3–5
Understanding Common Administrative Workflows on VMs in UCS 
Director
6, 7
Prime Service Catalog VM Integration
8–10

198  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
CAUTION The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chap-
ter. If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, 
you should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving your-
self credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might 
provide you with a false sense of security.
1. UCS Director can provide automation and orchestration of which of the following? 
(Choose all that apply.)
a. 
VMware ESXi
b. Citrix XenServer
c. 
Red Hat KVM
d. A Nexus switch
e. 
StorageTek tape libraries
f. 
AmigaOS
2. Which of the following statements correctly describes Cisco Intercloud Fabric?
a. 
Allows an organization to securely connect two private clouds together 
b. Securely connects two companies together so they can pass traffic in a secure, 
encrypted fashion
c. 
Creates a secure, encrypted connection between your on-premises data cen-
ter and one of many public cloud offerings and helps your IT organization to 
become the “organizational broker” to the consumption of virtual machines in 
public cloud offerings
d. Securely connects two public clouds together so an organization can easily 
migrate machines from one public cloud offering directly to another public 
cloud offering
3. Which of the following is an important goal of the Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud 
Suite?
a. 
Give you as an architect or administrator a flexible set of tools to offer an  
e-commerce/shopping-cart like experience to your internal IT users
b. Give you a central location to do asset reporting and trouble ticketing
c. 
Give you as an architect or administrator the ability to automate the installation 
of desktops within your organization
d. Give you the ability to centralize and control access to consumer-based cloud 
services from within your network for all of your end users
4. True or False. UCS Director provides a default way for end users to select and mount 
an ISO image as a CD/DVD drive into a virtual machine that they own.
a. 
True
b. False

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  199
8
5. Which of the following tasks could be performed as an advanced or custom VM opera-
tion within UCS Director? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Run a PowerShell script
b. Run a Python script
c. 
Query for custom VM performance statistics
d. Order pizza
e. 
Provision mainframe LPAR services
6. Which of the following hypervisors has the most administrative workflows available out  
of the box within UCS Director?
a. 
Microsoft Hyper-V
b. Red Hat KVM
c. 
VMware ESXi
d. Dec Alpha
7. Which of the following are common administrative workflows on Hyper-V VMs in UCS 
Director? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Add VM disk
b. Add VM NIC
c. 
Create VM snapshot
d. Delete VM disk
e. 
Delete VM NIC 
8. True or False. UCS Director is a full-fledged, end-user-friendly service catalog.
a. 
True
b. False
9. UCS Director provides which of the following? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
An IT-focused experience that is tightly coupled with technical IT task automation
b. An end-user-focused experience that is highly polished and focuses on end-user 
usability
c. 
A way to provision virtual machines in popular public cloud services such as AWS  
and Azure
d. A, B, and C 
e. 
None of the above
10. In Prime Service Catalog, “My Stuff” refers to:
a. 
A list of all IT assets assigned to you, such as your laptop, monitor, any personal  
printers, etc.
b. A location for you to store all of your documents centrally within the organization
c. 
A list of all the backups made for any systems you manage
d. A list of assets that have been provisioned within Prime Service Catalog, such as VMs

200  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
Understanding VM Virtualization in Cisco ONE 
Enterprise Cloud Suite
While the need for bare-metal applications still exists, virtualization is here to stay. 
Furthermore, many organizations are now adopting a “dual hypervisor” strategy to hedge 
their bets and ensure that there is no sort of longer-term vendor lock-in concerns. Add to 
that the fact that most organizations are also leveraging compute in public cloud offerings 
such as Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Microsoft Azure, as well as in other public cloud 
providers such as Cisco Powered clouds and other third-party offerings, and the landscape 
of solutions to support in the data center with regard to virtualization becomes fairly vast.
While virtualization does increase asset utilization by carving up a single physical system 
into a system that can run multiple virtual workloads, it also adds complexity to IT opera-
tions (see Figure 8-1). 
Physical Server
Web Application
Web Server
Operating System
Physical Server with Hypervisor
Virtual Server
Web
Application
Web
Server
Operating
System
Virtual Server
DB
Application
DB
Server
Operating
System
Virtual Server
App 2
App 1
Operating
System
Figure 8-1 Physical Server Versus Physical Server with a Hypervisor

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  201
8
With this added complexity comes added work for IT to operate and maintain the vir-
tual environment. Add in a second hypervisor and the need to keep track of public cloud 
options for your internal IT customers, and the workload can get busy very quickly.
Luckily, automating and orchestrating multiple virtual environments are cornerstone capa-
bilities of the Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite of products. Two products in particular 
that help are
■ UCS Director: Assists in the automating and orchestration tasks of virtual machines run-
ning on VMware ESXi, Microsoft Hyper-V, Red Hat KVM, and Citrix Xen. With the 
ability to create common workflows and to easily add provisioning of VMs from these 
environments to the UCS Director Service Catalog, you have a very agile toolset for 
automating many of the daily functions required of IT when it comes to virtual machine 
provisioning.
■ Intercloud Fabric: Assists your IT department in understanding what workloads are 
being provisioned into public cloud solutions such as Cisco Powered cloud providers, 
Amazon AWS, and Microsoft Azure. Intercloud Fabric creates a secure, encrypted con-
nection between your on-premises data center and one of many public cloud offerings 
and helps your IT organization to help become the “organizational broker” to the con-
sumption of virtual machines in public cloud offerings. This gives you additional visibi-
lity and control that allows IT to understand the consumption and usage patterns of 
public cloud usage in the organization while still providing the governance, security, and 
control of those virtualized workloads.
Both UCS Director and Intercloud Fabric maintain separate service catalogs that show, for 
example, a list of VMs that can be created on premises (with UCS Director) and a list of 
VMs that could be created in the public cloud (with Intercloud Fabric). Figures 8-2 and 8-3 
show these two catalogs. Note that these figures depict a new installation where folders 
have been created but no virtual machines have been added to the catalog for the user to 
order (see Figure 8-3).
Figure 8-2 UCS Director Folder of Servers Available

202  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 8-3 Intercloud Fabric Service Catalog Offerings
With the goal of simplification of the environment and creating a single self-service portal 
for viewing and accessing VMs both within UCS Director and via Intercloud Fabric, both 
products can be connected to Cisco Prime Service Catalog (PSC) to give a unified experi-
ence to your end users to see their VMs (regardless of whether they’re in the private cloud 
or public cloud), take common actions on those VMs, and potentially (if given permissions) 
perform cold migration of those VMs from on premises to off premises or vice versa (see 
Figure 8-4).
Figure 8-4 Prime Service Catalog Showing On-Premises and Off-Premises VM Offerings

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  203
8
This gives you the flexibility of offering both on-premises and off-premises virtualized 
workloads from a single catalog, which will streamline workload provisioning, lower overall 
organizational costs, and give IT visibility into public cloud usage within the organization. 
Overview of End-User VM Operations in UCS Director
An important goal of Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud is to give you as an architect or adminis-
trator a flexible set of tools to offer more of an e-commerce/shopping-cart like experience 
to your internal IT users, giving IT the tools to efficiently provision and manage workloads 
across any cloud. Today’s manual IT processes of provisioning infrastructure and applica-
tions for users are cumbersome, lengthy, and often prone to error. As the responsibilities 
increase for many IT administrators, just keeping things running becomes a greater and 
greater challenge. By moving to automation and orchestration with a self-service catalog for 
your internal users, you are moving IT into the Industrial Revolution factory-line processes 
of the IT World. Ensuring that your users have a flexible and consistent experience in this 
new world is the ultimate goal. If your users aren’t happy with how easy it is to consume IT 
processes and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) internally, they’ll simply circumvent the IT 
department and go straight to public cloud offerings, reducing your organizational effec-
tiveness and making management question just what sort of value IT is providing for the 
organization. 
UCS Director will enable your end to perform many functions that would normally require 
IT intervention, such as
■ Browsing for and ordering virtual machines (from many hypervisors, as previously  
discussed)
■ Selecting options for VMs ordered, such as number of virtual CPUs (vCPUs), RAM 
amount, and volume size
■ Common VM functions such as powering on or off a virtual machine, performing a snap-
shot on a virtual machine, adding additional virtual NICs (vNICs) to the VM, and much, 
much more
Let’s look at some of the operations you need to perform as an administrator to connect 
hypervisors into UCS Director. Then we’ll look at actions that your end users will be able 
to perform within UCS Director. Note this assumes that pods have already been created in 
UCS Director and that you’ll be adding these accounts to existing pods.
Adding a Virtual Hypervisor to UCS Director
Before you can begin modifying actions an end user can take on their virtual machines, you 
first have to connect hypervisor accounts to UCS Director in the pod of your choice. To do 
this, select the pod you want to add the hypervisor account to; then choose Administration 
> Virtual Accounts, as shown in Figure 8-5.

204  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 8-5 Accessing the UCS Director Administration Virtual Accounts Tab
On the Virtual Accounts tab, click the Add button to open the Add Cloud dialog box. 
Choose a cloud type from the Cloud Type drop-down menu, as shown in Figure 8-6. For 
purposes of this example, we’ll select a Hyper-V account to add. 
Figure 8-6 UCS Director Add Cloud Dialog Box
Once the Hyper-V account has been selected, fill in the following details in the resulting 
Add Cloud dialog pane:
■ Cloud Type: Hyper-V should be selected.
■ Cloud Name: A friendly name for the cloud.
■ PowerShell Agent: For Hyper-V, this is the link to a system running the UCS  
Director PowerShell Agent (PSA). This is a system that UCS Director can point to  
that will run PowerShell commands. The PowerShell Agent will be discussed in  
additional detail in the following section.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  205
8
■ Server Address: The IP address or fully qualified domain name of the hypervisor you are 
looking to add to UCS Director.
■ Server User ID: Administrator ID to connect UCS Director to the hypervisor to allow it 
to control actions of that hypervisor through API calls.
■ Server Password: The password on the hypervisor for the ID in the previous field.
■ Domain: The NTLM/AD domain the server resides in.
■ Pod: The Pod you are adding this hypervisor account to.
■ Optional information: Description, Contact Email, Location, Service Provider.
Installing PowerShell Agent
As an administrator, being able to leverage Microsoft PowerShell commandlets from within 
UCS Director opens up immense possibilities to extend automation and orchestration to 
many Windows systems, services, and applications. Once this is done, you have the abil-
ity to add PowerShell scripts at will to your automation and orchestration workflows. As 
an example, it is common to call a PowerShell script toward the end of VM provisioning 
to automatically add a record to Active Directory DNS with the hostname of the new 
virtual machine that was just created into DNS. The following steps explain how to set up 
PowerShell access from within UCS Director.
The whole reason a PowerShell agent is needed within UCS Director is because the UCS 
Director appliance is based on CentOS and not Windows and, as such, cannot directly 
execute PowerShell commands as there was no native PowerShell interpreter available on 
CentOS/Linux at the time this functionality was included in UCS Director.
Step 1. 
Navigate to Administration > Virtual Accounts.
Step 2. 
Click the PowerShell Agents tab, which is shown in Figure 8-7.
Figure 8-7 UCS Director PowerShell Agents Tab

206  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 3. 
Click the Download Installer button, which opens the Download Agent 
Installer dialog box shown in Figure 8-8.
Figure 8-8 UCS Director Download Agent Installer Dialog Box
Step 4. 
Click Submit to install that file on a remote system that meets the requirements 
defined in the UCS Director PSA documentation. 
Step 5. 
After the installation is complete, return to UCS Director and click the Add 
button. Fill in the following details of the Add Agent dialog box, as shown in 
Figure 8-9:
■ Agent Name: A system-friendly name for the PSA connection. You can have 
multiple PSA connections.
■ Agent Address: The IP address or fully qualiﬁed domain name of the PSA 
server installed on the remote server that you previously installed.
■ Agent Access Port: The UDP port used to communicate between UCS 
Director and the PSA running on the remote server.
■ Access Key: A unique value that must be entered in both the UCS Director 
Add Agent dialog box and in the PSA screen during installation of the agent.
■ Description: An optional description for the PSA.
Step 6. 
After you have successfully installed the PowerShell Agent and entered the 
access key both in UCS Director and in the PSA screen, click the connection 
you created and click the Test Connection button to verify communication 
between UCS Director and the PSA server. Upon success, you should see the 
dialog box shown in Figure 8-10.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  207
8
Figure 8-9 UCS Director Add Agent Dialog Box
Figure 8-10
UCS Director PSA Installation Test Connectivity Dialog Box
Once you’ve added one or more virtual accounts to UCS Director in their respective pods, 
you can explore what can be exposed to end users via VM actions.
Standard VM Operations
As the administrator of Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite, you have the ability to expose 
certain tasks to end users. Normally, many of these tasks may require administrative inter-
ruption to accomplish. By creating an End User Self-Service Policy, you can tailor the 
actions end users can take on VMs that they create. Note that policies are applied to a 
virtual data center (vDC), not to a pod. vDCs are covered in Chapter 4, “Cisco Cloud 
Automation/Orchestration Suites.”

208  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The ability to create multiple End User Self-Service Policies gives you a lot of flexibility. 
For example, you can create different policies for different vDCs of infrastructure within 
a UCS site. Let’s say that, for example, your main site where you’re using UCS Director has 
both a Development pod and a Production pod of infrastructure. Let’s develop policies for 
each pod that give the rights shown in Figure 8-11.
UCS Director
Development
Pod
Development End User
Self-Service Policy
End User Actions
Power On
Power Off
Suspend, Standby, Reset
Reboot, Shut Down
Resize VM
Snapshot Management
Delete VM
Configure VM Networking
Mount ISO to VM
Clone VM Actions
UCS Director
Production
Pod
Production End User
Self-Service Policy
End User Actions
Power On, Off, Reboot,
Shut Down
Mount ISO to VM
Figure 8-11 UCS Director Custom VM Example Between Development and Production 
To begin, let’s create a policy for our Development pod:
Step 1. 
In UCS Director, navigate to Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > Service 
Delivery.
Step 2. 
Click End User Self-Service Policy.
Step 3. 
Click Add.
Step 4. 
For the Development pod, check all the items listed, as shown in Figure 8-12. 
You will be checking all available options to give users in the Development 
pod access to do all actions on VMs, including
■ VM Power Management: Power ON, Power OFF, Suspend, Standby, Reset, 
Reboot, Shutdown Guest
■ VM Resizing: Resize VM
■ VM Snapshot Management: Create Snapshot, Revert Snapshot, Mark 
Golden Snapshot, Delete Snapshot, Delete All Snapshots
■ VM Deletion Management: Delete VM
■ VM Disk Management: Create VM Disk, VM Disk Resize, Delete VM Disk
■ VM Network Management: Add vNICs, Delete vNICs, VM Resync

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  209
8
■ VM Lease Expiry: Conﬁgure Lease Time
■ VM Console Management: Launch VM Client, Conﬁgure VNC, Test VNC, 
Enable/Disable VMRC Console 
■ VM Clone and Template Management: Clone, Clone VM as Image, 
Convert VM as Image, Move VM to VDC, and Assign VMs to VDC
■ VM ISO Management: Mount ISO Image as CD/DVD Drive
Step 5. 
After you have checked all of these options, click Submit.
Figure 8-12 UCS Director Development End-User Policy
The resulting policy will enable all users in the Development pod to perform all available 
standard actions on VMs that they create in that environment. Note that this assumes that a 
single vDC applies to the Development pod, but that isn’t necessarily always the case.
Many organizations have much more stringent rights and access policies for what can be 
done in production. So let’s create a new policy for our Production pod.
To create the policy for the Production pod:
Step 1. 
Within UCS Director, navigate to Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > 
Service Delivery.
Step 2. 
Click End User Self-Service Policy.
Step 3. 
Click Add.
Step 4. 
For the Production pod, check the items as shown in Figure 8-13. You will be 
checking the following selections to give users in the Production pod access to 
do a much more limited set of actions on VMs:

210  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ VM Power Management: Power ON, Power OFF, Reboot, Shutdown Guest
■ VM ISO Management: Mount ISO Image as CD/DVD Drive
Step 5. 
After you have checked all of these options, click Submit.
Figure 8-13 Edit End User Policy Tab
As you can see, End User Self-Service Policies give you the flexibility to give the neces-
sary access to end users based on the environments in which they are operating their virtual 
machines. You can put the proper, granular controls in place to limit users’ abilities to per-
form actions that may be undesirable in production environments while giving them com-
plete abilities to do things in a development or test environment and offering tremendous 
amounts of flexibility.
But what if your end users require even more advanced options for their virtual machines? 
Good news! UCS Director offers even more capabilities by enabling you to create custom 
VM operations that can be attached to a user’s virtual machines, giving them even more 
flexibility.
Advanced or Custom VM Operations
Beyond the actions discussed in the previous section, you may desire to give your users the 
ability to perform even greater actions on virtual machines. UCS Director enables you to set 
custom or advanced virtual machine options for end users. This can dramatically extend the 
use cases that can be solved in your organization with UCS Director. Custom VM Action 
Policies can be used to execute a custom workflow against a provisioned VM. What task 
that actual workflow executes is highly variable. The following are a couple of use cases 
that come to mind:

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  211
8
■ Give Windows virtual machine users the ability to register their newly created VMs 
with Microsoft System Center Configuration Manager (SCCM) so that those VMs can 
be remediated post provisioning to include any relevant operating system patches or 
applications that have been advertised to different SCCM collections. A representative 
use case of where this could be helpful would be to give the end user the ability to cre-
ate a generic Windows Server virtual machine and then, after creation, give them cus-
tom icons that offer the ability to add the VM to the Web, Application, or Database 
SCCM collection so that Internet Information Services (IIS), .NET, or SQL Server gets 
installed to that VM. 
■ Give Linux virtual machine users the ability to register their newly created VMs with dif-
ferent Puppet classes so that those VMs can be remediated post provisioning to include 
any relevant operating system patches or applications that have been assigned to differ-
ent Puppet classes. An example of this would be to give the end user the ability to create 
a generic Linux virtual machine and then, after creation, give them custom icons that 
offer the ability to add that VM to a Web, Application, or Database Puppet class so that 
Apache, Java, or MySQL gets installed to that VM.
In both of these examples, custom VM operations enable your end users to move beyond 
an Infrastructure as a Service model (a bare, generic VM) into more of a Platform as a 
Service model (a VM with a complete app stack installed on it). This dramatically increases 
the use cases for UCS Director as a tool in your IT automation framework and provides VM 
customization capabilities to end users while allowing for complete automation, orchestra-
tion, and self-service capabilities to end users of both VMs and the applications within 
those VMs.
Some other examples that come to mind of custom actions that may be applicable to your 
end users include
■ Registering a VM via PowerShell to an Active Directory domain.
■ Giving end users a button to click in the UCS Director catalog for their VM to redirect 
them to your organization’s internal change management database system (CMDB) to 
open a ticket on potential issues they may be experiencing with that VM or applications 
within the VM. 
■ Providing a custom policy button to allow the end user to request archives of the VM 
(in a test/development environment) in a situation where you are not utilizing lease dura-
tions within UCS Director on VMs. This would allow your users to request archives of 
the VM to a lower tier of storage or to an offline storage option so that it could be pre-
served for a duration of time for either development purposes, future access purposes, 
or government and regulatory purposes (for cases where nonactive VMs may need to be 
preserved for a period of time in case future access is required).
These are just some examples of how custom VM operations can be added within UCS 
Director to drastically extend the functionality and usefulness of available actions for end 
users in a self-service fashion, allowing them to perform the actions automatically without 
taking up valuable time and resources of your IT staff. Next, let’s discuss how to set custom 
virtual machine policies.

212  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Custom VM Action Policies
Within UCS Director, we have looked at how straightforward it is to create policy to allow 
a wide variety of functions that end users can take on virtual machines they’ve ordered 
through UCS Director’s catalog, actions such as powering on or off the VM, creating snap-
shots, changing attributes of the VM such as resizing it or adding a vNIC, etc.
Creating custom VM policies gives you an easy way to enable users to add additional, cus-
tom capabilities to their VMs and their UCS Director user dashboard.
At a high level, this is accomplished in four parts:
1. 
Create a custom workflow action.
2. 
Test and execute the custom workflow.
3. 
Assign that custom workflow action to a custom user VM policy.
4. 
Assign the custom user VM policy to a vDC.
Create a Custom Workflow Action
You first create a custom workflow action in UCS Director that executes the custom policy 
action you desire. After that workflow has been created, it can then be accessed via a User 
VM Action Policy that you create. Let’s look at an example where you can create a very 
simple workflow that runs a shell command on a Linux system.
Step 1. 
Within UCS Director, choose Policies > Orchestration. The Orchestration 
window opens with the Workflows tab displayed.
Step 2. 
On the Workflows tab, click the Add Workflow button (see Figure 8-14). 
Note that Figure 8-14 shows the Edit Workflow properties because the exam-
ple included here was created previously; therefore, the option to Add is not 
available, only Edit. The first time you create a workflow, you will see Add 
Workflow displayed.
Figure 8-14 Accessing the Add Workflow Button in UCS Director Policies
Step 3. 
On the Workflow Details page, give the workflow a name. In this example, use 
Show free disk space.
Step 4. 
Give the workflow an optional description.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  213
8
Step 5. 
Select where the workflow can run. In this case, set Workflow Context to 
Selected VM. When Selected VM is the context, the shell command is permit-
ted to run within the particular VM that will be selected by the end user. Note 
that when Selected VM is chosen, this allows a whole bunch of predefined 
variables to be exposed about the VM, which we will use later when we create 
the workflow for this example. A complete list of these workflows is shown in 
Figure 8-15.
Figure 8-15 Table of Defined Variables for Selected VM
Step 6. 
In the Save Options section, use the Select Folder field to choose a folder in 
which to save the workflow. Folders give you a way to conveniently organize 
workflows within UCS Director in a way that makes the most sense for your 
organization. Some larger organizations will have a very large folder struc-
ture for categorizing workflows within UCS Director, while others may find 
it simpler to put everything in a single folder. It is better to create folders 
from the start, though, for organizational purposes (see Figure 8-16). Note 
that Figure 8-16 shows the Edit Workflow properties because the example 
included here was created previously; therefore, the option to Add is not 
available, only Edit. The first time you create a workflow, you will see Add 
Workflow displayed.

214  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 8-16 UCS Director Add Workflow Dialog Box
Step 7. 
In the Notifications section, select an email policy for the workflow. In this 
case, as you won’t require any email notifications for this example, leave Email 
Policy set to No e-mail.
Step 8. 
Click Next.
Step 9. 
On the Edit User Inputs screen, click the green plus sign to add an input label. 
Create three total input labels, as listed next and shown in Figure 8-17. Pay 
particular attention to the Type for each label.
a. Input Label of Email address with a Type of email_address_list
b. Input Label of Username with a Type of gen_text_input
c. Input Label of Password with a Type of password

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  215
8
Figure 8-17 Completed Workflow User Inputs Screen
Step 10. Click Next to move to the final screen, Edit User Outputs. No outputs need to 
be specified, so click Submit.
Step 11. The workflow now appears under the folder named Test, as shown in  
Figure 8-18.
Figure 8-18 Workflow Titled “Show free disk space”
Step 12. Double-click the workflow name to launch the Workflow Designer application 
within UCS Director. For the purposes of this example, we will be creating a 
workflow that has two steps:
a. Execute a VIX script to show free disk space
b. Email the results to the end user

216  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 13. Using the upper-left search pane of the Workflow Designer, search for VIX 
(see Figure 8-19).
Figure 8-19 Searching for VIX in Available Tasks in the Workflow Designer
Step 14. From the search results, drag and drop the Execute VIX Script action onto the 
Workflow task pane. The Add Task wizard opens with the Task Information 
page displayed. Give the task a name such as Show free disk space, as shown 
in Figure 8-20.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  217
8
Figure 8-20 Providing Task Information for the VIX Script
Step 15. Click Next.
Step 16. On the User Input Mapping page, make the following configurations, as shown 
in Figure 8-21:
■ Under Select VM (Mandatory), check the Map to User Input check box and 
set the User Input ﬁeld to VM Selected (Context).
■ Under Login, check the Map to User Input check box and set the User 
Input ﬁeld to Username.
■ Under Password, check the Map to User Input check box and set the User 
Input ﬁeld to Password. 
Note that no additional information needs to be provided on this page.
Figure 8-21 User Input Mapping Selections

218  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 17. Click Next.
Step 18. On the Task Inputs page, set the Credential Type field to Login. In the Script 
pane, enter the simple Linux command to look at disk free space, df-h, as 
shown in Figure 8-22.
Figure 8-22 Task Inputs Page 
Step 19. Click Next.
Step 20. No changes are required on the User Output Mapping page, so simply click 
Submit to save the workflow.
Test and Execute the Custom Workflow
Step 1. 
You should now test the workflow and monitor the results of running this 
single VIX script, as we’ll need an output variable for the second task that we 
create a bit later.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  219
8
Step 2. 
Before testing the workflow, drag your cursor over the bottom edge of the 
“Show free disk space” task in the Workflow Designer. Note that as you 
move your cursor from left to right, you will see the ability to define where 
the workflow should go on success or failure. Click the On Success option 
to display what is shown in Figure 8-23. Select the drop-down menu option 
Completed (Success) and notice that a green arrow now connects the task to 
the green Completed (Success) box, as shown in Figure 8-24.
Figure 8-23 On Success Workflow Option
Figure 8-24 Showing Task Linked to Completed
Step 3. 
Complete Step 2 for the On Failure option, clicking the Completed (Failed) 
menu option for the task to connect it with a red arrow to the red Completed 
(Failed) box. 

220  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 4. 
Click the Execute Now button (see Figure 8-25).
Figure 8-25 Execute Now Button
Step 5. 
In the Executing Workflow: Show free disk space dialog box, shown in 
Figure 8-26, select a target VM (y4040 for this example), email address, 
username, and password (used to run this command on the selected Linux 
VM); then click Submit. 
Figure 8-26 Executing Workflow: Show Free Disk Space Dialog Box
Step 6. 
In the Service Request Submit Status dialog box (see Figure 8-27), click the 
Show Detail Status button. 

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  221
8
Figure 8-27 Show Detail Status for Service Request
Step 7. 
Click the Log tab and, toward the bottom, search for the words ERROR_
STATUS_MESSAGE (see Figure 8-28). Write down this variable exactly as it 
appears, including capital letters and underscores, for use in the second step of 
our workflow. Once noted, click Close to return to the Workflow Designer.
Figure 8-28 Log Tab of Workflow Status
Step 8. 
Using the upper-left search pane of the Workflow Designer application, search 
for either send or email. You are searching for an action to send an email, so 
experiment with different searches to become more familiar with different 
tasks in UCS Director (see Figure 8-29).

222  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 8-29 Searching for email in Available Tasks in the Workflow Designer
Step 9. 
From the search results, drag the Send Email task onto the workflow pane. The 
Edit Task wizard will automatically open for editing the task.
Step 10. If you want, on the Task Information page, give the task a name and a com-
ment (see Figure 8-30). Note that in the figure, the task isn’t editable because it 
was previously created in the making of the workflow for this chapter.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  223
8
Figure 8-30 Task Information Page for Send Email Task
Step 11. Click Next.
Step 12. On the User Input Mapping page, under the section titled E-mail Addresses 
(Mandatory), check the Map to User Input check box and set the User Input 
field to Email address (see Figure 8-31).
Figure 8-31 User Input Mapping Page for Send Email Task
Step 13. Click Next.

224  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 14. On the Task Inputs page, you set up a subject line and body message. Notice 
in the Body field shown in Figure 8-32 the use of the ERROR_STATUS_
MESSAGE variable that you wrote down in Step 27 from Figure 8-28. Enter an 
appropriate subject and body, ensuring that you copy the variable information 
${Show free disk space.ERROR_STATUS_MESSAGE} exactly as shown in 
Figure 8-32. Note that Figure 8-32 shows the Add Task Wizard as opposed to 
the Edit Task Wizard as shown in Figures 8-30 and 8-31. The dialog box will 
always show Add Task if a new task is being created or Edit Task if an existing 
task is being modified.
Figure 8-32 Task Inputs Page for Send Email Task
Step 15. Click Next. No entries are required on the User Output Mapping page, so click 
Submit.
Step 16. Back in the Workflow Designer, we now want to modify where our On 
Success and On Failure options for the “Show free disk space” command 
point. The new hierarchy of order should flow from Start > Task 1 > Task 2 > 
Completed. Modify the arrows so that your task flow looks like that shown in 
Figure 8-33.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  225
8
Figure 8-33 Completed “Show free disk space” Workflow
Step 17. Click Execute Now to run the workflow. As previously done in Step 5, select 
the target VM, username, and password for that VM, as well as the email 
address where the output should be sent. Click Submit. Optionally, feel free 
to then click the Show Detail Status dialog box and monitor the Log tab for 
progress on the workflow. Or simply wait for the email to arrive in your inbox 
with the requested information.
Step 18. Check your email inbox for the address you entered in Step 17. If all worked 
well, you should find an email similar to the one shown in Figure 8-34.
Figure 8-34 Email from UCS Director Showing Disk Usage for VM y4040

226  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Assign the Custom User VM Policy to a vDC
Step 1. 
Now that the workflow has been created and has run successfully, we must 
make it available to one or more vDC(s) within UCS Director, and then add the 
custom action to end-user virtual machines in that particular vDC. To do this, 
navigate to Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > Virtual Data Centers.
Step 2. 
Select the vDC name you want to map the policy to. In the example shown 
in Figure 8-35, the vDC named prd-ImportantACMEApp-y4027 has been se-
lected. Click the Edit button. 
Figure 8-35 List of Virtual Data Centers for All User Groups

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  227
8
Step 3. 
In the Edit vDC dialog box, scroll down to the Policies section and look for 
the User Action Policy drop-down list box. From the drop-down list, choose 
Disk Free, as shown in Figure 8-36, and then click Save.
Figure 8-36 Edit vDC Dialog Box

228  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Assign the Custom Workflow Action to a Custom User VM Policy
Step 1. 
Now that the policy has been assigned to a vDC, let’s add the Custom User 
VM Policy to VMs in that vDC. Navigate to Policies > Orchestration and then 
click the User VM Action Policy tab, as shown in Figure 8-37.
Figure 8-37 User VM Action Policy Tab
Step 2. 
Click the Add button.
Step 3. 
On the Create New Policy page, give the policy a name and choose 1 in the 
Select No. of Actions drop-down list (as shown in Figure 8-38).
Figure 8-38 Create New Policy Page
Step 4. 
Click Next.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  229
8
Step 5. 
On the Add VM Actions page, give the button a label in the Action Label 
field, select the workflow to perform when the button is clicked (1499 Show 
free disk space in this example), and then select the Authorized User Types by 
clicking on the Select button next to Authorized User Types and then choos-
ing Service End-User, as shown in Figure 8-39.
Figure 8-39 Add VM Actions Page
Step 6. 
Click Submit.
The final steps are to log out of UCS Director as an admin, and log in to UCS 
Director as an end user that has permissions to the vDC we just mapped this 
custom User VM Action Policy to. 
Step 7. 
In the upper-right corner of UCS Director, next to your username, click Log 
Out, as shown in Figure 8-40.
Figure 8-40 Logging Out of UCS Director

230  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 8. 
Log in to UCS Director as an end user. At the top, you will see the Virtual 
Resources menu option, as shown in Figure 8-41. Click that icon.
Figure 8-41 Virtual Resources Icon in End-User Service Catalog
Step 9. 
Navigate to the VMs tab and select the previous VM you used for testing (for 
the example, VM Name y4040). Notice that the menu now has a “Disk free*” 
menu option, as shown in Figure 8-42.
Figure 8-42 Disk free Menu Option
Step 10. Log out of UCS Director as the end user.
Setting VM Options for End-User Selection
When your users are requesting virtual machines from a Standard Catalog or Advanced 
Catalog, you have the ability to create conditions that can be enforced for the users by cre-
ating a Computing Policy. Please note that this is done by applying a Computing Policy to 
vDCs that you choose.
The Computing Policy drives all sorts of behaviors, such as whether or not an ESX cluster 
in a pod of infrastructure has enough vCPU or memory available to provision VMs success-
fully. In addition, you can set default options for permitted values of vCPUs and memory 
for end users.
As the UCS Director administrator, the Computing Policy allows you to focus on delivering 
varying tiers of service to virtual computing. As an example, you can choose older ESX clus-
ters with less memory or CPU resources for a development vDC while choosing a new ESX 
cluster with more CPU/memory for a production vDC.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  231
8
To create a Computing Policy, follow these steps:
Step 1. 
Within UCS Director, select Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > 
Computing.
Step 2. 
Navigate to the hypervisor of your choice. In this example, select the VMware 
Computing Policy tab. 
Step 3. 
Click the Add button to open the Add Computing Policy dialog box, shown in 
Figure 8-43.
Figure 8-43 Adding a Computing Policy
Step 4. 
Give the Computing Policy a name and, optionally, a description. In this exam-
ple the policy is named New-ESX-Policy.
Step 5. 
In the Cloud Name drop-down list box, select the cloud you would like to 
provision this policy for. In this example, cloud-vcenter is selected.
Step 6. 
If you want the Computing Policy to operate within the constraints of an ESX 
resource pool, click Select to the right of Resource Pool and choose a resource 
pool.
Step 7. 
Keep ESX Type set to Any ESX/ESXi.
Step 8. 
Keep ESX Version set to Any.

232  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 9. 
The Filter Conditions scrollable pane gives you a myriad of options. For 
brevity purposes, they won’t be listed here, but refer to Figure 8-43 to see 
a partial list of options. You can set parameters such as guests per host, 
VCPUs Ratio, Provisioned Memory, etc. If any of these conditions aren’t met 
when an end user requests resources in the vDC where this Computing Policy 
is applied, the provisioning process may not complete successfully due to a 
lack of available resources. This gives you the ability to ensure clusters don’t 
get over-provisioned as part of the end-user service catalog ordering process.
Step 10. Scroll down to the Resizing Options section, check the Allow Resizing of VM 
check box, and compete the fields as follows:
■ Permitted Values for vCPUs: Enter a string (separated by commas) of 
valid vCPU options that will be presented to the end user when they go to 
provision a virtual machine with this policy applied. For this example, 1, 2, 
and 4 vCPUs have been allowed.
■ Permitted Values for Memory in MB: Enter a numeric string (separated by 
commas) of permitted memory amounts to be allowed when provisioning 
a virtual machine that has this policy applied to it. For this example, we are 
only allowing the default options of 256 MB, 512 MB, and 1024 MB.
■ Deploy to Folder: Enter a name of a folder you’d like to create in Virtual 
Center where VMs created from this policy will reside. If the speciﬁed 
folder does not already exist, it will be created by UCS Director. This is 
helpful to keep track of the provisioned VMs and to see them organized 
logically within VirtualCenter. For this example, we have created a CCNA 
folder. Note that if the folder already exists, it won’t be re-created. 
Step 11. Click Submit to add the Computing Policy.
Understanding Common Administrative Workflows on 
VMs in UCS Director
UCS Director comes with a default set of administrative workflows that can be leveraged 
out of the box in your task of automating and orchestrating virtual machine actions within 
your private cloud infrastructure. This section is certainly not an exhaustive list of work-
flows but will cover some of the more common ones. You are encouraged to review many 
more of these within UCS Director in preparation for working with the product in your 
organization and for the purposes of studying for your CCNA certification.
Step 1. 
In UCS Director, navigate to Policies > Orchestration.
Step 2. 
Go to the Default folder and expand the Default\VMware folder.
Step 3. 
Select any workflow. For illustration purposes, select the VMware Clone VM 
As Image workflow.
Step 4. 
Double-click the selected workflow and you will see the Workflow Designer 
screen shown in Figure 8-44. Notice that the Workflow Designer screen has 
two main sections. On the left is a list of available tasks. On the right is a 

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  233
8
“canvas” similar to that found in many popular diagramming applications that 
allows you to simply drag and drop workflow tasks from the library on the left 
onto the canvas.
Figure 8-44 VMware Clone VM As Image Task
Under Available Tasks on the left of the Workflow Designer, there are two 
ways to find tasks to use. As you first start to work with UCS Director, it may 
be helpful to drill down into the various folders and subfolders to find tasks 
that you are interested in. As you gain more experience with the product and 
can start to recall task names that are frequently used, you can use the search/
query field to quickly and easily search and filter based on items you are 
interested in.
Step 5. 
To explore some of the common actions available to virtual hypervisors, 
expand the Virtualization Tasks folder, expand the HyperV Tasks folder, and 
then expand the HyperV VM Tasks subfolder, as shown in Figure 8-45. 
Figure 8-45 HyperV VM Tasks Folder Options

234  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 6. 
Note the common tasks available to you. You could drag and drop these items 
into the Workflow Designer canvas to link them with other available tasks to 
create more complex, multistep workflows. But for the purposes of this exer-
cise, we won’t be making any changes to the VMware Clone VM As Image 
workflow; we are simply observing available workflows. 
Step 7. 
Navigate to the Virtualization Tasks > VMware Tasks > VMware VM Tasks 
folder. Note some of the many options available that you can perform on a 
VMware ESX virtual machine. 
Step 8. 
Once you are done reviewing some of these actions, click Close.
To see a dynamic inventory of all available tasks defined in a particular instance of UCS 
Director, you can export the entire task library. This is a great reference to save offline out 
of UCS Director. This will allow you (if you print to PDF as an example) to have a list of all 
the standard tasks that ship with UCS Director for easy offline reference. 
Step 1. 
In UCS Director, choose Policies > Orchestration. 
Step 2. 
Click the Task Library icon, as highlighted in Figure 8-46. When the dia-
log box appears, click the Regenerate Document check box and then click 
Submit.
Figure 8-46 Exporting the UCS Director Task Library

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  235
8
Step 3. 
The resulting document can then be printed to PDF and used to reference all 
orchestration tasks within UCS Director (see Figure 8-47). Clicking any task 
will take you to a detailed summary, description, and table of inputs and out-
puts. Figure 8-48 shows an example of the output of the task titled VMware 
Host Tasks: Create Host Profile.
Figure 8-47 UCS Director Orchestration Task Library
Figure 8-48 Detailed UCS Director Task Inputs and Outputs
As you can see, UCS Director allows you great flexibility with the thousands of out-of-
the-box tasks. Combined with the ability to also import tasks easily into the task library 
from places like Cisco’s UCS Director community forums or peers of yours, you can see 
how UCS Director provides you, the cloud administrator, with a great deal of flexibility to 
handle a wide range of operational tasks within your organization.
Prime Service Catalog VM Integration
The last section of this chapter focuses on how to bring the virtual machine end-user experi-
ence into Prime Service Catalog. If we think about the two different audiences each tool in 
the Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite serves, it can be broken down along these lines:
■ UCS Director: A “quick and dirty” service catalog that you and your IT department can 
use for ordering infrastructure, ordering VMs, and automating common IT tasks (such 

236  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
as an Advanced Catalog entry in UCS Director to “Add a New VLAN” to the data cen-
ter) quickly and easily. UCS Director provides an IT-focused experience and is tightly 
coupled with technical IT task automation. However, if the organizational requirements 
are minimal, UCS Director’s service catalogs can be exposed directly to your end users 
for them to order infrastructure items quickly and easily. UCS Director lacks the polish, 
fit, and finish of Prime Service Catalog but may be good enough for your organization 
to compete with public cloud IaaS and PaaS offerings your internal IT users may be con-
templating using or already consuming.
■ Prime Service Catalog: Prime Service Catalog offers a much better “fit and finish” and is 
much more end-user friendly for both ordering catalog items and interacting with provi-
sioned VMs. Whereas UCS Director is an-IT focused experience, Prime Service Catalog 
focuses more on the end-user experience and centers on business logic more than techni-
cal IT task automation.
Linking UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog
The first step is to ensure that UCS Director is communicating properly with Prime Service 
Catalog. Cisco offers very easy out-of-the-box integration of these two products. The pri-
mary setup for this configuration takes place within Prime Service Catalog. Assuming con-
nectivity has already been established, to verify connectivity, take the following steps:
Step 1. 
Within Prime Service Catalog while logged in as an administrator, click your 
name in the upper-right corner and then choose Switch To > Administration 
(see Figure 8-49).
Figure 8-49 Accessing Administration View to Begin Prime Service Catalog and UCS 
Director Integration
Step 2. 
Once in the Administration screen, click Manage Connections in the upper 
menu bar as shown in Figure 8-50.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  237
8
Figure 8-50
Click Manage Connections on the Home Page
Step 3.
On the Manage Connection screen, you’ll see connections for UCS Director, 
Intercloud Fabric for Business, and Puppet. Click UCS Director, and then click 
Connections immediately below it. Click the Edit icon, denoted by a pencil 
(see Figure 8-51).
Figure 8-51
UCS Director Connection Properties
Step 4. 
Information and options for the connection are displayed across several col-
umns: Identifier, Name, Protocol, Host Name or IP Address, Port, Certificate, 
User Name, Password, Export User, and Enable Background Sync (see Figure 
8-52). Ensure that Export User is not checked and Enable Background is 

238  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
checked. Also ensure this username and password have the appropriate permis-
sions to perform this action. Click Save.
Figure 8-52 Enabling Background Sync for the Connection
Step 5. 
Click Connect & Import as shown in Figure 8-53.
Figure 8-53 Prime Service Catalog and UCS Director Integration: Connect & Import

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  239
8
Step 6. 
Once this completes successfully, expand the Discovered Objects list at the 
left and click a category, such as Workflows, and note the objects that have 
been imported from UCS Director (see Figure 8-54).
Figure 8-54 Imported Workflows for Prime Service Catalog and UCS Director Integration
Exploring “My Stuff”
To explore the My Stuff features, first log out as administrator and log in as an end user. 
Then, from the Prime Service Catalog home/welcome screen, click your username in the 
upper-right corner (see Figure 8-55) and click the My Stuff menu selection to see all of 
your Prime Service Catalog items. In addition, the default view of Prime Service Catalog 
has, as one of the main HTML5 panes, a Manage My Stuff pane, shown on the right in 
Figure 8-55 (partially obscured by the menu).
Figure 8-55 Prime Service Catalog My Stuff Menu Item

240  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Keep in mind that if you are supporting an existing implementation of Prime Service 
Catalog, you may see additional items in your My Stuff view, such as mobile applica-
tions, equipment that you have ordered, etc. Remember, the power and flexibility of 
Prime Service Catalog extends well beyond IaaS and PaaS scenarios (though those are the 
focus of discussion in most of this book) and gives you the power and flexibility of plac-
ing physical items and services in the service catalog, such as the ability to order business 
cards, provision desktop IP telephony services, or order custom-developed, in-house 
applications for your mobile device. These are just some of the many examples of busi-
ness processes that can be put into Prime Service Catalog’s self-service portal for internal 
end-user consumption.
Taking VM Actions in Prime Service Catalog
As you navigate into My Stuff within Prime Service Catalog, you will see in the left pane a 
list of all items belonging to your user account. These items can include virtual machines, 
applications, vDCs, and many other items. For the purposes of this chapter, the focus will 
be on virtual machines. Figure 8-56 shows a list of virtual machines belonging to the cur-
rently logged-in user.
Figure 8-56 List of Virtual Machines

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  241
8
Clicking a virtual machine pops up a menu that allows you to take actions on that virtual 
machine. By default, as shown in Figure 8-57, you can perform some basic virtual machine 
functions such as
■ Power off VM
■ Reboot VM
■ Shutdown VM Guest
Figure 8-57 Virtual Machine Actions
Additionally, you can click the More button, as seen in Figure 8-58, to open a menu of 
additional virtual machine actions that you can perform on the VM.
Figure 8-58 Default List of Virtual Machine Actions

242  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The list of available virtual machine actions under the More button include
■ Add vNIC
■ Clone VM
■ Create VM Disk
■ Create VM Snapshot
■ Delete VM Snapshot
■ Delete VNIC
■ Reset VM
■ Revert VM Snapshot
■ Standby VM
■ Suspend VM
By default, there are quite a few options that can be performed on virtual machines within 
Prime Service Catalog. Of course, with proper rights and permissions, this list of avail-
able actions can be pared down significantly. For instance, it may be good to provide very 
simple functionality to production virtual machines, such as Reboot VM and Shutdown VM 
Guest, while allowing development or test virtual machines to have more options available 
to them.

Chapter 8: Virtual Machine Management  243
8
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test.
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 8-2 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 8-2 Key Topics for Chapter 8
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Section
Installing PowerShell Agent
205
Section
Create a Custom Workflow Action
212
Figure 8-15
Table of defined variables for selected VM
213
Concept
UCS Workflow Designer
233
Figure 8-48
Detailed UCS Director task inputs and outputs
235
Section
Linking UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog
236
List
Virtual machine actions
242
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
Intercloud Fabric, self-service portal, service catalog, Prime Service Catalog (PSC), 
PowerShell, Cisco PowerShell Agent (PSA), guest, Microsoft System Center 
Configuration Manager (SCCM), Puppet, change management database (CMDB), virtual 
data center (vDC), orchestration, automation task, workflow, Amazon Web Services 
(AWS), Microsoft Azure, Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS)

This chapter covers the following exam topics:
3.0 Cloud Provisioning 
3.3 Deploy preconfigured templates and make minor changes to the service catalog 
offerings that do not affect workflows or services
3.3.a Describe the deployment of templates: storage, compute, network, and  
virtualization 
3.3.b Describe differences between the templates 
3.3.c Describe the need to convert between templates 

CHAPTER 9
Automating Cloud Infrastructure 
with UCS Director
There are many reasons to decide to implement a private cloud for your enterprise. The 
main reason should be to better enable your users to consume and manage infrastructure 
resources (compute, storage, network, etc.) by providing them the capability to discover ser-
vices, order services, and manage their own consumption with little to no manual interaction 
with the IT team. Before you can provide users with this capability, you need to develop the 
services that will be made available. To do this, you need a comprehensive understanding of 
how to deliver the infrastructure that will back these services. Policies describing the con-
sumption of compute, network, and storage resources need to be developed. And, automa-
tion workflows to deploy the standard configurations need to be built and tested. 
Cisco UCS Director provides a platform for infrastructure management and automation 
designed for IT infrastructure teams to work together to easily build policies for stan-
dard infrastructure offerings. The virtual data centers and workflows you will build in 
UCS Director provide the foundation for users to begin ordering and managing their own 
resources within the cloud. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 9-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 9-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
UCS Director Policies, Pools, and Virtual Data Centers
1–5
UCS Director Orchestration
6–8
UCS Director Service Requests
9, 10
CAUTION The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chap-
ter. If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, 
you should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving your-
self credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might 
provide you with a false sense of security.

246  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. How many groups will be assigned ownership of a virtual data center? 
a. 
One group
b. One or more groups
c. 
No groups, because virtual data centers are assigned to users
d. All groups share the same virtual data center assignments
2. Within what construct within UCS Director will you configure the policies that deter-
mine how a new virtual machine will be deployed into a cloud? 
a. 
Virtual private cloud (vPC) 
b. Virtual pod (vPod) 
c. 
Virtual data center (vDC) 
d. Virtual tenant (vTenant)
3. Which policy determines how elements such as hostname, domain membership, DNS 
settings, and time zone are configured? 
a. 
Service Delivery Policy
b. Computing Policy
c. 
Guest Customization Policy
d. System Policy 
4. Which of the following can be configured within UCS Director as part of the inte-
grated IP address management capabilities? 
a. 
Static IP pools
b. VLAN pools
c. 
IP subnet pools
d. All of the above
e. 
None of the above
5. When creating a new service profile through UCS Director, which physical infrastruc-
ture policies and templates must be configured within UCS Director itself? (Choose 
three.) 
a. 
vNIC template 
b. UCS Network Policy 
c. 
UCS Storage Policy 
d. UCS Bios Policy 
e. 
UCS Boot Policy
6. What does the Workflow Property “Mark as Compound Task” indicate? 
a. 
That this workflow is made up of child workflows 
b. That this workflow will be leveraged in other workflows
c. 
That this workflow leverages external libraries and features 
d. That this workflow will target a specific virtual machine 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  247
7. How do you add a new task to a workflow? 
a. 
Right-click in the Workflow Designer design area and choose New
b. Drag from the Available Tasks list
c. 
Double-click a task in the Available Tasks list
d. Any of the above
8. With what type of task can you ask an external user to provide an input value during 
workflow execution? 
a. 
User Approval Task 
b. Get Input Task 
c. 
Custom Approval Task 
d. Query User Task 
9. Which tab(s) of a service request can an end user view? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Status 
b. Log
c. 
Objects Created/Modified 
d. Inputs/Outputs
10. True or False. In order to use the Rollback capability of UCS Director, you must first 
build a workflow that acts as an Undo for the action you wish to roll back. 
a. 
True
b. False

248  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
UCS Director Policies, Pools, and Virtual Data Centers
To dynamically deliver infrastructure resources to users, your team of cloud architects and 
engineers must configure policies and workflows that reflect the intended standards for 
your enterprise. Several decisions must be made during provisioning, such as
■ What hypervisor host and data store to instantiate new VMs on
■ If and how to provide network access for new VMs
■ How many virtual network adapters a new bare-metal server should have
■ What VLAN and subnet to use when creating a new network segment
You will create policies, pools, and virtual data centers to provide UCS Director with the 
information needed to answer these and other questions during provisioning processes. 
Virtual Data Center and Policies
The virtual data center (vDC) is the logical representation of the private cloud that your end 
users will be deploying new virtual machines into. An individual vDC can be assigned only 
to a single group, but a single group can have one or many vDCs available for their use. 
You will need to determine the right number and purpose for building vDCs for your 
enterprise, as there are many possible strategies for using the vDC construct in a cloud. For 
example, an enterprise may choose to implement a very small number of vDCs based on a 
very coarse segmentation, such as a Production vDC, Development vDC, and Test vDC. In 
this case all virtual machines, no matter the application, would be deployed together and 
subject to the same set of policies. This model has the advantage of being simpler to initially 
set up, but you may find that it makes reporting on application usage and implementing 
flexible deployment polices more challenging. At the other end of the spectrum, you would 
deploy a vDC per application and environment. In this case you may have three or more 
vDCs per application (e.g., Production, Development, and Test). This method has the ben-
efit of providing very granular controls and visibility over the deployed resources, but will 
result in a much larger number of vDCs within the environment. Whichever method you 
initially deploy your cloud with, you can always adjust the model as your needs evolve. 
Each vDC will be made up of several policies that determine how new virtual machines 
will be deployed, managed, and billed back to the users and groups. Figure 9-1 provides a 
graphical representation of a vDC and the most important policies you will need to create. 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  249
Virtual Data Center
Compute Policy
Host Selection
System Policy
Guest Configuration
Storage Policy
Data Store Selection
Action Policies
Self-Service Options
Network Policy
Virtual Network
Cost Model
Showback
Figure 9-1 Virtual Data Center 
Configuration of the vDC and policies is done in the Edit vDC window, accessed via the 
administrator portal by choosing Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > Virtual Data 
Centers, as shown in Figure 9-2. Each of the policies is leveraged by UCS Director when 
provisioning new virtual machines to the underlying hypervisor platform being leveraged. 
Therefore, you’ll find that there are tabs for each of the supported cloud types. The differ-
ences between the VMware System Policy and the HyperV System Policy, as an example, 
are minor, and once you understand the overall usage of each policy type, it is fairly easy 
to leverage a different cloud type. In our discussions of the policies, we will be assuming 
VMware vCenter as the cloud type. 
Figure 9-2 Administrator Portal Virtual Data Centers Menu Option
Figure 9-3 shows vDC properties where the different policies are applied. As indicated by 
the red asterisk, the System, Computing, Network, and Storage Policies are mandatory for 
vDC creation. Policies for Cost Model and User Action are optional. Table 9-2 provides a 
simple breakdown of each virtual data center policy and its purpose.  

250  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-3 Virtual Data Center Properties 
Table 9-2 vDC Policies
vDC Policy
Purpose
System Policy
Configure guest operating system details like hostname, DNS, and 
time zone
Computing Policy
Determine what hypervisor host system to deploy the VM onto
Network Policy 
Determine the number and type of network connectivity needed 
for the VM 
Storage Policy 
Determine what data store to create the VM disks on
End User Self-Service 
Policy 
Provide access to out-of-the-box VM lifecycle action tasks to end 
users
User Action Policy 
Provide custom VM actions to end users by linking to workflows 
Cost Model
Assign value to different metrics such as number of vCPUs as part 
of a chargeback model
System Policy
You will find the System Policy under Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > Service 
Delivery along with other polices such as Cost Model, OS Licenses (Windows OS Product 
Keys), and other VM-level policies. The System Policy itself determines how the guest 
operating system will be configured during the customization phase of creation. As shown 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  251
in Figure 9-4, the main policy elements are about VM and hostname format, time zone, and 
DNS settings. If you configure the policy for both Windows and Linux VMs, you’ll need to 
configure several Windows-specific elements for licensing and domain settings. Configuring 
a Windows Product ID/Key in the System Policy is optional, as it is more likely to attach 
the Product Key information to the Standard Catalogs to support multiple guest OS types 
within a single vDC. 
Figure 9-4 VMware System Policy 
As you can see in Figure 9-4, UCS Director supports using variables within policies. Within 
UCS Director, variables are indicated and accessed through a ${Variable Name} syntax. For 
example, ${GROUP_NAME} would be replaced with the name of the group for which a 
resource is being provisioned, and ${USER_NAME} would represent the requesting user’s 
username. These variable references are often used when creating VM name and hostname 
templates as part of the System Policy. Table 9-3 lists and describes the available variables 
for use in creating hostnames and VM names. 
Table 9-3 VM Template and Hostname Variables
Name
Description
${CLOUD_NAME}
The name of the cloud used for VM provisioning.
${GROUP_NAME}
The name of the group to which the VM belongs.
${CATALOG_NAME}
The name of the catalog item used for VM provisioning.
${USER}
The requesting user ID.
${SR_ID}
The service request ID.
${COMMENTS}
The comments specified by the requesting user.

252  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Name
Description
${COST_CENTER}
The cost center that is associated with a group or customer 
organization. This is specified during group or customer organization 
creation.
${APPCODE}
The application code that is specified during catalog creation.
Administrators can mix static characters with variables to create a template for name  
creation. For example, the VM Name Template setting shown in Figure 9-4 is u${SR_ID}. 
This will create a name in which the service request number will be preceded by a single 
lowercase “u” character. This type of name will ensure uniqueness for new virtual machines. 
Administrators can choose to allow end users to provide a prefix that would be inserted 
before the template configured in the policy. 
Computing Policy
You use the VMware Computing Policy to give UCS Director the information it needs to 
select a vSphere host or cluster to deploy a new VM to. UCS Director will start by consid-
ering all available hosts or clusters that you indicate are available, and then filter down the 
selections by excluding any host that doesn’t meet the conditions specified in the policy. 
Figure 9-5 shows some of the common filter options, which you can use to enforce your 
organization’s standards for guest-to-host ratio, CPU/RAM oversubscription policies, and 
required available capacity on a single host. 
Figure 9-5 VMware Computing Policy 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  253
The default behavior for UCS Director when deploying a new VM is to maintain the under-
lying image/template settings for CPU and RAM. You can opt to give your users the ability 
to resize a VM at provision time by clicking the Resizing Options button near the bottom 
and providing a comma-separated list of options. The Override Template configuration in 
the policy would be a universal administrative override for all new VMs being deployed 
with this policy. 
Network Policy
You configure network connectivity for virtual machines with the Network Policy. UCS 
Director supports single or multiple network connections per VM. And each can be config-
ured for static or DHCP-assigned IP addresses. On occasions where you’d like to provide 
your end users some flexibility in network configuration when provisioning, you can even 
add choices regarding optional network adapters and the port groups being assigned. 
Figure 9-6 shows the main page of the VMware Network Policy. This page lists the number 
of VM networks (or virtual network adapters) this policy will configure. Clicking the Add 
button or Edit button above the table opens the dialog box shown in Figure 9-7 where you 
configure the settings for an individual network adapter. Each network entry has one or 
more port groups listed. Any single vNIC can be assigned only a single port group at a point 
in time. When multiple options exist, you can allow end users to choose their desired port 
group if you wish; otherwise, UCS Director will select the first one available (typically due 
to available IP addresses). Click the Add or Edit button in the Port Groups table to open the 
Edit Entry dialog box, shown in Figure 9-8, where the port-group and IP assignment con-
figuration is completed. Configuring IPv6 connectivity is an optional setting in the policy. 
Figure 9-6 VMware Network Policy 

254  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-7 VMware Network Policy: vNIC Configuration
Figure 9-8 VMware Network Policy: vNIC Port Group Configuration

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  255
Storage Policy
Your configuration of the VMware Storage Policy will determine what data store the VM’s 
disks will be stored on. Configured and applied very similarly to the Computing Policy, 
you will first indicate what possible data stores should be considered, and then what con-
ditions would exclude an individual option. This enables you to ensure a single data store 
doesn’t get overprovisioned. Figure 9-9 shows the configuration window, including the key 
elements of data store selection and filters. Also similar to the Computing Policy, you can 
override the template disk sizes or allow your end users to resize at provisioning. 
Be aware that when creating a new Storage Policy, all storage options (Local, NFS, and SAN) 
are selected by default. Be sure to specify which are appropriate for your cloud. A common 
mistake made by administrators is to leave Use Local Storage selected, in which case UCS 
Director will attempt to provision new VMs to local data stores. 
Figure 9-9 VMware Storage Policy 
If your environment has different tiers of data stores for uses like databases, swap, or gen-
eral data, you can indicate this type of configuration need in the Additional Disk Policies 
configuration of the Storage Policy, as shown in Figure 9-10. 

256  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-10 VMware Storage Policy: Additional Disk Policies 
Cost Model
Applying a Cost Model to a virtual data center is an optional configuration for enterprises 
moving into a showback or chargeback model. To access the Cost Model configuration 
settings, choose Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > Service Delivery > Cost Model. 
UCS Director supports a very flexible metering and billing policy through the Cost Model 
policy. Charges can be issued hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly, and metrics for 
CPU, memory, network, and storage are all supported. Figure 9-11 shows an example sec-
tion of a Cost Model configuration. 
NOTE Chapter 12, “Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting,” provides a complete discussion 
on chargeback and billing options. 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  257
Figure 9-11
Cost Model 
Action Policies 
In most cases, you will want to enable your users not only to provision new virtual 
machines, but also to self-manage the life cycle of those VMs. End-user productivity and 
satisfaction will not be much improved if end users need to open a ticket with IT every time 
they want to power on/off or snapshot their VM as they are managing or developing an 
application. There are two optional policies configurable within a vDC to enable users to 
take actions on their own VMs. 
The End User Self-Service Policy is located at Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > 
Service Delivery > End User Self-Service Policy, and is the policy you will start with to 
offer end-user control of VMs. Shown in Figure 9-12, this policy provides you the options 
to enable which of the out-of-the-box actions supported by UCS Director the end user will 
have access to. There are greater than 30 possible actions you can enable covering basic 
power management, snapshot management, and VM resizing. 

258  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-12 End User Self-Service Policy 
You will likely eventually find a need to enable end users to take some action on a VM that 
is not an out-of-the-box capability for UCS Director, or perhaps you may simply want to 
change or extend the behavior of an out-of-the-box task. In this case, you can build a work-
flow with a VM context for the new action and leverage the User Action Policy to give 
users access to the new capability. One common example is extending the Add VM Disk 
action to include mounting and formatting the disk in the guest operating system. 
The User Action Policy is configured via the Policies > Orchestration menu four tabs down 
from Workflows. Figure 9-13 shows a sample policy with some example Actions that could 
be built. 
Figure 9-13 User Action Policy 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  259
vDC Categories 
When you create a new vDC, part of the process is creating new policies, or selecting exist-
ing ones for each of the mandatory and optional types needed. This provides UCS Director 
the information needed to automatically deploy new VMs into the vDC based on the 
policy and governance needed by your organization. However, you will quickly realize that 
not all VMs deployed into a vDC have the same requirements for compute, network, and 
storage. Web and database servers have vastly different storage performance requirements. 
Some application servers may need a higher-performing CPU than a general server. 
Virtual data center categories can help solve the problem of differentiating policies within 
a vDC. In the “Standard Catalog” section in Chapter 10, “Building a Service Catalog and 
User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog,” you learn that when creating a 
Standard Catalog, one parameter you configure is the category of the catalog. The category 
selected corresponds to one of the available categories of a vDC. 
After creating a new vDC, you can select it in the Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies 
> Virtual Data Centers menu and click Manage Categories from the action menu. Figure 
9-14 shows a sample view of this interface, where you can see each of the categories listed 
with columns for each of the configured policies. Any policy setting configured here will 
override the default policy as configured on the vDC itself. In the figure you can see that 
the Network Policy has been adjusted to reflect web, app, and data port groups for the 
related categories. 
Figure 9-14 Virtual Data Center Categories
IP, Subnet, and VLAN Network Pools
Part of automating infrastructure delivery includes consuming resources from the cloud. 
Within network automation, the three most common resources that will need to be con-
sumed are IP addresses, subnets, and VLANs. Every enterprise network team will have some 
process for allocating and indicating use of these resources. Many organizations are still 
leveraging spreadsheets for manual tracking, while others have implemented enterprise IP 
address management (IPAM) tools. 
Whatever method your organization is using, UCS Director supports a lite-IPAM capability 
that will enable it to automatically allocate and record the consumption of resources as they 
are provisioned to new virtual machines or during a workflow execution. You configure 
these pools and policies from Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > Network. Figure 
9-15 shows the Static IP Pool Policy as well as the tabs for IP Subnet Pool Policy, VLAN 
Pool Policy, and VXLAN Pool Policy. 

260  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-15 UCS Director IPAM Options 
Static IP Pool Policy 
The Static IP Pool Policy is a critical component of most vDC Network Policies because 
few data centers leverage DHCP for assigning IP addresses to servers. However, a single 
static IP pool can be used across many Network Policies as well as for any instance where 
an IP address from a given range is required. For example, if you build a workflow to build 
and provision a new bare-metal server, its IP address could come from the same pool used 
for VM IPs in a vDC Network Policy. 
You add or edit a policy with an interface similar to Figure 9-16. A policy requires a name 
and optional description and one or more pools or ranges of IP addresses. If you configure 
more than one pool in a single policy, UCS Director will exhaust the first pool and then 
move to subsequent pools. Though a pool entry can include a VLAN ID, it is more for nota-
tion than an actionable piece of data. When an IP address is requested from a pool, a VLAN 
ID is not a consideration for determining an appropriate IP address. 
Figure 9-16 Static IP Pool Policy Configuration 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  261
Once a policy is created, you can double-click its name to bring up a table similar to the 
one shown in Figure 9-17, where each of the used IP addresses is noted along with details 
regarding which VM or service request has it reserved. The reservation can be cleared by 
rolling back the service request, or manually by the administrator. 
Figure 9-17 Static IP Pool Policy Consumption 
IP Subnet Pool Policy
An IP Subnet Pool Policy is very handy when constructing automation jobs that will be 
building a new network segment that will require IP space to be assigned and configured. 
Some examples where you would do this include adding a new VLAN to a traditional net-
work, creating a new bridge-domain subnet in an ACI-based network, or creating a level of 
segmentation with a firewall device. 
You will only need a few pieces of information to create a new IP Subnet Pool Policy. 
In addition to the policy name and description, you’ll need to provide a network super-
net address and mask, and indicate the number of subnets required. Finally, you indicate 
whether the gateway address should be the first or last available address in the subnet. This 
is helpful because the workflow task to generate a new subnet from a pool will provide 
several outputs to make using the new subnet easier, one of which is the gateway IP address. 
You can see an example of the interface in Figure 9-18. 
Figure 9-18 IP Subnet Pool Policy Configuration 

262  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
VLAN Pool Policy
You will leverage a VLAN Pool Policy to generate a new VLAN ID often along with using 
the IP Subnet Pool Policy to add new network segments. The VLAN Pool Policy is very 
simple, only requiring the range of VLAN IDs to use (see Figure 9-19). 
Figure 9-19 VLAN Pool Policy Configuration 
Physical Infrastructure Policies 
Your data center is made up of more than just virtual resources. Even if your application 
workloads are 100 percent virtualized, you still must have physical servers acting as hypervi-
sors, storage arrays to provide disk space to store all the VMs, and a network for everything 
to communicate over. Because you will always have to work with both physical and virtual 
resources, UCS Director provides methods to configure these physical resources as well. 
You will find that UCS Director offers many methods of configuring infrastructure as you 
become more familiar, but for this book we will be discussing what is available for assisting 
with provisioning new UCS service profiles. Figure 9-20 shows the location of both UCS 
Manager and UCS Central Policies, along with Rack Server (standalone Cisco C-Series) and 
NetApp Policies. 
Figure 9-20 Physical Infrastructure Policies 
UCS Policies
UCS Manager and UCS Central Policies will be used when you are looking to build a new 
service profile template or a new service profile without using a service profile template. In 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  263
these circumstances you will require UCS policies for storage and network configuration 
when creating a new service profile. 
The UCS Manager (or UCS Central) Network Policy simply indicates the number and type 
of virtual NICs (vNIC) to configure in a new template. Figure 9-21 shows a sample UCS 
Manager Network Policy. In the UCS Network Policy, you specify UCS Director vNIC tem-
plates for the vNIC1 and vNIC2 templates displayed in the figure.  It is typical to link the 
UCS Director vNIC template to an underlying UCS Manager or Central template. 
Figure 9-21 UCS Network Policy 
The UCS Manager Storage Policy does the same thing for virtual host bus adapters (vHBA) 
as the UCS Manager Network Policy does for vNICs. Figure 9-22 provides a sample. 
Figure 9-22 UCS Storage Policy 

264  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Regarding UCS Manager and UCS Central policies, templates and profiles, UCS Director 
will allow the creation of policies using local (from UCS Manager) or global (from UCS 
Central) templates; however, you should avoid mixing them when you create a service pro-
file or template in UCS Director. Either use only local or use only global objects underlying 
your policies. 
Once you have created the necessary policies, you can create a new service profile or tem-
plate within UCS Director that leverages them. Most often you will create a service profile 
or template as part of a workflow, but you can also create one on demand by navigating 
to Physical > Compute and locating your UCS Account in the tree menu on the left. On 
the Organizations tab, double-click the UCS Organization that your new service profile or 
template will be created within, and then switch to the Profile or Templates tab. Figure 9-23 
shows UCS Director navigated to the Service Profile Templates page. 
Figure 9-23 UCS Account Service Profile Templates View 
Click the Add button to open the Create Service Profile Template dialog box, shown in 
Figure 9-24, where you can create a new service profile template within your UCS envi-
ronment. The Storage and Network Policies are used within this dialog box to create the 
desired connectivity options. 
Within the dialog box to create the new service profile template is a Template Type field 
with options for Updating Template or Initial Template. This is an important characteristic 
of the service profile template to understand. New service profiles created from an Initial 
Template will match the template’s settings at the time of creation, but if the template were 
to be updated in the future, any service profiles already created would not be affected. 
With an Updating Template, changes to the template will also change all service profiles 
created and bound to the service profile template. There are circumstances where you may 
want to leverage both of these template types within your organization. For example, your 
critical production database servers may be created based on Initial Templates because any 
updates or changes to that server must be well planned and explicitly addressed per server. 
However, your virtualization host servers would be created based on Updating Templates to 
make sure that each host in your cluster has consistent settings when changes happen, such 
as new VLANs being added to vNICs.

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  265
Figure 9-24 Adding UCS Service Profile 
UCS Director Orchestration 
You will really start adding value to your enterprise when you begin automating the day-
to-day infrastructure delivery tasks that typically require significant planning and manual 
processes to complete. Enterprise IT organizations receive tasks from end users, such as 
“provision five new bare-metal servers for a new database cluster,” and tasks more targeted 
at IT operational activities, such as “add capacity to the virtualization farm.” In both of these 
cases, providing a method to provision through automation in a matter of minutes trans-
forms the way enterprises look at IT’s delivery capabilities. 
Workflows
There is really no end to the possibilities for what you could do with UCS Director work-
flows, but you will find the types of tasks it is well suited for involve infrastructure pro-
visioning and configuration tasks across the tiers of virtualization, compute, network, and 
storage. Here is a short list of some use cases you may consider ideal candidates for auto-
mation with UCS Director: 
■ Deploy one or more virtual machines 
■ Deploy new bare-metal servers for running applications on a Windows or Linux OS 
(including full configuration of physical compute, storage, and network requirements)

266  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ Expand the cloud capacity of an existing virtualization solution, by adding either new 
compute hosts or shared storage 
■ Add a new network segment to the data center across physical, virtual, and compute net-
working domains 
■ Add new data drives to a virtual machine, including mounting and formatting 
■ Perform snapshot maintenance and purging across all VMs in the cloud 
■ Create or update a help desk ticket in an external ticketing system 
■ Construct a standard three-tier application environment including network segmentation, 
security policy, and load-balancing rules
Locate the Orchestration capabilities of UCS Director under Policies > Orchestration. 
Figure 9-25 shows the menu location and the initial view of the Orchestration module. You 
will find there are several tabs and sections of the Orchestration engine. As you become 
more advanced, you will learn to leverage many of the capabilities available within this 
interface; however, for now we will focus on the first tab, Workflows, where you build and 
edit workflows. 
Figure 9-25 UCS Director Orchestration Menu Location and Interface
Workflow Properties 
Every workflow has a set of properties along with the actual automation logic. The first 
thing you will see after clicking Add to create a new workflow is the Add Workflow screen. 
Or you can click Edit Workflow on an existing workflow to view or make changes. As 
shown in Figure 9-26, the first page of the Edit Workflow window, Edit Workflow Details, 
includes the Workflow Name, which cannot be changed after initial creation, a Description 
field, and several other important workflow characteristics. 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  267
Figure 9-26 Workflow Properties – Edit Workflow Details 
The Workflow Context field has two possible options, Any or Selected VM. Most general-
purpose workflows will have a context of Any, but if you are building a workflow that is 
specifically intended to operate on a single VM, you can use Selected VM as the context. 
One advantage of setting up your workflow this way is that you will immediately have 
access to several inputs for tasks for details about the VM, such as its name and IP address. 
Table 9-4 provides a list of the additional variables available when working in a VM context. 
Second, this is the type of workflow you will want to use if you are building something 
intended to become part of a User Action Policy, as discussed earlier in this chapter. 
Table 9-4 Workflow VM Context Variables
Name
Description
${VM_NAME}
The name of the VM.
${VM_IPADDRESS}
The IP address of the VM.
${VM_STATE}
The state of the VM (ON or OFF).
${VM_STATE_DETAILS}
The state of the VM, power-on or power-off.
${VM_PARENT}
The ESX server or host node that is hosting the VM.
${VM_CLOUD}
The name of the cloud used for VM provisioning.
${VM_HOSTNAME}
The hostname of the VM.
${VM_GROUP_NAME}
The name of the group to which the VM belongs.
${VM_GROUP_ID}
The group ID to which the VM belongs.
${VM_CATALOG_ID}
The catalog ID used for VM.
${VM_ID}
The VM ID of the chosen VM.
${VM_SR_ID}
The VM service request ID.

268  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Name
Description
${VM_COMMENTS}
The comments specified by the requesting user.
${VM_VDC_NAME}
The name of the vDC.
Another important property to be familiar with is the ability to save the workflow as a com-
pound task. This means that once the new workflow is created, it will show up in the Task 
Library (discussed in the next section, “Workflow Designer”) as a reusable task. This allows 
for you to build reusable automation structures and use them within other workflows, pro-
viding for modular development. Then when you update the underlying compound work-
flow, all other workflows leveraging it will immediately benefit from the changes. 
On the second page of the Edit Workflow window, Edit User Inputs, you indicate the 
number and types of user inputs that will be gathered, as shown in Figure 9-27. These 
user inputs are a collection of variables that can be leveraged during workflow execution. 
Some of these variables will come from the end users when they either directly execute a 
workflow or order an Advanced Catalog backed by your workflow. Others can be admin-
istratively defined by the user building the workflow. Common user inputs include names 
or descriptions for servers or networks, IP address details, username and passwords for 
systems, detail selections such as the operating system or application tier needed for a new 
server, and so on. The workflow shown in Figure 9-27 will add a new network segment to 
the data center. The end user provides the VLAN name to use for the new network, but 
other inputs you might expect, such as VLAN ID or IP subnet, will be dynamically deter-
mined from configured pools as described earlier in the chapter.
Figure 9-27 Workflow Properties – Edit User Inputs 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  269
One important aspect of user inputs, and of all inputs and outputs in workflows, is that UCS 
Director has a strongly typed model for variables. Each input will be assigned one of many 
types, and when you later go to use that input within a workflow task, the type of the user 
input must match the type that the task is expecting. The one exception to this rule is the 
Generic Text Input (gen_text_input) option. In most cases, any workflow task input will 
accept a Generic Text Input; however, it is recommended to use this sparingly. Leveraging 
a type of IP address or VLAN ID for an input has the added benefit that UCS Director will 
make sure the value provided by the user fits the type of input expected. This means that a 
user would not be able to enter a value of 555.555.555.555 for an IP address. Figure 9-28 
shows a sample of some of the input types available within UCS Director. 
Figure 9-28 Input Types 
The final page of the Edit Workflow window is Edit User Outputs. Workflow outputs are 
used in compound tasks to pass information up to the parent workflow. Though all task 
outputs from the child task can be made available, often it is a subset of these outputs that 
will be of interest in the parent workflow. By mapping the relevant values to workflow out-
puts, it is much simpler to build complex workflows. 
Workflow Designer 
The Workflow Designer is where you build the actual automation structure for the work-
flow. You can access it by double-clicking the workflow name or by clicking the Workflow 
Designer button on the toolbar. Figure 9-29 shows an example of what you will see. The 
main section of the interface is the workspace where you drag and connect individual tasks, 
double-click a task to configure the task inputs to leverage a user input, output from a pre-
vious task, or administratively define the input within the task. On the left side is the Task 
Library, where you will find all of the available tasks organized into folders. UCS Director 
5.3 ships with over 1600 tasks out of the box, and while the folder organization helps, you 
will often find it faster to locate a needed task by using the search box above the list. At the 
top of the window are buttons that allow you to edit the workflow properties, create a new 
version of a workflow, validate the workflow (ensure all tasks are connected and have all 
mandatory inputs configured), and execute the workflow. 

270  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-29 Workflow Designer 
Workflow Creation Walkthrough 
Let’s walk through the creation of a simple sample workflow that adds a new VLAN to a 
Cisco Nexus switch. We will prompt the user for a VLAN name at execution, but will deter-
mine the VLAN ID by selecting one from a VLAN Pool Policy within UCS Director. 
To begin, we need to create a new workflow using the procedure discussed in the previous 
“Workflow Properties” section. Figure 9-30 shows the Add Workflow Details page filled 
in for our new workflow, and Figure 9-31 shows the Add User Inputs page configured to 
prompt the user for a VLAN name. 
Figure 9-30 New VLAN Workflow Details

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  271
Figure 9-31 New VLAN Workflow User Inputs 
Next, open the Workflow Designer to begin creating our new workflow. Two pieces of 
information are required to add a VLAN to a switch: the name and ID. The user will pro-
vide the name, but we need to generate the ID within the workflow. UCS Director provides 
tasks to generate available resources from pools and policies, and as shown in Figure 9-32, 
we leverage a task called Generate VLAN from pool. After dragging this task into the 
Workflow Designer pallet, we provide a descriptive name and comment for our task and 
click Next to continue. 
Figure 9-32 Generate VLAN from Pool Task Information
For this task we are not mapping any user inputs into the task, so skip the User Input 
Mapping page by clicking Next and move to the Task Inputs page. Here, as shown in  
Figure 9-33, we define the VLAN Pool Policy from which a new VLAN ID will be gener-
ated. Click Next and Submit on the Use Output Mapping page to save the task.  

272  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-33 Generate VLAN from Pool Task Inputs
Figure 9-34 shows this first task complete and added to the design, automatically connected 
to Start and Completed blocks. Also shown on the left in the figure are the many possible 
tasks to create a new VLAN. Drag the Create VLAN task from the Cisco Network Tasks 
group onto the Workflow Designer for our next step. 
Figure 9-34 Updated Workflow Designer with Task Added
The first step after dragging any new task into the Designer is to provide it a name and 
comment. For this task, we use “Create VLAN on Switch 1” for both the name and com-
ment. After you click Next, Figure 9-35 shows the User Input Mapping page of the task, 
where we checked the Map to User Input check boxes for VLAN ID and VLAN Name. 
This allows us to select either a workflow input, such as VLAN Name, or a previous task 
output, such as Generate VLAN ID.OUTPUT_VLAN_ID, to use as the task inputs. The lat-
ter example shows the notation used to reference task outputs within UCS Director with a 
TASK_NAME.OUTPUT_NAME structure. 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  273
Figure 9-35 Create VLAN User Input Mapping
Not all of the task inputs are mapped to user inputs. After clicking Next, in Figure 9-36 we 
are identifying which switch we will be adding this VLAN to. Click Next and Submit on the 
Use Output Mapping page to save the task.  
Figure 9-36 Create VLAN Task Inputs
After finishing the configuration of the task inputs, we still need to place the new task into 
the workflow processing structure. Only the first task added to a workflow is automatically 
added, and in Figure 9-37 we are indicating that a successful completion of the first task 
will lead to our new task. Figure 9-38 shows the Workflow Designer with both tasks com-
pletely configured. 

274  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-37 Connecting Tasks Together 
Figure 9-38 Completed Workflow Designer
The final step in our walkthrough is shown in Figure 9-39, where we have validated our new work-
flow and executed it. As expected, we are prompted to provide a new VLAN name to continue. 
Figure 9-39 Workflow Execution with User Input Dialog Box

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  275
Extending Orchestration
With practice, you will be able to build workflows that are very powerful, spanning across 
your infrastructure using only the available tasks shipped with UCS Director out of the box. 
However, there will come a time when you look for a task to accomplish some configuration 
or customization and it is not available natively. When confronted with this challenge, there 
are several options for extending the automation capabilities beyond the initial installation. 
Following are descriptions of the most common methods for extending Orchestration 
within UCS Director. Advanced discussion of these methods is beyond the scope of this 
book, and leveraging them is not part of the exam topics. Review the Cisco UCS Director 
Orchestration Guide and Programming Cookbooks available in the Programming Guides on 
Cisco.com for UCS Director. 
Cloupia Script 
One of the first tools you will likely use is the Execute Cloupia Script task that is within the 
native library. This task provides you with a text input box where you can enter raw Cloupia 
Script to be executed during a workflow, enabling you to write the code needed to fill a 
need in your workflow. Cloupia Script is a slightly customized version of JavaScript that 
combines the JavaScript language with included libraries to access runtime details from UCS 
Director itself. Within a Cloupia Script you’ll have access to a context object that relates to 
the running instance of your workflow. This object provides details such as the requesting 
user, the service request details, user inputs, and task outputs. 
Most Cloupia Scripts that you will write will be very simple functions. A common example 
would be manipulating a user input to meet some organizational standard. Figure 9-40 
shows one such example where a user-provided name is appended with the service request 
number to ensure uniqueness and document the source of the new service profile. 
Figure 9-40 Cloupia Script Example 

276  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Custom Tasks 
If you find that you are continually using the same Cloupia Script within several workflows, 
or have a need for something more complicated, the next option you have is to create a 
Custom Task. Custom Tasks are also written in Cloupia Script but are built to be much more 
reusable and portable between workflows. You will create task inputs and outputs, have an 
option to control the behavior of the task input interface to take action based on certain input 
values affecting others, and build your code using the same JavaScript-style construction from 
Cloupia Script. Once created, the Custom Task will show up in the Task Library under the 
Custom Tasks folder, and further organized as you indicated when creating the task. 
Custom Approval Task
Many organizations find that though the goal may be full automation of infrastructure 
requests, many start with a need to insert approval steps into a workflow. You will find 
included tasks for single and multiuser approval capabilities that will pause a workflow 
while waiting for the designated users to indicate their approval for the request. This can be 
very helpful. However, what about a case where the approver needs to provide some input 
back to the workflow to complete execution? For example, consider an example where 
a new server is being provisioned, and the network operations team needs to identify the 
proper VLAN to place the server onto. For cases like these, you will build a custom ap-
proval task to use in your workflows. 
You can create Custom Approval Tasks in the Orchestration interface several tabs to the 
right of the Workflow list. Each Custom Approval Task can be used in multiple workflows. 
Once created, the new task will show up in the Task Library along with all the others in 
a folder called Custom Approvals. Figure 9-41 shows an example Custom Approval Task 
where the approver will be asked to provide the vCPU and vRAM size information for a 
new VM. 
Figure 9-41 Custom Approval Task Example 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  277
Custom Workflow Input
You learned about the strongly typed nature of inputs within UCS Director in the 
“Workflow Designer” section of this chapter. There are hundreds of input types out of the 
box covering everything from general details like IP address and VLAN ID to infrastructure-
specific types like a UCS service profile. However, you may find that you want to have 
your user provide input but offer a limited selection of choices. A typical example would 
be choosing one option from a set of appropriate entries in a drop-down list (referred to as 
an LOV, or list of values). You will use the Custom Workflow Input to build a new input 
type to use in your workflows. When you create the Custom Workflow Input, it will be 
based on a native type, and useable wherever that native type is supported. Figure 9-42 
shows an example Custom Workflow Input called OS Choices that is based on a Generic 
Text Input and provides the user with a list of available operating systems supported in our 
environment. You can then use this input from the end user within the workflow as part of 
a branching logic to differentiate some aspect of the configuration based on the operating 
system in question.
Figure 9-42 Custom Workflow Input 
Cisco Community 
You are not alone when creating workflows and automation use cases with UCS Director, 
and you needn’t always start from an empty workflow. There is a Cisco Development 
Community where Cisco customers, partners, and employees share examples of work being 
done with all Cisco products, including UCS Director. At the time of the writing of this 
book, there are over 300 example workflows posted to the community that you can search 
and download to import into your system to use as inspiration or starting points for your 
own workflows, and more are being added weekly. In addition to sample workflows, there 
are many Custom Tasks that have been built to extend the native features of UCS Director 

278  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
to solve problems and fill gaps that others have found. When confronted with something 
that you may need, before building it yourself, take a look at the community to see if some-
one has already built a working task. 
Also, you can often find third-party integrations posted in the community. At the time 
of writing, integrations to the Infoblox IPAM solution and Nimble Storage Array are two 
examples shared on the community. 
You can find the home page for Cisco Communities at http://communities.cisco.com. The 
sample UCS Director workflows are located by navigating to Data Center Community > 
Unified Computing System (UCS) > UCS Integrations > UCS Director Workflows. See 
Figure 9-43 for a glimpse into the community. 
Figure 9-43 Cisco Community 
UCS Director Service Requests
Any activity that would execute a workflow will generate a service request within UCS 
Director. This includes ordering any of the UCS Director Catalog types (even Standard 
Catalogs execute a workflow), or manually executing a workflow through the Designer 
or the Orchestration interface. Even rolling back a service request creates a new service 
request. The service request is a record of a single automation activity, and stores all the 
details about who initiated the request, the status and time for each step in the workflow, 
detailed logging throughout, and all infrastructure manipulations made during its execution. 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  279
Service requests are available to be viewed and leveraged in both the administrator por-
tal and the end-user portal, but the type of details available differ. An end user will only 
have visibility to the service requests initiated by themselves or other members of their 
group. Figure 9-44 shows the Services page of the end-user portal. The user sees only three 
requests that were initiated. Compare this to the page available in the administrator portal 
at Organizations > Service Requests shown in Figure 9-45. The administrator sees the three 
requests executed by clouduser as well as those executed by user cloudadmin. Also notice 
that administrators have access to the archived service requests. Though end users can 
archive one of their service requests, they can’t view or unarchive the archived requests. 
Figure 9-44 End-User Services Page
Figure 9-45 Administrator Service Requests Page 
When an end user opens a service request to see more information, he will see the service 
request Status information, as shown in Figure 9-46. The Status page provides details on the 
request such as its Request ID, current status, the group and user who own the request, as 
well as a listing of each step or task in the underlying workflow indicating which steps have 
completed successfully (displayed in green with a time stamp) and which are currently in 
progress (displayed in blue), and, if applicable, which steps may have had errors (displayed 
in red or orange). The Status page is very helpful for end users to understand their request, 
but lacks the details available to an administrator in other tabs. 

280  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-46 End-User Service Request Status 
When you open a request as an administrator, the most helpful details are available on the Log 
tab, shown in Figure 9-47. You will find a very detailed rundown of the entire workflow and 
each included task. All inputs and outputs for each task are listed within the log to make it very 
easy to follow the progress as values change and new objects are created. When you are build-
ing a new workflow and troubleshooting a behavior that isn’t working as you intended, your 
best tool for debugging and fixing the problem will be the Log view of your service requests. 
Within the Log view, different colors indicate different types of messages. Informational mes-
sages are shown in black, debug messages in gray, errors in red, and warnings in orange. 
Figure 9-47 Administrator View Service Request Log 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  281
As an administrator, you will also have access to two other tabs providing details about 
the service request. First is the Objects Created and Modified tab, which shows some of 
the change-tracking capabilities of UCS Director. This view will list all VMs created, IP 
addresses reserved, VLANs created, LUNs created, and interfaces manipulated during 
the execution of the service request. An example of this view is shown in Figure 9-48. 
This information is useful as part of managing change, but even more important is how 
UCS Director can use this when rolling back or undoing a service request. The last tab is 
the Input/Output tab, where you will find a list of each task in the workflow and a break-
down of the different inputs and outputs involved. These details are also helpful during 
debugging workflows, or simply determining details such as what was the LUN ID of the 
new storage device that was created. 
Figure 9-48 Administrator View Service Request Objects Created 
Service Request Actions 
A service request is not a read-only object in UCS Director. You can take several actions on 
a service request depending on its current status. The actions are available for both admin-
istrators and end users through their portal interfaces in the toolbar, as shown in Figure 
9-49. You can cancel a service request that is still in progress, stopping execution at the 
current task. You can resubmit a request if it was canceled or failed during initial execution. 
This is helpful when the reason for a failure can be solved and you want to just pick up the 
automation from where it left off. A common example of this would be the exhaustion of 
an IP pool. Once additional IPs are made available, you can resubmit the request and con-
tinue from where it initially failed. Archiving a service request moves it from the main list 
of requests that is available to end users, and into the Archive. Once a service request is in 
the Archive, only administrators can view it or take action on it. Administrators do have the 
ability to return an archived request to the main list. 

282  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 9-49 Service Request Actions 
The most powerful of service request actions is the ability to roll back the request. A unique 
value provided with the automation engine of UCS Director is the integrated ability to 
roll back any automation workflow. UCS Director is model based, not script based. This 
means that a task from the library that takes an action, such as creating a new VLAN, can 
be undone without needing a separate task that would delete the VLAN. All tasks included 
in UCS Director include the capability to be rolled back, and it is best practice to consider 
rollback for any custom tasks or scripts you may create. 
You won’t need to build separate workflows to reclaim or delete resources; that logic is 
included when you build the initial workflow. This capability combined with the details 
stored in Objects Created and Modified view (previously shown in Figure 9-48) enable UCS 
Director to immediately and consistently roll back service requests that are executed. When 
you choose to roll back a service request, a new Undo service request is created. If you 
were not the originator of the service request being rolled back, an approval request will be 
sent to the original requester. UCS Director administrators have the ability to bypass this 
approval step. A sample Undo service request is shown in Figure 9-50. Notice that the Undo 
Workflow is mostly a reverse mirror of the tasks taken in the initial workflow. 

9
Chapter 9: Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director  283
Figure 9-50 Undo Workflow Service Request 
Reservations 
Another tab in the Organizations > Service Requests menu worth noting is the Reservations 
tab. This tab, shown in Figure 9-51, provides a single view of all consumable resources that 
have been assigned from policies and pools to different users and groups as part of service 
requests. Common examples of reservations include IP address and VLANs. This view 
is useful for checking the status of different reservations, but can also be used to manu-
ally clear a reservation in a case where the object may have been deleted outside of UCS 
Director so that the reservation wasn’t automatically cleared as part of a rollback. 
Figure 9-51 UCS Director Reservations List

284  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test. 
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 9-5 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 9-5 Key Topics for Chapter 9 
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Section
Understand the vDC construct and related policies within 
UCS Director.
248
Table 9-2
Describe the different vDC Policies and their purpose.
250
Paragraph
Understand UCS templates, differences between template 
types, and how to create templates within UCS Director.
264
Section
Describe the key workflow properties and how they impact 
the automation and orchestration. 
266
Paragraph
Describe the information available to users about the status 
and history of service requests within UCS Director. 
279
Paragraph
Describe the importance of the Rollback function for 
service requests.
282
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
virtual data center (vDC), System Policy, Computing Policy, Network Policy, Storage 
Policy, End User Self-Service Policy, User Action Policy, vDC categories, UCS Network 
Policy, UCS Storage Policy, workflow, compound workflow, Cloupia Script, service 
request, Rollback

This page intentionally left blank 

This chapter covers the following exam topics:
3.0 Cloud Provisioning
3.1 Describe predefined Cisco UCS Director-based services within the Cisco Prime 
Service Catalog
3.1.b Describe order permissions
3.1.c Describe template formats
3.2 Describe provisioning verification 
3.2.a Describe how to place an order for a service from the Cisco Prime Service 
Catalog as an end-user
3.2.b Verify that provisioning is done correctly 
3.2.c Access VMs and applications that have been provisioned 

CHAPTER 10
Building a Service Catalog and 
User Portal with UCS Director and 
Prime Service Catalog
In Chapter 9, “Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director,” you learned about 
creating the policies and automation workflows that will be used to deploy into the cloud 
the compute, storage, and network resources required by your users. The first half of this 
chapter reviews how you present these capabilities to your users, leveraging user portals 
and service catalogs. The second half explains how end users will locate and order services, 
monitor the provisioning of their requests, and manage the life cycle of their resources. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 10-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 10-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
UCS Director Catalogs 
1
Prime Service Catalog Fundamentals
2
Connecting and Importing to Prime Service Catalog
3
Customizing Auto-Created Services 
4
Ordering a Service with Prime Service Catalog
5, 6
Checking and Monitoring Status of an Order
7, 8
Accessing and Managing New Resources
9, 10
CAUTION The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chap-
ter. If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, 
you should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving your-
self credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might 
provide you with a false sense of security.

288  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. 
What catalog type from UCS Director is used to enable end users to order a single 
basic virtual machine based on a VM image or ISO? 
a. 
Advanced Catalog 
b. Standard Catalog 
c. 
VM Catalog 
d. Service Container Catalog
2. Within Prime Service Catalog, the Showcase refers to what? 
a. 
Administrative Utilization Dashboard
b. Front page of the Service Catalog 
c. 
Listing of all ordered services by the user 
d. Listing of the newest services 
3. What type of UCS Director user account is needed when connecting to Prime Service 
Catalog? 
a. 
Compute Admin 
b. Service End User 
c. 
System Admin 
d. Any of the above 
4. What types of UCS Director objects become Prime Service Catalog services when 
they are imported in? 
a. 
Images 
b. Catalogs
c. 
Workflows 
d. vDCs 
e. 
Application profiles 
5. Which element of the front page, or Showcase, of Prime Service Catalog provides 
users quick links to manage the resources they have provisioned and view open and 
completed orders? 
a. 
Manage My Stuff panel
b. Notifications
c. 
Shopping Cart
d. Browse Categories
6. What detail must a user provide when ordering a new virtual machine through a 
Standard Catalog–based service? 
a. 
VM name
b. vCPU count
c. 
vDC
d. vRAM

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  289
10
7. How can a user find the status of ongoing orders within Prime Service Catalog? 
(Choose two.)
a. 
Look in the Shopping Cart
b. Check the Notifications menu
c. 
Within their account settings 
d. Use the Open Orders link on the Showcase 
8. Within Prime Service Catalog, where can you find the UCS Director service request 
number for an order? 
a. 
Notifications menu 
b. Order Summary page
c. 
Order Details Comments and History 
d. You cannot find the service request number within Prime Service Catalog 
9. Which actions can end users take on their virtual machines from Prime Service 
Catalog? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Power on/off
b. Add or remove a virtual network adapter 
c. 
Create a snapshot
d. Delete a snapshot 
e. 
Clone a virtual machine 
10. How can you identify a virtual machine that is deployed to a public cloud provider 
through Intercloud Fabric in Prime Service Catalog? (Choose two.) 
a. 
Select the Cloud VMs Service Item type 
b. Check the VM details for the cloud type
c. 
Look for the cloud icon in the VM list
d. Through the Intercloud Fabric submenu in My Stuff

290  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
UCS Director Catalogs
Before users can order a service, you must create a catalog offer within UCS Director for 
the service. Catalog offers include everything from the most basic ordering of a new VM, to 
a sophisticated infrastructure offering that provisions physical storage, network, and com-
pute resources all at once. Figure 10-1 shows a selection of catalog offers within the admin-
istrator portal from UCS Director. These catalogs provide the template for services that will 
be created in Prime Service Catalog. 
Figure 10-1 UCS Director Catalogs
It is expected that you will have different catalogs for different groups of users at your 
enterprise. For example, your infrastructure engineering and operations users will need cata-
logs for Expanding Cloud Capacity, Adding New Network Segment, and Decommissioning 
a vSphere Host. However, your application development team would have no need for 
those catalogs, but will need catalogs for Deploy New Web/App/Data Server, Build New 
Application Environment, and Snapshot Application Environment. When you create the 
catalogs for these different capabilities, you indicate which groups will have the ability to 
see and order the catalogs. 
Depending on the type of offer you are creating, you will use one of four types of catalogs 
within UCS Director:
■ Standard Catalog
■ Advanced Catalog 
■ Service Container Catalog
■ VDI Catalog
Standard Catalog
The most basic type of service you’ll want to provide to your end users is the ability to 
order new virtual machines. In today’s data center, the virtual machine is nearly omnipresent 
and has taken over as the primary mechanism for deploying traditional client/server applica-
tions and workloads. Whether the end goal is to install all or part of a commercial software 
package, act as a shared database environment for multiple applications, or even provide 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  291
10
the compute infrastructure on which a custom-developed application will be built, a project 
often starts with creating new virtual machines. 
The Standard Catalog offering within UCS Director provides a very simple mechanism to 
enable users to select and order virtual machines based on the policies and templates you 
have configured as the administrator. When you create a Standard Catalog, you identify a 
source image (or ISO) from which to build the new virtual machine as well as other details 
that provide UCS Director with all the needed information to provision the new VM into 
one of the user’s available virtual data centers (vDCs and their policies are covered later in 
this chapter). 
The possible source images come from the virtual account (also referred to as a cloud within 
UCS Director) the Standard Catalog is being built for. UCS Director supports private clouds 
based on VMware vCenter, Microsoft System Center Virtual Machine Manager (SCVMM) 
for HyperV, and Red Hat Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM). Each of these clouds has 
its own templates or images for virtual machine catalogs. These templates differ based on 
the underlying hypervisor format being used, and a template from one cloud can’t be used 
on another cloud without being converted to that cloud’s format. 
New catalogs can be created from the administrator portal at Policies > Catalogs. As shown 
in Figure 10-2, action buttons are available to add a new catalog or clone an existing one. 
When you click Add, you are presented with the Add Catalog dialog box shown in Figure 
10-2, in which you can use the Catalog Type drop-down list to select Standard from among 
the options available and click Submit.
Figure 10-2 New Catalog Creation
The Basic Information page (see Figure 10-3) is the first part of adding a new Standard 
Catalog. This is where you give the new Standard Catalog a name, description, and icon 
that will determine how it will be presented to end users within the UCS Director end-
user portal or through API calls. You also determine which groups of users (or all) will 
have the ability to see and order this catalog. If you have multiple virtual accounts added 
to your UCS Director installation (that is, vCenter and/or Microsoft SCVMM), select the 
corresponding cloud name from the Cloud Name drop-down list. Then click the Image 
field’s Select button to identify the desired source image for the new VM. Alternatively, 
you can indicate that the VM will be provisioned using an ISO image from an available 
policy. Not shown in Figure 10-3 but available by scrolling down within the window, you 

292  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
can provide a Windows License Pool for Windows-based Standard Catalogs, as well as a 
folder to store this new catalog within. 
Figure 10-3 Standard Catalog Basic Information
Click Next to move to the Application Details page of the Add Standard Catalog Wizard, 
shown in Figure 10-4. Most of the options available here are primarily used for reporting or 
metering. However, Category is a powerful option to enable administrators to apply differ-
ent vDC policies to VMs within the same vDC based on characteristics of different VMs. 
For example, a VM that will be used to host a database would likely benefit from being 
placed on a higher-performing data store than a web server. Full discussion of how to dif-
ferentiate based on the Category of a provisioned catalog is included in the “UCS Director 
Policies, Pools, and Virtual Data Centers” section of Chapter 9. 
Figure 10-4 Standard Catalog Application Details 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  293
10
After you click Next on the Application Details page, the third page, shown in Figure 10-5, 
gives you options for sharing login credentials with users. You will find three options avail-
able: Do not share, Share after password reset, and Share template credentials. Typically, 
you would use the first option only when the end user would have another means for log-
ging in to the new machine through a sign-on service such as Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol (LDAP). When this isn’t the case, you can either directly share the credentials 
as configured in the template, or have UCS Director generate a random password when 
deploying and customizing the new VM and pass this on to the user. When shared, the pass-
word will be available from the UCS Director end-user portal through a VM action Access 
VM Credentials. 
Figure 10-5 Standard Catalog User Credentials 
On the Customization page, shown in Figure 10-6, you are given options for further cus-
tomization of the new VM. Enabling Automatic Guest Customization indicates that you 
would like UCS Director to leverage the Guest Customization features of the hypervisor 
to take actions such as applying a hostname, setting the IP address for the virtual machine, 
and generating a new SID for a Microsoft Windows VM. Unless you plan to address these 
needs through a separate automated process, it is recommended to select this option. 
By enabling Post Provisioning Custom Actions, you can select a workflow from the 
Orchestration engine within UCS Director to run after the virtual machine is provisioned. 
When selecting a workflow, you will want to select a workflow configured to run in a VM 
context. Virtual Storage Catalog is an optional policy that can adjust the storage policy 
as defined in the vDC configuration. Checking this box will enable a drop-down list box 
where a previously defined Virtual Storage Catalog Policy is selected. This policy provides 
the user with options to specify which of the available storage policies to use for this virtual 
machine deployment. 

294  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 10-6 Standard Catalog Customization 
Many enterprises are looking to begin moving to a chargeback or showback model for IT 
resources. UCS Director provides a very robust method for building Cost Models around 
resource utilization, as covered in Chapter 12, “Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting.” The 
Cost Computation option on the Customization page is a much less granular option that can 
be used as a simple method of attaching value to resources before building a more robust 
model as discussed in Chapter 12. 
The second to last page, VM Access (see Figure 10-7), enables you to indicate what type 
of access UCS Director should provide to the newly created VM for end users. Options 
include providing a cross-launch link to a web page, creating a custom Remote Desktop 
Protocol file that can be downloaded to open an RDP session to a Windows Server, or 
cross-launching to the VM Remote Console service provided by vSphere hosts. 
Figure 10-7 Standard Catalog VM Access 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  295
10
The final page is Summary, shown in Figure 10-8, which shows all settings you configured 
during the wizard. It is provided as a final review before creating the new Standard Catalog. 
Figure 10-8 Standard Catalog Summary 
Advanced Catalog
Somewhat counterintuitive, the Advanced Catalog is the simpler catalog to create com-
pared to Standard, but it is much more powerful. Its simplicity comes from the fact that 
you will have already done all the hard work when creating the workflow that will be used 
as the foundation for the Advanced Catalog. A Standard Catalog is used to create a single 
new VM within the constructs of a vDC and with the limited set of options available in the 
Standard Catalog offering discussed in the previous section. When requirements deviate 
from what is supported with a Standard Catalog, an Advanced Catalog can enable end users 
to order nearly any infrastructure service as long as you, or your team of cloud architects 
and engineers, have built the required workflow to take the action. 
In Chapter 9, you learned how to use the Orchestration engine of UCS Director to build 
workflows for different use cases. Let’s assume you have built a workflow that would provi-
sion a new bare-metal server, and you wish to make this an orderable catalog. 
Starting the same way you did to create the Standard Catalog, click Add in the Policies > 
Catalogs interface within the administrator portal, but this time select Advanced from the 
drop-down menu (shown earlier in Figure 10-2). Figure 10-9 shows the Basic Information 
page of the Advanced Catalog Wizard. Provide the new catalog a name, description, and 
icon for display in the end-user portal service catalog. Also indicate the group(s) who should 
have access to this catalog. In Figure 10-9 we have indicated that all groups will be allowed 
to see and order this service. 

296  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 10-9 Advanced Catalog Basic Information 
The second page of the wizard is where you identify the workflow to execute when the 
user orders this new Advanced Catalog. As you can see in Figure 10-10, there is nothing to 
indicate other than the workflow to leverage. Elements such as user inputs, approvals, and 
so on are all embedded in the workflow itself and will be discussed later in this chapter. 
Figure 10-10 Advanced Catalog vApp Workflow 
The final Summary page displays the details you configured on the previous pages as a final 
review. 
Service Container Catalog
UCS Director has a construct called an application container that provides a mechanism 
for multiple virtual and physical resources to be combined together and managed as a 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  297
10
single offering. An example would be a three-tier network structure (web, app, data) with 
embedded security and load-balancer policies exposing the compute resources within 
the network structure outside of the container in a controlled fashion. The application 
container can be powered on, off, or deleted as a single entity. Chapter 11, “Deploying 
Virtual Application Containers,” provides a thorough discussion of the variety of applica-
tion container types supported by UCS Director, and how to build container templates. 
The Service Container Catalog type is how an end user can be given the ability to order a 
designed application container. 
Click Add in the Policies > Catalogs interface and select Service Container from the drop-
down menu (refer to Figure 10-2) to access the Basic Information page of the new Service 
Container Catalog, shown in Figure 10-11. The familiar interface for name, description, and 
groups is presented along with a drop-down list box to select the service container template 
that will be used for provisioning. 
Figure 10-11 Service Container Basic Information 
The final Summary page displays the details you configured on the previous page as a final 
review. 
VDI Catalog
The VDI Catalog type can be used to provide end users the ability to order a virtual desk-
top from a managed Citrix VDI environment. This capability of UCS Director is out of 
scope for this book and the Introducing CCNA Cloud Administration (CLDADM) exam. 
Prime Service Catalog Fundamentals 
Within UCS Director you will create and test workflows, and make them orderable to end 
users by creating Advanced Catalog offers. You will provide the ability to order and deploy 
new VMs with Standard Catalogs. You will build the policies and vDCs for your end users 
to deploy their resources into. Once you have completed these steps, you are ready to 
assemble the user portal and service catalog and start having end users order and manage 
their resources. This is when you begin working with Prime Service Catalog. 

298  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The Showcase
The front page of Prime Service Catalog that is seen by everyone at first login is called the 
Showcase. The Showcase is your opportunity to welcome your users to their IT as a Service 
portal, educate them about new features, and provide them easy access to the most helpful 
or common services available in the catalog. You can see a sample front page and Showcase 
in Figure 10-12. The Showcase is divided into eight customizable sections that you can 
manipulate by linking the section to a category (described in the next section). The sample 
in Figure 10-12 is using only six of the possible sections, with the Bottom-Left, Bottom-
Center, and Bottom-Right sections providing Enterprise IaaS Services, PaaS Services, and 
Cloud Management Services, respectively. The large Welcome to Cisco ONE Enterprise 
Cloud Suite is in the Top-Left position, with Top-Center being filled by Unified Cloud 
Experience. The final section customized is the Browse Categories menu that is shown but 
not expanded in the figure. 
Figure 10-12 Prime Service Catalog Showcase 
You will customize and choose the categories for each section of the Showcase in the 
Service Designer module of Prime Service Catalog. The Showcase is configurable within the 
Extensions menu. You can see in Figure 10-13 where the Middle-Left and Middle-Right 
components are currently empty. When an element is left empty by design, or a logged-in 
user doesn’t have access to view the services within a category, Prime Service Catalog will 
adjust the remaining components to fill the page in an optimal way, and hide any indication 
something may be missing. 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  299
10
Figure 10-13 Prime Service Catalog Showcase Configuration 
Categories 
Categories are the main organizational component of Prime Service Catalog. As discussed 
in the prior section, the front page of the portal is built by displaying categories in configu-
rable page elements. Categories are also used within the actual service catalog to group and 
display services to end users. A single individual service can be within many different cat-
egories, grouped together in whatever makes sense for an organization. 
You will create many categories for your enterprise from the Service Designer module 
and in the Categories menu. As shown on the General page in Figure 10-14, you give each 
category a name and a description. You will want to make sure both are user friendly and 
read how you want your end users to see them, as each is displayed exactly as entered when 
used within the portal. Switching to the Presentation page while editing a category, you 
have the opportunity to link an image to the category for when it is displayed to the end 
user. The image can be even more valuable than the name in relating to the user the purpose 
of the category. You can manage the services and subcategories while editing a category, or 
when editing the individual services. 
Figure 10-14 Prime Service Catalog Category Edit View 

300  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Services
You want your end users to have a user-friendly portal to view and request infrastructure 
services, and that is the primary goal of Prime Service Catalog. As part of Cisco ONE 
Enterprise Cloud Suite, Prime Service Catalog makes it very easy to build and customize ser-
vices based on catalog offers from UCS Director and Intercloud Fabric for Business. More 
on that integration is covered later in the chapter in the section “Connecting and Importing 
to Prime Service Catalog.” However, Prime Service Catalog services are very powerful and 
customizable objects that can meet the need of delivering any type of cloud, technology, or 
even nontechnology services your organization may offer users. 
All services available within the catalog are located in the Service Designer module of Prime 
Service Catalog. Figure 10-15 shows a sample service for New Employee On Board that 
ships as part of example content with Prime Service Catalog. The different pages of the ser-
vice offer you the ability to provide the name and description, link image files, manipulate 
the user input form, and build the logic needed to deliver the service, including any needed 
approvals or integrations with external systems. 
Figure 10-15 Example Prime Service Catalog Service 
Designing and building services like New Employee On Board from scratch is out of scope 
for the CLDADM exam and this book; however, understanding the importance of services 
and what is included is good background knowledge. 
Connecting and Importing to Prime Service Catalog 
With a basic understanding of the key Prime Service Catalog components, you can now 
move to integrating UCS Director with Prime Service Catalog to present your created cata-
logs to end users. Prime Service Catalog and UCS Director are both components of Cisco 
ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite; you will find it straightforward to connect the tools together 
and begin customizing the auto-created services for end-user consumption. 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  301
10
Log in to Prime Service Catalog as Site Administrator and navigate to Administration > 
Manage Connections to see the interface shown in Figure 10-16. From this interface you 
can integrate UCS Director, Intercloud Fabric for Business, and Puppet with Prime Service 
Catalog. Clicking the button with the plus symbol will let you add a new UCS Director con-
nection. Provide the connection information for the UCS Director instance, making sure to 
provide credentials for an account in UCS Director with System Admin access level. The 
Identifier field is a three-character alphanumeric code used within Prime Service Catalog 
to distinguish different external cloud connections. The Name field will be a user-friendly 
name used for this UCS Director connection. The Export User setting determines how 
users and groups will be shared between the two applications. If you will be using locally 
created accounts within the programs, leave the box unchecked and Prime Service Catalog 
will import users from UCS Director and create accounts within Prime Service Catalog. If 
you are integrating with an external directory such as Microsoft Active Directory, then 
check this box. You will almost always want to check Enable Background Sync to ensure 
Prime Service Catalog and UCS Director regularly communicate the state of services and 
resources. 
NOTE The integration of Puppet with Prime Service Catalog is out of scope for this book 
and exam.
Figure 10-16 Prime Service Catalog Manage Connections Menu 
Once you have added a new connection, click Connect & Import to make the initial con-
nection and import catalogs, workflows, containers, VMs, vDCs, users, and groups all to 
Prime Service Catalog. The import can take some time depending on the number of objects 
within UCS Director being imported and processed. Once complete, you can expand the 
Discovered Objects menu on the left side of the Manage Connections window to view the 
different elements that have been discovered and imported into Prime Service Catalog. 
Figure 10-17 shows the discovered catalogs. You can similarly investigate each of the other 
object types listed. 

302  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 10-17 Discovered Catalogs 
Once you have set up your first connection to a UCS Director or Intercloud Fabric for 
Business system, you will need to enable two settings within Prime Service Catalog to com-
plete the integration. The first setting is found at Administration > Settings. It is an On/Off 
setting called UCSD Scheduler and must be set to On after at least one connection is set  
up. Shown in Figure 10-18, the simplest way to find it is to use the Find function in your 
browser and search for UCSD. The second setting is to start the Control Agent UCSDAgent. 
You will find this setting within the Service Link module of Prime Service Catalog, as 
shown in Figure 10-19. Simply select the agent and click the button Start Selected. Both of 
these steps need to be done only once and will be maintained on subsequent system restarts. 
Figure 10-18 UCSD Schedule Setting 
Figure 10-19 Control Agent UCSDAgent 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  303
10
Customizing Auto-Created Services 
You have now imported all the catalogs from UCS Director into Prime Service Catalog and 
created base services that are available to be viewed and ordered by end users. However, 
the auto-created services are not very descriptive or in a state that you would expect in an 
ITaaS eStore targeting end users. Figure 10-20 shows an example of a service for a Standard 
Catalog to order a new Windows 2012 R2 Web Server. As you can see, there is no display 
icon or description, and even the name isn’t very user friendly. 
Figure 10-20 Sample Auto-Created Service 
Fortunately, you can easily update the service to make it display better within the catalog. 
To do so, navigate to Administration > Manage Connections to open the interface where 
you did the initial import (refer to Figure 10-16). Under Discovered Services, you can see 
all the different services that were created from the imported catalogs. Figure 10-21 shows 
the one for the Windows 2012 R2 Web Server from the previous example. However, here 
it has been customized with a better name and description. Also, it has been added to the 
Enterprise IaaS Services Category, which if you recall is displayed on the front page of the 
user portal through the Showcase configuration. You will also want to add a graphic to your 
services, which you can do from the Presentation tab. You can use one of the image files 
included with Prime Service Catalog or upload one of your own. 
Figure 10-21 Basic Service Customization 
Prime Service Catalog has a robust role-based access control (RBAC) system to determine 
who can order and even see services. When the initial service was created at import, the per-
missions were configured to match how the underlying catalog was configured within UCS 
Director. However, if you need to make changes, you can do that from the Permissions tab 
in the interface. Figure 10-22 shows an example of this interface; notice the way the permis-
sions are coded with the platform type and identifier included in the name. 

304  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 10-22 Service Permission Customization 
With the service customized, you can see in Figure 10-23 the new view that users will be 
presented in the catalog. If you need to do more advanced customizations, such as add 
approval steps, integrate with external systems, or customize the data displayed on the 
form, you can do that from the Service Designer module, but that is out of scope for the 
CLDADM exam and this book.
Figure 10-23 Sample Customized Service 
Ordering a Service with Prime Service Catalog 
Within Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite, Prime Service Catalog is the primary user por-
tal and service catalog where end users will find, order, and manage their cloud resources. 
Prime Service Catalog is intended to be user friendly and intuitive to learn and use for most 
end users. It leverages concepts similar to those found ubiquitously on commercial online 
shopping sites, such as the Shopping Cart. 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  305
10
Finding Services and Their Details 
A goal of a cloud administrator should be to make it very easy for users to locate their 
desired services. You do this by prominently displaying the most common and newest ser-
vices on the Showcase (the front page), organizing services into clear categories, and build-
ing services to be easily found through the search capabilities of Prime Service Catalog. 
In Chapter 9 you learned the basics of building and managing the Showcase, and now we’ll 
take a look at how an end user would experience it to locate services. Figure 10-24 shows 
the Showcase with some areas marked with letter annotations for references. Each of these 
areas represents a key way users interact with the portal. Table 10-2 provides details on each 
annotated area of the Showcase and how the end user would use it. 
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
Figure 10-24 End-User Showcase Walkthrough
Table 10-2 End-User Showcase Walkthrough Details 
Annotation
Details
a
The Browse Categories menu is where users will find the full list of 
categories of services available within Prime Service Catalog. The 
expectation is that you as the administrator will provide the quick access and 
shortcuts to services on the Showcase itself, but the full list will be available 
through the menu. 
b
The Search button will open a text box where users can try to locate a 
service by a keyword or description. Users will likely leverage the search 
tool when they know exactly what they are looking for rather than browse 
through categories. 

306  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Annotation
Details
c
The Notifications menu provides users information about any approvals or 
orders in an ongoing state. From this menu, users can quickly jump to the 
relevant portal pages for more details. 
d
Clicking the Shopping Cart icon will expand it to show the user any items 
currently waiting to be ordered. 
e
Clicking the Manage My Stuff panel will slide it over and provide access to 
links for My Stuff (an interactive list of the user’s resources such as VMs and 
application templates), Open Orders, and Completed Orders. 
f
In the Mid sections of the Showcase, users will find a scrollable list of 
categories. Clicking one of the categories will navigate to a full listing of 
services within it. When the IT as a Service eStore becomes large enough, 
you will find that this is a great way to prominently display the most popular 
categories. 
g
The Bottom sections of the Showcase provide quick access to individual 
services from the catalog. You might want to leverage these sections for new 
services, or ones that are particularly popular in your organization. 
Often users will come to the portal knowing exactly what service they are in need of. In this 
case, the Search feature typically is the fastest method for users to order the service and 
continue. All service names and descriptions will be scanned for search terms entered in the 
form and displayed back to the user. In Figure 10-25, the user has searched for the term 
“Ubuntu 14” and is being presented with three matching services. 
Figure 10-25 Searching for Services 
When a user clicks a category itself to look through available services, whether this is 
through the Browse Categories menu or through an item displayed in the Mid section of 
the Showcase, Prime Service Catalog will provide the user with a display of all available 
services within the category for browsing and selection. An example view of the category 
Basic Virtual Machines is shown in Figure 10-26 along with the details for the Ubuntu 
14 Web Server that are available to the user by clicking “More…” in the description. This 
example shows how users are provided an Order button for quick and easy access to 
place orders for services while browsing. 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  307
10
Figure 10-26 Category and Service Details View Example 
Placing an Order 
When a user finds the service that they are looking for, they can then place an order for it. 
This is done by filling out the order form within Prime Service Catalog and providing the 
details needed for this particular service. In Figure 10-27 an order form is shown that will 
provide the user with a new virtual machine. This order form is included with Prime Service 
Catalog and is used for all Standard Catalog offers imported from UCS Director. End 
users will have to select one of their available vDCs and provide any customization details 
required for the service. Upon completing the order form, the user simply clicks Submit to 
place the order for the new VM. 
Within Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite, Prime Service Catalog provides a single portal 
and catalog for ordering both private cloud and public cloud resources in a consistent fash-
ion. Orders placed for private cloud VMs would be routed to UCS Director, while orders 
placed for public cloud VMs would be routed to Intercloud Fabric for Business. 

308  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 10-27 Standard Catalog Order Form 
You have the option as the administrator of Prime Service Catalog to configure each ser-
vice for immediate ordering, such as the virtual machine service in the previous example, or 
leverage the Shopping Cart feature. Figure 10-28 shows another example order form for a 
service. In this case, the end user has the option to Add to Cart rather than Submit. When 
using the Shopping Cart feature, a user can submit a single order within Prime Service 
Catalog and have it include multiple individual services. Upon adding a service to the cart, 
the user will be taken to their cart, shown in Figure 10-29, where they can review the ser-
vice or services it currently contains. The contents of the Shopping Cart are always available 
through the Shopping Cart button in the upper-right corner of the portal, also shown in 
Figure 10-29. When the user is ready to check out, they click the Place Order button within 
the cart to submit the order for all the services they’ve collected. 
Figure 10-28 Service Order Form with Add to Cart Option 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  309
10
Figure 10-29 Shopping Cart View 
Checking and Monitoring Status of an Order 
After placing an order, an end user might want to check the status of their order and 
monitor any problems that arise during order fulfillment. End users can use Prime Service 
Catalog to view orders that are currently open as well as those that have completed. 
Should a problem occur, an administrator can leverage the Service Request logs within UCS 
Director to find more details about the order, identify any errors encountered, and, ideally, 
resolve and continue the order completion. 
End-User Order Management in Prime Service Catalog
Immediately after submitting an order within Prime Service Catalog, you will see a notifica-
tion indicator in the upper-right corner of the portal. By clicking the envelope icon, you’ll 
be shown a display similar to Figure 10-30 where the new order is listed in the Open Orders 
tab. Click More to access details about the order. 
Figure 10-30 Order Notification Within Prime Service Catalog 
You will now be taken to the Open Orders list within the portal, as shown in Figure 10-31. 
The basic list view shows the order number and a basic progress indicator. By clicking the 
Order# link, you will see details on the order. Within the Comments & History section, 
shown in Figure 10-32, you can view the status of the underlying service request from UCS 
Director that was created for this order. Once an order completes, you can find a list of all 
previous orders in the Completed Orders view. 

310  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 10-31 Open Order List
Figure 10-32 Order Details Comments & History 
Access to the Open Orders and Complete Orders lists is also available directly from the 
Prime Service Catalog main page. When you expand the Manage My Stuff panel, the links 
for the order pages are listed below the My Stuff link, as shown in Figure 10-33. 
Figure 10-33 Manage My Stuff Panel 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  311
10
Administrator Service Request Management in UCS Director 
Look back at Figure 10-32 and notice the second entry from the bottom of the list reads 
“Request has been successfully submitted [service request id: 2489, requisition id: 142].” 
This indicates the exact service request number within UCS Director that is fulfilling this 
order. By switching to UCS Director, you can find that exact service request and look at the 
details of the technical automation fulfilling the order. Figure 10-34 shows the Workflow 
Status tab of this order, which includes each of the tasks that have been completed. As 
discussed in the Chapter 9 section “UCS Director Service Requests,” you can leverage the 
other tabs in the view to get detailed information about the processing of the order and any 
objects created or changed. If a service request fails for some reason, you can leverage these 
details to resolve the problem and resubmit the request. 
Figure 10-34 UCS Director Service Request View 
Accessing and Managing New Resources 
Enabling your end users to place orders for new virtual machines and other services on 
demand is a great start, but to truly move into self-service and cloud, you must provide 
the ability for self-management of those resources as well. User satisfaction won’t improve 
much if they still need to open help-desk tickets or find someone from infrastructure ser-
vices every time they need to power on or off their resources, resize them, or take snap-
shots of VMs. Within Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite, users are provided with methods 
for self-management in both Prime Service Catalog and UCS Director, so no matter which 
components of the suite you have deployed, you can enable your end users to manage their 
own services. 

312  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Managing “My Stuff” Within Prime Service Catalog 
Prime Service Catalog enables end users to manage their service items (that is, the individual 
objects that have been ordered by users or assigned to them, including VMs, vDCs, and 
applications) from within the My Stuff interface of the portal. Figure 10-35 shows the My 
Stuff screen and the different categories of service items this user has available listed in the 
left panel. The most common service items users will look to manage are their VMs. 
Figure 10-35 My Stuff Screen 
Prime Service Catalog provides out-of-the-box support for many common lifecycle manage-
ment tasks for virtual machines, some of which are shown in Figure 10-35 and the full list of 
which is detailed in Table 10-3. 
Table 10-3 Prime Service Catalog Supported VM Lifecycle Actions
Virtual Machine Action
Description
Power On/Off VM
Change the power state of a virtual machine. Note that Power 
Off is different from Shutdown VM Guest. 
Reboot VM*
Tell the guest operating system to reboot. 
Shutdown VM Guest*
Tell the guest operating system to shut down. 
Add vNIC
Add a new virtual network adapter to a VM. User will need to 
provide details on port-group assignment and IP information. 
Clone VM
Create a copy of the VM and place into a designated vDC. 
Create VM Disk
Create a new virtual hard drive and add it to the VM. Does not 
perform any OS provisioning. 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  313
10
Virtual Machine Action
Description
Create VM Snapshot
Create a new snapshot of the current state of a VM. 
Delete VM Snapshot
Delete an individual snapshot of a VM. 
Delete VNIC
Remove an individual virtual network adapter from a VM. 
Migrate VM to Public 
Cloud**
Move the VM to an available vDC in a public cloud and maintain 
the current configuration of the VM. 
Reset VM
Execute a power cycle task on the VM. This is different from 
Shutdown VM Guest. 
Revert VM Snapshot
Restore a VM to a previously taken snapshot state. 
Standby VM
Place the VM into a hypervisor-level pause state. 
Suspend VM*
Execute an OS-level suspend task.
* Requires that the VM have the proper VM management tools for the hypervisor installed.
** Only available when Intercloud Fabric is integrated into Prime Service Catalog.
In addition to taking action on a virtual machine, you will also find details about the virtual 
machine’s configuration within the My Stuff interface. Details such as hostname, IP address, 
category, guest OS, and much more are all available in the table views listed with each VM 
entry. Because Prime Service Catalog provides management of both private cloud and pub-
lic cloud resources, within the table users will have a mixture of both types of resources. 
The best indicator of private or public status of a VM is the small cloud icon listed next to 
some of the VMs in Figure 10-35. Those VMs with this icon are public cloud VMs being 
managed by Intercloud Fabric for Business. Those lacking are private cloud VMs managed 
by UCS Director. For the public cloud VMs, details about the public cloud provider in use 
are available as VM details within the table. 
Using the UCS Director End-User Portal 
In most cases, you will want to deploy Prime Service Catalog as the end-user portal and 
catalog within your cloud architecture. However, in cases where you are in an early phase 
of the deployment of the cloud and Prime Service Catalog hasn’t been implemented yet, or 
your requirements don’t need the features and capabilities it brings, UCS Director includes a 
simplified end-user portal that can be leveraged for ordering and managing resources within 
the private cloud. 
UCS Director users configured with an access level of Service End-User will be presented 
the end-user portal upon logging in to UCS Director. Figure 10-36 shows the Catalog view 
an end user will see upon logging in to the portal. As an end user, you are able to order any 
of the Standard, Advanced, or other catalog types your group has access to from within 
the portal. In the discussion of service requests in Chapter 9, you saw how end users can 
track the status of any service requests that have been submitted by their group, as well as 
execute a rollback of one. 

314  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 10-36 UCS Director End-User Portal Catalog 
You can also view and manage your VMs from within the UCS Director end-user portal. 
Navigate to the Virtual Resources > VMs page to view a list of all virtual machines con-
tained in the different vDCs owned by your group. By selecting an individual VM, you 
will see a list of different actions available to you, as displayed in Figure 10-37. Which 
actions are displayed is determined by the End User Self-Service and User Action Policies 
configured on the vDC. There are a few options available in UCS Director that are not cur-
rently supported out of the box with Prime Service Catalog. Some of these are the ability 
to mount an ISO image to a VM, access VM credentials and launch a VM client (i.e., RDP, 
Web, or VMRC access), and move a VM to a different vDC. 

Chapter 10: Building a Service Catalog and User Portal with UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog  315
10
Figure 10-37 UCS Director End-User Portal VM Management 

316  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test.
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 10-4 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 10-4 Key Topics for Chapter 10
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Section
Describe the purpose and types of UCS Director Catalogs. 
290
Paragraph
Understand the differences between cloud templates.
291
Section
Describe the Prime Service Catalog component “The Showcase” and 
methods for customization.
298
Section
Understand the process for connecting and importing to Prime 
Service Catalog.
300
Section
Describe methods for customizing auto-created services in Prime 
Service Catalog.
303
Section
Describe how users find services and their details.
305
Section
Describe how to place an order within Prime Service Catalog.
307
Section
Explain end-user order management in Prime Service Catalog.
309
Table 10-3
Understand the different VM actions available to users within Prime 
Service Catalog.
312
Complete Tables and Lists from Memory
Print a copy of Appendix B, “Memory Tables” (found online), or at least the section for 
this chapter, and complete the tables and lists from memory. Appendix C, “Memory Tables 
Answer Key,” also online, includes completed tables and lists to check your work.
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
Standard Catalog, Advanced Catalog, Showcase, Notifications menu, My Stuff,  
service item

This page intentionally left blank 

This chapter covers the following exam topics:
1.0 Cloud Infrastructure Administration and Reporting 
1.3 Deploy virtual app containers
1.3.a Provide basic support and troubleshoot app container with firewall, networking, 
and load balancer

CHAPTER 11
Deploying Virtual Application 
Containers
The term container has become very popular in IT and application development in recent 
years. In most cases today, container refers to an alternative method of constructing and 
running software in a lightweight, highly portable, and fast-to-instantiate virtualization tech-
nology as an alternative to virtual machines. Linux has had LXC, a method for creating and 
managing containers, for years. However, it wasn’t until Docker containers became available 
that the term and its use became so widespread. 
Within UCS Director, an application container is something very different from these 
containers. Application containers have been available within UCS Director for many years, 
long before the term became so strongly associated with the containers from Docker and 
other companies. A UCS Director application container is an object designed to offer end 
users the ability to rapidly deploy and manage a group of virtual machines organized into 
one or more network segments, or tiers, as a single entity. 
At a network layer, the application container is inherently a secure and isolated environment 
where the policies designed and offered in the template determine how virtual machines  
within the container communicate with each other, what traffic is allowed to leave the con-
tainer, and what services from the container virtual machines are exposed to external users 
and systems. Some application container types offer network services such as load balancing, 
stateful firewall, and application inspection capabilities to the container virtual machines. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 11-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 11-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Understanding UCS Director Application Containers
1, 7
Types of Application Containers
2–4
Container Template Setup
5, 8, 9
Managing Deployed Containers
6
Creating Container Catalogs
10

320  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
CAUTION The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chap-
ter. If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, 
you should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving your-
self credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might 
provide you with a false sense of security.
1. An application container within UCS Director refers to which of the following? 
a. 
An alternative method for deploying software within a lighter-weight virtualiza-
tion technology than traditional virtual machines 
b. A logical construct composed of one or more network tiers containing virtual or 
physical compute resources in a private and secured network environment that 
can be ordered, managed, and deleted as a single entity
c. 
A snapshot of a configured virtual machine enabling end users to roll back to 
previous application states 
d. A logical construct representing a software application that can be deployed onto 
a selected virtual machine 
2. Select all of the options that represent application container types supported in UCS 
Director.
a. 
Docker container
b. Fenced virtual container
c. 
Virtual Security Gateway (VSG)
d. APIC container
e. 
Fabric container 
f. 
LXC container
g. VACS container
3. Which technologies can provide firewall services into and within the different appli-
cation containers available in UCS Director? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Linux Gateway 
b. Virtual Security Gateway (VSG)
c. 
ASA 
d. ASAv
4. Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS) containers make use of which of the 
following Cisco technologies? (Choose three.)
a. 
Cloud Services Router (CSR) 
b. ASAv 
c. 
Virtual Security Gateway (VSG) 
d. Nexus 1000v
e. 
Application Policy Infrastructure Controller

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  321
11
5. Before creating application containers, which of the following Virtual/Hypervisor 
Policies must be configured? (Choose three.)
a. 
Computing Policy 
b. Storage Policy
c. 
End User Self-Service Policy 
d. System Policy 
6. True or False. Virtual machines can be added after an application container is 
deployed. 
a. 
True
b. False
7. What will happen when you power off an application container?
a. 
You will be presented an interface where you will indicate which container vir-
tual machines to power off.
b. All deployed virtual machines will be powered off and deleted. Network service 
appliances will remain powered on.
c. 
All deployed virtual machines and network service appliances will be powered 
off but maintain all configuration and be able to be powered on again.
d. You cannot power off an application container.
8. Which Gateway Types are options in a fenced virtual container Tiered Application 
Gateway Policy? (Choose two.)
a. 
CSR
b. ASA/ASAv
c. 
Nexus Switch
d. Linux
9. What are the three available container types within VACS? 
a. 
VACS – Custom Container
b. VACS – Flexible Container
c. 
VACS – 3 Tier (Internal)
d. VACS – 3 Tier (Private)
e. 
VACS – 3 Tier (External)
f. 
VACS – 3 Tier (Public)
10. What catalog type is used when publishing a VACS container template to the service 
catalog? 
a. 
VACS container
b. Application container
c. 
Service container 
d. Advanced

322  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
Understanding UCS Director Application Containers
Before we explore the different types of application containers within UCS Director, let us 
look at their general structure and common aspects.
Every application container is instantiated from a template, and the template is simply an 
infrastructure model that describes the network, security, services, and compute resources 
that will be delivered through automation when a new application container is ordered. 
The example three-tier application container represented in Figure 11-1 shows one of the 
most common and basic types of containers you might find offered through UCS Director. 
This container is composed of separate network segments for web, application, and data 
servers. Most containers also include a network device to provide routing and security 
enforcement for traffic to and from the servers in the individual tiers. This container is 
designed to offer a fairly typical security policy where servers in the web tier can commu-
nicate with the app tier, but not with the data tier. Only app tier servers can communicate 
with the data tier servers. External users are allowed to access only the web servers. Though 
this example leverages the ubiquitous three-tier model of an application, UCS Director 
application containers can be built to support one or more tier models. 
User
Network Routing/
Security Device
Web
App
Data
Figure 11-1 Example Three-Tier Application Container 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  323
11
In the example load-balanced application container shown in Figure 11-2, you will find 
a simple one-tier container where a load-balancing service is offered for the virtual 
machines deployed to the web tier. This makes it easy for users who are building or man-
aging a web application to scale out the service with included management of the load-
balancing configuration. 
User
Network Routing/
Security Device
Server Load
Balancer
Web
Figure 11-2 Example Load-Balanced Application Container 
After a new application container is ordered, users manage the container as a single object 
within UCS Director. Actions such as Power On or Off, Clone, or Delete can be executed on 
a deployed container. When one of these actions is executed, UCS Director will act on all 
virtual machines and resources within the container. For example, when you power off a con-
tainer with three web servers, two application servers, a data server, and a virtual router, all 
seven of the virtual machines will be shut down. If the template for the container allows for 
it, you can also add or remove virtual machines from a deployed container. Double-clicking 
a deployed application container enables you to see and interact with individual elements 
within the container based on the User Action Policies configured within the template. 
Types of Application Containers
Several types of application containers are supported within UCS Director. The main dif-
ferentiation between the types relates to how the container networking is created, and the 
virtual and/or physical infrastructure used to create it. Table 11-2 lists the different applica-
tion container types and the key characteristics of each. Following the table, the two most 
common types of containers will be explored in more depth. 

324  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Table 11-2 UCS Director Application Container Types 
Container Type
Description
Fenced virtual container
The original and most common type of application container. 
Doesn’t require any specific network architecture to use. 
Virtual Security Gateway 
(VSG)
Leverages the Cisco Virtual Security Gateway zone-based 
firewall solution to provide enhanced security for container 
virtual machines. 
APIC container
Tightly integrated with a Cisco Application Centric Infrastructure 
network deployment, leverages tenant and application profiles for 
creating application containers. Supports bare-metal workloads as 
well as VMware virtual machine workloads within the container. 
Fabric container 
An application container option for customers with a Cisco 
Dynamic Fabric Automation (DFA) network deployment.
VACS container
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation* (VACS) is a licensable 
feature set for UCS Director for customers looking for an 
advanced application container structure designed specifically for 
highly flexible and easy-to-deploy virtual network designs using 
Cisco virtual network technologies for routing, switching, and 
security.
* VACS was previously known as Virtual Application Container Services.
Fenced Virtual Container 
Fenced virtual containers can be used in any VMware-based deployment with UCS 
Director. The biggest advantage of this container type is that it does not require any par-
ticular network hardware, software, or topology. The virtual network for a fenced virtual 
container can be provided by a standard VMware vSwitch, a VMware Distributed vSwitch, 
or a Cisco Nexus 1000v. 
An application container requires a gateway to allow the deployed virtual machines to 
communicate with each other and outside of the container. The gateway provides inter-
VLAN routing, security enforcement, and IP network address translation (NAT) capabilities. 
Fenced virtual containers support two different types of gateway devices, a Linux VM or a 
Cisco ASA. UCS Director can leverage any available Linux VM template as the gateway by 
taking advantage of the IP forwarding and embedded firewall feature (IPTables) within all 
Linux distributions. And for deployments, where an enterprise-class stateful firewall with 
application inspection option is required, the Cisco ASA or ASAv can be used (requires 
licensing of the ASAv). 
Templates for a fenced virtual container without a gateway can be built. In these templates, 
you will need to address the networking design and deployment to enable communication 
to and from the container virtual machines outside of the template and default workflows 
used to build the application container. One way to accomplish this would be to build a 
custom workflow based on the out-of-the-box example that provides the networking needs 
of your environment. 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  325
11
Fenced virtual containers can optionally be deployed with a load-balancing policy to lever-
age an F5 BIG-IP application delivery controller as part of the container template. When 
included in a template, UCS Director will create and manage virtual server and server pool 
objects within the BIG-IP device automatically, but as of UCS Director 5.4, the VLAN and 
NAT settings within the gateway and BIG-IP device itself must be configured manually 
or through more customized infrastructure automation workflows. Providing automated 
configuration of these features as part of the fenced virtual container automation will be 
addressed in a future release of UCS Director. 
In a fenced virtual container, the gateway device provides the security enforcement based 
on the policies configured in the template. This means that enforcement is done at network 
boundaries between container tiers, or between the container and devices outside the con-
tainer. Communication within each tier is completely open and allowed. The VSG and VACS 
container options provide capabilities for more enhanced security by leveraging the Virtual 
Security Gateway and Nexus 1000v from Cisco to further segment the east-west communi-
cation within and between tiers. The security term microsegmentation has been coined to 
refer to a security style leveraging security between and within traditional security zones. 
VACS Container
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS) is an optional feature license for UCS 
Director available for customers looking to simplify the consumption of the robust virtual 
networking capabilities provided by Cisco to VMware and Hyper-V environments (VACS 
support for HyperV is roadmapped for CY2016). The VACS solution within UCS Director 
provides the following benefits to customers: 
■ Offers single per-hypervisor host license for required virtual network components 
■ Simplifies the installation and upgrade of the Nexus 1000v Virtual Switch, Virtual 
Security Gateway (VSG), Cloud Services Router (CSR), and Prime Network Services 
Controller
■ Enables end users to deploy application containers backed by Cisco switching, routing, 
and security services 
■ Ensures consistent cloud tenant segmentation 
VACS containers are built using proven and best-of-breed technologies. Figure 11-3 illus-
trates a VACS deployment and a sample application container. UCS Director provides the 
underlying infrastructure management and automation solution for the application con- 
tainer deployment. The installation of VACS into UCS Director adds the content (work-
flows and tasks) needed to install, upgrade, and manage the virtual network components as 
well as deploy and manage the application containers themselves. A first step of the instal-
lation involves deploying the Nexus 1000v Virtual Supervisor Module (VSM) into the virtu-
alization platform in use. This installation is fully automated and doesn’t require any manual 
configuration on the part of the cloud administrator. Prime Network Services Controller 
will also be automatically deployed, and it will be used to construct and deploy the network 
policies each time a new container is ordered. Depending on the template configuration, 
each application container will include a CSR, VSG, and server load balancer as required. 
These instances are dedicated to the container, and their life cycle will be managed as part 
of the container itself. 

326  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
User
UCS Director
Prime Network
Service Controller
Nexus 1000v VSM
Virtual Security
Gateway
Cloud Service
Router
Web
App
Data
Figure 11-3 VACS Deployment and Sample Container 
When comparing and evaluating using VACS over the fenced virtual container option  
within UCS Director, you should consider the following: 
■ With VACS deployed, you will be able to leverage the Nexus 1000v for managing appli-
cation container virtual networks as well as noncontainer-related virtual networks. This 
will provide you with the full Cisco switching feature set available with the Nexus 1000v 
Advanced License.
■ Each VACS container leverages a CSR to provide a stateful external firewall including 
Layer 7 application inspection of common applications including HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, 
DNS, ICMP, SQLnet, MSSQL, and LDAP.
■ The VSG provides east-west traffic protection, enabling you to build security policies 
much more granular than the network boundary–based security available with Fenced 
Virtual Containers.
■ By leveraging the CSR as the container gateway, your containers have available the full 
enterprise routing capabilities available, including dynamic routing, quality of service 
(QoS), VPN, and monitoring services such as NetFlow. 
■ For deployments where you are looking to avoid leveraging private container networks 
and NATing at the gateway, VACS offers more flexible options for IP subnet, routing, 
and NAT. 
■ Server Load Balancing (SLB) is also offered as an optional feature for each VACS con-
tainer and requires no external hardware or software licenses. SLB within VACS is built 
on the open source HAProxy load balancer widely available and used in many enter-
prises and cloud applications. With VACS, you can offer this service to a container tier 
without any manual configuration of HAProxy itself. 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  327
11
Container Template Setup
Having explored the details of fenced virtual and VACS application container types, we will 
now walk through how to build templates and deploy each type of container. Before creat-
ing your first application container template, you need to address the prerequisites for each 
container type, which are covered first. 
Fenced Virtual Containers 
UCS Director deploys fenced virtual containers into a VMware vCenter–based cloud or 
virtual account, so be sure to add this account before beginning the container template pro-
cess. Your container templates will also need to have access to virtual machine images (that 
is, VM templates) for the different VMs that will be provisioned into the new containers. 
This includes an image for a Linux Gateway VM if your containers will be leveraging one 
for the network boundary of the container. If you will be using an ASAv as the gateway, 
you will need to upload the ASAv OVA file to UCS Director before beginning to create 
the Container Policies. You can upload the OVA file by navigating to Administration > 
Integration > User OVF Management. The remaining portion of this walkthrough will 
leverage a Linux VM as the gateway, as this is the most common deployment method. 
Once you have the VMware Cloud connected and ready, you can create the needed 
Virtual/Hypervisor Policies that will be used during application container provisioning to 
properly place and configure new virtual machines deployed. Fenced virtual containers 
use these policies in a very similar way as virtual data centers (vDCs), covered in Chapter 
9, “Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director.” Figure 11-4 provides a summary 
of the policies you will need to configure as well as their purpose. You will need to create 
VMware Computing and VMware Storage Policies to indicate on which vSphere hosts or 
clusters, and which data stores or data store clusters, to deploy the new virtual machines. A 
VMware Network Policy is used for the configuration of the gateway’s outside interface. 
The inside interfaces and all virtual machine interfaces will be configured based on the con-
tainer tiers described within the template. A VMware System Policy is used to configure 
DNS and time zone information on virtual machines. The container virtual machine nam-
ing convention will reflect the container name itself rather than what is configured in the 
System Policy. A Cost Model is optional in a fenced virtual container template configura-
tion, but can be helpful when an enterprise is looking to implement a showback/chargeback 
policy as part of the private cloud deployment. Also, the End User Self-Service Policy is 
optional, but in most cases you will want to enable your users to have some level of admin-
istration over the container and its virtual machines. 

328  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Cost Model
VMware System Policy
DNS and Time Configuration
End User Self-
Service Policy
VMware
Computing Policy
VMware
Storage Policy
vSphere Host/Cluster
vSphere Data Store
Outside Gateway Network
VMware
Network Policy
$$$ Reports
Allowed Lifecycle
Operations
Figure 11-4 Fenced Virtual Container Virtual/Hypervisor Policies 
When a new fenced virtual container is ordered based on one of the configured templates, 
UCS Director executes a workflow to do the automation to build the container network 
and deploy the needed virtual machines. UCS Director ships with sample workflows for 
deploying the container, and in most cases only very minor modifications are needed. It is 
recommended that you clone the provided out-of-the-box workflows, make the needed 
changes for your environment, and use the cloned workflow in your container templates. 
Navigate to Policies > Orchestration > Workflows just as you would when building or 
managing any other automation workflow. As shown in Figure 11-5, you will find two 
sample workflows for Fenced Containers in the folder Default > Containers. The work-
flow “Fenced Container Setup” is used for Linux Gateway–based templates, and “Fenced 
Container Setup – ASA Gateway” is used for Cisco ASA–based templates. Clone the 
workflow based on your needs (the screenshots and remaining walkthrough are for a Linux 
Gateway container) and give it a descriptive name. 
Figure 11-5 Fenced Container Workflows 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  329
11
Open the Workflow Designer for your newly cloned workflow to make the needed  
changes. The first task in the workflow should be Allocate Container VM Resources;  
double-click it to open and edit its task inputs, as shown in Figure 11-6. Choose the appro-
priate Virtual Network Type for your VMware deployment and enter the name of the 
vSwitch or DVSwitch. In our example we are using a Nexus 1000v DVSwitch named VSM. 
You must submit the changes to the task by clicking Next and Submit, not simply close 
it after making the change. With the changes to the task submitted, close the workflow 
designer. 
Figure 11-6 Fenced Container Workflow Virtual Switch Configuration 
You have now completed all the preparation steps needed, and can begin creating the 
fenced virtual container policies and templates. Navigate to Policies > Application 
Containers for the remaining setup steps. Your goal is to create an application container 
template from which you can provision new application containers; however, the template 
requires available policies to properly provision the network elements. First navigate to the 
Tiered Application Gateway Policies tab and click Add Policy. On the first page, Policy 
Specification, shown in Figure 11-7, provide a Policy Name, optional Policy Description, 
Gateway Type (Linux, ASA, or ASAv), and Select Virtual Account for your VMware Cloud. 
Figure 11-7, and some later figures, shows the edit view of a policy rather than the creation 
view, the only difference between them being that you can’t edit a policy name. Click Next 
to move forward.  

330  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 11-7 Application Container Gateway Policy Specification 
On the second page, shown in Figure 11-8 for Gateway – Linux, you provide the details 
for the Linux Gateway that will be created for each new container. Select the VM image 
that will be used as the basis for each gateway and provide virtual hardware specifications. 
Provide the root credentials for the template and indicate if you want the credentials shared 
with end users. Click Next and move to the final page where you can click Submit after 
reviewing a summary of the policy you’ve configured. 
Figure 11-8 Application Container Linux Gateway Policy 
Now navigate to the Virtual Infrastructure Policies tab and click Add Policy. The Virtual 
Infrastructure Policy will be used in the fenced virtual container template creation in the 
next step, and it refers to the gateway and, if being used, F5 Load Balancer policy. On the 
first page of the policy wizard, shown in Figure 11-9, you determine the container type 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  331
11
being configured and the virtual account that will be used. Click Next and on the second 
page, shown in Figure 11-10, check the Gateway Required box (if it isn’t already checked) 
and select the policy you configured in the previous step. Click Next twice to skip the F5 
Load Balancer Information page, and then Submit the new Virtual Infrastructure Policy. 
Figure 11-9 Virtual Infrastructure Policy Specification
Figure 11-10 Virtual Infrastructure Policy Gateway 
You are now ready to move to the Application Container Templates tab and create a 
fenced virtual template. Click the Add Template button to open the wizard. On the first 
page, provide a template name and optional description and click Next. On the second 
page, select the Virtual Infrastructure Policy you created in the previous step and click 
Next. You will now be on the third page of the wizard, shown in Figure 11-11, where 
networks are configured. Use the table displayed to add the number of tiers you desire 

332  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
your fenced virtual container to have. Keep in mind that in a fenced virtual container, the 
internal networks are private to the container and not exposed to the rest of the data cen-
ter network. All traffic in and out of the container will run through IP NAT translation by 
the gateway. This means that all application containers deployed from a given template 
will leverage the same private IP network space. Figure 11-12 shows an example configu-
ration for a web tier of a container that is accessed by the add or edit buttons (plus and 
pencil, respectively) in Figure 11-11. Click Next when finished configuring the networks.  
Figure 11-11 Fenced Virtual Container Template Network Configuration
Figure 11-12 Fenced Virtual Container Template Web Tier Configuration 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  333
11
Moving on to the fourth page of the wizard, Virtual Machines, shown in Figure 11-13, you 
determine the number and type of virtual machines that will be available in each tier of 
the container. Even if you do not wish to initially deploy virtual machines as a container is 
built—that is, you’ll allow users to add virtual machines after deploying the container—you 
must still add virtual machine entries for each tier of the container. As can be seen in Figure 
11-13, you indicate both the maximum and initial quantities of VMs to be deployed. Simply 
indicate 0 as the initial quantity if you do not want to preprovision virtual machines in new 
containers, and then choose the template. Click Next to continue.  
Figure 11-13 Fenced Virtual Container Template Virtual Machine Configuration 
On the Security page, displayed in Figure 11-14, you configure the port mappings and 
outbound ACLs that will govern the traffic allowed in and out of the container. Because 
a fenced virtual container is designed to have a completely private internal network, you 
need to explicitly map any ports for services you wish container virtual machines to provide 
externally. The Remote IP Address fields are determined by the configurations you selected 
when configuring the networks and VMs for the container template. Also, by default no 
traffic will be allowed from the virtual machines out of the container. This includes standard 
services like DNS, LDAP, HTTP, etc. If you want container VMs to be able to access these 
types of services, be sure to provide the needed ACLs in the Security configuration. The 
configurations made here will be enforced on the gateway using platform capabilities. In 
our example, the Linux Gateway will leverage IPTables to apply these policies. Click Next 
to continue.

334  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 11-14 Fenced Virtual Container Template Security Configuration 
On the next two pages, Policies and Options, select the Virtual/Hypervisor Policies that you 
configured in preparation. On the Options page you can also indicate whether to allow end 
users to delete their own containers, as well as leverage VNC-based console access to con-
tainer VMs. On the second-to-last page of the wizard, Workflows, search for and select the 
customized workflow that you created where your virtual switching network was indicated. 
And then finally submit the template creation after reviewing the Summary. 
Having completed the template creation wizard, you can now select your template and 
click Create Container to build your first fenced virtual container. As shown in Figure 
11-15, you simply need to provide a container name, optional label, and group to own the 
new container. The container name must be less than 8 characters long to be valid because 
the container name is used as part of the virtual machine name, and Microsoft Windows 
restricts hostnames to 15 characters. Container names longer than 8 characters would have 
the potential to create invalid Windows hostnames. The creation of a container creates a 
service request for the workflow execution. Figure 11-16 shows a sample service request 
Status for a completed container creation. 
Figure 11-15 Create Container 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  335
11
Figure 11-16 Create Container Service Request Status 
Details on managing and working with a container will be covered in a later part of this 
chapter, but in Figure 11-17 you can see the newly deployed fenced virtual container in the 
Application Containers tab. 
Figure 11-17 Deployed Fenced Virtual Container 
VACS Containers 
Before you can begin building VACS containers with UCS Director, you must install and 
license the VACS feature. The initial installation of VACS is out of scope for the CLDADM 
exam and this book, but you can find a detailed walkthrough of the installation and setup 
on Cisco.com. At the time of this writing, the latest guide is Cisco Virtual Application 
Cloud Segmentation Services Installation and Upgrade Guide, Release 5.4STV3.0, which 
you can easily find through an Internet search of the title. You can also find video walk-
throughs of the installation and configuration by going to Cisco.com and conducting a 
search for Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation Install and Upgrade Guides. 

336  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Once you have VACS installed, you are ready to address the prerequisites for creating 
templates. At the time of writing, VACS only supports VMware-based hypervisor environ-
ments, so you will need to have the virtual account for the vCenter Cloud successfully 
added to UCS Director as well as virtual machine images available for deploying workloads 
into the new containers. 
You can create templates that will use either VLANs or Virtual Extensible LANs (VXLAN) 
for network segmentation. Using VXLANs is recommended because it doesn’t require the 
underlying physical network to have VLANs added to support the containers as they are 
built and changed. UCS Director could be used to automate the addition of the VLANs to 
physical switches and UCS Fabric Interconnects as a custom extension to the VACS work-
flows. However, by using VXLANs for the segmentation, this need is avoided completely. 
You will need to ensure a minimum Jumbo MTU size of 1600 bytes is available throughout 
the physical network to support the overhead of the VXLAN header. 
As with fenced virtual container preparation, you need to create Virtual/Hypervisor Policies 
for VMware Computing, Storage, and System before creating VACS templates. These poli-
cies are used to properly place and configure the container virtual machines at deployment. 
No Network Policies are required for VACS templates. 
You will need to create IP subnet pools, static IP pools, and VXLAN or VLAN pools 
before creating templates. Refer to the section “Network Resource Pools” in Chapter 9 for 
details on how to configure each of them. Each VACS container will deploy virtual network 
appliances for routing, security, and services, and these appliances will need management IP 
addresses. These addresses will be pulled from a static IP pool that you will identify when 
building a template. A second static IP pool is needed for the virtual router uplink interface. 
Both of these IP pools need to have the Gateway and VLAN fields completed as part of 
the configuration. Next, create an IP subnet pool from which the inside subnets for each 
container will be provisioned. And lastly, create either a VLAN or VXLAN pool to be used 
to identify each network segment for deployed containers. Be sure to provide large enough 
pools to meet the potential needs of your VACS usage. Having multiple network resource 
pools configured and used is supported, but any one template can reference only one of 
each type at any given time. 
After you complete all these prerequisite steps, navigate to Solution > VACS Container 
to create the templates. Click Add Template to open the template wizard shown in Figure 
11-18. On the first page, Template Specification, provide a name and optional description 
for the template, as well as identify the type of container you will be deploying. VACS 
provides three types from which to choose. The first two, VACS – 3 Tier (Internal) and 
VACS – 3 Tier (External), are very similar with only one difference. Each builds the typi-
cal three-tier network structure with a web, app, and data zone. Each also preconfigures 
security rules to enable the web tier (or zone) to communication with the app tier, enable 
the app tier to communicate with the data tier, and prevent the web tier from commu-
nicating with the data tier, as was represented in Figure 11-1. The difference between 
the two types is that the Internal version of the template allows communication from 
outside the container to reach only resources in the web tier, while the External version 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  337
11
allows external communication to all three tiers. The last type of container is the VACS – 
Custom Container. This type enables the designer to control all aspects of the container 
template. This includes the number and names of the tiers and full control over the secu-
rity policy applied. 
A very useful feature of VACS is that a container can be initially created as one of the 3 
Tier models, and then converted to a Custom Container for fine tuning and modification. 
This can make it easy to quickly get started offering VACS containers to your users, and 
then adjust as your end-user requirements become more understood. We will initially walk 
through the creation of a 3 Tier External template and then use this technique to investigate 
the other options available. 
Figure 11-18 VACS Template Wizard Template Specification 
On the second page, Deployment Options, shown in Figure 11-19, you configure the details 
of the size and configuration of the basic container features. First indicate whether you 
will deploy a Small, Medium, or Large template. Clicking the Select button will bring up 
an interface where you can see the RAM and CPU sizing for the different options that will 
affect the effective network throughput available to your container virtual machines. Select 
the proper virtual account, Nexus 1000v, and policies to be used. You can also check or 
uncheck the Server Load Balancing check box to indicate whether you want to provide SLB 
to one of the three tiers of the container. We will look at this feature more when we con-
vert to a Custom Container. 

338  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 11-19 VACS Template Wizard Deployment Options 
Network resource pool configuration is done on the third page, shown in Figure 11-20. 
Here you reference the management and uplink pools you set up previously. The option for 
Router IP Type indicates whether the container will leverage NAT from inside to outside 
(the Private type) or use EIGRP or Static routing to advertise the inside networks outside the 
container (the Public type). 
Figure 11-20 VACS Template Wizard Network Resource Pool 
On the next page, VM Networks, you provide the details for the inside VM networks to be 
configured in the container. Because tier segmentation is provided by the Virtual Security 
Gateway based on VM attributes, the 3 Tier Container types only leverage a single virtual 
machine network. This is very helpful to conserve IP subnets and addresses. In Figure 11-21 
you can see how a single lan0 network is configured using the VXLAN and subnet pools 
configured earlier. 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  339
11
Figure 11-21 VACS Template Wizard VM Networks 
The final configuration page, Virtual Machines, enables you to configure the details for vir-
tual machines to be added to the container. In Figure 11-22 you can see that a VM entry for 
each tier has been configured. Add your virtual machines, review the summary on the final 
page, and click Submit to save your new template. 
Figure 11-22 VACS Template Wizard Virtual Machines 
Now that your new template is created, let’s convert it to a Custom Template and take a 
look at the details of the network and security configuration that VACS abstracts and builds 
based on the default settings for a 3 Tier Container. Select your template and click Edit 
Template to reopen it. As shown in Figure 11-23, when you convert the type to a Custom 
Container, several new pages in the wizard become available. 

340  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 11-23 VACS Template Wizard Custom Container Menu 
Click Next several times to advance the wizard to the Security Zones page. You could 
add, edit, or delete zones using buttons in the table, and here in Figure 11-24 we are 
looking at the Edit Zone Entry interface of the WebZone. You can see by default virtual 
machines will be placed into proper security zones based on whether web, app, or data 
appears in the VM Name. 
Figure 11-24 VACS Template Wizard Security Zones 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  341
11
Click Next to move to the Access Control List page, where, as shown in Figure 11-25, you 
can see the default security rules based on the 3 Tier External container type. From this 
interface you can add, delete, or adjust the rules to meet your security policy requirements. 
Figure 11-25 VACS Template Wizard Access Control List 
Click Next to move to the last of the new pages available, Application Layer Gateway, 
shown in Figure 11-26. The page allows you to customize which application layer gateway 
(ALG) inspections are enabled on the CSR for traffic entering and leaving the container. 
These inspections look at traffic matching the typical protocols and ports for the enabled 
applications and make sure that the traffic aligns to the RFC specifications for the proto-
col. The goal of the inspections is to prevent unauthorized traffic from entering or leaving 
a container on an open port. In Figure 11-26 you can see the default inspections that are 
turned on with the 3 Tier Container models, as well as the additional optional protocols you 
can choose to enable. 
Figure 11-26 VACS Template Wizard Application Layer Gateway 

342  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Up to this point we have simply looked at the configuration that was applied based on our 
initial choice of a 3 Tier External Container. Go back to the Deployment Options page 
and check the box to enable Server Load Balancing. This adds an additional page to the 
wizard for Server Load Balancing, shown in Figure 11-27. By enabling the feature, VACS 
will deploy an additional service virtual machine to the container running HAProxy to load 
balance the virtual machines in the chosen tier. In the current release of VACS, only a single 
tier can be load balanced in a given container; however, enabling other options is being con-
sidered for future releases. Keep the defaults for the SLB feature and click Submit to submit 
your changes to save the container. 
Figure 11-27 VACS Template Wizard Server Load Balancing
Now that your template is finished, select your container and click the Create Container 
button located on the VACS Container interface. Provide a container name and an optional 
label, and indicate the group that will own the container, just like you did with the fenced 
virtual container. The container creation creates a service request like the one shown in 
Figure 11-28. Once deployed, you will find and manage the VACS containers in the same 
Policies > Application Containers menu where fenced virtual containers are located. 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  343
11
Figure 11-28 VACS Container Service Request 
Creating Container Catalogs 
No matter the type of application container, you create the catalog offers the same way. 
Recall from Chapter 9 that you must create catalog offers for any service that end users will 
be enabled to order and manage. As an administrator, you have the ability to create a new 
container simply by clicking the template. End users, on the other hand, do not have access 
to the templates; they have access only to the service catalog available. Navigate to Policies 
> Catalogs and click Add to create a new catalog. Choose the Service Container type from 
the drop-down list. Figure 11-29 shows the completed form for the new catalog that will 
allow end users to order and deploy a new container based on our template. 

344  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 11-29 New Service Container Catalog 
Managing Deployed Containers 
Deploying a container is a great first step, but you will also want to manage the life cycle 
of the container and work with the VMs contained within it. Several actions are available to 
end users, depending on the type of container. Figure 11-30 shows the actions available for 
a fenced virtual container and Figure 11-31 for a VACS container. Some of the key differ-
ences and things to note about the available actions are listed here:
■ Fenced virtual containers can be cloned to create a new container based on a copy of the 
running container.
■ VACS containers support configuring ERSPAN sessions to capture traffic from the con-
tainer networks and send it to a network analysis system.
■ VACS containers support changing the Firewall Policy on a deployed container through 
the portal. 
Figure 11-30 Fenced Virtual Container Actions 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  345
11
Figure 11-31 VACS Container Actions 
Although there is an option in the Fenced Container menu to Add BMs (bare-metal servers), 
enabling this feature for a fenced virtual container is complex and rarely used. For contain-
ers supporting bare-metal servers, the best option will be the newest container type, APIC 
containers, briefly discussed in the next section. 
All container types also provide end users with several report options from which they can 
obtain details about the container and the resources in the container. These details include 
the IP address, usernames and passwords, and hardware details for each virtual machine. 
Figure 11-32 shows an example report for a fenced virtual container. Users can find these 
reports by clicking the application container and selecting View Reports. The Detailed 
Report with Credentials is shown in the figure. 
Figure 11-32 Container Report 

346  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
APIC Containers
The newest types of application container supported in UCS Director are APIC containers. 
These containers are tightly integrated with Cisco Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI) 
and the policy-defined networking approach configured through the Application Policy 
Infrastructure Controller (APIC). APIC containers are built to extend the tenancy model 
from ACI into UCS Director and allow users to create container networks spanning virtual 
and physical resources, manage storage configurations for tenants, and provide robust secu-
rity and services with firewall and load balancers. 
The configuration and deployment of APIC containers are beyond the scope for the 
CLDADM exam and this book. For details, refer to the “Implementing Cisco Application 
Policy Infrastructure Controller Support” chapter of the Cisco UCS Director Application 
Container Guide available on Cisco.com. 

Chapter 11: Deploying Virtual Application Containers  347
11
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test. 
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 11-3 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 11-3 Key Topics for Chapter 11
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Table 11-2
List the different application container types supported by UCS 
Director.
324
List
Describe the benefits the VACS feature provides to customers.
325
Paragraph
Understand the network impact of using application containers and 
how to control traffic entering and leaving a container with policy. 
333
Paragraph
Explain the network resource pools required by VACS templates 
and the purpose of each one. 
336
Paragraph
Describe the three types of VACS containers available for template 
creation and the differences between each. 
336
Paragraph
Describe the application inspection feature of VACS containers and 
its value to customers. 
341
Complete Tables and Lists from Memory
Print a copy of Appendix B, “Memory Tables” (found online), or at least the section for 
this chapter, and complete the tables and lists from memory. Appendix C, “Memory Tables 
Answer Key,” also online, includes completed tables and lists to check your work.
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
application container, container gateway, container template

This chapter covers the following exam topics:
2.0 Chargeback and Billing Reports
2.1 Describe the chargeback model 
2.1.a Describe chargeback features
2.1.b Describe budget policy
2.1.c Describe cost models
2.1.d Describe adding a cost model to a tenant
2.2 Generate various reports for virtual and physical accounts
2.2.a Execute billing reports
2.2.b Execute system utilization reporting
2.2.c Execute a snapshot report

CHAPTER 12
Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting 
This chapter discusses two tightly related components of cloud administration: reporting 
and chargeback. Having a solid understanding of how well any IT system is operating has 
been a key part of system and network administration for years, and because of the self-
service and automated nature of a cloud, having that understanding is even more important. 
Details about the current status of the cloud infrastructure, trending information about 
usage, and historical data are all critical to building and maintaining a private cloud. Robust 
reporting capabilities are important not only for cloud administrators, but also for the end 
users and consumers of the cloud as part of the self-service ordering and management of 
cloud resources. 
A key element in distinguishing a cloud model from other networking models is the way in 
which cloud services are consumed and paid for. Along with providing end users the ability 
to provision and manage their resources through a self-service portal, generally cloud com-
puting involves having users pay for the resources they are using as an operating expense 
(OpEx for short). Depending on the cloud provider, users may be charged a one-time fee 
for ordering a resource; fees based on how long and how many resources they have active; 
fees based on performance characteristics such as CPU, RAM, and disk; or fees based on 
some combination of these and other metrics. Chargeback and the related concept of 
showback refer to the capability of a cloud platform to track metrics, assign them a dollar 
value, and generate billing reports for individual customers or groups. If an organization 
uses the billing reports for informational purposes but does not actually implement any 
financial transfers based on the reports, it is using a showback model. If the organization’s 
governance model changes such that users and groups begin paying for the usage of cloud 
services, it has moved to a chargeback model. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 12-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”

350  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Table 12-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Cloud Infrastructure Reports
1, 2, 4
Physical Infrastructure 
3
Virtual Infrastructure 
5, 6
CloudSense Analytics
7
UCS Director Chargeback 
8
Cost Models 
9
Budget Policy
10
CAUTION The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chap-
ter. If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, 
you should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving your-
self credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might 
provide you with a false sense of security.
1. Data from an infrastructure report in UCS Director can be exported in which for-
mats? (Choose three.)
a. 
PDF
b. Comma-separated values (CSV)
c. 
Microsoft Excel (XLS) 
d. Extensible Markup Language (XML)
2. Which action within an infrastructure report typically opens a new report drilling 
down into more details about a particular object in a table? 
a. 
Open 
b. View Details
c. 
Expand
d. Explore
3. Under which administrative menu option would you find details on UCS Manager 
accounts added to UCS Director? 
a. 
Administration > Compute Accounts
b. Infrastructure > Physical > Compute 
c. 
Physical > Compute 
d. Site > Pod > Compute

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   351
12
4. What types of objects can be assigned to a user or a group in UCS Director? (Choose 
all that apply.)
a. 
Virtual machines 
b. UCS service profile 
c. 
VLAN
d. LUN
e. 
Volume
5. Where would you find a report showing the number of virtual machines within a 
cloud account over the last month?  
a. 
Within a Trending Report under More Reports 
b. As part of a Historical Usage report for a virtual data center 
c. 
Within a Summary dashboard 
d. This information is not available within UCS Director 
6. A Map Report for a cloud account in UCS Director displays which of the following? 
a. 
A graphical topology representation indicating the relationship between VMs, 
hosts, clusters, and vCenter 
b. A color-coded heat map showing relative usage of different components within 
the cloud 
c. 
Integration with Google Maps to highlight where a selected piece of infrastruc-
ture is located
d. A graphical representation of the physical compute cluster, highlighting which 
physical server is hosting workloads 
7. CloudSense Analytics provide administrators with which capabilities not available in 
other report options in UCS Director? (Choose three.)
a. 
Combine information from multiple infrastructure reports into a single view
b. Snapshot and save details about the cloud infrastructure at a particular point in 
time
c. 
Construct custom executive reports from data throughout the cloud that can be 
emailed to users
d. Provide forecast and what-if analysis across the cloud infrastructure 
8. True or False. Chargeback refers to an IT governance policy where metrics and costs 
of IT resource consumption are tracked per user or group, and bills for that usage are 
paid to reimburse corporate IT for supporting applications.  
a. 
True
b. False

352  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
9. Within a UCS Director Cost Model, which of the following metrics can be used to 
calculate costs? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
One-time fixed cost
b. CPU cores 
c. 
Memory consumed 
d. Network bandwidth used 
10. What steps are needed to implement and enforce budgets for a group? (Choose 
three.)
a. 
Create and apply a Cost Model to vDCs 
b. Enable Budget Watch per group 
c. 
Create monthly budget entries per group
d. Create approval policies and designated approvers for groups

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   353
12
Foundation Topics
UCS Director Reporting
Within UCS Director there are two broad types of reports available. We have referred to 
and looked at examples of the first type of report many times within this book already. 
These cloud infrastructure reports encompass all of the different tables and data available 
within the UCS Director administrator and end-user portals. Each time you have investi-
gated a table of virtual machines, service requests, or VLANs, you were working with a 
cloud infrastructure report. The second type of reports are CloudSense Analytics, and they 
provide visibility into the utilization and performance across the infrastructure supporting 
the private cloud. These reports are leveraged to help answer questions related to utiliza-
tion, trending, and forecasting. The examples in this chapter show how to access and view 
the reports through the UCS Director web interface; however, all of the information is also 
available through the REST API. 
Cloud Infrastructure Reports
Cloud infrastructure reports are ubiquitous within UCS Director, and account for nearly 
all the screens and views both administrators and end users navigate within their interfaces. 
These reports show a snapshot of the current status of the infrastructure in question based 
on the most recent inventory polling data. This means there is always the potential for the 
data being shown to be slightly out of date for details that have recently changed or up-
dated. In cases where you know a change has happened in the infrastructure outside of UCS 
Director, you can manually run an inventory task through the Administrator > System > 
System Tasks page. Search for Inventory and you’ll see a list of each of the inventory tasks 
and their details, and be able to kick off an immediate run of the task. 
A typical cloud infrastructure report, along with annotations for the common attributes 
found on all reports, is shown in Figure 12-1. This is the UCS Servers report for a UCS 
Manager account within UCS Director where the details of the physical servers (not service 
profiles, but the actual servers) are displayed in a tabular format. No matter what report you 
are viewing, all will have the following commonalities:
■ The table can be sorted by any column by clicking the column name and then the up/
down arrow to indicate sort direction.
■ Two methods for searching or filtering the data are available: 
■ Entering text in the search box in the title bar for the table will limit the view to only 
rows that contain the text in any column. 
■ Clicking the Advanced Filter button displays the Search in Column dialog box, where 
you can provide more granular search criteria. 

354  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ The default view of the report may or may not show all available columns. Click the 
Customize Table Columns button, represented by a gear icon, to display or hide indi-
vidual data columns.
■ The data for the report can be exported from UCS Director for independent view 
and manipulation. Supported formats are PDF, comma-separated values (CSV), and 
Microsoft Excel (XLS). Note that the entire report will be exported, including all hidden 
columns and rows. 
Customize Columns
Search all data
Export Report
Search by column
Sorting options
Figure 12-1 Typical Cloud Infrastructure Report 
Another important characteristic common to many cloud infrastructure reports is the capa-
bility to take action or drill deeper into the infrastructure being displayed. Figure 12-2 
shows the same UCS Server report, but this time it has been filtered down to a single blade 
that has been selected. Once an item in the table is selected, UCS Director shows contextual 
actions available for the infrastructure being investigated. As shown in the figure, you can 
take several actions on an individual blade, including Power On or Off and Associate or 
Disassociate. 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   355
12
Figure 12-2 Contextual Actions in Cloud Infrastructure Reports 
Take note of the option to view details of the blade, an action that is typically also available 
by double-clicking an item in a table. This action is what will drill deeper into the infrastruc-
ture in question. Figure 12-3 shows some of the details available for an individual blade 
within UCS Director, in particular the type of interface cards installed in the blade. You can 
see in the figure that once again we can click View Details to see details of the VIC itself, 
and in Figure 12-4 the logical network interface cards (NIC) that have been created on the 
Cisco VIC are displayed. It is important to remember when working with cloud infrastruc-
ture reports that there is often more information available than what is originally displayed. 
Get into the habit of looking for links and buttons to view details. 
Figure 12-3 UCS Blade Details 
Figure 12-4 Network Interface Card Details 
Now that you have an understanding of how to work with cloud infrastructure reports, let’s 
explore some of the most useful reports that you will leverage within UCS Director when 
managing both physical and virtual infrastructure. 

356  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Physical Infrastructure 
Within the Physical interface menu, you will find options for Compute, Storage, and 
Network. Each option will enable you to drill into and investigate the physical infrastruc-
ture making up your deployment. You can see the Physical > Compute view in Figure 12-5 
with a UCS account selected. The first thing to note about the interface is that the organiza-
tion in the left panel is based on the Site > Pod > Account hierarchical structure used within 
UCS Director. For example, the deployment used in the figure has two sites, Richfield Lab 
and Southfield Lab. Within the Richfield Lab site, there are six pods, ACI Cloud, Cloud 
Management, Dev Cloud, General Lab, Mini Cloud, and Remote Sites; however, not all 
pods contain compute accounts. Also note that there are two top-level objects that are not 
sites themselves. The first is Unassigned Pods, which is a special object that will contain any 
pods that are not specifically assigned to a site object. And the second is Multi-Domain 
Managers, where you will find accounts like UCS Central that can potentially span across 
multiple pods and sites. 
Figure 12-5 Physical > Compute View 
UCS Compute Reports
When working with Cisco UCS accounts, you will find many of the interesting reports and 
interfaces available within an organization. Service profile templates, policies, and pools all 
exist within a specific organization because the UCS data model is inherently multitenant in 
structure. In Figure 12-6 you can see all the report options for a specific organization, the 
root org in the figure. Displayed is the vNIC Templates report, and take note of the Add 
button available in the display. Another key feature you can leverage in many, but not all, 
infrastructure reports is the ability to make ad hoc changes to the configuration of infra-
structure elements. Here, if you choose to add a new vNIC template within UCS Director, 
the dialog box shown in Figure 12-7 will be displayed. Within this interface you can specify 
all the details related to the new template, and upon clicking Submit, it will immediately be 
configured within the UCS Manager account. 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   357
12
Figure 12-6 UCS Organization vNIC Templates and Reports 
Figure 12-7 Add New vNIC Template Dialog Box
Service profiles are probably the most important object within UCS Manager, and UCS 
Director makes it very easy to view, manage, and add new service profiles using the 
Infrastructure Reports. In Figure 12-8 we have moved to the Service Profiles tab under 
the same root organization view. Here you can see the four service profiles currently cre-
ated within the system, along with many important details, including association state and 
assigned server. 

358  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 12-8 Service Profiles Report 
Take special note of the Group/User field in the display. Many objects within UCS Director 
can be assigned to a specific user or group. When an object like a service profile is assigned 
to a group, there are two main results. The first is that when a member of the group, or 
the user, logs in to the end-user portal, they will be able to see the object in their interface 
under physical resources and take any supported actions on the object. The second is that 
all chargeback reports and billing calculations will start including that object. Some of the 
objects that can be assigned to a user or group include virtual machines, UCS service pro-
files, VLANs, and LUNs. 
Physical Network Reports
Now let’s move to Physical > Network and investigate some of the valuable reports fea-
tures for administrating that part of the infrastructure. The initial view presented here, 
shown in Figure 12-9, is similar in organization to what we saw with Physical > Compute 
in Figure 12-5. Figure 12-9 also highlights an important characteristic of UCS Director: its 
multivendor capabilities. UCS Director supports not only Cisco infrastructure in compute, 
network, and storage, but also many other vendors used in enterprises (to see the hardware 
compatibility list for UCS Director, visit Cisco.com). In Figure 12-9 you can see that an F5 
BIG-IP Virtual Edition Load Balancer has been added to the ACI Cloud pod. 
Figure 12-9 Physical > Network View  

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   359
12
Within UCS Director, physical network objects include both Ethernet and Fibre Channel 
switches, security devices, load balancers, and SDN controllers such as the Cisco 
Application Policy Infrastructure Controller (APIC). In Figure 12-10 you can see the VLANs 
report for a Cisco Nexus 5000 Series Switch. Though it would be more common to leverage 
the infrastructure automation capabilities to build a workflow to add a new VLAN to all 
switches in your data center, you can very easily view and add or remove VLANs within the 
cloud infrastructure report view of UCS Director. 
Figure 12-10 Cisco Nexus VLANs Report 
Figure 12-11 shows the Interfaces report on the same physical switch. This view makes it 
very easy to see the current state of all the interfaces on an individual switch, as well as 
make live configuration changes. Some of the useful actions available in the interfaces con-
text include 
■ Create and manage port channel interfaces 
■ Enable/disable ports (that is, no shutdown/shutdown) 
■ Configure and update VLAN trunk interfaces 
Figure 12-11 Cisco Nexus Interfaces Report 
The last report we’ll look at with this Nexus switch is the L2 Neighbors report shown in 
Figure 12-12. A common operations task for network administration is to identify con-
nected devices to an individual switch. This report displays details from Cisco Discovery 
Protocol (CDP) and Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP) tables on the switch. And in 

360  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
cases where you need to locate a device that may not run one of these protocols, a MAC 
Address Table report is also available. 
Figure 12-12 Cisco Nexus L2 Neighbors Report 
When working with Fibre Channel switches, including both Cisco MDS/Nexus and Brocade 
switches, UCS Director includes reports for viewing and managing SAN zones, zonesets, and 
device aliases just as easily as managing VLANs and trunks.
Network Service Devices 
Moving to network service devices, let’s take a look at what UCS Director provides for an 
F5 BIG-IP device. UCS Director will never fully replace or replicate the features available 
in an underlying element manager for any supported device, and that is true for both Cisco 
and third-party devices. With this in mind, UCS Director’s support for the BIG-IP appliances 
is targeted at enabling basic levels of self-service for private cloud use cases where load-
balancing features are desired. Figure 12-13 shows the Virtual Servers report, including a 
Create button to create new virtual servers. UCS Director also supports the ability to modify 
or delete a selected virtual server. 
Figure 12-13 BIG-IP Virtual Servers Report
A virtual server requires a pool of real servers that are actually providing the service 
being load balanced. In Figure 12-14 you can see the Pool Members report available by 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   361
12
double-clicking, or by clicking View Details, an individual pool from the Pool report. 
UCS Director also provides the ability to add and remove entries from a pool, along with 
displaying the current details. 
Figure 12-14 BIG-IP Pool Members Report 
Cisco Application Centric Infrastructure
Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI) is the Cisco software-defined networking (SDN) 
platform for the data center and enables network configuration and management to be 
done through a policy definition, rather than via explicit per-device configuration. A data 
center network fabric built with ACI may include anywhere from four to hundreds of indi-
vidual physical switches, but the entire network is managed as a single object through the 
APIC. This makes ACI an excellent network for building an enterprise cloud, or simply for 
data center automation. 
Although ACI’s use of policy and objects to define and describe network configurations is 
beyond the scope of this book and the CLDADM exam, we will highlight some key cloud 
infrastructure reports available within UCS Director. Similar to the use of organizations 
within Cisco UCS Manager, APIC is built to be a multitenant network fabric, and the most 
important reports and policy elements are found within a Tenant object. Figure 12-15 shows 
the Tenant details for a tenant called CloudAdmins in this fabric. You can see in the figure 
the large number of reports available at the Tenant level, with the Application Profile report 
visible. The Application Profile (also called Application Network Profile, or ANP) is the 
main object within ACI that describes an individual network construct. If you click View 
Details on an individual ANP, you will be able to investigate the endpoint groups (EPG) that 
make up the tiers of the Application Profile, as can be seen in Figure 12-16. 
Figure 12-15 Cisco APIC Tenant Details Report 

362  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 12-16 Cisco APIC Application Profile Details Report 
Physical Storage
Out of the box, UCS Director supports storage arrays from several vendors, including EMC, 
NetApp, and IBM. In Figure 12-17 you can see details for an EMC VNX 5500 that is being 
managed by UCS Director. As with the compute and network components, reports are avail-
able for many of the different elements of the storage configuration, including the disks, 
volumes, and file systems providing the storage resources being consumed by servers and 
applications. 
Figure 12-17 EMC VNX Summary and Reports 
Similarly to how you can add and manage elements such as VLANs and service profiles 
from within UCS Director, you can use UCS Director to manage LUNs inside of a storage 
account, as shown in Figure 12-18. 
Figure 12-18 EMC VNX LUNs Report 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   363
12
In addition to the storage vendors supported natively by UCS Director, other vendors are 
using the available Software Development Kit (SDK) for UCS Director to provide installable 
plug-ins to manage other third-party storage. Hitachi, Pure Storage, and Nimble all have 
built and made plug-ins available. 
Virtual Infrastructure 
Cloud infrastructure reports for virtual infrastructure are organized and leveraged just like 
their physical infrastructure counterparts. Located under the Virtual interface menu are 
options for Compute, Storage, and Network that lead to the details for the different virtual 
accounts, or cloud accounts, added to UCS Director. Although the specific reports avail-
able depend on the hypervisor platform in use, many, but not all, of the following examples 
from VMware vCenter–based clouds apply to Microsoft Hyper-V and Red Hat KVM 
clouds as well. 
You will most likely find the most valuable and useful reports under Virtual > Compute. 
Under this menu, details related to the clusters, host nodes, virtual machines, templates, and 
much more are all available, as shown in Figure 12-19. When looking at the cloud account 
at the top level, the individual tabs for items such as VMs (displayed in the figure) will 
include all objects in the cloud. Often you will find that you are interested in a subset of 
details pertaining to a specific vDC, cluster, or host. Though you could use the Advanced 
Filter options in the report to find the data you are looking for, you will likely find it easier 
to drill into a cluster or host and view the VMs report from within that context first. 
Figure 12-19 Virtual > Compute VMs Report 
In Figure 12-20, you will find another VMs report, but this time it is based on drilling first 
into a cluster, and then into a host node of that cluster. You will find it important to be able 
to quickly narrow down the large scope of physical and virtual objects to what is relevant 
at a given point in time, and this technique will make it much easier to do so. Also notice 
in Figure 12-20 how these reports are actionable as well as informative. By selecting VMs 
from the list, you have access to a large number of lifecycle actions through UCS Director’s 
administrator and end-user portals. 

364  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 12-20 Host Node VMs Report 
And to show the depth of details available within UCS Director, Figure 12-21 shows the 
result of double-clicking one of the VMs in the previous report to investigate further. Tabs 
such as vNICs (shown in the figure), Disks, VM Snapshots, Service Request Details, and 
more are all available to view more details.
Figure 12-21 Virtual Machine Details vNICs Report 
Virtual Infrastructure–Specific Reports
Numerous very useful reports are available for virtual compute, storage, and network that 
mirror the reports available with physical infrastructure. However, there are also some 
reports and options available only for the virtual accounts that are worth spending time 
looking at. 
First, there are the Top 5 Reports, available from the tab of the same name when looking 
at a cloud account in the Virtual > Compute menu. Figure 12-22 shows an example of the 
Top 5 Report named VMs With Most CPU Usage. There are Top 5 Reports available that 
look at characteristics at the VM, group, host, and vDC levels that will allow you to find 
the largest consumers of cloud CPU, memory, and disk resources. The Top 5 Reports for 
groups and vDCs with the most VMs are also great for finding the biggest overall con-
sumers of the cloud. 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   365
12
Figure 12-22 Top 5 Report—VMs With Most CPU Usage 
The second type of unique report worth looking at is the Stack View available for individual 
virtual machines. The Stack View takes advantage of UCS Director’s unique look across the 
data center infrastructure stack, and combines details from the virtual machine, hypervisor, 
and physical infrastructure into a single view that indicates all the resources across the data 
center that are involved in delivery of an individual virtual machine. You can access the 
Stack View as a toolbar action after you’ve selected a virtual machine, as shown in Figure 
12-23. The report will open within the UCS Director window, also seen in Figure 12-23. 
Starting at the top with the VM’s operating system and then moving down through the 
layers, Stack View describes the hard disks and network adapters used by the VM, which 
hypervisor hosts, data stores, port groups, and virtual switches are being leveraged, and then 
finally the physical compute blade, LUN and Storage Process, and physical switch involved. 
This unique look at a virtual machine’s resources can be very powerful when identifying 
potential causes for problems, or scope of impact during a failure. 
Figure 12-23 Virtual Machine Stack View 

366  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Another collection of reports that can be very helpful to a UCS Director administrator are 
the Map Reports. Like Top 5 Reports, Map Reports are available at the Virtual > Compute 
cloud account level. Map Reports present a color-coded view of the utilization of the 
physical cloud resources, including hosts, CPU, memory, and storage. Figure 12-24 shows a 
sample Map Report called CPU Utilization Map, which depicts the CPU utilization across 
a cloud account. In this single view, each hypervisor host is represented by a box in the 
image. The relative size of the box indicates the overall CPU capacity for the host in rela-
tion to the other hosts. This makes it very easy to see the hosts with the largest and smallest 
overall CPU horsepower. Within a host, each virtual machine active is represented by a box, 
where the size relates to the number of vCPUs configured and the color represents how 
utilized they are. The colors range from green to red, with red indicating a VM with fully 
utilized vCPU resources. In Figure 12-24, the host represented by the box in the lower-right 
corner has a VM (Cisco Prime Collaboration) in the middle with a very highly utilized CPU 
(displayed in red). 
Figure 12-24 CPU Utilization Map Report 
Figure 12-25 shows the Storage Usage Map Report. In this report, each data store is repre-
sented as a box one time, no matter how many hosts the data store may reside on. In this 
image, there is once again a single element (datastore1) that is very highly utilized, and it has 
been selected in the view so that its details are shown in the upper-right corner. 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   367
12
Figure 12-25 Storage Usage Map Report 
The five Map Reports available in the Report drop-down list are
■ CPU Utilization Map
■ Memory Utilization Map 
■ VM Density 
■ Inactive VMs 
■ Storage Usage 
The last of the unique reports available in the Virtual > Compute interface to cover are 
found on the More Reports tab with a cloud account selected. You will find a More 
Reports tab when looking at several other types of virtual and physical infrastructure;  
however, the variety of reports is unique to virtual compute accounts. 
Three types of reports are available in More Reports: 
■ Tabular Reports: Provide details such as licensing, end of support, compatibility, and 
general status information across the cloud. 
■ Instant Reports: Provide graphical representations of the performance of the cloud; 
these reports are covered in more detail in Chapter 14.
■ Trending Reports: Provide some visibility into the historical performance and changes 
to the environment over time. There are Trending Reports that look at VM numbers and 
changes, CPU and memory utilization, snapshot file sizes, and host nodes. You can view 
the data over configurable time ranges up to a month back. Figure 12-26 shows an exam-
ple Trending Report for the Number of VMs over the Last Month. The slider bars below 
the graph enable you to drill in and adjust the view of the report to narrow the scope to 
look at spikes and valleys in the trend. 

368  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 12-26 Trending Report Number of VMs 
CloudSense Analytics 
The cloud infrastructure reports available within UCS Director are very powerful and 
informative, but they do not provide all the reporting functionality needed for cloud 
administration. One limitation is that they are always very limited in scope, as they target 
a single element of the cloud. For example, you can get a report of all virtual machines 
assigned to a group or a report of all service profiles assigned to a group, but there is no 
infrastructure report that will show you both in a single report. Second, with the excep-
tion of the trending information available for cloud accounts, all the infrastructure 
reports show the current state of the cloud infrastructure when you pull up the report. 
Outside of exporting the data from UCS Director, there is no way to capture historical 
information using infrastructure reports. 
CloudSense Analytics provide another mechanism for reporting within UCS Director that 
can help fill the gaps in capabilities of basic cloud infrastructure reports. A CloudSense 
report combines data available from different UCS Director infrastructure reports into a 
single view, and allows reports to be generated and saved to store a snapshot of the state 
of the cloud at any point in time. For example, the Group Infrastructure Inventory Report 
provides the administrator a single report for an individual group identifying all the servers, 
service profiles, storage volumes, virtual machines, and port groups assigned to that group 
across all the sites and pods managed by UCS Director. 
The primary method to access the CloudSense reports is from the CloudSense > Reports 
menu, as shown in Figure 12-27. However, you will find a CloudSense tab available when 
looking at some virtual and physical accounts in other areas of UCS Director. Also under the 
CloudSense menu are two other options, Assessments and Report Builder. Report Builder 
is just what its name implies, a method to construct your own CloudSense templates from 
different reports available within UCS Director. Under Assessments you can generate the 
Virtual Infrastructure Assessment report that provides feedback on several checks that UCS 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   369
12
Director performs on the health of the underlying infrastructure to gauge its capability to  
support a private cloud with VMware vCenter. These checks include verifying clock synchro-
nization between vCenter, UCS Director, and vSphere hosts, VMware Tools presence in tem-
plates, and compliance to hardware compatibility lists for the physical servers in use. 
Figure 12-27 CloudSense Reports 
The CloudSense reports available out of the box with UCS Director (as of version 5.3) include 
■ Application Container Report
■ Billing Report for a Customer 
■ Cisco C880M4 Inventory Report
■ EMC Storage Inventory Report 
■ Group Infrastructure Inventory Report 
■ HyperV Cloud Utilization Summary 
■ IBM Storwize Inventory Report
■ NetApp Storage Inventory Report 
■ NetApp Storage Savings Per Group 
■ NetApp Storage Savings Report 
■ Network Impact Assessment Report
■ Organization Usage of Virtual Computing Infrastructure
■ PNSC Account Summary Report
■ Physical Infrastructure Inventory Report for a Group 
■ Service Request Statistics
■ Service Request Statistics Per Group 
■ Storage Dedupe Status Report
■ Storage Inventory Report for a Group
■ Thin Provisioned Space Report
■ UCS Data Center Inventory Report
■ VM Activity Report By Group
■ VM Performance Summary
■ VMware Cloud Utilization Summary
■ VMware Host Performance Summary
■ Virtual Infrastructure and Assets Report 

370  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Once a report is generated, it is saved within UCS Director and available to be accessed at 
any point in the future until it is deleted. Reports can be viewed or emailed in either HTML 
or PDF format. CloudSense reports can be generated manually by the administrator or auto-
matically based on a schedule. 
Now that you have an understanding of what CloudSense reports are, let’s take a look at 
some sample reports available. 
As your cloud grows and is used, you will need to monitor its utilization and track its con-
sumption and available resources such as CPU, memory, and storage space. The VMware 
Cloud Utilization report is very useful for tracking this information on a per cloud account 
basis. Select the report in the menu and generate it for one of your cloud accounts. Figures 
12-28 and 12-29 show some of the data that is provided by this report. In this report, over-
all capacity, provisioned capacity, reserved capacity, and used capacity are all indicated in 
easy-to-read graphs. 
Figure 12-28 VMware Cloud Utilization Report: CPU and Memory

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   371
12
Figure 12-29 VMware Cloud Utilization Report: Storage 
A second useful report is VM Activity Report By Group, which can highlight the groups 
that have deployed the most VMs to your cloud, including details on active/inactive VMs, 
CPU utilization, and memory utilization. Figure 12-30 is an example of this report show-
ing the distribution of the consumption among several groups in our cloud. The entries 
for Default Group indicate virtual machines discovered by UCS Director but currently not 
assigned to any particular group. 
Figure 12-30 VM Activity Report By Group 

372  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The last CloudSense report that we will look at is Billing Report for a Customer, which is 
best discussed as part of the “UCS Director Chargeback” section coming up next. 
UCS Director Chargeback
A major goal of most enterprise IT executives as part of a cloud initiative is to implement 
some form of chargeback to the business. The traditional method for budgeting and pay-
ing for hardware, software, maintenance, and manpower to design, build, and maintain data 
centers and IT systems has focused on IT as a cost center or as a simple cost of business. 
When an enterprise’s governance is modeled in this way, a project to implement or upgrade 
a major system may include some incremental budget for the IT needs at inception; how-
ever, ongoing maintenance and support of the infrastructure are often the responsibility of 
enterprise IT going forward. This results in a constant pressure on IT staff to learn how to 
do more and more with less budget and resources, and this is not seen as a viable long-term 
strategy in most organizations. 
Many organizations are using private cloud projects as a catalyst for changing this tradi-
tional model, enabling them to begin to replicate the operating expense model of IT that is 
the standard for public cloud providers. In this model, application owners, lines of business, 
or developers pay for their consumption of IT resources based on some agreed-upon metric 
and rate scale. This has benefits for both the consumers of the private cloud and the enter-
prise IT staff who is building and managing it. 
For the consumers of cloud services, their initial investment is much lower than in a tradi-
tional project. Many projects today have unclear potential for success or impact on the busi-
ness, and the typical model of large initial investment before a project proves its worth has 
pushed these projects to services such as public cloud. With a private cloud modeled for 
operating expenses like a public cloud, the line of business can align its spend with the value 
the project is offering through its lifetime. 
With a private cloud, enterprise IT no longer is burdened with the cost of never-ending sup-
port and maintenance of applications and services that are deployed to their data centers. 
There is a monetary incentive for lines of business to diligently age out and move to end-
of-life status systems that are no longer providing value, rather than maintain them indefi-
nitely. Enterprise IT can also begin to move away from being seen as a cost center pulling 
money from an enterprise’s bottom line. Most organizations won’t want to see enterprise IT 
become a profit center, unless their business involves delivery of IT services to consumers. 
However, building a balanced IT budget where their expenses are offset by the paid con-
sumption of services from the lines of business is a very reasonable and achievable goal. 
To effectively implement chargeback or showback, an organization must tackle two chal-
lenges. First, there is a need for a technology platform that can monitor and track consump-
tion of IT resources at a granular level that aligns with consumption, and then output this 
data as consumable reports. The metrics tracked will vary by organization, but common 
ones include the number of virtual machines and physical servers in use, CPU and memory 
consumption from the compute resources, data storage consumed, and network traffic 
generated. The granularity of billing will also be a major factor to determine. Hourly, daily, 
weekly, and monthly intervals for basing charges are all possible options for private clouds, 
while many public clouds track based on hourly usage. 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   373
12
Second, and significantly more difficult for most organizations, is determining what to actu-
ally charge for the consumption of resources in the cloud. The operation of a private cloud 
requires significant resources for design, engineering, and operations that are difficult, if not 
impossible, to directly bill to end users; however, they must be accounted for. Also, there 
are power, cooling, and facility charges that need to be addressed as part of the rate sched-
ule. This means that even for organizations that have a good idea of what the compute, net-
work, and storage costs are for a data center, work must be done to attach the less concrete 
costs into the rate schedule for the elements that can be easily tracked and metriced. Lastly, 
just because you could track and charge based on kilobyte of data transferred, megabyte of 
storage consumed, and gigahertz of process power utilized, that doesn’t mean that there is a 
benefit to the organization to track at that level. 
Although very important in developing a chargeback strategy for an enterprise, discussing 
how an organization might answer the second of these challenges is outside the scope of the 
CLDADM exam and this book. You will learn in the following sections about the capabili-
ties in Cisco UCS Director to build models and rate schedules for implementing a charge-
back policy, how to ensure the policy is enforced by the platform, and options for generat-
ing bills and reports per group or tenant consuming resources. 
Cost Models 
Once your organization has determined which metrics to track, over what duration to bill, 
and how much to charge, the next step is to implement and enforce that Cost Model in 
your cloud. Cisco UCS Director offers you a very flexible method for building differenti-
ated Cost Models based on a number of factors. 
In Chapter 9, “Automating Cloud Infrastructure with UCS Director,” you learned about 
the virtual data center (vDC) and its related policies in UCS Director that govern details 
for how end users can order resources, as well as how they are deployed to the physical 
and virtual infrastructure. One of the optional configurable parameters of the vDC that 
Chapter 9 discussed is the Cost Model policy. Like other policies in UCS Director, a Cost 
Model is a reusable policy element that you configure and then apply to the vDCs to 
which it should apply. This means that in your deployment, you could have different Cost 
Models for different groups, or even for different vDCs for a single group. This is actually 
very typical and expected in a cloud deployment, as performance characteristics, service-
level agreements (SLA), or response times could differ across groups and vDCs, justifying 
higher or lower costs. 
Navigate to Policies > Virtual/Hypervisor Policies > Service Delivery to find the Cost 
Models tab. An initial installation of UCS Director will have a Default Cost Model 
with each possible metric set to zero dollars. Click the Add button to create a new 
Cost Model, as seen in Figure 12-31. The first decision and configuration you will need 
to make after providing a name and optional description for the policy is the Charge 
Duration, or how often UCS Director will take an average of consumption and record the 
charge to the database. Options include Hourly, Daily, Weekly, Monthly, and Yearly. This 
will have a significant impact on the chargeback policies for your organization. On one 
hand, the longer the charge duration, the less often and less data UCS Director will need 
to track while monitoring usage. Fewer bills would need to be generated, and IT might 

374  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
have an easier time determining costs per metrics. However, there is a downside to using 
a longer charge duration. End users could end up paying exaggerated bills for resources 
that were used for a very short time. Consider a developer who regularly creates and 
deletes virtual machines several times a day, each lasting only a few hours. With a charge 
duration of daily, each virtual machine would result in a full day’s charge, despite being 
in use for only a fraction of the day. This would be exaggerated for weekly or monthly 
durations. On the other hand, for a private cloud deployment, it might not make sense to 
track and bill based on hourly usage in the same way a public cloud provider might. 
Figure 12-31 New Cost Model 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   375
12
With the Charge Duration configured, you will then begin setting the actual dollar (or what-
ever local currency is in use) costs for the identified metrics. A UCS Director Cost Model 
is used to charge for both virtual and physical servers, and it provides both coarse and 
granular options for calculating costs. On the coarse end of the spectrum, you can assign a 
one-time, initial cost for ordering a new server, as well as options for tracking active or inac-
tive (that is, powered on or off) virtual machines with different rates. More granular options 
are available for tracking CPU, memory, and storage consumption by virtual and physical 
servers. Virtual servers have an additional metric of network bandwidth consumption, while 
physical servers can assign costs based on full- or half-width blades. Figures 12-32 and 
12-33 (along with Figure 12-31) show the full Cost Model interface. 
Figure 12-32 New Cost Model Virtual Server Metrics 

376  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 12-33 New Cost Model Physical Server Metrics
Once the Cost Model (or Cost Models) has been created, it won’t have any effect until 
it is applied to vDCs. As when applying other policies, navigate to Policies > Virtual/
Hypervisor Policies > Virtual Data Centers and either edit an existing vDC or create a new 
one. Then, as shown in Figure 12-34, choose the appropriate Cost Model for the vDC. You 
can also indicate by checking the box whether you wish for cost estimates to be included in 
Service Request Summary tabs and email templates. 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   377
12
Figure 12-34 Applying Cost Model to vDC
The decision to implement Cost Models is not an all or nothing one. In a given deploy-
ment, you could have some vDCs with no Cost Model, others with a very basic and coarse 
Cost Model, and others with complex and granular Cost Models all for a single group. This 
capability enables organizations to implement very flexible options as they begin to roll out 
chargeback solutions. 
Chargeback Reports
Configuring and applying a Cost Model is just the beginning of the chargeback deploy-
ment. You must also have a way to investigate the metrics that are being tracked, and gener-
ate bills for customers, whether they are actually being paid or just used for informational 
purposes. The majority of the information you will want to see as an administrator is found 
under the Organizations > Chargeback menu. From this interface you can investigate 
chargeback details at the entire deployment level (All User Groups), at the group level, or at 
an individual vDC level. At each level you’ll find Current and Previous Month Summaries as 
well as several reports containing different levels of detail, ranging from month-by-month 
totals, down to individual metrics per virtual machine. 
Figure 12-35 shows the Chargeback tab from an individual group. The number of columns 
displayed has been reduced to highlight several of the cost columns; however, by default 
the report includes the individual metrics used to generate the costs as well. In this report, 
notice how it provides details per virtual machine, per monthly billing cycle, the associated 
costs per metric (such as Active and Inactive status), and the total cost. This type of report 
can be very helpful for a group to identify which of their resources are resulting in the high-
est bills, and why. 

378  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 12-35 Chargeback Report for a Group  
The Chargeback reports also include some very helpful Summary dashboards to get a 
glimpse at the current and previous months’ data. In Figure 12-36 an example Current 
Month Summary page is shown, providing a very quick one-page view to understand the 
overall status for the group’s current month utilization. A similar dashboard is available 
showing the Previous Month Summary. 
Figure 12-36 Current Month Summary  
The last report to look at here is the CloudSense report mentioned in a previous section. 
The Customer Billing Report is intended to be generated monthly per group or tenant in the 
cloud and provides a breakdown of the charges accrued through the month by the group. 
Figure 12-37 shows a pie chart view of the costs across categories, and in Figure 12-38 the 
tables of raw data are visible for deeper analysis by the customers. 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   379
12
Figure 12-37 CloudSense Billing Report – Pie Chart
Figure 12-38 CloudSense Billing Report – Data
Budget Policy
Having configured and deployed Cost Models and viewed the consumption reports, the 
next challenge you will likely be assigned is to provide some mechanism to limit active 
cloud consumption by a group based on some predefined budget. UCS Director provides a 
mechanism for individual groups to be assigned a monthly budget to be tracked in real time 
when new virtual resources are being ordered. 

380  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Before enabling the Budget Watch feature for a group, it is important to first establish the 
group’s monthly budget; otherwise, the group might find itself unable to order new re-
sources due to lack of budget. Navigate to Organizations > Summary to view and enter 
new budget entries. A single budget entry is composed of three main values: the group the 
entry applies to, the month and year for the budget line, and the dollar (or local currency) 
amount allocated for the group and month. Click the Add button make a new entry and 
display the form shown in Figure 12-39. Provide an entry name (which will be suffixed with 
the month and year), the group and dollar amount, and the time frame for the new entry. 
UCS Director allows you to easily configure repeated budget entries by allowing you to 
indicate a repeat count. Click Add, and the indicated group now has a budget to be tracked 
against for the months indicated. 
Figure 12-39 Add Budget Entry Form 
With the budget entries for your group or groups (once again, UCS Director allows budgets 
to be configured and enforced per group and not globally), you need to enable the Budget 
Watch feature on the group itself. This is done from the User Groups configuration tab 
located under Administration > Users and Groups. Select the group that will now be under 
Budget Watch and click the Budget Policy button to open the interface shown in Figure 
12-40. Then check the Enable Budget Watch check box and indicate whether the group 
should be allowed to go over budget. If the Allow Over Budget feature isn’t enabled, a group 
will be prevented from ordering new resources once UCS Director’s chargeback calculations 
indicate the group is out of resources for the month. 

Chapter 12: Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting   381
12
Figure 12-40 Enable Budget Watch for a Group 
Exporting Metering Data for External Integration
Although the chargeback and reporting capabilities in UCS Director are very flexible and 
powerful, UCS Director is not an accounting and finance system. Most enterprises truly 
looking to implement a chargeback strategy will want to have an integration to their corpo-
rate accounts payable system where actual bills and records of payment can be addressed 
as part of typical day-to-day IT management. Rather than build direct integrations into 
any number of potential finance systems customers may use, UCS Director provides a 
mechanism to export the metering and tracking data that can be ingested by the accounting 
system. Navigate to Administration > Integration and then to the Metering Data Export 
Setup tab and you will find a screen similar to the one shown in Figure 12-41. Here you can 
indicate whether to export to a CSV or Extensible Markup Language (XML) data format, an 
FTP server destination, and the rate at which to export data. With this setup, your account-
ing team can monitor this destination and import the data to be fed through the proper 
rules and policies before generating bills, or simply initiating internal budget transfers from 
the groups consuming cloud services to enterprise IT. 
Figure 12-41 Metering Data Export Setup 

382  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test. 
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 12-2 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 12-2 Key Topics for Chapter 12 
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Paragraph
Understand how to navigate the levels of infrastructure reports by 
double-clicking or using the View Details action.
355
Paragraph
Understand how to assign an object to a group and what the impact 
is for management and reporting. 
358
Paragraph
Explain the potential lifecycle actions for a virtual machine available 
within UCS Director.
363
Paragraph
Understand the key differences between a CloudSense and standard 
infrastructure report.
368
Paragraph
Understand how to use the different utilization reports to track 
consumption of cloud resources. 
370
Section
Understand UCS Director chargeback.
372
Paragraph
Understand how to create Cost Models within UCS Director. 
373
Paragraph
Understand how to apply Cost Models to a vDC.
376
Paragraph
Understand how to generate a Customer Billing Report and what data 
is included.
378
Section
Know the steps to apply Budget Policies to a group. 
379
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
chargeback, showback, Stack View, Map Report, Trending Report, CloudSense Analytics, 
Cost Model, Budget Watch

This page intentionally left blank 

This chapter covers the following topics:
4.0 Cloud Systems Management and Monitoring
4.3 Describe Cisco UCS Performance Manager
4.3.a Describe capacity planning
4.3.b Describe bandwidth monitoring
4.3.c Describe how host groups facilitate dynamic monitoring
4.5 Perform cloud monitoring using Cisco Prime Service Catalog, Cisco UCS Director, 
Cisco Prime infrastructure
4.5.a Describe fault monitoring
4.5.b Describe performance monitoring
4.5.c Describe monitoring of provisioning outcomes
4.6 Create monitoring dashboards
4.6.a Configure custom dashboards
4.6.b Configure threshold settings
5.0 Cloud Remediation
5.1 Configure serviceability options
5.1.a Configure syslog
5.1.b Configure NTP
5.1.c Configure DNS
5.1.d Configure DHCP
5.1.e Configure SMTP
5.2 Interpret Logs for root cause analysis
5.2.a Analyze fault logs
5.2.b Analyze admin logs
5.2.c Analyze application logs
5.3 Configure backups
5.3.a Configure database backup
5.3.b Configure database restore

CHAPTER 13
Cloud Performance and Capacity 
Management
As an administrator, one of the main challenges you face when your organization is deploy-
ing infrastructure for internal use is how to plan for capacity, which includes determining what 
assets are available and how much they’re utilized. The challenge is compounded with integrated 
infrastructures because you’re required to look across storage, network, compute, and virtual-
ization stacks to try and get a sense of how much capacity and performance is available within 
an integrated infrastructure solution. UCS Manager, UCS Central, UCS Director, and UCS 
Performance Manager all include key capabilities that can help you understand not only how 
much infrastructure has been consumed, but also when you hit particular thresholds and may 
require expansion of the cloud stack to accommodate new workloads. This chapter looks at the 
options in each of these UCS products to show how you can benefit from greater visibility into 
your cloud stack infrastructure. The chapter ends with a quick look at how to configure many of 
the serviceability options of the Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite.  
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this entire 
chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in doubt about 
your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge of the topics, read 
the entire chapter. Table 13-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and their corresponding 
“Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in Appendix A, “Answers 
to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 13-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
Performance Management in UCS Manager
1, 2
Performance/Capacity Management in UCS Central
3, 4
Capacity Management in UCS Director
5–7
Performance Management in UCS Performance Manager
8–10
Configuring Serviceability Options
11–13
Caution The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chapter. If 
you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, you should 
mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving yourself credit for an 
answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might provide you with a 
false sense of security.

386  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. What tabs in UCS Manager would you most likely frequent to look at performance 
information for your UCS systems? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Equipment tab
b. Servers tab
c. 
LAN tab
d. SAN tab
e. 
VM tab
f. 
Admin tab
2. Where would an administrator monitor Ethernet port channel bandwidth usage within 
UCS Manager?
a. 
Equipment tab
b. Servers tab
c. 
LAN tab
d. SAN tab
e. 
VM tab
f. 
Admin tab
3. Does UCS Central allow the administrator to easily see how many blades are associ-
ated to service profiles versus how many blades are free?
a. 
Yes, within the Domains > Equipment tab.
b. Yes, within the Statistics > Standard Reports view.
c. 
Yes, within the Servers section under Servers.
d. No, UCS Central does not provide this information.
4. UCS Central allows you to view statistics, out of the box, for which of the following 
using Standard Reports? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Average Power
b. Peak Power
c. 
Peak Fan Speed
d. Peak Temperature
e. 
Receive Traffic (Rx) for Fibre Channel
f. 
Transmit Traffic (Tx) for Fibre Channel
5. Within UCS Director, when looking at dashboard statistics for the Virtual > Compute 
view, which of the following statistics are viewable by default? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
VMs active vs. inactive
b. VM clones
c. 
VM performance statistics
d. Memory usage (total vs. consumed, per cloud)
e. 
CPU usage (total vs. consumed, per cloud)

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  387
13
6. CloudSense Reporting in a component of:
a. 
UCS Manager
b. UCS Central
c. 
UCS Director
d. UCS Performance Manager
7. Report Builder allows you to view reports in which formats? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
Historical
b. Snapshot
c. 
Tabular
d. Linear
e. 
Orthogonal
8. UCS Performance Manager can show performance information for which of the fol-
lowing? (Choose all that apply.)
a. 
VMware ESXi as a hypervisor
b. Hewlett-Packard HP C7000 Blades
c. 
Cisco Unified Computing System
d. IBM Storwize storage arrays
e. 
EMC storage arrays
f. 
NetApp storage arrays
9. UCS Performance Manager Topology view can show which of the following? 
(Choose all that apply.)
a. 
UCS domains
b. Storage arrays
c. 
Nexus fabrics
d. MDS fabrics
e. 
Brocade fabrics
10. What feature in UCS Performance Manager allows you to group together multiple 
virtual machines and/or physical hosts into a logical container and assess performance 
and fault impacts within the boundaries of that container?
a. 
UCS Performance Manager Application Containers
b. UCS Performance Manager Fenced Applications
c. 
UCS Performance Manager Containers
d. UCS Performance Manager Application Groups
11. What would a severity level of Warning indicate in a syslog message?
a. 
Immediate action needed
b. Non-urgent failure
c. 
An error will occur if no action is taken
d. Normal operating behavior

388  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
12. True or False. An NTP server of stratum 15 would be preferred over a stratum  
0 server.
a. 
True
b. False
13. Which details are provided to clients by the Baremetal Agent in a DHCP message? 
(Choose all that apply.) 
a. 
IP address
b. Subnet mask
c. 
PXE filename
d. TFTP server

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  389
13
Foundation Topics
Performance Management in UCS Manager
As the most basic element of your cloud stack, availability of compute is an important aspect 
to consider. The majority of organizations employ virtualization technology via hypervisors 
on their compute layer, which means compute is often one of the first elements to run out of 
capacity within an integrated infrastructure. This section focuses on the key capabilities pres-
ent in UCS Manager to assess performance and capacity. The section will look at both moni-
toring of hosts and the networking infrastructure within UCS Manager, such as the Ethernet, 
Fibre Channel, or Fiber Channel over Ethernet (FCoE) bandwidth used.
Monitoring Hosts/Blades
Understanding host utilization is one of the most important aspects of assessing cloud perfor-
mance. UCS Manager has a variety of built-in views that can help you gauge performance at 
the host level.
Monitoring Bandwidth
In UCS, it is important to be able to identify how much bandwidth an individual blade is 
using. The best way to view this information is to take the approach provided in the following 
steps. As a refresher, in UCS, only blades with an active service profile associated with them 
are powered on and able to run an operating system. Without the service profile association, 
a blade or compute node in UCS is simply sheet metal and silicon, waiting to be programmed.
Also, within UCS Manager, the user interface is divided into two panes, the navigation pane 
on the left and the action pane on the right, as shown in Figure 13-1.
Navigation Pane
Action Pane
Figure 13-1 Navigating in UCS Manager

390  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 1. 
In UCS Manager, navigate to the Servers tab. Click Service Profiles, and then 
navigate to a service profile. Note the name of the service profile you are look-
ing for.
Step 2. 
On the service profile’s General tab, you will see Associated Server or Blade 
on this pane, as seen in Figure 13-2. Note that, depending on firmware version 
and what object you are looking at in UCS Manager, you might see “associated 
server” or “associated blade.”
Figure 13-2 Service Profile General Tab
Step 3. 
With the associated server or blade selected in Step 2 in mind, click the 
Equipment tab of the navigation pane and navigate to the adapter you wish 
to inspect, such as Adapter 1, by expanding Chassis > Chassis N > Servers > 
Server N > Adapters > Adapter N.
Step 4. 
Click the (+) icon next to the subset of interfaces you want to see, such as host 
bus adapters (HBAs). Click the interface you want to view statistics for, such as 
HBA 1.
Step 5. 
In the action pane on the right, click the Statistics tab (see Figure 13-3). This 
shows you information about traffic performance for each virtual adapter on 
the UCS blade’s service profile. 
From this view, you’re able to determine performance of the individual adapters in the sys-
tem. You can also click the Chart tab to see various options to chart performance over time. 
Note that a very limited amount of data is collected here and that this view within UCS 
Manager isn’t meant to be a historical graph of this data. UCS Performance Manager is a 
better tool for longer-term performance trending over time.

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  391
13
Figure 13-3
UCS Manager HBA 1 Traffic Statistics
Monitoring CPU/Memory
Within UCS Manager, you can monitor environmental attributes only (not usage) of a 
system’s motherboard, CPU sockets, and memory DIMMs. Figure 13-4 shows a detailed 
view of navigating to Equipment > Chassis, Chassis 1 > Servers > Server 1 and clicking the 
Statistics tab in the action pane.
Figure 13-4 UCS Manager Motherboard, Memory, and Processor Environmental Details 

392  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Monitoring Other Components
There is also deep bandwidth monitoring information available for each UCS chassis’ 
IO Module (IOM). In systems where there is a potential for throughput contention (for 
example, a chassis that has heavy workloads but may only be using one uplink cable on each 
IOM, delivering 2 × 10 GbE, or 20 Gbps, of total bandwidth to a chassis). It is important, in 
situations where you may be experiencing slow throughput (VMs seeing SCSI timeouts or 
aborts as an example), to inspect the counters on the IO Module backplane ports that are 
connected to the particular blade in question. Figure 13-5 shows some of the counters avail-
able for capacity planning and monitoring purposes.
Figure 13-5 IOM Counters for Backplane Ports
Monitoring Infrastructure
Assessing performance on an individual blade level is important in situations where perfor-
mance of a particular host or VM running on a host needs to be monitored. Equally impor-
tant is the ability to ascertain the performance on the entire UCS system from a bandwidth 
utilization perspective. This is important to ensure that there is adequate Ethernet or Fibre 
Channel egress bandwidth available from the UCS Fabric Interconnects northbound, as well 
as to ensure the system isn’t oversubscribed. 

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  393
13
As a quick refresher, UCS Fabric Interconnects aggregate bandwidth, management, and 
configuration for up to 20 chassis and 160 blades (or a combination of a total of 160 
blades and UCS C-Series rackmount systems that are UCS Manager integrated). A pair of 
Fabric Interconnects and all connected chassis and rackmount systems are known as a UCS 
domain. In some cases when I/O gets very heavy in the environment, the need may arise 
to add additional bandwidth so monitoring domainwide system bandwidth (at the Fabric 
Interconnect level) is very important for the overall balance and performance in the system.
Monitoring Ethernet Bandwidth
Most UCS implementations utilize Ethernet port channels for northbound Ethernet traf-
fic leaving or entering the UCS Fabric Interconnect. UCS Manager enables you to monitor 
bandwidth at the individual port level as well as at the port-channel level.
To gain insight into how much bandwidth is being utilized on a per Ethernet uplink port 
basis, let’s first determine the interface role. Within UCS Manager, navigate to Equipment 
> Fabric Interconnects > Fabric Interconnect (A or B) > Fixed Module > Ethernet Ports. 
From here, as shown in Figure 13-6, you can determine which ports are network ports and 
which are chassis-facing ports. (Note that if you have an expansion module or modules in 
your Fabric Interconnect, you may have to navigate to that particular module to check traf-
fic.) In Figure 13-6, Ports 1 and 2 are network uplink modules.
Figure 13-6 Determining Interface (If) Role in UCS Manager

394  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Once the interface role has been determined, clicking the interface name in the navigation 
pane and choosing the Statistics tab in the action pane will show you all statistics for that 
interface, as shown in Figure 13-7.
Figure 13-7 Ethernet Uplink Single Port Statistics
Next, assuming the interfaces are in a port channel, navigate to the UCS Manager LAN 
tab in the navigation pane, and then drill down into LAN > LAN Cloud > Fabric A (or B) 
> Port Channels > Port Channel (name). In Figure 13-8, Port-Channel 1 is named aci1. 
Selecting Port-Channel 1 and clicking Statistics in the action pane will show all statistics for 
Port-Channel 1.
Figure 13-8 Port-Channel 1 Statistics

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  395
13
Monitoring Fibre Channel Bandwidth
Similar to the previous section where we looked at Ethernet statistics and interface informa-
tion, we can do the same for Fibre Channel interfaces in UCS Manager. Also, assuming the 
cloud environment is utilizing Cisco MDS Fibre Channel (FC) switches or Nexus switches 
supporting Fibre Channel as the next hop, FC port channeling is also supported. There is 
not support for FC port channeling in non-UCS Fibre Channel implementations.
To see individual interface statistics, navigate to Equipment > Fabric Interconnects > 
Fabric Interconnect (A or B) > Fixed Module > FC Ports. Select the correct FC Port num-
ber and click the Statistics tab in the action pane (see Figure 13-9). Note that if you have an 
expansion module or modules in your fabric interconnect, you may have to navigate to that 
particular module to check interface traffic. 
Figure 13-9 Fibre Channel Single Port Statistics

396  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
In addition, as discussed, with Cisco Fibre Channel products such as an MDS switch north 
of the UCS Fabric Interconnect, FC port channels can also be utilized. To view statistics 
for an FC port channel, in the navigation pane, navigate to SAN > SAN Cloud > FC Port 
Channels, click the name of the FC Port Channel, and then click the Statistics tab in the 
action pane. See Figure 13-10.
Figure 13-10 Fibre Channel Port Channel Statistics
Performance/Capacity Management in UCS Central
Some larger cloud environments may utilize UCS Central for UCS management. UCS 
Central is a centralized manager of multiple UCS domains. In a single UCS domain, UCS 
Manager resides on a pair of Fabric Interconnects and is where you connect to administer 
the system. Once you get into a handful of UCS domains (or dozens or hundreds), managing 
each domain by visiting the Fabric Interconnects only gives you 160:1 management scale (as 
each domain can grow to around 160 UCS rackmounts or blades total). As shown in Figure 
13-11, UCS Central is a virtual appliance that allows you to manage up to 10,000 total end-
points, scaling to dozens or hundreds of separate UCS domains.

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  397
13
Chicago
New York
L.A.
UCS Admin
View, Configure, Define, Place, Move
UCS Central
Virtual Appliance
 Information:
 - Faults
 - Events
 - Inventory
 - Statistics
 Configuration:
 - Service
   Profiles
 - Pools
 - Policies
 Information:
 - Faults
 - Events
 - Inventory
 - Statistics
 Configuration:
 - Service
   Profiles
 - Pools
 - Policies
 Information:
 - Faults
 - Events
 - Inventory
 - Statistics
 Configuration:
 - Service
   Profiles
 - Pools
 - Policies
Figure 13-11 UCS Central High-Level Logical View
Seeing Available Host Capacity
The interface of UCS Central, much like that of UCS Manager (discussed in the previous sec-
tion), has a navigation pane on the left and an action pane on the right. When you first log in 
to UCS Central, your default view will be of the Domains tab with the Equipment subtab in 
the navigation pane showing UCS Domains (see Figure 13-12). In the action pane, you will see 
an overview of all the UCS domains in your environment. This overview will show you how 
many hosts are currently used (in all domains registered with UCS Central) and how many are 
free. This can be very helpful in determining cloud capacity used and remaining.
Figure 13-12 UCS Central Servers In Use Versus Available

398  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Statistics and Reporting
UCS Central provides some ability to report on bandwidth utilization (Ethernet) at the UCS 
domain level to see which ports are the busiest. In addition, there are other standard reports 
that ship out of the box.
Standard Reports
In UCS Central, click Statistics in the menu bar to see Standard Reports and Custom 
Reports in the navigation pane, as shown in Figure 13-13.
Figure 13-13 UCS Central Statistics View for Reporting
Within the Standard Reports, you will see the following: 
■ Average Power
■ Peak Fan Speed
■ Peak Temperature
■ Receive Traffic (Rx)
■ Transmit Traffic (Tx)
To view the type of information available in these Standard Reports, click Receive Traffic 
(Rx), and then click the Open icon as highlighted in Figure 13-14. 

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  399
13
Figure 13-14 UCS Central Opening a Standard Report
Once the Receive Traffic (Rx) report is open, click the Run Report > To Load Data icon, as 
shown in Figure 13-15.
Figure 13-15 UCS Central Run Report Screen
Running the report will show you total bandwidth (Rx) used in the last 12 hours for each 
UCS domain. Figure 13-16 shows that UCS domain cloud-fi has used 1.88 TB of Ethernet 
Rx traffic.

400  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 13-16 UCS Central Receive Traffic (Rx) Report
Custom Reports
Custom Reports within UCS Central can provide a wealth of valuable information to you as 
you look to understand traffic patterns in and out of your UCS-based cloud infrastructure. 
Step 1. 
Starting from the top-level Statistics menu, expand Custom Reports in the 
navigation pane, as shown in Figure 13-17. Note that you have the ability to 
create different groups of reports by clicking the Create Group button in the 
upper-right corner.
Figure 13-17 Opening Custom Reports in UCS Central

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  401
13
Step 2. 
Click Create Group and create a new group called New-Custom-Group, as 
shown in Figure 13-18. Click OK.
Figure 13-18 New Custom Group in UCS Central Custom Reports
Step 3. 
Navigate to the newly created group and click the Create Report icon, as 
shown in Figure 13-19.
Figure 13-19 Create Custom Report in UCS Central
In the Create Report dialog box that opens, you can create information from a variety 
of sources by choosing among the options available in the Report Type drop-down list, 
including
■ Cooling
■ Network
■ Power
■ Temperature

402  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
For the purposes of cloud capacity monitoring, let’s look deeper at the Network report 
type. 
Step 1. 
In the Create Report dialog box, shown in Figure 13-20, give the report a name 
of New-Net-Report.
Step 2. 
In the Report Type drop-down list box, select Network.
Step 3. 
In the Properties section, the Default View setting gives you the option to 
select either a Table view or a Chart view. Select the Chart radio button.
Step 4. 
For the Display setting, check both the Total Transmit (Tx) Traffic (Delta) and 
Total Receive (Rx) Traffic (Delta) check boxes.
Step 5. 
In the For drop-down list, select NICs.
Step 6. 
In the Duration drop-down list box, select Last 48 Hours.
Step 7. 
For the Context option, click Select Context and navigate to a UCS domain or 
domains that you would like to report on and select those domains.
Step 8. 
Your report settings should look similar to those shown in Figure 13-20. Click 
Save.
Figure 13-20 Custom Report Properties in UCS Central
Step 9. 
Once your New-Net-Report has been saved for New-Custom-Group, select it 
in the action pane and click the Open icon, as shown in Figure 13-21.

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  403
13
Figure 13-21 Opening New-Net-Report in UCS Central
Step 10. With the report opened, click the Run Report > To Load Data icon. Your 
report outlook should look similar to Figure 13-22.
Figure 13-22 New-Net-Report Output in UCS Central
Notice in the upper-right corner of the chart that you can toggle between 
Chart view and Table view for this data. Also notice that when you are 
working with this report, hovering over the values in the chart will show you 
their absolute values, which can be helpful for monitoring bandwidth trends 
over time.

404  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Capacity Management in UCS Director
As discussed earlier in this chapter, UCS Manager and UCS Central are good at showing 
real-time and historical performance monitoring for a variety of statistics. UCS Central also 
includes some capabilities for doing capacity management at the very coarse level of how 
many blades are consumed in a cloud offering. When you want to get more granular on 
capacity management, UCS Director has a lot of great information available. 
Dashboard Statistics
When you first log in to UCS Director as an admin, you’ll see the converged view of Sites 
and Pods. Navigate to Virtual > Compute and you’ll see a variety of useful statistics regard-
ing your cloud usage. See the example shown in Figure 13-23.
Figure 13-23 UCS Director All Clouds Dashboard View
The Summary tab in the action page shows statistics that include
■ Total number of clouds registered to UCS Director
■ Total memory footprint of all compute nodes in these clouds
■ Storage statistics including total combined capacity as well as free GB and free space as a 
percentage
Additionally, you can navigate to Physical > Compute in UCS Director to see compute 
statistics regarding the total number of UCS servers that are associated versus those that are 
unassociated, and the total number of servers and total number of chassis in the cloud.
CloudSense Reporting
As discussed previously, CloudSense reports within UCS Director give you a lot of power-
ful information and reporting capabilities. Within CloudSense, there are three different 
reporting areas, as shown in Figure 13-24:
■ Reports
■ Assessments
■ Report Builder

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  405
13
Figure 13-24 Reporting Areas Within CloudSense
Let’s take a quick look at each in turn.
CloudSense Reports in UCS Director
A vast number of reports are available out of the box, including (in UCS Director 5.3)
■ Application Container Report
■ Billing Report for a Customer
■ Cisco C880M4 Inventory Report
■ Group Infrastructure Inventory Report
■ Hyper V Cloud Utilization Summary
■ EMC, IBM Storwize, and NetApp Storage Inventory Reports
■ Reports for Service Request Statistics or SR statistics per Group
■ UCS Data Center Inventory Report
■ VM Activity Report by Group
■ VM Performance Summary
■ VMware Cloud Utilization Summary
■ VMware Host Performance Summary
■ Virtual Infrastructure and Assets Report
These give you, the cloud admin, a vast set of prebuilt reports to instantly understand 
capacity and utilization of resources within the cloud environment. Figure 13-25 shows  
the output of the VMware VM Performance Report. The report shows trends over time  
for CPU, memory, disk, and network usage.

406  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 13-25 UCS Director VMware VM Performance Report
CloudSense Assessments in UCS Director
Within Assessments in UCS Director, you will see the Virtual Infrastructure Assessment. 
Generating this report provides information such as Fault Counts by Severity, Fault Counts 
by Rule, Hardware Compatibility Information, and information about all clocks registered 
with UCS Director. As you will see in the configuring serviceability options section toward 
the end of this chapter, having all system time sources synchronized to a common NTP tar-
get can be very helpful when troubleshooting an issue across the multiple components of a 
Cisco cloud solution. Figure 13-26 shows output from the Virtual Infrastructure Assessment 
report.
Figure 13-26 Virtual Infrastructure Assessment Report

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  407
13
CloudSense Report Builder in UCS Director
Within Report Builder in UCS Director, you get an extremely powerful engine for building 
custom reports to understand both capacity and utilization of various cloud resources. 
Step 1. 
Within Report Builder, you must first add a template by clicking the Add 
Template icon. Doing so brings up the Add Template dialog box shown in 
Figure 13-27.
Figure 13-27 Report Builder Add Template Dialog Box
Step 2. 
Click the green + icon to open the Add Entry dialog box (see Figure 13-28). In 
this form, you have the option to select the reporting context for the report. 
Options in the Report Context drop-down list include
■ VDC (virtual data center)
■ Cloud (for example, the VMware hypervisor)
■ Physical Account
■ Multi Domain Manager (for example, UCS Central)
■ Global
■ Global Admin
Figure 13-28 UCS Director Report Builder Add Entry Dialog Box

408  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Step 3. 
To view a sample report, select Cloud as the Report Context, choose the cloud 
names in the Clouds drop-down list box, and select a few options by clicking 
the Report(s) Select button. For the report shown in Figure 13-28, we’ll select 
the following reports and set the Duration for Trend Reports field to Daily:
■ VMs with Under-Utilized CPU Usage
■ Trend: Storage Capacity, Used & Free
■ vDCs with the Most CPU Usage
■ VMs with Most Memory Usage
Step 4. 
Once you have added these entries successfully, click Submit, and then OK. 
Now, select the Report Builder Template you created and click the Generate 
Report icon, as shown in Figure 13-29. Click Submit.
Figure 13-29 UCS Director Generate Report Icon
Step 5. 
Give the report a Report Title and then click the Generate button.

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  409
13
Step 6. 
Click the View Reports icon, as shown in Figure 13-30.
Figure 13-30 UCS Director View Reports Icon
Step 7. 
Select the report you just created and click View Report. Choose the output 
format as HTML to view the report as shown in Figure 13-31.
Figure 13-31 UCS Director Custom-Report
As you can see, there is a very rich set of reporting resources available within UCS Director 
for understanding cloud capacity and consumption. Next, we’ll look at the features that 
exist in UCS Performance Manager.

410  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Performance Management in UCS Performance 
Manager
UCS Performance Manager is a product that was designed to address the question that 
too often arises when multiple performance management suites are used in an organiza-
tion. For example, the storage team may be using one tool to assess performance of the 
storage infrastructure, while the network team is using a separate tool to view the net-
work. The compute team uses a third tool, and perhaps hypervisor information is being 
monitored via a fourth tool. As is often the case, when performance issues arise, you 
are stuck trying to use your “decoder ring” across a variety of tools and vendors to try 
to assess performance impact. Further complicating matters, often if an application is 
impacted, it can be very hard to ascertain what infrastructure may be contributing (or not 
contributing) to the application issue. 
UCS Performance Manager was designed to help answer just such questions, giving you the 
ability to see into multiple aspects of the system and get a picture quickly of what is going 
on in the environment.
Cisco currently offers two versions of UCS Performance Manager. You should assess your 
needs to decide which version is right for you:
■ UCS Performance Manager Express: Covers only the physical and virtual compute plat-
form and the operating system
■ UCS Performance Manager: Covers physical and virtual compute, Fabric Interconnects, 
Ethernet and Fibre Channel switches, and supported storage arrays from EMC and 
NetApp
UCS Performance Manager is typically deployed as a virtual appliance using a VMware 
OVA package. It can also be installed via a self-installing ISO package for systems like 
Microsoft Hyper-V. Data is stored within the appliance, and the amount of vCPUs, memo-
ry, and storage you allocate to the VM is based on the number of systems being monitored, 
as summarized here:
■ Small UCS domain/site (1–50 servers): 4 vCPUs, 32 GB RAM, 50 GB storage
■ Medium UCS domain/site (51–100 servers): 8 vCPUs, 64 GB RAM, 100 GB storage
■ Large UCS domain/site (101–500 servers): 12 vCPUs, 96 GB RAM, 150 GB storage
Now let’s look at some of the features of UCS Performance Manager.
Dashboard 
When you first log in to UCS Performance Manager 1.x, use port 8080, which is the default 
port for login. Note that in USC Performance Manager 2.x, the port defaults to HTTP/
HTTPS standard port numbers of 80/443.

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  411
13
Upon logging in, you’ll be presented with the Dashboard pane. The GUI is made up of 
HTML5 portlets, and you have a variety of options available at first login, as shown in the 
upper right of Figure 13-32:
■ Reset Portlets: Return to the default view of UCS Performance Manager
■ Configure layout: Change the order of what is displayed on the Dashboard  
summary view
■ Add portlet: Add new portlets from the UCS PM database to the Dashboard  
summary view
■ Stop Refresh: Manually disable refreshing of portlets (which happen on a 30-second 
interval by default)
Also note in Figure 13-32 the navigation options at the top level from the home screen. You 
can navigate into Dashboard, Event, Infrastructure, Reports, and Advanced.
Figure 13-32 The Dashboard Summary View in UCS Performance Manager
Dashboard Topology
On the main Dashboard screen, click Topology (to the right of Dashboard) to see an over-
view of all the connected UCS domains in the navigation pane and two quick charts per 
domain (see Figure 13-33):
■ Overall Ethernet Bandwidth Utilization
■ Connected Ethernet Ports Bandwidth Utilization

412  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 13-33 Dashboard Topology View
Clicking different domain names or IP addresses will navigate you quickly through all the 
UCS domains being managed by UCS Performance Manager. In the action pane, you will see 
a view of the entire UCS domain as well as connections to LAN Cloud and SAN Cloud. This 
action pane can be zoomed in and out as necessary to drill into specific details of the system.
From this view, clicking any element in the action pane (such as a UCS chassis) will drill you 
into details on that particular element. In Figure 13-34, you are presented with the view of 
chassis-2 from domain 172.22.251.91. Here you can see blades, associated service profiles, 
and transmit and receive utilization.
Figure 13-34 Topology View Chassis Drill Down
Monitoring Infrastructure
Within UCS Performance Manager from the home screen, clicking the Infrastructure top-
level choice will take you into a list of all the devices in the system. Devices are classified by 
object type, such as Cisco UCS, Storage, Network, and Hypervisor. See Figure 13-35.

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  413
13
Figure 13-35 UCS Performance Manager Infrastructure View
Clicking any object will drill down into that object. In this example, we have clicked the first 
object in the view, /CiscoUCS system 10.87.34.15. From this next view, shown in Figure 
13-36, you will see very detailed information about the UCS system. In the navigation pane 
there is overview information of the system as well as some useful additional views:
■ Bandwidth Usage: Shows very detailed bandwidth information for chassis, SAN uplinks, 
LAN uplinks, direct-attached storage, as well as any Fabric Extenders (FEXs) attached to 
the UCS chassis. Reporting time frames are configurable to show statistics ranging any-
where from the last hour to the last day. In the example shown in Figure 13-36, we have 
clicked chassis-1. 
Figure 13-36 Bandwidth Usage View for chassis-1

414  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ Dynamic View: Generates a real-time view of all the components in the entire system 
being monitored by UCS Performance Manager. For example, if you are looking at a 
top-level object type of /CiscoUCS and you click Dynamic View, you will see all Service 
Profiles, Fabric Extenders, Fabric Interconnects, UCS Chassis, UCS Blades, UCS IO 
Cards, UCS Racks, and UCS Fabric Ports for the entire domain.
■ Topology: Takes you back to the same view you see in the Dashboard/Topology view 
for the particular element you have drilled into (shown previously in Figure 13-33).
■ Events: Shows all faults by severity level. This view can be queried, sorted, exported, and 
filtered in a variety of views. 
■ Components: Lists all the components that make up the top-level object. In our case, 
having clicked /CiscoUCS, we see all fans, blades, adapters, and all aspects of the entire 
UCS domain in the Components list.
This is a very quick overview of the information available in the Infrastructure view. 
For CCNA study, drill down on the available performance and capacity metrics within 
Infrastructure view and discover just how powerful and complete UCS Performance 
Manager is.
Application Groups
Often, understanding what infrastructure an application resides on in large organizations 
can be a daunting challenge. As an application becomes performance impacted, it often 
takes minutes, hours, or days to fully understand what storage array the application resides 
on, which Ethernet and Fibre Channel switches pass the application’s traffic, which UCS 
blade/domain the application resides in, etc. Application Groups within UCS Performance 
Manager can assist in the task of understanding all infrastructure comprising an application 
and, therefore, if any impacts or faults in the infrastructure could be the cause of an appli-
cation performance issue. 
Take the following steps to view an existing Application Group within UCS Performance 
Manager:
Step 1. 
From the top-level menu, click Infrastructure.
Step 2. 
In the navigation pane, expand Application Groups.
Step 3. 
Click an already defined Application Group. As you can see in Figure 13-37, 
clicking the AppGrp1 Application Group shows an application composed of 
five Windows Servers.

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  415
13
Figure 13-37 Application Groups
Here we can see that ucspm-vm-win3.ucsdemo.cisco.com has an event. Double-clicking the 
object shows that the VM is down (see Figure 13-38).
Figure 13-38 UCS Performance Manager Application Group VM Down
Application Groups give you a very powerful means to group pieces of infrastructure 
together in meaningful ways to understand the impact of traffic paths through devices as 
well as systems that support particular applications. Understanding all the components that 
make up a particular application can increase the awareness of the infrastructure support-
ing those applications (such as switches in the application path, storage, etc.), decrease time 
required to troubleshoot issues, and assist with capacity and performance monitoring.

416  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Available Reports in UCS Performance Manager
Finally, let’s look at reports available in UCS Performance Manager. The system comes 
with a variety of reports that you can view out of the box after you’ve added the infra-
structure you want to manage. These reports can provide valuable information to deter-
mine utilization of bandwidth, discover memory expansion opportunities for your UCS 
systems, compile a hardware inventory report, determine CPU and memory utilization 
for your systems, and much more. 
From the top-level menu, click Reports to see a list of reports available out of the box. 
Reports are grouped into four key areas:
■ Cisco UCS Capacity Reports
■ Cisco UCS Reports
■ Enterprise Reports
■ Performance Reports
Each reporting area is briefly discussed next in turn.
Cisco UCS Capacity Reports
Capacity Reports in UCS Performance Manager focus mostly on areas of bandwidth 
consumption within your UCS domains. Reports are available for Aggregate Bandwidth 
Utilization, Aggregate Port Pool Utilization, Bandwidth Utilization vs. Capacity, Interface 
Volume, Interface Utilization, and overall Port Utilization. Figure 13-39 shows a Bandwidth 
Utilization vs. Capacity report for a UCS Domain. It shows, for example, the system average 
for sys_switch-A Tx is 2.95 percent.
Figure 13-39 Bandwidth Utilization vs. Capacity Report
Cisco UCS Reports
The Cisco UCS Reports section of UCS Performance Manager shows free memory slots as 
well as hardware inventory per managed UCS domain. Figure 13-40 shows Free Memory 
Slots Report by UCS domain. Note that you can export these results to a CSV file.

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  417
13
Figure 13-40 Free Memory Slots Report
Enterprise Reports
Configuration parameters such as how many datapoints have been collected, how many 
devices are being managed, and what thresholds have been defined are all options in the 
navigation pane under the Enterprise Reports action pane in UCS Performance Manager.
Performance Reports
Performance Reports in UCS Performance Manager include Availability Report, which 
reports on overall availability of the system, CPU Utilization, Interface Utilization, and 
Memory Utilization, and Threshold Summary, which provides a summary view of all thresh-
olds set in the system. Figure 13-41 shows a CPU Utilization report organized by /Devices/
Server spanning a one-week reporting period.
Figure 13-41 CPU Utilization

418  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Configuring Serviceability Options
There is much more to providing an effective cloud than just installing the software that 
provides automation, management, and user portals. The goal is to build an easy-to-use 
cloud, but that doesn’t mean the cloud itself is a simple system that doesn’t require active 
monitoring, maintenance, and troubleshooting of problems. Serviceability refers to how 
the cloud operators go about these and other day-to-day tasks. Note that these are features 
that the end users of your cloud offering will likely never see, but they impact your ability 
as the operator of the cloud to provide the highest levels of SLAs for the cloud offering.
There are many tools, services, and network protocols that you will configure as part of 
your cloud setup that will aid in keeping it running well and serving clients. In this section 
we review some of the most common of these that you should become familiar with as you 
prepare for the CCNA Cloud exam. 
Syslog
Syslog has long been a standard for message and event logging by applications and network 
devices and is described in RFC 5424. The messages logged in syslog range from normal 
details about the operational status and processing of an application, to critical alarms indi-
cating failure conditions. Although most systems generate and store syslog messages locally 
by default, a highly recommended practice is to leverage a centralized logging server for 
combining logs from multiple systems in your organization. When deployed in the client/
server mode with a centralized syslog server, the syslog messages are typically sent over 
UDP port 514 or TCP port 6514. 
Leveraging a central syslog server provides two main benefits. First, it is much easier to 
search for patterns and correlate logs across systems when you view and report on them 
from a single interface. And second, one of the important times to access the syslog mes-
sages is when troubleshooting during a failure scenario. Often you may find it difficult or 
impossible to access the local syslog service in these states, and looking at the messages on a 
remote syslog server will provide details leading up to the error. 
Syslog messages are made up of several component parts used to provide detailed informa-
tion on the event being logged. Figure 13-42 provides an example message with the key 
parts identified. The Timestamp provides the date and time the message was created and 
is very important for correlating events across systems. The Facility describes the category 
and source of a message and an integer between 0 and 23 mapped to a value by the send-
ing system. RFC 5424 includes a recommended mapping of Facility numbers to uses, but it 
will not be uniform across all systems. The Severity is a numerical value ranging from 0 to 7 

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  419
13
that indicates the level of importance of the message; Table 13-2 lists the different Severity 
codes and their meanings. Note that in Figure 13-42, an actual syslog entry shows the sever-
ity code of “info” for an Integer value of 6, Informational error. The details of the event 
being logged are contained in the Message component. 
2011 Apr 19 17:11:12 UTC: %UCSM-6-LOG_CAPACITY: [F0461][info]
[log-capacity][sys/chassis-1/blade-7/mgmt/log-SEL-0] 
Log Capacity on Management Controller on Server 1/7 Is Very Low
Timestamp
Facility
Severity
Message
Figure 13-42 Example Syslog Message
Table 13-2 Syslog Severity Levels
Integer
Severity
Description
0
Emergency
System is unusable.
1
Alert
Immediate action is needed.
2
Critical
A condition that should be corrected immediately has occurred.
3
Error
Non-urgent failure.
4
Warning
An error will occur if no action is taken.
5
Notice
An unusual but non-error condition.
6
Informational
Normal operating behavior.
7
Debug
Used for debugging an application, but not typically tracked.
To configure UCS Director to forward syslog messages to a central server, navigate to 
Administration -> Integration. Click the Syslogs tab and check the box to Enable Syslog 
Forward. And, as shown in Figure 13-43, configure the details for what level of severity to 
send. UCS Director will forward the selected severity messages as well as all messages of 
higher severity (represented by lower integer values). UCS Director can forward to one or 
two different servers for redundancy and will send either plaintext or XML-based messages. 

420  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 13-43 UCS Director Syslog Forwarding Configuration
Network Time Protocol
In the previous section on syslog we discussed how the timestamp is included in every mes-
sage to allow operators to correlate events across multiple systems, as well as find events 
that may have occurred around a particular point in time. In order for this to be effective, 
it is critical that every system have accurate and configured time. Network Time Protocol 
(NTP) is deployed and leveraged to ensure a consistent reference time for all network de-
vices, servers, and applications. 
NTP is a hierarchical service where different NTP server levels, called stratum levels, are 
used to allow consistent time across an entire environment but allow for scaling the cli-
ent server traffic across multiple systems. The most preferred stratum level is 0 and would 
represent the master time server for a network. Each level of client would move to the next 
higher stratum level. For example, a network core switch can be configured to be a client of 
the master NTP server (stratum 0), and then act as the NTP server for all other switches in 
the network as a stratum 1 server. NTP communications occur over UDP port 123. 
UCS Director can be configured to synchronize to an NTP server either from the Shell 
Menu or as part of the Guided Setup Wizard within the administrator portal. Figure 13-44 
shows the process to set an NTP server from the Shell Menu. After choosing option 9 in 
the menu, you’ll be provided an option to first sync time with the underlying hardware time 
of the virtual appliance. This time is typically pulled from the hypervisor layer where UCS 
Director is running. Next you will be given the chance to sync with NTP. Type Y and enter 
your NTP server address. 

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  421
13
Figure 13-44 UCS Director CLI NTP Server Configuration
Figures 13-45 through 13-47 walk through the process of configuring NTP as part of the 
Guided Setup. First choose Administration > Guided Setup, and then click Launch Guided 
Setup. NTP configuration is part of the Initial System Configuration Wizard, so check that box 
(see Figure 13-45) and click Submit. This wizard allows you to identify which parameters to 
set; for NTP you can simply check Initial System Configuration for that task only, as shown in 
Figure 13-46. Click Submit again and the wizard will display the currently configured NTP serv-
ers and provide an option to modify the list of servers, as shown in Figure 13-47.
Figure 13-45 UCS Director Guided Setup Wizard Options

422  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 13-46 UCS Director Guided Setup Wizard Task Selection
Figure 13-47 UCS Director Custom Wizard NTP Server Configuration
Domain Name Service
Applications, devices, and services are all accessed over the network at their IP address; 
however, IP addresses on their own aren’t very intuitive and can be difficult to remem-
ber. The Domain Name System (DNS) is a network protocol that allows the mapping of a 
human-readable name to an IP address to make locating and connecting to services easier 
for the end user. DNS servers provide this translation service to client devices over UDP or 
TCP port 53. 

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  423
13
When a user or system makes a request for an Internet service, such as browsing to a web-
site such as http://www.cisco.com, the first step to deliver the web page for the end device 
is to perform a DNS lookup of the hostname www.cisco.com at the configured DNS serv-
ers. The DNS servers will resolve this name to one or more IP addresses and return the result 
to the client. Then the browser will make the HTTP request to the IP address provided. 
UCS Director can leverage DNS servers to allow administrators and users to provide details 
such as the address for physical and virtual accounts, NTP servers, SMTP servers, etc., by 
using hostnames rather than IP addresses. In addition to the usability advantages, this also 
means that should the IP address for a device change, as long as the name remains the same, 
UCS Director will not need to be updated with the new IP address. 
Like NTP server configuration, DNS servers can be configured from the Shell Menu or via 
Guided Setup in the Initial System Configuration Wizard. 
To configure DNS servers through the Shell menu (shown previously in Figure 13-44), enter 
option 14, Configure Network Interface, and then specify the IP address(es) of the DNS 
server(s) you wish to add, then press Enter to save those changes.
To configure DNS servers from the administrator portal, launch the Initial System 
Configuration Wizard as instructed for NTP, check the Initial System Configuration check 
box for the DNS Server task only, and click Submit. Figure 13-48 shows the page in the 
Initial Configuration Wizard where DNS servers can be configured. 
Figure 13-48 UCS Director Guided Wizard DNS Server Configuration
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
Anything that will communicate over the network requires an IP address. Within the con-
text of your Cisco Powered cloud, the primary use case for DHCP is for PXE builds from 
the UCS Director Baremetal Agent (BMA) appliance. Other use cases of DHCP on other 
networks within the enterprise (other than the PXE deploy/build networks specified during 
your cloud setup) are out of scope for this discussion and the exam.

424  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Devices can leverage a static IP address that is manually configured on the device, or they 
can use a dynamic IP address that is learned through DHCP. DHCP servers listen on UDP 
port 67 for requests from clients on UDP port 68. The communication between clients and 
servers follows a four-step process. 
1. 
A DHCP client sends a DISCOVER message as a broadcast looking for any DHCP 
servers available on the network. 
2. 
A DHCP server sends an OFFER back to the DHCP client with an IP address and 
additional configured options. 
3. 
The DHCP client sends a REQUEST for the offered IP address back to the DHCP 
server. 
4. 
The DHCP server sends an ACKNOWLEDGE to the DHCP client to complete the 
process. 
As mentioned in Step 3 in the process, a DHCP server can provide configuration details 
other than the IP address to the client. Nearly every DHCP server provides at least the 
router or gateway address, DNS server addresses, and the local domain name. These are 
provided as DHCP Options in the OFFER message. The UCS Director Baremetal Agent 
acts as a DHCP server as part of a deployment where PXE services are used to configure 
bare-metal or virtual servers through network boot. To accomplish this, the DHCP OFFER 
includes these additional options:
■ DHCP Option 67 – filename: The name of the file to request over TFTP from the server 
identified in the next-server option
■ DHCP Option 66 – next-server: The IP address of the Baremetal Agent that is also run-
ning the TFTP service hosting the PXE configurations
To configure the DHCP server on the Baremetal Agent in UCS Director, choose 
Administration > Physical Accounts, click the Baremetal Agents tab, select the BMA 
instance, and then click Configure DHCP. Figure 13-49 shows the DHCP Configuration 
dialog box where you provide the DHCP subnet, network mask, starting IP address, and 
ending IP address to use in the address pool. If the servers will need to communicate with 
resources on other IP networks during the PXE loading phase, be sure to provide the 
optional Router IP Address for the default gateway on the network. 

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  425
13
Figure 13-49 Configuring Baremetal Agent DHCP Server
Once configured, you can view the configuration of the dhcpd service running on the BMA 
by clicking View DHCP Configuration from the interface. An example configuration is 
shown in Figure 13-50. Note at the bottom the “next-server” and “filename” settings that 
were added by UCS Director automatically. 
Figure 13-50 Viewing Baremetal Agent DHCP Configuration 
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
One of the most common methods of communication today remains through email mes-
sages. Simple Mail Transport Protocol (SMTP) is the protocol over which email messages are 
delivered to email servers. Related protocols like Post-Office Protocol (POP) and Internet 
Message Access Protocol (IMAP) are used by mail clients to retrieve messages from email 
servers for reading and viewing. SMTP has long used TCP port 25, but ports 587 and 465 
are also used by some servers, often when implementing secure SMTP services. 

426  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
UCS Director can send email messages to users and administrators as part of typical man-
agement and operations of the private cloud. Administrators can be notified through email 
of alert conditions. End users will often receive details about ordered services through 
email. And Approval notifications are sent to users and administrators through email mes-
sages. Configuring email integration should be considered a key part of UCS Director setup. 
You can configure SMTP servers as part of the Initial System Configuration Wizard in the 
same manner as previously discussed for configuring NTP and DNS servers (by checking the 
Initial System Configuration check box for the Mail Setup task; refer to Figure 13-46), but 
you can also configure SMTP servers by choosing Administration > System and clicking 
the Mail Setup tab. As shown in Figure 13-51, you need to provide the address and port for 
the email server as well as an email address to use as the sender of all messages. If the email 
server requires authentication to send messages, include the username and password in the 
configuration. To verify settings are successful, and the connection to the email server is 
working as expected, check the Send Test Email check box before clicking the Save button. 
Figure 13-51 UCS Director Mail Setup 

Chapter 13: Cloud Performance and Capacity Management  427
13
Exam Preparation Tasks
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 13-3 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 13-3 Key Topics for Chapter 13
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Figure 13-8
Port channel statistics
394
Steps
Creating reports in UCS Central
402
Figure 13-23
Dashboard in UCS Director
404
Section
CloudSense reports in UCS Director
405
Section
UCS Performance Manager Dashboard
410
Section
Available reports in UCS Performance Manager
416
Section
Syslog configuration
418
Table 13-2
Syslog severity levels
419
Section
Network Time Protocol
420
Section
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
423
Section
Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
425
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
UCS Performance Manager, IO Module (IOM), Fabric Interconnects, UCS domain,  
UCS Central, port channel, UCS Director Dashboard, CloudSense, Report Builder, 
Application Group 

This chapter covers the following exam topics:
4.0 Cloud Systems Management and Monitoring
4.5 Perform cloud monitoring using Cisco Prime Service Catalog, Cisco UCS Director, 
Cisco Prime Infrastructure 
4.5.a Describe fault monitoring
4.5.b Describe performance monitoring
4.5.c Describe monitoring of provisioning outcomes
4.6 Create monitoring dashboards
4.6.a Configure custom dashboards
5.0 Cloud Remediation
5.2 Interpret Logs for root cause analysis
5.2.a Analyze fault logs
5.2.b Analyze admin logs
5.2.c Analyze application logs
5.3 Configure backups
5.3.a Configure database backup
5.3.b Configure database restore

CHAPTER 14
Monitoring and Maintaining the 
Health of Your Cloud 
Once you and your users become accustomed to the advantages of self-service order-
ing, management, and data center automation, maintaining a healthy environment will 
become a critical part of day-to-day administration. Tracking current usage statistics 
across the infrastructure supporting the cloud, monitoring faults and events, reviewing 
system logs, and managing backups will become routine activities. In this chapter we will 
explore the most common and important mechanisms for monitoring and maintaining 
the health of your cloud. 
“Do I Know This Already?” Quiz
The “Do I Know This Already?” quiz allows you to assess whether you should read this 
entire chapter thoroughly or jump to the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section. If you are in 
doubt about your answers to these questions or your own assessment of your knowledge 
of the topics, read the entire chapter. Table 14-1 lists the major headings in this chapter and 
their corresponding “Do I Know This Already?” quiz questions. You can find the answers in 
Appendix A, “Answers to the ‘Do I Know This Already?’ Quizzes.”
Table 14-1 “Do I Know This Already?” Section-to-Question Mapping
Foundation Topics Section
Questions
UCS Director Dashboards
1–3
Fault Severities and States
4 
Cloud Monitoring 
5–7
Visibility and Troubleshooting Through Logs
8, 9
Backing Up the Cloud
10
CAUTION The goal of self-assessment is to gauge your mastery of the topics in this chap-
ter. If you do not know the answer to a question or are only partially sure of the answer, 
you should mark that question as wrong for purposes of the self-assessment. Giving your-
self credit for an answer you correctly guess skews your self-assessment results and might 
provide you with a false sense of security.

430  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
1. What actions are available from an individual widget’s action menu in UCS Director? 
a. 
Export Report
b. Expand View
c. 
Close View
d. Clone View
e. 
Add to Dashboard
2. Where would you find a view showing summary statistics comparing the consumption 
of resources across all virtual accounts in UCS Director?  
a. 
CloudSense > Reports > Cloud Summary
b. Administration > Virtual Accounts > Dashboard 
c. 
Virtual > Compute > All Clouds > Summary Tab 
d. This information is not available within UCS Director
3. True or False. Dashboard views are only available in UCS Director on the administra-
tor portal. 
a. 
True
b. False
4. Which fault severity indicates a service-affecting condition that is causing severe deg-
radation of services?  
a. 
Critical 
b. Major
c. 
Minor
d. Warning
5. Within UCS Director, where is the best place to look for the reason behind a service 
profile association failure?  
a. 
Organizations > Service Requests > Service Request Details > Log
b. Organizations > Faults > UCS Manager Account > Service Profile 
c. 
Physical > Compute > UCS Manager Account > Faults 
d. Physical > Compute > UCS Manager Account > Service Profiles > Faults 
6. Within UCS Director, where would be a good place to identify the most utilized 
vSphere hosts in your cloud? 
a. 
System Dashboard
b. Virtual Account Hosts Report 
c. 
CloudSense VMware Host Performance Summary 
d. Virtual Account Top 5 Reports

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   431
7. Your manager wants to know the percentage of virtual machine deployments that 
have completed successfully since UCS Director has been in use. How could you 
quickly provide this information? 
a. 
Review the Archived Service Requests report in UCS Director, filter for Virtual 
Machine Deployments, and calculate the success percentage.
b. Interview the users of the system and gather anecdotal data to give a report on 
general impression to your manager. 
c. 
Export the data from the Service Requests Statistics report to Excel and use it to 
calculate the success ratio and build graphs to represent the overall data across all 
types of deployments. 
d. There is no way to provide this answer to your manager.
8. Which UCS Director log would be useful in determining the cause of errors related to 
gathering the inventory of a storage array? 
a. 
Authenticator Log
b. Patch Log 
c. 
Infra Manager 
d. Tomcat Log 
9. Where could you go to gain access to the Orchestration Log for Prime Service 
Catalog? (Choose two.) 
a. 
Log in to web as administrator and choose Service Designer > Logs
b. Log in to web as administrator and choose Administrator > Utilities > Logs and 
Properties > psc-c.orchestration.log 
c. 
Log in to the Shell Menu and choose View Logs > View Orchestration Log
d. Contact Cisco TAC and open a case 
10. True or False. Database backups for both UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog 
must be taken from the command-line interfaces, because there is no way to generate 
a database backup from their administration portals. 
a. 
True
b. False

432  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
UCS Director Dashboards 
Whether in an automobile or software system, a dashboard provides the user with immediate 
access to the most important pieces of information about the status of the underlying sys-
tem. UCS Director leverages dashboards and summary views in many places to provide you, 
the cloud administrator, with the information needed to understand which areas may require 
further investigation. The dashboards, and widgets viewed on the dashboards, are in addition 
to the reports that were covered in Chapter 12, “Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting.” 
Dashboard Widgets
UCS Director dashboards are made up of one or more available widgets that bring together 
key data points for some element of the cloud. UCS Director has hundreds of available 
widgets that display details related to physical or virtual infrastructure, virtual data centers, 
groups, and more. Figure 14-1 shows four widgets that provide details related to a UCS 
Manager account from UCS Director. Each widget is designed to provide the administra-
tor with the most important details in the easiest-to-consume fashion. In this case, details 
related to the equipment from the compute domain are presented in bar and pie charts. 
When viewing a dashboard with many widgets on the screen all at once, you may want to 
investigate a single widget closer. The Expand View action shown in the figure will take a 
single widget and zoom it out to full screen size temporarily. You can also use the Export 
Report option to pull the raw data that is feeding the widget into another system for more 
processing. Exports can be taken in PDF, CSV, or XLS format. 
Figure 14-1 Sample UCS Manager Dashboard Widgets 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   433
When viewing a dashboard and reviewing the data within the widgets, you have control 
over the order and size of the widget display on the screen. While viewing a dashboard, 
you can click and drag widgets around the screen as shown in Figure 14-2, allowing you 
to customize the layout of the dashboard. And to adjust the default size of the widgets, 
use the slider highlighted in the same figure in the upper-right corner of the dashboard. 
By making the widgets smaller, you will fit more widgets on the screen at once, providing 
more information in a single glance; however, as widgets get smaller, you may find the 
data difficult to comprehend. 
Resize Widgets
Figure 14-2 Manipulating Widget Location and Size 
Infrastructure Summary Dashboards
Widgets are mostly found throughout UCS Director on the Summary tab when viewing 
an element of infrastructure. Nearly all physical and virtual infrastructure types that can 
be added to UCS Director will have a Summary tab with at least one widget listed. Also, 
as you drill into the details of a component, you may find additional Summary tabs avail-
able at lower levels. 
For example, Figure 14-1 displayed the Summary tab from a UCS Manager account, 
while in Figure 14-3, the details of an individual Fabric Interconnect from the same 
domain are being investigated and the Summary tab is displayed. The widgets available 
at the account level provide details across the domain, and the widgets available within 

434  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
an individual Fabric Interconnect are focused on just its characteristics. In Figure 14-3 
we can see graphs related to data transmitted and received through the device, as well 
as CPU and memory utilization trends. For dashboards like this one where widgets pro-
vide trending details over time, the user is provided a drop-down list box to indicate the 
time range over which he would like to see the data. Finally, note in the figure that the 
Customize button has been clicked to display the drawer of available widgets. From this 
drawer you can drag currently closed widgets back onto the dashboard. 
Customize Dashboard
Figure 14-3 UCS Fabric Interconnect Summary Dashboard 
Dashboards are often used to get details at a very macro level before drilling down into 
details. For example, look at the Summary dashboard in Figure 14-4 displaying details 
across all clouds configured in this UCS Director deployment. As the administrator of this 
system, you should quickly be able to identify that there is one cloud account with a con-
sumption level more than twice that of the others. Though this fact may or may not indicate 
an actual problem, the value of the dashboard is in the ability to quickly deduce trends and 
characteristics across the environment. 
Summary dashboards are available not only in the administrator portal for UCS Director, 
but also in the end-user portal, which provides Summary tabs in several areas for individual 
users to understand the health of their group’s provisioned resources. Figure 14-5, for exam-
ple, shows the Virtual Resources Summary tab of the end-user portal. In this dashboard, end 
users can view the amount of resources being consumed in the cloud. Particularly once your 
organization begins implementing chargeback or showback, users will find it very important 
to be able to get a quick glimpse of their cloud consumption. 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   435
Figure 14-4 All Clouds Summary Dashboard 
Figure 14-5 End-User Portal Virtual Resources Summary View 
System Dashboard
Each of the infrastructure Summary view dashboards available within UCS Director is  
loaded with widgets focused on the particular context being viewed at one time. These 
can be very helpful as you are investigating one part of the cloud or another, but what 
about when you want to get an overall view of the key details across the deployment? UCS 
Director offers a top-level, system-wide dashboard that can be enabled and populated with 
widgets from any individual dashboard. 

436  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
The System Dashboard is available within both the administrator portal and end-user portal 
and is enabled and customized per user login. To enable the Dashboard, access the user 
information dialog box by clicking your username in the web page header, highlighted in 
Figure 14-6, and clicking the Dashboard tab in the dialog shown. Simply check the Enable 
Dashboard check box and click Apply. This will add the Dashboard link at the very begin-
ning of the main navigation bar within the portal. If you immediately navigate to the 
Dashboard, you will likely find it completely empty, as each user needs to identify which 
widgets they’d like to see on their Dashboard. 
Click to Open User Information
Figure 14-6 Enable System Dashboard 
Once the Dashboard is enabled, return to the Summary dashboards containing the widgets 
you’d like to place on the System Dashboard. In the action menu for each widget, there is 
an option to Add to Dashboard, as shown in Figure 14-7. Continue adding whatever mix-
ture of widgets will provide you with the details that will be interesting in your day-to-day 
administration of the cloud. 
Once you’ve finished, navigate to the System Dashboard and you will see a nice cross-
system Dashboard like the one shown in Figure 14-8. You can customize the display of the 
Dashboard by arranging the widgets in the desired order, adjust their size, and manipulate 
the time range over which any trending widgets are displayed. There is also an option to 
turn on auto-refresh of the Dashboard if you wish to leave it up in a browser tab through-
out the day to make it easy to check the current status and health of your cloud. 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   437
Figure 14-7 Add Widget to Dashboard 
Figure 14-8 System Dashboard 

438  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Fault Severities and States 
Part of the day-to-day administration of the cloud will be reviewing entries related to 
system events, faults, and debug logs. It will be important to be able to quickly under-
stand the relative importance of each entry and identify those that are purely informa-
tional, and those that indicate a system state that requires remediation and action. Within 
the infrastructure and cloud management solutions leveraged in the cloud, there is a 
framework for classifying entries into monitoring systems to indicate their severity and 
state. Having a solid understanding of these classifications will be very important. 
Table 14-2 breaks down the severity levels you will see related to events and faults within 
the UCS Director management reports, as well as within some of the available trouble-
shooting logs. 
Table 14-2 Severity Levels
Severity 
Level
 
Description
Critical
A service-affecting condition that requires immediate action to resolve. This 
severity indicates that some element is completely out of functional service. 
Major 
A service-affecting condition that requires urgent action to resolve. This severity 
indicates that there is severe degradation in capabilities of the affected element. 
Minor
A nonservice-affecting condition that needs to be resolved. This severity 
indicates a noted alarm condition, but no service degradation is being 
experienced. 
Warning
An indication of a potential service-affecting condition that should be 
investigated and resolved to prevent future problems. 
Condition
An informational detail about a current condition within the system. 
Info
A basic notification or informational message.  
Table 14-3 identifies the different states that a fault condition could be in at a given point in 
time. Fault states are expected to change over time. 
Table 14-3 Fault States
State
Description 
Active
The fault condition was experienced and is currently still active. 
Cleared
A fault condition occurred but has ended. Also, after clearing, it didn’t reoccur 
within the flapping interval. 
Flapping 
A fault occurred, ended, and reoccurred within a short time interval, known as the 
flapping interval. 
Soaking
A fault occurred and ended in a short amount of time, known as the flapping 
interval. The short time between start and end could indicate a flapping condition, 
and this condition is temporary while awaiting another occurrence of the fault 
within the flapping interval. 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   439
Cloud Monitoring 
As the console for managing your private cloud, and the infrastructure it is constructed 
from, UCS Director provides several methods for monitoring the status and health of your 
cloud. In fact, we have covered many of them in previous chapters of this book, in addition 
to the coverage in the previous “UCS Director Dashboards” section. In this section we dis-
cuss three specific types of cloud monitoring that you should understand and leverage daily 
in your operations: 
■ Infrastructure event and fault monitoring
■ Performance monitoring
■ Service request monitoring
Infrastructure Event and Fault Monitoring 
It has been said that there is no cloud, just someone else’s computer. Though typically 
meant as a joke, there is definitely a kernel of truth within the statement. To be effective, 
every cloud relies on physical and virtual infrastructure operating efficiently and without 
error. A large portion of administering a cloud involves maintaining the storage, compute, 
network, and virtualization infrastructure in use. UCS Director isn’t meant to be a replace-
ment for dedicated monitoring, alerting, and centralized logging tools you may be leverag-
ing in your enterprise, but it does provide its administrators ways to check the status of 
infrastructure elements within the portal. 
The Cisco Unified Computing System (UCS) is the leading computer platform for cloud 
builders, and one reason is the way it centralizes the monitoring within UCS Manager and 
exposes it through the open API. In addition to the policies, pools, equipment, and service 
profiles that are made available for management and automation within UCS Director, so 
are the faults, called events in UCS Director, at both the system and component levels. 
In Figure 14-9 you can see the Events report from a UCS Manager account within UCS 
Director. Even a stable, well-performing UCS domain will have lots of events at any point in 
time, so be sure to leverage the available filtering capabilities within UCS Director to narrow 
the scope of what is displayed. 
Figure 14-9 UCS Manager Events and Faults 
Another way to limit the displayed information is to look at the reports from within a par-
ticular component’s details. For example, in Figure 14-10 the Events page for an individual 
server blade is displayed. 

440  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 14-10 UCS Blade Events 
VMware vCenter provides similar centralized management and reporting for the virtual 
compute environment as UCS Manager does for the physical compute, and UCS Director 
likewise exposes events from the virtual accounts within its administrator portal. As key 
components of the cloud, having this information easily available, as shown in Figure 14-11, 
within UCS Director can make checking the current status and health a routine part of the 
cloud operator’s day. In cases where an event is identified as needing deeper investigation, 
the administrator will often decide to move from using the reporting and management capa-
bilities of UCS Director to using individual element managers. 
Figure 14-11 VMware vCenter Event Report 
Performance Monitoring 
Maintaining a well-performing cloud requires a way to understand and track cloud usage 
and reporting. Chapter 12 covered reporting options available within UCS Director in detail, 
and two of the reports discussed that can help you monitor the performance of the cloud 
are the Top 5 Reports and Trending Reports. 
Top 5 Reports provide administrators with several options to look for elements of the 
environment that are overutilized, or simply find the largest consumers of cloud resources. 
Figure 14-12 shows the Hosts With Most Memory Usage report along with the drop-down 
list of other available host-focused reports. With these reports you can make determina-
tions about when adding additional cloud capacity in the form of new hypervisor hosts may 
be necessary. 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   441
Figure 14-12 Top 5 Report: Hosts With Most Memory Usage 
Most reports in UCS Director provide current details that are accurate as of the most recent 
inventory checks across the infrastructure. The one class of report that provides some his-
torical details about the environment is Trending Reports. Trending Reports can show how a 
metric has changed over time, and allow the administrator to look for common patterns, or 
extrapolate what will likely occur based on past behavior. Figure 14-13 shows an example 
Trending Report for the Number of VMs over the Last Month. Other Trending Reports will 
show CPU, disk, or memory performance as well. 
Figure 14-13 Trending Report: Number of VMs in Last Month
Service Request Monitoring 
A successful cloud is a cloud that is being used, and that means you will spend a lot of time 
monitoring the status of service requests being executed by UCS Director. In the Chapter 9 
section on service requests, you learned about how service requests provide the audit trail 
for all automation actions executed by UCS Director, as well as detailed information about 
each step of the workflow execution, and any objects created or modified. We’ll review 
some of the key elements related to monitoring cloud consumption in this section. 

442  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Navigating to Organizations > Service Requests from the administrator portal will show 
you all unarchived service requests in a display like that shown in Figure 14-14. In the figure, 
you can see in the rightmost column that there are several service requests that are Complete, 
three In Progress, and one that Failed. If you were to open one of the In Progress requests, 
you’d be able to track the automation as it progresses in real time through the Status and Log 
tabs in the display. This view will automatically update on a regular basis, but you can click 
the Refresh button to get the latest information at any time. That can be very interesting, but 
you will be far more likely to investigate Failed requests to identify and resolve the cause of 
the failure. 
Figure 14-14 Service Request Report 
The Service Request Status view shown in Figure 14-15 will identify the step in the work-
flow that failed, but the real information is available in the Log tab shown in Figure 14-16. 
When you review the error messages and warnings (shown in red and orange in the log) and 
details in the log, the cause for the failure should be easily identified. In this example the 
problem, framed in the figure, is that UCS Director “Failed to allocate resources.” The ser-
vice request was to deploy a new virtual machine, so this error indicates a problem identify-
ing a compute, storage, and network to provision the new virtual machine into based on the 
vDC policies. This is often caused by a cloud that has run out of available capacity. 
Figure 14-15 Failed Service Request Status 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   443
Figure 14-16 Failed Service Request Log 
UCS Director also provides a CloudSense report for service requests that provides statis-
tics about all the service requests that have been executed by the system. You can find the 
information available on the Service Request Statistics tab, shown in Figure 14-17, as an 
instant report, or from the CloudSense tab, where you can generate a point-in-time report 
to save for later analysis. The report provides details about the total number of service 
requests, including child service requests, that have been executed, the workflows they were 
running, and details on the numbers that were successful, failed, or are currently in progress. 
Figure 14-17 Service Request Statistics 

444  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Visibility and Troubleshooting Through Logs 
Much of the day-to-day monitoring of cloud activities will involve leveraging the dash-
boards and reports that are readily available within the application portals. However, in 
some cases you may find yourself troubleshooting a system failure, installation problem, or 
some more challenging problem that requires you to look into the debug logs that are main-
tained by the appliances, but typically hidden from view. Often this will be at the request of 
Cisco TAC, but as you become more experienced with the components of the solution, you 
may find yourself consulting the logs on your own. 
UCS Director Logs
Under the Administration menu, navigate to the Support Information section of the portal. 
From this page you can generate one of several reports providing a deep look at the opera-
tional status of the UCS Director appliance as well as key logs from the appliance. The logs 
can either be displayed immediately or be downloaded for offline analysis. Figure 14-18 
shows the list of different logs that can be generated, and Table 14-4 provides some details 
about what information each provides. 
Figure 14-18 Support Information Logs 
Table 14-4 UCS Director Logs 
Log
Description
Infra Manager
Provides details on the infrastructure management and automation services 
of UCS Director. This log captures very detailed information related to 
regular system tasks that inventory underlying infrastructure as well as 
service requests execution. 
Web Context 
Cloud Manager 
Provides details on all web resources accessed by web and API users. 
Tomcat Log
Provides details on the status and health of the Tomcat Server that 
executes the underlying Java programs that provide access to the 
administrator and end-user portals. 
Authenticator 
Log
Provides details regarding both local and LDAP authentications from UCS 
Director as part of both web and API access. 
Mail Delivery 
Log
Provides details related to sending of emails from UCS Director as part of 
alerts, approvals, or workflow notifications. 
Patch Log
Provides detailed information about any updates and patches applied to 
the system. 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   445
Along with the logs listed in Table 14-4, the System Information (both Basic and Advanced) 
report, generated from the Administrator > Support Information interface, is very helpful 
when seeking details related to the UCS Director appliance operation. A portion of the Basic 
report can be seen in Figure 14-19, but the full report provides information on the following: 
■ UCS Director Version 
■ System Clock and Uptime 
■ Service Status 
■ Licensing Information
■ System Resource Usage (CPU/RAM) 
■ Physical and Virtual Account Status
■ Catalogs Published 
■ Processes running
■ And much more
Figure 14-19 System Information (Basic) 

446  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
In the case of a major system failure, the administrator portal may be inoperable. In that 
case, you can access the same details by connecting to the appliance through Secure Shell 
(SSH) and accessing the command-line interface (CLI). From the main Shell Menu, shown 
in Figure 14-20, there is an option to view the Inframgr Log (option 18), but all the other 
information is available by gaining root access to the appliance (option 23). 
Figure 14-20 UCS Director Shell Menu 
Prime Service Catalog Logs
Similar to UCS Director, Prime Service Catalog provides access to logs through both the 
web interface and the Shell Menu. Figure 14-21 shows the Shell Menu for Prime Service 
Catalog with option 10 selected to reveal the View Logs menu, which provides quick access 
to key troubleshooting logs, descriptions for which are presented in Table 14-5. For deeper 
troubleshooting, the menu also provides the ability to log in as root (option 13), but doing 
so is recommended only under the advice and direction of Cisco TAC. 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   447
Figure 14-21 Prime Service Catalog Shell Menu  
Table 14-5 Prime Service Catalog Logs 
Log
Description
Prime Service 
Catalog Log
Provides details on the web portal and catalog interface for end users and 
administrators. 
Service Link 
Log
Provides details on the integration between Prime Service Catalog and 
external systems such as UCS Director accomplished through Control 
Agents and messaging services. 
Orchestration 
Log
Provides details on end-user orders and the execution of service plans. 
Firstboot Log
Provides details from the first boot of the appliance after installation, when 
the initial configuration, database, and application setup was executed. 
From the Administration module of the web interface, you can find access to the logs as 
well as other tools from the Utilities view. Figure 14-22 shows the Logs and Properties tab. 
Within the page you have access to view both the current and previous instances of the logs 
that have been compressed for archiving. 

448  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 14-22 Prime Service Catalog Administration Utilities 
Backing Up the Cloud 
There are numerous reasons in every IT field for making regular system backups and testing 
the ability to effectively restore from backups as part of standard procedures, and a cloud 
solution is no different. Whether the reason for backing up is to be prepared for a disaster 
condition, to fulfill a demand to have a second setup to test upgrades or new features, or 
to be able to roll back from some unintended mistake, you can be assured that during your 
role as a cloud administrator you will be called upon to back up, and perhaps restore your 
systems many times. 
Before looking at how to get database backups from UCS Director and Prime Service 
Catalog, it is worth discussing one of the many benefits that compute virtualization provides 
and how to best leverage it as part of your backup strategy. All virtualization technologies 
today include the ability to take a snapshot of the current state of a virtual machine and 
roll back to that saved state in the future. This powerful capability makes some elements 
of backup and recovery much simpler than full system recovery from source and database 
backups; however, it does have some limitations and caveats. Snapshotting captures the 
current state of the running virtual server, and typically all storage disks, but it saves that 
information in the same location as the virtual server itself. This means that it does not 
protect against the underlying infrastructure failure. Also, the nature of snapshots means 
that over time the performance of the virtual machine will begin to decline as the hypervi-
sor platform is maintaining the difference between the snapshot and the currently running 
virtual machine. Typical recommendations are to keep snapshots for no more than 72 hours, 
with many recommending no longer than 24 hours. This makes snapshots a great short-term 
backup and recovery option, but definitely not a long-term solution. 
The ease of creating snapshots and restoring to them, plus their limited shelf life, make 
them ideal for use when implementing a major change to the system such as a patch or 
upgrade. Before executing the change, take a snapshot. Then, after you have completed the 
change and verified it was successful, you can delete the snapshot. However, should some-
thing go wrong in the change, you can easily roll back and return to a known good state. 
Many virtualization solutions allow for live snapshots—that is, while the virtual machine is 
running—but for UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog, it is recommended to shut down 
the virtual appliances before taking the snapshot. This is to be sure there is no problem due 
to active transactions in the database or open files. 

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   449
Backups in UCS Director 
UCS Director database backup and recovery is done from the Shell Menu (previously 
shown in Figure 14-20), and not from the web administration portal. Again, this is due to 
the need to shut down all services prior to taking the database backup to ensure that it is 
complete and accurate. You will also need to have an FTP server available and an account 
with write permissions because the backup task includes transferring the backup to an 
external server. Choose option 7, Backup Database, from the Shell Menu to begin the fol-
lowing set of steps, an example of which is shown in Figure 14-23. If you are deployed in a 
multinode configuration of UCS Director, backups require some additional steps, but that 
procedure is outside the scope of the CLDADM exam and this book. 
Step 1. 
Stop the services.
Step 2. 
Provide FTP server address, login, and password.
Step 3. 
Wait while UCS Director backs up the database, compresses the backup, and 
copies it to the remote server.
Step 4. 
After the backup is complete, press Enter and then manually restart the ser-
vices using option 4, Start Services, in the Shell Menu.
Figure 14-23 UCS Director Database Backup 
Restoring the database from backup follows a very similar process using option 7, Restore 
Database, from the Shell Menu. The steps are as follows and can be seen in Figure 14-24: 
Step 1. 
Stop the services. 
Step 2. 
Provide the FTP server address, login, and password. 
Step 3. 
Provide the path and filename to the database backup file. 
Step 4. 
After the restore completes, manually restart the services using option 4, Start 
Services, in the Shell Menu.

450  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Figure 14-24 UCS Director Database Restore 
Using the Shell Menu to capture a backup is easy, but it is a one-time activity. Because UCS 
Director is based on a CentOS appliance, you can easily leverage the included cron utility 
to schedule regular backups. You can find an example of how to set this up in the Cisco 
Community at https://communities.cisco.com/docs/DOC-56973. 
Backups in Prime Service Catalog 
Similar to UCS Director, database maintenance for Prime Service Catalog is accomplished 
from the Shell Menu (shown previously in Figure 14-21), with backups and restores acces-
sible within the top-level menu option Manage Databases, option 5. In the Manage System 
Databases menu, shown in Figure 14-25, you will find backup and restore options for the 
Prime Service Catalog Database and the Orchestration Database. To capture a full backup of 
the appliance, both databases are needed. 
Figure 14-25 Prime Service Catalog Manage System Databases Menu

14
Chapter 14: Monitoring and Maintaining the Health of Your Cloud   451
Whereas the backup option in UCS Director automatically copies the file to a remote FTP 
server, Prime Service Catalog saves the backup locally at the path /opt/cisco/.backups/ with 
subdirectories for each database. Each database backup or restore will require the services 
on the appliance to be stopped, just as with UCS Director. One extra piece of required 
information to execute the backups is the database password configured during initial 
installation, so be sure to have that readily available. Figure 14-26 shows an example of tak-
ing a backup of the Prime Service Catalog Database. Some of the informational output has 
been removed from the figure to focus on the key steps in the process. 
Figure 14-26 Prime Service Catalog Database Backup 
After using the menu commands to create the database, you will need to copy it from the 
appliance to a remote server manually. You can do so using any number of commonly sup-
ported transfer protocols such as FTP, SFTP, or SCP. Another typical practice is to leverage 
cron on the underlying appliance to schedule automatic regular backups and remote copies, 
instead of relying on manual backups. 

452  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Foundation Topics
Exam Preparation Tasks
As mentioned in the section “How to Use This Book” in the Introduction, you have a couple 
of choices for exam preparation: the exercises here, Chapter 15, “Final Preparation,” and 
the exam simulation questions on the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test.
Review All Key Topics
Review the most important topics in this chapter, noted with the Key Topics icon in the 
outer margin of the page. Table 14-6 lists a reference of these key topics and the page num-
ber on which each is found.
Table 14-6 Key Topics for Chapter 14 
Key Topic 
Element
Description
Page 
Number
Paragraph
Understand how to manipulate the size and position of dashboard 
widgets.
433
Section
Describe how to enable and customize the System Dashboard.
435
Table 14-2
Differentiate between severity levels. 
438
Section
Describe infrastructure event and fault monitoring features. 
439
Section
Describe how to leverage service requests to monitor the 
provisioning of resources. 
441
Table 14-4
Describe the available UCS Director logs and the details they 
contain.
444
Table 14-5
Describe the available Prime Service Catalog logs and the details 
they contain.
447
List
Describe the steps required to take a backup and restore UCS 
Director.
449
Complete Tables and Lists from Memory
Print a copy of Appendix B, “Memory Tables” (found online), or at least the section for 
this chapter, and complete the tables and lists from memory. Appendix C, “Memory Tables 
Answer Key,” also online, includes completed tables and lists to check your work.
Define Key Terms
Define the following key terms from this chapter and check your answers in the glossary:
widget, dashboard, fault, event, snapshot, cron, flapping interval

This page intentionally left blank 


CHAPTER 15 
Final Preparation 
The first 14 chapters of this book cover the technologies, protocols, design concepts, and 
considerations required to be prepared to pass the CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 exam. 
While these chapters supply the detailed information, most people need more preparation 
than a cover-to-cover reading can provide. This chapter details a set of tools and a study 
plan to help you complete your preparation for the exams. 
This short chapter has two main sections. The first section lists the exam preparation tools 
useful at this point in the study process. The second section lists a suggested study plan now 
that you have completed all the earlier chapters in this book. 
NOTE Appendixes B and C, “Memory Tables” and “Memory Tables Answer Key” respec-
tively, also exist as soft-copy appendixes on the companion website. See the instructions in 
the Introduction to this book on how to access this site. 
Tools for Final Preparation 
This section provides some information about the available tools and how to access the tools. 
Pearson Cert Practice Test Engine and Questions 
The companion website includes the Pearson Cert Practice Test engine—software that dis-
plays and grades a set of exam-realistic multiple-choice questions. Using the Pearson Cert 
Practice Test engine, you can either study by going through the questions in study mode, or 
take a simulated (timed) CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 exam. 
The installation process requires two major steps: installing the software and then activating 
the exam. The companion website has a recent copy of the Pearson IT Certification Practice 
Test engine. The practice exam (the database of exam questions) is not on this site. 
NOTE The cardboard sleeve in the back of this book includes a piece of paper. The paper 
lists the activation key for the practice exam associated with this book. Do not lose the 
activation key. On the opposite side of the paper from the activation code is a unique, one-
time-use coupon code for the purchase of the CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official 
Cert Guide, Premium Edition. 
Install the Software 
The Pearson IT Certification Practice Test is a Windows-only desktop application. You can 
run it on a Mac using a Windows virtual machine, but it was built specifically for the PC 
platform. The minimum system requirements are as follows: 

456  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
■ Windows 10, Windows 8.1, or Windows 7 
■ Microsoft .NET Framework 4.0 Client 
■ Pentium-class 1-GHz processor (or equivalent) 
■ 512 MB RAM 
■ 650 MB disk space plus 50 MB for each downloaded practice exam 
■ Access to the Internet to register and download exam databases 
The software installation process is routine as compared with other software installation pro-
cesses. If you have already installed the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test software from 
another Pearson product, there is no need for you to reinstall the software. Simply launch the 
software on your desktop and proceed to activate the practice exam from this book by using 
the activation code included in the access code card sleeve in the back of the book. 
The following steps outline the installation process: 
Step 1. 
Download the exam practice test engine from the companion site. 
Step 2. 
Respond to Windows prompts as with any typical software installation process. 
The installation process will give you the option to activate your exam with the activation 
code supplied on the paper in the cardboard sleeve. This process requires that you estab-
lish a Pearson website login. You need this login to activate the exam, so please do register 
when prompted. If you already have a Pearson website login, there is no need to register 
again. Just use your existing login. 
Activate and Download the Practice Exam 
Once the exam engine is installed, you should then activate the exam associated with this 
book (if you did not do so during the installation process) as follows: 
Step 1. 
Start the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test software from the Windows 
Start menu or from your desktop shortcut icon. 
Step 2. 
To activate and download the exam associated with this book, from the My 
Products or Tools tab, click the Activate Exam button. 
Step 3. 
At the next screen, enter the activation key from the paper inside the card-
board sleeve in the back of the book. Once entered, click the Activate button. 
Step 4. 
The activation process will download the practice exam. Click Next, and then 
click Finish. 
When the activation process completes, the My Products tab should list your new exam. 
If you do not see the exam, make sure that you have selected the My Products tab on the 
menu. At this point, the software and practice exam are ready to use. Simply select the 
exam and click the Open Exam button. 
To update a particular exam you have already activated and downloaded, display the Tools 
tab and click the Update Products button. Updating your exams will ensure that you have 
the latest changes and updates to the exam data. 

15
Chapter 15 : Final Preparation   457
If you want to check for updates to the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test engine soft-
ware, display the Tools tab and click the Update Application button. You can then ensure 
that you are running the latest version of the software engine. 
Activating Other Exams 
The exam software installation process, and the registration process, has to happen only 
once. Then, for each new exam, only a few steps are required. For instance, if you buy 
another Pearson IT Certification Cert Guide, extract the activation code from the cardboard 
sleeve in the back of that book; you do not even need the exam engine at this point. From 
there, all you have to do is start the exam engine (if not still up and running) and perform 
Steps 2 through 4 from the previous list. 
Premium Edition 
In addition to the free practice exam, you can purchase additional exams with expanded 
functionality directly from Pearson IT Certification. The Premium Edition of this title 
contains an additional two full practice exams as well as an eBook (in both PDF and ePub 
format). In addition, the Premium Edition title also has remediation for each question to the 
specific part of the eBook that relates to that question. 
Because you have purchased the print version of this title, you can purchase the Premium 
Edition at a deep discount. There is a coupon code in the cardboard sleeve that contains a 
one-time-use code as well as instructions for where you can purchase the Premium Edition. 
To view the Premium Edition product page, go to http://www.ciscopress.com/
title/9780134305561.
The Cisco Learning Network 
Cisco provides a wide variety of CCNA Cloud CLDADM preparation tools at a Cisco 
Systems website called the Cisco Learning Network. This site includes a large variety of 
exam preparation tools, including sample questions, forums on each Cisco exam, learning 
video games, and information about each exam. 
To reach the Cisco Learning Network, go to https://learningnetwork.cisco.com, or just 
search for “Cisco Learning Network.” You will need to use the login you created at  
www.cisco.com. If you don’t have such a login, you can register for free. To register,  
simply go to www.cisco.com, click Register at the top of the page, and supply the 
requested information. 
Memory Tables 
Like most Official Cert Guides from Cisco Press, this book purposefully organizes informa-
tion into tables and lists for easier study and review. Rereading these tables can be very use-
ful before the exam. However, it is easy to skim over the tables without paying attention to 
every detail, especially when you remember having seen the table’s contents when reading 
the chapter. 
Instead of simply reading the tables in the various chapters, this book’s Appendixes B and C 
give you another review tool. Appendix B lists partially completed versions of many of the 

458  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
tables from the book. You can open Appendix B (available on the companion website) and 
print the appendix. For review, you can attempt to complete the tables. This exercise can 
help you focus on the review. It also exercises the memory connectors in your brain; plus it 
makes you think about the information without as much information, which forces a little 
more contemplation about the facts. 
Appendix C, also a PDF located on the companion website, lists the completed tables to 
check yourself. You can also just refer to the tables as printed in the book. 
Chapter-Ending Review Tools 
Chapters 2–14 each have several features in the “Exam Preparation Tasks” section at the end 
of the chapter. You might have already worked through these in each chapter. It can also be 
useful to use these tools again as you make your final preparations for the exam. 
Suggested Plan for Final Review/Study 
This section lists a suggested study plan from the point at which you finish reading through 
Chapter 14, until you take the CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 exam. Certainly, you can 
ignore this plan, use it as is, or just take suggestions from it. 
The plan uses four steps: 
Step 1. 
Review Key Topics and DIKTA Questions: You can use the table that lists the 
key topics in each chapter, or just flip the pages looking for key topics as indi-
cated by a Key Topic icon in the margin. Also, reviewing the “Do I Know This 
Already?” (DIKTA) questions from the beginning of the chapter can be helpful 
for review. 
Step 2. 
Complete Memory Tables: Open Appendix B and print the entire appendix, 
or print the tables by major part. Then complete the tables. 
Step 3. 
Define Key Terms: Try to define the terms listed at the end of each chapter to 
identify areas in which you need more study. 
Step 4. 
Use the Pearson IT Certification Practice Test Engine to Practice: The 
Pearson IT Certification Practice Test engine can be used to study using a bank 
of unique exam-realistic questions available only with this book. 
If you have decided to use Appendix D, “Study Planner,” to support your learning during 
the reading of all chapters, you can still benefit from it in your final review. In this case, you 
can use the “Second Date Completed” column to control the pace of each chapter review 
and dedicate special attention to the chapters whose “Goal Date” you have missed in your 
first reading (as signaled by the “First Date Completed” column). 
Using the Exam Engine 
The Pearson IT Certification Practice Test engine includes a database of questions created 
specifically for this book. The Pearson IT Certification Practice Test engine can be used 
either in study mode or practice exam mode, as follows: 

15
Chapter 15 : Final Preparation   459
■ Study mode: Study mode is most useful when you want to use the questions for learning 
and practicing. In study mode, you can select options like randomizing the order of the 
questions and answers, automatically viewing answers to the questions as you go, testing 
on specific topics, and many other options. 
■ Practice exam mode: This mode presents questions in a timed environment, provid-
ing you with a more exam-realistic experience. It also restricts your ability to see your 
score as you progress through the exam and view answers to questions as you are taking 
the exam. These timed exams not only allow you to study for the actual CCNA Cloud 
CLDADM 210-455 exam, they help you simulate the time pressure that can occur on the 
actual exam. 
When doing your final preparation, you can use study mode, practice exam mode, or 
both. However, after you have seen each question a couple of times, you will likely start to 
remember the questions, and the usefulness of the exam database may go down. So, con-
sider the following options when using the exam engine: 
■ Use this question database for review. Use study mode to study the questions by chap-
ter, just as with the other final review steps listed in this chapter. Plan on getting another 
exam (possibly from the Premium Edition) if you want to take additional simulated 
exams. 
■ Save the question database, not using it for review during your review of each book part. 
Save it until the end, so you will not have seen the questions before. Then, use practice 
exam mode to simulate the exam. 
Picking the correct mode from the exam engine’s user interface is pretty obvious. The 
following steps show how to move to the screen from which to select study or practice 
exam mode: 
Step 1. 
Click the My Products tab if you are not already in that screen. 
Step 2. 
Select the exam you wish to use from the list of available exams. 
Step 3. 
Click the Use button. 
When you complete these actions, the engine should display a window from which you 
can choose Study Mode or Practice Exam Mode. When in study mode, you can further 
choose the book chapters, limiting the questions to those explained in the specified 
chapters of the book. 
Summary 
The tools and suggestions listed in this chapter have been designed with one goal in mind: 
to help you develop the skills required to pass the CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 exam. 
This book has been developed from the beginning to not just tell you the facts but also 
help you learn how to apply the facts. No matter what your experience level is leading up 
to taking the exam, it is our hope that the broad range of preparation tools, and even the 
structure of the book, will help you pass the exam with ease. We truly hope you do well on 
the exam. 


Glossary
A
ACI context A tenant network. Also called a private network in the APIC GUI.
ACI contract A set of rules between endpoint groups (EPGs) that defines communications.
ACI endpoint group (EPG) A managed object that is a named logical entity that contains a 
collection of endpoints in ACI.
ACI tenant In ACI, a logical container for application policies that enables an administrator 
to exercise domain-based access control.
Advanced Catalog An end-user orderable item within UCS Director that enables end users 
to execute workflows.
Amazon Web Services (AWS) Amazon’s public cloud offering.
AMQP Advanced Message Queuing Protocol, a standards-based method for constructing, 
routing, queuing, and publishing communications between distributed software applications.
Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI) The Cisco software-defined networking offering 
for data center and cloud networks.
application container An application group within UCS Director designed to enable end 
users to rapidly deploy and manage a group of virtual machines deployed into one or more 
network segments as a single entity.
Application Group The capability in UCS Performance Monitor to group multiple virtual 
machines (VMs) and/or physical hosts together to see all potential infrastructure faults in the 
path of that group of systems.
Application Policy Infrastructure Controller (APIC) The unifying point of management 
and automation for Nexus 9000 switches using Application Centric Infrastructure (ACI) mode 
in a Cisco fabric.
Application Virtual Switch (AVS) Programmed by the APIC, the virtual switching 
components in a Nexus 9000 SDN architecture.
automation task A task that completes in a predictable and repeatable fashion without  
user input.
B
Baremetal Appliance (BMA) A virtual appliance that ships as part of UCS Director that 
allows for PXE booting and installation of operating systems on both physical and virtual 
machines.
base DN Base distinguished name, the point from which a server will start its search for users.

462 bind DN
bind DN Bind distinguished name, an object in LDAP that you bind to that gives you 
permission to perform a certain operation.
Budget Watch A feature of UCS Director used to enforce a per-group governance policy 
related to the amount of cloud consumption available tracked by Cost Models.
BYOD Bring your own device is an IT service many companies offer to allow their employees 
to use personally owned tablets and smartphones on the corporate network. This service can 
be provisioned through Prime Service Catalog.
C
Catalyst A popular Cisco Ethernet switch.
change management database (CMDB) A database used in organizations to track changes 
to infrastructure so that projects and changes can be referenced centrally over time in a single 
location.
chargeback The ability to set up parameters within UCS Director or Prime Service Catalog 
to allow departmental billing for infrastructure within your private cloud. 
Cisco Adaptive Security Virtual Appliance (ASAv) A virtualized version of the popular 
Cisco ASA firewall product.
Cisco PowerShell Agent (PSA) A system that UCS Director can point to that will run 
PowerShell commands against remote systems.
CloudSense UCS Director reporting engine.
CloudSense Analytics A reporting module within UCS Director that uses out-of-the-box 
or custom templates to create reports based on data from multiple infrastructure reports and 
saves the data to be retrieved in the future. 
Cloupia Script Based on JavaScript, the language used for creating custom tasks and scripts 
needed to extend functionality of UCS Director.
compound workflow A type of workflow that is designed to be used within other 
workflows. 
Computing Policy Determine on which hypervisor host system to deploy the VM.
container gateway The boundary between the inside and outside of an application 
container that provides security and network controls for traffic traversing the boundary. 
container template A grouping of policies and configurations from which individual 
application containers can be instantiated. 
Cost Model A UCS Director policy used to create a monetary rate card for infrastructure 
consumption that is applied to virtual data centers.
cron A Linux utility used for scheduling automatic execution of some action over some time 
period.

Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) 463
D–E
dashboard A view that provides the user with immediate access to the most important 
pieces of information about the status of the underlying system.
End User Self-Service Policy Provide access to out-of-the-box VM lifecycle action tasks 
to end users.
event A record of a change in state of a system or component of a system. Does not 
necessarily indicate a problem. 
F
Fabric Extender (FEX) Similar to a remote linecard, a fabric extender enables Ethernet ports 
to be decentralized from a central switch and located closer to hosts in the data center, usually 
at the top of rack.
Fabric Interconnects Within a UCS system, aggregate management and I/O for up to 20 
chassis, 160 servers. They’re deployed in redundant pairs.
fault An occurrence of a condition that deviates from the normal and expected state of a 
system or component of a system.
Fibre Channel over Ethernet (FCoE) A technology that encapsulates Fibre Channel frames 
within Ethernet frames for delivery over a single Ethernet fabric. It enables Fibre Channel to 
use 10 Gigabit or faster Ethernet networks for the delivery of storage/Fibre Channel traffic.
flapping interval The short interval over which repeated changes in failure state of a 
component indicates a Flapping state.
fully qualified domain name (FQDN) The LDAP syntax to refer to an object. For example, 
if user1 is in the acme.com domain, the FQDN for this object would be user1.acme.com. 
G–H–I
guest Another name for a virtual machine.
Heat Orchestration An orchestration engine that is part of OpenStack.
in-service software upgrade (ISSU) The ability to upgrade a product or component 
without interrupting data-plane traffic.
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) Delivering infrastructure resources such as storage, 
network, compute, and virtualization “as a service” by providing self-service capabilities, easy 
service catalog ordering, etc.

464 Intercloud Fabric
Intercloud Fabric A Cisco product that allows you to securely extend your on-premises 
Layer 2 networks out into public cloud providers such as AWS or Azure or Cisco Powered 
cloud providers.
IO Module (IOM) Exists in the back of a UCS Blade Series 5108 chassis and is responsible 
for delivering Ethernet, Fibre Channel (using FCoE), and management traffic to servers/blades 
in that chassis.
J-K-L
Juniper Virtual Gateway (vGW) A hypervisor-based firewall and intrusion detection 
system.
Keystone Identify management component of OpenStack.
LDAP search base A way to limit where in an LDAP tree a search should start.
lifecycle management The process for managing an IT service from inception to 
decommissioning.
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) A client/server protocol used to access 
and manage directory information over TCP/IP networks.
M
Map Report A type of infrastructure report available for cloud accounts in UCS Director 
that displays a color-coded heatmap view indicating relative usage of infrastructure like CPU, 
memory, and storage.
Microsoft Azure Microsoft’s public cloud offering.
Microsoft System Center Configuration Manager (SCCM) A Microsoft product used 
to administer and manage Windows systems, Macs, and UNIX/Linux servers along with cloud-
based mobile devices.
Multilayer Director Switch (MDS) A Cisco product used for Fibre Channel switching.
My Stuff An interactive list of provisioned resources (service items) where users can view and 
manage items such as virtual machines. 
N
Network Policy Determine the number and type of network connectivity needed for the VM. 
Nexus A series of Cisco data center networking switches that support Ethernet, Fibre 
Channel, and Fibre Channel over Ethernet (FCoE).

self-service portal 465
Nexus 1000V (N1KV) The Cisco Nexus 1000V virtual switch is a software-only switch that 
installs on top of popular hypervisors and allows centralized configuration of virtual Ethernet 
switches in virtualized environments.
Notifications menu Provides users information about approvals and ongoing orders.
O
OpenStack Open source cloud computing software.
orchestration Combining multiple automation tasks together, such as the configuration, 
creation, provisioning, etc., of infrastructure.
P–Q
Platform as a Service (PaaS) Delivering platforms such as OS and application stack(s) “as a 
service” by providing self-service capability, easy service catalog ordering, etc. 
port channel The aggregation of multiple Ethernet or Fibre Channel links into a virtual port 
that is the sum of the individual links’ bandwidth.
Portal Designer A module within Prime Service Catalog responsible for the look, feel, and 
operations of the end-user portal and ordering system.
PowerShell A popular scripting language developed by Microsoft, used to script tasks in 
Microsoft environments.
Prime Service Catalog A service ordering solution for self-service, on-demand IT service 
provisioning and lifecycle management. 
Puppet Commonly used by many organizations to deliver PaaS (operating system plus 
applications). Puppet Labs produces a variety of free and fee-based tools that assist in the 
automation of many systems, including Linux hosts. 
R
RabbitMQ An open source project that provides message broker software that uses AMQP 
as its messaging protocol. 
Report Builder A feature within UCS Director’s CloudSense module that allows the 
administrator to build standard and custom reports.
Rollback An available action for service requests that will create a new Undo service request 
that will remove the configuration applied in the initial service request.
S
self-service portal A single place end users can go to order IaaS and PaaS solutions within 
UCS Director and Prime Service Catalog.

466 service catalog
service catalog Organized and curated collection of IT-related offerings that support busi-
ness requirements.
Service Designer A module within Prime Service Catalog responsible for the configuration 
and management of service offerings.
service item An individual object that has been ordered by users or assigned to them, 
including VMs, vDCs, and applications.
service request A record of workflow execution within UCS Director.
showback IT governance policy where the consumption of resources is tracked and value 
applied to create informational reports without actual transfer of money.
Showcase The front page of the Service Catalog module of Prime Service Catalog. 
snapshot A mechanism of quickly capturing the current state of a running system, after 
which changes are tracked and kept separate, enabling users to easily revert to the beginning 
state.
software-defined network (SDN) A term to describe various methods by which to make 
configuration of the network as easy and flexible as configuring virtualized servers revolving 
around centralized management of policy and network changes. 
Stack Designer A tool within Prime Service Catalog that allows administrators to build full 
suites of application templates that can then be ordered from the service catalog.
Stack View A graphical representation of a virtual machine showing the physical and 
virtual hardware involved in providing compute, storage, and network resources to the virtual 
workload.
Standard Catalog An end-user orderable item within UCS Director that will provision a 
new virtual machine into a given vDC.
Storage Policy Determine on which data store to create the VM disks.
System Policy Configure guest operating system details like hostname, DNS, and time zone.
T
template Prebuilt and standardized set of components and configurations that make up an 
IT service offering. 
Trending Report A type of report in UCS Director that shows the change of a metric over a 
given time range.
U
UCS Central A manager of multiple UCS domains that allows administrators to manage 
multiple UCS domains from a single manager of UCS Managers.

Virtual Supervisor Module (VSM) 467
UCS Director The Cisco product for automation and orchestration of storage, network, 
compute, and virtualization of data center infrastructure. 
UCS Director Dashboard A view within UCS Director that shows statistics for storage, 
memory, and CPU usage within a UCS Director pod.
UCS domain A UCS system composed of a pair of Fabric Interconnects and all-blade chassis 
and/or rackmounts connected to them.
UCS Network Policy A UCS Director Physical Infrastructure Policy that determines the 
number and configuration of vNICs created within a new service profile.
UCS Performance Manager Cisco’s Performance Management for looking at full stack 
performance across storage, network, compute, virtualization, as well as storage fabrics.
UCS Storage Policy A UCS Director Physical Infrastructure Policy that determines the 
number and configuration of vHBAs created within a new service profile. 
User Action Policy Provide custom VM actions to end users by linking to workflows. 
user groups The ability to group a specified set of users into a group by function, such as 
End Users, Administrators, etc.
user role A set of privileges assigned to a user type in UCS Director.
V
vDC categories A way to indicate different types of workloads within a vDC and apply  
different compute, network, storage, etc., policies based on need. 
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation (VACS) A rich set of networking services and 
interactions between different application tiers used in a Nexus 1000V virtual environment.
virtual data center (vDC) A logical construct into which users deploy virtual machines.
virtual device context (VDC) The ability to virtualize a Nexus switch to run separate/
unique L2/L3 services in each VDC.
Virtual Ethernet Module (VEM) In virtual switching such as the Nexus 1000V, analogous to 
a physical linecard in a modular switch.
Virtual Palo Alto Networks appliance (vPAN) Created by Palo Alto Networks, the vPAN 
appliance is a hypervisor-based firewall and intrusion detection system.
Virtual Security Gateway (VSG) A Cisco software product that provides virtual security 
services along with Cisco Nexus 1000V.
Virtual Supervisor Module (VSM) In virtual switching such as the Nexus 1000V, analogous 
to a physical supervisor in a modular switch.

468 widget
W–X–Y–Z
widget A dashboard element designed to provide the most important details in the easiest-
to-consume fashion.
workflow An automation routine created within UCS Director, composed of one or more 
tasks, that when executed creates a service request. 
Workflow Designer A diagramming-like interface within UCS Director where the adminis-
trator can make advanced, multiple-step workflows that can be published in the UCS Director 
service catalog.
YAML Yet Another Modeling Language, used for the construction of Heat templates.

APPENDIX A
Answers to the “Do I Know This 
Already?” Quizzes
Chapter 1
1. A, C
 
2. C
 
3. A, D
 
4. D
5. A
6. B, D
 
7. A, B, D
 
8. A, C
 
9. C
10. A
Chapter 2
1. B
2. D
3. B
4. D
5. C
6. A, B, C
 
7. A, C
 
8. A, B
 
9. A
10. D
Chapter 3
1. A
2. D
3. B
4. D
5. A
 
6. D
 
7. B
 
8. C
 
9. C
 10. A
Chapter 4
1. A, B, D
 
2. A, C
 
3. A, B, C
 
4. B, C
 
5. C
 
6. A
 
7. A
 
8. C
 
9. D
 10. A
Chapter 5
1. D
2. B
3. B
4. C
5. D
6. C
7. A
8. A
9. A
10. C

470  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Chapter 6
1. A, C, D, E
 
2. C
 
3. D
 
4. A, D
 
5. D
 
6. D
 
7. B, D
 
8. A, B, C, D
 
9. A, B, D
 10. B
Chapter 7
1. D
 
2. C, D, E
 
3. C
 
4. D
 
5. F
 
6. B
 
7. E
 
8. C, D
 
9. B
 10. B
Chapter 8
1. A, B, C, D
 
2. C
 
3. A
 
4. A
 
5. A, B
 
6. C
 
7. A, B, C
 
8. B
 
9. A
 10. D
Chapter 9
1. A
 
2. C
 
3. D
 
4. D
 
5. A, B, C
 
6. B
 
7. B
 
8. C
 
9. A
 10. B
Chapter 10
1. B
2. B
 
3. C
 
4. B
 
5. A
 
6. C
 
7. B, D
 
8. C
 
9. A, B, C, D, E
 10. B, C
Chapter 11
1. B
 
2. B, C, D, E, G
 
3. A, B, C, D
 
4. A, C, D
 
5. A, B, D
 
6. A
 
7. C
 
8. B, D
 
9. A, C, E
 10. A

Appendix A: Answers to the “Do I Know This Already?” Quizzes  471
A
Chapter 12
1. A, B, C
 
2. B
 
3. C
 
4. A, B, C, D, E
 
5. A
 
6. B
 
7. A, B, C
 
8. A
 
9. A, B, C, D
 10. A, B, C
Chapter 13
1. A, B, C, D
 
2. C
3. A
4. A, C, D
 
5. A, D, E
 
6. C
7. A, B, C
 
8. A, C, E, F
 
9. A, B, C, D
 10. D
 11. C
 12. B
 13. A, B, C, D
Chapter 14
1. A, B, C, E
 
2. C
 
3. B
 
4. B
 
5. D
 
6. D
 
7. C
 
8. C
 
9. B, C
 10. A

This page intentionally left blank 

APPENDIX B
Memory Tables
Chapter 9
Table 9-2 vDC Policies
vDC Policy
Purpose
System Policy
 
Computing Policy
 
Network Policy 
 
Storage Policy 
End User Self-Service Policy 
 
User Action Policy 
 
Cost Model
 

474  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Chapter 10
Table 10-3 Prime Service Catalog Supported VM Lifecycle Actions
Virtual Machine Action
Description
Power On/Off VM
 
 
Tell the guest operating system to reboot. 
Shutdown VM Guest*
Add a new virtual network adapter to a VM. User will need to 
provide details on port-group assignment and IP information. 
Clone VM
Create a new virtual hard drive and add it to the VM. Does not 
perform any OS provisioning. 
Create VM Snapshot
Delete an individual snapshot of a VM. 
Delete VNIC
Move the VM to an available vDC in a public cloud and maintain 
the current configuration of the VM. 
Reset VM
 
 
Restore a VM to a previously taken snapshot state. 
Standby VM
Execute an OS-level suspend task.
* Requires that the VM have the proper VM management tools for the hypervisor installed.
** Only available when Intercloud Fabric is integrated into Prime Service Catalog.
Chapter 11
Table 11-2 UCS Director Application Container Types 
Container Type
Description
The original and most common type of application container. 
Doesn’t require any specific network architecture to use. 
Leverages the Cisco Virtual Security Gateway zone-based 
firewall solution to provide enhanced security for container 
virtual machines. 

Appendix B: Memory Tables  475
B
Container Type
Description
Tightly integrated with a Cisco Application Centric 
Infrastructure network deployment, leverages tenant and 
application profiles for creating application containers. 
Supports bare-metal workloads as well as VMware virtual 
machine workloads within the container. 
An application container option for customers with a Cisco 
Dynamic Fabric Automation (DFA) network deployment.
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation* (VACS) is a licensable 
feature set for UCS Director for customers looking for an 
advanced application container structure designed specifically 
for highly flexible and easy-to-deploy virtual network designs 
using Cisco virtual network technologies for routing, switching, 
and security.
* VACS was previously known as Virtual Application Container Services.
Chapter 13
Table 13-2 Syslog Severity Levels
Integer
Severity
Description
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Chapter 14
Table 14-2 Severity Levels
Severity Level
Description 
A service-affecting condition that requires immediate action to resolve. 
This severity indicates that some element is completely out of functional 
service. 
A service-affecting condition that requires urgent action to resolve. This 
severity indicates that there is severe degradation in capabilities of the 
affected element. 

476  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Severity Level
Description 
A nonservice-affecting condition that needs to be resolved. This 
severity indicates a noted alarm condition, but no service degradation is 
being experienced. 
An indication of a potential service-affecting condition that should be 
investigated and resolved to prevent future problems. 
An informational detail about a current condition within the system. 
A basic notification or informational message.  
Table 14-4 UCS Director Logs 
Log
Description
Infra Manager
 
 
  
Web Context Cloud 
Manager 
  
 
Tomcat Log
 
 
Authenticator Log
 
Mail Delivery Log
 
Patch Log
 
Table 14-5 Prime Service Catalog Logs 
Log
Description
Prime Service Catalog 
Log
 
 
Service Link Log
 
 
Orchestration Log
 
Firstboot Log
 
 

APPENDIX C
Memory Tables Answer Key
Chapter 9
Table 9-2 vDC Policies
vDC Policy
Purpose
System Policy
Configure guest operating system details like hostname, 
DNS, and time zone
Computing Policy
Determine what hypervisor host system to deploy the  
VM onto
Network Policy 
Determine the number and type of network connectivity 
needed for the VM 
Storage Policy 
Determine what data store to create the VM disks on
End User Self-Service Policy 
Provide access to out-of-the-box VM lifecycle action tasks to 
end users
User Action Policy 
Provide custom VM actions to end users by linking to 
workflows 
Cost Model
Assign value to different metrics such as number of vCPUs as 
part of a chargeback model

478  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Chapter 10
Table 10-3 Prime Service Catalog Supported VM Lifecycle Actions
Virtual Machine Action
Description
Power On/Off VM
Change the power state of a virtual machine. Note that Power Off 
is different from Shutdown VM Guest. 
Reboot VM*
Tell the guest operating system to reboot. 
Shutdown VM Guest*
Tell the guest operating system to shut down. 
Add vNIC
Add a new virtual network adapter to a VM. User will need to 
provide details on port-group assignment and IP information. 
Clone VM
Create a copy of the VM and place into a designated vDC. 
Create VM Disk
Create a new virtual hard drive and add it to the VM. Does not 
perform any OS provisioning. 
Create VM Snapshot
Create a new snapshot of the current state of a VM. 
Delete VM Snapshot
Delete an individual snapshot of a VM. 
Delete VNIC
Remove an individual virtual network adapter from a VM. 
Migrate VM to Public 
Cloud**
Move the VM to an available vDC in a public cloud and maintain 
the current configuration of the VM. 
Reset VM
Execute a power cycle task on the VM. This is different from 
Shutdown VM Guest. 
Revert VM Snapshot
Restore a VM to a previously taken snapshot state. 
Standby VM
Place the VM into a hypervisor-level pause state. 
Suspend VM*
Execute an OS-level suspend task.
* Requires that the VM have the proper VM management tools for the hypervisor installed.
** Only available when Intercloud Fabric is integrated into Prime Service Catalog.
Chapter 11
Table 11-2 UCS Director Application Container Types 
Container Type
Description
Fenced virtual container
The original and most common type of application container. 
Doesn’t require any specific network architecture to use. 
Virtual Security Gateway 
(VSG)
Leverages the Cisco Virtual Security Gateway zone-based 
firewall solution to provide enhanced security for container 
virtual machines. 

Appendix C: Memory Tables Answer Key  479
C
Container Type
Description
APIC container
Tightly integrated with a Cisco Application Centric 
Infrastructure network deployment, leverages tenant and 
application profiles for creating application containers. 
Supports bare-metal workloads as well as VMware virtual 
machine workloads within the container. 
Fabric container 
An application container option for customers with a Cisco 
Dynamic Fabric Automation (DFA) network deployment.
VACS container
Virtual Application Cloud Segmentation* (VACS) is a licensable 
feature set for UCS Director for customers looking for an 
advanced application container structure designed specifically 
for highly flexible and easy-to-deploy virtual network designs 
using Cisco virtual network technologies for routing, switching, 
and security.
* VACS was previously known as Virtual Application Container Services.
Chapter 13
Table 13-2 Syslog Severity Levels
Integer
Severity
Description
0
Emergency
System is unusable.
1
Alert
Immediate action is needed.
2
Critical
A condition that should be corrected immediately has occurred.
3
Error
Non-urgent failure.
4
Warning
An error will occur if no action is taken.
5
Notice
An unusual but non-error condition.
6
Informational
Normal operating behavior.
7
Debug
Used for debugging an application, but not typically tracked.
Chapter 14
Table 14-2 Severity Levels
Severity Level
Description 
Critical
A service-affecting condition that requires immediate action to resolve. 
This severity indicates that some element is completely out of functional 
service. 
Major 
A service-affecting condition that requires urgent action to resolve. This 
severity indicates that there is severe degradation in capabilities of the 
affected element. 

480  CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official Cert Guide
Severity Level
Description 
Minor
A nonservice-affecting condition that needs to be resolved. This 
severity indicates a noted alarm condition, but no service degradation is 
being experienced. 
Warning
An indication of a potential service-affecting condition that should be 
investigated and resolved to prevent future problems. 
Condition
An informational detail about a current condition within the system. 
Info
A basic notification or informational message.  
Table 14-4 UCS Director Logs 
Log
Description
Infra Manager
Provides details on the infrastructure management and automation 
services of UCS Director. This log captures very detailed 
information related to regular system tasks that inventory 
underlying infrastructure as well as service requests execution. 
Web Context Cloud 
Manager 
Provides details on all web resources accessed by web and API 
users. 
Tomcat Log
Provides details on the status and health of the Tomcat Server that 
executes the underlying Java programs that provide access to the 
administrator and end-user portals. 
Authenticator Log
Provides details regarding both local and LDAP authentications 
from UCS Director as part of both web and API access. 
Mail Delivery Log
Provides details related to sending of emails from UCS Director as 
part of alerts, approvals, or workflow notifications. 
Patch Log
Provides detailed information about any updates and patches 
applied to the system. 
Table 14-5 Prime Service Catalog Logs 
Log
Description
Prime Service Catalog 
Log
Provides details on the web portal and catalog interface for end 
users and administrators. 
Service Link Log
Provides details on the integration between Prime Service Catalog 
and external systems such as UCS Director accomplished through 
Control Agents and messaging services. 
Orchestration Log
Provides details on end-user orders and the execution of service 
plans. 
Firstboot Log
Provides details from the first boot of the appliance after 
installation, when the initial configuration, database, and 
application setup was executed. 

Prime Service Catalog backups,  
450-451
UCSD backups, 449-450
faults, troubleshooting
fault monitoring, 439
fault severity levels, 438
fault states, 438
logs
Firstboot logs, 447
Orchestration logs, 447
Prime Service Catalog logs, 446-447
Service Link logs, 447
UCSD logs, 444-446
monitoring
infrastructure event/fault  
monitoring, 439
performance monitoring, 440
service request monitoring, 441-443
administrative workflows (VM) in UCS 
Director, 232-235
Advanced Catalog (UCSD)
Basic Information page, 295
Summary page, 296
vApp Workflow page, 296
agents, defining, 15
Agile IT design approach, 27
Agile Manifesto, The, 27
Allspaw, John
10+ Deploys Per Day: Dev and Ops 
Cooperation at Flickr, 32
DevOps, 32
Amazon.com
AWS, cloud history, 8-9
IT operations, 28
Index
Numbers
3-Tier External Container Template 
(VACS), 150
3-Tier Internal Container Template 
(VACS), 149
10+ Deploys Per Day: Dev and Ops 
Cooperation at Flickr, 32
A
abstraction, Domain Ten cloud framework, 
50-51
ACI (Application-Centric Infrastructure)
APIC, 139-140, 145
context, 140
defining, 15
EP, 140
EPG, 140-142
reports, 361
tenants, 140
action policies
vDC, 226-227, 250, 257-258
VM
assigning to vDC, 226-227
creating in UCS Director, 212
custom workflow actions, 212-218, 
221, 224, 228-230
Active Directory domains, registering VM, 
211
Active Form Components tab (Prime 
Service Catalog, Service Designer), 102
activities, UCSD workflow design, 81
administration
backups, 448

482  AMQP (Advanced Message Queuing Protocol)
AMQP (Advanced Message Queuing 
Protocol), 103, 123
analytics, Domain Ten cloud framework, 
56-57
ANP (Application Network Profiles),  
141-142
API (Application Programming Interface), 
defining, 14
APIC (Application Policy Infrastructure 
Controllers), 139-140, 145
Application Profile Details reports,  
361-362
containers, 324, 346
Tenant Details reports, 361-362
application containers, 296
APIC containers, 324, 346
catalogs, creating, 343
Cisco UCS Director Application Container 
Guide, 346
defining, 319
deployed containers, managing, 344-345
fabric containers, 324
fenced virtual containers
creating, 334
deploying, 325
security, 325, 333
setting up, 327-330, 333-335
templates, 324, 327-330, 333-335
VACS container comparisons to, 326
VM deployments, 333
load-balanced containers, 323
managing, 323
reports, generating, 345
three-tier containers, 322
VACS containers, 324
benefits of, 325
deploying, 337
fenced virtual container comparisons 
to, 326
installing, 325
security, 341
setting up, 335, 339-342
SLB, 326, 342
templates, 335, 339-342
VSG, 324
Application Details page (Standard 
Catalog), 293
application groups, UCS Performance 
Manager, 414
applications
ACI
APIC, 139-140, 145
context, 140
EP, 140
EPG, 140-142
tenants, 140
ANP, 141-142
cloud-native applications, 17
Domain Ten cloud framework, 56-57
legacy applications, data storage and 
Domain Ten cloud framework, 56
microservices, 17
RabbitMQ message broker (Prime Service 
Catalog), 102
Stack Designer templates, 113, 116,  
120-122
traditional applications, 15
virtualized applications, 16
approving workflows through UCSD, 82
architectures, UCSD, 73-75
archiving VM, 211
ARPANET, mainframe computing and 
cloud history, 7
artifacts, 34
ASP (Application Service Providers), cloud 
history, 8
assessments (CloudSense), 406
auto-created services (Prime Service 
Catalog), customizing, 303-304
automation
BMA, 85
CIAC, 69
Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite, UCS 
Director, 72, 76

catalogs (UCSD)  483
cloud infrastructure, 130-131
Domain Ten cloud framework, 51
MetaCloud, 72
OpenStack, 70-71
Prime Service Catalog, automated service 
delivery, 92
self-service portals, 41
service delivery process
CIAC, 69
MetaCloud, 72
OpenStack, 70-71
UCS Director, 72-77, 85, 138, 142, 265
workflows, 59
available host capacity, managing via UCS 
Central, 397
AVS (Application Virtual Switches)
components of, 146
virtual switching and cloud infrastructure, 
145
AWS (Amazon Web Services), cloud  
history, 8-9
B
backups, 448
Prime Service Catalog backups, 450-451
UCSD backups, 449-450
bandwidth, monitoring
UCS Manager, 389-390, 393-396
UCS Performance Manager, 413
Basic Information page
Advanced Catalog, 295
Service Container Catalog, 297
Standard Catalog, 291
BIG-IP Pool Member reports, 361
BIG-IP Virtual Server reports, 360
billing
chargebacks, 349, 372
Budget Policies, 379-380
Charge reports, 377-378
Cost Models, 373-377
Customer Billing Reports, 378
Metering Data Export Setup, 381
Customer Billing Reports, 378
showbacks, 349, 372
Bimodal IT, 29-30
Black, Benjamin, 9
blades, monitoring
bandwidth, 389-390
CPU, 391
IOM, 392
memory, 391
block storage (Cinder), OpenStack, 71
BMA (Baremetal Agent), UCS Director, 76, 
83
automation, 85
integration, 84
preconfigured virtual appliances, adding, 
84
Reachability status, 85
bootups, Firstboot logs, 447
browsing services via Prime Service 
Catalog, 105-106
Budget Policies, 379-380
BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) service 
descriptions, 95
C
capacity management
UCS Central, 396
available host capacity, 397
statistics/reporting, 398-403
UCS Director
CloudSense reporting, 404-408
dashboard statistics, 404
Capacity Reports (UCS Performance 
Manager), 416
catalogs (container), creating, 343
catalogs (UCSD)
Advanced Catalog
Basic Information page, 295

484  catalogs (UCSD)
Summary page, 296
vApp Workflow page, 296
creating, 291
Prime Service Catalog
backups, 450-451
categories, 299
connecting to, 301
Control Agent UCSDAgent, 302
End-User Portal, 313-314
importing to, 301
logs, 446-447
My Stuff screen, 312-313
self-management features, 312-314
services, checking/monitoring order 
status, 309-311
services, customizing auto-created 
services, 303-304
services, example of, 300
services, finding, 305-306
services, finding available services, 
300
services, ordering, 307-311
services, viewing details of, 306
Shopping Cart feature, 308
Showcase, 298, 305-306
UCSD Scheduler, 302
VM lifecycle actions, 312-313
Service Container Catalog, 296-297
Standard Catalog, 290
Application Details page, 293
Basic Information page, 291
Customization page, 293
ISO, 291
Summary page, 295
VM Access page, 294
VDI Catalog, 297
categories (Prime Service Catalog), 299
Categories tab (Prime Service Catalog, 
Service Designer), 102
CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 Official 
Cert Guide, Premium Edition, 455
Ceilometer (telemetry/metering), 
OpenStack, 71
chapter-ending review tools, exam prepara-
tion, 458
chargebacks, 349
Budget Policies, 379-380
Chargeback reports, 377-378
Cost Models, 373-377
Customer Billing Reports, 378
Domain Ten cloud framework, 55
Metering Data Export Setup, 381
CIAC (Cisco Intelligent Automation for 
Cloud), 69
Cinder (block storage), OpenStack, 71
Cisco Communities, workflow develop-
ment, 277
Cisco Learning Network, 457
Cisco ONE Enterprise Cloud Suite, 72
Intercloud Fabric for Business, 69
Prime Services Catalog, 69
UCS Director, 69
architecture of, 73-75
benefits of, 73
BMA, 76, 83-85
components of, 74
deploying, 76
installing, 76,
multinode deployment, 76
operating, 75
orchestration, 78-83
self-service portals, 77
as turnkey solution, 73
workflow design, 80-83
VACS, 69
Cisco Server Provisioner (CIAC), 69. See 
also BMA
Cisco UCS Director Application Container 
Guide, 346
Cisco UCS Director Orchestration Guide, 
275
Cisco UCS Reports (UCS Performance 
Manager), 416

cloud infrastructure  485
Cisco Virtual Application Cloud 
Segmentation Services Installation and 
Upgrade Guide, Release 5.4STV3.0, 335
cloud, 6
applications
cloud-native applications, 17
microservices, 17
traditional applications, 15
virtualized applications, 16
benefits of, 48
characteristics of, 10
defining (NIST), 9
characteristics of, 10
deployment models, 12
service models, 11
deployment models, 12
Domain Ten framework, 49, 60
abstraction, 50-51
analytics, 56-57
applications, 56-57
automation, 51
chargebacks (financials), 55
compliance, 57
data management, 56
data privacy, 56
data storage, 56
documentation, 57-58
environmental factors, 50
financials, 55
governance, 57-58
infrastructure, 50
operations, 57-58
orchestration, 52
organization, 57-58
PaaS, 56-57
platforms, 56
SaaS, 57
security, 57
self-service portal, 53
service catalog, 54
showbacks (financials), 55
virtualization, 50-51
future of, 9
history of
ASP, 8
AWS, 8-9
mainframe computing, 6
VM, 7-8
VPN, 8
IT operations
Agile design approach, 27
Bimodal IT, 29-30
cloud deployments, 48
DevOps, 30-36
future of, 29-30
IT as service broker, 30
Lean design approach, 26
self-service portals, 39-41
service catalogs, 36-39
shadow IT, 46-47
speed of development, 28
Waterfall design approach, 24-26
public cloud, security and Intercloud 
Fabric Secure Extender, 156
SaaS consumption model, 46
SDN
ACI, 15
agents, 15
API, 14
benefits of, 13
defining, 13
network virtual appliances, 15
plug-ins, 14
service models, 11
cloud backups, 448
Prime Service Catalog backups, 450-451
UCSD backups, 449-450
cloud infrastructure
ACI
APIC, 139-140, 145

486  cloud infrastructure
context, 140
EP, 140
EPG, 140-142
tenants, 140
ANP, 141-142
automation, 130-131, 142
Intercloud Fabric, 152
hybrid deployments, 153-154
Intercloud Fabric for Business, 155
Intercloud Fabric for Providers, 155
Intercloud Fabric Secure Extender, 
155-156
switches and, 154
monitoring
UCS Manager, 392-396
UCS Performance Manager, 412-414
orchestration, 130-131
physical switching, 131
cloud programmability of Nexus 
Switches, 138
Nexus 2000 Series FEX, 132-134
Nexus 3000 Series Switches, 135
Nexus 4000 Series Switches, 135
Nexus 5000 Series Switches, 136
Nexus 6000 Series Switches, 136
Nexus 7000 Series Switches, 137
Nexus 9000 Series Switches, 138
UCS Director, infrastructure animation, 
142
VACS
benefits of, 146
containers, 148-152
UCS Director and, 147
virtual switching
AVS, 145
Nexus 1000V Series Switches, 144
overview of, 143
Cloud Infrastructure Reports, 353-355
ACI reports, 361
APIC Application Profile Details reports, 
361-362
APIC Tenant Details reports, 361-362
BIG-IP Pool Member reports, 361
BIG-IP Virtual Server reports, 360
EMC VNX LUN reports, 362
EMC VNX Summary reports, 362
Host Node VM reports, 363
Instant Reports, 367
Map Reports, 366
network service device reports, 360
physical network reports, 358-360
Physical Storage reports, 362
Stack View reports, 365
Tabular Reports, 367
Top 5 Reports, 364
Trending Reports, 367
UCS Compute Reports, 356
Virtual > Compute VM reports, 363
virtual infrastructure reports, 363-366
Virtual Machine Details vNIC reports, 364
cloud monitoring
infrastructure event/fault monitoring, 439
performance monitoring, 440
service request monitoring, 441-443
Cloudia Script, UCSD, 275
CloudSense Analytics, 368-372
CloudSense reporting via UCS Director, 
404-405
assessments, 406
Report Builder, 407-408
CMDB (Change Management Database 
System), troubleshooting VM, 211
collaboration tools, DevOps, 34
community cloud, 12
compliance, Domain Ten cloud framework, 
57
Components view (UCS Performance 
Manager), 414
Compute (Nova), OpenStack, 70
Computing Policies
creating for VM in UCS Director, 230-232
vDC, 250-253

customizing services in Prime Service Catalog  487
configuration management tools,  
DevOps, 34
configuring
application templates via Stack Designer 
(Prime Service Catalog), 116, 120-122
Puppet configuration management tool 
(Prime Service Catalog), 103
vDC, 249
containers (application), 296
APIC containers, 324, 346
catalogs, creating, 343
Cisco UCS Director Application  
Container Guide, 346
defining, 319
deployed containers, managing, 344-345
fabric containers, 324
fenced virtual containers, 324
creating, 334
deploying, 325
security, 325, 333
setting up, 327-330, 333-335
templates, 324, 327-330, 333-335
VACS container comparisons to, 326
VM deployments, 333
load-balanced containers, 323
managing, 323
reports, generating, 345
three-tier containers, 322
VACS containers, 324
benefits of, 325
deploying, 337
fenced virtual container  
comparisons to, 326
installing, 325
security, 341
setting up, 335, 339-342
SLB, 326, 342
templates, 335, 339-342
VSG, 324
containers (VACS), 148
3 Tier External Container Templates, 150
3 Tier Internal Container Templates, 149
building with gateway of choice, 151-152
context (ACI), 140
continuous delivery stage (DevOps), 36
continuous deployment stage (DevOps), 36
continuous integration stage (DevOps), 36
continuous integration tools (DevOps), 34
contracts (EPG), 142
Control Agent UCSDAgent (Prime Service 
Catalog), 302
Cost Computation option (Standard 
Catalog, Customization page), 294
Cost Models, 250, 256, 373-377
CPO (Cisco Process Orchestrator), CIAC, 
69
CPU
monitoring with UCS Manager, 391
Utilization Map Reports, 366
crypto cards, 56
Custom Approval Tasks (UCSD), 276
custom reporting via UCS Central, 400-403
Custom Tasks (UCSD), 276
custom VM action policies, creating in UCS 
Director
assigning to vDC, 226-227
custom workflow actions, 212-218, 221, 
224, 228-230
Custom Workflow Input (UCSD), 277
Customer Billing Reports, 378
Customization page (Standard Catalog)
Cost Computation option, 294
Post Provisioning Custom Actions option, 
293
Virtual Storage Catalog Policy option, 293
customizing services in Prime Service 
Catalog, 303-304

488  dashboards
D
dashboards
Dashboard (Horizon), OpenStack, 70
statistics, managing via UCS Director, 404
UCS Performance Manager
login options, 410
topology view, 411-414
UCSD
dashboard widgets, 432-433
infrastructure summary dashboards, 
433-434
System Dashboard, 435-436
data management, Domain Ten cloud 
framework, 56
data privacy, Domain Ten cloud frame-
work, 56
data storage, 56
delivering services
automated delivery process
CIAC, 69
MetaCloud, 72
OpenStack, 70-71
on-demand delivery, Prime Service 
Catalog, 94
delivery, continuous delivery stage 
(DevOps), 36
deploying
application containers, managing deploy-
ments, 344-345
cloud, benefits of, 48
continuous deployment stage (DevOps), 
36
fenced virtual containers, 325
UCS Director, 76
VACS containers, 337
deployment models, 12
DevOps, 30
collaboration tools, 34
configuration management tools, 34
continuous delivery stage, 36
continuous deployment stage, 36
continuous integration stage, 36
continuous integration tools, 34
development of, 32
guiding principles of, 32
IaaS, 33
image control tools, 34
PaaS, 34
practices, 33
Puppet configuration management tool 
(Prime Service Catalog), 103
source control tools (version control), 34
tools
list of, 33
pipeline, 34-35
DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration 
Protocol)
server configuration, UCS Director, 424
serviceability, 423-424
Dictionaries tab (Prime Service Catalog, 
Service Designer), 102
DNS (Domain Name Service)
server configuration, UCS Director, 423
serviceability, 422-423
documentation
Domain Ten cloud framework, 57-58
workflows, 58
Domain Ten cloud framework, 49, 60
abstraction, 50-51
analytics, 56-57
applications, 56-57
automation, 51
chargebacks (financials), 55
compliance, 57
data management, 56
data privacy, 56
data storage, 56
documentation, 57-58
environmental factors, 50
financials, 55

fabric  489
governance, 57-58
infrastructure, 50
operations, 57-58
orchestration, 52
organization, 57-58
PaaS, 56-57
platforms, 56
SaaS, 57
security, 57
self-service portal, 53
service catalog, 54
showbacks (financials), 55
virtualization, 50-51
downloading Pearson Cert Practice Tests, 
456-457
Dynamic view (UCS Performance 
Manager), 414
E
email
SaaS, outsourcing email to, 46
SMTP
server configuration via UCS 
Director, 426
serviceability, 425
EMC VNX LUN reports, 362
EMC VNX Summary reports, 362
End-User Portal (Prime Service Catalog), 
313-314
End User Self-Service Policies
creating in UCS Director, 208-210
vDC, 250
end-user storefront (Prime Service Catalog), 
97
logins, 103
services
browsing for, 105-106
ordering, 110-111
overview (description) of, 109
searching for, 107-108
viewing order status details, 111-113
Enterprise Reports (UCS Performance 
Manager), 417
environmental factors, Domain Ten cloud 
framework, 50
EP (Endpoints), ACI, 140
EPG (Endpoint Groups), ACI, 140-142
Escher, M.C., 24
eStore (Prime Service Catalog), 100
Ethernet, monitoring bandwidth via UCS 
Manager, 393-394
event/fault monitoring, 439
Events view (UCS Performance Manager), 
414
exam preparation/review
chapter-ending review tools, 458
Cisco Learning Network, 457
memory tables, 457
Pearson Cert Practice Test engine
downloading/activating exams,  
456-457
practice exam mode, 459
Premium Edition, 457
software installation, 455-456
study mode, 459
suggested study plan, 458
Extensions tab (Prime Service Catalog, 
Service Designer), 102
F
fabric
fabric containers, 324
Intercloud Fabric, 152
hybrid deployments, 153-154
Intercloud Fabric for Business, 155
Intercloud Fabric for Providers, 155
Intercloud Fabric Secure Extender, 
155-156
Prime Service Catalog, 202
switches and, 154
VM, 201

490  faults
faults
monitoring, 439
severity levels, 438
states of, 438
FC (Fibre Channel), monitoring bandwidth 
via UCS Manager, 395-396
fenced virtual containers
creating, 334
deploying, 325
security, 325, 333
setting up, 327-330, 333-335
templates, 324, 327-330, 333-335
VACS container comparisons to, 326
VM deployments, 333
FEX (Fabric Extenders), Nexus 2000 Series 
FEX
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infrastruc-
ture, 132-134
final preparation/review
chapter-ending review tools, 458
Cisco Learning Network, 457
memory tables, 457
Pearson Cert Practice Test engine
downloading/activating exams,  
456-457
practice exam mode, 459
Premium Edition, 457
software installation, 455-456
study mode, 459
suggested study plan, 458
financials, Domain Ten cloud framework, 
55
finding services via Prime Service Catalog, 
105-108, 305-306
Flickr and DevOps development, 32
forms, Active Form Components tab (Prime 
Service Catalog, Service Designer), 102
G
Gartner Bimodal IT, 29-30
Glance (image service), OpenStack, 70
governance of Domain Ten cloud frame-
work, 57-58
groups
application groups, UCS Performance 
Manager, 414
managing
local groups in UCS Director,  
176-177
mapping users in Prime Service 
Catalog, 164-166, 169-172
H
Hammond, Paul
10+ Deploys Per Day: Dev and Ops 
Cooperation at Flickr, 32
DevOps, 32
Heat orchestration
OpenStack, 71
Prime Service Catalog, 123-124
History tab (Prime Service Catalog, Service 
Designer), 102
Horizon (Dashboard), OpenStack, 70
Host Node VM reports, 363
hosts
available host capacity, managing via UCS 
Central, 397
monitoring
bandwidth, 389-390
CPU, 391
IOM, 392
memory, 391
HOT files (Heat orchestration with Prime 
Service Catalog), 124
hybrid cloud, 12
hypervisors (virtual), adding to UCS 
Director, 203-205

ISO, Standard Catalog (UCSD)  491
I
IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service), 11, 33
IBM, VM, 7
identity service (Keystone), OpenStack, 71
image control tools (DevOps), 34
image service (Glance), OpenStack, 70
importing to Prime Service Catalog, 301
infrastructure (cloud)
ACI
APIC, 139-140, 145
context, 140
EP, 140
EPG, 140-142
tenants, 140
ANP, 141-142
automation, 130-131, 142
Intercloud Fabric, 152
hybrid deployments, 153-154
Intercloud Fabric for Business, 155
Intercloud Fabric for Providers, 155
Intercloud Fabric Secure Extender, 
155-156
switches and, 154
orchestration, 130-131
physical switching, 131
cloud programmability of Nexus 
Switches, 138
Nexus 2000 Series FEX, 132-134
Nexus 3000 Series Switches, 135
Nexus 4000 Series Switches, 135
Nexus 5000 Series Switches, 136
Nexus 6000 Series Switches, 136
Nexus 7000 Series Switches, 137
Nexus 9000 Series Switches, 138
UCS Director, infrastructure animation, 
142
VACS
benefits of, 146
containers, 148-152
UCS Director and, 147
virtual switching
AVS, 145
Nexus 1000V Series Switches, 144
overview of, 143
infrastructure, Domain Ten cloud frame-
work, 50
infrastructure event/fault monitoring, 439
infrastructure monitoring
UCS Manager, 392-396
UCS Performance Manager, 412-414
infrastructure summary dashboards 
(UCSD), 433-434
installing
Pearson Cert Practice Test engine  
software, 455-456
Powershell agent in UCS Director,  
205-206
UCS Director, 76
VACS containers, 325
Instant Reports, 367
integration
continuous integration stage (DevOps), 36
continuous integration tools (DevOps), 34
Intercloud Fabric, 152
hybrid deployments, 153-154
Intercloud Fabric for Business, 155
Intercloud Fabric for Providers, 155
Intercloud Fabric Secure Extender,  
155-156
Prime Service Catalog, 202
switches and, 154
VM, 201
Intercloud Fabric for Business (Prime 
Service Catalog), 103
IOM (IO Modules), monitoring via UCS 
Manager, 392
IPAM (IP Address Management), 259
IP Subnet Pool Policy, 261
Static IP Pool Policy, 260-261
VLAN Pool Policy, 262
ISO, Standard Catalog (UCSD), 291

492  IT
IT
evolution of, 66
old IT model versus new IT model, 66
service requests, Prime Service Catalog, 
92-93
IT and cloud operations, 24
Agile design approach, 27
Bimodal IT, 29-30
cloud deployments, 48
DevOps, 30
collaboration tools, 34
configuration management tools, 34
continuous delivery stage, 36
continuous deployment stage, 36
continuous integration stage, 36
continuous integration tools, 34
development of, 32
guiding principles of, 32
IaaS, 33
image control tools, 34
PaaS, 34
practices, 33
source control tools (version control), 
34
tools, 33-35
future of, 29-30
IT as service broker, 30
Lean design approach, 26
self-service portals
automation, 41
benefits of, 41
RBAC, 39
service catalogs, 36-39
shadow IT, issues with, 46-47
speed of development, 28
Waterfall design approach, 24-26
J
JavaScript, Scripts tab (Prime Service 
Catalog, Service Designer), 102
K
Keystone (identity service), OpenStack, 71
Keywords tab (Prime Service Catalog, 
Service Designer), 102
L
LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol), UCS Director integration, 
178-180, 183
Lean IT design approach, 26
Lean Software Development: An Agile 
Toolkit, 27
legacy applications, data storage and 
Domain Ten cloud framework, 56
Licklider, J.C.R., 6
load balancing
application containers, 323
SLB, VACS containers, 326, 342
locating services via Prime Service Catalog, 
105-108, 305-306
logins, Prime Service Catalog, 103
logs
Firstboot logs, 447
Orchestration logs, 447
Prime Service Catalog logs, 446-447
Service Link logs, 447
UCSD logs, 444-446
M
Machine That Changed The World, The, 26
mainframe computing and cloud history, 6
maintenance, faults. See also serviceability
monitoring, 439
severity levels, 438
states of, 438

monitoring  493
managing
application containers, 323
capacity
UCS Central, 396-403
UCS Director, 404-408
configuration management tools (DevOps), 
34
connections, Prime Service Catalog, 172
data management, Domain Ten cloud 
framework, 56
deployed application containers, 344-345
groups
default roles in UCSD, 183-185, 188
local groups in UCS Director,  
176-177
mapping groups in Prime Service 
Catalog, 164-166, 169-172
IT service requests, Prime Service Catalog, 
92-93
performance
UCS Central, 396-403
UCS Manager, 389-396
UCS Performance Manager, 410-417
Puppet configuration management tool 
(Prime Service Catalog), 103
users
local users in UCS Director, 173-175
mapping users in Prime Service 
Catalog, 164-166, 169-172
new users with a single role in 
UCSD, 188, 191-193
VM
adding virtual hypervisors to UCS 
Director, 203-205
archiving, 211
CMDB, troubleshooting VM, 211
common administrative workflows 
in UCS Director, 232-235
creating Computing Policies in UCS 
Director, 230-232
creating custom action policies in 
UCS Director, 212-218, 221,  
224-230
creating End User Self-Service poli-
cies in UCS Director, 208-210
installing PowerShell agent in UCS 
Director, 205-206
Intercloud Fabric, 201
Prime Service Catalog, 236-242
registering new VM in UCS 
Director, 211
setting up end-user options in UCS 
Director, 230-231
troubleshooting, 211
UCS Director, 201-218, 221, 224-
238
vDC in UCS Director, 207, 226-227
Manifesto for Agile Software Development, 
27
Map Reports, 366
mapping
groups in Prime Service Catalog, 164-166, 
169-172
users in Prime Service Catalog, 164-166, 
169-172
McCarthy, John, 7
memory
memory tables, exam preparation, 457
monitoring via UCS Manager, 391
messaging, AMQP, 103, 123
MetaCloud, 72
metering/telemetry (Celiometer), 
OpenStack, 71
microsegmentation (security), 325
microservices, 17
MIT
Lean IT design approach, 26
mainframe computing and cloud history, 7
monitoring. See also serviceability
bandwidth via UCS Performance Manager, 
413
cloud performance via UCS Manager
blade monitoring, 389-392
host monitoring, 389-392
infrastructure monitoring, 392-396

494  monitoring
infrastructure
event/fault monitoring, 439
via UCS Performance Manager, 412-
414
performance monitoring, 440
service request monitoring, 441-443
Moore, Gordon, 143
multinode deployments, UCS Director, 76
My Stuff screen (Prime Service Catalog), 
96, 239, 312-313
N
Network Policy (vDC), 250, 253-254
networking (Neutron), OpenStack, 71
networks
SDN
ACI, 15
agents, 15
API, 14
benefits of, 13
defining, 13
network virtual appliances, 15
plug-ins, 14
VPN, cloud history, 8
network service device reports, 360
network virtual appliances, 15
Neutron (networking), OpenStack, 71
Nexus 1000V Series Switches, 144
Nexus 2000 Series FEX
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infrastruc-
ture, 132-134
Nexus 3000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infrastruc-
ture, 135
Nexus 4000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infrastruc-
ture, 135
Nexus 5000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infrastruc-
ture, 136
Nexus 6000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infrastruc-
ture, 136
Nexus 7000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infrastruc-
ture, 137
Nexus 9000 Series Switches, 138
Nova (Compute), OpenStack, 70
NTP (Network Time Protocol) server syn-
chronization via UCS Director, 420-421
O
object storage (Swift), OpenStack, 70
Objectives tab (Prime Service Catalog, 
Service Designer), 102
Ohno, Taiichi, 26
on-demand service delivery, Prime Service 
Catalog, 94
online resources
Cisco Communities, workflow develop-
ment, 277
Cisco Learning Network, 457
OpenStack
block storage (Cinder), 71
Compute (Nova), 70
Dashboard (Horizon), 70
identity service (Keystone), 71
image service (Glance), 70
implementing, 71
networking (Neutron), 71
object storage (Swift), 70
Orchestration (Heat), 71
telemetry/metering (Ceilometer), 71
O’Reilly Velocity Conference and DevOps 
development, 32

Poppendieck, Tom  495
orchestration
cloud infrastructure, 130-131
CPO (CIAC), 69
Domain Ten cloud framework, 52
Heat (Prime Service Catalog), 123-124
Orchestration (Heat), OpenStack, 71
UCS Director, 78-79, 138
Cisco Communities, 277
Cloudia Script, 275
Custom Approval Tasks, 276
Custom Tasks, 276
Custom Workflow Input, 277
UCS Manager, workflows, 266-277
workflow design, 80-83
ordering services (Prime Service Catalog), 
307-309
organization in Domain Ten cloud frame-
work, 57-58
P
PaaS (Platform as a Service), 11
DevOps, 34
Domain Ten cloud framework, 56-57
Pearson Cert Practice Test engine
downloading/activating exams, 456-457
practice exam mode, 459
Premium Edition, 457
software installation, 455-456
study mode, 459
performance management
UCS Central, 396
available host capacity, 397
statistics/reporting, 398-403
UCS Manager
blade monitoring, 389-392
host monitoring, 389-392
infrastructure monitoring, 392-396
UCS Performance Manager
application groups, 414
bandwidth monitoring, 413
Capacity Reports, 416
Cisco UCS Reports, 416
Components view, 414
dashboard, 410-414
Dynamic view, 414
Enterprise Reports, 417
Events view, 414
infrastructure monitoring, 412-414
Performance Reports, 417
performance monitoring, 440
Performance Reports (UCS Performance 
Manager), 417
physical network reports, 358-360
Physical Storage reports, 362
physical switching within cloud infrastruc-
ture, 131
cloud programmability of Nexus Switches, 
138
Nexus 2000 Series FEX, 132-134
Nexus 3000 Series Switches, 135
Nexus 4000 Series Switches, 135
Nexus 5000 Series Switches, 136
Nexus 6000 Series Switches, 136
Nexus 7000 Series Switches, 137
Nexus 9000 Series Switches, 138
Pinkham, Chris, 9
platforms, Domain Ten cloud framework, 
56
plug-ins, 14
policies
Computing Policies, creating in UCS 
Director, 230-232
custom VM action policies, creating in 
UCS Director
assigning to vDC, 226-227
custom workflow actions, 212-218, 
221, 224, 228-230
End User Self-Service Policies, creating in 
UCS Director, 208-210
Poppendieck, Mary, 27
Poppendieck, Tom, 27

496  Portal Designer (Prime Service Catalog)
Portal Designer (Prime Service Catalog), 
94, 98-100
Post Provisioning Custom Actions option 
(Standard Catalog, Customization page), 
293
PowerShell
PowerShell agent, installing in UCS 
Director, 205-206
registering VM to Active Directory 
domains, 211
practice tests, Pearson Cert Practice Test 
engine
downloading/activating exams, 456-457
practice exam mode, 459
Premium Edition, 457
software installation, 455-456
study mode, 459
preparing for the exam
chapter-ending review tools, 458
Cisco Learning Network, 457
memory tables, 457
Pearson Cert Practice Test engine
downloading/activating exams,  
456-457
practice exam mode, 459
Premium Edition, 457
software installation, 455-456
study mode, 459
suggested study plan, 458
Prime Service Catalog, 38-39, 89
automated service delivery, 92
backups, 450-451
categories, 299
CIAC, 69
connecting to, 301
connection management, 172
Control Agent UCSDAgent, 302
End-User Portal, 313-314
end-user storefront, 97
browsing for services, 105-106
logins, 103
ordering services, 110-111
searching for services, 107-108
service overview (description), 109
viewing service order status details, 
111-113
eStore, 100
group mapping, 164-166, 169-172
Heat orchestration, 123-124
home page, 94, 104
importing to, 301
Intercloud Fabric for Business, 103
IT service requests, 92-93
logins, 103
logs, 446-447
My Stuff screen, 96, 239, 312-313
on-demand service delivery, 94
Portal Designer, 94, 98-100
Puppet configuration management tool, 
103
RabbitMQ application message broker, 
102
self-management features
End-User Portal, 313-314
My Stuff screen, 312-313
self-service portal, 92
Service Designer, 94, 101-102
services
browsing for, 105-106
checking/monitoring order status, 
309-311
customizing auto-created services, 
303-304
example of, 300
finding, 305-306
finding available services, 300
ordering, 110-111, 307-311
overview (description) of, 109
searching for, 107-108
viewing details of, 306
viewing order status details, 111-113

reports  497
Shopping Cart feature, 308
Showcase, 298, 305-306
Stack Designer, 94, 97-98
application templates, 113, 116,  
120-122
target types, 116
UCS Director, 102, 202, 236-238
UCSD Scheduler, 302
user mapping, 164-166, 169-172
VM
lifecycle actions, 312-313
linking Prime Service Catalog to 
UCS Director, 236-238
list of VM actions in Prime Service 
Catalog, 240-242
My Stuff menu, 239
privacy (data), Domain Ten cloud frame-
work, 56
private cloud, 12
processes, CPO (CIAC), 69
public cloud, 12, 156
Puppet classes, registering new VM in UCS 
Director, 211
Puppet configuration management tool 
(Prime Service Catalog), 103
R
RabbitMQ application message broker 
(Prime Service Catalog), 102
RBAC (Role-Based Access Control)
Domain Ten cloud framework, 53
self-service portals, 39
registering new VM in UCS Director, 211
reports
ACI reports, 361
APIC Application Profile Details reports, 
361-362
APIC Tenant Details reports, 361-362
application container reports, generating, 
345
BIG-IP Pool Member reports, 361
BIG-IP Virtual Server reports, 360
chargebacks, 349, 372
Budget Policies, 379-380
Charge reports, 377-378
Cost Models, 373-377
Customer Billing Reports, 378
Metering Data Export Setup, 381
Cloud Infrastructure Reports, 353-355
ACI reports, 361
APIC Application Profile Details 
reports, 361-362
APIC Tenant Details reports,  
361-362
BIG-IP Pool Member reports, 361
BIG-IP Virtual Server reports, 360
EMC VNX LUN reports, 362
EMC VNX Summary reports, 362
Host Node VM reports, 363
Instant Reports, 367
Map Reports, 366
network service device reports, 360
physical network reports, 358-360
Physical Storage reports, 362
Stack View reports, 365
Tabular Reports, 367
Top 5 Reports, 364
Trending Reports, 367
UCS Compute Reports, 356
Virtual > Compute VM reports, 363
virtual infrastructure reports,  
363-366
Virtual Machine Details vNIC 
reports, 364
CloudSense Analytics, 368-372
CloudSense reporting via UCS Director, 
404-405
assessments, 406
Report Builder, 407-408
custom reporting via UCS Central,  
400-403
EMC VNX LUN reports, 362

498  reports
EMC VNX Summary reports, 362
Host Node VM reports, 363
Instant Reports, 367
managing via UCS Central
custom reports, 400-403
standard reports, 398
Map Reports, 366
network service device reports, 360
physical network reports, 358-360
Physical Storage reports, 362
showbacks, 349, 372
Stack View reports, 365
Tabular Reports, 367
Top 5 Reports, 364
Trending Reports, 367, 441
UCS Compute Reports, 356
UCS Performance Manager
Capacity Reports, 416
Cisco UCS Reports, 416
Enterprise Reports, 417
Performance Reports, 417
Virtual > Compute VM reports, 363
virtual infrastructure reports, 363-366
Virtual Machine Details vNIC reports, 364
reservations (UCSD service requests), 283
reviewing for the exam
chapter-ending review tools, 458
Cisco Learning Network, 457
memory tables, 457
Pearson Cert Practice Test engine
downloading/activating exams,  
456-457
practice exam mode, 459
Premium Edition, 457
software installation, 455-456
study mode, 459
suggested study plan, 458
rollbacks, UCS Director workflow design, 
83
S
SaaS (Software as a Service), 11
Domain Ten cloud framework, 57
email, outsourcing to SaaS, 46
SCCM (System Center Configuration 
Manager), registering new VM in UCS 
Director, 211
scripting, installing PowerShell agent in 
UCS Director, 205-206
Scripts tab (Prime Service Catalog, Service 
Designer), 102
SDN (Software-Defined Networking)
ACI, 15
agents, 15
API, 14
benefits of, 13
defining, 13
network virtual appliances, 15
plug-ins, 14
searching services for via Prime Service 
Catalog, 107-108
security
Domain Ten cloud framework, 57
fenced virtual containers, 325, 333
Intercloud Fabric Secure Extender,  
155-156
microsegmentation, 325
public cloud, 156
Syslog, 419
VACS containers, 341
VSG, VACS 3 Tier Internal Container 
Templates, 150
segmentation, VACS
benefits of, 146
containers, 148-152
UCS Director and, 147
self-service portals
automation, 41
benefits of, 41
Domain Ten cloud framework, 53

software  499
Prime Service Catalog, 92
RBAC, 39
UCS Director, 78-79
service catalogs, 36-37
cloud service catalogs, 38
Domain Ten cloud framework, 54
IT and cloud operations, 39
Prime Service Catalog, 38-39
Service Container Catalog (UCSD),  
296-297
Service Designer (Prime Service Catalog), 
94, 101-102
service models, 11
serviceability. See also maintenance; moni-
toring; troubleshooting
defining, 418
DHCP, 423-424
DNS, 422-423
NTP, 420-421
SMTP, 425
Syslog, 418-419
services
BYOD descriptions, 95
delivering, automated delivery process
CIAC, 69
MetaCloud, 72
OpenStack, 70-71
finding via Prime Service Catalog, 105-108
IT as service broker, 30
life cycle of, 40
Prime Service Catalog
browsing for services, 105-106
checking/monitoring order status, 
309-311
customizing auto-created services, 
303-304
example of, 300
finding, 300, 305-306
IT service requests, 92-93
on-demand service delivery, 94
ordering services, 110-111, 307-311
searching for services, 107-108
service overview (description), 109
viewing details of, 306
viewing service order status details, 
111-113
requests, 278-279
actions, 281-282
monitoring, 441-443
reservations, 283
shadow IT, issues with, 46-47
Shopping Cart feature (Prime Service 
Catalog), 308
showbacks, 55, 349, 372
Showcase (Prime Service Catalog), 298, 
305-306
SLB (Server Load-Balancing), VACS  
containers, 326, 342
SMTP (Simple Mail Transport Protocol)
server configuration, UCS Director, 426
serviceability, 425
software
Agile IT design approach, 27
artifacts, 34
Lean IT design approach, 26
Pearson Cert Practice Test engine
downloading/activating exams,  
456-457
installing, 455-456
practice exam mode, 459
Premium Edition, 457
study mode, 459
platforms, Domain Ten cloud framework, 
56
SaaS consumption model, 46
SDN
ACI, 15
agents, 15
API, 14
benefits of, 13
defining, 13

500  software
network virtual appliances, 15
plug-ins, 14
Waterfall IT design approach, 24-26
source control tools (version control), 
DevOps, 34
source images, Standard Catalog (UCSD), 
291
Stack Designer (Prime Service Catalog), 94, 
97-98
application templates, 113, 116, 120-122
target types, 116
Stack View reports, 365
Standard Catalog (UCSD), 290
Application Details page, 293
Basic Information page, 291
Customization page
Cost Computation option, 294
Post Provisioning Custom Actions 
option, 293
Virtual Storage Catalog Policy 
option, 293
ISO, 291
Summary page, 295
VM Access page, 294
stateful/stateless triggers, UCS Director 
workflow design, 81
Static IP Pool Policy (IPAM), 260-261
statistics
dashboard statistics, managing via UCS 
Director, 404
managing via UCS Central, 398-403
storage
block storage (Cinder), OpenStack, 71
data storage, 56
object storage (Swift), OpenStack, 70
Physical Storage reports, 362
Virtual Storage Catalog Policy option 
(Standard Catalog, Customization 
page), 293
Storage Policy (vDC), 250, 255-256
Storage Usage Map Reports, 366
storefront (end-user), Prime Service 
Catalog, 97
logins, 103
services
browsing for, 105-106
ordering, 110-111
overview (description) of, 109
searching for, 107-108
viewing order status details, 111-113
Strachey, Christopher, 7
studying for the exam
chapter-ending review tools, 458
Cisco Learning Network, 457
memory tables, 457
Pearson Cert Practice Test engine
downloading/activating exams, 456-
457
practice exam mode, 459
Premium Edition, 457
software installation, 455-456
study mode, 459
suggested study plan, 458
subnetting, IP Subnet Pool Policy (IPAM), 
261
Summary page
Advanced Catalog, 296
Service Container Catalog, 297
Standard Catalog, 295
Swift (object storage), OpenStack, 70
switches
AVS
components of, 146
virtual switching and cloud infra-
structure, 145
Intercloud Fabric and, 154
Nexus 1000V Series Switches, 144
Nexus 3000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infra-
structure, 135

UCS Performance Manager  501
Nexus 4000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud  
infrastructure, 135
Nexus 5000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud  
infrastructure, 136
Nexus 6000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud  
infrastructure, 136
Nexus 7000 Series Switches
cloud programmability, 138
physical switching and cloud infra-
structure, 137
Nexus 9000 Series Switches, 138
synchronizing NTP servers via UCS 
Director, 420
Syslog
forwarding configuration, 419
security, 419
serviceability, 418-419
System Dashboard (UCSD), 435-436
System Policy (vDC), 250-252
T
Tabular Reports, 367
target types (Stack Designer), 116
telemetry/metering (Ceilometer), 
OpenStack, 71
templates
fenced virtual containers, 324, 327-330, 
333-335
Stack Designer, 113, 116, 120-122
VACS container templates, 335, 339-342
3 Tier External Container Templates, 
150
3 Tier Internal Container Templates, 
149
tenants (ACI), 140
three-tier application containers, 322
Time Sharing in Large Fast Computers, 7
Top 5 Reports, 364
TPS (Toyota Production System) design 
process and IT development, 26
traditional applications, 15
Trending Reports, 367, 441
triggers, UCS Director workflow design, 81 
troubleshooting. See also serviceability
faults
monitoring, 439
severity levels, 438
states, 438
logs
Firstboot logs, 447
Orchestration logs, 447
Prime Service Catalog logs, 446-447
Service Link logs, 447
UCSD logs, 444-446
VM, 211
U
Uber, IT operations, 28
UCS Central
capacity management, 396
available host capacity, 397
statistics/reporting, 398-403
custom reporting, 400-403
performance management, 396
available host capacity, 397
statistics/reporting, 398-403
UCS Compute Reports, 356
UCS Performance Manager
application groups, 414
bandwidth monitoring, 413
blade monitoring, 389-392
Components view, 414

502  UCS Performance Manager
dashboard
login options, 410
topology view, 411-414
Dynamic view, 414
Events view, 414
host monitoring, 389-392
infrastructure monitoring, 392-396,  
412-414
reports
Capacity Reports, 416
Cisco UCS Reports, 416
Enterprise Reports, 417
Performance Reports, 417
UCSD (UCS Director), 69, 72, 245, 248, 
287, 290
Advanced Catalog, 295
Basic Information page, 295
Summary page, 296
vApp Workflow page, 296
application containers, 296
APIC containers, 324, 346
Cisco UCS Director Application 
Container Guide, 346
creating container catalogs, 343
defining, 319
fabric containers, 324
fenced virtual containers, 324-330, 
333-335
generating container reports, 345
load-balanced containers, 323
managing, 323
managing deployed containers,  
344-345
three-tier containers, 322
VACS containers, 324-326, 335-342
VSG, 324
architecture of, 73-75
automation, 138, 142, 265
backups, 449-451
benefits of, 73
BMA, 76, 83
adding preconfigured virtual  
appliances, 84
automation, 85
integration, 84
Reachability status, 85
capacity management
CloudSense reporting, 404-408
dashboard statistics, 404
catalogs, creating, 291
chargebacks, 349, 372
Budget Policies, 379-380
Charge reports, 377-378
Cost Models, 373-377
Customer Billing Reports, 378
Metering Data Export Setup, 381
Cisco Communities, 277
Cisco UCS Director Orchestration Guide, 
275
Cloud Infrastructure Reports, 353-355
ACI reports, 361
APIC Application Profile Details 
reports, 361-362
APIC Tenant Details reports,  
361-362
BIG-IP Pool Member reports, 361
BIG-IP Virtual Server reports, 360
EMC VNX LUN reports, 362
EMC VNX Summary reports, 362
Host Node VM reports, 363
Instant Reports, 367
Map Reports, 366
network service device reports, 360
physical network reports, 358-360
Physical Storage reports, 362
Stack View reports, 365
Tabular Reports, 367
Top 5 Reports, 364
Trending Reports, 367
UCS Compute Reports, 356
Virtual > Compute VM reports, 363

UCSD (UCS Director)  503
virtual infrastructure reports,  
363-366
Virtual Machine Details vNIC 
reports, 364
Cloudia Script, 275
CloudSense Analytics Reports, 368-372
components of, 74
Custom Approval Tasks, 276
Custom Tasks, 276
Custom Workflow Input, 277
dashboards
dashboard widgets, 432-433
infrastructure summary dashboards, 
433-434
System Dashboard, 435-436
default roles, 183-185, 188
deploying, 76
DHCP server configuration, 424
DNS server configuration, 423
installing, 76
IPAM, 259
IP Subnet Pool Policy, 261
Static IP Pool Policy, 260-261
VLAN Pool Policy, 262
LDAP integration, 178-180, 183
logs, 444-447
maintenance
fault monitoring, 439
fault severity levels, 438
fault states, 438
managing
default roles, 183-185, 188
local groups, 176-177
local users, 173-175
new users with a single role, 188, 
191-193
monitoring
infrastructure event/fault monitor-
ing, 439
performance monitoring, 440
service request monitoring, 441-443
multinode deployment, 76
Nexus 1000V Series Switches, 144
NTP server synchronization, 420
operating, 75
orchestration, 78-79, 138
Cisco Communities, 277
Cloudia Script, 275
Custom Approval Tasks, 276
Custom Tasks, 276
Custom Workflow Input, 277
workflows, 80-83, 266-277
physical infrastructure policies, 262-264
PowerShell agent, installing, 205-206
Prime Service Catalog, 102, 202, 236-238
backups, 450-451
categories, 299
connecting to, 301
Control Agent UCSDAgent, 302
End-User Portal, 313-314
importing to, 301
logs, 446-447
My Stuff screen, 312-313
self-management features, 312-314
services, checking/monitoring order 
status, 309-311
services, customizing auto-created 
services, 303-304
services, example of, 300
services, finding, 305-306
services, finding available services, 
300
services, ordering, 307-311
services, viewing details of, 306
Shopping Cart feature, 308
Showcase, 298, 305-306
UCSD Scheduler, 302
VM lifecycle actions, 312-313
reports, 441
self-service portals, 77
Service Container Catalog, 296-297

504  UCSD (UCS Director)
service requests, 278-279
actions, 281-282
monitoring, 441-443
reservations, 283
SMTP server configuration, 426
Standard Catalog, 290
Application Details page, 293
Basic Information page, 291
Customization page, 293-294
ISO, 291
Summary page, 295
VM Access page, 294
Syslog forwarding configuration, 419
Trending Reports, 441
turnkey solution, UCSD as, 73
UCS Manager Storage Policy, 263-264
UCS Manager (UCS Central) Network 
Policy, 263-264
VACS, 147
vDC, 207, 248
Action Policy, 250, 257-258
assigning custom user VM policies 
to vDC, 226-227
categories, 259
Computing Policy, 250-253
configuring, 249
Cost Model, 250, 256
End User Self-Service Policy, 250
Network Policy, 250, 253-254
properties of, 249-250
Storage Policy, 250, 255-256
System Policy, 250-252
VDI Catalog, 297
VM, 201
adding virtual hypervisors to UCS 
Director, 203-205
common administrative workflows, 
232-235
creating Computing Policies,  
230-232
creating custom action policies,  
212-218, 221, 224-230
creating End User Self-Service  
policies, 208-210
installing PowerShell agent in UCS 
Director, 205-206
linking UCS Director to Prime 
Service Catalog, 236-238
registering new VM, 211
setting up end-user options, 230-231
vDC, 207, 226-227
workflows
activities, 81
approving workflows, 82
building workflows, 80
Cisco Communities, 277
creating, 270-274
Custom Approval Tasks, 276
Custom Tasks, 276
Custom Workflow Input, 277
properties of, 266-269
rollbacks, 83
triggers, 81
validating workflows, 81-82
Workflow Designer, 80, 269
UCSD Scheduler (Prime Service Catalog), 
302
user management
default roles in UCSD, 183-185, 188
local users in UCS Director, 173-175
mapping users in Prime Service Catalog, 
164-166, 169-172
new users with a single role in UCSD, 188, 
191-193
user portals. See self-service portals
V
VACS (Virtual Application Cloud 
Segmentation)
benefits of, 146
containers, 148

VLAN (Virtual LAN)  505
3 Tier External Container Templates, 
150
3 Tier Internal Container Templates, 
149
benefits of, 325
building with gateway of choice, 
151-152
deploying, 337
fenced virtual container comparisons 
to, 326
installing, 325
security, 341
setting up, 335, 339-342
SLB, 326, 342
templates, 335, 339-342
UCS Director and, 147
validating workflows through UCSD, 81-82
vApp Workflow page (Advanced Catalog), 
296
vDC (Virtual Data Centers), 248
Action Policy, 250, 257-258
categories, 259
Computing Policy, 250-253
configuring, 249
Cost Model, 250, 256
custom user VM policies, assigning to, 
226-227
End User Self-Service Policy, 250
Network Policy, 250, 253-254
properties of, 249-250
Storage Policy, 250, 255-256
System Policy, 250-252
UCS Director and, 207
VDI Catalog (UCSD), 297
version control tools (source control), 
DevOps, 34
viewing service order status details in Prime 
Service Catalog, 111-113
Virtual > Compute VM reports, 363
virtual hypervisors, adding to UCS 
Director, 203-205
virtual infrastructure reports, 363-366
Virtual Machine Details vNIC reports, 364
Virtual Storage Catalog Policy option 
(Standard Catalog, Customization page), 
293
virtual switching within cloud infrastructure
AVS, 145
Nexus 1000V Series Switches, 144
overview of, 143
virtualization
Domain Ten cloud framework, 50-51
VM, 197, 200
adding virtual hypervisors to UCS 
Director, 203-205
archiving, 211
CMDB, troubleshooting VM, 211
common administrative workflows 
in UCS Director, 232-235
creating Computing Policies in UCS 
Director, 230-232
creating custom action policies in 
UCS Director, 212-218, 221,  
224-230
creating End User Self-Service poli-
cies in UCS Director, 208-210
installing PowerShell agent in UCS 
Director, 205-206
Intercloud Fabric, 201
Prime Service Catalog, 236-242
registering new VM in UCS 
Director, 211
setting up end-user options in UCS 
Director, 230-231
troubleshooting, 211
UCS Director, 201-218, 221,  
224-238
vDC in UCS Director, 207, 226-227
virtualized applications, 16
VLAN (Virtual LAN)
IPAM, VLAN Pool Policy, 262
workflows
Cisco Communities, 277
creating, 270-274

506  VLAN (Virtual LAN)
Custom Approval Tasks, 276
Custom Tasks, 276
Custom Workflow Input, 277
VM (Virtual Machines), 197, 200
archiving, 211
cloud history, 7-8
CMDB, troubleshooting VM, 211
fenced virtual containers, VM deploy-
ments, 333
Intercloud Fabric, 201
Prime Service Catalog
linking to UCS Director, 236-238
list of VM actions in Prime Service 
Catalog, 240-242
My Stuff menu, 239
supported lifecycle actions, 312-313
reports
Host Node VM reports, 363
Virtual > Compute VM reports, 363
Virtual Machine Details vNIC 
reports, 364
troubleshooting, 211
UCS Director, 201
adding virtual hypervisors to UCS 
Director, 203-205
common administrative workflows, 
232-235
creating Computing Policies,  
230-232
creating custom action policies,  
212-218, 221, 224-230
creating End User Self-Service poli-
cies, 208-210
installing PowerShell agent in UCS 
Director, 205-206
linking to Prime Service Catalog, 
236-238
registering new VM, 211
setting up end-user options, 230-231
vDC, 207, 226-227
VM Access page (Standard Catalog), 294
VMware
Action Policy, 250, 257-258
Computing Policy, 250-253
End User Self-Service Policy, 250
Network Policy, 250, 253-254
Storage Policy, 250, 255-256
System Policy, 250-252
Workstation, cloud history, 8
VPN (Virtual Private Networks), cloud his-
tory, 8
VSG (Virtual Security Gateways), 150, 324
W
Waterfall IT design approach, 24-26
web resources
Cisco Communities, workflow develop-
ment, 277
Cisco Learning Network, 457
widgets (UCSD dashboard), 432-433
wildcard searches, Prime Service Catalog, 
108
workflows
activities, 81
approving workflows, 82
automating workflows, 59
building workflows, 80
Cisco Communities, 277
common VM administrative workflows in 
UCS Director, 232-235
creating, 270-274
Custom Approval Tasks, 276
Custom Tasks, 276
custom VM action policies, 212-218, 221, 
224-230
Custom Workflow Input, 277
defining, 58
documenting workflows, 58
properties of, 266-269
rollbacks, 83
triggers, 81

YAML, HOT files (Heat orchestration with Prime Service Catalog)  507
validating workflows, 81-82
Workflow Designer, 80, 269
Workstation (VMware), cloud history, 8
X - Y - Z
YAML, HOT files (Heat orchestration with 
Prime Service Catalog), 124

This page intentionally left blank 

REGISTER YOUR PRODUCT at CiscoPress.com/register 
Access Additional Benefits and SAVE 35% on Your Next Purchase
• 
Download available product updates.
• 
Access bonus material when applicable. 
• 
 Receive exclusive offers on new editions and related products.  
(Just check the box to hear from us when setting up your account.)
• 
 Get a coupon for 35% for your next purchase, valid for 30 days.  
Your code will be available in your Cisco Press cart. (You will also find  
it in the Manage Codes section of your account page.)
Registration benefits vary by product. Benefits will be listed on your account page  
under Registered Products.
CiscoPress.com – Learning Solutions for Self-Paced Study, Enterprise, and the Classroom
Cisco Press is the Cisco Systems authorized book publisher of Cisco networking technology,  
Cisco certification self-study, and Cisco Networking Academy Program materials. 
At CiscoPress.com you can 
• 
Shop our books, eBooks, software, and video training.
• 
Take advantage of our special offers and promotions (ciscopress.com/promotions).
• 
Sign up for special offers and content newsletters (ciscopress.com/newsletters).
• 
Read free articles, exam profiles, and blogs by information technology experts.
• 
Access thousands of free chapters and video lessons.
Connect with Cisco Press – Visit CiscoPress.com/community
Learn about Cisco Press community events and programs.

Appendix D
Study Planner
Practice Test
Reading
Task
Element 
Task
Goal Date
First Date 
Completed
Second 
Date 
Completed 
(Optional)
Notes
Introduction
Read Introduction
1. Introduction to Cloud
Read Chapter
2. Cloud: A New Operating Model for IT Read Chapter
3. The Cloud Operation Journey
Read Chapter
4. Cisco Cloud 
Automation/Orchestration Suites
Read Foundation Topics
4. Cisco Cloud 
Automation/Orchestration Suites
Review Key Topics 
4. Cisco Cloud 
Automation/Orchestration Suites
Define Key Terms
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 4 in 
practice test software
5. Cisco Prime Service Catalog
Read Foundation Topics
5. Cisco Prime Service Catalog
Review Key Topics 
5. Cisco Prime Service Catalog
Define Key Terms
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 5 in 
practice test software
6. Cisco Cloud Infrastructure
Review Key Topics 
6. Cisco Cloud Infrastructure
Define Key Terms
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 6 in 
practice test software
7. Managing Users and Groups
7. Managing Users and Groups
Review Key Topics 
7. Managing Users and Groups
Define Key Terms
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 7 in 
practice test software

8. Virtual Machine Management
Read Foundation Topics
8. Virtual Machine Management
Review Key Topics 
8. Virtual Machine Management
Define Key Terms
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 8 in 
practice test software
9. Automating Cloud Infrastructure with 
UCS Director
Read Foundation Topics
9. Automating Cloud Infrastructure with 
UCS Director
Review Key Topics 
9. Automating Cloud Infrastructure with 
UCS Director
Define Key Terms
9. Automating Cloud Infrastructure with 
UCS Director
Review Memory Tables
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 9 in 
practice test software
10. Building a Service Catalog and User 
Portal with UCS Director and Prime 
Service Catalog
Read Foundation Topics
10. Building a Service Catalog and User 
Portal with UCS Director and Prime 
Service Catalog
Review Key Topics 
10. Building a Service Catalog and User 
Portal with UCS Director and Prime 
Service Catalog
Define Key Terms
10. Building a Service Catalog and User 
Portal with UCS Director and Prime 
Service Catalog
Review Memory Tables
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 10 
in practice test software
11. Deploying Virtual Application 
Containers
Read Foundation Topics
11. Deploying Virtual Application 
Containers
Review Key Topics 
11. Deploying Virtual Application 
Containers
Define Key Terms
11. Deploying Virtual Application 
Containers
Review Memory Tables
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 11 
in practice test software
12. Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting
Read Foundation Topics
12. Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting
Review Key Topics 
12. Chargeback, Billing, and Reporting
Define Key Terms

Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 12 
in practice test software
13. Cloud Performance and Capacity 
Management
Read Foundation Topics
13. Cloud Performance and Capacity 
Management
Review Key Topics 
13. Cloud Performance and Capacity 
Management
Define Key Terms
13. Cloud Performance and Capacity 
Management
Review Memory Tables
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 13 
in practice test software
14. Monitoring and Maintaining the 
Health of Your Cloud
Read Foundation Topics
14. Monitoring and Maintaining the 
Health of Your Cloud
Review Key Topics 
14. Monitoring and Maintaining the 
Health of Your Cloud
Define Key Terms
14. Monitoring and Maintaining the 
Health of Your Cloud
Review Memory Tables
Practice Test
Take practice test in study 
mode using Exam Bank 1 
questions for Chapter 14 
in practice test software
15. Final Preparation
Read Chapter
15. Final Preparation
Take practice test in study 
mode for all Book 
Questions in practice test 
software
15. Final Preparation
Review Exam Essentials 
for each chapter on the 
companion page
15. Final Preparation
Review all Key Topics in 
all chapters
15. Final Preparation
Complete all memory 
tables from Appendix B
15. Final Preparation
Take practice test in 
practice exam mode using 
Exam Bank 1 questions 
for all chapters
15. Final Preparation
Review Exam Essentials 
for each chapter on the 
PDF from the companion 
website
15. Final Preparation
Take practice test in 
practice exam mode using 
Exam Bank 2 questions 
for all chapters

The Professional and Personal Technology Brands of Pearson
Register this eBook to unlock the 
companion files that are included on  
the companion website. Follow the  
steps below:
1.  Go to www.ciscopress.com/register 
and log in or create a new account.
2.  Enter the ISBN: 9781587144530.  
(NOTE: Please enter the print  
book ISBN provided to register  
the eBook you purchased.)
3.  Answer the challenge question as  
proof of purchase.
4.  Click on the “Access Bonus Content” 
link in the Registered Products section 
of your account page, to be taken to  
the page where your downloadable 
content is available.
Where are the companion  
content files?
Register this digital version of  
CCNA Cloud CLDADM 210-455 
Official Cert Guide  
to access important downloads.
This eBook version of the print title 
does not contain the access code needed 
to use the practice test software that 
accompanies the print book. 
You May Also Like—Premium Edition 
eBook and Practice Test. To learn about 
the Premium Edition eBook and Practice 
Test series, visit  
www.pearsonITcertification.com/
practicetest

