
CELEBRITY IN THE
21ST CENTURY

 Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s 
 CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES 
 Series 
American Families in Crisis, Jeffrey S. Turner 
 Animal Rights, Clifford J. Sherry
Autism Spectrum Disorders, Raphael Bernier and Jennifer Gerdts
Climate Change, David L. Downie, Kate Brash, and Catherine 
Vaughan
DNA Technology, David E. Newton
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Education in Crisis, Judith A. Gouwens
Environmental Justice, David E. Newton
Gangs, Karen L. Kinnear
Gay and Lesbian Rights, David E. Newton
Global Refugee Crisis, Mark Gibney
Globalization, Justin Ervin and Zachary A. Smith
Identity Theft, Sandra K. Hoffman and Tracy G. McGinley
Lobbying in America, Ronald J. Hrebenar and Bryson B. Morgan
Modern Piracy, David F. Marley
Modern Sports Ethics, Angela Lumpkin
Obesity, Judith Stern and Alexandra Kazaks
Same-Sex Marriage, David E. Newton
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
Sexual Crime, Caryn E. Neumann
Sexual Health, David E. Newton
Substance Abuse, David E. Newton
U.S. Border Security, Judith A. Warner
U.S. National Security, Cynthia A. Watson
U.S. Trade Issues, Alfred E. Eckes Jr. 
Waste Management, Jacqueline Vaughn
 For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
 www.abc-clio.com . 

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital 
issues in today’s society, such as genetic engineering, pollution, 
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and 
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly 
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting 
point for research by high school and college students, scholars, 
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople, 
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an 
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical 
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other 
primary-source material, a directory of organizations and 
agencies, annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, 
and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will 
ﬁ nd the information they need to have a better understanding 
of the social, political, environmental, and economic issues 
facing the world today.  


 CELEBRITY IN THE 
21ST CENTURY 
 A Reference Handbook 
 Larry Z. Leslie 
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES

 Copyright © 2011  by ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior 
permission in writing from the publisher. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Leslie, Larry Z. 
 Celebrity in the 21st century : a reference handbook / Larry Z. Leslie. 
  p. cm.—(Contemporary world issues) 
 Includes bibliographical references and index. 
 ISBN 978-1-59884-484-9 (hard copy : alk. paper)—ISBN  978-1-
59884-485-6 (ebook) 
 1. Celebrities—United States—History—21st century. 2. Popular 
culture—United States—History—21st century. 3. United States—
Civilization—21st century. 4. United States—Social life and 
customs—21st century. 5. Fame—Social aspects—United States—
History—21st century. 6. Mass media—Social aspects—United 
States—History—21st century. 7. Celebrities—United States—
Biography. I. Title. 
 E169.12.L454  2011 
 920.073—dc22   2010039842 
 ISBN: 978-1-59884-484-9 
 EISBN: 978-1-59884-485-6 
 15 14 13 12 11  1 2 3 4 5 
 This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an eBook. 
 Visit www.abc-clio.com for details. 
 ABC-CLIO, LLC 
 130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911 
 Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper 
 
 Manufactured in the United States of America 

vii
 Contents 
 List of Tables,  xi 
 Preface,  xiii 
 1 Background and History,  1 
 A Modern Celebrity,  1 
 Early Uses and Meanings,  2 
 The Classical Civilizations,  4 
 The World in Transition,  7 
 Important Progress in Europe,  8 
 America Stirs,  10 
 The Rise of Media in 19th-Century America,  10 
 Media Gain Strength in the Early 20th Century,  12 
 Media Become Powerful in the Late 20th Century,  14 
 The Public ’ s Role in Celebrity,  15 
 Celebrities as Stars,  17 
 The Remarkable 21st Century,  18 
 A Celebrity Taxonomy,  23 
 Members of the General Public as Seekers of Fame,  24 
 Members of the Public as Famous Newsmakers,  25 
 References,  28 
 2 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions,  31 
 Is Celebrity Finite?,  31 
 Celebrities Who Violate Social or Moral Norms,  36 
 Celebrity Endorsement,  45 
 Fictional and Cartoon Celebrities,  47 
 Source and Quality of Celebrity Information,  49 
 Celebrity Magazines,  50 
 Celebrity Television Programs,  57 
 Celebrities and Electronic Media,  62 
 Traditional Information Sources,  62 
vii

viii Contents
 New Media Information Sources,  64 
 Social Media and Celebrities,  66 
 Misconceptions about Celebrity,  69 
 Summary and Conclusion,  72 
 References,  73 
 3 Worldwide Perspective,  75 
 Entertainment Celebrities,  76 
 Celebrities and Politics,  77 
 Limits on Worldwide Celebrity,  80 
 A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity 
Taxonomy,  82 
 Politics and Government,  83 
 The Arts,  89 
 Science and Medicine,  90 
 Academia,  93 
 Business,  96 
 Religion,  97 
 Summary,  100 
 References,  101 
 4 Chronology,  105 
 References,  120 
 5 Biographical Sketches,  121 
 Glenn Beck,  121 
 Beyoncé,  122 
 Kobe Bryant,  123 
 George Clooney,  123 
 Tom Cruise,  124 
 Ellen DeGeneres,  125 
 Tony Dungy,  126 
 Bill Gates,  126 
 Al Gore,  127 
 Scarlett Johansson,  128 
 Angelina Jolie,  129 
 Michael Jordan,  129 
 Jennifer Lopez,  130 
 Stephenie Meyer,  131 
 Michael Moore,  132 
 Barack Obama,  132 
 Conan O ’ Brien,  133 
 Bill O ’ Reilly,  134 

Contents ix
 Danica Patrick,  135 
 Brad Pitt,  136 
 Rachael Ray,  137 
 Arnold Schwarzenegger,  137 
 Martin Scorsese,  138 
 Britney Spears,  139 
 Steven Spielberg,  140 
 Jon Stewart,  140 
 Taylor Swift,  141 
 Rick Warren,  142 
 Oprah Winfrey,  143 
 Mark Zuckerberg,  143 
 6 Data and Documents,  145 
 Celebrity Magazines and Television 
Programs,  145 
 Celebrities and the Movies,  147 
 Gender Differences in Prime Time Television 
Celebrity Earnings,  149 
 Highest-Earning Celebrities,  151 
 Top Celebrity Fundraisers,  152 
 Celebrities and Religion,  153 
 Celebrity Chefs,  154 
 AKA (Also Known As),  154 
 Celebrities and Music,  165 
 Specialized Celebrities,  168 
 Celebrity Families,  170 
 Early Celebrity Jobs,  173 
 Early Celebrity Deaths,  173 
 Celebrity Writers,  174 
 Celebrity Business Criminals,  177 
 Celebrities and Controversial Issues,  179 
 Celebrities and the Public,  181 
 Two Celebrity-Related Leisure Activities,  182 
 Recreational Expenditures,  183 
 Internet Use,  184 
 Letters to Celebrities,  185 
 7 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and 
Web Sites,  191 
 Celebrity-Sponsored Charities,  192 
 Celebrity-Afﬁ liated Charities,  199 

x Contents
 Professional Organizations,  201 
 Multi-Service Organizations,  205 
 Speakers Bureaus,  207 
 Celebrity Look-Alikes,  209 
 Celebrity News and Gossip Web Sites,  211 
 Connections to Celebrity Fan Clubs and Web Sites,  221 
 8 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources,   225 
 Print Resources,  225 
 Books with Historical Perspectives,  225 
 Books with Special Perspectives,  228 
 Academic Journal Articles,  233 
 Academic Journals,  240 
 Selected General-Interest Celebrity Magazines,  243 
 Nonprint Resources,  246 
 Video,  246 
 Video Games,  251 
 Audio,  252 
 Useful Internet Sites,  254 
 Glossary,  259 
 Index,  263 
 About the Author,  273 

xi
 List of Tables 
 1.1 
Eight Categories of Celebrity,  23 
 6.1 
Viewership of Celebrity Television Programs, 
 1998–2008,  146 
 6.2 
Celebrity Magazine Circulation, 2008,  147 
 6.3 
Top Ten Highest-Grossing Films (Worldwide),  147 
 6.4 
Movie Celebrities of the 20th Century,  148 
 6.5 
Movie Celebrities of the Early 21st Century,  149 
 6.6 
U.S. Prime Time TV Top-Earning Females,  150 
 6.7 
U.S. Prime Time TV Top-Earning Males,  150 
 6.8 
Top 25 Highest-Earning Celebrities,  151 
 6.9 
Top Celebrity Fundraisers, 2009,  152 
 6.10 
Religious Preferences of Celebrities,  153 
 6.11 
Top-Earning Celebrity Chefs,  154 
 6.12 
Celebrities ’ Real Names,  155 
 6.13 
Top-Selling Music Artists (as of 2008),  166 
 6.14 
Consumer Music-Purchasing Proﬁ le by Genre and 
 Format, 2000–2008,  167 
 6.15 
Consumer Music-Purchasing Proﬁ le by Gender, 
 Age, and Purchase Method, 2000–2008,  168 
 6.16 
Nobel Prize Winners, 2001–2009,  169 
 6.17 
Keeping Celebrity in the Family,  171 
 6.18 
Before They Were Celebrities,  174 
 6.19 
Celebrities Who Died Young,  175 
 6.20 
Celebrity Authors,  176 
 6.21 
Ten Celebrity Criminals in American Business,  178 
 6.22 
Celebrities Who Have Shown Support for Gay, 
 Lesbian, and Transgender Causes,  179 
 6.23 
Celebrities Who Have Spoken Out on Abortion,  180 
 6.24 
Celebrity Views on the War in Iraq/War on 
 Terrorism,  181 

xii List of Tables
 6.25 
Participation in Two Celebrity-Related Leisure 
Activities, 2008,  182 
 6.26 
Attendance at Selected Spectator Sports, 1990–2008,  183 
 6.27 
Selected Individual Expenditures for Recreation, 
 1990–2007,  183 
 6.28 
Attendance and Demographics: Selected Arts 
 Activities, 2008,  184 
 6.29 
Daily Internet Activities, Adults 18 and Older, 
 November 2008–April 2009,  185 
 6.30 
Bizarre Letters to Celebrities,  186 
 6.31 
Enclosures Sent to Hollywood Celebrities,  187 
 6.32 
Speciﬁ c Items Sent to Celebrities,  188 
 6.33 
Threats Made in Letters to Celebrities,  188 

xiii
 Preface 
 O
ne of the popular features on  The Tonight Show with Jay Leno 
is a segment called “Jaywalking.” Leno, microphone in 
hand, stops individuals on the street and asks them simple 
questions: “Who gave America the Statue of Liberty?” “How 
many lungs do you have?” “What are the three branches of the 
federal government?” “Which weighs more: a pound of muscle 
or a pound of fat?” Naturally, the audience laughs when they 
give the wrong answers. Still, we are inclined to forgive these 
poorly informed folks for their lack of speciﬁ c knowledge. After 
all, most people work hard just to get by; those questions have 
little to do with everyday life and are therefore not important to 
them. It might be interesting, however, if Leno were to ask these 
people on the street to name two or three celebrities. Chances 
are everyone could come up with a correct answer. We may not 
know our history, our physiology, or our weights and measures, 
but we know our celebrities. This says something about contem-
porary culture. 
 Contemporary culture is, for all practical purposes, popular 
culture. Media—that is, radio, television, magazines, music, 
video games, the Internet, ﬁ lm, and all the rest—are what we 
are most interested in and pay the most attention to. Celebrities 
are one of popular culture ’ s most important products. There are 
many other pop culture products, of course: YouTube, Facebook, 
Hip-Hop music, the movies, and  American Idol , to name a few. 
Celebrities owe their recognition to these and other aspects of 
popular culture that provide the means for them to implant 
themselves ﬁ rmly in the minds and hearts of the public. Because 
celebrities are important to many of us, understanding what 
celebrity is all about can be useful in helping us understand 
ourselves. 

xiv Preface
 While the notion of celebrity may seem insigniﬁ cant to 
some people, the fact that celebrities play an important role in 
contemporary culture makes them subjects worthy of serious 
study. Is celebrity a broad category into which we can place 
anyone who has achieved any sort of recognition? If so, how 
much and what kind of recognition are required for one to be a 
celebrity? Is celebrity a narrow category into which we can place 
only those who have accomplishments and qualities beyond 
simple recognition? In some cases, this book will provide answers 
to those questions and raise new ones. In other cases, the book 
will allow readers to exercise their judgment or apply their 
opinions in answering a question. 
   Chapter 1   provides an historical context for understanding 
celebrity. Who were the ﬁ rst celebrities? The chapter explores 
celebrity in the early Egyptian, Greek, and Roman cultures. 
It follows the development of celebrity across time, from Europe 
to America, emphasizing media as the most important factor in 
modern celebrity. The public ’ s role in celebrity is examined in 
this chapter, which concludes with a presentation of the different 
types of celebrity apparent in contemporary culture. 
   Chapter 2   addresses problems and issues, some of them 
controversial, relating to celebrities. Solutions to problems are 
often suggested. The chapter discusses what happens when 
celebrities behave in ways that violate society ’ s social or moral 
standards. Proﬁ les of magazines and television programs that 
feature news and gossip about celebrities reveal a great deal 
about these information outlets as well as about fans who follow 
their favorite celebrities. The role of electronic media in celebrity 
is explored, and the chapter concludes with an examination of 
several misconceptions about celebrity. 
 Because the world is essentially a global village, celebrities 
are no longer restricted to work or recognition in a single country. 
Worldwide celebrities are introduced in   Chapter 3  . Many world-
wide celebrities work in either entertainment or politics. However, 
celebrities may become internationally recognized for their 
accomplishments in one (or more) of several other ﬁ elds: the arts, 
science, medicine, and business, among others. 
 Readers who are interested in the historical development 
of celebrity in more detail than found in  Chapter 1 will enjoy the 
chronology presented in   Chapter 4 . Beginning with the classical 
civilizations, the notion of celebrity is traced in its various 
developmental stages up to the present time. Celebrity is presented 

Preface xv
alongside other signiﬁ cant events.   Chapter 5   shows the range of 
celebrity across many occupations by presenting biographical 
proﬁ les of more than two dozen individuals who are currently 
celebrities and who will continue to be celebrities well into the 
second and third decades of the 21st century. 
   Chapter 6   presents data and documents relating to a variety of 
celebrity activities and situations. Readers will ﬁ nd information 
on celebrity families, earnings, and religious beliefs as well as data 
about celebrities who died young and celebrities who do not use 
their real names. Celebrity writers, celebrity chefs, celebrity crimi-
nals, celebrity musicians, and more provide additional insights 
into the role of celebrities in contemporary culture. Readers may 
be especially interested in the section detailing some of the letters 
(and objects) celebrities have received from their fans. 
 Many celebrities take an interest in the world beyond their 
own spheres of inﬂ uence and contribute both time and money 
to worthy causes.   Chapter 7   proﬁ les celebrity charities and then 
looks at professional and business organizations popular with 
celebrities. Some readers will enjoy the list of celebrity news and 
gossip Web sites that concludes the chapter. For those who wish 
to read more about celebrities or study some aspect of celebrity 
in depth,   Chapter 8   provides print and non-print resources. The 
annotated list of books, journals, articles, magazines, videos, 
audio CDs, and Internet sites shows the broad range of infor-
mation available. 
 I wish to express my sincere appreciation to those who 
assisted in the preparation of this book. Special thanks to Bob 
Batchelor, a friend, colleague, and fellow golfer who ﬁ rst recom-
mended me for the project and whose advice was extremely 
valuable. The gang at ABC-CLIO, particularly Robin Tutt, Mim 
Vasan, Cathleen Casey, and Jane Messah, as well as the production 
and marketing departments, provided guidance and support 
throughout. Thank you all. It was fun! 


1
 1 
 Background and History 
 A Modern Celebrity 
 W
ord of his death spread quickly. It raced first through the
emergency room in a California hospital, spilled out into the 
street, then across the country, and around the world. Pop 
music icon Michael Jackson was dead. Many of his fans were 
hysterical. Some were sobbing; others dressed up as Michael 
and danced in tribute (  Corliss 2009  ). In the days that followed, 
millions of people around the world—from England (where he 
was soon to begin a new concert tour) to Europe, China, and 
Japan—mourned the passing of one of the all-time great musi-
cal artists. Memorial services were held; fans ﬂ ocked to record 
stores to buy his music. 
 It is not surprising that the death of a world-renowned 
celebrity would be widely acknowledged. However, at the time 
of his death in June 2009, Jackson had not had a hit record in 
years. There were other issues in Jackson ’ s life: plastic surgery 
had altered his face almost beyond recognition; charges of child 
molestation in 1993 (settled out of court for a reported $20 million) 
and more molestation charges in 2003; that embarrassing incident 
in Germany in 2002 where he showed off his baby son to gath-
ered fans by dangling the youngster over a hotel balcony (  Corliss 
2009  ). A jeweled glove on one hand, worn for no apparent reason? 
No problem. None of these things made any difference to his 
fans. They remembered him as a talented singer and a gifted 
dancer. They loved his music, his style, and his eccentricities. Why 
did this 50-year-old man remain a celebrity when his best years 
were clearly behind him? 

2 Background and History
 Most of us could identify several people whom we consider 
to be celebrities. We would likely have a variety of reasons for 
selecting them. But the celebrity label may be applied to individuals 
too often these days. Not everyone is a celebrity. Some people are 
merely well known. Some people are famous. Is there a differ-
ence in being well known, being famous, and being a celebrity? 
What qualiﬁ es one as a celebrity? Where did the notion of celebrity 
begin? Who was the ﬁ rst celebrity? To understand the concept of 
celebrity and the use of the term in the 21st century, we need to 
look at how the word  celebrity  developed. It would be help-
ful to know its meaning and how that meaning changed over the 
years as the term was applied to noteworthy individuals. 
 Early Uses and Meanings 
 During the early days of civilization, primitive tribes probably 
cele brated often. We don ’ t know much about how these early 
tribes communicated. Did they have languages? Perhaps. We do 
know they communicated something of their lives in drawings and 
paintings on cave walls. The cave paintings of Lascaux, France, 
and Altamira, Spain, are well known. 
 Paintings have also been discovered in Mexico, Peru, and 
other Central and South American countries. Some of the paint-
ings seem to depict celebrations. A good day hunting, victory 
over a competing tribe for food or territory, the elevation of a 
tribe member to chief, or perhaps even the birth of a child were 
appropriate occasions for celebration. It is unlikely, however, that 
the tribes called their gatherings celebrations. They probably just 
all got together, had something to eat and drink, maybe smiled 
a lot, and then retired for the evening. It may not have been all 
that signiﬁ cant to them. Survival, however, was important to 
these early tribes, and celebrating their continued survival may 
have brought a temporary sense of relief, but little else. More hard 
work awaited them the next day. Today, of course, we celebrate all 
sorts of things: births, weddings, accomplishments at work, the 
achievement of a long-sought goal, a large pay increase, a winning 
sports team, and national holidays. Someone is always celebrating 
something. It has not always been this way. 
 One of the earliest uses of the word  celebration  in English was 
in a work by Sir Philip Sidney. In 1580, Sidney used the word to 
describe a performance or solemn ceremony, such as a ceremony 

Early Uses and Meanings 3
of marriage. In 1600, Richard Hooker used  celebrity  to refer to “the 
condition of being much extolled or talked about” (  Simpson and 
Weiner 1989  , 1018–1019). The term can be found in the work of 
Samuel Johnson in 1751 to mean a feast or ceremony as well as 
publically praising or extolling an individual. In 1838, the poet 
Matthew Arnold further developed the term by noting that a 
celebrity was a public person, a celebrated character. Of course, 
no one really knows when or where the terms  celebration  and  celebrity 
were ﬁ rst used. 
 The word  famous  can be found as early as the 1400s in Sir 
Thomas Malory ’ s  Le Morte D ’ Arthur  (The Death of Arthur). Both 
John Milton and John Dryden used the word; for them, its meaning 
was rather straightforward: “celebrated in fame or public report; 
much talked about.” The word also had negative meanings. It is 
safe to say that our current use of these terms derives mainly from 
their early usage in English literature. Furthermore, it is clear that 
for an individual to be famous, to be talked about or celebrated, 
a minimum set of conditions must apply: a role in public life; 
important or interesting accomplishments that are communicated 
to the general public; and recognition by the public that the individ-
ual ’ s activities are signiﬁ cant enough to merit continued attention. 
 Is a famous person automatically a celebrity? One might 
infer that from the early uses described previously, but that 
judgment would be incorrect. Some scholars believe that “celeb-
rities have been around for as long as human beings have lived 
together in groups” (  McCutcheon, Maltby, Houran, and Ashe 
2004  , 60). This book rejects that view as simplistic. Celebrity, 
as the term is used in contemporary culture, is a concept that 
was not present in earlier civilizations but developed over time 
and depended, among other things, on the quality and ﬂ ow of 
information to the general public. As new methods were devel-
oped to communi cate with the public, the concept of celebrity 
evolved and became more complex. Obviously, the words 
 famous and  celebrity are closely related, but there is a marked 
difference among individuals to whom these terms are applied. 
That difference will be explained in the upcoming pages in 
this chapter. Some historical perspective is needed to provide 
context before we attempt to discuss celebrity in today ’ s (and 
tomorrow ’ s) culture. Why the history lesson? You can ’ t have a 
complete understanding of anything unless you know the inter-
related circumstances and conditions that enable it to occur. 
Celebrity is no exception ( Cashmore 2006 ).  

4 Background and History
 The Classical Civilizations 
 Three early civilizations are often called classical because of the 
excellent contributions they made, not only to their own time, 
but also to ours. The Egyptians (ca. 3100  BCE –200  BCE ) were great 
builders. The Sphinx and the pyramids remain a testament to their 
construction skills. Remarkably well-preserved mummies show 
that the Egyptians were excellent embalmers. Egyptian farmers 
developed important irrigation techniques (  Roberts 1993  ). For all 
their accomplishments, however, it is unlikely there were any celeb-
rities in ancient Egypt, at least none that ﬁ ts our modern notion 
of celebrity. Egypt ’ s rulers are legendary: Ramses, Cleopatra, 
King Tutankhamen, and Hatshepsut. They led interesting and 
sometimes exciting lives. But the typical Egyptian probably did not 
think much about them. Aside from the hieroglyphics that were 
often part of Egyptian temples and monuments, and pictograms 
on clay tablets that few people other than Egyptian priests could 
read or interpret, communication was primarily oral (  Fang 2008  ); 
stories about rulers and warriors were circulated, but life for most 
Egyptians was hard. Agriculture was extremely important, so 
many Egyptians worked the land. The success or failure of a crop 
depended on the Nile River overﬂ owing its banks and depositing 
a rich layer of soil. Farmers, together with builders and tradesmen, 
were often drafted to work as slaves on the ruler ’ s monuments 
or pyramid (  Roberts 1993  ). While most slaves probably knew the 
name of the ruler for whom they worked, it is unlikely they held 
that person in high esteem. We in modern times know the names 
and accomplishments of many Egyptian rulers. We might even 
call Cleopatra, for example, a celebrity. But our judgment is based 
on historical perspective and a description of her life in art and 
literature over time. Cleopatra ’ s Egyptians had no such perspective. 
She was their queen for awhile, well known among some, and of 
little interest to many. In short, there is no evidence that Egyptians 
recognized anyone as a celebrity. 
 The Greeks (ca. 1200  BCE –320  BCE ), like the Egyptians, were 
skilled builders. The Parthenon still stands, and many buildings 
around the world use the Doric, Ionic, or Corinthian columns 
that were so much a part of Greek architecture. Cities became 
important in Greek civilization, particularly Athens and 
Sparta, although some Greeks still lived in rural areas. A few 
were landowners, but most rural residents worked the land 

The Classical Civilizations 5
as farmers and led pretty humble lives (  Roberts 1993 ). Traders, 
craftsmen, shippers, and—above all—warriors were also major 
inﬂ uences on Greek life. Communication about people and events 
was primarily oral. However, the culture made great advances 
in literature and philosophy: the plays of Sophocles; Homer ’ s 
 Iliad and Odyssey ; and the philosophies of Socrates, Plato, and 
Aristotle. Plato ’ s Academy was established, as were other 
schools, and education became important. Pythagoras was 
active in the ﬁ eld of mathematics. Powerful military ﬁ gures, like 
Alexander the Great, led massive armies and eventually con-
quered the entire Persian Empire (  Woolf 2008 ). Many Greeks 
lived in or near the cities, making it much easier to talk about 
major ﬁ gures in the culture. No doubt some who attended the 
plays of Sophocles or read the work of Homer considered them 
famous. Socrates was something of a public ﬁ gure, too, having 
committed suicide after being condemned to death by the gov-
ernment for his controversial views. While there was much talk 
about and recognition of these and other well-known individuals 
among the Greeks, there is no indication that these men rose to the 
level of celebrity. However, Alexander the Great probably came 
the closest to being a celebrity. He was widely known for his 
military and leadership skills, and because his armies acquired 
almost 3,000 miles of territory, there was much cele bration upon 
his return from the various wars ( Woolf 2008 ;  Roberts 1993 ). 
 It should be noted that oral communication was not the only 
way to transmit information in the Egyptian and Greek cultures. 
Some information was written on papyrus or parchment, in 
addition to clay tablets. This information was not widely avail-
able to members of the general public, most of whom could 
not read anyway. Although some citizens listened to debates in 
the Greek Assembly (  Thomas 1992  ), the typical Greek, like the 
Egyptian, had to depend on hearing the latest news from a friend 
or neighbor. The news might not have been accurate. Word-of-
mouth communication is often unreliable; rumors become truth; 
stories are enhanced. Nevertheless, we can see some progress 
from the Egyptian to the Greek culture. The Greeks were more 
likely to have known about the major ﬁ gures in their culture 
and were much closer to identifying a celebrity than were the 
Egyptians. Most Greek literature was written to be heard or sung 
(  Thomas 1992  ). Those in attendance at such performances most 
likely knew, for example, who wrote the play they were watch-
ing. We must take care, however, not to force our 21st-century 

6 Background and History
perspective on the historical record of these early civilizations. By 
our modern standards, Socrates, Sophocles, Plato, and Aristotle 
would indeed all be celebrities. But there is no evidence that they 
were considered such by the Greeks. They were well known, 
but—as we shall see—being well known is not enough to make 
one a celebrity, parti cularly in the 21st century, and almost cer-
tainly not in the early civilizations where the concept of celebrity 
did not exist. 
 The third classical civilization belongs to the Romans (ca. 
753  BCE –410  CE ) who changed life in several ways. The Roman 
Empire extended over much of the known world, thanks to a 
large and aggressive army. Although some men were full-time, 
professional soldiers, every male citizen who owned property 
was required to serve in the military, if needed. Other Roman 
citizens were shopkeepers, tradesmen, or farmers (  Roberts 1993  ). 
The Romans made important contributions to engineering, art, 
and literature. Christianity developed during this period and later 
became the ofﬁ cial religion of the empire ( Woolf 2008 ). Were there 
celebrities in Roman culture? Many individuals were famous or 
well known: Julius Caesar, Nero, Caligula, Marcus Aurelius, Mark 
Antony, Horace, Ovid, and Virgil, among others. These men ﬁ t 
precisely the deﬁ nition of famous presented earlier in this chapter. 
They were in public life, their accomplishments were important 
and interesting, information about them was communicated to 
the public, and the public judged their actions to be worthy of 
continued attention. We have seen that communication was pri-
marily oral in the Egyptian and Greek civilizations. The Romans 
added an important component to oral communication. News 
and announcements were read aloud to crowds in the forum or 
other public places, but the information was mostly limited to 
items approved by the government—most likely the emperor. 
Nevertheless, this practice enabled the general public to become 
better acquainted with the culture ’ s inﬂ uential individuals. The 
public did not always approve of what it heard, but hearing about 
the exploits of the army or the latest proclamation by the emperor 
focused attention on those individuals and actions likely to impact 
public life. To be sure, some communication was written, probably 
on parchment or papyrus; documents containing announcements 
or proclamations were often posted after being read aloud, but 
few of these documents have survived. It is doubtful Roman citi-
zens had much access to them; most Romans could neither read 
nor write. 

The World in Transition 7
 To answer an earlier question, were there celebrities in 
Roman culture? No major ﬁ gures in Roman life were famous or 
well known, and while there were plenty of celebrations during 
Roman times, there is no evidence that any famous or well-known 
individuals were called celebrities. 
 The World in Transition 
 The collapse of the Roman Empire marked the end of the classical 
period and the beginning of the medieval era in world history 
(  Woolf 2008  ). Many aspects of the classical era faded away and 
were replaced by new practices and new traditions. Civilizations 
began to grow in other parts of the world: the Celts were active in 
Western Europe and Northern Spain; the Germanic people pros-
pered in Northern Europe; cultures developed in India, China, 
and Japan; across the Atlantic, the Mayan civilization held sway 
in Central America. These were important and inﬂ uential addi-
tions to the culture of the world. Nevertheless, we will continue to 
concentrate on the development of culture in Europe as the leading 
inﬂ uence on many aspects of contemporary American life. 
 Religion and the church were the major inﬂ uences on life 
during the medieval era, sometimes called the Middle Ages 
(ca. 400  CE –1400  CE ). This historical period saw much politi-
cal and social activity; important contributions were made to 
music, literature, and art; moreover, Christianity survived the fall 
of Rome and became a powerful force during this period. The 
pope became a major political ﬁ gure as well as the most impor-
tant religious leader. The Crusades occurred during this period, 
the Vikings expanded their culture, and the Black Death swept 
across Europe (  Woolf 2008  ). Clearly, the Middle Ages were 
years of change. A few individuals became well known during 
this time, but their fame was not widespread. It was more dif-
ﬁ cult to communicate with increasingly larger populations and 
expanding territories. Communi cation was primarily oral, but 
trans portation was improving, and information ﬂ owed more 
easily from one area to another than was the case with previ-
ous civilizations. Still, by one estimate, a typical man in the 10th 
century may have encountered fewer than 200 people during his 
whole life (  Menache 1990  ). Monks, living in monasteries, worked 
on manuscripts, but most people still could not read. Thus, fewer 
people were famous because the public was larger and spread 

8 Background and History
over many developing territories. If you were famous, you were 
likely well known primarily in your own limited geographical 
area. The exception, of course, was the pope who was widely 
known because of his inﬂ uence on religious and political life. 
Well-known individuals during this historical period included 
the Italian poet Dante, explorer Marco Polo, Charlemagne, and 
Thomas Becket, the Archbishop of Canterbury.  
 Important Progress in Europe 
 Communication improved signiﬁ cantly during the Renaissance/
Reformation period (ca. 1400  CE –1650  CE ). A clear shift occurred 
from handwritten parchment documents to printed material. This 
major development was the result of the invention of moveable 
type by Johannes Gutenberg in the mid-15th century. Although 
paper had been invented by the Chinese much earlier, its move-
ment into Western culture was slow. Copies of manuscripts were 
still being written by hand and woodblock printing was still in 
fashion (  Kleinschmidt 2000  ). Nevertheless, with both paper and 
the printing press now available, all sorts of documents could be 
produced and distributed (  Rodman 2006  ). Although some histo-
rians believe the invention of the printing press did not have 
an immediate impact and was therefore not much of a revolution 
(  Eisenstein 2005  ), there can be little doubt that it was important 
in bringing about change. Use of the printing press spread rap-
idly throughout Europe (  Fussel 2005  ). More people learned to 
read. It became easier for individuals in public life to become well 
known for their accomplishments. Today, we are well acquainted 
with the famous people of this era: Chaucer, Michelangelo, Coper-
nicus, Galileo, Henry VIII, Martin Luther, El Greco, Rembrandt, 
and Shakespeare. The actions and accomplishments of many of 
these individuals surely came to the attention of the general public. 
Were they celebrities? By this time, the word  celebrity  had sprung 
from the more general  celebration in some of the literature of the 
time, although there is no evidence that this term was regularly 
applied to the famous in public life. It is important to note that 
oral communication was not replaced by the printed word during 
this time. Most communication required direct contact between 
communicator and audience in guild meetings, community assem-
blies, religious gatherings, and the like ( Menache 1990 ). 
 Change came more rapidly during the Enlightenment (ca. 
1650  CE –1850  CE ). The arrival of this important historical period 

The World in Transition 9
signaled dramatic progress in all areas of life (  Roberts 1993  ). 
The human spirit and mind were awakened; the ability to reason 
led science to become a major inﬂ uence in understanding the physi-
cal world; signiﬁ cant contributions were made in art, music, 
philo sophy, and religion. There was no mass communication in 
this era, in the sense that we use the term today. Written communi-
cation included letters, diaries, literature, and other material, 
but usually only members of the upper class could read and 
write; those who were well-off could often be found in salons, 
academies, and coffee shops. On the other hand, shopkeepers, 
semi-skilled workers, servants, even some skilled laborers often 
got their information in conversations with neighbors, friends, 
or those they met at festivals or fairs. Market days in rural areas 
were popular settings for exchanging information. Books were 
popular during the Enlightenment, but they were expensive and 
beyond the means of all but the most afﬂ uent (  Munck 2000  ). Still, 
the list of famous people during this time reads like a  Who ’ s Who 
of history: philosophers Descartes, Voltaire, and Rousseau; musi-
cians Handel, Hayden, Mozart, Bach, and Beethoven; French 
rulers Louis XIV, Louis XVI, and Marie Antoinette; English 
painter William Hogarth; scholar and mathematician Isaac Newton; 
and English poet Alexander Pope. 
 The entire world was now well acquainted with written 
communi cation. Although oral communication did not dis-
appear, of course, many people felt the written word had a 
power the spoken word lacked. Even today, we say, “Get it in 
writing.” As people became educated, they were more likely 
to read. Newspapers were common in 18th-century Europe; it 
was easier to follow the lives and actions of important people 
in public life. 
 We should pause for a moment here, having just com-
pleted a whirlwind trip through the history of Western civiliza-
tion, and recall what we know. We know early civilizations had 
important, noteworthy people in public life and that some infor-
mation about their actions and accomplishments was available 
to the public primarily through oral communication. Written 
communi cation existed, but its usefulness to the general public 
was limited. We found there were no celebrities in these early 
cultures, but that there were people who were well known or 
famous. Such people played an important role in public life, had 
their actions or accomplishments communicated to the public, 
and were sig niﬁ cant enough to merit continued public attention. 

10 Background and History
Additionally, we noted that the invention of the printing press 
and paper enabled the public to receive all sorts of printed or 
written information.  
 America Stirs 
 Across the Atlantic, a new nation was growing. The New England 
colonies were established around 1620. The Declaration of Inde-
pendence was signed in 1776. Anyone who has studied American 
history knows the challenges faced by Colonial America, partic-
ularly in dealing with Native Americans and with the inﬂ uence 
of foreign nations. We also know who was famous during 18th-
century America: Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, George 
Washington, and a host of others typically called the Founding 
Fathers. We also recognize Nathaniel Hawthorne, Edgar Allan 
Poe, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David Thoreau, among 
others, as making signiﬁ cant contributions to early American 
litera ture. Artists were busy in early America, too: John J. 
Audubon, Frederic Remington, Nathaniel Currier, James Ives, 
and James Whistler. The ﬁ rst regularly published newspaper in 
America was the  Boston News-Letter  in 1704. It printed political 
documents and opinion pieces; gossip and rumors, neither 
very accurate, were also part of the paper. The  Boston Gazette 
came along in 1719 ( Rodman 2006 ).  
 The Rise of Media in 19th-Century America 
 The arrival of the 19th century in America signaled the beginning 
of a new age: the era of mass media. The public was no longer 
dependent only on oral communication and simple printed docu-
ments for news and information. When the penny press arrived 
in 1833, America had its ﬁ rst mass medium (  Campbell, Martin, 
and Fabos 2007  ). Newspapers were now within the reach of many 
Americans. For just one cent, readers could get gossip, crime news, 
and advertising messages. Although magazines appeared a few 
years before the penny press, their development was slow.  The 
Saturday Evening Post  was the ﬁ rst magazine to have a large public 
following (  Biagi 2005  ). By the beginning of the 20th century, more 
than six thousand magazines were being published, although most 
of them were intended for local or regional audiences ( Campbell 
et al. 2007 ). 

The Rise of Media in 19th-Century America 11
 One new technology is noteworthy here, although it did not 
lead to another mass medium. The ﬁ rst electric telegraph line, in 
1844, made communication across long distances almost instanta-
neous. Where newspapers and magazines had to be transported 
from where they were printed to where they would be sold, the 
“lightning lines” of the telegraph had no such problem (  Czitrom 
1982  ). However, only brief messages could be sent by telegraph; 
therefore, we must consider it a personal medium, not a mass 
medium. 
 Progress came rapidly as America moved toward the end 
of the 19th century. The book industry ﬂ ourished; mass market 
paperbacks became available in the 1870s. Newspapers increased 
their circulation. Engravings and illustrations were added to 
magazines, making them more appealing to the public. Early 
steps were taken in developing sound recordings and ﬁ lm images. 
Experiments with radio waves were being conducted and work 
was underway on a cathode ray tube, the forerunner of the tele-
vision picture tube (  Campbell et al. 2007  ). Even as media were 
appearing on the American landscape, there was much political and 
social change elsewhere in the country. America ’ s population was 
growing, oil was discovered in Pennsylvania, steel plants were estab-
lished, and the telephone was invented. Americans went to war 
three times during these years: the Mexican-American War, the 
Civil War, and the Spanish-American War (  Miller and Thompson 
2006 ). The new mass media, primarily newspapers and maga-
zines at this point, enabled the American public to follow social, 
political, and technological developments, and to become well 
acquainted with individuals who were making contributions to 
public life. 
 Were there celebrities in 19th-century America? Up to this 
point, we ’ ve been saying that individuals who were active in 
public life often became famous or well known because their 
actions or accomplishments were communicated to the public 
and were signiﬁ cant enough to merit continued attention, but 
that they did not qualify as celebrities. Here ’ s another important 
question, the answer to which will guide our discussion for the 
remainder of this chapter. How does one go from being famous or 
well known to being a celebrity? It is really quite simple:  celebrity 
depends on regular media exposure . Moreover, an individual must, in 
some way,  seek fame and recognition . In other words, one ’ s activities 
must be reported by the media, or, in some cases, be made avail-
able to the public as media. Here ’ s an example. English novelist 

12 Background and History
Charles Dickens wrote more than 30 novels as well as numerous 
short stories and nonﬁ ction articles. Charles Dickens was a celeb-
rity. His novels were usually serialized in magazines before being 
collected as books. He sought fame and recognition by touring 
England and America, reading his work to audiences in formal, 
lecture-like settings. In both England and America, the public 
read about him in the newspapers, read his work in magazines or 
books, and perhaps attended or heard talk about his performance 
at a reading. Clearly, the media most responsible for Dickens ’ s 
celebrity were magazines and books, but he solidiﬁ ed his place as 
a celebrity by seeking fame and recognition. 
 During the 19th century, a great many Americans were 
famous or well known: President Abraham Lincoln; Civil War 
generals Robert E. Lee and Ulysses S. Grant; architect Frank 
Lloyd Wright; inventor Thomas Edison; industrialists Andrew 
Carnegie and John D. Rockefeller; newspaper publisher William 
Randolph Hearst; poet Walt Whitman; writer and satirist Mark 
Twain, and a host of others in many areas of American life. Do 
these individuals qualify as celebrities? Yes, some of them do. 
It could be argued that Lincoln, Lee, and Grant were not fame 
seekers, but merely men thrust into the public consciousness by 
the difﬁ culty and scope of their work. But the others in this list 
were indeed celebrities. They sought to be recognized and hon-
ored for their accomplishments. Americans not only read about 
these individuals in newspapers and magazines, but also con-
nected personally with them. Whitman ’ s poetry and Hearst ’ s 
newspapers were available to the public, for example. Edison ’ s 
telephone, light bulb, and primitive motion pictures were stunning 
additions to American life (  Miller and Thompson 2006  ). In other 
words, the work of the famous and well known became an 
important part of the lives of many Americans who welcomed 
these advances, were anxious to see what was to come next, and 
depended on media to keep them informed.  
 Media Gain Strength in the Early 
20th Century 
 In his book  Intimate Strangers: The Culture of Celebrity ,  Richard 
Schickel (1985)   makes this bold statement: “there was no such 
thing as celebrity prior to the beginning of the 20th century.” 

Media Gain Strength in the Early 20th Century  13
He notes that in the 1940s, the word  celebrity  was almost never 
used in print or conversation. If one read about people in the 
papers or in magazine proﬁ les, or heard about them on the air, 
they were called “successful” or “famous” (23). 
 That changed in 1959 with the publication of Blackwell and 
Amory ’ s  International Celebrity Register , a book containing brief, 
biographical summaries of more than 2,000 public ﬁ gures. The 
book covered “a multitude of ﬁ elds” and contained proﬁ les of 
sports ﬁ gures, businessmen, scientists, comedians, young actresses, 
and even Supreme Court justices (  Ponce de Leon 2002  , 11). The 
book was immediately controversial. Individuals had apparently 
been selected for the book based not on their accomplishments, 
but on their visibility. The historian Daniel J. Boorstin roundly 
criticized the book, suggesting it embraced “the vacuous and the 
ephemeral” and that those listed were merely famous for being 
well known. To Boorstin, this sort of celebrity was a “pseudo-
human event,” with little relationship to reality (12). Never theless, 
visibility is what distinguishes celebrities from the masses; 
moreover, visibility is made possible by the media ’ s shaping of 
celebrities as extraordinary, complex, and interesting individuals 
with unique talents and gifts ( Ponce de Leon 2002 ). Visibility was 
made possible by an expanding media. Newspapers reported on 
important political, social, and business issues. The magazine 
industry advanced with the publication of the  Ladies Home Journal , 
 Reader ’ s Digest ,  Time , and  Life . Book publishing prospered; book 
clubs were introduced. Many American homes had phonographs. 
Early movie theaters, called nickelodeons, brought ﬁ lm to many 
cities. Radio, already beginning to form broadcasting networks, 
became an inﬂ uential mass medium, reaching what some call its 
golden age in the 1930s (  Campbell et al. 2007  ). By the time World 
War II began in 1939 (America ofﬁ cially entered the war in 1941), 
print, radio, recording, and ﬁ lm were well established as integral 
parts of American life; television was in its infancy, having been 
introduced to the public by President Franklin D. Roosevelt at 
the 1939 World ’ s Fair (  Biagi 2005  ). With the coming of television 
and the end of World War II, 20th-century media were poised to 
become an even more powerful and inﬂ uential force in American 
life. One thing is clear: becoming a celebrity was fairly easy in the 
20th century. Individuals in public life, or the public sphere as it 
is sometimes called, could not avoid media attention. Many of 
them did not want to avoid it, but depended on it, in fact, to lift 
them to celebrity status. 

14 Background and History
 From the end of World War II until the early 1980s, it is not 
enough to say that media grew. The word that best describes the 
tremendous advances in media technology and content is the verb 
 exploded . Look at what happened during those years: 
 cassette tapes became popular 
• 
 rock-and-roll music and then hip-hop captured the 
• 
attention of young and old alike 
 cable television provided diverse programming to 
• 
many American homes 
 FM radio surpassed AM radio in popularity 
• 
 the Corporation for Public Broadcasting was authorized  
• 
 the Internet was established, followed soon by the 
• 
development of e-mail 
 video cassette recorders (VCRs) allowed Americans to 
• 
see movies at home on VHS-formatted videocassettes  
 
• USA Today , America ’ s ﬁ rst national newspaper, 
began publication 
 compact discs (CDs) replaced cassette tapes as 
• 
personal sources of recorded music 
 Cable News Network (CNN) became the ﬁ rst full-
• 
time cable news outlet 
 ﬁ ber optic cable and hypertext enabled information 
• 
to be transmitted and linked rapidly ( Campbell et al. 
2007 ). 
 This rich media environment made it possible for indi-
viduals in public life—and even some in private life—to 
become celebrities. Still, “the emergence of celebrity depended 
to a large extent on the social, economic, and political trans-
formations that have remade the world since the 16th century, 
and by new values and beliefs” that have resulted in moderni-
zation. Thus,  celebrity can be seen as fame modernized ( Ponce de 
Leon 2002 , 13).  
 Media Become Powerful in the Late 
20th Century 
 When you think about it, progress is a remarkable thing. So 
much can happen in a culture in a very short time. Sometimes 

The Public’s Role in Celebrity 15
the word  progress  does not do justice to the breadth and depth 
of change. This is certainly true if one considers media progress 
in the late 20th century. Media growth is steady and consider-
able attention is given to improving some of the products and 
services developed in the ﬁ rst part of the century. Talk becomes 
a popular radio format. Multiple-screen theaters open. Web 
browsers make Internet use easy; the Internet becomes a mass 
medium. Online shopping is common. Some big-city news-
papers begin to fail as consumers turn to the Internet for news and 
information. Digital video discs (DVDs) replace videocassettes 
for viewing movies at home. Cable news outlets expand. High 
deﬁ nition broadcasting begins using digital rather than analog 
signals (  Campbell et al. 2007  ;   Biagi 2005  ). In effect, at century ’ s 
end, “the bar had been lowered: in previous decades famous 
ﬁ gures . . . had to work harder to achieve fame or notoriety” 
(  Cashmore 2006  , p. 4). Celebrities now ﬁ nd it easy to reach, capture, 
and sustain the interest of the general public in their lives and 
activities.  
 The Public ’ s Role in Celebrity 
 It might appear that celebrity is all media ’ s doing, that media 
exposure alone can make an obscure individual famous. While it 
is true that media play an important part in celebrity, the general 
public plays a signiﬁ cant role, too. As   Braudy (1986)   writes, “in a 
society committed to progress, the seeking of fame, the climbing 
of the ladder of renown expresses something essential in that 
society ’ s nature” (5). 
 We think we know celebrities; we think we know what moti-
vates and inspires them. We believe ourselves to be much closer 
to them than we are to individuals with whom we might have 
regular, professional contact—doctors, pharmacists, hair stylists, 
retail clerks, mechanics, and the like. We know celebrities better 
than we know those who provide us routine services, or think 
we do. However, in reality our relationship with celebrities is 
based not on real intimacy but on the illusion of intimacy. We 
really don ’ t know celebrities, and they really don ’ t want to know 
us. A famous movie star put it this way: when you are faced 
with a crowd, “walk fast. Don ’ t stop and shake hands. You touch 
them, they don ’ t touch you” (  Schickel 1985 , 5). We know celebri-
ties are not normal members of society, but they are extensions 

16 Background and History
of what is normal, extensions of our desires. Their fame allows 
them to stand apart from us, but with our approval. We give 
them this power because they appear to be the personiﬁ cation of 
individuality, to be themselves in a way no one else can afford to 
be. We don ’ t mind if they are occasionally socially irresponsible 
(  Braudy 1986  ;   Schickel 1985  ). In short, we want to be like them, 
but we know we can ’ t. We can, however, live a little vicariously 
through them. 
 Sociologist Francesco Alberoni suggests that certain condi-
tions must exist for individuals to become famous, to become 
stars or celebrities, among which are the following: an economic 
environ ment conducive to the production of media texts such as 
ﬁ lms, television programs, music recordings, books, and the like; 
the ability of celebrities or their representatives to publicize or 
market celebrity talent; the ability of celebrities to connect with 
the collective unconscious, to speak to the inner wants and needs 
of the public (  Dyer 1998  ). The term  collective unconscious was 
described by psychiatrist Carl Jung as “a form of the unconscious 
(that part of the mind containing memories and impulses of which 
the individual is not aware) common to mankind as a whole and 
originating in the inherited structure of the brain. According to 
Jung, the collective unconscious contains archetypes, or univer-
sal primordial images and ideas” ( Encyclopedia Britannica ). Stated 
simply, celebrities appeal to “the public ’ s primal fantasies and 
basic emotions, lifting people from their everyday lives and mak-
ing them believe anything ’ s possible” (  Steele 2009  ). Celebrities 
play to our innate tendencies, tricking us into believing that they 
are our “intimate daily companions.” They “summon our most 
human yearnings: to love, admire, copy, and, of course, to gossip 
and to jeer” (  Flora 2004  ). The lives of celebrities “create a sort of 
psychic energy ﬁ eld that surrounds us and penetrates us, bind-
ing our universe together” (  Schickel 1985  , 275). To the typical 
member of the general public, a celebrity appears “to fulﬁ ll both 
a dream of autonomy and, at the same time, a dream of inti-
mate, almost familial connection among ﬁ gures of glamour and 
authority” (255). 
 As times change, media become more inﬂ uential, and the 
number of people who are famous and well known increases, 
our current deﬁ nition of celebrity may soon be inadequate to 
deﬁ ne the complex nature of the phenomenon, particularly as 
we move deeper into the 21st century. Before going forward, 
let ’ s pause again and review our current deﬁ nition. At the end of 

Celebrities as Stars 17
the 20th century, a celebrity can be said to have each of the fol-
lowing characteristics: 
 1.  leads a public life; is involved in work or activity in 
some area of the public sphere 
 2.  has accomplishments of interest and importance to 
the general public 
 3.  is well known or famous, usually because of those 
accomplishments 
 4.  seeks to become a celebrity by ﬁ nding ways to be 
regularly seen and heard, thus maintaining status as 
a well-known, famous individual 
 5.  is highly visible on or in media 
 6.  connects with the public on a subconscious level, 
embodying its dreams and desires. 
 Celebrities as Stars 
 Are celebrities also stars? Maybe, but not necessarily. We should be 
aware that the various words used to describe those in public life 
who have gained notoriety, that is, those who are generally known 
and talked of, are not precise synonyms. There is a difference in 
meaning among the following:  well known ,  famous ,  celebrity , and 
 star . The difference may not be obvious if one consults a thesaurus 
or a dictionary; those words are normally used interchangeably in 
daily discourse. However, this book strives to present the concept 
of celebrity precisely so that it may be clearly understood. This 
means we must be careful in how we use words that are related 
but may not have exactly the same meaning. For example,   Lai 
(2006)   makes an interesting distinction between the terms  star and 
 celebrity . While acknowledging that scholars often disagree on the 
distinctions between the two, “in general, celebrity is used to refer 
to anyone who has achieved widespread renown, either by merit, 
accident, or notoriety. Star is more frequently used to refer to indi-
viduals who have become famous via their activities in the art and 
entertainment industries . . .” (p. 229). For example, the Dalai Lama 
is a Tibetan spiritual leader. He is committed to promoting compas-
sion, forgiveness, tolerance, contentment, and self-discipline. He 
travels widely, receives awards for his work, appears frequently 
in the news, and even has his own Web site (  www.dalailama.com  ). 
The Dalai Lama is, by our current deﬁ nition, a celebrity, but he is 

18 Background and History
not a star; in all likelihood, he would reject both the celebrity and 
star labels as being inappro priate for a spiritual leader. On the 
other hand, Kevin Bacon, who once claimed to have worked with 
everyone in Hollywood, is an accomplished actor. He is a celeb-
rity, but because his activities occur in the enter tainment industry, 
he is also a star. The Kevin Bacon Game, sometimes called the Six 
Degrees of Kevin Bacon, allows one to link Bacon to any other actor 
in fewer than six movies (  http://oracleofbacon.org/  ). Additionally, 
Bacon has teamed with his brother Michael to form a band called 
The Bacon Brothers. This adds to Bacon ’ s popularity and creates a 
sort of mystique around him. 
   Herwitz (2008)   has a slightly different view of a star. He 
believes a star is a cultural icon, that is, a symbol of an idea or con-
cept, or an individual idolized by some. To be a star, a synergy must 
exist between one ’ s performance and one ’ s personal life. Princess 
Diana is a good example. Before her untimely death in 1997, Diana 
was married to Prince Charles, the future king of England, and 
carried the title Princess of Wales. With her husband and sons, 
William and Harry, Her Royal Highness represented a fresh face 
and a welcome change from what many considered the stufﬁ ness 
of royalty. Her personal life as wife and mother was supplemented 
by her work for many charitable causes. She was seen embracing 
an AIDS patient, talking with a leper, and cradling children whose 
limbs had been damaged by land mines (  Leslie 2004  ). Her per-
formance in these and other instances blended nicely with her 
personal life as a member of England ’ s royal family. This synergy 
made her not only a celebrity, but also a star. Given the outpouring 
of grief at her death, it is safe to say that she was idolized by many 
the world over. 
 The Remarkable 21st Century 
 Because we are living in it, the 21st century may not seem all that 
amazing to us. We may be victims of the boiled frog phenomenon. 
You ’ ve probably heard the story before, but it bears repeating here 
because it is a likely explanation of why we are so blasé about liv-
ing in contemporary culture. If you take a frog and place it in a 
pot of extremely hot water, the frog will try to jump out of the pot. 
But if you put that same frog in a pot of tepid water and gradually 
increase the heat, the frog will sit quietly in the pot, adjusting eas-
ily to the small increases in temperature until the water is warm 

The Remarkable 21st Century 19
enough to induce unconsciousness, allowing the frog to ultimately 
be boiled to death (  Pollard 2004  ). It is unclear whether scientists have 
ever conducted this experiment; nevertheless, the story makes a 
valid point. Many people are relatively unaware of the true sig-
niﬁ cance of the steady advance of cultural change. Sure, people 
recognize, even embrace, change. They know, for example, that 
the wireless cell phone is replacing the old home landline, that the 
microwave or convection oven is squeezing out the old electric 
range, that the computer has replaced the electric typewriter, and 
that the iPod has replaced the home phonograph. People relish 
these changes but lack a complete understanding of the way they 
funda mentally change our lives. Take the cell phone, for example. 
The cell phone is an excellent example of a technology illustrating 
the law of unintended consequences; it ’ s not a real law, of course, 
but a principle that can be seen at work in contemporary culture. 
Brieﬂ y stated, the law of unintended consequences suggests the 
“actions of people always have effects that are unanticipated or 
unintended” (Norton n.d.). Who could have anticipated that cell 
phone use while driving would increase the likelihood that you ’ d 
have a trafﬁ c accident? One research study found that test sub-
jects were “faster to brake and caused fewer crashes when they 
had a .08% blood-alcohol content than while sober and talking on 
a cell phone” (  Cruz and Oloffson 2009  , 46). Texting (sending text 
messages on a cell phone) is even worse. A study by the National 
Highway Trafﬁ c Safety Administration (NHTSA) “identiﬁ ed the 
cell phone as a serious safety hazard when used on the road.” Sev-
eral states and the District of Columbia have passed laws impos-
ing a ban on texting while driving (  Cruz and Oloffson 2009  , 45). 
Surely no one intends to have a trafﬁ c accident while talking on 
a cell phone! Now that we know the dangers of cell phone use 
while driving, can we anticipate problems? Yes. Will we change 
our behavior? No! A headline in the July 30, 2009, edition of the  St. 
Petersburg Times  sums up the typical reaction to all those research 
studies: “Dangerous, yes, but who cares?” What does all this have 
to do with celebrity? Quite a bit, actually, as we shall soon see. 
 We have ﬁ rmly established that media, and speciﬁ cally media 
visibility, is a key component of celebrity. Without media, celebrities 
are not celebrities at all, but merely individuals who are success-
ful, well known, or famous. As noted earlier, celebrity is fame 
modernized. In 21st-century America, modern means new media, 
a cadre of celebrities, and a host of celebrity pretenders. The devel-
opment of new media has absolutely changed our deﬁ nition of 

20 Background and History
celebrity. Is it now possible for anyone, or everyone, to become a 
celebrity? Are we living proof that pop artist Andy Warhol was 
prophetic years ago when he said that one day everyone in the 
world will be famous for 15 minutes? We ’ ll treat this issue in some 
depth in   Chapter 2  . However, at present, it is enough to say that 
as new media appear, our concept of celebrity changes. We, like 
the frog, may not be much aware that the changes around us—in 
our case, changes in media and our perception of celebrity—will 
have a major impact on our lives. 
 What is meant by the term new media? Well, computers 
and the Internet certainly qualify; they were around and in use 
at the end of the 20th century. Today, the computer is essen-
tially an appliance, as necessary to a home as a television set, 
a washer/dryer, a coffee maker, or a toaster. But computers are 
constantly changing. Whether it ’ s a desktop or a laptop, your 
computer may already be obsolete. Smaller, more efﬁ cient, and 
less-expensive machines appear on a regular basis. They have 
more memory, better software, quicker processors, and a host 
of other features. You can continue to use your present machine 
in the near term, but, before long, you ’ ll want to “upgrade.” 
Your friends, family, or business associates may have newer 
models, and you ’ ll feel the pressure to join them in exploring 
all that is available online. What happens to your old machine? 
Recycle it if you can, but one computer technician, when asked 
what could be done with an old computer, remarked, “it makes 
a good doorstop.” 
 What does a computer have to do with celebrity? A computer, 
connected to the Internet and accessing the World Wide Web, is 
the doorway to new media content. It is this content that will 
deﬁ ne celebrity in the 21st century. Electronic mail (e-mail) is 
routine these days. We get some important messages via this 
technology, but we also get spam and a variety of messages 
designed to steal our identities or personal information or 
implant a virus on our computer hard drives. We ’ ll acknowl-
edge e-mail ’ s occasional usefulness, but dismiss it as having 
much inﬂ uence on celebrity. Most of the action is on the larger, 
more complex World Wide Web. We ’ ll discuss some of the prob-
lems and controversies relating to Web sites, online activities, 
and celebrities in   Chapter 2  . But now, let ’ s take a broad, general 
look at the Web and identify some things with the potential to 
change not only the way people use and view media, but also 
the way we view celebrity. 

The Remarkable 21st Century 21
 The World Wide Web has enabled anyone with a computer 
to come forward as a potential celebrity. You can establish your 
own Web site. You can blog, that is, provide opinions, ideas, or 
information about your daily life in an online diary or journal. 
You can often comment on the blogs of other people. You can 
usually comment on news or human interest stories in the space 
provided at the end of an online article; these comments are 
collected by the Web site and are available to all readers. You 
can shoot your own video and upload it to YouTube where it can 
be seen by anyone accessing the site. You can join one of several 
social networks, such as MySpace or Facebook, or join the busi-
ness and professional network LinkedIn. In short, there is almost 
an unlimited amount of content that gives you access to infor-
mation about relatives, friends, neighbors, co-workers, politicians, 
newsmakers, lawbreakers, and yes, even celebrities. You can join 
this parade of personalities by getting involved in Web activities. 
You can increase your visibility in the world, or at least in the 
online world. You can present yourself as successful, rich, talented, 
and important, even if you are none of these. The truth is very 
slippery online. 
 Don ’ t like to surf the Web? Would you prefer something a 
little more personal? The 21st century has it. It ’ s a cell phone, 
and yes, we acknowledge what was said earlier about driving 
and cell phone use. But when you are not driving, the device 
can be used in a somewhat smaller context than the Internet and 
with much the same beneﬁ t—increasing your visibility. “Today ’ s 
phones come equipped with many useful calling and multimedia 
features, including a media player, camera, Web browsing, child-
location, and call-management services” (   Consumer Reports 2009 ). 
One popular cell phone activity is twittering. Twitter is a “real-
time short messaging service that works over multiple networks” 
(Twitter n.d.). A short message—no more than 140 characters—is 
called a “tweet.” If you send tweets to others on the network, 
you are said to be a “tweeter “or to be “twittering.” “Unlike most 
text messages, tweets are routed among networks of friends,” or 
followers. Followers can be strangers “who choose to receive the 
tweets of people they ﬁ nd interesting” (  Twitter 2009  ). So, Twitter 
is another media service that allows one to make oneself visible 
and important to others in any desired way. Some critics feel 
that most tweets are mundane and unimportant; an Ohio man 
expressed the opinion of many. He asked, “Do we really need to 
know that you just put your pants on, just brushed your teeth, 

22 Background and History
just ordered a hamburger, just ﬁ nished dinner, just walked out 
of the bathroom?” (  Swartz 2009  ). Nevertheless, the service is 
extremely popular, particularly among politicians and celebrities. 
One study found that politicians spent most of their Twitter time 
promoting themselves (  World in a Snap 2009  ). A Georgia man 
noted that Twitter is “a look-at-me-technology that seems to be 
more about vanity and competition than about information.” 
If Twitter is about vanity and self-promotion, it is made to order 
for celebrities. Actor Ashton Kutcher has more than 3.2 million 
Twitter followers. Still, Twitter use by celebrities “has led many of 
their fans to the misguided impression that they ’ re on a ﬁ rst-name 
basis” with the stars they follow (  Swartz 2009  , 3B). What we are 
seeing is that new media technology is making it relatively easy 
to become highly visible in the 21st century, even if you are not 
famous or well known, but particularly easy if you  are  famous or 
well known. It is possible that media visibility may soon become 
the only characteristic of a celebrity (see  Chapter 2 ). 
 What about recorded music? Is it still important in the 21st-
century celebrity world? It is. Although compact discs (CDs) 
are still popular, many people are turning to an iPod for music. 
“The iPod is a portable digital music and video player made 
by Apple . . . designed to work with the iTunes media library 
software, which lets users manage the music libraries on their 
computers and their iPods.” A song can be downloaded to an 
iPod often for less than a dollar. As one Web site says, “the iPod 
is gaining in popularity and you do not want to be left out in 
the cold. Face it, even the youngest of children are (sic) learning 
how to work these new devices with ease” (iPod basics n.d.). The 
music of popular recording artists is now available at your ﬁ nger-
tips. You may not be able to “see” your favorite stars, but you can 
hear them. Thus, the iPod provides a slightly different, but still 
effective, medium for celebrity visibility. 
 It would be a mistake to assume that celebrity in the 21st 
century is dependent only on electronic media, that is, television, 
computers, cell phones, iPods, and the Internet. A growing maga-
zine industry has become an important part of the celebrity world. 
The editors of AllYouCanRead.com, a magazine and newspaper 
online database, developed a list of the top 10 celebrity maga-
zines:  In Touch Weekly ,  InStyle ,  Interview ,  J-14  (the #1 teen cele brity 
magazine),  Life and Style Weekly ,  OK! Magazine ,  People ,  Tatler 
(from Great Britain),  US Weekly , and  Vanity Fair . Appearing on 
a magazine cover is, of course, extremely important, but being 

A Celebrity Taxonomy 23
featured inside the publication isn ’ t bad either. The recession of 
2008–2010 took a toll on celebrity magazine sales; nevertheless, 
overall circulation “held up well despite the [economic] downturn” 
(Perez-Pena 2009). 
 It is obvious that the expansion of media in the 21st century 
provided additional opportunities for celebrities to become more 
visible and for some private individuals to become somewhat 
visible in the new media world. We have the means today to pres-
ent ourselves to the world in ways that everyday people in the 
ancient civilizations of Egypt, Greece, Rome, and the Middle Ages 
could not even imagine. 
 A Celebrity Taxonomy 
 A taxonomy is a classiﬁ cation system. Although typically used to 
categorize plants and animals, it is also useful in organizing peo-
ple and ideas. Based on the review of history and the rise of media 
presented earlier in this chapter, we can place the well known and 
the famous into distinctive categories. For example, although there 
were few well-known people in Ancient Egypt, those who did get 
recognition and a small measure of fame were primarily politi-
cal, military, or religious ﬁ gures. The taxonomy expands during 
the Greek civilization where—in addition to the well known and 
famous in politics, government, and the military—other indi-
viduals made contributions to architecture, sculpture, literature, 
philos ophy, and education. Taking into consideration all we know 
up to the present, we can assign the well known, the famous, and 
most celebrities to one of the following eight categories: 
 TABLE 1.1 
Eight Categories of Celebrity 
Category
Speciﬁ c Examples
Politics, Government
rulers, military ﬁ gures, politicians
The Arts
writers, artists, musicians
Science, Medicine
scientists, physicians
Entertainment
ﬁ lm and television stars, sports ﬁ gures
Academic
philosophers, teachers, scholars
Business
entrepreneurs, captains of industry
Religion
popes, preachers, religious leaders
General Public
reality show participants, newsmakers

24 Background and History
 This taxonomy provides a basic framework on which we can 
build. We ’ ll be able to better understand the taxonomy in the 
chapters ahead as we explore the changing nature of celebrity—
what it is and what it means in the 21st century. 
 If you read the list carefully, you will notice there is one cat-
egory about which we have said little in terms of members of the 
category being celebrities: the general public. Is it possible for 
members of the general public to become celebrities? Yes, it is 
possible, but certain conditions must apply. Let ’ s take a detailed 
look at this category and see just why some members of the public 
might be considered celebrities, or at least well known or famous. 
 To be sure, most members of the general public are not well 
known or famous, and thus cannot be celebrities. They lead quiet 
lives. They go to work, pay their bills, watch television, send 
e-mail, and take a vacation occasionally; they may be married or 
single; they may or may not have children. They are known to their 
co-workers, neighbors, family, and friends. They may be known 
socially by others outside their immediate sphere of inﬂ uence, 
particularly if they attend religious services, join an exercise club, 
have their letter to the editor published by the local newspaper, or 
are active in community or civic groups. They may be known by 
those upon whom they depend for service; their doctor, dentist, 
banker, or hair stylist may know them by name. In short, these 
members of the public are known within the framework of their 
lifestyles. They are known, but not well known enough to be 
considered famous. 
 Members of the General Public as Seekers of Fame 
 Some members of the public are not satisﬁ ed to be known sim-
ply in their own milieu, that is, their own surroundings. They ’ d 
like to be better known than that, to be more widely recognized. 
These individuals might actually achieve some small measure 
of fame if they use the tools given them by 21st-century media. 
They can shoot a home video and upload it to YouTube, estab-
lish a Web site, or start a blog. They can apply to appear on one 
of several television reality shows in the hope of being selected 
as a contestant. Appearing on television is considered by many 
the quickest way to become famous. Tens of thousands of people 
regularly apply to television ’ s reality shows:  Survivor ,  American 
Idol ,  Big Brother ,  The Amazing Race ,  The Bachelor , and  So You Think 
You Can Dance , among others. The few selected to appear on these 

A Celebrity Taxonomy 25
shows will have their 15 minutes of fame, but probably no more 
than that. Once they ’ ve completed their time on the shows, they ’ ll 
be quickly forgotten. Who remembers the person who won the 
million dollars on the second season of  Survivor ? Which team won 
the million dollar prize on the ﬁ rst season of  The Amazing Race ? 
A few television junkies, that is, those who gather and retain tele-
vision trivia, may be able to identify these individuals, but the rest 
of us cannot. Their fame was limited to their time on television, 
and because they are no longer on television, they are no longer 
famous. They were never famous or well known enough to be 
classiﬁ ed as celebrities. 
 There is, however, an exception to the ﬂ eeting nature of 
reality show fame:  American Idol . Winners on this show have often 
been signed to recording contracts, and some still remain famous; 
Kelly Clarkson and Carrie Underwood are good examples. These 
women were just small-town singers from Texas and Oklahoma 
until their appearance on  Idol . Their success on the show propelled 
them to fame. Even some of the losers have become successful. 
Jennifer Hudson won an Oscar for her role in  Dreamgirls , and Kellie 
Pickler became a country music artist. We ’ ll give  American Idol its 
due in helping to create some famous, well-known individuals, 
but, for the most part, the fame associated with television ’ s reality 
shows is short-lived. 
 Members of the Public as Famous Newsmakers 
 There is another, somewhat-more-common way for members of 
the general public to become famous: in the course of your normal 
life, do something extraordinarily unusual or extremely illegal. 
Either consciously or unconsciously, behave in such a way as to 
draw considerable media attention. The key phrases in this sub-
category are “extraordinarily unusual” and “extremely illegal.” 
Many people do unusual things or break a law or two. Someone 
might walk from one end of a state to another in an attempt to 
raise money for a charitable cause—praiseworthy, but not all that 
unusual. Another person might go big-game hunting in Africa—
interesting, but not truly remarkable. Still another might get a 
speeding ticket or be arrested for burglary—troublesome, but not 
signiﬁ cant enough to draw any sort of sustained media attention. 
 There are individuals, however, who were thrust into the 
media spotlight and became famous because they did something 
that was beyond the usual, or beyond small violations of the law. 

26 Background and History
 Nadya Suleman made headlines in January 2009 when she 
gave birth to history-making octuplets. That event itself was 
extraordinarily unusual, but it was made even more so by the 
news shortly thereafter that Suleman already had six children, 
all of them born through in vitro fertilization. “Many people 
across the country expressed outrage at Suleman and the fertil-
ity doctor who impregnated her, saying it was irresponsible for 
a single woman to bring 14 children in the world without the 
means to care for them” ( Ferran 2009 ). This situation was tailor-
made for the news media who are always eager to exploit the 
unusual for the ratings it might generate. True enough, dozens 
of requests and offers poured in. ABC ’ s  Good Morning America 
was one of the ﬁ rst to call, asking for an interview. Suleman, now 
known as “Octomom,” was eager to capitalize on her sudden 
fame. She sought to trademark the term  Octomom . She explored 
the possibility of having her own television show and consid-
ered developing a line of diapers, dresses, pants, and shirts with 
the Octomom label ( Duke 2009 ). Thus, we can see it is not all that 
difﬁ cult for a member of the general public to become famous—
just do something really, really unusual and get a lot of media 
attention for it. 
 In the second part of this sub-category we ﬁ nd individuals 
who have broken the law to such an extent that they, too, became 
famous in the news media spotlight. Such was the case with two 
high school seniors in Littleton, Colorado. On April 20, 1999, 
Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold took the ﬁ rst steps on the road 
to fame. They conducted an assault on Columbine High School 
during the middle of the school day, wanting to kill as many of 
their fellow students as possible. The attack was poorly planned 
and some of the bombs they planted failed to detonate; never-
theless, when the smoke cleared, 12 students, one teacher, and 
both boys were dead (Rosenberg n.d.). The media quickly swung 
into action, covering every aspect of the situation, and passing 
along some incorrect information in the process. The Trench Coat 
Maﬁ a (TCM) was said to be behind the killings. Although the 
boys were wearing trench coats, they were not part of any group 
calling itself the TCM; in fact, the TCM was largely a myth. The 
news media clearly contributed to the confusion surrounding 
the situation; they failed to ask basic questions about the boys 
and the group they were presumed to be part of. Later, law 
enforcement ofﬁ cials were accused of making mistakes in the 
investigation of the slaughter and of covering up those mistakes 

A Celebrity Taxonomy 27
(  Cullen 2009  ). The Columbine school shooting was a far more 
complicated series of events, both before and after the actual 
gunﬁ re, than we can deal with here. Still, the tragic event illus-
trates how an extreme breaking of the law—in this case murder—
can make those who commit the act famous. Harris and Klebold 
dominated news coverage of the event for many days; report-
ers ﬂ ocked to Colorado to interview anyone who would talk to 
them. Harris and Klebold became household names. They were 
featured on the cover of the May 3, 1999, issue of  Time maga-
zine, together with photos of the 13 people they killed. Yes, they 
were famous. Sadly, that fame came at a high price: the death of 
15 human beings. It is so often the case. Law breakers become 
famous if their deeds involve the loss of life, particularly the loss 
of many lives. Timothy McVeigh took 168 lives when he bombed 
the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City in April 1995. 
There are other examples, of course, but the point is that one way 
to become famous is to do something extremely illegal and gain 
signiﬁ cant news media exposure as a result. 
 Were Eric Harris, Dylan Klebold, and Timothy McVeigh 
celebrities? If we apply our deﬁ nition of celebrity, we can see they 
fail to meet at least two, perhaps three, important characteristics. 
Their actions did not connect subconsciously in the sense that they 
embodied the dreams and aspirations of the public. No mentally 
healthy person wishes for the death of others. It could also be 
argued that the attacks at Columbine High and in Oklahoma 
City were not so much accomplishments as actions. The word 
 accomplishment  carries—as we have applied it to celebrities—the 
implication of something worthwhile, something positive. Murder 
is neither of these. It is unknown whether Harris, Klebold, and 
McVeigh were seeking to become famous. All three were pursuing 
personal goals, however twisted. McVeigh apparently wanted to 
get away with it; it is not clear what Harris and Klebold thought 
about the outcome of their actions. Nevertheless, the three killers 
do qualify as celebrities on some of the other qualities. 
 The Octomom, on the other hand, initially missed on only 
two characteristics: embodying the dreams and desires of the 
public, and seeking ways to be seen and heard. However, once 
her story was out, she did indeed seek to capitalize on her notoriety. 
Thus, she qualiﬁ es on ﬁ ve of the six characteristics. This raises 
an interesting question. Must one meet all six requirements to be 
considered a celebrity? You ’ ll ﬁ nd the answer to that question in 
 Chapter 2 . 

28 Background and History
 References 
 Biagi, Shirley. 2005.  Media/Impact . Seventh edition. Belmont, CA: Thomson 
Wadsworth. 
 Braudy, Leo. 1986.  The frenzy of renown . New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Campbell, Richard, Christopher Martin, and Bettina Fabos. 2007.  Media 
and culture . Fifth edition. Boston: Bedford/St. Martins. 
 Cashmore, Ellis. 2006.  Celebrity/Culture . New York: Routledge. 
 Consumer Reports. “Cell phones and services.” [Online information; 
retrieved 10/01/09.]  http:www.consumerreports.org/cro/electronics-
computers/phones-mobile-devices/cell-phones-service.html . 
 Corliss, Richard. 2009. “Legend.”  Time , June 29. 
 Cruz, Gilbert, and Kristi Oloffson. 2009. “Driving us to distraction.” 
 Time , August 24. 
 Cullen, Dave. 2009.  Columbine . New York: Grand Central Publishing. 
 Czitrom, Daniel. 1982.  Media and the American mind . Chapel Hill: 
University of North Carolina Press. 
 Duke, Alan. 2009. “Octomom seeks to trademark nickname for TV, 
diaper line.” [Online article; retrieved 10/06/09.]  http://cnn.
com/2009/us/04/15/octuplet.mom/index.html . 
 Dyer, Richard. 1998.  Stars . London: British Film Institute. 
 Eisenstein, Elizabeth. 2005.  The printing revolution in early modern Europe . 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Encyclopedia Britannica.  http://britannica.com/EBchecked/
topic/125572/collective-unconscious . 
 Fang, Irving. 2008.  Alphabet to Internet: Mediated communication in our 
lives. St. Paul, MN: Rada Press. 
 Ferran, Lee. 2009. “Octomom: I screwed my life up.” [Online 
article; retrieved 10/06/09.]  http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/
Story?id=7762688&page=1 . 
 Flora, Carlin. 2004. “Seeing by starlight: Celebrity obsession.” [Online 
article; retrieved 09/29/09.]  http://www.psychologytoday.com/
articles/200407/seeing-starlight-celebrity-obsession . 
 Fussel, Stephan. 2005.  Gutenberg and the impact of printing . Translated by 
Douglas Martin. Burlington, VT: Ashgate. 
 Herwitz, David. 2008.  The star as icon . New York: Columbia University 
Press. 

References 29
 “ipod basics for the beginner.” n.d. [Online information; retrieved 
10/02/09.]  http://technology.solveyourproblem.com/ipod/ipod-
basics-beginners.shtml . 
 Kleinschmidt, Harald. 2000.  Understanding the MiddleAges . Woodbridge, 
Suffolk, England: Boydell Press. 
 Lai, Adrienne. 2006. “Glitter and grain.” In  Framing celebrity , eds. Su 
Holmes and Sean Redmond, 215–230. New York: Routledge. 
 Leslie, Larry Z. 2004.  Mass communication ethics: Decision making in post-
modern culture . Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
 McCutcheon, Lynn, John Maltby, James Houran, and Diane Ashe. 2004. 
 Celebrity worshippers: Inside the minds of stargazers . Baltimore: Publish 
America. 
 Menache, Sophia. 1990.  The vox dei . New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Miller, James, and John Thompson. 2006.  Almanac of American history . 
Washington, DC: National Geographic Society. 
 Munck, Thomas. 2000.  The enlightenment . New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
 Norton, Rob. n.d. “Unintended consequences.” [Online article; retrieved 
09/30/09.]  http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/Unintended
Consequences.html . 
 Perez-Pena, Richard. 2009. “Celebrity magazines post a downturn 
in sales.” [Online article: retrieved 10/02/09.]  http://www.nytimes.
com/2009/02/10/business/media/10mag.html . 
 Pollard, David. 2004. “The boiling frog.” [Online article; retrieved 
09/30/09.]  http://blogs.salon.com/0002007/2004/02/06.html . 
 Ponce de Leon, Charles. 2002.  Self-exposure: Human-interest journalism 
and the emergence of celebrity in America . Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press. 
 Roberts, J. M. 1993.  A short history of the world . New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 Rodman, George. 2006.  Mass media in a changing world . New York: 
McGraw Hill. 
 Rosenberg, Jennifer. n.d. “Columbine massacre.” [Online article; 
retrieved 10/06/09.]  http://history1900s.about.com/od/
famouscrimescandals/a/columbine.htm . 
 Schickel, Richard. 1985.  Intimate strangers: The culture of celebrity . Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday & Company. 
 Simpson, John, and Edmund Weiner. 1989.  The Oxford English dictionary . 
Second edition. Volume II, V. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 

30 Background and History
 Steele, Margaret. 2009. “The psychology of celebrity worship.” [Online 
article; retrieved 09/29/09.]  http://health.usnews.com/articles/
health/healthday/2009/06/26-the-psychology-of-celebrity-worship . 
 Swartz, Jon. 2009. “Twitter haters see no point in tweeting.”  USA Today , 
August 25, 3B. 
 Thomas, Rosalind. 1992.  Literacy and orality in ancient Greece . New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Twitter. 2009. [Online information; retrieved 10/02/09.]  http://topics.
nytimes,com/top/news/business/companies/twitter/index.html . 
 Twitter. n.d. [Online information; retrieved 10/02/09.]  http://twitter.
com/about . 
 Woolf, Alex. 2008.  A short history of the world . New York: Metro Books. 
 World in a Snap. 2009. “Pols can brag in 140 characters or less.”  St. 
Petersburg Times , September 19, 4A. 

31
  2 
 Problems, Controversies, 
and Solutions 
 T
 his chapter explores several current issues involving celebrity 
and suggests how some of the more interesting, perhaps one 
could say the more troublesome, can be satisfactorily resolved. 
Where possible, both sides of an issue will be presented. In some 
cases a solution will be offered; in others, readers will be on their 
own to determine which arguments are most convincing. 
 Is Celebrity Finite? 
 Does celebrity have deﬁ nite, recognizable boundaries or limits? 
In other words, can we determine when celebrity begins and 
when it ends?   Chapter 1   presented six characteristics an indi-
vidual should have to be considered a celebrity. One must lead a 
public life or work in the public sphere, accomplish something of 
importance and interest to the public, be well known or famous, 
seek celebrity by being seen and heard regularly, be highly visible in 
the media, and connect with the public by embodying its dreams 
and aspirations. If one accepts those characteristics, then celebrity 
begins when all six are met. Note that celebrity does not depend 
on age, gender, place of birth, talent, or skill, although these qualities 
may be more helpful to some people than to others. Celebrity 
depends on the  action  taken by individuals, that is, how they use 
their talent, skills, age, gender, and so forth. Notice some of the 
verbs in the list of characteristics: work, accomplish, seek, connect. 
These require considerable effort and energy. Having youth and 

32 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
talent will not get you very far unless you do something with that 
youth and talent. In today ’ s popular terminology, you must be 
proactive. Passivity won ’ t work to your advantage. If one accepts 
the six characteristics as determining celebrity, it becomes quickly 
obvious that not all those in public life are celebrities. It is pos-
sible to have some, even most, of the traits and still fall short of 
celebrity. One can be famous and well known, but not a celebrity. 
One can have signiﬁ cant work accomplishments and still not be 
a celebrity. In short, our requirement that an individual meet all 
six characteristics makes becoming a celebrity more involved that 
one might expect. 
 On the other hand, some people might feel that a list of 
qualities one must have to become a celebrity is too complicated, 
too analytical, too academic, too confusing. If you were such a 
person, you might pose some interesting questions. You might 
ask, “Why not simplify celebrity? In our technologically heavy 
society, doesn ’ t it make sense to say that if one is highly visible in 
the media, that ’ s enough to make that person a celebrity? Hasn ’ t 
that person already met most of the other characteristics? More-
over, because contemporary society values everyone ’ s opinion, 
if my opinion is that someone is a celebrity, it ’ s a done deal! Why 
can ’ t I say who is and who is not a celebrity in the same way I 
choose which songs to include on my iPod? It ’ s all about indi-
vidual choice today. Celebrity should not be any different. Why 
should other people make decisions about anything, including 
celebrity, I can make for myself?” This argument has consider-
able appeal. It is straightforward and doesn ’ t demand the kind 
of time and effort applying a set of characteristics requires. The 
argument is supported, to some degree, by the technological 
determinism theory, developed by Marshall McLuhan, a Cana-
dian professor of culture and technology. Although McLuhan 
died in 1980, his work remains a major inﬂ uence in helping 
us understand popular media culture. McLuhan believed that 
media technology determines how people think, feel, and act. 
In other words, the messages we receive through media are so 
inﬂ uential in our lives that we are no longer aware that our feel-
ings, ideas, and opinions are being shaped by technology and 
the messages it carries. Thus, technology is the determining 
factor, that is, the unstoppable, unavoidable authority in estab-
lishing how we perceive the world. Not all scholars agree with 
McLuhan, but many do. In any case, McLuhan ’ s theory offers 
some support to the notion that being highly visible in media 

Is Celebrity Finite? 33
is all that is necessary to make one a celebrity. In short, media 
exposure alone—because of technological determinism—is 
the deﬁ nitive element in celebrity. This argument makes valid 
points about the power of the individual and the power of 
media. We are taught that our ideas, opinions, and choices do 
not hold absolute truth; others rightfully have different ideas and 
opinions and make different choices. Diversity is highly valued 
in contemporary multicultural society. Furthermore, we live in a 
media-rich culture of computers, smart phones, iPods; we blog, 
we tweet, and we upload to YouTube. New media, particularly, 
are quite powerful. 
 The conclusion to be drawn from these two arguments is, of 
course, a matter of individual choice. However, the stronger argu-
ment appears to be the one requiring celebrities to meet the six 
characteristics developed in   Chapter 1  . These qualities represent a 
set of standards, that is, a way of determining what a thing should 
be. If celebrities are role models or individuals the public holds 
in high esteem, they should meet some basic standards. Life is 
full of standards. There are standards for obtaining a driver ’ s 
license, standards for earning a high school diploma or college 
degree, standards for entering adulthood, and standards for 
entering many professions. One cannot just arbitrarily do these 
sorts of things. There are criteria to be met. Even the media have 
standards: a television show that fails to attract a large number of 
viewers will not get high ratings and will likely be cancelled; an 
album recorded by a popular music group will not be designated 
“gold” or “platinum” if it fails to meet certain sales goals. In a 
world where standards are ﬁ rm for many of the things with which 
we have contact, we cannot abandon celebrity to the whim of the 
individual. Furthermore, celebrity would be too easy to achieve 
if it depended solely on the opinion of an individual. Nothing 
worthwhile is easy. This brings to mind the 1992 movie  A League 
of Their Own , a ﬁ lm about the ﬁ rst female professional baseball 
league in the 1940s. When a player complains about how hard it 
is to play, actor Tom Hanks, as team manager Jimmy Dugan, says, 
“It ’ s supposed to be hard. If it wasn ’ t hard, everyone could do 
it. The hard . . . is what makes it great.” Meeting the six celebrity 
characteristics is hard; not everyone can do it. That ’ s what makes 
celebrity special! 
 When does celebrity end? The quick answer is that it ends 
when an individual fails to meet the six celebrity characteristics. 
At ﬁ rst glance, one would be tempted to say that celebrity ends 

34 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
when an individual ceases to become highly visible in the media. 
That ’ s true, but other factors may also be at work. Take Gary 
Coleman, star of the popular television sitcom  Diff ’ rent Strokes in 
the late 1970s and early 1980s. Although Coleman died in late May 
2010, his later life provides a good example of how celebrity can 
slip away. Coleman had ﬁ nancial problems for almost 20 years 
before he ﬁ nally ﬁ led for bankruptcy in 1999. The few roles he got 
on television or in ﬁ lms were minor ones; for example, he played 
the pizza guy in the 2007 B-level ﬁ lm  A Christmas Too Many . That 
was not enough for him to maintain celebrity status. Were it not 
for his apparent suicide attempt and a charge of assault on a fan, 
he would have been entirely out of public view. In any case, he 
no longer had accomplishments of interest and importance to the 
public. He did not embody the dreams and desires of those young 
people who were fans of his television show. In short, he failed to 
meet several celebrity characteristics and was therefore considered 
a former celebrity. 
 We mean no disrespect to Coleman. He has a lot of company 
in the former-celebrity category. Willie Aames, another popular 
sitcom star in the late 1970s and 1980s ( Eight is Enough ), has also 
fallen on hard times; he ﬁ led for bankruptcy in 2007. Richard 
Hatch, the winner on the ﬁ rst season of CBS ’ s reality show  Survivor , 
received a 51-month prison sentence for failing to pay taxes on his 
million dollar prize (  Spears 2009  ). However, having money trouble 
is not the only way to lose celebrity status. In the 2007 Miss Teen 
USA pageant, South Carolina teen Caitlin Upton was an on-stage 
celebrity for perhaps an hour until she tried to answer a question 
about why a ﬁ fth of Americans are unable to locate the United 
States on a world map. In an answer peppered with  uhs  and  ums , 
she said it was because “U.S. Americans don ’ t have maps.” She 
plowed on, referencing South Africa and “the Iraq.” The video was 
uploaded to YouTube and received hundreds of thousands of hits, 
but her celebrity was not real. She had no accomplishments, was 
the object of nationwide ridicule, and certainly did not embody 
anyone ’ s dreams and desires. Then there ’ s the case of Olympic 
ﬁ gure skater Tonya Harding. According to her Web site (  www 
.tonyaharding.com  ), she is one of the most inﬂ uential and contro-
versial ﬁ gures in sports history, second only to boxer Muhammad 
Ali. Most people would probably agree with the contro versial 
part. She conspired with her ex-husband and two others to attack 
competitor Nancy Kerrigan at an Olympic practice session in 1994. 
Kerrigan was injured in the attack and did not place ﬁ rst in the 

Is Celebrity Finite? 35
U.S. ﬁ gure skating ﬁ nals that year. Harding and her ex-husband 
also appear in a sex tape, presumably made on their wedding 
night. More recently, she turned to boxing and, according to her 
Web site, hopes to make enough money to retire and “live alone 
with her Persian cat.” In the minds of the general public, she 
retired from celebrity long ago! Aames, Hatch, Upton, Harding, 
and a host of others, once celebrities, now fail to meet several of 
the required characteristics. They are former celebrities. 
 There are other ways, of course, that an individual ’ s celeb-
rity can come to an end. Although not common, a few indi-
viduals have chosen to leave the media spotlight and essentially 
abandon their celebrity. This was the case with Bobby Fischer. 
Fischer won the World Chess Championship in 1972 and then 
dropped from sight for almost 20 years. Fischer was quirky, 
cranky, and somewhat reclusive before the championship 
match, but the competition seemed to bring out his other nega-
tive qualities. He complained about ﬁ rst one thing, and then 
another, during the match. He returned to competition brieﬂ y 
in 1992 by playing a match in Yugoslavia, but disappeared 
again for several years before moving to Iceland where he died 
in 2008. Fischer was the ﬁ rst American to win the World Chess 
Championship and could have capitalized on his celebrity, but 
he chose not to. 
 Obviously, death can bring an end to celebrity, although a 
celebrity ’ s reputation and work may live on. Take Michael Jackson, 
for example. Although the King of Pop died in June 2009, fans still 
buy his music, and his brothers and sisters make regular public 
appearances discussing Michael ’ s life and the impact of his death. 
Four months after Jackson ’ s death, his friend Kenny Ortega 
released a ﬁ lm comprised mainly of video clips from rehearsal 
sessions for Jackson ’ s planned concert series.  This Is It was well 
received by both critics and fans.  Forbes  magazine reported the 
Jackson estate earned $90 million in a recent year. The estates 
of other dead celebrities also managed to do well: Beatle John 
Lennon $15 million, Dr. Seuss (Theodor Geisel) $15 million, singer 
Elvis Presley $55 million, and fashion designer Yves Saint Laurent 
$350 million (  www.forbes.com  ). In short, death may remove celeb-
rities from the media spotlight, but their work and their earning 
power may live on. 
 Advancing age is also a factor in bringing celebrity to an end. 
Dozens of the famous and well known are over the age of 85 and, 
although still alive, have faded into the celebrity background.

36 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
For example, actresses Olivia de Havilland ( Gone with the 
Wind ) and Joan Fontaine ( Suspicion ) are in their nineties. So 
are actors Harry Morgan ( M*A*S*H ) and Frank Cady ( Green 
Acres ). These and other elderly celebrities are rarely seen. Their 
names are recognized only by people of a certain age; today ’ s 
younger generation knows little or nothing about these senior 
celebrities. 
 To answer the question posed at the beginning of this section, 
yes, celebrity is ﬁ nite. Celebrity has boundaries. Becoming a 
celebrity means meeting all six of our characteristics; the end of 
celebrity is less deﬁ nite and includes factors, such as age, that are 
not part of the list of required celebrity qualities. 
 Celebrities Who Violate Social or 
Moral Norms 
 A norm is a principle of correct action held by members of a 
society that guides, controls, or regulates behavior. Here ’ s a 
simple example. Time was, men stood aside respectfully and held 
doors open so women could pass through ﬁ rst. This practice was 
con sidered entirely appropriate; failure to follow this norm was 
the epitome of rudeness. A few old-timers still follow this prac-
tice today, but contemporary society is egalitarian; some women 
might feel they are being treated as the “weaker sex” if they are 
not allowed to open their own doors. Other women may simply 
not pay much attention to who goes through a door ﬁ rst. Never-
theless, norms still exist in contemporary society. What happens to 
a celebrity when the individual violates a social or moral norm? 
 Although there are violations of social and moral norms in 
all areas of life, most high-proﬁ le violations for celebrities seem 
to occur in politics and entertainment. Politicians are often not 
precise in their comments about pending legislation, government 
policies, the behavior of peers, or their own actions. This some-
times gets them into trouble because they violate a norm, that is, 
a standard of behavior expected of everyone. Take, for example, 
Rod Blagojevich who, in 2008, was the governor of Illinois. On 
the morning of December 9, he was arrested at his Chicago home 
and charged with “conspiring to commit mail and wire fraud and 
soliciting bribes” (  Scherer 2008  ). Of particular interest to federal 
ofﬁ cials was his apparent attempt to “sell” an appointment to 

Celebrities Who Violate Social or Moral Norms  37
the U.S. Senate. Recorded conversations appeared to show that 
in order to be nominated for the vacant Senate seat, one had to 
contribute a large sum of money (reportedly $1.5 million) to the 
governor ’ s campaign fund. You don ’ t have to be a legal expert to 
see that this appears to be bribery, and bribery is not only illegal 
but also violates moral and social norms. We expect individuals 
to acquire jobs on merit; we expect those in public ofﬁ ce to work 
for the common good, not their individual good. Our expectations 
are not always met, but they are worthy goals; we, as members 
of society, expect our leaders to behave properly. In this case, 
Blagojevich ignored a host of norms: legal, political, social, and 
moral. The Illinois legislature apparently agreed with this assessment 
and removed him from ofﬁ ce early in 2009. 
 More often than not, politicians violate what might be 
termed “the marriage norm.” Marriage norms require, among 
other things, that one “forsake all others” and be faithful to one ’ s 
spouse. More than a few politicians have trouble with the “for-
saking” business. South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford, 
Nevada Senator John Ensign, former presidential candidate John 
Edwards, and New York Governor Eliot Spitzer were discovered 
to have had sexual relationships with women to whom they were 
not married. All confessed to their wrongdoing and offered apolo-
gies. Only Spitzer resigned his position. It is safe to say that these 
men were diminished in the eyes of the public because they were 
unfaithful to their wives; adultery is still a serious violation of 
social norms in contemporary society. Whatever celebrity these 
men might have enjoyed as high-proﬁ le public ofﬁ ce holders has 
slipped away. 
 Although the media pay close attention to the negative things 
politicians do, they give even greater attention to the misdeeds of 
entertainment celebrities. But unlike politicians, celebrities who 
violate social or moral norms do not necessarily lose or dimin-
ish their celebrity. The case of recording artists Chris Brown and 
Rihanna, R&B ’ s most famous couple, is a good example. Grammy 
awards are given for outstanding achievement in the music 
industry. On Grammy day in 2009, Brown turned himself in to 
police and was booked on suspicion of making criminal threats. 
Further investigation revealed that his girlfriend Rihanna had 
bruises on her face as a result of an apparent early morning 
confrontation with Brown. One report said Rihanna had been 
hospitalized as a result of the attack. Neither performer appeared 
at the Grammy ceremony (  Errico 2009  ). Several months later, 

38 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
Brown reportedly asked his now ex-girlfriend to keep details of 
the attack private in her interview with ABC ’ s Diane Sawyer. She 
didn ’ t, admitting to Sawyer that Brown bit her, “put her in a head 
lock and punched her several times in the face” (  Michaels 2009  ). 
Brown released a new CD late in 2009, and although a singing 
appearance on ABC ’ s  Good Morning America  was cancelled, his 
in-depth interview with ABC ’ s Robin Roberts for  20/20  was not. 
For her part, Rihanna also released an album in late 2009. Critics 
did not like it; one said it “sucked.” Still, critics said they liked 
her personally, but disliked her musical performance on the new 
album. Clearly, it is not socially acceptable to attack one ’ s girl-
friend. Brown violated a social norm and appears to be less popular 
than before. Nevertheless, the careers of both singers seem to be 
moving forward, and the two recording artists ’  celebrity seems to 
be holding up. The question here is whether this violation of social 
norms  should have  led to diminished celebrity. On the one hand, 
one could argue that no one is perfect and that humans make 
mistakes, especially when strong emotions are involved. On the 
other, abuse of any sort violates contemporary social norms and 
should be punished. Professional football star Michael Vick went 
to prison for his role in promoting dog ﬁ ghts; our culture is not 
willing to ignore animal abuse. Are we willing to ignore the abuse 
of a girlfriend (or boyfriend)? What punishment, if any, should 
Brown be assessed as a result of his violation of a social norm? 
In theory, Brown deserves some punishment, but in practice, the 
general public is not inclined to deal harshly with celebrity misbe-
havior. Remember that celebrities embody the dreams and desires 
of many members of the public. We feel close to celebrities; many 
are role models. We resist making judgments that might destroy 
our relationship with them, however illusory. 
 Other entertainment celebrities have violated social or moral 
norms, yet they, too, seem to have survived with most of their 
celebrity status intact. Paris Hilton had the advantage of being 
born into a well-known family. The Hilton family is both rich and 
famous, best known for its worldwide chain of hotels. Paris con-
siders herself a model, actress, singer, and fashion designer. She 
has her own line of fragrances. Others believe her to be a socialite, 
that is, an individual who is prominent due to social or ﬁ nancial 
status but who may have few real accomplishments. That assess-
ment may be a bit harsh because Paris has some accomplishments. 
She appears regularly on television, both in the United States and 
elsewhere. She starred in her own television show,  The Simple Life ; 

Celebrities Who Violate Social or Moral Norms  39
she appeared in several B-level ﬁ lms. Paris works hard and is 
willing to make personal appearances even in small venues. But 
Paris has a history of violating social and moral norms. In 2003, 
just before  The Simple Life  began its 56-episode run on television, 
a sex tape involving her and then-boyfriend Rick Salomon began 
circulating on the World Wide Web. Paris has some company on the 
sex tape list: Tommy Lee and Pamela Anderson ’ s honeymoon sex 
tape (apparently stolen from their home), and Kim Kardashian ’ s 
2007 tape with then-boyfriend Ray J (before Kardashian became 
well known). Public display of sexual activities violates social 
and moral norms; everyone knows humans are sexual beings, 
but intimate behavior should be private. 
 Hilton violated another social and moral (and legal) norm 
by driving with a suspended license. She lost her license because 
of “alcohol-related reckless driving” after she was stopped for 
weaving down the street in her Mercedes. She was also sentenced 
to three years probation. Nevertheless, several months later she 
was stopped by police who discovered her license had been sus-
pended. This landed her in jail. Originally sentenced to 45 days 
for driving with a suspended license, Paris served only four 
days and was released to home conﬁ nement with an ankle track-
ing device after “extensive consultations with medical personnel” 
(  Nizza 2007  ). Reckless driving, driving while intoxicated, and 
driving with a suspended license violate social, moral, and legal 
norms. The public found these incidents somewhat entertaining 
but was disturbed that because she was a celebrity, Paris served 
less time in jail than she should have. Any member of the general 
public would almost certainly have had to serve more than four 
days. This raises the “double standard” issue. Should celebrities 
be held to the same standards as common folk? Paris doesn ’ t 
think so. She told CNN ’ s Larry King that she got a “raw deal.” 
Many people would disagree; celebrities get lots of breaks when 
it comes to violations of the law or violations of social and moral 
norms. Most members of the public would not get similar breaks 
in similar situations. There is a simple answer to the double 
standard question: everyone should be treated equally when it 
comes to violations of the law; social and moral norms are not as 
ﬁ rmly established as laws and thus violations should be subject 
to more ﬂ exible treatment. But the simple answer will not hold 
in today ’ s complex culture. The double standard will continue 
primarily because, as everyone knows, the rich are different! So 
are celebrities! 

40 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Pop singer Amy Winehouse has been described as “troubled,” 
“a train wreck,” and “self-destructive.” Winehouse has a history 
of bizarre behavior. At a jazz festival in the spring of 2009, she 
stopped singing in the middle of a song, “stared at the ground 
for 30 seconds and walked off stage—leaving her backup singers 
looking as confused as she does on a regular basis” (  www.tmz 
.com/category/amy-winehouse  ). She sought and was awarded an 
injunction against the paparazzi; they must stay at least 100 meters 
away from her London apartment. She was acquitted of assault 
charges lodged against her by a fan who said Winehouse punched 
her in the face. Admitting to alcohol abuse, Winehouse took an 
eight-month vacation on a Caribbean island, stopped drinking, 
and emerged from the “rehab” experience looking refreshed. 
The celebrity gossip world promptly began buzzing about her 
apparent breast augmentation and her apparent new addiction—
exercising. Determining the truth is hard here, obscured as it is 
by the hype and spin of her supporters and the delight some 
Web sites take in trashing her. Has Winehouse violated social or 
moral norms? Probably, but the public may have some sympathy 
for her; it is well known that alcohol abuse is a problem at every 
socioeconomic level of society. Your next-door neighbor or your 
cousin or your best friend could have a drinking problem. While 
no one likes to see another in a state of intoxication—or be on the 
receiving end of some drunken behavior—people tend not to con-
demn the person but to urge the individual to seek help. Is there a 
difference between the behaviors of Paris Hilton and Amy Wine-
house? Yes, there is. Paris was essentially found to be driving under 
the inﬂ uence (DUI) of alcohol, but is not known to be addicted 
to drink. Winehouse was addicted to it. Addiction is a serious 
problem worldwide. The public favors helping ﬁ rst, but stands 
ready to reassess its opinion if an individual either refuses help or 
returns to the addiction. Winehouse wasn ’ t much of a celebrity to 
begin with, but her lifestyle has pushed her into the media spot-
light in a way her singing career has not. 
 The list of entertainment celebrities who have violated social 
or moral norms is a long one. Not all of them can be proﬁ led here, 
but a few more will serve to illustrate the point. Actress Lindsey 
Lohan was given an extra year of probation by a judge who dis-
covered she had failed to attend alcohol education classes for her 
two DUI convictions. Lohan explained she was out of the country 
working; the judge ordered her to get court approval before 
leaving town or face time in jail ( Gillin 2009 ). CBS ’ s David 

Celebrities Who Violate Social or Moral Norms  41
Letterman was the apparent victim of an extortion attempt, but 
cooperated with authorities in a sting that resulted in charges 
against Robert “Joe” Halderman, a veteran CBS news producer. 
In the course of the investigation, authorities found the extortion 
attempt was based on information the producer had about Letter-
man ’ s sexual liaisons with some of the women who had worked for 
him on the  Late Show . This news was, of course, not well received 
by Letterman ’ s wife. Nevertheless, Letterman confessed on-air to 
the affairs and apologized for his behavior. Ratings for the  Late 
Show  improved for a week or so, but settled to their former levels 
when the story disappeared from newspapers and entertainment-
news television programs. Neither Lohan nor Letterman appears 
to have diminished their celebrity status. We may be at the point 
in the culture where people just accept the fact that celebrities do 
these sorts of things and that celebrity social and moral norms are 
ﬂ exible. Often the best we can hope for is an apology and a return 
to normal life. 
 The case of professional golfer Tiger Woods raises another 
issue regarding celebrities who run afoul of social and moral 
norms. Can celebrities choose when to make information about 
their lives public and when to keep information private? In other 
words, should celebrities be permitted to control their celebrity 
status, that is, seek recognition and respect for their work in the 
public sphere, but withdraw from the celebrity spotlight when it 
is convenient for them? The concept of privacy is important to 
most Americans. To some extent, one ’ s privacy is protected by 
law. But the law also makes a distinction between public and 
private ﬁ gures. Private individuals, that is, those who do not 
lead public lives and “invite” public attention to themselves or 
their work, are entitled to a great deal of privacy. They have a 
right to be “let alone” and to be secure from outside interference 
in their work, homes, and possessions. Individuals in the public 
sphere are entitled to privacy but must understand that living a 
public life requires them to give up some of it. Celebrity depends 
to some degree on public opinion. A public hungry for informa-
tion may go to unusual lengths to take a celebrity ’ s picture, get an 
autograph, ﬁ nd out whom the celebrity is dating, learn what the 
celebrity likes to eat, and so forth. Because they lead public lives, 
celebrities must tolerate this “special” attention. Most ordinary 
citizens would call police if someone was lurking outside their 
home trying to snap a photo of them. Nevertheless, the degree 
of privacy to which one is entitled is an issue frequently argued 

42 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
in court. Let ’ s take a closer look at privacy by examining the case 
involving Tiger Woods. 
 On the Friday after Thanksgiving 2009, at 2:30 in the morning, 
Tiger Woods had a single car accident in his suburban Orlando 
neighborhood. He struck a ﬁ re hydrant and then rammed a 
nearby tree. Woods suffered cuts and bruises but no permanent 
injury. Woods, exercising his right under Florida law, refused to 
speak with law enforcement about the accident. The questions 
came quickly. Did Tiger and his wife have an argument? Did he 
leave the house in anger? Exactly how did he manage to hit both 
a hydrant and a tree and do considerable damage to his vehicle? 
Where was he going at that time of night? Tiger was silent for 
more than 48 hours. On the following Sunday afternoon, he 
posted a statement on his Web site. “This situation is my fault, 
and it ’ s obviously embarrassing to my family and me. I ’ m human, 
and I ’ m not perfect. I will certainly make sure this doesn ’ t happen 
again,” Woods wrote. This explanation satisﬁ ed almost no one. 
It failed to answer any of the questions the public and the media 
had posed. During the next couple of days, rumors about possible 
extra-marital affairs and domestic violence began to swirl. Woods 
described the rumors as “malicious” and reafﬁ rmed his belief that 
the situation was a private matter and, furthermore, he intended 
to keep it that way. 
 This situation clearly illustrates a problem celebrities some-
times have. They may want to control or manage what the public 
knows about them. To some extent they can do this by being well 
behaved and having a good publicist, but their power is limited; 
celebrity, as we noted in   Chapter 1  , depends to a large extent 
on public opinion, often formed as a result of media coverage. 
Celebrities, as a rule, cannot control what media say about them 
or in what context media choose to feature them. Thus, celebrity 
control of a situation often ends when the television cameras roll. 
Nevertheless, Woods clearly violated a social norm: explaining 
the accident to law enforcement. Many people believe that if you 
have nothing to hide, why should you fear talking to police? 
Others might wonder whether a trafﬁ c citation would be issued 
if they talked. Is it best to talk or remain silent? In Woods ’ s case, 
sportswriters were divided on the issue. One said the accident 
details were “none of our business.” Another said the “none of 
our business” argument is the proper one and is justiﬁ ed under 
the circumstances (  Farris 2009  ). But others said the matter is 
indeed the public ’ s business: Woods has made millions being a 

Celebrities Who Violate Social or Moral Norms  43
public ﬁ gure and cannot suddenly become a private ﬁ gure when 
he has a trafﬁ c accident. Mike Paul, a public relations consultant, 
suggested Woods surrendered his privacy “when he turned pro in 
1996 and signed his ﬁ rst Nike endorsement contract.” “The good 
news is,” Paul continued, “you ’ re getting a lot of money. The bad 
news is: Privacy? Are you kidding me? It just went out the win-
dow” (  Brady and DiMeglio 2009  ). Woods ’ s Web site statement 
appeared on Sunday and the media and Internet buzz about 
Tiger continued on Monday and Tuesday. Woods remained 
silent . . . until Wednesday. 
 On Wednesday,  US Weekly , a popular celebrity magazine, 
revealed that Woods would be featured in its December 14 issue. 
Woods appeared on the magazine cover along with the caption 
“Yes, He Cheated.” The story inside the magazine contained 
new information, speciﬁ c enough to further tarnish Woods ’ s 
reputation. It should be noted here that until the time of the 
auto accident, Woods had a sterling reputation as a professional 
golfer, a husband and father, and a supporter of important 
charities. As the ﬁ rst sports billionaire, he was thought to be 
leading the perfect life: attractive wife, great kids, golf talent, and 
rich beyond anyone ’ s wildest dreams. He was featured in many 
product commercials including Nike, Gatorade, and EA Sports. 
His failure to provide details about the accident would probably 
not have done much damage to his reputation; his celebrity would 
have remained intact. His violation of a social norm (refusing to 
talk to police) was a minor one and likely to be quickly forgiven 
(or forgotten) by the public. However, the information in the  US 
Weekly  story almost certainly damaged both his reputation and 
his celebrity status. 
 The magazine reported that Woods had an on-going relation-
ship with Jaimee Grubbs, a woman he met at a Las Vegas nightclub 
in 2007. The story also included a word-by-word transcript of a 
voice mail message Woods apparently left on the woman ’ s phone 
asking her to take her name off the phone because his wife went 
through his phone and might be calling her. The voice mail mes-
sage itself was played by the broadcast media; the voice sounded 
like Woods ’ s, but the Associated Press reported it could not con-
ﬁ rm Woods was the caller. Another report said that there may have 
been as many as 300 text messages exchanged between Grubbs 
and Woods, although none of the texts was quoted. There were 
indications that Woods may have had relationships with other 
women, although the magazine ’ s focus was on Grubbs. Almost 

44 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
immediately after the  US Weekly  story broke, Woods made a public 
apology and appealed again for privacy. Woods acknowledged 
that he had let his family down by committing “transgressions.” 
“I have not been true to my values and the behavior my family 
deserves,” he said. “I will strive to be a better person and the 
husband and father that my family deserves. For all of those who 
have supported me over the years, I offer my profound apology,” he 
concluded. 
 Woods ’ s statement had the effect of admitting the affair with 
Grubbs; it provided evidence that he violated a social and moral 
norm—being faithful to one ’ s spouse. Although Woods received 
unqualiﬁ ed support from other sports ﬁ gures, not everyone 
agreed that life would soon return to normal, he would continue 
to win golf tournaments, and his celebrity status would be as 
good as ever. The public expects an apology from those who have 
violated social and moral norms. Once an apology is given, repu-
tations can be repaired. The same can be said of one ’ s celebrity. 
An apology goes a long way in helping one maintain celebrity 
status. As a practical matter, however, neither one ’ s reputation 
nor one ’ s celebrity status can be totally restored. Woods ’ s control 
of information about his life and activities slipped away quickly 
following the car accident. Just a few days later, he had little 
control over the information about him. Woods seemed to blame 
the media for this.  USA Today  ’ s Christine Brennan noted that his 
statement also contained an attack on the media “for having 
the audacity to invade his privacy, as if to say, ‘How dare you do 
this to me’?” (  Brennan 2009  ). While celebrities have a great deal 
of authority and prestige, those who gave them prestige and author-
ity cannot be ignored. An aggressive media and public opinion 
are powerful forces. Even the world ’ s greatest golfer cannot stand 
against them. If the media report your wins, they ’ ll also report 
your sins. This is the nature of celebrity in the 21st century. 
In early December, Woods, essentially acknowledging multiple 
outside “relationships,” announced he was taking an indeﬁ nite 
leave from professional golf in order to work on some issues with 
his family. Shortly thereafter, the sponsors for whom Woods does 
endorsements began to reassess their relationship with him. Several 
indicated they still supported him; several distanced themselves 
by shelving commercials featuring the golfer; a few severed their 
relationship with him, one noting that he was “no longer the 
right representative” of the company ’ s values. Woods ’ s troubles 
seemed to multiply with each passing day. Public opinion polls 

Celebrity Endorsement 45
showed a signiﬁ cant decline in his popularity. Nevertheless, the 
Associated Press named him the 2009 Athlete of the Year; just 
a few days later he was named the PGA Tour Player of the Year. 
These awards were based on his year-long golﬁ ng performance. 
Thus, Woods is still a celebrity but, in the minds of many, not the 
celebrity he was when we all sat down to dinner on Thanksgiving 
Day 2009. Woods and his wife divorced in late August 2010. 
 We have seen that, overall, violating social and moral norms 
is frowned upon by the public, regardless of whether one is a 
politician, an entertainer, or active in some other profession. 
Celebrities can usually maintain their status by explaining what 
happened and apologizing for their inappropriate actions. Failing 
to make apologies and explanations can further damage a celeb-
rity ’ s reputation. The public is less forgiving, however, when 
celebrities violate a legal norm and are given special treatment 
because of their celebrity status. Nevertheless, celebrity rarely 
ends as a result of violating a social or moral norm. 
 Celebrity Endorsement 
 One of the most popular advertising techniques worldwide is to 
have a celebrity endorse a product. Celebrity endorsement is usually 
only a part, but an important part, of a larger product marketing 
campaign. In addition to being well known and famous, celebrities 
are attractive, likeable, and trustworthy—at least in the minds of 
the public to whom the advertising message is directed. The 
hope is that the celebrities ’  qualities will be “transferred” in some 
way to a product and stimulate sales (  Erdogan 1999  ). Advertisers 
avoid celebrities, such as O. J. Simpson, who have negative repu-
tations. However, very little research has been done on the issue 
of celebrity endorsement. Scholars have discovered only a few 
things of note. One important ﬁ nding is that celebrity endorsement 
is culture speciﬁ c, that is, celebrity endorsement is most effective 
in the celebrity ’ s home country. For example, an American celebrity 
endorsing a product in an advertisement broadcast in Austria was 
less effective in fostering an intent to purchase than a non-celebrity 
native spokesperson, making the country of origin (COO) an 
important factor in endorsement decisions (  Chao, Wuhrer, and 
Werani 2005 ). Other scholars see celebrity endorsers as “cultural 
products” of their respective countries that are particularly effective 
if their countries are political and ﬁ nancial powers ( Chung 2003 ; 

46 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
  Choi, Lee, and Kim 2005  ). In a capitalistic society, it just makes 
sense to use celebrities to sell products or services. Capitalism has 
always made maximum use of the tools it has available to pursue 
proﬁ t. However, there are less-visible issues here that make celebrity 
endorsement problematic. 
 The most obvious question that arises from celebrity endorse-
ment is this one: What expertise does the celebrity endorser have? 
Returning to Tiger Woods, for a moment, could it be said that 
when he endorses Gatorade, he is an expert and thus qualiﬁ ed 
to make the endorsement? The consumer presumes so, given the 
fact that Gatorade was originally developed for and is regularly 
consumed by all types of athletes. Actress Jennifer Love Hewitt 
has appeared on behalf of Hanes lingerie. The implication is 
she wears the undergarments she is endorsing. But what about 
celebrities endorsing products with which they have no apparent 
expertise? Chrysler removed ads featuring singer Celine Dion 
after she failed to increase sales of the Chrysler Paciﬁ ca. The con-
nection between the celebrity and the automobile was not strong 
enough to motivate sales of the Paciﬁ ca, but may have increased 
interest in Dion ’ s music. The singer may have been seen as having 
little or no expertise in automobiles.   McCracken (1989)   suggests 
that there are a variety of endorsement modes: explicit (“I endorse 
this product”), implicit (“I use this product”), imperative (“You 
should use this product”), and co-present (that is, merely appearing 
with the product). Ultimately, the mode of endorsement may not 
mean as much as the credibility of the endorser. A highly credible 
(and likeable) celebrity could probably endorse a product in any 
of the aforementioned modes with positive results. In any case, 
endorsement of a product the celebrity has no direct connection 
to may be troublesome in terms of generating product sales, but 
probably has little effect on the celebrity ’ s status. 
 A related issue involves ethics. Is it ethical for celebrities to 
endorse products they do not use or have no expertise in? As a rule, 
ethical behavior is expected of individuals, groups, and corpora-
tions in all walks of life. As a practical matter, however, people are 
willing to stretch this ethical rule, or perhaps ignore it altogether, 
if it is convenient for them or makes their lives easier. In trafﬁ c, 
some motorists regularly run red lights; in parking lots, some 
drivers park in ﬁ re lanes; in department stores, some shoppers 
return an article of clothing they purchased the previous day and 
wore the previous night; in the job market, some workers inﬂ ate 
their resumes—listing jobs they have not had or degrees they 

Fictional and Cartoon Celebrities 47
have not earned. The actions of “some” often impact the lives of 
“others.” Because most of contemporary society tends to see ethics 
as relative (ﬂ exible), those who see ethics as absolute (ﬁ rm), are 
often considered out of step. After all, many argue, there is no 
clear right and wrong, no clear black and white; the world is gray. 
Relativists would say it is acceptable for celebrities to endorse 
products they do not use or have no connection to; absolutists 
would say the practice is not acceptable. The culture and the law 
have almost always given advertisers the freedom to advertise 
products in their most appealing light. For example, a fast-food 
hamburger advertisement on television might show the burger as 
a hot, juicy slab of beef, paired with a rich, red slice of tomato, and 
accompanied by a deep-green leaf of lettuce, all on a fresh bun. 
A consumer purchasing a hamburger would likely ﬁ nd it is not 
much like the one advertised: the beef is barely warm, the tomato 
barely ripe, the lettuce slightly brown at the edges, and the bun 
stale from sitting under the kitchen ’ s heat lamp. Yet consumers 
buy these sorts of burgers by the millions daily. Consumers do not 
require their burgers to match the ideal one they saw on televi-
sion. Thus, as a people, we accept puffery, that is, the exagge ration 
of a product ’ s qualities or beneﬁ ts, as a necessary part of adver-
tising. This is welcome news to celebrities. They need not fear 
that the products they endorse will cast them in a negative light 
if those products do not perform as promised. It ’ s ironic, in a way. 
A celebrity can endow a product with positive qualities, but a 
product ’ s negative qualities will not adversely affect a celebrity ’ s 
status. With all due respect to the ethical absolutists, the relativists 
win here. Celebrity endorsements do little harm and are ethically 
acceptable to most consumers. 
 Fictional and Cartoon Celebrities 
 Must a celebrity be a real person? Up to this point, we have assumed 
so. However, a closer look at popular culture reveals some celeb-
rities are not real people. Take, for example, Homer Simpson, the 
bumbling father on the highly rated animated television sitcom 
 The Simpsons . Homer is so well known that some of his favorite 
utterances have made their way into regular human conversation. 
“D ’ Oh” and “Mmm donuts” are two examples. At special events, 
an individual who wears a Homer Simpson costume is popular 
with the younger set. No one cares to know the name of the person 

48 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
wearing the costume; Homer is the celebrity. The same could be 
said of Marge, Maggie, Lisa, and Bart, the other Simpson family 
members. Most viewers of the program probably couldn ’ t tell you 
whose voice is behind each of the characters. Homer Simpson is 
famous and well known, highly visible in the media, and seeks 
to maintain his status, but meets none of the other standards for 
being a celebrity. 
 Other ﬁ ctional characters have captured the attention of the 
public, or at least the younger segment of the public. Like some 
other ﬁ ctional ﬁ lm or television stars, SpongeBob SquarePants has 
his own line of merchandise, such as pillows, bed linens, clothing, 
and backpacks. Individuals dressed as SpongeBob are popular 
wherever they go. Even some parents have been known to watch 
the SpongeBob program with their children. Then there ’ s  South 
Park . Although not written for children, the program is highly 
popular among younger viewers; however, many of them may 
not understand the program as satire. Nevertheless, Stan, Cartman, 
Kyle, and Kenny, the  South Park  third graders, are celebrities. Kenny 
is particularly well known for dying in almost every episode, 
giving rise to the popular statement, “Oh my God, they killed 
Kenny!” SpongeBob and the South Park kids are recent additions 
to a tradition of ﬁ ctional celebrities. Older adults will remember 
the Flintstones, Road Runner, Bugs Bunny, Elmer Fudd, Foghorn 
Leghorn, as well as Mickey Mouse and other early Disney characters. 
Should the celebrity label be applied to these and other cartoon 
characters? If the answer is yes, then a different list of celebrity 
characteristics must apply. As noted earlier, only three of our cur-
rent celebrity characteristics ﬁ t ﬁ ctional characters: being famous 
and well known, being highly visible in media, and seeking to main-
tain status. There seems to be no harm in this. Adults know the 
difference between a real and a ﬁ ctional celebrity. Children may 
not know the difference, but it probably doesn ’ t matter. 
 On the other hand, some people might say, “No, ﬁ ctional 
characters should not be celebrities. Children need to be taught 
the difference between the real and the pretend world. Cartoons 
are a good place to start. Children should learn that cartoon 
characters can do things real people cannot, such as return from 
the dead for the next  South Park  episode or drink lots of beer as 
Homer Simpson does with no real consequences. Reality triumphs 
ﬁ ction. Therefore, celebrities must be real people.” This argument 
makes a good point. Some children do mimic what they see on 
television and viewing cartoon or other ﬁ ctional characters as 

Source and Quality of Celebrity Information  49
celebrities can have tragic consequences. For example, a 12-year-old 
Maryland boy committed suicide and left a note for his parents, 
telling them to watch  South Park  to learn why he took his life. The 
note speciﬁ cally mentioned Kenny, the character who is killed in 
most episodes (McManus 1998). Scholars are divided on the causal 
connection between media consumption and human behavior. 
Some say the connection is strong; others say media may only be 
one of a number of factors in an individual ’ s decision to act in a 
certain way. However, most scholars agree that a child ’ s view of 
the world can be properly adjusted if parents watch programs 
with the child, ask questions about the child ’ s beliefs, and inter-
vene when needed. Parental inﬂ uence is becoming an increas-
ingly important part of a child ’ s experience with media. This 
is particularly true since there appears to be no shortage of real 
people playing ﬁ ctional celebrities who can be seen by the young 
as role models: Spiderman, Harry Potter, the Incredible Hulk, 
the  X-Men ’ s Wolverine, and Hanna Montana, among others. 
 Fictional and cartoon personalities are often a signiﬁ cant part 
of a youngster ’ s life. Calling these characters celebrities appears to 
do little harm, particularly if parents monitor a child ’ s media expe-
riences. However, not every cartoon or ﬁ ctional character can qual-
ify as a celebrity. To be considered a celebrity, the character must 
possess three of our celebrity characteristics: be famous and well 
known, be highly visible in media, and seek to maintain status.  
 Source and Quality of Celebrity
 Information 
 The general public gets most of its information about celebrities 
from the media, relying on celebrity magazines, celebrity tele-
vision programs, and the Internet for the latest “scoop” on what 
a favorite celebrity is doing. A celebrity may occasionally make 
the more formal “evening news,” but, as a rule, celebrity media 
(magazines, television programs, and the Internet) are the source 
of most current celebrity information. An individual does not 
have to monitor all celebrity media, of course, to stay informed. 
Friends, family, and co-workers regularly pass on what they know 
or have heard about celebrities. It might be revealing to look at 
each celebrity medium with a view toward understanding what 
and how information is presented. 

50 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Celebrity Magazines 
 What follows are brief content descriptions of six of the most 
popular celebrity magazines (four weekly and two monthly) in 
December 2009. The information, photos, and other material in each 
magazine appear to be typical of the magazine ’ s regular content. 
 The December 21, 2009, issue of  OK Weekly  featured Tiger 
Woods and one of his alleged girlfriends on the cover. Inside, a 
fashion layout was ﬁ rst, revealing the different tastes and styles of 
actresses Penelope Cruz, Kate Hudson, Kristen Bell, Nicole Kidman, 
Drew Barrymore, as well as singer Carrie Underwood and bad-
girl Lindsey Lohan. A photo spread featured recent shots of Tom 
Cruise, Katie Holmes, and daughter Suri; Brad Pitt, Angelina 
Jolie, and son Maddox; Paris Hilton and her new boyfriend sled-
ding in Canada; and several cast members of television ’ s  Glee 
enjoying a break from the show ’ s shooting schedule. That was 
followed by photos of couples: Hillary Swank and her new boy-
friend, George Clooney and his new girlfriend, Jack Black and 
his wife, and Britney Spears and her new boyfriend. Each of the 
photos had either a short caption of explanation or a slightly 
longer sidebar of information. This photo-and-caption technique 
is highly popular with celebrity magazines. It is quick and simple. 
A single celebrity photo takes up little space leaving room for 
other celebrity photos. The cover story about Tiger Woods was 
longer, of course, but there was no shortage of photos of Tiger, his 
wife and children, and his alleged mistresses. As one moved on, the 
number of photos and snippets of information multiplied. The mag-
azine covered celebrity holiday preparations, celebrity rumors, 
celebrity travel, and celebrities “after hours.” Featured celebrities 
included singer Susan Boyle, Chef Gordon Ramsay, singer Lady 
Gaga, actress and model Pamela Anderson, actress Julia Roberts, 
singer Taylor Swift, singer Madonna, actresses Brooke Shields, 
Rosie Perez, Jane Lynch, Jennifer Aniston, and Anne Hathaway, 
among many others. 
 In Touch Weekly  ’ s December 21, 2009, issue also featured Tiger 
Woods and one of his alleged girlfriends on the cover. A fashion 
layout was ﬁ rst inside, featuring many of the same celebrities and 
the same clothing featured in  OK Weekly . Short features followed 
revealing actress-singer Miley Cyrus ’ s new tattoo, the popularity 
of spiked clothes (singers Rihanna and Adam Lambert, actress 
Kristen Stewart), and the silly faces made by the young children 
of celebrities. Did  American Idol  ’ s Simon Cowell wax his chest hair 

Source and Quality of Celebrity Information  51
and have Botox treatments? Perhaps, as a before-and-after photo 
comparison showed. A favorite section in many celebrity magazines 
might be called “out-and-about.” Photos are presented showing 
celebrities engaged in simple, everyday activities—much like any 
member of the public. We see celebrities getting coffee, standing 
in line at a grocery or convenience store, shopping, or playing 
with their children. The photos are, of course, accompanied by 
brief captions. Apparently, singer LeAnn Rimes, actress Jennifer 
Lopez, singer Marc Antony, singer Gwen Stefani, and actresses 
Hayden Panettiere and Ellen Pompeo are just like us! They walk, 
they play with dogs, they buy bread, they push their children on 
playground swings. Actress Kristen Chenoweth is seen eating a 
pretzel; actor Jerry O ’ Connell is pictured leaving the post ofﬁ ce 
with stamps and other mailing supplies in hand. Yes, indeed, 
just like us! Next, the Tiger Woods cover story is presented. It ’ s 
longer and includes numerous photos of all those involved in the 
scandal. Additionally, some signiﬁ cant space is given to a story 
about Amanda Knox, the student in Italy who was convicted of 
murdering her roommate. Fashion layouts are next, featuring the 
Real Housewives of New Jersey. The cast of MTV ’ s  Jersey Shore 
gets some attention; upcoming movies are reviewed. 
 Tiger Woods did not appear on the cover of  Life and Style 
Weekly  for the week of December 21, 2009. What celebrity 
pushed Tiger off the cover? Actress Sandra Bullock. Her battle 
to help her husband (television personality Jesse James) gain 
custody of his son from a previous marriage was the magazine ’ s 
featured story. First inside was a fashion layout featuring the 10 
best dressed female celebrities of the week. Much like the ones 
in the two previous magazines described, the layout featured 
the usual suspects: actresses Penelope Cruz, Kate Hudson, and 
Drew Barrymore, among others. The reader is shown the best 
photos of the week: actress-singer Miley Cyrus, singer Carrie 
Underwood, actress Paris Hilton, the New Jersey Housewives, 
actress Halle Berry, Brad Pitt with Angelina Jolie, Tom Cruise 
and Katie Holmes, and Jennifer Lopez with Mark Antony. The 
reader discovers that Brad and Angelina have been a couple for 
ﬁ ve years. It ’ s their anniversary. Will the relationship last? Has 
actor George Clooney ﬁ nally met his match in model Elisabette 
Canalis? Next, information about the Tiger Woods situation is 
presented; the emphasis is on whether his marriage will survive 
his alleged inﬁ delity. Elsewhere in the magazine, the reader will 
ﬁ nd bits of information and photos of MTV ’ s  Jersey Shore cast, 

52 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
go behind the scenes of the upcoming movie  Sex and the City 2 , 
ponder whether actress Cameron Diaz and singers Courtney 
Love and Madonna have had “cheek-plumping” surgery, as 
well as examine wedding dress fashions, jewelry, fragrances, 
footwear, hair styles, and makeup advertisements featuring 
celebrities as models. 
 People magazine (December 21, 2009) took a slightly different 
approach by featuring Elin Woods on the cover. Deep inside the 
magazine, the full Woods story was presented, but the emphasis 
appeared to be on what she would (or should) do as a result of 
her husband ’ s apparent inﬁ delity. But ﬁ rst inside the magazine 
were photos of celebrities out-and-about: actress Halle Berry and 
daughter, singer Gwen Stefani and son, actor Simon Baker and 
son, television ’ s David Letterman and son, the Tom Cruise family, 
and Brad with Angelina. Fashion photos revealed the particular 
clothing styles of actresses Kate Hudson, Penelope Cruz, Nicole 
Kidman, Kate Beckinsale, and singers Carrie Underwood and 
Miley Cyrus. A section titled “Scoop” presented the latest infor-
mation on actress Jennifer Aniston, singer Susan Boyle, actress 
Reese Witherspoon and actor Jake Gyllenhaal, singer Taylor Swift, 
and singer-actress Jessica Simpson. Celebrities were shown wearing 
spiked clothing. Movie reviews were presented for a half-dozen 
upcoming ﬁ lms. The year ’ s best kid ’ s television shows were listed 
as well as signiﬁ cant upcoming television programs. Alicia Key ’ s 
music was discussed. On the more serious side, an in-depth 
article explored the effects of the recession on Wilmington, a 
small Ohio town. Chaz (formerly Chastity) Bono—daughter-now-
son—of singers Sonny and Cher was proﬁ led with emphasis on 
the impact of gender change. A Top Chef recipe was presented 
as were numerous advertisements for lingerie and jewelry with 
celebrities as models. 
 The following conclusions can be drawn from the examination 
of the four weekly celebrity magazines: 
 They are more similar than different. 
• 
 They present hundreds of photos and bits of 
• 
information. 
 They limit longer features to current, “hot” celebrity 
• 
personalities. 
 They mostly feature entertainment celebrities. 
• 
 They are supportive, not critical, of celebrities. 
• 

Source and Quality of Celebrity Information  53
 Each of these statements requires explanation. First, the four 
weekly celebrity magazines are more similar than different. In all 
but one case, the ones examined had the Tiger Woods situation 
as the cover story; they all had introductory fashion layouts 
utilizing most of the same female celebrities; they all had what we 
are calling “out-and-about” photos showing celebrities in real life 
situations; most of the photos were exactly the same from maga-
zine to magazine, but where there was a difference, the photos 
appeared to have been taken only seconds apart. With only a few 
exceptions, the same celebrities were featured in all four maga-
zines. Only  People  magazine devoted space to a “common” topic: 
the recession in a small town. 
 The photos in each magazine number in the hundreds. To 
an infrequent or new reader, the photos and accompanying bits 
of information seem to be overwhelming. An experienced celeb-
rity magazine reader will think nothing of it. Page after page 
contains photos, large and small, ﬁ tted as neatly together as a 
completed jigsaw puzzle. But the eye moves quickly, the infor-
mation is absorbed, and the reader moves on. Furthermore, with 
the exception of the staged fashion layouts, the photos depict 
reality. In other words, they are true representations of what was 
actually happening at the time the photo was taken. Captions 
identify the celebrities and the event or location at which they 
were photographed. 
 Selecting a current or “hot” personality for the cover and for 
a detailed story is not only a good marketing ploy, but also an 
indication that the magazine is up to date on celebrity culture. 
Cover photos are eye-catching and usually accompanied by a few 
words indicating “the issue” to be discussed inside. There are 
cover similarities among the magazines, especially if a celebrity 
has been the subject of much public interest. But the stories inside 
are usually different in both tone and approach. A cover story may 
be accompanied by one or two shorter pieces, with photos, high-
lighting other celebrities who might be considered “runners-up” 
in a competition to appear on the magazine ’ s cover. 
 We know there are celebrities in almost every profession. The 
taxonomy developed in   Chapter 1   clearly indicates that. However, 
celebrity magazines routinely ignore celebrities in other profes-
sions and concentrate on only those in entertainment. A quick look 
back in this chapter will reveal the celebrities mentioned are actors, 
actresses, singers, models, or television stars. Finding information 
in the magazines about celebrities in politics, business, science, or 

54 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
one of the other categories is almost impossible. In other words, 
the magazines have a narrow celebrity focus. This is probably 
to their advantage; entertainment celebrities are more likely than 
celebrities in other ﬁ elds to pique the interest of a typical reader. 
Still, shouldn ’ t a celebrity magazine provide broader coverage? 
Admittedly, these magazines have a limited number of pages; 
they can ’ t cover everything. Printing deadlines require articles 
and photos to be prepared well in advance of the publication date. 
Editors and publishers may ask themselves what they can include 
in a magazine that typically runs about 80 pages and must con-
tain a signiﬁ cant number of advertisements. Who will generate 
the most interest, and the most sales? The answer, of course, is 
entertainment celebrities. 
 It is not at all surprising that celebrity magazines support, 
rather than criticize, the celebrities they feature. No one likes 
criticism, particularly if that criticism is directed at a favorite 
celebrity. Remember that a celebrity can embody the dreams and 
desires of many members of the general public. Criticizing a celeb-
rity can be seen as criticizing the reader. That ’ s not as farfetched 
as it might seem. Many people identify closely with celebrities. 
People buy their music, attend their concerts, watch their movies, 
and purchase products they have endorsed. These bonds are 
not easily broken. Celebrity is powerful in the 21st century. The 
maga zines recognize this and rarely make a critical comment. 
If on occasion they do offer one, it is often mild and related to 
a social or moral norm. For example,  In Touch Weekly  (“Miley: 17 
going on 37?”) wondered whether actress-singer Miley Cyrus ’ s 
tattoo was “age-appropriate.” Perhaps the magazine did not 
realize that tattooed teens are not all that unusual today. Cyrus ’ s 
ink was relatively benign: just breathe. However, the magazine 
also questioned her pole dancing at the Teen Choice Awards, her 
leather clothes, and her “itsy-bitsy” bikini. The mild criticism was 
offset to some degree by the almost full-length, half-page photo 
of Miley in that bikini. High school boys all over America would 
probably spend a little time looking at that photo. Okay, so she ’ s 
growing up fast. Who doesn ’ t these days? 
 Two other celebrity magazines were reviewed,  In Style and 
 Vanity Fair . Although these magazines are among the top-selling 
magazines in the country, they are issued monthly; this presents 
a number of challenges. Because of printing deadlines, they cannot 
cover what celebrities did or said last week or perhaps even 
last month. Also, when information about events or situations is 

Source and Quality of Celebrity Information  55
presented, the accompanying photos reveal that the celebrities 
mentioned may not be celebrities at all. How many people would 
recognize Pepe Fanjul or Irina Lazareanu? Who are they? Few 
people know, but one magazine says they (and other unknowns) 
attended a dinner at the Monkey Bar, hosted by a New York fashion 
house. Many of the recognizable celebrities who appear on the 
pages of these magazines are typically used as models in adver-
tising. A reader will occasionally get information on the comings-
and-goings of well-known celebrities, but most are endorsing 
some product. For example, actress Zooey Deschanel appears in 
an ad for cotton ﬁ bers and actor Matthew McConaughey in an ad 
for a men ’ s fragrance. A ﬁ rst-time reader of these magazines might 
be left with two impressions. First, the articles and information 
in the magazine are simply overwhelmed by advertisements. 
Second, the magazines seem to be written for the “in-crowd,” 
wealthy, hip, connected individuals who live, work, and socialize 
in the New York metropolitan area. Only once in a while will 
one discover an article that might be interesting to Americans 
who live in what has been called “ﬂ yover country,” that is, 
the middle part of the United States that East Coasters jet over 
on their way to Holly wood, America ’ s other mecca, on the West 
Coast. In short, these magazines are slick, glamorous, wish books, 
ﬁ lled with products and services typical Americans neither want 
nor can afford. The apparent emphasis on New York personalities 
makes the magazines seem snobbish. In any case, because they do 
not deal with current well-known celebrities in the same way the 
weeklies do, we will not consider them further. 
 So is there a problem with celebrity magazines? Some critics 
might say there is more than one problem with the magazines. 
First, the information they provide is sparse. It is true every photo 
has a caption, but the captions don ’ t tell us much. Features do 
provide some in-depth information, but if one already knows 
about the individual or situation featured, these extended pieces 
add little new information and tend toward speculation. If we 
already know the facts from other sources, what ’ s left to say? 
“Well,  if  such-and-such happens, then  maybe  this will happen.” 
This is not good journalism. In fact, some critics would say, it isn ’ t 
journalism at all. Journalists once prided themselves on writing 
fair, balanced, objective stories. Stories in celebrity magazines are 
not necessarily unfair, but they often lack balance and objectivity. 
Moreover, at its best, journalism provides important news and 
information we  need  to manage our lives, not trivial information we 

56 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 want about celebrities. However, what does one expect? You can 
buy a celebrity magazine for about $3. Information-wise, celebrity 
magazines are like cotton candy: tasty and fun, but not nutritious. 
Second, there is an obvious redundancy across all celebrity maga-
zines in photos and information. In spite of the fact that some 
of the magazines have the word  style  in their name, the reality 
is that the magazines have no unique style. The same photos 
are used, the same information is conveyed in captions, the same 
advertisements appear, and the same individuals are often on the 
cover. The magazines look pretty much alike. Tear a page from 
one of the magazines and show it to a regular celebrity magazine 
reader; chances are the reader could not tell you from which 
magazine it was taken. 
 On the other hand, some people might feel critics of the 
magazines are unduly harsh. So what if the magazines are cotton 
candy? We need cotton candy. There ’ s a time and place for it. 
It is not supposed to be a breakfast food. Similarly, celebrity 
magazines are not supposed to provide a reader with the latest 
world and national news. Get information on wars, the economy, 
and government from other sources. Celebrity magazines are 
light and frothy, just what some readers want and need to take 
their minds off their (or the world ’ s) troubles. In short, celebrity 
magazines have a narrow, speciﬁ c goal and they are strikingly 
good at achieving that goal. Additionally, there is nothing wrong 
with repetition of photos and information. Not everyone pur-
chases all the magazines; a reader who purchases only one will 
not notice the repetition. Besides, people enjoy having a choice 
among similar products. That ’ s why there is more than one type of 
bread on grocery store shelves. 
 Readers wanting a different type of celebrity information 
often turn to the supermarket tabloids. A tabloid is a small-format, 
newspaper-type publication featuring “screaming headlines . . . 
large photographs and stories about sex, violence, and celebrities” 
(  Biagi 2005  ). For example, the cover of one  National Enquirer issue 
showed several hip and leg photos of celebrities together with 
the headline “Stars with Cellulite!” The cover also promised that 
a story inside would reveal “Charlize Theron ’ s Shocking Secret 
Life.”  The National Examiner  and  The Globe  are two other well-
known tabloids. There is some debate about whether these publi-
cations are newspapers or magazines. They use newsprint and 
look like a newspaper, but rarely follow standard journalistic rules 
of truth, balance, and objectivity. It seems more appropriate to call 

Source and Quality of Celebrity Information  57
them entertainment magazines. These publications occasionally 
turn to the bizarre. For example, past headlines have revealed 
“Noah Had Dinosaurs on the Ark,” “Bigfoot Kept Lumberjack as 
Love Slave,” and “Man Sets Lard Eating Record.” Supermarket 
tabloids are not serious sources of information, but they can be 
escapist fun. They are not important enough to contribute any-
thing useful to our discussion of celebrity. 
 Celebrity magazine circulation declined during the recession 
of 2008–2010. Several magazines suffered from poor management 
practices. The conclusion some experts draw from these problems 
is that there are too many celebrity magazines and “consolida-
tion is inevitable as advertising and circulation erodes” (  Stableford 
2009  ). Nevertheless, celebrity magazines in some form are here to 
stay. They are popular with readers and usually sell well, especially 
when placed near the checkout lanes of book and grocery stores. 
In a culture stressing the importance of diversity in all things, 
celebrity magazines, perhaps downsized, fewer in number, or 
offered in electronic form can take their rightful place among the 
other specialty magazines. Historically, many magazines with a 
modest target audience (sports, bridal, automotive, fashion, and 
cooking) have survived. Many general interest magazines ( Life, 
Saturday Evening Post ) have not. 
 Celebrity Television Programs 
 As it is used here, the phrase “celebrity television programs” 
refers not to shows  starring  celebrities, but to shows  about celeb-
rities. These half-hour programs can often be seen daily in 
what is called “prime time fringe,” the time between the end 
of the evening news broadcasts and the beginning of network 
programming service. Local stations must ﬁ ll this time each day 
with programs they have purchased through syndication. Some 
stations run off-network shows such as  Friends , while others pre-
fer ﬁ rst-run game shows, such as  Wheel of Fortune  or  Jeopardy . 
Celebrity television programs are popular choices for prime time 
fringe. They are fresh and topical. Two mid-December broadcasts 
of four popular celebrity television shows ( Extra, Inside Edition, 
The Insider,  and  TMZ ) were examined to determine what and how 
information was presented as well as provide material for compari-
son with celebrity magazines. 
 Inside Edition  is hosted by Deborah Norville, former host of 
NBC ’ s  Today  show and a former television journalist. In a Tuesday 

58 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
episode, the Tiger Woods scandal was the hot topic; events 
related to his situation were summarized. A summary of the 
Golden Globe Award nominees was presented. A short feature 
followed on an Oklahoma woman who saw a burglar leaving 
her house with the family ’ s Christmas presents and pursued 
him until he was captured by police. A second short feature 
speculated on the whereabouts of a Salt Lake City woman who 
mysteriously disappeared. Was her marriage on the rocks? Why 
did her husband go camping in bad weather and leave her home 
alone? The next program segment listed the year ’ s top sex scan-
dals. Celebrities on the list included television talk show host 
David Letterman, sports broadcaster Steve Phillips, South Car-
olina Governor Mark Sanford, and actor Josh Duhamel, among 
others. Actress Kate Hudson was shown working out at a New 
York gym, the video having been shot through a rain-speckled 
window. Film stars Sarah Jessica Parker and Hugh Grant were 
shown promoting their new movie. The show concluded with 
a short video clip of an octopus using two coconut shells as a 
house. Wednesday ’ s episode began by rehashing Tiger Woods ’ s 
troubles. A feature on ESPN sports reporter Erin Andrews followed. 
Andrews was secretly videotaped in the nude in her hotel room. 
She was seen leaving the courtroom after confronting Michael Bar-
rett who pleaded guilty to the crime. Next, a short piece intro-
duced the viewer to Tom Smallwood, a man who, after losing 
his job, pursued his dream of becoming a professional bowler. 
Numerous shorter items followed, all but two of them featured 
celebrities, including Kate Hudson (no longer with New York 
Yankee boyfriend Alex Rodriguez), singer Taylor Swift (soon 
to be on the cover of  People ), and the cast of MTV ’ s  Jersey Shore 
(wondering why a female cast member was punched in the face 
at a bar). One exception to this laundry list of celebrity activi-
ties involved a grandmother who was kidnapped, beaten, and 
kept in the trunk of an automobile for 26 hours but survived. 
She warned viewers to be wary of strangers knocking on their 
doors. The second exception, and perhaps the most unusual 
snippet of information in the show, revealed that a government 
employee had received an honor. The Federal Reserve ’ s Ben 
Bernanke was reported to have been named  Time magazine ’ s 
Person of the Year. Government employees are usually not con-
sidered celebrities unless they are involved in some scandal that 
has signiﬁ cant consequences. No matter, the Bernanke item took 
fewer than 10 seconds of program time. 

Source and Quality of Celebrity Information  59
 Film and television actor Mario Lopez hosts  Extra . A Tuesday 
episode of this show began with questions about the Tiger Woods 
situation. Did he pay off one of his mistresses? Will there be a 
court battle with his wife over the children? The Golden Globe 
nominees were summarized and Sarah Jessica Parker and Hugh 
Grant were interviewed as they were out and about promot-
ing their new movie. Viewers got a behind-the-scenes look at 
the popular television program  NCIS  and were then treated to 
photos of a fashion layout featuring singer and model Rihanna. 
Couples news was next. Kate Hudson and Alex Rodriguez may 
have split; the Reese Witherspoon-Jake Gyllenhaal romance may 
be over. Actor Mel Gibson, however, is apparently still with 
singer-girlfriend Oksana Grigorieva. They have a new baby girl. 
Wednesday ’ s program began with another summary of the Tiger 
Woods scandal, but asked a new question: Did Woods have an 
affair with singer Jessica Simpson? Although the two posed for 
pictures at some event, that ’ s apparently all it was—two celeb-
rities meeting and agreeing to have their picture taken together. 
The movie  Nine  was reviewed. The Kate Hudson-Alex Rodriguez 
breakup was announced. Short pieces followed on David 
Letterman, comedian George Lopez, actress Helen Mirren, and 
the dancing kids in the television commercial for GAP clothing. 
Holiday makeup tips were given, followed by a promotional 
announcement for FOX ’ s  So You Think You Can Dance ? 
 The Insider  features Lara Spencer and her colleagues as co-
hosts. Spencer has been host of several television programs. 
One of her co-hosts is Star Jones, a lawyer and former co-host of 
the popular daily morning talk show  The View . Celebrity followers 
may know Spencer and Jones, but the other co-hosts (they often 
vary from time to time) are mostly young, attractive, unknowns. 
The program presents itself as a forum for arguments about celebrity 
news and frequently asks the question, “Which side are you on?” 
The Tuesday episode began by asking two guests (a comedian 
and a lawyer) to argue this question: If Tiger Woods is found to 
have taken performance-enhancing drugs, is he ﬁ nished as a celeb-
rity? The “argument” between the two guests consisted mostly 
of gossip and did little more than generate laughs and further 
speculation about Woods. The viewer was next informed that “a 
friend told us” Kate Hudson and Alex Rodriguez were ﬁ nished 
as a couple. Famous New Jersey housewife Bethenny was seen 
posing for a picture in the nude in New York. The Golden Globe 
award nominees were announced, and Rihanna was shown in 

60 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
a fashion shoot for  GQ  magazine. The program listed its Top 
Newsmakers of 2009. The list included actress McKenzie Phillips 
(at #4) who wrote a book about her life and the sexual relationship 
she had with her father. The program scolded her for revealing 
such intimate facts and suggested that she included the inces-
tuous relationship with her father simply to sell books. The top 
newsmaker in 2009, according to the program, was singer-dancer 
Michael Jackson. The program concludes each episode by nam-
ing the best and worst celebrities of the day. On Tuesday, singer 
Susan Boyle was the best; singer Courtney Love was the worst. 
Wednesday ’ s show began with the news that Reese Witherspoon 
and Jake Gyllenhaal had split. Tiger Woods ’ s problems followed. 
One item about Woods was delivered as if it were breaking news. 
“This just in” is a phrase used several times in the program to 
alert viewers that new information is to follow: Tiger Woods ’ s jet 
plane ﬂ ew across the country . . . but Tiger was not on board. With 
that trivial bit of information delivered, the program moved on to 
discuss why men “marry high, but cheat low.” Kate Hudson and 
her co-stars next promoted their new movie. Actor Johnny Depp 
and actress Anne Hathaway were seen in a trailer from the movie 
 Alice in Wonderland . The top celebrity babies were featured, and 
the gossip and innuendo about Tiger Woods and Jessica Simp-
son was presented. “I have a source who has a friend who told 
me . . .” Woods and Simpson exchanged text messages! The day ’ s 
best celebrity was actress Emma Watson; the worst was country 
singer Toby Keith. 
 Harvey Levin ’ s  TMZ is, in many respects, unlike other 
celebrity television programs. First, there is no host,  per se . Levin 
and his employees at TMZ.com gather around a couple of ofﬁ ce 
cubicles and share information about celebrities. They are just 
“hangin ’  out” and swapping stories. The program often plays for 
laughs by using oversized graphics and distorted or high-pitched 
voices in pre-taped inserts. Sometimes the overall effect is to ridi-
cule the subject—at others merely to parody what some celebrity 
has said or done. A Tuesday program in mid-December began 
with a photo showing singer Miley Cyrus apparently holding a 
cigarette. But, no, she wasn ’ t smoking; the photo had been cropped. 
The original photo showed a woman standing next to Cyrus hold-
ing the cigarette. Short video clips followed. Singer Britney Spears 
was shown buying an orange drink at a convenience store; Elin 
Woods was seen taking her children out to lunch. A longer 
video piece featured young singer Justin Bieber performing at a 

Source and Quality of Celebrity Information  61
Los Angeles mall. The cast of MTV ’ s  Jersey Shore  was interviewed 
with particular emphasis on the female cast member who was 
punched out in a bar. A favorite TMZ technique is the “ambush 
question.” TMZ cameras are apparently almost everywhere celeb-
rities are so it ’ s relatively easy to catch a celebrity going from one 
place to another, walk along with the celebrity, and ask a question 
or two. Actor-director Ron Howard was caught in this fashion 
and asked whether he ’ d make a movie about the Tiger Woods sit-
uation. Howard was noncommittal. Asked what the movie ’ s title 
might be, Howard responded, “Smooth Swing.” A short video 
clip revealed that actress Renée Zellweger and actor Bradley Coo-
per were seen (from across the street) either arguing or house 
hunting—hard to tell. A Wednesday show revealed that Tiger 
Woods may have been spending time on his luxurious yacht. This 
gave rise to a musical parody sung to the tune of  Gilligan ’ s Island. 
Next, the ambush question technique was used on singer LeAnn 
Rimes and California ﬁ rst lady Maria Shriver. Singer Rod Stewart 
and his wife Penny were seen dancing and being pursued by a 
drunken fan. Young singer Jason Bieber was ambushed at the 
airport and asked if he was ready to date. The  Jersey Shore cast 
made another appearance. A photo of Nicole Kidman was shown 
and comments made about her makeup—too much white. John 
Lithgow was ambushed on the street and asked about his role in the 
television show  Dexter . Actor Tim Robbins was seen riding his 
bike. Robbins stopped to take a question about a possible movie. 
The program ended with a photo of a statue of Marilyn Monroe, 
made entirely of jelly beans. In each case, on both days, when a 
photo or video clip was shown, it was followed (or preceded) by 
light banter between Levin and one or more of his employees. 
 Celebrity television programs are often referred to as “news 
magazines.” In a way, they are. They do provide news, but it ’ s a 
specialized type of news. It ’ s entertainment news, usually only 
about celebrities; it ’ s not information members of the general 
public  must have  to manage their lives. There is repetition of infor-
mation, some of it little more than gossip; much of it is simply 
trivial. The programs feature many of the same celebrities the print 
magazines do, but feature fewer celebrities in one show than their 
print cousins feature in one issue. However, the television programs 
move at a faster pace and, because they have shorter production 
deadlines, are consequently more current. Still, like their print 
counterparts, celebrity television programs provide little infor-
mation, lack balance and objectivity, and—with the exception of 

62 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 TMZ —have no unique style. If viewed as entertainment, these 
programs seem harmless. However, most present themselves 
as “news” sources, utilize the anchor-correspondent model of 
conveying information, and otherwise appear to be purvey-
ors of something  important . In other words, they look like real 
news, but are, in fact, merely sources of amusing, inconsequen-
tial information. The problem is, many viewers substitute these 
sorts of programs for more traditional news sources. This often 
results in viewers knowing the latest gossip about their favorite 
celebrities, but knowing little or nothing about poverty in Africa, 
increased tension in the Middle East, or the latest terror attack in 
Europe. Poverty, the threat of war, and terrorism—anywhere in 
the world—are almost certainly more signiﬁ cant in an indi-
vidual ’ s life than what some celebrity did or did not do yesterday. 
This problem can be solved, but not easily. The solution lies in 
training individuals—from a young age—to read print and 
view tele vision material about celebrities with an analytical and 
critical eye. This sort of media literacy requires the intervention 
of adults in the media lives of children; furthermore, adults must 
reorganize their own thinking, learn how and why media work 
the way they do, and examine all media content for truth and 
utility. Celebrity magazines and television programs are really 
“playgrounds” where it can be fun to spend some time, but life is 
not lived on playgrounds. We live in the real world and knowing 
that can help us keep celebrity “news” in its proper perspective.  
 Celebrities and Electronic Media 
 As used here, the term  electronic media refers to computers and 
sophisticated cell phones. More speciﬁ cally, our concern is with 
the content available on these devices and what that content 
means for celebrity in the 21st century. Most of the content comes 
from the Internet, although both computers and cell phones have 
other uses. 
 Traditional Information Sources 
 News services with a history of providing important informa-
tion to the public are often called  traditional  news outlets. These 
include newspapers, a smattering of print news magazines ( Time , 
 Newsweek ,  U.S. News and World Report ), and broadcast network 

Celebrities and Electronic Media 63
evening newscasts (ABC, CBS, NBC, PBS). Once cable television 
became popular, new sources of information became available, 
often linked to a traditional service. FOX is the exception here; the 
network provides some prime-time programming but no evening 
newscast. FOX does, however, have a popular cable service, FOX 
News. CNN (Cable News Network) is another exception. It is a 
stand-alone cable news service. For a time, these traditional news 
outlets seemed to meet the public ’ s needs. However, the Internet 
and its related peripherals have changed the traditional media 
world, perhaps forever. It is widely known that newspapers are 
in ﬁ nancial trouble; most have reduced the size of their papers 
and/or laid off workers; some have gone out of business. Fewer 
subscribers want the print editions of a paper, preferring instead 
to go online and get their news from a newspaper ’ s Web site or 
from an online news aggregator. Online news is mostly free; sub-
scriptions to a print edition may cost as much as $200 or more 
per year. Additionally, the network evening newscasts have been 
losing viewers for several years. Cable news is still popular, 
perhaps because it is available 24 hours a day. Nevertheless, 
more and more people are turning away from traditional news 
sources in favor of news they can get online via a computer or cell 
phone. The most sophisticated cell phones can do many amazing 
things. Using a 3G network, phones can not only make calls, but 
also access the Internet, play music, serve as a GPS device, and 
do dozens of other things by simply touching the screen to load 
an app (application). Moreover, you can do this from almost any-
where you are; you do not need to be sitting in front of a television 
set to get the latest news and information. 
 Celebrity requires media exposure. A changing media 
environ ment can inﬂ uence the frequency and quality of celeb-
rity information the public receives. Traditionally, celebrity news 
has been only a small part of the information provided by print 
newspapers. The early newspapers, you may remember, provided 
bits of information about the well known and the famous. Some-
times the information was gossip; sometimes it was factual. But as 
newspapers developed, such news was relegated to inside pages, 
or perhaps a small weekend section. It rarely detracted from a 
newspaper ’ s primary mission: delivering information the public 
needs to make decisions about their lives, the “yellow journalism” 
period (overly dramatic, highly sensational stories about crime, 
scandals, and celebrities in the late 1800s) being the exception. 
Some yellow journalism can be found today. Still, the decline 

64 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
of print journalism in the 21st century makes newspapers less 
important to celebrities than they were at one time. 
 News magazines, because they publish weekly, are also less 
important to celebrities. They cannot keep pace with celebrity 
television programs and can, at best, only summarize what we 
already know about celebrities from other sources. Moreover, 
their sometimes in-depth treatment of celebrity issues appears 
to be at odds with the reading preferences of many individuals. 
Few people want to take time to read four pages, but might read 
four paragraphs, or—more likely—four lines. If print is mostly 
irrelevant when it comes to celebrities, what about television? 
Network evening newscasts have little time for routine celebrity 
news, but may devote a minute or two to an individual or situation 
that has captured the public ’ s interest. On the other hand, cable 
news outlets, because they operate 24 hours a day, have plenty 
of time to cover a wide range of celebrity issues. Most cable news 
services have a regular, short entertainment news segment each 
hour. The information provided is often fact-based but, at times, 
relies on rumor, gossip, and innuendo. Some viewers ﬁ nd this 
sort of information less compelling than celebrity information 
they ﬁ nd elsewhere. Thus, we can see that when they were the 
only media available, traditional news outlets were important 
sources of celebrity information. However, the media landscape 
has changed. 
 New Media Information Sources 
 The development and growth of the Internet and of electronic 
devices used to access it have given rise to new sources of 
celebrity information. Newspapers were somewhat reluctant, 
at ﬁ rst, to put their news online, but fell into line quickly when 
they discovered hundreds of millions of people were using the 
Internet for all sorts of things, including getting the latest 
news. Metropolitan newspapers such as the  New York Times and 
the  Washington Post established Web sites that carried many of the 
stories found in their print versions. Other papers, in markets 
large and small, followed. Most daily newspapers now have 
an associated Web site; some have a webmaster whose job it 
is to keep online information current. While some celebrity 
news ﬁ nds its way onto these Web sites, the majority of mate-
rial relates directly to news of local, national, or international 
interest. 

Celebrities and Electronic Media 65
 The television and cable news services also have Web sites 
that publish information, typically stories, or versions of stories, 
news anchors and reporters have read on the air. The information 
on these Web sites is usually organized according to content. For 
example, a Web site might begin with the latest news—usually no 
more than three or four stories—at the top of the page. Intro-
ductory paragraphs are offered and links provided to the full 
stories. Further down the page, a reader will often ﬁ nd sections 
devoted to national, international, political, economic, sports, and 
entertainment news. It is in the entertainment section that one 
ﬁ nds most celebrity information. Each section usually contains 
several headlines that readers can click on to get details. On a 
Monday in late December, a survey of ﬁ ve Web sites (msnbc.
com, abcnews.com, cbsnews.com, cnn.com, and foxnews.com) 
revealed the following:  
 All ﬁ ve Web sites had entertainment news sections 
• 
 Four Web sites provided information on the previous 
• 
weekend ’ s most successful movies 
 Five Web sites covered the arrest of actor Charlie 
• 
Sheen for domestic violence; they disagreed, 
however, as to whether Sheen and his wife were 
headed for counseling or divorce 
 Two Web sites reported that Ivana Trump, former 
• 
wife of billionaire Donald Trump, had been escorted 
from a plane by police; she apparently became angry 
and argumentative when she lashed out at young 
children who had been running and screaming in the 
aisles 
 Three Web sites contained information on the year ’ s 
• 
celebrity deaths 
 There were some interesting differences among the 
• 
ﬁ ve Web sites. 
 None of the Web sites missed “breaking” celebrity news; 
the differences were mostly in the choice of subject. For example, 
cbsnews.com included a story titled “Love and Sex with Robots,” 
asking the question, “Can robots be more than friends?” Over on 
abcnews.com, readers learned that actor Tim Robbins and actress 
Susan Sarandon had split; a story summarizing the lives of stars 
who died young was followed by another story asking whether 
pharmacy shopping, that is, the practice of getting prescription 

66 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
drugs from several different doctors, could have contributed to 
the stars ’  early deaths. A preview of upcoming NBC television 
shows had a prominent place on the msnbc.com site. Foxnews.
com reported singer Mary J. Blige punched her husband at a bar 
they were in after she apparently caught him ﬂ irting with a wait-
ress. Both Blige and her husband reportedly left the bar rapidly 
after the incident. Nicolas Cage ’ s ﬁ nancial problems were the 
subject of a cnn.com story; Cage was being sued by a real estate 
company for $36.7 million. 
 So this is progress—news Web sites consider celebrity and 
entertainment news important enough to place it alongside 
news from politics, government, the economy, and world affairs. 
Some people might wonder why these Web sites take the trou-
ble to include celebrity news. After all, there are many Web sites 
devoted entirely to celebrities (see   Chapter 7  ). If one is hungry 
for celebrity news, those Web sites are chock-full of all sorts of 
information. Furthermore, celebrity information on news Web 
sites pales in comparison to what is available in celebrity maga-
zines and on celebrity television shows. Old-timers might raise 
the issue of whether celebrity news belongs anywhere near the 
“real” news. We need information vital to the functioning of 
individuals in a democracy—that ’ s news. Information that feeds 
our vicarious or leisure lives is not news—that ’ s entertainment. 
Some see the line between news and entertainment as important 
as the line between truth and ﬁ ction. Sadly, those lines are increas-
ingly blurred. Younger people, however, have a much broader 
view of news. To many of them, news is information of any sort. 
They ’ d argue that it ’ s the information, not the categorization, 
that ’ s important. This dichotomy of views is more than a mere 
academic argument. How we deﬁ ne news, what we want from 
news, and where we get our news will shape the media world as 
well as both our behavior and our knowledge in the years ahead. 
What role will celebrities play in the news? No one knows for 
sure, but chances are, celebrities will continue to be inﬂ uential 
and people will want to know more about them as we move 
ahead in the 21st century.  
 Social Media and Celebrities 
 The term  social media  “describes the collaborative process that 
creates meaning and community online through the exchange 
of text, photos, or videos . . . [and] includes blogs, video-sharing 

Celebrities and Electronic Media 67
sites, social networks, message boards, and social news sites” 
(  Burns 2009  , xii–xiii). The remarkable thing about social media 
is that “users” control content. Anyone can contribute anything 
to the Internet world through one or more of the social media 
outlets. This differs signiﬁ cantly from the world of newspapers, 
magazines, television shows, and news Web sites where content is 
closely controlled and where consumers have little input. 
 The development and use of social media has resulted in 
several issues of interest to our discussion of celebrity. First, social 
media, particularly blogs, and to some degree MySpace and Face-
book, have enabled people to comment freely about celebrities 
and get feedback from readers. Until social media developed, 
media critics working for newspapers, magazines, and television 
or cable outlets were responsible for commenting on the lives and 
work of celebrities. Blogs are a forum for the exchange of ideas 
and information about many things, including celebrities. Today, 
anyone can comment on the latest celebrity movie, romance, or 
hairstyle; however, much of what one ﬁ nds on blogs is opinion, 
and one must be careful not to interpret everything one reads as 
fact. Blogs may actually beneﬁ t celebrities, keeping their names 
and activities in focus and important to many readers. Although 
MySpace and Facebook are the two top social networking sites, 
there are others, including Bebo, Cyworld, Friendster, Twellow, 
Classmates.com, and Xanga. LinkedIn is predominantly a busi-
ness networking site. MySpace and Facebook have the most 
members and are therefore important sources of information. 
Many celebrities, particularly those in entertainment, have a 
MySpace or Facebook page and some allow individuals to sign 
up as “friends,” enabling them to follow celebrities more closely 
than might otherwise be possible. Admittedly, some of the infor-
mation posted to these sites is trivial and mundane, but trivial 
and mundane information is often accepted as worth knowing in 
today ’ s postmodern culture. 
 The apparent generational differences about social media 
have less to do with the concept than with the execution. In other 
words, communication among family, friends, and associates is 
important; using electronic technology and establishing systems 
to facilitate such communication is also to be valued. So, too, 
is the freedom to express one ’ s ideas and opinions on any subject, 
including celebrities. However, these positives may be tempered 
by the poor quality of most social media communication. Clarity 
and correctness are often missing from material posted on social 

68 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
media sites. Many blogs, messages, and the like are full of 
grammatical errors. Call it old-fashioned if you will, but there 
is value in using language correctly. Any argument or opinion 
piece is less important to a reader if it is poorly organized, has 
mis spellings, and lacks proper capitalization or punctuation. 
You don ’ t have to be an English teacher to appreciate good writ-
ing; moreover, good writing goes a long way toward making an 
argument persuasive. Would you be convinced of an argument ’ s 
validity if a blog about Britney Spears spelled her name Brittany 
Speers? Is Ms. Spears ’ s celebrity status enhanced or diminished 
by the error, assuming a reader notices the error? 
 Another signiﬁ cant problem relates to threaded discussions 
on message boards, but is also in evidence elsewhere, particu-
larly on news Web sites where reader comments about stories are 
encouraged and posted. In threaded discussions a user can post a 
comment and get responses to it from other users. A reader is able 
to see the original post and subsequent replies, and, if the reader 
so chooses, add to the discussion. There are two problems here. 
First, replies to the original post may, for a time, comment on the 
topic. However, before long, many users begin to write, not about 
the topic, but about another individual ’ s comments. This seems 
acceptable up to a point, but wandering away from the topic 
often dilutes its signiﬁ cance. Try this: log on to a message board 
and look at the most recent comment in a threaded discussion 
of celebrities. Can you tell, from the most recent comment, what 
the original post said? You might say, yes, the original post was 
about celebrities. Well, that may be true, but what about celebri-
ties exactly? Can you tell from the last post whether the original 
mentioned a speciﬁ c celebrity, was pro-celebrity, anti-celebrity, or 
just raising an issue for comment? What key idea was expressed 
in the original post? Chances are the latest post will not tell you 
much about the original. Is this important? Yes, it is. In order to 
understand fully any idea, comment, or perspective, one must see 
it in context, that is, how it is connected or related to other ideas, 
comments, or perspectives. You could get the context by reading 
 all  the posts about celebrities, but sometimes there are hundreds, 
even thousands, of them. Who has the time to read them all? 
Well, some people apparently have a lot of time and spend hours 
posting comments here and there—ﬁ rst one place, then another. 
What quality of life is inherent in following celebrities by spending 
hours and hours staring at a computer screen or pounding on a 
keyboard? 

Misconceptions about Celebrity 69
 The other problem with threaded discussions is misinfor-
mation. As we have seen, rumor and gossip about celebrities is 
everywhere. If a rumor gets a thorough workout in a threaded dis-
cussion on a message board, a news Web site, or elsewhere, it often 
takes on the cloak of truth. If everyone is talking about it, it must be 
true, right? Wrong. The volume of comments does not confer truth. 
Furthermore, as we have seen with exchanges of information on 
MySpace and Facebook, much of the information in threaded dis-
cussions borders on the trivial and mundane. It is difﬁ cult to see 
how trivial or misinformation serves celebrities unless one believes 
British writer Oscar Wilde was correct when he said, “the only 
thing worse than being talked about is not being talked about.” 
 Overall, social media seem, at present, to play a moderate 
role in the lives of celebrities. There is much diversity of opinion 
among social media outlets and consensus is rare. Celebrities may 
not be well served by information about them on social sites, but 
they are not likely to be much hurt. Misinformation, particularly 
rumors and gossip, can be mitigated to some extent by traditional 
media ’ s presentation of the facts. More and more people are turning 
away from traditional media, however, and this makes grasping 
the truth about any celebrity a slippery enterprise. One would do 
well not to consider social media as the only source of information. 
Nevertheless, given the power of the Internet and the increasing 
popularity of some Web sites, the day may come when social 
media are the only “news” media we have. On that day, in the 
absence of traditional media, if celebrities wish to maintain their 
status, they all may have to take more responsibility for connecting 
with the public by becoming regular bloggers, designing their 
own message boards, and initiating threaded discussions. This 
will mean closer public contact and spending more time online, 
something with which not all celebrities will be comfortable. 
 Misconceptions about Celebrity 
 There are several misconceptions about celebrity worth not-
ing. First, simply calling oneself a celebrity does not make 
it so. In a recent cable television commercial, author and ﬁ t-
ness expert Jennifer Nicole Lee, appearing on behalf of a brand 
of ﬁ tness machines, was identified as a “Fitness and Exercise 
Celebrity.” In the fitness world, she is probably well known. 
Her Web site (jennifernicolelee.com) indicates she “has become 

70 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
an icon for women and fellow moms across the world with her 
amazing 70-pound plus weight loss success story.” Further-
more, she has shared her weight loss story with Oprah Winfrey, 
 Inside Edition , and  The Early Show  on CBS. Promoting a healthy 
lifestyle is praiseworthy, but with all due respect to Ms. Lee, she 
is, at best, a limited celebrity, known primarily in the ﬁ tness and 
exercise world. True celebrities are more widely known than Ms. 
Lee. Suppose one were to obtain photographs of Ms. Lee and a 
widely known celebrity such as Paris Hilton, Angelina Jolie, or 
even ABC News ’ s Barbara Walters or CBS News ’ s Katie Couric. 
Show the photos to 100 people on the street (or to 20 friends) 
and see how many recognize Lee. It ’ s not scientiﬁ c research, 
but it would likely reveal that more people know Hilton, Jolie, 
Walters, or Couric than know Lee. This simply means that 
Lee ’ s celebrity is limited. She barely meets our list of celebrity 
characteristics, and only if we broadly expand some criteria to 
include her accomplishments. There are many individuals who 
qualify as limited celebrities: reality show contestants who did 
not win, most cable television news anchors, winners of a state 
or national lottery, and so forth. Of course, we cannot prevent 
individuals from calling themselves celebrities, but we should 
be aware that language is important. Celebrity is a powerful 
phenomenon in the 21st century. We should be careful on whom 
we confer celebrity status. 
 Second, and related to the one just discussed, is the mis-
conception that any member of the general public becomes a 
celebrity by doing one thing and having that one thing viewed 
or acknowledged by a large number of people. Take, for example, 
the videos uploaded to YouTube and available for viewing world-
wide. Many videos are funny, entertaining, or unusual. However, 
even if a video has been viewed by 17 million people in 20 
countries (  Burns 2009  ), that doesn ’ t mean the video producer is 
a celebrity. Many videos are poorly photographed, lack proper 
audio, or treat trivial subjects. Some viewers may watch a video 
several times, but rarely pay attention to or remember who pro-
duced the material. Realistically, uploading a video to YouTube 
is not a real accomplishment. Anyone can do it. Those who put 
their work on YouTube do not live and work in the public sphere, 
have no real accomplishments worthy of continued attention, are 
not well known or famous, and do not embody the dreams and 
desires of the public. Clearly, they meet none of the characteristics 
required of celebrities. 

Misconceptions about Celebrity 71
 Here ’ s another misconception: celebrities are superior to the 
rest of us. It ’ s a fact that many of them are talented, rich, have 
luxurious homes, and live exciting lives. Their lifestyles are different 
from, and in some ways more comfortable than, the lifestyles of 
the rest of us. Still, they are just people; they have many of the 
same ﬂ aws and problems you, your neighbors, your co-workers, 
your boss, or your friends have. During the ﬁ rst decade of the 
21st century, more than a few celebrities were arrested on charges 
ranging from driving under the inﬂ uence, drug possession, 
reckless driving, and assault to child molestation and gun posses-
sion. The list of celebrity names connected to these charges reads 
like a  Who ’ s Who  in the celebrity world: Robert Downey Jr., Nick 
Nolte, Wynonna Judd, Michael Jackson, Macaulay Culkin, Mel 
Gibson, Paris Hilton, Nicole Richie, Kiefer Sutherland, Lindsay 
Lohan, Heather Locklear, O. J. Simpson, Andy Dick, Lil Wayne, 
and Phil Spector, among others ( Gillin 2010 ). Celebrities are just 
as likely to break the law or engage in unethical behavior as any 
group of people anywhere in the world. In short, they are like the 
rest of us, except when they ’ re not. 
 Are we being too harsh and judgmental? Perhaps. Accepting 
the diversity in our culture and the vagaries of life makes us a 
richer, more complex society, a society where we enjoy life, feel 
comfortable about ourselves and others, and have much freedom 
of movement and expression. Maybe we ’ d be better off to just 
“chill” (to use an old term) and let things be, particularly when it 
comes to celebrities. On the other hand, celebrities play an impor-
tant part in the lives of many people. Some serve as role models, 
others as leaders. We spend money to see, hear, or be near them. 
If celebrities are important to the culture, shouldn ’ t they at least 
meet a minimum set of standards that qualiﬁ es them to exercise 
such inﬂ uence? Many things in our society are based on merit. 
You can ’ t justiﬁ ably put an MA after your name unless you have 
 earned  a master ’ s degree, or justiﬁ ably call yourself “General” 
unless you have served in the military and earned the rank. Of 
course, people assign themselves unearned or undeserved titles 
all the time, but that does not make it right. In short, if one is going 
to be considered a celebrity, shouldn ’ t the individual have earned 
that status? Celebrity status can be earned by meeting all six of 
our celebrity characteristics. 
 We are thus presented with a difﬁ cult choice in the 21st 
century. Should we accept the most inclusive view of celebrity 
by agreeing that anyone can be one, small accomplishments 

72 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
matter, inappropriate behavior should be ignored, and lists of 
characteri stics are unimportant, or should we differentiate among 
those who wish to be celebrities by establishing standards, hold-
ing them accountable for their behavior, critically evaluating their 
accomplishments, and separating the little known from the 
widely known? Tough question. Some people will prefer the ﬁ rst 
choice; this book, of course, prefers the second. 
 Summary and Conclusion 
 There are, of course, other celebrity issues and problems. As the 
21st century progresses, new concerns will almost certainly arise. 
This chapter has, however, covered some important and contro-
versial ones. It has shown there is a beginning and an end to 
celebrity: celebrity begins by meeting the six celebrity character-
i stics developed in   Chapter 1  ; its end depends on different factors, 
including age and/or lack of media attention. We noted celeb-
rities, like many of the rest of us, often violate social or moral 
norms and, if they publically apologize, lose little of their celebrity 
status. Celebrities who violate legal norms and get special treat-
ment may face diminished celebrity status. In general, celebrities 
who endorse products do not suffer if the products endorsed do 
not perform as promised; moreover, celebrities may, but are not 
required to, have expertise with the products endorsed. 
 Fictional and cartoon celebrities are important to children, 
but do not damage their perception of the real world if parents 
or other adults interact with them, stressing the difference 
between the cartoon and the real world. Celebrity magazines 
are popular and very much alike, supporting, rather than criti-
cizing, celebrities, but may face consolidation due to declining 
revenues. Celebrity television shows are similar in many ways 
to celebrity magazines, but are often more up-to-date. Celeb-
rity information provided by both magazines and television is 
often trivial and little more than rumor or gossip. Celebrities 
depend on media exposure, and with the decline of interest in 
traditional media, now ﬁ nd that new media are important, that 
is, being seen and heard by individuals using the Internet and 
social media Web sites. Finally, several misconceptions about 
celebrity revealed a divergence of opinion about whether celeb-
rities are special and whether celebrity should be earned, inclusive, 
or restrictive.  

References 73
 References 
 Biagi, Shirley. 2005.  Media/Impact . Seventh edition. Belmont, CA: Thomson 
Wadsworth. 
 Brady, Erick, and Steve DiMeglio. 2009. “How much privacy do public 
ﬁ gures deserve?”  USA Today , December 3, A1. 
 Brennan, Christine. 2009. “Tiger ’ s sorry statement illuminating.”  USA 
Today , December 3, 3C. 
 Burns, Kelli S. 2009.  Celeb 2.0 . Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 
 Chao, Paul, Gerhard Wuhrer, and Thomas Werani. 2005. “Celebrity and 
foreign brand name as moderators of country-of-origin effects.” 
 International Journal of Marketing 24(2).  
 Choi, Sejung Marina, Wei-Na Lee, and Hee-Jung Kim. 2005. “Lessons 
from the rich and famous: A cross-cultural comparison of celebrity 
endorsement in advertising.”  Journal of Advertising 34(2), 85–98. 
 Chung, Heejoon. 2003. “Sport star vs. rock star in globalizing popular 
culture.”  International Review for the Sociology of Sport 38(1), 99–108. 
 Erdogan, Zafer B. 1999. “Celebrity endorsement: A literature review.” 
 Journal of Marketing Management 15(4), 291–314. 
 Errico, Marcus. 2009. “Chris Brown arrested after alleged Rihanna 
assault.” [Online article; retrieved 12/01/09.]  http://www.eonline 
.com/uberblog/b99069_police_looking_chris_brown_after.html . 
 Farris, Gene. 2009. “Juicy details, on a want-to-know basis.”  USA Today , 
November 30, 3C. 
 Gillin, Joshua. 2009. “Lilo gets more probation.”  St. Petersburg Times , 
October 17, 2B. 
 Gillin, Joshua. 2010. “Celebrity slammer.”  St. Petersburg Times , January 
1, 2B. 
 McCracken, Grant. 1989. “Who is the celebrity endorser? Cultural foun-
dations of the endorsement process.”  Journal of Consumer Research 16(3), 
310–321. 
 McManus, Mike. 1999. “Puzzled about teen violence? Have you seen 
‘South Park’?”  Tampa Tribune , May 31, C6. 
 Michaels, Sean. 2009. “Chris Brown: Rihanna assault should remain 
private.” [Online article; retrieved 12/01/09.]  http://www.guardian.
co.uk/music/20089/nov/09/chris-brown-rihanna-assault . 
 Nizza, Mike. 2007. “Paris Hilton leaves prison for house arrest.” [Online 
article; retrieved 11/30/09.]  http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2007/
paris-hilton-is-reportedly-freed . 

74 Problems, Controversies, and Solutions 
 Scherer, Michael. 2008. “Governor gone wild: The Blagojevich scandal.” 
[Online article; retrieved 12/01/09.]  http://www.time.com/time/
nation/article 0,8599,1865781,00.html . 
 Spears, Steve. 2009. “Top 5: What ’ s super hot . . . for the moment.” 
 St. Petersburg Times , November 2, 2B. 
 Stableford, Dylan. 2009. “DeSilva + Phillips report: Turnaround ‘slow, 
painful, and partial at best.’” [Online article; retrieved 01/04/10.] 
 http://www.foliomag.com/node/34098 . 

75
  3 
 Worldwide Perspective 
 M
any of us would be interested to know what the future holds, 
that is, what lies ahead in our lives. Will we be successful,  
healthy, happy? It is not possible, of course, to predict the 
future when it comes to human beings. There are simply too many 
variables in life to make any sort of accurate prediction. Some 
people get enjoyment out of dreaming what they might do and be 
if they won, say, their state ’ s lottery. But we don ’ t really expect it 
to happen. Often the best we can do is make choices intelligently 
and with an eye on the possible consequences. It often comes as 
a surprise, therefore, when someone predicts something and that 
something comes true. 
 You met Canadian media theorist Marshall McLuhan in 
 Chapter 2  . Much of what McLuhan predicted in the 1960s about 
media and popular culture has, in fact, become reality. He made 
many of his predictions when television was in its infancy and 
20 years before the development of the personal computer 
(  Kappelman 2001  ). Of most interest in this chapter on celebrity from 
a worldwide perspective is McLuhan ’ s notion of the world as a 
 global village . The term is a metaphor suggesting that new technol-
ogies have the ability to electronically link the world (  Zechowski 
n.d.  ). In other words, electronic technology, primarily the media, 
function as an electronic nervous system enabling people to 
experience—in real time—events from other parts of the world. 
As a result, “information about people of different cultures, in 
diff erent countries thousands of miles away, becomes as mean-
ingful to media consumers as things happening in their own 
neighborhoods” (  Rodman 2006  , 452). Because we live in a global 
village, celebrities today are no longer bound by the borders 

76 Worldwide Perspective
of their home countries. In   Chapter 1  , we noted that the early 
civilizations may have had famous or well-known individuals, 
but they were not widely known beyond their own spheres of 
inﬂ uence because there was no way to communicate information 
across long distances. Did the ancient Chinese culture know about 
the famous playwrights of ancient Greece? Probably not. Would 
Chinese citizens today know about a devastating earthquake in 
Greece that destroyed part of an ancient Greek theater? Yes, they 
would if they were in contact with the rest of the world through 
today ’ s complex electronic media and chose to access that infor-
mation. People from many parts of the world have laptops, cell 
phones, and the like that connect them to the Internet, which has 
essentially become the world ’ s electronic nervous system. 
 Your parents or grandparents probably enjoyed chatting with 
their neighbors over the backyard fence. Today, if you are in France, 
you can chat with friends in Australia just as easily. If you are in 
Japan, you can communicate with acquaintances in California. 
Obviously, the global village provides us the opportunity to 
communicate over long distances by simply striking a few keys, 
touching a screen, or activating a voice-recognition system. There 
are limits to what we can do, however. Not all countries in the 
world are economically and politically stable enough to partici-
pate fully in today ’ s electronic community. There are many places 
on earth, most of them in third-world countries, where the tools 
of technology are simply not available. Nevertheless, communica-
tion today is easier than it has ever been and distance is usually 
not a problem. This beneﬁ ts us as individuals because we can pass 
along personal information, but it also beneﬁ ts celebrities in that 
they can become better known worldwide as information about 
them and their accomplishments is readily available through 
a variety of electronic devices. It is doubtful McLuhan thought 
much about the impact of the global village on celebrities, but the 
impact has been substantial. 
 Entertainment Celebrities 
 Entertainment is a worldwide phenomenon. Whether it ’ s a simple 
tribal dance in some less-developed part of the world or a rock-
music concert in Europe, people enjoy being entertained. Film 
and television stars, major sports ﬁ gures, and recording artists 
move easily from one part of the world to another. It is usually 

Celebrities and Politics 77
not important from what country these celebrities come; the 
importance lies in the fact that they provide entertainment, a 
pleasurable diversion from the often mundane routine of life. 
Movie viewers, for example, may not know or care that the main 
characters in a ﬁ lm are from countries other than their own. Just 
because someone in a ﬁ lm speaks with a British accent does not 
mean the individual is a native of Great Britain. Accents can be 
learned or mimicked; after all, that ’ s part of what acting is all 
about. The National Basketball Association (NBA), America ’ s 
professional basketball league, has a number of players from 
countries other than America. No one seems to care about where 
these sports ﬁ gures are from; they do care about how many points 
these players score in a game. To further illustrate the point, 
let ’ s look at some speciﬁ c examples. Tennis celebrity Maria 
Sharapova is from Russia but plays in tournaments and makes 
public appearances in many other parts of the world. British soc-
cer star David Beckham and his wife Victoria, a former member 
of the music group Spice Girls, are a celebrity couple whose fame 
extends beyond the playing ﬁ eld or the recording studio. Actress 
Salma Hayek was born in Mexico; actresses Nicole Kidman and 
Naomi Watts are from Australia; supermodel Gisele Bundchen is 
a native of Brazil; rock star Bono is from Ireland. These and other 
entertainment celebrities are widely known and much esteemed 
anywhere in the world they choose to go. The global village thus 
provides the famous and well known in the entertainment indus-
try the opportunity to become celebrities not only in their native 
countries, but also in many other countries around the world. 
 Celebrities and Politics 
 Appearing on the world ’ s stage as they do, many celebrities cannot 
resist the impulse to comment on or participate in the world of 
politics. American celebrities are particularly noted for their politi-
cal activism. They have a wide range of interests and opinions 
and are not shy about communicating them when an opportunity 
presents itself. Many members of the general public, however, 
are not all that pleased about celebrities ’  political activism. Many 
people wonder why celebrities think they are qualiﬁ ed to tell us 
how to vote. Time after time, public opinion polls have shown 
that a majority of people feel celebrities should stay out of politics. 
Ironically, one actor summed up the feeling of more than a few 

78 Worldwide Perspective
members of the public when he said, “Hollywood activists should 
keep their mouths shut.” 
 Celebrity activity in politics is not limited to America, of 
course. “Recently, there has been notable involvement of Latino 
celebrities within politics” (  Velasquez 2008  ). This may be the 
result of the rise of a number of speciﬁ c issues, like immigra-
tion, of interest to the Latino community. For example, come-
dian George Lopez and television actor Adam Rodriguez came 
out in support of Senator Barack Obama when he was running 
for president; actors Lorenzo Lamas and Eduardo Verastegui sup-
ported Senator John McCain. Television actress Eva Longoria 
Parker is also active in support of Latino causes. When asked 
about it, she said she just wanted to make people aware of the 
importance of registering to vote and helping others register to 
vote. Parker also said she feels “empowered” by participating 
in the political arena and that it is her “responsibility to do so” 
( Velasquez 2008 ). 
 Talking about politics is one thing, but running for political 
ofﬁ ce is quite another. Several American celebrities have run for 
ofﬁ ce, and a few have been successful. The most notable examples 
include actor Ronald Reagan who became president, actor Jesse 
Ventura who served as governor of Minnesota, and actor Arnold 
Schwarzenegger who was elected governor of California. Other 
famous or well-known Americans have been elected to Congress. 
Finnish distance runner Lasse Viren won gold medals at the 
Olympic games in 1972 and 1976. He set an Olympic record in 
the 5,000 meter race in 1972, giving Finland its ﬁ rst gold medal in 
36 years. Yet his 1976 win was controversial. He won the 10,000 
meters, but took off his shoes and held them over his head during 
a victory lap. He was accused by the International Olympic Com-
mittee of advertising a product; the logo on the shoes could be 
clearly seen as he held them high. Viren denied the charge, saying 
he had a blister. He was also involved in blood boosting, a prac-
tice that involves freezing blood and then returning it to the body 
later to improve the blood ’ s oxygen content. Though controversial, 
the practice was not illegal at the time (  Viren n.d.  ). Viren was, never-
theless, highly popular in Finland and was elected to the Finnish 
Parliament where he served from 1999 to 2007. 
   Moores (1991)   suggests that one reason celebrities ﬁ nd run-
ning for public ofﬁ ce so attractive is that political candidates often 
use many of the same public relations and promotional campaigns 
that celebrities do in order to project an image; many feel, therefore, 

Celebrities and Politics 79
that making the transition from celebrity to elected ofﬁ cial will 
not require a complete change of identity. Celebrities in some 
countries, however, have not had much success in running for 
ofﬁ ce. For example, in 1981 Coluche, a popular French comedian 
who died in 1986, ran for the French presidency. Public opinion 
polls gave him 16 percent of the vote even though he proposed no 
social or political policies upon which a voting decision could be 
made (  Moores 1991  ). Apparently, his support was based solely on 
his celebrity status as a comedian. 
 Not all celebrities are interested in running for public ofﬁ ce, 
but many of them do promote their pet projects. Sometimes it 
seems as though “celebrities today are obsessed with trying to 
move the global agenda” (  Drezner 2007  ). They raise money for 
a variety of humanitarian causes such as hunger and stem cell 
research. “Celebrity activism is nothing new. In 1971, Beatles star 
George Harrison performed a concert for Bangladesh to raise 
money for starving refugees” and later persuaded Bob Dylan, 
Ringo Starr, and others to join him in a concert to raise money 
for the United Nations Children ’ s Fund. In the eight-year period 
from 1973 to 1981, Harrison raised about half a million dollars a 
year to ﬁ ght hunger. U2 singer Bono created an organization to 
ﬁ ght poverty and toured Africa in “an effort to encourage debt 
relief for poor countries” ( West 2007 ). Although Bono ’ s debt-relief 
campaign was considered successful, “his (Product) Red campaign, 
which aimed to generate money for the U.N. Global Fund to Fight 
AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria” was a disappointment. There 
are obviously limits on what a celebrity can do. “Promoting a policy 
agenda is one thing; implementing it is another thing entirely. 
A celebrity who harps on a cause risks generating fatigue with the 
general public” ( Drezner 2007 ). 
 As we noted in   Chapter 1  , celebrities depend on media expo-
sure to assist them, not only in becoming celebrities, but also in 
remaining celebrities. The media appear all too willing to provide 
the needed assistance.  Drezner (2007) suggests that “the power 
of soft news has given stars new leverage.” Today, it seems that 
much of the news we see is about what we  want to know rather 
than what we  need to know . Cable television, talk shows on radio 
and television, Internet blogs, YouTube, and a host of other media 
outlets appear to have blurred the line between news and enter-
tainment. We apparently know less about important political and 
social issues than we do about the lives of celebrities. A Nielsen 
poll in Australia, for example, found that “fewer people—across 

80 Worldwide Perspective
age groups—could correctly answer political questions than 
popular culture questions about actors, models, and sporting 
ﬁ gures” (  Sheridan 2009  ). None of the respondents to the survey 
could name the leader of Australia ’ s NSW National Party; only 
25 percent could identify the country ’ s health minister. However, 
60 percent could name two songs by Lady Gaga, 85 percent knew 
that a comic actor had lost lots of weight, and every respondent 
knew that two popular Australian radio disc jockeys had been 
recently suspended. One psychologist noted that many people 
shy away from discussing current political and social issues 
because they fear exposing their ignorance; they ’ d rather stick to 
safe, popular topics such as the dramatic weight loss of a television 
personality ( Sheridan 2009 ). 
 Limits on Worldwide Celebrity 
 We noted earlier in this chapter that because the world is a global 
village and because we have the means to communicate over long 
distances, celebrities are no longer bound by the borders of their 
home countries. This is true, but only to the extent that well-known 
or famous people have spent a signiﬁ cant amount of time on the 
world stage and drawn a correspondingly signiﬁ cant amount of 
attention and exposure from the media. For example, one could 
easily argue that Katarina Witt, an Olympic gold medal–winning 
ﬁ gure skater, and Boris Becker, a world-class tennis professional, 
are worldwide celebrities in addition to being celebrities in their 
native Germany. Professional tennis matches and the Olympic 
Games get a tremendous amount of media coverage. But are 
Oliver Kohn and Franz Beckenbauer also worldwide celebrities? 
Both are German football stars, but because German football does 
not get much media attention worldwide, these two men are not 
widely known in the global village. This phenomenon is in evi-
dence elsewhere. In Spain, Rafael Nadal Parera is a famous tennis 
player, and Fernando Diaz is a well-known Formula One driver. 
The former is a worldwide celebrity; the latter is little known 
outside his home country. The amount of worldwide media 
cover age given to individuals has a direct impact on the degree to 
which they will (or will not) become worldwide celebrities. Here ’ s 
another example. Stefka Kostadinova holds the world ’ s record in 
women ’ s high jumping, but would not draw a crowd if she came 
to New York City; her accomplishment is praiseworthy and she 

Limits on Worldwide Celebrity 81
is undoubtedly famous in her home country of Bulgaria, but 
she is not a “media star” and thus not a worldwide celebrity. Our 
examples here are from sports, but the principle holds true for 
other occupations. Did you know that Bulgaria ’ s Veselin Topakov 
is a chess grandmaster and a former FIDE world champion? Thus, 
there is a clear distinction between individuals who are world-
wide celebrities and those who are merely famous or well known 
within their home countries. 
 It should be noted that what might be called the “stay-at-
home-celebrity” phenomenon is often a choice celebrities make. 
Some prefer to live in their home countries, content to get consid-
erable recognition there among their fellow countrymen with 
perhaps only an occasional, brief moment in the world spotlight. 
Others seek wider fame by relocating to another country, typically 
the United States. The United States is considered the leader in the 
production of media product, that is, movies, television programs, 
videos, books, magazines, and the like. This is not to say that other 
countries do not have media product or that their products are 
less important, but the sheer volume of media output in America 
makes relocating here a key factor in a celebrity ’ s pursuit of world-
wide fame. Take, for example, the case of Renny Harlin. Born in 
Finland, Harlin relocated to America and became a well-known 
Hollywood director, producer, actor, writer, and cinematographer. 
He directed several popular movies, including  Die Hard 2 (with 
actor Bruce Willis),  A Nightmare on Elm Street 4: The Dream Master , 
and  Exorcist: The Beginning . In all, he has more than three dozen 
ﬁ lms as well as many short video clips and production pieces. 
He moved to celebrity status when he married American actress 
Geena Davis in 1993; they divorced in 1998. Although Harlin made 
some ﬁ lms in his native Finland, he is best known for his work in 
the United States. 
 There are, of course, other examples. Australian actor Heath 
Ledger moved to America after a rather mediocre career in 
Australian ﬁ lm and television. His performance was not particu-
larly noteworthy in the American ﬁ lm  10 Things I Hate About You , 
but he did much better in  The Patriot  (with actor Mel Gibson). 
Some critics say his best performance was in  Brokeback Mountain , 
a movie about two cowboys who fall in love in the American 
West. Ledger died in New York in January 2008 from an over-
dose of prescription drugs; he was posthumously awarded an 
Oscar for Best Supporting Actor in his ﬁ nal ﬁ lm role: the Joker in 
 The Dark Knight .  

82 Worldwide Perspective
 A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity 
Taxonomy 
 You may recall the celebrity taxonomy described in  Chapter 1 , 
showing eight celebrity categories: politics and government, enter-
tainment, the arts, science and medicine, business, academia, 
religion, and the general public. Thus far in this chapter, our 
discussion has centered primarily on celebrities in the entertain-
ment ﬁ eld; however, there are worldwide celebrities in the other 
categories. Before looking at those, we should recall the deﬁ nition 
of celebrity developed in   Chapter 1  . A celebrity leads a public life 
or works in the public sphere, has accomplishments of interest 
and importance to the general public, is considered well known 
or famous, seeks to maintain status as a famous or well-known 
person, is highly visible in or on media, and connects with the 
public by embodying their dreams and desires. Some of the indi-
viduals discussed in the sections that follow meet all six celebrity 
characteristics; others meet only the ﬁ rst four. You ’ ll see some 
individuals fall short of worldwide celebrity because they are 
not highly visible in the media or because they do not connect 
with the public ’ s dreams and desires. Furthermore, we are set-
ting aside the “general public” category because the individuals 
in that category are mostly of local—or at best regional—interest. 
For example, backpack serial killer Ivan Milat is famous in his 
home country of Australia, where he is said to have killed more 
than 20 women. Milat is not, however, known outside Australia 
and, furthermore, his actions do not reﬂ ect the public ’ s dreams 
and desires. We don ’ t add much to our discussion of worldwide 
celebrity by tracking down individuals who are mostly of local 
interest. 
 There is another issue we need to consider, too, as we 
move forward through the taxonomy. According to   Brown and 
Fraser (2008)  , researchers have “provided only a limited under-
standing of the central place of the celebrity in society and the 
appeal of celebrities across cultural, political, social, and eco-
nomic boundaries” (47). Therefore, our look at the taxonomy 
of worldwide celebrities cannot be solely based on anything we 
absolutely know to be true; our understanding of celebrity is 
grounded mostly in what we can observe and infer from the 
information we do have.  

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 83
 Politics and Government 
 Although we have thus far resisted the temptation to say that 
well-known individuals in politics and government are celebrities, 
we must acknowledge that some of them are, in fact, famous 
enough to be worldwide celebrities. South Africa ’ s Nelson 
Mandela is a good example. “Mandela is one of the world ’ s most 
revered statesmen . . . [he] led the struggle to replace the apart-
heid regime of South Africa with a multi-racial democracy” ( BBC 
News 2008  ). He campaigned against segregation and discrimi-
nation early in his career and was charged with treason by the 
government. Convicted and given a life sentence in 1964, he was 
freed from prison in 1990. Mandela won the Nobel Peace Prize in 
1993 and was elected his country ’ s ﬁ rst black president one year 
later. Although he retired from public life in 2004, he continues to 
be active in the Mandela Foundation, a charity he founded. He 
formed a group known as The Elders, leading world ﬁ gures who 
are willing to offer their time and expertise in solving some of 
the world ’ s toughest problems (  BBC News 2008  ). There can be 
little doubt Mandela ’ s life and accomplishments have earned him 
a place as one of the few in politics and government who can be 
considered celebrities. 
 It almost goes without saying that Queen Elizabeth of 
England and her relatives are celebrities. The English have a 
genuine fondness for their royalty. Crowds gather, in England 
and in other countries, when any member of the royal family, 
parti cularly the Queen or Prince Charles, the heir to the throne, 
appears in public. William and Harry, Charles ’ s sons, are favorites 
among young people. You may recall the worldwide outpouring 
of grief at the death of Princess Diana, Charles ’ s former wife. Is 
the royal family ’ s celebrity status based more on tradition than on 
accomplishment? Perhaps it is, but most members of the Queen ’ s 
family are involved in civic and charitable causes worldwide. 
 Others in this category, however, owe their rise as celebrities 
to activities that have little to do with their accomplishments as 
politicians or heads of state. Nicolas Sarkozy is president of France. 
Elected in 2007, he worked diligently to promote social and politi-
cal reform at home while enhancing the image of France abroad. 
But it is his “private life that has enthralled the media.” Shortly 
after his election to the presidency, Sarkozy divorced Cecilia 
Ciganer-Albeniz, a former model and public relations executive. 
Four months later, he married model-turned-singer Carla Bruni. 

84 Worldwide Perspective
“The publicity surrounding the romance between Sarkozy, 54, 
and Bruni, 41, was a departure from the French tradition of 
keeping presidential private lives private.” In terms of his work 
as president, he earned the nickname “hyper-president” because 
he was a workaholic, willing to tackle racism, the economy, illegal 
immigration, and a host of other problems. However, his taste for 
Rolex watches and luxury yachts earned him a less impressive 
nickname, “the bling-bling president” (  BBC News 2009a  ). Thus, 
his work as president has made him famous in France, but the 
media ’ s attention to his personal life has made him a celebrity, 
both in France and in other parts of the world. 
 Controversial and ﬂ amboyant are words often used to 
describe Silvio Berlusconi, Italy ’ s prime minister. In his seventies, 
Berlusconi is among Italy ’ s richest men, worth more than $6 
million, according to  Forbes  business magazine. His wealth 
comes from a business empire that includes media, advertis-
ing, insurance, food, and construction. Many Italians are unclear 
about his accomplishments as prime minister. Berlusconi has been 
accused of embezzlement, tax fraud, and bribery; in some cases 
he was acquitted; in others he was convicted but the convictions 
were overturned on appeal. He admits to having had cosmetic 
surgery, but denies allegations that he paid prostitutes for sex. 
Whatever positive accomplishments he might have as prime 
minister seem to have been largely ignored by the Italian media 
who would rather concentrate on his private and business lives. 
Some complain that “an Italian voter cannot escape blanket 
coverage favorable” to him. That is no surprise. Berlusconi ’ s 
investment company controls three of Italy ’ s biggest private tele-
vision stations, and his political appointees control three public 
stations. His opponents are troubled by his control of the media, 
noting that comedians who made fun of him when he was last 
prime minister “never appeared on TV again” (  BBC News 2009b  ). 
Berlusconi is famous in Italy, known worldwide, and gets signiﬁ -
cant media attention. He is clearly a celebrity. 
 There are other politicians and government leaders who are 
well known, perhaps famous worldwide, but they have not risen 
to celebrity status in the United States. Tony Blair, former prime 
minister of Great Britain, and Gordon Brown, who succeeded 
Blair, are familiar to many in Europe and North America. Great 
Britain has ties to the European continent, of course, and has 
almost always supported the United States in whatever foreign 
policy initiatives the American government promotes. However, 

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 85
because Americans and Europeans have their own politicians 
and government ofﬁ cials, it is unlikely that many citizens would 
call either Blair or Brown a celebrity. The same applies to German 
Chancellor Angela Merkel. She is the ﬁ rst woman to serve as 
Germany ’ s head of government and has good working relation-
ships with other European government ofﬁ cials, particularly on 
economic issues. However, she is still a relative newcomer to politics 
and has not risen to celebrity status. Notice that, in contrast to 
Sarkozy and Berlusconi, neither Blair, nor Brown, nor Merkel has 
a controversial private life. Must one have a splashy private life 
to become a celebrity? It would seem so. If you are a politician or 
government ofﬁ cial, the nature of your work requires you to live 
something of a public life, that is, you ’ ll attend meetings, hold 
news conferences, run for election (or reelection), and otherwise 
spend a considerable amount of time in front of media cameras. 
But conversations about monetary policy, government white 
papers, and the like are of so little interest to most people that 
these media appearances register not as individuals whose life-
styles we ’ d like to have, but as individuals doing their jobs. This 
alone cannot make them celebrities. 
 A few politicians and government ofﬁ cials are often in con-
ﬂ ict with American foreign policy, are viewed with suspicion, and 
are not celebrities in the United States, although they may be well 
known and considered celebrities elsewhere. Chief among these 
is Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the president of Iran. Readers who 
are acquainted with America ’ s involvement in the wars in Iraq 
and Afghanistan will recognize the Iranian president as a problem 
for American foreign policy in the Middle East. Although he does 
not have tremendous support in Iran, Ahmadinejad was reelected 
in 2009 in what some say was a fraudulent election. Nevertheless, 
he remains popular in his own country and among Muslims 
throughout the world. 
 Cuba lies about 90 miles off the coast of Florida. One might 
think Cuba and the United States would be long-time friends, but 
the two countries have had a strained relationship for years, dat-
ing back to the 1960s and the administration of President John 
F. Kennedy. Cuban leader Fidel Castro is well known in the 
Western Hemisphere and may be considered a celebrity in some 
parts of South and Central America. Under his leadership, Cuba 
embraced communism, depended on the old Soviet Union—an 
American enemy in those days—for aid, and frequently stirred up 
trouble in the Caribbean. In declining health, Castro turned over the 

86 Worldwide Perspective
government to his brother Raul in 2006. Fidel ’ s years as Cuba ’ s head 
of state get mixed reviews. He did make some improvements in 
health care and education, but “the Cuban people still face food 
shortages, economic hardship, and little personal freedom” (  A&E 
Television Networks 2006 ). Nevertheless, Fidel remains a popu-
lar celebrity in his country. Many smaller countries in the world 
appreciate the fact that he governed his own way and did not take 
direction from the more-powerful United States. Still, Castro is 
disliked by many Cuban Americans, particularly those living in 
Florida who think his repressive regime has harmed (and is still 
harming) their relatives and friends in Cuba. Under Raul, Cuba is 
attempting to moderate relations with the United States and there 
is optimism some of the problems between the two countries can 
be solved. However, unlike his brother, Raul is not a celebrity. 
 Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez is currently out of favor 
in the United States. Few Americans would call him a celebrity. He 
has both supporters and critics in his home country. His supporters 
see him as “a populist and a champion of the poor, while his crit-
ics call him anti-business and neo-fascist.” Nevertheless, Chavez 
was reelected president in 2006 by a fairly wide margin (  Pearson 
Education 2007  ). Even his critics would probably acknowledge 
that he has celebrity status in Venezuela. His relationship with 
America is quite another thing. He was a regular critic of President 
George W. Bush, accusing Bush of plotting to assassinate him. He 
“made suggestive comments about Secretary of State Condoleezza 
Rice, visited Fidel Castro in Cuba, bashed the United States on the 
al-Jazeera television network, and traveled to Libya to receive an 
award from Moammar Gaddaﬁ .” He also threatened to cut off 
Venezuelan oil shipments to the United States as a way to ﬁ ght 
American power (  Sullivan 2005  ). Chavez has been equally contro-
versial in his comments about President Barack Obama. He called 
Obama an “ignoramus” for saying that Venezuela ’ s socialist 
government exports terrorism and obstructs progress in Latin 
America ( Daniel 2009  ). Although his verbal attacks on the United 
States have not endeared him to Americans, his willingness to 
insult America ’ s politicians and government ofﬁ cials has made 
him popular in countries where anti-American feeling runs high. 
To many citizens of those countries, Chavez is a celebrity. 
 No discussion of worldwide politicians and government 
ofﬁ cials would be complete without including Russia ’ s Vladimir 
Putin. Putin became Russia ’ s president in 1999 and immediately 
set about restoring Russia ’ s place as an inﬂ uential world power. 

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 87
He was reelected to a second term in 2004. Although the United 
States and Russia (the old Soviet Union) have had signiﬁ cant 
differences on most issues down through the years, the rise of 
Mikhail Gorbachev and then Boris Yeltsin to the Russian presidency 
brought a new era of cooperation between the two countries. How-
ever, relations cooled a bit when Putin became president. Because 
of term limits, Putin could not run for president again in 2008, but 
he ensured the election of his protégé Dmitry Medvedev and essen-
tially appointed himself prime minister, thus maintaining control 
of the Russian government. The Russian system of government 
and even the lives of Russian citizens are something of a mystery to 
most Americans. Like many other countries, Russia has signiﬁ cant 
problems: high unemployment, food shortages, harsh winters, and 
an ever-watchful government. The Russian people have adjusted 
to these problems, but are not particularly happy about them. Yet it 
doesn ’ t pay to criticize the government, the president, or the prime 
minister too much. Tales of the Russian secret police are still circu-
lated. Thus, many Russians tolerate Putin and his ilk but do not 
consider them celebrities. Nevertheless, Putin is known worldwide 
not only as a ﬁ rm and decisive leader but also as an adventurer 
who has tranquilized tigers and demonstrated the art of judo on 
DVDs. He is a celebrity in many parts of the world. 
 To be sure, there are other politicians and government leaders 
who are visible on the world ’ s stage: North Korea ’ s president Kim 
Jong Il, Afghanistan ’ s president Hamid Karzai, Canadian prime 
minister Stephen Harper, Mexican president Felipe Calderon, 
and Chinese premier Wen Jiabao. For the most part, these men 
are well known, both inside and outside their countries, as many 
heads of state are. However, they have not risen to worldwide 
celebrity status. 
 Media Inﬂ uence and Political Celebrity 
 Communication scholars regularly study the impact of all sorts 
of media messages on human behavior. It is a generally accepted 
notion that media inﬂ uence is a fact of life. Consumers purchase 
many of the products and services they see advertised, youngsters 
often mimic actions they have seen or repeat speech they have 
heard on television, candidates for public ofﬁ ce solicit the edito-
rial endorsement of newspapers, and so on.   McCombs and Shaw 
(1972)   believe that although the media may not tell us  what to think , 
they are quite successful at telling us  what to think about . How-
ever, some scholars believe media messages are more powerful 

88 Worldwide Perspective
than we realize. There is widespread agreement, however, that 
causal relationships (A causes B) are difﬁ cult to prove; correlation 
(A bears some relationship to B) is sometimes the best we can do. 
Can a medium, say a magazine, make someone an international 
celebrity? If high media visibility is one of the requirements for 
becoming a celebrity, wouldn ’ t it follow that signiﬁ cant expo-
sure by a magazine would meet that requirement? And what 
is meant by “signiﬁ cant exposure?” Would appearing on the 
magazine ’ s cover be signiﬁ cant? Would it be even more mean-
ingful if the cover caption included the words, “She ’ s a global 
celebrity?” What if the “she” referred to is U.S. Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton? 
 The cover story in the November 16, 2009, issue of  Time 
magazine is about Clinton and her service as secretary of state. 
Written by Joe Klein, “Hillary ’ s Moment” examines the successes 
and disappointments of Clinton ’ s ﬁ rst nine months on the job. 
Klein writes that Clinton “is the star of the Obama Cabinet and 
an international celebrity” and “the second most popular American 
in the world” (25–26). Klein acknowledges that Clinton “has no 
history as a global strategist” but is “an international celebrity 
with a much higher proﬁ le than any of her recent predecessors” 
(27). Some readers, maybe even many of them, will accept Klein ’ s 
assessment of Clinton as a celebrity. But a closer look will reveal 
some problems with that assessment. First, Klein does not tell 
us what an international celebrity is, but he does tell us Clinton 
is one. Can we accept his word for it, or should he explain how 
she ﬁ ts his (or any) deﬁ nition of international celebrity? Clinton 
is the star of the Obama cabinet, he says. This claim may come 
as a surprise to some other cabinet members who may consider 
themselves the stars. Klein admits Clinton is not a global strategist 
but has a higher proﬁ le than other secretaries of state. Moreover, 
she is the second most popular American in the world, a claim 
Klein makes without any supporting data. On what did he base 
that claim? An international poll, perhaps? If so, where are the 
numbers showing the degree of her popularity? More likely, some 
world leaders know her best as the wife of former president Bill 
Clinton, but few would know of her accomplishments as the 
junior senator from New York. Therefore, based on Klein ’ s article, 
we are led to think that an international celebrity is a political star 
with little or no worldwide foreign policy experience who main-
tains a high proﬁ le and is the second most popular person in the 
world from her country. 

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 89
 We have no particular quarrel with Secretary of State Hillary 
Clinton. We do have a problem with Klein ’ s casual use of the 
phrase “international celebrity.” As the preceding chapters in this 
book have shown, deﬁ ning celebrity is not easy. Many variables 
are involved and these variables differ from culture to culture, 
country to country. Simply saying someone is a celebrity doesn ’ t 
make it true. Additionally, Klein is a long-time political strategist, 
novelist, and journalist with ties to the Clinton family. The article 
does a disservice not only to our understanding of celebrity, but 
also to objective journalism. So, is Clinton an international celebrity? 
Yes, but not for the reasons Klein mentions. Clinton qualiﬁ es by 
meeting all six of our celebrity characteristics. The lesson here is 
that high media visibility comes with a caveat: examine media 
exposure critically and assess its reliability as an indicator of 
celebrity. 
 The Arts 
 Although the individuals in this category are all performers of 
sorts, that is, writers, artists, sculptors, and musicians, most of them 
lack the worldwide recognition that politicians and governmental 
leaders get. At best, those in this category who are extremely well 
known qualify as second-level celebrities. What is a second-level 
celebrity? The term is not meant to minimize either talent or 
contribution to cultural life. Used here, it denotes individuals who 
are celebrities in their own countries, but only well known in some 
parts (not all) of the world. George Hobeika is a good example. 
Hobeika is a famous fashion designer and is highly respected in 
his home country of Lebanon and in other areas of the Middle East. 
He is largely unknown to individuals who are not connected to 
the fashion industry. He is famous in Paris for his  haute couture , or 
trend-setting fashions. It is unlikely, however, that his fame extends 
much beyond the fashion industry. Would his name be among 
those mentioned if a dozen Canadians (or Japanese or Austrians) 
were asked to name ﬁ ve fashion celebrities? Almost certainly not. 
Fashion is often unique to a country or a region (denim jeans being 
a notable exception). Chinese fashion is obviously different from 
African fashion, which differs from Brazilian fashion, and so on. 
There is no shame in being a second-level celebrity. Even if you are 
a stay-at-home celebrity, it means you ’ ve made enough of a mark 
in the world to be well known or famous among a select group of 
people elsewhere. 

90 Worldwide Perspective
 It might be useful to identify some individuals in the arts who 
are well known enough to be considered second-level celebrities. 
Googoosh (real name Faegheh Atashin) is a famous Persian and 
Iranian singer and actress. Georg Baselitz is a well-known German 
painter and sculptor. Fred Williams is an Australian painter and 
printmaker. Peter Abrahams is an award-winning South African 
novelist. So is Nigerian Chinua Achebe whose novel  Things Fall 
Apart  is required reading in many schools. Before her death in 
2010, Dame Joan Sutherland was an Australian soprano famous in 
the opera world. Manuel de Elias was a well-known Mexican com-
poser and conductor. Marwa Rakha is a famous writer, poet, and 
marketing personality from Egypt. Damien Hirst is a British artist. 
A few individuals in the arts category may be slightly better known 
that those mentioned herein: feminist writer Germaine Greer, art 
critic Robert Hughes, and award-winning authors Peter Carey and 
David Malouf, all from Australia. However, these names may be 
more recognizable to Americans than to some people in other parts 
of the world. Hughes, for example, was an art critic and writer for 
 Time  magazine; Greer ’ s writing and lectures have attracted large 
audiences, particularly in the United States (  African Writers Index 
2000 ,  Fanoos Encyclopedia n.d. ,  Linkism n.d. ,  White Hat 2009 ). 
 So what ’ s missing? Why aren ’ t these individuals ﬁ rst-level 
celebrities? The answer, of course, is that while these individuals are 
doing important work, they lack signiﬁ cant, continuing media 
exposure. Media in this case means primarily television. Perhaps 
this is a Catch-22 situation: they are not on television because 
people do not know much about them, and people do not know 
much about them because they are not on television. Thus, we 
echo previous statements in this book by noting that celebrity 
depends on high media visibility. The degree to which these indi-
viduals may or may not embody the public ’ s dreams and desires 
is unknown.  
 Science and Medicine 
 It has become obvious that not all categories in our taxonomy con-
tain worldwide celebrities. Although many people in the world 
consider science important, few have a complete understand-
ing of it, and still fewer think much about scientists as celebrities. 
There are famous people in science, of course, but, with a couple of 
exceptions, their fame does not extend much beyond the bound-
aries of the profession. The same is true of physicians and others 

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 91
in the ﬁ eld of medicine. But let ’ s look at scientists ﬁ rst, speciﬁ cally 
those who are exceptions to the rule of limited fame. 
 Stephen Hawking is a British theoretical physicist. His 1988 
book  A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang to Black Holes  is a 
long-time best seller. He has written other things, of course, and 
has appeared in movies and on television, but it is his scientiﬁ c 
work that has prompted some to call him a genius. His accom-
plishments are even more remarkable given the fact that he has 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), sometimes called Lou Gehrig ’ s 
disease. He is wheelchair-bound and speaks through a computer-
ized voice synthesizer (  WGBH 1998  ). If there is any scientist who 
can be considered a worldwide celebrity, it is Stephen Hawking. 
 On February 28, 1953, two scientists in Cambridge, England 
announced that they “had found the secret of life.” Indeed, they 
had. James Watson and Francis Crick had ﬁ gured out the structure 
of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and thus the key to life ’ s heredi-
tary information.  Time  magazine listed Watson and Crick as two 
of the 100 Most Important People of the [20th] century. There can 
be little doubt that both Watson and Crick, who died in 2004, are 
worldwide celebrities ( Time n.d. ). 
 For every Hawking, Watson, and Crick who become famous 
and get increased media exposure, there are dozens of scientists 
who work diligently without media attention. In paleontology, 
Dong Zhiming is known for leading numerous expeditions in 
his home country of China and for discovering a large number 
of dinosaurs. Argentina ’ s Jose F. Bonaparte is said to be the most 
proliﬁ c paleontologist in South America, a claim based on the 
large number of dinosaurs he discovered and named. Rinchen 
Barshold ’ s important fossil discoveries made him the most famous 
paleontologist in Mongolia. Before her death in 2008, Joan Wiffen 
of New Zealand was a respected self-taught fossil hunter (  About.
com n.d.  ) These scientists are well known, even famous, within 
the ﬁ eld of paleontology, but are essentially unknown outside the 
scientiﬁ c community. They receive little media attention and are 
not celebrities. 
 Other scientists ﬁ nd themselves in a similar situation: famous 
within the scientiﬁ c community, and, lacking media exposure, 
relatively unknown elsewhere. French developmental biologist 
Nicole Le Douarin and French geneticist Axel Kahn have signiﬁ -
cant accomplishments: the former for her work on animal nervous 
and immune systems, the latter an award winner for his work in 
genetics. Yet they are unknown to the world at large. Ireland ’ s 

92 Worldwide Perspective
Jocelyn Bell Burnell discovered (and continues to study) pulsars—
rapidly rotating neutron stars. The general public, a key factor in 
someone becoming a celebrity, knows nothing about Burnell and 
even less about neutron stars. Australian Peter Doherty won a 
Nobel Prize for his work in immunology, and fellow Australian 
Tim Flannery is recognized as a groundbreaking environmentalist. 
But we don ’ t know much about them (  Reville 2000  ,   White Hat 
2009  ). Let ’ s be clear. We are not minimizing the important work 
these scientists are doing. We are saying that the nature of their 
work makes them well known or famous among their fellow 
scientists, but their fame does not extend much beyond that. They 
lack high media visibility; they are not celebrities. 
 From time to time a relatively unknown scientist may tempo-
rarily garner headlines, usually for an important scientiﬁ c discovery 
or accomplishment. On rare occasions, a scientist is exposed for 
wrongdoing. Such was the case with South Korean scientist Hwang 
Woo-suk who was found guilty in 2009 of “embezzling from his 
stem cell research fund and illegally buying human embryos.” 
Hwang became a national hero in South Korea after he claimed to 
be the ﬁ rst to successfully clone human cells, but he partially fabri-
cated his research results. He was given a suspended sentence of 
two years. Hwang apologized for his misdeeds, but that failed to 
stop Seoul National University from ﬁ ring him from his professor-
ship ( Park 2009 ). This is, of course, not the sort of fame a scientist 
wants. His life as a celebrity in South Korea is over. 
 Let ’ s turn our attention now to the ﬁ eld of medicine. The 
relationship between patients and their physicians has always 
been a private one. Individuals who have certain illnesses or 
diseases are often uncomfortable discussing those problems with 
friends or acquaintances, but are quite willing to discuss them with 
their doctors. They know their doctors will respect their privacy 
and offer medical advice on how to deal with health issues. It is 
extremely rare for a doctor or some other medical service pro-
vider to become a celebrity based on treatment of patients alone. 
A doctor may become well known in a community or a region if 
satisﬁ ed patients recommend the physician to others. This sort of 
word-of-mouth advertising is often effective in building a doctor ’ s 
reputation for quality patient care. 
 For physicians or other individuals in the medical ﬁ eld to 
become celebrities, they must contribute to medical science in 
ways other than direct patient care. This usually means conduct-
ing research, inventing a surgical device, developing a treatment, 

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 93
discovering a disease, or in some other way contributing to the 
betterment of all patients with whom physicians might have 
contact. A few physicians achieved worldwide celebrity based 
on their work. South Africa ’ s Christiaan Barnard performed the 
ﬁ rst heart transplant; America ’ s Jonas Salk developed a polio 
vaccine. Like both Barnard and Salk, many important contribu-
tors to medical science have passed on, but their work is still in 
evidence. This is particularly true if a disease carries their name: 
Alzheimer ’ s disease is named after Alois Alzheimer, Parkinson ’ s 
disease is named for James Parkinson, Down syndrome after John 
Langdon Down, and so on. But for the most part, those who have 
made major contributions to medical science are unknown to 
the general public. For example, we all know that active people 
reduce their risk of heart disease and live longer, but how many 
of us know that the studies resulting in that principle were con-
ducted by Ralph Paffenberger? Do we know that Trinidad ’ s Lall 
Sawh is a surgeon and urologist who is well known in the Caribbean 
for his expertise in kidney transplantation? 
 Are there other ways for physicians to become well known, 
perhaps even celebrities? Yes, and it usually involves moving out-
side typical medical practice. Jack Kevorkian, known as “Doctor 
Death,” is a well-known advocate of a patient ’ s right to die and 
was convicted of assisting in the suicide of many terminal patients. 
He served a prison term but was released in 2007 due to ill health. 
Robin Cook is the author of bestselling medical novels. Deepak 
Chopra is an Indian American writer of motivational and health 
books. Other physicians have served in government, composed 
music, and become comedians or actors or athletes. Of course, 
almost none of these individuals is well known. 
 It is safe to conclude, therefore, that those in science and 
medicine have, at best, limited worldwide celebrity. They are well 
known, even famous, within their own speciﬁ c occupational 
communities. Although their contributions may speak to the 
public ’ s dreams and desires for a quality life, they remain mostly 
unknown to the general public. The primary reasons for their lack 
of worldwide visibility are the complex nature of their work and 
the lack of high media visibility. 
 Academia 
 It is fair to say that most people believe education is important. 
Countries all over the world invest millions of dollars annually 

94 Worldwide Perspective
in educating both the young and the old. Parents monitor the 
academic performance of their children, encouraging them to do 
well, and, perhaps, even helping them with homework. Getting 
a secondary school education is a must in most cultures, and 
a college degree is a goal worthy of much individual sacriﬁ ce. 
Although education is held in fairly high esteem worldwide, 
those who provide the instruction that comprises a large part 
of that education are not. Commonly referred to as  the academy 
or  academia , teachers, administrators, and other school ofﬁ cials—in 
elementary, secondary, and higher education—are under con-
stant scrutiny and criticism. Truth be told, the academic world 
“is marked by venality, pretension, irresponsibility, and risible 
claims” (  Fish 2009  ). Guess who wrote the quoted part of the 
last sentence? If you said “an academic,” you are correct. Let ’ s 
put that quote in more familiar words. The academic world is 
open to corruption, ﬁ lled with overly ambitious workers (many 
of whom are untrustworthy), and makes laughable claims about 
the sig niﬁ cance of its work. Although the previous sentence is 
not a precise paraphrase of the quotation in question, it captures 
its spirit. The academy is an insular world: narrow, limited, and 
self-absorbed. While not everyone feels that way about academia, 
many people do, and they are not shy about speaking up. There 
is a general notion that academics have cushy jobs, earn large 
salaries, work in “ivory towers” and are thus out of touch with 
reality, argue over meaningless theories, and, worst of all, have 
tenure that gives them lifetime job security. As a result of this wide-
spread opinion of those in the academy, there are no worldwide 
academic celebrities. Like the physicians described previously, 
public school teachers and university professors may be well 
known, but their fame does not extend beyond the academy. 
   Rodden (1998)   appears to disagree with that assessment, not-
ing that “celebrity is a new and important phenomenon in the 
academy: signiﬁ cant changes have indeed occurred in the acad-
emy since the 1960s” (171). Rodden ’ s view is more than a decade 
old; nevertheless, his notion that universities operate more as 
businesses than as “pastoral or utopian retreats” has merit; so 
does his observation that the absent-minded professor has been 
replaced by the career-minded professional. Still, regardless of the 
changes in the academy over the last dozen years or so, the celeb-
rity scholars he identiﬁ es are almost all from American universi-
ties, thereby reinforcing our notion that their fame does not extend 
into the world much beyond the academy. Even if we accept the 

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 95
idea that there are academic celebrities, an idea we strongly dis-
pute, it is not the same sort of celebrity garnered by those in, say, 
entertainment. Academic celebrities enjoy privacy, do not have to 
dodge the paparazzi, and need not worry about having their latest 
exploits exposed on a syndicated television “entertainment-news” 
program. Neither will they grace the cover of a pop-culture, celeb-
rity magazine. It would be unfair, however, to say that academ-
ics never make the news. One did in the summer of 2009. African 
American scholar Henry Louis Gates Jr., a professor at Harvard, 
was arrested at his home by police investigating a possible break-in. 
Gates charged police with racial proﬁ ling; they charged him with 
disorderly conduct. An investigation revealed that it was all just 
a misunderstanding, and apologies were offered all around. The 
incident was a nightly feature on American newscasts for several 
days, but was not of much concern to people elsewhere in the 
world. 
 It might be useful to identify a few of the academy ’ s high-
proﬁ le scholars. Australia ’ s Peter Singer, a professor of bioethics 
at Princeton University, is known for favoring the rationing of 
health care; Harold Bloom, a faculty member at Yale University, 
has made contributions to literary criticism; Princeton ’ s Cornel 
West has been a champion of racial justice; Richard Dawkins, 
retired from the University of Oxford in England, is a writer well 
known for books critical of organized religion; David Lodge, 
retired from England ’ s University of Birmingham, writes novels 
about academic life. Frenchmen Michel Foucault, Jean Baudrillard, 
and Jacques Derrida, all postmodernists, were popular in the 
academy beyond their home country, but all three are dead. Uni-
versities, however, are willing to accept outsiders, that is, those 
who are not trained academics, if they contribute signiﬁ cantly to 
the school ’ s reputation. For example, former Mexican president 
Ernesto Zedillo directs a research center at Yale University. Jose 
Maria Aznar, former prime minister of Spain, is a distinguished 
scholar at Georgetown University. Salman Rushdie, a native of 
India who is known for his novels and essays, is on the faculty of 
Emory University. 
 The conclusion to be drawn about academic celebrities is 
rather obvious. Some scholars are well known, even famous, in the 
academy for their work. Only a few of them are known in countries 
other than their own. A college student in Hong Kong might be 
assigned one of Professor Bloom ’ s books on William Shakespeare, 
but that does not make the gifted professor a celebrity. It simply 

96 Worldwide Perspective
makes him required reading. Academics are mostly unknown to 
the world at large; they lack high media visibility. It is fair to say 
that not many members of the public dream about becoming a 
teacher, professor, or philosopher. Therefore, there are no world-
wide academic celebrities.  
 Business 
 One of the surest ways to become famous in the business world 
is to make lots of money. At the very least, you ’ d be identiﬁ ed as 
a billionaire in  Forbes  magazine and held in awe by most of the 
people in your home country; you would probably be a celebrity 
there. Americans will recognize the names of successful celeb-
rity businessmen and women who have made important contri-
butions to life and commerce in the United States and in the 
world: Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, Steve Jobs, Ralph Lauren, T. Boone 
Pickens, Martha Stewart, Steve Wynn, and Donald Trump. 
 There are, of course, others in the business world who have 
been just as successful as the Americans, but maybe not quite as 
well known. Richard Branson is a famous British entrepreneur and 
founder of the Virgin brand of products and services, among which 
are Virgin Records and Virgin Atlantic airlines. Branson owns a 
private island in the British Virgin Islands and has attracted con-
siderable media attention for his publicity stunts. Giorgio Armani 
is a famous Italian businessman and fashion designer. Clothing 
designed by Armani is much in demand and being able to afford 
it signals one ’ s good taste and high economic status. Both Branson 
and Armani are well known outside their own countries, but 
would not be considered celebrities in some others, particularly 
third-world countries where poor economic conditions make the 
services and products offered by the two men irrelevant. 
 A host of other successful businessmen are not as familiar 
to Americans, but there is little doubt they have celebrity status, 
not only in the business world, but also in their home geographic 
regions. Sergey Brin is a Russian Internet entrepreneur and com-
puter scientist known for co-founding the Google search engine. 
Fellow Russian Roman Abramovich made his fortune in oil and 
is owner of the English football team Chelsea. Saudi Arabian real 
estate and stock mogul Alwaleed Bin Talal is a member of the Saudi 
Royal Family. Amancio Ortega of Spain is said to be that country ’ s 
richest man, having made his fortune in fashion. China ’ s Li Ka 
Shing, a billionaire businessman and philanthropist, is the richest 

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 97
man in East Asia. Mexico ’ s communications and investment king 
Carlos Slim Helu is a billionaire. So is Sweden ’ s Ingvar Kamprad, 
founder of the IKEA furniture brand. Taiwan ’ s Jerry Yang is 
co-founder of Yahoo! 
 Billionaires are obviously famous among their fellow busi-
nessmen and well known enough to be considered celebrities 
in some parts of the world, particularly because many members 
of the general public dream of being rich and powerful. Money 
often attracts media attention. There appears to be a correlation 
between the amount of money you have and the degree to which 
you are a celebrity. This is bad news for your hometown realtor 
who struggles daily to sell houses, and is important to you if you 
are in the market for a new home, but is unlikely to achieve the 
recognition that Japan ’ s Akira Mori, a billionaire real estate and 
hotel tycoon, has achieved. In short, money changes everything! 
 Religion 
 Can religious leaders be celebrities? Does the secular idea of 
celebrity conﬂ ict with the mission of spreading God ’ s word 
and encouraging believers to lead more spiritual lives? Before 
answering these questions, we should remember that religion is a 
sensitive topic worldwide. Not everyone believes in God or a 
supreme being. Nevertheless, there may be as many as 10,000 
different religions worldwide. Wars have been fought because of 
religious differences. These days, when someone brings up reli-
gion at a social or political gathering, tempers usually ﬂ are. There 
is often tacit agreement among friends or co-workers never to 
discuss religion at a party, at work, or during lunch. One ’ s belief 
system is considered highly personal and few people want to 
argue the particular aspects of their religion with someone who 
holds different beliefs, particularly if the individual is disinclined 
to change, but quite willing to engage in a lengthy argument. Still, 
religion and celebrity may not be incompatible. 
 The degree to which religious leaders may become celebri-
ties depends to a large extent on the general public. For present 
purposes, we can place members of the public in one of four 
categories: the believers, the atheists, the agnostics, and the 
uninformed. This typology is important because individuals in 
each category have a different view of religious leaders and that 
view will determine whether a religious leader can be deemed 
a celebrity. Because atheists do not believe in a supreme being, 

98 Worldwide Perspective
they are unlikely to care much about anything relating to religion. 
Believers, on the other hand, care a great deal about religion and 
hold many religious leaders in high esteem. Agnostics believe 
that the existence of a deity is unknown and, moreover, unknow-
able. Thus, they have no opinion about religious matters. The 
uninformed, as the name implies, simply lack information about 
religion and cannot, therefore, have a valid opinion about any 
religious leader or issue. We can collapse the atheists, the agnos-
tics, and the uninformed into a single category: the indifferent. In 
other words, religion does not matter one way or the other to this 
group. They ’ ll be of no help in determining whether a religious 
leader is a celebrity. 
 Time now to answer the two questions posed at the begin-
ning of this section. Can religious leaders be celebrities? Yes, they 
can, but mostly among the believers. Does the idea of celebrity 
conﬂ ict with the mission of religion? No, not if celebrity assists in 
bringing a spiritual message to the world. There are probably only 
three worldwide religious celebrities: Pope Benedict XVI, the Dalai 
Lama, and Billy Graham. There are other religious leaders who 
are well known and famous to a lesser degree, but among believers, 
only three ﬁ t all six celebrity characteristics. Bear in mind that this 
overall assessment is based on the opinions of a section of the 
general public: the believers. Still, each of the three has captured 
the interest and attention of many other people worldwide. They 
work in the public sphere, have accomplishments of importance, 
are well known or famous, seek celebrity as a means to spread-
ing the gospel, are highly visible in the media, and embody the 
dreams and desires of believers. 
 The Dalai Lama was brieﬂ y mentioned in   Chapter 1  . The 
Tibetan spiritual leader travels widely, appears regularly at con-
ferences and religious gatherings worldwide, works for political 
change in his country, is frequently in the news, and has received 
awards for his work promoting a more spiritual life. Although he 
might be a little uncomfortable with being called a celebrity, he 
would likely acknowledge that being one enables him to bring his 
message of compassion, tolerance, self-discipline, and forgiveness 
to the attention of more people than might otherwise be possible. 
 As the head of the Roman Catholic Church, Pope Benedict 
XVI is a celebrity, not only to the hundreds of millions of Catholics 
in the world, but also to many Protestants. Many tourists visiting 
Rome make their way to the Vatican, hoping to catch a glimpse 
of the pope. He conducts public worship services regularly, travels 

A Look at the Worldwide Celebrity Taxonomy 99
the world with his spiritual message, and is a media favorite. The 
pope ’ s role in world affairs may have been enhanced by the 
ministry of Benedict ’ s predecessor, John Paul II, a man with an 
engaging personality who was much admired the world over. 
Benedict is a little less effusive than John Paul was, but still a 
major inﬂ uence in religious matters ( Mansﬁ eld 2005 ). 
 American evangelist Billy Graham is a celebrity, chieﬂ y 
because his ministry conducted more than 376 crusades world-
wide between 1947 and 1996. Graham preached to millions during 
that time. He is the author of two dozen books and has advised 
and counseled many American presidents (  Graham 1997  ). Graham 
is often mentioned as the best-known spiritual leader in America, 
although he retired a number of years ago. 
 There are, of course, other well-known religious leaders whose 
work is recognized in countries other than their own, but who lack 
the high media visibility of the three leaders mentioned here. 
Desmond Tutu, the retired South African Archbishop of Cape 
Town, has a long, distinguished history of religious accomplish-
ments. Teacher, priest, bishop, and then archbishop, Tutu dedi-
cated his life to ending apartheid; moreover, he worked on behalf 
“of all the poor and oppressed wherever they might be” (  Gish 
2004  , xii). A man with a sparkling wit and outgoing personality, he 
was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984. Even in retirement, he 
continues to work for freedom and justice for all. 
 Rowan Williams was ofﬁ cially conﬁ rmed as the 104th Arch-
bishop of Canterbury in London in December 2002. As head 
of the Church of England, he has spoken out on both religious 
and political issues. Politically, he opposed the wars in Iraq and 
Afghanistan; socially, he is “opposed to abortion and believes 
consumerism exploits, corrupts, and causes a premature sexuali-
sation of children” ( BBC 2002 ). 
 As noted earlier, religion is a sensitive and controver-
sial subject. Nevertheless, not all religious leaders are widely 
respected. Take, for example, televangelist and faith healer Benny 
Hinn. Considered a prophet by some, Hinn travels worldwide 
preaching to thousands who attend his crusades hoping to be 
healed. However, several investigations revealed that not even 
one healing has been objectively proved. “Instead, people appar-
ently  feel  ‘healed,’ therefore they  are  ‘healed’ (emphasis added).” 
The media have examined his ministry and concluded that he 
is manipulating the faithful for his personal ﬁ nancial gain. His 
lifestyle is lavish ($1,000 a night presidential hotel suites; a house 

100 Worldwide Perspective
with seven bedrooms and eight baths; several BMWs). Still, his 
followers don ’ t seem to mind that he spends a lot of money. One 
of the faithful noted, “It takes money to be on TV and to do 
crusades. Why is everyone hung up on money? The streets of 
heaven are paved with gold” (  Ross 2002  ).    
 Summary 
 Electronic technology—particularly computers, the Internet, 
and cell phones—has made the world a global village. We have 
almost instantaneous access to information about other people 
and events worldwide. The famous and well known are no longer 
bound by the borders of their home countries; some have become 
worldwide celebrities. Some individuals in the entertainment 
ﬁ eld have become famous worldwide for promoting charitable 
projects. A few entertainers have run for public ofﬁ ce; others have 
relocated to the United States in order to improve their visibility. 
Some in the entertainment ﬁ eld are content to be celebrities in 
their home countries only. In the area of politics and government, 
there are celebrities, but many of these are heads of state or other 
important governmental ofﬁ cials whose work automatically puts 
them at the center of attention. In addition, a few have interesting 
lifestyles, one of the factors inﬂ uencing celebrity. The media pro-
vide those in entertainment, government, and politics with plenty 
of exposure and celebrity status is often the result. 
 Individuals in the arts, science and medicine, and education 
all share a common status: limited celebrity in their own areas 
of work. If you are an artist, a scientist, a physician, or a professor, 
you may be well known, even a celebrity, within your own ﬁ eld. 
It is extremely difﬁ cult to become known worldwide unless 
you receive a considerable amount of media attention for some 
major invention or accomplishment. Most individuals in these 
categories receive little media attention and are thus typically 
not celebrities. 
 In business and religion, however, things are a bit differ-
ent. There are worldwide celebrities in these ﬁ elds. Business is 
an important enterprise worldwide. As a result, those who have 
become successful business persons (especially those who make a 
great deal of money), are celebrities and more than a few are known 
beyond the business world. Religious leaders are, of course, well 
known or famous among their faithful believers, but only three 

References 101
currently have worldwide celebrity standing. The media give both 
business and religion considerable exposure. 
 Worldwide celebrities must work in the public sphere, have 
accomplishments of importance and interest, be well known or 
famous, seek celebrity status, be highly visible in the media, and 
embody the dreams and desires of the public. Many individuals 
meet some of these requirements; a smaller number meet them 
all. If one were to select the requirement that most distinguishes a 
celebrity from an almost-celebrity it would be this one: signiﬁ cant 
media exposure. 
 References 
 A&E Television Networks. 2006. “Fidel Castro.” [Online information; 
retrieved 10/31/09.]  http://www.biography.com/hispanic-heritage/
ﬁ del-castro.jsp . 
 About.com . n.d. “Famous paleontologists, dinosaur scientists, and fossil 
hunters.” [Online information; retrieved 10/25/09.]  http://dinosaurs.
about.com/od/famouspaleontologists . 
 “African writers index.” 2000. [Online information; retrieved 
10/25/09.]  http://www.geocities.com/africanwriters/AuthorsA.
html?200925 .  
 BBC. 2002. “Dr. Rowan Williams.” [Online article; retrieved 
11/11/09.]  http://www.bbc.co.uk/religions/Christianity/people/
rowanwilliams_l.shtml . 
 BBC News. 2008. “Mandelas ’ s life and times.” [Online information; 
retrieved 10/31/09.]  http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/1454208.
stm?ad=1 . 
 BBC News. 2009a. “Proﬁ le: Nicholas Sarkozy.” [Online information; 
retrieved 10/31/09.]  http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/3673102.
stm?ad=1  .   
 BBC News. 2009b. “Proﬁ le: Silvio Berlusconi.” [Online information; 
retrieved 10/31/09.]  http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/3034600.
stm?ad=1 . 
 Brown, William J., and Benson P. Fraser. 2008. “Global identiﬁ cation 
with celebrity heroes.” In  Heroes in a global world , eds. Susan J. Drucker 
and Gary Gumpert. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press, 45–65. 
 Daniel, Frank Jack. 2009. “Venezuela ’ s Chavez calls Obama ‘ignora-
mus’.” [Online article; retrieved 10/31/09.]  http://www.reuters.com/
article/topNews/idUSTRE52L19G20090322?sp=true . 

102 Worldwide Perspective
 Drezner, Daniel W. 2007. “Should celebrities set the global agenda?”  Los 
Angeles Times , December 30. 
 Fanoos Encyclopedia. n.d. “Middle East celebrity.” [Online information; 
retrieved 10/25/09.]  http://www.fanoos.com/encyclopedia/
middleeastcelebrity . 
 Fish, Stanley. 2009. “Academics under siege.” [Online article; retrieved 
11/04/09.]  http://ﬁ sh.blogs.nytimes.com/2009/10/19/academics-
under-siege .  
 Gish, Steven D. 2004.  Desmond Tutu: A biography. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press. 
 Graham, Billy. 1997.  Just as I am . San Francisco: Harper/Zondervan. 
 Kappelman, Todd. 2001. “Marshall McLuhan: The medium is the
message.” [Online article; retrieved 10/18/09.]  http://www.leaderu.
com/orgs/probe/docs/Mcluhan.html . 
 Klein, Joe. 2009. “Hillary ’ s moment.”  Time , November 18, 24–33. 
 Linkism. n.d. “Contemporary art.” [Online information; retrieved 
10/25/09.]  http://www.linkism.com/visual_artists/famous-artists/
contemporary/index/htm . 
 Mansﬁ eld, Stephen. 2005.  Pope Benedict XVI: His life and mission. New 
York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin. 
 McCombs, Maxwell E., and Donald L. Shaw. 1972. “The agenda-setting 
function of the mass media.”  Public Opinion Quarterly , 36, 176–187. 
 Moores, Pamela M. 1991. “Celebrities in politics: Simone Signoret and 
Yves Montand.” In  Political culture in France and Germany , ed. John Gaffney 
and Eva Kolinsky. New York: Routledge. 
 Park, Ju-Min. 2009. “Disgraced cloning scientists Hwang Woo-suk 
guilty of embezzlement.” [Online article; retrieved 11/01/09.]  http://
www.latimes.com/news/nationworld/la-fg-clone27-2009oct . 
 Pearson Education. 2007. “Hugo Chavez.” [Online article; retrieved 
10/31/09.]  http://www.infoplease.com/biography/var/hugochavez.
html . 
 Reville, William. 2000. “Ireland ’ s scientiﬁ c heritage.”  The Irish Times , 
December 14. 
 Rodden, John. 1998. “The scholar gypsies: Academic celebrity in 
America.” [Online article; retrieved 11/03/09.]  http://www.mmisi.org/
ma/40_02/rodden.pdf . 
 Rodman, George. 2006.  Mass media in a changing world . New York: 
McGraw Hill. 
 Ross, Rick. 2002. “Benny Hinn is raking it in.” [Online article; retrieved 
11/11/09.]  http://www.cultnews.com/archives/000189.html . 

References 103
 Sheridan, Jennifer. 2009. “Celebrities, yes, but politics? Don ’ t ask.” 
[Online article; retrieved 10/22/09.]  http://www.smh.com.au/
national/celebrities-yes-but-politics-dont-ask-200090919-fw4d.html . 
 Sullivan, Kevin. 2005. “Chavez casts himself as the anti-Bush.” [Online 
article; retrieved 10/31/09.]  http://www.washingtonpost.com/ac2/
wp-dyn/A35193-2005MAR14 . 
 Time . n.d. “The Time 100.” [Online information; retrieved 11/03/09.] 
 http://www.time.com/time/time100/scientist/proﬁ le/watsoncrick.
html . 
 Velasquez, Bertha. 2008. “Celebrities and their politics.” [Online 
article; retrieved 10/22/09.]  http://www.lavozcolorado.com/news.
php?nid=2944&page0 . 
 Viren, Lasse. n.d. [Online information; retrieved 10/22/09].  http://
222.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/629818/Lasse-Viren and  http://
www.spiritus-temporis.com/lasse-viren . 
 West, Darrell M. 2007. “Celebrity, politics, political celebrities.” 
[Online article; retrieved 10/22/09.]  http://www.britannica.com/
blogs/2007/08/celebrity-politics-political-celebrities . 
 WGBH. 1998. “Stephen Hawking.” [Online information; retrieved 
11/13/09.]  http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/aso/databank/entries/
bphawk.html . 
 White Hat. 2009. “The white hat guide to 200 signiﬁ cant Australians.” 
[Online information; retrieved 10/25/09.]  http://www.whitehat.com.
au/australia/people/People200.asp . 
 Zechowski, Sharon, n.d. “McLuhan, Marshall.” [Online information; 
retrieved 10/18/09.]  http://www.museum.tv/archives/etv/M/htm/
mcluhanmars . 


105
  4 
 Chronology 
 H
istorical records do not tell us when the term  celebrity 
was ﬁ rst used. We see the word and its cognates—
  celebration ,  celebrated ,  famous , and  well known—  in English 
literature as early as the 16th century. It may have been used 
in oral communi cation earlier than that. Determining a precise 
date for the widespread use of the term is not possible. If we 
accept   Schickel ’ s (1985)   notion that prior to the beginning of 
the 20th century there was no such thing as celebrity, then ﬁ xing 
a precise date for the beginning of celebrity is easy; it ’ s 1900. In 
a way, Schickel has a point. Celebrity depends on media expo-
sure and media did not become highly developed until the 20th 
century. However, given the fact that some form of media has 
been around since the early civilizations, we prefer   Ponce de 
Leon ’ s (2002) idea that celebrity is fame modernized. Thus, any 
chronology of events relating to celebrity—such as the one this 
chapter provides—must take into account the historical, political, 
cultural, and social conditions resulting in improved communica-
tion and in the modernization of life in each historical period. 
You will, therefore, ﬁ nd information in the chronology detailing a 
variety of events for a given time period with particular emphasis, 
of course, on media. 
 Readers today are not particularly inclined to remember 
historical dates and events much beyond the birthdays and anni-
versaries of relatives and friends. Many adults remember being 
required to memorize dates, names, and other facts for exams 
they took as youngsters in school. Most of them hated memoriz-
ing names and dates. It was frustrating and seemed to make little 
sense. The younger generation is growing up with a similar 

106 Chronology
distaste for knowing dates and events. Want to know when 
and where World War II started? No problem, just look it up on 
the Internet. Today, electronic technology puts us in touch with 
all sorts of information, most of it at our ﬁ ngertips and avail-
able quickly. We have access to a great deal of information, but 
much of it is disorganized and offered with little or no context. 
Internet search engines fail to present information in any logical 
fashion. A single piece of online information rarely answers all 
one ’ s questions. Moreover, it is not often placed in context with 
other, similar pieces of information. It is very much like dump-
ing 1,000 jigsaw puzzle pieces on a table, picking up one or two, 
and trying to determine what picture is on the puzzle. In order 
to understand completely any person, event, situation, or phe-
nomenon, we need context, that is, a framework allowing us to 
see our subject of interest and its relationship with interrelated 
subjects and conditions. 
 Celebrity is not a difﬁ cult concept to grasp, but our under-
standing of it can be enhanced by seeing the framework in which 
it developed. It did not spring full blown into the 21st century. 
Its development depended on many things, some directly 
and others indirectly important to its growth. This chapter 
provides a chronology of events, particularly the development 
of communi cation and media. Because celebrity is fame modern-
ized, one must see it in its proper context. Media exposure is critical 
to modern-day celebrity. 
 BCE (Before the Common Era, dates approximate) 
 3500 
 Date of earliest known writings in Mesopotamia. A com-
plex set of symbols, sometimes called pictograms, is 
developed. Messages are inscribed on clay tablets. 
Communication is primitive; almost no one is widely 
known.
 2600 
 Egyptian scribes use hieroglyphics . Priests use these 
picture words and inscribe them on the walls of 
Egyptian tombs and on pottery. They also use a cur-
sive form of hieroglyphics involving pictograms and 
consonants. However, most Egyptians cannot read 
and thus pay little attention to the writing. Some 
Egyptian rulers are known by the general public but 
are not considered famous.

Chronology 107
 2200 
 Papyrus becomes popular . The papyrus reed is plentiful 
on the banks of the Nile. Workers split the reeds into 
thin strips, place them close together in cross-rows, 
pound them into smooth sheets, and dry them in the 
sun. Scribes write on these sheets, using ink made from 
berries or soot. Daily life is difﬁ cult. People have little 
time to think about affairs other than their own. There 
are no celebrities and few well-known individuals.
 800 
 Greeks improve the Phoenician alphabet, adding vowels . As 
literacy improves, the Greeks use papyrus, together 
with a simpliﬁ ed alphabet designed to better represent 
speech, and contribute to art and literature. The library 
at Alexandria has about 700,000 papyrus scrolls. The 
Greeks enjoy attending plays and political gatherings 
and understand the importance of oral communication. 
Inﬂ uential writers, politicians, and military ﬁ gures are 
well known among members of the general public.
 200 
 Romans use parchment and vellum . Made from treated 
animal skins, these writing surfaces are popular 
among Roman writers. Many Roman citizens cannot 
read and thus hear ofﬁ cial news and proclamations 
read aloud to them in public places. Romans share 
information with others, including travelers from 
other parts of the world. Major political and military 
ﬁ gures are well known, some of them famous for 
their accomplishments.
 105 
 Chinese invent paper . Ts ’ ai Lun, a government employee, 
mixes tree bark, hemp, and rags to make a smooth writ-
ing surface. It is cheaper to make than papyrus or parch-
ment but is not as durable. Nevertheless, paper is not 
widely used in Western culture until the 13th century.
 400 
 Literacy advances . Rome has more than 20 libraries 
containing about 20,000 scrolls each. Private schools 
are available for those who can afford them. Travel is 
easier and information sharing is common. The num-
ber of well-known writers, politicians, and others in 
public life increases. Some information is available on 
what is happening elsewhere in the world.
 CE (Common Era, most dates approximate) 

108 Chronology
 600 
 Manuscript culture develops . The number of books 
(papyrus scrolls) increases and literacy continues to 
improve. The Middle Ages era begins. Monks and other 
religious scribes produce illuminated manuscripts 
containing colorful designs on each page. Religion con-
tinues to be a dominant inﬂ uence in the lives of many. 
The world expands beyond the Roman Empire. There is 
much political and social activity in Europe. Important 
contributions are made to art, music, and literature. It is 
easier for members of the public to become acquainted 
with important, inﬂ uential individuals. Many people 
are considered to be famous or well known.
 1453 
 Printing press invented.  Using an old wine press, 
Johannes Gutenberg develops the printing press during 
the Renaissance era. Movable metal type, together with 
paper that has made its way west from China, allows 
Gutenberg to mass produce printed material. Although 
many Europeans cannot read, the printing press makes 
Europe a more literate society. The Bible is printed in 
several languages. Works of literature and philosophy 
are widely available. The word  famous  is used occa-
sionally in literature. The general public, having seen, 
heard, or read about them, consider many of those in 
public life well known or famous. Oral communication 
is still a primary means of information exchange.
 1632 
 London coffeehouses become communication centers . The 
importance of oral communication is evident as citizens 
gather to share information and ideas. In addition to art 
and literature, coffee drinkers talk about science and 
philosophy. The terms  celebration  and  celebrity  appear in 
some works of literature. In America, the New England 
colonies struggle to establish life in the new world. The 
ﬁ rst American newspaper is published in 1690. Several 
colonists are well known; only a few are famous.
 1750 
 The Enlightenment is in full bloom . The world is 
expanding and the human spirit is awake! Writers, 
philosophers, musicians, artists, religious leaders, and 
politicians from many countries contribute to both 
their individual cultures and to worldwide culture. 
This rich intellectual and social environment makes it 
easier for individuals to become well known or famous.

Chronology 109
A few are on the verge of celebrity. In the colonies, the 
Revolutionary Era is poised to begin. The Revo-
lutionary War makes many colonists well known, 
parti cularly those in government and the military. 
Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, and George 
Washington, along with others, become famous for 
their roles in establishing the United States as a nation.
 1850 
 Magazines and newspapers prosper in America. After a 
modest start at the beginning of the 19th century, print 
media become inﬂ uential.  The Saturday Evening Post is 
a popular magazine and has nationwide distribution. 
Engravings and other illustrations are added to maga-
zines. Newspaper circulation increases. Early experi-
ments begin in what will become the radio and music 
industries. The public is aware of signiﬁ cant news 
events. Individuals in government appear to be well 
known, but a growing literary culture earns recog-
nition; the works of Nathaniel Hawthorne, Edgar 
Allan Poe, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry David 
Thoreau are widely read.
 1861–1865 
 War years.  The Civil War enables many in govern-
ment and the military to become well known. Some 
military leaders are famous for their tactics or perfor-
mance on the battleﬁ eld. Generals William T. Sherman, 
Robert E. Lee, and Ulysses S. Grant are widely recog-
nized for their roles in the war. Writers and artists are 
also at work during these years, but the country ’ s 
attention is focused on the war.
 1900 
 Media continue to grow.  By the time the 20th century 
begins, media seem to be everywhere in life. News-
papers suffer a bit from the effects of yellow journal-
ism—a period of wild, sensational stories, perhaps a 
forerunner of some of today ’ s celebrity publications. 
Paperback books are widely available. Many homes 
have phonographs. City dwellers see ﬁ lms in Nick-
elodeons. The public becomes more knowledgeable 
about important individuals in politics and enter-
tainment. The Industrial Revolution brings the leaders 
of business and industry to the public ’ s attention. 
John D. Rockefeller and J. P. Morgan become well 
known for their work in the oil and steel industries.

110 Chronology
Alexander Graham Bell invents the telephone and 
Henry Ford establishes assembly line production of 
automobiles. The Wright Brothers test the ﬁ rst air-
plane. Because media are fairly robust and report 
every new development in the country, Rockefeller, 
Ford, and the others are celebrities.
 1920 
 More media.  With World War I over, Americans hope 
for a period of normalcy. Book clubs begin.  Ladies 
Home Journal ,  Time ,  Life , and  Reader ’ s Digest  are popular 
magazines. Radio is a full-time mass medium. The 
ﬁ rst experimental television signal is transmitted. 
Movies now have a sound track. For some individuals 
in public life or in the news, the growth of media 
during these years signals an upcoming transition; 
more well-known or famous individuals will soon 
become celebrities.
 1930 
 More celebrities.  Celebrity expands beyond govern-
ment, business, and literature to include individuals 
in other areas of life. Baseball ’ s Babe Ruth estab-
lishes the single-season home run record; Ty Cobb 
and Rogers Hornsby establish baseball records of 
their own. Major sports ﬁ gures are well known and 
famous enough to be celebrities. Even those on the 
wrong side of the law become celebrities; Al Capone, 
a Chicago gang leader and racketeer, gains celebrity 
status. John Dillinger and Bonnie and Clyde are also 
celebrities.
 1950 
 Media become more organized and inﬂ uential . At 
mid-century, media have an important place in 
American life. The airwaves buzz with radio and 
television signals. The public knows about domes-
tic and foreign political affairs, listens to music on 
vinyl discs, reads books, attends movies in theaters, 
reads magazines and newspapers, and—if they can 
afford a set—watches television. Color television is 
just a few years away. Well-known and famous indi-
viduals are celebrities because they beneﬁ t from 
regular media exposure. Celebrities can be found 
in politics, government, business, industry, sports, 
and entertainment.

Chronology 111
 1960 
 The number of celebrities increases as media use increases. 
Media are powerful forces in American life. Thou-
sands of books are published annually. Newspapers 
beneﬁ t from wide circulation and report interesting, 
important world and national events. Radio ’ s popu-
larity increases with the coming of the Top 40 format 
and FM. Popular music is available on vinyl discs or 
on cassette tapes. Cable television systems eliminate 
the need for an outside antenna. Some television 
signals are relayed by satellite. Research begins for 
the Internet. The public becomes well acquainted with 
radio, television, and movie personalities as well as 
politicians and others in public life by reading about 
them in newspapers or magazines, hearing them on 
radio, or seeing them on television or in ﬁ lms. Indi-
viduals who seek and receive regular media exposure 
for their accomplishments are celebrities.
 1970 
 Print media begin to lose audience; celebrity depends to a 
large degree on exposure in electronic media . Newspapers 
are steady, but general interest magazines ( Life, Look ) 
decline and eventually disappear. However, magazines 
designed to reach a “niche” audience, that is, an audi-
ence with special interest in a speciﬁ c subject, remain 
successful.  People  magazine begins publication. With 
no commercial messages, National Public Radio (NPR) 
brings news and special features to its radio audience. 
Situation comedies are popular on television. Elec-
tronic mail (e-mail) and the microprocessor develop, 
adding important components to a young Internet. 
Many individuals in public life are celebrities. It is, in 
fact, rather easy to be a celebrity. One simply works 
in the public sphere, has a signiﬁ cant accomplishment 
or two, captures the imagination of the public, and 
appears regularly somewhere in the media (usually on 
radio or television, or in the movies).
 1980 
 New developments . The  Columbus Dispatch becomes 
the ﬁ rst online newspaper. Traditional print infor-
mation sources seem less important to the public than 
the new electronic media. VHS videocassettes mark 
a major transformation in movies and video. Video 
cassette recorders (VCRs) are available for home use.

112 Chronology
Cable television is increasingly popular. Fiber optic 
cable improves transmission of information on the 
Internet. These technological advances increase 
the public ’ s ability to access information and enter-
tainment in their homes. Most media personalities 
are celebrities; many high-proﬁ le individuals from 
business and government are also celebrities.
 1990 
 More progress.  The typical American home has ﬁ ve 
radio sets and access to more than 30 cable television 
channels. Television hits include  Seinfeld  and  Law and 
Order . Talk radio becomes the most popular radio for-
mat.  Entertainment Weekly  magazine begins publica-
tion.  Dances with Wolves, Pretty Woman, and  GoodFellas 
draw well in theaters. Photoshop becomes available 
for computers, enabling users to manipulate images. 
Celebrity grows; hundreds of personalities from enter-
tainment and politics, as well as a smattering from 
other ﬁ elds, are held in high esteem by Americans.
 1995 
 A rich media environment enhances celebrity status. 
Although traditional print newspapers begin to 
falter, other media capture the attention of Americans. 
Multiplex theaters provide several different movies in 
one location. Web browsers make it easy to navigate 
the Internet. Amazon.com begins online shopping. 
Television service is available by direct broadcast 
satellite (DBS). Jerry Springer, Jenny Jones, and 
Maury Povich host tabloid television talk shows. 
CNN becomes the most popular cable television 
news channel, largely due to its coverage of the Gulf 
War in 1991.  Comedy Central ,  SciFi Channel ,  Cartoon 
Network , and  Court TV  are added to cable television 
systems. More than 65 million personal computers 
are in use, about 2 million of them connected to the 
Internet. The World Wide Web is available for gen-
eral use. Compact disc music sales increase; cassette 
music tapes decline. More than 150 newspapers 
offer news content online.  Schindler ’ s List ,  Sleepless 
in Seattle ,  Forrest Gump, The Lion King, Braveheart, 
and  Pulp Fiction  entertain moviegoers. Television 
hits include  NYPD Blue, X-Files, Friends,  and  ER. The 
video game industry earns about $3 billion. Although 
no one is counting, there may be a thousand celebrities.

Chronology 113
In the minds of many members of the public, 
individuals become celebrities by appearing in one 
movie, or having one hit record, or starring in one 
television show. It doesn ’ t take a record of accom-
plishments; just one will do.
 2000 
 Internet use increases; celebrity becomes commonplace. 
At the beginning of the 21st century, the shift from 
traditional to new media is well underway. Some news-
papers have closed; others publish only online 
editions. Network evening newscasts begin to lose 
audience. One-third of Americans use the Internet 
regularly. America Online (AOL) reports 15 million 
subscribers. Internet users can access more than 800 
million Web sites. Some analog formats are replaced 
by digital. Digital video discs (DVDs) enable Americans 
to view movies at home on DVD players that offer 
better picture and sound quality than movies on 
VHS cassette tapes. MP3 players are popular with 
music lovers. The video game industry continues to 
grow in popularity and in revenue. Many Americans 
have cell phones. Lance Armstrong wins his second 
Tour de France race. Vladimir Putin is elected pres-
ident of Russia. Author J. K. Rowling releases her 
fourth Harry Potter book. Winners of FOX ’ s  Who 
Wants to Marry a Millionaire —Darva Conger and 
Rick Rockwell—fail as a married couple. Rapper 
Eminem is arrested twice on weapons charges but 
has the #1 album on music charts. Because the public 
has access to so much media content, the celebrity 
label is quickly applied to most individuals who 
appear in movies, on television, in the news, or on 
the Internet.
 2001 
Media cover the terrorist attacks; celebrity exposure 
increases. George W. Bush is sworn in as the 43rd 
president. Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh 
is executed. Slugger Barry Bonds becomes the 
single-season home run champion with 73 homers. 
Sean Combs, also known as Puff Daddy, is acquit-
ted of weapons and bribery charges and changes 
his name to P. Diddy. Hollywood stars Tom Cruise 
and Nicole Kidman ﬁ le for divorce. Venus Williams 
wins the women ’ s Wimbledon tennis championship.

114 Chronology
  Traditional media regain some ground in the fall of 
2001 as Americans (and the world) turn to television 
for news and video of the terrorist attacks of 9/11. 
Newspapers, television networks, and cable sys-
tems are popular information sources about the ter-
rorist attacks. The Internet, too, serves as a source of 
infor mation, but is more instrumental in establishing 
memorial services and soliciting memorial funds for 
those killed in the attacks. Osama bin Laden is identi-
ﬁ ed as the primary force behind the terrorist attacks 
and becomes famous in some parts of the world. The 
terrorist attacks have three effects on celebrity. First, 
they make some individuals heroes, particularly police, 
ﬁ remen, and other personnel involved in rescue efforts 
at New York ’ s World Trade Center. Some rescue per-
sonnel lose their lives; others survive. A few become 
well known. Second, the terrorists who planned and 
carried out the attacks become well known in America 
and famous in some other parts of the world. Third, 
many celebrities (George Clooney, Jack Nicholson, 
and Bruce Springsteen, among others) appear on 
television commenting on the attacks or appealing for 
donations to help survivors or cleanup efforts.
 2002 
 Signiﬁ cant developments.  World Wide Web users create 
online journals, or Weblogs, and are called bloggers. 
E-mail is an increasingly popular form of communica-
tion. Satellite radio offers two services, Sirius and XM. 
 American Idol  begins its run on FOX. Movie industry 
revenue tops $33 billion worldwide; computer users 
can download movies and save them to DVD. File 
sharing is popular among computer users. Serena 
Williams defeats her sister Venus in the women ’ s 
Wimbledon tennis ﬁ nal. The movie  Spider-Man earns 
more than $400 million. Hollywood movie stars Den-
zel Washington and Halle Berry win Oscars. Celebrity 
is widespread among individuals in many ﬁ elds.
 2003 
Personal, electronic communication increases. More than 
150 million people worldwide use cell phones; some 
phones have Internet capability. The Internet is impor-
tant in political campaign fund-raising. iTunes offers 
songs for 99 cents each, which can be downloaded 
to iPods.  DVD movie sales outstrip box ofﬁ ce sales.

Chronology 115
More newspapers offer content online. The United 
States launches an attack on Iraq, citing that nation ’ s 
weapons of mass destruction as a threat to world 
security. The Space Shuttle  Columbia  explodes, killing 
all seven aboard. Actor Arnold Schwarzenegger is 
elected governor of California. Singer Norah Jones 
wins ﬁ ve Grammy awards.  American Idol , in its second 
season, increases in popularity.
 2004 
 More growth.  Most American homes have a color 
television. Three-fourths of Americans use the 
Internet. Online advertising rakes in $21 billion. 
Cell phones number 1.5 billion worldwide. iTunes 
sells its 200 millionth song. MySpace becomes an 
Internet social networking site. Mark Zuckerberg 
launches “thefacebook.” Massachusetts Senator 
John Kerry wins 9 of 10 spring primaries to become 
the Democratic nominee for president, but loses in 
the fall to Republican George W. Bush. Business-
woman and television host Martha Stewart is sen-
tenced to ﬁ ve months in prison after being found 
guilty of charges related to illegal stock market 
activities. Singers Janet Jackson and Justin Timber-
lake experience a “wardrobe malfunction” during 
their halftime performance at Super Bowl XXXVIII 
when Timberlake rips the bodice of Jackson ’ s dress, 
revealing her right breast; the Federal Communica-
tions Commission (FCC) ﬁ nes Super Bowl broad-
caster CBS half a million dollars for the incident. 
Filmmaker Michael Moore releases  Fahrenheit 9/11 , 
a ﬁ lm sharply critical of President George W. Bush 
and the Iraq war. Mel Gibson ’ s ﬁ lm  The Passion of 
the Christ  stirs up religious controversy. Celebrities 
seem to be everywhere.
 2005 
 A troubled year . Hurricanes Katrina and Rita strike 
America ’ s Gulf Coast, destroying property and leaving 
many homeless and without help. A 7.6 earthquake 
in Pakistan ’ s Kashmir region leaves more than 4 
million people homeless. Pope John Paul II dies and 
is replaced by Pope Benedict XVI. The number of U.S. 
soldiers killed in the Iraq war reaches 2,000. CBS ’ s Dan 
Rather steps down as evening news anchor after airing 
an erroneous story about President George W. Bush.

116 Chronology
Peter Jennings, ABC ’ s evening news anchor, dies. 
Actor Brad Pitt recovers quickly after his divorce 
from Jennifer Aniston by hooking up with Angelina 
Jolie, his co-star in the movie  Mr. and Mrs. Smith . 
Actor Tom Cruise and actress Katie Holmes become 
engaged. ABC ’ s  Lost ,  Desperate Housewives , and  Grey ’ s 
Anatomy  are popular television shows; performers on 
those shows become instant celebrities.  People , the 
leading celebrity magazine, has a total paid circula-
tion of more than 3.7 million.
 2006 
 Big numbers.  Millions of bloggers post information 
and opinion online for millions of readers. YouTube 
has more than 100 million videos, with tens of 
thousands added daily. Popular television programs 
are available on the Web. Facebook expands its 
membership to include anyone 13 years of age or 
older. Jack Dorsey creates Twitter, a free microblog-
ging and social information service. Celebrity Web 
sites, like TMZ.com, are popular. CBS ’ s Katie Couric 
becomes the ﬁ rst female evening news anchor. Bill 
Gates steps down as day-to-day manager of Micro-
soft.  Babel  and  Dreamgirls  are identiﬁ ed as two of 
the top ﬁ lms of 2006 by the American Film Institute. 
Saddam Hussein, former Iraqi dictator, is convicted 
of crimes against humanity and hanged in Baghdad. 
 Time  magazine lists actor George Clooney, actress 
Meryl Streep, television personalities Ellen DeGeneres 
and Rachael Ray, and comedian Stephen Colbert 
among the 100 people who are shaping our world. 
Some members of the public apply the celebrity 
label to anyone who posts a video on YouTube, but 
entertainment personalities are still the culture ’ s 
primary celebrities.
 2007 
 Staying the course.  The War in Iraq continues. Gordon 
Brown replaces Tony Blair as British prime minister. 
Democrat Nancy Pelosi is elected the ﬁ rst woman 
Speaker of the House.  The Departed  wins the Academy 
Award for best picture. The Dixie Chicks win three 
Grammys: record, album, and song of the year.  People 
magazine continues to be the top-selling celebrity maga-
zine, but loses almost 200,000 in paid circulation. FOX ’ s 
 American Idol  continues its run as the top tele vision 
program, followed by ABC ’ s  Dancing with the Stars .

Chronology 117
The popularity of these two television shows leads 
many of the participants to claim their 15 minutes of 
fame. Bloggers consider themselves famous for their 
work on the Internet. Facebook users consider them-
selves famous if they have lots of “friends.” For many, 
“well known” means being acknowledged for an 
accomplishment, however small. The terms  well known , 
 famous , and  celebrity appear to have the same meaning.
 2008 
 New developments. The Taliban reemerge in Afghan-
istan. China hosts the Summer Olympics. Bank fail-
ures, subprime mortgages, and stock market declines 
contribute to a global ﬁ nancial crisis. Four important 
celebrities die: actors Heath Ledger and Paul Newman, 
comedian George Carlin, and NBC ’ s Tim Russert. 
Britney Spears undergoes a psychiatric evaluation early 
in the year, but rebounds with a new album in the fall. 
 People  magazine continues to be the top-selling celeb-
rity magazine.  US Weekly ,  Entertainment Weekly ,  and 
In Style  trail  People  by about one million in circulation 
each.  American Idol  dominates television ratings. Singer 
Taylor Swift tops the charts in America with more than 
4 million albums sold.  The Dark Knight  and  Slumdog 
Millionaire  are the year ’ s top movies. Senator Barack 
Obama, an Illinois Democrat, is elected president.
 2009 
 Oversaturation . Too much media and too many celeb-
rities characterize this year. Media dominate the lives 
of many Americans. Eighty-ﬁ ve percent of the public 
uses cell phones; more than 100 million Web logs are 
in cyberspace. Texting and twittering are daily, rou-
tine activities. Facebook is an obsession for the more 
than 300 million users worldwide. Google introduces 
Chrome, a faster Web browser. Use of digital cameras 
is widespread (no more ﬁ lm!). Although network 
television viewing declines, cable channel viewing 
increases with popular shows on Bravo, the Food 
Network, USA, AMC, HBO, and Showtime. News 
channels CNN, FOX, and MSNBC gain viewers. 
Digital Video Recorders (DVRs) allow users to 
record their favorite shows for later playback. Many 
television programs are available online. Most movie-
rental outlets experience a decrease in rentals, leading 
some to close. Film lovers rent their favorite movie 
by mail or from a vending machine at local stores.

118 Chronology
The ubiquity of media enables almost any member 
of the public to become a celebrity. Some individu-
als have noteworthy accomplishments; others have 
questionable ones. Chesley “Sully” Sullenberger, a 
57-year-old U.S. Airways pilot, makes a successful 
emergency landing in the Hudson River and is hailed 
as a hero. Oprah Winfrey announces that the 2010 
season will be the last for her syndicated television 
talk show. Susan Boyle ’ s singing performance on the 
television show “Britain ’ s Got Talent” lifts her to the 
top spot in YouTube video viewings and ultimately 
results in a best-selling album. Six-year-old Falcon 
Heene is a pawn in a balloon hoax designed to earn 
his parents a television reality show. It doesn ’ t. 
Former Republican vice-presidential candidate Sarah 
Palin resigns as governor of Alaska, writes a book, 
and undertakes a speaking tour. Tareq and Michaele 
Salahi, a socialite couple from Virginia, breach White 
House security and attend a state dinner uninvited. 
Comedian David Letterman admits past affairs and 
is the victim of an extortion plot. Comedian Jay Leno 
is ousted from NBC ’ s  The Tonight Show  in favor of 
Conan O ’ Brien; Leno is given a 10  p.m . prime-time 
weekday slot on the network. Singer Michael Jack-
son dies. Tiger Woods has multiple affairs, a trafﬁ c 
accident, and suspends his golﬁ ng career for a time. 
South Carolina Governor Mark Sanford admits an 
extramarital affair. South Carolina Representative Joe 
Wilson interrupts President Barack Obama ’ s State 
of the Union speech by shouting, “You lie!” Clearly, 
there are more celebrity goings-on than the typical 
American can readily follow.
 2010 
 A busy, uncertain, troubling year. Apple introduces 
the iPad, a multipurpose electronic device. A group 
of individuals unhappy with Washington politics 
formally organizes as the Tea Party and holds its 
ﬁ rst convention. Professional golfer Tiger Woods 
confesses to past sexual indiscretions and enters ther-
apy.  The Hurt Locker  wins the Academy Award as 
best picture, edging out the popular  Avatar . Earth-
quakes cause major devastation in Haiti and Chile.

Chronology 119
Internet-search-engine-giant Google quarrels with 
China over government restrictions on Google access. 
Golfer Tiger Woods emerges from therapy and holds a 
small press conference but refuses to answer questions 
about some aspects of his behavior. Woods returns to 
the professional golf tour by entering the Masters 
in April, but he doesn ’ t play well. The Democrat-
controlled Congress passes major health care reform 
over the objections of Republicans. Actress Sandra 
Bullock, winner of this year ’ s Academy Award as 
Best Actress for her role in  The Blind Side , encounters 
domestic trouble when her husband, actor and motor-
cyclist Jesse James, is discovered to have had several 
affairs, primarily with tattooed women, during his 
marriage to Bullock. Russia and the United States reach 
an agreement to reduce the number of nuclear missiles. 
Although its ratings slip a bit during the winter, 
 American Idol  continues to be the most-watched tele-
vision program. However, most of the celebrity buzz is 
about  Dancing with the Stars . Former Republican vice-
presidential candidate Sarah Palin becomes a commen-
tator on FOX News. The U.S. census is conducted with 
regular media announcements encouraging citizens 
to return the census questionnaire. War in the Middle 
East continues but the emphasis shifts from Iraq to 
Afghanistan. A volcano erupts in Iceland, spewing a 
debris cloud into the atmosphere where winds move 
the cloud eastward resulting in major ﬂ ight cancella-
tions, the loss of millions of dollars by the airlines, and 
major inconvenience for passengers affected by the can-
celled ﬂ ights. An oil rig explodes and sinks in the Gulf 
of Mexico off the coast of Louisiana leaking millions 
of gallons of oil into the water, endangering wildlife, 
commercial ﬁ shing, and tourism all along the Gulf 
Coast. Early attempts to stop the leak are unsuccess-
ful. A terrorist bomb in an SUV in New York ’ s Times 
Square fails to detonate and the perpetrator is caught 
trying to leave the country on a commercial airline. 
The stock market ’ s Dow Jones average plunges almost 
1,000 points in the spring on news that Greece may 
default on its debt obligations, although some observers 
blame a transaction typographical error for the drop.

120 Chronology
The market slowly recovers only to fall again in early 
summer due to problematic world economic condi-
tions. Gordon Brown resigns as Britain ’ s prime min-
ister and is replaced by David Cameron. Arizona 
passes an illegal immigration law; special interest 
groups protest, but polls show majority public sup-
port for the law. Heavy rains ﬂ ood most of the 
Nashville, Tennessee, area, including the site of the 
Grand Ole Opry; country music celebrities help with 
the cleanup. Facebook, accused of selling users ’  
personal information to advertising and marketing 
ﬁ rms, struggles to revise its privacy policy. Golfer 
Tiger Woods and his wife Elin divorce; some sources 
say Elin may have gotten as much as $100 million as 
part of the settlement.
 References 
 Campbell, Richard, Christopher Martin, and Bettina Fabos. 2007.  Media 
and culture . Fifth edition. Boston: Bedford/St. Martins. 
 Fang, Irving. 2008.  Alphabet to Internet: Mediated communication in our 
lives. St. Paul, MN: Rada Press. 
 Miller, James, and John Thompson. 2006.  Almanac of American history. 
Washington, DC: National Geographic Society. 
 Ponce de Leon, Charles. 2002.  Self-exposure: Human-interest journalism 
and the emergency of celebrity in America. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press. 
 Schickel, Richard. 1985.  Intimate strangers: The culture of celebrity. Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday and Company. 
 www.cbsnews.com/stories/2009 . 
 www.infoplease.com/year . 

121
 5 
 Biographical Sketches 
 T
 his chapter presents brief biographical proﬁ les of 30 celeb-
rities. These particular celebrities were selected for several 
reasons. They are all famous, well-known individuals with sig-
niﬁ cant accomplishments. They are visible in or on media. They 
seek publicity opportunities for themselves or their work. Each 
connects in some way with the public, either as an individual 
whose lifestyle is admired or as an individual who embodies the 
public ’ s dreams and desires. In other words, the 30 precisely ﬁ t 
the deﬁ nition of celebrity developed and presented in   Chapter 1  . 
And, because this book is primarily about celebrity in the 21st 
century, celebrities who are dead or who are no longer in the pop 
culture spotlight for one reason or another are not included. 
However, you will notice some older celebrities in the group. 
Their work began in the 20th century and has continued well into 
in the 21st century. The expectation is they have more to contrib-
ute as the 21st century progresses. Additionally, this chapter does 
not include celebrities whose lives or activities were discussed at 
length in earlier chapters. 
 Glenn Beck (1964–) 
 Glenn Beck, a radio-television political talk show host and author, 
was born in Mt. Vernon, Washington, on February 10, 1964. His 
teen years were troubled. Glenn lost his mother when he was 13; 
she drowned in a bay near Tacoma. Shortly after his mother ’ s 
death, one of his brothers-in-law committed suicide and another 
had a fatal heart attack. However, that same year, Glenn won a 

122 Biographical Sketches
local radio contest and was allowed to work for an hour at a local 
radio station as a disc jockey. He graduated from high school 
in Bellingham, Washington, and set out to establish a career in 
radio, working at stations in both small and large markets. Glenn 
was well known in the radio industry, but not yet a celebrity. 
By age 30, he tired of radio and turned to alcohol and drugs for 
solace. He and his wife divorced after four years of marriage and 
two daughters—one of whom had cerebral palsy. Still battling 
substance abuse, Glenn decided to enroll at Yale University as 
a theology major; he lasted one semester. He began to turn his 
life around with the help of friends and Alcoholics Anonymous. 
Returning to radio, his “Glenn Beck Program” was soon heard on 
more than 40 stations. He went from a local radio personality to 
a national radio celebrity very quickly. Television followed soon 
after. His daily show on the FOX News cable channel is one of 
the network ’ s most popular. Like some other political talk show 
hosts, Glenn is outspoken, conservative, and often inﬂ ammatory. 
Because of his widespread support among political conservatives, 
he is a media celebrity of considerable inﬂ uence. 
 Beyoncé (1981–) 
 An American singer and actress, Beyoncé Giselle Knowles was 
born September 4, 1981, in Houston, Texas. As a preteen, she 
began singing with the popular R&B group Destiny ’ s Child. 
Early on, their music was a rich mix of gospel, rhythm and 
blues, and hip-hop, but they settled mainly on R&B in 1995. Her 
father Mathew served as the group ’ s manager. The group soon 
became well known, appearing on television ’ s  Star Search , but 
the singers had not yet become individual stars. The group ’ s 
ﬁ rst two albums were overwhelming successes, both at home 
and abroad; concerts sold out. Internal conﬂ icts in 2000 led to the 
group ’ s breaking up; in 2004 Beyoncé won ﬁ ve Grammy Awards 
for her single “Dangerously in Love,” ﬁ rmly establishing her 
as a music industry celebrity. She also had an interest in acting, 
appearing in an MTV production before landing roles in the 
James Bond parody  Goldmember  (2002),  The Fighting Temptations 
(2004), and  The Pink Panther  (2006). Her celebrity was enhanced 
in 2006 when she appeared in  Dreamgirls , a ﬁ lm nominated for 
a Golden Globe award; her song “Listen” was nominated for an 
Academy Award. Beyoncé married hip-hop personality Jay-Z in 

George Clooney (1961–) 123
2008, making them one of the music industry ’ s most powerful 
celebrity couples.  
 Kobe Bryant (1978–) 
 Kobe Bean Bryant is a professional basketball player for the Los 
Angeles Lakers. Born August 23, 1978, in Philadelphia, Pennsylva-
nia, Kobe immediately became part of a sports family: his father, 
Joe, had played in the National Basketball Association (NBA), and 
his two older sisters were athletic. By age three, he was already 
playing basketball. After living and playing basketball for a while 
in Italy, Kobe returned to Philadelphia where he became a high 
school basketball star, winning several awards. He decided to 
turn professional right out of high school. This was unusual; most 
NBA players are drafted after their college careers. Nevertheless, 
he was drafted by Charlotte and traded to Los Angeles. In 1998, 
he was selected for the NBA All-Star team, the youngest all-star 
(at 19) in NBA history. Kobe helped the Lakers win three consecu-
tive NBA championships and signed endorsement contracts with 
Adidas, Sprite, and other sponsors. At the pinnacle of his celebrity 
in 2003, he was charged with one count of sexual assault on a 
19-year-old female hotel worker in Colorado. Kobe admitted to 
adultery, but denied the rape charge. The case was dismissed in 
2004, but a civil lawsuit against him by the apparent victim was 
settled out of court. Understandably, the episode eroded his celeb-
rity status and resulted in a couple of forgettable seasons on the 
basketball court. Still, he returned to form and helped his team to 
the NBA ﬁ nals in 2008 and 2009. Kobe continues to be an inﬂ uential 
celebrity in the sports world. 
 George Clooney (1961–) 
 George Timothy Clooney, born May 6, 1961, in Lexington, Kentucky, 
is an actor, director, producer, and social activist. Although he 
was not aware of it at the time of his birth, some members of 
his family were celebrities. Perhaps he was destined to become 
a celebrity himself. Nick, his father, was a celebrated television 
news anchor—ﬁ rst in Lexington, then in Columbus and Cincinnati, 
Ohio. Rosemary Clooney, his aunt, had been a popular singer in 
the 1940s and 1950s. For a time, Rosemary was married to José 

124 Biographical Sketches
Ferrer, a well-known actor. However, as a youngster, George was 
interested in sports. He played basketball and baseball during 
his school years and tried out for the Cincinnati Reds but did not 
make the team. As a student at Northern Kentucky University, 
George was known more for partying than studying; he quit 
before the end of his freshman year and moved to Los Angeles 
to pursue an acting career. Although he came from a family of 
celebrities, George was not an immediate success in Hollywood. 
He failed to get an acting job for two years, so he took construction 
jobs to pay for acting classes. He soon appeared in a few com-
mercials and some minor television sitcoms. His big break came 
when he was cast as a doctor on  ER , an NBC television drama 
where he quickly became one of the show ’ s most popular char-
acters. Although he had parts in several B-level movies during his 
 ER  stint, his success in ﬁ lms began in 1996 when he starred with 
Michelle Pfeiffer in  One Fine Day . He played Batman in the 1997 
ﬁ lm  Batman and Robin . His popularity increased as a result of roles 
in  Ocean ’ s Eleven  (2001) and  Michael Clayton  (2007). Total celebrity 
ﬁ nally arrived for George in 2009 when he starred in  Up in the Air 
and was nominated for an Academy Award as Best Actor. The 
ﬁ lm itself was nominated for Best Picture. George once described 
himself as “an actor, businessman, and a bit of a hothead.” 
 Tom Cruise (1962–) 
 Thomas Cruise Mapother IV was born in Syracuse, New York, on 
July 3, 1962. Today he is a celebrated actor, but acting was of little 
interest to him growing up. His family moved often and he suf-
fered from dyslexia. As a result, he did poorly in school, but tried 
to compensate by becoming active in sports, particularly wres-
tling. As a 14-year-old seminary student, Tom was deeply religious 
and felt destined to become a priest. However, he began thinking 
about an acting career, and—at age 18—dropped out of school and 
headed for New York. Within a few years, Tom was starring in 
some popular ﬁ lms, including  Top Gun  (1986),  The Color of Money 
(1986), and  Born on the Fourth of July  (1989), and playing alongside 
some well-established ﬁ lm celebrities, including Dustin Hoffman 
and Paul Newman. Tom joined the upper-rank of celebrity with 
 A Few Good Men  (1992, with Jack Nicholson and Demi Moore), and 
 Jerry Maguire  (with Cuba Gooding Jr. in 1996). Since then, Tom has 
had one hit movie after another. However, as is so often the case, 

Ellen DeGeneres (1958–) 125
a celebrity ’ s personal life becomes the center of public attention. 
Tom began dating actress Katie Holmes in 2005; the couple—
dubbed “TomKat” by the pop culture media—had a daughter in 
April 2006 and married in November 2006 (his third, her ﬁ rst). Tom 
was widely ridiculed for his behavior on  The Oprah Winfrey Show . 
He hopped up and down on the couch, proclaiming his love for 
Holmes. Critics have also quibbled about his height (5 ’  7”) and his 
devout following of Scientology. Nevertheless, Tom remains a box 
ofﬁ ce favorite and an inﬂ uential celebrity in the movie industry.  
 Ellen DeGeneres (1958–) 
 Ellen Lee DeGeneres, a television talk show host and author, was 
born January 26, 1958, in Metairie, Louisiana, a suburb of New 
Orleans. Growing up she dreamed of becoming a veterinarian, but, 
feeling she was not “book smart” enough for that career, enrolled 
after high school at the University of New Orleans as a communi-
cations major. She dropped out after one semester and worked as 
a waitress, vacuum cleaner salesperson, house painter, and legal 
secretary before turning to stand-up comedy. She appeared on  The 
Tonight Show with Johnny Carson  in 1986. The appearance on the 
Carson show gave her immediate recognition and a limited sort of 
celebrity. Although her early work as a supporting actress in tele-
vision sitcoms did little to enhance her celebrity, her own sitcom 
 Ellen  (1994) became a hit. The show was cancelled after the 1997 
season because of poor ratings; nevertheless, Ellen made television 
history that year by revealing (on air) that she was a lesbian. Now 
she was really a celebrity; some critics wondered whether her show 
had been cancelled because of poor ratings, because sponsors with-
drew from the program, or because of her sexual orientation. She 
returned to stand-up comedy for a while before attempting another 
show in 2001,  The Ellen Show , but it, too, suffered from poor ratings 
and was cancelled. Never one to give up, Ellen returned to televi-
sion in 2003 with a daytime television talk show. It was both a criti-
cal and commercial success, winning 15 Emmy awards in its ﬁ rst 
three seasons, including the award for Outstanding Talk Show host. 
She continued to ride the celebrity wave as host of the Grammy 
Awards show, Emmy Awards show, and the Academy Awards 
show. In 2008, Ellen married actress Portia de Rossi. In early 2010, 
she joined Simon Cowell and others on the  American Idol judges ’ 
panel but left the show after one season.  

126 Biographical Sketches
 Tony Dungy (1955–) 
 Anthony Kevin Dungy was born October 6, 1955, and grew up 
in Jackson, Michigan. The former professional football coach 
was a natural athlete as a youngster and often played with older 
children, relishing the challenge of competing with those older 
and stronger. He played football, basketball, and baseball in high 
school, leading his teams to eight championships. Tony ’ s coaches 
were impressed by his leadership, preparation, intelligence, and 
natural ability. He played football at the University of Minnesota 
and was twice named the Golden Gophers ’  Most Valuable Player. 
Although he had impressive statistics as a college quarterback, 
he was not drafted by a National Football League (NFL) team. 
Nevertheless, he signed as a free agent with the Pittsburgh 
Steelers. He was subsequently traded to San Francisco, and 
then to the New York Giants who cut him prior to the 1980 season. 
Tony retired as a player but did not leave the game. He turned to 
coaching and held a variety of defensive coaching positions with 
the Steelers, Chiefs, and Vikings. At one time, he was the youngest 
and only African American defensive coordinator in the NFL. 
Although Tony was well known in NFL circles, he did not come to 
the attention of the sports public until 1996, when he became head 
coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, where he established a strong 
defense and improved the team ’ s offensive effort. Fired in 2001, 
Tony soon became head coach of the Indianapolis Colts. Under 
his leadership, the Colts won the 2007 Super Bowl. Tony became 
the ﬁ rst African American head coach to win a Super Bowl. At the 
height of his celebrity, he retired from coaching after the 2008 
season. Tony has always been active in civic and religious activities, 
including the Fellowship of Christian Athletes and Big Brothers/
Big Sisters. A former player, when asked about Tony, said, “He ’ s a 
man of integrity, he has a great deal of character. He has that aura. 
You want to do your best because of the type of guy he is.”  
 Bill Gates (1955–) 
 Businessman, entrepreneur, and software developer William H. 
Gates III was born October 28, 1955 in Seattle, Washington. He 
enjoyed a normal childhood, active in sports and Cub Scouts. 
His family thought he might follow in his father ’ s footsteps and 
become an attorney. However, by the seventh grade, Bill had 

Al Gore (1948–) 127
developed an interest in computer science at Seattle ’ s private 
Lakeside School. He met Paul Allen at Lakeside and the two 
became fast friends. At age 15, Bill and Paul (who was two years 
older) developed a trafﬁ c-monitoring computer program and 
earned $20,000 for their work. After graduating from Lakeside, 
he enrolled at Harvard University, still interested in a law career, 
but spent more time in the computer lab than in class. He dropped 
out of Harvard in 1975 and began a career in software design 
with his friend Paul, forming a company called Micro-Soft; the 
hyphen was soon dropped and the company became Microsoft. 
The two friends wrote programs for the early Commodore and 
Apple computers, but took a large step forward in 1980 with the 
Microsoft Disk Operating system (MS-DOS) for IBM. Between 
1978 and 1981, Microsoft experienced unprecedented growth: the 
staff increased from 25 to more than 120 and revenue increased 
from $4 million to $16 million. Although Bill was certainly well 
known—and probably a celebrity—in the computer world, he was 
relatively unknown to the general public, which knew little about 
computers. However, the rest—as they say—is history! Computers 
eventually worked their way into the personal and work lives of 
everyday citizens and Bill ’ s aggressive and sometimes ruthless 
approach to business made him the wealthiest man in America. 
He married Melinda French in 1994 and the couple established 
the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, focusing on improving 
the health care and education of children around the world. The 
foundation has donated billions of dollars to worthy causes. He 
stepped down as the day-to-day manager of Microsoft in 2000, 
but remains the company ’ s chairman and chief software architect. 
With a unique combination of business and philanthropic success, 
Bill is a worldwide celebrity.   
 Al Gore (1948–) 
 Former U.S. Vice President Albert Arnold Gore Jr. was born March 
31, 1948, in Washington, D.C. He presently serves as chairman of 
Current TV, a cable television news network. Al was born into 
a family already on its way to political celebrity. His father was 
in the U.S. House of Representatives and then was elected to the 
Senate in 1953. Although the family home was in Carthage, Ten-
nessee, young Al spent the school year in the nation ’ s capital, 
returning home in the summer. Al attended Harvard,  graduating 

128 Biographical Sketches
with a degree in government. He roomed with future actor 
Tommy Lee Jones. He enlisted in the army and served ﬁ ve months 
in Vietnam, returning home to Tennessee to work as a reporter for 
the  Tennessean and to enroll in Vanderbilt University ’ s law school. 
However, he quit law school to run for the U.S. House from Ten-
nessee. Elected four times, he followed his father ’ s path and ran 
for the Senate, where he remained until he was selected by Bill 
Clinton as the Democratic vice-presidential candidate in 1992. 
After serving two terms as vice president, Al won the Democratic 
nomination in 2000, but lost a close election to Republican George 
W. Bush. Serving as vice president and then running for president 
automatically made Al a political celebrity. However, his work 
since leaving politics propelled him to greater celebrity heights. 
His long-term interest in environmental issues motivated him to 
write a book on the subject and to make an Oscar-winning docu-
mentary ﬁ lm titled  An Inconvenient Truth . In 2007, Al won a Nobel 
Prize for his work on global warming. He continues to speak and 
write on the dangers posed by climate change and is considered 
the nation ’ s most important environmental celebrity. 
 Scarlett Johansson (1984–) 
 Scarlett Johansson was born November 22, 1984, in New York City 
to parents of Polish and Danish descent. The actress is the grand-
child of Ejner Johansson, a well-known Danish screenwriter and 
ﬁ lmmaker and was thus surrounded by creative people early in 
life. As early as age three she expressed an interest in becom-
ing an actress. Scarlett ’ s stage debut came at age eight when she 
starred with Ethan Hawke in an off-Broadway play. Her ﬁ rst 
ﬁ lm was Rob Reiner ’ s  North  (1994). She had supporting parts in 
other ﬁ lms with movie celebrities Sean Connery, Sarah Jessica 
Parker, and Ben Stiller. She costarred with Robert Redford in  The 
Horse Whisperer  (1998) and was nominated for an award as most 
promising actress by the Chicago Film Critics Association. Scar-
lett was well on her way to becoming an accomplished actress. 
After graduating from the Professional Children ’ s School in New 
York City, she applied to New York University ’ s Tisch School of 
the Arts, but decided to focus on her acting career when she was 
not accepted. Although her appearance with Redford gained her 
some attention, her role with Bill Murray in  Lost in Translation 

Michael Jordan (1963–) 129
(2003) established her as an important actress and set her on the 
celebrity path. Scarlett has worked steadily since age 12. When 
asked about her career, she said, “I have a hard time taking time 
off . . . There are so many great actors who are unemployed and 
seeing them makes you wonder why everything ’ s happening for 
you . . . I ’ m just lucky.”  
 Angelina Jolie (1975–) 
 Angelina Jolie Voight, actress and social activist, was born June 4, 
1975, in Los Angeles, California, to parents who were already 
celebrities at the time of her birth. Her father is Academy Award–
winning actor Jon Voight; her mother is French actress Marcheline 
Bertrand. Thus, growing up, she was no stranger to the celebrity 
spotlight. By age 11, Angelina was studying acting at the famous 
Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute. She studied ﬁ lm for a time at 
New York University, and at age 16, began a career in modeling. 
Of Czech, French-Canadian, Iroquois, and English ancestry, her 
exotic good looks made her particularly attractive to ﬁ lmmakers. 
She appeared in several movies in the late 1990s, but was more 
famous for her off-screen relationships. She married and divorced 
actor Jonny Lee Miller and then actor Billy Bob Thornton. Her 
ﬁ lm celebrity caught up with her personal-celebrity in 2001 when 
she starred in  Lara Croft: Tomb Raider . That movie was followed a 
few years later by  Mr. and Mrs. Smith  (2005) where she costarred 
with actor Brad Pitt, whom she married in 2008. The couple has 
three adopted and three biological children. Very much the social 
activist, Angelina has capitalized on her celebrity in drawing 
attention to the plight of the world ’ s refugees. She was made a 
Goodwill Ambassador for the UN Refugee Agency in 2001 and 
was praised for her work on behalf of Cambodian refugees. In 
2005, she received the Global Humanitarian Action Award from 
the United Nations for her work on behalf of refugee rights. She is 
a frequent subject in tabloid newspapers, which regularly speculate 
on when the Jolie-Pitt marriage will end. 
 Michael Jordan (1963–) 
 Michael Jeffrey Jordan, a businessman, actor, and former profes-
sional basketball player, was born in Brooklyn, New York, on 

130 Biographical Sketches
February 17, 1963, but grew up in Wilmington, North Carolina. 
As a youngster, he was interested in sports, primarily baseball. 
However, inﬂ uenced by his older brother, he turned to basketball. 
He did not make his high school team as a sophomore, but even-
tually made the team and was named to the McDonald ’ s All-Star 
Team as a senior. Accepting a basketball scholarship to the Univer-
sity of North Carolina, he helped his team win the 1982 NCAA 
Championship. Michael was the third overall pick by the Chicago 
Bulls in the 1984 National Basketball Association (NBA) draft. By 
the late 1980s, he had developed into a superstar and enjoyed the 
celebrity that came not only from his agility and leadership on 
the court, but also from several endorsement deals, particularly 
Nike. After the death of his father in 1993, he retired from profes-
sional basketball to pursue a baseball career. His performance in 
the minor leagues was less than spectacular; he returned to pro-
fessional basketball in 1995, but retired again in 1999 as one of 
the greatest ever to play the game. His celebrity status was fur-
ther enhanced in 2009 when he was inducted into the Naismith 
Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Although retired, Michael is 
still very much a celebrity. Recently, he has appeared with actor 
Charlie Sheen in television commercials for Hanes underwear.  
 Jennifer Lopez (1970–) 
 Born July 24, 1970, in the Bronx, New York, Jennifer Lynn Lopez 
is a singer, actress, and model. By age ﬁ ve, she was enrolled in 
singing and dancing classes. In high school, she played softball 
and tennis, and was interested in gymnastics. After graduating, she 
worked in a law ofﬁ ce for a while and continued with dancing 
lessons. Her ﬁ rst break came in 1990, when she earned a dancing 
spot on the television sitcom  In Living Color . After several small 
acting jobs, she jumped to the big screen with her ﬁ rst major ﬁ lm 
role alongside Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson in  Money Train 
(1995). Two years later, she became a full-ﬂ edged ﬁ lm celebrity, 
playing the title role in  Selena , a biographical ﬁ lm about Tejano 
pop singer Selena Perez who was killed by a crazed fan. While she 
enjoyed her movie work and had a couple of hit records, Jennifer 
was a dancer at heart. She was nominated for Best Dance Perfor-
mance for “Waiting for Tonight,” her second hit single; however, 
actress-singer Cher won the award. Nevertheless, Jennifer had 
established herself as a multi-talented celebrity. Appearing with 

Stephenie Meyer (1973–) 131
George Clooney in  Out of Sight  (1998), she became the highest 
paid Latina actress in history. At the height of her celebrity, she 
and then-boyfriend Sean “Puffy” Combs were involved in a 1999 
shooting incident outside a New York City nightclub. Three people 
were injured; Combs was charged with gun possession and 
bribery but was later acquitted of all charges. Jennifer ended their 
relationship two months later. Other personal relationships kept 
her in the celebrity spotlight; she was linked romantically with 
dancer Cris Judd and actor Ben Afﬂ eck. She married singer Marc 
Anthony in 2004. 
 Stephenie Meyer (1973–) 
 Stephenie Meyer, a novelist, was born Stephenie Morgan on 
December 24, 1973, in Hartford, Connecticut. Her family moved 
to Phoenix when she was four. She graduated from high school in 
Scottsdale, Arizona, was awarded a National Merit Scholarship, 
and used it to ﬁ nance her education at Brigham Young University, 
where she majored in English. She married “Pancho” Meyer in 
1994; she had known him since she was four years old, primarily 
through church activities. She became a stay-at-home mother, 
taking care of her young sons. She had little thought of becoming 
a celebrity of any sort. However, that changed on June 2, 2003.
Stephenie awoke that morning clearly remembering a rather 
remarkable dream. The dream nagged at her throughout the day 
until she ﬁ nally sat down at her computer and began to sketch 
out a few ideas for a novel. Developing the plot in her head as 
she helped her sons with such things as swim lessons and potty 
training, she did not sit down to write each day until her children 
were in bed for the night and the house was quiet. Her ﬁ rst novel, 
 Twilight , was one of 2005 ’ s most discussed novels and debuted at 
#5 on the  New York Times  best seller list within weeks of its release. 
Named one of the top 10 books for young adults by the American 
Library Association, it has been translated into 20 languages. With 
 Twilight  Stephenie became an instant celebrity, not only among teen 
readers, but also in the publishing world. Sequels followed, each 
springing quickly to the top of the bestseller list. Stephenie keeps a 
rather low proﬁ le, but her work places her among the top celebrities 
ever in the world of young adult ﬁ ction. Her novels have spawned 
a series of movies starring Robert Pattinson and Kristen Stewart.  

132 Biographical Sketches
 Michael Moore (1954–) 
 Michael Francis Moore, a ﬁ lmmaker, actor, and political activist, 
was born April 23, 1954, in Davison, Michigan, a suburb of Flint. 
Both his father and grandfather worked for General Motors, a fact 
that was to ﬁ gure prominently in Michael ’ s life. He attended paro-
chial school, but transferred to Davison High School when he was 
14. He became immediately interested in school politics. At age 18, 
he ran for the Flint school board and was elected, becoming one 
of the youngest people in the country to win an election for public 
ofﬁ ce. He enrolled at the University of Michigan-Flint, but dropped 
out to pursue a career as a social/political activist. After jobs at 
several newspapers and magazines, Michael considered making a 
movie about the closure of the General Motors auto plants in Flint; 
the closures bothered him because the company was highly prof-
itable and there appeared to be no reason to close the plants. He 
scraped up enough money to begin the ﬁ lm, and when the money 
ran out, held bingo games to raise money to ﬁ nish it. The ﬁ lm,  Roger 
and Me , featured Moore ’ s repeated attempts to meet with General 
Motors Chairman Roger Smith to question him about the plant 
closures and the ultimate effect on Flint ’ s economy. The ﬁ lm was 
an immediate critical success, making Michael an instant celebrity. 
Not all of his subsequent ﬁ lms were successful, but several were. 
 Bowling for Columbine  (2002) won an award at the Cannes Film 
Festival and an Academy Award for Best Documentary. No ques-
tion about it now, Michael was a full-ﬂ edged celebrity. In 2004, 
his  Fahrenheit 9/11 , a ﬁ lm critical of George W. Bush and America ’ s 
war in the Middle East, was a box ofﬁ ce hit, becoming the most 
successful documentary of all time. His most recent ﬁ lms have not 
experienced the success of his earlier ones, but Michael remains a 
celebrity, known for his sharp wit and his ability to ask tough ques-
tions to the powerful while projecting a regular-guy attitude.  
 Barack Obama (1961–) 
 Barack Hussein Obama, born August 4, 1961, in Honolulu, 
Hawaii, is president of the United States. His father left home 
when Barack was two; his parents divorced, his mother remar-
ried, and the family moved to Jakarta, Indonesia. Because he 
had mixed-race parents, he grew up confused about the social 

Conan O’Brien (1963–) 133
differences between the black and white cultures. This confusion 
may have led to brief experiments with drugs and alcohol. After 
graduating high school, he did two years at Occidental College in 
California before enrolling as a political science major at Columbia 
University in New York City. Barack worked brieﬂ y for a ﬁ nancial 
consulting ﬁ rm in New York, but was more interested in work-
ing as a community organizer. He eventually landed a position 
with the Developing Community Project in Chicago. He entered 
Harvard Law School in 1988 and was later named the ﬁ rst African 
American president (editor) of the  Harvard Law Review . He met and 
married Michelle Robinson in 1992. Barack was not yet a celebrity, 
and there is no evidence that he ever aspired to be one. He was 
interested in politics and government, however, and was elected 
to the Illinois State Senate in 1996 where he had few legislative 
accomplishments. Nevertheless, he was intelligent and a powerful 
speaker. He delivered the Keynote Address to the 2004 Demo-
cratic Convention and just a few months later was elected to the 
United States Senate. Even in Washington, Barack had few legis-
lative accomplishments. Still, many political insiders considered 
him a rising star. They were particularly impressed by his book 
 Dreams from My Father  (1995). His second book,  Audacity of Hope: 
Thoughts on Reclaiming the American Dream  (2006), vaulted him into 
the celebrity spotlight. He appeared on  Oprah  and  Larry King Live . 
Journalists and media pundits began wondering whether he had 
his sights set on the presidency. True enough, Barack announced 
his candidacy for president in early 2007 and faced Hillary Clinton 
in a battle for his party ’ s nomination. He won the nomination and 
beat Republican John McCain in the November 2008 general 
election. Barack became the 45th president of the United States, 
the ﬁ rst African American to hold that position. Although few poli-
ticians can claim celebrity status based on their positive actions, 
Barack is one who can. He is well spoken, intelligent, and has a 
sense of humor, but can be overly serious at times. His third book, 
 Change We Can Believe In: Barack Obama ’ s Plan to Renew America ’ s 
Promise (2008), won a Grammy award for spoken recordings.  
 Conan O ’ Brien (1963–) 
 Conan Christopher O ’ Brien, a television talk show host and 
writer, was born April 18, 1963, in Brookline, Massachusetts. 

134 Biographical Sketches
He grew up in a large, Irish Catholic family and had an early 
connection to a limited sort of celebrity—his sister Jane was a 
scriptwriter and his cousin Denis Leary was an actor and comedian. 
Conan loved to make people laugh and was known for “goof-
ing off” as a youngster. At Harvard University, he found oppor-
tunities to pull pranks and was twice named president of  The 
Harvard Lampoon , a humor magazine. By 1988, Conan was writing 
comedy sketches for NBC ’ s  Saturday Night Live , but was essentially 
unknown by the general public. A series of changes in network 
late-night television programs (11:35  p.m . and later) propelled 
him into the celebrity spotlight. In 1992, Johnny Carson retired 
from NBC ’ s  Tonight Show ; Jay Leno was named to replace him. 
This resulted in David Letterman leaving NBC ’ s  Late Night  (a show 
that followed Carson ’ s) for a job at CBS. Conan was given the 
host job on  Late Night,  a move questioned by some critics since 
he was generally unknown outside of television-writing circles. 
Nevertheless, after a rough start, Conan eventually established 
himself in the late-night position with quirky stunts and self-
deprecating humor; he became a favorite of college students. 
However, the late-night television wars were far from over. 
When NBC failed to renew Leno ’ s contract in 2009, Conan 
replaced him on the well-known and widely watched  Tonight 
Show . Leno was shifted to the 10  p.m . prime time slot where he 
promptly failed to attract a sizeable audience. NBC announced 
that Leno would be returning to the 11:35  p.m .  Tonight Show , 
but Conan, having occupied the host chair for seven months, 
declined to step aside. The resulting standoff between Conan 
and NBC made entertainment news for several weeks and, to 
some extent, increased his celebrity status. He eventually agreed 
to a $45 million payoff and left NBC. Rumors circulated about 
a possible late night show for him on another network. In any 
case, Conan is a bona ﬁ de talk show celebrity from whom we 
have not heard the last.  
 Bill O ’ Reilly (1949–) 
 Born in New York City on September 10, 1949, Bill O ’ Reilly grew 
up in Levittown, New York. He is a radio-television political 
talk show host and author. At an early age he told everyone he 
was going to be on television, tell people what to think, and tell 
them what ’ s right and what ’ s wrong. With such an ambitious 

Danica Patrick (1982–) 135
goal, perhaps Bill felt destined to be a celebrity. He excelled in 
sports during his school years, studied history at Marist College 
where he played quarterback on the football team, and, upon 
graduation, taught school for two years in Miami, Florida. After 
a master ’ s degree in broadcast journalism at Boston College, 
Bill worked as a reporter for several television stations and 
soon became a correspondent for ABC ’ s  World News Tonight . 
He became anchor of the syndicated news/entertainment pro-
gram  Inside Edition in 1989. He left that job in 1995 and entered 
Harvard ’ s Kennedy School of Government, earning a master ’ s 
in public policy. Bill was immediately hired by the Fox News 
Channel as host of  The O ’ Reilly Factor , described as an alterna-
tive to traditional news programs. His combative, outspoken 
approach allowed him to dismiss the arguments of anyone who 
challenged him. Bill was little known as a television reporter, 
but rapidly rose to celebrity status with Fox News. A polarizing 
ﬁ gure, he regularly irritates liberals with his conservative stance 
on most issues.  
 Danica Patrick (1982–) 
 Racing star Danica Patrick was born March 25, 1982, in Beloit, 
Wisconsin, but her younger sister Brooke was the race enthusi-
ast in the family. Brooke raced go-karts and snowmobiles for a 
while, but gave up racing after crashing four times. Nevertheless, 
Brooke ’ s inﬂ uence led to Danica ’ s interest in racing. She felt she 
could do well—after all, she was two years older than her sister. 
She began competing in go-kart races sponsored by the World 
Karting Association, ﬁ nishing second in overall points in the 1992 
season. She won her ﬁ rst Grand National Championship two 
years later. Racing ofﬁ cials suggested she switch from go-karts 
to race cars. She did and developed her racing skill on the British 
racing circuit. In 2002, Bobby Rahall signed her to a racing contract 
with the Rahal Letterman team. Although she had no ﬁ rst-place 
ﬁ nishes in races for Rahal Letterman, Danica was promoted to 
the Indy Racing League (IRL), becoming the fourth woman to 
compete in the IRL. In a sport dominated by men, Danica quickly 
rose to celebrity status. Her celebrity was enhanced when she 
placed fourth in the Indy 500 in 2005. Described as a “slick, 5 
foot-1, 100 pound package of talent and charisma,” Danica has 
a hidden side. As Rahal observed, when she shakes your hand, 

136 Biographical Sketches
it ’ s “crunch, like a truck driver . . . The exterior is nice and pretty—
and underneath she is as tough as steel.” Danica also appears 
regularly in television commercials for  Go-Daddy.com , an Internet 
domain name service.  
 Brad Pitt (1963–) 
 William Bradley Pitt was born December 18, 1963, in Shawnee, 
Oklahoma, but was raised in Springﬁ eld, Missouri. Pitt is an actor, 
although he was initially interested in a career in advertising. 
In high school, he enjoyed sports, debating, student government, 
and school musical productions. He attended the University of 
Missouri, majoring in journalism with a specialty in advertising. 
However, near the end of his college career, Brad decided to 
pursue an acting career. He quit college, just two credits short of 
his degree. The acting world, however, did not welcome him with 
open arms. In California, he drove a limousine—transporting 
strippers from one party to the next—delivered home appliances, 
and wore a chicken costume to promote a local restaurant. He 
joined an acting class and eventually landed a few jobs in television. 
Brad ’ s screen debut came in 1989 with  Cutting Class , but neither 
the ﬁ lm nor his performance attracted much attention. Other ﬁ lms 
followed but none elevated him to celebrity status. His stock rose 
a bit with his appearance in Robert Redford ’ s 1992 ﬁ lm  A River 
Runs Through It.  He appeared in other movies with ﬁ lm celebri-
ties Harrison Ford, Tom Cruise, and Anthony Hopkins. However, 
Brad still lacked that one ﬁ lm, that one performance that would 
catapult him to ﬁ lm celebrity. He worked in  Fight Club (1999) with 
Edward Norton, in  The Mexican  (2000) with Julia Roberts, and in 
 Spy Game  (2001) with Robert Redford. One might think appearing 
with all these established celebrities would have some beneﬁ t on 
Brad ’ s own celebrity status; however, for the most part, he was 
unable to escape the shadows of the more famous. That changed in 
2001 when he joined George Clooney and Matt Damon in  Ocean ’ s 
Eleven . His performance in that movie was every bit as good as 
those of his costars and propelled him to A-level celebrity status. 
Brad ’ s celebrity was further enhanced in 2005 when he appeared 
opposite Angelina Jolie in the blockbuster  Mr. and Mrs. Smith . 
He married Jolie three years later. Brad was nominated for an 
Academy Award as Best Actor in 2009 for his role in  The Curious 
Case of Benjamin Button .  

Arnold Schwarzenegger (1947–) 137
 Rachael Ray (1968–) 
 Rachael Domenica Ray was born August 25, 1968, on Cape Cod, 
Massachusetts. She is a celebrity chef, television personality, and 
author. Her parents were employed in the restaurant industry so 
food was always important in the Ray household. She learned 
cooking from her mother. After college, Rachael began working 
for local restaurants and caterers in upstate New York. She held 
a variety of positions: candy counter clerk, fresh-foods manager, 
gourmet store manager, and gourmet foods buyer. She soon real-
ized people weren ’ t purchasing a lot of gourmet foods. Thinking 
it was because they had little time to cook, Rachael started a cooking 
class—30 minute meals. The class was popular and resulted in 
her ﬁ rst book,  30 Minute Meals  (1991). Her appearance on NBC ’ s 
 Today  show in 2001 got the attention of Food Network executives 
who offered her a show. She accepted;  30 Minute Meals  aired in 
November 2002. Rachael became one of the most popular ﬁ gures 
on the cable network, assuring her celebrity. One of the quickest 
ways to increase your celebrity is to associate with established 
celebrities. On  Inside Dish with Rachael Ray  (Food Network, 2004), 
she regularly interviewed celebrities such as Morgan Freeman and 
Tony Danza. Another way to increase your celebrity is to work in 
other media ﬁ elds. Rachael has published cookbooks and serves 
as editor for her lifestyle magazine,  Every Day with Rachael Ray . 
Personality is perhaps another contributor to celebrity. Rachael 
has been described as “normal, cute, fun, bubbly, perky, adorable, 
and chatty.” This sort of personality doesn ’ t work for everyone, 
but it is working for Rachael. 
 Arnold Schwarzenegger (1947–) 
 Arnold Alois Schwarzenegger, born July 30, 1947 in Graz, Austria, 
is governor of California. His family had no indoor plumbing, 
telephone, or refrigerator until he was 14 years old. He credits 
a poor childhood environment with his strong desire to succeed. 
He saw his ﬁ rst movie at age 11, became fascinated with America 
and believed he was destined for something big. He began a body-
building regimen, feeling it was the quickest way to gain entrance 
to the United States. After a stint in the Austrian army (where 
he served a year in the brig for being AWOL to compete in a 

138 Biographical Sketches
weightlifting competition), Arnold continued building strength 
and muscle, winning the 1967 Mr. Universe title and becoming a 
celebrity among those in the bodybuilding/weightlifting field. 
After competing in Miami Beach in 1968 for a second Mr. Universe 
title (placing second), he went to Los Angeles hoping to work his 
way into the ﬁ lm industry. He worked in several B-level movies, 
including  Hercules Goes to New York  (1970).  Conan the Barbarian 
(1982) and  Conan the Destroyer  (1983) utilized his physical assets, 
and although critics disliked both ﬁ lms, Arnold became a minor 
ﬁ lm celebrity. He became a U.S. citizen in 1983. He moved to major-
celebrity status in 1984, starring in James Cameron ’ s  The Terminator . 
A string of movies followed:  Predator  (1987),  Total Recall  (1990), and 
two more Terminator ﬁ lms, among others. Arnold became inter-
ested in politics in the early 1990s. He told friends he hoped one 
day to seek public ofﬁ ce. His chance came in 2003 when he was 
elected governor of California as a Republican in a special election 
(occasioned by the recall of Governor Gray Davis). Arnold is 
married to Maria Shriver, a television journalist and part of the 
Kennedy family Democratic political dynasty.  
 Martin Scorsese (1942–) 
 Martin Luciano Scorsese is a celebrity ﬁ lmmaker. He was born 
November 17, 1942, in Flushing, New York, to parents of Italian 
Sicilian descent. He suffered from asthma as a child and, unable to 
roughhouse with other children in the neighborhood, play sports, 
or do odd jobs, became something of an outsider. To take his mind 
off his poor health, his father took him to movies. He enjoyed the 
ﬁ lms, but felt he was destined to become a Catholic priest. After 
a bit of religious training, Martin decided that ﬁ lmmaking was 
his true calling. He studied ﬁ lmmaking at New York University 
(NYU) where his student ﬁ lms won awards. After earning a gradu-
ate degree in ﬁ lm communications, he taught for a while at NYU. 
Although he made several ﬁ lms before 1976, his big break came in 
that year with  Taxi Driver , a ﬁ lm critics deplored for its violence, 
but a ﬁ lm that won the grand prize at the Cannes Film Festival. 
Martin was on his way to becoming a celebrity.  Raging Bull (1980) 
was praised by critics, but was not a box ofﬁ ce success. He continued 
to battle chronic fatigue and asthma. One doctor told him he was 
killing himself with work and would have to change his lifestyle 

Britney Spears (1981–) 139
if he wanted to live. In the 1980s, he contemplated a change from 
what he called “personal” ﬁ lms to more market-driven ones.  The 
Color of Money  (1986),  Goodfellas  (1990), and  Gangs of New York 
(2002) ﬁ rmly established him as a celebrity ﬁ lmmaker. He worked 
often with celebrity actor Robert DeNiro.  The Departed  (2006) was 
hailed by one critic as the “most purely enjoyable movie in years.” 
It won four Academy Awards, including the awards for Best 
Picture and Best Director. 
 Britney Spears (1981–) 
 No list of celebrities destined to be important in the 21st century 
would be complete without Britney Spears. She is a singer, song-
writer, and actress. Love her or hate her, she ’ s been a celebrity 
most of her life. Britney Jean Spears was born December 2, 1981, 
in Kentwood, Louisiana. As a child, she took dancing classes, 
participated in gymnastics, and appeared to know what she was 
born to do. She once noted that at age seven or eight, she would 
perform in front of the television set to entertain her parents ’  
guests. At age eight, she auditioned for a role on Disney ’ s  The 
New Mickey Mouse Club , but was judged too young for the part. 
After appearing on  Star Search  (1992) at age 11, she tried out again 
for  The New Mickey Mouse Club  and was picked for the cast along 
with Justin Timberlake, Christina Aguilera, and Keri Russell. 
When the show was cancelled, Britney began focusing on her 
musical career. Her ﬁ rst hit single, “Baby One More Time,” hit 
the top of the pop music charts in early 1999, but it was probably 
the song ’ s music video—where Britney wore a skimpy school-
girl uniform—that propelled her toward celebrity. As is often the 
case with celebrities, part of Britney ’ s appeal revolved around 
her personal life—the full-mouth kiss with singer Madonna at 
the 2003 Music Video Awards, her two-day marriage to childhood 
friend Jason Alexander, her involvement with dancer Kevin 
Federline (his girlfriend was pregnant at the time), her marriage 
to Federline in 2004, her shaved head and subsequent rehab stint 
(the ﬁ rst of several), and driving with her infant son in her lap 
rather than in a child safety seat. Nevertheless, her concerts are 
well attended and her music continues to be popular. Her album 
 Blackout  (2007) placed second on the music charts shortly after 
its release. Britney appears to have settled down a bit in recent 
years, but she is still a worldwide celebrity.   

140 Biographical Sketches
 Steven Spielberg (1946–) 
 Steven Spielberg is one of the most creative, important ﬁ lmmakers 
in the history of the ﬁ lm industry. His work is known and loved 
worldwide. Steven Allan Spielberg was born December 18, 1946, 
in Cincinnati, Ohio. Because his family moved often, he had few 
childhood friends. He was often lonely and dispirited, but found 
comfort in watching movies. After his parents ’  divorce in 1965, 
Steven moved to California where he completed high school. He 
applied to the University of Southern California ﬁ lm school but 
was rejected three times. He attended Long Beach State for a time, 
but dropped out to pursue a career in ﬁ lm. After some early direct-
ing experience on several television shows ( Columbo  and  Marcus 
Welby, M.D. , among others), he turned his full attention to ﬁ lm. 
His ﬁ rst ﬁ lm,  The Sugarland Express  (1974), was a box ofﬁ ce failure. 
However, his second ﬁ lm became a classic and vaulted him to 
cele brity status;  Jaws (1975) was both a critical and ﬁ nancial suc-
cess. From there, it was one successful movie after another, each 
enhancing his reputation as a movie-making genius:  Close Encoun-
ters of the Third Kind  (1977),  Raiders of the Lost Ark  (1981),  E.T.: The 
Extra-Terrestrial  (1982),  Jurassic Park  (1993),  Schindler ’ s List  (a 1993 
ﬁ lm that earned seven Oscars, including Best Director and Best 
Picture), and  Saving Private Ryan (1998, earning an Oscar for Best 
Director). Steven has more than a dozen other successful ﬁ lms, and 
a few not-so-successful ones. He is Hollywood ’ s most successful—
and wealthiest—ﬁ lmmaker. He is a worldwide celebrity.  
 Jon Stewart (1962–) 
 Jon Stewart, a comedian and comedy-television-show host, was 
born Jonathan Stuart Leibowitz in New York City, November 28, 
1962. He grew up in Lawrenceville, New Jersey, and graduated 
from the College of William and Mary in Virginia. Following 
graduation, he worked a series of jobs back home in New Jersey 
before moving to New York City in 1986 to pursue a comedy 
career; he became a familiar ﬁ gure on the city ’ s comedy club 
circuit. His minor league celebrity was soon replaced by a more 
visible sort. Known for his sarcastic, incisive sense of humor, Jon 
landed a spot on  The Larry Sanders Show  (1992) and served as guest 
host on  The Late, Late Show with Tom Snyder . His celebrity status 

Taylor Swift (1989–) 141
sprang into the television public ’ s consciousness when he was 
named host of Comedy Central ’ s  The Daily Show  in 1999, which 
was renamed  The Daily Show with Jon Stewart.  Jon has won Emmy 
and Peabody awards and was named America ’ s Best Talk Show 
Host by  Time  magazine. Posing as a fake newsman on  The Daily 
Show , his success derives mainly from his entertaining and contro-
versial approach to the news. When asked about his success on the 
show, Jon said, “Liberal and conservative have lost their meaning 
in America. I represent the distracted center. When in doubt, I can 
stare blankly. The rubber face. There ’ s only so many ways you can 
stare incredulously at the camera and tilt an eyebrow, but that ’ s 
your old standby.”  
 Taylor Swift (1989–) 
 Country music singer, songwriter, and musician, Taylor Alison 
Swift was born December 13, 1989, in Wyomissing, Pennsylva-
nia. Her family owned a Christmas tree farm and that ’ s where 
she spent her early childhood. However, she had a thin con-
nection to celebrity in those early days—her grandmother had 
been a professional opera singer. By age 10, Taylor had begun 
singing at local fairs and civic events. She sang “The Star-Spangled 
Banner” at age 11 before a professional basketball game and was 
writing songs and learning to play the guitar a year later. Realizing 
Taylor ’ s talent and potential, her family moved to Nashville 
where she could more effectively pursue her interest in music. 
A performance at Nashville ’ s Bluebird Café caught the attention 
of a music industry executive who signed her to a recording 
contract. Her ﬁ rst single, “Tim McGraw” (2006), became a Top 10 
hit on the country charts. Her album that same year sold more 
than 2 million copies. Her celebrity was assured when she won 
the Academy of Country Music ’ s “Female Vocalist of the Year” 
award in 2007. Other awards and hit songs followed. In 2009, 
onstage to accept the MTV award for “Best Female Video,” Taylor 
was interrupted by rapper Kanye West who leaped onstage, took 
the microphone away from her, and declared that R&B singer 
Beyoncé should have won the award. Taylor was stunned 
and unable to make an acceptance speech; West was removed 
from the stage. Later in the show, Beyoncé, onstage to accept 
an award for best video, called Taylor to the stage to ﬁ nish her 
acceptance speech. West later apologized to her. The incident 

142 Biographical Sketches
added to Taylor ’ s celebrity status. Her concerts sell out in just a 
few minutes;  Forbes  magazine ranked her as the 69th most power-
ful celebrity. She won four Country Music Association (CMA) 
awards in 2009 (Album of the Year, Female Vocalist of the Year, 
Entertainer of the Year, and Music Video of the Year). Onstage to 
accept the awards, Taylor poked fun at the West incident saying, 
“I want to thank every single person here tonight for not running 
up on stage during this speech.” No doubt about it, Taylor is a 
major music celebrity.  
 Rick Warren (1954–) 
 Richard Duane “Rick” Warren is an evangelical minister and 
author. Born January 28, 1954, in San Jose, California, Rick joined 
a family already committed to a religious life. His father was a 
minister as was his great-grandfather. After high school, he stud-
ied for the ministry, earning bachelor ’ s, master ’ s, and doctoral 
degrees. After completing his religious education, Rick felt called 
to start a program to reach people who did not attend church. He 
organized a small bible study group in his home; the group grew 
quickly and held its ﬁ rst public service in 1980 for more than 200 
people. The Saddleback Valley Community Church, established 
as a result of that ﬁ rst public service, now has about 20,000 
members and is one of the largest mega-churches in America. Rick 
holds several honorary doctorates, has lectured at Oxford and 
Cambridge, and has spoken at various United Nations ’  forums. 
In religious circles, Rick was now most certainly a celebrity. He 
was named by  Time  magazine as one of 15 World Leaders Who 
Mattered Most in 2004 and by  U.S. News and World Report  as one 
of America ’ s Top 25 Leaders in 2005. Rick is a  New York Times best-
selling author. One of his books,  The Purpose Driven Life , has sold 
more than 30 million copies. He hosted the Civil Forum on the 
Presidency at his church during the 2008 presidential campaign, 
discussing politics and religion with candidates Barack Obama 
and John McCain. Obama later asked Rick to deliver the invoca-
tion at the presidential inauguration ceremony in January 2009. 
It is difﬁ cult for a religious ﬁ gure to achieve true celebrity status. 
The public often feels that religion is a private matter and only 
a few religious leaders become national or international celebri-
ties. However, Rick ’ s work as a minister, author, and speaker has 
made him a celebrity, at least in the United States. 

Mark Zuckerberg (1984–) 143
 Oprah Winfrey (1954–) 
 Oprah Winfrey, a television personality, actress, and producer, 
has been called “The Queen of Daytime TV.” Oprah Gail Winfrey 
was born on January 29, 1954, in Kosciusko, a small farming 
community in Mississippi. Although she learned to read and 
deliver recitations by age three, her childhood was not happy. She 
was sexually abused by a number of male relatives and friends 
of her mother. She moved to Nashville, Tennessee, to live with 
her father and entered Tennessee State University in 1971, major-
ing in Speech Communications and Performing Arts. Her broad-
cast career began almost immediately. She was hired by WVOL 
radio in Nashville, and two years later landed a job as a reporter/
anchor at Nashville ’ s WTVF-TV. Oprah moved to Baltimore, 
joining WJZ-TV as a news anchor and soon became co-host of the 
station ’ s “People Are Talking” show. The show became highly 
popular. Eight years later, she was hired by Chicago ’ s WLS-TV 
to revitalize its faltering talk show, “AM Chicago.” By this time, 
she had become something of a celebrity in television circles, but 
was generally unknown to the country at large. That changed in 
1986 when  “The Oprah Winfrey Show”  became the number one 
tele vision talk show in syndication; the following year it received 
three Daytime Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Host. 
Oprah was now a national celebrity. For more than 20 years,  The 
Oprah Winfrey Show , often called just  Oprah , has been available 
in 200 television markets, has dominated daytime television, and 
enabled her to build a multibillion-dollar media empire. In 2009, 
 Forbes  magazine listed her as the top-earning celebrity ($275 million). 
Today, HARPO Productions, her production company, is a power-
ful and inﬂ uential force. Her fans were shocked, therefore, when 
she announced in late 2009 that her show will end its run in 2011. 
Oprah is involved in several important social causes. In 1993, 
President Bill Clinton signed the National Child Protection Act, a 
bill promoted by Oprah establishing a national database of con-
victed child abusers. Her own Angel Network strives to improve 
the lives of others. 
 Mark Zuckerberg (1984–) 
 Mark Elliot Zuckerberg was born May 14, 1984, in Dobbs Ferry, 
New York. He is the founder of Facebook, a social networking 

144 Biographical Sketches
Web site. Mark may be the only person in this chapter whose 
work is better known than he is. His interest in technology began 
in the sixth grade and by the ninth grade, he was writing soft-
ware programs. He attended the Phillips Exeter Academy prep 
school, then enrolled in Harvard in 2002 as a psychology major. 
However, he continued to write computer programs. One of the 
programs was called “Facemash,” an online directory of Harvard 
students. By February 2004, the program had morphed into “the 
  facebook.com  .” Other universities adopted the program for their 
students; eventually it had more than a million users. The word 
 the was dropped in 2005. Facebook began to expand, offering 
membership not only to students, but also to university faculty 
and alumni. Since 2006, Facebook has been available to anyone 
who wishes to join. Facebook statistics are staggering—more than 
400 million active users, 5 billion pieces of content shared each 
week, and more than 3 billion photos uploaded each month. 
It is the most popular social networking Web site on the Internet. 
Mark moved to Palo Alto, California, and now operates Facebook 
full time from four downtown buildings. As suggested earlier in 
this proﬁ le, Facebook may be the real celebrity here, but Mark 
gets the credit for making it a social and ﬁ nancial success. 

145
  6 
 Data and Documents 
 T
his chapter presents facts, ﬁ gures, and other information 
relating to celebrities and their work. As you read through 
the chapter, you will notice much of the information is about 
individuals in entertainment ﬁ elds, that is, television, music, and 
the movies. However, some attention is given to celebrities in 
other ﬁ elds, although data in some areas are limited. It is help-
ful to keep in mind data are accurate only for a short time. In 
other words, data can be said to be valid immediately after facts 
are gathered, but the passage of time almost certainly results in 
changes to some data.  
 Celebrity Magazines and Television 
Programs 
 Television is not as popular as it once was chieﬂ y because con-
sumers have other electronic devices that demand their attention. 
Many people get news and information from the Internet that 
can also be used to access television shows and other entertainment 
programs. This makes computers and smart phones as valuable 
to consumers as the family television in the living room. While 
the television news audience may be shrinking, viewership of 
celebrity television programs, that is, programs  about celebri-
ties, remains fairly strong. As   Table 6.1   shows, overall viewer-
ship of celebrity television programs remained steady during 
the 10-year period 1998–2008. For example, the celebrity show 
 Extra  had slightly more than 7 million viewers in the 1998–1999 

146 Data and Documents
period. By 2005–2006, the program was down to about 3 million 
viewers. However, the celebrity show  Insider  picked up 3.5 million 
viewers. During that same period,  Access Hollywood  picked up 
almost a million viewers. The net result was that there was little 
overall change. The conclusion most apparent from   Table 6.1   is 
that viewers apparently moved around from one celebrity show 
to another over the years, but remained rather faithful to these 
sorts of programs.  
 Celebrity magazine circulation ﬁ gures in 2008 (  Table 6.2  ) 
clearly indicate two longstanding publications dominate the ﬁ eld. 
 People  and  TV Guide  each had almost double the circulation of the 
runner-up,  US Weekly . It could be argued that  TV Guide  is not a 
real celebrity magazine—its main purpose is providing listings 
of television program offerings. However, the publication does 
feature brief articles on celebrities and may, in fact, be the main 
source of celebrity information for some consumers. Notice that 
four of the top celebrity magazines in 2008 had circulations of 
 TABLE 6.1 
 Viewership of Celebrity Television Programs, 1998–2008 
Program
Year
Viewers
 Access Hollywood 
8/98–8/99
2,450,000
 Entertainment Tonight 
8/98–8/99
4,489,000
 Extra 
8/98–8/99
7,334,000
 Insider 
—
—
 TMZ 
—
—
 Access Hollywood 
9/00–9/01
3,010,000
 Entertainment Tonight 
9/00–9/01
7,769,000
 Extra 
9/00–9/01
3,753,000
 Insider 
—
—
 TMZ 
—
—
 Access Hollywood 
8/05–8/06
3,319,000
 Entertainment Tonight 
8/05–8/06
6,760,000
 Extra 
8/05–8/06
2,928,000
 Insider 
8/05–8/06
3,494,000
 TMZ 
—
—
 Access Hollywood 
9/08–12/08
2,588,000
 Entertainment Tonight 
9/08–12/08
5,951,000
 Extra 
9/08–12/08
2,233,000
 Insider 
9/08–12/08
2,573,000
 TMZ 
9/08–12/08
2,866,000
Adapted from: The Nielsen Company; DeSilva + Phillips

Celebrities and the Movies 147
fewer than a million. This may be further evidence of the declin-
ing inﬂ uence of print media in the United States. 
 Celebrities and the Movies 
 Movies have been a part of American life since the silent ﬁ lm era of 
the early 1900s. For actors, actresses, producers, and directors, ﬁ lms 
have been a quick route to celebrity. The ﬁ lm industry is big busi-
ness worldwide. Movies draw large audiences.   Table 6.3   shows the 
most popular movies earn millions—and in some cases, billions—of 
 TABLE 6.2 
 Celebrity Magazine Circulation, 2008 
Magazine Title
Subscriptions
Single Copy
Total
 People 
2,127,384
1,472,149
3,599,533
 TV Guide 
2,942,230
155,391
3,097,621
 US Weekly 
1,011,018
796,669
1,807,687
 Entertainment Weekly 
1,701,153
50,437
1,751,590
 Star Magazine 
571,525
617,096
1,188,621
 In Touch Weekly 
64,419
834,492
898,911
 National Enquirer 
271,275
620,100
891,375
 OK! Weekly 
341,759
490,417
832,176
 Life & Style Weekly 
10,189
461,989
472,178
Adapted from DeSilva + Phillips, LLC
 TABLE 6.3 
 Top Ten Highest-Grossing Films (Worldwide) 
Film (year)
Celebrity Stars
Receipts 
(rounded in millions)
  1. Avatar (2009)
Sigourney Weaver, Zoe Saldana
2,249
  2. Titanic (1997)
Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet
1,843
  3. Lord of the Rings: Return of the King (2003)
Elijah Wood, Orlando Bloom
1,119
  4. Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man ’ s Chest (2006)
Johnny Depp, Orlando Bloom
1,066
  5. The Dark Knight (2008)
Heath Ledger, Christian Bale
1,002
  6. Harry Potter: Philosopher ’ s Stone (2001)
Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson
975
  7. Pirates of the Caribbean: At World ’ s End (2007)
Johnny Depp, Keira Knightley
961
  8. Harry Potter: Order of the Phoenix 2007)
Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson
958
  9. Harry Potter: Half-Blood Prince (2009)
Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson
944
 10. Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002)
Elijah Wood, Sean Astin
935
Adapted from: Box Ofﬁ ce Mojo;  imbd.com 

148 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.4 
 Movie Celebrities of the 20th Century 
 (Listed alphabetically with birth and death dates and representative ﬁ lm) 
Fred Astaire
(1899–1987)
Clark Gable
(1901–1960)
 Top Hat 
 Gone with the Wind 
Lucille Ball
(1911–1989)
Cary Grant
(1904–1986)
 The Long, Long Trailer 
 North by Northwest 
Ingrid Bergman
(1915–1982)
Judy Garland
(1922–1969)
 Murder on the Orient Express 
 The Wizard of Oz 
Humphrey Bogart
(1899–1957)
Audrey Hepburn
(1929–1993)
 Casablanca 
 Breakfast at Tiffany ’ s 
Marlon Brando
(1924–2004)
Boris Karloff
(1887–1969)
 The Godfather 
 Frankenstein 
Richard Burton
(1925–1984)
Grace Kelly
(1929–1982)
 Who ’ s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? 
 Rear Window 
James Cagney
(1899–1986)
Vivian Leigh
(1913–1967)
 Yankee Doodle Dandy 
 Gone with the Wind 
Charlie Chaplin
(1889–1977)
Groucho Marx
(1890–1997)
 The Great Dictator 
 Duck Soup 
Gary Cooper
(1901–1961)
Marilyn Monroe
(1926–1962)
 High Noon 
 Some Like It Hot 
Bette Davis
(1908–1989)
Gregory Peck
(1916–2003)
 All About Eve 
 To Kill a Mockingbird 
Marlene Dietrich
(1901–1992)
Edward G. Robinson
(1893-1973)
 Witness for the Prosecution 
 Double Indemnity 
Bing Crosby
(1903–1977)
Ginger Rogers
(1911–1995)
 Holiday Inn 
 Top Hat 
Joan Crawford
(1908–1977)
Spencer Tracy
(1900–1967)
 Mildred Pierce 
 Judgment at Nuremberg 
James Dean
(1931–1955)
James Stewart
(1906–1997)
 Rebel without a Cause 
 It ’ s a Wonderful Life 
Errol Flynn
(1909–1959)
John Wayne
(1907–1979)
 The Adventures of Robin Hood 
 The Green Berets 
Henry Fonda
(1905–1982)
Orson Welles
(1915–1985)
 The Grapes of Wrath 
 Citizen Kane 
 dollars. Nine of the top 10 worldwide highest-grossing movies were 
produced in the 21st century,  Titanic being the exception in 1997.  
 Some readers of this book may recognize some of the 20th-
century ﬁ lm celebrities and their movies in   Table 6.4  . It is impor-
tant to recognize that movies were in large part responsible for 
the success of many actors and actresses. Although all those listed 
in   Table 6.4   are dead, many of their performances rank as some of 

Gender Differences in Prime Time Television Celebrity Earnings   149
 TABLE 6.5 
 Movie Celebrities of the Early 21st Century
 (Listed alphabetically with birth date and representative ﬁ lms) 
Jennifer Aniston (b. 1969)
 Marley & Me 
Shia LaBeouf (b. 1986)
 Transformers 
Christian Bale (b. 1974)
 Batman Begins 
Jude Law (b. 1972)
 Sherlock Holmes 
Abigail Breslin (b. 1996)
 Little Miss Sunshine 
Heath Ledger (1979–2008)
 Dark Knight 
Gerard Butler (b. 1969)
 300 
Jennifer Lopez (b. 1969)
 The Wedding Planner 
Jim Carrey (b. 1962)
 The Truman Show 
Rachel McAdams (b. 1978)
 Sherlock Holmes 
Michael Cera (b. 1988)
 Juno 
Toby Maguire (b. 1975)
 Spider-Man 
George Clooney (b. 1961)
 Up in the Air 
Michael Moore (b. 1954)
 Fahrenheit 9/11 
Jennifer Connelly (b. 1970)
 A Beautiful Mind 
Ellen Page (b. 1987)
 Juno 
Bradley Cooper (b. 1975)
 The Hangover 
Dev Patel (b. 1990)
 Slumdog Millionaire 
Daniel Craig (b. 1968)
 Casino Royale 
Robert Pattinson (b. 1986)
The  Twilight Saga 
Russell Crowe (b. 1964)
 Gladiator 
Daniel Radcliffe (b. 1989)
 Harry Potter ﬁ lms
Tom Cruise (b. 1962)
 Mission Impossible 
Adam Sandler (b. 1966)
 50 First Dates 
Matt Damon (b. 1970)
The  Bourne ﬁ lms
Will Smith (b. 1968)
 I Am Legend 
Johnny Depp (b. 1963)
 Pirates of the Caribbean 
Kristen Stewart (b. 1990)
The  Twilight Saga 
Cameron Diaz (b. 1972)
 What Happens in Vegas 
Meryl Streep (b. 1949)
 Julie & Julia 
Leonardo DiCaprio (b. 1974)
 The Departed 
Hilary Swank (b. 1974)
 Boys Don ’ t Cry 
Robert Downey Jr. (b. 1965)
 Sherlock Holmes 
John Travolta (b. 1954)
 Taking of Pelham 1 2 3 
Jodie Foster (b. 1962)
 The Brave One 
Vince Vaughn (b. 1970)
 Wedding Crashers 
Megan Fox (b. 1986)
 Transformers 
Denzel Washington (b. 1954)
 The Book of Eli 
Jake Gyllenhaal (b. 1980)
 Brokeback Mountain 
Emma Watson (b. 1990)
 Harry Potter ﬁ lms
Tom Hanks (b. 1956)
 The Da Vinci Code 
Owen Wilson (b. 1968)
 Wedding Crashers 
Scarlett Johansson (b. 1984)
 Lost in Translation 
Reese Witherspoon (b. 1976)
 Legally Blonde 
Angelina Jolie (b. 1976)
 Mr. & Mrs. Smith 
Elijah Wood (b. 1981)
 Lord of the Rings ﬁ lms
Nicole Kidman (b. 1967)
 Eyes Wide Shut 
the all-time best in the movies. For example, Gregory Peck was 
outstanding in  To Kill a Mockingbird , Clark Gable was remarkable in 
 Gone with the Wind , and Judy Garland was marvelous in  The Wizard 
of Oz . But our emphasis in this book is on celebrity in the 21st 
century. Therefore,   Table 6.5   should be of considerable interest to 
a movie buff. The actors listed there continue to make ﬁ lms and 
most will be around as ﬁ lm celebrities for some time to come. 
 Gender Differences in Prime 
Time Television Celebrity 
Earnings 
 There is much talk these days about gender equity in salary and 
in employment opportunities. While there has been improvement 

150 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.6 
 U.S. Prime Time TV Top-Earning Females 
Name
Television Show
Earnings (in millions)
Tyra Banks
 The Tyra Banks Show 
$30
Katherine Heigl
 Grey ’ s Anatomy 
$18
Marg Helgenberger
 CSI: Crime Scene Investigation 
$    9.5
Eva Longoria Parker
 Desperate Housewives 
$    9
Mariska Hargitay
 Law & Order 
$    8.5
Julia Louis-Dreyfus
 Adventures of Old Christine; Saturday Night Live 
$    8
Maura Tierney
 ER; Mercy 
$    8
Tina Fey
 30 Rock; Saturday Night Live 
$    7
Marcia Cross
 Desperate Housewives 
$    6.2
Jennifer Love Hewitt
 Ghost Whisperer 
$    6
Ellen Pompeo
 Grey ’ s Anatomy 
$    6
Adapted from  Forbes.com ,  famewatcher.com 
 TABLE 6.7 
 U.S. Prime Time TV Top-Earning Males 
Name
Television Show
Earnings (in millions)
Simon Cowell
 American Idol 
$75
Donald Trump
 The Apprentice 
$50
Ryan Seacrest
 American Idol 
$38
Charlie Sheen
 Two and a Half Men 
$21
Steve Carell
 The Ofﬁ ce 
$21
Howie Mandel
 Deal or No Deal 
$15
Kiefer Sutherland
 24 
$13
Jeff Foxworthy
 Are You Smarter than a Fifth Grader? 
$11
Hugh Laurie
 House 
$10
David Caruso
 CSI: Miami 
$   9
Adapted from  Forbes.com ,  famewatcher.com 
in business, industry, and other fields, there are noticeable 
 differences in earnings of the top male and female celebrities on 
prime time television.  
 As Tables 6.6 and 6.7 indicate, male prime time television 
stars earn considerably more than female prime time stars. 
The highest-earning female would place fourth on the men ’ s 
earnings list. Moreover, 7 of the top 10 female earners would 
not be listed at all on the male top 10.  

Highest-Earning Celebrities 151
 Highest-Earning Celebrities 
 In earlier chapters we said that while there are few celebrities 
in science, medicine, academia, and religion, there are plenty of 
celebrities in entertainment.  Table 6.8 shows this to be true, at least 
in terms of total earnings. The highest-earning celebrities can be 
found in music, ﬁ lm, and radio and television. The lone exceptions 
are novelist James Patterson who ranks 20th and professional 
golfer Tiger Woods who holds down 5th place on the list of top 
earners. Woods ’ s earnings represent his earnings from golf and not 
earnings from endorsements. It is no surprise that tele vision per-
sonality Oprah Winfrey is the top-earning entertainment celebrity. 
 TABLE 6.8 
 Top 25 Highest-Earning Celebrities 
 Name 
 Celebrity Occupation 
 Earnings (in millions) 
Oprah Winfrey
television personality
$275
George Lucas
ﬁ lm producer, writer, director
$170
Steven Spielberg
ﬁ lm producer, writer, director
$150
Madonna
music recording artist
$110
Tiger Woods
professional golfer, advertising spokesperson
$110
Jerry Bruckheimer
ﬁ lm and television producer
$100
Beyoncé Knowles
music recording artist
$    87
Jerry Seinfeld
actor, comedian
$    85
Dr. Phil McGraw
television personality, author
$    80
Simon Cowell
television personality
$    75
Tyler Perry
actor, writer, producer
$    75
Bruce Springsteen
music recording artist
$    70
Coldplay
music recording artist
$    70
Howard Stern
radio personality
$    70
Harrison Ford
actor
$    65
Kenny Chesney
music recording artist
$    65
Dave Matthews Band
music recording artist
$    65
Rascal Flatts
music recording artist
$    65
AC/DC
music recording artist
$    60
James Patterson
author
$    60
Adam Sandler
actor
$    55
Larry David
comedian, television writer
$    55
Rush Limbaugh
radio talk show host
$    54
Toby Keith
music recording artist
$    52
Bon Jovi
music recording artist
$    50
Adapted from  Forbes.com ,  famewatcher.com 

152 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.9 
 Top Celebrity Fundraisers, 2009 
Name
Profession
Amount
Cause
Justin Timberlake
singer
$9.3 million
Shriners Hospitals for Children
Madonna
singer
5.5 million
Raising Malawi
Pamela Anderson
actress, model
4.8 million
PETA
Oprah
television personality
4.0 million
Oprah ’ s Angel Network
Bono
singer
3.5 million
ONE Campaign
Angelina Jolie
actress
3.0 million
UN Commission for Refugees
Rihanna
singer, model
2.3 million
UNICEF
George Clooney
actor
2.1 million
United Nations
Salma Hayek
actress
1.6 million
UNICEF
Brad Pitt
actor
1.2 million
Not on Our Watch
Shakira
singer
1.2 million
UNICEF
Charlize Theron
actress
1.2 million
PETA
Orlando Bloom
actor
1.1 million
UNICEF
Sharon Stone
actress
950,000
Foundation for AIDS Research
Denzel Washington
actor
900,000
Boys & Girls Clubs of America
Adapted from:  www.looktothestars.org ;  www.thedailybeast.com 
She is one of the most widely recognized and respected celebrities 
of the early 21st century. A brief biographical proﬁ le of Winfrey 
can be found in   Chapter 5  . Filmmakers George Lucas and Steven 
Spielberg have numerous movie successes to their credit and are 
worthy runners-up to Winfrey. Furthermore, the list of names in 
  Table 6.8   reveals that to make lots of money, one must become 
a celebrity in an entertainment ﬁ eld such as movies, television, 
music, and the like.  
 Top Celebrity Fundraisers 
 Many celebrities have a strong sense of social responsibility, that 
is, working for charities or other organizations designed to help 
the less fortunate of the world.   Table 6.9   shows celebrities to be 
fairly accomplished at raising money for their favorite charity. 
Celebrity causes are as varied as the celebrities themselves, but 
the United Nations Children ’ s Fund (UNICEF) appears to be the 
most popular among the top fundraisers. Singer Justin Timberlake 
was a surprising ﬁ rst on the 2009 list. Oprah, Bono, and Angelina 
Jolie have a history of work on behalf of charities and their 
contributions were signiﬁ cant in 2009. However, Timberlake beat 

Celebrities and Religion 153
second-place Madonna by almost $4 million, Oprah by $5 million, 
Bono by $5.8 million, and Jolie by more than $6 million. 
 Celebrities and Religion 
 We noted in an earlier chapter that religion is a sensitive topic 
among some people and discussion of religion or religion-related 
issues makes some people uncomfortable and other people angry. 
However, for many people—including celebrities—religion is 
an important part of life.  Table 6.10 reveals the religious prefer-
ences of some celebrities. Scientology is a popular choice for many 
celebrities. Although   Table 6.10   doesn ’ t show it, there are dozens 
of celebrities who are either atheists or agnostics. 
 TABLE 6.10 
 Religious Preferences of Celebrities * 
Celebrity
Profession
Religious Status
Muhammad Ali
professional boxer
Muslim
Woody Allen
actor, director
Atheist
Kirstie Alley
actress
Scientologist
Beck
musician, singer, songwriter
Scientologist
Warren Buffett
businessman
Agnostic
Richard Dreyfus
actor
Agnostic
Jenna Elfman
actress
Scientologist
Larry Flynt
magazine publisher
Atheist
Richard Gere
actor
Tibetan Buddhist
Mel Gibson
actor
Catholic
Katie Holmes
actress
Scientologist
Angelina Jolie
actress
Spiritualist
Nicole Kidman
actress
Catholic
Ben Kingsley
actor
Quaker
Gladys Knight
singer
Mormon
George Lucas
ﬁ lm director, producer
Buddhist Methodist
Lisa Marie Presley
actress
Scientologist
Kelly Preston
actress
Scientologist
Anne Rice
author
Catholic
Jada and Will Smith
actress/actor
Scientologists
Britney Spears
singer
Baptist/Christian Life
Uma Thurman
actress
Buddhist
John Travolta
actor
Scientologist
Serena and Venus Williams
professional tennis players
Jehovah ’ s Witnesses
 * List compiled from multiple sources and based on news reports or celebrities ’ personal statements. Beliefs are 
subject to change.

154 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.11 
 Top-Earning Celebrity Chefs 
Chef
Earnings (in millions)
Sources of Income
Rachael Ray
$18
Television, magazine, endorsements
Wolfgang Puck
$16
Restaurants, supermarket products
Alain Ducasse
$    5
International restaurants
Paula Deen
$    4.5
Television, magazine, cookbooks
Mario Batali
$    3
Restaurants, television, cookbooks
Adapted from  Forbes.com 
 Celebrity Chefs 
 Cooking shows are popular television fare. Cookbooks sell well, 
especially during the holiday season. Almost everyone likes to 
dine out at a favorite restaurant. In short, we like our food and we 
want to know how to prepare it; we also enjoy watching others 
prepare it. Although their earnings are signiﬁ cantly less than the 
celebrities on the top-earning list, celebrity chefs manage to make 
a good living.   Table 6.11   shows the typical annual earnings of ﬁ ve 
celebrity chefs. Rachael Ray (proﬁ led in   Chapter 5  ) tops all chefs, 
but earns only $2 million more than second-place ﬁ nisher Wolf-
gang Puck. The “dean” of Southern cooking, Paula Deen, earns a 
respectable $4.5 million per year. 
 AKA (Also Known As) 
 It is widely known that many celebrities do not use their real 
names in their professional lives. There may be two reasons for 
this. First, celebrities may wish to preserve the small amount of 
privacy afforded them by using a “stage name.” Second, many 
celebrities have complicated names that would be difﬁ cult for the 
public to remember. If one wishes to be known and talked about, 
an easy-to-say-and-remember name—one which might contain 
a rather common ﬁ rst or last name—goes a long way toward 
making a celebrity well known.   Table 6.12   lists the real names 
of more than four hundred celebrities, past and present. A close 
examination of the list reveals celebrities take one of two paths in 
selecting a professional name. Celebrities may use a variation of 
their real names. For example, country singer Randy Travis ’ s real 

 TABLE 6.12 
 Celebrities ’ Real Names 
Professional Name
Real (Birth) Name
Maud Adams
Maud Solveig Christina Wikstrom
Eddie Albert
Edward Albert Heimberger
Tim Allen
Tim Allen Dick
Woody Allen
Allen Stewart Koningsberg
Tori Amos
Myra Ellen Amos
Don Ameche
Dominic Felix Amici
Julie Andrews
Julia Elizabeth Wells
Jennifer Aniston
Jennifer Anastassakis
Ann-Margret
Ann-Margret Olsson
Adam Ant
Stuart Leslie Goddard
Rosanna Arquette
Rosanna Lauren
Fred Astaire
Frederick Austerlitz
Frankie Avalon
Francis Thomas Avallone
Charles Aznavour
Shahnour Varenagh Aznavourian
Lauren Bacall
Betty Joan Perske
Catherine Bach
Catherine Bachman
Richard Bachman
Stephen Edward King
Lucille Ball
Dianne Belmont
Anne Bancroft
Anna Maria Luisa Italiano
Brigitte Bardot
Camille Javal
Drew Barrymore
Drew Blyth Barrymore
Warren Beatty
Henry Warren Beaty
Bonnie Bedelia
Bonnie Culkin
Pat Benatar
Patricia Andrejewski
Dirk Benedict
Dirk Niewoehner
Tom Berenger
Thomas Michael Moore
Milton Berle
Milton Berlinger
Irving Berlin
Israel Isidore Baline
The Big Bopper
Jiles Perry Richardson
Billy the Kid
Henry McCarty
Robert Blake
Michael Gubitosi
Blondie
Debbie Harry
Dirk Bogarde
Derek Jules Gaspard Ulric Niven van denBogaerde
Michael Bolton
Michale Bolotin
Jon Bon Jovi
John Bongiovi
Bono
Paul Hewson
Victor Borge
Borge Rosenbaum
Ernest Borgnine
Ermes Effron Borgnino
David Bowie
David Robert Hayward Stenton Jones
Edgar Box
Gore Vidal
Beau Bridges
Lloyd Vernet Bridges, III
Morgan Brittany
Suzanne Cupito
Charles Bronson
Charles Buchnisky
(continued )

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Albert Brooks
Albert Einstein
Elkie Brooks
Elaine Bookbinder
Geraldine Brooks
Geraldine Stroock
Mel Brooks
Melvin Kaminsky
Yul Brynner
Yuliy Borisovich Bryner 
Buffalo Bill
William Frederick Cody
George Burns
Nathan Birnbaum
Ellen Burstyn
Edna Rae Gillooly
Richard Burton
Richard Walter Jenkins Jr.
Red Buttons
Aaron Chwatt
Nicolas Cage
Nicolas Coppola
Michael Caine
Maurice J. Micklewhite
Maria Callas
Maria Ann Soﬁ a Cecelia Kalogeropoulos
Dyan Cannon
Samille Diane Friesen
Eddie Cantor
Israel Itskowitz
Kate Capshaw
Kathleen Sue Nail
Tia Carrere
Althea Janairo
Lewis Carroll
Rev. Charles Lutwidge Dodgson
Butch Cassidy
George Robert LeRoy Parker
Phoebe Cates
Phoebe Katz
Jackie Chan
Chan Kong-Sang
Coco Chanel
Gabrielle Bonheur Chanel
Stockard Channing
Susan Stockard
Cyd Charisse
Tula Ellice Finklea
Leslie Charteris
Leslie Charles Bowyer Lin
Chevy Chase
Cornelius Crane Chase
Chubby Checker
Ernest Evans
Cher
Cherilyn Sarkisian LaPiere
Eric Clapton
Eric Patrick Clap
Jimmy Cliff
James Chambers
Patsy Cline
Virginia Patterson Hensley
Lee J. Cobb
Leo Jacoby
Claudette Colbert
Claudette Lily Chauchoin
Nat King Cole
Nathaniel Adams Coles
Chuck Connors
Kevin Joseph Connors
Mike Connors
Krekor Ohanian
Joseph Conrad
Jozef Teodor Konrad Nalecz Korzeniowski
Alice Cooper
Vincent Damon Furnier
David Copperﬁ eld
David Kotkin
Alex Cord
Alexander Viespi
Elvis Costello
Declan Patrick McManus
Lou Costello
Louis Francis Cristillo
Peter Coyote
Peter Cohon
Joan Crawford
Lucille Fay LeSueur
Michael Crawford
Michael Dumbell-Smith
Bing Crosby
Harry Lillis Crosby
Christopher Cross
Christopher Geppert

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Tom Cruise
Thomas Cruise Mapother IV
Marie Curie
Marja Sklodowska
Tony Curtis
Bernard Schwartz
Rodney Dangerﬁ eld
Jacob Cohen
Ted Danson
Edward Bridge Danson III
Tony Danza
Anthony Ladanza
Bette Davis
Ruth Elizabeth Davis
Geena Davis
Virginia Davis
Miles Davis
Dewey Davis III
Doris Day
Doris Mary Ann von Kappelhoff
James Dean
James Byron
Kiki Dee
Pauline Matthews
Delores Del Rio
Lolita Dolores Martinez Asunsolo Lopez
Catherine Deneuve
Catherine Dorleac
John Denver
Henry John Deutschendorf Jr.
Bo Derek
Mary Cathleen Collins
John Derek
Derek Harris
Danny DeVito
Daniel Michaeli
Susan Dey
Susan Smith
Angie Dickinson
Angeline Brown
Bo Diddley
Elias McDaniel
Snoop Doggy Dogg
Calvin Broadus
Fats Domino
Antoine Domino
Diana Dors
Diana Fluck
Kirk Douglas
Issur Danielovitch Demsky
Melvyn Douglas
Melvyn Edouard Hesselberg
Margaret Dumont
Margaret Baker
Bob Dylan
Robert Allen Zimmerman
Sheena Easton
Sheena Shirley Orr
Blake Edwards
William Blake McEdwards
Carmen Electra
Tara Patrick
Duke Ellington
Edward Kennedy Ellington
Gloria Estefan
Gloria Fajardo
Linda Evans
Linda Evanstad
Tom Ewell
S. Yewell Tompkins
Douglas Fairbanks
Douglas Elton Ulman
Morgan Fairchild
Patsy Ann McClenny
Jamie Farr
Jameel Farrah
José Ferrer
Vicente Ferrer De Otero y Cintron
Sally Field
Sally Mahoney
W. C. Fields
William Claude Dukenﬁ eld
Linda Fiorentino
Clorinda Fiorentino
Grandmaster Flash
Joseph Saddler
John Forsythe
John Lincoln Freud
Jody Foster
Alicia Christian Foster
Samantha Fox
Stacia Micula
Redd Foxx
John Elroy Sanford
Connie Francis
Concetta Franconero
(continued )

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Kenny G
Kenny Gorelick
Zsa Zsa Gabor
Sari Gabor
Greta Garbo
Greta Lovisa Gustafsson
Andy Garcia
Andres Arturo Garci-Menendez
Vincent Gardenia
Vincente Scognamiglio
Ava Gardner
Lucy Johnson
Judy Garland
Frances Ethel Gumm
James Garner
James Scott Baumgarner
Ben Gazzara
Biago Anthony Gazzara
Boy George
B. George Alan O ’ Dowd
George Gershwin
Jacob Gerhvin
Stan Getz
Stanley Gayetzsky
Barry Gibb
Douglas Gibb
Dizzy Gillespie
John Birks Gillespie
Lillian Gish
Lillian de Guiche
Paulette Goddard
Pauline Marion Goddard Levy
Whoopi Goldberg
Caryn Johnson
Samuel Goldwyn
Schmuel Gelbﬁ sz
Elliott Gould
Elliott Goldstein
Stewart Granger
James Leblanche Stewart
Cary Grant
Archibald Alexander Leach
Peter Graves
Peter Aurness
Rocky Graziano
Thomas Rocco Barbella
Joel Grey
Joel Katz
D. W. Grifﬁ th
David Lewelyn Ward Grifﬁ th
Che Guevara
Ernesto Guevara
Alex Guinness
Alec Guinness de Cuffe
Buddy Hackett
Leonard Hacker
Gene Hackman
Eugene Alden Hackman
Arsenio Hall
Chuckton Arthur Hall
M. C. Hammer
Stanley Kirk Burrell
Mata Hari
Margaretha Geetruida Zelle
Renny Harlin
Lauri Harjola
Jean Harlow
Harlean Carpenter
Rex Harrison
Reginald Carey Harrison
P. J. Harvey
Polly Jean Harvey
Goldie Hawn
Goldie Jean Studlendgehawn
Rita Hayworth
Margarita Carmen Cansino
Tippi Hedren
Natalie Kay Hedren
Hugh Hefner
Larry Douglas Hefner
Jimi Hendrix
James Marshall Hendrix
Buck Henry
Buck Henry Zuckerman
Audrey Hepburn
Edda van Heemstra Hepburn-Ruston
Pee Wee Herman
Paul Rubenﬁ eld
James Herriot
James Alfred Wight
Barbara Hershey
Barbara Herzstein
Charlton Heston
John Charles Carter

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Hulk Hogan
Terry Bollea
Hal Holbrook
Harold Rowe Holbrook Jr.
William Holden
William Franklin Beedle Jr.
Billie Holiday
Eleanora Fagan
Buddy Holly
Charles Hardin Holley
Bob Hope
Leslie Townes Hope
Harry Houdini
Ehrich Weiss
John Houseman
Jacques Haussmann
Rock Hudson
Roy Harold Scherer Jr.
Engelbert Humperdinck
Arnold George Gerry Dorsey
Lauren Hutton
Mary Laurence Hutton
Lee Iacocca
Lido Anthony Iacocca
Janis Ian
Janis Eddy Fink
Ice Cube
O ’ shea Jackson
Ice-T
Tracy Marrow
Vanilla Ice
Robert Van Winkle
Billy Idol
William Michael Albert Broad
Burl Ives
Icle Ivanhoe Ives
L. L. Cool J.
James Todd Smith
Kareen Abdul-Jabbar
Ferdinand Lewis Alcindor Jr.
Wolfman Jack
Robert Weston Smith
Tito Jackson
Toriano Adaryll Jackson
Bianca Jagger
Bianca Perez Morena de Macias
Mick Jagger
Michael Philip Jagger
Etta James
Jamesetta Hawkins
Rick James
James Johnson
David Janssen
David Harold Meyer
Jose Jimenez
Bill Dana
Elton John
Reginald Kenneth Dwight
Don Johnson
Donnie Wayne Johnson
Al Jolson
Asa Yoelson
Brian Jones
Lewis Brian Hopkins Jones
Jennifer Jones
Phylis Isley
Spike Jones
Lindley Armstrong Jones
Tom Jones
Thomas Jones Woodward
Louis Jourdan
Louis Gendre
Raul Julia
Raul Rafael Carlos Julia y Arcelay
Boris Karloff
William Henry Pratt
Danny Kaye
David Daniel Kominski
Elia Kazan
Elia Kazanjoglou
Buster Keaton
Joseph Francis Keaton
Diane Keaton
Diane Hall
Michael Keaton
Michael Douglas
Howard Keel
Harold Clifford Leek
Gene Kelly
Eugene Curran Kelly
Chaka Khan 
Carole Yvette Marie Stevens
B. B. King
Riley B. King
Carole King
Carole Klein
(continued )

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Larry King
Lawrence Harvey Zeiger
Ben Kingsley
Krishna Banji
Rudyard Kipling
Richard Kipling
Calvin Klein
Richard Klein
Evel Knievel
Robert Craig Knievel
Cheryl Ladd
Cheryl Jean Stoppelmoor
Diane Ladd
Rose Diane Ladner
Frankie Laine
Frank Paul LoVecchio
Jimmy Lane
Abel Ferrara
Veronica Lake
Constance Frances Marie Ockelman
Hedy Lamarr
Hedwig Eva Maria Kiesler
Dorothy Lamour
Mary Leta Dorothy Kaumeyer
Burt Lancaster
Stephen Burton
Audrey Landers
Audrey Hamburg
Judy Landers
Judy Hamburg
Michael Landon
Eugene Maurice Orowitz
K. D. Lang
Katherine Dawn Lang
Jessica Lange
Mary MacGregor
John Lange
Michael Crichton
Mario Lanza
Alfredo Arnold Cocozza
Stan Laurel
Arthur Stanley Jefferson
Ralph Lauren
Ralph Lifshitz
Piper Laurie
Rosetta Jacobs
John Le Carre
David John Moore Cornwell
Bruce Lee
Lee Jun Fan
Peggy Lee
Norma Engstrom
Spike Lee
Shelton Jackson Lee
Janet Leigh
Jeanette Helen Morrison
Jennifer Jason Leigh
Jennifer Lee Morrow
Vivien Leigh
Vivian Mary Hartley
Jack Lemmon
John Uhler Lemmon III
Julian Lennon
John Charles Lennon
Jay Leno
James Douglas Muir Leno
Tea Leoni
Tea Pantleoni
Huey Lewis
Hugh Cregg
Jerry Lewis
Joseph Joey Levitch
Liberace
Wladziu Lee Valentino
Virna Lisi
Virna Pierlisi
Tone Loc
Anthony Terrell Smith
Herbert Lom
C. Angelo Kuchacevich
Carole Lombard
Jane Alice Peters
Traci Lords
Nora Louise Kuzma
Sophia Loren
Soﬁ e Villani Scicolone
Peter Lorre
Ladislav Loewenstein
Joe Louis
Joe Barrow
Courtney Love
Love Michelle Harrison
Myrna Loy
Myrna Williams

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Bela Lugosi
Bela Ferenc Blasko
Dolph Lundgren
Hans Lundgren
Loretta Lynn
Loretta Webb
Andie McDowell
Rosalie Anderson Qualley
Ali McGraw
Alice MacGraw
Elle Macpherson
Eleanor Nancy Gow 
Madonna
Louise Veronica Ciccone
Lee Majors
Harvey Lee Yeary II
Karl Malden
Malden Sekulovich
Anthony Mann
Emil Anton Bundsmann
Jayne Mansﬁ eld
Vera Jayne Palmer
Marilyn Manson
Brian Warner
Sophie Marceau
Sophie Maupu
Frederic March
Frederick Ernest McIntyre Bickel
Teena Marie
Mary Christine Brockert
E. G. Marshall
Edda Gunnar Marshall
Dean Martin
Dina Paul Crocetti
Chico Marx
Leonard Marx
Groucho Marx
Julius Henry Marx
Gummo Marx
Milton Marx
Harpo Marx
Adolph Arthur Marz
Zeppo Marx
Herbert Marx
Walter Matthau
Walter Matuschanskatasky
Elaine May
Elaine Berlin
John McEnroe
Patrick John McEnroe Jr.
Kristy McNichol
Christina Ann McNichol
Meat Loaf
Marvin Lee Aday
Ethel Merman
Ethel Zimmerman
George Michael
Georgios Kyriacos Panayiotou
Vera Miles
Vera Ralston
Ray Milland
Reginald Alfred Truscott-Jones
Carmen Miranda
Maria do Carmo Miranda Da Cunha
Joni Mitchell
Roberta Joan Anderson
Marilyn Monroe
Norma Jean Mortenson (Baker)
Yves Montand
Ivo Montand Livi
Chris Montez
Christopher Montanaez
Demi Moore
Demetria Guynes
Rita Moreno
Rosita Dolores Alverio
Pat Morita
Noriyuki Morita
Zero Mostel
Samuel Joel Mostel
Mother Teresa
Agnes Gonxha Bojaxhiu
Liam Neeson
William Neeson
Sam Neill
Nigel John Dermot Neill
Mike Nichols
Michael Igor Peschkowsky
Stevie Nicks
Stephanie Nicks
Harry Nilsson
Edward Nilsson III
Chuck Norris
Carlos Ray Norris
Nostradamus
Michel de Notredame
(continued )

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Billy Ocean
Leslie Sebastian Charles
Warner Oland
Johan Verner Olund
Ryan O ’ Neal
Patrick Ryan O ’ Neal
George Orwell
Eric Arthur Blair
Ozzy Osbourne
John Osbourne
Marie Osmond
Olive Osmond
Frank Oz
Frank Richard Oznowicz
Al Pacino
Alfredo James Pacino
Jack Palance
Walter Jack Palanuik
Robert Palmer
Alan Palmer
Col. Thomas A. Parker
Andreas van Kuijk
Mandy Patinkin
Mandel Patinkin
Gregory Peck
Eldred Gregory Peck
Sam Peckinpah
David Samuel Peckinpah
Pele
Edson Arantes do Nascimento
Pepa
Sandra Denton
Isabel Peron
Maria Estela Martinez Cartas
Luke Perry
Coy Luther Perry III
Bernadette Peters
Bernadette Lazzara
Michelle Phillips
Holly Graham Gilliam
Edith Piaf
Edith Giovanna Gassion
Slim Pickens
Louis Bert Lindley Jr.
Mary Pickford
Gladys Mary Smith
Brad Pitt
William Bradley Pitt
Pocahontas
Matoaka Rebecca Rolfe
Iggy Pop
James Newell Osterberg
Stephanie Powers
Steﬁ na Zoﬁ a Frederkiewcz
Paula Prentiss
Paula Ragusa
Priscilla Presley
Priscilla Beaulieu
Prince
Prince Rogers Nelson
Claude Rains
Williams Rains
Anne Rampling
Anne Rice
Tony Randall
Leonard Rosenberg
Robert Redford
Charles Robert Redford Jr.
Paul Reubens
Paul Reubenfeld
Fernando Rey
Fernando Casado Arambillet
Burt Reynolds
Burton Leon Reynolds Jr.
Debbie Reynolds
Marie Frances Reynolds
Little Richard
Richard Penniman
Joan Rivers
Joan Sandra Molinsky
Edward G. Robinson
Emmanuel Goldenberg
Sugar Ray Robinson
Walter Smith Jr.
Smokey Robinson
William Robinson Jr.
Gene Roddenberry
Wesley Eugene Roddenberry
Ginger Rogers
Virginia Katherine McMath
Roy Rogers
Leonard Franklin Slye
Henry Rollins
Henry Garﬁ eld

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Mickey Rooney
Joe Yule Jr.
Axl Rose
William Rose Bailey
Diana Ross
Diane Ross Earle
Katherine Ross
Dorothy Walter
Johnny Rotten
John Lydon
Mickey Rourke
Philip Andrew Rourke Jr.
Jack Ruby
Jacob Rubenstein
Jane Russell
Ernestine Russell
Theresa Russell
Theresa Paup
Babe Ruth
George Herman Ruth
Meg Ryan
Margaret Mary Emily Anne Hyra
Bobby Rydel
Robert Luigi Ridarelli
Winona Ryder
Winona Laura Horowitz
Yves Saint-Laurent
Henri Donat Mathieu
Susan St. James
Susan Jane Miller
Jill St. John
Jill Oppenheim
Salt
Cheryl James
Susan Sarandon
Susan Abigail Tomalin
Telly Savalas
Aristoteles Harris Savalas
Leo Sayer
Gerald Hugh Sayer
Romy Schneider
Rosemarie Albach-Retty
Seal
Sealhenry Samuel
Peter Sellers
Richard Henry Sellers
Jane Seymour
Joyce Penelope Wilhelmina Frankenberg
Del Shannon
Charles Weeden Westover
Omar Sharif
Michael Shalhoub Prizhivago
Ally Sheedy
Alexandra Elizabeth Sheedy
Charlie Sheen
Carlos Irwin Estevez
Martin Sheen
Ramon Estevez
Sam Shepard
Samuel Shepard Rogers VII
Talia Shire
Talia Rose Coppola
Simone Signoret
Simone Henriette Charlotte Kaminker
Gene Simmons
Chaim Whitz
Nina Simone
Eunice Kathleen Waymon
O. J. Simpson
Orenthal James Simpson
Frank Sinatra
Francis Albert Sinatra
Sinbad
David Adkins
The Singing Nun
Jeanine Deckers
Slash
Saul Hudson
Christian Slater
Christian Hawkins
Suzanne Somers
Suzanne Mahoney
Elke Sommer
Elke Schletz
David Soul
David Solberg
Sissy Spacek
Mary Elizabeth Spacek
Mickey Spillane
Frank Morrison Spillane
Dusty Springﬁ eld
Mary Isobel Catherine Bernadette O ’ Brien
Robert Stack
Robert Langford Modini
Sylvester Stallone
Michael Sylvester Stallone
(continued )

 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Barbara Stanwyck
Ruby Stevens
Ringo Starr
Richard Starkey
Cat Stevens
Steven Georgiou
Stella Stevens
Estelle Egglestone
Rod Stewart
Roderick David Stewart III
Sting
Gordon Matthew Sumner
Lee Strasberg
Israel Strassberg
Dorothy Stratten
Dorothy Hoogstratten
Meryl Streep
Mary Louise Streep
Barbra Streisand
Barbara Joan Streisand
Donna Summer
LaDonna Andrea Gaines
Gloria Swanson
Gloria May Josephine Svensson
D. B. Sweeney
Daniel Barnard Sweeney
Booker T
Booker T. Jones
Mr. T
Lawrence Tureaud
Terry-Thomas
Thomas Terry Hoar Stevens
Lily Tomlin
Mary Jean Tomlin
Rip Torn
Elmore Rual Torn Jr.
Peter Tosh
Winston Hubert McIntosh
Randy Travis
Randy Bruce Traywick
Lana Turner
Julia Jean Mildred Frances Turner
Ted Turner
Robert Edward Turner III
Mark Twain
Samuel Langhorne Clemens
Twiggy
Leslie Hornby
Liv Tyler
Liv Rundgren
Roger Vadim
Roger Vadim Plemiannikov
Ritchie Valens
Richard Steven Valenzuela
Frankie Valli
Frank Castelluccio
Jean-Claude Van Damme
Jean-Claude Van Varenberg
Vangelis
Evangelos Papathanassiou
Vanity
Denise Katrina Smith
Eddie Vedder
Edward Louis Severson III
Sid Vicious
John Simon Ritchie
Gore Vidal
Eugene Luther Vidal Jr.
Gene Vincent
Eugene Vincent Craddock
Bobby Vinton
Stanley Robert Vinton
Diane Von Furstenburg
Diane Michelle Halﬁ n
Max Von Sydow
Carl Adolph Von Sydow
Christopher Walken
Ronald Walken
Andy Warhol
Andrew Warhola
Dinah Washington
Ruth Jones
Muddy Waters
McKinley Morganﬁ eld
John Wayne
Marion Michael Morrison
Sigourney Weaver
Susan Alexandra Weaver
Raquel Welch
Raquel Tejada
Tuesday Weld
Susan Ker Weld
H. G. Wells
Herbert George Wells
Oskar Werner
Oskar Josef Schliessmayer

Celebrities and Music 165
 TABLE 6.12 (continued) 
Dr. Ruth Westheimer
Karola Ruth Siegel
Vanna White
Vanna Marie Rosich
Oscar Wilde
Fingal O ’ Flahertie Wills
Billy Wilder
Samuel Wilder
Gene Wilder
Jerome Silberman
Tennessee Williams
Thomas Lanier Williams
Bruce Willis
Walter Bruce Willis
Shelly Winters
Shirley Schrift
Tom Wolfe
Thomas Kennerley
Stevie Wonder
Steveland Morris Hardaway
John Woo
Wu Yusen
Natalie Wood
Natasha Nikolaevna Zacharenko-Gurdin
Jane Wyman
Sarah Jane Fulks
Tammy Wynette
Virginia Wynette Pugh
Malcolm X
Malcolm Little
Susannah York
Susannah Yolande Fletcher
Sean Young
Mary Sean Young
Pia Zadora
Pia Schipani
Source:  www.netogram.com 
name is Randy Bruce Traywick. He kept the common ﬁ rst name 
“Randy,” but morphed Traywick into “Travis.” Actress Goldie 
Hawn kept her ﬁ rst name but uses only the last four letters of 
her real last name, Studlendgehawn. On the other hand, some 
celebrities select a professional name that bears no relationship 
to their real name. Thus, actor-singer Marvin Lee Aday became 
Meat Loaf, actor-rapper James Todd Smith became L. L. Cool J., 
singer Louise Veronica Ciccone became Madonna, and wrestler-
actor Terry Bollea became Hulk Hogan. 
 Celebrities and Music 
 Americans love their music. They spend millions of dollars 
purchasing music for their iPods or other electronic listening 
devices. Some music is sold on CDs, but the old-time 45 rpm and 
33 1/3 rpm vinyl records are long gone, as are 8-track and cassette 
tapes.   Table 6.13   shows the top-selling music artists as of 2008. 
Ironically, two of the top three have not recorded anything new in 
more than 30 years. The Beatles top the list with 170,000,000 units 
sold. The Beatles ’  last album was recorded and released in 1970. 
Since then, two of the Beatles have died. Elvis Presley, who died in 
1977, ranks third with 120,000,000 units sold. 

166 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.13 
 Top-Selling Music Artists (as of 2008) 
Artist
Units Sold (in millions)
Artist
Units Sold (in millions)
The Beatles
170
Celine Dion
50
Garth Brooks
128
Neil Diamond
48.5
Elvis Presley
120
Fleetwood Mac
48.5
Led Zeppelin
111.5
Kenny G
48
The Eagles
100
Shania Twain
48
Billy Joel
79.5
Journey
47
Pink Floyd
74.5
Alabama
46
Barbra Streisand
71.5
Guns ‘N Roses
43.5
AC/DC
71
Santana
43
Elton John
70
Alan Jackson
42.5
Michael Jackson
69.5
Eric Clapton
42.5
George Strait
68.5
Bob Seger/Silver Bullet Band
41
Aerosmith
66.5
Reba McIntire
40.5
The Rolling Stones
66
Prince
39.5
Madonna
64
Chicago
38.5
Bruce Springsteen
64
Simon & Garfunkel
38.5
Mariah Carey
63
Foreigner
37.5
Metallica
59
2 PAC
37.5
Van Halen
56.5
Bob Dylan
37
Whitney Houston
55
Backstreet Boys
37
U2
51.5
Rod Stewart
37
Kenny Rogers
51
Tim McGraw
35.5
Source: Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA)
 It is interesting to note the public ’ s music-purchasing habits 
(see   Table 6.14  ). Rock music continues to be the most popular, 
averaging about 30 percent of sales in recent years. Rap/Hip Hop, 
R&B/Urban, and Country compete for second place, each averag-
ing about 11 percent of sales. Other music types sell only in the 
single-digit percentages, some even less than 1 percent in 2008 (Old-
ies, New Age, and Soundtracks).   Table 6.14   also shows the format 
in which music is acquired. Full-length CDs captured most of the 
sales through 2008, with digital downloads becoming increasingly 
popular. With the widespread use of the iPod and easily down-
loadable music from the iTunes store, digital downloads are likely 
to become more popular as we move along into the 21st century 
and will overtake CDs as the primary music delivery format.  
 Who purchases all this music? Good question.   Table 6.15   
breaks down music purchases for 2000–2008 by age group, 
gender, and purchase method. We should take the data on purchase 
method/location lightly because the data report behavior only 

Celebrities and Music 167
 TABLE 6.14 
 Consumer Music-Purchasing Proﬁ le by Genre and Format, 2000–2008 
 (percent of total sales) 
Category
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
 Genre 
Rock
24.8
24.4
24.7
25.2
23.9
31.5
34.0
32.4
31.8
Rap/Hip-Hop
12.9
11.4
13.8
13.3
12.1
13.3
11.4
10.8
10.7
R&B/Urban
9.7
10.6
11.2
10.6
11.3
10.2
11.0
11.8
10.2
Country
10.7
10.5
10.4
10.4
13.0
12.5
13.0
11.5
11.9
Pop
11.0
12.1
9.0
8.9
10.0
8.1
7.1
10.7
9.1
Religious
4.8
6.7
6.7
5.8
6.0
5.3
5.5
3.9
6.5
Classical
2.7
3.2
3.1
3.0
2.0
2.4
1.9
2.3
1.9
Jazz
2.9
3.4
3.2
2.9
2.7
1.8
2.0
2.6
1.1
Soundtracks
0.7
1.4
1.1
1.4
1.1
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.8
Oldies
0.9
0.8
0.9
1.3
1.4
1.1
1.1
0.4
0.7
New Age
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.5
1.0
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.6
Children ’ s
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.6
2.8
2.3
2.9
2.9
3.0
Other
8.3
7.9
8.1
7.6
8.9
8.5
7.3
7.1
9.1
 Format 
Full-length CDs
89.3
89.2
90.5
87.8
90.3
87.0
85.6
82.6
77.8
Full-length cassettes
4.9
3.4
2.4
2.2
1.7
1.1
0.8
0.3
0.4
Singles (all types)
2.5
2.4
1.9
2.4
2.4
2.7
3.4
2.4
3.8
Music videos/Video DVDs
0.8
1.1
0.7
0.6
1.0
0.7
1.1
0.4
0.8
DVD audio
NA
1.1
1.3
2.7
1.7
0.8
1.3
1.2
1.0
Digital download
NA
0.2
0.5
1.3
0.9
5.7
6.7
11.2
12.8
Other
0.5
0.6
0.7
1.0
1.7
1.9
0.6
1.3
2.1
Source: Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA)
through 2008. Music purchase at retail stores accounted for more 
than 87 percent of sales in 2002, but only 58 percent of sales in 
2008. Digital downloads were not available until 2005, but since 
then have become increasingly popular (more than 13 percent in 
2008). One would expect that ﬁ gure to grow—and the retail store 
purchases to decline—as we move forward in the 21st century. 
 The data on gender and age are more revealing. More females 
than males purchased music between 2000 and 2008, but not by 
much. As a rule, 51 percent of music purchasers were female, 49 
percent male. In terms of the age of music purchasers, one might 
expect younger people to purchase the lion ’ s share of music. How-
ever, as late as 2008, the 45-plus age group accounted for almost 
34 percent of sales. The 24-and-under group accounted for about 
28 percent of sales. Thirty-nine percent of sales went to the 25 to 44 
age group. These differences are interesting, but mainly reveal that 
all age groups purchase music in a generally consistent fashion.  

168 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.15 
 Consumer Music-Purchasing Proﬁ le by Gender, Age, and Purchase Method, 2000–2008 
 (percent of total sales) 
Category
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
 Age 
10–14 Years
8.9
8.5
8.9
8.6
9.4
8.6
7.6
11.5
7.3
15–19 Years
12.9
13.0
13.3
11.4
11.9
11.9
12.8
12.3
10.9
20–24 Years
12.5
12.2
11.5
10.0
9.2
12.7
9.8
11.3
10.1
25–29 Years
10.6
10.9
9.4
10.9
10.0
12.1
12.7
9.2
8.3
30–34 Years
9.8
10.3
10.8
10.1
10.4
11.3
10.2
11.3
8.9
35–39 Years
10.6
10.2
9.8
11.2
10.7
8.8
10.6
11.9
9.8
40–44 Years
9.6
10.3
9.9
10.0
10.9
9.2
9.0
7.9
11.0
45–plus Years
23.8
23.7
25.5
26.6
26.4
25.5
26.1
24.8
33.7
 Purchase Method/Location 
Record Store
42.4
42.5
36.8
33.2
32.5
39.4
35.4
31.1
30.0
Other Store
40.8
42.4
50.7
52.8
53.8
32.0
32.7
29.7
28.4
Record Club
7.6
6.1
4.0
4.1
4.4
8.5
10.5
12.6
7.2
Media Ad/800 
Number
2.4
3.0
2.0
1.5
1.7
2.4
2.4
1.7
1.8
Internet
3.2
2.9
3.4
5.0
5.9
8.2
9.1
10.9
14.6
Digital Download
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
6.0
6.8
12.0
13.5
Concert
NA
NA
N
NA
1.6
2.7
2.0
1.5
3.0
 Gender 
Female
49.4
51.2
50.6
50.9
50.5
48.2
49.6
50.8
51.5
Male
50.6
48.8
49.4
49.1
49.5
51.8
50.4
49.2
48.5
Source: Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA)
 Specialized Celebrities 
 We noted several times many of today ’ s celebrities come from enter-
tainment ﬁ elds, that is, television, movies, music, and sports. We also 
observed that while many other ﬁ elds have well-known or famous 
people, they are less likely to become celebrities due primarily to 
the absence of regular media exposure, although the public ’ s lack of 
knowledge or interest in their accomplishments may also play a role 
in their failure to become celebrities.  Table 6.16 illustrates this point. 
 The Nobel Prize is an international award given annually 
to individuals for their outstanding achievements in physics, 
chemistry, physiology/medicine, economics, literature, and 
peace. The award consists of a gold medal, a diploma, and a cash 
award, usually $1 million. If more than one person wins a spe-
ciﬁ c award, the cash is divided. Most of the names in   Table 6.16   

 TABLE 6.16 
 Nobel Prize Winners, 2001–2009 
Name(s)
Field
Year
Eric A. Cornell, Wolfgang Ketterie, Carl E. Wieman
Physics
2001
William S. Knowles, Ryoji Noyori, K. Barry Sharpless
Chemistry
2001
Leland H. Hartwell, Tim Hunt, Sir Paul Nurse
Physiology/Medicine
2001
Sir Vidiadhar Surajprasad Naipaul
Literature
2001
George A. Akerlof, A. Michael Spence, Joseph Stiglitz
Economics
2001
Koﬁ  Annan
Peace
2001
Raymond Davis Jr., Masatoshi Koshiba, Riccardo Giacconi
Physics
2002
John B. Fenn, Koichi Tanaka, Kurt Wuthrich
Chemistry
2002
Sydney Brenner, H. Robert Horvitz, John E. Sulston
Physiology/Medicine
2002
Imre Kertesz
Literature
2002
Daniel Kahneman, Vernon L. Smith
Economics
2002
Jimmy Carter
Peace
2002
Alexei A. Abrikosov, Vitaly L. Ginzburg, Anthony J. Leggett
Physics
2003
Peter Agre, Roderick MacKinnon
Chemistry
2003
Paul C. Lauterbur, Sir Peter Mansﬁ eld
Physiology/Medicine
2003
John M. Coetzee
Literature
2003
Robert F. Engle III, Clive W. J. Granger
Economics
2003
Shirin Ebadi
Peace
2003
David J. Gross, H. David Politzer, Frank Wilczek
Physics
2004
Aaron Ciechanover, Avram Hershko, Irwin Rose
Chemistry
2004
Richard Axel, Linda B. Buck
Physiology/Medicine
2004
Elfride Jelinek
Literature
2004
Finn E. Kydland, Edward C. Prescott
Economics
2004
Wangari Muta Maathai
Peace
2004
Roy J. Glauber, John L. Hall, Theodor W. Hansch
Physics
2005
Yves Chauvin, Robert H. Grubbs, Richard R. Schrock
Chemistry
2005
Barry J. Marshall, J. Robin Warren
Physiology/Medicine
2005
Harold Pinter
Literature
2005
Robert J. Aumann, Thomas C. Schelling
Economics
2005
Mohamed ElBaradei
Peace
2005
John C. Mather, George F. Smoot
Physics
2006
Roger D. Kornberg
Chemistry
2006
Andrew Z. Fire, Craig C. Mello
Physiology/Medicine
2006
Orhan Pamuk
Literature
2006
Edmund S. Phelps
Economics
2006
Muhammad Yunus, Grameen Bank
Peace
2006
Albert Fert, Peter Grunberg
Physics
2007
Gerhard Erti
Chemistry
2007
Mario R. Capecchi, Sir Martin J. Evans, Oliver Smithies
Physiology/Medicine
2007
Doris Lessing
Literature
2007
Leonid Hurwicz, Eric S. Maskin, Roger B. Myerson
Economics
2007
Albert Arnold (Al) Gore
Peace
2007
Yoichiro Nambu, Makoto Kobayashi, Toshihide Maskawa
Physics
2008
Osamu Shimomura, Martin Chalﬁ e, Roger Y. Tsien
Chemistry
2008
(continued )

170 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.16 (continued) 
Harald zur Hausen, Francoise Barre-Sinoussi, Luc Montagnier
Physiology/Medicine
2008
Jean-Marie Gustave Le Clezio
Literature
2008
Paul Krugman
Economics
2008
Martii Ahtisaari
Peace
2008
Charles K. Kao, Willard S. Boyle, George E. Smith
Physics
2009
Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, Thomas A. Steitz, Ada E. Yonath
Chemistry
2009
Elizabeth H. Blackburn, Carol W. Greider, Jack W. Szostak
Physiology/Medicine
2009
Herta Muller
Literature
2009
Elinor Ostrom, Oliver E. Williamson
Economics
2009
Barack H. Obama
Peace
2009
Adapted from  http://nobelprize.org 
are unfamiliar to most people. However, these individuals are 
likely well known, perhaps even famous, within their speciﬁ c 
disciplines. For example, Charles K. Kao, Willard S. Boyle, and 
George E. Smith won the 2009 Nobel Prize in Physics. These are 
men of signiﬁ cant achievement. Their work involves “the trans-
mission of light in ﬁ bers for optical communication,” and “semi-
conductor circuits.” It is safe to say most of us could not explain 
either of these accomplishments or what they mean to life. These 
men are likely to be known, perhaps even well known, in the 
world of physics, but they are not household names and are not 
likely to be proﬁ led on television or asked to star in movies. They 
may be celebrities within the physics world but are not celebrities 
beyond that world. 
 There are, of course, exceptions. A careful, well-informed 
reader will ﬁ nd a few recognizable names in   Table 6.16  . The United 
Nations ’ Koﬁ  Annan won the 2001 Nobel Peace Prize. Former 
president Jimmy Carter won the 2002 Nobel Peace Prize. British 
poet and playwright Harold Pinter was awarded the 2005 Nobel 
Prize in Literature. Former Vice President Al Gore received the 
2007 Nobel Peace Prize. Economist Paul Krugman was awarded 
the 2008 Nobel Prize in Economics. President Barack Obama won 
the 2009 Nobel Peace Prize. These men are known worldwide and 
are considered celebrities in many parts of the world. 
 Celebrity Families 
 Does celebrity run in families? It would seem so.   Table 6.17   
reveals several things. First, celebrity siblings seem to be 

 TABLE 6.17 
 Keeping Celebrity in the Family 
Names
Birth Year
Celebrity Profession (s)
Afﬂ eck brothers
Ben
1972
actor
Casey
1975
actor
Dillon brothers
Matt
1964
actor
Kevin
1965
actor
Astin brothers
Sean
1971
actor, director, producer
Mackenzie
1973
actor
Belushi brothers
John
1949 (d. 1982)
actor, comedian, musician
Jim
1954
actor, comedian musician
Phoenix brothers
River
1970 (d. 1993)
actor
Joaquin
1974
actor, musician
Connery brothers
Sean
1930
actor, producer
Neil
1938
actor
Howard brothers
Ron
1954
actor, director, producer
Clint
1959
actor
Bridges brothers
Beau
1941
actor
Jeff
1949
actor, musician
Quaid brothers
Randy
1950
actor, comedian
Dennis
1954
actor
Savage brothers
Fred
1976
actor, producer, director
Ben
1980
actor
Wahlberg brothers
Donnie
1969
singer, actor, producer
Mark
1971
actor, producer
Arquette siblings
Rosanna
1959
actress, director, producer
Patricia
1968
actress
Alexis (born Robert)
1969
transwoman, actress, musician
David
1971
actor, director, producer
Duff sisters
Haylie
1985
actress, singer
Hillary
1987
actress, singer
Tilly sisters
Jennifer
1958
actress, poker player
Meg
1960
actress, dancer, writer
(continued )

TABLE 6.17 (continued)
Bateman siblings
Justine
1966
actress
Jason
1969
actor
Gyllenhaal siblings
Maggie
1977
actress
Jake
1980
actor
Fonda family
Henry
1905 (d. 1982)
actor
Jane
1937
actress, political activist
Peter
1940
actor
Bridget
1964
actress
Cusack siblings
Joan
1962
actress, comedienne
John
1966
actor, screenwriter
Madsen siblings
Michael
1957
actor, poet, photographer
Virginia
1961
actress, documentary producer
Roberts family
Eric
1956
actor
Emma
1991
actress, singer
Lisa (Gillan)
1965
actress
Julia
1967
actress
Baldwin brothers
Alec
1958
actor
Daniel
1960
actor, producer, director
William (Billy)
1963
actor
Stephen
1966
actor, writer, producer
Judd family
Naomi
1946
singer, songwriter
Wynonna
1964
singer
Ashley
1968
actress
Simpson sisters
Jessica
1980
singer, actress, TV personality
Ashley
1984
singer, songwriter
Carter brothers
Nick
1980
singer, musician, actor
Aaron
1987
singer
Bacon brothers
Michael
1949
singer, musician, composer
Kevin
1958
actor, musician, singer
Deschanel sisters
Emily
1976
actress
Zooey
1980
actress, singer, musician

Early Celebrity Deaths 173
commonplace: Ron and Clint Howard, Beau and Jeff Bridges, 
Maggie and Jake Gyllenhaal, and Jessica and Ashley Simpson, 
for example. In some cases, however, one sibling is quite well 
known, the other less so. Take the Connery brothers. Sean Con-
nery is famous for his role in the James Bond ﬁ lms. His brother 
Neil is not well known in America, but is a well known actor 
in Great Britain. Another good example is the Bacon brothers. 
Kevin is an established Hollywood celebrity, having appeared 
in numerous ﬁ lms. His older brother Michael is not an actor 
and is known only as one-half of the Bacon Brothers band, 
younger brother Kevin being the other half. Second, a few 
families ’  celebrity runs more than one generation. The family 
of actor Henry Fonda is a good example. Fonda ’ s children Jane 
and Peter are celebrities, as is granddaughter Bridget. A third 
observation about siblings (and families) as celebrities is the 
consistency of profession within a family. In other words, most 
of them are singers, actors, actresses, or musicians, with a few 
going on to produce or direct. No sibling has become a nuclear 
engineer, or a grade-school teacher, or a customer service rep-
resentative. What this means, of course, is what we have said 
several times thus far in this book: celebrities, highly visible in 
media, come primarily from entertainment ﬁ elds; accomplish-
ments by individuals in other ﬁ elds are not media noteworthy 
and are routinely ignored. This is neither bad nor good; it ’ s 
simply the way things are.  
 Early Celebrity Jobs 
 Not all celebrities come from famous families. Some had to earn 
their way to stardom.  Table 6.18 shows a few of the jobs a dozen 
celebrities had before they became famous and well known. It is 
not all that difﬁ cult to envision Clint Eastwood as a lumberjack 
or Paula Abdul as a cheerleader, but it stretches the imagination 
to think of Whoopi Goldberg as a garbage collector or Matthew 
McConaughey as a dishwasher. 
 Early Celebrity Deaths 
 More than a few members of the public wish they could be 
celebrities. Fame, wealth, and a lavish lifestyle seem to be the 

174 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.18 
 Before They Were Celebrities 
Name
Early Jobs
Celebrity Job
Paula Abdul
cheerleader (L.A. Lakers)
singer; dancer
Marlon Brando
ditch digger; night watchman
actor
Sean Connery
milkman; lifeguard
actor
Clint Eastwood
lumberjack; steel mill worker
actor; director
Dennis Farina
police ofﬁ cer
actor
Whoopi Goldberg
bricklayer; garbage collector
actress; television host
Mick Jagger
hospital porter
singer; songwriter
Jason Lee
fast food employee
actor
David Letterman
television weatherman
television talk show host
Matthew McConaughey
dishwasher; manure remover
actor
Madonna
donut shop worker
singer; actress
Ozzy Osbourne
slaughterhouse worker
singer; songwriter
Adapted from  http://howstuffworks.com 
height of accomplishment and perfection. However, celebrity 
often has a high price: an early death.   Table 6.19   lists celebrities 
who died before age 40. More troubling is the cause of death for 
many on the list. Plane crashes and drug overdoses appear to 
be the main cause of early death among celebrities. Although 
we cannot hold celebrities responsible for plane crashes, we 
can hold them responsible for drug overdoses. The common 
explanation for drug deaths is that the life of a celebrity is so 
controlled, so intense, and so public that some turn to drugs 
to escape the stress. Society appears to understand rather than 
condemn this. To be fair, we should note that some celebrities 
died early from causes not related to their famous lives: actress 
Heather O ’ Rourke from a bowel obstruction and musician Bob 
Marley from lung and brain cancer.  
 Celebrity Writers 
 A common joke among some people who are retiring is this one: 
When asked the question about what he or she plans to do in the 
golden years, the answer is “write The Great American Novel.” 
Literature has been a part of culture as far back as the early civi-
lizations. Contemporary American culture is no different. Getting 
a book on the  New York Times  bestseller list is a sure way to 

Celebrity Writers 175
 TABLE 6.19 
 Celebrities Who Died Young 
Name
Age
Profession
Apparent Cause of Death
Heather O”Rourke
12
actress
bowel obstruction
Ritchie Valens
17
singer
plane crash
Aaliyah
22
singer
plane crash
Buddy Holly
22
singer
plane crash
Freddie Prinze
22
actor
suicide
River Phoenix
23
actor
drug overdose
Selena
23
singer
homicide
James Dean
24
actor
auto accident
Otis Redding
26
singer
plane crash
Janis Joplin
27
singer
drug overdose
Jim Morrison
27
singer
heart attack; drug overdose
Jimi Hendrix
27
singer; musician
drug overdose
Kurt Cobain
27
singer; musician
suicide (?)
Brandon Lee
28
actor
accidental shooting
Hank Williams
29
singer
heart attack; drug overdose
Andy Gibb
30
singer
heart failure; drug abuse
Jim Croce
30
singer
plane crash
Patsy Cline
30
singer
plane crash
Bruce Lee
32
actor
allergic reaction (?)
Cass Elliott
32
singer
heart attack
Karen Carpenter
32
singer
cardiac arrest
Keith Moon
32
musician
medication overdose
Chris Farley
33
actor; comedian
drug overdose
John Belushi
33
actor
drug overdose
Andy Kaufman
35
actor; comedian
lung cancer
Stevie Ray Vaughan
35
musician
helicopter crash
Bob Marley
36
musician
lung and brain cancer
Princess Diana
36
British royal
auto accident
Marilyn Monroe
36
actress
drug overdose
Lou Gehrig
37
baseball player
ALS
Florence Joyner
38
Olympic runner
seizure
Harry Chapin
38
singer
auto accident
John F. Kennedy, Jr.
38
journalist/publisher
plane crash
Roberto Clemente
38
baseball player
plane crash
Sam Kinison
38
comedian
auto accident
Anna Nicole Smith
39
actress; model
medication overdose
Martin Luther King, Jr.
39
minister; activist
assassination
Adapted from  http://howstuffworks.com 
fame—and maybe fortune. Even if we don ’ t plan to write the 
great novel, many of us do keep journals, daily diaries, or blogs. 
It is no surprise, then, that some celebrities turn to writing, either 
to earn extra income or to tell a story important to them.   Table 6.20   

 TABLE 6.20
 Celebrity Authors 
Name
Celebrity Profession
Book Title
Woody Allen
actor; director
 Mere Anarchy 
Pamela Anderson
actress
 Star Struck: A Novel 
Julie Andrews
actress
 Last of the Really Great Whangdoodles (c)
Alan Arkin
actor
 The Lemming Condition (c)
Victoria Beckham
singer; actress
 Learning to Fly 
Jimmy Buffett
singer; actor
 A Salty Piece of Land 
Naomi Campbell
model
 Swan 
Kim Cattrall
actress
 Satisfaction: The Art of the Female Orgasm 
Lynne Cheney
author; scholar
 Sisters 
Stephen Colbert
comedian
 I Am America (And So Can You!) 
Lauren Conrad
TV personality; author
 L. A. Candy 
Bill Cosby
actor; comedian
 Fatherhood 
Katie Couric
television news anchor
 The Blue Ribbon Day (c)
Billy Crystal
actor
 700 Sundays 
Macaulay Culkin
actor
 Junior 
Miley Cyrus
actress; singer
 Miles to Go (p)
Fabio
model
 Wild 
Jane Fonda
actress; political activist
 My Life So Far 
Whoopi Goldberg
actress; TV personality
 Sugar Plum Ballerinas (c)
Amy Grant
singer
 Mosaic: Pieces of My Life So Far 
David Hasselhoff
actor
 Making Waves 
George Hamilton
actor
 Don ’ t Mind if I Do 
Teri Hatcher
actress
 Burnt Toast & Other Philosophies of Life 
Ethan Hawke
actor
 Ash Wednesday 
Paris Hilton
actress; socialite
 Confessions of an Heiress 
Larry the Cable Guy
actor; comedian
 Git-R-Done 
Hugh Laurie
actor
 The Gun Seller 
Jay Leno
TV talk show host
 If Roast Beef Could Fly (c)
Danica McKellar
actress
 Math Doesn ’ t Suck (t)
Madonna
singer; actress
 Mr. Peabody ’ s Apples (c)
Steve Martin
actor; comedian
 Born Standing Up: A Comic ’ s Life 
Bette Midler
singer; actress
 The Saga of Baby Divine (c)
Julianne Moore
actress
 Freckleface Strawberry (c)
Deborah Norville
TV host
 The Power of Respect 
Rosie O ’ Donnell
actress; comedienne
 Celebrity Detox 
Sarah Palin
politician
 Going Rogue 
Dolly Parton
singer; actress
 Coat of Many Colors (c)
Jada Pinkett-Smith
actress
 Girls Hold Up This World (c)
Paulina Porizkova
model; actress
 A Model Summer (t)
Carrie Prejean
model
 Still Standing 
LeAnn Rimes
singer
 What I Cannot Change 
Nicole Ritchie
actress; socialite
 The Truth about Diamonds 
Jerry Seinfeld
actor; comedian
 SeinLanguage 
Jane Seymour
actress
 Making Yourself at Home 
William Shatner
actor
 Tek Power 

Celebrity Business Criminals 177
TABLE 6.20 (continued)
Ally Sheedy
actress
 Yesterday I Saw the Sun: Poems 
Will Smith
actor
 Just the Two of Us (c)
Britney Spears
singer; actress
 Heart to Heart 
Jon Stewart
comedian
 Naked Pictures of Famous People 
Elizabeth Taylor
actress
 My Love Affair with Jewelry 
Shirley Temple
actress
 Child Star 
Tila Tequila
singer; model
 Hooking Up with Tila Tequila 
John Travolta
actor
 Propeller: One-Way Night Coach 
Henry Winkler
actor
 Hank Zipzer: Niagara Falls—or Does It? (c)
(c) = children ’ s book; (t) = teen; (p) = preteen
lists some celebrities and their books. You will note that many of 
those on the list are actors or actresses, but there is a smattering 
of individuals from other celebrity ﬁ elds. There seem to be a lot 
of children ’ s books on the list. Are they easier to write? Perhaps. 
Some books have a clear connection to their authors ’  lives. For 
example, country singer Dolly Parton ’ s children ’ s book  Coat of 
Many Colors  bears the same title as one of her hit songs. Actor 
John Travolta is also a pilot, so it is reasonable for him to write 
 Propeller: One-Way Night Coach.  Just looking at their titles, some 
of these books appear to be worthwhile reads: Bill Cosby ’ s 
 Fatherhood , Danica McKellar ’ s  Math Doesn ’ t Suck, and Deborah 
Norville ’ s  The Power of Respect . On the other hand, several 
books—by their titles—do not encourage us to read them: Elizabeth 
Taylor ’ s  My Love Affair with Jewelry , Nicole Ritchie ’ s  The Truth 
about Diamonds , and Teri Hatcher ’ s  Burnt Toast and Other Philoso-
phies of Life . With all due respect to Ms. Hatcher, burnt toast is 
not a philosophy of life; it is a breakfast mistake. However, we 
should not judge these celebrities too harshly. There is usually 
something to be learned from reading any book; some celebri-
ties have a large number of fans who would be willing to read 
anything their favorite celebrities write.  
 Celebrity Business Criminals 
 Lawbreakers can be found in all professions. Some individuals 
have drawn considerable media attention, due in large part to 
the magnitude of their illegal activities. Media exposure and their 
often lengthy trials make celebrities of many of these lawbreakers. 
Members of the public are usually willing to forgive and forget 

178 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.21 
 Ten Celebrity Criminals in American Business 
Year
Name
Description of Criminal Activity/Resulting Punishment
1920
Charles Ponzi
Established the pyramid-style scam by promising investors 50% or better 
proﬁ t, then paying them off with money from new investors; ruined 5 
banks; sentenced to 5 years in prison and then another 7 on a related scam; 
deported upon release and died poor in South America.
1969
Frank W. Abagnale
Con man, forger, swindler famous for passing bad checks; made more than 
$2.5 million; served less than 5 years and was released in 1974 to become 
a government contact in fraud and scam cases.
1987
Barry Minkow
Ran an apparently successful carpet-cleaning empire, but company collapsed 
due to ﬁ nancial fraud; investors lost $100 million; sentenced to 25 years in 
prison where he was converted to Christianity and became a minister.
2002
Martin Frankel
Involved in insurance fraud, racketeering, and money laundering; famous 
for ripping off small-town insurance companies; collected $208 million; 
sentenced to 16 years in prison.
2003
James Lewis
Collected more than $311 million by swindling the elderly in California using a 
Ponzi scheme; used most of the money to fund his high lifestyle; sentenced 
to 30 years in prison.
2005
Bernie Ebbers
Cofounder of Worldcom; investors lost $11 billion due to false ﬁ nancial 
reporting; sentenced to 25 years in prison.
2005
Dennis Kozlowski
Former CEO of Tyco; convicted of misappropriation of more than $400 million 
of the company ’ s money to support his lavish lifestyle; sentenced to 8 years,
 4 months in prison.
2006
Kenneth Lay
Involved in fraud, corruption, and illegal bookkeeping as chairman of ENRON, 
an energy company; investors lost millions; company went bankrupt; died of 
a heart attack before he was sentenced for securities fraud.
2008
Lou Pearlman
Another Ponzi scheme artist; created “paper” companies and convinced 
high-proﬁ le people to invest in them; he pocketed the cash, valued at an 
estimated at $300 million; sentenced to 25 years in prison.
2009
Bernard Madoff
Used a Ponzi scheme to cheat more than a thousand investors, including some 
Hollywood stars, out of $65 billion; sentenced to 150 years in prison.
Adapted from  http://business.rediff.com 
a charge of “driving under the inﬂ uence” but are less forgiving 
when their money is involved.   Table 6.21   lists 10 celebrity crimi-
nals in American business. The list is not exhaustive, but it does 
contain the most egregious violations of the law in the late 20th 
and early 21st centuries. The lone exception dates to the early 
20th century when Charles Ponzi was involved in a pyramid-
type scam, an illegal practice that bears his name even today. 
When one hears the term “Ponzi scheme,” it means large proﬁ ts 
are promised to early investors but the money is never invested; 
proﬁ ts are paid from the money of later investors. Eventually, the 

Celebrities and Controversial Issues 179
practice collapses when money from new investors is insufﬁ cient 
to pay older investors. That ’ s something of an oversimpliﬁ cation, 
but it serves our purpose here because more than a few business 
criminals have used it to enrich themselves; James Lewis in 2003 
and Bernard Madoff in 2009 are good examples. 
 Celebrities and Controversial Issues 
 Most celebrities have never been shy about expressing their 
views on important social and political issues from time to time. 
  Table 6.22   lists celebrities who have commented positively about, 
 TABLE 6.22 
 Celebrities Who Have Shown Support for Gay, Lesbian, and Transgender Causes 
Name
Profession
Name
Profession
Brad Pitt
actor
Melissa Ethridge
singer
Madonna
singer; actress
Rosie O ’ Donnell
actress, comedienne
Elton John
singer; songwriter
Mary J. Blige
singer
Ben Afﬂ eck
actor
Jake Gyllenhaal
actor
Katherine Heigl
actress
Quincy Jones
musician; composer
Sharon Stone
actress
Janet Jackson
singer
Antonio Banderas
actor
Jennifer Aniston
actress
Cher
singer; actress
Rosario Dawson
actress; singer
Charlize Theron
actress
Liza Minnelli
singer; actress
Whoopi Goldberg
actress; TV host
Sigourney Weaver
actress
Pink
singer
Hillary Duff
actress
Gillian Anderson
actress
Debra Messing
actress
Megan Mullaly
actress
Brittany Snow
actress
Roseanne Barr
actress; comedienne
Joan Jett
singer
Margaret Cho
comedienne
George Michael
singer
Anne Hathaway
actress
Hillary Clinton
politician
Jorja Fox
actress
Nathan Lane
actor
Alan Cumming
actor
Carmen Electra
actress; model
Cyndi Lauper
singer
Pauley Perrette
actress
Bridget Fonda
actress
Gus Van Sant
director
George Takei
actor
Barbra Streisand
singer; actress
David Hyde Pierce
actor
Rob Reiner
actor; director
Wanda Sykes
actress; comedienne
Lance Bass
singer; actor
Rose McGowan
actress
James Cromwell
actor
Patricia Clarkson
actress
Anjelica Huston
actress
Sean Penn
actor
Portia de Rossi
actress
Ellen DeGeneres
TV host
Samantha Ronson
disc jockey
Antonio Villaraigosa
politician
Bruce Cohen
producer

180 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.23 
 Celebrities Who Have Spoken Out on Abortion 
Name
Profession
Apparent Stand on Abortion
Matthew Broderick
actor
pro-choice
Margaret Colin
actress
pro-life
Jonathan Demme
director
pro-choice
Jane Fonda
actress; political activist
pro-choice
Joel Grey
actor
pro-choice
Mel Gibson
actor; producer; director
pro-life
Deborah Harry
singer
pro-choice
Patricia Heaton
actress
pro-life
Kathy Ireland
model
pro-life
Michelle Malkin
journalist
pro-life
Mary Stuart Masterson
actress
pro-choice
Kate Mulgrew
actress
pro-life
Sarah Jessica Parker
actress
pro-choice
Brooke Shields
actress
pro-life
Ron Silver
actor
pro-choice
Gloria Steinem
writer; editor
pro-choice
Blair Underwood
actor
pro-choice
made appearances on behalf of, or donated money to various 
gay, lesbian, and transgender causes. The list is not exhaustive; 
there are likely other celebrities who have similar views but 
are not mentioned. Remember, also, that views change. The table 
reﬂ ects celebrity opinion over the last several years. Their views 
may be different today.  
 The same subject-to-change qualiﬁ cations apply to the 
celebrities presented in   Table 6.23  . Abortion has been a sensi-
tive issue in America for several years. Strong opinions exist 
on both sides. Those who are pro-choice appear to outnumber 
those who are pro-life, but the table does not represent any 
scientiﬁ c study of the issue among celebrities. The table does 
reﬂ ect the views of  some  celebrities who have spoken out force-
fully on the issue.  
 America ’ s war on terrorism, and speciﬁ cally the War in Iraq, 
has generated much comment among celebrities. As   Table 6.24   
shows, more celebrities appear to be against the war effort than 
celebrities who support it. Remember the table does not list every 
celebrity who has an opinion on war. Nevertheless, entertain-
ment celebrities appear to almost always reject war as a solution to 
political problems. During the administration of President George 

Celebrities and the Public 181
 TABLE 6.24 
 Celebrity Views on the War in Iraq/War on Terrorism 
 Support War in Iraq/On Terrorism 
Robert Duvall
actor
Kelsey Grammer
actor
Jason Priestley
actor
Kid Rock
rapper
Ron Silver
actor
Fred Thompson
actor; former senator
Bruce Willis
actor
 Do Not Support War in Iraq/On Terrorism 
Robert Altman
director
Ed Asner
actor
Sandra Bernhard
actress; comedienne
David Clennon
actor
George Clooney
actor
Sheryl Crow
singer
Janeane Garofalo
actress
Danny Glover
actor
Woody Harrelson
actor
Avril Lavigne
singer
Spike Lee
actor; producer; director
Natalie Maines
singer
Dave Matthews
singer; musician
Michael Moore
ﬁ lmmaker
Susan Sarandon
actress
Shakira
singer
W. Bush, 104 celebrities signed a letter to the president calling 
on him to reconsider declaring war on Iraq. The list of those who 
signed is not reprinted here, but may be viewed at   www.celebrity-
websites.com/celebritypetition.htm .  
 Celebrities and the Public 
 As noted earlier in this book, celebrity requires, among other 
things, a connection to the public. Ideally, a celebrity embodies 
the dreams and desires of the public and is highly visible in or on 
media. The public, however, does not play a passive role in this 
relationship. In the same way a celebrity must seek to maintain 
a high proﬁ le, the public must seek the latest information about 
celebrities, attend events featuring celebrities, or in some other 
way be engaged as a member of the celebrities ’ audience. 

182 Data and Documents
 Table 6.25 
 Participation in Two Celebrity-Related Leisure Activities, 2008 
Rounded in Percent
Category (number participating)
Movie Attendance
Sports Attendance
Gender: 
Female (116,300,000)
54
27
 
Male (108,500,000)
53
35
Age: 
18–24 years (28,900,000)
74
37
 
25–34 years (39,900,000)
65
37
 
35–44 years (41,800,000)
60
37
 
45–54 years (43,900,000)
53
31
 
55–64 years (33,300,000)
46
26
 
65–74 years (19,900,000)
32
18
 
75 years & older (17,100,000)
19
10
Education: Grade school (11,200,000)
17
07
 
High school grad (68,300,000)
43
23
 
Some college (61,400,000)
61
34
 
College grad (41,300,000)
69
45
 
Graduate school (20,500,000)
72
44
Adapted from U.S. Census Bureau ’ s  2010 Statistical Abstract .
 Two Celebrity-Related Leisure Activities 
 Americans have many options when it comes to enjoying leisure 
time. Two of the most popular ways to relax and be entertained 
are the movies and sports events.   Table 6.25   clearly indicates 
the widespread popularity of movies and sports. Many celeb-
rities come from the movie or professional sports industries. 
In terms of the public, more males than females attend sports 
events, but about the same percentage of males and females 
attend movies. Both movie and sports attendance appear to be 
more popular among the young. However, the more education 
you have the more likely you are to attend movies or sports 
contests.  
 A closer look at attendance at sports events is more reveal-
ing.   Table 6.26   shows attendance ﬁ gures for some major sports 
events for the 1990–2008 period. During that time, the popularity 
of major league baseball has increased, particularly since 2000. 
Attendance at NCAA men ’ s and women ’ s basketball games 
increased markedly in 2004 and has held steady since. The 
National Hockey League has also shown increased attendance 
since 2000.  

Celebrities and the Public 183
 TABLE 6.26 
 Attendance at Selected Spectator Sports, 1990–2008 
 (in thousands) 
Sport
1990
1995
2000
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
Major League Baseball
55,512
51,288
74,339
74,822
76,286
77,524
80,803
79,975
NCAA Men ’ s Basketball
28,741
28,548
29,025
30,761
30,569
30,940
32,836
33,396
NCAA Women ’ s Basketball
2,777
4,962
8,698
10,016
9,940
9,903
10,878
11,121
National Hockey League
13,936
10,563
20,325
22.065
—
22,384
22.359
23,828
Adapted from U.S. Census Bureau ’ s  2010 Statistical Almanac .
 Recreational Expenditures 
 Table 6.27 presents ﬁ nancial data relating to the public ’ s expenses 
for other sorts of recreational activities. Celebrities can be found 
multiple places in the culture and the public appears willing to 
spend some money to follow their interests. Since 1990, the great-
est growth has been in money spent on audio/video products 
and computers. This is not surprising, given the technological 
advancements of recent years. Since 2000, however, expenditures 
for items like books, maps, magazines, radio/TV repair, and the 
like have generally remained stable. Still, since ﬁ gures in the 
table are reported in the billions of dollars, these expenditures 
represent signiﬁ cant activity.  
   Table 6.28   shows 2008 attendance and demographic informa-
tion related to two other leisure time activities: music concerts 
and plays. In general, more people attended plays than concerts. 
Percentage wise, those who attended both plays and concerts were 
more often individuals with advanced education and greater 
 TABLE 6.27 
 Selected Individual Expenditures for Recreation 1990–2007 
(rounded in billions of dollars)
Type of Purchase Activity
1990
2000
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Books and maps
16
34
39
40
42
44
46
Magazines, newspapers, sheet music
22
35
36
39
42
45
49
Audio/video products, computers
53
116
123
133
142
154
161
Television/radio repair
3
4
4
5
5
5
5
Admission to spectator amusements
15
30
36
38
38
41
44
Adapted from U.S. Census Bureau ’ s  2010 Statistical Abstract .

184 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.28 
 Attendance and Demographics: Selected Arts Activities, 2008 
(in percent)
Category
Adult Population
Jazz/Classical Concert
Plays (incl. musicals)
Gender:
 Male
108.5 million
16.2
22.6
 Female
116.3 million
17.9
29.5
Age:
 18–14
28.9 million
14.2
22.7
 25–34
39.9 million
14.7
25.2
 35–44
41.8 million
16.1
27.1
 45–54
43.9 million
20.0
26.1
 55–64
33.3 million
21.3
31.8
 65–74
19.9 million
18.3
29.0
 75–plus
17.1 million
13.7
17.4
Race/Ethnicity:
 White
154.5 million
20.1
31.4
 African American
25.6 million
12.9
14.1
 Hispanic
30.4 million
7.7
12.4
 Other
14.3 million
12.8
19.5
Education:
 Grade school
11.2 million
3.3
2.4
 Some high school
22.1 million
4.7
8.0
 High school grad
68.3 million
7.0
12.1
 Some college
61.4 million
17.2
26.1
 College grad
41.3 million
30.4
47.6
 Grad school
20.5 million
44.5
62.2
Income:
 Less than $10,000
11.6 million
8.3
10.6
 $10,000–19,999
19.3 million
7.5
10.0
 $20,000–29,999
23.4 million
8.5
11.8
 $30,000–39,999
22.6 million
13.9
17.7
 $40,000–49,999
18.8 million
17.6
22.8
 $50,000–74,999
40.7 million
17.1
24.0
 $75,000–99,999
27.2 million
20.4
35.2
 $100,000–149,999
21.4 million
28.2
46.1
 $150,000 & over
16.0 million
38.2
64.3
Adapted from U. S. Census Bureau ’ s  2010 Statistical Abstract .
annual income. The age and gender distributions for these activities 
were fairly stable across all categories.  
 Internet Use 
 We get a lot of information about celebrities from the Internet, 
particularly the celebrities ’  own Web sites as well as the well-known 

Celebrities and the Public 185
gossip Web sites. We are able to communicate with others using 
Internet social media; we can purchase products or watch a video 
online.   Table 6.29   lists some daily Internet activities and reports 
on their use by individuals in various age groups. Reading and 
sending e-mail and using a search engine appeared to be the 
most popular Internet uses for the November 2008–April 2009 
period among the more than 2,000 people polled. Social network-
ing (Facebook, MySpace, and the like) was popular among those 
18–29. Individuals 30–49 used the Internet to get news to a greater 
degree than any other age group.     
 Letters to Celebrities 
 For many celebrities, getting and reading fan mail is an enjoy-
able experience. Celebrities have almost always received letters, 
birthday cards, and the like from their adoring fans. For the most 
part, these communications are harmless. However, from time to 
time, celebrities receive some letters that are not only bizarre but 
also threatening.   Table 6.30   presents excerpts from some letters 
to celebrities. To call these letters “bizarre” might be an under-
statement. The table shows letters with the wording exactly as 
received. It is obvious the writers have little concern for grammar, 
punctuation, and spelling. All four examples seem to suggest the 
writer feels he is important to the celebrity and that his sugges-
tions or wishes will be seriously considered. Of course, nothing 
 TABLE 6.29 
 Daily Internet Activities, Adults 18 and Older, November 2008–April 2009 
(percent by age group)
Activity
18–29
30–49
50–64
65 & Older
Read/send e-mail
57
62
53
46
Use search engine
56
56
41
30
Get news
35
44
37
28
Watch a video
36
17
10
10
Use a social networking site
51
28
10
04
Send instant messages
20
12
04
03
Purchase a product online
09
08
07
06
Create or work on a blog
05
03
02
02
Rate a product, service, person
03
02
03
05
Download a podcast for later use
06
03
02
01
Survey sample size ranged from 2,254 in November 2008 to 2,253 in April 2009.
Adapted from U.S. Census Bureau ’ s  2010 Statistical Abstract ; Pew Internet & American Life Survey

186 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.30 
 Bizarre Letters to Celebrities 
 Example: A middle-aged man wrote to a young singer: 
I am afraid I made a mistake when I told you I was your father. Some guy showed me a picture of you and your 
father standing together when you got your award. I was so proud when I thought I was your pop. I guess that 
means my daughter aint your sister either . . . I asked your manager to borrow $10,000 I hope she lets me have it. 
Before I go I just want to say that the only reason I thought I was your pop was because I used to go with a person 
that looked like you. Love forever
 Example: A man wrote to a female celebrity: 
hello darling this is youre New friend . . . we will be soon together for our love honey. I will write and mail a lovely 
photo of myself okay. I will write to you Soon, have a lovely Easter time hoping to correspond. . . . here is a postcard 
for you . . . honey how are you doing . . . wishing to correspond with you Soon . . . hoping we do some camping and 
Barbecueing Soon okay.
 Example: A woman sent a Christmas card to an actor: 
I know that Jason is my beautiful baby and that [you are] the daddy. I never been in love and I always been a
queen . . . I don ’ t know much of anything other than the fact that I love my son and [you] very much. I don ’ t know 
very much about life I was never told about life or how to love or be loved . . . I know I don ’ t deserve a man like 
[you] . . . come get Jason and take him Home with you and the boys.
Thanks, love, . . .
 Example: A young man wrote to an actress: 
. . . I hate to trouble you with my problems, but I have a few. You see, I ’ m being harassed by this wall that . . . 
controls [most of the state]. Myself, I am a  cat , yes really. Believe it or not, this wall is trying to frame me and put 
me in jail. You see I ’ m just a helpless image, and I control more than one wall. Nine I think. Please get in touch with 
me, because I know who L-7 is.
Sincerely 
Tommy, alias—the LINE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
P. S. I am Round  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
But I don ’ t know how long . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 
I can last.—H.E.L.P . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Reprinted, with permission, from  The Journal of Forensic Sciences 36(1), January 1991, Copyright ASTM 
International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428,  www.astm.org .
could be further from the truth. It is difﬁ cult to see how any of 
the four writers could be considered as having a grasp on reality. 
For example, no one with a ﬁ rm understanding of the real world 
would ask for or expect to get $10,000 from a singer ’ s manager. 
Another writer thinks he is a cat. That ’ s bad enough, but he also 
thinks he knows who L-7 is. These letter writers don ’ t appear to 
be evil, just out of touch with real life. 
 Some researchers have studied the sorts of communications 
and items sent to celebrities. The results of one such research 
project are presented in   Table 6.31  . This table categorizes the 
objects sent to celebrities. One has to wonder whether those who 

Celebrities and the Public 187
 TABLE 6.31 
 Enclosures Sent to Hollywood Celebrities 
Enclosure
N (%)
Subject ’ s creative efforts * 
50 (23)
Photograph of subject
38 (18)
Other apparently homemade photographs ** 
22 (10)
Bizarre materials *** 
18 (08)
Religious or mystical materials
14 (07)
Media clippings and photographs
13 (06)
Commercial pictures **** 
13 (06)
Valuables and commercial materials
12 (06)
Business cards
17 (08)
Other business-like enclosures ***** 
24 (11)
Other
41 (20)
 * includes drawings, poems, tape recordings, and literary works
 ** includes only those that could have been taken by the subject; excludes photographs of the subject or the celebrity
 *** includes biological materials (blood, semen, hair, coyote head), personal documents (Social Security card, 
driver ’ s license, birth certiﬁ cate), drugs, pebbles, dirt, seeds, and similar objects
 **** includes commercial drawings, stickers, seals
 ***** includes literature explaining businesses and self-addressed replies 
Reprinted, with permission, from  The Journal of Forensic Sciences 36(1), January 1991, Copyright ASTM 
International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428,  www.astm.org .
mailed poems, blood, semen, dirt, seeds, and the like to celebrities 
expected the celebrities to do something with the objects. Did 
the writers think this was the way to establish a connection with 
the celebrity? It seems those who enclosed items, like those who 
wrote the letters in   Table 6.30  , were not in touch with the real 
world, or at least had a warped sense of how reality works. 
 Table 6.32 lists speciﬁ c items some fans sent celebrities.  
 One again has to wonder what use the fans expected celeb-
rities to make of the items sent. Why would you send a pencil 
to a celebrity? A half-eaten candy bar? A bed pan? A shampoo 
coupon? It is beyond the ability of most of us to understand what 
they were thinking when they stuffed these (and other useless 
items) in a letter or package and sent it to their favorite celebrity. 
However, threats are the most troubling of all the things sent to 
celebrities.   Table 6.33   presents the precise wording of eight threats 
celebrities received. Researchers found many more, of course, but 
the eight found in   Table 6.33   are typical. One person writes, “I am 
not a nut.” Most people reading the ﬁ rst part of that commu-
nication might disagree: “I realize that you aren ’ t going to come 

188 Data and Documents
 TABLE 6.33 
 Threats Made in Letters to Celebrities 
•  I don ’ t know what else to tell you. I ’ ve warned you. Repent and accept Christ before the hour of God ’ s Wrath upon 
the world arrives. It will be a Holocaust like the world has never seen.
•  You better not get your hair cut because if you do—Jupiter will collide with Mars.
•  I feel that you are in danger with you new boyfriend . . . if he has brown eyes. I lost my only brother whom was 
married to a brown eyed girl.
•  May the veins in your legs get darker, bluer, and uglier; and bigger; and hideous—like your repulsive body.
•  Write that letter to me God Damn It or else I ’ ll have you all fornicating with Ubangies before I ’ m through with 
you—and I mean it!!
•  My People are out to kill all Gays & Lesbian Women all over the world all Gay men who Do Not Work In Show 
Bussiness & also Lesbian Women who Do Not Work In Show Bussiness will also Be Killed.
•  I realize that you aren ’ t going to come looking for me. So, I ’ m going to have to go looking for you. Please don ’ t 
be frightened. I am not a nut.
•  I saw your movie you looked at me at the last of the picture, now I am going to do something else with my time. 
This was not in this letter last time! You will see.
Reprinted, with permission, from  The Journal of Forensic Sciences 36(1), January 1991, Copyright ASTM 
International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428,  www.astm.org .
 TABLE 6.32 
 Speciﬁ c Items Sent to Celebrities 
dog teeth
2 sleeping pills
a bed pan
a syringe of dried blood
animal feces
a toy submarine
a facsimile bomb
 2150 A.D. (a science ﬁ ction novel)
a disposable lighter
a driver ’ s license
U.S. currency
a half-eaten candy bar
a tape of the subject speaking to the 
celebrity in a halting manner with 
music in the background
5 one-cent stamps
a disposable razor
copies of  Texas Monthly magazine
57 Ohio State lottery tickets
a pad of blank paper
a motorcycle
8 tubes of red lipstick from various 
manufacturers
a pack of cigarettes
a deposit slip and three personal 
checks—one made out to the 
celebrity for $1.00; 2 blank
3 ballpoint pens
a small stone
a pencil
A Rubik ’ s Cube key chain
4 $100 bills of play money
a shampoo coupon
6 comic books
3 playing cards
blood-smeared paper
a map of the subject ’ s home town
a photograph of the celebrity ’ s 
home
25 drawings and water color 
paintings, mostly of faces or eyes
a tape of the subject singing along 
with a record, interspersed with 
comments to the celebrity
medical photographs of corpses 
with the celebrity ’ s face pasted 
on the corpses ’ torsos
a book inscribed to the celebrity: 
“I ’ m still stuck on you . . . Still 
believe I ’ m your Husband!!!”
Reprinted, with permission, from  The Journal of Forensic Sciences 36(1), January 1991, Copyright ASTM 
International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428,  www.astm.org .

Celebrities and the Public 189
looking for me. So, I ’ m going to have to go looking for you.” That 
seems pretty nutty. It suggests the individual is a stalker. That sort 
of behavior is clearly illegal and dangerous. Another writer wants 
to kill all the gays and lesbians in show business. That, too, is both 
illegal and dangerous, not to mention immoral. 
 Thus, it is obvious not all celebrity followers are well-
meaning, rational individuals, although most are. It is those who 
appear to be out-of-touch with reality and those who clearly wish 
to do a celebrity harm who cause the most concern. 


191
 7 
 Directory of Celebrity 
Organizations and Web Sites 
 T
 here are many organizations, associations, and agencies 
connected in some way to celebrities. This chapter presents 
brief proﬁ les of some of the better-known ones. Celebrity-
sponsored charities are presented ﬁ rst. These are listed in alpha-
betical order by a celebrity ’ s last name if the name appears as 
part of the charity ’ s ofﬁ cial name. If the charity has some other 
name, the organization takes its alphabetical place among all the 
others. The second section proﬁ les charities with celebrity afﬁ li-
ations, that is, celebrity volunteers or spokespersons; none of 
these carries a celebrity ’ s name; they are also listed alphabeti-
cally. A description of important and well-known professional 
organizations and associations follows in the third chapter sec-
tion. For-proﬁ t organizations with celebrity connections are 
presented in the fourth chapter section. Speakers ’  bureaus and 
celebrity look-alike companies follow in the ﬁ fth and sixth sec-
tions. It is, however, the seventh section—celebrity news and 
gossip Web sites—that many readers will ﬁ nd most useful if 
they are interested in speciﬁ c, current celebrity information and 
photos. The ﬁ nal section in this chapter suggests ways a reader 
can go about accessing information about a speciﬁ c celebrity. A 
Web site address is provided for each proﬁ led organization in 
this chapter. Individuals who wish speciﬁ c contact information 
such as e-mail addresses, telephone numbers, or postal mailing 
addresses can usually get that information by logging on to the 
Web site and clicking on the “contact us” button.  

192 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
 Celebrity-Sponsored Charities 
 The charities in this section usually bear the name of the spon-
soring celebrity. The celebrity appears to be quite active in the 
on-going work of the charity. Having a charity carry the name 
of a famous, well-known individual is often an important way to 
gain attention and attract resources. 
 Lance Armstrong Foundation 
 http://www.livestrong.org 
 Tour de France bicycle race champion Lance Armstrong devel-
oped testicular cancer at the height of his career. Untreated, 
the cancer spread to other locations in his body. Armstrong, 
however, decided to be a survivor, not a victim. He undertook 
a strong program of physical conditioning and medical treat-
ment. This aggressive approach enabled him to beat the disease. 
The Lance Armstrong Foundation was founded in 1997 by 
Armstrong, well before he knew he would survive the disease. 
The foundation seeks to inspire and empower people with can-
cer. It provides practical information and tools people living 
with cancer need to fight their disease. Like Armstrong, the 
foundation believes strength, knowledge, and attitude are of 
primary importance in fighting cancer. The foundation empha-
sizes prevention, of course, but has been quite successful in 
giving people access to screening and care and in funding cancer 
research.  
 Children ’ s Health Fund 
 http://www.childrenshealthfund.org 
 Celebrity singer-songwriter Paul Simon and pediatrician Irwin 
Redlener established the Children ’ s Health Fund in 1987. Its pur-
pose is to provide health care to America ’ s most underserved 
children. This may involve primary medical care, responses to 
public health crises, or educational programs. One of the fund ’ s 
ﬁ rst efforts was to launch the New York Children ’ s Health Project, 
a state-of-the-art mobile medical clinic that brought medical care 
directly to children who had no other way to get care. Down 
through the years, the fund has replicated this program across the 

Celebrity-Sponsored Charities 193
country. Each program is afﬁ liated with a local health institution 
and delivers medical care through mobile medical clinics. Since 
it began, the national network of mobile clinics has served more 
than 200,000 children, all underserved and many in disadvan-
taged rural and urban communities. The fund has a number 
of celebrity supporters, including singer-songwriters Billy Joel 
and Bruce Springsteen,  American Idol ’ s Simon Cowell, actor-
comedian Robin Williams, and former Secretary of State Colin 
Powell, among others.  
 William J. Clinton Foundation 
 http://www.clintonfoundation.org 
 The William J. Clinton Foundation is interested in issues requiring 
signiﬁ cant and immediate action. The foundation is worldwide 
in scope and emphasizes solutions to problems, especially solu-
tions with measurable results. Founded by President Bill Clinton 
after he left ofﬁ ce, the foundation ’ s primary purpose is to act in 
ways that make a signiﬁ cant difference in the lives of people 
around the world. The foundation is particularly interested in 
issues such as global climate change, health among peoples in the 
developing world, and economic development in Third World 
Countries. The foundation is composed of seven initiatives rang-
ing from the Alliance for a Healthier Generation to the Clinton 
HIV/AIDS Initiative.   
 The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson ’ s Research 
 http://www.michaeljfox.org 
 The Michael J. Fox Foundation ’ s main purpose is ﬁ nding a cure 
for Parkinson ’ s disease. Celebrity actor Michael J. Fox has the 
disease and devotes considerable time to raising money for his 
foundation. He has testiﬁ ed before Congress in an attempt to 
raise awareness and generate ﬁ nancial support for more research. 
The foundation funds a research agenda that focuses not only on 
ﬁ nding a cure but also on improving life for those living with 
Parkinson ’ s. TeamFox encourages individuals and organizations 
to sponsor fundraising events by holding breakfasts, mara-
thons, bicycle competitions, and the like to beneﬁ t Parkinson ’ s 
research.  

194 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
 The Hole in the Wall Gang Camp 
 http://holeinthewallgang.org 
 Actor Paul Newman founded The Hole in the Wall Gang Camp in 
1988. The camp was named for the secret hideout in Newman ’ s ﬁ lm 
 Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid . It has been serving seriously ill 
children for more than 20 years. It provides year-around programs, 
but the summer camp experience is the most popular. The sum-
mer camp often serves more than 1,000 children, stressing safety, 
respect, and love and engaging children in a variety of activities, 
including archery, swimming, boating, ﬁ shing, horseback riding, 
sports, and arts and crafts, among others. The events are managed 
so that every child experiences success. One camper summed it up 
pretty well saying, “I love it here. Sometimes you think being so sick 
gives you limits, but the camp helps you try everything.” Weekend 
programs during the fall and spring serve another 3,000 seriously ill 
children. Under its Hospital Outreach Program, the camp provides 
services to more than 10,000 children in major hospitals from New 
York to Boston. The program has many friends and supporters and 
provides all its services free of charge.  
 The Elton John AIDS Foundation 
 http://www.ejaf.org 
 Established in 1992 by celebrity singer-songwriter-musician Elton 
John, the Elton John AIDS Foundation has two separate grant-
awarding ofﬁ ces: the United States ofﬁ ce is in New York City; the 
United Kingdom ofﬁ ce is in London. The mission of these two 
ofﬁ ces, however, is the same—to support important HIV preven-
tion programs and to provide direct care and support services 
for people living with HIV/AIDS. Together, the two ofﬁ ces have 
raised more than $175 million to support projects in 55 countries 
around the world. The United States ofﬁ ce emphasizes projects in 
the Americas and the Caribbean, while the United Kingdom ofﬁ ce 
focuses on programs in Africa, Asia, and Europe. 
 The Larry King Cardiac Foundation 
 http://www.lkcf.org 
 The Larry King Cardiac Foundation (LKCF) was established in 
1988 to provide funding for individuals who would otherwise 

Celebrity-Sponsored Charities 195
be unable to afford treatment for heart disease. These individuals 
usually have limited means or no insurance. In partnership with 
hospitals throughout the nation, the foundation works to ensure 
that proper medical attention is rendered and that doctors perform 
necessary surgery at no charge; however, hospitals are compen-
sated for the materials used in the operating procedures. Named 
for television talk-show host Larry King, the foundation is funded 
primarily by the royalties from King ’ s books, the honoraria from 
his speaking engagements, and from entertainment parties in 
major American cities. More than 60 million Americans suffer 
from heart disease; King is, of course, one of them. To assist him in 
the work of the foundation, King has recruited his celebrity friends 
who have had heart problems; they tell their stories in an effort to 
educate the public about this growing problem. The foundation 
also has the ﬁ nancial support of such well-known institutions as 
the Cleveland Clinic and the St. Jude Medical Foundation.  
 McCarty Cancer Foundation 
 http://mccartycancerfoundation,org 
 National Hockey League star Darren McCarty (of the Calgary 
Flames) established the McCarty Cancer Foundation in 1997 as a 
Father ’ s Day gift to his father Craig who had been diagnosed with 
multiple myeloma a couple of years earlier. Craig died in 1999. The 
foundation is dedicated to raising awareness of multiple myeloma, 
improving the lives of those with the disease, and working to ﬁ nd 
a cure. It ﬁ nances forward-looking research, particularly projects 
that show signiﬁ cant promise in ﬁ nding a cure for cancer. The 
foundation ’ s board of directors is advised by a panel of scientists 
and physicians who help guide the project ’ s funding decisions.  
 New York Restoration Project 
 http://www.nyrp.org 
 Founded by actress-singer Bette Midler in 1995, the New York 
Restoration Project (NYRP) is a nonproﬁ t organization whose pur-
pose is to reclaim and restore New York ’ s city parks, community 
gardens, and open space. In cooperation with the City of New 
York, NYRP is leading the effort—called MillionTreesNYC—to  
plant one million trees throughout the city ’ s ﬁ ve boroughs by 
2017. The project has a number of signiﬁ cant accomplishments. 

196 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
Working with other organizations, NYRP has already planted 
thousands of trees, shrubs, and ﬂ owers in city parks and has 
removed almost 2,000 tons of garbage from the city ’ s open space. 
Additionally, NYRP has saved more than 100 community gardens 
from commercial development and established a trust fund to 
ensure these gardens will always be available for public use. 
Other projects include the transformation of a Harlem dumping 
ground into a park and the development of environmental educa-
tion programs. 
 The Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation 
 http://www.christopherreeve.org 
 The Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation is dedicated to 
curing spinal cord injury. Named for paralyzed actor Christopher 
Reeve and his wife Dana (both now deceased), the foundation 
funds aggressive research and works to improve the lives of 
people with paralysis. Through its Quality of Life program, the 
foundation awards grants to nonproﬁ t organizations that provide 
important, caring service to paralyzed individuals. The founda-
tion has a resource center that provides information and referral 
services. Charity Navigator, an online charity watchdog, (www.
charitynavigator.org) gave the Christopher and Dana Reeve 
Foundation an overall rating of 2 out of 4 for its operating efﬁ -
ciency, somewhat lower than other charities performing similar 
types of work.   
 Rock Bottom Remainders 
 http://rockbottomremainders.com 
 The Rock Bottom Remainders is not a typical charity organiza-
tion. Members of the group meet only once a year. The group is 
composed of well-known, celebrity authors who, together with a 
supporting entourage (including groupies), tour the country rais-
ing money for charitable causes. The group ’ s members include 
Stephen King, Amy Tan, Dave Barry, and Ridley Pearson, among 
others. In 2010, The Rock Bottom Remainders raised money in 
Washington, New York, and Boston on behalf of Haiti earth-
quake relief and in Philadelphia in support of the Free Library 
of Philadelphia. America ’ s Promise and Jumpstart, organizations 
working to improve the lives of children, have also received 

Celebrity-Sponsored Charities 197
support from the group. The group ’ s music is available on CD 
and Rock Bottom Remainder T-shirts are also available. 
 Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project 
 http://www.charlizeafricaoutreach.org 
 Partnered with the Entertainment Industry Foundation, Academy 
Award–winning actress Charlize Theron has established the 
Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project. Its goal is to improve 
the lives of poor children and their families in South Africa, espe-
cially those children and families suffering from HIV/AIDS. The 
project looks for unique, creative ways to raise funds for its work. 
In a recent promotion, TOMS Shoes joined the project to create a 
limited edition shoe for men and women. For every pair of these 
shoes purchased, TOMS donated a pair of shoes to a child in 
need. Ten thousand pairs of shoes were given to children living in 
remote parts of South Africa. The project has also created mobile 
health units that travel throughout South Africa providing educa-
tional information about health and social issues. 
 The Mike Utley Foundation 
 http://www.mikeutley.org 
 Former National Football League (NFL) offensive guard Mike 
Utley has founded the Mike Utley Foundation whose mission is 
to provide ﬁ nancial support for activities designed to improve 
functioning for individuals with spinal cord injuries. Utley, who 
played for the Detroit Lions, was paralyzed in an NFL game in 
1991. As he was carried from the ﬁ eld, he gave his teammates and 
fans a “thumbs up” signal, a gesture that symbolized his ﬁ ghting 
spirit; he believes those with spinal cord injuries can improve their 
quality of life and expand their full potential through rehabilitation, 
education, and a positive attitude. The Mike Utley Foundation 
supports research, patient and family assistance programs, reha-
bilitation and therapy equipment, and education programs.  
 The V Foundation for Cancer Research 
 http://www.jimmyv.org 
 Founded by North Carolina State basketball coach Jim Valvano and 
cable sports giant ESPN, the V Foundation for Cancer Research has 

198 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
raised more than $90 million, awarding cancer research grants in 
38 states and the District of Columbia. As he battled cancer, 
Valvano often dreamed of a foundation that would further research 
into ﬁ nding a cure for the disease. He decided to turn his dream 
into reality and recruited family and friends to lead an effort to 
eradicate the disease. The foundation ’ s advisory board consists of 
some of the top physicians and research scientists in the country. 
Only projects with the most potential are funded. Nevertheless, the 
foundation has been successful in ﬁ nding brilliant, young research-
ers who have made progress in learning about the disease and ﬁ nd-
ing ways to ﬁ ght it. The foundation prides itself on spending 100 
percent of all new cash donations on research and related projects. 
This wise ﬁ nancial management earned the foundation a rating of 
4 out of 4 by Charity Navigator, the online charity watchdog. The 
foundation has received a four-star rating multiple times.  
 The Montel Williams MS Foundation 
 http://montelms.org 
 The Montel Williams MS Foundation was established to further 
the scientiﬁ c study of multiple sclerosis (MS). It provides ﬁ nan-
cial assistance to certain organizations and institutions who are 
conducting innovative research. In addition, the foundation seeks 
to raise national awareness about multiple sclerosis and to work 
for an increase in research allocations from the federal govern-
ment. More than $1.5 million in grants have been awarded. The 
foundation is named for television personality Montel Williams 
who has MS. When Williams was diagnosed with the disease, he 
said “it hit me like a brick. “I thought the diagnosis was a death 
sentence. I ’ d heard of multiple sclerosis, but I really didn ’ t know 
what it was.” Williams realized that, as host of a nationally syn-
dicated television show, he had the platform to raise awareness 
and launch a ﬁ ght against the disease. The foundation has made 
grants to research centers at Johns Hopkins, Yale University, and 
Harvard ’ s Brigham and Women ’ s Hospital, among others. 
 Oprah Winfrey ’ s Angel Network 
 http://www.oprahsangelnetwork.org 
 Oprah ’ s Angel Network has a simple mission: to encourage 
people to make a difference in the lives of others. The idea began 

Celebrity-Afﬁ liated Charities 199
in 1997 on  The Oprah Winfrey Show  when Oprah asked viewers 
to join her in helping improve the lives of others. One of the 
ﬁ rst efforts involved partnering with the Boys and Girls Clubs 
of America to raise money for 150 scholarships and build homes 
for the needy through Habitat for Humanity International. In all, 
the Angel Network has received more than $80 million in public 
donations and has built more than 55 schools in 12 countries. In 
one year alone, more than $1 million worth of school supplies 
and school clothes were given to poor children in South Africa. 
A number of subsidiary charities operate under the Oprah ’ s 
Angel Network banner. These include Free the Children and 
OAmbassadors.  
 YUM-O! 
 http://www.yum-o.org 
 Celebrity chef Rachael Ray established Yum-O! in 2006. This 
nonproﬁ t organization is designed to educate kids and their 
families about food and cooking. It also works to feed hungry 
American kids and provides education and scholarships in 
partnership with the National Restaurant Association Educa-
tional Foundation and the Alliance for a Healthier Generation. 
Ray believes that today ’ s kids and their families are so active 
and busy they may not take the time (or even know how) to cook 
basic nutritious meals, settling instead for prepackaged food 
with low nutritional value. Yum-O! hopes to inspire kids and 
their parents to make better food choices. Another important 
function of the organization is the feeding of hungry children. 
A startling number of Americans go hungry each year and one 
in ﬁ ve of those is a child. In cooperation with Share our Strength, 
Yum-O! contributes to the ﬁ ght against hunger and works to 
raise awareness of the problem.  
 Celebrity-Afﬁ liated Charities 
 The charity organizations in this section are afﬁ liated with one 
or more celebrities, but the celebrities were not the “founders.” 
Celebrities often serve as honorary chairpersons or spokesper-
sons for the charity and give generously of their time to support 
worthy causes. 

200 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
 Celebrities Fore Kids, Inc. 
 http://www.celebritiesforekids.org 
 Celebrities Fore Kids (CFK) is a specialized charity providing 
ﬁ nancial assistance to children with cancer and their families 
living on Florida ’ s Treasure Coast. Established in 1997, CFK 
works closely with physicians, schools, hospitals, and pediatric 
care centers to offer ﬁ nancial, emotional, and social support. The 
organization ’ s annual fundraiser is a golf tournament that draws 
a number of celebrities, most from the sports world. Celebrities 
who have participated in past events include baseball ’ s Whitey 
Ford, Gary Carter, Jim Palmer, and Mike Schmidt, baseball 
umpire Paul Runge, hockey ’ s Bobby Orr, and well-known world 
athlete Jim Thorpe.  
 Make-A-Wish Foundation 
 http://wish.org 
 The Make-A-Wish Foundation is well known for granting the 
wishes of children with life-threatening medical conditions. It 
seeks to enrich the lives of these children with hope, strength, 
and joy. Celebrities of one sort or another are often a part of a 
child ’ s wish; the foundation has worked with many celebrities 
as well as members of the general public to make a child ’ s wish 
come true. Established in 1980, the foundation has served more 
than 174,000 children around the world. The foundation utilizes a 
network of volunteers as wish granters, fundraisers, and special 
events workers.   
 Mickelson ExxonMobil Teachers Academy 
 http://mickelson.nsta.org 
 The Mickelson ExxonMobil Teachers Academy was established 
for teachers in grades three through ﬁ ve and is designed to 
assist teachers in providing learning experiences for children 
to advance their knowledge of math and science. As teachers 
gain content knowledge, they can couple this knowledge with 
innovative instructional strategies to better serve their students. 
The academy conducts one-week seminars around the country. 
Each seminar is highly structured for maximum impact. Teach-
ers are given the opportunity to network with others as a way 

Professional Organizations 201
to improve both communication and instruction. The academy 
carries the name of professional golfer Phil Mickelson who 
provides some ﬁ nancial support. However, it is unclear whether 
Mickelson founded the academy, whether it was jointly decided 
upon by Mickelson and ExxonMobil, or whether it was Exx-
onMobil ’ s idea. Regardless of how it began, the academy has 
drawn interest from elementary school teachers around the 
country. Mickelson ’ s wife, Amy, produces a bimonthly blog in 
support of education and the academy.  
 National Stroke Foundation 
 http://www.stroke.org 
 Established in 1984, the National Stroke Foundation focuses all of 
its efforts on stroke. Its goal is to lower the incidence and impact 
of stroke by developing forward-thinking community outreach 
programs. It also emphasizes improving the care of stroke 
patients and educating both health care professionals and the 
general public about stroke, particularly prevention, symptom 
recognition, and treatment options. The National Stroke Associa-
tion is not celebrity sponsored, but works with celebrities who 
support the mission. Often this support is ﬁ nancial, but publicity 
is important, too. Among the celebrities who have supported the 
association are actresses Marcia Cross, Courtney Cox, Eva Long-
oria, Felicity Huffman, and Nicollette Sheridan, guitarist Carlos 
Santana, and professional boxer Laila Ali, daughter of famed 
boxer Muhammad Ali.    
 Professional Organizations 
 Professional organizations serve the needs of individuals employed 
in a particular profession. Almost every area of work has a sup-
porting professional organization. For example, teachers have 
the National Education Association, truckers have the Teamsters 
Union, scientists and engineers have the National Academy of Sci-
ences, and so on. When it comes to celebrities, professional organi-
zations in the entertainment ﬁ eld seem to dominate. This is not to 
say organizations do not exist for celebrities in politics, medicine, 
religion, and the like. They do. However, a typical member of the 
general public is more likely to have heard of organizations that 

202 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
support celebrities in the various entertainment fields. This 
section presents brief proﬁ les of some professional organizations 
well known in the entertainment world. Membership lists for these 
organizations are closely guarded. Therefore, it is not possible to 
know the names of the celebrities who are members.  
 Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences 
 http://www.oscars.org 
 The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences is the world ’ s 
best-known professional movie organization. Its membership 
totals more than 6,000 individuals working in the ﬁ lm industry. In 
addition to its annual Oscar telecast (where outstanding perfor-
mances and accomplishments are recognized), the organization 
sponsors education and research activities, supporting libraries, 
museums, and other outreach programs. 
 Academy of Television Arts and Sciences 
 http://www.emmys.org 
 The Academy of Television Arts and Sciences recognizes out-
standing prime-time television programming. Twenty-six peer 
groups who have speciﬁ c areas of expertise examine all areas of 
television work, both in front of and behind the cameras. Based 
in Los Angeles, the Academy awards Emmys for signiﬁ cant and 
important prime-time television programming. A related organi-
zation, the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences, is 
based in New York and determines awards for daytime, news, 
and sports programming. 
 Actors Fund 
 http://www.actorsfund.org 
 Founded in 1882, the Actors Fund serves all performing profes-
sionals, including individuals in ﬁ lm, theater, television, music, 
opera, and dance. The organization works with more than 11,000 
performing artists across the country. The fund understands that 
the life of a performer is unpredictable. Economic, political, and 
social concerns often rob performers of job security. Moving from 
job to job is not the easiest way to make a living. When problems 

Professional Organizations 203
arise, the fund can assist with ﬁ nancial support, health care, 
housing, and social services. 
 American Federation of Musicians of the United States 
and Canada 
 http://afm.org 
 The American Federation of Musicians of the United States and 
Canada is the largest organization in the world representing the 
interests of professional musicians. Services include negotiating 
agreements, protecting ownership of music, securing health care 
and pension beneﬁ ts, as well as lobbying efforts. 
 American Federation of Television and Radio Artists 
(AFTRA) 
 http://aftra.org 
 AFTRA is a national labor union with a membership of more 
than 70,000 performers, journalists, and others working in the 
entertainment and news industries. The organization ’ s reach is 
broad, drawing members from broadcast, public, and cable tele-
vision, talk and variety shows, reality shows, children ’ s program-
ming, radio, sound recordings, Broadway shows, and Internet 
and digital programming. AFTRA negotiates and enforces more 
than 300 collective bargaining agreements that deal with a wide 
range of employment issues.  
 American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers 
(ASCAP) 
 http://www.ascap.org 
 ASCAP claims more than 380,000 members who work primarily 
in the music industry. Individuals may be composers, songwrit-
ers, lyricists, or publishers. This performing rights organization 
assists its members in securing copyrights and performance 
royalties. Its members include Duke Ellington, George Gersh-
win, and Leonard Bernstein from the past and Dave Matthews, 
Stevie Wonder, Beyoncé, and Alan Jackson, among others, from 
the present.  

204 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
 Country Music Association (CMA) 
 http://www.countrymusic.org 
 The Country Music Association is dedicated to promoting country 
music worldwide. CMA ’ s annual televised awards ceremony 
recognizes excellence in the country music industry. The organi-
zation publishes the CMA Directory, which contains contact 
information for a wide range of country music artists, promoters, 
agents, and other professionals. Membership is available only to 
those working in the country music industry. 
 International Society for the Performing Arts (ISPA) 
 http://www.ispa.org 
 ISPA is an international network of performing arts professionals 
whose goal is to strengthen the arts worldwide by stressing lead-
ership and excellence. With a membership of more than 350 indi-
viduals and organizations, ISPA works in more than 40 countries 
around the world. The society believes that much can be accom-
plished by connecting with other cultures and by understanding 
the interconnectedness that exists among performers. The orga-
nization ’ s goal is to provide the best possible support for cultural 
exchange resulting in positive outcomes for those involved. 
 National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences 
 http://www2.grammy.com 
 The National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences is often 
called The Recording Academy. It is best known for its televised 
Grammy awards ceremony where outstanding performances in 
music and recording are recognized. Awards are given for tech-
nical proﬁ ciency, artistic achievement, and overall excellence. 
The Academy ’ s overall goal is to positively impact the lives of 
musicians, those who work throughout the industry, and those 
who enjoy music and musical performances.  
 Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) 
 http://www.riaa.com 
 RIAA is a trade organization supporting and promoting the 
creative and ﬁ nancial health of the major music companies. 

Multi-Service Organizations 205
Membership includes companies whose music labels comprise 
about 85 percent of all legitimate music produced and sold in the 
United States. Protecting intellectual property and advocating 
First Amendment rights are two important functions of the asso-
ciation. Additionally, the organization funds research related to 
the music industry, as well as monitoring all laws, regulations, 
and policies relating to music. RIAA is responsible for certifying 
album sales as Gold, Platinum, Multi-Platinum, or Diamond.  
 Songwriters Hall of Fame 
 http://www.songwritershalloffame.org 
 The Songwriters Hall of Fame was established in 1969. It honors 
those whose songs are among the most recognized and most 
popular. The Hall believes music is the soundtrack of American 
life and that songwriters are part of the country ’ s rich history. Each 
year songwriters are inducted into the Hall after being approved 
by membership vote. The list of those honored in the Hall is 
impressive: John Fogerty, Isaac Hayes, Carole King, Paul Simon, 
Bob Dylan, Billy Joel, Elton John, James Taylor, James Brown, 
Bruce Springsteen, Phil Collins, Van Morrison, and Dolly Parton, 
among others. The Hall is also involved in the development of 
programs to develop new songwriting talent through workshops, 
seminars, and scholarships. Its digital initiative has resulted in an 
online museum (www.songhall.org). 
 Multi-Service Organizations 
 The organizations proﬁ led in this section are for-proﬁ t businesses 
that regularly recruit and employ celebrities to serve publicity or 
other client needs. The organizations usually provide a variety of 
other services for their clients; many services are related to media.  
 Burns Entertainment 
 http://www.burnsent.com 
 Burns Entertainment offers a variety of celebrity services, 
including advertising, public relations, and celebrity appear-
ances at special events. The company is especially proud of its 
expertise in the sports world, providing sports celebrities for 

206 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
product endorsement or for participation in marketing cam-
paigns. The company has recruited and worked with many 
celebrities, including Joe Montana, Jada Pinkett-Smith, Paula 
Abdul, Carmen Electra, Paris Hilton, Stevie Wonder, Madonna, 
and Cindy Crawford, among others.  
 Celebrity Connections 
 http://celebrityconnections.net 
 “How can we get our message out to the public?” This is a ques-
tion many charities, social organizations, or community groups 
often ask. Celebrity Connections says it has the answer. A division 
of Tailored Marketing, Celebrity Connections was created to link 
advocacy groups or charity organizations with a commanding 
celebrity voice. Messages using celebrities often stand out in a 
world bombarded daily by thousands of media communications. 
The organization has used celebrities such as the NFL ’ s Peyton 
Manning, PGA golfer Vijay Singh, and actress Julianne Moore, 
among others, to raise the visibility of and promote fundraising 
for its clients. Celebrity Connections offers a variety of creative 
services, including graphic design, copywriting, audio and video 
production, and Web development. 
 Celebrity Talent Agency 
 http://celebritytalentagency.com 
 Celebrity Talent Agency is an entertainment and talent organi-
zation providing a variety of entertainment activities, usually 
related to music. The company specializes in hip-hop, jazz, 
and R&B musician celebrities and has placed many throughout 
America and Europe. Over the years, the agency has worked 
with superstars such as Prince, Eddie Murphy, Grandmaster 
Flash, and Ice-T. The company is open to developing and promot-
ing emerging artists.  
 Executive Vision, Inc. 
 http://www.executivevisions.com 
 Executive Vision, Inc. (EVI) produces corporate communication 
and brand-linked events. The company offers a variety of services 

Speakers Bureaus 207
including celebrity entertainment concerts and events, the staging 
of corporate meetings, product launchings, marketing consulting, 
and training/education programs. Celebrities often ﬁ gure promi-
nently in these activities. EVI emphasizes activities that inform, 
entertain, motivate, and sell products and services. Celebrities often 
appear in promotions for such clients as Coca-Cola, McDonalds, 
IBM, and Holiday Inn Worldwide, among others. 
 Speakers Bureaus 
 Need a celebrity speaker for your organization ’ s annual confer-
ence or other event? Speakers Bureaus specialize in providing 
celebrity speakers for all sorts of events and special occasions. 
The organizations proﬁ led in this section are for-proﬁ t com-
panies that regularly recruit celebrities for special speaking 
engagements.  
 AEI Speakers Bureau 
 http://www.aeispeakers.com 
 AEI Speakers Bureau has recruited motivational and inspirational 
speakers from the world of sports, business, and politics. Their 
roster of celebrities also includes individuals who can speak on 
literature, popular culture, technology, and the media. The company 
accepts all types of clients, including corporations and nonproﬁ t 
organizations as well as educational and civic groups. The goal is 
to provide an entertaining and inspiring speaker who is speciﬁ c 
to a client ’ s needs. The company has utilized celebrities such as 
Donald Trump, Olivia Newton-John, Jamie Lee Curtis, and Diahann 
Carroll, among others. 
 All-American Speakers Bureau and Celebrity Network 
 http://allamerianspeakers.com 
 The All-American Speakers Bureau and Celebrity Network main-
tains a database of speakers and high-proﬁ le talent from almost 
every walk of life. The company considers itself one of the premier 
professional bureaus and claims it has the most comprehensive 
list of celebrity speakers. Celebrities are often in highest demand 
as motivational and inspirational speakers, but the company 

208 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
also offers celebrities for autograph and book signings, cooking 
demonstrations, “meet and greets,” and trade shows, among 
other events. All-American has placed celebrities such as Kareem 
Abdul-Jabbar, Hector Elizondo, Spike Lee, George Lopez, and 
Billie Jean King, among others, at various events.  
 The Allen Agency 
 http://www.speakerbooking.com 
 The Allen Agency provides professional speakers, celebrities, 
and entertainers for private parties, charity fundraising activi-
ties, and corporate events. The agency has arranged for celebrities 
such as Jay Leno, Naomi Judd, and Pat Riley to appear, speak, or 
entertain at events worldwide. Stressing client satisfaction, The 
Allen Agency is willing to work small events.  
 BigSpeak 
 http://www.bigspeak.com 
 Like almost all the other organizations of its type, BigSpeak 
offers celebrity motivational or keynote speakers for a variety 
of meetings and events. Some speakers serve as consultants or 
trainers and are dedicated to getting a positive response from 
employees, stockholders, or others in attendance at speciﬁ ed 
meetings. The company offers assistance in planning meetings 
as well as in providing speakers for the meetings. Lance Arm-
strong, Donald Trump, Deepak Chopra, and John Wooden are 
among the celebrities placed by the company at conventions, 
retreats, or other corporate events.  
 The Lighthouse Agency 
 http://www,lighthouseagency.co.uk 
 The Lighthouse Agency works with churches in Great Britain to 
organize and conduct special events. Speakers and entertainers 
are willing to share their Christian faith and to lead or participate 
in church breakfasts, conferences, evangelistic outreach, or special 
dinners. The agency is willing to work with all age groups, from 
children to senior citizens, and to participate in events for any 
specialized segment of a congregation. The agency ’ s celebrities 

Celebrity Look-Alikes 209
are likely to be well known to religious communities and organi-
zations, but perhaps not so well known to the general public. The 
agency ’ s roster includes Bill Legend, the drummer of the famous 
rock band T-Rex, as well as John Gaughan, a member of Herman ’ s 
Hermits and a songwriter for The Drifters. 
 NOPACTalent 
 http://www.nopactalent.com 
 The National Organization of Professional Athletes and Celebri-
ties Talent Agency (NOPACTalent) was founded in 1998 and 
specializes in booking celebrity sports ﬁ gures, but books enter-
tainers and musicians, too. The agency claims access to more than 
15,000 celebrities. Celebrities often serve as motivational speakers, 
product endorsers, or VIPs for “meet and greet.” Celebrities come 
from every area of sports. Stand-up comedians, celebrity chefs, 
famous models, journalists, authors, politicians, and reality TV 
stars are popular choices for celebrity appearances. Sports celeb-
rities Isiah Thomas, Jason Elam, and Darrell Green are joined by 
actors Billy Crystal and Joe Pesci, and by entertainers Patti LaBelle, 
Sister Sledge, and Mark Knopﬂ er on the agency ’ s roster. 
 Millionaire ’ s Concierge 
 http://millionairesconcierge.com 
 Millionaire ’ s Concierge offers an “individual” experience with a 
celebrity. Advertising “celebrities for hire,” the company can pro-
vide a celebrity for a special event or simply for an individual 
experience. Dinner with actor Woody Harrelson? Boating with pro 
wrestler Hulk Hogan? Comedians Chris Rock and Roseanne as well 
as the Beach Boys, blink-182, and Julio Iglesias are also apparently 
available. The company does not reveal much on its Web site, not-
ing that “some celebrity names cannot be displayed for security rea-
sons.” The Web site does, however, provide a reservation form and 
an e-mail address, but stresses it wants “serious inquiries only.”  
 Celebrity Look-Alikes 
 Event planners for charity fundraisers, corporate meetings, annual 
conventions, and the like are often unable to afford bringing a real 

210 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
celebrity to their special event. Sometimes they must settle for the 
next best thing: a celebrity impersonator or a celebrity look-alike. 
The companies proﬁ led in this section make these types of indi-
viduals available for less money than it would take to bring in a 
real celebrity. 
 Celebrity Management 
 http://www.celebritymgr.com 
 Celebrity Management provides celebrity look-alikes and celeb-
rity impersonators for clients throughout the United States and 
abroad. The company claims its talent is among the best in the 
industry. Experience, reliability, and professionalism are com-
pany trademarks. Celebrity look-alikes available include Barbra 
Streisand, Cher, Dolly Parton, Elton John, Frank Sinatra, and 
George W. Bush, among others.  
 Lookalike-USA 
 http://lookalikes-usa.com 
 Lookalike-USA is a full-service entertainment company, spe-
cializing in celebrity look-alikes, impersonators, and doubles. 
The company also offers professional disc jockeys, models, 
musicians, and other services. With more than 900 look-alikes, 
doubles, and impersonators available, the company believes it 
has the personnel to meet any need. Conventions, trade shows, 
and commercial placement are popular venues for the com-
pany ’ s talent. Look-alikes are available for celebrities such as 
Sarah Palin, Hillary Clinton, John McCain, Johnny Depp, Paris 
Hilton, Tom Cruise, Angelina Jolie, Al Gore, and even ﬁ ctional 
superspy James Bond. The company has placed talent in the 
United States, Europe, Asia, Australia, South America, and 
Canada.  
 Talent Plan, LLC 
 http://www.lookalikes.net 
 Talent Plan, LLC is the parent company of Mulligan Manage-
ment. Mulligan Management was established in 1987 by Brian 
Mulligan, who is an internationally recognized Charlie Chaplin 

Celebrity News and Gossip Web Sites 211
impersonator. The company says it is the country ’ s leading 
look-alike talent management agency. The company provides 
talent and production assistance to a variety of corporations, 
including such well-known companies as IBM, Toshiba, Disney, 
and Warner Brothers, among others. The company ’ s imperson-
ators have appeared in advertising for  Esquire  magazine, Cher-
okee Clothing, and Chanel fragrances. In 2005, the company 
expanded services to include musicians, bands, comedians, and 
other specialty acts.  
 Celebrity News and Gossip Web Sites 
 Web sites specializing in celebrity news, information, and other 
items of celebrity interest are brieﬂ y proﬁ led in this section. In 
many cases, visitors to these Web sites can get some informa-
tion free, but to get in-depth information, special photos, inter-
views, and access to chat rooms or discussion forums, visitors 
usually must register with the Web site. In some cases, a sub-
scription is necessary to access special or unusual features. One 
does not usually think of Web sites as organizations; however, 
in a world where social media have an increasing inﬂ uence, 
celebrity Web sites are essentially “electronic, virtual-world 
organizations.”  
 Absolute Celebrities 
 http://www.absolutecelebrities.com 
 Celebrity news and photos are featured on this Web site. Links 
are provided to celebrity photo galleries. Two of the most interest-
ing links will send users to information on celebrity heights and 
celebrity mug shots. 
 Access Hollywood 
 http://accesshollywood.com 
 The Top 5 celebrity news stories of the day lead on this Web site ’ s 
home page. Other celebrity news and photos are also available. 
Celebrity fashion information, television, and music links are 
provided.  

212 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
 Anything Hollywood 
 http://anythinghollywood.com 
 The usual mixture of celebrity news, photos, and gossip is avail-
able on this Web site. The site provides dozens of celebrity bios 
and links to “blogs we like.” 
 Ayyyy 
 http://ayyyy.com 
 This Web site says it is “where fashion and celebrity collide.” 
Admitting that its purpose is “gently making fun of the famous,” 
this site does, in fact, poke fun at celebrities and their clothing 
choices. There are links to information and photos on dozens of 
celebrities. The site appears to be sponsored by Manolo Blanhnik 
footwear. The Manolo name is everywhere on the site; the site ’ s 
publisher is listed as “Manolo the Shoeblogger.” 
 Celebrities Zone 
 http://www.celebritieszone.com 
 This Web site contains photos of the “hottest” celebrities (all 
women). A user can browse by category, such as actors, musicians, 
athletes, models, and so forth. This Web site does not emphasize 
celebrity news or other bits of celebrity information. 
 Celebrity Café 
 http://thecelebritycafe.com 
 This is a typical Web site offering celebrity news, photos, and infor-
mation on music, movies, travel, and contests. The site reviews 
music, television programs, and books relating to celebrities.  
 Celebrity-Gossip 
 http://www.celebrity-gossip.net 
 This Web site says it has the “hottest” celebrity news stories and 
photos. Information on celebrity videos, awards, signings, cou-
ples, scandals, television, and music, weddings, pregnancies, and 
fashion is available.   

Celebrity News and Gossip Web Sites 213
 Celebrity Palace 
 http://www.celebritypalace.com 
 Brief proﬁ les of celebrities past and present appear on this Web 
site. There are few photos; however, links are provided to celeb-
rity news, gossip, jokes, and the like. 
 Celebrity Wallpaper 
 http://www.go4celebrity.com 
 Free celebrity wallpapers are available from this Web site. 
All the celebrities are female and listed alphabetically by first 
name.  
 Celebrity Wonder 
 http://www.celebritywonder.com 
 This Web site appears to emphasize celebrities and the movies. 
Celebrity news and photos are provided and so are celebrity 
videos and movie trailers. Links take users to photo galleries, 
wallpaper, and games.  
 Celebuzz 
 http://www.celebuzz.com 
 This site contains celebrity news and photos and is packed with 
links to other stories, photos, and gossip. Photos and features 
appear to number in the hundreds. Movie information is available. 
User comments are frequently displayed. 
 dlisted 
 http://www.dlisted.com 
 This Web site warns users to “be very afraid.” That ’ s probably 
because the celebrity photos here are less appealing than those on 
other sites. Not all celebrities have beautiful moments, as some of 
the photos on this site clearly show. There are links to other celeb-
rity sites, discussion forums, and sites where dlisted merchandise 
may be purchased. 

214 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
 E! 
 http://www.eonline.com 
 Celebrity news, photos, and videos populate this Web site ’ s 
home page. It provides links to celebrity-award events and 
programs as well as information about celebrities and the latest 
movies. A user can access a directory of E! television shows or 
access celebrity message boards.  
 Gabby Babble 
 http://gabbybabble.celebuzz.com 
 This Web site contains the latest celebrity news, photos, and 
gossip. The site proclaims, “We ’ ve got the juicy juice.” The site 
is fond of labeling its information. For example, a user will ﬁ nd 
“babblicious pictures” of celebrities and “babblicious comments” 
about them. There ’ s the “Gabber Quote of the Day.” Links are pro-
vided to dozens of “gabber categories,” such as actors, arrests, and 
so on. However, some information and many photos are archival 
in nature, that is to say, out-of-date, in some of the categories. 
 Gawker 
 http://gawker.com 
 The latest celebrity news and photos can be found on this Web 
site ’ s home page. Links are available to other celebrity informa-
tion sites, including Deadspin (sports), Kotaku (gaming), Jezebel 
(women and fashion), io9 (the future), and Lifehacker (tips for 
getting things done). Other unique sites that can be accessed 
from gawker.com include Jalopnik (automobiles) and Gizmodo 
(gadgets).  
 Hollyscoop 
 http://www.hollyscoop.com 
 The word  scoop  in this Web site ’ s name suggests it has information 
or features others do not. However, the Web site is not particularly 
unique. Like many of the others, it provides celebrity news and 
photos, celebrity videos and photo galleries, and current informa-
tion on movies, music, television, and fashion. 

Celebrity News and Gossip Web Sites 215
 Hollywood.com 
 http://www.hollywood.com 
 This Web site is all about movies and the celebrities who star in 
them. The site was rated a “Top 10 Film Site” by the  London Times . 
Photo galleries of ﬁ lm stars are available as well as movie trailers. 
Links are provided to some fan sites. 
 Hollywood Gossip 
 http://www.thehollywoodgossip.com 
 This Web site is typical of many. The latest celebrity news is 
provided in addition to celebrity photos and videos. Information 
on celebrity scandals, hairstyles, fashion, and babies is available. 
 Lemondrop 
 http://www.lemondrop.com 
 This Web site says it is “sweet, tasty, tart.” The content here is 
generally about sex and relationships and appears to be mostly 
of interest to women. There are few photos. Hot features include 
dating/love, dudes, animals, booze, humor, and weird news. 
 Maxim 
 http://www.maxim.com 
 This Web site appears to be designed primarily for men. There 
are lots of scantily clad girls on this site; a few of them are celebri-
ties, but most appear to be celebrity wannabees. A section named 
“Hometown Hotties” allows a user to browse photos of girls by 
city and state. Links are provided for information on the best 
places to meet women, as well as information on games, sports, 
movies, music, and television. 
 Omg! 
 http://www.omg.yahoo.com 
 This Web site delivers celebrity news, the latest celebrity pho-
tos, and some celebrity videos. A search box enables a user to 

216 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
look for information on a speciﬁ c celebrity. Links are provided 
to celebrity blogs.  
 People 
 http://www.people.com 
 This Web site appears to be an online version of  People magazine. 
The home page features a “top story,” as well as celebrity news, 
photos, and videos. A visitor can ﬁ nd information on celebrity 
babies, television stars, and the latest fashions. A user can access 
new “games” and get a free trial play, but the connection of the 
games to celebrities is unclear.  People  magazine archives may also 
be accessed from this Web site. 
 PerezHilton 
 http://perezhilton.com 
 This Web site features celebrity news and photos. The home 
page requires a user to move through several screens to see all 
the information. Most stories on the site lack a date; therefore, 
a reader can never be sure if a story is current or out-of-date. It 
is a popular Web site, perhaps because some of the information 
presented is quite detailed.  
 PopCrunch 
 http://popcrunch.com 
 There is some celebrity news and information on this Web site, 
but its primary focus is on celebrity photos. Dozens of celebrity 
photo galleries are available. A user can page through numerous 
celebrity photos, some of which date back several years. 
 PopEater 
 http://www.popeater.com 
 This Web site ’ s home page presents the latest celebrity news 
and photos. A user can access celebrity information relating to 
movies, television, music, and videos. An unusual feature pro-
vides information on how to get a PopEater iPhone or iPad app. 
Another special feature delivers the latest Latino celebrity news 

Celebrity News and Gossip Web Sites 217
and photos. This Web site is one of the few (and maybe the 
only one) to provide pictures and information about the site ’ s 
editorial staff.  
 Pop on the Pop 
 http://poponthepop.com 
 This site provides the usual celebrity news and photos, together 
with user comment. Links are available to celebrity videos, as 
well as information about and photos of celebrities who are not 
currently in the news, but who are well-known and of continuing 
interest. A link to “Exclusives” takes a user to special celebrity 
news and information, some of which may include celebrity 
interviews.  
 PopSugar 
 http://popsugar.com 
 This Web site advertises itself as “insanely addictive.” In addition 
to the latest celebrity news and photos, the site provides infor-
mation on fashion, home décor, health, food, money, technology, 
pets, and games. However, very little of the information is 
connected to celebrities. Once a user gets past the home page, the 
information is rarely tied to a speciﬁ c celebrity.   
 Radar 
 http://www.radaronline.com 
 The usual celebrity news and photos are available on this Web 
site. Special features include pop culture information, beauty tips, 
fashion tips, and giveaways (free merchandise and event tickets). 
Links provided to Popeater, Huff Post, and other celebrity sites. 
 Socialite Life 
 http://socialitelife.celebuzz.com 
 “Gossip is served” on this Web site. There is some celebrity news 
and a few photos, but the information on the site is heavy on 
gossip (as promised). Users can explore dozens of celebrity cat-
egories (A to Z) ranging, for example, from Adam Lambert to 
Zac Efron.  

218 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
 Starlink 
 http://starlink.com 
 There is nothing fancy about this Web site. Its home page is 
simply a list of celebrities, presented alphabetically by ﬁ rst name. 
Clicking on a celebrity name will send a user to another Web site 
(www.the-alist.org). There a user will ﬁ nd the celebrity ’ s photo as 
well as news and other information relating to the celebrity. 
 Star Pages 
 http://starpages.net 
 Celebrity news is featured here. Links are provided to celebrity 
Web sites by category (actors, actresses, impressionists, dancers, 
and so on). A user can link to Web sites offering merchandise and 
tickets to concerts or sports events. 
 Starpulse 
 http://www.starpulse.com 
 This Web site is similar to many others, offering celebrity news 
and photos on the home page, as well as celebrity information 
from music, movies, and television. Links are provided to sites 
offering ringtones, celebrity event tickets, shopping, contests, and 
chat rooms. This site also has links to other celebrity Web sites, 
including Popeater, Fark, and the Frisky. 
 SuperiorPics 
 http://www.superiorpics.com 
 This Web site specializes in celebrity photos. Celebrity news and 
some videos are also available. Visitors to this site can register and 
enter one of several discussion forums, most relating in some way 
to celebrities. 
 Teen Hollywood 
 http://www.teenhollywood.com 
 Although apparently for teens, this Web site differs little from 
some of the others in terms of its home page. Celebrity news 

Celebrity News and Gossip Web Sites 219
and photos are presented. Movie news, celebrity videos, and 
information on contests and horoscopes are available. However, 
clicking on the “proﬁ les” button will send a user to a Web site 
where teens are allowed to establish a proﬁ le (and photo) of them-
selves. Other teens may sign up as “friends” of those proﬁ led.  
 theFrisky 
 http://thefrisky.com 
 This Web site says it ’ s about “love, life, stars, style.” A user will 
ﬁ nd the latest celebrity news and a few photos here as well as a 
smattering of world and national news. The site identiﬁ es what it 
considers to be “hot” in the celebrity world and provides informa-
tion on relationships, sex, and movies. 
 The Popeye 
 http://thepopeye.blogspsot.com 
 This Web site describes itself as “steaming plates of useless 
junk . . . served daily.” The news here tends to be a bit bizarre and 
often titillating. News from the television program  American Idol 
seems to dominate the site, but there are links to other celebrity 
gossip sites. There is little reason for a user to disagree with the 
site ’ s description of itself. 
 The Superﬁ cial 
 http://www.thesuperﬁ cial.com 
 This Web site is somewhat different from many of the others. 
There is little news on this site, but plenty of photos—many 
of them somewhat revealing. The language is less restrained on 
this site than elsewhere. Links are provided to the latest celebrity 
gossip and to current movies. 
 The Wrap 
 http://thewrap.com 
 Touting itself as a site that provides “entertainment industry 
analysis” and “breaking Hollywood news,” this site won the 

220 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
LA Press Club ’ s National Entertainment Journalism Award for 
Online News in 2009. On the home page a user will ﬁ nd links 
to as many as 20 news stories, most with photos. Movie and 
television news and information is provided. Links are avail-
able to the blogs of some Hollywood personalities, but few of 
them appear to be well known outside the movie-television 
industry.  
 TMZ 
 http://www.tmz.com 
 TMZ is one of the most popular Web sites. It is known for 
breaking celebrity news, in most cases before the television 
and cable news networks report the story. The death of Michael 
Jackson in 2009 is a good example. TMZ had information well 
before any of the other news outlets. The Web site prides itself 
on its investigative journalism, particularly when it comes to 
celebrities. The Web site has lots of information—the home 
page usually requires a user to move through several screens. 
The site provides photos, videos, celebrity sports news, celeb-
rity games, and clips from TMZ ’ s syndicated celebrity television 
program.  
 US 
 http://www.usmagazine.com 
 This Web site appears to be related to  US Magazine.  A user will 
ﬁ nd the latest celebrity news and photos, along with information 
on style and beauty. Celebrity moms and their babies may be seen. 
Information is also available on movies, television, and music. 
Some celebrities offer lifestyle tips. A celebrity directory allows a 
user to browse all the celebrities available on the Web site. 
 Wonderwall 
 http://www.wonderwall.msn.com 
 This Web site provides entertainment news and photos. There 
are links to sports, ﬁ nancial matters, and other topics; however, 
these links usually lead to other MSN Web sites that have news of 

Connections to Celebrity Fan Clubs and Web Sites  221
general interest and importance, but which may or may not have 
news, information, or photos about celebrities. 
 Your Tango 
 http://www.yourtango.com 
 “Smart talk about love” can be found on this Web site. There 
is, indeed, much talk about love here, but whether the informa-
tion is smart depends on one ’ s point of view. Celebrity news 
and photos are available, but much space is given to tips about 
relationships, dating, and the like. Links are provided to other 
celebrity news Web sites and blogs.  
 Connections to Celebrity Fan 
Clubs and Web Sites 
 Some people may want to avoid celebrity news and gossip Web 
sites in favor of a celebrity ’ s own personal Web site. Finding that 
site may not be as easy as one might think. Some celebrities pre-
fer Facebook interactions; others have an ofﬁ cial Web site. This 
section should help a user searching for information directly 
connected to a celebrity.  
 A General Approach 
 Fans using a general search engine such as Google or Bing to 
ﬁ nd a celebrity ’ s Web site will likely be disappointed with 
the search results. General searches do not lead directly—or 
quickly—to celebrity Web sites or fan clubs. A few Web sites offer 
tips and links to a limited number of celebrities. For example, Fan 
Source (  http://fansource.com  ) has a short list of celebrity mailing 
addresses and fan club information. The list contains older celeb-
rities such as Ann-Margaret, Barbara Eden, and Lindsay Wagner. 
The addresses provided are mostly post ofﬁ ce boxes. Another 
Web site (  http://picturetrail.com  ) invites users to join existing 
fan clubs or create their own. An assortment of fan clubs is listed, 
but most have fewer than 200 members. A general search will also 
yield Web sites providing information about celebrities in other 
countries such as India or Australia. A number of Web sites that 

222 Directory of Celebrity Organizations and Web Sites 
turn up in a general search sell celebrity merchandise of one sort 
or another.  
 A Speciﬁ c Approach 
 Taking a more speciﬁ c approach to ﬁ nding celebrity fan clubs 
and Web sites is not without problems. Celebrity Base (  http://
celebritybase.net  ) provides a celebrity search engine some users 
might ﬁ nd useful. Enter a celebrity ’ s name in the search box, 
click on the “search” button, and you may or may not get infor-
mation. The database ’ s coverage of celebrity sites is spotty. For 
example, inquiries about Megan Fox, Angelina Jolie, and Lady 
Gaga returned no results. However, inquiries about Jennifer 
Lopez, Tom Cruise, and Brad Pitt did return results. Unfortu-
nately, results are often little more than links to celebrity bios, 
movie trailers, photos, and the like. An occasional fan club or 
ofﬁ cial celebrity Web site will appear, but not often. 
 Much the same thing can be said of the Big Celebrity Direc-
tory ( http://www.bigcelebritydirectory.com ). Hundreds of 
celebrities are listed alphabetically, each linking a user to infor-
mation. Fan club and Web site information is rare. More often, 
the information is general. Moreover, many of the celebrities 
listed have been dead many years. Can Fatty Arbuckle or Bing 
Crosby still be considered celebrities? Arbuckle, a silent ﬁ lm 
actor and comedian, died in 1933. Crosby, a singer and actor, 
died in 1977. Few “modern” celebrities are listed in the big 
celebrity directory. However, links are provided to a variety of 
other celebrity information sites, ranging from celebrity icons 
to celebrity trivia. 
 Celebrity watchers may ﬁ nd Celebrity Websites (  http://
websites.celebritypro.com ) more informative. The main celeb-
rity Web sites directory asks a user to ﬁ rst select a celebrity ’ s 
profession (actor, actress, band, model, singer, athlete, and the 
like). Clicking on the profession link will result in an alphabet-
ized list (by ﬁ rst name) of celebrities in that profession. Click 
again on a speciﬁ c celebrity name and the information appears. 
Touted as the celebrity ’ s “home on the Internet,” it is unclear 
whether the information is celebrity-sanctioned or simply aggre-
gated by the Web site owners—more likely the latter. Additional 
links are provided for each celebrity. These range from celebrity 
pictures, posters, blogs, and screensavers to YouTube videos. 

Connections to Celebrity Fan Clubs and Web Sites  223
Celebrity Link (  http://www.celebrity-link.com  ) is a directory 
of links to Web sites dedicated to celebrities. A user can browse 
by celebrity ﬁ rst name, category, or nationality. The site claims a 
database of more than 26,000 celebrities and links to more than 
42,000 Web sites.  


225
  8 
 Selected Print and Nonprint 
Resources 
 T
his chapter provides a list of books, journals, journal articles, 
general articles, and nonprint resources important to an 
understanding of celebrity. The list ranges from books funda-
mental to the concept of celebrity to academic articles exploring 
various aspects of celebrity to audio and video products offering 
unique celebrity perspectives. The overall goal of this chapter is 
to demonstrate the range and depth of the resources available for 
further study.  
 Print Resources 
 Books with Historical Perspectives 
 Barbas, Samantha. 2001.  Movie Crazy. New York: Palgrave. 218 
pages. 
 This book is subtitled “Fans, Stars, and the Cult of Celebrity.” 
It explores America ’ s fascination with ﬁ lm and ﬁ lm stars after 
World War I. It argues that ﬁ lm signiﬁ cantly inﬂ uenced movie-
goers ’ ideas about stardom, celebrity, reality, and life. 
  Boorstin, Daniel. 1962.  The Image, or What Happened to the 
American Dream. New York: Atheneum. 315 pages. 
 Although this book is more than 40 years old, it is a seminal work 
on celebrity, but celebrity as seen in the larger context of our 
failure to see the realities of life—preferring instead to believe 

226 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
the images we are presented. This conﬂ ict between image and 
reality was further developed by postmodernist philosopher 
Jean Baudrillard in the late 20th century. Thus, this book is slightly 
ahead of its time in exploring the image-reality issue. There is 
quite a bit of history here, but gems of insight about fame and 
celebrity are scattered throughout. 
  Braudy, Leo. 1986.  The Frenzy of Renown: Fame and Its History. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 649 pages. 
 This book is more than 25 years old, but has been inﬂ uential 
in helping us understand fame ’ s historical roots. The author 
suggests that those who seek fame do so out of a desire to be 
unique, but also take pleasure in pleasing the audience. Historical 
references range from Caesar and Jesus to P. T. Barnum. There is 
much historical detail here and not all of it is tied directly to fame 
and celebrity; however, the book reveals the social and political 
complexities of fame.  
  Burns, Eric. 2007.  Virtue, Valor, and Vanity: The Founding Fathers 
and the Pursuit of Fame.  New York: Arcade Publishing. 239 
pages. 
 In the 21st century almost all politicians are celebrities of one 
sort or another. However, in America ’ s early days, celebrity 
was not automatically awarded to those who held public ofﬁ ce 
or engaged in public service. This book examines the founding 
fathers and the reasons why they were celebrities. The author 
discusses six qualities of fame possessed by those early leaders: 
ambition, vanity, modesty, jealousy, image, and myth. He shows 
how these qualities played a role in the rise of some early American 
politicians and public ﬁ gures to fame. The book focuses on 13 
early personalities, ranging from well-known individuals such 
as Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson to less well-known 
Americans such as James Wilson and Benjamin Rush.  
  Cashmore, Ellis. 2006.  Celebrity/Culture . New York: Routledge. 
311 pages. 
 This book examines the origins, meaning, and global inﬂ uence 
of celebrity. It suggests celebrities may be commodities, that is, 
products to be marketed to a consumer culture. This may explain 
why we have become so interested, perhaps even addicted, to 
celebrities. The author draws examples from the early Hollywood 
ﬁ lm industry, the music industry, television, and new media on 

Print Resources 227
his way to answering the question of why we are so absorbed in 
the lives of people who essentially have no material impact on our 
rather ordinary lives. 
  Law, Lisa. 2000.  Interviews with Icons.  Santa Fe, NM: Lumen. 
286 pages. 
 Subtitled “Flashing on the Sixties,” this book is composed of 
celebrity interview transcripts. Interviews were conducted by 
the author who is a photographer and documentary producer. 
Interview subjects were famous personalities during the turbu-
lent 1960s in America. Most interviews date from the late 1980s 
and ask the subjects to recall their lives in the 1960s. Among those 
interviewed are poet Allen Ginsberg, Woodstock ’ s Wavy Gravy, 
musician/singer Graham Nash, and actors Peter Fonda and 
Dennis Hopper. 
  Ponce de Leon, Charles L. 2002.  Self-Exposure: Human-Interest 
Journalism and the Emergence of Celebrity in America, 1890–
1940.  Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press. 325 
pages. 
 Acknowledging that contemporary America is obsessed with 
celebrity, the author of this book initially set out to write a book 
critical of celebrity, but as the writing progressed, he found 
that celebrity is more complex than generally thought and full of 
ambiguities and contradictions. This book is not without critical 
comment; however, it makes a positive contribution to the litera-
ture by tracing the development of celebrity journalism and its 
consumption by audiences. The author advocates a sort of media 
literacy when it comes to celebrity: read (or watch) carefully and 
be skeptical; understand how images are produced and readers 
manipulated; and appreciate the contributions celebrity makes to 
the culture. 
  Schickel, Richard. 1985.  Intimate Strangers: The Culture of Celeb-
rity. Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Company. 299 pages. 
 Considered by many to be the most important early work on the 
subject, this book is critical to an understanding of the history 
and significance of celebrity. Although the book is more than 
25 years old, one does not get that impression when reading it. The 
author ’ s comments and observations seem to ﬁ t today ’ s celebrity 
world as well as they ﬁ t the 1980s. Especially important in this 
book are the connections the author makes between celebrity and 

228 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
the power inherent in our social and political cultures. This book 
has no table of contents and no index, so speciﬁ c information is 
hard to ﬁ nd, but it is intelligently written and a must read for 
celebrity researchers. 
 Books with Special Perspectives 
  Breitbart, Andrew, and Mark C. Ebner. 2004.  Hollywood, Inter-
rupted: Insanity Chic in Babylon—The Case against Celebrity . 
New York: Wiley. 394 pages. 
 Many Hollywood celebrities have been known to act up from 
time to time: drunken driving, inﬁ delity, spouse abuse, and the 
like. This book reveals some of the closely guarded secrets held 
by celebrities. The authors suggest that instances of negative or 
inappropriate behavior are pathological in nature and contribute 
to ruined relationships, broken families, and regular visits to rehab 
centers. Drawing on examples from the lives of Tom Cruise, Anne 
Heche, Eddie Murphy, Courtney Love, Robert Downey Jr., and 
others, the authors expose a side of Hollywood that may be shock-
ing to outsiders, but is not all that unusual for Hollywood types.  
  Burns, Kelli. 2009.  Celeb 2.0: How Social Media Foster Our Fas-
cination with Popular Culture.  Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO. 
212 pages. 
 Social media are almost as important to celebrities as they are to 
many members of the general public. Facebook, MySpace, Twitter, 
and all the rest are discussed in this book in terms of their impor-
tance to and primary role in popular culture. Special attention is 
given to the impact of social media on television, ﬁ lm, popular 
ﬁ ction, and advertising. One particularly useful chapter explores 
how celebrities engage fans by maintaining blogs that give fans 
an inside look at celebrity life. 
  Cowen, Tyler. 2000.  What Price Fame?  Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 248 pages. 
 This book explores some of the less positive aspects of fame 
and celebrity life. While many fans love and adore celebrities, 
celebrities can also face hostility, ridicule, and failure. For some 
celebrities, fame is a burden. However, fame can be addictive 
and can give celebrities an inﬂ ated view of their worth. Many 
celebrities, past and present, are discussed in this book. Examples 

Print Resources 229
include a broad range of personalities, from Plato to baseball ’ s 
Babe Ruth to singer Michael Jackson.  
  DeAngelis, Michael. 2001.  Gay Fandom and Crossover Stardom. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 285 pages. 
 Gay and lesbian characters have been a part of television pro-
gramming for several years. Their appearance in movies has 
been somewhat less noticeable. This book examines aspects of 
the complex dynamic between gay male audiences and Holly-
wood stars. The focus is on three well-known ﬁ lm stars: James 
Dean, Mel Gibson, and Keanu Reeves. None of the three stars is 
presented as gay, but there may be certain facets of their perfor-
mances that are potentially important to gay male moviegoers. 
The three featured actors ’  performances and personas are viewed 
for: (1) shifts in perceptions of male sexuality, (2) a star ’ s physical 
and emotional vulnerability, (3) the degree to which a star has the 
potential to be gay, (4) ambiguities in the cultural interpretation 
of a performance, and (5) the role of identity and fantasy in the 
perception of a star. 
  Dezenhall, Eric. 2003.  Nail ‘em! Confronting High-Proﬁ le Attacks
on Celebrities and Businesses.  Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books. 
341 pages. 
 A business may be targeted for an attack by a competitor, an indi-
vidual, even the public. The attack is often vicious and may or 
may not be backed up by facts. For a business under attack, the 
goal is survival. This is increasingly difﬁ cult because, as this book 
argues, many attacks really work. Moreover, the techniques used 
to attack businesses are also often used to attack celebrities of one 
sort or another. There is usually a victim, a villain, a vindicator, a 
void, a vehicle (usually the media), and a value in any success-
ful attack. Drawing examples from the business world (includ-
ing Prozac, ValuJet, and General Motors) and examples from the 
celebrity world (designer Tommy Hilﬁ ger, former president Bill 
Clinton, and television personality Kathie Lee Gifford), the 
author discusses how the attack process works and why it is 
often successful.  
  Dyer, Richard. 1998.  Stars.  London: British Film Institute. 217 
pages. 
 This book is primarily about celebrities in the ﬁ lm industry. The 
author calls them “ﬁ lm stars.” Beginning with an examination of 

230 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
the sociological aspects of ﬁ lm and ﬁ lm stars, this book further 
examines semiotic aspects (signs and symbols) present in ﬁ lm. 
Film is essentially a text that can be closely examined to reveal 
that stars merely signify something. We do not see them as real 
people, but as individuals who represent a type of social reality. 
This book is heavy on theory but is important to readers who are 
especially interested in ﬁ lm studies.  
  Espejo, Roman (ed.) 2009.  Can Celebrities Change the World? 
Detroit: Greenhaven Press. 97 pages. 
 This slim volume is a collection of essays presenting arguments both 
for and against speciﬁ c propositions involving celebrities and their 
activism on behalf of worthy causes. For example, many celebri-
ties undertake fundraising or other work on behalf of poor nations 
and poverty-stricken people in parts of Africa. This book presents 
two essays on celebrity activism in Africa: one essay argues that the 
work of celebrities beneﬁ ts Africa; the other presents the counter-
argument that the work of celebrities  does not beneﬁ t Africa. Other 
essays examine celebrity activism in international affairs, in philan-
thropy, and as role models, among other topics.  
  Giles, David. 2000.  Illusions of Immortality: A Psychology of 
Fame and Celebrity. New York: St. Martin ’ s Press. 187 pages. 
 What is it like to be famous? What role does society play in the 
lives of the famous? This book examines these and other questions 
relating to celebrity, and discusses the psychology involved in 
the relationship between celebrities and their fans. The author 
identiﬁ es different types of fame, noting that our concept of  fame 
has changed down through the years, and ultimately suggests it 
might be time to retire the word in favor of the word  celebrity , 
given the inﬂ uence of media in today ’ s world. 
  Herwitz, Daniel. 2008.  The Star as Icon.  New York: Columbia 
University Press. 157 pages. 
 This book examines what the author calls “the star icon,” an 
endlessly talked about but little understood individual who 
somehow captures our attention and garners our adoration. 
What is it about television, ﬁ lm, and consumer culture that 
singles out some individuals to go beyond stardom to iconic 
status? The author attempts to answer this question, drawing 
primarily on the lives of Princess Diana, Jackie Onassis, Marilyn 
Monroe, and Grace Kelly.  

Print Resources 231
  Holmes, Su, and Sean Redmond (eds.). 2006.  Framing Celebrity: 
New Directions in Celebrity Culture.  New York: Routledge. 369 
pages. 
 This book is a collection of essays from 20 scholars. When the 
book speaks of fame, it essentially means celebrity. The two terms 
are used interchangeably here. Fame (or celebrity) is presented 
in four different frames, or contexts. Each frame is designed to 
help us understand something about the complex nature of the 
celebrity/fame phenomenon. For example, one contributor, in a 
frame titled “fame damage,” examines mental illness in celeb-
rity culture. Another frame, titled “fame now,” looks at celebrity 
politicians.  
  McCutcheon, Lynn E., John Maltby, James Houran, and Diane 
D. Ashe. 2004.  Celebrity Worshippers: Inside the Minds of Star-
gazers. Baltimore: PublishAmerica. 184 pages. 
 This is an academic book, written by scholars and full of infor-
mation on their various research projects, projects designed to 
explore the psychology behind celebrity worship. Following a 
rather exhaustive review of the literature on the subject of celebrity 
worship, the authors explain in detail their attempts to measure 
attitudes about celebrities. Examples of questionnaires and 
measurement scales are presented. Tables show some statistical 
analyses of the data. A casual reader can simply glide over the 
research methodology explanation and take the word of these 
experienced researchers as to what it all means. What the research-
ers found is not all that surprising: celebrity worship exists and 
usually for a variety of (or multiple) reasons. The book also 
suggests ways to reduce celebrity worship. 
 Moran, Joe. 2000.  Star Authors: Literary Celebrity in America. 
Sterling, VA: Pluto Press. 187 pages. 
 Although some people may not think of authors, that is, writers 
of books, as celebrities, they can be if certain conditions are met. 
In fact, authors are highly visible—in media and elsewhere. 
Newspapers and magazines regularly review their work; they 
appear on television programs promoting their work; they often 
tour the country to appear at signings and book fairs. Theirs is 
a special breed of celebrity. Nevertheless, as this book argues, 
authors are often thrown in with all the other entertainment 
celebrities. This often trivializes their work and marginalizes the 
serious, intellectual aspects of literature. The book gives in-depth 

232 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
attention to four popular authors: John Updike, Philip Roth, Don 
DeLillo, and Kathy Acker. 
  Newton, Michael. 2008.  Celebrities and Crime.  New York: Chel-
sea House. 112 pages. 
 There can be little doubt that Americans love their celebrities. 
Fans enjoy watching singers, actors, athletes, fashion models, and 
others as they rise to fame. To some degree, fans live vicariously 
through the lives of their favorite celebrities. However, quite often 
fans also enjoy media reports of celebrity divorce, disgrace, or 
other misfortunes. This book ’ s 10 chapters do a rather thorough 
job of examining some celebrities and their problems with crime. 
In most cases, the fact that a celebrity is involved in some sort of 
wrongdoing affects the justice system to one degree or another. 
Among the book ’ s chapters are ones on the 1969 Manson Family 
murders, the still-unsolved murder of actor Bob Crane (of  Hogan ’ s 
Heroes  fame), the mysterious murder of the wife of actor Robert 
Blake, and the issues between rival rap stars Tupac Shakur and 
Notorious B.I.G. and the death of both men. 
 Orth, Maureen. 2004.  The Importance of Being Famous. New 
York: Henry Holt & Company. 372 pages. 
 This book presents proﬁ les of the famous. Some individuals are 
well known; others are not. The more well known include singers 
Madonna and Tina Turner, as well as Russia ’ s Vladimir Putin, 
among others. The less well known include personalities such as 
Sinn Fein ’ s Gerry Adams and fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld. 
Most of the proﬁ les provide information from the mid-to-late 
1900s. The book presents itself as a behind-the-scenes look at 
the celebrity-industrial complex, which the author deﬁ nes as “the 
media monster that creates the reality we think we see, and the 
people who thrive or perish there.” 
  Schmid, David. 2005.  Natural Born Celebrities: Serial Killers in 
American Culture.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 327 
pages. 
 Most people have heard of Jack the Ripper, the famous serial killer 
of the Victorian era. In the past several decades or so, America 
has had its share of serial killers: Jeffrey Dahmer, Ted Bundy, John 
Wayne Gacy. The American media machine and the public ’ s 
compelling interest have made these men celebrities. They are 
the subjects of made-for-TV movies; their deeds are chronicled 

Print Resources 233
in books. Why do we ﬁ nd these men so fascinating? This book 
considers this and other questions and examines why we can ’ t 
look away from these men and their deeds. 
 Weber, Brenda R. 2009.  Makeover TV: Selfhood, Citizenship, and 
Celebrity. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 324 pages. 
 At the end of the 20th century, there was much discussion and 
some research on the prevalence of “perfect” models in television 
and magazine advertising. Some argued this was appropriate; 
others argued that such representations were not congruent with 
real life. The arguments have cooled somewhat as America entered 
the 21st century. However, the issue of what might be called “body 
image” remains important to many. This book examines the vari-
ous makeover TV shows, including those involving makeovers 
of ﬁ nances, trucks, and homes. Viewers are often told to uncover 
their true self, or reinvent themselves, or become empowered, 
or take the advice of experts. The ultimate message appears to 
be this: to be special, you must look and act like everyone else. 
The author discusses this notion and contends that makeover 
television shows are complicated texts that tell us much about 
our culture and our fears.  
 Academic Journal Articles 
 Alperstein, Neil M. 1991. “Imaginary Social Relationships with 
Celebrities Appearing in Television Commercials.”  Journal of 
Broadcasting and Electronic Media 35(1): 43–58. 
 There is much academic literature exploring the practice and 
impact of celebrity endorsement. This study reports the results of 
interviews with 21 individuals who were professionals or home-
makers living in Columbia, Maryland, and 39 college students 
also living in Columbia, Maryland. The author was interested in 
determining the degree to which these subjects established social 
relationships with celebrities who appeared in television com-
mercials as well as the nature of those relationships. The study 
assumed the relationships would be imaginary, since it was highly 
unlikely any real-world relationship existed between the subjects 
and the celebrities. Results revealed the subjects were quite aware 
that celebrity use in commercials was an advertising technique 
and that this knowledge may lead to an adjustment of their beliefs 
about celebrities. Nevertheless, the subjects were attracted to the 

234 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
celebrities and incorporated the knowledge and impressions they 
gained from the celebrities ’  appearances into their overall social 
perception of the celebrity. 
  Basil, Michael D. 1996. “Identiﬁ cation as a Mediator of Celeb-
rity Effects.”  Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media 40(4): 
476–495. 
 This is yet another study among the many on the effect of celebrity 
endorsement on consumer behavior. One hundred forty-seven 
Hawaiian college students were surveyed. The research project 
was conducted after basketball star Magic Johnson revealed he 
tested positive for HIV. The author hypothesized that Johnson ’ s 
announcement may determine the degree to which students who 
identify with him modify their AIDS-related beliefs, attitudes, 
and behaviors. The hypothesis was only partially supported. 
The study revealed that the issue was complex and that some 
differences occurred when it came to issues of personal concern, 
perceived risk, and sexual behavior.  
 Boon, Susan D., and Christine D. Lomore. 2001. “Admirer-
 Celebrity Relationships among Young Adults: Explaining 
Perceptions of Celebrity Inﬂ uence on Identity.”  Human Com-
munication Research 27(3): 432–465. 
 This study investigated the judgments young adults make 
regarding the degree to which their relationships with celebrities 
inﬂ uenced the young people ’ s sense of identity and self-worth. 
Seventy-ﬁ ve participants completed a survey questionnaire. 
Re sponses indicated the young adults were moderately to strongly 
attracted to celebrities they identiﬁ ed as life idols. The study 
examined the celebrities identiﬁ ed as idols and identiﬁ ed some 
of the characteristics of the respondents that may have led them 
to use a celebrity in forming their identities or their sense of self-
worth. 
  Bush, Alan J., Craig A. Martin, and Victoria D. Bush. 2004. 
“Sports Celebrity Inﬂ uence on the Behavioral Intentions of 
Generation Y.”  Journal of Advertising Research 44: 108–118. 
 This is an academic study examining the effects of athlete role 
models on teenagers ’  intentions and purchase behavior. A sur-
vey of 218 adolescents revealed that celebrity sports ﬁ gures have 
a positive inﬂ uence on word-of-mouth advertising and brand 
loyalty. When celebrities made brand choices and said positive 

Print Resources 235
things about a product, survey respondents were inﬂ uenced to 
adopt the celebrities ’  views. Additionally, females were more 
likely than males to engage in word-of-mouth advertising. The 
study suggests using athletes as spokespersons for products or 
brand names is usually a wise strategy. 
 Dietz, Park Elliott, Daryl B. Matthews, Cindy Van Duyne, Dan-
iel Allen Martell, Charles D. H. Parry, Tracy Stewart, Janet War-
ren, and J. Douglas Crowder. 1991. “Threatening and Otherwise 
Inappropriate Letters to Hollywood Celebrities.”  Journal of 
Forensic Sciences 36(1): 185–209. 
 Although this study is at least 20 years old, it remains compelling 
reading. The authors examined the characteristics of approxi-
mately 1,800 threatening and inappropriate letters sent to 
Hollywood celebrities. The 214 letter writers whose work was 
examined mailed an average of eight letters apiece. The article 
quotes from some of the letters and provides interesting tidbits 
of information from the others. In some instances, the letters were 
harmless, if somewhat bizarre. In other cases, the letter writers 
appear to be interested in pursuing encounters with their favorite 
celebrity and could, therefore, be considered a possible threat to 
the celebrity ’ s safety.  
  Ferris, Kerry O. 2001. “Through a Glass Darkly: The Dynam-
ics of Fan-Celebrity Encounters.”  Symbolic Interaction 24(1): 
25–47. 
 This study examines the activities through which some fans 
seek face-to-face encounters with the celebrities they admire. The 
article discusses some of the problems that result from these 
encounters. Through participant observation and personal 
interviews, the author gathered data from groups of  Star Trek 
fans and fans of soap operas. The study found that encounters 
can come in any one of several ways: (1) at public events that 
are usually highly controlled and often in a question-and-answer 
format; (2) celebrity sightings, particularly in large cities such 
as New York or Los Angeles, and often at airports, supermar-
kets, or theaters; or (3) active pursuit, deﬁ ned as fans gather-
ing addresses and other personal information about celebrities 
and attempting to stage a meeting; this approach can develop 
into stalking behavior. The study concludes that fan-celebrity 
interaction can be pleasant or problematic, depending on the 
circumstances.  

236 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
  Fraser, Benson P., and William J. Brown. 2002. “Media, Celeb-
rities, and Social Inﬂ uence: Identiﬁ cation with Elvis Presley.” 
 Mass Communication and Society 5(2): 183–206. 
 In a media-saturated world, celebrity is no longer restricted to 
one country or one region. Celebrity can be international. This 
study looks at the powerful inﬂ uence celebrities have on those 
who closely identify with a celebrity ’ s media image. Researchers 
interviewed 35 Elvis Presley fans, including some who were Elvis 
impersonators. Results indicate that both fans and impersonators 
identify strongly with Elvis and consciously model his values by 
changing their own lifestyles to more closely resemble his. 
  Gamson, Joshua. 2001. “Jessica Hahn, Media Whore: Sex Scan-
dals and Female Publicity.”  Critical Studies in Media Communi-
cation 18(2): 157–173. 
 This essay examines the 1980s sex scandal involving televangelist 
Jim Bakker and occasional television performer Jessica Hahn. It is 
fairly common for politicians and other public ﬁ gures to become 
involved in sex scandals of one sort or another. The author focuses 
on the whole Bakker-Hahn saga, with particular emphasis on 
events in 1987. The encounter between Bakker and Hahn, appar-
ently in a Florida hotel room, led to the collapse of Bakker ’ s PTL 
television empire, but vaulted Hahn to media fame. Both  Play-
boy  and  Penthouse , well-known “men ’ s magazines,” competed 
for interviews and photos. Was she an innocent victim? Was she 
promiscuous and experienced before the encounter? The media ’ s 
treatment of Hahn appeared to be uneven; sometimes positive, 
sometimes negative. The article suggests that media coverage 
of the scandal probably confused the truth rather than revealing 
it. This ﬁ nding may hold true for today ’ s media coverage of sex 
scandals. 
  Gamson, Joshua. 1992. “The Assembly Line of Greatness: Celeb-
rity in the Twentieth Century.”  Critical Studies in Media Com-
munication 9(1): 1–24. 
 Two intertwining textual narratives are discussed in this essay 
that examines the relationship of celebrity to the development 
of publicity techniques. The ﬁ rst narrative, said to be typical of 
the ﬁ rst part of the twentieth century, suggests those who are 
deserving naturally rise to the top, that is, to celebrity status. The 
second narrative, typical of the latter part of the twentieth century, 
suggests celebrities are artiﬁ cially manufactured, that is, made 

Print Resources 237
famous by a variety of sophisticated publicity techniques that 
enable them to become more highly visible. The author questions 
the role of publicity and the dynamics of public image making in 
a democracy. 
 Greene, A. L., and Carolyn Adams-Price. 1990. “Adolescents ’ 
Secondary Attachments to Celebrity Figures.”  Sex Roles 23(7/8): 
335–347. 
 This is an academic study of the inﬂ uence of age, gender, and phys-
ical development on the qualities adolescents see in celebrities their 
own age. Sixty students, both males and females from the ﬁ fth, 
eighth, and eleventh grades, completed questionnaires assessing 
the maturity, attractiveness, and personality of six young male and 
six young female celebrities. Results indicated that, for the most 
part, students preferred opposite-sex celebrities rather than same-
sex celebrities (no surprise). However, the study also found that 
as females approach puberty, they have a greater need for attach-
ment to or identiﬁ cation with a same-age celebrity, sometimes even 
a same-sex celebrity. Interestingly, a number of students in the sur-
vey reported they preferred androgynous celebrities.  
  Gwenllian-Jones, Sara. 2000. “Starring Lucy Lawless?”  Contin-
uum: Journal of Media and Cultural Studies 14(1): 9–22. 
 This is a case study examining the ways in which the star image 
of the ﬁ ctional television character Xena (of  Xena, Warrior Princess ) 
is related to Lucy Lawless, the actress who played the part. Inter-
views were conducted with the show ’ s fans. Results revealed that 
the ﬁ ctional Xena was of more interest to fans than Lawless herself. 
One explanation suggested that the ﬁ ctional character was more 
accessible (via the television show) than the actress was in real 
life. In other words, access to the ﬁ ctional character was essen-
tially unlimited, while access to the actress who played the part 
was strictly controlled. Anecdotally, some fans reported being 
dissatisﬁ ed with some of the show ’ s episodes and vowed to stop 
watching. 
  Laurens, R. H. 2001. “Year of the Living Dead: California 
Breathes New Life into Celebrity Publicity Rights.”  Hastings 
Communications and Entertainment Law Journal 24(1): 109–147. 
 The use of images of deceased actors in ﬁ lms (and more recently in 
commercials) is highly controversial. Digital imaging  technology 
has made it possible to insert these images into contemporary 

238 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
ﬁ lms or other video material. The heirs of deceased actors often 
object to this practice for a number of reasons, including economic 
and privacy concerns. A law was passed in California in 1999, and 
although it failed to extend full protection to deceased celebrities, 
it did strengthen a few existing protection rules. This article traces 
the development of the law and comments on the legal, economic, 
and public policy issues involved. 
  McRobbie, Angela. 1986. “Postmodernism and Popular Cul-
ture.”  Journal of Communication Inquiry 10(2): 108–116. 
 This article is written for an informed academic audience. How-
ever, it makes several important points about the relationship 
between postmodern thinking and popular culture. The author 
suggests postmodern theory can be useful in analyzing various 
aspects of popular culture. For example, postmodernism rejects 
a singular explanation of almost everything in favor of multiple 
explanations for the events, phenomena, and situations we see 
or are involved in. Moreover, media have considerable inﬂ uence 
in presenting an image of a celebrity, for example. The image is 
quite likely to be different from reality, postmodernists say. The 
essay uses numerous examples from popular culture, including 
television shows  Dynasty  and  Dallas , as well as celebrity music 
groups from the 1980s (Frankie Goes to Hollywood and Culture 
Club). The author suggests that if more young people knew about 
postmodern thinking, they ’ d probably like it because it can offer 
explanations and points of view about celebrities and popular 
culture that ﬁ t their worldview. 
  Mittelstaedt, John D., Peter C. Riesz, and William J. Brown. 2000. 
“Why Are Endorsements Effective?”  Journal of Current Issues in 
Research in Advertising 22(1): 55–65. 
 This study examines three different explanations of the relation-
ship between celebrity endorsers and the products they endorse. 
The authors evaluated the endorsement potential of three 
Olympic athletes for three different products. Three hundred 
sixty-seven individuals were contacted by telephone. Results 
indicated that the most effective matches between endorser 
and product were not based on either the product itself or the 
endorser alone, but on the perceived connection between the 
product and the endorser.  
  Ross, Rhonda, Toni Campbell, John C. Wright, Aletha C. Hus-
ton, Mabel L. Rice, and Peter Turk. 1984. “When Celebrities 

Print Resources 239
Talk, Children Listen: An Experimental Analysis of Children ’ s 
Responses to TV Ads with Celebrity Endorsement .” Journal of 
Applied Developmental Psychology 5(3): 185–202. 
 This study is one of the early ones exploring the effects of televi-
sion ads with celebrity endorsement on the product preference 
of 8- to 14-year-old boys. The study also examined the subjects ’  
understanding of advertising intent and techniques. Results 
showed that celebrity endorsement led to increased preference for 
a toy (a brand of model racer) chieﬂ y because the boys believed 
that the celebrities were experts. Furthermore, 8- to 10-year old 
boys appeared to be highly inﬂ uenced by the glamour of the 
celebrity and were thus more likely to take the celebrity ’ s advice 
than were the 11- to 14-year olds. There was no evidence that the 
boys understood the complexities of advertising techniques and 
applied them in critically looking at the product. 
  Stack, Steven. 1987. “Celebrities and Suicide: A Taxonomy and 
Analysis, 1948–1983.”  American Sociological Review 52(3): 401–412. 
 Suicide is a sensitive topic. Many people ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to dis-
cuss suicide or even to hear about someone—whom they may 
or may not know—who has been a victim of suicide. This study 
focuses on celebrity suicides, categorizing them according to two 
sociological theories: the laws of imitation and the concept of the 
elite. The imitation effect applies to American entertainers and 
political celebrities, but not to artists, villains, and the economic 
elite. Although suicides are often highly publicized, the reasons 
for suicides are not: divorce, illness, mental impairment, and the 
like. The problems that give rise to suicide are often problems 
shared by both celebrities and the general public.  
  Stafford, Maria Royne, Nancy E. Spears, and Chung-kue Hsu. 
2003. “Celebrity Images in Magazine Advertisements: An 
Application of the Visual Rhetoric Model.”  Journal of Current 
Issues and Research in Advertising 25(2): 13–20. 
 Although the title of this article suggests it is complex, the article, 
in fact, is rather straightforward. Researchers analyzed the content 
of 207 advertisements containing celebrity endorsers. Results 
showed male celebrities are associated with both the verbal and 
the visual presentation. However, female celebrities are associated 
with a visual-only presentation. These results are not particularly 
surprising, given what other researchers have discovered about 
the nature of celebrity endorsement. 

240 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 Street, John. 2004. “Celebrity Politicians: Popular Culture and 
Political Representation.”  British Journal of Politics and Inter-
national Relations 6(4): 435–452. 
 Many studies have noted almost all politicians are considered 
celebrities. This article explains the general notion that there are 
two main types of celebrity politicians. The ﬁ rst is the politician 
who uses his/her celebrity status to establish a claim (whether 
true or not) to represent a particular group or cause. The second is 
the individual who uses his/her popularity to speak (often with-
out justiﬁ cation) for public opinion. Some scholars feel that the 
claims these two types of celebrity politicians make are damaging 
to the democratic process and to honest political representation. 
This article, however, rejects that argument, suggesting instead 
that while the claims made by celebrity politicians may or may 
not be legitimate, they are in fact fairly consistent with normal 
political representation. 
  Till, Brian D., and Terence A. Shimp. 1998. “Endorsers in Adver-
tising: The Case of Negative Celebrity Information.”  Journal of 
Advertising 27(1): 67–82. 
 The authors conducted three experimental studies. They were 
interested in examining how negative information about a 
celebrity can impact the brand the celebrity endorses. The ﬁ rst 
two studies used ﬁ ctitious celebrities; the third used an actual 
celebrity. Results showed negative information about the celeb-
rity resulted in a decline in a subject ’ s attitude toward the brands 
endorsed only by the ﬁ ctitious celebrities. There was little or no 
attitude change recorded as a result of negative information about 
the real celebrity. Important factors in this study include the timing 
of the negative information and the strength of the connection 
between the celebrity and the brand. 
 Academic Journals 
 Americana: The Journal of American Popular Culture, 1900 to 
Present 
 http://www.americanpopularculture.com 
Frequency of publication: Quarterly 
 This journal is one of three periodicals published by Ameri-
cana: The Institute for the Study of American Popular Culture, 
 headquartered in Hollywood, California.  Americana: The Journal of 

Print Resources 241
American Popular Culture  features peer-reviewed scholarly research 
papers written for an academic audience; papers are typically on 
some aspect of popular culture. Recent issues contain articles on 
the ﬁ lms  Basic Instinct and  Silence of the Lambs , television ’ s  The 
West Wing , and  Batman . The organization is eco-friendly and, as 
such, does not print hard copies of its publications; its journals 
are available online only. The organization does, however, have 
a book division that publishes paperbacks through its Press 
Americana division. The two other periodicals published by 
the organization are  Review Americana: A Literary Journal and 
 Magazine Americana.  Individuals wishing to submit papers for 
review can ﬁ nd links to submission guidelines and additional 
information on the organization ’ s Web site. 
 Images: A Journal of Film and Popular Culture  
 http://www.imagesjournal.com 
Frequency of publication: Quarterly 
 This journal is available online only. It features articles that 
examine visual media as primary material. Articles about movie 
directors, ﬁ lm genres, comic books, television programs and tele-
vision stars, and the like are encouraged. However, the editors 
look speciﬁ cally for strong images and concrete examples in a 
written piece. Philosophical approaches or generalizations without 
supporting examples are not considered for publication. Past 
issues have featured articles on celebrities: an interview with 
documentary ﬁ lmmaker Michael Moore, an essay on the ﬁ lms of 
Quentin Tarantino, a look at the ﬁ lm work of actor Clint East-
wood. The journal also contains essays on other popular culture 
subjects, of course. One particularly interesting piece examined 
teenagers and horror ﬁ lms of the 1950s. 
 Journal of Criminal Justice and Popular Culture  
 http://www.albany.edu/scj/jcjpc 
Frequency of publication: Quarterly 
 Headquartered at the University of Albany in Albany, New York, 
this journal features scholarly research and opinion on the relation-
ships among crime, criminal justice, and popular culture. 
The peer-reviewed journal is written for an academic audience. 
Although the journal primarily publishes original research 
articles, it will, from time to time, publish interviews, ﬁ ction, 
photo essays, and the like. Past articles include essays on sex and 

242 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
violence in slasher horror ﬁ lms, the use of torture in television ’ s 
 24 , and media presentations of identify theft. 
 Journal of Popular Culture  
 https://www.msu.edu/~tjpc 
Frequency of publication: Six times a year 
 This journal is the ofﬁ cial publication of the Popular Culture 
Association (PCA) and is considered by many to be the ﬁ eld ’ s 
premier journal. The peer-reviewed journal is available in print 
form in about 1,400 libraries worldwide. The PCA believes that 
the perspectives and experiences of many individuals can enrich 
the discussion about the role and importance of popular culture 
in life. Previously published articles include essays on  SpongeBob 
SquarePants ,  The Man Show , and the political satire of celebrities 
Stephen Colbert and Jon Stewart. 
 Journal of Religion and Popular Culture  
 http://www.usask.ca/relst/jrpc 
Frequency of publication: Three times yearly 
 This Web-based, peer-reviewed journal is written for an
aca demic audience and features the exploration, analysis, and 
inter pretation of the interrelationships and interactions between 
religion/religious expression and popular culture. Based in 
Canada, the journal is international in scope and is open to essays 
from a variety of religions, nationalities, and cultures. The journal 
is supported by a grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities 
Research Council of Canada. Past articles include essays on religion 
and sexuality in the ﬁ lm  300 , Jesus Christ and Billy the Kid as 
archetypes of the self, and the Internet matchmaking activities of 
American Muslims. 
 Studies in Latin American Popular Culture  
 http://www.utexas .edu/utpress/journals/jslapc.html 
Frequency of publication: Annually 
 This scholarly journal is interdisciplinary in nature and publishes 
articles, review essays, and interviews on the diverse aspects of 
Latin American popular culture. Articles are written in English, 
Spanish, or Portuguese. The journal deﬁ nes popular culture 
as “some aspect of culture which is accepted by or consumed by 
signiﬁ cant numbers of people.” It is especially interested in articles 
offering new methodological or theoretical approaches, articles 

Print Resources 243
exploring the modernization and global impact of Latin American 
cultural practices, and the social meanings and power images 
found in popular culture. Past articles include a study on hip hop 
and black racial identity in Brazil, an essay on Che Guevara 
as trickster and cultural hero, and a cultural analysis of Brazilian 
immigration to New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. 
 Studies in Popular Culture  
 http://pcasacas.org/SiPC 
Frequency of publication: Biannually 
 This peer-reviewed journal is an ofﬁ cial publication of the Popular 
Culture Association and the American Culture Association in the 
South. It is available online and publishes articles dealing with 
any aspect of American or international popular culture. The 
emphasis may be either historical or contemporary. Articles in the 
journal have dealt with subjects from ﬁ lm, literature, radio and 
television, music, and graphics, among other mediated forms of 
communication. Celebrities are often the subject of an article or 
essay. Past articles have included a Freudian analysis of a song by 
Madonna, and an essay on early radio pioneers. 
 Selected General-Interest Celebrity Magazines 
 Details  
 www.Details.com 
Frequency: 10 issues/year
Publisher: Condé Nast Publications
  The target audience for this magazine is afﬂ uent, career-minded 
men. Regular features include sections on style and culture, as 
well as sections with hip names such as “Dossier,” “Exit,” and 
“Wiseguy.” These sections cover a variety of topics ranging from 
celebrities and personal relationships to interviews with experi-
enced men who offer life advice. 
 GQ 
 www.gq.com 
Frequency: Monthly 
 Publisher: Condé Nast Publications 
  This magazine ’ s target audience is smart, sharp men. Each issue 
contains interviews with sports ﬁ gures as well as photos of 

244 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
some of today ’ s hottest models and actresses. The magazine also 
provides tips on ﬁ ne dining, politics, fashion, and grooming. 
Celebrities are often featured on the magazine ’ s cover. 
 Interview 
 www.interviewmagazine.com 
Frequency: Monthly 
 Publisher: Brant Publications  
   This magazine began as a newsletter in the late 20th century, but 
has become a cutting-edge publication, particularly in the minds 
of New York residents. The publication ’ s roots go back to Andy 
Warhol. It markets itself as “magazine chic at its highest.” The 
magazine utilizes a simple question-and-answer format. How-
ever, the individuals selected for interviews are not necessarily 
the celebrities of today. More likely, those interviewed are the 
celebrities of the future (in the magazine ’ s judgment). Said to be 
the ultimate pop culture magazine,  Interview  is not afraid of pro-
fanity and nudity. The work of celebrity photographers is often 
featured in the magazine. 
 OK! 
 www.okmagazine .com 
Frequency: 51 issues/year
Publisher: Northern and Shell North America 
  This well-known magazine claims to be the home of celebrity 
news. Each week, the magazine features stories, photos, and 
gossip about celebrities from the wonderful world of show busi-
ness. Celebrities are almost always featured on the cover, with 
an accompanying detailed story about the individuals inside. 
 People StyleWatch 
 www.peoplestylewatch.com 
Frequency: 10 issues/year
Publisher: Time Direct Ventures 
  This magazine is the somewhat lesser-known cousin to  People 
magazine. The fashion and beauty information inside the maga-
zine is said to be inspired by celebrities, but not in the typical way. 
The emphasis in this publication is the real-life, authentic look of 
the stars, not the look they exhibit at openings and galas. Appar-
ently, the stars do not look all that bad in real life. The magazine 

Print Resources 245
claims to pack each issue with must-have products, great deals, 
and exclusive discounts. 
 Rolling Stone 
 www.RollingStone.com 
Frequency: 26 issues/year
Publisher: Wenner Media 
 Rolling Stone  is the number one pop culture reference point for mil-
lions of young adults. In many ways, the magazine is a cultural icon. 
In addition to information on music, the magazine regularly cov-
ers the broad entertainment ﬁ eld, including movies,  tele vision, 
and technology, as well as national affairs. If it is important, trendy, 
and worth thinking about, you ’ ll ﬁ nd it in this magazine. 
 Seventeen 
 www.seventeen.com 
Frequency: Monthly
Publisher: Hearst Magazines 
 The name of this magazine reﬂ ects its target audience. For many 
young women, the magazine is an important part of their lives. 
Photos and information on celebrities, fashion, music, movies, and 
cultural trends are available in each issue. In addition to sections 
on fashion and beauty, the magazine ’ s other sections include 
“Love Life,” “Your Life,” and “Weekend.” The magazine claims a 
readership of 13 million and markets itself as an important part of 
a young woman ’ s passage into adulthood. 
 Teen Vogue  
 www.TeenVogue.com 
Frequency: 10 issues/year
Publisher: Condé Nast Publications 
  This magazine is for teenagers, primarily young females, who care 
about style, fashion, beauty, health, and entertainment news. The 
magazine ’ s photographs are high quality. The magazine claims 
that some readers have been known to purchase two copies of the 
magazine so they can tear out some of the photos to paste on 
the walls of their room. Fashion features often include celebrities 
such as Miley Cyrus or the Jonas Brothers. Celebrities are often 
featured on the magazine ’ s cover. Celebrities Hayden Panettiere, 
Ellen Page, and Rihanna are among those on recent covers. 

246 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 Us Weekly 
 www.usmagazine.com 
Frequency: 52 issues/year
Publisher: Wenner Media 
  If you are compelled by breaking celebrity news, by Hollywood 
style, by health and beauty routines, and by nutrition and ﬁ tness 
advice, then you are part of this magazine ’ s target audience. 
Young educated adults will ﬁ nd a variety of features that not only 
include the areas just mentioned, but also include news and fea-
tures about ﬁ lm, television, and music. This magazine features “all 
things celebrity.” Each issue is packed with photos and informa-
tion. Celebrities almost always appear on the magazine ’ s cover.  
 Nonprint Resources 
 Video 
 American Pop Culture History Films 21-DVD Collection: 1930s, 
1940s, 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s Celebrity Pop Culture, American 
Movie Stars, Famous People and Celebrity Films  (2007)
Quality Information Publishers (DVD, time unknown) 
 This ﬁ lm collection features movies, commercials, interviews, 
news clips, and other material by and about some of Hollywood ’ s 
greatest actors and actresses and best-known public celebrities. 
Marilyn Monroe, Frank Sinatra, Eleanor Roosevelt, Alexander 
Graham Bell, Paul Newman, Albert Einstein, John Glenn, Richard 
Nixon, Helen Keller, and Jimmy Stewart are among those whose 
work is illustrated. 
 Be a Blogging Celebrity  (2009)
BeachViewMedia.com (DVD, 82 minutes) 
 This video is a “how-to” manual for becoming a celebrity. It sug-
gests setting up your own blog and using it to establish yourself as 
an expert or a celebrity. The makers of the video seem to believe 
the only accomplishment you need to become famous is to estab-
lish yourself and your “brand” online. Given the nature of online 
communication and the tendency of online users to be highly gull-
ible, what you write online need not be true. Thus, image trumps 
reality. 

Nonprint Resources 247
 Carl Sagan: A Cosmic Celebrity  (2000)
A&E Home Video (VHS, 50 minutes) 
 This video was an installment in the  Biography  program series on 
cable television ’ s A&E Network. It traces the life of scientist Carl 
Sagan with particular emphasis on his accomplishments and his 
legacy. Some viewers will enjoy the occasional glimpses into his 
personal life. The material is not overly scientiﬁ c and is appropriate 
for all audiences. 
 Celebrity (1999)
Miramax (DVD, 113 minutes) 
 There are several ﬁ lms titled  Celebrity . This particular one is 
thought by some viewers to be the best of the lot. This may be 
because it is a Woody Allen movie, or it may be because it stars 
a number of celebrities: Leonardo DiCaprio, Melanie Grifﬁ th, 
Kenneth Branagh, and Judy Davis, among others. The ﬁ lm is 
essentially a view of celebrity life. It was shot in black and white 
and follows life as seen through the eyes of a recently divorced 
couple. After a divorce, how does one build a new life in a media-
saturated, celebrity-driven world? As with many Woody Allen 
movies, the plot has some complex aspects, but an attentive 
viewer will be able to piece things together and notice a number 
of celebrity cameo shots. 
 Celebrity (1984)
Starmaker (VHS, 106 minutes) 
 This ﬁ lm also stars several celebrities: Joseph Bottoms, Michael 
Beck, Tess Harper, and Hal Holbrook, among others. This 1984 
ﬁ lm differs from the 1999 one in that this one is an adaptation of 
a book about a sordid sex crime that claimed the careers of a jour-
nalist, a Hollywood superstar, and a fanatical evangelist. Three 
friends leave their small-town Texas home to ﬁ nd fame and for-
tune. However, being famous means that the past often comes 
back to haunt you, as the three ultimately discover. 
 Celebrity News Reels: Hollywood ’ s Most Infamous Couples and 
Ugliest Breakups (2005)
Star Rush Media (DVD, 60 minutes) 
 Calling itself an “unauthorized documentary,” this video takes 
the viewer behind the scenes of the Hollywood dating game. 
What really goes on with those high-proﬁ le celebrity couples? 

248 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
What happened between Brad and Jennifer, or Ben and J-Lo, 
or Angelina and Billy Bob? Although the video purports to 
give the viewer the truth behind the headlines, some viewers 
will likely feel that some of the information is little more than 
 gossip. 
 Celebrities: Caught on Camera  (2000)
Sling Shot (VHS, 69 minutes) 
 This tape may be the video equivalent of a supermarket tabloid. 
The makers of this videotape prowl the places where celebri-
ties might be caught off guard: on the street, at airports, outside 
health clubs, and the like. The result is a video about celebri-
ties who are not often at their best in these situations. Those 
caught on tape include Pamela Anderson, Shannon Tweed, Car-
men Electra, and Tommy Lee, among others. Most of them are 
irritated by the camera ’ s intrusion into their private lives: some 
try to hide their faces; others yell at the camera. Not all view-
ers have found this video all that interesting because the video ’ s 
premise—while perhaps somewhat amusing at ﬁ rst—gets old 
quickly. 
 Diana: Life through a Lens  (2007)
Kultur White Star (DVD, 48 minutes) 
 Diana, Princess of Wales, was a worldwide celebrity. Her death 
in 1997 brought an end to a remarkable high-proﬁ le life of public 
service. It was said that more than 2 billion people worldwide 
watched her televised funeral. This video, however, is not about 
her death, but about her life. Photographer Jane Fincher accom-
panied Diana for 17 years, capturing pictures of her in a variety of 
personal and public situations. Through the photographer ’ s eyes, 
this video offers an insight into Diana, her adoring public, and the 
press corps that shadowed her everywhere. 
 Everybody ’ s Famous  (2000)
Miramax (DVD, 97 minutes) 
 This ﬁ lm won an Academy Award nomination for Best Foreign 
Language Film in 2000. It is a Belgian comedy that follows 
a young woman ’ s quest to become a famous singer and her 
father ’ s often outrageous efforts to help her gain celebrity status. 
Many viewers found this subtitled movie quite charming. 

Nonprint Resources 249
 Ghetto Celebrities (2009)
Phoenix Entertainment (DVD-R, 75 minutes) 
 High-proﬁ le rap artists with roots in the ghetto are featured in 
this documentary. Jay-Z, Nas, Ja Rule, and others are interviewed 
about their lives and their work. Some athletes and fashion 
designers are also interviewed. This video is uncensored and 
contains adult language. The celebrities are quite willing to say 
things to a documentary interviewer that they would never say to 
formal members of the press. 
 Hip-Hop: Beyond Beats and Rhymes 
Media Education Foundation (DVD, 60 minutes) 
 This ﬁ lm discusses race, gender violence, homophobia, and cor-
porate exploitation in the hip-hop recording industry. Rappers 
and cultural critics are interviewed with a view toward exam-
ining the sometimes destructive male stereotypes often pres-
ent in hip-hop music. Viewer discretion is advised; this ﬁ lm 
contains violent and sexual imagery in its unabridged version. 
An abridged version is available with the nudity and profanity 
edited out. 
 Hit Celebrity TV Commercials  (2004)
Passport Video (DVD, 95 minutes) 
 Celebrities have long been used as spokespersons for various 
products and services. This video provides a fairly comprehensive 
look at the movie stars, sports ﬁ gures, and other celebrities, many 
of them early in their careers, as they appeared in television 
commercials. Featured celebrities include Marilyn Monroe, 
O. J. Simpson, Michael Jordan, Cybill Shepard, Dustin Hoffman, 
and Susan Sarandon, among others. 
 Hollywood Ghosts and Gravesites  (2003)
Delta (DVD, 61 minutes) 
 Ever wonder where those Hollywood stars are buried? This 
video provides some of the answers to that question, taking the 
viewer on a tour of Hollywood gravesites. The crypts, tomb-
stones, or graves of Rudolph Valentino, Harry Houdini, and 
Marilyn Monroe are located, among others. The video also 
tours the studio lots and other locations where the stars used 
to hang out. 

250 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
 Investigative Reports: Celebrity Close Encounters  (1991)
A&E Home Video (VHS, 60 minutes) 
 Journalist Bill Kurtis narrates this look at celebrities who believe 
in UFOs and alien visits. The video was produced for A&E Net-
work ’ s  Investigative Reports  program series. Celebrities are inter-
viewed in-depth about their beliefs. While this topic may seem 
bizarre to some, the video presents celebrities ’  views without bias 
or judgment. Actor Dennis Weaver, astronaut Gordon Cooper, and 
ﬁ lm director Robert Wise are among those who believe we are not 
alone in the universe. 
 Movie Stars and Celebrities of the 1930s: A 20 DVD Collection  (2008)
Quality Information Publishers (DVD, length unknown) 
 Viewers who love old movies or those who want to see some of 
the best early movies and their celebrity stars for the ﬁ rst time will 
enjoy this collection. Some critics feel that performances by many 
of the stars in the 1930s were the best ever ﬁ lmed, easily surpass-
ing the work of today ’ s movie celebrities. This collection features 
the work of Shirley Temple, Béla Lugosi, David Niven, John Payne, 
Bette Davis, Carole Lombard, and Ginger Rogers, among others. 
 Playing Unfair: The Media Image of the Female Athlete  
Media Education Foundation (DVD, 30 minutes) 
 Are appearance and sexuality emphasized over athletic excellence 
in our view of female athletes, some of whom are celebrities? This 
video explores this question as it looks at how the images created 
by media impact our understanding of gender and our attitudes 
toward sports. Sexism, homophobia, and more may be the result 
of the stories and images we receive from the media. The video 
suggests that skill and strength should be emphasized when it 
comes to female athletes. 
 Prince William and Prince Harry: Prisoners of Celebrity  (2005)
Tango Entertainment (DVD, 50 minutes) 
 Being a member of the British Royal Family automatically makes 
one a celebrity. Prince William and Prince Harry, sons of Charles 
and Diana, have been in the celebrity spotlight almost since they 
were born. This documentary video examines both the positive 
and negative aspects of having celebrity parents as well as the 
princes ’  own search for a meaningful life in a media-saturated, 
celebrity-mad world. 

Nonprint Resources 251
 The Ultimate Vintage Movie Stars Collection: 70 Films Featuring 
Hollywood ’ s Greatest Actors and Actresses  (2008)
Quality Information Publishers (DVD, length unknown) 
 This collection features ﬁ lms from the early- to mid-20th century. 
Silent ﬁ lm stars such as Buster Keaton and Stan Laurel are pre-
sented as well as the more contemporary John Wayne and Jack 
Nicholson. From drama to comedy to horror, this collection 
includes  D.O.A., The Last Time I Saw Paris, Cyrano de Bergerac, and 
 Phantom of the Opera.  Superb acting and timeless themes can be 
found in every featured ﬁ lm. 
 20th Century with Mike Wallace: Celebrities, Scandal and the Press  
(no date)
A&E Home Video (VHS, time unknown) 
 The modern public has almost always been interested in the lives 
of the rich and famous. Journalism has been more than willing, 
down through the years, to follow celebrities, particularly when a 
scandal is involved or when a celebrity ’ s private life is somehow 
exposed. This video takes a look at how the media handle these 
stories. Speciﬁ c cases are examined with a view toward under-
standing not only how a celebrity-driven story develops but also 
how following it changes the nature of news. 
 Video Games 
 Celebrity Sports Showdown  (2008)
Platform: Nintendo Wii 
 This video game allows people of all ages to compete in a dozen 
sports events. Marketed as the ultimate party game, you play as 
your favorite celebrity. Players may select their personas from a list 
of celebrities that includes Fergie, Nelly Furtado, Mia Hamm, Reggie 
Bush, and Sugar Ray Leonard, among others. The goal is to become 
the ultimate celebrity athlete. Games include beach volleyball, bad-
minton, dodgeball, archery, wild water canoeing, and others. 
 Gotcha: Celebrity Secrets  (2010)
Platform: Windows Vista, XP 
 This game is designed for one player. The player takes on the per-
sona of a celebrity blogger who is desperate to leave a dead-end 
job for the exciting world of celebrity gossip. By tracking celebri-
ties ’  activities, you uncover some startling secrets, get tips from 

252 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
anonymous sources, and solve puzzles. A skillful player just 
might become a famous Hollywood blogger! 
 MTV ’ s Celebrity Deathmatch  (2003)
Platform: Windows 98, 2000, XP
Nintendo Wii, PlayStation 2 and 3, XBox 
 This simple video roughly approximates the animated  MTV 
Celebrity Deathmatch  program. It gives a player the chance to test 
a favorite (or least favorite) celebrity ’ s strength in the wrestling 
ring. Busta Rhymes, Carmen Electra, and Marilyn Manson are 
some of the featured celebrities. Ringside announcers provide 
a play-by-play description of the action as well as commentary 
before and after the match. 
 Paparazzi! Tales of Tinseltown  (1995)
Platform: Windows 95 
 The object of this video game is to take revealing, candid pictures 
of two dozen celebrities in Tinseltown. Photos can be sold to vari-
ous publications, some sleazy tabloids and other well-respected 
magazines. A 24-hour period is allowed for each play and during 
that time, a player can go to two different places in an attempt to 
get the needed photos. There are fewer than 14 periods allowed, 
so a player must maximize his/her photo opportunities during 
each 24-hour period. But here ’ s the challenge: not just any photo 
will do; a player must shoot the “right” photo. 
 Audio 
 BVM Quantum Subliminal CD Fame and Celebrity: Become 
Famous and Be a Celebrity  (no date)
Label: Brainwave Mind Voyages
Format: Audio CD 
 This product is something of an enigma. It is a collection of 
sounds that, the producers claim, can program your subconscious 
mind to attract fame and become a celebrity. You can tune your 
brainwaves to speciﬁ c frequencies, they say, and thus enable your 
mind to receive powerful subliminal messages. Some audio tracks 
feature ocean sounds, and one track is completely silent with no 
sound at all. While this “subliminal neurotechnology” may be 
relaxing, there is little evidence that it can help you become a 

Nonprint Resources 253
celebrity. The CD may have entertainment value, but its scientiﬁ c 
value is questionable. 
 Celebrities That Helped Shape  (2006)
Label: Jerden
Format: Audio CD 
 Celebrities often serve as role models for some members of the 
general public. In this and other ways, celebrities often shape 
our attitudes, beliefs, even our lifestyles. This CD is a collection 
of speeches, interviews, press conferences, or conversations with 
celebrities about various aspects of their lives. Elvis Presley holds 
a 1957 press conference, Mohammed Ali discusses his career as 
a boxer, Joe DiMaggio remembers his childhood and his heroes, 
and The Beatles appear at a 1966 press conference. Other celebri-
ties also contribute to this collection whose purpose, it seems, is to 
provide some insight into the lives of the featured celebrities as 
well as inspire and motivate others to live productive lives. 
 NBC Celebrity Christmas (Special Edition)  (2001)
Label: NBC
Format: Audio CD 
 This disk is a collection of Christmas music as performed on an 
NBC television network holiday special. Most of the performers 
were, at the time, part of the NBC family of prime time program-
ming. They include Donny and Marie Osmond (from  the Donny 
and Marie  show), Sean Hayes (from  Will and Grace ), Martin Sheen 
and Stockard Channing (from  The West Wing ), Alex Kingston 
(from  ER ), Jane Leeves (from  Frasier ), and Jay Leno (from  The Tonight 
Show ), among others. The music ranges from the traditional ( Winter 
Wonderland ) to the sacred ( O Holy Night ). The music is lively. The 
performances are interesting, good news given the fact that the 
performers are actors and not professional singers. 
 Nebraska Celebrities Sing for Sight  (2006)
Label: JMR Productions
Format: Audio CD 
 This CD presents music by celebrities from (or with a connec-
tion to) the state of Nebraska. It was produced to raise money to 
help blind children have a better life. All proceeds from the sale 
of the CD are donated to the Nebraska Foundation for Visually 
Impaired Children. Unless you are from Nebraska, or perhaps 

254 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
a nearby state, you will not likely recognize the celebrity per-
formers on this disc: John Beasley, Cory Sanchez, Dick Boyd, 
State Senator David Landis, among others. Still, the collection 
has a noble purpose. 
 Golden Throats: The Great Celebrity Sing Off  (1988)
Label: Rhino
Format: Audio CD 
 Can you imagine  Star Trek ’  s Mr. Spock (Leonard Nimoy) singing 
 Proud Mary ? How about Andy Grifﬁ th singing  House of the Rising
Sun ? These and other interesting performances appear on this 
music collection. Some listeners said the celebrities are terrible 
singers; others said the performances are surprisingly good 
and enjoyable. At the very least, this disc is good for a laugh. 
It apparently sold quite well because other collections have been 
produced, among which are  Golden Throats 2: More Celebrity 
Rock Oddities  (1991) and  Golden Throats 4: Celebrities Butcher the 
Beatles (1997). 
 Voices of Our Time: Five Decades of Studs Terkel Interviews  
(2005)
Label: Highbridge Audio
Format: Audio CD 
 Chicago radio journalist and author Studs Terkel was the premier 
interviewer of his time. During his career (ca. 1940–1998) he inter-
viewed or conversed with many celebrity authors, actors, and 
musicians. This collection is drawn from his work and reengi-
neered for modern quality listening. You ’ ll ﬁ nd Terkel talking with 
Gore Vidal, Woody Allen, Pete Seeger, Dorothy Parker, and Mel 
Brooks, among others. Just hearing famous voices speak across 
time makes this collection an important part of celebrity history.  
 Useful Internet Sites 
 African American Web Connection 
 www.aawc.com 
 This site provides access to proﬁ les of prominent African 
Americans. Proﬁ les range from better-known celebrities such 
as poet Maya Angelou and guitarist BB King to lesser-known 
politicians such as Congresswoman Corrine Brown. Still, the 

Nonprint Resources 255
site is fairly comprehensive. A user can also access a variety of 
information about African Americans including black authors, 
churches, and publications. 
 Biography.com 
 www.biography.com 
 A variety of information can be found on this site. Biographical 
information about celebrities (and some not-so-famous people) 
is available, of course. But the site also delivers news and video 
features as well as games and information on celebrity birthdays. 
By accessing the archives, a user can ﬁ nd videos of famous athletes, 
actors/actresses, and business ﬁ gures. In other words, there is more 
to this Web site than just biography. 
 Buzzle.com 
 www.buzzle.com 
 This site specializes in biographies and autobiographies. The bios 
are short and can be found on artists, authors, actors, scientists, pres-
idents, and other famous people. It is interesting that the site mixes 
biographies and autobiographies. For example, a user can read a 
biography of composer Antonio Vivaldi (1648–1741) and then read 
the autobiography of tennis celebrity Serena Williams. The site also 
provides news and feature articles on current and past celebrities. 
 Blog Top Sites 
 www.blogtopsites.com 
 This is a directory designed to provide a user with the best blogs 
available. One can choose from more than 40 categories, ranging 
from academics to gambling. One of the categories, of course, is 
celebrity blogs, usually blogs  about  celebrities, not  by  celebrities. The 
site ranks the number of unique visits each blog receives in a month. 
Blog owners can register their site with this Web site and gain the 
attention of a broader audience. In terms of celebrity blogs, a user 
could, for example, access Celebrity Gossip (  http://celebrity.ohfree.
net  ), a site claiming to update information every ﬁ ve minutes with 
the latest celebrity news, scandals, rumors, and the like worldwide. 
 Docstoc 
 www.docstoc.com 
 This unusual Web site enables a user to ﬁ nd (and share) profes-
sional documents. It boasts access to millions of public documents. 

256 Selected Print and Nonprint Resources
A user can select a document category such as business, technology, 
education, real estate, and so on. Users interested in documents 
relating to celebrities should ﬁ nd the search box located on the 
site and type in  celebrities . The search will result in a list of docu-
ments about celebrities. These range from news releases to articles 
about the paparazzi and celebrity tattoos, among others. Power-
Point presentations can occasionally be found on some topics. 
Most information is free, but access and downloading of some 
documents may require a payment of some sort. 
 Internet Movie Database 
 www.imdb.com 
 A user might think this site has a single purpose: to provide 
information about all things related to movies. The site does 
indeed emphasize movies, celebrity actors and actresses, the 
latest Hollywood news, how ﬁ lms are doing at the box ofﬁ ce, 
what ﬁ lms will soon be released, and so on, but it also provides a 
wealth of information about popular television programs. A user 
can access clips from TV shows as well as movie trailers. It even 
provides a listing of daily television programs on the major TV 
networks. It recaps the previous night ’ s television fare and asks a 
daily poll question. 
 Laughing Star 
 www.laughingstar.com 
 Need a photo of a celebrity? This site is a free celebrity photo data-
base. A user can click on the ﬁ rst letter of a celebrity ’ s last name or 
select a name from a list of celebrities. Clicking on a name will result 
in a page showing several thumbnail photos, each of which can be 
enlarged for a better view. Both male and female celebrities are 
featured. Celebrities range from Paula Abdul to Renée Zellweger. 
 LibrarySpot 
 www.libraryspot.com 
 This Web site is a free virtual library resource center available to 
everyone. Its purpose is to break through the overload of infor-
mation on the Web and focus on the best library and reference 
sites, particularly those of interest to educators, students, families, 
and businesses. The sites featured are carefully selected and 
reviewed by an editorial team. Quality, content, and utility are key 
considerations. Information is available on a multitude of topics, 

Nonprint Resources 257
of course. In terms of celebrities, a user can access information on 
artists, athletes, musicians, poets, scientists, and so on. 
 NNDB 
 www.nndb.com 
 This site contains more than 35,000 proﬁ les that can be accessed by 
last name. Although this site presents itself as “tracking the entire 
world,” it does not list everyone. If an individual is the object of 
permanent public interest, has held certain public ofﬁ ces, or is 
listed in certain encyclopedias, for example, then the individual 
is likely proﬁ led. However, just appearing in a ﬁ lm, or being a 
part of a musical group, or authoring a book, or being married 
to a celebrity does not usually qualify one for admission to this 
select group of proﬁ les. Thus, the site appears to have a quite 
speciﬁ c, if rather narrow, deﬁ nition of celebrity (or fame). Still, this 
site is extremely interesting. It deals with issues of nationality 
and ethnicity as well as further reﬁ ning the qualities required for 
inclusion in its database. 
 Who ’ s Alive and Who ’ s Dead 
 www.whosaliveandwhosdead.com 
 One does not need to be morbidly curious to browse this Web site. 
Watching movies or hearing someone talk about a celebrity can 
often result in this question: Is (name) still alive? This is a natural 
question. This Web site enables a user to ﬁ nd out who is alive and 
who is dead. One can browse by category (actors and actresses, 
musical performers, political ﬁ gures, or athletes and sports ﬁ gures) 
or click on the ﬁ rst letter of a celebrity ’ s last name. Birth (and 
death) dates are given for each celebrity as well as the celebrity ’ s 
age—current age if alive, or age at death. The site also features 
special categories such as Living Oscar Winners, Dead Playboy 
Playmates, and Mouseketeers, Alive and Dead. 


259
 Glossary 
 blog     A short form of the word  Weblog , this term refers to an individual ’ s 
personal journal or diary, posted online and available for reading and 
comment by others. 
 celebration  As ﬁ rst used in early English literature, this word referred 
to a performance or solemn ceremony. In modern times, the word has 
come to be used for almost any sort of festive gathering. 
 celebrity     A term freely applied by the general public to individuals 
who are famous or well known. As a concept, however, the term is more 
complex than usually assumed. A celebrity must meet a number of char-
acteristics beyond being famous or well known. In the 21st century, one 
of the most important characteristics is regular media exposure; therefore 
celebrity is fame modernized. 
 celebrity magazines     A term referring to the weekly (and a few monthly) 
magazines publishing photos and information  about  celebrities. These 
publications are not sponsored by celebrities but celebrities are the main 
focus of their content. 
 celebrity television programs  These are 30-minute syndicated television 
shows  about  celebrities. They often appear in the time period immediately 
preceding network prime time programming and feature gossip, video, 
and news about celebrities, most often those in entertainment. 
 classical civilizations     A term used by some historians to denote the 
contributions made by the early Egyptian, Greek, and Roman cultures. 
Many of the practices developed by these cultures, such as irrigation tech-
niques and architectural style, are still important and useful in modern 
life. There is no evidence, however, that any of these accomplishments 
made the individuals involved celebrities in their time. 
 collective unconscious     First described by psychiatrist Carl Jung, this 
term refers to a part of the mind containing memories and impulses of 
which one is not aware. The images and emotions resulting from these 

260 Glossary
memories and impulses are often embodied in one ’ s interest in or attraction 
to a celebrity or a celebrity ’ s lifestyle. 
 cultural icon     A symbol, an idea, or a concept that is important to people 
or a culture. An individual may become a cultural icon if the person ’ s 
work and life illustrate a valued idea or concept. For example, Mother 
Teresa, a Catholic nun who worked with the poor, the sick, and the dying, 
could be said to be a cultural icon because of her religious faith and 
self-sacriﬁ ce in the service of others. 
 demographics     A term applied to data relating to human characteristics 
such as age, gender, income, education, and the like. 
 famous     A word applied to individuals who are prominent and broadly 
known for their achievements. The word is commonly used by the public 
as a synonym for  celebrity  and  well known , although it has a slightly 
different meaning. 
 15 minutes of fame  A paraphrase of Andy Warhol ’ s well-known 
statement about how a pervasive and often temperamental media and 
our desire for recognition will—at some future point—result in everyone 
in the world being famous for 15 minutes. 
 global village  A term coined by communication scholar Marshall 
McLuhan that serves as a metaphor or description of the world we live 
in, one where new technologies link people and events in real time, 
making us all essentially members of the same human community. 
 hieroglyphics     A term describing early writing in the Egyptian culture 
(ca. 3100  BCE –200  BCE ). Used primarily by priests and religious leaders, the 
writing consisted not of letters but of pictures and symbols. 
 media     As used in the 21st century, this term means the multitude of ways 
individuals, groups, organizations, and institutions communicate—in 
print or electronically—over long distances with others. Media include 
radio, television, newspapers, magazines, music and sound recordings, 
ﬁ lm, and the Internet. 
 new media     A term commonly used to describe electronic communica-
tion in the 21st century, including computers, iPhones or other cellular 
devices, the Internet, and so on. 
 papyrus     A plant available in the Nile valley during the Egyptian culture 
(ca. 3100  BCE –200  BCE ). When cut into strips, dried, and pressed together, it 
became a surface on which one could write. 
 parchment     Popular during the early civilizations, it is the skin of an 
animal—usually a sheep or a goat—dried and stretched to make a 
writing surface. 
 pictograms     A word describing pictures made on cave walls by pre-
historic peoples. Also, pictures engraved on clay tablets, primarily in 
Mesopotamia and also in the Egyptian culture (ca. 3100  BCE –200  BCE ). 

Glossary 261
 Ponzi scheme  An illegal ﬁ nancial-investment plan named for Charles 
Ponzi, thought to be the inventor. Often called a pyramid-style scam, 
it involves promising investors large proﬁ ts, but the promoter keeps 
their money instead of investing it and pays proﬁ ts from money collected 
from new investors. The scam usually collapses when the money from 
new investors is insufﬁ cient to pay promised proﬁ ts. Almost a dozen 
businessmen have achieved a sort of criminal celebrity by using this 
scam to defraud investors. 
 printing press     Invented by Johannes Gutenberg in 1453 from an old 
wine press, this device used moveable metal type to make impressions 
on paper. The invention led to a better informed, more literate public and 
may have been an important factor in some individuals becoming well 
known. 
 pseudo-human event     A term used by the historian Daniel Boorstin 
to describe a type of empty celebrity whereby one is famous merely 
for being well known and not for any accomplishments connected to 
reality.  
 social media     A term referring to several Web sites where one can post 
personal information, photos, or videos, and interact with others. Popular 
sites include Facebook, MySpace, and LinkedIn. 
 star     A term often applied to celebrities in the entertainment ﬁ eld, but 
rarely applied to celebrities in other ﬁ elds. For example, a celebrity 
appearing in a movie is often called a star; however, celebrities in politics, 
medicine, science, and other ﬁ elds are not normally considered stars, 
although they may have signiﬁ cant accomplishments. 
 taxonomy     A word used by scientists and others to describe a classiﬁ ca-
tion system whereby objects, animals, plants, even people, are organized 
and placed into meaningful categories. 
 technological determinism  A theory developed by communication 
scholar Marshall McLuhan stating that media technology determines 
how people think, feel, and act. If true, it explains how celebrity is, in 
large part, a function of media exposure. 
 The Enlightenment     This is the name usually given the historical culture 
period (ca. 1650  CE –1850  CE ) during which civilization made signiﬁ cant 
advances in science, art, music, and philosophy. There were many famous 
and well-known people in this era, but communication during the time 
was oral, written, or printed and was not widespread enough to qualify 
the famous or well known as celebrities. 
 twitter     A small-scale communication service available to Internet users 
and usually accessible by cell phone enabling an individual to post a 
message of 140 characters or fewer and have the message sent to or read 
by one ’ s “followers.” 

262 Glossary
 well known     A term describing an individual (or event or location) 
widely recognized by typical members of the general public. Often used 
as a synonym for  celebrity  or  famous , the word does not have precisely the 
same meaning as the other two. 
 yellow journalism     A period in the early years of the American news-
paper industry during which newspapers attempted to gain readers by 
publishing unusual, sensational—often bizarre—stories. 

263
 Index 
 Aames, Willie,  34 
 Abdul, Paula,  173 
 Abrahams, Peter,  90 
 Abramovich, Roman,  96 
 Absolute Celebrities (Web site), 
 211 
 Academy of Motion Picture Arts 
and Sciences,  202 
 Academy of Television Arts and 
Sciences,  202 
 Access Hollywood,  146,  211 
 Achebe, Chinua,  90 
 Actors Fund,  202–203 
 Aday, Marvin Lee,  165 
 AEI Speakers Bureau,  297 
 Ahmadinejad, Mahmoud,  85 
 Alberoni, Francesco,  16 
 Alexander the Great,  5 
 All-American Speakers Bureau 
and Celebrity Network, 
 207–208 
 Allen, Paul,  127 
 Allen Agency,  208 
 Alliance for a Healthier 
Generation,  199 
 AllYouCanRead.com ,  22 
 Altamira, Spain,  2 
 Alwaleed Bin Talal,  96 
 Alzheimer, Alois,  93 
 American Federation of 
Musicians of the United 
States and Canada,  203 
 American Federation of Television 
and Radio Artists (AFTRA), 
 203 
 American Idol ,  25,  125 
 American Society of 
Composers, Authors and 
Publishers (ASCAP),  203 
 anchor-correspondent model,  62 
 Anderson, Pamela,  39 
 Angel Network,  143,  198–199 
 Annan, Koﬁ ,  170 
 Anything Hollywood (Web site), 
 212 
 Aristotle,  6 
 Armani, Giorgio,  96 
 Armstrong, Lance,  192 
 Arnold, Matthew,  3 
 Atashin, Faegheh.  See Googoosh 
 attendance at sports events,  182 
 Audacity of Hope ,  133 
 Audubon, John J.,  10 
 Ayyyy (Web site),  212 
 Aznar, Jose Maria,  95 
 
 Bach, Johann Sebastian,  9 
 Bacon, Kevin,  18,  173 
 Barnard, Christiaan,  93 
 Barshold, Rinchen,  91 
 Baselitz, Georg,  90 
 Basketball Hall of Fame,  130 
 Batman and Robin ,  124 
 Baudrillard, Jean,  95 

264 Index
 Beck, Glenn,  121–122 
 Beckenbauer, Franz,  80 
 Becker, Boris,  80 
 Becket, Thomas,  8 
 Beckham, David,  77 
 Beethoven, Ludwig van,  9 
 Benedict XVI,  98–99 
 Berlusconi, Silvio,  84 
 Big Celebrity Directory,  222 
 BigSpeak,  208 
 Bill and Melinda Gates 
Foundation,  127 
 Black Death,  7 
 Blackout,  139 
 Blagojevich, Rod,  36–37 
 Blair, Tony,  84 
 “bling-bling president,”  84 
 blogs,  21,  66–68,  79,  175 
 Bloom, Harold,  95 
 boiled frog phenomenon,  18 
 Bollea, Terry.  See Hulk Hogan 
 Bonaparte, Jose F.,  91 
 Bono,  77,  79,  152–153 
 book industry,  11 
 Boorstin, Daniel J.,  13 
 Born on the Fourth of July ,  124 
 Boston Gazette ,  10 
 Boston News-Letter ,  10 
 Bowling for Columbine ,  132 
 Boyle, Willard S.,  170 
 Branson, Richard,  96 
 Braudy, Leo,  15 
 Brennan, Christine,  44 
 Bridges, Beau and Jeff,  173 
 Brief History of Time, A ,  91 
 Brin, Sergey,  96 
 Brokeback Mountain,  81 
 Brown, Chris,  37–38 
 Brown, Gordon,  84 
 Brown, William J.,  82 
 Bruni, Carla,  83–84 
 Bryant, Kobe,  123 
 Buffett, Warren,  96 
 Bugs Bunny,  48 
 Burnell, Jocelyn Bell,  92 
 Burns Entertainment,  205–206 
 Burnt Toast and Other Philosophies 
of Life ,  177 
 Bush, George W.,  86 
 Cable News Network (CNN),  14, 
 63–64 
 cable television,  14,  63 
 Cady, Frank,  36 
 Calderon, Felipe,  87 
 Caligula,  6 
 Carey, Peter,  90 
 Carnegie, Andrew,  12 
 Carter, Jimmy,  170 
 cassette tapes,  14 
 Castro, Fidel,  85–86 
 celebrations,  2–3,  8 
 Celebrities Fore Kids (CFK),  200 
 Celebrities Zone (Web site),  212 
 celebrity 
 characteristics of,  17,  31 
 and controversial issues, 
 179–181 
 earnings,  150 
 endorsements,  45–47 
 ethics,  46–47 
 ﬁ ctional,  47–49 
 meaning of,  3,  8 
 media,  11,  49,  63 
 misconceptions about,  69–72 
 movies,  147–149 
 music,  165–168 
 politics,  77–80 
 public,  181 
 religious,  153 
 as “stars,”  17–18 
 visibility,  13 
 celebrity activism,  79 
 Celebrity Base,  222 
 celebrity business criminals, 
 177–179 
 Celebrity Café (Web site),  212 
 celebrity chefs,  154 
 Celebrity Connections,  206 
 celebrity families,  170–173 

Index 265
 celebrity fundraisers,  152 
 Celebrity-Gossip (Web site),  212 
 Celebrity Link,  222 
 celebrity magazines,  50–57 
 circulation,  146 
 photo-and-caption 
technique,  50 
 problems,  55–56 
 Celebrity Management,  210 
 Celebrity Palace (Web site),  213 
 celebrity siblings,  170,  173 
 Celebrity Talent Agency,  206 
 celebrity taxonomy,  23–24 
 celebrity television programs, 
 57–62,  145 
 Celebrity Wallpaper (Web site), 
 213 
 Celebrity Wonder (Web site),  213 
 celebrity writers,  174–177 
 Celebsites,  223 
 Celebuzz (Web site),  213 
 cell phones,  19,  21 
 Change We Can Believe In ,  133 
 Charity Navigator,  196,  198 
 Charlemagne,  8 
 Charlize Theron Africa Outreach 
Project,  197 
 Chaucer, Geoffrey,  8 
 Chavez, Hugo,  86 
 Children ’ s Health Fund,  192 
 Chopra, Deepak,  93 
 Christmas Too Many, A ,  34 
 Christopher and Dana Reeve 
Foundation,  196 
 Chrysler Paciﬁ ca,  46 
 Ciccone, Louise Veronica.  See 
Madonna 
 classical civilizations,  4–7 
 Cleopatra,  4 
 Cleveland Clinic,  195 
 Clinton, Bill,  193 
 Clinton, Hillary,  88,  133 
 Clooney, George,  123–124,  136 
 Close Encounters of the Third Kind, 
 140 
 Coat of Many Colors,  177 
 Coleman, Gary,  34 
 collective unconscious,  16 
 Color of Money, The ,  124,  139 
 Coluche,  79 
 communication, progress in,  8 
 compact discs (CDs),  14,  22 
 Conan the Barbarian,  138 
 Conan the Destroyer,  138 
 Connery brothers,  173 
 Cook, Robin,  93 
 Copernicus,  8 
 Corporation for Public 
Broadcasting,  14 
 Cosby, Bill,  177 
 country music,  166 
 Country Music Association,  204 
 country of origin (COO),  45 
 Cowell, Simon,  50,  125,  193 
 Crick, Francis,  91 
 Cruise, Tom,  124–125 
 Crusades, the,  7 
 Curious Case of Benjamin Button, 
The ,  136 
 Currier, Nathaniel,  10 
 Cutting Class ,  136 
 Daily Show with Jon Stewart,  141 
 Dalai Lama,  17–18,  98 
 “Dangerously in Love” (Beyoncé), 
 122 
 Dante Alighieri,  8 
 Dark Knight, The ,  81 
 Dawkins, Richard,  95 
 Declaration of Independence,  10 
 Deen, Paula,  154 
 DeGeneres, Ellen,  125 
 Departed, The ,  139 
 Derrida, Jacques,  95 
 Descartes, René,  9 
 Destiny ’ s Child,  122 
 Diaz, Fernando,  80 
 Dickens, Charles,  12 
 Diff ’ rent Strokes ,  34 
 digital video discs (DVDs),  15 

266 Index
 Fatherhood,  174 
 Few Good Men, A ,  124 
 ﬁ ber-optic cable,  14 
 Fight Club ,  136 
 Fighting Temptations, The ,  122 
 Fischer, Bobby,  35 
 ﬁ tness and exercise celebrities,  69 
 Flannery, Tim,  92 
 Flintstones,  48 
 Foghorn Leghorn,  48 
 Fonda, Henry,  173 
 Fontaine, Joan,  36 
 Forbes ,  35,  96,  142–143 
 Foucault, Michel,  95 
 Founding Fathers,  10 
 Fox, Michael J.,  193 
 FOX News,  63 
 Franklin, Benjamin,  10 
 Fraser, Benson P.,  82 
 Frisky, the (Web site),  219 
 Gabby Babble (Web site),  214 
 Gable, Clark,  149 
 Galileo,  8 
 Gangs of New York,  139 
 Garland, Judy,  149 
 Gates, Bill,  96,  126–127 
 Gates, Henry Louis, Jr.,  94 
 Gawker (Web site),  214 
 Geisel, Theodor (Dr. Seuss),  35 
 Global Humanitarian Action 
Award,  129 
 global village,  75–77 
 Globe, The ,  56 
 Goldberg, Whoopi,  173 
 Goldmember,  122 
 Gone with the Wind,  149 
 Goodfellas,  139 
 Googoosh,  90 
 Gore, Al,  127–128,  170 
 Graham, Billy,  98–99 
 Grant, Ulysses S.,  12 
 Greeks,  4–6 
 Greer, Germaine,  90 
 Grubbs, Jaimee,  43 
 Dion, Celine,  46 
 Dlisted (Web site),  213 
 DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid),  91 
 “Doctor Death.”  See Kevorkian, 
Jack 
 Doherty, Peter,  92 
 Dong Zhiming,  91 
 Down, John Langdon,  93 
 Dreamgirls ,  25,  122 
 Dreams from My Father ,  133 
 Drezner, Daniel W.,  79 
 Dryden, John,  3 
 Dugan, Jimmy,  33 
 Dungy, Tony,  126 
 Dylan, Bob,  79 
 E! (Web site),  214 
 early celebrity deaths,  173–174 
 early celebrity jobs,  173 
 Early Show,  70 
 Eastwood, Clint,  173 
 Edison, Thomas,  12 
 Edwards, John,  37 
 Egyptians,  4 
 electronic media,  62 
 El Greco,  8 
 Elias, Manuel de,  90 
 Ellen Show,  125 
 Elmer Fudd,  48 
 Elton John AIDS Foundation,  194 
 e-mail,  20 
 Emerson, Ralph Waldo,  10 
 Enlightenment, the,  8–9 
 Ensign, John,  37 
 entertainment celebrities,  76–77 
 ER ,  124 
 Esquire ,  211 
 E.T.: The Extra-Terrestrial,  140 
 Every Day with Rachael Ray ,  137 
 Executive Vision, Inc. (EVI), 
 206–207 
 Extra ,  59,  145 
 Facebook,  21,  67,  69,  143–144 
 Fahrenheit 9/11,  132 

Index 267
 “hyper-president,”  83 
 hypertext,  14 
 Inconvenient Truth, An,  128 
 Indy Racing League (IRL),  135 
 Ingvar, Kamprad,  97 
 In Living Color ,  130 
 Inside Dish with Rachael Ray ,  137 
 Inside Edition ,  57–58,  70,  135 
 Insider, The ,  59,  146 
 In Style,  22,  54 
 international celebrity,  88–89 
 International Celebrity Register ,  13 
 International Society for the 
Performing Arts (ISPA),  204 
 Internet,  14–15,  20–22,  49,  62–64, 
 67,  69,  72,  76,  184–185 
 Interview,  22 
 Intimate Strangers,  12 
 In Touch Weekly,  22,  50–51,  54 
 iPod,  22,  166 
 Ives, James,  10 
 Jackson, Michael,  1,  35 
 Jaws,  140 
 Jay-Z,  122 
 Jefferson, Thomas,  10 
 Jerry Maguire ,  124 
 J-14 ,  22 
 Jobs, Steve,  96 
 Joel, Billy,  193 
 Johansson, Scarlett,  128–129 
 John, Elton,  194 
 John Paul II,  99 
 Johnson, Samuel,  3 
 Jolie, Angelina,  129,  152–153 
 Jones, Star,  59 
 Jordan, Michael,  129–130 
 Julius Caesar,  6 
 Jung, Carl,  16 
 Jurassic Park,  140 
 Kahn, Axel,  91 
 Kao, Charles K.,  170 
 Kardashian, Kim,  39 
 Gutenberg, Johannes,  8 
 Gyllenhaal, Maggie and 
Jake,  173 
 Halderman, Robert “Joe,”  41 
 Handel, George Frideric,  9 
 Hanks, Tom,  33 
 Harding, Tonya,  34–35 
 Harlin, Renny,  81 
 Harper, Stephen,  87 
 Harris, Eric,  26–27 
 Harrison, George,  79 
 Harvard Lampoon,  134 
 Hatch, Richard,  34 
 Hatcher, Teri,  177 
 Havilland, Olivia de,  36 
 Hawking, Stephen,  91 
 Hawn, Goldie,  165 
 Hawthorne, Nathaniel,  10 
 Hayek, Salma,  77 
 Hearst, William Randolph,  12 
 Helu, Carlos Slim,  97 
 Henry VIII,  8 
 Hercules Goes to New York,  138 
 Herwitz, David,  18 
 Hewitt, Jennifer Love,  46 
 Hilton, Paris,  38–40 
 Hinn, Benny,  99 
 Hirst, Damien,  90 
 Hobeika, George,  89 
 Hogarth, William,  9 
 Hole in the Wall Gang Camp,  194 
 Hollyscoop (Web site),  214 
 Hollywood.com ,  215 
 Hollywood Gossip (Web site),  215 
 Holmes, Katie,  124 
 Homer Simpson,  47–48 
 Hooker, Richard,  3 
 Horace,  6 
 Horse Whisperer, The ,  128 
 Howard, Ron and Clint,  173 
 Hudson, Jennifer,  25 
 Hughes, Robert,  90 
 Hulk Hogan,  165 
 Hwang, Woo-suk,  92 

268 Index
 Life and Style Weekly,  22,  51 
 Lighthouse Agency,  208 
 Li Ka Shing,  96 
 Lincoln, Abraham,  12 
 LinkedIn,  21,  67 
 L. L. Cool J.  See Smith, James Todd 
 Lodge, David,  95 
 Lohan, Lindsey,  40–41 
 Lookalike-USA,  210 
 Lopez, George,  78 
 Lopez, Jennifer,  130–131 
 Lopez, Mario,  59 
 Lost in Translation ,  128 
 Louis XIV,  9 
 Louis XVI,  9 
 Luther, Martin,  8 
 Madoff, Bernard,  179 
 Madonna,  153,  165 
 magazines,  10–11,  22 
 Make-A-Wish Foundation,  200 
 Malory, Thomas,  3 
 Malouf, David,  90 
 Mandela, Nelson,  83 
 Manolo Blanhnik footwear,  212 
 Marco Polo,  8 
 Marcus Aurelius,  6 
 Marie Antoinette,  9 
 Mark Antony,  6 
 Marley, Bob,  174 
 mass media,  10–11,  14–15 
 Math Doesn ’ t Suck,  177 
 Maxim (Web site),  215 
 McCain, John,  78,  133,  142 
 McCarty, Darren,  195 
 McCombs, Maxwell E.,  87 
 McConaughey, Matthew,  173 
 McCracken, Grant,  46 
 McKellar, Danica,  177 
 McLuhan, Marshall,  32,  75–76 
 McVeigh, Timothy,  27 
 Meat Loaf.  See Aday, Marvin Lee 
 medieval era,  7 
 Merkel, Angela,  85 
 Mexican, The ,  136 
 Karzai, Hamid,  87 
 Kerrigan, Nancy,  34–35 
 Kevorkian, Jack,  93 
 Kidman, Nicole,  77 
 Kim Jong Il,  87 
 King, Larry,  195 
 Klebold, Dylan,  26–27 
 Klein, Joe,  88 
 Knowles, Beyoncé,  122–123 
 Kohn, Oliver,  80 
 Kostadinova, Stefka,  80 
 Krugman, Paul,  170 
 Kutcher, Ashton,  22 
 Ladies Home Journal,  13 
 Lai, Adrienne,  17 
 Lamas, Lorenzo,  78 
 Lance Armstrong Foundation,  192 
 Lara Croft: Tomb Raider ,  129 
 Larry King Cardiac Foundation 
(LKCF),  194–195 
 Larry Sanders Show,  140 
 Lascaux, France,  2 
 Late, Late Show with Tom Snyder, 
 140 
 Late Night ,  134 
 Latino celebrities,  78 
 Lauren, Ralph,  96 
 Laurent, Yves Saint,  35 
 League of Their Own, A,  33 
 Ledger, Heath,  81 
 Le Douarin, Nicole,  91 
 Lee, Jennifer Nicole,  69–70 
 Lee, Robert E.,  12 
 Lee, Tommy,  39 
 Lemondrop (Web site),  215 
 Le Morte D ’ Arthur (The Death of 
Arthur),  3 
 Lennon, John,  35 
 Leno, Jay,  134 
 Letterman, David,  40–41,  134 
 letters to celebrities,  185–189 
 Levin, Harvey,  60 
 Lewis, James,  179 
 Life,  13 

Index 269
 National Restaurant Association 
Educational Foundation,  199 
 National Stroke Foundation,  201 
 Nero,  6 
 network evening newscasts,  64 
 New England colonies,  10 
 Newman, Paul,  194 
 new media,  20,  33,  64–66 
 New Mickey Mouse Club,  139 
 news magazines,  61,  64 
 newspapers,  10–11,  64 
 Newton, Isaac,  9 
 New York Children ’ s Health 
Project,  192 
 New York Restoration Project 
(NYRP),  195–196 
 New York Times ,  64 
 nickelodeons,  13 
 Nielsen poll,  79–80 
 Nobel Prize,  168 
 norms,  36–45 
 North ,  128 
 Norville, Deborah,  57,  177 
 Obama, Barack,  78,  86,  132–133, 
 142,  170 
 O ’ Brien, Conan,  133–134 
 Ocean ’ s Eleven ,  124,  136 
 “Octomom.”  See Suleman, Nadya 
 OK! Magazine,  22 
 OK Weekly ,  50 
 Omg! (Web site),  215–216 
 One Fine Day ,  124 
 Oprah Winfrey Show,  124,  143,  199 
 oral communication,  5–7 
 O ’ Reilly, Bill,  134 
 O ’ Reilly Factor,  135 
 O ’ Rourke, Heather,  174 
 Ortega, Amancio,  96 
 Ortega, Kenny,  35 
 Out of Sight ,  131 
 Ovid,  6 
 Paffenberger, Ralph,  93 
 Parker, Eva Longoria,  78 
 Meyer, Stephenie,  131 
 Michael Clayton ,  124 
 Michael J. Fox Foundation,  193 
 Michelangelo,  8 
 Mickelson ExxonMobil Teachers 
Academy,  200–201 
 Mickey Mouse,  48 
 Microsoft,  127 
 Middle Ages.  See medieval era 
 Midler, Bette,  195 
 Mike Utley Foundation,  197 
 Milat, Ivan,  82 
 Millionaire ’ s Concierge,  209 
 MillionTreesNYC,  195–196 
 Milton, John,  3 
 modes of endorsement,  46 
 Money Train ,  30 
 Montel Williams MS Foundation, 
 198 
 Moore, Michael,  132 
 Moores, Pamela M.,  78 
 Morgan, Harry,  36 
 Mori, Akira,  97 
 Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus,  9 
 Mr. and Mrs. Smith ,  129,  136 
 Mulligan, Brian,  210 
 multiple sclerosis (MS),  198 
 My Love Affair with Jewelry ,  177 
 MySpace,  21,  67,  69 
 Nadal, Rafael,  80 
 National Academy of Recording 
Arts and Sciences,  204 
 National Basketball Association 
(NBA),  77 
 National Child Protection Act,  143 
 National Enquirer ,  56 
 National Examiner,  56 
 National Highway Trafﬁ c Safety 
Administration (NHTSA),  18 
 National Hockey League,  182 
 National Organization of Pro-
fessional Athletes and 
Celebrities Talent Agency 
(NOPACTalent),  209 

270 Index
 Raging Bull,  138 
 Raiders of the Lost Ark,  140 
 Rakha, Marwa,  90 
 R & B/urban music,  166 
 rap/hip hop,  166 
 Ray, Rachael,  137,  154,  199 
 Ray J,  39 
 Reader ’ s Digest,  13 
 Reagan, Ronald,  78 
 Recording Industry Association of 
America (RIAA),  204–205 
 recreational expenditures,  183 
 Redlener, Irwin,  192 
 Reeve, Christopher,  196 
 Rembrandt,  8 
 Remington, Frederic,  10 
 Renaissance/Reformation period, 
 8 
 Rihanna,  37–38 
 Ritchie, Nicole,  177 
 River Runs Through It, A,  136 
 Road Runner,  48 
 Roberts, Robin,  38 
 Rock Bottom Remainders,  196–197 
 Rockefeller, John D.,  12 
 rock music,  166 
 Rodden, John,  94 
 Rodriguez, Adam,  78 
 Roger and Me,  132 
 Romans,  6 
 Roosevelt, Franklin D.,  13 
 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques,  9 
 Rushdie, Salman,  95 
 Saddleback Valley Community 
Church,  142 
 Salk, Jonas,  93 
 Salomon, Rick,  39 
 Sanford, Mark,  37 
 Sarkozy, Nicolas,  83–84 
 Saturday Evening Post,  10 
 Saturday Night Live,  134 
 Saving Private Ryan,  140 
 Sawh, Lall,  93 
 Sawyer, Diane,  38 
 Parkinson, James,  93 
 Parton, Dolly,  177 
 Patrick, Danica,  135–136 
 Patriot, The ,  81 
 Patterson, James,  151 
 Paul, Mike,  43 
 Peck, Gregory,  149 
 People,  22,  53,  146,  216 
 PerezHilton (Web site),  216 
 Pickens, Boone T.,  96 
 Pickler, Kellie,  25 
 Pink Panther, The ,  122 
 Pinter, Harold,  170 
 Pitt, Brad,  129,  136 
 Plato,  6 
 Poe, Edgar Allan,  10 
 political activism,  77 
 Ponzi, Charles,  178–179 
 PopCrunch (Web site),  216 
 Pope, Alexander,  9 
 PopEater (Web site),  216–217 
 Popeye, The (Web site),  218 
 Pop on the Pop (Web site),  217 
 PopSugar (Web site),  217 
 popular media culture,  32 
 Powell, Colin,  193 
 Power of Respect, The ,  177 
 Predator,  138 
 Presley, Elvis,  35,  165 
 prime-time fringe,  57 
 primitive tribes,  2 
 Princess Diana,  18 
 printing press,  8 
 privacy, concept of,  41 
 Propeller: One-Way Night Coach, 
 174 
 Puck, Wolfgang,  154 
 Purpose Driven Life, The ,  142 
 Putin, Vladimir,  86–87 
 Queen Elizabeth II,  83 
 “Queen of Daytime TV,”  143 
 Radar (Web site),  217 
 radio,  13 

Index 271
 St. Jude Medical Foundation,  195 
 Sugarland Express, The ,  140 
 Suleman, Nadya,  26 
 Superﬁ cial, The (Web site),  218 
 SuperiorPics (Web site),  218 
 supermarket tabloids,  56–57 
 Survivor,  34 
 Sutherland, Joan,  90 
 Swift, Taylor,  141–142 
 tailored marketing,  206 
 Talent Plan,  210–211 
 Tatler,  22 
 Taxi Driver,  138 
 Taylor, Elizabeth,  177 
 technological determinism theory, 
 32–33 
 Teen Hollywood (Web site), 
 218–219 
 telegraph lines,  11 
 10 Things I Hate About You,  81 
 Terminator, The ,  138 
 Theron, Charlize,  197 
 Things Fall Apart ,  90 
 30 Minute Meals,  137 
 This Is It ,  35 
 Thoreau, Henry David,  10 
 threaded discussion,  68–69 
 Timberlake, Justin,  152–153 
 Time,  13,  142 
 Titanic,  148 
 TMZ ,  60–62,  220 
 Today ,  137 
 To Kill a Mockingbird ,  149 
 TOMS Shoes,  197 
 Tonight Show with Johnny Carson, 
 125,  134 
 Topakov, Veselin,  81 
 Top Gun,  124 
 Total Recall,  138 
 traditional news outlets,  62 
 Travis, Randy,  154 
 Travolta, John,  177 
 Trench Coat Maﬁ a (TCM),  26 
 Trump, Donald,  96 
 Schickel, Richard,  12–13 
 Schindler ’ s List,  140 
 Schwarzenegger, Arnold,  78, 
 137–138 
 scientology,  124,  153 
 Scorsese, Martin,  138–139 
 second-level celebrities,  89–90 
 Selena,  130 
 Shakespeare, William,  8 
 Sharapova, Maria,  77 
 Share Our Strength,  199 
 Shaw, Donald L.,  87 
 Sidney, Philip,  2 
 signiﬁ cant exposure,  88 
 Simon, Paul,  192 
 Simple Life, The ,  38 
 Simpson, Jessica and Ashley,  173 
 Simpson, O. J.,  45 
 Simpsons, The ,  47–48 
 Singer, Peter,  95 
 Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon,  18 
 Smith, George E.,  170 
 Smith, James Todd,  165 
 Socialite Life (Web site),  217 
 social media,  66–69 
 Socrates,  6 
 Songwriters Hall of Fame,  205 
 Sophocles,  6 
 South Park ,  48 
 Spears, Britney,  139 
 specialized celebrities,  168–171 
 Spencer, Lara,  59 
 Spielberg, Steven,  140 
 Spitzer, Eliot,  37 
 SpongeBob SquarePants,  48 
 Springsteen, Bruce,  193 
 Spy Game ,  136 
 Starlink (Web site),  218 
 Star Pages (Web site),  218 
 Starpulse (Web site),  218 
 Starr, Ringo,  79 
 Star Search,  122,  139 
 stay-at-home-celebrity,  81,  89 
 Stewart, Jon,  140–141 
 Stewart, Martha,  96 

272 Index
 West, Cornel,  95 
 Whistler, James,  10 
 Whitman, Walt,  12 
 Wiffen, Joan,  91 
 Wilde, Oscar,  69 
 William J. Clinton Foundation,  193 
 Williams, Fred,  90 
 Williams, Montel,  198 
 Williams, Robin,  193 
 Williams, Rowan,  99 
 Winehouse, Amy,  40 
 Winfrey, Oprah,  70,  143,  151–153 
 Witt, Katarina,  80 
 Wizard of Oz, The ,  149 
 Wonderwall (Web site),  220–221 
 Woods, Tiger,  41–46,  151 
 World Karting Association,  135 
 World News Tonight ,  135 
 World ’ s Fair, 1939,  13 
 worldwide celebrity 
 academia,  93–96 
 the arts,  89–90 
 business,  96–97 
 politics and government,  83–89 
 religion,  97–100 
 science and medicine,  90–93 
 Wrap, The (Web site),  219–220 
 Wright, Frank Lloyd,  12 
 written communication,  9 
 Wynn, Steve,  96 
 Yang, Jerry,  97 
 yellow journalism,  63 
 Your Tango (Web site),  221 
 YouTube,  21,  24,  33–34,  70,  79 
 Yum-O!,  199 
 Zedillo, Ernesto,  95 
 Zuckerberg, Mark,  143–144 
 Truth about Diamonds, The ,  177 
 Tutankhamen,  4 
 Tutu, Desmond,  99 
 TV Guide ,  146 
 Twain, Mark,  12 
 Twilight,  131 
 Twitter,  21–22 
 United Nations Children ’ s Fund 
(UNICEF),  152 
 Up in the Air ,  124 
 Upton, Caitlin,  34 
 USA Today,  14 
 US Magazine ,  220 
 U.S. News and World Report ,  142 
 US Weekly,  22,  43–44,  146 
 Utley, Mike,  197 
 Valvano, Jim,  197–198 
 Vanity Fair,  22,  54 
 Ventura, Jesse,  78 
 Verastegui, Eduardo,  78 
 V Foundation for Cancer 
Research,  197–198 
 Vick, Michael,  38 
 videocassette recorders (VCRs),  14 
 Vikings,  7 
 Viren, Lasse,  78 
 Virgil,  6 
 Voltaire,  9 
 Warhol, Andy,  20 
 Warren, Rick,  142 
 Washington, George,  10 
 Washington Post ,  64 
 Watson, James,  91 
 Watts, Naomi,  77 
 Web sites,  65–66 
 Wen Jiabao,  87 

 About the Author 
 Larry Z. Leslie, Ph.D.,  is Associate Professor Emeritus in the 
School of Mass Communications at the University of South Florida, 
Tampa, where he still teaches an occasional course. He holds a 
bachelor ’ s degree in English from Eastern Illinois University 
(1966), a master ’ s in English from Austin Peay State University 
(1972), and a Ph.D. in Communications from the University of 
Tennessee (1986). He has been a high school teacher in Illinois, 
a community college teacher in Kentucky and South Carolina, 
and a disc jockey, news reporter, and program director at radio 
stations in Illinois and Tennessee. His areas of expertise include 
media ethics, communication research methods, public opinion, 
and postmodern culture. 
 The recipient of numerous teaching awards, he has pub-
lished a dozen journal articles and has written two books,  Mass 
Communication Ethics: Decision Making in Postmodern Culture 
(Second edition, 2004, Pearson/Allyn & Bacon) and  Communica-
tion Research Methods in Postmodern Culture: A Revisionist Approach 
(2010, Pearson). 

