
For your convenience Apress has placed some of the front 
matter material after the index. Please use the Bookmarks 
and Contents at a Glance links to access them. 

 
v
Contents 
About the Author .............................................................................................................vii 
About the Technical Reviewer ................................................................................viii 
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................. ix 
Introduction.......................................................................................................................... xi 
Part 1: 
Scouting Your Surroundings and Defining Your Mission...................... 1 
Chapter 1: What Is Special About Smaller Businesses?............................................. 3 
Chapter 2: Titles vs. Job Descriptions ........................................................................... 9 
Chapter 3: The CFO’s Mission and Aspirations........................................................15 
Chapter 4: Eight Balls You Must Keep in the Air......................................................21 
Chapter 5: The Essential Knowledge Prerequisites..................................................27 
Part 1I: 
Enforcing the Law: Policies, Procedures, and Controls......................33 
Chapter 6: System of Internal Control and Company Policies..............................35 
Chapter 7: Generally Accepted Fiscal Policies...........................................................43 
Chapter 8: Procedures for Quintessential Tasks ......................................................53 
Chapter 9: The Weakest Link........................................................................................65 
Chapter 10: Budgeting as a Control Mechanism .........................................................77 
Chapter 11: Controlling Commerce ..............................................................................85 
Part 1II: 
Deep Pockets: Your Capital Resources .................................................93 
Chapter 12: Options for Capital Financing ...................................................................95 
Chapter 13: Business Nature vs. Financial Resources..............................................113 
Chapter 14: Soliciting Investors and Lenders.............................................................123 
Chapter 15: Nurturing Financial Relationships...........................................................131 
Part 1V: 
Cash Must Flow: Treasury Management ..............................................139 
Chapter 16: The Gist of the Treasury Function ........................................................141 

 
vi 
Chapter 17: Cash Flow Projections ............................................................................. 145 
Chapter 18: Daily Cash Position................................................................................... 153 
Chapter 19: Managing Receivables and Payables....................................................... 161 
Chapter 20: Treasury Management Services ............................................................. 173 
Part V: Data Mining: Information Management, Analysis, and Reporting.............. 183 
Chapter 21: Information Technology Decisions ....................................................... 185 
Chapter 22: Ode to Excel .............................................................................................. 195 
Chapter 23: Executive Reports and Performance Analytics .................................. 203 
Chapter 24: The Importance of Segmental Analysis ................................................ 215 
Chapter 25: Ad Hoc Reporting..................................................................................... 223 
Part V1: Accounting by the Book................................................................................... 229 
Chapter 26: Clean Books and Compliant Statements ............................................. 231 
Chapter 27: Accounting Cycles and the Structure of Financial Statements....... 239 
Chapter 28: The Most Important Statement: Cash Flow ....................................... 245 
Chapter 29: Choose Your Auditors Wisely .............................................................. 251 
Chapter 30: What Guarantees Fast and Painless Audits......................................... 257 
Part VII: Risk Management .............................................................................................. 263 
Chapter 31: Insurable Risks ........................................................................................... 265 
Chapter 32: Commercial Risks ..................................................................................... 271 
Chapter 33: Tax and Regulations Compliance .......................................................... 279 
Part VIII: Ensuring Your Going Concern: Strategies, Plans, and Forecasts ......... 285 
Chapter 34: Principles of Strategic Planning............................................................... 287 
Chapter 35: Practical Modeling and Forecasting....................................................... 297 
Chapter 36: New Ventures............................................................................................ 307 
Chapter 37: Exit Strategies ............................................................................................ 315 
Part IX: Administration: The Organization of People............................................... 323 
Chapter 38: Acquisition of Human Resources.......................................................... 325 
Chapter 39: Managing Human Resources................................................................... 333 
Chapter 40: The Behavioral Approach........................................................................ 343 
Index 
................................................................................................................................. 349

 
xi 
Introduction 
What It Takes to Succeed as a CFO, or 
How Long Is Your Hat Rack? 
In the past ten years, quite a few business books and articles have come out 
with demands for CFOs and controllers to reinvent themselves. The authors 
implore us to stop being bean counters and refashion ourselves as strategists 
and tacticians. We hear the same call for dramatic changes from speakers 
during conferences and professional gatherings. It resonates deeply among 
us. Oh, how we long to rise above our daily routines and into the realm of 
meetings with agendas full of abstract conceptualizations. 
Well, that is all the time we have for dreams. Let’s get back to Earth, roll up 
our sleeves, and attend to the reality. This book is not for Fortune 500 CFOs 
with hundreds of subordinates to whom ordinary tasks and even implemen-
tation of new ideas can be delegated. This book is for those professionals in 
financial management—CFOs, controllers, treasurers, VPs, and directors of 
finance—who, like me, toil to ensure the commercial survival of small and 
midsize businesses. 
I don’t mean to say that strategy and tactics are not on our lists of priorities. 
Neither do I imply that our scope of responsibilities has not changed in the 
last decade. As a matter of fact, I believe that CFOs and controllers in smaller 
businesses have experienced a more significant transformation of their roles 
than those in large companies. As the business climate changes, small and 
midsize companies struggle harder than ever for survival. That imposes even 
more demands on our positions. Yet the reality of our work environment 
does not allow us to drop any “old” tasks from our scrolls of duties. Instead, 
we take on more functions and expand our span of command. 
Thus, it is not the reinvention of the job, but the functional diversification that 
assures the successful performance of a hands-on financial leader. This broad 
functionality is the central theme and the subject of this book. Whether you 
have just been promoted and it is your first time at the top of the corporate 
accounting and finance department, or you have worn these shoes before and 

 
xii 
have years of executive experience, you will find the streamlined concepts 
helpful. This is not an academic text, nor is it a compilation of theoretical in-
formation from popular resources. The material is based on practical knowl-
edge and hands-on experience. It will provide you with comprehensive guide-
lines regarding the most important functions under your control—the areas 
of expertise where you must excel and achieve your best. 
Smaller enterprises commonly have to deal with limited resources, and that 
translates into slimmer organizational structures and smaller teams. In this 
environment, the hands-on approach becomes mandatory. CFOs and con-
trollers must know all the functions intimately and cannot avoid tending to 
some tasks firsthand.  
Business owners and chief executives—frequent agents of change in their 
companies—will find this book useful as well. It can help to formulate ex-
pectations for senior financial managers, who are entrusted with the most 
expensive resource: money. 
A person who has achieved a top financial position in a business organization 
must possess expert knowledge in a variety of technical disciplines related to 
finance and accounting. Moreover, your books still need to be in order, you 
cannot escape dealing with banks, and your formal financial statements still 
have readers. However, all that is not enough anymore. To succeed as a 
CFO or a controller, one must possess sharp commercial acumen, under-
stand all aspects of corporate management, and, yes, be a strategic thinker. A 
person in such position will wear many hats, handling duties that recently 
were not in the job description. 
Whether you installed a hat rack by your door or store your hatboxes un-
der your desk, one thing is guaranteed: your list of duties requires you to 
wear many hats and to change them quickly as your workday progresses. 
You may have started the day at your desk in your business suit, but here 
you are in a policeman’s cap enforcing civility in human relations; and there 
you are in a Napoleonic bicorn developing global expansion strategies; next 
in a deerstalker using your forensic skills in search of a lost container; now in 
a geeky, propeller beanie discussing upgrade requirements with your IT staff; 
then in a barrister’s wig reading a legal brief; and so on. The smaller the 
company, the larger the hat collection.  
We must embrace this functional diversification. It is a natural result of a fi-
nancial manager’s evolution. Here’s why:  
• Human resources are related to payroll, which is not only a 
monetary concern, but also frequently the largest budgetary  
constraint.  

 
xiii 
• Accounting modules usually make up the largest portion of an  
IT system. Hence we have vested interests in their adequate de-
velopment.  
• Business strategies are fueled by cash flow, investments, and lend-
ing. You are indispensable to the executive strategists. 
• Our performance analysis provides indicators as to whether the 
business has an ability to expand, or must contract immediately.  
• Dynamic development is the key to commercial survival in today’s 
complex markets. As members of executive teams, we must fa-
cilitate forward progression while installing proper provisions to 
cover all associated risks.  
• All banking, customer, vendor, investment, financing, leasing, and 
even employment relationships are entangled in contracts, which 
we need to fully understand for compliance and proper proce-
dural implementation. An ability to cut through legalese into the 
essence of these documents requires sufficient familiarity with 
both the form and substance of such instruments. 
• In businesses where products have dollar signs in front of them 
(such as asset management or financial services), operational 
management becomes one of the financial responsibilities as well.      
Only large enterprises can afford to have VPs for every separate group of 
functions. In smaller companies, functional concentration of any position is 
much higher, especially that of a head of finance.    
They say small business is the backbone of the economy. Well, if that’s true, 
then we are the spinal cord inside those vertebrae. We carry our load and 
support our employers by attending to the multitude of these functions, 
wearing different hats and juggling 30 balls at a time. Personally, I would not 
have it any other way. This is how we make our impact. This is what defines 
us as professionals.

P A R T 
I 
Scouting Your  
Surroundings  
and Defining  
Your Mission 
 
It is important to grasp the general characteristics of small and midsize busi-
nesses, which determine their organizational environment. As a head of  
finance, you must fully understand the nature of your position, your place 
within the organization, and the expectations of your bosses. The crucial 
tasks of identifying the key functional sectors of your responsibilities and 
studying essential specifics of your employer’s business are prerequisites of 
your professional success. 
 

C H A P T E R 
1 
What Is Special 
About Smaller 
Businesses? 
 
According to the US Census Bureau’s data, there are nearly 6 million com-
panies in this country with less than 100 employees.1 Besides their relatively 
small size, the most essential characteristic they have in common is how dif-
ferent they all are. Even those operating within the same industry and com-
peting in the same markets display an array of entity setups, organizational 
structures, and corporate cultures. 
It is only natural. The majority of these companies are entrepreneurial in 
their origins. They are frequently born out of ideas generated by one person 
or a small group of collaborators. If the founders manage to hold on, the 
company’s development follows a unique path influenced by a multitude of 
forces specific to that organization.  
Except for those operating in a few regulated industries, the way these 
companies conduct business is not monitored by external agencies. Many of 
them remain privately held, and therefore don’t need to comply with SEC 
rulings or legislative acts. Those employing less than 50 people benefit from 
friendlier labor laws. In other words, each is free to develop into a one-of-a-
kind establishment.  
                                                
1 U.S. Census Bureau, “Statistics of US Businesses,” www.census.gov/econ/susb/, 2008. 

Chapter 1 | What Is Special About Smaller Businesses? 
 
4  
Still, there are certain typical organizational attributes that can be identified 
in all small and midsize companies. These common factors impact and shape 
all functions and positions, from receptionist to CFO and CEO.  
Flat Organizational Structures 
Large companies usually have multilayered management hierarchy with ex-
ecutive (a.k.a. upper), senior middle, junior middle, and supervisory eche-
lons. Each rank is further divided by functions, groups, tasks, and so on. 
There are hundreds of people with the words vice president, director, and 
manager in their titles. These are Egyptian pyramids of organizational design.  
Smaller companies are not able to take advantage of economies of scale and 
absorb large overheads. As the result, they are characterized by much flatter 
organizational structures with fewer managerial levels. I have seen companies 
with as many as 80 employees and over $200 million in revenue operating 
without middle and supervisory managers. This brings executive manage-
ment much closer to the frontline staff. 
A fiscal group composition largely depends on the company’s size, the na-
ture of its business, and the number of functions required to carry out its 
operations. It can range anywhere from one person holding a controller title 
and covering all receivable, payable, and general ledger tasks by herself to 
fully developed accounting and finance departments with middle manage-
ment and staff in international offices. Ideally, an effective structural ar-
rangement should leave no blind spots in functional coverage, and assure 
nondiscriminatory workload for all employees without unproductive or idle 
time, while fitting within your budgetary constraints.  
Figures 1-1, 1-2, and 1-3 show generalized examples of what I find to be 
popular setups of financial chains of command for small, small-to-medium, 
and midsize companies. 
 
Figure 1-1. Financial functions structure typical for a small company 

CFO Techniques 
 
5  
 
Figure 1-2. Financial functions structure typical for a small-to-midsize company 
 
Figure 1-3. Financial functions structure typical for a midsize company 
 
 

Chapter 1 | What Is Special About Smaller Businesses? 
6  
 Note  Keep in mind that, depending on the needs and availability of funds, the lower divisions 
may consist of a supervisor with subordinate staff, or one staffer, or a person with managerial 
qualifications without subordinates. Frequently, there is no one to man the function and its execu-
tion falls to the direct responsibility of the manager who oversees it. 
High Concentration of Duties 
These flatter and leaner structures, with smaller supervisory staff, result in a 
higher concentration of controlling duties in the hands of executives. It applies 
not only to us, the financial heads, with our numerous tasks and endless 
supply of hats—every member of a small company’s upper management at-
tends to multiple functions.  
The VP of operations controls procurement, supplier/vendor relationships, 
production, distribution, logistics, storage, support, and all related tech-
nologies. I use the term production here in a much broader sense than manu-
facturing. Products, processes, or services, whether manufactured, created, 
or traded—whatever generates the company’s revenue—are at the center 
of operational management’s concern.  
The head of sales and marketing is responsible for the sales force and its 
tactics, customer support, marketing strategies, and advertising campaigns. 
Nowadays, Internet visibility has become one of the most important mar-
keting tools for a lot of businesses. There are new forms of online advertis-
ing sprouting up almost daily—social networking, Google products, and 
more. This executive has to be on top of all innovative developments. 
Contrast this with a big company. It’s similar to when you watch a big stu-
dio production movie and the credits at the end take up to six minutes to 
roll. Teams upon teams of people, each responsible for an individual task, 
are listed.  
On the other hand, when you go to see an indie movie made on a shoe-
string budget, the credits don’t take too much time. It’s often something like 
“Written, Directed, and Produced by Mos Dedicated. Camera, Light, and 
Sound by Nyfa Pal. Finances, Accounting, Legal, Gaffer Services, and Cater-
ing by Best M. Ever.”  
That’s one of the primary differences between a large and a small enter-
prise. The intensity of having all these functions under one’s control is 
daunting and exciting at the same time. It makes us very, very busy, and 
that’s not even the end of it. 

CFO Techniques 
 
7  
Hands-On Management 
In a large company, the higher you are in the corporate hierarchy, the smaller 
the number of your direct reports. In smaller companies, however, in the ab-
sence of extra managerial padding, CFOs and controllers command a mix of 
middle and junior managers, as well as staffers, who report to them directly.  
The firsthand familiarity with individual tasks performed by your immediate 
subordinates is one of the most important managerial traits in the flat or-
ganizational environment. Your position makes you a single source for ex-
pert advice, judgment calls, procedural guidance, and problem resolution. 
The expediency of your decisions is crucial. You need to be proficient in all 
functions under you in order to be a successful CFO or controller. 
 Note  I define an expert as someone who is not just knowledgeable in a particular area, but also 
capable of coming up with correct solutions in the shortest possible time. When you have acquired 
sufficient experience in a matter, an answer should form in your mind almost subconsciously.  
One has to differentiate between hands-on management and micro-
management, though. The latter is out of the question. Efficiency must be 
your highest priority. You will be able to achieve it only by balancing a 
hands-on managerial approach and the appropriate delegation of duties.  
When budgetary constraints leave some of your functions unmanned, you 
roll up your sleeves and attend to them yourself. Active participation in daily 
routines is not unheard of for CFOs and controllers, even in midsize com-
panies. In small companies, it’s commonplace. I am sure many of you design 
reports, create models, cut checks, make general entries, and execute wire 
transfers. Frequently in small companies, a controller or an accounting man-
ager is a one-person show altogether, doing everything herself. In any case, 
I’ve always believed that executives should know how to do the job of every 
person who reports to them directly or indirectly.  
There are some popular workplace sitcoms on network television right 
now. Once in a while, when I am on a plane, I watch an episode. The fun-
niest thing about these shows for me is how much free time the manage-
ment has. Then again, they are typically employed by huge organizations and 
they are very hands off. We, on the other hand, take charge and take part; 
our every minute is filled with hard work. 

Chapter 1 | What Is Special About Smaller Businesses? 
 
8  
The Owner’s Proximity 
Having the owner of the company as your active CEO and your immediate 
boss is a blessing and a curse.  
On one hand, this is what we call a high-visibility position. There is nobody 
between you and the person who is ultimately responsible for assessing your 
performance and rewarding you for your efforts. It also heightens your sense 
of responsibility, as you should always be conscious of the fact that whatever 
you do affects the wallet of a person you see every day. Some people, weigh-
ing pros and cons, may place this factor into the bowl of disadvantages, but I 
consider it a positive ingredient of professional development.  
On the other hand, this places you face to face with a person who 
 
is afflicted by an entrepreneurial bug (i.e., wants everything to be 
done yesterday); 
 
has most likely never been an employee and doesn’t understand 
what it means to be one; and 
 
has a racing, idea-generating mind and allows for no implementation 
time. 
I am sure you can continue this list yourself. The bottom line is that dealing 
with the boss is stressful, sometimes frustrating, and unavoidable. A con-
stant effort to make the best of it is an integral part of the job.  
Here is another important aspect of boss’s proximity. Some people think 
that politics are prevalent only in large bureaucracies. In reality, it has noth-
ing to do with the organization’s size. It’s the human factor: people are peo-
ple. Beware of backroom campaigning in small and midsize companies. 
There is no corporate ladder to climb, so everyone vies for the same 
spot—at the right hand of the boss. When you are a CFO and the owner is 
your CEO, you’ve reached the highest attainable position in the company. 
This doesn’t mean, however, that your opinions or ideas will not be under-
cut by your executive peers or even insubordinate staffers. 
 Tip  Everyone develops his or her own coping mechanisms for handling the stress of a fast-
paced, hands-on environment. The best thing you can do is to be prepared for it. If you know that 
this is the reality of your daily life, there will be no discouraging surprises. Just deal with it as an or-
dinary course of business. One of the useful devices is self-organization, discussed in Chapter 3. 

C H A P T E R 
2 
Titles vs. Job  
Descriptions 
 
The flexibility and informal genesis of organizational structures in smaller 
companies make the idea of managerial titles, in all practical senses, ir-
relevant. The designation printed on your business card is frequently influ-
enced by such random matters as traditions, your own seniority with the 
company, the owner’s whim—considerations that have nothing to do with 
your scope of responsibilities or level of authority.  
In many instances, your title is the reflection of your boss’s respect and ap-
preciation of your efforts. You can learn a lot about a business owner by 
recognizing what significance he places on a particular title: his reluctance, 
for example, to bestow an executive title on somebody other than himself, 
or on someone who has been working for him for a long time and started at 
a much lower level.  
As a result, financial professionals working in small companies may hold dif-
ferent titles while performing exactly the same set of duties. I have known 
controllers who occupied their positions for ten years, and after leaving the 
company were replaced by CFOs without any changes in the functional re-
sponsibility. 
Sometimes a title is just a title. You may get promoted into it as a token for 
the years you have spent with the company, but there are no new mean-

Chapter 2 | Titles vs. Job Descriptions 
 
10  
ingful professional challenges and no changes in the quality of your duties or 
the compensation scale. One cannot call such title progression successful. 
Personally, I have always believed that they can call me whatever they want: 
a hey-you, a firefighting exec, or a clean-after-everyone lady, as long as I can 
continue to impact the business in the most profound way, implement ideas 
of highest sophistication, keep a tight rein on all activities, and receive re-
wards reflecting my influence on the company.  
It is the job description that really matters. What are the functions you con-
trol? Which tasks are you expected to cover? What is the scope of your 
executive authority and the range of your autonomy? Are you expected to 
participate in strategic and tactical decisions? 
I am not going to bore you with dictionary-based definitions. Yet, since every 
job is a line on a resume, and because it may help as a bargaining tool in the 
next raise negotiation, you may find useful the following informal correlation 
between actual job descriptions and commonly used titles. It may also help 
those people who were given a title without a job description—this happens 
more frequently than one may think. The boundaries of control will expand 
from title to title as we move through the following sections.  
 Note  Even though the predominant notion here is that the title-holders oversee accounting and 
finance departments in their companies, the descriptions could be applicable to the subordinate 
managers as well. Also, keep in mind that every subsequent position must cover all functions listed 
for the previous one.  
Accounting/Finance Manager 
There are further variations of this title: accounting manager, finance man-
ager, accounting and finance manager, and so on. Sometimes the word senior 
is added. Regardless, it is expected that the entire system of accounting and 
treasury tasks supporting the business’s daily operations, as well as periodic 
reporting, are supervised and/or performed by this person. The following 
are the main areas of controlled duties: 
 
All tasks related to AR (billing, credit, collections, and receipts) and 
AP (payable entries, schedules, and payments) 
 
Payroll and benefits administration, including payroll taxes 
 
General ledger transactions (including fixed assets, financing and 
capital transactions, adjustment entries, etc.—whatever is applicable 
to your business) and accounts reconciliation 

CFO Techniques 
 
11  
 
Daily treasury activities, including cash position and requirements 
reports, deficit/surplus assessment, and banking 
 
Monthly bank statement reconciliation 
 
Monthly/quarterly/annual closing procedures, including accruals and 
prepaids, cost of goods sold (COGS)/ inventory valuations, capitaliza-
tion, reserves, payroll, commissions, depreciation, and amortization 
 
Monthly internal financial statement preparation 
 
Revenue, expenses, and profitability analysis and reporting 
 
Quarterly and annual trial balances and supporting documentation 
for reviews, audits, formal financial statements, and tax returns 
 
Hiring, training, and supervision of staff 
Director of Accounting/Finance 
I have met some private business owners who mistook the financial director’s 
position as more senior than that of a controller. In Europe, for example,  
Director is frequently the highest available title. In the United States, how-
ever, a director is usually understood to be a manager of managers. In larger 
companies, controllers have several directors reporting to them. In practical 
terms, the functions of higher organizational importance must be added to 
the scope:  
 
Budgeting and variance analysis 
 
Treasury management and cash flow projections 
 
Business intelligence and performance analytics 
 
Accounting research and standards/pronouncements compliance 
 
Human resources (HR) management 
Controller 
This is the most prevalent and familiar title for the senior accounting and  
finance person in a flat-structured organization. Even a start-up company 
will employ a controller at the very beginning of its life cycle, so that all ini-
tial recording and reporting functions, as well as all subsequent tasks, can be 
properly initiated, developed, and kept under control. The controllership 
brings into the picture the responsibilities for integrity, compliance, and ef-
ficiency of the company’s fiscal structure: 
 
Policy and procedure development and control 
 
Internal controls and auditing 

Chapter 2 | Titles vs. Job Descriptions 
 
12  
 
Cost and profitability control 
 
Independent audit management 
 
External financial reporting 
 
Taxation 
 
Information systems decisions and management 
Vice President of Finance 
This title, even though very appropriate for a large conglomerate, is some-
what strange in a smaller company. Yet, it is very popular. Strictly speaking, a 
VP is a subordinate of a president, who in turn reports to a chief executive 
officer. However, in many companies, president and CEO are merged into 
one person, who obviously prefers the most prestigious title. Here is a famil-
iar example: Facebook’s founder and 24% shareholder Mark Zuckerberg is 
officially listed as the company’s CEO/president. However, in most publica-
tions, articles, and interviews, the word president is habitually dropped.  
The point is, if there is no president per se, how could there be a VP? Yet, 
there are plenty of VPs of marketing, sales, operations, and so on, reporting 
directly to the CEO. Most of the time, the intent behind assigning the VP ti-
tle to the person in charge of the company’s accounting and finance is to 
equalize her level of authority with the other VPs. This position’s responsi-
bilities usually expand further into capital and finance areas of expertise: 
 
Capital structuring and resourcing 
 
Lender and investor relationships 
 
Business development forecasting and modeling 
 
Commercial risk management, including foreign exchange, commod-
ity, and interest rate hedging 
 
Insured risk management 
Chief Financial Officer 
This is the big kahuna of financial management—a member of the C-level ex-
ecutive rank. Ideally, at this stage, you become the CEO’s partner in assuring 
the company’s successful development and survival. Your duties should com-
bine the responsibilities for the company’s financial well-being and the busi-
ness’s strategic advancement. The following concerns must be added to the 
long list of functions we have accumulated so far: 
 
Tax and regulation compliance 

CFO Techniques 
 
13  
 
Economic, political, and business environment analysis and fore-
casting 
 
Viability assessment 
 
Commercial development planning, including diversification, expan-
sion/contraction, international sourcing/ distribution, and so on 
 
New venture evaluations and setups 
 
Acquisitions due diligence 
 
Strategic planning and implementation, including foreign entities, 
outsourcing, restructuring, and exits 
 Note  Remember, whether you have several fully staffed departments under your control or you 
are all alone, as long as you attend to all the CFO’s tasks, you can consider yourself one, regard-
less of your official title. 

C H A P T E R 
3 
The CFO’s Mission 
and Aspirations 
 
Let’s face it, the main reason why people go to work every day is to provide 
sustenance for those who depend on us, including ourselves. Maslow’s Hier-
archy of Needs (see Figure 3-1) is unbeatable: roof over your head, food on 
the table, clothes on your back, and safety always come first. However, 
there must be a reason for the chart to have this particular shape. As we 
climb up the mountain of expertise, enrichment, and vocational advance-
ment, after a certain point we pass into more elevated regions of wants.  
 
Figure 3-1. Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs 

Chapter 3 | The CFO’s Mission and Aspirations 
 
16  
Even if leading financial functions in a small or midsize business is not per-
ceived as a pinnacle of one’s life by the majority of people, we can definitely 
agree that self-actualization is a big part of our striving for higher professional 
status. We seek to make a difference, to leave our personal imprint on the 
company’s prominence, and to achieve results, which give us that priceless 
award: the sense of self-respect. For me personally, it has always been im-
portant to live up to my own professional standards and ethics, even if no-
body else acknowledges it.   
All CFOs must define for themselves the higher purposes of their work ef-
forts, those that go beyond the material necessities: their professional mis-
sion and aspirations. 
Your Mission 
If I had to express it in just one sentence, I would say that the mission of 
CFOs is to utilize their best abilities and partner with other senior managers in 
facilitation of the company’s commercial survival, stability, and growth. 
Ideally, the pursuit of this purpose will bring not only the moral satisfaction 
of doing something valuable, but will coincide with your personal goals of 
professional development and merit-based rewards. 
By ensuring commercial progress and the viability of our employers, we 
provide ourselves with the opportunity to grow further with the company. 
We also get a chance to affect the lives of other people both within and 
outside of the organization: employees, suppliers, customers, lenders, and 
many others who depend on the business not to fail.  
Your Aspirations 
While mission is a singular aim, you can aspire to multiple achievements and 
accomplishments, which become integral parts of that overall ambition. Eve-
ryone may have their own, and they can be very general or broken down 
into individual stepping stones. I have formulated four main aspirations, 
which are relatively broad and encompass many individual efforts. I find them 
useful because they help to keep my professional activities in perspective.  
Free Your CEO 
Many small and midsize businesses are privately held with owners assuming 
the position of CEOs. Frequently, they are the very entrepreneurs who 
conceived the idea and, against all odds, implemented it by establishing the 

CFO Techniques 
17  
company, producing products or services, and creating job positions, includ-
ing the one you hold. That alone deserves an ode to courage. 
Whether the CEO is the founder, an heir, or an appointed exec, as the head 
of finance, you must stand by his shoulder, fighting the daily war of com-
mercial survival. Most importantly, it is your job to promote the boss’s abil-
ity to attend to his primary responsibilities—the generation of new ideas, 
business development, strategic initiatives, and executive decision-making, all 
of which will ensure that the company prospers and grows.  
To achieve that, you must free the CEO from involvement in any matters 
that you and your peers have authority to resolve and control. Your boss 
should be able to forget that the tasks under your management even exist. 
As his strategic partner, you cannot afford to let him spare a thought on is-
sues in the realm of your own functionality. If he does that, he is not think-
ing about new markets, products, distribution channels, or organizational 
improvements. And when ideas are formulated, analyzed, and approved, we 
are obligated to make sure that all supporting elements—financing, struc-
tures, and control procedures—are in place.  
I don’t let my CEOs be bothered by bankers or vendors; I don’t allow them 
to fiddle with numbers; I don’t ask them to learn computer systems. In fact, I 
even prefer them not to know Excel. Here is an example of what I consider 
great executive support: Radiohead’s frontman, Thom Yorke, cannot read 
sheet music. For 25 years now, his classically educated multiinstrumentalist 
bandmate, Johnny Greenwood, has deliberately resisted teaching Thom mu-
sical grammar out of concern that it may diminish Yorke’s creativity. We 
should all aspire to such an attitude.    
Transform Your Role 
Even though I employed a bit of sarcasm when I was talking about the “CFO’s 
reinvention” movement in the Introduction, I rigorously support the idea of 
our role’s transformation. I emphasized that new activities, not too long ago 
unknown to senior accounting and finance management, still must be added 
to our functional rosters. 
The truth is that many accountants don’t help design and produce products 
or services; most of the time they don’t participate in operational efficiency 
improvements; they don’t source the cheapest materials or engage the best 
logistics; they don’t find markets, nurture customers, or push products at 
the best prices. Way after all these actions take place in the value chain, old-
fashioned bean counters, in the most passive and reactionary way, close the 

Chapter 3 | The CFO’s Mission and Aspirations 
 
18  
numbers and then report on results in formal statements that have no 
chance to cause any changes or affect the bottom line. 
This is not acceptable in today’s environment. CFOs and controllers must 
become active agents of their companies’ commercial process and engage in 
activities that impact profitability with a magnitude comparable to the best 
procurement, production, and sales practices. Business strategy develop-
ment, benchmarking, economic assessment, tactical modeling, real-time per-
formance analytics, and risk management are among the important value-
added tasks that can bring about powerful positive consequences.   
By making themselves integral parts of the value chain, financial profession-
als accomplish their mission as growth and stability facilitators and boost 
their worth.   
Professional Growth 
Even when your diligent work efforts and loyalty assure your success in your 
current position within the company, never rest on your laurels. You must 
continue your professional growth in two ways.  
First of all, expand your scope of responsibilities beyond your original job 
description. If you find functional deficiencies at your employer and you 
think that they hold the business back, don’t hide from additional work—
formulate new tasks and implement the change. This will enhance the quality 
of your position.  
Secondly, keep abreast of all developments related to the functions under 
your control: the new features released for your system, a report writer that 
has just been developed, new treasury instruments offered by your banks, 
and so on. Otherwise you will be left behind. 
In the summer of 2004, my bankers at the time, knowing my interest in all 
new things treasury related, invited me to participate in the Wachovia Bank 
Conference on the Check 21 Act that had just been put in force. That was 
how I learned about remote deposit capturing. As a result, my employer 
was one of the first clients to take advantage of a check scanner, improving 
cash flow management. 
Keep Your Sanity 
Somebody at work once gave me a magnet with a crazy-looking person be-
hind a desk and the caption, “Not another crisis! My schedule is full!” It 

CFO Techniques 
 
19  
would be funny if it weren’t so true. We cannot deny the fact that trying 
really hard to advance the mission frequently leads to feeling overwhelmed 
and frustrated. 
We must resist and keep ourselves sane, or we will fail. And the secret, I believe, 
is in prioritization and time organization. There are tons of books written on 
these subjects. I just want to share a few thoughts and rules I have estab-
lished for myself. 
Prioritization Rules 
Rule #1: Assign priority scores to each task. The highest priority on your 
list should always be given to the task that in a long run will benefit the bot-
tom line the most. 
Rule #2: Designate time for periodic tasks of high priority in advance. There 
are such things as bank reports, monthly budgets, weekly cash flow projec-
tions, and so on, that occur periodically. Prevent yourself from cramming at 
the last moment by scheduling these tasks ahead of time. 
Rule #3: Be flexible. Don’t get paranoid about the schedule you have created 
yourself. If something urgent comes up, be prepared to reshuffle your list. 
It is amazing what a little adjustment in time organization can do for you. 
Even with all the unexpected emergencies and endless interruptions, I try to 
assign time limits to all parts of my daily routines. Not only does it allow me 
to move along from task to task, but it also frequently results in efficiency 
improvements. If something takes an unreasonably long time to execute, it 
means the process needs to be redesigned. 
One of the most time-consuming and disruptive factors of business life to-
day is e-mailing. I have established rules for that too. I do not drop every-
thing to answer an e-mail that just arrived into my inbox. Everyone I deal 
with on a regular basis knows that I answer my messages twice a day—first 
thing in the morning and at 4:00 p.m. If their chairs are on fire, they can al-
ways call me.  

C H A P T E R 
4 
Eight Balls  
You Must Keep  
in the Air 
 
The variations of monetary concerns, recording specifics, and reporting ob-
jectives in individual businesses are astronomical. Yet, there are eight core 
functional sectors that are building blocks of the accounting and financial man-
agement framework in every organization. They are absolutely essential for 
stable operation and successful growth. So, like a juggler, you must keep 
these balls in the air and your eyes on them at all times. Depending on the 
industry and the company’s nature, the practical impact of each group of ac-
tivities may differ. However, in one form or another, they are fundamental 
components of the responsibilities of CFOs and controllers.  
Separate parts of this book are devoted to features pertaining to each func-
tional group and the related duties of senior financial management. For the 
time being, let’s discuss what makes these responsibilities so crucial. 
Policies, Procedures, and Controls 
There is a wonderful simile we use to describe something steady and depend-
able that progresses without any problems. We say, “Runs like clockwork.” 

Chapter 4 | Eight Balls You Must Keep in the Air 
 
22  
The reason a high-quality watch can be used as a standard for an untroubled 
undertaking is that it is built in accordance with precise rules that were in-
vented centuries ago and have been honed ever since. Furthermore, if we op-
erate and maintain it as recommended by the instruction manual, it will serve 
us for many, many years. Some special watches are even passed on from gen-
eration to generation. 
We would all like our organizations to run just as smoothly, and this is the 
very first step on the way to continuous and efficient workflow. When a 
company’s policies and procedures are properly developed and implemented, 
the business machine runs smoothly according to the general rules of move-
ment, and is similarly honed over time. Without such a system of regulations 
and instructions, the business runs like a chaotic, unmanageable, and feverish 
organism. Control processes serve as measures that prevent violations and 
assure proper execution of this internal legal code.  
Capital Resources and Banking 
In the vast sea of commerce, the most lucrative business is selling money. 
Banks, financial institutions, hedge funds, and equity investors take risks by 
placing money from their pockets into someone else’s in the hope of big re-
turns. It is business like no other business (not even show business), but it 
still abides by the basic economic law of supply and demand. The reason 
funds are offered on the market is because there is an incredibly high de-
mand for them. Money is the fuel of the business machine. No company can 
function without capital, whether it is borrowed, invested, or even its own 
equity. Its timely acquisition, proper care, and correct utilization are integral 
means to accomplishing your mission as a head of finance.  
Cash Management 
Securing funds from outside sources in itself does not guarantee that you 
can meet your monetary obligations on daily basis. Careful planning and per-
sistent efforts, including management of operational inflows, structuring of 
external relationships, engagement of innovative banking instruments, and 
design of specific organizational tools are all required. There is a lot of work 
to be done to ensure that you never halt business operations because you 
run out of cash or its equivalent.  

CFO Techniques 
 
23  
Information, Analysis, and Reporting 
The importance of information as one of the primary business resources is a 
notion so prominent in our minds that it almost sounds banal. This postulate 
is taught in schools, featured in periodicals, and discussed on Internet boards. 
Yet, in smaller companies, time after time, you observe environments nearly 
devoid of managerial reporting, commercial intelligence, and even the most 
elemental analytical tools. It is an unfortunate fact that there are organiza-
tions losing market share, revenues, profits, and liquidity without even realiz-
ing it until after the fact. Far more frequently than we would like to admit, 
lack of just-in-time information becomes a reason for a commercial downfall.  
Accounting Management, Financial 
Statements, and Audits 
We cannot say for sure just when the ingenious canons of double-entry 
bookkeeping were first formulated. The earliest proof of its practical usage 
was found in Florence and dates to the beginning of the thirteenth century. 
At the peak of the Italian Renaissance, in the fifteenth century, prominent 
mathematicians found it necessary to include the so-called Venetian method 
of bookkeeping in their treatises, including the 1494 Summa de arithmetica, 
geometria, proportioni et proportionalita, by Fra Luca Bartolomeo de Pacioli—
the first published book containing a section on accounting. Pacioli’s 36 chap-
ters describe the full accounting cycle ending with the trial balance (summa 
summarium), which lists debits on the left side and credits on the right. 
When the totals of the two columns are equal, the books are balanced. 
It is not surprising that mathematicians were at the origin of the basic rules 
still employed by professionals in charge of keeping financial books and re-
cords everywhere on the globe—after all, they were teaching the world 
how to count. It is also apparent why it was the Italian scholars who turned 
their attention to the subject. At the time, Venice was the greatest maritime 
power and the largest commercial hub. Venetian merchant marine com-
panies that sent their vessels across the seas for silk, grains, and spices 
needed a common “language” to keep accounts of their dealings with ship-
builders, financiers, sellers, and buyers in order. They needed methods that 
would deliver clarity to their records and keep everyone on the same page. 
No matter how complicated today’s Generally Accepted Principles (GAAP) 
and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) have become, the fun-
damental principles of bookkeeping and formal presentation of fiscal data 

Chapter 4 | Eight Balls You Must Keep in the Air 
 
24  
remain unchanged. This universality of accounting standards makes them the 
common ground for everyone interested in assessing your company’s finan-
cial standing, whether it is your local banker or an individual investor on an-
other continent. I cannot overemphasize how important it is to know and 
properly follow the established guidelines for translating business events 
into ledger entries and producing financial statements that accurately reflect 
the results of your business activities. 
I, for one, adore the unbeatable logic and streamlined beauty of accounting 
principles. Their mathematical clarity unites all financial professionals around 
the world; they are our Esperanto.  
Risk Management and Compliance 
The increasing complexity of the current business environment with its global 
dependability, volatile financial and commodities markets, unpredictable de-
mand deviations, and abrupt political changes is the common denominator of 
all operating entities, regardless of their industry or size. Recognizing and 
minimizing the risks associated with your company’s daily activities is an inte-
gral part of your responsibilities as an organizational manager. 
What’s more, whether you have worldwide exposure or are fully enclosed in 
one locality, you are subject to the laws and regulations of various agencies, 
governments, and jurisdictions. They are always complicated, frequently con-
fusing, and sometimes overlapping. Taxation—international, federal, state, 
and local (including foreign)—may be the most obvious and vast area, but it’s 
far from the only one of these concerns. Violations of the legal rules put 
businesses at high risk of monetary and administrative sanctions and may 
cause their downfall. Such violations should be prevented at all costs.  
Strategic Planning 
With increasing frequency, we encounter within job descriptions for CFOs 
and controllers requirements such as “partner with CEO,” “support CEO,” 
“take part in executive decisions,” and so forth—especially in entrepre-
neurial companies. Just look through the job boards’ listings. We can say 
that all our functions are intended to support the boss. However, these 
demands go beyond day-to-day accounting and finance.  
If the CEO’s job is to grow and advance the business for the sake of its sur-
vival and prosperity, your collaboration translates into an alliance with this 
cause and direct participation in its promotion. Senior financial executives 

CFO Techniques 
 
25  
today are expected to possess and apply considerable commercial acumen. 
Your active contribution into evaluation of opportunities, development of 
strategies, scenarios modeling, tactical planning, and implementation process 
signifies your transformation into a business executive.  
Administration and HR 
This functional sector encompasses more than common payroll and benefits 
handling. HR, if properly trained, developed, nurtured, and retained, consti-
tutes one of your organization’s most valuable assets. HR functions provide 
a CFO with a unique opportunity to influence the organizational culture in a 
positive way. 
 

C H A P T E R 
5 
The Essential 
Knowledge  
Prerequisites 
 
By now you should have some general ideas about typical characteristics of 
your environment, your own role and purpose, the expectations of others, 
and primary routes for channeling your talents and efforts. It is time to 
study the specific aspects of your surroundings and draw a detailed map that 
will help you on your journey. 
This is a mandatory activity for a recently hired head of finance, new to a 
company. It is also a good idea for someone who has been with a company 
for a while in a lower position and has just been promoted—a new vantage 
point may provide you with the better vision of your company. Even if you’ve 
held the top post for a few years, but never got around to doing this and feel 
that the incomplete picture prevents you from excelling, maybe now is a 
good time to go back to the drawing board. 
This is your R&D stage, necessary for the proper functional design of your 
job. Your research will help you to improve future performance. Every CFO 
and controller must acquire an exhaustive understanding of their employer’s 
business. There is no doubt that compiling what I call the big picture is the 

Chapter 5 | The Essential Knowledge Prerequisites 
 
28  
key element in your strategic responsibilities. However, it is just as impor-
tant for day-to-day hands-on management. In the absence of thorough 
knowledge of all operational and organizational features, it is impossible to 
construct budgets, define tasks, or determine reporting requirements. 
At the very least, your information-gathering activities should be focused on 
the following four areas. 
Study of Corporate Structure 
Economic complexity pushes businesses into multiple levels of diversifi-
cation—wider product ranges, additional services, new geographical and 
demographic markets, related industries, outsourcing, foreign productions, 
and so on. As companies pave new ways to conduct business, their cor-
porate structures adapt accordingly: branches are created, subsidiaries are 
formed, and satellite offices are opened. Today, a $10 million service com-
pany may turn out to be a surprisingly complicated organism. These struc-
tural developments affect nearly every accounting and financial function:  
local taxation, intercompany transactions, principles of consolidation, finan-
cial statement disclosures, and banking facilities, just to name a few. 
Let’s say you have taken a CFO position in New York. Through the inter-
view process, web site information, and a couple of initial meetings, you 
have found out that, besides the New York City headquarters, the company 
has a presence in Houston, Texas; Buffalo, New York; Columbus, Ohio; 
Shanghai, China; Amsterdam, the Netherlands; and Istanbul, Turkey. Is this 
knowledge sufficient for you to define your actions with respect to each lo-
cation? The answer is no because this geographical lineup can be translated 
into completely different scenarios. There are as many variations as there 
are companies.  
In scenario 1 (Figure 5-1), for example, you have a New York corporation 
with three wholly owned subsidiaries, two of them overseas, plus 50% own-
ership in a Chinese manufacturer, and two satellite offices in different states. 
Four of these companies need to be consolidated into your financial state-
ments. To highlight some other pressing issues, you have intercompany 
transitions in various currencies, import/export duty exposure, and an array 
of tax headaches, both domestic and international, including VAT (value-
added tax, common in Europe).   

CFO Techniques 
29  
Figure 5-1. Corporate structure, scenario 1 
On the other hand, in scenario 2 (Figure 5-2), you have only one foreign sub-
sidiary to consolidate and you do not have any intercompany transactions. 
This setup appears to be simpler, yet there are still some important concerns 
you should keep in mind. Even though the New York company does not have 
any stakes in the Dutch and Turkish entities, they all have the same owner-
ship. Therefore, they are considered related parties—a fact that must be dis-
closed in your financial statements, and most likely to your lenders and inves-
tors. Another important point is the state tax situation: even though you do 
not own the Ohio warehouse, it is possible that a tax return will need to be 
filed based on the physical presence of your goods in there.  
Figure 5-2. Corporate structure, scenario 2 
In some small companies, the owners believe that this information is on a 
need-to-know basis only. It will be your job to convince them that your 
complete understanding of the structure will allow you to attend to the re-
lated issues and protect the business from unnecessary risks. Don’t just stop 
at verbal explanations either. You must see corporate documents and read 
agreements in order to make sure that you’ve got everything covered.    

Chapter 5 | The Essential Knowledge Prerequisites 
 
30  
Study of Operational Flow and Value 
Chain 
Not only do I make my understanding of the entire business cycle from A to 
Z the highest priority, I also go out of my way to make sure that people in 
my departments have a good grasp of their employer’s operations and eco-
nomic purpose. Later on, we will come back to discussing how the em-
ployees’ realization of their place within the organization impacts their mo-
rale. During your orientation stage, though, this study has immediate prac-
tical applications. It is a prerequisite to identifying accounting cycles, classify-
ing assets and liabilities, pinpointing cost centers, determining analytical and 
financing needs, and more. There are transactions happening at every stage 
of the operational flow that give rise to accounting events. Without full com-
prehension of the value chain, you run the risk of oversights and errors.  
What are the revenue-generating products and/or services? Do you pur-
chase the raw materials or buy prefabricated parts? Do you have your own 
storage facilities or use public warehouses? And what exactly are you stor-
ing there—is it your inventory, or your supplier’s product you bought on 
consignment, or your customer’s goods, for which you are charging a stor-
age fee? It would take a separate book to list all the possibilities.  
You must analyze the business nature of your company, formulate appropri-
ate questions accordingly, and get the questions answered. I have found 
constructing elaborate operational flow sequences or detailed value chain 
charts to be very helpful. A generalized version of such a chart is exempli-
fied in Figure 5-3.    
 
Figure 5-3. Example of a value chain chart 

CFO Techniques 
 
31  
Study of the Organizational Chart and 
Functional Distribution 
In the previous section we talked about processes. In this one, we’ll survey 
people and their positions. I don’t have to convince anybody that it is im-
portant to figure out the chain of command and designation of responsibilities 
within your employer’s organization—you must need to know who’s who. It 
goes beyond just knowing your peers with whom you discuss company-wide 
issues and interdepartmental relationships. You have to know people along 
the value chain—those who are in charge of cost and profit centers; those 
who have relationships with suppliers, vendors, and customers; and those 
who maintain your facilities and receive your mail.  
For the departments outside of your managerial scope, an elaborate chart of 
existing people with their titles and principal responsibilities should be 
enough. However, for your departments, I suggest a different approach that 
is more function driven. It will not just help you to establish correlations be-
tween tasks and employees, but it can also help to identify your blind spots.  
You can start with a structure that includes all functions you believe to be 
necessary and then fill in the existing staff. Figure 5-4 shows a possible out-
come. The boxes without names are open positions. This can be a starting 
point for regrouping, new assignments, and possibly hiring.  
 
Figure 5-4. Example of existing accounting and finance functional structure 

Chapter 5 | The Essential Knowledge Prerequisites 
 
32  
Study of Existing Policies and Procedures 
If you have become a CFO or a controller in a company that already has 
policies in writing and documented procedures in place, even if they are de-
ficient, consider yourself very lucky. You can study the existing papers, out-
line blind spots, and pinpoint weak or erroneous steps. It is easier to en-
force changes if employees are already comfortable with an idea of adhering 
to a recorded set of rules. 
On the other hand, you must be prepared to deal with a complete lack of 
anything in writing. The important thing to remember is that this doesn’t 
mean policies and procedures don’t exist. They are there like the oral folk-
lore of an ancient tribe, passed from generation to generation. It would be a 
big mistake just to ignore the traditions and try to impose a new order. You 
have to uncover and learn them first.  
This process will require asking plenty of questions, observing actions, and 
collecting documents. Interview people about their routines and the reasons 
they perform their duties in a particular way. Ask them to prepare step-by-
step written outlines. There is a good technique used in operational man-
agement: observing workers throughout the day and recording their activi-
ties. You may consider doing this with employees responsible for the most 
important tasks under your control.  
Make an effort not to criticize—it will put people on the defensive and make 
the implementation of future changes much more difficult. Try to stop your-
self from effecting modifications during your discovery process—you may 
not find out everything you need. Don’t dismiss the existing methods until 
you completely understand why things are done in a particular way. Many of 
these practices have developed naturally and don’t violate any principles. It 
is likely you will end up adapting at least some of them. 
 Note  Remember, you cannot afford to take weeks to complete your orientation. Your employers 
will expect you to attack your responsibilities as soon as you start. Recruiters and hiring executives 
frequently insist on prior industry experience in hopes of eliminating the learning curve, even 
though, as was previously pointed out, all companies differ from one another anyway. As an ex-
pert, you have the power to apply your fundamental knowledge to any type of business. If you go in 
prepared, with a clearly outlined plan of actions, you should be able to dissect your new profes-
sional endeavor in no time. 
With your scouting exercise complete, you are now ready to embark on a 
quest for successful accomplishment of your mission.  

P A R T 
II 
Enforcing the  
Law: Policies,  
Procedures, and 
Controls 
 
A company is a microcosm of a country—a nation with its own government 
(sometimes monarchic, other times democratic), population, sovereign ter-
ritory, and “foreign” relations. Like any country, it must have the Law of the 
Land—a system of rules and guidelines, which shapes its internal and exter-
nal activities. Well-defined policies and procedures, properly followed, en-
sure the company’s efficiency and effectiveness as an entity. They minimize 
risks and perpetuate advancement. Managing the application of the law  
requires persistent monitoring. Altogether, these components constitute 
the internal control structure with the controlling duties in the hands of fi-
nancial executives. 
 

C H A P T E R 
6 
System of Internal 
Control and  
Company Policies 
 
There are many specific definitions of internal control, which take slightly dif-
ferent meanings depending on which group of functions is involved. At the 
same time, the words frequently carry a narrow meaning of the accounting 
and auditing discipline. Conceptually, however, the idea of internal control 
has a wider significance, which can be summed up in this way: internal control 
encompasses all steps to be taken by a company to make sure it doesn’t fail. Even 
the standard accounting definition of internal control’s objectives, provided 
in Statement on Auditing Standards No. 55, issued by Audited Standards 
Board of American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), goes 
outside narrow professional scope and includes 
 
reliability of financial reporting; 
 
laws and regulation compliance; and 
 
operational effectiveness and efficiency. 
Therefore, it is appropriate to use the term in its broadest context and in-
clude in the internal control structure all policies and procedures established 

Chapter 6 | System of Internal Control and Company Policies 
 
36  
within an organization, regardless of which aspect of the company’s activity 
they address. 
The idea of control as an active process consists of five universally applicable 
components, which can be utilized in virtually any supervised structure: 
 
Creating a control environment, where people understand that they 
can rely on and must follow the system of monitored rules, which is 
achieved by delivering policies and procedures to employees. 
 
Assessing risk, which is not limited just to direct dangers, such as 
fraud, accidents, or violations of laws, but also includes isolating im-
portant tasks that need to be regulated to assure successful execu-
tion of a company’s strategies. 
 
Defining and implementing policies and procedures as guiding de-
vices. 
 
Developing information-processing and communication systems 
that digest data and enable the delivery of vital results to interested 
parties. 
 
Designing monitoring mechanisms and applied control instruments 
that test the conformity, efficiency, and accuracy of all parts and 
players in the structure. 
As central parts of the internal control architecture, policies are fundamental 
principles and rules that provide members of your organization with guide-
lines for the course of actions to be taken under certain circumstances and 
assist them in making decisions. They don’t actually outline the steps to fol-
low, but instead give a general idea about the company’s stand on a particu-
lar issue. It is important that policies are explicitly defined, clearly explained, 
and diligently adapted by everyone. A well-formed policy should be useful in 
the normal course of business as well as in case of extraordinary events. 
Procedures, on the other hand, are intended to detail how, when, and where 
the described tasks must be performed. Hence, they have to be designed as 
a series of steps intended to take a person through the process from the 
beginning to the end, accomplishing the desirable results. Procedures are 
formulated for repetitive tasks and together comprise the methodology of 
how business is conducted in your enterprise.  
A great thing about policies and procedures is that they serve a dual pur-
pose. They provide employees with the support system that removes un-
certainty from their daily activities and instills a sense of confidence. At the 
same time, as part of the internal control framework, these rules and guides 

CFO Techniques 
 
37  
guarantee the entity’s efficiency and make everyone’s effort a meaningful 
contribution toward the company’s overall goals.  
Writing a good policy is hard and every detail is important. The language 
and style used in written policies often reflects the company’s culture. Read-
ing these documents can reveal management’s attitudes toward employees 
and the CEO’s top priorities. This is especially true in small companies. I 
once had an opportunity to read a set of guidelines written by a business 
owner. They consisted almost entirely of imperative verbs (e.g., “you 
must”). It is no surprise that this organization suffered one of the highest 
turnovers I’ve ever observed.  
Essentially, all company policies are “employee” policies, since they are to 
be followed by people working for the organization. However, most of the 
time, an employee policy per se is understood to be a sort of code of con-
duct (i.e., an HR policy). Let’s follow this convention and separate employee 
policies from other business policies, which are more closely associated 
with procedures. These I would like to divide further into two groups: 
those related to operations and those dealing with finance and administration.  
One of the practical applications of separating an all-encompassing general 
business policy into groups and sections, governing different aspects of the 
company’s activity, is that you can distribute those parts only to employees 
whose jobs are directly affected by the established rules.  
Employee Policies 
These are the most widely used policies, and the majority of companies 
have some sort of a document in place—an employee handbook, or a man-
ual, or just a few stapled-together pages. Regardless of the format, they are, 
as a rule, intended for all employees in the company and should be formu-
lated with that in mind. At the very least, they include rules covering the  
areas outlined following. Of course, depending on the company’s priorities 
regarding the employees, there could be additions or subtractions.  
Does the CFO or controller really need to worry about the handbook? Yes. 
As a CFO, I have personally written employee handbooks. In smaller com-
panies, HR managers are sometimes less qualified than CFOs to write these 
documents. If a company cannot afford to hire someone, the CFO should be 
able to step in. After all, we understand policies, regulations, rules, and pro-
cedures. That said, if you are in charge of charting the handbook, it is wise 
to have your draft reviewed by an employment attorney or an HR consult-
ant. It will cost less than having them design it from scratch, but will assure 
that the document adheres to current labor laws. 

Chapter 6 | System of Internal Control and Company Policies 
 
38  
Here’s a sample listing of typical topics covered in a handbook: 
 
Introduction 
 
Management note 
 
Mission statement 
 
Goals and values 
 
Equal opportunity statement 
 
At-will employment statement 
 
Workplace behavioral guidelines (a.k.a. company image) 
 
Work hours 
 
Attendance and tardiness 
 
Workplace etiquette 
 
Work area maintenance 
 
Premises regulations 
 
Anti-substance abuse 
 
Sexual harassment 
 
Dress code 
 
Internal and external communications 
 
Benefits and tenure 
 
Personal time off  
 
Observed holidays 
 
Payroll periods 
 
Performance reviews 
 
Salary reviews 
 
Bonuses 
 
Health benefits, COBRA 
 
Disability and life insurance, workers compensation 
 
Retirement plans 
 
Fringe benefits 
 
Continuous education 
 
Company property 
 
Personal use 
 
Removal from premises 
 
Equipment and furniture care 
 
Intellectual property 
 
Files and directories 

CFO Techniques 
 
39  
 
Proprietary information 
 
Security 
 
Safety and accidents 
 
OSHA regulations 
 
Emergency procedures 
Benefits and paid time off (frequently abbreviated as PTO) make up the 
most sensitive section of the handbook. Make sure that it goes beyond just 
stating the number of days allowed, and spells out the rules for waiting peri-
ods, accruals, rollovers, maximum consecutive days, and so on. The benefit 
clauses have to be explicit with respect to employees’ contributions, vesting 
periods, and the like.  
Labor laws are less restrictive when it comes to small businesses. State la-
bor departments leave many decisions to the employers’ discretion and will 
refer to your written policy if there is a dispute with a former or current 
employee. This makes your manual even more important. A signed accep-
tance document should be collected from newly hired employees on their 
first working day. It must expressly state that they have read and under-
stood all clauses of the handbook. By signing off, the employees also ac-
knowledge that their employment is contingent on adhering to the code of 
conduct, giving sufficient grounds for dismissal if the rules are violated.  
Business Policies: Operations 
The central intention of business policies is to support the company’s strat-
egy. The executives in charge need to question the ultimate purpose of each 
function or set of actions. In order to create an effective policy, they must 
identify the most impactful elements in the value chain and institute the 
guidelines that will bring about the intended results at the lowest risk. 
If customer retention is the most important factor in your revenue-
generation cycle, then elaborate rules need to be established for customer 
service and support. If you are in an industry that depends on relationships 
with few big suppliers, you should have strict regulations covering that area. 
Businesses with long-term contractual arrangements need to formulate 
code for initiation, approval, and execution of the agreements. On the other 
hand, companies whose success depends on constant sales effort and en-
gagement of the customer base for generation of new transactions must 
have clear criteria for selling practices. 

Chapter 6 | System of Internal Control and Company Policies 
40  
How important is the establishment of overarching, key operational poli-
cies? Harley-Davidson has been a subject of many business articles and case 
studies for its implementation of a just-in-time (JIT) inventory policy, which 
results in tremendous cost reduction but at the same time creates waiting 
lists in their dealerships. The entire business structure of Harley-Davidson is 
driven by this policy. Companies with less hard-core consumers must manu-
facture or acquire surplus inventories to accommodate urgent orders. 
Sometimes inventories are accumulated in anticipation of market changes. 
Whatever the reason, strict guidelines need to be established to minimize 
associated risks.  
I believe that one of the most important sets of operational standards is the 
one reflecting the company’s transactional philosophy. Which type of deals 
should you enter into and which should you avoid? Will you accept that 
small order that takes as long to fulfill as the larger one? If the answer im-
pacts your company’s strategy, it must be defined as a policy.  
And again, as CFO or controller—and likely a member of the executive 
committee overseeing policy—you are in an excellent position to either 
make operations-related decisions or provide indispensable input. 
Business Policies: Finance and  
Administration 
I separate these guidelines from other strategy-driven policies because cre-
ating them is one of the primary responsibilities of a company’s financial 
leader. The employee handbook and operational policies are results of col-
laborative efforts, significantly influenced by your CEO/owner. However, 
regulations governing financial and administrative areas are yours to define. 
For myself, I expand the breadth of fiscal policies beyond generally accepted 
principles for monetary control, compliance, and reliability of standard fi-
nancial reporting. (The next chapter is devoted to this part of the internal 
control system.) I add two more types of policies: (1) finance operational 
policies, and (2) what I call bottom-line policies. 
With the variety of functions controlled by a head of finance, there are spe-
cific processes and tasks, beyond conventional accounting, that require their 
own regulations. Again, the subjects of these policies are dictated by the 
business nature and particular structure. Just as with any other business pol-
icy, examine your departments’ functionality, find the pressure points, and 
set appropriate rules.  

CFO Techniques 
 
41  
For example, if all your material purchases are financed by letters of credit 
(LCs), you should impose a policy for procurement staff to check with the 
finance department for facility availability before they accept any deal. On 
the other side of the cycle, if you accept term LCs from your customers, 
you may want to consider implementing a rule for discounting any instru-
ment with a term over 90 days. This way you will not need to make an ex-
ecutive decision for every transaction.  
The bottom-line policies are my favorite financial policies. They have to do 
with cost-center responsibilities, budgetary restrictions, and transactional 
gross margins. Working on these tricky subjects will require you to wear 
two hats at the same time. You have to be a flexible strategic thinker de-
termined not to stifle the business, while trying to apply constraints to pre-
serve your profitability and positive cash flow. It’s not easy. You will find fur-
ther discussion of these control methods in Chapters 10 and 11.  
Theoretically speaking, administrative policies could be part of an employee 
handbook. However, because they are related to activities that are not nec-
essarily applicable to all employees, I prefer to separate them. Not everyone 
in the company travels, hires people, or incurs out-of-pocket business ex-
penses. The following is not an exhaustive, but definitely a representative, 
list of the most typical items to be covered in this section: 
 
Recruitment process 
 
Office supplies requisition 
 
Shipping, mailing, messaging, and courier services 
 
Travel approval  
 
Events participation 
 
Travel arrangements 
 
Corporate credit cards 
 
Miles utilization 
 
Expense reimbursements 
You don’t need to address every small or rarely occurring event. For exam-
ple, if the only person who travels in your company is the owner, there is 
no need to establish any policies for him. However, all common, easy-to-
generalize situations should be covered. 
 Note  Just like laws, policies need to be ratified before they can be implemented, regardless of 
who develops and writes them. The complete set of guidelines must be approved and accepted by 
the governing body, whether that’s a single person or a board. 

C H A P T E R 
7 
Generally Accepted 
Fiscal Policies 
 
Many risks and controls, traditionally associated with accounting functions 
and reliability of financial reporting, have been eradicated from our pro-
fessional lives by computerized, integrated solutions. Software warns you if 
the entry is out of balance, it automatically prompts to the next invoice (or 
voucher, or check, or credit memo) number in the system, it advises if the 
entered account doesn’t exist, and so on.  
There are no more dangers of one-sided bookkeeping mistakes or posting 
omissions. Even the least sophisticated application knows that an invoice 
generated as the result of a shipped order or performed service must be 
recorded in the customer’s account in the subsidiary “ledger” (aka accounts 
receivable module), and give rise to sales and accounts receivable accounts 
in the general “ledger” (aka general ledger module). We don’t even see it 
happening—the system takes care of it without any human participation. 
This, of course, created an army of accounting clerks who are basically data 
processors and don’t understand the nature of double-entry bookkeeping, 
but I will address this problem later in the book. 
Together with the risks went away the necessity of creating policies and es-
tablishing monitoring tools for many standard tasks. On the other hand, we 
are so dependent on our computer systems today that we need a separate 
set of policies addressing their adequacy, setup, and security.  

Chapter 7 | Generally Accepted Fiscal Policies 
 
44  
Still, there are several fundamental principles that permeate all fiscal activi-
ties within an organization and remain valid no matter how digitized your in-
formation processing is. These control activities are universal and must be 
implemented in all entities: manufacturers, traders, service providers, profit, 
and nonprofit. The good news is that you don’t need to invent them—they 
have been a part of our professional foundation forever. Unlike functional 
policies driven by specific business characteristics, they are independent of 
operational variations. 
In accounting canon, the principle fiscal controls are separated into loosely 
defined groups, but the truth is that the comprising policies, procedures, 
and monitoring mechanisms are so interwoven that the traditional division 
is somewhat irrelevant. It is the whole system that activates the controlling 
function.  
Segregation of Duties 
Frequently listed last in textbooks and digests of professional standards, this 
group of policies has always been my highest professional priority. Whether 
or not you have the time, resources, or executive support to attend to the 
legislative function as a whole, you must nevertheless have the guidelines for 
segregation of duties in place. Even if you are a one-person show, a control-
ler, or an accounting manager with no subordinates, you must come up with 
a solution for implementing the safeguarding mechanisms. 
The  sole purpose of dividing duties is  to reduce the possibility that the same 
person can commit an erroneous, irregular, or illegal act, and have an opportunity 
to conceal it in the normal course of his or her work. The object of the pol-
icy, therefore, is to separate the three types of responsibilities, described 
following, within every process that has a potential of such risk, by assigning 
those tasks to different people. It is important to identify the duties accord-
ing to their nature so that the segregation policy works properly. 
1. Authorizing of transactions: This isn’t limited to signed or initialed re-
quests; it could also include, for example, the marking of vouchers 
in the system for payment by the AP manager, or an e-mail you 
send to your treasury operator with the list of wires to be set up—
anything that approves transactional inception. 
2. Recording of transactions: This, with the increased sophistication of 
computer applications, may include not only a direct entry and post-
ing, but also printing of shipping slips, or execution of check runs, or 

CFO Techniques 
 
45  
any other action that prompts the system to automatically generate 
internal entries. 
3. Maintaining custody of assets: This is an old-fashioned formula that 
evokes images of cash transactions with big safes and vaults full of 
stacks of paper money and rolls of gold coins; in the current age of 
electronic payments, a person with authority to sign a check or re-
lease a wire transfer is a custodian of the majority of your monetary 
assets. Other keepers of assets may include those responsible for 
petty cash, customers’ checks, various inventories, and so on.  
Of course, cash management and accounts payable functions are central 
concerns when it comes to segregation of duties. Ideally, CFOs and con-
trollers should be involved only in authorizing related transactions. The 
most secure setups, for instance, for processing wire transfers and making 
check payments in a privately held company, are presented in Figure 7-1. 
These examples combine all the best practices: head of finance is involved 
only in the authorization steps, there are two people responsible for re-
cording process at different stages, and the owner/CEO retains full custody 
of monetary assets.  
 
Figure 7-1. Example of segregation of duties for wire transfers and check payments 

Chapter 7 | Generally Accepted Fiscal Policies 
 
46  
Banks’ online treasury systems provide clients with multistep authorization 
features and dual-signature drafts, which with a proper setup should accom-
modate these policies. Assigning specific rights in your integrated computer 
system is an integral part of their implementation as well.  
Hopefully, you have at least three people you can get involved in each func-
tion that calls for separation of responsibilities to minimize risks. However, 
in some small companies, you may not have a sufficient number of people 
available to comply with this requirement.  
Let’s say you are a controller with no supporting staff. In that case, when it 
comes to making payments, you have to reduce your responsibility to recording 
only. For example, pick out the invoices you need to pay, ask your CEO to 
approve your selection, cut the checks, pass them for his signature, and post 
the payments. Under no circumstances should the same person be selecting 
the payment, printing the check, signing, posting, and mailing it. 
Not only is this a mandatory requirement of accounting management stan-
dards and ethical code—you need it for your own peace of mind. Having 
the segregation-of-duties policies frees you from suspicion of malice or 
wrongdoing if something goes wrong. There are plenty of owners out there 
who mismanage their businesses and run into severe operational losses—
which in turn translate into cash flow shortages—and then declare that 
someone must have stolen the money. Protect yourself. 
Making payments is not the only area with segregation-of-duties concerns. 
Similar policies must be created for any situation in which the risk of cover up ex-
ists. This may include a variety of transactions: borrowing funds, executing 
hedging or futures contracts, and so on. By the same token, a person in 
charge of releasing products from a warehouse should not be allowed to 
approve and post the released order in the system. Try to identify all possi-
bilities and safeguard them by allotting tasks to different people.  
Principles of Information Processing 
This part of internal control deals with the general rules for data manage-
ment that directly impact the integrity of financial reporting: existence of 
authorization practice as well as completeness and accuracy of transactions. 
Today many policies directly associated with these concepts are imple-
mented directly through the computerization of information processing.  

CFO Techniques 
 
47  
Authorization 
While major safeguards for completeness and accuracy are usually pre-
defined in integrated systems, the authorizations must be selected and set 
up. Study your application’s potential and try to utilize as many approval fea-
tures as you can.  
For example, a credit manager can set up credit limits for each customer so 
that a new order cannot be entered if the line is full. The same can be done 
on your accounts payable side. A new product cannot be entered into the 
inventory unless a system administrator has set it up. Payroll processing will 
be initiated only after time cards have been marked for approval. Checks 
will not print unless AP vouchers are created by selecting invoices.  
Even the simplest software comes with most of these capabilities. Utilizing 
them will assist you with implementation of transactional authorization 
policies.   
Completeness 
In the context of information processing, completeness signifies that all trans-
actions are recorded. The time-proven sequential numbering of documents 
generated within your system is the most popular of information-processing 
policies. The automatic prompt to the next purchase or sales order, invoice, 
voucher, credit or debit memo, or check number was embedded in the ear-
liest of accounting applications. The few remaining programs that still allow 
users to overwrite documents’ numbers should be avoided, as they violate 
the very principle of minimizing risks.  
Proper policy for records completeness should include rules for handling of 
erroneous or invalid documents with voiding checks, creating numbered 
credit and debit memos for sales and purchase invoices, reversing trans-
actions in the general ledger, and so on. Your computer systems should be 
set up in a way that does not allow a simple deletion of entries and that re-
quires creation of appropriate corrective entries.  
As important as prenumbering is, it primarily targets transactions generated 
within your own system. It doesn’t fully guarantee that nothing coming to 
you from the external connections will go amiss. Say the company’s pur-
chasing department places an order for raw materials to be delivered to the 
manufacturing location. When the product is received, the inventory will 
most likely be updated in the operational module. However, you probably 
have to depend on the supplier for sending you the purchase invoice.   

Chapter 7 | Generally Accepted Fiscal Policies 
 
48  
In 2002, I went to a Microsoft conference, where they introduced the .NET 
Framework—a unified platform that allows developers to build applications 
for various devices and across the Internet, not only threading together func-
tions within a company, but also connecting suppliers, vendors, clients, and 
customers into one structure. It was exhilarating to imagine the possibility of 
a supplier’s invoice flowing automatically into your system as soon as the 
product your company purchased left the supplier’s warehouse. Nothing 
would ever be lost in the mail or on somebody’s desk, or be stuck into the 
wrong folder. 
Well, eventually we will get there. For now, though, the majority of small 
and midsize companies are still exposed to the disconnect between their 
own operations and the outside world. This, together with the dependency 
on the human factor, makes it very difficult to control the completeness of 
records. The combination of specifically designed procedures and monitor-
ing tests, discussed in the next three chapters, should serve that purpose.   
Accuracy 
No matter how you look at it, the only true policy for accuracy is “do it 
right.” We constantly encourage our employees to be focused and pay at-
tention, and ask questions if they are not sure. Still, the risk of inaccuracy 
exists in every singe aspect of information processing. Mistakes are made 
with quantities, dollar values, subsidiary and control accounts selection, clas-
sification of events, and so on.  
Again, a lot of responsibility for accuracy can be transferred to your soft-
ware. It all depends on its capabilities. One thing I can promise you is that 
you are better off taking your time to study these capabilities and exhaust all 
possibilities for diminishing as many risks of errors as you can. The system, 
for example, should be able to prevent creation of a sales invoice if there is 
no inventory available for a particular product. You can create a fixed corre-
lation between subsidiary accounts and control accounts in the general 
ledger to eliminate the necessity of selecting one from the chart of accounts 
when invoices are entered. Sales terms can be assigned to individual custom-
ers. Warnings can be activated for invoice amounts that don’t match order 
amounts. Whatever you can do, do.  
Here is a typical problem. I am sure many of you have encountered the curse 
of duplicate customers and suppliers’ accounts, with some invoices posted 
there and others here. An account may have been originally set up in a last-
name/first-name format. Then, an employee was looking at the list based on 
the first name, did not find the account, and created a new one. I have tried 

CFO Techniques 
 
49  
to implement strict policies for account setups, specifying word order, 
treatment of the word the in corporate names, and so on. It doesn’t work—
it is impossible to anticipate all variations. The only way to deal with these is-
sues is to have a policy of assigning setup rights to one conscientious person 
who knows to look for all variations before deciding that a new account 
must be created. The same goes for new products, services, employees, and 
so on. 
One of the biggest issues of accuracy is recognition of rights and obligations. 
Employees responsible for related entries should have a clear understanding 
of the rules governing transfer of ownership based on shipping and delivery 
terms, which affect correctness of receivables, inventories, payables, reve-
nues, and costs. The title passage policies are prescribed by Incoterms (Inter-
national Commercial Terms), which will be further discussed in Chapter 26.  
Physical Controls 
These policies deal with physical security of assets, including facilities, inven-
tories, equipment, records, and data. Generally, they fall into two categories: 
1. Authorization of access, which should not only prevent harmful or il-
licit actions from outsiders, but also provide evidentiary records in 
case of internal misappropriation. With a variety of security systems 
available on the market, most companies opt to guard their prem-
ises and assets via various electronic means, including keypad locks, 
card readers, video monitoring, and so on. Related policies should 
specifically describe the accepted authorization protocol and the 
management of security systems.  
2. Protection from damage, which include all your actions addressing 
possibilities of accidents, deliberate violations, and natural disasters. 
The installation of appropriate devices and measures should be 
aligned with the safety rules outlined in the employee handbook.  
To comply with accounting rules, physical control policies should be com-
plemented by procedures for periodic counting of material assets and com-
parison with existing records.  
IT Security and Data Recovery 
Theoretically, activities related to protection of your data are part of the 
physical control. However, the value of information as an asset and the  

Chapter 7 | Generally Accepted Fiscal Policies 
 
50  
impact of its loss are so significant, the subject deserves a separate heading. 
I am not talking about the hardware either, which is made up of nothing 
more than expensive but easily replaceable generic boxes. On the other 
hand, the mere thought of losing years of recorded transactions, carefully 
designed analytical reports, performance measurements, payroll files, and 
so forth, makes me feel dizzy. And if your company stores customers’ per-
sonal data, the importance of this issue increases exponentially.  
So, forgive me for being fervent about pushing for utilization of as many op-
tions for successful data recovery as you can afford. First of all, I like the six-
disks-a-week backup policy: Monday through Thursday, plus two on Friday. 
The Friday duplicate should be kept outside of the office, since the prob-
ability of some disaster happening at the same time in two places is very 
low. Additionally, there are Internet backup services that allow you to exe-
cute an online transfer of your fully encrypted data to an offsite center. The 
benefit of this option lies in the combination of storing your records away 
from your facilities and using the local restore functionality. If you can, have 
both systems in place.  
Keep in mind that the centralized company-wide backup captures data that 
resides on your servers (file, web, mail, etc.), not on the local hard drives of 
individual computer stations. Not all of your employees are sufficiently com-
puter-savvy to understand the impact of using local hard drives for storing 
company files. If something happens with a particular station, locally stored 
files will not magically appear on the backup cache. Therefore, you need a 
strict policy on the use of employees’ subdirectories for all company-related 
files, which must be explained to all new hires during their orientation. If, for 
some reason, there is a need to store information on local drives, then they 
should be backed up separately on external hard drives, flash drives, or disks.   
The necessity of a firewall as a key element of protecting your local area 
network from outside dangers is beyond obvious, and at this point, a simple 
statement that every company must have one is all that needs to be said 
about it. However, no firewall will provide sufficient safety if users keep in-
viting perpetrators to come in the door. More computer equipment and 
programs have been destroyed by viruses, worms, and spyware dragged in 
through online shopping and gaming than by physical accidents. Many em-
ployees will comply with the handbook’s rule and refrain from using their 
stations for personal use during working hours, and then go on an Internet 
shopping spree instead of getting their lunch. Your computer safety policy 
should spell out the material dangers and consequences of such activities to 
the company’s assets.   

CFO Techniques 
51  
In my own experience, one of the most neglected aspects of information se-
curity is the treatment of login passwords. What frequently happens in 
smaller companies is that when IT administrators set up network features, 
mapping users’ subdirectories and creating login scripts, they don’t use ran-
dom password generators, and instead give everyone the same generic login 
script: a standardized username with something like “12345” for a pass-
word. And this is viewed as all right, because the expectation is that after 
the initial login, every employee will create his or her own unique password. 
However, unless you have an explicitly expressed policy demanding every-
one to do so, more than half of the people will not bother. As a result, the 
network becomes vulnerable to unauthorized use. 
 Note  Accounting and finance employees have to be especially careful about the security of 
their login scripts, as they have access to sensitive information such as the company’s financials 
and personnel records. They also connect to online banking and payroll services. You should be 
especially vigilant about systems’ safety precautions when it applies to your own direct and indirect 
reports.   
Sarbanes-Oxley Act  
Widely known nowadays as SOX, this US federal law, enacted on July 30, 
2002, targets publicly traded companies’ accounting, internal controls, finan-
cial reporting, and board-of-directors awareness, in an effort to protect 
stock market investors from falling victims to the likes of Enron, Tyco, and 
WorldCom.  
The full implementation of the law is expensive, as it requires investment in 
high-end accounting applications, additional personnel, and far more exten-
sive audits. Small-cap companies have filed many complaints with the SEC, 
trying to get exceptions from the most expensive part of SOX, section 
404—the internal control audit. This exception was finally granted in 2010. 
However, that’s the only exclusion. So, if you work for a public company, 
you must abide by the law. There is a slew of readily available books de-
voted to elaborate interpretations and checklists that make the adoption 
process somewhat easier.   
Privately held companies are not required to comply. Nevertheless, you 
should not completely ignore SOX either. There are two main reasons for 
any company to consider application of some of the SOX concerns. First of 

Chapter 7 | Generally Accepted Fiscal Policies 
 
52  
all, a lot of collective effort went into study and selection of the best prac-
tices guaranteeing the reliability of financial reporting. Since SOX was paid 
for with the taxpayers’ money, we might as well take advantage of the result-
ing gold standards. Secondly, voluntary SOX compliance can be an excellent 
card to play in your capital-raising efforts. Lenders, private and venture capi-
tal investors, and potential buyers will look at your company differently. 
Following are some of the act’s policies that I believe to be useful for any 
company: 
 
Full financial reporting disclosure, including off-balance-sheet items 
 
Document preservation 
 
Strict auditor independence by avoiding the use of a CPA firm both 
for audit and consulting work 
 
Conflict-of-interest guidelines 
Having a framework of efficiently constructed accounting and fiscal policies 
will ease the process of formulating functional procedures discussed in the 
next chapter. 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
8 
Procedures for 
Quintessential 
Tasks 
 
All functional tasks must have clearly defined procedures. They are an integral 
part of the internal control system, which is directly responsible for the effec-
tiveness of processes and the accuracy of information. Providing employees 
with these road maps is the only way to make sure that your departments 
carry out their responsibilities in accordance with the established policies in 
order to pursue the company’s strategy.  
You know how every time you buy a new computer, it comes with a 
poster-size folded brochure called “Quick Start?” It tells you what to do 
first, what needs to be connected and in what order, and which cables to 
use. The purpose here is for you to follow the steps exactly as instructed, 
so that you can have the new system functional and ready for use in the 
quickest possible time. 
This, in a nutshell, is an example of an efficient procedural instruction. It’s 
supposed to guide the user from one step to another in order to achieve the 
intended result. To accomplish this, a well-designed procedure document 
must utilize the following key elements: 

Chapter 8 | Procedures for Quintessential Tasks 
 
54  
 
State the purpose. 
 
Indicate when the task is to be accomplished. 
 
Point out where each action must take place (this could be a physical 
place, a system module, a particular screen, a document file, etc.). 
 
Explain what documents, devices, and such need to be assembled. 
 
Provide the exact sequence of necessary steps to be taken. 
 
See if aggregate steps can be broken down further to achieve more 
clarity.  
One of the most important things to remember while designing a procedure 
is that you should write for an abstract person who has never undertaken 
this task before. I am not talking about professional knowledge here—of 
course, you don’t have to explain accounting terminology to your qualified 
employees. Yet, you have to keep in mind that the same process can be 
conducted differently under various policies, industrial specifics, and com-
puter systems. Therefore, in order to create a clear and complete pro-
cedure, you must not skip any steps or meaningful details, just because you 
assume them to be obvious.  
Another thing to remember is to make the layout user-friendly and present 
the sequence exactly in the way it needs to be viewed and followed. If a 
procedure can be related to a specific company policy, disclose the con-
nection so that an employee will understand the task’s contribution to the 
bigger picture.  
Typical Procedure Layouts 
There are two basic ways of presenting a procedure: as a process flow 
chart or as a narrative. I find that narratives lack the visual impact, may 
seem tedious, and have a tendency of being too verbose. On the other 
hand, sparsely worded diagrams may turn out to be too obscure. However, 
nothing prevents you from going beyond basics and mixing it up to achieve 
a better result.  
I am partial to a sort of a hybrid—a flow chart with a sufficient description 
of each step. An example of a credit approval procedure is provided in Fig-
ure 8-1 to give you an idea of what a typical document may look like. It was 
created by a consulting firm, E&D CC, for a specific company. Therefore, 
not all the steps may apply to your operations. The arrangement presented 
can be easily translated into a simpler, more schematic chart, or into a de-
scriptive manual, or an outline with sections and subsections, or a com-
bination of any of these styles. 

CFO Techniques 
 
55  
One important thing to remember is to be flexible. Some formats are more 
suitable for certain procedures, but not others. You don’t have to be strictly 
uniform. The main purpose is clarity and comprehension. 
Some companies combine a specific functional policy with a related pro-
cedure. For example, you may have a policy that customers’ checks must be 
deposited twice a week in order to facilitate expedient account updates and 
improve the cash flow. The procedure for check deposits may follow after 
that. Alternatively, you may want to have all your policies in one place. 
Again, you can choose whatever methodology achieves better results. 
 
Figure 8-1. Credit approval procedure (courtesy of E&D CC)  

Chapter 8 | Procedures for Quintessential Tasks 
 
56  
Notable Procedures 
Over the next few pages, I will highlight some of the most crucial functions, 
grouped by category, for which explicit procedures must be defined.  
When it comes to operations of accounting and finance departments, I find 
the traditional transactional cycle approach to be the most natural way to be-
gin assessing which procedures you need to have in place. Grouping related 
transactions by major functional areas provides a streamlined structure and 
assists in making sure that nothing is missing.  
The specific cycles may vary depending on the industry and the type of en-
tity. Service providers, for example, don’t have a conversion cycle with vari-
ous inventories. At the same time, some companies’ financing may be very 
intricate and involve transactions not listed following. That said, the universal 
nature of accounting principles assures similarity of the core activities and 
procedural requirements. Most CFOs and controllers will find tasks within 
these generalized lists applicable to them. 
Revenues and Accounts Receivable  
These procedures should cover all activities related to credit, sales record-
ing, adjustments, and collections. The word customer is meant here to in-
clude any recipient of your goods or services. Most companies in service in-
dustries traditionally use the word client. You should have procedures in 
each of these areas: 
 
New customer submissions by the sales department 
 
Credit line approval 
 
New customer account setup 
 
Credit sales order approval 
 
Credit lines increase 
 
Customer letters of credit (LC) acceptance 
 
Bank-avalized (endorsed) drafts and notes 
 
Customer prepayments 
 
Customer billing 
 
Royalties, licenses, franchises, and technology revenue 
 
Installment contracts 
 
Revenue recognition  
 
Customer returns, allowances, and discounts 
 
Credit sales collection 

CFO Techniques 
 
57  
 
Delinquent accounts  
 
Uncollectible accounts 
 
Receiving payments for credit sales 
 
Customer payments by paper checks 
 
Electronic check processing 
 
Credit card processing  
 
Customer sight LC presentation for payment 
 
Customer term LC presentation for payment 
 
Forfeiting  
 
Receiving cash payments 
 
Cash deposits 
 
Receipt posting and customer file updates 
Expenditures, Accounts Payable, and Payroll 
Technically speaking, the mechanics of the expenditure cycle are simple—
we obtain goods or services and we pay for them. However, the vast variety 
and different nature of resources required for operating a business make 
this the broadest category of procedures. 
 
Material purchases, manufacturing, logistics, and other operational 
expenditures 
 
New supplier and vendor setup 
 
Supplier and vendor credit relationship management 
 
LC opening 
 
Prepaid purchases 
 
Material purchase transaction initiation and approval 
 
Vendor services acquisitions and approval 
 
Royalties, licenses, and franchise fees 
 
Supplier and vendor invoice identification, matching, and  
allocation  
 
Verification and endorsement by cost centers 
 
Supplier invoice coding and recording 
 
Purchase returns and allowances 
 
Debit memo recording 
 
Accounts-payable management  
 
Credit purchase payments 
 
LC payments 
 
Payment posting and supplier account updates 

Chapter 8 | Procedures for Quintessential Tasks 
 
58  
 
Selling, general, and administrative expenses 
 
Trade show and conference expense approval 
 
Advertisement, marketing, and corporate identity program  
approval 
 
Legal and other professional services requisitions 
 
Retainer agreements 
 
Insurance policies and premium payments 
 
Lease management and payments 
 
Services with automatic billing and periodic fees 
 
Utility payments 
 
Telecommunications payments 
 
Postage and delivery services 
 
1099 vendors 
 
Office supplies and office services requisitions and inventory 
 
Corporate credit card charges verification and reconciliation 
 
Employee out-of-pocket-expense reimbursements 
 
Petty cash management and recording 
 
Temporary employees 
 
Voucher verification and approval 
 
Voucher recording 
 
Payment approval and recording 
 
HR and payroll 
 
Hiring 
 
New employees and HR record setup 
 
Pay rate changes 
 
Timekeeping management 
 
Overtime 
 
PTO recording 
 
Bonuses and commissions 
 
Employee contributions and voluntary deductions 
 
Payroll processing 
 
Direct deposits and payroll paper checks  
 
Payroll recording 
 
Payroll tax payments and recording 
 
Payroll tax quarterly and annual reports 
 
HR record updates 
 
Labor union management 
 
Labor safety procedures 
 
Benefits management 
 
Terminations 

CFO Techniques 
 
59  
Inventory and Cost of Goods Sold 
In manufacturing, the conversion cycle has a very literal meaning of combining 
various raw material inventories with labor, production costs, and fixed as-
sets, and transforming them into a finished-goods inventory. Whether the in-
ventory of products available for sale is manufactured or purchased in trade, 
upon its sale it undergoes an accounting transformation into cost of goods 
sold through allocation of other operational costs.    
 
Inventory items, cost categories, jobs, and allocations setup 
 
Job and production authorization 
 
Raw materials inventory recording, control, and valuation 
 
Allocation of raw material costs 
 
Direct labor and other manufacturing expense capitalization 
 
Work-in-process inventory control and valuation 
 
Finished-goods inventory recording 
 
Finished-goods inventory control and valuation 
 
Storage and logistics cost allocation 
 
Job costing 
 
Overhead allocation and capitalization 
 
Inventory/COGS conversion 
Financing, Investing, and Banking 
These procedures must cover all transactions related to capital, debts, in-
vestments, banking, and treasury management.  
 
Loan and revolving credit line utilization 
 
Trade finance instruments: LCs, banker’s acceptances, and loans 
 
Borrowing base reports 
 
Covenants compliance 
 
Lender and investor reports  
 
Lender audits and due diligence 
 
Asset-based financing  
 
Factoring 
 
Leasing and equipment financing 
 
Commercial mortgage management  
 
Cash surplus investing 
 
Derivatives  
 
Financing/investment transaction recording 

Chapter 8 | Procedures for Quintessential Tasks 
 
60  
 
Interest and fees recording 
 
Cash position updates 
 
Cash projections 
 
Online banking 
 
Wire transfers  
 
Check payments 
 
Foreign currency management and hedging 
 
Bank reconciliations 
Fixed Assets  
Traditionally, fixed assets are considered to be a part of the financing/invest-
ing cycle. However, I separated them into a special category because of the 
specific nature of accounting events that can be associated with their acquisi-
tion, ownership, and disposal. 
 
Plant and manufacturing equipment acquisition 
 
Computing and office equipment acquisition 
 
Furniture and fixtures acquisition 
 
Software and technology acquisition 
 
Property, plant, and equipment recording and expensing/depreciating 
 
Physical property disposal and write-offs 
 
Wear and tear  
 
Copyrights, trademarks, service marks, and other intellectual prop-
erty recording and expensing/amortizing 
 
Research-and-development cost treatment 
Month-End 
Period-closing routines have a cross-functional nature, but their timing and 
importance warrants separating them into dedicated groups. Some functions, 
even though performed once a month or once a quarter, do not necessarily 
coincide with a period’s end; others make more sense if grouped with the 
other procedures in the cycle—look for them in the preceding sections.  
Thankfully, today all accounting systems contain features for reversible 
transactions, which are specifically designed in such a way that posting clos-
ing records on the period’s last days triggers automatic reversal entries on 
the first day of the following period. This eliminates the need for creating 
reversing procedures. 

CFO Techniques 
61  
 
Accruals recognition and recording 
 
Expensing previous period prepaids 
 
Prepaids recognition and recording 
 
AR, AP, and merchant account reconciliations 
 
Depreciation and amortization recording 
 
Intercompany transactions recognition 
 
Intercompany accounts reconciliation 
 
Consolidation 
 
Internal audit tests  
 
Budget vs. actual analysis, monthly budget adjustments 
 
Period financial statements 
 
Key performance indicators (KPIs) 
 
Executive reporting packages 
 
Board-of-directors (BOD) reporting packages 
 
Sales tax reporting and payments 
 
VAT (value-added tax) reporting 
 
System modules period closing and new period setup 
 
Following-month budget uploads 
Year-End 
In addition to the regular period-end actions, there are a few transactions 
that are performed only at the end of the fiscal year.  
 
W-2 distribution and W-3 filing  
 
Various 1099 distributions 
 
System fiscal-year closing and new-year setup 
 
Annual financial statements, footnotes, and audit preparation 
 
Federal and state corporate tax returns 
 
General ledger chart-of-accounts adjustments 
 
Next-year budget setup  
Documenting Procedures 
I have come to regard policies and procedures as a company’s intellectual 
property. Altogether, they contain the entity’s functional know-how and con-
stitute the framework of operative memory. It is no wonder that some em-
ployees come to feel very possessive about their way of doing things. How-
ever, as with any other asset, this knowledge does not belong to individual 
staff members. It is the company’s property and must be treated as such. 

Chapter 8 | Procedures for Quintessential Tasks 
 
62  
The only way you can ensure the retention and continuity of your internal 
control system is through diligent documentation, systematization, and con-
glomeration of all relevant information. This will protect your company 
against the unfortunate consequences of corporate memory loss during 
staff movements. 
Those rules, regulations, and activities that are structured and implemented 
by the financial executives are usually well archived in one or another for-
mat. However, unless you have been there since the founding of the com-
pany, it is most likely that there are plenty of operational methods you have 
adapted as practical and useful. If they are not recorded, you run the risk of 
losing them. 
A good starting point in having them documented is to ask the person exe-
cuting the task to write it out for you. It is possible you will face some resis-
tance, which you must find a way to overcome. You may want to consider 
forming a documentation committee (or whatever you want to call it) out of 
those employees whose cooperation you need. Participation in something 
that goes beyond their daily routines may spark people’s interest and make 
them understand their importance on a bigger scale.  
 Note  I know only too well that the process of putting this operational manual together will take 
time from other urgent things you must do. The incentive to attend to this issue lays in the future 
benefits. If you have any doubts, just think about the time you will save by having a new hire study 
the well-written documents instead of personally training them and relying on their note-taking skills.   
The Importance of Scheduling  
A large portion of functional processes constitute daily routines; timing of 
others is triggered by certain events. Still, a significant number of tasks need 
to be performed in predefined cycles or by certain dates. Their proper timing 
is an important part of efficient operations. I have seen manuals developed for 
large enterprises and, especially, government entities that actually had the ex-
act commencement dates embedded within procedures for all tasks.  
It is hard to do the same in smaller companies. The limitations of resources 
and overwhelming multitasking call for a less-constricted approach. I can 
formulate my practical advice to fellow financial professionals in small and 
midsize companies in two words: lists and schedules.  

CFO Techniques 
 
63  
Consider assisting yourself by creating the following lists: 
1. Tasks assigned to each group/person, with their time frames, based 
on your accounting-and-finance functional structure (look back at 
Figure 5-4 for a quick reference).  
2. Mandatory daily functions. 
3. Periodic activities and reports with fixed dates, responsible parties, 
and intended users/recipients (weekly, monthly, quarterly, annual). 
4. Long-term list with projects that are not crucial to immediate 
commercial goals, but are necessary to bring the company to the 
next level, with tentative start dates. 
These lists could be the foundation of the following four schedules: 
1. Current day’s schedule (which I usually prepare the previous night). 
2. Two-week tasks outline. 
3. Two-month highlights. 
4. Tentative four-month plan. 
 Note  I would like to emphasize that flexibility is key: don’t let yourself become obsessively rigid. 
Changes and diversions are to be expected and there is no reason to get worked up about them—
after all, we operate in a very fast-changing business world. 

C H A P T E R 
9 
The Weakest Link 
 
Let’s say you have all policies outlined and procedures carefully designed. 
Everything is properly documented and bound into books and manuals, 
which are readily available for orientation, training, and daily reference. 
Through an intensive internal audit program, all components have been ex-
amined; everything has been tested in practice. Whatever did not work well 
has been tweaked, cumbersome procedures were replaced with more 
straightforward ones, and the inferior ones have been improved.  
Finally, it has been determined that the internal control system is both effec-
tive and efficient in accomplishing the company’s goals and the executive 
management’s objectives. Is it reasonable at this point to expect that every-
thing should be working like that expensive watch I keep mentioning as a 
model of a perfect mechanism? Unfortunately not.  
We don’t exist in the virtual world of The Matrix trilogy, where everyone is 
manipulated by the digital code. In real life it is other way around: our well-
designed systems and structures depend on being properly handled by peo-
ple. Their proficiency and diligence determine how well the policies and 
procedures are being performed. I have mentioned the human factor de-
pendency in Chapter 7’s discussion of policies designed to increase com-
pleteness and accuracy of information processing. The truth is that every 
task performed by an employee is vulnerable to occasional unintentional er-
rors, consistent sloppiness, and even deliberate mishandling. 
Any designer of functional systems with frameworks that include people as 
key elements knows that humans are the weakest links in the chain of actions. 
A long time ago, when computers were so huge that a single unit occupied a 

Chapter 9 | The Weakest Link 
 
66  
hall the size of the New York Public Library’s reading room, all programs and 
data were coded on punch cards. A punched-out spot was read by the com-
puter’s card reader as a character or a digit. These cards were manually cre-
ated by operators trained to use a keypunch machine. Guess what? Two 
separate people produced every card in duplicate. No exceptions. If the cards 
did not match, they had to be repunched. Thus, the risk of human error was 
managed. 
Such duplication of staff is unthinkable now. Today, we rely on computer sys-
tems to reduce at least the most common of the risks. The rest of the flaws 
must be caught through vigorous and persistent scrutiny of performance 
quality. Monitoring is a cornerstone of internal control and one of the most im-
portant responsibilities of a supervisor. It brings the entire system together 
and ensures that policies, procedures, and people concur. A series of timely 
and thoughtful tests should become a part of your, or your internal auditors’, 
routine. 
 Note  Remember, if not corrected, every mistake your employee makes will end up in financial 
data, documents, and reports, for which you are ultimately responsible. One erroneous entry may 
affect your bank’s collateral statement or a presentation to the board of directors. Omissions will 
impair strategic decisions. Communication mishaps can impact commercial relationships. These 
flaws will most definitely be a poor reflection on your reputation as a financial leader. You have to 
create filters that will catch the debris before they pollute the results of your hard work.  
The monitoring methodology varies from company to company, depending 
on the suitability to a particular business. The setup of your controlling sys-
tem should accommodate your departmental needs. It can include standard, 
commonly used checks-and-balances instruments, as well as unique tools 
developed by you personally. Whatever the tactics, you will be pursuing 
three basic targets:  
 
Compliance: The procedures and policies to be followed correctly 
 
Completeness: No transactions to be missed or duplicated 
 
Accuracy: Everything to be recorded correctly  
The types of techniques described in this chapter were chosen because they 
help in preventing mistakes that occur most frequently. It is my expectation 
that many CFOs and controllers in small and midsize companies will consider 
this selection to be a good starting point. Yet it is by no means exhaustive. If 

CFO Techniques 
 
67  
you feel the need to look for more options, just go through your old auditing 
book. When it comes to technical tools, they are pretty much the same for 
both external and internal audits. At the same time, don’t try to replicate an 
independent auditor’s process. You have the benefit of an insider; you know 
your operations intimately—sometimes you can feel an error in the air. Fol-
low your professional instincts.  
Watch and Listen 
In formal auditing, physical observation is usually reserved for the processes 
considered to be of the lowest risks. For example, accounting staff’s phone 
etiquette is far less crucial than that of service desk representatives, who af-
fect customer satisfaction, or of debt collectors, whose mistakes have legal 
ramifications. Paying attention to employee actions will not eradicate book-
keeping mistakes. Nevertheless, keeping your eyes and ears open can play a 
positive role in preventing some problems. 
Unless there is a confidential meeting or a conference call, I always keep my 
office door open. The accounting and finance departments usually have a very 
low noise level, so my workflow is not disturbed. Because employees are 
aware of this and can observe me working as well (which is good for their 
morale), they don’t consider this an intrusion—eventually everyone gets used 
to it. I also refrain from unnecessary meddling and wasteful interferences.  
Still, from time to time, there will be a need to step in. On some occasions, 
you will overhear your subordinates leaning toward a wrong solution for a 
problem they are discussing, and with a quick interjection you will be able to 
correct the course of action. In another instance, you may witness your 
credit manager on the phone with a difficult delinquent customer and decide 
to contribute your negotiation skills to get a payment instead of letting the 
situation escalate into a shouting match.  
Watching staff working while you’re merely passing through may alert you 
to some changes that require your attention. Let’s say you have a new ac-
counts-payable staff member who was trained two months ago. For a while 
you saw an open procedural manual next to her every time you walked 
through the room. Now it’s gone. This could be a good time to suggest to 
her immediate supervisor to check that the processes are truly memorized 
correctly and the functions are performed in compliance with your policies 
and procedures. 
One facet of contemporary office operations that is very difficult to control 
is e-mail communication generated by your employees to the company’s  

Chapter 9 | The Weakest Link 
 
68  
external relations. In the absence of a face across the desk or a human voice 
on the other side of the telephone line, people frequently lose their sense of 
propriety and self-discipline. The problem becomes especially acute when 
accounting and finance employees are responsible for contacts with impor-
tant customers, vendors, bank officers, and so on.  
Over the years, I’ve had several unfortunate firsthand experiences with my 
own subordinates. In one case, my trade finance specialist wrote to a bank’s 
credit officer that she “should go bowling with the other blond bimbos in 
her group.” Let me tell you, the damage control campaign I had to launch in 
order to prevent losing the credit line with that bank took a huge chunk of 
my working week. Moreover, I had to personally apologize to the offended 
party, plus the financial institution’s executive VP, and my own boss.  
My advice is to define a group of high-sensitivity correspondents and estab-
lish the rule that all electronic exchanges with them are copied to you. Don’t 
forget to include your bosses in this category—you need to know what goes 
to them out of your departments. This is also useful for the particular rela-
tionship’s track record. Of course, with the current Internet speed, the re-
traction of inappropriate e-mails is useless, but at least you will be aware that 
something requires your immediate attention. 
Common-Sense Tests 
As I already mentioned, nobody has a better feel for your numbers than you. 
Having a good understanding of what makes and what does not make sense 
in your books and records empowers you with an ability to spot errors just 
by looking at the figures. It is useful to develop criteria for particular infor-
mation, and then you, or your capable direct reports, can eye-scan the data 
for the items that stick out. 
Here are a few examples that should give you a general idea about the es-
sence of this control task: 
 
Look through a detailed printout of the general ledger sales account. 
If your sales invoices normally range between $100,000 and 
$1,000,000, and you spot a $10 or a $10 million entry, something is 
incorrect. 
 
If you see debit entries in your sales account that are not identified 
with credit memo numbers, investigate those entries. 
 
If in the normal course of business you don’t accept returns, and 
price adjustments require a special approval process, yet all of a 

CFO Techniques 
 
69  
sudden you see a series of credit memos in your detailed records, it 
is a reason to be alarmed. 
 
Let’s say your raw materials inventory turnover is usually 120 days. 
But, when reviewing the details of inventory as of the end of the 
month, you spot items there with nine-month-old purchase invoices. 
This is a good reason for a physical check of those particular lots. 
 
Your landlord’s bill includes electricity charges that vary between 
$800 and $1,500. You established a policy that rent is separated 
from utilities and each is posted to its corresponding account. 
When reviewing the details of these accounts in the general ledger, 
you see a $950 charge in the rent account and $18,000 in the utili-
ties account—an obvious misposting error. 
As you can see, there are no special tests, no sampling, nothing sophisti-
cated—just a good knowledge of what makes commons sense on your books.  
One of the oldest error-spotting tacks used by bookkeepers in resolving un-
balanced accounts or discrepant totals is the mathematical effect of trans-
posing digits: the difference between correct and mistyped numbers is always 
divisible by 9. For instance, if the original number was 148 and the number 
entered was 418 (1 and 4 are switched), the difference is 270, which is divisi-
ble by 9. So, if the discrepancy you are investigating is divisible by 9, it is pos-
sible a result of transposed digits—one of the most common mistakes made 
by human beings.  
Those companies who strive to integrate all their functions into one system 
are rarely exposed to this particular type of error. However, many smaller 
companies use different special-purpose programs and frequently need to 
reenter data from one system into another (e.g., working hours from time-
clock software into the payroll system in the absence of direct upload fea-
ture). So, if the totals of the original and the transferred sets of numbers do 
not match, calculate the difference between the two, and if it is divisible by 
9, look for transposed digits.  
I  T-Accounts 
This long-forgotten visualization aid for depiction of general ledger accounts 
is my favorite tool for spotlighting possible omissions and misstatements. By 
analyzing T-accounts related to each other through transactional cycles, you 
can verify the correctness of general ledger account balances at the end of a 
period. It especially helps if you have proven independent data you can in-
corporate into the analysis. For example, a cash account reconciled with a 

Chapter 9 | The Weakest Link 
 
70  
bank’s statement provides reliable outside information for both revenue and 
expenditure cycle tests.  
 Note  This is probably a good place to draw your attention to the importance of your chart-of-
accounts setup. It should sufficiently accommodate your transactional details and separate differ-
ent types of assets, liabilities, equities, revenues, and expenses in such a way that your trial bal-
ance provides a clear reflection of the business specifics. I am noting it here because adequately 
elaborate accounts and subaccounts ensure the possibility of efficient accuracy tests, particularly 
narrowing the field of detective work. However, we will come back to this issue again in other sec-
tions, including in the discussion of performance analytics in Part V.  
In the example presented in Figure 9-1, it is assumed that “Operational Cash 
Account” is both a dedicated bank and a matching general ledger account 
used specifically for movements related to the company’s commercial activi-
ties. Thus, the incoming funds exclusively represent collections of customers’ 
accounts receivables. When the cash account is reconciled against the bank 
statement, you can rely on the amount debited as receipts to be accurate. 
Now you can use this number to calculate what your commercial receivable 
balance should be. By adding total sales to the beginning balance and then 
subtracting returns and allowances (in this example, these two numbers are 
verified), as well as the bank-confirmed cash receipts, you arrive at the ex-
pected ending balance. The result does not match the general ledger control 
account. The obvious conclusion is that the actual amount of receipts 
posted during the period differs from the total of funds deposited into the 
bank account. The discrepancy of $275,000 represents a customer payment 
(or several payments) that was misposted and credited to some other ac-
count. Now you can look for it and correct the error.  

CFO Techniques 
 
71  
 
Figure 9-1. Example of a T-accounts test for a general ledger accounts-receivable account 
The T-accounts exercises are also the best double-entry bookkeeping train-
ing tools for those young staff members who are blindsided by the out-of-
sight accounting software manipulations and lack the true understanding of 
our profession’s mechanics. You can show them that when sales are re-
corded, the same amount is debited to the receivable asset and credited to 
the revenue account; the opposite happens when credit memos are entered 
for returns and allowances, and so on. 
Control Accounts vs. Transactional Totals 
With very few exceptions, your general ledger control accounts—such as 
accounts receivable, accounts payable, inventory, revenue, and expenses—
should be “fed” through transactions posted in correspondent subsidiary 
modules: customer invoices and collections, vendor invoices and disburse-
ments, production job orders, and so on.  
If you use high-end accounting software, you most likely have an option of 
setting up your general ledger accounts in a way that prohibits direct en-
tries. Many companies opt to do so. If there are adjusting entries to be 

Chapter 9 | The Weakest Link 
72  
made that have nothing to do with a particular customer account, for ex-
ample, you need to set up a separate adjusting account, which is a good 
practice anyway. However, if you utilize a program without such an option, 
or for one or another reason choose to leave the control accounts unre-
stricted to direct fixing, you are opened to possibility of incomplete and in-
accurate general ledger balances.  
If that is the case, you must have a monitoring system that reconciles the con-
trol accounts with transactional totals. In the T-account example in Figure 9-1, 
general ledger period-ending balances of revenues account and returns-and-
allowances account were matched against totals of invoices and credit 
memos booked during that period. In the case that these records do not 
concur, you would need to look for errors there.  
If you don’t have a practice of generating transactional-detail reports, I sug-
gest you start doing that right away. Most accounting software nowadays 
comes with exporting options, which allow you to draw detailed data and 
then throw it into, let’s say, Excel. For instance, you can create a full list of 
supplier invoices for a particular period within your accounts-payable mod-
ule, export it into a spreadsheet, manipulate it into a convenient form, and 
use the result as your material purchases transactional report. Then you can 
reconcile it with the debit booked during the period into your general 
ledger raw-materials-inventory account.  
Jobs or projects modules in your operating system, and even separate spe-
cialized software, can be useful resources that you can utilize in your ac-
curacy and completeness testing. Many operational departments prepare 
their own managerial reports, rich with transactional details that you can 
employ in your quest for quality. Discuss this with your executive peers and 
you may find informational treasures.  
Did You Lose Something? 
Conceptually speaking, to assert completeness is the most difficult test. The 
complications originate in the mere fact that you are looking for evidence 
of things that potentially, but not necessarily, could be missing. The task is 
further hindered by the limited availability of informational resources. Even 
during your annual audits, you have to plead with your banks/vendors/ 
customers/clients to reply to the confirmation letters.  
Nevertheless, as limited as they are, there are ways of reducing the prob-
ability of transactions going missing: 

CFO Techniques 
 
73  
 
First of all, remember the document-numbering system discussed 
previously. If your accounting software allows transactions to be 
deleted, scan the records for sequential breaks and investigate the 
omissions.  
 
The bank statement, of course, is our greatest resource for verifying 
that accounts affected by cash inflows and outflows are correct. 
 
I cannot overemphasize the importance of issuing monthly customer/ 
client statements. Many companies choose to establish criteria of 
sending statements only to delinquent accounts, but that reduces this 
valuable document to a one-dimensional collection tool. If you dis-
tribute the statements to all your customers, they will work for you 
as a quality-control instrument as well. Electronically delivered state-
ments have been gaining popularity lately, and I think they are great 
not only because they are economical, but also because for the ma-
jority of people e-mails have become high-priority items. If your sales 
department is concerned that an important and prompt customer 
may be offended, design a pacifying cover letter that explains the 
statement distribution process as a mandatory company policy. 
 
The same is valid for your suppliers and vendors. If you have ven-
dors with large transactional volumes and they don’t distribute 
statements, have your accounts-payable staff request them and per-
form monthly reconciliations. 
 
Practically all banks and financial institutions provide their credit of-
ficers and lending staff with sophisticated internal reporting systems 
that generate loan balance lists, credit line utilization breakdowns, 
and other reconcilable documents by individual client. You can util-
ize your good relationship with your financing contacts to obtain 
these reports. Some financial organizations with sophisticated online 
facilities provide their corporate clients with excellent user inter-
faces complete with a variety of daily, monthly, and annual reports. 
I am positive that if you put your mind to it, you will discover even more re-
sources to assist you in looking for things that might be lost.    
Cutoff Tests 
One of the most persistent accounting errors is recording transactions in 
the wrong period. Most of the time these mistakes occur around the end of 
a month or a fiscal year, and if they remain undetected, they create weighty 
4

Chapter 9 | The Weakest Link 
 
74  
impacts on financial data by overstating or understating revenues, expenses, 
assets, and liabilities. The sensitivity of those several days before and after 
the end of the period is very high, and you should pay special attention to 
transactions that have a potential for missing the boat.  
There are multiple reasons, ranging from ignorance to negligence, why these 
mistakes are so frequent. An accountant lacking basic knowledge of com-
mercial terminology sees no difference between an FOB (free-on-board) 
and CIF (cost, insurance, and freight) material purchase, and therefore runs 
the risk of posting it on the wrong date. The same misinterpretation can 
happen to recording of sales. This is very crucial, and we will talk more 
about the importance of Incoterms for manufacturing and trading industries 
later on, in discussion of properly prepared and audited financial statements 
in Chapter 26. 
Another common reason is running future checks, such as rents or insur-
ance premiums, while the next fiscal period is not opened yet in your sys-
tem, or two consecutive periods are opened at the same time. This is how 
we end up with payments dated May 1, but posted in April. People forget 
and make mistakes.  
I worked with a staff accountant once who could not remember that it took 
24 hours for the bank to credit funds into our suppliers’ accounts after I ini-
tiated requests for trade financing. He used my banker’s acceptance applica-
tions as source documents. If one had a last-day-of-the-month date, my pay-
ables did not match with receivables of suppliers who got their payments on 
the first of the following month. The first time it happened, I had an explana-
tion session with the employee. After the second time, I ordered a “posting 
date” stamp and used bright red ink to indicate the proper date before the 
document got into his inbox.  
These types of preventative measures, including educating, training, and 
foolproof safeguarding, are the best things you can do to ensure proper 
recognition of accounting period. However, mistakes still will be made. The 
only way to catch them is through the old-fashioned cut-off test of sampling 
the most susceptible transactions and matching them with the source 
documents. The good news is that, again, you can use your intimate knowl-
edge of the books. It should guide you toward most likely victims and elimi-
nate the necessity of a massive examination.  

CFO Techniques 
 
75  
Company Performance Reviews 
These methods are cousins of the common-sense scans discussed previously. 
The difference is that instead of checking for unusual items among transac-
tional details, you are searching for extraordinary deviations in the aggregate 
numbers that reflect results of your company’s business activities during the 
analyzed period. 
If you are in an industry that follows a particular seasonal cycle and your 
revenue data contradicts it, this may be an indication of some extraordinary 
commercial or operational events, but it also could be a result of recording 
mistakes. Are there significant anomalies in this month’s actual key per-
formance indicators (KPIs—more about them in Chapter 23) compared to 
the ones you forecasted? Are there reasonable explanations, or are they re-
sults of errors?  
Comparing current business analysis results with the previous period, or the 
same period during last year, may lead you to the discovery of incomplete 
or inaccurate bookkeeping. Ratio analysis and even external information 
may play key roles in your assessments.  
Let’s say your leverage ratio has been held at 4 for years, and all of a sudden 
it jumped to 5 this period. There have been no losses or owner’s with-
holdings that could have reduced your equity. Moreover, the company had 
profits, and you did not borrow more than you usually do. That’s a signal to 
look at your debt components for possible errors: omitted payment to a 
supplier or to the bank, a misposted purchase invoice, and the like.  
Budgets are traditional review resources for both external and internal audi-
tors. Line-by-line analysis of variances between actual and budgeted amounts 
provides a great opportunity for spotting recording improprieties. Even if 
you don’t do anything else, you must look at your budget as the weakest 
link’s detector. 
However, budgets are not just good sleuthing tools for debris catching. 
They are indispensable instruments of the bottom-line control that allows 
CFOs and other financial execs to implement the shift in quality of their 
functionality, from passive reflectors into active participants in the com-
pany’s business. The importance of budgets merits a separate chapter, and 
will be covered next.  
 
 
3

C H A P T E R 
10 
Budgeting  
as a Control 
Mechanism 
 
Budgets have always been essential for any effective internal control system. 
Governments, nonprofits, and many for-profit organizations place budgets 
among most significant policy documents. Historically, as industrialization 
fueled the expansion of economic structures and the growth of individual 
entities, executive management, whether bureaucratic officials or private en-
trepreneurs, looked for ways to plan revenues and expenses in advance. If 
you think about it, the entire system of centrally planned economies em-
ployed by socialist countries was nothing more than a state-controlled 
multiyear budget. The origin of the word budget itself (from bougette, French 
for purse) suggests the idea of monetary control. 
Those accountants who view this planning instrument strictly as a fiscal dic-
tum, especially niche budget specialists employed by large enterprises, re-
vere the old-fashioned, labor-intensive, rigid and highly detailed long-term 
format, such as the one presented in Figure 10-1. It has to be displayed with 
huge breaks in order to fit on one page, and it is still nearly impossible to 
see the details. Way before computers, these documents were prepared on 
actual paper spreadsheets that folded out both horizontally and vertically, 
just like maps.  

Chapter 10 | Budgeting as a Control Mechanism 
 
78  
Yet here lies the contradiction: on one hand, budgets are expected to be 
precise accounting reports; on the other hand, they seem to belong in the 
realm of future predictions. By engaging in the time-consuming exercise of 
attempting to foretell every aspect of business dynamics, we attempt to 
squash the ever-changing reality into a structure that gets outdated with 
every passing minute. As the collapse of command-and-control economies 
and quarterly surprises of public companies’ performance reports teach us, 
these efforts are basically futile. 
In today’s globally sensitive economy, who can possibly guess 12 months in 
advance every single factor that will impact your company’s revenues and 
costs? If you work, for example, for any company that in some ways is ex-
posed to oil-derivative products, and is therefore affected by market oil 
prices, how can you budget your material purchases or revenues a year 
from now? And the number of companies in this particular category is tre-
mendous: from airlines to logistics services employing truck fleets to faux 
stucco manufacturers using polystyrene foam to apparel manufacturers pro-
tecting their goods with plastic covers, not to mention the makers of elec-
tronics, cars, soft drinks, and so forth. 
The intellectual flexibility of smaller companies, though, allows us to step 
away from archaic forms. We cannot afford to invest our time into some-
thing that does not facilitate progress anymore. We must be more innovative 
in our approaches to planning and controlling through budgetary tools. Instead 
of relying on a mechanistic, year-in, year-out attitude toward this task, you 
can create important and intelligent devices with real impact on the com-
pany’s business. The planning purpose can be fulfilled with an aggregate annual 
budget and the control can be exercised by means of a detailed monthly budget.  
The aggregate annual budget should translate your company’s strategic busi-
ness plan for the upcoming year into the road map expressed in monetary 
terms of revenue expectations and the cost of resources required to fulfill 
them with desired profitability. Both the revenues and expenses can be pre-
sented in composite categories, which are easier to plan and observe.  
In the detailed monthly budget, however, you must sensibly break those cate-
gories down into more comprehensive elements and set targeted levels for 
each and every one of them. Before anything else, the controlling functionality 
of this document should determine its architecture. Thankfully, nowadays all 
accounting programs with budget modules are designed to accommodate 
the detailed monthly approach by mirroring the general ledger chart of ac-
counts and allowing budgeted amounts to be entered for each fiscal period.  

CFO Techniques 
 
79  
 
Figure 10-1. Example of a traditional budget (courtesy of E&D CC)  

Chapter 10 | Budgeting as a Control Mechanism 
 
80  
In practical terms, the two most important things to keep in perspective 
when working on both the annual and the monthly documents are the level 
of detail or aggregation and controllability of each item within the set period of 
time. What exactly are you budgeting? Theoretically, you can break down 
your office supplies into individual categories: pens, pencils, paper, erasers, 
and so on. But before you do that, you should ask yourself the following 
questions: 
 
Is this detail materially significant by itself, or should it be combined 
with others into a meaningful category? 
 
Does it have a sufficient impact on the company’s bottom line to 
warrant attention and control measures? 
 
Is the item controllable and can it be managed within the set pa-
rameters? 
Answering these questions will provide you with a solid idea of what your 
budget structures should be like. For example, if you are in the business of 
distressed commercial debt management and depend on volumes of col-
lection letters to be sent out to debtors on a regular basis, then paper and 
envelopes will be the costs of high priority—no question about that. Alter-
natively, if you work for a technology company that barely produces any pa-
per documents and strives to distribute all information electronically, paper 
expense will not be sufficiently significant on its own.  
Figure 10-2 is an example of an annual budget plotting the most significant 
milestones for business performance over the 12-month period. Figure 10-3 
is a suggestion for a detailed monthly budget with those items of operational 
costs and expenses most critical for the illustrated company highlighted to 
indicate that they are the ones to keep in the controlling focus.  
By paying close attention to these items on a month-to-month basis, working 
with the responsible parties, and making sure that the actual results come as 
close to your planned numbers as possible, you will make an invaluable con-
tribution to your company’s bottom line. This is how you generate executive 
impact and transform yourself from a bean-counter into a breadwinner.  
Budget control is not the only way CFOs and controllers can influence their 
companies’ performance. The next chapter discusses other methods of ac-
tive participation in profit-making.  

CFO Techniques 
 
81  
November
Budget
Actual
Var.
Budget
Actual
Var.
Budget
Actual
Var.
Budget
XYZ, Inc.
Aggregate Annual Budget Template
Actual
January
Physical Volume
GROSS REVENUE
GROSS PROFIT
Selling Expenses:                                             
Administrative Salaries:                                   
Rents & Utilities:                                               
Technology & Telecommunications:                 
Professional Fees:                                            
Commission
Marketing & Promotions
Conventional Advertising
Internet Advertising
SEO
Networking & Travel
Selling Expenses
Administrative Salaries
Rents & Utilities
Technology & Telecommunications
Professional Fees
Corporate Insurance
Office Expenses
Banking & Financing Expenses
TOTAL SELLING, G & A EXPENSES
EBITDA
Rents
Utilities
Other Rent-Related Expenses
Connectivity & Web-Related Expenses
LAN & Hardware Support
Software Systems Support
Telephony
Phones
Legal Fees
Accounting Fees
Recruitment
Other
Officer’s Salaries
Office Salaries
Full-Time Employment Expenses
Exectuvie Salaries
COGS
Operational Overhead
February
March
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Var.
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Budget
Actual
Var.
Budget
Actual
Var.
December
YTD
 
Figure 10-2. Aggregate annual budget for manufacturing/trading companies (courtesy of 
E&D CC)  

Chapter 10 | Budgeting as a Control Mechanism 
 
82  
 
 

CFO Techniques 
83  
Figure 10-3. Detailed monthly budget for technology/service companies (courtesy of E&D 
CC) 

C H A P T E R 
11 
Controlling  
Commerce 
 
Regardless of the industry, business sector, organizational mission, or eco-
nomic purpose, there is a point in every entity’s operational cycle when it 
enters the realm of commerce. Traditional manufacturers, developers of 
various virtual products, technology companies, service providers, trading 
companies, and even nonprofit organizations, at a certain point along their 
value chains, engage in selling their output. 
This is the stage in which revenue is created. Accounting logically follows the 
common sense, demanding the conversion of products into incomes and 
outlays into costs to be recognized only when the ownership rights are 
transferred. You can create a warehouse full of great items, but, unless you 
exchange them for their value, they will not provide you with the means to 
cover the expenses you incurred. This is the essence and the function of 
commercial enterprise. 
The beneficial correlation between revenues and the expenses borne in or-
der to generate them is the basic reason for any business activities. Profit-
ability is the ultimate measure of organizational performance. So, the posi-
tive EBITDA (earnings before income taxes, depreciation, and amortization), 
or, as I prefer to call it, the “bottom line,” is everybody’s concern.  
CFOs and controllers, with their proximity to the numerical indicators of 
the company’s health, have the benefit of the quickest knowledge of the  

Chapter 11 | Controlling Commerce 
 
86  
results of commercial activities. However, this is a reactive state that has no 
impact on our employers’ ability to survive and prosper. We must repo-
sition ourselves as proactive agents of profitability. That should be one of 
the most important responsibilities on the roster of functions you pursue.  
So, what can we do? Since there are two components to profitability, we 
should focus our commercial guidance activities in both directions: what-
ever costs we can control and whatever means of influence we can affect 
on those who carry revenue-generating responsibilities. I find the manage-
ment of cost centers, transactional profitability, and commission structure to be 
the areas where our efforts can be most consequential. Each is discussed 
following in turn.  
Cost Center Control  
The previous chapter identified the budgetary function as one of the con-
trolling mechanisms. It provides all responsible parties with guidelines for 
keeping levels of expenditures within defined parameters. However, just 
establishing the directives is not sufficient. CFOs and controllers must fo-
cus on key cost centers to monitor their performance and suggest possible 
improvements. 
 Note  Cost centers are business divisions, sectors, groups, and individual employees whose ac-
tivities within the company contribute to the costs, but only indirectly add to the profits. This specific 
nature is what brings them under the scrutiny of financial executives. Optimization of costs vs. 
benefits is the foundation of the controlling principles applied to these points of expenditures.  
Look back at the detailed monthly budget in Figure 10-3. The shaded areas 
are the ones that a CFO in this type of business would consider important 
and controllable. Customer service, technology support, marketing, and ad-
vertising, among others, are not just fund-intensive internal services. Fre-
quently these departments enjoy certain independence in selection of ac-
tions, acquisition of supporting tools, and engagement of outside services. 
Without a proper control in place, these decisions may be made without 
any cost/benefit considerations. 
One of the most explicit example of such a cost center is a logistics de-
partment that operates by procuring services on an outsourcing basis. 

CFO Techniques 
 
87  
Smaller manufacturers and trading companies rarely have their own truck 
fleets or storage facilities. Instead they pull together external resources 
from a multitude of companies: public warehouses, trucking companies, ma-
rine shippers, freight forwarders, custom brokers, and so on. Choosing and 
combining them into an efficient supply chain is the science with the 
cost/benefit assessment at its core.   
The first rule of controlling cost centers is the implementation of bill-
approval procedures. No matter who procures or engages a service or 
product, their actions generate bills that must be paid by the accounting de-
partment. The accounts-payable function is under your control, and that 
gives you power to structure the processes in such a way that agents of ex-
penditures approve the bills, thus taking responsibility for their decisions. 
Organize the distribution of vendors’ invoices, whether paper or electronic, 
in such a way that they end up with the cost centers before they even come 
to accounts payable. You may consider providing the mail sorter with a list 
of recurring vendors divided by cost centers, so that all bills coming from, 
let’s say, advertising media go to the marketing department, those from ship- 
ping companies go to logistics, the ones for computer peripherals go to IT, 
and so on. The responsible parties should approve these bills and identify the 
related transactions. Only after that may they pass the bills to accounting for 
payment. 
The second rule of controlling cost centers is imposing self-tracking mech-
anisms on them, so that they can monitor their expenses during the fiscal 
period and try to plan and adjust in a way that ensures their compliance 
with the budgeted level. This approach works much better than all the post 
factum fighting that ensues after the previous period’s performance is ana-
lyzed. It is also important that the cost centers go through the process 
themselves. It makes it their own, reducing resistance and heightening their 
sense of responsibility. 
If your budgets are posted in the system, which allows selective access to 
the data, the department heads can see how their allowance is getting used 
up with every posted bill and react accordingly. If you use a less sophisti-
cated system, then have someone in your AP department create tracking 
spreadsheets and update the cost centers with relevant information on a 
weekly basis.  
Making managers responsible for their departments’ contribution to the or-
ganization’s expenses will give you an opportunity to stimulate their drive 
for improving performance and searching for new ways of achieving more cost-
effective results. To illustrate this point, I would like you to refer to Figure 

Chapter 11 | Controlling Commerce 
 
88  
10-3 one more time, particularly to the customer service section. Shifting 
from human voice to automatic interaction can save companies up to 70% 
of customer service cost—something the executive in charge may be more 
willing to consider if the numbers are in front of him all the time. You can 
help with these innovations by employing your own business acumen and mak-
ing appropriate strategic suggestions. 
Transactional Profitability Control 
It is not the financial head’s job to dictate sales prices and procurement 
rates—there are usually other senior managers responsible for that. In small 
companies, commonly the owners are the ultimate authority in these mat-
ters. Even more frequently, the market imposes its own supply and demand 
rules on the trading game. That is why the banality of “buy low, sell high” 
advice, so readily supplied by low-quality business consultants and independ-
ent accountants, irks me. Sometimes, circumstances work against that obvi-
ous statement.  
Yet, as financial leaders, we must implement programs designed to prevent 
commercial practices from jeopardizing the organization’s well-being. The 
particular circumstances of your company may dictate a variety of different 
tactics, but my personal experience with this specific matter has crystallized 
into a strong opinion that our best shot to control the overall result is at 
the transactional level. 
Be prepared—your efforts will be met with great resistance, especially from 
the sales force. The good news is that in privately held businesses, you have 
an opportunity to solicit the owners’ support. Convince them that your 
purpose is to protect their pockets and you will garner their cooperation. If 
you decide to embark on the crusade for healthy returns, start creating the 
system of transactional profitability control with the following steps. 
Determine the Best Point of Control 
The variety of possibilities here depends on the nature of your business. 
Ideally, you want to position the point of control at the inception of trans-
actional possibility, before the deal is confirmed. In simple terms, what you 
must try to accomplish is preventing transactions destined to lose money 
from entering your operational system and using up precious resources.  
If, for example, your company’s business is project based, then you must in-
sert a project profitability assessment step into the evaluation process, which 

CFO Techniques 
 
89  
ultimately leads to accepting or rejecting the deal. Similar concepts are ap-
plied to operations driven by jobs, dedicated trade transactions, and so on. 
Here is another example. Let’s say as a part of your services to customers, 
your company integrates its product into their systems for free, even 
though it is a costly process. It is advisable to account for the cost of inte-
gration while assessing the profitability potential before the customer is 
signed on. Otherwise, there is a possibility of not recovering the investment 
and losing money. This is where your prerequisite knowledge of the com-
pany’s operations becomes especially valuable—it should help you to define 
what exactly a “transaction” is, and how and where it is initiated.   
Devise Methods of Profitability Calculation 
Say you win the right to express your opinion on whether a transaction is 
good or bad for your company in terms of the contribution to the bottom 
line. What will be the basis of your assessment?  
We all know that the most straightforward profitability calculation is for the 
entity as a whole: the sum of all expenses is deducted from all revenues—
that’s all there is to it. However, if we decide to analyze business elements 
(locations, projects, units), as soon as the direct revenues and costs are 
dealt with, we enter the intricate world of allocations.  
 Note  Transactional profitability is just one of this book’s subjects affected by the concept of al-
location. It will be a recurring issue—most notably in the discussion of segmental performance 
analysis, which includes a separate section on principles of allocation (chapter 24). 
In the context of the current topic, though, I would like to set you in the 
logical direction with a few key points: 
 
The most important thing is to include all components of the cost. 
Don’t forget anything—start with the revenue estimate, continue 
with direct costs, and move on to allocation of all indirect expenses. 
 
At the same time, keep in mind that this is a preliminary evalu- 
ation, not an SEC report; hence, don’t be afraid to use reasonable 
estimates. 
 
Manufacturing accountants deal with allocation of indirect expenses 
via standard costs daily when they work on per-unit costing and 

Chapter 11 | Controlling Commerce 
 
90  
pricing. I suggest you utilize the same approach: some items can be 
calculated as percentages in line with your overall income statement 
(e.g., financing costs), others as activity-based dollar rates (e.g., 
warehousing costs per square foot).  
Establish Profit Criteria 
In my opinion, you don’t really need to go beyond gross profit as long as 
you know how much each transaction needs to contribute to overhead, 
plus net profit. Because you will most likely use estimates in your calcu-
lations, allow some margin of error—there is no reason to dismiss a trans-
action that comes within 5 to 10% of your set criteria.  
Define and Implement Control Procedure 
It’s not enough to devise the policy and get it accepted. Unless there is a 
strictly followed protocol in place that makes this process a routine, you 
will fail at fulfilling the underlying purpose of securing the company’s bottom 
line. It will be up to you to define the appropriate procedure.  
Ideally, your system should be set up in such a way that a transaction re-
mains inactive unless you, or a person designated by you, approves it based 
on the acceptable gross profit. Most software today is loaded with features 
that allow setup of different status levels for jobs, projects, purchase or 
sales orders, customer accounts, and so on. In the absence of such abilities, 
you will have to establish a strict practice of having transactions be submit-
ted for your approval before they are entered into the system.  
A Few Words on Commissions 
Commissions (called bonuses in some industries) are curiously contra-
dictory—they are usually revenue-driven expenses; they don’t precede the 
commercial activity, but follow it, and that separates them from other costs. 
These incentives are basically wages calculated as a percentage of one or 
another base. And it is the selection of the base that, unfortunately, hurts 
most of the companies using this type of remuneration.  
Traditionally, commissions are driven by volume—sales, purchases, col-
lections, and so on. Employing a system like that stimulates the race for big 
numbers—the more you sell (procure, collect), the higher your commissions 
are. The sales force runs down every single order without any concern for 

CFO Techniques 
 
91  
its contribution to the company’s bottom line. Of course, returns, allow-
ances, and price discounts are all accounted for in the calculations, but most 
of the volume-based payees don’t care whether the company loses or makes 
money on their deals. 
Even with the transactional profitability preapproval system in place, it is im-
possible to predict everything, and some transactions will end up losing 
money for one or another reason: the freight rates, for example, may sud-
denly go up due to a spike in oil prices. Yet, the commissions will be paid 
anyway, further deteriorating the bottom line. 
The only way to prevent that from happening is to switch your company to 
commissions paid based on the transactional gross profit. I will not deny the fact 
that it is a pain: there is a lot of work involved in all the allocation proc-
esses, and the calculations will be severely scrutinized by all interested par-
ties. Over the years of my career, I was able to implement such systems in 
two companies. Both times I had a dedicated analyst assigned to the task 
and personally dealt with complaints from the traders. But the benefits to 
the businesses are undeniable—no commissions are ever paid on losing 
deals. Think about it.  

P A R T 
III 
Deep Pockets: 
Your Capital  
Resources 
 
From start-up to full maturity, and at every stage in between, a company 
needs capital to finance its activity cycle from its operational inception until 
the realized revenues are turned into collected funds. Furthermore, avail-
ability of money in excess of immediate needs is a primary resource for  
sustainable growth. The basic qualifications of a successful head of finance 
include comprehensive knowledge of various financing means available to 
different types of companies, and the ability to frame an efficient capital 
structure applicable to a particular organization. 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
12 
Options for  
Capital Financing 
 
After you strip away all the complexity of risk assessments, negotiations, 
due diligence, legal documents, and the rest of the brouhaha surrounding fi-
nancing transactions, at their core they are no different from all other 
commercial transactions—barter to be more precise—with money taking a 
role of a commodity rather than a medium. On one side of the deal, there 
are the deep pockets with funds they want to gainfully exchange for some-
thing; on the other side, there are entities in need of capital, prepared to 
acquire it by giving something up. This money-purchasing essence is clearly 
reflected in the translation of financing activities into accounting events: no 
matter where the credit goes, you debit, even if for a split second, the most 
current of your assets: cash. 
One of the fundamental ways of classifying financial resources is by looking 
at the very nature of the articles expected in return for use of money. All 
other specific characteristics (e.g., utilization restrictions, terms, risks, and 
costs) are aligned with the precise types of financing and the underlying 
pledges or surrenders. 
From the point of view of an executive in charge of this function, financing, 
in its broadest sense, is the act of pooling sufficient monies from all available 
resources in order to keep the business going. Besides the conventional 
channels of soliciting investments and borrowing, there are other ways of 
accomplishing this daunting task. In order to provide you with a complete 

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
96  
picture, they are presented in this chapter as well. Even these less common 
instruments do not violate the general rules of basic commerce: it is always 
about exchanges of interests and benefits.  
Equity Investments 
As the name itself implies, in these types of financing, money is exchanged 
for the rights of ownership. Institutions and individuals part with their funds, 
and in return become stockholders in a business. The incentive to do so is 
tied to the anticipation of high returns driven by either distribution of the 
company’s revenues (dividends and withholdings) in proportion to the equity 
share or a gainful resell of said ownership rights in the future (public trading, 
merger and acquisition transactions, etc). 
The great expectations are usually associated with greater risks, which are 
mitigated by careful analytical scrutiny and evaluation of future returns, as 
well as business intelligence and the due diligence process. The simplest 
measurement of an investment’s performance (its profitability) is return on 
investment (ROI), usually expressed as a percentage: 
(All Gains from Investment) – (Cost of Investment) 
ROI =  
Cost of Investment 
You can only attract investors with a possibility of high ROI. If it is the same 
as the interest rate offered by, let’s say, a bank’s certificate of deposit, they 
are better off emptying their deep pockets there without risking a penny of 
the original investment.  
The main principle of differentiating equity investments is based on the par-
ticipation availability. If a company’s stock is accessible for purchase on an 
open market by the general public, it is conventionally called public equity. 
All other kinds of business ownerships are labeled private.  
 Note  I have personally always found these traditional designations regarding equity as seman-
tically inexact. If you think about it, anyone who invests his personal funds into a stock, whether 
“public” or “private,” is a private investor. Nevertheless, we will follow the generally accepted  
terminology.  

CFO Techniques 
 
97  
One of the most important benefits of bringing in capital through equity in-
vestments is that the resulting inflow of funds is not restricted to a particu-
lar business need. The company is free to use them in whatever areas the 
board of directors and executive management team find important: R&D, 
acquisition of fixed assets, operational volume growth, or overhead ex-
penses backing. The newly minted owners have a vested interest in the 
company’s ability to cover all of its monetary requirements and normally 
will not impose utilization constraints.  
Public Equity 
Those smaller entities that have matured and settled into their optimal size 
rarely go this route. However, if you are a dynamic company with an expo-
nential growth potential, an IPO (initial public offering) might be in your fu-
ture. For your benefit, here are a few highlights. 
Successful sale of a company’s shares on one of the major stock exchanges 
not only brings an incredible influx of cash into the operations, but it also 
holds a possibility of eventually making the prepublic owners mythologically 
rich, as their personal wealth will now be calculated in the multiples of the 
dollar amount next to the ticker symbol. At the time of writing this, the 
price of a single share of Google’s stock, for example, is $521.  
Aside from the change of ownership itself, the most important thing a com-
pany gives up in exchange for this opportunity is, naturally, privacy. The ex-
pression “going public” means the same thing regardless of its application. 
Whether you publicize your personality, privileged information, or the com-
pany’s stock, you inevitably draw the attention of many people to yourself.  
The prerequisite of being allowed to offer equity to the general public is 
transparency. Stock trading is regulated by the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), which requires listed companies to file numerous specific 
reports, most notably quarterly (10-Q) and annual (10-K) financial state-
ments, prepared by accounting companies with big names (and astronomical 
fees). With the introduction of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2002, the estab-
lishment of accounting boards, strict audit requirements, and personal re-
sponsibilities of C-level executives, including CFOs, have become significant 
factors in every public company’s existence as well.  
Also, your performance focus must shift from being concerned with healthy 
operations and logical business development to actions that improve such 
ratios as ROE (return on equity), P/E (price-earnings), EPS (earnings per 
share), and so on. The company’s image and the way it’s reflected in the 
media becomes one of the highest priorities on the executive agenda.  

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
 
98  
Keep in mind that going public is an expensive decision: even without un-
derwriter’s commissions (calculated as an agreed percentage of the total 
deal), between legal, accounting, listing, printing, and public relations fees, 
the pre-IPO stage alone may cost you over $1 million dollars. Only some of 
these expenses go away after public equity process is finalized. The ongoing 
costs will remain at around $250,000 a year.  
Private Equity 
Most small and midsize companies are privately held, and that is where the 
majority of us work. These companies’ common stock is not available for 
sale to the public, and frequently the transfers and sales to third parties are 
restricted by special agreements in order to make sure that control of the 
company remains with those who hold the majority of shares. 
All private equity owners can be informally divided into two groups: 
 
The founders (or their heirs), who create companies from ideas, 
frequently based on their own set of professional knowledge and 
skills; in most cases they hold top positions in the company and par-
ticipate in its executive management. 
 
Backers (also called financial sponsors)—investors who use their 
personal and/or institutional wealth (sometimes individually, but 
more frequently pooled) for partial or complete acquisition of com-
panies in need of outside capital. 
Because private companies are not regulated and do not report to the SEC, 
equity investors are actively involved in executive management and per-
formance monitoring. After the due diligence process ends, their funding 
usually comes with restructuring proposals, new business strategies, and 
operational-change requirements, as well as monthly reporting packages. 
The investors frequently visit the company themselves or send their ob-
servers and in-house consultants for managerial tune-ups.  
Angel Investments and Venture Capital 
Some new business ideas cannot be started on a small scale—their actualiza-
tion and implementation are capital-intensive processes that require signifi-
cant sums of money right from the start. Alternatively, a business might start 
small, but further development opens possibilities of gigantic proportions 
that cannot be achieved without a real investment. This is particularly true 
with technology companies—development of digital and Internet products 

CFO Techniques 
 
99  
and services requires a lot of sophisticated computing equipment and many 
man-hours of code-writing, creative marketing programs, and exposure op-
timization. In other words, it’s expensive.  
If the idea is truly innovative, viable, and attractive in terms of high-growth 
potential and possibly lucrative exit strategy, and you are a part of the start-
up team (based on my personal experience, an exciting place to be), write 
the business plan and start honing your pitching techniques—you are going 
after angel investments and/or venture capital. 
There are few major differences between angel investors and venture capi-
tal providers that must be kept in mind when considering one or another, 
or both: 
 
Angel investors are wealthy individuals with their own entrepreneu-
rial experience who invest their personal money, while venture 
capital funds are corporate entities pooling individual and institu-
tional investors together. 
 
Angel investments range from $25,000 to $1 million, while venture 
capital transactions are much larger—from $500,000 to $10 million. 
 
Contrary to popular opinion, both angel and venture investments 
are difficult to find and obtain. However, the due diligence and legal 
process of entering into venture capital financing is much more rig-
orous and taxing than that of the angel investment.  
Even though they vary in the aspects just noted, there is one thing these 
capital resources have in common: their cost is commensurate with the high 
risk associated with start-up companies. So, be prepared to give up the ma-
jority of ownership to the investors in exchange for their money.  
Private Equity and Mature Businesses 
Private equity funds are pooled from a variety of limited partners: individu-
als, pension funds, insurance companies, trusts, endowments, funds of funds, 
corporations, and so on. A private equity firm is a company that establishes 
the funds and then manages its investments by employing different strate-
gies. It primarily targets larger small and midsize companies, usually with 
revenues ranging from $100 million to $2 billion.  
Institutional private equity investing is a very developed and sophisticated 
industry with conglomeration of all kinds of specialized entities into a fund-
ing conveyor: private equity funds, private equity management, private eq-
uity consulting, private equity auction houses, brokerage, and even private 
equity exchange and secondary markets.  

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
 
100  
When it comes to investing in mature businesses, the most typical strategies 
pursued by these firms are growth capital, leveraged buyout, and distressed 
companies investment. Growth capital is the least dramatic of these venues. 
It usually results in minor ownership and doesn’t cardinally affect the bal-
ance of control. It is most frequently invited when a company undergoes 
major restructuring, changes its operational course, or gets on the acquisi-
tion path. One of the subforms of growth capital investments is private in-
vestment into public equity (PIPE): a transaction specifically designed as offering 
of public stock to private equity funds.  
On the other hand, a leveraged buyout (LBO) is usually a purchase of a con-
trolling share of a company, sometimes 100%. However, only a portion of 
the purchase price is paid out of the investment funds, with the rest (usually 
60 to 90%) covered by a credit facility arranged by the buyers. These types 
of strategies can be pursued only by companies with steady operating cash 
flows sufficient to cover the repayment of the loans’ principal and interest.  
Harsher economic conditions consistently give rise to the practice of dis-
tressed business investment. Struggling, near-bankruptcy companies are 
bought, sometimes through brokerages or at organized auctions, usually 
with intent to revive them with new capital and heavy managerial involve-
ment. Many firms engaged in these activities have in-house turnaround 
teams. Others use full-service private equity consulting firms with their own 
restructuring, staffing, organizational, and operational contingents.  
Whether the company is doing more-or-less fine, or is struggling to survive, 
the only reason for the owners to give up any part of their stock, and often 
control, in exchange for the investors’ capital, is their inability to fund con-
tinuous operations or expansion by any other means. Even though the pri-
mary purpose is, of course, financial gains, private equity funds—whether in-
tentionally or inadvertently, through their investments—participate firsthand 
in preservation and development of small and midsize businesses. Some, like 
Lynn Tilton of Patriarch Partners, even make it their mission. Her motto, 
stated on the opening page of the company’s site, is “Rebuilding America: 
One Company at a Time, One Job at a Time.”  
Founders’ Investments and Company’s Own 
Capital 
Both public and private equity investors expect high returns in the future, 
but the targets of their risk-taking are diametrically opposite. On one end, 
there are entities projecting images of an overwhelming success; on the 

CFO Techniques 
 
101  
other end, there are those lacking track record, striving to grow, and even 
distressed. So, who occupies the middle ground?  
Scores and scores of companies have been started with the founder’s own 
money—sometimes inherited, sometimes saved, sometimes borrowed from 
family and friends. Frequently, there is no initial capital at all—just a sound 
idea, a lot of ambition, and good common sense that allows the entrepre-
neur to structure the operations in such a way that he can get it going, be-
ginning on a small scale. 
If the owners are interested in sustaining the organization’s growth, they 
don’t withdraw all net income as personal compensation. This allows a por-
tion of the returns to accumulate in retained earnings, thus building the 
company’s own equity. This precious capital must be treated with more re-
spect than any other type of money turning around within the entity’s op-
erations. It is an impressive testimony of success and a better performance 
indicator than a stock market’s share prices. 
There are a couple of important things every CFO and controller must re-
member when dealing with the company’s own capital. First of all, the same 
ROI rule applies here as to any other investment: if the business does not 
provide owners with better return than a bank’s interest-bearing account, 
there is no reason for them to fight the daily war of commercial survival, in-
vesting their own time and effort and placing already accumulated wealth in 
jeopardy. They can just close the business, and put the money into savings. 
As the matter of fact, owners’ capital is supposed to generate larger returns 
than the riskiest publicly traded stock.  
Consequently, this capital cannot be assumed cost-free. When you calculate 
your various profitabilities, don’t forget to account for the appropriate ex-
pected rate of return as a part of financial costs. 
Just recently I met an owner of a jewelry-manufacturing company, which he 
founded with his brother 20 years ago without any outside capital. Now 
they are a $50-million-a-year international organization, still operating ex-
clusively on their own capital. He has no liabilities other than operational 
payables and a nearly paid factory mortgage. Every week he gets calls from 
new-business execs of major New York banks—he is a very attractive tar-
get for their commercial-lending products. This brings us to debt financing.  

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
 
102  
Debt Financing 
In principle, moneylending is the simplest transaction there is—funds are 
provided to you for temporary use under certain conditions, which most of 
the time include only two terms: (1) when the money must be returned, 
and (2) the amount to be paid in excess of the originally borrowed sum (aka 
interest). The practice of making loans dates back to ancient times, with the 
first known written records from Assyria and Babylonia around 2000 BC. 
Private citizens of the Roman Empire, who amassed impressive fortunes, 
systematically advanced money with profit; and the interest rates were quite 
moderate: 4 to 12%. 
Lending was a foundation of banking, which was further diversified when 
Greeks and Romans started taking deposits and exchanging currencies. Simi-
lar activities were recorded at the same time in China and India. The origins 
of institutionalized banking, just as with accounting, can be traced to wealthy 
merchant cities of Italy—Florence, Venice, and Genoa—leading with Medici 
Bank, established in 1397 by Giovanni Medici. As much as contemporary 
banks try to expand their scopes—and through mergers enter new financial 
territories of investments, insurances, and whatnot—the crux of the banking 
industry remains the same: accepting deposits and channeling them into 
lending activities for profit.  
Extending commercial credit, especially in the United States, is a democratic, 
merit-based activity. A company’s creditworthiness determines its eligibility 
for borrowing money. The healthier the business, the better chance you 
have to obtain loans. As long as you are able to show steady operational returns 
that can assure timely repayments, ample margins to cover interest, and sufficient 
value to secure the risk, you will have access to many banking products.  
Companies with sufficient borrowing power enjoy additional competitive 
advantages and capacity to grow. Moreover, this type of financing does not 
entail relinquishing ownership or control. Lenders don’t demand staff 
changes and layoffs; they don’t suggest market strategies or production cy-
cle alterations. 
Of course, in the absence of direct participation in the running of business, 
commercial bankers have to exercise some form of oversight over their 
money. This is implemented through specific conditions of credit agree-
ments, which vary depending on the nature of debts, but generally cover 
four major areas: 
 
Restrictions on funds utilization. 
 
Assets pledged by the company to cover risks of default. 

CFO Techniques 
 
103  
 
Performance covenants, which are most frequently formulated as 
expectations of financial ratios (leverage in particular) and margin 
requirements, but may also include disclosures of material changes 
and other stipulations. 
 
Periodic reporting (including borrowing base reports and audited fi-
nancial statements) and field audits. 
It is difficult to apply one principle of classification to the variety of credit 
products offered today by financial institutions. The categories described 
following are set apart based on the combination of their forms, uses, and 
unique features.  
Corporate Bonds 
Even though the bond market is much larger than the stock market, small 
and midsize businesses do not participate in this type of public borrowing—
an issuance of a $400 million debt is considered to be a small deal in that 
world. Yet, for educational purposes let me offer few basic points. 
Corporate bonds are long-term debt instruments issued by public and pri-
vate companies. They are traded together with government and municipal 
bonds on major exchanges. Buying a bond is equivalent to lending money to 
the issuer in exchange for periodic coupon (interest) payments and repay-
ment of the principal at maturity date. 
Issuance of bonds is an expensive ordeal: the underwriter’s involvement is 
even more intensive than during the IPO process, particularly with the 
preparation of a prospectus, which becomes very important to mitigate the 
perception of high risk. This drives up commissions: on average, investment 
banks charge up to four times higher rates for bond deals than for stock 
market issuances, making over $10 million on a $500 million transaction.  
Commercial Credit Facilities 
The banking industry is very competitive. That is why banks try to diversify 
and offer a broad spectrum of products. And if you are creditworthy, they 
need your business. The majority of large banks today prefer to offer their 
commercial clients relationship-based lending packages that utilize all possi-
ble solutions required to accommodate specific business needs.  
Most large US banks have different departments responsible for handling 
businesses of different sizes: under $100 million, $100 to $500 million, $0.5 

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
 
104  
to $2 billion, and above. From the credit assessment point of view, this divi-
sion is related to the size of the lines these departments handle. A credit re-
lationship officer, let’s say at JPMorgan Chase, who deals with companies 
under $500 million volume, is most likely limited to credit facilities of $20 
million per company. On the other hand, if you are looking for a $500,000 
overall line, it will not be within his scope, and you have to address your 
needs with a small-business specialist. 
If you are seeking a facility of a significant size (anything above $3 million), 
the banks’ due diligence process will not be limited to a mere review of 
audited financial statements, standard business information, and a couple of 
meetings. You should be prepared for a field audit of the collateral assets, as 
well as exhaustive questionnaires with detailed inquiries into the company’s 
business. Further discussion of the preapproval work and term sheet ne-
gotiations will be provided in Chapter 14.  
Once approved, your credit line can be structured according to your needs 
and used for short-term direct borrowing, letters of credit, revolving credit 
lines, and so on. Most of the line’s utilization is expected to be dedicated to fi-
nancing your operational cycle—from purchasing of inventories to converting ac-
counts receivable into cash. Only a portion of the commercial credit facility 
(usually no more than 5 to 10%) can be utilized to fill your nonspecific li-
quidity needs. 
The cost structure of a credit facility depends on your creditworthiness and 
the type of instruments you intend to use, which are all priced differently. 
The rates are usually expressed as LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate) 
or Prime, plus a certain percentage above it: 1%, 1.5%, 2%, and so on. Since 
LIBOR is the bank’s own cost of money, the additional percentage repre-
sents its revenue and depends on the level of assessed risk.  
Virtually all commercial loans are secured. You pledge your company’s assets 
as collateral in case of a default. Moreover, the value of the pledged assets 
influences your borrowing power—it forms your borrowing base, which is 
used by the banks to determine your line’s availability. Qualitative and quan-
titative limits on assets to be included in your borrowing base frequently 
become the most important part of your credit agreement negotiations, 
which will be addressed in Chapter 14.  
If the company has subsidiaries and/or related companies, their assets are fre-
quently pledged as well. Nevertheless, banks understand very well that, when 
it comes to private businesses, the security of the lender lies in the hands of 
the owners. Hence, their personal guarantees are demanded as well.  

CFO Techniques 
 
105  
Also called signature loans, unsecured loans, which are based on a promise 
to pay without pledging any assets as collateral, are as real as unicorns. In 
case of insolvency or bankruptcy, the owner of unsecured debt has a gen-
eral claim against the debtor’s assets, but only after all specific pledges are 
assigned to the holders of secured papers. It is unlikely that today any bank 
will extend a business credit line under such conditions.  
The closest you can get to an unsecured loan in business is a 12-month 
credit line personally guaranteed by the business owners and their spouses. 
This guarantee is always recorded with the state through UCC (Unified 
Commercial Code) forms filings. In case of default, the bank will execute a 
lien on the owners’ personal property. 
Make sure you understand very well the structure of your credit line and 
what you can and cannot do with it. Never violate utilization rules laid out 
in the credit agreement—it may jeopardize your relationship with the bank. 
A good example is a revolving credit line. Many CFOs and controllers bor-
row against it and then keep it permanently 100% utilized. If you do so, it 
will be hard to convince the bank to renew it. This instrument is intended 
to revolve (i.e., it must be used gradually and periodically repaid in full). Ide-
ally, banks like to see it at zero balance every 30 days or so.  
 Note  Besides traditional banks, there are also financial institutions with narrower commercial 
banking specialization: the ones who deal primarily with commodities-trading businesses, or mining 
industries, for example. If you are in an international business and have a concentration within cer-
tain countries, it may be useful to check if the local banks are interested in extended a dedicated 
line of credit to finance transactions specifically in that country.  
Asset-Based Lending 
Simply speaking, any time a specific asset is pledged to secure a loan, the 
transaction is classified as asset-based lending. This implies two important 
features of such financing: 
 
The amount of the loan is determined by the value of the asset; 
most of the time it is at least 10 to 30% lower. 
 
If the loan is defaulted, the asset is taken over by the lender. 
This differs from securing your credit facility with the company’s overall as-
sets, as described in the previous section, where the default may result in 

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
106  
lenders’ liquidation of sufficient assets to cover their outstanding exposure. 
In case of asset-based loan default, the funder keeps all payments already 
made and takes possession of the asset—just like in housing foreclosures. In 
fact, if a company has both a regular credit line and a loan with a specific as-
set pledge, the latter must be excluded from the facility’s security.  
Informally, asset-based finance can be classified into two basic forms: 
 
Financing that concurs with the acquisition of assets. Building mort-
gages, loans paying for factory machinery, and merger fundings are 
typical examples. The payment made to the seller of the asset is 
usually composed of a smaller portion paid by the borrower with 
the rest of the money coming from the lender. In these cases the 
object of the loan utilization and its security are the same asset. 
 
Loans utilized for the conventional purpose of bridging the com-
pany’s operating capital needs during the production-inventory-
receivables-cash conversion cycle. In this case, not only paid-up 
fixed assets, but also specific operating assets, such as itemized in-
ventory and receivables, can be used as a pledge. Depending on the 
lender’s risk assessment, he may place restrictions on the manage-
ment of pledged assets. Frequently, for instance, a borrower’s cus-
tomers are instructed to direct their payments to a specified lock-
box controlled by the lender, who approves both the withdrawals 
by the company and the repayments of the loan. 
Even though they can be accessed by any business with verifiable assets, a 
large portion of asset-based lending deals are related to operational ex-
pansions in mining, oil extraction, manufacturing, and construction, which in-
volve multi-million-dollar investments in fixed assets. At the same time, even 
intangible assets, such as copyrights, trademarks, and patents, can be used as 
collateral for this type of financing. Ownership of rights to popular songs, for 
example, can be very lucrative through licensing. Hence, there would be no 
problems securing a credit line with a pledge of, let’s say, the Beatles’ song 
catalog. One of the popular examples of an asset-based loan involving an in-
tangible asset was Midway Games’ financial facility, which was secured by its 
Mortal Kombat franchise before Warner Brothers bought the company. 
Many financial service institutions and investment banks (e.g., Goldman 
Sachs), and all national banking conglomerates (e.g., Citigroup, JPMorgan 
Chase),  as well as regional banks, offer asset-based lending services. There 
are also smaller financing firms that specialize exclusively in this form of 
corporate finance. Frequently, they create leveraged packages, which pool 

CFO Techniques 
 
107  
together private equity funds with the financing company’s own bank credit 
facilities.  
People turn to asset-based lending either because it is an acceptable practice 
for a specific need—like equipment purchase—or because they did not suc-
ceed in obtaining or expanding conventional financing with less-restrictive 
security. Asset-based loans carry much higher interest rates, which, depend-
ing on the perceived risks and difficulties of reclaiming the assets, can range 
from 7 to 18%. Of course, the implicit cost of this type of financing can be 
even higher if something goes wrong and the pledge is lost.  
Trade Finance  
Even though a trade finance facility is usually obtained as a part of your 
credit relationship with the bank, their particular applications, instruments, 
and methods of utilization are unique and deserve a separate discussion. 
Not only is this type of financing used specifically in purchases/sales of mate-
rials and products, but it is also primarily intended for international com-
merce (i.e., for import/export transactions).  
The two basic risks associated with any trade—the timely and compliant de-
livery of the ordered product by the buyer and the receipt of payment by 
the supplier—are further exacerbated when foreign entities are involved. 
We live in the times of overwhelming globalization of business, yet geo-
graphical distances, legal disparities, involvement of government regulations, 
and so on, make international trade difficult. Suppliers usually want to get 
paid before or on the delivery of the product, and buyers want to make 
sure that they pay for what they actually purchased. 
Here is where banks’ trade finance operations come to the rescue. Through 
a variety of instruments, such as letters of credit (LCs), documentary collections, 
and banker’s acceptances (BAs), banks serve as intermediaries between buy-
ers and suppliers, and facilitate the process of international trade risk mitiga-
tion. Unlike asset-based finance driven by a specific asset, trade finance is 
driven by individual transactions.  
Let me accentuate the fact that by getting involved in trade transactions, the 
banks do not participate in the trade itself. They don’t deal with goods—
only with documents. An LC is a documented payment undertaking—that is, if 
the LC’s conditions are met by the supplier, as proved by presentation of 
documents, the bank guarantees to issue the payment.  
That is why (1) LCs are very literal documents, with every line being exam-
ined by the bank, and (2) LCs are part of your credit facilities—by issuing an 

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
 
108  
LC, the bank undertakes the responsibilities to pay the supplier even if you 
end up not having sufficient funds. If you are a new business with no credit, 
but your suppliers only wants to work with LCs, most likely you will have to 
guarantee these instruments with equivalent funds deposited into the bank’s 
security account.  
These are tedious papers, but thankfully most of the banks today have an 
online LC interface where you can save your templates and reuse them for 
new transactions. Regardless, when an LC is composed, very careful atten-
tion must be paid to the specifications of products, quantities, prices, deliv-
ery, insurance, documents requirements, and so on. Then even more atten-
tion must be paid when the documents presented for payment are matched 
with these specifications. 
Depending on the country and the foreign bank’s status, there may be some 
intermediary and confirming banks involved. However, the majority of LC 
transactions fall under the following scheme: 
 
The buyer issues an LC at his bank (the issuing bank). 
 
The issuing bank sends the LC to the seller. 
 
The seller prepares both products and documents according to the 
LC’s specifications, and goes through all logistics steps to deliver the 
products to the agreed point, where the ownership transfers from 
the seller to the buyer. 
 
The seller submits all required documents to his bank (the advising 
bank). 
 
The advising bank sends a coded message to the issuing bank and 
transfers the documents for examination there. 
 
The issuing bank examines the documents and either notifies the 
buyer that they are in order or provides him with the list of discrep-
ancies. 
 
If the buyer accepts the discrepancies or the documents are clean, 
the payment is made to the LC’s beneficiary at the advising bank. 
 
The buyer either funds the payment himself or finances the payment 
(assuming the facility is available) by converting the LC into a loan.  
If your company both buys and sells overseas, you will be dealing with both 
“import” and “export” LCs. This banking terminology does not necessarily 
signify that the product ever touches US ground. Importing into and export-
ing out of the US are only two possibilities. I’ve dealt with many transactions 
where the product was purchased, let’s say, in Germany, and delivered di-
rectly to Turkey. Still, the LC I opened to buy the product was called “im-
port,” and the one I accepted from the Turkish buyer was called “export.” 

CFO Techniques 
 
109  
Most international trade LCs are irrevocable and cannot be changed without 
both the issuer and beneficiary’s agreements. In case of a revocable LC, 
terms can be changed without the beneficiary’s notification. Sight LCs are 
payable on the presentation of the compliant documents. Term LC payments 
are deferred until the specified maturity date; they vary from 60 to 360 days.  
The set of records required to be presented by the conditions of an LC may 
differ depending on the nature of the product, but generally it includes the 
following types of documents: 
 
Commercial documents: invoices, packing lists 
 
Shipping documents: bills of lading, insurance certificates 
 
Official documents: licenses, embassy legalization, certificates of ori-
gin, inspection certificates 
Standby LCs are sometimes used as guarantees of open credit you may have 
with your foreign supplier. They are usually opened for 360 days. No docu-
ments are presented for payment against this instrument unless the buyer is 
in default on his regularly due invoices. It is wise to explicitly define in the 
LC what constitutes the default (e.g., over 90 days past due, or something 
like that) to prevent frivolous misuse of the document.  
In many European countries, buyers can utilize their credit lines by issuing 
drafts, which are basically promissory notes confirmed (avalized) by the 
bank. They also can be sight or term drafts. If your company sells overseas 
and accepts these payments, you will have to engage in the documentary col-
lection process. These are less secure for seller transactions than LCs, as the 
product is shipped first and then the shipping documents are presented to 
the issuing bank in order for the draft to be executed. 
BAs are basically loans financing advance payments to a particular supplier 
for particular goods. Like all advance payments, they provide no guarantee 
of delivery after the payment is received. However, specifying in the BA ap-
plication the payment’s beneficiary and purpose creates a legal record that 
may be somewhat helpful in case of force majeure (unforeseeable circum-
stances that may prevent a supplier from fulfilling the contract). 
Practically all US commercial banks, not just national conglomerates, have 
trade finance divisions. You can dedicate whatever portion of the line you 
may need to payments to suppliers (bankers’ acceptances) or LCs. The trad-
ing assets you generate by using these instruments—inventory and accounts 
receivable—will in turn increase your borrowing base, providing access to 
more trade finance.  

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
 
110  
Many European and Asian banks are interested in opening trade finance fa-
cilities to American companies doing business in their countries. It is worth 
exploring these opportunities for the sake of expanding your trading pow-
ers. At the same time, keep in mind that those banks are usually more ex-
pensive and stricter in their transactional control requirements. For exam-
ple, if you finance a supplier’s payment with them, they will insist on making 
the transfer themselves rather than depositing funds into your account, 
which is what most US banks do. 
Even though LCs carry lower rates then BAs or regular loans, their cost is 
not limited to the value-based rate negotiated in your bank’s credit agree-
ment. Every single move a bank makes in the process of issuing import LCs, 
examining documents, making payments, accepting export LCs, and so on, 
has its own separate fee. In order to determine the true financing cost of 
these instruments, you must study your banks’ fees schedule and account 
for everything.  
Sales of Financial Interests 
Many people mistake factoring and forfaiting for asset-based finance. While 
doing so, they confuse a purpose and a substance. Indeed, these activities 
have to do with specific assets, and businesses use the proceeds to finance 
their operations. Yet, these transactions are not borrowings secured by the 
assets, with only a possibility of losing its ownership in case of default. In-
stead, in their pure, nonrecourse form, they represent actual sales, the for-
going of your financial interest in the assets in exchange for immediate funds. 
Your financial cost is the discount—the difference between the asset’s value 
and the amount you receive. Because it is a sale, there is no repayment. And 
nobody controls how you use the money—you can pay any business ex-
penses, including the overhead.  
The assets in question here are different forms of accounts receivable, and 
one of the most important attributes of these transactions is the seller’s ob-
ligation not to collect on the sold accounts.  
Factoring 
Factoring primarily applies to domestic accounts receivable. The whole con-
fusion of sales vs. borrowing comes from the fact that many financial institu-
tions specializing in these transactions do both, but call them by the same 
name. The best way to distinguish whether you sell your invoices or borrow 

CFO Techniques 
 
111  
against your receivables is to look for a recourse clause in the contract: if it is 
a nonrecourse transaction, it is a sale and can be recorded as such; otherwise, 
it’s borrowing. The discount rates are dictated by the creditworthiness of 
the customers whose invoices comprise the tranche offered for sale. 
Prior to the vast consolidation of banking and diversification of financial 
services within the same institution that we have been experiencing for the 
past 15 years, there were companies specializing exclusively in factoring 
transactions: CIT Group, Rosenthal & Rosenthal, and so on. Now, CIT 
Group is a middle-market full-service financial institution, but they do fac-
toring as well. On the other hand, many major banks, particularly Wells 
Fargo, as well as regional financial institutions, have factoring departments.  
Forfaiting 
Remember those term LCs and avalized drafts I mentioned in the “Trade 
Finance” section? These documentary payments received primarily by ex-
porters are perfect candidates for forfaiting. Why would you want to hold 
on for a year to a document issued by a foreign bank, even if your cash flow 
allowed you to do so? You are better off turning it into immediate cash. 
Besides their international flair, these discounting transactions differ from 
factoring in two major ways:  
 
Instead of being applied to any part of or the whole receivable asset, 
they are related to an individual sale transaction. 
 
Discounts are dictated not by the creditability of the customers, but 
by the credit rating of the guaranteeing bank on the international 
forfaiting market. 
The center of global forfaiting is London, UK, with London Forfaiting Com-
pany holding a leading position for the past 20 years. However, there are 
many US banks that discount international LCs and drafts by export regions. 
For example, PNC Bank (formerly National City) has close forfaiting rela-
tionships with Turkish banks. The Internet is the best source to look for 
these institutions. 
Curious Financing Disguised As Revenue 
Since forever, radio stations, newspapers, magazines, television networks, 
movie productions, popular web sites (such as Facebook), and even blogs 
(such as the Huffington Post)—let’s call them collectively content providers—

Chapter 12 | Options for Capital Financing 
 
112  
have been “selling” their physical and virtual space to businesses for adver-
tisement and product-placement purposes. Traditionally, the monetary vol-
ume generated this way is considered to be revenues. However, technically 
speaking, this practice acts more like financing—not just because the funds’ 
inflow precedes the products’ output and fuels the production cycle, but 
more importantly, because payers take high risks on the future values they 
may receive in return for sometimes extraordinarily high fees.  
On the opposite side, it is difficult to put your finger on the cost of this 
form of brand financing. Commercialization of content for the sake of at-
tracting financial sponsors has an undeniable impact on the quality of televi-
sion programming, mainstream periodicals, and all other content providers. 
Featuring products in a major movie production requires alterations of both 
the screenplay and directorial choices. The Social Network (2010) was an un-
deniable critical and box office success ($215 million, with a $40 million 
budget). Yet, many reviewers felt obligated to note more than 20 promi-
nently placed products. Mark Zuckerberg complained that it all seemed to 
be about the clothes they were wearing rather than the brilliant code they 
were writing. We may never know how much North Face paid to put all 
those jackets on Jesse Eisenberg, Andrew Garfield, and the rest of the cast, 
but we can be sure it paid for a big chunk of the movie’s production costs.  
 

C H A P T E R 
13 
Business Nature 
vs. Financial  
Resources 
 
In the previous chapter, the financing function was defined as an exchange of 
business interests between those entities searching for outside capital in or-
der to sustain and/or grow their operations, and those in the business of 
selling money. It is only natural to continue this train of thought and con-
clude that the availability of one or another financial resource to a particular 
enterprise depends on a very simple notion: what exactly does it have to offer 
in exchange for money? In other words, what is attractive about my business 
that will induce someone to lend my company capital or make an equity in-
vestment? 
With that angle in mind, for the purpose of establishing a correlation be-
tween different businesses and capital access opportunities, I have aggre-
gated 25 industrial sectors recognized by the North American Industry 
Classification System (NAICS) into seven groups: 
1. Industries with significant fixed assets, such as production facilities, 
equipment, and heavy machinery on their balance sheets: manufac-
turing, agriculture, mining, oil and gas extraction, utilities, and con-
struction 

Chapter 13 | Business Nature vs. Financial Resources 
 
114  
2. Companies involved in acquiring inventories of raw materials and fin-
ished products and selling them through various commercial chan-
nels to business customers and consumers (i.e., the international and 
domestic trading sectors: import, export, wholesale, and retail) 
3. Companies who provide other industries with means of distribution 
through commercial channels and own warehousing facilities and 
transportation fleets (i.e., the logistics sector) 
4. Companies involved in the creation, production, and distribution of 
intellectual content, including books, magazines, newspapers, and 
software publishing; movies and music production; broadcasting; and 
syndication 
5. The information-processing and delivery sector, which includes all 
telecommunications, data processing, hosting, and Internet-related 
businesses 
6. Companies with unique inventories of entire buildings, individual 
units, space, vehicles, and equipment for lease and rent—from real 
estate to power washers 
7. All types of services—professional, financial, health, and so on 
The matrix in Figure 13-1 represents a summary of correlations between 
these industrial groups and financing resources.   
 Note  The exercise of matching industries with financial resources is not an exact science. Every 
company is unique, and its particular edge may lead to opportunities not available to others. There 
is no law out there that prohibits you from trying to pursue venues nobody else in your industry has 
ever explored. The main purpose here is to provide general guidelines based on empirical preva-
lence. There are no strict rules, and even if there were, there are always exceptions.  
Several types of fundings are nondiscriminatory as far as the targeted indus-
tries are concerned, and are applicable for all seven groups. For instance, 
from a point of view of strict economics, the nature of a company’s business 
should be irrelevant to investors as prospective owners. As long as the 
company falls under the established criteria for revenue expectations and 
exit strategies, and thus delivers sufficient ROI, it should qualify for the in-
vestment consideration. This is one of the main reasons why there are 
companies not only in every sector, but also in every industry and every 
segment that have been started with the founders’ own capital. 

CFO Techniques 
 
115  
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
Manufacturing,
Agriculture,
Mining &
Extraction,
Utilities,
Construction
Import/Export,
Wholesale,
Distribution,
Retail
Logistics:
Warehousing,
Transportation
Media and
Software:
Publishers,
Production and
Broadcasting
Information:
Telecom, Data
Processing,
Hosting
Real Estate and
Other Rental &
Leasing
All Services
Founders’ Capital
Public
Angels
Venture Capital - startup through
exit
Growth Capital
LBO
Distressed Buyout
Corporate Bonds
Credit Lines with Borrowing Base
Other Credit Lines
Asset-Based Lending
Trade Finance
Factoring
Forfaiting
Content-Based Financing
Any company can be started and sustained with the founders’ own capital
There are publicly-traded companies in all industrial sectors; the key is to build a value image and perception of
high growth
Biotechnology,
energy and
medical devices—
very early
stages
Consumer
products,
especially
eCommerce
Unlikely
Software and
entertainment
media
Telecom &
Internet
Unlikely
Unlikely
Business
products &
services
Energy,
biotechnology,
medical
equipment,
electronics,
semiconductors,
consumer
products,
computers
Consumer
products,
retail &
distribution
Unlikely
Software
Telecom,
networking
IT Services,
financial
services,
healthcare,
business
products
Companies with history of revenue growth, high operating margins and strong management team
Companies with steady and sufficient cash flow to service the underlying debt
Manufacturing
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Secured by
pledges &
guarantees
Secured by
pledges &
guarantees
Secured by
pledges &
guarantees
Secured by
pledges &
guarantees
Secured by
pledges &
guarantees
Secured by
pledges &
guarantees
Secured by
pledges &
guarantees
Consumer
Products
Any Logistics
Unlikely
Unlikely
Rarely
Business
Services
Not for small and midsize companies: predominantly large organizations
Companies
with pledgable
assets
Companies
with pledgable
assets
Companies
with pledgable
assets
Services with
significant AR
Services with
significant AR
Some
intangible
assets
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Unlikely
Unlikely
Unlikely
Unlikely
Unlikely
Unlikely
Rare
Yes
With
export/import
exposure
International
With domestic
AR
With domestic
AR
With
international
sales
With
international
sales
Content-
related
services
Equity Investments
Debt Financing
Other
 
Figure 13-1. Correlation matrix showing industrial groups vs. financing resources 
 

Chapter 13 | Business Nature vs. Financial Resources 
116  
The same trend can be observed on the opposite side of the investing spec-
trum: there are public companies in virtually every single industry. If they have 
achieved sufficiently impressive growth and are promising enough to spark 
the investing community and business media’s interest; if they deal with 
products or services that are assumed to be in large demand; if they present 
themselves as fully transparent, and analysts predict glorious earnings per 
share; then they are excellent candidates for IPOs. 
The following list of the ten companies that went public at the time of this 
chapter’s writing is a pretty good illustration of the industrial diversity, even 
though technology, predictably, dominates: 
1. LinkedIn: Business-related web-driven social-networking service 
2. New Mountain Capital: Private equity firm specializing in LBO, growth 
capital investments, and recapitalization 
3. Yandex N.V.: Russian information technology company 
4. The Active Network: Community-and-recreation web-driven social-
networking technology 
5. Freescale Semiconductor: Global manufacturer of embedded process-
ing solutions (aka computer chips) 
6. Lone Pine Resources: Canadian oil and gas exploration and production 
company 
7. Spirit Airlines: “Ultra low cost airline” based in Florida 
8. Solazyme: Alternative energy company, specializing in production of 
algal fuel 
9. Fusion-io: Designer and manufacturer of computer hardware and 
software memory technology 
10. Taomee Holdings: China’s leading children’s entertainment and media 
company 
Because private equity firms specializing in growth capital investments and 
LBOs invest in mature businesses, their decisions are to a large extent 
grounded in companies’ short-term capabilities to start producing quick re-
sults. An organization with a solid history of revenue growth and high op-
erating margins, whose strong management team has demonstrated impres-
sive competence sufficient to carry out the next expansion move, will be an 
attractive subject to an investment company looking to acquire a minor 
ownership position. And as long as a company has a track record and a 

CFO Techniques 
 
117  
proven ability to sustain steady and sufficient cash flows to service the un-
derlying debt, an LBO will be a very likely possibility.  
These calculated, practically accounting-based, funding criteria make the na-
ture of business less relevant to potential investors. If you look at the in-
vestment strategy pages of prominent private equity firms such as, let’s say, 
the Jordan Company, you will see that their interests lie in a wide range of 
industries covering practically all seven groups: aerospace, automotive parts, 
building and industrial products, business services, chemicals, consumer 
products, distribution, education, energy, financial services, health care, in-
surance, metals, packaging, retail, telecom, transportation, and logistics.   
Even when specific industries are targeted by angels, venture capitalists, and 
distressed buyout specialists, this targeting is predominantly related to the 
perception of future potentials associated with certain products and serv-
ices. The main reason why the entire investment community pounces on 
every company that claims to come up with, for example, a new energy so-
lution, is because it’s a buzzword.  
Lenders are far more specific and rigid in their business profiling. Of course, 
every healthy establishment that owns rather than rents its operational and 
office facilities, whether it is a manufacturer of electronics or a law firm, will 
be able to obtain a mortgage with a sufficient down payment. And any com-
pany in good standing may apply for a credit line at a bank as long as it can 
provide sufficient pledges and guarantees. In fact, the size of such a credit line 
will be in direct correlation with the company’s revenue and the strength of 
the guarantee, rather than with the nature of business per se. 
Still, many financing resources have specific business inclinations, and their 
availability and utilization vary from one industrial group to another. These 
particular interconnections are discussed following. 
Manufacturing, Mining, Utilities, and 
Construction Companies 
This is a group with the widest spectrum of opportunities to access different 
sources of financing, even for the smallest enterprises. The companies com-
prising the group manufacture products, own rights to natural resources, 
produce energy, and build large structures. Many of them have a potential  
to generate steady growth and revenue volumes that, even with bottom-line 
losses, look very impressive on the presentation charts. Of the entire indus-
trial mix, these companies have the longest value chains with multistep  

Chapter 13 | Business Nature vs. Financial Resources 
 
118  
processes, which can be isolated into separate targets of various financial 
means: they are able to finance major machinery purchases with asset-based 
lending tools, operational growth with minor private equity investments, 
trading activities with banks’ trade finance instruments, and so on. 
By the sheer virtue of the investment size required to start a company with 
production facilities, mining equipment, or construction machinery, angel in-
vestors only get involved at the idea-inception stages in very selected indus-
tries—biotechnology, energy, medical devices, and so forth. These are usually 
companies that have a potential to grow very big, but at the same time can be 
started small—with financing of R&D, or prototype building and testing. 
On the other hand, venture capital firms are capable of carrying new, prom-
ising companies through all stages of the financial cycles from seed (idea 
generation) to start-up, ramp-up, and exit. Since the exit strategy is usually 
their primary concern, the concentration pattern of the investments is still 
dominated by the industries with the highest IPO potentials, including the 
three mentioned in the previous paragraph, with addition of electronics, 
semiconductors, consumer products, and computer manufacturers. 
The prevalence of outsourcing and global competition have weakened the 
manufacturing sector and made it a prominent target for distressed buyout 
leaders, particularly in the small-to-midlevel market, with many companies 
ranging from $100 to $500 million in annual revenues. This is where in-
vestors find the highest level of turnaround success. 
Growing and mature companies in this group of industries are all character-
ized by asset-heavy balance sheets, which make them attractive to lenders 
looking to back their credit lines with sufficient security. Banks and financial 
institutions tailor their credit facilities to accommodate multitudes of needs 
at every stage of these entities’ business cycle, from financing their opera-
tions against a borrowing base fueled by inventories and receivables to pur-
chases of equipment and machinery secured by asset-specific instruments. 
Those who buy their raw materials, parts, packaging, and equipment over-
seas, as well as export their products abroad, devote big portions of their 
credit availability to trade finance in order to provide themselves with the 
flow of LCs and transactional borrowing. 
Finally, they can sell their domestic receivables via factoring services and 
term documents issued to them by foreign banks on behalf of international 
customers on the forfaiting market. Clearly, if you are a CFO or a con-
troller working in one of these industries and responsible for providing your 
employer with sufficient means to run the business, you have an opportunity 
to compile most diversified financing solutions. 

CFO Techniques 
 
119  
Trading Companies 
While not as attractive to investors as enterprises in the first group, most 
trading companies in good financial standing enjoy access to the broadest va-
riety of banks’ lending products. Still, because goods directed toward the end-
user markets enjoy a fairly steady demand, and a majority of them are manu-
factured abroad, those companies engaged in the trading and distribution of 
consumer products, including e-commerce and conventional retail, have a  
potential to ignite interest in both angel and venture capital.  
Since the end of 2010, many analysts have predicted that private equity will 
be eyeing retail chains. One of the recent examples (January 2011) of such a 
buyout is the purchase of crafts and fabrics retailer Jo-Ann Stores by Leon-
ard Green and Partners for $1.6 billion. 
Companies of this group are the most important utilizers of trade finance 
facilities provided by banks. Importers and exporters of raw materials and 
products are limited in their payment options and exposed to high risks un-
less they have access to LCs and other payment instruments, where banks 
take intermediary responsibilities for documentary compliance. In the ab-
sence of these resources, organizations are forced to resort to prepayment 
arrangements, which are perilous for importers and constrictive for export-
ers. The banks are usually very interested in acquiring as many international 
clients with trade finance needs as they can because of the lucrative reve-
nues generated through the multiple charges associated with their services. 
Moreover, use of the banking instruments gives rise to inventories and re-
ceivables, which in turn increase the clients’ borrowing base.  
With the exception of retailers, who deal directly with consumers, all other 
players in this group usually have significant commercial receivables that can 
be used as collateral for asset-based lending, or discounted for immediate 
cash with factors and forfaitors.  
Logistics Companies 
Companies specializing in transportation and warehousing are crucial for 
other industrial sectors as their external partners in the value chain, espe-
cially for smaller manufacturers and traders. Long before “outsourcing” has 
become a household term, small and midsize producers and wholesalers who 
could not afford to keep their own ships, truck fleets, refrigerated contain-
ers, and warehousing facilities relied on their relationships with providers  
of logistics services to complete their operational cycles. This important po-

Chapter 13 | Business Nature vs. Financial Resources 
 
120  
sitioning assures a high rate of longevity: there are many small and midsize 
entities that have been in business for over 100 years. Successful organiza-
tions frequently grow and diversify through acquisition of other companies, 
particularly those with complementary market shares and services. Such ex-
pansive movements usually fit well into private equity investment strategies. 
Purchases of property and equipment are usually financed through mort-
gages and other lending instruments associated with specific assets, such as 
marine vessels and heavy-duty motor vehicles. Many companies in this group 
provide their customers with credit terms and accumulate healthy receiv-
ables that can be utilized as part of a borrowing base or sold to factors.    
Content Producers and Distributors 
In this group of industries, software publishing and entertainment media 
draw attention of both angel and venture capital investors with historically 
attractive average ROIs. Not every computer program, iPhone application, 
or video game gives birth to a future international conglomerate with a 
multi-billion-dollar exit perspective, but statistically speaking, the chances of 
such an investment turning out to be a moneymaker are much higher than 
that of a book publishing house. 
Media companies traditionally undergo frequent mergers and acquisitions. 
The general population drives revenues of movie studios, TV networks, and 
cable channels. These companies inevitably get absorbed by huge conglom-
erates, such as, for example, NBCUniversal, which owns 40 brands in all 
types of media, including NBC News, NBC Entertainment, Telemundo, 
Bravo, USA Networks, A&E, Universal Pictures, Focus Pictures, Fandango, 
Hulu, and iVillage—to name a few.  
At the same time, movie-making outside of big studios, helmed by produc-
tion companies, with or without distribution deals attached, technically can 
be considered a small-or midsize project-based business. Their financing so-
lutions are usually combinations of private investments and loans, with the 
proportion between the two changing in direct correlation with the track 
record of prior commercial success. Production companies with steady ros-
ters of box-office winners have much better chances securing various fund-
ings. Of course, the attachment of big names, especially A-list actors, works 
wonders in these matters.  
Many industries in this group rely heavily on advertising and product place-
ment as a means of bankrolling their production cycles. From a major net-
work to an individual blog, the attractiveness of one or another media  

CFO Techniques 
 
121  
company to advertisers is dictated by circulation (printed media), viewership 
(TV and movies), and impressions (Internet) numbers. In other words, the 
more eyes can be drawn to the content, the higher the advertising revenues 
that can be generated by, for example, a web site or a small magazine.  
Here are a couple of familiar and self-explanatory examples. The New York 
Times’ circulation on a weekday is about 877,000, but the Sunday issue has a 
readership of 1.4 million—nearly 60% higher. That is why in the latter, every 
other page (and sometimes even more) is an ad, plus there are special in-
serts, and so on. By the same token, CBS’s average 30-second advertising 
rate is about $122,000, but during Super Bowl XLV (February 2011) it was 
$3 million. And the popularity of the most famous “blog”—the Huffington 
Post—first attracted a sufficient number of advertisers to warrant several 
rounds of private equity investments, and eventually resulted in a $315 mil-
lion acquisition by AOL on February 7, 2011.  
Information  
Industries of this group, even though a few decades old by now, are consid-
ered new and exciting primarily because they still display high acceleration 
of innovative developments—it is a continuous stream of novelties. In addi-
tion, many technologies in this sector impact consumers in one way or an-
other, which broadens their market appeal. This widespread presence is fur-
ther intensified by the unusual adaptiveness of users to modern advance-
ments—many of us cannot even imagine our lives without smartphones or 
streaming media (both only 12 years old). That is why angels and venture 
capitalists are highly attuned to start-up ideas in this sector: anything that 
appears cutting-edge and unique in telecommunications, networking, and 
especially the Internet, has a far better chance to get a pitching opportunity 
for funding than any other idea. And, as you can see from the preceding IPO 
list, the successful ones have the potential to make investors richer. 
On the other hand, these industries have a very high rate of failure and 
rapid aging. The searing pace of advancement leaves fallen victims behind: 
the already mentioned smartphones made PDAs obsolete; and don’t get me 
started on Napster or Netscape; not to mention the accounting scandals of 
WorldCom. All this makes banks very cautious. Of course, small and mid-
size technology companies whose founders are willing to pledge their per-
sonal savings as guarantees to finance equipment purchases will be able to 
strike some lending relationships with their banks, but you really need to 
gain some revenue momentum before tapping into significant lines of credit. 
I personally know several information management companies that started 
with their owners’ personal credit cards.   

Chapter 13 | Business Nature vs. Financial Resources 
 
122  
Real Estate and Other Rentals 
This group enjoys the most streamlined financing structures, fueled by their 
acquisitions and inventories of rentable assets, as well as the structured in-
flow of receivables. As long as your credit history is clean and there are suf-
ficient liquid funds for a down payment, the banks will be willing to finance 
procurement of an apartment building (or motor vehicles, or inventories of 
power tools, party equipment, furniture, etc.), using the assets themselves 
as collateral, seizable in case of a default. At the same time, leasing and 
rental contracts have predictable future returns and can be utilized in bor-
rowing base financing.   
Services  
The service sector has the smallest playfield of financing opportunities. 
There is a reason why so many service firms start out with the combination 
of principals’ personal investments and professional expertise, and continue 
to survive on their own cash flow. On the other hand, most service com-
panies, with HR as their primary cost, do not need heavy capital investments 
to run their businesses. 
Those companies that require facilities and equipment (health care), sophis-
ticated technology (financial and business services), or R&D (IT services) for 
their operations frequently turn to equity investors and asset-based lenders 
for funding.   
   
 

C H A P T E R 
14 
Soliciting Investors 
and Lenders 
 
It has been said many times before that you should look for money when 
you don’t need it. This banal statement is, nevertheless, very true. Now, 
more than ever, due to tightening of credit criteria and somewhat dim-
inished financial capacities, you must look for credit long before you need it. 
If you start looking when you actually need the money, it will be too late. 
Finding investments and engaging lenders is a laborious, and frequently dis-
heartening, ordeal. It involves a lot of groundwork and rigid qualification 
mechanisms. A head of finance on the hunt for new capital resources must 
be very well prepared. 
Even though the processes are substantially different, there are certain 
common aspects in methodologies of soliciting investors and lenders: 
 
Technically speaking, you are “selling” the company to the money-
holders even when no stock shares change hands. The ability to 
come up with a great presentation and spin the information in the 
most beneficial way during the pitch to either investors or lenders is 
crucial. Your listeners must believe that passing on this opportunity 
will be the worst mistake they ever make.  
 
Regardless of who is in front of you, the way to get them interested 
is by matching your company’s potentials with their expectations. 
For example, your high inventory turnover would be very important 

Chapter 14 | Soliciting Investors and Lenders 
 
124  
for a lender’s evaluation of the borrowing base. On the other hand, 
the fact that your product is compatible with cloud technology will 
definitely prick up an angel investor’s ears.  
 
Make the prospective funders feel secure. It is not enough to paint a 
glorious future ahead—every statement you make must be sup-
ported with solid facts and verifiable data. Nothing will guarantee 
them absolute security, but lenders and investors should feel that 
the risks are minimized and outweighed by future returns.  
 
Remember the power of numbers. Cognitive scientists, who study 
human minds as information processors, have proven that people 
get far more impacted by numbers than by narrations.  
 
Be prepared to open your books to the harshest scrutiny. 
 Note  One of a very few rationales for spending time and money on audited financial state-
ments, issued with unqualified opinions by a reputable firm, is that they are prerequisite documents 
for any type of financing soliciting. Having them does not guarantee your getting the funds you are 
seeking, but not having them current and readily available shuts down the possibility of even start-
ing a dialogue about it.  
Investment Bankers  
When contemplating an IPO, remember that your initial pitch should be 
aimed at getting an investment bank’s underwriter excited about the possi-
bility of earning substantial fees. They will tell you whether you qualify to go 
public or not.  
Different types of financial institutions perform underwriting services:  
 
Full-service investment banks, such as Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, 
Nomura Securities, Citigroup, JPMorgan, and UBS 
 
Financial conglomerates, such as ING Group, SunTrust, and Wells 
Fargo Securities, among others 
 
Independent investment banks, such as Brown Brothers Harriman and 
Allen & Co. 
There used to be a time when $20 million companies were commonly con-
sidered for IPOs, but lately we have observed a substantial increase in re-
quired volumes. LinkedIn, for example, exceeded $150 million in annual 

CFO Techniques 
 
125  
revenues before going public. Recent market events lead to the conclusion 
that before contacting any of the institutions just listed, a business, at the 
very minimum, needs to demonstrate the following: 
1. A history of consistent growth—20 to 25% annually 
2. An ability to sustain the same level of growth in the next five years 
3. $100 million or more in revenue 
4. $1 to $5 million in pretax profits 
5. Net tangible worth of $4 to $6 million 
6. Market value of $40 to $100 million 
7. Public awareness of the type of products/services the company  
offers 
8. Industry’s perception of the company as one on the leading edge 
9. Ability to perform better than competitors within the industry 
10. Strong outside team of IPO consultants, accountants, attorneys, and 
public relations specialists 
11. Credibility and superb experience of top management 
 Caution  The last item is considered to be a key element by most underwriters. Many CFOs 
whose efforts have laid foundations for their employers’ successes have fallen victim to the pre-
IPO ax just because their resumes didn’t measure up. 
Essentially, an entity must act like a public company for at least three years 
prior to the IPO to display its suitability for access to the worldwide-capital 
resource. The mode of transparency must commence way before you make 
your first contact with an investment bank’s underwriter. Whatever auditing 
requirements, including SOX compliance, are imposed on public companies, 
you must adapt them way in advance. You also need to get your company’s 
name and products/services into the public’s consciousness. Ideally, you 
should be at such a stage of exposure that when you call an IPO consultant 
or an underwriter, he should be aware of your company’s existence already. 

Chapter 14 | Soliciting Investors and Lenders 
126  
Angels and Venture Capitalists 
This is the hardest route of them all—looking for someone to give you 
money when a company is at the very early stages of its development, or re-
cently born, or, even scarier, just conceptualized. It’s not like you can fall 
back on years of impressive performance indicators. Just imagine the mo-
mentum of conviction, interest, and trust you must generate. The salesman-
ship aspect of the process needs to be cranked up to full volume. 
The action plan for raising seed or start-up capital has three basic parts: 
 
Writing the best possible business plan 
 
Looking for the prospective investors 
 
Pitching the project 
There are a lot of products and “templates” on the Internet, offering “fast 
and simple” solutions for writing a business plan. And they might be OK for 
entrepreneuring beginners with little financial experience. However, if you 
are a career financial professional involved in putting together a good busi-
ness plan for a start-up company, the best choice available is Palo Alto Soft-
ware’s Business Plan Pro, especially the newest Premier Edition, which allows 
you to import QuickBooks data and Excel spreadsheets. It provides an ex-
cellent framework for most types of prospectuses. Of course, you have to 
be smart about it and skip items you find unnecessary for your particular 
needs, while adding unique features applicable only to your case. 
It is important to remember that a business plan’s main purpose is to get in-
vestors interested and to validate that you do have a promising idea and a 
plan for its implementation. Thus, the allowed 25 pages do not need to de-
scribe the entire thought process or every technological step. All infor-
mation needs to be boiled down to the very essence of the new venture. 
There is a multitude of opinions on the subject of what constitutes a perfect 
business plan. Yet, most advisors agree on the following main elements: 
 
Executive summary—a snapshot overview  
 
A brief company description 
 
Description of products/services 
 
Industry analysis 
 
Competitive analysis, including SWOT (strength, weaknesses, op-
portunities, threats) 
 
Market analysis and marketing plan 
 
Organizational plan 

CFO Techniques 
 
127  
 
Detailed funding needs with clearly identified risk-mitigating  
milestones 
 
Five-year financial model with sensitivity and ROI analysis 
 
Description of exit strategies 
It is not easy to find, and more importantly, to make contact with the right 
start-up investor. Networking connections seem to be the most successful 
venues—as with everything, who knows who is the key. Nevertheless, there 
are a few Internet resources that can serve as a good starting point. Angel-
soft, for example, is a web-driven platform used by over 650 venture capital 
and angel investment groups to track their deals online, and it offers entre-
preneurs an opportunity to contact participating investors. Even without 
creating a login, you can access information on each fund.  
Business Week regularly publishes lists of the top 20 investors in each cate-
gory, and an online version links you to individual profiles. There are other 
sources to try, such as National Venture Capital Association and CB Insights—
they provide listings and rankings of both national and local firms.  
Pitching skills are far more important for this type of investing than for any 
other. You cannot just send an unsolicited business plan. The process usu-
ally starts with a written inquiry—a one-pager that summarizes the most 
important points of the proposal, starting with a one-line essence of the 
idea. If you spark an interest, you may get lucky to be invited for a pitch—a 
10- to 15-minute briefing that must deliver all relevant information to the 
prospective investor. This is the decisive moment. If you pass this stage, you 
will be asked to show a business plan.  
And if you are on this path, good luck! I mean it from the bottom of my 
heart—our economy desperately needs new products and services provided 
by young, small, robust entrepreneurial companies. 
Private Equity Firms  
As previously noted, the private equity investment field has developed into 
quite a complicated industry. The investment firms’ strategies vary in terms 
of preferred types of deals, industry specialization, stages of involvement, 
growth requirements, and many other aspects. But before you can even be-
gin to research them, you need to look at your company in terms of private 
equity considerations. That requires a lot of very specialized knowledge. 
That is why many companies looking to fund their growth or overcome fi-
nancial difficulties turn to private equity consulting and brokerage firms. 

Chapter 14 | Soliciting Investors and Lenders 
 
128  
These consulting groups usually have strong relationships with private equity 
funds and are capable of matching the right one to a particular entity. They 
take upon themselves to conduct the due diligence that complies with their 
investing clients’ requirements. They can also outline possible organizational 
and operational changes to make a company more attractive. Sometimes, 
investment firms choose to retain the same consultants in the post-deal 
stages of reorganization. 
 Note  The private equity consulting firms are usually paid by investors; in this case, the compa-
nies seeking funding through them carry no cost associated with their services.  
There is a reverse possibility as well: CB Insights, mentioned previously, is 
actually a service targeted toward investors looking for growth capital deals. 
They collect intelligence on high-growth private companies by scouting vari-
ous resources, including listings of start-up financings, government grants, 
venture capital deals, and media mentions. So, if your company blips on their 
radar, there is a chance you may get a call from interested investors. 
One thing I want to reiterate is that the due diligence associated with private 
equity is probably the most rigorous of all other business investigations. Your 
company will be invaded and dissected well beyond your audited financial 
statements. They will start with the same approach I recommended for you 
in Chapter 5 and end with checking into the personal background of every 
member of the key management team.   
Lenders 
Virtually 100% of businesses have at least one operating account in a bank, 
including entities employing “cash-only” relationships with their cus-
tomers—they too may need to write an occasional check or make an elec-
tronic payment for this or that.  
So, no matter what your company does, it has a banking relationship. That 
puts you on their solicitation radar. Every bank’s internal system is pro-
grammed to look for specific indicators, such as cash movement patterns 
and balances. Combining this information with the knowledge of your orga-
nization’s nature, a full-service financial institution, sooner or later, will try 
to offer you various products that may fit your needs, as they perceive it. It 
does not guarantee that you will be approved for credit, but they will ex-
plore the opportunity.  

CFO Techniques 
 
129  
And even if they don’t initiate the dialogue, it is most likely that your first 
step in searching for a credit facility will be with the very bank that holds 
your accounts. Assuming you get approved there, you may eventually need 
to complement their facility with those from other financial institutions. This 
may further lead to merging of multiple credit facilities into a lenders’ club 
(not to be confused with Lending Club, a person-to-person lending web 
site), which is usually governed by a common credit agreement with partici-
pating lenders sharing both risks and collaterals on a pari passu basis (i.e., 
proportional to their contribution). 
When starting a conversation with lenders about your financing needs, try 
to complement your audited financial statements (usually they ask for the 
last two to five years) with as much information as you can. The more, the 
merrier: the company’s history, future projections, and so on. But keep in 
mind that they will come back: first, with their standard due diligence ques-
tionnaire, and then, after the initial review by their credit committee, with 
further questions. These are exhaustive lists with 20 to 30 detailed inquiries 
that, after you provide answers to each and every one of them, will become 
multipage documents. 
Even though extensive, lenders’ due diligence and, if required, field audits 
are selective in their focus. Concerned with the borrower’s ability to repay 
loans and compensate LCs, or cover defaults with sufficient assets, banks 
concentrate on things like the following: 
 
Products and markets breakdown 
 
Fixed assets valuations 
 
Procurement concentration 
 
Sales and purchase terms 
 
Sales credit policies and defaults protections (e.g., credit insurance)  
 
Concentration and distribution of accounts receivable 
 
Receivables collection processes and bad-debt history  
 
Inventory location and turnover 
Besides the quality of the collateral assets, which impact the company’s eli-
gibility and define the structure of the borrowing base, there are certain as-
pects of your financial statements that are crucial for the banks’ decisions. 
These two closely related indicators are the net worth (difference between 
all assets and all liabilities) and the leverage ratio (total liabilities divided by 
net worth). As a general rule, banks would like net worth to be substantial 
enough to keep the leverage ratio as low as possible. Of course, like every-
thing else, it is negotiable and depends on your company’s financial strength 
and your ability to present a compelling argument for a higher number.  

Chapter 14 | Soliciting Investors and Lenders 
 
130  
Ideally, if the interest is there, you should be able to start pressuring your 
financial resource for the term sheet as soon as you address the first wave 
of their inquiries. This way you will be able to negotiate the terms and con-
ditions in parallel with the ongoing due diligence, so that both processes 
can be concluded in accord. The term sheet is a brief but most critical 
document—even though it does not constitute the financial institution’s 
commitment, it outlines all the key points related to the proposed credit 
facility and is subsequently used as a framework for the credit agreement 
documentations. 
The following are the most common components of a term sheet: 
 
Facility’s size 
 
Facility’s description (demand loans, BAs, LCs, etc.) 
 
Security (collateral) description 
 
Pricing for each instrument of the facility utilization 
 
Borrowing base structure (which assets are included and at what 
percentage rate) 
 
Financial covenants (net worth requirements, leverage ratio, etc.) 
 
Other covenants. (This is a broad category, as various banks impose 
different restrictions, insurance demands, and disclosure require-
ments—all should be carefully considered, and if possible, negoti-
ated.) 
 
Periodic reporting requirements. (This is another negotiable item. 
Try to insist on at least 15 to 20 days after the end of the month for 
the Monthly Borrowing Base report, 120 days after the end of the 
fiscal year for the audited annual financial statements, and 45 days 
after the quarter-end for quarterlies, which they will want reviewed 
by auditors. But that’s an additional expense and you can argue for 
the internal statements.) 
 
Annual line fees ($20 to $40 thousand, or more) 
  
 

C H A P T E R 
15 
Nurturing  
Financial  
Relationships 
 
Everything is finalized and now you have access to the capital you so des-
perately needed. Is this the end of the story? No, it’s not. It’s like childbirth: 
the labor is painful, but it is just the beginning of the journey. Now you have 
a new permanent function in your job description: ongoing relationships 
with your investors and continuous lenders. You have to keep them happy 
and protect them from regretting their decision to invest or lend. 
There are three foundation blocks mandatory for establishing a rapport be-
tween a company’s financial leader and the institutions or people who en-
trusted their funds to him: 
 
Timely reporting 
 
Abiding by the rules (regulations, laws, policies, agreement condi-
tions, facility provisions, etc.) 
 
Open-line communications 
My extensive experience dealing with both private equity investors and vari-
ous lenders has taught me that, when it comes to ensuring a company’s fi-
nancial stability, perfecting this seemingly obvious protocol is one of the 
most important of the CFO’s responsibilities.  

Chapter 15 | Nurturing Financial Relationships 
 
132  
That said, I have to acknowledge the fact that building a bond with lenders, 
who have the power to discontinue their credit provisions at any time, is by 
far a more sensitive task than maintaining a working connection with in-
vestors-turned-stockholders. The truth is, even though it is difficult to get 
either public or private equity investment in place, the mechanics of post-
closing upkeep are not that complicated. 
 Note  We are not talking about the pressure on the business as a whole to perform, develop, 
and grow, which we addressed in previous chapters. That’s a given. This is a narrower topic of a 
CFO’s responsibilities for direct relationships with funders.  
As long as the organizational progress meets the investors’ expectations, 
there is no need for special hand-holding. Financial analysts and business 
media deal with the investing public, while private funds take charge of their 
involvement. And if the company exhausts its potential for success, good re-
lationships will not be able to prevent devaluation. 
With lenders, on the other hand, it is a completely different story—they are 
not tied to borrowers by stock certificates and the corporate charter. A 
negative assessment of a company by a credit officer may result in non-
renewal and phasing-out of outstanding balances, or, even worse, accel-
eration of all loans. This can have devastating impact on your company’s 
ability to survive. It is impossible to overemphasize the importance of keep-
ing your lending connections content. 
That is why this chapter is primarily dedicated to nurturing your relation-
ships with financial entities that provide you with borrowing capacity. How-
ever, first, a few more words about investors.  
Investor Relations  
The term investor relations (IR) is primarily used to describe one of the inte-
grated responsibilities of a public company’s CFO. It includes SEC reporting 
filed through the Electronic Data-Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval system 
(EDGAR), security regulations compliance, and systematic communications—
altogether designed to maintain effective two-way contact between the 
company and the financial community.  
However, this concept can be easily applied to a company’s relationships 
with private investors as well. Essentially, the connection is maintained by 

CFO Techniques 
 
133  
employing exactly the same components: financial reporting, compliance 
with established policies and conditions, and periodic communications. 
In addition to regular financial statements, various business intelligence and 
performance analysis reports are customarily included in investors’ monthly 
information packages, which are designed to track the investment’s perform-
ance. The requirements vary, but such details as capital utilization, milestone 
attainment, market share dynamics, customer acquisition, and realization of 
volume targets are most likely to be among the data deliverables. Many pri-
vate equity firms have their own analysts who dissect the information pro-
vided by the portfolio companies and generate fund-wide reports.  
As was underscored before, angels, venture capitalists, and private equity 
firms are closely involved in the organizational management of the com-
panies in their portfolios. They provide overall guidance on structure, policy 
development, business strategies, and operational tactics. Equity partners 
are crucial members of the investees’ boards of directors. They pay fre-
quent visits and meet regularly with executive management for progress 
meetings. CFOs’ presentations to the board of directors are expected to 
provide assurance of proper fiscal control and to communicate information 
on all important happenings, both positive and negative.   
What Makes Lenders Comfortable? 
It is impossible to address every single requirement imposed by the nearly 
7,000 banks out there for the various lending products they offer. Yet, it can 
be said that in the majority of cases, when we manage a bank’s credit facility, 
the reporting, compliance, and communication fundamentals acquire certain 
properties specific to this form of financing. These unique attributes are dis-
cussed following. 
Credit Lines with Monthly Reporting   
There is nothing special about the quarterly and annual financial statements 
you are required to submit to your bank in accordance with the schedule 
laid out in the credit agreement. These are the same standard audited ac-
counting reports you prepare for multiple uses. And if your borrowing is 
limited to a straightforward term loan for a specific amount with a specific 
payment schedule, or a revolving credit line, the financial statements might 
be your only reporting requirement. 
However, if you operate within a diversified credit facility, which is driven 
(entirely or partially) by the bank borrowing base (BBB), you are required to 

Chapter 15 | Nurturing Financial Relationships 
 
134  
file a monthly BBB report (frequently called a certificate), complemented by 
supporting schedules detailing every line. If you fail to do so, your bor-
rowing availability will be set to zero. 
 Note  The BBB is essentially a formula that determines your company’s current borrowing ca-
pacity. It is defined in the credit agreement and consists of collateral assets included into the calcu-
lations at various percentage rates established during the term sheet negotiations.   
Figure 15-1 shows a simple BBB report that is typical for many credit lines 
and adaptable to practically any straightforward terms. The example in Fig-
ure 15-2 is a more complex, multilevel document I have specifically created 
for a business with a combination of financing provided by a domestic three-
bank credit club and several foreign transactional-based lines. 
 
Figure 15-1. Simple borrowing base certificate 

CFO Techniques 
 
135  
The upside of having a more detailed formula and BBB is the flexibility of the 
collateral utilization you can achieve by including items that otherwise might 
have been disallowed altogether. In this example, such items are the inter-
company receivables derived from sales to the company’s subsidiary, which 
are included at a 50% rate, and in-transit inventory destined for  customers 
with cash-against-documents sales terms. The downside is the extent of 
work it requires to analyze the supporting data by the multiple categories of 
the collateral. 
 
Figure 15-2. Example of a borrowing base certificate defined by a multiasset formula 
Whether you do this work all by yourself or delegate the prep to your sub-
ordinates, check if the document you are about to sign makes sense. You 
don’t want to give your bankers a chance to catch you on mistakes in your 
own numbers. Of course, information that can be verified by the banks’  

Chapter 15 | Nurturing Financial Relationships 
136  
internal systems, such as cash balances and outstanding credit items issued 
by them, must be confirmed first and foremost. But that’s not all—the BBB 
has to be consistent with your balance sheet. For instance, the sum of col-
lateral excess and items excluded from BBB can be supported only by three 
sources: the company’s own capital, accounts payable, and financing instru-
ments provided by other sources (which you most likely must disclose). 
Make sure that there are no unexplainable holes. It is especially sensitive 
during the quarter-ends, when you actually have to present the lender with 
your financial statements as well.   
Covenants and Utilization Compliance 
The previous chapter discussed the multitude of conditions banks impose 
on the borrowers through credit agreements. They vary from one financing 
deal to another. Most of them are cumbersome, but not too difficult to 
manage. Even if the lenders demand that all sales above a certain amount 
must be approved by them, well, it’s annoying, but it’s just a matter of one 
phone call, and you should be able to argue that this deal is a must for the 
survival of the company. However, the burden of financial covenants has a 
potential of influencing how business is conducted in your company, and 
therefore commands your careful attention.  
The frequent minimum net worth requirement is usually implanted into the 
agreement in order to preclude owners from frivolous withdrawals of net 
profits. Banks prefer the retained earnings to remain in the company, as it 
reassures the going concern. But the equity is reduced by operational losses 
too, and you have to be very careful (within the limits of your power, of 
course) about not falling below the acceptable level. 
The healthy net worth also helps to contain the most volatile covenant of 
them all—the leverage ratio defined in the previous chapter—as well. I’ve al-
ways wondered about the banks’ counterintuitive insistence on limiting their 
clients’ borrowing powers by demanding that the balance sheet liabilities be 
a certain multiple of the company’s capital. At the end of the year, you may 
have millions of dollars in credit availability, but you will be hesitant to use 
it, because it may tip your December 31 leverage over the threshold. And 
that’s a shame, because at the end of the year, suppliers are trying to turn 
their inventories into revenues—the procurement and operations are de-
manding from you the transactional approvals, and you are mad at your 
bankers for inadvertently affecting commercial activities. 
What you need is an end-of-the-period action plan. It has to be thought out 
well in advance and coordinated with your executive peers. And it cannot be 
a moratorium on all activities—you are a member of the strategic team, not 

CFO Techniques 
 
137  
just a financial guardian. There are many ways of easing up the liability burden 
on the books. They depend on the particular nature of the business, but the 
following general ideas may point you in the right direction of thinking: 
 
The collection efforts must be intensified ahead of time so that you 
can have more cash available either to pay down some debts or use 
it for advance payments. 
 
Suppliers normally demanding prepayments will be more motivated 
at the end of the year and flexible to accept LCs instead. 
 
Large suppliers are frequently more concerned with booking orders 
than recognizing revenues before the cutoff date—have them bill 
you on delivered terms or ship the product on January 1.  
All companies are different, and it is very likely that many CFOs and con-
trollers are never exposed to the dangers of covenants violations. But if you 
always walk on the razor’s edge due to the company’s expansion path or 
the industry’s cyclicality, you must have a prevention program for every re-
porting period. Because every time you are officially incompliant, a special 
waiver needs to be issued by the bank. It is recorded and constitutes a red 
flag. If you accumulate enough of them, it can potentially impair your ability 
to renew the credit facility. 
Paradoxically, on one hand they limit you with leverage, and on the other 
hand, if the facility is significantly underutilized, the bankers become un-
happy, as they feel that they gave you too much credit. You must exercise a 
fine art of optimization to keep these matters in balance. And I cannot over-
emphasize the importance of the proper use of lending instruments. Don’t ex-
haust the revolving credit line and keep the balance at the maximum for 
months. As mentioned before, it has to be paid down completely once in a 
while. And never use lines intended exclusively for transactional financing to 
cover your overhead shortages—that for sure will get you in trouble. 
Love Thy Banker 
I know that many of my readers think that there is no need to schmooze 
bankers who have already come on board with their financial offerings. More-
over, many of us get annoyed when bankers call us just to “check how things 
are.” Some bankers go further, and even though you are their primary con-
tact, they periodically attempt to call your CEO to see how things are going.  
There is no reason to get irritated. An account executive in any industry,  
including banking, is a combination of a salesperson, an underwriter, and a 
client service representative. It is not like he has nothing else to do; it’s an 

Chapter 15 | Nurturing Financial Relationships 
 
138  
essential part of his job to periodically check on the companies in his 
caseload. He entered this phone call into his calendar a few months ago and 
now he attends to his duties. So, be conscious of his importance for your 
business—chat for 10 to 15 minutes; tell him how wonderful everything is in 
the company. Hopefully you noted the names of his wife, children, and 
grandchildren—ask about them. If he wants to visit—be receptive to the 
idea. Lunch—even better. Trust me, it will pay off down the line. 
Credit Line Renewal 
Time runs fast, and before you know it a facility’s renewal date is upon you. 
If it is the first anniversary, the best approach for preparation I can recom-
mend is getting ready early. Don’t wait for your bank officer to come at you 
with his numerous requests—he operates on his own schedule and doesn’t 
have to be considerate about your time constrains. Maybe a couple of 
months in advance, get out the initial due diligence questionnaire and give it 
an analysis from the outsider’s point of view: which items never change and 
which could be perceived as dynamic? 
For example, let’s say a part of the original exploration was the list of all 
manufacturing and warehousing facilities the company owns, which you pro-
vided. At the same time, according to the agreement, the lender’s consent is 
required for divesting of any asset with a value of, let’s say, $250,000. This 
means that there is no reason for the bank to ask you for the list of facilities 
again. On the other hand, if there were requests for breakdowns of sales by 
countries, products, and/or markets; for top-ten listings of suppliers and 
customers; or for other items that may change their values from year to 
year; you can be 100% sure you will need to provide the answers again. So, 
it is better to prepare in advance. Also, refer to the agreement for the field 
audit requirements—some banks make annual (sometimes biannual) exami-
nation of collateral assets mandatory.  
Next time around it will be easier, as you will have the firsthand experience 
of the previous year. That is, assuming there is no need for substantial 
changes in the nature or size of the facility or overall financial structure. If 
you want your line to be increased, or there is another lender ready to 
come along as an additional resource, then you are back nearly at the same 
level of scrutiny you were during the initial solicitation. However, if by now 
you have managed to establish friendly relationships with your bankers, your 
path will be much easier. 

P A R T 
IV 
Cash Must Flow: 
Treasury  
Management 
 
You can be the richest person in the world, with billions in equities and un-
limited credit lines. Yet, if for whatever troubled reasons you need $20,000 
in cash on Saturday night, you’d better have it under your mattress (the safe 
behind that Picasso will do, too). The same goes for any business. As a head 
of finance, you may have at your company’s disposal buildings, factories, mil-
lions in inventories and receivables, and sizable credit lines. The business may 
be recording impressive profits that make your financial statements look very 
attractive. But none of it means that you will be able to meet your payroll 
requirements tomorrow, unless you carefully plan for it. That is why cash 
flow management is probably the most vital function of CFOs and control-
lers, especially in small and midsize companies.  
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
16 
The Gist of the 
Treasury Function 
 
Generally speaking, there are two main facets of cash management as a 
functional concept. For the lack of better terminology, let me call them 
macromanagement and micromanagement. They are equally important and 
cannot be isolated from each other—successful macromanagement guar-
antees more efficient micromanagement. 
Macromanaging of treasury deals with an entity’s balance sheet liquidity. It 
targets the company’s working capital (defined as a difference between cur-
rent assets and current liabilities) and consists of efforts designed to increase 
this metric by building cash reserves. There is a certain dissimilarity in how 
different companies define the purpose of this process and determine levels 
of their monetary caches. 
The financial community (and therefore the investing public) counts liquidity 
among one of the most important positive indicators in the evaluation of 
public companies. Thus, organizations with stocks traded on the open mar-
ket and executives motivated by their stock options strive to raise levels of 
working capital.  
I find it interesting that the majority of large companies, both public and pri-
vate, come to view working capital as some sort of nest egg intended to as-
sure the business’s survival on a rainy day (frequently they even treat it in a 
very personal manner, investing in risky derivatives). This explains, though, 

Chapter 16 | The Gist of the Treasury Function 
 
142  
why in the times of economic distress there are always articles about the 
importance of cash management with quotes from Fortune 500 CFOs detail-
ing their liquidity-enhancement programs and explaining that in the times of 
banks’ tighter credit policies, they can rely on their own cash reserves. But 
as soon as the global economies rebound, the same executives pronounce 
working capital matters to be less relevant. 
Seriously? In smaller companies there is never a time, rain or shine, when 
treasury concerns can be put on the back burner—this function is always on 
the top of the list. And you are a lucky and quite rare CFO if you can 
choose to build a long-term cash reserve. In the reality of a dynamic small 
or midsize business, the true purpose of liquidity improvement is to ensure 
continuous positive cash flow (i.e., to do whatever it takes to have your inflows 
exceed your outflows at any given moment). 
The good news is that regardless of your reasoning for the betterment of 
the working capital movements, the integral parts of the action plan are 
identical: 
 
Faster current assets turnover—increasing rates of liquidating inven-
tories into sales and converting receivables into cash (AR manage-
ment is discussed in Chapter 19) 
 
Effective accounts payable (AP) management (also discussed in 
Chapter 19) 
 
Accurate cash demand forecasts via meticulous cash flow projec-
tions (discussed in the next chapter) 
 Note  My experience working with complex treasury operations that involve a wide variety of in-
flow sources, numerous credit lines, multiple currencies, and sporadic demands of funds eventually 
led me to a conclusion: for practical purposes, it is necessary to incorporate a dynamic forecast of 
credit-line utilization into the cash availability planning. Every time the cash flow projection shows 
deficiency, I peg an applicable financing method to cover it, thus estimating in parallel my future bor-
rowing capacity. An added benefit of this exercise is an ability to provide strategic support for opera-
tional plans—you can effectively assess the possibility of financially accommodating one or another 
development. For example, if a request for a new $5 million transaction to be funded in two weeks 
comes, you can approve or reject it depending on the combined cash and financing availability.  

CFO Techniques 
 
143  
Micromanagement of treasury, on the other hand, is the set of daily activities 
directed at satisfying your immediate cash requirements. Over the years I 
have come to define immediate as a five-business-day slice. With the advance 
cash projection serving as guidance, you, or your treasury group, can de-
velop a concrete action plan for the next few days. It’s a task that’s per-
petually rolling forward—from determining the current day’s cash position 
to updating the remaining days and adding a new one.  
At this level the treasury is not about educated guesses and anticipatory ac-
tivities anymore. It is all about factual status and judgment calls. It is tightly 
interwoven with accounts-receivable, financing, and accounts-payable func-
tions: starting with receipt processing through disbursement instructions. Of 
course, it goes without saying that no matter how accurate your forecasts 
are, there are always last-moment payment requests or inflow delays. 
Every CFO or controller creates her own daily treasury routine, accommo-
dating managerial, financial, operational, and whatever other considerations 
of a particular business exist. Nevertheless, there are basic steps that must 
be included in all of them: 
 
Cash position assessment (further discussed in Chapter 18) 
 
Determination of status of receipts in-process 
 
Finalization of disbursements lineup and instructions 
 
Administration of foreign currency instruments 
 
Execution of borrowing decisions to cover deficits or disposition of 
cash excesses. 
Even though it is quite rare for a business operating account to have a 
minimum balance provision, the bankers like when significant balances are 
kept on depositors’ accounts because they use the funds to cover their Fed-
eral Reserve requirements, or to invest, including in the lucrative interbank 
lending market. As much as I try to be friendly with our bankers, I always 
say that commercial CFOs and controllers are not in the business of sitting on 
a pile of idle cash. The company’s money has to work for your organization, 
not make the banks richer. That is why I consider dealing with cash excess 
just as important of a matter as handling the deficits. 
In fact, if at the end of the day your operational inflows exceed your imme-
diate needs, you must act like a banker and deal with the leftover cash in the 
same manner they do—you can reserve a certain amount for an unexpected 
requisite and do one of the following things with the rest: 
1. Utilize it to fund a next-in-line operational transaction, such as a mate-
rial purchase, which may improve the production flow. 

Chapter 16 | The Gist of the Treasury Function 
 
144  
2. Pay down some of the interest-bearing liabilities to reduce financing 
costs. 
3. Pay down some other debt to free up bank or commercial credit. 
4. If none of these uses is relevant enough for operational or financial 
positions, then you must invest the excess cash to earn some interest 
income—another good way to offset some of the interest expense. 
Unless it is a permanent reserve, which, as I said before, can be invested 
into whatever long-term instrument you find appropriate and safe, it is ad-
visable to use a short-term, fast-liquidating option. You can go as simple as 
throwing it into a savings account through your online banking. Keep in 
mind, though, that you get only six free transfers a month back from savings 
into checking—after that you incur penalties for each additional transfer. I 
personally prefer various types of sweep accounts, which automatically 
transfer (sweep) funds in excess of the preset amount into, let’s say, a 
money market account that can be accessed at any given moment.   
A sweep account is just one of the treasury solutions in a bank’s arsenal of 
products. In order to facilitate their clients’ efforts to consistently meet cash 
demands, financial institutions offer various cash management services, 
which address many aspects of both macro- and micromanagement pro-
cesses. These services are discussed in more detail in Chapter 20. 
  
 

C H A P T E R 
17 
Cash Flow  
Projections 
 
Cash projection is the most important treasury macromanagement tool. It is 
a dynamic report that extends into the future covering the time frame with-
in the limits that should make sense for a particular business. The report’s 
main purposes are 
1. to provide you with a clear vision of whether the company will be 
able to meet its cash demands at any given point within the time 
scope of the forecast; and  
2. to prompt you to take appropriate long-term (liquidity manage-
ment) and short-term (borrowing and disbursements administra-
tion) actions ensuring that these demands are satisfied.  
Generally speaking, these objectives are achieved through the accurate as-
sessment of two basic cash movements: inflows and outflows.  
Structural Concerns 
There is no single predefined recipe for a universal cash projection design. I 
wouldn’t say that every single company should reinvent the wheel—there 
are some general principles applicable to any business (they are outlined fur-
ther in this chapter). Nevertheless, every CFO and controller should be 
mindful of specific features that may affect the cash projection configuration.  

Chapter 17 | Cash Flow Projections 
 
146  
It’s not just the question of the covered time period—many other factors 
influence the form and structure of this instrument, including the entity’s 
business nature, maturity level, financial stability, operational cycle, and 
credit relationships. As a testimony to the considerable variety of these re-
ports, both in form and substance, let me offer this bit of information: the 
sector of E&D CC consulting services dedicated specifically to the devel-
opment of cash flow management solutions offers over 30 different Excel-
based projection templates designed for smaller enterprises. They can be 
further adapted to particular features of each individual company. 
Here are a few primary differential parameters that may impact the cash 
flow projection’s layout: 
 
Business nature is the most influential aspect. Obviously, a cash fore-
cast for a manufacturing company with multiple levels of outflows at 
various stages along the value chain will be different from that of an 
Internet company with most disbursements in overhead categories 
and advertising income.  
 
Business complexity affects the entire concept of cash flow. A 
straightforward commercial movement of, let’s say, a wholesale 
company specializing in distribution of one particular type of prod-
ucts, will call for a simple design. On the other hand, some enter-
prises with multiple divisions may have business configurations so 
complicated that they would need a separate cash flow projection 
for each section.  
 
Stage of maturity (but not necessarily the age) dictates whether you 
can rely on the historical data in discerning the inflow and outflow 
patterns. An entity with balanced operational flow will allow for 
more reliable long-term forecasts; but for a growing, dynamic com-
pany, building even a short-term projection will be a hands-on pro-
cess, sometimes requiring daily attention.  
 
In the absence of outside financing, companies depend entirely on 
their own cash inflows. They have to be more careful with timing 
their disbursements, trying to keep their payables current without 
creating negative balances in the projected future. The ability to 
cover operational deficits with borrowing resources provides the 
flexibility for time-saving fixed-check-run schedules and unplanned 
strategic deals. 
 
Commercial tactics play a significant role in cash flow cycles. Many 
companies, for example, acquire production raw materials or goods 

CFO Techniques 
147  
for resale when the markets are low and hold on to those long po-
sitions for some time to make extra profits when the prices change. 
Clearly, special estimation techniques need to be applied in these 
cases in order to predict when these inventories will be liquidated 
and turned into receivables and then into cash.  
 
Credit terms and payment forms that a company offers its customers 
and negotiates with its vendors and suppliers are the most evident 
and some of the most crucial factors impacting the cash flow itself 
and the structure of its projection.  
A company in the example illustrated by Figure 17-1 is a mature service 
company with Internet-driven revenue that generates virtually immediate 
cash through online credit card payments and service-fee income derived 
from the long-established customer base. The conventional customers ei-
ther have fixed-price contracts or are billed on an hourly basis. There have 
not been any changes in the business operations for some time, and it al-
lows the company to determine the exact pattern of their collections from 
all three types of revenues. 
The AP disbursements are identical from one month to another, and the 
most significant (and slightly variable) category of operational outflows is 
the cost of labor. The company has an unrestricted $500,000 revolving 
credit line, which it uses when there is a temporary deficit, and pays it 
down whenever there is a sufficient surplus. If, at any given point, the col-
lections fall short of the expectations, it would be treated as a signal to ini-
tiate one or another measure of accounts-receivable management. All in all 
this is a very straightforward cash flow projection with a high level of pre-
dictability that allows for a long-term (in this case, six month) forward out-
look. It can be extended at the end of each month. The example in Figure 
17-2 is an altogether different animal. This is an international import/export 
company on a growth path, adding 40% to its volume annually for the past 
five years in a row.  

Chapter 17 | Cash Flow Projections 
 
148  
 
Figure 17-1. Example of a six-month cash flow projection (courtesy of E&D CC) 
 

CFO Techniques 
 
149  
 
Figure 17-2. Example of a six-week cash flow projection (courtesy of E&D CC) 
Moreover, it trades listed commodities and depends on daily market 
changes. From time to time, it participates in “announced at random” open 
multi-million-dollar bids and holds long positions of inventories to be sold 
later for higher profits. The entity has an unrestricted credit line that can be 
used to cover any cash deficits and several trade finance facilities utilized for 
material purchases only via LCs and BAs. The inventory acquisitions, to-
gether with financing transactions, constitute the largest portion of the com-
pany’s disbursements. On the receivables side, the variety of terms is offered 
to customers, ranging from prepayments to open credit and everything in 
between. Even though the company enjoys sufficient liquidity, which allows it 
to bunch all accounts payable and payroll disbursements into orderly bi-
weekly arrangements, the constant hunt for more business makes treasury 
activities somewhat hectic. This exciting, high-blood-pressure set of circum-
stances permits no more than six weeks of reliable projections of cash flow 
combined with credit utilization. And it is apparent that starting with the 
fourth week, changes must be expected. In fact, even though it appears that 
this report can be updated once a week, the business seems to be so active 
that I personally would attend to this forecast daily. 
As different as these two illustrations are, their formats are dictated by cer-
tain fundamental principles—the common basic elements of a cash flow pro-
jection structure: 
1. The predictability of inflows and outflows determines the extent of 
the forecast. Companies with stable and repetitive patterns of col-
lections and disbursements can go several months forward. How-
ever, if the nature of the business makes predictions far in advance 
nonsensical, you should stick to a more feasible time span. 

Chapter 17 | Cash Flow Projections 
 
150  
2. The operational cycle is the foundation of revenue generation. With 
a single exception of prepaid products and services, revenue recog-
nition serves as the initial point in assessment of value and timing of 
cash inflows.  
3. Sales credit terms, payment forms, and collection patterns drive the 
inflows forecasts. If you universally extend, let’s say, 30 days of 
credit to your customers who generally pay with a 30-day delay, 
you can predict your March inflows based on January invoicing. This 
data also has a reciprocal value of letting you know where the ef-
forts to improve receivables need to be concentrated.  
4. If it is important to track inflows from different sources of revenue, 
they should be separated. One example would be inflows generated 
from sales of different product lines. The same goes for the types of 
receivables (credit cards vs. cash sales, foreign receivables vs. do-
mestic, etc.). 
5. Credit relationships with your vendors and suppliers, as well as 
forms of payments you use, particularly in trading transactions, dic-
tate the arrangements of outflows. 
6. The key outflows must be separated from other disbursements be-
cause they require special attention. For example, labor-intensive 
companies should be particularly concerned with meeting funding 
requirements for operational payroll; on the other hand, material 
purchases must be set apart for manufacturing and trading compa-
nies. You may also consider distinguishing between overhead and 
operational payables, as well as financing transactions, such as loan 
repayments.  
7. Growing companies acquiring fixed assets and/or making capital in-
vestments should definitely designate a separate line or column for 
those activities for the sake of visual clarity.  
Inflows and Outflows: Principle of  
Conservatism 
The basic accounting principle of conservatism is just a more palatable way of 
saying “expect the worst”: probable losses must be recognized, but gains 
must not; the assets are stated at their lowest values; contingencies with pos-
sible payouts must be disclosed, but not those with a chance of awards; and 
so on. There is a reason why accountants are always depicted in cartoons 

CFO Techniques 
 
151  
with long faces and mournful eyes—it is an accurate visual representation of 
the pessimistic realism we are implored to utilize as a proper evaluation tech-
nique in all cases. And thank you, our accounting forefathers, for that! 
It is mandatory to employ the principle of conservatism when it comes to 
the assessment of projected inflows and outflows: 
 
Use the longest historical statistics for production cycles and inven-
tory turnovers. 
 
Discount future revenues. 
 
Anticipate higher prices for purchases and increases in services’ rates. 
 
Always add extra time for collections. 
 
Expect to make payments earlier. 
 
Build a cushion for extraordinary events and unexpected  
disbursements. 
Adhering to these rules will result in the creation of a cash flow safety net, 
preventing the possibility of being strapped for funds.   
Cash Forecasts Generated by Accounting 
Systems 
The task of forecasting is only partially an exact science. Even the most ad-
vanced, custom-made program that studies the data and makes predictions 
based on past patterns cannot accommodate extraordinary events and mo-
mentary changes. There is some element of an intuitive art to this process, 
and that is why it is difficult to automate—it requires a hands-on touch, es-
pecially if you deal with a dynamic entity in a volatile market. 
The majority of popular small-business accounting systems (QuickBooks and 
such) do not produce reports like that at all—you, your treasury group, or 
your financial analyst will have to design one, most likely in Excel, and then 
update it based on the data in the system, which can be exported and then 
manipulated. Writing macros may facilitate this task. If there is a lack of time 
and/or skills, you should outsource the development, but don’t get sucked 
into buying an expensive report-writer just because you need this and few 
other reports. Instead, find people who provide solution-by-solution serv-
ices. I can always suggest someone suitable to your needs through my blog, 
The Frustrated CFO.  
If you have an expensive high-end program integrated with a sophisticated 
report developer, such as IBM Cognos, you may be able to create a cash 

Chapter 17 | Cash Flow Projections 
 
152  
forecast that will be updated automatically every time you run the report. 
Without a doubt, these are the most time- and effort-efficient solutions. 
Nevertheless, a certain level of flexibility is lost there, due to the stan-
dardization of reporting features.  
Midmarket programs, such as various packages within Microsoft Dynamics 
business solutions, all have prebuilt cash requirements queries. However, 
you must keep in mind that these reports do not actually have forecasting 
capabilities—they draw the projections based on the data already in the sys-
tem. Therefore, unless you have all your anticipated outflows entered into 
the AP module, you will not be able to generate a six-month forward report. 
My experience shows that even treasurers with complicated and powerful 
IT products at their disposal end up with a set of interconnected Excel 
spreadsheets that allow them to play with the data predicting cash flows.  
 
 

C H A P T E R 
18 
Daily Cash  
Position 
 
Cash position is a basis of the treasury micromanagement and the starting 
point of the corresponding routine described in Chapter 16. On a concep-
tual level, just like cash projection, it has a dual implication—on one hand, it’s 
an evaluation process (the collection of data), and on the other, it’s the de-
livery of information (the resulting report as a decision tool). As integral 
parts of the same task, they influence each other and must be designed to-
gether. In other words, you cannot create a step-by-step procedure for cash 
position assessment without deciding on the presentation format. 
Developing this task, I always found the method of logical deduction to pro-
duce the best results—you start by envisioning the instrument that would 
consistently facilitate effective monetary judgment calls and then unspool the 
process of arriving at that desired outcome. This approach basically comes 
down to answering the following questions in this particular order: 
1. What is the scope of daily treasury decisions? What are the actions 
that need to be taken to satisfy the cash management goals? 
2. What kind of knowledge is mandatory to make these decisions? 
What are the crucial items of data required to accomplish this task? 
3. What kind of presentation format will allow the most efficient utili-
zation of this information in the decision-making process? 

Chapter 18 | Daily Cash Position 
 
154  
4. Who will be responsible for compiling the end report?  
5. What are the timeframe restrictions to finalize all daily treasury 
tasks? This condition also dictates the deadlines for the position as-
sessment and report(s) delivery.  
6. Where does the necessary data come from? What are the original 
sources of the information? 
7. How will the information be collected? 
8. Who will be responsible for gathering each of the informational 
elements?  
The answers to these questions will lay the foundation for designing your 
cash position task structure. Of course, the variations will be as plentiful as 
the number of companies out there. A multitude of business nuances can in-
fluence both the way the position is determined and the configuration of the 
report(s) you want to see before making your treasury decisions. 
Unlike the dynamic cash flow projection with its approximation of the fu-
ture outlook, cash position is a static report of present reality—a snapshot 
of right now. And like any photograph, depending on the subject matter, it 
could be as simple as a passport photo or as complex as Diane Arbus’s 
creative insights.  
There are successful companies with the simplest cash management setups: 
one checking account, one currency, one type of collections from cus-
tomers with the same sales terms, and all payables paid by checks. Such a 
company may not need a cash position report at all. The entire treasury 
routine consists of few elementary steps:  
1. Get the previous day’s bank balance. 
2. See if any customers’ receipts are being deposited. 
3. Schedule a check disbursement run based on the total availability of 
cash. 
On the other hand, there are companies with complications at all stages of 
cash management: several currencies with foreign exchange exposure, mul-
tiple sources of daily inflows, spontaneous disbursements, and decisions 
with significant business impact every step of the way. For businesses like 
that, the aggregation of information on the status of various accounts in the 
banks around the world is a task of its own.   
Moreover, the more difficult the cash matters, the more sensitive they are to 
the time factor. The United States is behind the rest of the world in time—

CFO Techniques 
 
155  
frequently you need to make decisions about your foreign accounts transac-
tions before 9:00 a.m. Sometimes, time constraints play the most influential 
role in shaping the cash position procedures. Regardless of the complexity, 
the urgency of daily actions demands optimization of expediency, efficiency, 
and comprehensiveness of both the process and the resulting reports. You 
may be forced to trade absolute accuracy for timely performance. 
Examples of Cash Position Reports  
It is most illustrative to demonstrate the mechanics and the logic of cash posi-
tion development by studying examples. Hopefully, the two presented follow-
ing will provide you with some ideas about the basic principles you may em-
ploy yourself. I want to reiterate that the reports presented in Figures 18-1 
and 18-2 are summary cash position reports used for daily treasury decision-
making. These are final outcomes with data linked in from various schedules. 
More details on this process are provided for each illustration.  
Illustration 1 
 
Figure 18-1. Cash position report, illustration 1 (courtesy of E&D CC) 
This is a company severely strapped for cash. It operates exclusively on its 
own cash flow with no borrowing resources. Moreover, the business’s re-
ceivables are rigid—they are either generated on the spot through tele-
phone sales or paid on scheduled days by contingency clients outsourcing 
the entity’s services. This precludes any possibility for macromanaging of li-
quidity. It is what it is. These are difficult conditions experienced, in one way 
or another, by many companies today. 

Chapter 18 | Daily Cash Position 
 
156  
Under these circumstances, the single purpose of the daily treasury man-
agement and the cash position report is for the company’s controller to 
pick and choose the most important payments for approval on a particular 
day, just to keep the company from shutting down. Sometimes, she is forced 
to authorize payments in excess of available cash, counting on the check 
float to clear after more cash comes through. The payments scheduling can-
not go further than four days forward, limited by the ability to anticipate the 
collections. When receipts materialize, the controller throws them into dif-
ferent bank accounts according to calculated deficits. 
The previous day’s balances, outstanding checks, and intraday inflows are 
collected by one of the junior accountants from online banking reports. Ac-
counts Payable is responsible for keeping the system’s records very current, 
so that the controller can fully rely on the aging.  
Illustration 2 
This company’s CFO is not concerned about meeting her requirements of 
covering operational accounts payable, overhead, and payroll. In fact, her AP 
department does not deal with payments in those categories of expenses on 
daily basis—they make weekly disbursement runs, and there is a semi-
monthly payroll managed by a third-party provider. Sufficient funds are 
transferred on prescheduled days to cover these needs, as shown in the top 
section of the chart.  
Here the ultimate purpose of the cash position report, and the cash man-
agement task itself, is to ensure smooth conduct of the company’s business 
through decision-making processes that yield sufficient payments or various 
forms of financing for the company’s acquisitions of inventories. Everything 
is focused on transactional support: the control of receivables, efficient serv-
ice of the credit lines, and foreign exchange) administration. All become in-
tegral parts of the action plan and are interconnected within this summary. 
The previous-day’s bank balances and intraday positions are drawn from re-
ports produced within domestic and foreign banks’ online treasury systems. 

CFO Techniques 
157  
Figure 18-2. Cash position report, illustration 2 (courtesy of E&D CC) 

Chapter 18 | Daily Cash Position 
 
158  
 Note  Because this company’s transactional accounts sometimes carry significant balances, 
they are all set up with an overnight sweep feature—all funds above $100,000 are invested over-
night and then returned to the account before the beginning of the next banking day.  
Accounts Receivable and Collections groups feed the information about all 
check and wire payments in both currencies into their schedules, which link 
into the corresponding cells in the summary. In a similar fashion, the Trade 
Finance group maintains details on export and import LCs and documentary 
collections, as well as the maturity dates of bankers’ acceptances. For in-
stance, on July 11, a banker’s acceptance payment of $170,120 is due for re-
payment to Credit Line 1. It is reflected as a negative number in US dollar 
disbursements, but it also adds back to the availability of the credit line, so it 
is a positive number in that section. Accounts Payable’s schedule automati-
cally updates open credit payments according to their due dates. Finally, the 
transactional pipeline comes from the operational side of the company’s sys-
tem, where transactions are ranked in order of strategic priority.  
Populating beginning balances, receipts, disbursements, and credit line pay-
offs with all this data provides the treasurer with the daily cash require-
ments, as well as the credit availability for the next five days. After verifica-
tion and approval of the requested payments, the action plan is devised with 
regard to which credit line to use for each new transaction. Based on these 
decisions, the instructions are distributed to the Trade Finance group and 
operations managers. On July 11, the scheduled disbursements ($378,610 + 
$170,120 + $200,000) and authorized new transactions ($1,922,058) are 
satisfied from the cash availability (beginning balance, plus receipts) and the 
issuing of the $122,058 LC and borrowing $200,000 from Credit Line 1 as 
well as borrowing $1,000,000 from Credit Line 2.  
As you can see in the foreign currency section in Figure 18-2, one of the 
new deals is a unilateral foreign currency transaction, which means that the 
material will be purchased in euros, while distribution will be in US dollars. 
In order to protect the company from the currency exchange risk, a hedging 
contract is taken. As a result, when the payment to the supplier will be 
made, regardless of what happens to the currency market, the exchange 
rate for this transaction will be fixed. (You’ll find more details on foreign 
exchange risks in Part VII of this book). 
s

CFO Techniques 
 
159  
 Tip  This seems like a good place to mention the tricky nature of foreign currency balances. For 
financial statement purposes, at the end of fiscal periods the control balances need to be converted 
into US dollars at the published rate of the moment. This applies to cash, receivables, and pay-
ables. Depending on the rate’s behavior during the period, it may result in losses or gains.  If there 
is a foreign exchange hedging contract in place, its restatement at the same rate will balance those 
changes to some extent. This frequently happens with leftover cash balances. I always suggest be-
ing mindful of this possibility and disposing of the cash before the end of the period—there are al-
ways some bills you can prepay.  
Clearly, with wires going from different international banks to various coun-
tries, foreign currency transactions, and bank communications about differ-
ent financing instruments, cash micromanagement of this complexity is a 
time-sensitive matter: every bank has separate cutoff times for each differ-
ent function, and for some transactions, a one-day delay is a deal-breaker. In 
this company, the deadline for having all supporting information updated in 
the cash position report is 11:00 a.m., and all decisions are made by noon. 
Whether your cash management process is intense or simple, the daily cash 
position report is a valuable tool that brings together all the data you need 
for making important treasury decisions in a sensible, logical manner.  

C H A P T E R 
19 
Managing  
Receivables and 
Payables 
 
My grandfather used to say, “Live within your means and don’t spend the 
money you don’t have in your pocket.” On the surface it may seem like an 
old-fashioned point of view, but it is essentially the golden rule of liquidity, 
applicable to individuals and business entities alike. Let’s face it, if everyone 
lived by this precept, the global credit crunch wouldn’t have happened. 
Keeping expenses below revenues and collecting receivables before paying 
bills are two strategies that together guarantee positive cash flow. Of 
course, it is easier said than done.  
Ideally, we would be happy if our customers prepaid in advance while our 
vendors extended us 360-day credit. If that were the case, we wouldn’t be 
seeking the means of financing discussed in Chapter 12; growth capital would 
become the only external funding need. But this is not possible, because it’s 
not just us—all businesses want the same thing. Our suppliers would prefer 
prepayments as well, while our customers seem to be accepting products 
and throwing the bills away. So, to establish more-or-less normal commercial 
relationships, everyone needs to compromise: we work hard on obtaining 
the best credit terms for our employers, on minimizing the risks of extending 
credit to others, and on getting paid at least with reasonable delays.  

Chapter 19 | Managing Receivables and Payables 
 
162  
In other words, we are forced to manage receivables and payables. It is un-
avoidable because open credit goes hand in hand with the potential to gen-
erate more revenue. The more liberal the credit terms, the higher the sales. 
And there is nothing we can do about it except for trying to find an optimal 
balance between the risks and the volume ambitions. The good news is that 
it works both ways: our suppliers extend us credit because they want more 
sales as well. 
In fact, the dynamics of credit terms are dictated by the basic economic rule 
of supply-and-demand. In other words, they are determined by a company’s 
industrial positioning. And it is important to understand where you stand in 
order to manage your receivables and payables effectively. 
The ideal situation described in the second paragraph can occur under the 
conditions of simultaneous excessive supply of the materials a company 
needs and unlimited demand for its own exclusive product with no competi-
tion in the marketplace. Then both the vendors and the customers are 
knocking on the door agreeing to whatever terms this championed enter-
prise may command. This can only happen with companies in possession of 
unique technologies. For example, if someone comes up with a way of mak-
ing highly efficient and low-priced fuel out of carrots, the growers will ex-
tend them whatever credit they want, while wholesale distributors will be 
willing to pay on delivery. Of presently existing companies, I would name 
Apple, with its iPhones and iPads, and Google, with its AdWords and Ad-
Sense programs, as rare examples of entities with preferential treatment by 
both suppliers and customers.  
For the rest of us, the story usually follows one of these scenarios: 
1. In the industries with a few big players on the supply side, the scarce 
sources of products are far more important than the customers, and 
you must nurture your relationship with them. And if the nature of 
the product is such that you can always find someone to buy it, you 
can afford to be choosy about the extension of credit. Under these 
circumstances, losing a slow-paying customer is not that big of a deal. 
A good example of a business like that would be wholesale distribu-
tion of a soft commodity such as sugar, for which only several coun-
tries in the world supply the raw materials, and the refining process 
is concentrated in the hands of a few conglomerates.  
2. The situation is reversed in the industries where a few big-box 
chains monopolize the majority of the consumer market. Barnes & 
Noble, Amazon.com, and Wal-Mart not only mandate severe dis-
counts of books, but also command whatever credit terms they may 
w

CFO Techniques 
 
163  
need from publishers. Thankfully, there is no shortage of writers 
willing to work on a contingency basis. 
3. Finally, it is possible—but would be a very foolish commercial 
move—to find yourself in a position of having to rely on a limited 
number of suppliers while at the same time having claim only on a 
small market share. You can kiss liquidity goodbye.  
A few years ago I was invited by my CEO to attend a session of his TEC 
group (The Executive Committee, now known as Vistage1) dedicated to 
commercial relationships. Curiously enough, the composition of that par-
ticular group was skewed toward owners of businesses with limited pay-
ables and long lists of credit sales customers. They all shared concerns 
about improving their collection cycles (that is why I was invited). All except 
for one: there was an entrepreneur in the group with a reverse situation—a 
retailer with a very long accounts-payable schedule. During discussion she 
said, “Well, I just stretch everything to 120 days regardless of the terms,” 
and a dead silence fell. Everyone just stared at her. She couldn’t understand 
why the rest of the group was so offended until I explained that she was ba-
sically creating a cost-free financing for herself at the expense of her com-
mercial partners’ liquidity.  
Credit Receivables 
There are three potential stages in the management of credit relationships 
with customers: 
1. The new customer presale stage, which starts with risk evaluation 
and ends with either an approval of a certain credit line or a denial. 
2. Continuing credit relationships with existing customers, which in-
clude collecting, monitoring of the established line’s utilization, and 
occasional revisions. 
3. The unfortunate reality of handling delinquency and bad debts. 
These three components of the credit function are discussed in more details 
following.  
                                                
1 Vistage (formerly TEC) is a membership-based international executive leadership program 
that specifically targets owners/CEOs of small and midsize private companies. Its members 
meet in small peer advisory groups once a month for discussions of various topics under the 
guiding principle of achieving better performance results. 

Chapter 19 | Managing Receivables and Payables 
 
164  
Extending Credit 
This is where the foundation of successful receivables management is built. 
By making correct judgment calls when extending open credit, we ensure 
healthier future cash flow and reduce the possibility of bad-debt losses.  
The most important prerequisite of a fruitful customer credit function is the 
establishment of a credit application procedure for the sales department. There 
has to be a very good understanding among salespeople that no order for a 
new customer will be considered unless it is accompanied by a fully com-
pleted credit form—something like the example presented in Figure 19-1. It 
only makes common sense for a person who offers a product to a customer 
with an option of 30, 60, or 90 days payment delay to ask them to fill out this 
form—they are already talking anyway. If this opportunity is missed, then 
someone from your credit department will need to waste time looking for 
the person responsible for credit information, explaining the reason for the 
request (the new order most likely will not be in their system yet), and so on.  
Regardless of the actual format, besides the prospective customer’s name 
and full address, the credit application should provide the reviewer with in-
formation sufficient to conduct the most crucial steps of the credit-risk 
evaluation. This information is covered in the following subsections.  
EIN (Employer’s Identification Number) for Credit 
Insurance Coverage  
I am a big proponent of obtaining a business credit insurance (aka trade in-
surance, aka accounts-receivable insurance) policy. Statistically speaking, 
anyone with open credit receivables of more than $2 million will benefit 
from protecting themselves from possible bad-debt losses. 
The largest provider of domestic and export credit coverage in North 
America is Euler Hermes ACI. American Credit Indemnity (ACI) was a dom-
inant domestic player for decades, and it only makes sense that it was even-
tually acquired by the world’s largest trade insurance provider, Euler Her-
mes, which pretty much shares the world market with another competi-
tor—Coface Group. I have used ACI since the times when we had to dial 
into their automatic telephone system to obtain instant coverage or initiate 
a credit review. Now there is a beautiful online system, EOLIS, which per-
forms the same functions in an interactive mode. 
 

CFO Techniques 
 
165  
 
Figure 19-1. Example of a customer’s credit application 
For me personally, the biggest advantage of having credit insurance is not 
the possible loss coverage, but the opportunity to drastically cut the time 
and cost of credit research by tapping into the vast and thorough knowledge 
accumulated within the ACI system. I am usually opposed to the notion of 

Chapter 19 | Managing Receivables and Payables 
 
166  
“industry experience” as a recruitment requirement (an expert should pos-
sess transferable professional skills), but when it comes to credit manage-
ment, the support of an entire organization with a hands-on knowledge of 
individual customers in your particular market is invaluable. Credit insurance 
companies employ pros with very specialized sets of expertise focused on 
separate industries (factors do the same, by the way). Sometimes, you can 
call a reviewer about a customer, and in a heartbeat he’ll give you the entire 
history of the entity in question. The combination of an in-house credit 
manager’s efforts and an insurance provider’s resources prove to be indis-
pensable for achieving the best results. Also, if the insurance provider de-
clines to cover a customer, that’s a warning. They might be more con-
servative than your company is, and you may end up extending a credit line 
anyway, but at least it will put you on alert. 
One of the significant responsibilities of the credit insurance policy adminis-
trator is periodic reporting on the payment patterns of covered customers. 
It is not a good idea to neglect this task, as the provider incorporates the 
collected data into its system, which improves the quality of the information 
it uses to determine business creditworthiness.  
D-U-N-S Number, to Review the Company’s D&B 
Report 
Dun & Bradstreet (D&B), which is over 170 years old, is another company 
I’ve been using since pre-Internet times. The subscription to its services 
used to involved receiving enormous books filled with listings of companies 
in an incredibly small type. Presently, their global commercial database con-
tains 195 million business records compiled into beautifully streamlined re-
ports, which can be accessed online from anywhere in the world. It is my 
opinion that a D&B subscription is advisable for any entity with more than 
30 customers, and is absolutely mandatory for those who work hard on ex-
panding their market shares. 
Nowadays, D&B offers a variety of supplemental services, but its unmatch-
able core value still lies in the collection and analysis of financial data and 
payment records of the listed companies. D&B’s proprietary algorithms as-
sess credit capacity, payment trends, and financial strength, yielding four es-
sential indexes: D&B Rating, Credit Score Class, Financial Stress Class, and 
12-Month D&B PAYDEX. The D&B comprehensive report also includes aged 
payment summary by vendors’ industries, detailed payment history, all pub-
lic filings, history of operations, and whatever banking and financial informa-
tion D&B’s in-house scouts were able to obtain.   

CFO Techniques 
 
167  
You can derive some interesting insights about a company even from the 
business summary that starts every comprehensive report. You may find 
out, for example, that the prospective customer is a subsidiary of another 
company, which is owned by the CEO’s father. This may give you an under-
standing of the dynamics within the company. 
Bank References 
Due to privacy concerns, the information a bank officer can divulge is limited. 
Yet, at the very least you will be able to ask about the demand accounts’ av-
erage balances, as well as inquire about the existence and extent of credit 
lines. Keep in mind that most banks’ regulations demand a client’s formally 
executed release of information, so if collecting banking references is your 
common process, you are better off asking for the release right away. 
Trade References 
Ideally, it is most meaningful to collect references from companies similar to 
yours. In reality, however, these companies could be your competitors, and 
the customer may not want to publicize the fact that he is looking for a new 
vendor. The second best option is to match the order volumes. Clearly, if 
you are considering a $200,000 credit line, references with less than 
$20,000 maximum exposure will not be good benchmarks. I recommend 
creating a reusable form with questions covering basic information such as 
the following: 
 
Inception of credit relationships 
 
Credit line size 
 
Highest credit achieved 
 
Last sale 
 
Current outstanding balance 
 
Average payment record 
Other Important Information 
The company’s ownership structure is important for understanding the extent 
of personal responsibilities and for assessing the possibility of asking for the 
owners’ personal guarantees. 
Finally, always ask for current audited financial statements. Whether you get 
them or not, however, is a different question. It is easier with public  

Chapter 19 | Managing Receivables and Payables 
168  
companies whose Q-1s and K-1s are always available for viewing. But pri-
vate companies don’t really need to share their financial information with 
anybody. It is up to the credit manager to convince them that having their 
statements will have an impact on the credit decision. If privacy is the cus-
tomer’s concern, you can always offer an NDA (nondisclosure agreement).  
If your credit staff has exhausted all possibilities of establishing the credit 
line for a new customer, and upon review you agree with their decision and 
opt not to take the risk, don’t just bounce the order back to sales. See if the 
customer will be willing to start the relationship on some other terms, like 
partial prepayment, or installments. After all, facilitating revenue generation 
is a part of your strategic mission.  
Ongoing Credit Monitoring and Collections 
Staying on top of the receivables turnover is probably your most important 
cash management tool. And it all comes down to establishing strict monitor-
ing and quick-response procedures. This includes mandatory monthly 
statements, frequent aging reviews, and a hierarchy of danger alerts com-
plemented with precise action instructions, such as the following: 

Fifteen days past due: AR distributes a duplicate statement. 

Thirty days past due: A collector makes a collection phone call or 
writes an e-mail to the customer’s AP manager. 

Forty-five days past due: Credit manager alerts the sales department 
and issue a moratorium on new shipments. 

Sixty days past due: One of senior managers (maybe even a control-
ler or CFO) calls a person holding a similar position in the cus-
tomer’s organization. If at this time financial troubles are disclosed, 
try to negotiate a repayment deal (a series of postdated checks, a 
signed repayment schedule, etc.). 

Seventy-five days past due: Credit manager issues a placement-for-
collection warning letter. Euler Hermes ACI supplies its clients with 
a thick pad of very officially looking forms, but it is not difficult to 
compile your own. 

Ninety days past due: Consider this a delinquent account and deal 
with it accordingly.  
Remember, the tighter your criteria of lateness, the greater the speed of col-
lections. However, one has to be well versed in the fine art of balancing gen-
tle pressure for promptness and good communications with repeat buyers. 

CFO Techniques 
 
169  
Real-time updates of customers’ files with invoices and approved—but not 
shipped yet—orders is highly important for keeping the credit line utilization 
within established limits. If something is not recorded, you run the risk of in-
creasing exposure beyond the acceptable criteria.  
The biggest challenge of continuing-customer relationships comes when a 
demand for a credit line increase arises; not because it sends you back to the 
drawing board—now that your company has established its own history, 
that job becomes easier. However, as a CFO or controller you must not 
give into the sales department’s desire to satisfy every order that comes 
along. The danger of shoving too much credit down a customer’s throat lies 
in the possibility of reaching a point when even a well-paying customer 
starts delaying remittances. 
Many companies liberally offer prepayment discounts as means of improving 
liquidity. And that is fine as long as the cost/value correlation makes sense. 
When a company offers net 30 terms with a 2% discount for payments 
made in 10 days, it equates the cost of money to 36% per annum, which is 
pretty high. It’s definitely not a good idea to offer prepayment if you have 
access to financing priced at LIBOR + 2%.  
Dealing with Delinquency 
Bad debts are terribly damaging, especially to companies with narrow mar-
gins. If your net profits run around 3% and one of your customers defaults 
on a $100,000 receivable balance, the company will need to generate $3 
million in additional revenue to make up for it.  
If you do have a credit insurance policy and the customer was covered, you 
can place a claim in accordance with the schedules provided to you by the 
underwriter. The claims are usually paid within 60 days for domestic debts 
and somewhere between 90 and 120 days for foreign debts. Of course, as 
with all insurance, the history of frequent claims will affect your renewal 
premium rates. 
There are also collection agency or specialty law firm options. They offer 
their services on contingency basis, which means that you don’t pay anything 
upfront while they do their work. To compensate for that, they charge 30 
to 40% fees on collected amounts. This is a last resort, and it should not be 
utilized unless you are absolutely certain that there is no possibility for your 
company to collect the debt. 
If your customer has filed for bankruptcy and your receivables were re-
corded on his books, you will be notified by the court of the proceedings. 

Chapter 19 | Managing Receivables and Payables 
 
170  
Unless the outstanding balances were quite significant, it is unlikely you will 
be able to recover anything. In the hierarchy of debts, open credit payables 
are classified as the lowest priority because they are unsecured. 
My very first boss, a fourth-generation manufacturer and wholesaler whose 
family has been dealing with retail customers for over 120 years, used to tell 
me that the best way to get back at a customer who did not pay you is to 
sell to them again, but on terms beneficial to you. Some businesspeople 
manage to bounce back after falling into trouble, and if your company’s 
product is what they need, they will come back to you. Here is your chance 
to improve your liquidity by offering them stricter terms citing the past 
precedent, even if they are covered by credit insurance.  
Credit Payables 
I don’t know whether that member of the TEC Group I mentioned before  
is still in business. Hopefully, she revised her wicked ways and her company 
is operating successfully. The economy cannot really afford to lose any en-
trepreneurs, but stretching payables and floating checks (like the company 
illustrated in Figure 18-1 in the previous chapter) is definitely not the way 
to go. A lot of companies experience cash flow problems, yet for many of 
them jeopardizing their credit power can mean an instant destruction of 
the business. 
In fact, the best way to manage your payables and improve your liquidity is 
by perfecting your credit scores. Just think what would make an ideal cus-
tomer in your book, and use those very criteria to become one for your 
vendors and suppliers: 
 
Build good relationships with credit managers, and willingly cooper-
ate when they go through their credit reviews. 
 
Design efficient payables procedures—don’t let sloppiness impair 
your credit. It is very sad when a company has sufficient cash avail-
ability, but is late with an important payment just because someone 
in payables screwed up. When payments are made by check, make 
sure that they go out at least a week before the due date to arrive 
on time. 
 
Pay special attention to big-name service providers, such as phone 
companies and utilities; they have designated employees whose job 
is to report on your lateness. 

CFO Techniques 
 
171  
D&B has done an excellent job helping companies set up their credit-
worthiness. They even have products specifically designed for small busi-
nesses with services dedicated to building a credit profile, establishing busi-
ness credit, and managing creditability. If your own D&B report looks good, 
don’t wait for your creditors to obtain one (for all you know they may not 
have a subscription and you cannot rely on other people’s proficiency). Take 
the matter in your own hands: make a copy and send it to them. It will pay 
off in the long run—all these efforts will build a foundation for your ability 
to negotiate better credit terms with your vendors, and thus improve the 
company’s liquidity. 
The strategy of enhancing your cash flow should always be targeted at having 
a positive terms gap between the ones you receive and the ones you give 
your customers. If the latter are 30 days, then you should strive for the 
former to be at least 60 days.  
And the tactics for negotiating more preferential terms with vendors and 
suppliers should be targeted on what I call “going one better.” In other 
words, if you’ve been paying promptly with 30-day terms, go one step fur-
ther and ask for 45 days, and then for 60. If a supplier has been demanding 
prepayments for years, maybe you can offer paying with LCs. If sight LCs 
have been the primary arrangement, a term draft could be a next step, or 
even better, a standby LC (a much cheaper instrument) as a security against 
an open credit. You get the idea.    
 Caution  Don’t put off a credit manager on the other side of the negotiation by saying that you 
want to improve your liquidity—that’s for you to know. Find another reason for needing better 
terms: growth strategy, market share expansion, and so on—positive explanations that also have a 
connotation of more business with the vendor. 
If you do find yourself in a cash-tight situation, try to prioritize: vendors that 
have the power to halt your operations should come first, then the ones 
who charge dizzying late fees, and so on. Many financial managers hide away 
from collecting vendors during difficult times, but the truth is, your trading 
partners don’t want bad debts either. Work with them; try to negotiate ex-
tensions or installment payments. I hope, though, that you will never need 
to do that.  
 

C H A P T E R 
20 
Treasury  
Management 
Services 
 
In 1997, I was asked to take part in a focus group initiated by, as the invita-
tion suggested, a “large financial organization,” for a discussion on treasury 
services. It did not take the participants too long to figure out that besides 
everyone’s involvement with cash management, the only other thing we had 
in common was that we were Bank of America clients. This was a time when 
direct modem dialing into the bank’s treasury portal in order to access your 
balances and initiate wire transfers was considered a cutting-edge service—
many of our colleagues were still faxing their wire requests. But the modera-
tor’s main task was to survey our willingness to go a step further. Would we 
feel comfortable forgoing our beloved dial-up connections and get to our ac-
counts over the World Wide Web? Really? Just like that—go onto Internet 
Explorer, and enter a web address and login? We debated the possibility for 
four hours. 
Today it’s impossible to imagine doing it any other way—all banks offer 
web-driven services. Moreover, they compete with each other on the qual-
ity, breadth, variety, and pricing of online instruments. When First Union 
merged with Wachovia in 2001, one of the main reasons for the transaction 

Chapter 20 | Treasury Management Services 
 
174  
itself and the adoption of the smaller company’s name was the customers’ 
satisfaction with Wachovia services, especially its online products. 
No one can deny the impact that online tools have on the very meaning of 
real-time liquidity management. The ability to attend to the cash needs of a 
New York company from Amsterdam, Istanbul, Tokyo, Milan, Athens, St. 
Louis, Buffalo, or the hospital bed has redefined the notion of expediency. It 
has resulted in an otherwise rarely achieved balance between the urgency of 
the tasks and the capability to accomplish them.   
This chapter, while giving its due to bank account administration, will take a 
broader approach and explore other treasury-related products and their 
impact on a company’s liquidity. The Internet has sprouted a whole universe 
of non-banking providers delivering various combinations of treasury serv-
ices to their customers. As a matter of fact, some of these companies have 
been able to carve out their own niches by developing specialized technolo-
gies and outpricing large banks out of several payment-processing services. 
Demand Deposit Account Services 
When it comes to managing bank accounts, the main concerns are fairly ba-
sic and self-explanatory: 
 
Ability to obtain information as close to real time as possible 
 
Immediacy of funds availability at your disposal 
 
Ease and expediency of executing transactions such as account and 
wire transfers, automatic payments, and so on 
 
Options for profitable utilization of concentrated balances 
 
Diversified reporting functions 
With these considerations in mind, an executive wearing a treasurer’s hat 
should be aware of the principal difference between regular online (and now 
mobile) banking—which is offered to corporate and individual customers 
alike—and a true business treasury solution. No matter how sophisticated and 
user-friendly the former is, its design and technological capabilities emulate a 
visit to a local branch. Most of the transactions that can be initiated while 
standing in front of an ATM machine, a teller’s window, or a service repre-
sentative’s desk can be accomplished through online banking (although our 
computers don’t spew cash yet). Yet, that plastic shield that separates visi-
tors from the bank’s entrails is still there when you use the generic Internet 
portal of a bank. So, for example, when you enter a wire transfer request, it 
is no different from handing a wire transfer paper form to a teller—
figuratively speaking, it goes into an inbox and waits to be taken inside. 

CFO Techniques 
 
175  
On the other hand, a treasury management service takes you behind that 
shield and lets you look at the screens and make entries into the fields ac-
cessible to the bank employees; it brings you several steps closer to the 
Fedwire (the Federal Reserve Wire Network), a real-time funds transfer sys-
tem that enables its members (pretty much all banks) to electronically trans-
fer funds to each other. Here, when you initiate a wire transfer, it goes 
straight into the wire room, and you immediately obtain a unique Fedwire 
reference number. The system lets you see the incoming funds as soon as 
they are executed within the Federal Reserve network. Moreover, they are 
available to you immediately. Most such cash management products have a 
comprehensive automatic payment interface and multiformat reporting func-
tionality, as well as such add-ons as stop payment and check copy requests.     
If you end up not disbursing all cash during the day, the best way to prevent 
accumulated balances from just sitting there idly, while at the same time 
preserving their liquidity, is to use the bank’s overnight investment opportu-
nity. By linking your business account to a two-way sweep service, you can 
automatically invest all funds in excess of the predetermined reserve over-
night. The banks usually offer several investment options, including money 
market funds, repurchase agreements, and Eurodollar deposits.  
Alternatively, a controlled disbursement setup can be used. It costs more in 
maintenance fees, but it maximizes the investment gains. Under this option, 
you can see your checking balances at the beginning of the day as well as the 
total payments coming through for clearance, funding just enough to cover 
the necessary sum. The rest remains in the investment account.  
 Note  Large international corporations with multiple accounts in various financial institutions 
around the world have further options for enhancing their bank flow management, either by using 
single-portal solutions for multibank pooling, or acquiring their own SWIFT (Society for Worldwide 
Interbank Financial Telecommunications) memberships, which allow them to exchange stan-
dardized financial messages directly with their bankers.  
CFOs and controllers frequently end up utilizing account services of the 
banks that provide them with credit facilities. That leaves you to choose 
from whatever products they have in their service portfolio. But, if you are 
not bound by such requirements, and are concerned with improving liquid-
ity, you should look for the best treasury management services offered. In 
January 2011, Global Finance magazine named Citi a global winner as a best 

Chapter 20 | Treasury Management Services 
 
176  
overall bank for cash management. Bank of America Merrill Lynch (a subsidi-
ary of Bank of America) got the first ranking in the same category for North 
America, while Wells Fargo was named the best in the combined quality of 
collections and payment services. 
Receivables Solutions 
Regardless of all the bells and whistles different providers use to dress up 
their offerings, all solutions related to collection of receivables are differen-
tiated by the customers’ choices of payments. Consequently, they fall into 
two main groups:  
 
Those that must be ultimately processed by a bank: These include incom-
ing wire transfers, ACH (Automatic Clearing House) credit payments 
initiated by customers from their accounts directly into a payee’s ac-
count, and check payments. They are discussed in this section. 
 
Those that can be processed by merchant service providers (not necessar-
ily banks): These include payments by credit and debit cards, and  
e-checks. They are discussed in the next section.  
Wire transfers and ACHs generated by your customers are straightforward 
payments—all you need is to provide the payers with the bank’s routing 
number (a.k.a. ABA [American Bankers Association] number) or a SWIFT, 
and the beneficiary’s account number. 
Some readers may be surprised to know, though, that in the United States, 
checks still remain the predominant method (used in about 60% of cases) of 
paying bills both by business payers and individual consumers. Yet it makes 
perfect sense in the psychological context of liquidity management, espe-
cially for those who experience cash flow difficulties. It is basically a form of 
stretching: on one hand the check is cut, but on the other, there is still mail-
ing time, depositing, float, and so on to deal with.  
To counteract these delays and improve their own liquidity, payees have al-
ways been looking for ways to speed up check processing. For a long time 
there was only one product available for this: the lockbox. A lockbox is sim-
ply a PO box accessible by the bank and specifically designated to receive a 
client’s check collections. As a part of the service, the bank’s employees pick 
up the checks, open the envelopes, record the payment information, and 
make deposits straight into the client’s account. Obviously, from a cost-
efficiency standpoint, this service is used primarily by businesses with a large 
volume of check-based receivables. 

CFO Techniques 
 
177  
The enactment of the Check 21 (Check Clearing for the 21st Century) law 
in October of 2004 brought to life drastic time reductions in check payment 
processing by utilizing imaging technology and allowing the substitution of 
physical paper with its digital equivalent cleared through the interbanking 
system electronically. No more trucking of checks across states lines! 
Thus, remote deposit capturing (RDC) has become a reality. It has raised the 
efficiency of lockbox services to the next level for large-volume bank clients. 
It has also had a great impact on businesses with a much smaller inflow of 
check payments. Now any company can use online remote deposit services 
(RDSs) by attaching a little check-scanning device to a computer and logging 
into the RDS portal of your bank. Besides the obvious benefits of eliminating 
trips to the bank, the ability to make deposits 24/7, and the enjoyment of 
cutting down on clearance processes, there are additional privileges offered 
by financial institutions: extended hours for the same-day value (up to 10:00 
p.m.), automatic payee endorsements, early notices for rejected items, and 
downloadable data.  
Merchant Services 
It’s interesting that the name for these services is derived from the narrow-
est definition of the word merchant you can find in a dictionary: a store 
owner. Ever since retailers and food establishments started accepting credit 
card payments about 50 years ago, banks moved to become members of 
Visa and MasterCard associations and perform a merchant service that in 
the banking industry is called acquiring (i.e., collecting sales drafts and subse-
quently crediting the proprietors with the net proceeds). 
 Note  This is not a chapter on the history or the mechanics of the credit card industry. Neverthe-
less, for the sake of clarification I would like to offer some additional information. Banks who become 
members of Visa and MasterCard associations can be the issuers of credit cards, or the acquirers 
(providers of the merchant services), or both. Other credit cards institutions—American Express, 
Discover, Diners Club, and JCB—are self-contained companies that don’t utilize banks. They handle 
their own issuing, acquiring, managing of cardholder payments, and handling of disputes.   
Merchant services have been associated with brick-and-mortar companies 
to such an extent that at the dawn of e-commerce, when Internet entrepre-
neurs looked for shopping cart solutions and naively called their banks, they 
were frequently met with requests to visit the retail locations.  

Chapter 20 | Treasury Management Services 
 
178  
The window of opportunity was opened, however, because the issuers/ 
acquirers always outsourced the processing of plastic payments (autho-
rization, capturing, settling) to third-party providers—Global Payment, First 
Data Resources, and so on. The Internet demand resulted in the creation of 
a new processing technology, payment gateway, which allowed entering any 
type of credit card information into a virtual terminal online. The largest pro-
vider of payment gateway in today’s market is Authorize.net. 
An ability to process online credit card payments opened the doors of mer-
chant services to companies in industries that had nothing to do with retail. 
Their options further expanded with the development of service providers 
who combined virtual terminals with the conversion of information cap-
tured from debit cards or checks (also called e-checks) into ACH debit requests, 
drawing funds directly from the payers’ accounts.  
 Caution  There are so many payment-processing companies now that selecting the right one 
becomes a special project. The reputation and fee structure are the two most important areas of 
research. A good place to start is the TopTenReviews site: www.toptenreviews.com.   
Things came full circle when banks realized that offering their clients a vari-
ety of possibilities to collect receivables is another value-added service. 
They had no choice but to enter this market sector. Chase Paymentech, for 
example, was listed at number 5 on the TopTenReviews’ 2011 merchant 
service providers list. American Express OPEN has created its own set of 
cash management applications targeted toward small businesses. Since the 
basics are pretty much invariable, the competitive edge is gained primarily 
by moderation of fees and enhanced services such as recurring billing, elec-
tronic invoicing integrated with clients’ systems, and reporting features.  
There is pretty much no limit anymore on what type of companies can use 
merchant services now. Whether you are a law firm or a machinery manu-
facturer, you can offer your customers an opportunity to execute a pay-
ment online, further reducing the receivables turnover cycle. 
Payables Solutions 
I stressed in the last chapter that building your payment reputation is the key 
to negotiating better terms for the sake of improving the company’s liquid-
ity. When you consider the innovative payment options offered today by dif-

CFO Techniques 
179  
ferent financial institutions, that consideration should be the primary cri-
teria. Of course, labor-reduction convenience is another concern. And you 
should also be aware of the options that let you legitimately gain more time 
on paying your bills without any detriment to your vendors and suppliers. 
Electronic processing cut a huge chunk of time out of treasury tasks by get-
ting rid of repetitive entries. We are able to set up templates for any form 
of payments: account transfers, ACHs, domestic and international wires, 
and letters of credit. All predefined fields are populated, leaving only variable 
items to be filled in. Even the examination of international trade documents 
presented for payments can be done electronically today.   
Setting up recurring ACHs for periodic flat-fee payments eliminates the pos-
sibility of missing a payment or being late by accident. And, while giving au-
thorization for automatic withdrawals somewhat diminishes your control 
over disbursements, it is perceived positively by vendors and can earn you 
some goodwill for future negotiations. 
Business cards have always been good options for consolidating and keeping 
track of T&E (travel and entertainment) expenses in a single report. Card is-
suers try very hard to gain a competitive advantage by providing their cus-
tomers with further improvements of delivery and integration of expense 
data. However, with many vendors offering online payments option now, 
business credit cards have become a useful liquidity management tool even 
for the companies with barely any T&E activities. They give you an opportu-
nity to pay bills on time, while delaying the actual cash outlay by at least 30 
days at no extra cost. One of the best business credit card offers today is 
the Plum Card from American Express. It provides you with 1.5% discount if 
you pay your bill within 10 days of the statement’s closing date, or gives you 
60 days to pay the full outstanding balance with no interest.  
Foreign Currency Management 
All major global banking conglomerates provide online foreign exchange por-
tals to their international business customers with multiple-currency expo-
sure. Regardless of the differences in user interface, they all offer direct ac-
cess to foreign exchange transactions and a similar spectrum of services: you 
can check current and future exchange rates, buy spot contracts, hedge your 
deals with forward contracts, and book options to match your target rates. 
These online products are usually combined with the standard treasury man-
agement capabilities allowing the client to see activities on the accounts and 
execute international wire transfers in correspondent currencies. 

Chapter 20 | Treasury Management Services 
 
180  
Just as with stocks, bonds, or commodities, currency trading is an open 
market. Naturally, besides the banks’ foreign exchange departments, there is 
a long list of brokers who perform exactly the same transactions and offer 
their clients similar services. Many of them are big enough to command 
great buying power and compete with behemoth bankers on the pricing. 
The ratings frequently shift, but FxPro and TradingPoint almost always ap-
pear on top-ten listings. 
There is one undeniable liquidity advantage in doing your foreign exchange 
business with the same bank you have a credit line at. Since your credit has 
already been approved there, you don’t need to pull funds away from oper-
ations to cover a margin deposit required by the brokerage houses as a se-
curity for forward contracts. 
Payroll Management 
Payroll, being one of the most significant outlays in many operations, is a big 
part of the cash management function. It is safe to say that many companies 
nowadays opt for outsourcing payroll to such third-party processors as 
ADP and Paychex. In fact, the only companies I know that still keep their 
payroll processing in house are the ones with severe cash flow problems—
they desperately need those couple of days of check float advantage and 
prefer to pay tax authorities at the last possible moment. They cannot af-
ford the processing simplicity of the payroll service provider that initiates 
each pay period just two ACHs out of the designated accounts: for tax 
payments and for direct deposits into employees’ accounts. Besides the 
convenience of direct deposit, so cherished by employees, the most signifi-
cant benefit of using payroll services lies in the time saved on the tax prepa-
ration, especially for multistate companies. That said, if your payroll taxation 
is limited to one state, a well-integrated payroll module, such as the ones of-
fered by some ERP solutions and QuickBooks, may be sufficient. 
Some entities go even further and use complete human resources manage-
ment solutions provided by such companies as Triton LLC, covering the  
entire employment cycle: recruitment, time keeping, payroll processing, 
benefits management, termination, and post-employment. Triton specifically 
targets small and midsize companies with lean organizational structures, of-
fering significant cost reductions by not only replacing entire departments 
and eliminating costly software implementations, but also by supplying bene-
fits at much lower rates than a small company would be able to negotiate.  
As I mentioned in the beginning of the chapter, there are numerous smaller, 
Internet-based providers offering a spectrum of cash management solutions, 

CFO Techniques 
 
181  
such as merchant services, automatic payables disbursements, and “payroll 
processing.” It is tempting, especially for a small company with limited staff, 
to concentrate all these needs into one hub. Yet, you must be an educated 
consumer here: most of these companies can take care of the direct depo-
sits, but they will not file your federal and state payroll tax returns or make 
the appropriate payments on your behalf. Another key issue here is the 
cost/value consideration. Keep in mind that these companies have their own 
cost structures and their pricing comes with a premium, even though they 
are able to negotiate wholesale rates for themselves. Just as with any service 
provider, take your time to shop around for the best pricing and the most 
efficient and comprehensive functionality.  

P A R T 
V 
Data Mining:  
Information  
Management, 
Analysis, and  
Reporting 
 
Entrepreneurs and CFOs open the business sections of their daily news-
papers every morning with a good chance of encountering the cliché that in-
formation is power, and it may make total sense to them in the context of the 
material they are reading. Yet, many of them fold the paper, come to the of-
fice, and try to run their companies with inadequate or nonexistent analysis 
of their enterprise’s health. This is the functional area, where a CFO or con-
troller can impact the commercial survival of the business in the most pro-
found way. Quality and expediency of analytical and reporting activities are at 
the heart of executive decision-making, and have the power of promoting a 
success or instigating a failure. In the fast-paced environment of the present 
economy, providing essential information at the right moment is like supply-
ing oxygen to a human brain—in its absence, you cease to exist.          

C H A P T E R 
21 
Information 
Technology  
Decisions 
 
For years I’ve been trying to come up with a snappy, aphoristic explanation 
of why so many CFOs and controllers have absorbed the responsibilities of 
the chief information officer. It’s not easy because the underlying reasons 
are not that trivial, nor are they limited to smaller companies with flexible 
structures, fluid job descriptions, and frequently blurry lines in the division 
of responsibilities. Larger companies and even international conglomerates 
have experienced the same qualitative change. 
There are, as always, unique explanations pertaining to individual entities, but 
it is possible to isolate a few general causes behind this functional blending:  
 
Historically, a large portion of data processing has been related to 
accounting and finance tasks, so CFOs have naturally been posi-
tioned as leaders of computerization movement.  
 
A substantial portion of analytical reporting has always been ex-
pressed in monetary terms, thus placing the responsibility for it into 
our hands. 

Chapter 21 | Information Technology Decisions 
 
186  
 
The perceived reliability and meticulous disposition of financial pro-
fessionals make them obvious candidates for making decisions that 
may cost a lot of money but must create improvements in the com-
pany’s performance.  
Regardless of the etiology of this change, the fact remains that many CFOs 
and controllers are heavily involved in the information technology (IT) mat-
ters of their employers. For this reason, I felt compelled to start this part of 
the book, primarily devoted to data digestion and analytics, with a chapter 
on the responsibility many top financial managers are expected to add to 
their job descriptions: the selection of functional software. Without a doubt, 
we have a vested interest in making the best decisions we can within given 
constraints, because ultimately they influence our own ability to extract re-
levant data and compile a system of reports that will accurately reflect the 
business’s current state of affairs. There is no question that successful data 
mining is dependent on a computer system’s capabilities. So, why would we 
want anybody else choosing applications for us? 
Software: Weighing Pros and Cons 
If you are empowered with the authority to select, improve, or upgrade the 
technological and computing environment of your employer, keep in mind 
that this is a task that demands wearing many hats at once. You must op-
timize sometimes contradictory considerations, constantly keeping in check 
the desire to satisfy your departments’ priorities first; plus you must fit the 
project into your own budgetary calculations. You want to be a strategic 
thinker. You want to be an agent of change that will propel your company 
into the future. You envision information seamlessly flowing from product 
design to financial statements. But can it be done with minimal capital in-
vestment? The strategic plans of business development must be weighed 
against the streamlining of operations, the integration of data against internal 
controls, customer service expediency against cost efficiency, and so forth. If 
it sounds like an impossibly difficult task, that’s because it is. 
It is a good idea to start by making a list of everything you may want from a 
system and prioritizing it in the order of importance for the entire organiza-
tion. It should be as detailed as you can manage. I have seen so many com-
panies making expensive IT choices based on someone’s suggestion (“Oh, 
it’s a great program. I love it!”), or because they liked the first presentation, 
or because they were impressed with the look and feel of a particular entry 
screen. The right thing to do is to think very hard about the expectations of 
every single user and every single information recipient. Whether the end 

CFO Techniques 
 
187  
result will satisfy everyone is a different story (most likely, it will not). Nev-
ertheless, that is the right way to start.  
It is mandatory to discuss this wish list with your peers managing other 
functions, so that nothing goes missing from the list. None of us wants to 
meddle in the business of other VPs. They run their departments to the 
best of their abilities. On the other hand, this is necessary if you are to 
make decisions about informational support of their functions. No matter 
how busy your CEO is, you must assess his or her expectations as well. 
Then you can try to qualify different features of the packages under consid-
eration against these various aims. The most important thing is to constantly 
perform a cost/benefit analysis, evaluating the gains you will achieve against 
the full cost of this difficult exercise.  
As always, the wish list will vary from business to business. Yet, I find the 
following general considerations most relevant to the selection process, re-
gardless of the company’s operational specifics. 
ERP vs. Special-Purpose Applications 
As a holistic CFO who understands how all parts of a business are inter-
connected and affect each other, you must focus on finding a solution that 
satisfies the needs of all functions along the company’s value chain and on 
creating a data flow with minimal gaps. Putting other aspects (such as cost 
concerns) aside purely on a technical level, this can be achieved in two ways: 
 
Through implementation of an enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
system   
 
By combining a program that covers the majority of general func-
tions, particularly accounting, with specialized software designed for 
purposes particular to your industry 
As attractive as the idea of completely integrating all business functions 
is, this does not mean it will satisfy your specific needs. If it fulfills all 
your requirements, you don’t need to look any further. Yet, one has to 
remember that the best thing about an ERP system is its modular con-
nectivity. When evaluated separately, the modules don’t necessarily rise 
above a generic level, so the unique requirements of each business are 
usually accommodated through further customization, and still the users 
may never be fully satisfied. On the other hand, there are industry- 
specific solutions on the market that may completely match your opera-
tional or service needs. Such a perfect fit potentially outweighs the ben-
efits of the complete integration offered by an ERP system. 

Chapter 21 | Information Technology Decisions 
 
188  
Quality of the Accounting Modules 
Even though the basic accounting functions are more standardized than op-
erational ones, not all accounting modules are created equal. In some pack-
ages they make more logical sense than in others, while others are more 
user-friendly. For example, a package may have award-winning order-
processing and inventory management modules, but if your company is in a 
service industry with monthly billing, such capabilities are irrelevant. Look 
instead for an application with a strong customer service module. I like 
Microsoft Dynamics SL very much, but think long and hard before acquiring 
it if you have an in-house payroll. The payroll module is this application’s 
weakest link: it is not fully integrated with the general ledger and has no tax 
returns functionality. When looking at accounting modules, take your time 
reading the specs for all relevant tasks, and ask for exhaustive demos. Make 
sure that you are satisfied with their functional abilities. 
Reporting Capability 
The reporting capability of the software in your use is the foundation of the 
data management and analytical functions. It determines efficiency, expe-
diency, and ease of manipulating data into anything from standard financial 
statements to a spur-of-the-moment study of a particular business param-
eter. Your wish list must include all variations of information you may need, 
and all possible presentation formats. It is important to completely under-
stand the different levels of data utilization available to you. There is a big 
difference between a system’s ability to produce listings of all purchase in-
voices by vendors, and the potential to analyze a particular product’s pro-
curement history broken down by country, state, supplier, and price range, 
even though they come from the same set of data. In the current technolo-
gical environment, you may need to assess the following reporting facilities:  
 
Predefined system-generated reports: Nowadays more sophisticated 
packages have a limited number of preset reports—they give users 
freedom to design their own instead, so that, for example, cash flow 
statements can group data from different accounts exactly as you 
want. However, you should make sure that certain standard re-
ports—such as orders, invoices, agings, statements, journals, and trial 
balances—satisfy your requirements. You don’t want to spend time 
and money designing those. Also, if you cannot allocate time and tal-
ent resources to report tailoring, you should look for solutions with 
more comprehensive lists of system-generated statements. 

CFO Techniques 
 
189  
 
Ease of data querying: Business solutions are database driven. On a 
very simplistic level, this means that all information entered into the 
system is stored in tables: inventory item tables, sales invoice tables, 
and so forth. Every new record entered into the system becomes a 
row in the table, identified by a unique number (PO number, invoice 
number, etc.), with columns populated by field entries (customer’s 
name, quantity shipped, unit price, etc.). This structure provides an 
opportunity to pull different combinations of data from a particular 
table based on specific criteria. For example, if you want to see all 
sales made to a particular customer, you can specify the customer 
name, and the system will look at all the records (lines in the sales 
table) with the matching “customer name” field. That’s basic query-
ing. However, some systems come with more user-friendly tools for 
querying than others. In many applications, the field names are con-
verted into codes, and you have to use special linguistics to specify 
your selection criteria. Consequently, the user needs to figure out 
his way around it before being able to draw the simplest data query. 
If you need your less savvy junior or middle-level staff to be able to 
extract information whenever you need it, you should consider 
looking for applications with simpler querying functionality. 
 
Drill-down features: These are important in two forms: in live data 
displayed within the system, and in the reports generation. When 
you bring up a customer’s account, you have the ability to click on 
an invoice and see its details, and to go from there into the sales 
order, the salesperson’s history, and so forth, which is a very valu-
able intelligence tool. On the other hand, the report’s drill-down 
features allow you to look at a summary linked to related data in 
other reports. For example, if you are looking at a sales control ac-
count in the trial balance, clicking on it can lead you to a sales jour-
nal composed of invoices, etc.  
 
Data exportability: Depending on the number of modules in your op-
erating system, your business information may be stored in dozens, 
or even hundreds, of separate tables. If the analytical demands call 
for manipulation of the data beyond querying capabilities, or for 
presentation in a specific format (e.g., in PowerPoint), or for a com-
bination of data from various tables (e.g., if you need to see all sales 
of a product bought from a particular supplier), you must be able to 
export information outside of the system—into Excel, Access, and 
so forth. Also, it is not just the ability to export; the different op-
tions for doing that are extremely important. Some systems limit 

Chapter 21 | Information Technology Decisions 
 
190  
you to exporting information as a printed report with merged col-
umns and repeated page headers, which results in a time-wasting re-
formatting process just to make the data workable. Others offer an 
option of throwing raw data into pure, unformatted arrangements, 
which is preferable.  
 
Data warehousing: If you can afford to go a step further in your ability 
to successfully manipulate data pulled together from different infor-
mational sources, you should consider the possibility of integrating 
your data into a data warehouse—a unified database specifically used 
for storage and reporting purposes across the entire business. Even if 
it is only a remote possibility for your company, you should consider 
your operating system’s ability to be linked to such functionality.  
 
Integration with report writers: Further expansion of reporting capa-
bilities is available through integration with various business intelli-
gence software: report writers, which allow users to create data 
connections and design various report layouts. Some of the most 
prominent packages with broad design options (such as IBM Cog-
nos, SAP Business Objects, Microsoft SQL Analysis, FRx, and Crys-
tal Reports) work with specific database layouts—an important fac-
tor to consider. These report designers are fairly sophisticated and 
require training and close familiarity with their structures for suc-
cessful utilization. There are also a large number of smaller business 
intelligence packages that offer a set of predesigned informational 
outputs, such as dashboards and sales graphs, populated by the data 
from the operating system. If you are considering the enhanced 
business intelligence options, your choices will be determined by the 
selection of the main application.  
 Caution  None of the numerous possible IT woes can compare to the problem of your boss’s 
expectations of the new system’s instant reporting potency. In the mind of an average business 
owner, that should be proportional to the amount of money spent. If you’ve spent around $100,000, 
the system is expected to “print” a report with any combination of randomly chosen data. If you’ve 
spent around $500,000, the system should project the profitability a year from now, and the answer 
is expected while he is on the phone with you. If you’ve spent over $1,000,000, the system must 
initiate a daily call to the boss’s personal phone, reporting in a soothing voice yesterday’s net profit. 
The only way to prevent these illusions is to keep a constant dialog and present a realistic picture 
without going into long technical descriptions—not an easy task either.  

CFO Techniques 
191  
Online Accessibility 
The ability to access operating systems and business data remotely has be-
come very important to companies with multiple facilities in different loca-
tions and offsite staff. If that’s the case, you should look for solutions with 
online login portals or other network capabilities. 
Price 
The reality is that for many small businesses this is usually the most impor-
tant consideration. But even if the company is not that concerned about do-
ing things the cheapest way, it is important to understand the full cost of a 
system so there are no surprises afterward. Costs include the following: 

The basic cost of the system’s modules 

Cost of implementation (installation, setups, etc.) provided by the 
vendor (licensed distributor) and billed on the basis of hourly rates. 
Theoretically it is possible to strike a flat-fee deal with the vendor, 
but vendors usually despise the very idea of it 

Cost of customizations also provided by the vendor 

Cost of customer support; usually an annual fee 

Cost of automatic upgrades; also frequently an annual fee 
If you are considering any of the additional integration options for the pur-
pose of business intelligence, you have to estimate their main and support 
costs as well. 
Vendor Selection 
Except for the mass-market programs that you can buy in any office or com-
puter supplies store, business software is usually acquired from a licensed re-
seller staffed with certified application specialists. On the surface it does not 
seem all that important, but as with everything, it is important to shop 
around for a vendor with a good reputation. There are companies, who after 
making their decisions, go through three or more different authorized dis-
tributors due to dissatisfaction with implementation scheduling or an inability 
to understand the business’s needs and deliver promised quality. Vendor as-
signment usually works on a geographical basis, so when you call the soft-
ware developer, ask for a few names in your area, and then check for refer-
ences and even try to visit other companies who have already gone through 
the process. 

Chapter 21 | Information Technology Decisions 
 
192  
Cloud Technology and Software as a Service  
Cloud technology is on-demand technology complex that includes any type of 
software you may need, along with your data stored securely offsite, accessed 
via the Internet, shared by employees in different locations, and paid for with 
a monthly subscription. This is what I call a 21st century virtual company 
dream. Individual applications ready for cloud technology are known as Soft-
ware as a Service (SaaS). Many developers are joining in the movement and 
creating their own packages, from SAP (with its Business by Design service, 
which at the time of writing is $149 per month per user) to Intuit (whose 
QuickBooks is $12.95 per month, with no contract). These could be good  
solutions for start-ups (as long as their Internet connection is strong).  
Popular Software Packages 
Software packages are usually classified based on the size of the targeted cli-
ent, which naturally corresponds both to their price level and complexity: 
tier 1, midmarket, or entry level. However, because the business applica-
tions market undergoes so many shifts, mergers, acquisitions, expansions of 
capabilities, and other movements, it’s difficult to clearly make these distinc-
tions. Instead, I will highlight the most dominant brands.  
Large Enterprise Solutions 
Without getting into a long discussion of what constitutes a large enterprise, 
especially in terms of sales volume (it is really a matter of each specific in-
dustry sector), I will say that full-scale applications by companies such as 
SAP and Oracle should not be considered by any business with less than 
1,000 employees, and even then only if it deals with vast amounts of data, 
looks for a full integration of all functions, and has an unlimited implementa-
tion budget.  
These developers’ main focus is on database management and server/client 
architecture, which acts as a foundation for ERP products that integrate cus-
tomer relationship management, product lifecycle management, supply chain 
management, supplier relationship management, and other functions into 
one platform. Yet, in the last few years, both SAP and Oracle have created 
ERP solutions scaled toward small and midsize businesses. In particular, SAP 
Business One can be suitable for companies with less than 500 employees. 
With its 14 integrated modules, plus e-commerce and the Internet access 
options, it is considered one of the best on the market. 

CFO Techniques 
 
193  
Microsoft Dynamics Solutions 
Practically all independent midmarket software I have purchased, imple-
mented, and worked with has been absorbed into the Microsoft Dynamics 
business solutions suite: Solomon has become Microsoft Dynamics SL, Great 
Plains has become Microsoft Dynamics GP, Navision Financials has become 
Microsoft Dynamics NAV, and Axapta has become Microsoft Dynamics AX. 
They were all very good systems with strong accounting modules and better 
than average data integrity, which made them attractive acquisition targets. 
They are designed to accommodate different industries and together pretty 
much let Microsoft cover the entire spectrum—manufacturing, distribution, 
financial and professional services, retail, and public sector—and they are 
suitable to any company with annual sales between $2 million and $500 mil-
lion. The most important thing they have in common is their unique scala-
bility. The developers constantly create new modules, and you can combine 
them into a full-scope ERP solution or select only those needed to cover all 
your main accounting functions, without losing any functionality. It makes 
these packages attractive to companies with different budgetary constraints.  
Because they are Microsoft products, they have the familiar interface of any 
Windows program. Moreover, the export/import functions are really a snap 
and can be performed in different formats. The applications are integrated 
with the Microsoft FRx report designer, featuring impressive drill-down ca-
pabilities, as well as Microsoft SQL Analysis. As new and improved Micro-
soft report-writing solutions come along, they will most likely be just as 
seamlessly integrated as their predecessors.  
QuickBooks Pro 
QuickBooks Pro is considered an entry-level accounting package that can 
satisfy the needs of most small businesses. It is by far the most popular ac-
counting software on the market. There are no modules—it comes fully 
loaded with all basic features of AP, AR, HR, general ledger, and basic finan-
cial reporting. It will not satisfy industry-specific business needs and it will 
not provide you with sophisticated project or product costing, but if those 
needs are covered by specialized software while your accounting and fi-
nance processes are fairly streamlined, it will do the job until you outgrow 
it. And, as of now, no one can beat its price. 
QuickBooks Pro literally requires no training and can be learned in under an 
hour. It has limited but user-friendly querying features, and while it doesn’t al-
low you to design any reports, the drill-down capabilities of the predesigned 

Chapter 21 | Information Technology Decisions 
 
194  
ones are very handy. You can export data from any report into Excel as well. 
The only separate add-on you need to buy is a payroll module, which is pretty 
good, and offers a rarely found multistate tax return feature. 
Many smaller CPA companies prefer it, because it allows setup for multiple 
companies, and they can create mirror images of all their clients by simply 
importing the client databases (this should give you a hint as to how small 
those databases are). Moreover, it is produced by Intuit, which also devel-
ops ProSeries, the best professional tax software on the market. The data 
from QuickBooks can be directly uploaded into the tax software for corpo-
rate tax return preparation. However, with this software, controllers and 
auditors alike should be especially vigilant when it comes to internal con-
trols; unfortunately, QuickBooks allows easy override of past transactions.  
Final Considerations 
Making IT decisions is a daunting task. Whether you are overhauling the 
company’s entire information-processing setup, changing portions of it, or 
upgrading to higher versions, you are stepping on a long, time-consuming, 
laborious and expensive path. The decisions themselves are just the begin-
ning. The implementation and transitional periods, tremendously difficult for 
everyone involved, still loom ahead. In the end, the entire company, from 
receptionist to CEO, must live with the outcome of your efforts. So, if you 
are in charge, be most thorough and conscientious. Each step should be well 
motivated and evaluated from all possible angles.  
Before you finally give the project a green light, it is advisable to make a final 
presentation to everyone whose contribution you have solicited along the 
way, including your CEO. Emphasize the most crucial changes, highlighting 
the future benefits and their impact on the company’s well-being; give realis-
tic estimates of all costs and put forward a conservative timeline of de-
liverables. Most importantly, make sure that the results can live up to the 
promises you make.  
 

C H A P T E R 
22 
Ode to Excel 
 
Spreadsheets and I, we go back a long way; and I mean a long way—as far as 
DOS-driven Lotus 1-2-3 with its execution of one-key commands. I still re-
member most of them. Many high-tech historians attribute the revolutionary 
success of IBM PCs in the 1980s to this program. It was the first computer 
software ever to use television consumer advertising. Alas, it lost the battle 
of rows and columns to a far more superior, forever improving, and now 
world-dominating rival—Microsoft Excel. But that does not diminish the bril-
liant simplicity of Lotus’s product name: “1-2-3” signified the combination of 
three fundamental capabilities of these instruments:  
 
Calculable spreadsheets 
 
Data analysis 
 
Visual presentation 
Excel fulfills all these needs and more (functions that seemed futuristic nearly 
30 years ago) all at the same time. Today you can take an empty worksheet 
and make it into an accounting ledger table, a calculating tool with automati-
cally updated values, a business form, a fancy-looking report, a formal fin-
ancial statement, a functional database, or a colorful diagram. And it’s all  
dynamic—it can be changed automatically or manually at any time. The pos-
sibilities are virtually unlimited. It wouldn’t be a stretch to say that it is used 
for a variety of purposes by every single businessperson around the world 
and by scores of folks who have nothing to do with business, including eld-
erly people keeping track of their doctor’s appointments and primary school 
children preparing their science fair reports.  

Chapter 22 | Ode to Excel 
 
196  
A Big Calculator 
Accountants have come a long way since using various types of abacuses for 
millennia. In its most basic, primary purpose, Excel is the ultimate achieve-
ment in the “counting frame” evolution: a very large, powerful, and sophisti-
cated calculating device with a screen for data visualization to boot. Wheth-
er you want it to emulate an adding machine by typing a set of numbers into 
a column to get a total, or optimize parameters in various models of stra-
tegic business development, Excel’s workbooks will accommodate.   
Excel’s latest versions come with a library of formulas and functions, which I 
informally divide into the numeration and analytical groups. Many of the nu-
meration formulas can be found on a good scientific calculator, and using 
them accomplishes the most basic of Excel’s tasks: mathematical, trigono-
metric, financial, and statistical calculations. All of these formulas can be 
used in analytical tools created within a spreadsheet environment as well, 
but they fundamentally differ from text, logical, lookup, and reference for-
mulas, which either do not use numbers at all or manipulate them in a diag-
nostic rather than numeric sense.  
The ability to link spreadsheets by referring cells in one of them to particular 
cells in others eliminates the necessity of updating multiple reports when 
some parameters change. It also allows us to hide the cumbersome and vi-
sually confusing calculations of voluminous data behind the elegant summary 
report. I have always found spreadsheet linking very helpful, especially when 
it comes to the executive reporting: that’s all the boss needs to see—the 
easily digestible one page.  
Database and Analytical Functionality 
All the data-warehousing tools, report designers, and business intelligence 
programs I mentioned in the previous chapter are great testaments to the 
technological developments in computing. They are also evidence of how 
huge the databases of some big-time operations are, and of the amount of 
money these organizations are willing to pay to track their information. 
They are definitely not for small companies. 
The good news is that within Excel, data is arranged as a grid of cells or-
ganized into rows and columns essentially making up a database. You can 
apply data operations and analytical functions to it: sorting, filtering, valida-
tion, grouping, ungrouping, subtotaling, consolidation, scenario management, 
and so on. You can also bring in data from external sources, most notably 
Microsoft Access databases, and still apply the same tools. 

CFO Techniques 
 
197  
One of my favorite Excel data analysis tools is the pivot table, which is basi-
cally a summarizing instrument. Besides the fact that a pivot table automati-
cally sorts, counts, and totals (or averages) the source data, it allows the 
user to structure various summaries by dragging and dropping fields, so that 
he can select which data to look at. Then the pivot table can perform cross 
tabulation, which sounds mysterious, but simply means that it will make 
summary calculations for the fields you picked. 
Figure 22-1 illustrates such a pivot table exercise. On the left side of the 
spreadsheet is a partial section of Company N’s February 2011 open order 
details. The full set of data in this spreadsheet consists of 658 records and 
over 10,000 data cells, organized by order number. The right section shows 
a pivot table that analyzes the details and provides a summary of physical 
(tons) and monetary value of total open orders for each product as of Feb-
ruary 28, 2011.  
Logical, text, lookup, and reference formulas and functions are also very 
powerful, especially if you learn how to combine them to achieve the best 
results. Lookup formulas in particular help with searching for data in spread-
sheets with many rows and columns. For example, if in the same illustration 
I’d wanted to quickly see which product was ordered in PO number 
C10440, I would write the following formula: 
=VLOOKUP("C10440",$A$3:$Q660,3) 
specifying first my criterion, then the areas of search, and then the number 
of the column where my target data can be found. The cell containing the 
formula would return the desired answer: TITANIUM DIOXIDE. 
Of course, the size of the database matters. Excel will not be able to handle 
the humungous volumes generated by multi-billion-dollar enterprises. But 
small and even midsize companies may never accumulate enough informa-
tion to justify data warehousing. There is no argument against the beauty of 
business intelligence software integrated with your operational system, pro-
viding automatic real-time feed of data. However, it is a luxury unaffordable 
to the majority of small business owners, who nevertheless suffer from a 
lack of performance awareness. They need to know what’s going on in their 
business without spending money on expensive software, high-salaried ana-
lysts, or consultants who spend days upon days “studying the business,” only 
to offer their own in-house solution for several thousands of dollars. For 
these businesspeople, as well as their CFOs and controllers, the ability to 
have several revelatory and consistent Excel tools could be a lifesaver.  
 

Chapter 22 | Ode to Excel 
 
198  
 
Figure 22-1. Pivot table functionality 

CFO Techniques 
 
199  
Visualization Tools 
The presentation of dynamic information in a form that makes logical sense, 
has visual appeal, and has the power of attracting the user’s attention to the 
most important, most vital aspects of the message is one of Excel’s biggest 
assets. Once in a while, it gives a CFO or controller an opportunity to con-
vert the most boring set of data into an effective tool for influencing peo-
ple’s decisions and changing the course of their actions. 
And it is not only about manipulation of colors, fonts, borders, and shapes. 
Excel also provides conditional formatting capabilities, which allow us to set 
rules for automatic changes to the data’s appearance depending on the cri-
teria we establish. I have to confess that the possibility of making a red flag 
pop up next to an item of concern makes  dealing with the problem less ag-
gravating to me.  
Cognitive scientists established a long time ago that the human brain is bet-
ter equipped to absorb information in visual formats such as graphs, charts, 
and diagrams than in the numerical or tabular formats. We cannot say yet 
that Excel has managed to incorporate all possibilities, but the options are 
expanding with every new version. I am particularly partial to the bubble 
chart, because it allows for the clear display of a three-dimensional set of 
parameters. Consider the one in the Figure 22-2, which shows the relation-
ship between marketing expenses and sales volumes over the course of a 
year. Even without looking at the numbers, you can see that the larger sales 
bubbles are floating at the higher layers of marketing air.    
 
Figure 22-2. Example of an Excel bubble chart 

Chapter 22 | Ode to Excel 
 
200  
The ability to combine different presentational forms within the same 
spreadsheet allows for the aggregation of different sets of data into dash-
boards, which will be discussed in the next chapter. 
Integration and Beyond 
Programmers always act so mysteriously because they are “coding like mad” 
with their secret languages. In Excel you can do that too—you can automate 
repetitive action by programming macros in Visual Basic. The spreadsheet 
presented in Figure 22-1, for example, uses a macro that separates the com-
bined traders’ code in column Q into individual traders, allocates their profit 
contributions for each order, and creates separate trader-by-trader reports. 
Another remarkable attribute of Microsoft Excel is that it’s a part of the Mi-
crosoft Office suite, which allows the interchange of data between different 
programs in the suite: Word, Access, Visio, PowerPoint, Publisher, and Out-
look. The latest Excel version provides an ability to bring in data from outside 
resources via the Internet. For example, you can automatically poll external 
databases, measuring instruments (such as those from Bloomberg and 
Reuters), and commodities movements in accordance with a schedule of 
regular updates. It can also analyze results, update a dashboard, and make a 
Word report or a PowerPoint slide show. (I already mentioned in the previ-
ous chapter the ease of data inflow from Microsoft Dynamics ERP programs.)  
Yet, that’s not all. The unique combination of powerful and diverse features 
combined with simplicity, acknowledged by millions of users, are obvious 
reasons why so many operational, accounting, and business intelligence pro-
grams developed by companies other than Microsoft create options for Ex-
cel-formatted outputs. For example, the popular IBM business intelligence 
package Cognos 8 BI has the Go! Office module, which allows you to work 
with Cognos content in Excel in order to “add value, apply calculations, use 
macros,” and enhance visualizations. Cognos Express Xcelerator, which was 
launched in 2009, is an Excel-based planning and business analysis tool tar-
geted specifically toward the midsize market.  
Some business intelligence theoreticians scorn analytical instruments cre-
ated in Excel for being susceptible to each user’s whim. For example, if you 
create a report and save it in a public directory, someone can easily play 
with it and distort everything, with unknown consequences. However, to-
day’s Excel provides opportunities to overcome such obstacles: you can re-
strict the document to reading rights only; you can share it on a document 
management server; and you can create a document workplace, for which you 

CFO Techniques 
201  
can create a site for the workbook, appoint members, assign related tasks, 
and set the visibility of different documents and even separate objects within 
a workbook or individual spreadsheet.  
No matter which parts and features of Excel you use, no matter the size of  
the business under your control, no matter which powerful computing and 
analytical tools you have available, you will almost certainly find something in 
Excel that you cannot get anywhere else. I have personally found Excel to be 
the most universal and comprehensive tool for many solutions and inter-
active analytical guidelines that I have developed for small businesses. I am 
sure we will continue using it until the next software revolution happens. 

C H A P T E R 
23 
Executive Reports 
and Performance 
Analytics  
 
Business intelligence and performance analytics are current buzzwords, but they 
are not new ideas. Those of us working with impatient entrepreneurs have 
been crafting just-in-time, sensible, easy-to-read executive reports for years. 
Our bosses would not tolerate obscure generic statements and schedules—
they wanted reports that were creative, clear cut, and enlightened. 
Having sufficient knowledge at your hands does not guarantee business suc-
cess—there are definitely other factors, including economic and market con-
ditions, competitive advantages, organizational adequacy, and technological 
changes, among many others. Moreover, some companies manage to tempo-
rarily ride the rising wave of their sectors and succeed without having any in-
formational support at all. However, even under the most favorable condi-
tions, being attuned to the company’s health is a necessity of the long-term 
survival.  
Theory of Executive Reporting 
It’s my professional trait: I’ve always considered timely, forward-looking ex-
ecutive reports to be a CFO or controller’s highest priority. With every 

Chapter 23 | Executive Reports and Performance Analytics 
 
204  
new position or client, the first thing that I do is assess the managerial re-
porting systems’ deficiencies. Then I study the possible needs of all key peo-
ple, including myself, in the context of that particular business, and start  
improving existing tools and/or drafting new ones. This is very difficult, es-
pecially in small businesses, where mountains of other responsibilities are 
overwhelming. Yet there is no avoiding it, because the absence of good in-
formation is like sensory deprivation—without it, the business owners, our 
peers, and we are blind and helpless. 
The scarcity of time is not even the toughest challenge. There is a reason I 
call it a reporting system—it takes a meticulous systematic approach to se-
lect the precise information that will have an impact on different business 
processes and facilitate successful decision-making; and then to determine 
the construction methodology, the scope, the timing, and the delivery. 
There are several fundamental notions behind this task that must be taken 
into consideration. First of all, executive business intelligence falls into two 
basic categories:  
 
External data collected and analyzed to assess market conditions, 
competitive benchmarking, economic factors relevant to this par-
ticular business, price movements of products and pivotal re-
sources, and so on. 
 
Performance reporting on the company’s own activities that provides 
valuable highlights targeted at specific executives in the context of 
their scope of interest within a certain time frame.  
Secondly, when executive reports are constructed, a decision must be made 
for every piece of information on whether it is sufficient to deliver it as a 
singular static figure or in an analytical form. The latter can be any variation of 
time relativity, component breakdown, causal association, and so on.  
Here are some examples that draw the distinction between these two types 
of information representation. You can have a commodity price ticker that 
shows an updated number every time you look at it, or a graph that displays 
the changes over time. A report can show the total number of employees 
participating in a company’s profit-sharing plan, or it can show the depart-
mental distribution of the participants. In a revenue report, data can be pre-
sented on its own, or in relation to the marketing expenses for the corres-
ponding periods. Which representation you choose is an important decision, 
as it has a significant impact on how information is absorbed and utilized.  
Thirdly, when it comes to performance reporting, I consider three types of 
information to be essential for executive business intelligence. I call them 

CFO Techniques 
 
205  
results, dynamics monitoring, and dynamics of results. One can argue that eve-
rything that ever gets reported is a result. However, if we apply a strict 
logic to this concept, we can say that the results of a company’s performance 
have a far more definitive and finalized connotation: distribution of sales, 
net revenue for the period, COGS, and profits cannot be determined until 
everything is confirmed, source data is processed and properly allocated, 
closing procedures are performed, and so on. On the other hand, any in-
formation reported continuously, drawn from immediate resources, with-
out any formal digestive operations is what I call dynamics monitoring. It’s 
like keeping our hands on the pulse of the business, assessing whether the 
vitals are OK, are better than expected, or require emergency attention. 
Finally, the analysis of the historical data provides us with the dynamics of 
results, allowing us to observe patterns, recognize trends, draw tactical 
conclusions, and develop strategies.  
The descriptions themselves indicate that these definitions are closely asso-
ciated with the reporting time frames. We cannot possibly report business 
“results” on daily basis—those are usually reported monthly. On the other 
hand, looking at sales broken up by day at the end of the month is meaning-
less—those numbers should be monitored in real time.  
Considering the uniqueness of each business, it is impossible to come up 
with generalized recommendations. However, it can be safely suggested that 
the following items are crucial for daily dynamics monitoring by executive 
management: 
 
Previous-day business activities: These include market movements, the 
competition’s actions, produced quantities, placed orders, booked 
billable hours, shipped quantities, returns, collected amounts, idle 
times, and whatever else applies, broken down into different categories 
(e.g., by division, region, product, or person).  
 
Balances: These include product and material inventories, cash, 
loans, unfulfilled business, and so forth. 
If there are some intraperiod patterns or cycles, or daily attention is not 
mandatory, some of this data can be assembled into weekly or ten-day-
period reports. On the other hand, such information as revenue break-
downs, compositions of COGS and overhead, profit analysis, budget vari-
ances, market share evaluations, and customers’ acquisition definitely quali-
fies as performance results for monthly reports.  
Reporting packages, regardless of their informational substance and timing, 
usually contain summaries (in whatever format was selected) and volumes of 

Chapter 23 | Executive Reports and Performance Analytics 
 
206  
detailed supporting schedules. It is not that obvious, but who sees what is an 
important functional decision. CFOs, controllers, and their analytical groups 
usually utilize all the data available to them for methodical scrutiny and 
deeper understanding of underlying reasons and causes. At the same time, it 
must be determined what level of detail is necessary to be presented to 
other users. Frequently, illustrative summaries are sufficient for CEOs.  
 Tip  This is a small but nevertheless very important thing to remember when publishing periodic 
executive report packages: they always need to be time-stamped to establish continuity. Also, to 
prevent accidental alterations, never transmit the source data. If you must, you can convert it into a 
PDF file. 
Key Performance Indicators  
Key performance indicators (KPIs) have become a business jargon term that 
basically means a set of parameters that assesses a company’s performance. 
These indicators don’t necessarily need to be quantitative. They can be de-
scriptive as well, aiming at organizational developments, structures, proc-
esses, managerial targets, and so on. However, in the context of this book, 
KPIs are metrics that reflect the achievement (or not) of a company’s ulti-
mate purpose: positive financial results. In fact, I consider KPI reports, re-
gardless of their presentational formats, to be the best overall summaries in 
an executive reporting system.  
That said, I’ve seen a lot of KPIs of different shapes and varieties, and I’ve 
found most of them absolutely irrelevant. A CEO looking at the 12-month 
revenue curve displaying an expected cyclical pattern does not learn anything 
new after spending a tidy sum for the ability to generate a graph at a push of 
a button—last year’s curve had exactly the same shape. How does she know 
whether the business is doing better or worse now than a year ago? 
The crux of compiling effective KPIs is finding items that for your particular 
business are the equivalents of human vitals you see on hospital monitors: 
what determines the company’s blood pressure, pulse, heart rate, and so 
on. Revenue volumes and profits are always the most obvious financial indi-
cators, but a capable CFO or controller thinks beyond that, looking for the 
factors that impact those final results. What made them happen? Was it the 
product mix, the geographical distribution, the concentration of labor? 

CFO Techniques 
 
207  
When you know which information is most important for you and your 
CEO—which parameters affect your business’s ability to survive—then you 
can figure out what combination of data would have a real impact on deci-
sion-making, how frequently it needs to be seen, whether it needs to be dy-
namic or static, and so on. At the end of the day, it is all about common 
sense, and it is very specific. A hedge fund manager needs to see the ticker 
of his portfolio’s stocks and bonds all the time, and it is basically external 
data. On the other hand, any business that uses telemarketing, or some type 
of call center services, should consider such unique items as “cost per seat” 
(the full cost allocated to individual employee) to be one of the most impor-
tant indicators, because the performance is evaluated on an individual basis. 
The KPI example in Figure 23-1 is a compact but fairly elaborate report with 
a lot of vital information presented in an absorbable manner. This particular 
one happens to contain annual data, but it is usually produced on a monthly 
basis, showing the company’s progress throughout the year. Horizontally, it 
is divided into eight sections that represent the areas of executive interest.  
Sales, gross profit, gross margin, operating expenses, and EBITDA are orga-
nized in identical fashion. The top row shows corresponding numbers from 
the previous year. The middle rows labeled with “0” show the target num-
bers for each of these categories. The other rows are filled with conditional 
formulas that analyze the actual results in the source data and place the 
numbers in a row that reflects their correlation with the target value: better 
by 10% or less, better by more than 10%, worse by 10% or less, or worse 
by more than 10%. This positioning of the results provides an instant visual 
performance assessment.  
This example company deals in products with prices that fluctuate with the 
industry’s market conditions. That is why it is important to track the growth 
in terms of the physical units, free of the price effect, and that is why this 
data is displayed right under sales. The section displaying open orders pro-
jects future performance. The entity’s operations are fueled by significant 
credit lines, and one of the main concerns is the leverage covenant compli-
ance imposed by the lenders. Accordingly, the bottom portion of the report 
addresses this area of interest. If the report is used as an interactive tool, 
rather than just reviewed as a printed summary, all numbers can be drilled 
down to the linked supporting data. It’s a comprehensive picture of the or-
ganization’s core accomplishments.  

Chapter 23 | Executive Reports and Performance Analytics 
 
208  
 
Figure 23-1. Example of a KPI set 

CFO Techniques 
 
209  
Dashboards and Other Visualization 
Concerns 
The items of business intelligence and the results of performance analysis 
can be delivered in various formats, and dashboards have become somewhat 
of a fad. Technically speaking, a dashboard is an executive’s interface with an 
information system, specifically designed to be easy to read. Just like a driver 
in the car—who does not need to know how the speedometer works, but 
can make adjustments according to his reading of the device—an executive 
should be able to quickly grasp the company’s vitals presented to him. CFOs 
and CEOs need information integrated from different sources, they need it 
fast, and most of the time they need it in one place. 
However, regardless of the look and feel, the success of a dashboard depends 
on the metrics that were chosen for monitoring. The form cannot obscure 
the substance. One cannot get carried away by beautiful visual arrangements. 
Gauges, for example, seem especially exciting to many executives. Indeed, 
they look awesome and justify the name “dashboard,” but they are the most 
difficult charts to read, they take up a lot of space, and they deliver informa-
tion only on a single parameter. (They are definitely good for monitoring fi-
nancial ratios, however.)  
The point is that the executive reporting decisions discussed previously need 
to be made first and foremost. KPIs, balanced scorecards (primarily used in 
strategic planning and discussed in Part 8 of this book), and sales perform-
ance analysis are good candidates for dashboards. Accordingly, they can be 
efficiently designed only after the right performance parameter choices have 
been made. And truth be told, you don’t need expensive software to create 
good reports. As I testified in the previous chapter, for small and midsize 
businesses, Excel can do just fine. All examples in this chapter were designed 
and updated in an Microsoft Office environment. 
Keep in mind that since they are just visual representation of business intel-
ligence data, dashboards can be real-time/daily, reflecting the dynamics of 
business goings-on, or weekly/monthly/annual, showing performance results 
and their dynamics over time. Even though most of them are created as a 
quick mental prompt for a decisive reaction, some can be used for a closer 
look and further analysis.  
For example, the month-by-month performance numbers (sales, gross 
profit, gross margin, operating expenses, and EBITDA) of the KPI example 
in Figure 23-1 could be converted into graphical versions and represented 
by line or column charts one under another, making the example into a 

Chapter 23 | Executive Reports and Performance Analytics 
 
210  
dashboard. Used in this way, a dashboard is a great tool for someone who 
wants to analyze the actual numbers and see the correlation between differ-
ent indicators. It allows a CFO or a controller to observe, for example, that 
when sales exceeded the targeted levels, in most months this was achieved 
by giving up a significant portion of profit margins. 
The dashboard in Figure 23-2 is related to the same annual results for the 
same company, but I designed it specifically for a quick grasp of the most es-
sential parameters. It does not call for detailed study of the actual numbers, 
but it provides a pretty clear picture of what happened throughout the 
year—a good instrument for a CEO. From the green columns of targets 
standing in the middle of sales and EBITDA charts, you can see that the 
company outperformed on sales most of the month, while opposite can be 
said about the bottom line. The line graph of the physical volume shows that 
the company sold more product in 2010 than in the previous year, regard-
less of the price fluctuation. The leverage gauge points to the unfortunate 
fact of the violation of the lender covenant at the end of the year. The num-
bers show that the company was in violation four times and only twice 
came within the established requirement. This is a clear indicator that the 
volume growth was achieved through heavier borrowing; maybe it is time to 
renegotiate the banks’ conditions. To complement the sales and EBITDA 
presentations, the breakdowns of COGS and overhead are included. With 
material purchases being the largest outlay, the other cost components are 
taken out into the side pie to show further details. 
For companies with primary concerns focused on what and who drives the 
revenue toward the desired targets, the dashboard presented in Figure 23-3 
could be an acceptable visual solution. It analyzes the sales by geographical 
markets, products, and salespeople. It’s applicable to any type of revenue: 
sales, collections, services, and professional fees. The version shown here is 
related to monthly results, but exactly the same concept can be adapted for 
the previous-day performance monitoring, making it a daily dashboard. The 
percentages on the breakdowns can be replaced by the dollar values; in-
stead of open orders you can show, for example, market prices or esti-
mated commissions. 
 

CFO Techniques 
 
211  
 
 Figure 23-2. Example of a KPI dashboard 

Chapter 23 | Executive Reports and Performance Analytics 
212  
Figure 23-3. Example of a monthly sales dashboard 

CFO Techniques 
 
213  
The visual variations are really unlimited, and I must reiterate that the design 
should be secondary to the data. As you can see, one of the biggest advan-
tages of dashboards is the opportunity they provide to observe data from 
various sources within the same framework in an easily digestible format. If 
an executive needs to see the performance of all the company’s divisions, 
they can be brought together onto the same screen. The job is to deter-
mine what will give her the best assessment of the situation and allow for 
making quick decisions. 
Even if you have done your job well and picked the perfect information to 
be displayed in your dashboards, it can only be efficient if its visuals (tables, 
graphs, pictures, etc.) are updated automatically every time you open or re-
fresh the files containing your reporting tools. Even if the perfect integra-
tion of the data inflow from the operating system cannot be achieved, many 
of the processes can be streamlined through linking of source data and 
macro shortcuts. 
The big problem that I have with many purveyors of business intelligence and 
performance analytics solutions and software is that they seem to offer a cer-
tain set of tools designed to fit some universe of average cases. Standardi-
zation is mandatory in order to capture larger market shares. Businesspeople 
who buy these solutions end up spending a lot of money and then unnaturally 
trying to adapt their needs to the options they have, looking at pretty pic-
tures without necessarily getting the help they need. I employ the reverse  
order: listening to users’ concerns about the business, distilling the most im-
portant aspects of it, trying different versions, and only then devising a final 
analytical instrument. If you or your analytical staff are designing an executive 
reporting system, consider the ultimate users and include them in the pre-
liminary process. Most importantly, keep the main purpose in sight—it must 
perpetuate the efficiency of the executive decision-making.  
 

C H A P T E R 
24 
The Importance  
of Segmental 
Analysis  
 
Most businesses are complex and comprised of various distinct operational 
sectors, or deal with different products or services, or conduct business in 
different regions. And that’s an excellent thing—the more diversified the en-
terprise, the higher its chances for survival. I am a big proponent of various 
diversification strategies. However, when it comes to performance evalua-
tion, diversification creates an additional important angle that cannot be 
overlooked.  
You might have developed the most sophisticated executive reporting sys-
tem that reflects overall performance, but if asked to pinpoint the exact 
segments, where you lose or make money, most likely the answer is too 
broad, or intuitive, or incorrect. Whether your company has the most so-
phisticated custom-designed ERP fitted with Cognos or makes do with a 
QuickBooks/Excel combo, the principal concept is the same: only segmental 
performance analysis can signal troubles in a particular business section. 
Practically all companies track their revenues by various categories, but this 
is not enough. The purpose of segmental analysis is to determine each compo-
nent’s contribution to the company’s bottom line—all the way to EBITDA is the 
best, but at the very least to the gross profit level. 

Chapter 24 | The Importance of Segmental Analysis 
 
216  
Segmental analysis is an important preventative tool that can show the first 
signs of developing problems, but it is absolutely mandatory in cases when 
the entire business organism shows signs of some illness and you need to 
identify the distressed areas. A few years ago, I was invited into a private 
company with national exposure—14 operational facilities in different states. 
Something was not going well in this business, which for several years had 
experienced stable growth coincident with the industry’s rise. Its operating 
system produced all kinds of reports related to revenue volumes, but no 
one thought they needed anything beyond that. Now, all of a sudden, they 
started experiencing cash flow shortages, and they did not know why. The 
first thing I did was devise a profitability analysis for each of the locations. I 
uncovered that 9 out of 14 had been consistently bleeding money for the 
previous 18 months. I helped them to close 7 of them. 
Principles of Segmental Analysis 
CFOs and controllers instinctively know the parts that comprise the busi-
ness—those cross-functional sectors that contribute directly to the bottom 
line. The most important principle to keep in mind is that structurally, a 
segmental analysis is a profitability analysis. Therefore, the subject matter con-
cerns the revenue-generating segments. Every time executives ask about on-
line sales of Software A, hours billed by the Chicago office, client contracts 
signed in Canada, and so forth, they’re basically expressing their interest in 
the performance of a particular segment.  
Then again, what is a reasonable level of detail? Do we need the Large Had-
ron Collider to break the business matter into invisible particles? Of course 
not, but a sensible division can give invaluable insight and bring about organi-
zational changes. The segmentation exercise is a game of optimizing a desirable 
level of detail with the resources required to achieve it.  
There are three natural fragmentation categories that, at the very least, pro-
vide a logical aid in defining the targets of the profitability analysis: 
 
Organizational structure (which includes the geographical dispersal): This 
category includes, most obviously, locations (for businesses with 
multiple facilities, multistate and international offices, etc.), and also 
divisions, subdivisions, and so on. 
 
Revenue generation composition: This includes product lines (e.g., 
QuickBooks vs. ProSeries), types of products (e.g., computing 
hardware vs. consumer electronics), and services (e.g., auditing vs. 
consulting). 

CFO Techniques 
 
217  
 
Profitability stimulants: This category includes supply sources, market 
concentrations, distribution channels, and so on. 
Of course, for some entities, the most rational partitions will not fit into any 
of these categories, and that is perfectly fine, as long as they serve their 
business intelligence purpose. 
The principle of allocation applied to costs and expenses for the purpose of 
segmental analysis derives from the activity-based costing (ABC) model, in 
which all activities in an organization are identified and the cost of each ac-
tivity is allocated to every segment. This includes all variable and fixed direct 
costs, as well as shared costs, overhead, and financing expenses.  
For some businesses it may not even be necessary to go all the way down 
to EBITDA. Gross profit maybe sufficient if you have developed standards 
for acceptable gross margins. And if you break down your gross profit 
analysis to the salesperson level, it may open a window of opportunity for 
commercial control (which I addressed in Chapter 11). 
In reverse, segmental analysis can be used to determine the break-even reve-
nues for each sector, which are equal to the sum of all allocated costs. 
Break-even analysis on a segmental level can provide more insights into the 
operational adjustments and improvements that need to be made to achieve 
the desired profitability in a particular division (hire more revenue-
generating staff while cutting the number of supervisors, replace some staff 
with technology, etc.). There are many ways of utilizing this knowledge, as 
long as sufficient diligence is applied to allocation of the expense compo-
nents, which guarantees the accuracy of the calculations.  
Segmental Chart of Accounts 
A logical way of partially accommodating the efficiency of segmental analysis 
and making your life a little easier is to map your chart of accounts in such a 
way that it appropriates revenues and direct costs to the defined segments. 
Depending on the account nature, this can be done by setting up a separate 
general ledger account or through subaccounts.  
For example, it is acceptable, to set up separate accounts for different types 
of revenues, if they are your segments, since you may want to identify them 
in different reports and even in the financial statements anyway. However, if 
the revenue is homogenous but is generated in different locations, then 
geographical subaccounts of a revenue account will do just fine. 

Chapter 24 | The Importance of Segmental Analysis 
 
218  
Similar principles should be applied to direct costs, but I highly recommend 
considering each type separately. Materials used in manufacturing of various 
product lines can be separated into accounts. Operational payroll (e.g., pro-
fessional staff in different national offices) can instead be divided into subac-
counts. Sometimes the same expense can be treated differently depending 
on the circumstances. If you have one lease for a bunch of equipment used 
in different locations, it is better to allocate the parts of the lease, piece by 
piece of equipment, to subaccounts. On the other hand, if your different di-
visions handle their equipment leasing independently, the right thing to do is 
track that through separate general ledger accounts. 
As I said, look at each direct expense category and make your decisions. 
The important thing is to segment whatever you can—then at least that part 
of the analysis can be covered by separate detailed reports drawn straight 
from your operating system. You will have your hands full with indirect ex-
penses anyway.  
Allocation Hurdles 
The selection of proper principles of allocation for all shared costs is the 
most intense part of the analysis; and after you determine the principles, 
the allocation process itself is usually the most time consuming. If you have 
the financial and technological means to do so, have the defined allocation 
algorithms programmed and connected in your system to each category of 
expense, so that you can execute it every time you run the analysis. If the 
analysis is performed entirely in an Excel environment, you can replicate 
the same process by creating allocation schedules linked to your segmental 
report.  
Many report designers opt for revenue volume as the most obvious and 
readily available basis of allocation, universally applying it to all expenses. 
However, even though the better-performing segments carry the biggest 
load of the company’s expenses in general, for the purpose of analytical per-
formance assessment, burdening them with higher shares may distort the 
results. This would be equivalent to punishing them for doing better than 
others, which is most likely the result of superior management and higher 
efficiency rather than utilization of more resources. I find the use of factors 
that create or drive the cost of an activity, known as cost drivers, to be an 
adequate foundation for the allocation methodology. For example, the most 
logical basis for allocating HR costs to a segment is a head count: the larger 
the operational staff, the more time and resources are spent on hiring, pay-
roll processing, benefits management, and so on. If electricity is a shared 

CFO Techniques 
 
219  
cost, the square footage occupied by each segment is a meaningful cost 
driver. For expensing the cost of operational software it could be man-
hours, for equipment installation expenses it might be the time spent on the 
installation of each piece of equipment multiplied by the number of units in a 
segment, and so on. Revenue volume is an obvious cost driver for such cat-
egories as financing costs and payment-processing fees. 
In the example presented in Figure 24-1, for instance, software and hard-
ware leases, administrative salaries, and phones are allocated based on the 
head count of operational staff, because in this particular service company, it 
drives the number of software licenses, computers, administrative tasks, and 
volume of calls. On the other hand, merchant services, PayPal fees, and ad-
vertising expenses are directly related to the volume of services generated 
within each segment. The nature of the company’s business is such that any 
direct contact between operational staff and customers creates the possibil-
ity of litigation. It leads to the necessity of keeping track of such contacts 
through operational software. This indicator is used for allocation of such 
categories of expenses as legal fees, liability, and malpractice insurance. 
To Shut Down or Not to Shut Down 
Let’s say you have determined that one or more of your segments generate 
losses (such as location 4 in Figure 24-1). What is the decision to be made? 
Should it be closed (if it’s a location) or discontinued (if it’s a product or 
service line)? Should you get out of a particular region based on the fact of 
consistent losses? If it is a completely self-contained unit without any ex-
penses shared with other sectors (e.g., USA Networks within the family of 
NBC Universal companies), the answer is obvious. Don’t even delay it.  
However, if the problematic segment carries a portion of the company’s 
overhead on its shoulders, the best approach before you make the deci-
sion is to play the what-if game. What happens with the other segments? If 
you close this one, will they remain profitable? Will you need to make ad-
justments (e.g., lay off some general and administrative staff)? Does it make 
sense to keep this segment going so that it continues to carry the shared 
burden?  
 

Chapter 24 | The Importance of Segmental Analysis 
 
220  
 
Figure 24-1. Segmental analysis by location for a service company 

CFO Techniques 
 
221  
The scenario in Figure 24-2 shows location 4 closed. All direct and indirect 
expenses that fluctuate with the head count are gone now, together with 
the revenue this segment brought in. Yet the other segments’ profitability 
and the overall bottom line have suffered significantly. The bottom line is 
$63,000 less, and location 3 is now in the red. This happened because now 
the company carries an overhead burden that is too large for the reduced 
revenue. The starred expenses (hardware leases, administrative salaries, 
etc.) remain unchanged and have to be allocated to the surviving segments.  
If the company could have proportionally scaled back the hardware leases, 
interrupted the space rental, and cut office salaries and marketing expenses 
by $60,000 and $50,000 a year respectively, it could have closed location 4 
and still kept its monthly profits at $325,000. However, it is quite rare that 
companies can get out of equipment or rental agreements easily; office lay-
offs may disrupt the normal course of business; marketing expenses most 
likely need to stay at the same level to make up for the lost revenue; and so 
on. Under these conditions, even the 9% loss in one segment is tolerable for 
the sake of spreading the overhead.  
The rule of thumb is that as long as a segment can cover its direct expenses 
and shoulder some of the shared overhead, there is no reason to discon-
tinue it. Work will need to be done to improve its performance and bring it 
out of the red zone, but it’s still worth keeping. However, as soon as the 
segment’s revenues fall below its direct expenses (or, even worse, its gross 
profit becomes negative), there is no reason to let it bleed better-
performing sectors just for the sake of keeping it alive. 
Unfortunately, we don’t see too much awareness of a complete segmental 
analysis in either the corporate or consulting environments, and that in-
cludes business intelligence and performance analytics specialists. Based on 
my experience, segmental performance is one of the most deficient areas of 
business analysis. Everybody is busy breaking down revenues into a variety 
of combinations, but very few professionals go all the way to the bottom 
line. It is understandable—allocations are difficult. I know only a couple of 
consultants who consider segmental performance analysis their specialty and 
develop client-specific models for various businesses and industries at mod-
erate rates. I strongly believe that it should be a central focus of multimodal 
small businesses—they cannot afford to let troubles in any part of their op-
erations remain unnoticed and drag the entire company down. 
 

Chapter 24 | The Importance of Segmental Analysis 
 
222  
 
Figure 24-2. What-if scenario of the segmental analysis 

C H A P T E R 
25 
Ad Hoc Reporting  
As a head of finance and someone who is perceived to be the hard hat–
wearing foreman of the data mine with access to the information ore, a CFO 
or a controller should always be ready for a spur-of-the-moment request to 
provide a peculiar set of data or an unusual analysis. Frequently, such inquir-
ies come from owners/CEOs, whose business development plans or desire 
to look at the company’s activities in a new light bring about special ideas. 
Other departments in your company may have urges for obscure combina-
tions of numbers as well. Plus, there are various external parties for whom 
your must spin facts with the most radiant confidence. And on many occa-
sions, creative and responsible financial executives themselves cannot stop 
their minds from digging deeper in the pursuit of the business’s well-being.  
Dictionaries give a definition for ad hoc as something formed, arranged, or 
done for a particular purpose only. This implies that such reports are usually 
used once, but it also has a connotation of an unpredictable relevance. Ad 
hoc reports may pertain to any part of a company’s activity, deal with ran-
dom combinations of data, and take a variety of shapes and forms. As dispa-
rate as ad hoc reports may be, there are few distinct features that apply to 
them all: 

They are usually sprung on you (whether by others or by yourself) 
without warning. 

They have no structural precedence, and therefore need to be con-
ceived from scratch. 

They are always needed yesterday. 

Chapter 25 | Ad Hoc Reporting 
 
224  
This urgency is always the biggest constraint on the reports’ quality and ul-
timate value. It needs to be countered by habitual preparedness and flexibility. A 
financial leader should possess certain key attributes that guarantee an ability 
to mobilize informational and analytical resources on a moment’s notice: 
 
An ability to quickly conceptualize the general reporting structure. 
 
An intimate knowledge of the data arsenal. You should completely 
understand the quality of the information, its potential, and what 
you can distill from it. 
 
Thorough knowledge of your accounting, operational, special-
purpose, and general software. You must have full grasp on where 
the needed information resides, how it will be obtained, and what 
further analytical and presentational transformation, if any, it should 
undergo before becoming the final report. 
 
An acceptable level of flexibility. Not only should you be prepared 
for the request’s essence to be altered at any given moment, but as 
the report’s concept is being shaped, you should also be aware that 
unexpected ideas can come up. You should be ready to discard an 
inferior solution for the sake of a better one.  
 
Realistic assessment of your staff’s abilities with respect to mining 
and analyzing the data as well as designing the report’s structure and 
presenting the results in a sensible and effective format. 
Following is probably the most important piece of advice I can give you 
about reporting functions in general, but especially concerning ad hoc tools. 
You may have experienced this situation firsthand. You receive a request 
for information in the following form: “Can I see numbers about [insert 
subject here] broken down into columns X, Y, Z (or rows 1, 2, 3)?” Never 
accept this type of request. The person asking most likely does not know 
what should go into columns and what should go into rows. Moreover, he 
or she may have only a vague idea whether the information requested will 
even answer the question at hand. My reply to such an inquiry is always the 
same: “Tell me your goals, and let me decide what information and in what 
form will fulfill your needs.” You must know the ultimate purpose of the data 
request. Otherwise, you risk wasting time and effort without achieving any 
viable results. 
By the same token, if you give an assignment to subordinates who are capa-
ble of making their own design decisions, don’t demean their achievements 
by talking about columns and rows. Instead, also give them the reason for 
the report and then limit your involvement to general concepts and ideas—
there are other pressing tasks on your desk anyway. That said, if you don’t 

CFO Techniques 
 
225  
have anyone on your staff who can complete this task on her own, the next 
level of involvement would be designing the report yourself and compiling 
instructions on how to draw the required data into it. Then you can pass it 
on for completion. Of course, in small businesses many CFOs and control-
lers end up doing all of it themselves—sometimes because there is no other 
choice, and sometimes because that’s the fastest way to go. I’ve done that 
many times as well. But if there is someone with a potential to grow, give 
them a chance. It will pay off in the long run, because there will be more ad 
hoc reports coming your way.  
With a strong foundation of high proficiency and alertness, you and your 
analysts can design solutions to fill any informational void and satisfy any 
knowledge request. The following two examples show how different in ori-
gin, purpose, complexity, outcome, and effect ad hoc reports can be. 
Due diligence processes conducted by prospective lenders and investors 
frequently give rise to ad hoc reporting needs. Outsiders have their own 
perspective on how the company’s performance and collateral value must 
be evaluated. For example, Figure 25-1 shows an analysis of 18-month in-
ventory (a part of the collateral) dynamics requested by a bank. The com-
pany’s management never looks at such breakdowns of month-end balances, 
because the shifts between the selected categories occur not just daily, but 
many times during a given day. Yet the bank was interested in looking at the 
still snapshot, with balance sheet values of inventories divided by location 
and trading status, and further elaboration of the unsold position’s purpose. 
This report was prepared specifically for this objective. 

Chapter 25 | Ad Hoc Reporting 
 
226  
 
Figure 25-1. Ad hoc inventory dynamics report (courtesy of E&D CC) 
The ad hoc study presented in Figure 25-2 has a completely different his-
tory. The idea for it came to me on a political hunch. For some time I’d 
been observing management changes that took place within several divisions 
of producer B, a European conglomerate and one of my then employer’s 
top ten suppliers of various products used in different markets. Our overall 
purchase volumes seemed to be unchanged, but a few personal meetings 
with my direct contacts there raised my concern about the new manage-
ment’s tactics with respect to one particular product we used exclusively in 
the United States. 

CFO Techniques 
 
227  
 
Figure 25-2. Ad hoc three-year supplier analysis 

Chapter 25 | Ad Hoc Reporting 
 
228  
The CEO/CFO periodic reporting package I designed for my boss and my-
self included an assortment of segmental reports. My analyst dissected 
monthly performance by product groups, suppliers, and market sectors. 
However, since we bought different products from producer B and the ma-
terial in question was procured simultaneously from different suppliers, my 
regular business intelligence did not provide me with sufficient information 
to confirm my suspicions.  
I decided to isolate the purchases and sales of that product that originated 
exclusively from that supplier, and combine the analysis of physical and 
monetary purchase volumes with sales profitability over a three-year period. 
Unrecognizable on a short-term basis, a deliberate trend emerged: they 
were selling us less and less product (26% physical volume reduction) at 
consistently increasing prices (42% dollar volume increase), which resulted 
in the contraction of the related profits (52% reduction of gross margin). 
Since the material was in the top tier of the company’s resources, eventually 
it would have a more significant impact on the overall performance. Armed 
with this knowledge, though, we were able to take care of the problem be-
fore that happened. In fact, this ad hoc analysis was transformed into a reg-
ular quarterly exercise applied to a group of products selected based on my 
specific criteria: if any volume of a top-ten product was acquired from a top-
ten supplier, the concentration of exposure justified the task. 
There is always the latent possibility of an ad hoc report turning out to be 
so important that it ends up on the permanent roster of periodic reports. 
I’ve seen sparks of fear in the eyes of many an analyst in this regard: “I’ll do 
it well, and then they will want it all the time—more work for me.” Some-
times I wonder if the relative sloppiness of some of the impromptu reports I 
receive is a manifestation of that subconscious resistance, rather than the 
result of the time pressure. I must say that’s a terrible attitude. We all 
should take pride in the quality of our work, especially when it comes to 
business intelligence and performance analytics tasks, where we can create a 
real impact on business vitality. If you create something that makes a differ-
ence and is valuable enough to become permanent, cherish your accom-
plishment.  
 

P A R T 
VI 
Accounting by  
the Book 
 
This is not a part in which I try to jam the entirety of accounting theory and 
its practical application into a few chapters. It would be an impossible and, 
most importantly, unnecessary task. Even the owner of the smallest business 
needs the support of a knowledgeable accountant, and the readers who have 
reached the top levels of accounting and finance management wouldn’t have 
been able to do so without knowing their way around their company’s books. 
It therefore makes more sense to concentrate on several important elements 
that strongly affect the quality of conventional accounting’s final products—
the financial statements. Yet these items are, according to my observations, 
frequently overlooked, ignored, or forgotten. Standardized accounting princi-
ples used in preparation of the financial statements make these documents 
universally acceptable as a company’s credentials to lenders, investors, com-
mercial partners, licensing agencies, and governments. So, it is important that 
the books are compliant and the statements reflect the company’s position 
accurately. Even if the books aren’t being audited by an independent account-
ing firm, they should still be timely and correct—business conditions con-
stantly change, and the need to present financial statements to an external 
party may emerge unexpectedly.    
 
 

C H A P T E R 
26 
Clean Books  
and Compliant 
Statements  
 
Everything that happens in the course of business activities must be re-
flected in the company’s accounts so that it can be summarized, and at the 
end of a period presented in the form of standard financial statements: bal-
ance sheets, profit and loss statements, statements of changes in equity, and cash 
flow statements. Even events that cannot be quantified but have sufficient sig-
nificance must be disclosed in the footnotes. Therefore, identifying account-
ing events and properly translating them into recordable transactions in ac-
cordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) are the 
core requirements for keeping orderly books and producing compliant fi-
nancial statements. 
Many corporate accountants, even at the CFO/controller level, seem some-
what insulated by their operating software from the necessity of delving into 
accounting theories. However, most accounting modules in their out-of-the-
box state are equipped with capabilities common to everyone. It’s impres-
sive, but very general: they hide away the double-bookkeeping, making a 
typical transaction into a single-document entry; they can correlate inven-
tory, receivables, payables, payroll, and fixed assets with general ledger; they 

Chapter 26 | Clean Books and Compliant Statements 
 
232  
can aggregate subcategories, and so on. Yet they are not familiar with the 
specifics of your business: what constitutes your revenue, when that reve-
nue needs to be recognized or deferred, what you can expense and what 
you must capitalize, how to interpret a financing transaction—the list goes 
on and on.  
It is up to you and your staff to teach the system to do these things cor-
rectly, and to set it up so that the books reflect the business adequately. To 
accomplish that you must have broad knowledge of accounting concepts and 
a keen understanding of their applications. You also need to keep an eye on 
new developments and pronouncements issued by the Financial Accounting 
Standards Board (FASB) that may be applicable to your company. As with 
many things, it all comes down to combining your fundamental knowledge 
with new improvements as they come along. 
The Fundamentals 
The beauty of basic accounting principles lies in their universality. They can 
be applied to the recording of any transaction in any business. They are like 
a panacea: if in doubt, you can always turn to them to remedy the confusion. 
A real accountant, whose expertise is built on a strong theoretical basis and 
thorough understanding of the fundamentals, does not care about industrial 
specifics; his knowledge can be easily adapted. Actually, all new standards 
and practices developed by accounting theoreticians are deeply rooted in 
these time-proven canons and essentially represent their practical interpre-
tations in light of particular circumstances.  
There are ten commonly recognized basic accounting principles. I have seen 
them listed in different orders depending on the source. Most of them are 
extremely straightforward and ingrained in our professional consciousness 
to such an extent that we follow them automatically. Others are more 
complicated, and if misinterpreted can render books and financial state-
ments incorrect. So, my list with brief comments itemizes them in the order 
of progressive importance: 
1. Economic entity: This refers to the separation of a business entity 
from its owners. 
2. Monetary unit: For the purposes of financial statements, we disregard 
the changes in money’s purchasing power due to inflation. 
3. Time period: We look at financial events that have occurred within a 
specified time period and at the results as of the end of the period. 

CFO Techniques 
 
233  
4. Full disclosure: Whatever information is considered useful to the us-
ers of financial statements must be either reflected in the numbers 
or disclosed in the footnotes. 
5. Historical cost: For accounting purposes we stick to the original 
costs, whether they are from yesterday or 100 years old. There-
fore, if you want to know the current value of a museum’s holdings, 
don’t look at the balance sheet. 
6. Materiality: If the amounts are relatively negligible, it is acceptable to 
violate guiding principles, rules, and regulations, as they will not have 
a significant impact on the financial statements. 
7. Going concern: It is assumed that the entity will continue to exist 
long enough to accomplish its purpose and fulfill its obligations. This 
principle is the basis of deferrals; it allows us to allocate revenues 
and expenses to future periods, where they belong. 
8. Conservatism: Already defined in the discussion of cash flow projec-
tions (Chapter 17) as an expect-the-worst principle, this dictates 
that we must value assets and incomes at the lowest possible levels, 
and liabilities and costs at the highest; and to anticipate losses, but 
never gains. 
9. Recognition: The majority of businesses employ the accrual basis of 
accounting (as opposed to the cash basis), recognizing revenues and 
expenses, financing, capital, and all other transactions at the mo-
ment an accounting event (a sale, service performance, purchase, ac-
quisition, etc.) takes place. Recording of credit sales is probably the 
broadest application of this principle—everyone knows that you 
don’t need to wait for payment to arrive. However, it is unfortunate 
that the importance of determining the precise timing of an ac-
counting event is sometimes ignored, resulting in misstated books 
and records. Understanding exactly when the title for goods passes 
between a buyer and a seller, or when a service is considered per-
formed, is one of the most important accounting issues. The correct 
answers are tightly related to the nature of the business and the 
terms of each transaction; they need to be very well understood 
and interpreted in order to comply with established principles. 
10. Matching: Directly related to the rules of recognition under the ac-
crual basis, this principle also deals with timing of recording, and 
demands that corresponding revenues and expenses be recognized 
in the same period. This principle guides inventory capitalization 
rules and gives rise to prepaids and accruals. For example, even if a 

Chapter 26 | Clean Books and Compliant Statements 
234  
company has paid for the freight of delivering a product from the 
supplier, this company cannot expense it until the product is sold. 
Likewise, even if sales commissions are not due to be paid until 90 
days from the end of the sales period, a business must accrue them 
as expenses. 
The last three principles, even though they are universally applicable just like 
the rest, may result in different interpretations, depending on the nature of 
a particular business. It is important to figure out how they affect the trans-
lation of your company’s activities into accounting events to establish their 
proper reflection in the books, and ultimately in the financial statements. 
Incoterms: The Recognition Tool 
Assumed by many to be relevant exclusively to companies involved in inter-
national trade, the unfortunately named Incoterms (International Commer-
cial Terms) actually regulate the split of responsibilities, risks, and owner-
ship between a buyer and a seller for any entity engaged in procurement of 
physical products for further processing or any type of resale. It does not 
matter whether the goods cross any borders or the transaction takes place 
within the same country—the definitions and implications of these terms 
remain the same regardless of the circumstances. They even pertain to the 
relationships between individual consumers and retailers selling their prod-
uct through catalogs or on the Internet: the reason your credit card 
charges coincide with the shipping records is because the terms of these 
transactions are FOB.  
With the exception of the service industries, the accounting records of all 
businesses are affected by the correct understanding of what each of these 
purchase terms means, because they determine the instant at which the prod-
uct’s title is transferred from the seller to the buyer, define the timing of the ac-
counting event, and lock the proper date of revenue/purchase recognition. They 
are so important and yet so overwhelmingly misunderstood that I feel it is 
necessary to provide the guidelines presented in Figure 26-1. The last four 
columns are particularly crucial, as they indicate when the ownership and 
the risk transfers occur, when the accounting events are recognized, and 
which supporting source documents are to be used for recording.  

CFO Techniques 
 
235  
 
Figure 26-1. Commercial terms and ownership transfer (courtesy of E&D CC) 
I must mention that group C usually represents the biggest source of confu-
sion. Because the cost of transportation to the agreed destination is paid by 
the seller, many buyers assume that the risk and ownership are transferred 
on delivery, which is wrong. As you can see in the figure, the sale/purchase 
takes place as soon as the product passes to the carrier. Some companies 
discover their misunderstanding of the matter the hard way. For example, 
I’ve heard stories from insurance brokers dealing with cargos lost during 
Hurricane Katrina in 2005. It came as a shock to many business owners that 
they were responsible for paying their suppliers for product bought on cost 
and freight (CFR) and cost, insurance, and freight (CIF) terms—they had no 
clue that it belonged to them while it was on the water. Listening to these 
stories, I kept thinking about all those misstated financial statements with 
years of purchases recorded on the wrong date.  
Ever-Evolving Body of Regulations 
Business environments constantly change, new industries emerge, products 
of a previously unknown nature come to the market, innovative ways of 
earning revenues become everyday reality, and all of it still needs to be in-
terpreted from an accounting point of view, set into procedures, recorded, 
and translated into financial statements. Moreover, everyone exposed to the 
changes must use standardized rules, so there can be no misunderstandings. 

Chapter 26 | Clean Books and Compliant Statements 
 
236  
In step with these changes, accounting theory and its practical applications 
constantly evolve, addressing individual issues with new pronouncements 
and positions. 
For many years, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
(AICPA) took charge of the process of developing standards, rules, and reg-
ulations, first through its Committee on Accounting Procedures (1936–
1959) and later through the Accounting Principles Board (1959–1973). Since 
1973, the duty of developing new statements of financial accounting stan-
dards (SFAS,) for nongovernmental entities rests in the hands of FASB, es-
tablished as an independent not-for-profit organization. AICPA still plays a 
significant role by issuing statements of positions (SOPs) on various specific 
matters, which, after being cleared by FASB, become accepted practices in 
the related industries.  
The globalization of business, including the new ability of delivering soft 
products and services that cross all borders via the Internet, exposed many 
companies to the variations of foreign accounting. This led to the formation 
of the International Accounting Standards Board and the development of In-
ternational Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), which have the main goal of 
making the international comparisons as easy as possible. 
Each of these organizations has its own online research portal. All CFOs and 
controllers should be aware of those standards that specifically pertain to 
their financial statements. If you have foreign currency transactions, for ex-
ample, you must take a look at FAS 52, on foreign currency translations; 
companies with investments in other entities should account for them in ac-
cordance with FAS 115; and those with investments in financial instruments 
(derivatives) should be guided by SFAS 133 and all the amendments that fol-
lowed its issue.  
It is not really necessary for a corporate accounting manager to study every 
single regulation, but it is important to know where to look for the relevant 
one in order to ensure your compliance. Most importantly, keep your eyes 
and ears open to hot topics in discussion. AICPA and FASB eventually react 
to new business developments. When in the early 2000s financial brokers 
started packaging delinquent debt into securities and the entire industry that 
trades them formed, AICPA responded in 2003 with SOP 03-3, Accounting 
for Certain Loans or Debt Securities Acquired in a Transfer, which affected 
every single asset management company. The latest hot topic has been the 
revenue recognition for providers of software as a service.  
So, if you are in a new industry or deal with products that have not been on 
the market before—or if something does not quite fit your understanding of 

CFO Techniques 
 
237  
accounting rules—don’t ignore it. Do your research and be attuned to the 
possible changes in standards. Even if your financial statements are audited 
by one of the larger CPA firms, don’t wait for them to alert you—they have 
a lot of clients. It is your job to know what makes your books correct and 
financial statements compliant.  

C H A P T E R 
27 
Accounting Cycles 
and the Structure 
of Financial  
Statements  
 
In Chapter 8, the concept of accounting (or transactional) cycles was used 
to separate quintessential tasks into functional groups with closely related 
procedures: financing/investing, expenditure, conversion, and revenue cy-
cles. Generally speaking, this is the most sensible basis for building any type 
of accounting framework, from charts of accounts to budgets and analytical 
systems, because each cycle encompasses specific categories of transactions 
and account balances, reflecting a sector of related business events in a 
company’s books.  
Understanding the relationship between transactional cycles and financial state-
ments as it applies to your business guarantees higher-quality financial reporting. 
Moreover, auditors use a transactional cycle approach in their examination 
of books and records, evaluation of internal control, and assessment of risks. 
Having well-constructed statements accommodates a better understanding 
of the company’s activities and their translation into accounting events by 

Chapter 27 | Accounting Cycles and the Structure of Financial 
Statements 
 
240  
anyone who needs to analyze them; not just auditors and tax preparers, but 
also lenders, investors, and anyone conducting a due diligence exercise. 
It starts with building the chart of accounts within your software. You usually 
have the option of giving each account two designations. The first indicates 
whether it belongs to the balance sheet or the income statement. The other 
corresponds to the transactional cycles (revenue, expenses, COGS, cash, re-
ceivables, payables, etc.). With a few variations, virtually all programs nowa-
days have a very similar setup interface. Some programs go even further, of-
fering a user to pick a type of business and respond with an equivalent pre-
built chart of accounts that accommodates the correlation between account-
ing cycles and the structure of financial statements. You can take this route if 
it fits your needs perfectly (or requires only minor adjustments). Otherwise, 
custom tailoring is always recommended. 
The treatment of COGS in income statements requires a special note here. 
Conventionally, only manufacturing companies are considered to have a true 
conversion cycle with materials going through production processes. How-
ever, the act of creating services or adding value to products, as it is done by 
entities in the service and trading industries, is in essence an operational 
transformation. It involves allocation of special labor and other expenses, 
which are very different from those usually included in overhead. In a call 
center, for example, employees fulfilling customer service functions on behalf 
of clients represent operational labor, and it would not be correct to record 
their wages in the same account as that of the receptionist’s in the front of-
fice. It is sort of a quasi-conversion cycle that gives rise to cost of 
goods/services sold in any type of business.  
The diagram in Figure 27-1 represents a generalized arrangement of transac-
tional cycles fitting to most companies’ activities. 
Keep in mind that changes in equity and cash flow are not primary state-
ments—they are derivatives of the main ones: two consecutive balance sheets 
and the current income statement. It is the makeup of these core statements 
that is directly impacted by the transactional cycles. Regardless of the com-
pany’s specifics, all balance sheets and income statements are organized in the 
same standard manner, which is very helpful as a constructional guideline. 
 

CFO Techniques 
 
241  
 
Figure 27-1. Typical transactional cycles 
Balance Sheets 
Standard components of balance sheets include the following aggregate ac-
counting categories: 
 
Assets: 
 
Current assets (those with turnover under 12 months), listed in the 
order of their liquidity: Cash, inventories, receivables (less allow-
ance for bad debt), and so on. 
 
Fixed assets: Property, plant, equipment, furniture, fixtures (all 
reduced by accumulated depreciation), investment property, in-
tangible assets (less accumulated amortization), financial assets 
(non-equity investments), and equity investments. 
 
Liabilities: 
 
Current liabilities (those maturing in less than 12 months): Payables, 
short-term financial liabilities, tax liabilities, contingent liabilities, 
deferred income, and so on. 

Chapter 27 | Accounting Cycles and the Structure of Financial 
Statements 
 
242  
 
Long-term liabilities: Obligations with a maturity date over one 
year. 
 
Equity: 
 
Issued capital 
 
Non-controlling capital 
 
Retained earnings 
 
Capital reserves 
Income Statements 
All income statements adhere to the following basic structure:  
Revenue 
Less: Cost of goods sold 
Resulting gross profit 
Less: General and administrative expenses 
Other income 
Less: Other expenses 
Resulting income before taxes 
Income taxes 
Net income 
 Caution  In accordance with the previously discussed matching principle, only the revenue cycle 
can establish how material purchases and operational expenses will be reflected in the financial 
statements: expensed as COGS in an income statement, or capitalized in the balance sheet’s cur-
rent assets section.  
Besides separating accounts among the primary statements, there are sev-
eral other important things to remember when building a chart of accounts 
that will help adequately translate the nature of your business into the finan-
cial reports. First of all, most systems follow numerical order logic. There-
fore, items that you want to be listed first in your statements must have 

CFO Techniques 
 
243  
smaller account numbers. For example, all of your current liabilities should 
be numbered with combinations that start with smaller digits than the long-
term liabilities. Otherwise, they may show up in the wrong part of your bal-
ance sheet. 
Also, by its nature, the income statement, driven by expenditure, conver-
sion, and revenue cycles, has a 12-month life span—at the end of a fiscal 
year we close the net result (income summary) into the retained-earnings 
account. This is why all corresponding balance sheet accounts are situated 
in the current section: AR, AP, inventories, and so on.  
The financing/investing cycle is confined to the balance sheet realm. The rest 
of the cycles are largely responsible for the interaction of income statement 
and balance sheet general ledger accounts. And this responsibility of estab-
lishing the clear correspondence between the accounts becomes a key task 
in constructing sensible financial statements. 
For example, if you buy four types of material (or goods for resale) and set 
up four purchase general ledger accounts, it is highly advisable to set up four 
corresponding inventory accounts. Moreover, make sure that the account 
number structures are aligned to reflect the relationship within each pur-
chase/inventory pair. This will make the ledger more comprehensible and 
list corresponding accounts on the balance sheet and income statement in 
the same order. Furthermore, if you have an inventory module, it will ease 
the setup of automatic recording of purchased materials as inventory items 
and their subsequent transfers into COGS.  
By the same token, if you provide services to starkly different groups of cus-
tomers and would like to separate them into specific receivable accounts, it 
would be a good idea to set up matching revenues as well. For some com-
panies, the correlation of accounts through the entire chain of cycles may be 
appropriate: from purchases and payables through inventories and COGS to 
sales and receivables. You must evaluate the transactions within each of the 
accounting cycles and define for them the best path into the company’s fi-
nancial results. 
The table in Figure 27-2 provides the basic correlation between trans-
actions that typically occur within each accounting cycle and the way they 
are reflected in financial statements. Knowing the transactional associations 
between income statement and balance sheet accounts can serve as an aid 
for charting them in a way that clearly reveals the nature of the company’s 
activities.  

Chapter 27 | Accounting Cycles and the Structure of Financial 
Statements 
 
244  
 
Figure 27-2. Correlation between transactional cycles and the structure of financial 
statements  
 

C H A P T E R 
28 
The Most Important 
Statement: Cash 
Flow 
Anyone who is required by their professional duties to review financial 
statements of different companies in order to evaluate their performance—
investment analysts, lenders, D&B rating experts and other credit specialists, 
and all accounting professors and members of various standards boards—will 
tell you that you can gather more valuable information about a company’s 
health from its cash flow statements than from any other part of the stan-
dard financial reporting package. This recognition of the report’s importance 
is grounded in the same reasoning that places treasury management (dis-
cussed in Part 4 of this book) higher on my priority list than conventional ac-
counting issues: having grand revenue volumes and booking impressive net 
incomes does not guarantee that a company will have sufficient funds tomor-
row to pay its payroll tax obligations or rent.  
Even though common sense makes the value of the cash flow statement ob-
vious, it took a while for it to make its way into formal financial disclosure 
requirements. Since the early 1970s, FASB has been trying to work out the 
reporting provisions and definitions for cash flow statements. Only in 1987 
did FAS 95 make the cash flow statement a mandatory part of a company’s 

Chapter 28 | The Most Important Statement: Cash Flow 
 
246  
financial statements. Thus, the fact that revenues and expenses recorded on 
accrual basis produce paper profits and cannot be used to assess a com-
pany’s viability in the way that positive cash flow allows us to do was offi-
cially recognized. 
The purpose of a cash flow statement is to provide insight into the following 
crucial indicators: 
 
The company’s liquidity and solvency 
 
The nature of the dynamics affecting the company’s assets, liabilities, 
and equities 
 
The company’s ability to improve its future cash flows 
 
Estimates of volume, timing, and probability of future cash flows 
In order to fulfill these functions, the statement examines the changes in 
cash flows generated by the company’s activities, which are separated by 
their nature into three categories: 
 
Operating activities, including all revenue-generating activities of pro-
ducing and selling goods and/or services (sales receipts, payments 
related to procurement of materials, supplies, services, and labor), 
short-term borrowing activities (operating and trading loan receipts 
and repayments, and related interest payments), and short-term in-
vesting activities (interest and dividends receipts, proceeds from eq-
uity-trading activities, etc.) 
 
Investing activities (i.e., the company’s investments), including pur-
chase and disposition of assets (plants, equipment, marketable secu-
rities, etc.), loans made to suppliers or received from customers, 
and mergers and acquisitions 
 
Financing activities (i.e., investments into the company), including is-
sue of debt instruments and long-term borrowing (proceeds, princi-
pal, and interest payments), capital leases (repayments only, since 
the obtaining of the related assets does not involve cash and is dis-
closed separately), repurchase of the company’s stock, and pay-
ments of dividends and distributions 
Because the statement is concerned with the changes these activities cre-
ate in the cash balance, three basic financial statements are utilized in its 
preparation: 
 
The income statement, covering the same fiscal period, to obtain 
the net income figure as a starting point of the cash flow calculation 

CFO Techniques 
 
247  
 
Two consecutive balance sheets (previous and current year), flank-
ing the beginning and the end of the period, for calculation of in-
cremental changes (inflows and outflows) in each cash-related item 
After adding all inflows and subtracting all outflows generated by the com-
pany’s activities, we arrive at the number that represents the change in the 
cash balance itself. It is customarily used to reconcile the company’s cash bal-
ances at the beginning and the end of the period.  
Note that this is the only analytical report included in a formal set of finan-
cial statements. Its diagnostic quality separates it from the passive nature of 
the balance sheet’s momentary snapshot and the income statement’s sum-
mary of the period’s events. Of course, there is a slew of ratio-based calcu-
lations one can perform with the numbers provided by those other two 
documents in order to assess such parameters as turnover, leverage, and 
profitability. Yet it is up to the users of the reports to conduct such manip-
ulations. But the cash flow statement does not require any additional cal-
culations. It’s an analytical instrument that gives you an instant understanding of 
a company’s ability to meet its immediate payment obligations and a pretty good 
idea about the quality of the treasury function.  
So, it is unfortunate that the majority of smaller companies’ owners, who 
theoretically constitute the core audience of this particular report, don’t 
really know how to read it. So many executives have admitted to me that 
they don’t understand the cash flow statement that I have come to the con-
clusion that it must be a dominant trend. Moreover, many less-proficient fi-
nancial professionals seem to be uncomfortable with this great tool. But 
cash flow is not Fermat’s Last Theorem, and if you know its purpose and 
understand its logic, it becomes clear enough to explain to anyone. 
For educational purposes, I must mention the direct method of generating a 
cash flow statement, which is a cash-basis approach that uses actual cash re-
ceipts and cash payments during the period, extracted from the accounting 
records. Even though the resulting report appears to be easier to read, it is 
essentially disconnected from the balance sheet and income statement re-
ports and relies on a separate calculation of cash inflow and outflow. The in-
direct method, on the other hand, essentially converts the accrual net income 
from the profit-and-loss statement for the period into cash flow, utilizing 
changes in the balance sheet items over the same period. It is a prevailing 
method prescribed by GAAP. 
Learning how to correctly interpret these changes in the balances of assets, 
liabilities, and equity items ensures a firm grasp on the essence of this most 
valuable of financial statements. I will use the cash flow statement presented 

Chapter 28 | The Most Important Statement: Cash Flow 
 
248  
in Figure 28-1 as a case study to provide explanations for the treatment of 
some of the most notable items. Since the reporting of small and midsize pri-
vate businesses is somewhat informal, you may have seen and used various 
formats with different names for individual items. In some reports, you might 
see “Change in accounts receivable,” while in others you might see “Accounts 
receivable activity.” I have deliberately used a descriptive approach, identifying 
the effect that a particular item’s change between the beginning and the end 
of the period will have on the cash position. This should provide you with a 
guideline to proper treatment of each cash-related activity. 
 
Figure 28-1. Cash flow statement (courtesy of E&D CC) 
v

CFO Techniques 
 
249  
Since the cash flow statement’s calculation goal is to determine change in 
cash, each activity item is examined from the vantage point of whether its 
change gives rise to or reduces cash (these definitions of positive and nega-
tive effects on the cash flow are sometimes referred to as adjustment rules): 
 
The faster you collect your receivables, the better the cash flow. An 
increase in AR balance between the beginning and the end of the 
year signifies slower collections and has a negative effect on cash. 
Hence, it is treated as a deduction. A decrease in AR balance would 
be indicative of an additional cash inflow, and the increment’s sign 
would be turned to positive. 
 
Holding inventories slows the revenue generation down and re-
duces the potential for cash inflows. A buildup of inventory by the 
end of the period shows that resources were used without a match-
ing incoming cash flow—a deduction. As shown in Figure 28-1, XYZ 
Company apparently experienced high rates of inventory liquidation, 
which decreased its balance by about $250,000. This is added to the 
cash flow calculation.  
 
When you pay for goods and services in advance, it means that the 
outflow of cash takes place before the benefits can be used in your 
operating activities to generate revenue. Therefore, if the balance is 
higher at the end of the period, then there has been an outflow. A 
reduction in advances and prepaids shows an improvement in the 
treasury management, either through elimination of such terms of 
payment altogether or shortening of the time that these items re-
main outstanding—an addition to the cash inflow. 
 
Increases in any types of current liabilities, including all payables and 
accruals, signify either receipts of more payments (operating loans, 
unearned income, etc.) or receipts of goods/services that can be 
used in revenue-generating activities before the company pays for 
them (AP, accruals, etc.)—all of which are positive. On the other 
hand, reductions of liabilities would mean more repayments than 
receipts and result in a net outflow.  
 
The determination of cash flow effects  for investing and financing 
activities is more straightforward. There are no hidden implica-
tions—it’s all about actual payments and receipts. Every time assets 
or investment instruments are obtained, an outflow of cash takes 
place—a reduction. Divesting of such items brings cash in—an addi-
tion. Raising capital through issue of debt or equity instruments by 

Chapter 28 | The Most Important Statement: Cash Flow 
 
250  
definition brings money in. On the other hand, if a company buys 
stock back or pays dividends, cash goes out. 
That’s all there is to it. If you ever encounter an item that is not explicitly 
mentioned here, just apply the same logical principles to classify it. 
All operating activities are featured in cash flow statements, including non-
cash items such as depreciation, amortization, and deferred tax, which are 
added back to the net income when it’s converted into the cash flow. How-
ever, investing and financing activities that don’t involve cash and don’t have 
an impact on net income are not included here. Some examples of such 
transactions are leasing of assets, debt-to-equity conversions, non-cash ex-
changes of assets and liabilities, and stock issues in exchange for assets. 
These events are usually disclosed in the financial statement’s footnotes. 
Besides concluding that XYZ Company is solvent and has sufficient liquidity, 
we can also note that the increase in AR is most likely a result of sales vo-
lume growth fueled by an increase in borrowing (both are nearly identical). 
We can gather that the company’s products are selling well and the inven-
tory’s turnover is satisfactory, since the inventory balance has decreased 
(even though not as much as in the previous year). And while the CFO or 
controller needs to work on getting better terms with the vendors to slow 
down the payables’ outflow, she obviously did a great job with the significant 
reduction of prepaids and advances. 
A cash flow statement is a great source of invaluable information that can be 
put to good use by a company’s financial and executive top management, as 
long as it is fully understood and correctly interpreted.  
 

C H A P T E R 
29 
Choose Your  
Auditors Wisely 
 
This personal aphorism of mine actually goes, “Choose your auditors wisely 
and teach them everything you know,” but that would make for too long of 
a chapter title. I will address the teaching part at the end of this chapter.  
And I say “auditors” in a very broad sense. Millions of small and midsize com-
panies never get their books formally audited, because they have no use for 
an unqualified opinion.1 Yet practically all corporations engage some sort of 
public accounting and/or taxation service—for compilations of financial state-
ments from the company’s records, reviews, state of business evaluations, 
preparation of tax returns, and so on. I could collectively call them Certified 
Public Accountants (CPAs), but that would be confusing. Many CPAs work in 
corporate finance and accounting, quite few of them as CFOs and controllers. 
So, the few important principles highlighted in this chapter pertain to firms 
providing any type of independent accounting work, not just audits. 
Accounting Firm Selection Criteria 
The only time a company’s management does not have a say in which ac-
counting firm to hire is when an entity is backed by venture, hedge fund, or 
                                                
1 An auditor’s formal report concluding that a company’s financial statements present a true 
and fair view, in all material respect, of its financial position in accordance with the financial 
reporting framework applicable to the entity (GAAP, IFRS, etc.).  

Chapter 29 | Choose Your Auditors Wisely 
 
252  
private equity capital. The investors are likely to impose on their portfolio 
companies the auditors that satisfy their exit strategy—most likely one of 
the Big Four (Deloitte, Ernst & Young, PricewaterhouseCoopers, and 
KPMG). In the majority of other cases, the decision is unrestrained. 
The truth is that, at the beginning of their entrepreneurial journeys, many 
private companies’ owners go to someone they know or to someone who 
was recommended by someone they know; frequently, it is a one-person 
practitioner or a very small firm. If the business is successful, its needs even-
tually outgrow the service provider’s capacities. In another scenario, you 
may have a long-term relationship with a firm, but it merges with another 
one and stops being a good fit. Sometimes these mergers result in huge fee 
hikes and the cost becomes unaffordable. Or, you get new financing and 
need to upgrade your auditors to satisfy lenders’ and investors’ require-
ments. Whatever the reason for your being faced with the necessity of se-
lecting new independent accountants, the choice should be founded on a 
logical set of criteria that will yield a satisfactory match. The following guide-
lines are intended to help narrow down the selection. 
Purpose 
At least at the beginning, looking for an auditor isn’t really much different 
than looking for any other professional service (e.g., a doctor or an attor-
ney). You don’t go to an injury lawyer if you are seeking a divorce (even 
though it may sound appropriate). So, there is no reason to hire Deloitte if 
all you need is a straightforward, single-company corporate tax return based 
on the trial balance you prepared. You can use H&R Block Small Business 
Services for that. I also happen to think that, with some exceptions, the Big 
Four are culturally not the best options for small and midsize companies.  
However, if the company’s strategic plans involve going public or being ac-
quired by a big industry player, your choice should have a nationally recog-
nizable name and an impressive track record of similar deals. On the other 
hand, if you seek assistance with multistate taxes or transfer price issues, 
look for firms with strong taxation departments. If it’s not just accounting 
but consulting support that you require, look specifically for the companies 
that cover the precise areas where you need help, whether that is policies 
and internal control revisions, or performance analytics, budgeting, and 
other instrument development.  
CFOs and controllers of privately held small and midsize companies with 
standard audit-plus-taxes needs have to do a lot of legwork in the selection 
process, because the number of firms providing such services is huge. Of 

CFO Techniques 
 
253  
course, Google makes all types of research easier nowadays. You can type 
“top 100 accounting firms” in the search box and get an interactive list that 
lets you quickly explore the companies’ sites one by one. Or, you can type 
“state payroll tax services Harrison, PA,” and relevant results will come 
back to you within seconds. Another possible starting point for the first 
stages in the selection process is GoodAccountants.com. It is a free service 
that lets you select from over 25 primary accounting areas of interest. With 
minimal information about your business, it finds possible candidates from 
its national registry of thousands of small CPA firms and individual profes-
sionals. (They are the ones who pay for this brokerage—the entry fee is 
$5,000.) You can get from this site an initial list of providers of the particu-
lar services you need, and then narrow it down based on other criteria. 
Business Sector Specialization 
Most large and very large firms (let’s say the top 20) cover all possible serv-
ices (accounting and auditing, taxation, forensics, business consulting, risk, 
compliance, etc.), and also have specialists on staff for practically all in-
dustries, especially the ones that bring in big bucks through equity financing 
and IPOs. At the onset of the Internet bubble, around 1995, all the top-tier 
firms (at the time it was Big 5 with Arthur Andersen still in the game before 
it got Enroned) formed technology divisions; they learned how to trace 
every online customer’s mouse clicks to the revenue records.  
Middle-market and smaller firms, however, tend to specialize in certain busi-
ness sectors, so the hire-who-you-know tradition can lead to some unfor-
tunate outcomes. For example, I have known of international commodity-
trading companies that used accounting firms with 99% of their clients in ap-
parel and footwear. As a result, these companies’ tax returns lacked man-
datory forms disclosing foreign bank and financial accounts. An even a 
worse example would be a structurally complex financial service using a 
personal taxation practitioner for its independent accounting needs and hav-
ing the books of all its subsidiaries commingled.  
Whatever you use it for, you are much better off with a firm that either has 
broad expertise or, through its clientele, has gained sufficient understanding 
of your industry’s specifics and the applicable reporting requirements. Again, 
you can search online, but there are other ways of locating specialists as well. 
In most industries, competitors know each other well. They meet at conven-
tions and trade shows, they steal each other’s key salespeople, and so on; in 
other words, you or your CEO most likely knows someone to ask about in-
dependent accountants. Your bank officers, who frequently have clients in 

Chapter 29 | Choose Your Auditors Wisely 
 
254  
similar businesses, represent another good source for this information. The 
same goes for factoring services. Just ask around—it’s worth the effort.  
Geographical Exposure 
A frequent argument for going with one of the Big Four companies is their 
international presence. They are in all commercial and financial centers 
around the world, and if you work for a company with foreign subsidiaries, 
currency translations, and financial statements’ consolidation, it actually 
makes sense to deal with a firm that can dispatch its local staff to your over-
seas offices if needed. Most second-tier companies are multistate. They are 
usually also members of Nexia International, a worldwide network of inde-
pendent firms, which helps them to refer you to a local firm in another 
country. However, be wary of such referrals, because it is very possible that 
a firm has never worked with its foreign connection before and cannot 
guarantee its proficiency.  
Even without such complications, geographical spread is an important factor. 
It is much less relevant for consulting and analytical services, which with cur-
rent technology can be conducted remotely. However, when it comes to 
auditing and accounting help, you definitely want somebody with an office in 
your vicinity. Depending on your remoteness from major business hubs, this 
criterion may be the first one to consider before weighing anything else.  
Reputation 
If a service provider is not referred to you by someone who can attest to the 
quality, reliability, and integrity of his work, you will have to rely on whatever 
other sources of information are available. Smaller firms with lesser-known 
names frequently post their clients’ testimonials online. Do not hesitate to ask 
for references and speak to other CFOs and controllers who use this firm. 
Finally, you can ask for a peer review report, which contains conclusions on 
the quality of accounting, auditing, and taxation services compiled by an 
AICPA authorized reviewer.  
Acceptability to the Financial Statements’ Users 
Some people say that the only time you need audited financial statements is 
when you are looking for financing. This is mostly true, and many companies 
do fine with a compilation or a review, or even an internal financial state-
ment. Yet there are some other entities, besides lenders and investors, that 

CFO Techniques 
255  
require a CPA’s signature on annual reports. State licensing agencies re-
sponsible for regulated industries and assurance bond underwriters are just 
a couple of examples. Also, you may be able to get away with an indepen-
dent accountant’s opinion, if it’s a matter of a small credit line or loan. But if 
there are millions of dollars at stake, bankers and capital holders can be 
picky about the particular auditing firm you use. At the very least, they want 
someone reputable and prefer a familiar name. If you know that obtaining a 
credit line or searching for investors is a future possibility, you should take 
that into consideration when selecting a new company. The peer review 
may come in handy here as well—if you like your present auditors and they 
do a good job, ask them to make a presentation to the bankers, thus turning 
them from questionable to acceptable.  
Price 
This is where the Big Four eliminate themselves from the picture for most 
privately held companies with no going-public dreams—their fees do not fit 
into your budgets. Cost/benefit concerns are very important in these deci-
sions. It’s OK to spend $40,000 a year for audited financial statements and 
corporate tax returns if you need to renew $75 million worth of opera-
tional credit lines. But it is not OK to pay 10% of your net income to audi-
tors for the sake of a $500,000 revolving credit line. Also, as with any pro-
fessional services, keep in mind that you always need to fight for the flat 
rate. You cannot rely on how quickly different members of the independent 
team can work—they are not your employees, so you don’t even have the 
option of adjusting their performance. So, figure out the appropriate annual 
fee, take off 15%, and then start negotiating. 
Quality Control 
Quality-control issues apply only to those companies that get their financial 
statements formally audited. And the reality is that there is not much you 
can do about accounting firms’ need to protect themselves from regulatory 
censure—every more or less sizable accounting firm has a quality control 
department. They receive the auditors’ working papers and review them for 
accuracy and compliance before an opinion can be released. It does not hurt 
to casually ask about the quality control department’s severity when you 
interview prospective service providers. When you do so, pretend that you 
are Dr. Cal Lightman (Tim Roth) from Lie to Me: ignore the words and look 
for microexpressions. If you catch rolling eyes, that’s a signal that the quality 
control is tough and the audit results may go back for more testing, disclo-
sure, reinterpretation, and so on. Too-stringent quality procedures are not a 

Chapter 29 | Choose Your Auditors Wisely 
 
256  
sufficient reason to dismiss a firm if it is a good match otherwise, but being 
aware of all possibilities is very helpful.  
Teach Them Everything You Know 
This point does not require a lengthy explanation, but its importance merits 
a separate header. You may succeed in finding the most suitable independent 
accounting firm, and its management may assign a team of sharp, informed, 
and likable people to your engagement. But every business is unique, and 
even though auditing methodologies are standard, the interpretation of in-
formation may be different depending on specifics. Expertise acquired dealing 
with one company can never be applied 100% to another. Just like we mold 
the fundamental knowledge base in our heads every time we take a position 
at a new company, auditors need to adapt their judgment to your business, 
financial, and accounting models. 
At the same time, you cannot rely on auditors’ own initiative—even the best 
of people have a tendency to take the path of least resistance. The problem 
is that if they don’t ask questions, they will make assumptions. Then you run 
the danger of possibly wrong information distorting their work, and ulti-
mately affecting the results you hired them to accomplish. This is not about 
personalities; it is about getting the job done properly. So you must take the 
matter into your own hands. 
Whether it’s you or your auditors who are new to your company, try to 
schedule a preliminary meeting dedicated to knowledge sharing with the 
auditors. Make sure that they understand the company’s commercial mission, 
the business and corporate structures, the composition of capital financing, 
the principles of revenue and cost recognition you use, and so on. Share with 
them your policies and internal control practices. If there are complicated 
accounting issues that pertain specifically to the company, you should men-
tion these as well—if the auditors are aware of them, they will be impressed 
by your proficiency. If they are not, they will go back and study them, and 
then they will be prepared.  
Of course, you have to be very gentle and make an effort not to act like you 
know more than the independent professionals do—place an emphasis on 
the company’s specifics. As always, there will be those who don’t want to 
learn anything, and if you run into them, it means you’re working with the 
wrong people. Go back to square one (or the beginning of this chapter) and 
start looking again.  
For those of us who actually must go through formal audits, the next chap-
ter provides a few tips on alleviating the pains of this process. 

C H A P T E R 
30 
What Guarantees 
Fast and Painless 
Audits 
 
No matter how optimized your schedule is, audits are disruptive for you and 
your staff. While you are answering auditors’ questions and fulfilling their re-
quests, nobody attends to the tasks of your daily routine. Even with the cal-
endar cleared in advance, things will get backed up. That is why you must do 
whatever it takes to minimize the pain. Of course, having your books in or-
der is the prerequisite, but there are other helpful tactics you can employ. 
The Audit’s Timing 
Many CFOs and controllers make the mistake of thinking that they have un-
til September to get last year’s books audited or reviewed. They file a six-
month extension for the corporate tax return on March 15 and assume that 
they can delay the external disturbance for several months. Theoretically, if 
it is not a full-scope audit with mandatory tests and disclosures, but just a 
review, compilation, or tax return preparation, delay it all you want.  
However, if the requirement is a proper audit resulting in an unqualified 
opinion, then that’s a poor strategy. In this case, the earlier the audit takes 
place, the better it is for you. My personal preference is the last week of 

Chapter 30 | What Guarantees Fast and Painless Audits 
 
258  
February, assuming December 31 is the end of the fiscal year, or 45 to 50 
days after any other fiscal year’s end. The closer you are to the end of the au-
dited year, the narrower the extent of the examination. 
In accordance with auditing standards, auditors are obligated to uncover, 
isolate, and test subsequent events—events that occurred between the date 
of the financial statements (let’s say December 31) and the date of the audi-
tors’ report. The subsequent events fall into two categories: 
 
Events that result in adjusting the financial statements  
 
Events that require disclosure in the footnotes 
In order to detect such events, the auditors must probe the transactions 
that took place during the months after the closing of the fiscal year under 
examination. It goes without saying that those CFOs and controllers who 
see their accountants sometime in July undergo much lengthier audits than 
the ones who are ready to face the music at the end of February. 
Less obvious, but nevertheless important, is the consideration of an ac-
counting firm’s calendar, especially if you use a smaller firm that provides 
services to individual taxpayers as well. January and February are relatively 
slow months, with the majority of corporate clients closing their previous 
year’s books and individuals awaiting W-2s and 1099s. So, the accountants 
are very eager to put you on the calendar as a February engagement and 
give their billable hours a boost. But beginning with the second week of 
March, they start getting busier every day. This means that they will work at 
a faster pace trying to wrap up whatever audits they have started in Febru-
ary as quickly as possible.  
 Tip  If you start your audit at the end of February, the financial statements will not likely be final-
ized by March 15, the standard due date for corporate tax returns. Therefore, you will need to file 
for an extension (with IRS Form 7004). If you need to do this, remember that the extension is pro-
vided for the tax return, not the tax payment. It is allowed so that the companies can file the most 
accurate returns possible. Yet companies are still expected to pay at least 95% of the federal and 
state taxes by March 15; otherwise, they can incur nonpayment penalties. 
Preparation Is Key 
There is definitely something scholastic about the auditing process. The 
books get examined, independent professionals conduct tests, and everyone 
in accounting and finance feels a little bit apprehensive, just like before finals 

CFO Techniques 
 
259  
at college (you can think of quarterly reviews, if you have them, as mid-
terms). So, what can ensure excellent performance during exams? We all 
know the answer: hard preparatory work. The more groundwork you do in 
advance, the faster and smoother your team and the auditors’ experience 
will be. 
Seasoned CFOs and controllers usually have a good understanding of audit-
ing principles. More importantly, they gain hands-on knowledge while going 
through audits year after year. So, they know very well what exactly the 
auditors need. But even if you are preparing for your very first books-
examination exercise, you can achieve a high level of readiness by following 
your own common sense. 
Take your trial balance—this is the first document the auditors must get, and 
it also serves as your syllabus. First of all, look for anything that can be con-
firmed externally. All cash and financing (loans and investments) account 
balances are always confirmed with bankers and financial institutions. If you 
use third-party warehouses, for example, your inventory balances will need 
to be confirmed as well. If you have corporate attorneys, they are obligated 
to confirm the existence and status of all litigations. Get the confirmation let-
ters from the auditors as early as possible, and then fill and send them out 
right away. Banks are usually very good at replying quickly, but you cannot 
be sure about your other business partners. Sometimes, it takes up to three 
contacts to get confirmations from certain parties.  
For every line on the balance sheet, you need a supporting breakdown: bank re-
conciliations and account statements for every month; AR schedule; inven-
tory details; short-term investments’ composition; itemizations of prepaids, 
security deposits, and accruals; AP, notes, and loans schedules; and what-
ever else you have there. The auditors need to see all forms of contracts, 
including deeds, leases, mortgages, credit line agreements, sales and pur-
chase commitments, and insurance policies. Of course, payroll records and 
tax returns are included in the auditing working papers too.   
It is impossible to confirm every single vendor or customer balance, but you 
can estimate the scope of testing based on the materiality level. You can fig-
ure out which vendors and customers will fall into the range of auditors’ in-
terest, and not only request the confirmation of balances, but also prepare 
the transactional details with all supporting documents in advance. The same 
idea applies to individual expense categories: the larger they are, the more 
likely they will be tested. For instance, if your annual revenue is $100 mil-
lion, and the company spent $1 million on advertising, you can be sure that 
the auditors will want to see every single bill in that category.  

Chapter 30 | What Guarantees Fast and Painless Audits 
 
260  
In addition to verification of accounting accuracy and completeness, the au-
ditors are responsible for expressing their opinion on the company’s fiscal 
policies, internal controls, software adequacy, and so on. They use specifi-
cally designed documents to assess the relevant information, which are 
more or less standard. Yet, regardless of whether it is your first time with a 
particular accounting firm or you have been dealing with this firm for years, 
it is recommended to ask for the list of deliverables in advance. Sometimes, 
there are internal or profession-wide changes that may alter the auditing 
requirements, and you don’t want to be caught unaware.  
 Tip  One of the best ways of speeding up the audit process is to have the copies of supporting 
documents made for the auditors in advance. Otherwise, they will have to waste their field time on 
it. Many accounting firms are now paperless, so scanned files can be easily transmitted to them. 
I am sure that by analogy, with the items described here, you can come up 
with other elements of preparation specific to your business. Working with 
your team in advance of the audit also gives you the benefit of timing the 
tasks at your own convenience rather than trying to accomplish them when 
people are breathing down your neck. If you have the necessary documents 
ready and clearly labeled, with the auditors’ copies already made, as long as 
you haven’t violated some accounting standards, the audit will run with mi-
nimal difficulties.   
Instructions for Your Staff 
Even superb preliminary work cannot eliminate additional onsite inquiries 
entirely. And as much as we want to streamline and expedite the auditing 
process, one thing I always try to avoid is letting auditors roam around the 
offices asking for source documents, schedules, and other information di-
rectly from accounting, operational, IT, and other staff. It’s not like you have 
anything to hide, but you cannot coach every single person on the appro-
priateness of this or that request, the relevance of information as it pertains 
to accounting audits, the theory of cutoff tests, and so on.  
These random encounters, especially when they involve junior auditors used 
by managers as gofers and junior members of the company’s staff, have a po-
tential for disturbing the schedules of too many people. They also frequently 
end up causing blunders and miscommunications, which further result in 

CFO Techniques 
 
261  
time-wasting discussions and corrective efforts. Most importantly, you can-
not guarantee a proper handling of the proprietary and privileged informa-
tion by the auditors, unless they receive it with suitable warnings. You may 
end up with payroll records lying on some desk during lunch hour. 
The first thing I always recommend is appointing a liaison—a well-trained 
and prepared accounting manager, or somebody in an equivalent capacity. If 
you don’t have anybody like that, then it will have to be you. This person 
should be introduced to the auditors as their go-to contact for any requests 
they may have. He can also report the ongoing status and consult with you 
on issues beyond his level of competency.  
However, you cannot really manage the working habits of independent pro-
fessionals, so there is still a possibility of them going directly to other em-
ployees. So, the second thing to do is to provide the rest of the staff with 
simple but strict instructions to either send the auditors to the appointed 
manager or politely accept their requests and pass them in the right direction. 
Make Auditors Feel Welcome 
Many times I have observed auditors being treated by a company’s senior 
management with irritable hostility. It almost feels like they are perceived as 
antagonists on the other side of the barricades. And it’s understandable. 
With them poking into this and that event, questioning numbers, and making 
requests to see more, you cannot help but feel judged and possibly resent-
ful. Yet, that is not just wrong, it is counterproductive.  
You need their cooperation. You and your auditors pursue the same pur-
pose: proving that your books are in good condition, all accounting events 
are translated in accordance with applicable standards, and the statements 
fairly reflect the company’s financial condition. But we are all human beings, 
and there is a basic law of physics that translates well to this scenario: for 
every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction. If the outsiders feel 
unwelcome, they will be more inclined to make your life difficult. They can-
not violate their professional code of ethics, but they can channel their reac-
tive animosity in other ways. That kind of atmosphere is not conducive to 
quick audits.   
Remember that the main target of your efforts is to manage a successful 
audit while diminishing its disruptive impact. The only way you can achieve it 
is by eliminating the need for a long field examination (i.e., the time auditors 
spend on your premises). They only need to stay until they finish conducting 
tests, collecting source documents, filling out questionnaires, and compiling 

Chapter 30 | What Guarantees Fast and Painless Audits 
 
262  
data that they can obtain only while in your office. After that, they can con-
tinue working on your material at their own desks, and usually they prefer 
that. Of course, there are always follow-up questions and requests, but they 
can be answered remotely and don’t need to interfere with your normal 
working process as much.  
If you know your stuff, comply with all accounting principles, and prepare for 
the audit in advance, the onsite part will be over in a matter of a few days. 
Then you will be able to check off the completion of last year’s cycle on your 
functional roster and attend to the pressing responsibilities of the present.  
 

P A R T 
VII 
Risk Management 
 
There was a time when the only risk-prevention policy employed by ac-
counting and finance professionals was to try to veto any innovative or en-
terprising initiative. That time has long passed. As a member of a commercial 
strategic team and the CEO’s partner, a contemporary CFO must support 
opportune plans of business development that don’t guarantee absolute suc-
cess. Still, the uniqueness of a CFO’s position is in its duality. While partici-
pating in risk-taking decisions, we remain concerned with the assessment of 
possible outcomes and try to minimize the uncertainties. Thus, most CFOs’ 
agendas contain a complex of responsibilities focused on managing various 
risks, preventing possible pitfalls, and ensuring that the company is impervi-
ous to any dangers. Only by being prepared for future possibilities in advance 
can we justify our approval of any degree of unpredictability. As Niccolo Ma-
chiavelli taught in his treatise on governing all forms of organization, The 
Prince (The Prince and The Art of War, CRW Publishing, 2004), “For it is by 
foreseeing difficulties from afar that they are easily provided against; but 
awaiting their near approach, remedies are no longer in time, for the malady 
has become incurable.” 
 
 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
31 
Insurable Risks 
 
The daily existence of a business entity, just like a person’s life, is teeming 
with possibilities for small mishaps and real misfortunes. This is especially 
true for dynamic entrepreneurial companies on the path of diversifying their 
activities and expanding their commercial horizons. Small and midsize com-
panies are far more vulnerable to the impact of unforeseeable events than 
large enterprises. The monetary consequences of a single accident have the 
potential to close a small business with slim cash reserves. Alleviating the fi-
nancial burdens that may result from various contingencies with the help of 
insurance is the most obvious method of dealing with the unpredictable fu-
ture. Conceptually, it constitutes a risk management strategy: transferring 
the risk to another party—in this case, insurance policy underwriters. With 
sufficient knowledge of the subject matter, you can find policies that will 
cover payments associated with most trials and tribulations.   
Essentially all insurable risks can be divided into three categories: 
 
Risks of damage to your tangible or intangible assets 
 
Risks (liabilities) that arise from casualties suffered by your em-
ployees in the course of business 
 
Risks (liabilities) that arise from property damage or personal harm 
caused to third parties in the course of business 
There is a wide spectrum of commonly used and specialized business insur-
ance products available to secure a variety of risks. The majority of people 
are aware of protection provided by such basic policies as the following:  

Chapter 31 | Insurable Risks 
266  

General liability insurance, which covers injuries that may be caused to 
third parties or their properties under common situations (e.g., ac-
cidents on your premises). 

Property insurance, which covers loss of and damage to business prop-
erty caused by broadly defined accidents and some natural disasters. 

Commercial automobile insurance, which covers vehicles used in busi-
ness. This type of insurance is usually designed as a combination of 
liability (to cover injured third parties) and property (to cover dam-
age to your automobiles, trucks, buses, etc.) policies. 

Workers’ compensation insurance, which primarily covers employees’ 
on-the-job injuries. The majority of states make it mandatory for 
any business with at least one employee to carry some sort of 
workers’ compensation insurance. On the flip side, the same states 
usually have laws preventing employees from bringing negligence 
lawsuits against an employer for work-related injuries, unless gross 
negligence on the part of the employer can be established.  
 Note  Technically speaking, the government-mandated unemployment and disability contribu-
tions made by employers can be viewed as premium payments. Hence, the programs are rightfully 
called insurances. Unlike other commercial insurances, they don’t cover business risks, but rather 
they protect employees from the risks of losing wages. A private disability policy is often a part of 
an employee benefit package.  
Some specialized types of coverage are also very well known. Malpractice in-
surance, sometimes called professional liabilities insurance, is a good exam-
ple. It covers court and settlement costs of doctors, dentists, attorneys, ac-
countants, architects, real estate agents, and so on, in case their substandard 
professional conduct causes an injury to a third party. Sometimes it is diffi-
cult to say whether it exists because we live in the most litigious country in 
the world, or it’s the other way around—the public goes to court knowing 
that there is malpractice insurance backing the defendant.  
Other lesser-known, niche policies may be applicable to a particular busi-
ness, and some are compulsory, depending on its industry. The following are 
some of the most prominent types of insurance designed to cover specific 
hazards and liabilities: 

CFO Techniques 
 
267  
 
Product liability insurance is one of the most important (and expen-
sive) policies for manufacturers and traders (not just retailers, but 
also wholesalers, jobbers, and resellers) who produce and sell goods 
that may cause injuries when used by the general public (food, 
medicine, automobiles, toys, etc.) or through accidental exposure 
(e.g., hazardous materials). By definition, such insurance covers 
claims filed by anybody who buys and/or uses the product, as well as 
bystanders. In addition to covering defects or malfunctions related 
to design flaws, these policies also address manufacturing process 
problems (such as contamination of production lines), in-transit ac-
cidents, and improper or inadequate warnings and instructions. 
Wholesalers frequently think that because they don’t sell directly to 
consumers, product liability is not their concern. But that is not 
correct—they are just as exposed as manufacturers and retailers.  
 
Errors and omissions (E&O) insurance covers injury to a third party 
caused by inadvertent mistakes or failures. The errors must not be 
deliberate or result from poor judgment (malpractice insurance 
covers the latter); they must result from a truly accidental occur-
rence. For example, if a shipping agent forgets to include a certifi-
cate of origin with a set of required documents, causing a delay in 
customs clearance that results in a payment of demurrage1 by the 
importer, the freight forwarder’s restitution of this expense should 
be covered by its E&O insurance. 
 
Marine insurance covers commercial goods during sea voyages, while 
inland marine insurance picks up the protection in transit on dry land 
and in storage. It can be taken both by the primary owner of the 
product and the third party with the temporary custody of the 
product (e.g., a service for restoring antiquities can cover clients’ 
items on its premises). 
 
Business interruption insurance covers lost income resulting from an 
inability to conduct business due to damage or loss of property. It 
usually takes the form of reimbursements of actual expenses in-
curred during the idle time (salaries, payroll taxes, rents, leases, 
etc.), plus the estimated net profits. 
                                                
1 Demurrage is a charge payable to the owner of a chartered vessel in case of a failure to load or 
unload cargo within an agreed time. 

Chapter 31 | Insurable Risks 
 
268  
 
Crime insurance covers theft, burglary, and robbery of the com-
pany’s property (including money, securities, inventory, supplies, 
office equipment, and fixtures), committed either by employees or 
outsiders. 
 
In the United States, terrorism was transformed in everyone’s mind 
from a nearly impossible cataclysm into a very real possibility on 
September 11, 2001. Nowadays, you will not find it on a list of risks 
covered by a standard property and casualty policy; a separate en-
dorsement with an additional premium needs to be obtained. 
Moreover, insurance companies have not figured out yet how to 
model the probabilities of these events and still price these products 
similarly to those for natural catastrophe risks. The US government 
stepped into the picture with a reinsurance law—the Terrorism 
Risk Insurance Act (TRIA)—in November 2002. It provides for the 
federal backing of the private underwriters in the case of an over-
flow of terrorism claims. It was supposed to be a temporary meas-
ure to give the insurance industry time to develop adequate prod-
ucts. It has been extended twice so far and currently has an expira-
tion date of December 31, 2014.   
 
Political risk insurance has been gaining popularity as globalization has 
begun to impact more industries. Companies in search of new mar-
kets and cheaper resources take chances conducting their business in 
regions susceptible to sudden changes in political climate that may 
result in losses. Political risk coverage is not limited to such violent 
acts as revolution, insurrection, civil unrest, and war. Government 
decrees resulting in expropriation or confiscation of assets, repudia-
tion of contracts, and willful business interruption are also covered. 
Among the fiscal events that underwriters include in this category of 
casualties are wrongful recalling of LCs and other bank guarantees, 
inconvertibility of foreign currencies, and inability to repatriate funds.  
 Note  History provides many examples of economic devastation caused by the overthrow of 
governments. Castro’s revolution, which caused an immediate expropriation of all American prop-
erties and investments in Cuba, comes first to mind. But there is a more recent case that didn’t in-
volve any violent international shake-ups, and therefore went largely unnoticed by the general pub-
lic while affecting a score of companies and several US industries.  

CFO Techniques 
 
269  
After the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991, Russia found itself with deficits in pretty much everything, 
including food—particularly affordable proteins. The US suppliers of frozen chicken parts quickly 
seized this opportunity. Increased demand raised prices in the commodity market and gave poultry 
production a significant boost. Dedicated value chains were developed: large and small US ports, 
fleets of refrigerated vessels, newly formed export-trading companies, and so on. The process 
turned into a nonstop conveyor of production and delivery. It grew to be a multi-billion-dollar busi-
ness within a couple of years.  
By the end of 1990s, though, the Russian government, strengthened by the privatization and  
commercialization of its economy, woke up to the fact that its own agricultural producers couldn’t 
compete with the volumes and prices delivered from overseas. As an act of protectionism, it de-
clared that US poultry did not meet Russian sanitary standards and vetoed its importation. Even 
then–Vice President Gore’s emergency visit to Moscow did not change anything. Vessels were 
turned away and had to come back at a great expense. Only vertically integrated giants like Tyson 
and Hudson Foods could survive such a blow. The prices tanked and inventories became com-
pletely devalued. Producers, packers, ports, and shipping companies involved in this trade suffered 
a severe contraction. Some time later, the moratorium was lifted, but the damage was already 
done. Many midsize and small exporters, not covered by specific political risk insurance, went out 
of business.  
There are still more narrowly targeted types of coverage that cater to pro-
tecting companies from losses caused by particular events or that affect a 
particular named property. These include earthquake, flood, tornado, ordin-
ance and law, builder’s risk, glass, boiler and machinery, computer, and de-
bris removal insurance. Still other types of insurance cover liabilities in-
curred as a result of explicit actions—these include employment practices 
insurance and directors and officers insurance. They are frequently used as 
add-on clauses to general liability and property insurance.  
In fact, multiline insurance policies, which cover an entire spectrum of business 
risks, have become a popular and cost-effective alternatives to assembling a 
portfolio of various policies from different resources. Of course, there may 
be a hazard or two that even a large insurance provider will not be able to 
cover, creating a need for obtaining separate contracts. Nevertheless, the 
more endorsements you can combine together, the smaller the sum of the 
premiums will be, which is an important factor, as they are not cheap. 

Chapter 31 | Insurable Risks 
 
270  
Of course, I also must mention umbrella policies, which can be added to any 
main policy. The name reflects the nature of this instrument, which enfolds 
many different endorsements within the overall coverage and provides poli-
cyholders not only with protection above and beyond the standard limit of 
each clause, but also fills gaps by covering incidents excluded from the pri-
mary list (e.g., libel, slander, and invasion of privacy). Umbrella insurance is 
usually sold in increments of $1,000,000. Thus, a million-dollar policy, for 
example, effectively raises a $300,000 auto liability limit to $1,300,000. 
Even though all insurance companies provide extensive opportunities to re-
search their offerings online, when it comes to piecing together a complex 
package addressing all risks applicable to your company, you are still better 
off working with an experienced broker. Their services are free, as they are 
compensated by the insurance providers. Plus, to keep their clientele happy, 
they always help with problems and claims. It is important to find someone 
with a record of diligence: when making a proposal for a particular policy, a 
good broker should present you with at least three or four options.  
Even if you enlist the best assistance, however, an external person will not 
be able to assess all possible risks as well as someone who knows the busi-
ness inside and out. Therefore, it is very important for a CFO or controller 
to be well versed in the different types of coverage available for protecting 
the company from all eventualities. 
 

C H A P T E R 
32 
Commercial Risks 
 
Commercial risks are associated with an entity’s way of conducting its busi-
ness and the nature of its daily activities. Companies that use and accept 
foreign currencies; produce, consume, and trade raw materials or primary 
agricultural products; utilize financial instruments with adjustable interests; 
or construct their operations in such a way that it results in a concentration 
of risks are all exposed to a variety of potentially problematic events that 
can result in negative business adjustments, financial losses, and failure. De-
pending on the nature of these risks, various management strategies can be 
applied to them, including the transferring of the burden to another party, 
reducing probability of the risk, and minimizing its possible negative effects. 
Schematically, we can divide commercial uncertainties into two groups. Let’s 
call the first group external risks. They are usually beyond the company’s di-
rect management power and arise from global financial and economic 
changes. On the surface, it seems like small and midsize companies are help-
less in the face of giant market movements. Yet the methodology of pro-
tecting a business from the negative effects of these risks is pretty straight-
forward. Decades of global economic development has led to the creation 
of specific defense mechanisms, such as various hedging instruments, avail-
able to companies of all sizes. 
On the other hand, prevention of internal risks related to a company’s de-
velopment strategy, operational structure, sourcing, selling, and other daily 
business practices largely depends on establishment of specific commercial 
safeguards and the quality of executive management. Volumetric risks related 

Chapter 32 | Commercial Risks 
 
272  
to changes in demand and risks of concentration (the proverbial “putting all 
your eggs into one basket”) are the reality of commercial existence. Yet 
their negative effects can be minimized through diversification efforts.  
Trading credit risk stands alone as a sort of a hybrid. It is definitely an internal 
commercial risk, related to a company’s growth strategy, credit policy, and 
even individual judgment calls. At the same time, changes in the economic 
environment can affect the ability of customers to pay. Bad-debt risks can be 
minimized by the company’s expansion of the customer base, stricter credit 
procedures, and close monitoring of AR. Still, the prevalent nature of open 
credit relationships has led to the development of instruments that treat 
them both as insurable (discussed in Chapter 19) and hedgeable.  
Hedging 
The word insurance is frequently used when hedging is defined—not in the 
sense of a policy purchased from MetLife that pays you in case of a loss, but 
rather in its purely semantic interpretation: as something that provides pro-
tection against a possible eventuality. Unlike an insurance policy, hedging 
doesn’t target the possibility of a bad outcome, but the very probability of 
change. Under the principle of conservatism, we must take into account 
only a negative contingency. Still, by entering into a hedging contract, a 
company insulates itself from any shifts of specific parameters, whether they 
would result in losses or gains. And it’s a good thing, because commercial 
enterprises are not in the business of speculating in expectations (there are 
various market players for that); their purpose it to make profits by creating 
products and services. To do so successfully, they must avoid or at least di-
minish the impact of external factors. 
In a general sense, hedging can be described as an action taken in an oppo-
site direction from the original transaction, with the purpose of offsetting 
and balancing the possible risk. By that definition, the forfaiting of a term LC 
(a trading credit risk), previously discussed in Chapter 12, is fundamentally a 
hedging instrument. First, you agree to exchange your product for an LC 
with a payment deferred by 180 days (the action: accepting to hold), taking a 
risk that the issuing bank’s situation may deteriorate and it will not be able 
to honor the document six months from now. To offset this risk, you enter 
into a forfaiting market and sell this term LC (the opposite action: forgoing 
the holding) at a discount (a premium paid for insuring yourself against the 
default while transferring the risk to the third party). 
Natural economic selection has led to development of hedging tools in most 
volatile markets, especially equity (stocks). Of all the risks associated with 

CFO Techniques 
 
273  
commercial activities, three have gained prominence as hedgeable: shifts in 
commodity prices, foreign currency exchange–rate movements, and cost of 
money (interest rate) adjustments.  
Commodity Hedging 
You may have seen the film Trading Places, with Eddie Murphy and Dan Ak-
royd. If you ask most people who have seen it what exactly the rich broth-
ers, Randolph and Mortimer, did for a living, most will say, “Something on 
the stock market.” That would be incorrect—the brothers were active 
members of one of the oldest commodity markets in the world: the New 
York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX), founded in 1882 (there are nearly 60 
commodity exchanges worldwide). The entertaining commotion created at 
the end of the movie on the trading floor of frozen concentrated orange 
juice (FCOJ) was supposedly caused by the brothers’ attempt to corner the 
market by speculating on a major price shift; an attempt that failed because 
they found themselves on the wrong side of the shift.  
In reality, it could never have happened, because the commodity players—
both producers (the sellers) and manufacturing processors or distributors 
(the buyers)—habitually protect themselves from the demand and supply 
adjustments that affect market prices by using hedging mechanisms. There 
are not too many products characterized by sufficient global demand to 
qualify as commodities. But those few are so crucial to world’s economy 
that they affect manufacturers and traders of all sizes in many industries. 
They are usually divided into four groups: agricultural (corn, oats, soybeans, 
soybean oil, rice, wheat, milk, cocoa, coffee, sugar, FCOJ, lean hogs, frozen 
pork bellies, and live cattle); energy (crude oil, ethanol, natural gas, heating 
oil, gasoline, propane, and purified terephthalic acid); precious and industrial 
metals (gold, platinum, palladium, silver, copper, lead, zinc, tin, aluminum, 
nickel, cobalt, and molybdenum), and other (rubber, palm oil, wool, poly-
propylene, and linear long-density polyethylene).  
The simplest way to prevent exposure to future price fluctuations is to en-
ter into a forward contract, which fixes the delivered/accepted quantity, the 
delivery date, and the future price estimated based on today’s knowledge 
(forward price). This way, the producer evaluates the volume he will be able 
to yield in a certain period of time, and fixes the sales price that should 
cover all his expenses and produce a profit. The buyer agrees to take the 
delivery of the product at that time and at the fixed price, which he, in his 
turn, can use to calculate his own production costs and/or resale prices. Re-
gardless of whether the market moves up or down by the forward date, 

Chapter 32 | Commercial Risks 
 
274  
neither is affected. Either side could have speculated on more gains (for the 
producer if price moved up) or lower costs (for the buyer if price moved 
down), but this way the uncertainty of the outcome is removed for both. 
In the previous chapter’s political risk example concerning frozen chicken 
parts, the negative impact on poultry producers wasn’t caused by the losses, 
but by the volume contraction they experienced afterward. At the time the 
problem occurred, their product was protected from the immediate drop of 
the prices by forward contracts.  
A commodity may vary in quality, grade, and other parameters. In the past, 
an inspection verifying the compliance with specifications was a mandatory 
requirement for all trades. However, eventually these variables were stan-
dardized, and forward contracts were modified into instruments called fu-
tures contracts. Futures have become a subject of market speculation like any 
other tradable instrument. The brokers in Trading Places had nothing to do 
with either production or processing of FCOJ. Instead, they made long and 
short paper bets based on their “educated” expectations of prices going up 
or down in the future. 
At the same time, futures contracts have become an additional hedging in-
strument for producers, especially in agriculture. They are used to minimize 
the negative impact of unexpectedly poor crops. This type of hedging, how-
ever, works only if the worsening conditions affect everyone. Let’s say a 
large quantity of the wheat harvest in the United States is destroyed by a 
massive epidemic. The growers cannot deliver sufficient volumes and make 
enough money. However, the subsequent shortage of wheat results in the 
price hike of futures. The profits made on the sale of the hedging contracts 
make up for the low production revenues.  
Foreign Exchange Hedging 
Buying and selling products and services overseas frequently results in the 
necessity of dealing with multiple currencies. Since the euro entered circula-
tion in 2002, the number of currencies with a significant influence on US 
commerce has dropped. Still, besides the euro, there is the Japanese yen, 
British pound, Swiss franc, Canadian dollar, and Australian and New Zealand 
dollars. And formerly confined to mainland China, the very important yuan 
also entered the international currency trade in 2011. 
It is important to understand that dealing with foreign currencies does not 
automatically expose companies to foreign exchange risks. If an entity can 
isolate its operations in different currencies one from another, it remains 

CFO Techniques 
 
275  
impervious to any movements on the foreign exchange market. For exam-
ple, if a part of a company’s business is conducted within the European Un-
ion (EU) in such a way that it buys materials, pays for labor and services, and 
sells product in euros, then these European operations have no exposure to 
exchange rate adjustments.  
However, that’s not what generally occurs with the majority of small and 
midsize companies involved in international commerce. The most common 
case is an importer with payables in foreign currencies and receivables in US 
dollars. So, let’s say your procurement department enters today into a 
€500,000 purchase contract payable in 90 days on CIF (cost, insurance, and 
freight) terms, when the product is loaded for shipment. There is only one 
way to protect this company from foreign exchange risk: to acquire a for-
ward contract to purchase euros on the day the company will need the cur-
rency. Just like any other forward hedging, such a contract fixes the quantity 
(amount of currency) you will receive, the date of the transaction, and the 
price you will need to pay (the future exchange rate). 
 Caution  It is mandatory to establish proper communication procedures for the departments re-
sponsible for the initiation of transactions that involve foreign currencies. They should check with 
the treasury function before any commitment is made, so that the exchange rates can be verified 
and possible profits/losses assessed based on the converted values. Staff should be forewarned of 
the dangers of exposing the company to foreign exchange risks.  
If the currency you need to purchase is on a rising track, it is likely that your 
future rate will be higher than the current moment’s spot rate. (Just like 
stock prices, currency rates move up and down throughout the day.) On 
the surface, it is cheaper to buy the currency right away, with a spot contract, 
but that’s a bad treasury management move—you cannot sit on the idle sum 
of money for several months. The only time it makes sense to do that is 
when the contract’s conditions can be negotiated for prepayment with a 
discount sufficient, together with the currency price gain, to cover the ef-
fects of the negative cash flow (the payment before receipts). In situations 
with declining currency rates, the temptation is always to wait longer before 
entering into a forward contract, in hopes of even better prices. However, 
that’s speculation, and our purpose is to avoid or minimize uncertainties.  

Chapter 32 | Commercial Risks 
276  
 Note  Keep in mind that by fixing the conversion rate, you assign an exact value to the product 
in question. This way, you level it with all other costs measured in US dollars, and give yourself the 
benefit of proper pricing, accurate revenue and profitability forecasts, as well as realistic cash flow 
projections.  
Exporters or international distributors who accept payments in local cur-
rencies are not common. Most transactions are conducted in dollars and 
euros. Still it happens from time to time. And in these cases, the principles 
of hedging the future receivables are exactly the same. This time, however, 
you must enter into a forward sale contract. In this situation, the foreign ex-
change uncertainty is multiplied by the credit risk. You don’t want to find 
yourself with an open forward contract approaching a due date and no cur-
rency on hand to back it up because the customer is late with the payment. 
Ideally, open-term receivables in foreign currencies should be avoided. 
When it comes to LCs and bank guarantees, you still should be very careful 
in estimating the hedging time window, allowing for presentation and proc-
essing time.  
As discussed in Chapter 20, in order to conduct foreign currency transac-
tions, you need to employ foreign exchange services provided by banks or 
brokerage houses. Remember that the rates quoted to you will be higher 
than whatever numbers are published in newspapers or on the Internet, as 
they will include the service provider’s costs.  
Interest Rate Hedging 
Some may think that interest rate–hedging derivatives do not have much to 
do with small and midsize companies, but that depends on the industry. In 
commodity import/export, a company with $300 million annual sales and 40 
employees is considered small. A manufacturer with the same annual vol-
ume and 1,000 employees is still a small company. Yet these types of entities 
are frequently heavily leveraged by multi-million-dollar credit lines, most of 
them with adjustable interest rates tied to LIBOR or prime, both of which 
change daily.  
If the sums of such floating-rate loans are significant, a company may consider 
hedging the risk of the soaring cost of money with such instruments as an in-
terest rate cap, which sets an upper limit on the interest rate in exchange for 
an up-front fee, or an interest rate swap, which converts a flexible rate into a 

CFO Techniques 
 
277  
fixed one for a period of time. If you are in need of a quick cash influx, you 
can use a LIBOR-driven loan to enter into an interest rate floor derivative, 
which pays up-front fees for foregoing the benefits of the dropping rates. The 
most conservative of these derivatives is the interest rate collar, which installs 
both the cap and the floor in such a way that the fees cancel each other, 
making it a safe and free instrument. 
Hymn to Diversification 
The very first and most basic advice you’ll receive when you plan to invest 
your savings is to diversify your portfolio. And everyone understands it: the 
simple rules of statistical probability tell us that if you invest $10,000 in ten 
different instruments, it is unlikely that all of them will fail at the same time. 
On the other hand, if you put the entire sum into one basket, the risk of 
losing everything is high. 
It’s simple. Yet, time and again, private business owners and their teams in-
vest money, talent, and effort into a single niche, because it is the most at-
tractive and profitable for the time being. They don’t take the conservative 
(frequently labeled as pessimistic) position that business environments may 
change at any moment. They forget that concentration is the enemy and 
that diversification is the only means of survival, especially for small compa-
nies. It is the most important preventative strategy when it comes to dimi-
nishing commercial risks. 
Concentration comes in different forms and shapes, but among the most 
persistent are the following: 
 
Customer concentration: Some businesses go as far as selling up to 
90% of their products or services to one customer, even turning 
new customers away for the sake of that “most important” one. 
What they forget is that there is no such a thing as a loyal cus-
tomer; a new supplier with a lower price may come along and you 
can say goodbye to your single source of revenue. The larger your 
customer base, the better chance you have to survive. 
 
Sourcing concentration: Relying on one source of raw materials or 
products can quickly bring your production or trade to a halt if your 
commercial partner loses financing, sells its operations, or decides 
to get out of that business. In some industries, it is difficult to have 
parallel sources, because they compete against each other. Still, it is 
highly important to have backups for all resources. 

Chapter 32 | Commercial Risks 
 
278  
 
Geographical concentration: It frequently happens in small businesses 
that due to the management’s connections or some temporary eco-
nomic development in a particular area, the company’s sales efforts 
are focused on a single region. Domestically, such a strategy suffers 
from possible exposure to changes in local economic conditions. In-
ternationally, a multitude of risks arise, including a decline in de-
mand and political risk. The search for new markets and geographi-
cal diversification are crucial survival factors.  
 
Product concentration: It is not easy to constantly develop new prod-
ucts or formulate new services. Yet one-product and one-service 
companies are the most vulnerable. On the other hand, a company 
with a long list of marketable offerings can afford to lose one or 
two, if the demand for them declines for one or another reason. 
Diversification of revenue-generating channels and attainment of 
strong positions in new market sectors with complementary prod-
ucts and services is the most important risk-management strategy. 
CFOs and controllers don’t have to deal with commercial risks alone. Man-
aging these risks should be a collective effort that includes the entire execu-
tive team. Procurement, sales, and operations can be both risk-taking and 
risk-resolution centers. Promoting the cooperation of all parts of the busi-
ness organism in building a protective shield should be one of the top priori-
ties of the financial executives. 
 

C H A P T E R 
33 
Tax and  
Regulations  
Compliance 
 
In his letter to Jean-Baptiste Leroy (November 13, 1789), Renaissance man 
and Founding Father Benjamin Franklin, with his characteristic wry wit, formu-
lated one of the undeniable truths of human existence: “In this world nothing 
can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.” Ever since the Egyptians 
introduced the biennial tax over 5,000 years ago, rulers and governments 
have been collecting a variety of levies from their subjects and citizens, gener-
ating income that sustains the state. Originally, people conducting any sort of 
business paid appropriate dues as individual taxpayers. The concept of the 
corporation as an entity that can survive its individual members and thus 
maintain a going concern indefinitely was formulated in ancient Rome. Since 
those times, such enterprises have been considered legitimate taxpayers.  
In the United States, the authority to collect all taxes, except for tariffs, 
rested with the state and local governments until the beginning of the 20th 
century. Several prior attempts by the federal government to impose in-
come taxes on both individuals and business taxpayers were deemed uncon-
stitutional, until the 16th Amendment legalized Congress’s right to levy an 
income tax. Today, taxes are imposed by all three levels of government.  

Chapter 33 | Tax and Regulations Compliance 
 
280  
In its precise definition, the term corporate tax refers to an income tax that is 
applied to an entity’s net income, calculated as revenue reduced by all allow-
able cost and credit deductions. The variety of tax issues affecting businesses 
and their shareholders is mind-boggling, especially for organizations at a cer-
tain level of structural complexity with multistate and international exposure, 
even if they are relatively small. The intricacies of tax law for acquisitions, 
consolidations, transfer prices, foreign tax credits, special treatments of cer-
tain revenues, and deductions are only a few of the biggest challenges. As of 
April 18, 2011, the length of the US tax code was 60,000 pages.  
Add to this the diversity of state and local corporate tax requirements, plus 
other categories of business taxation, with industrial and licensing regula-
tions on top, and it becomes clear that a significant level of familiarity with 
what applies to your company is required in order to prevent exposure to 
the risks of noncompliance. It’s necessary whether you have external advi-
sors or not. You may not need to memorize every single detail of the vari-
ous laws, but you must have an overall picture in mind.  
US business taxes can be divided into the following main groups: 
 
One group is the already mentioned corporate taxes, which on the 
federal level are based on net operating income. This also includes 
capital gains resulting from the disposition of assets and dividends 
from investments. Forty-seven states and many localities impose 
corporate taxes as well. Some of them are applied to the operating 
income, while others may use asset-based calculations. A state con-
siders a company established under its jurisdiction domestic. A 
company that was formed elsewhere but does business within the 
state is considered foreign, and is taxed only on the allocated por-
tion of its business. Entities with multistate presence allocate their 
income throughout all states where business is conducted. Depend-
ing on the state, earning income (selling), owning assets, renting fa-
cilities, paying wages, and even holding inventories in third-party 
warehouses are considered grounds for local taxability.  
 
Payroll taxes are levied on employers under the Federal Insurance 
Contribution Act (FICA, 7.65%) and the Federal Unemployment 
Tax Act (FUTA). The effective federal unemployment tax rate is 
0.08% on the first $7,000 earned by each employee. The rest of the 
unemployment contributions, at various higher percentages and 
wage bases, are collected by the states. In addition to the taxes due 
from a company, the employer is responsible for withholding and 
remitting employees’ income taxes and FICA payments. 

CFO Techniques 
 
281  
 
Sales and use taxes exist only under most state (all but five) and local 
jurisdictions. Retail sales (i.e., sales for consumption, not resale), and 
the leasing and rental of many goods and some services are subject 
to these taxes. The sellers are responsible for charging and remit-
ting the taxes, as well as filing the tax returns. There are three main 
issues to be considered by any business in relation to the sales tax 
responsibility: whether the company’s products and/or services are 
taxable, whether the products and/or services are obtained by the 
final user, and in which states and localities a company can be as-
sumed liable for sales tax collection. The last consideration is espe-
cially sensitive today, since many sales are conducted via the Inter-
net. When e-commerce was born, for some time it was assumed to 
be a no-jurisdiction territory, and whatever you bought online was 
tax-free. Eventually, the regulations caught up with the issue, and 
now everyone abides by the same rules. The main determining fac-
tor used by the majority of tax authorities is physical presence. If you 
have an office, warehouse, operational location, or any other type of 
commercial residency in a state, retail purchases there will be tax-
able. In addition, a company as a consumer is subject to use taxes. 
For example, if you buy computers in California and have them 
shipped to New York, the seller does not need to charge you New 
York’s sales taxes if she does not have a physical presence in the 
state. However, you must report and remit them as use taxes. 
 
Excise taxes are governments’ (federal, state, or local) instruments of 
controlling market demand for specific products or activities. As 
such, they can be defined in various terms and formulas: per unit of 
measure, excess of produced quantities, sale price base, and so on. 
Excise taxes are usually imposed on producers, wholesalers, and re-
tailers. Yet they’re considered indirect taxes, as they’re passed on to 
the ultimate consumer as a part of the price. The population’s alco-
hol consumption has been one of the main targets of excise taxation 
in many countries, including the United States, for centuries. Among 
other domestic examples are tobacco, firearms, communications, 
air and waterway transportation, fishing, oversized tires and heavy 
trucks, coal mining, crude oil, aviation fuel, and gasoline. 
 
Property taxes are mostly regulated by jurisdictions below the state 
level. Only a few states have property taxes. Rules vary from one 
locality to another. Most frequently, they affect the real estate and 

Chapter 33 | Tax and Regulations Compliance 
 
282  
are determined on the basis of fair market value. However, even if 
your company doesn’t own any buildings or land, the application of 
property taxes to other forms of business property must be investi-
gated. In some cities, rentals above a certain value or inventories 
held for sale are subject to property taxes. 
 
Customs duties (a.k.a. tariffs) are federal importation taxes imposed 
on goods brought from foreign countries. Besides being a significant 
source of the government’s revenue, they also act as an efficient in-
strument of trade control. Thus, the duty rates vary depending not 
only on the type of product, but from country to country as well. 
Products from some countries can be brought into the United 
States duty-free based on various trade agreements. There is also a 
list of exempt products. Companies engaged in the continuous im-
portation of goods as part of their operations either have in-house 
customs experts or utilize the services of a broker. 
In addition to business taxation, the privilege of conducting certain types of 
business is regulated through licensing and issuing of special permits. The in-
dustry and the locality of operation determine whether you’re subject to 
various requirements imposed at different levels of authority. There are 
several industries regulated on the federal level: agriculture, alcoholic bever-
ages, firearms, fish and wildlife, maritime transportation, mining and drilling, 
nuclear energy, radio and TV broadcasting, oversized-load transportation, 
and logistics. However, the list of industry-wide and narrowly specific li-
censes and permits imposed by state and local agencies is significantly longer 
and widely varied, and needs to be thoroughly checked. Some states and 
municipalities, such as Washington, DC, California, and South Carolina, re-
quire all entities to acquire general business licenses in order to be able to 
operate within the jurisdiction.  
Tax evasion and deliberate misstatements on returns are serious offenses 
and can have criminal consequences, particularly to the owners of closely 
held corporations. Of course, if you fail to pay importation duties, it auto-
matically arrests your ability to bring your product into the country and 
leads to numerous problems not only with Customs and Border Protection 
(CBP), but also with your freighters, customers, and so on. Otherwise, the 
risks associated with errors or violations of tax laws are primarily related to 
the heavy financial burdens of penalties. There are basically four types of tax 
offenses resulting in penalties: 
 
Failure to file the tax return by the due date, which, depending on  
the type of the return and the locality, could be a flat and fairly  

CFO Techniques 
 
283  
reasonable amount such as $50 or $100, or calculated as a percent-
age of your prior periods’ liabilities.  
 
Improper filing format, which is most frequent with large volumes of 
taxation information—for example, with federal W-2 or 1099 sub-
missions, which are required to be filed electronically via the IRS’s 
Filing Information Returns Electronically (FIRE) system if you have 
more than 250 forms. If you file paper forms, the penalty is $100 
per each form in excess of 250. 
 
Failure to submit payments on time, which is the most expensive of 
taxation violations, because the penalties are calculated as percent-
ages of balances owed. The ones associated with corporate and 
payroll taxes are especially severe, with federal rates of 2 to 10% 
depending on the time that has passed between the due date and 
actual payment; some states charge as much as 50%. Payroll taxes 
that are delinquent beyond the due date of the quarterly return 
(usually one month after the end of the calendar quarter) may result 
in business owners’ personal liability, which applies to anyone who 
owns more than 5% of the company’s stock. 
 
Erroneous returns, which may or may not go unnoticed. Nowadays, 
the IRS and state taxation agencies filter all filed returns through 
electronic systems with preconfigured lists of red flags. And even 
though top-to-bottom audits are rare, especially when it comes to 
small companies, individual lines and items are frequently ques-
tioned. This may result in the returns’ restatements with increased 
tax liabilities.    
On top of penalties, the tax authorities charge interest on all unpaid bal-
ances. As of April 2011, the rate was 4%.  
 Tip  If you have a delinquent bill with any tax authorities and you believe it is incorrect, you 
should dispute it as soon as possible. If it is correct, it’s important to keep communicating with 
them. If the issue is neglected, they usually act quickly. They have an automatic system of approv-
als and will execute a bank account lien very fast. 
The risks of noncompliance with licensing and permits regulations go be-
yond just penalties and fines, which are generally (and generously) admin-
istered together with time limits for remedying the violations. Authorities 

Chapter 33 | Tax and Regulations Compliance 
 
284  
have various means of restricting or prohibiting business operations in case 
of persistent failure to comply. 
Again, I cannot overemphasize the importance of being sufficiently educated 
about taxation and licensing requirements as they apply to you, and keeping 
abreast of all changes. As with any information today, it’s all about knowing 
where to begin. If you find a good starting point for research, it will lead you 
to more and more resources. One of the first well-designed government In-
ternet sites was the IRS’s (www.irs.gov), and it’s indispensable when it 
comes to federal taxation information. You can subscribe to IRS Newswire 
and receive regular e-mail notifications about all new developments, includ-
ing standard quarterly and annual changes. You can find links to all the state 
tax sites on the Business tab. 
That said, my personal favorite portal into the wealth of information avail-
able on the Internet for both business taxation and licensing requirements is 
the US Small Business Administration site (www.sba.gov). It’s organized in a 
way that eases navigation through all facets of government regulations from 
start to finish, and includes not only elaborate explanations and forms con-
cerning federal matters, but also links to states’ sites that provide informa-
tion on different aspects of business regulations. 
It goes without saying that as soon as your company reaches a certain level 
of organizational complexity, which translates into taxation or business reg-
ulation concerns of higher sophistication, the best approach is to seek ad-
vice from the tax division of the CPA firm you use, specialized tax attorneys, 
and private companies offering licensing support services. 
 

P A R T 
VIII 
Ensuring Your  
Going Concern: 
Strategies, Plans, 
and Forecasts 
 
It’s scary out there. The daily struggle for business survival is getting harder 
and harder. There are no saved paths, definite possibilities, or guaranteed 
outcomes. Economic, financial, and commercial environments are con-
stantly changing. The first impulse is to play ostrich—bury your head in the 
sand of the daily routine and try not to worry about your bottom sticking 
out into the doubtful future. However, the harshness of the daily reality is 
the very reason why contemporary CFOs and other senior financial man-
agers cannot afford to act like that. You have to raise yourself above the 
scope of direct functional responsibilities and define your position from a 
holistic point of view—as an integral part of the business mechanism. You 
have to be brave and look forward. Partnering with the CEO/business 
owner in the process of shaping the company’s future became a mandatory 
job requirement a decade ago. Today we must go further and not just par-
ticipate and support, but also apply our commercial acumen to formulate 

Forecasts 
Part VIII | Ensuring Your Going Concern: Strategies, Plans, and 
286  
and propose new initiatives. It is a misconception that these tasks belong 
only to the world of big business. Small and midsize companies are more 
vulnerable to external impacts and, therefore, in need of even more strate-
gic executive care.      

C H A P T E R 
34 
Principles of  
Strategic Planning 
 
Strategies and tactics sound like big words and evoke images of Napoleon and 
Churchill, or at the very least, long, polished mahogany boardroom tables, 
but in reality every person strategizes. The Oxford English Dictionary defines 
strategy as a plan of action designed to achieve a long-term or overall aim. A 
16-year-old high-school student deciding whether to apply to college to 
study accounting or go to Hollywood in pursuit of an acting career makes a 
strategic decision that will affect her future. The core logical procedures be-
hind such decision-making apply to any type of critical planning.  
In principle, a business strategy formulates an organization’s path into the future 
and answers three basic questions: 
 
What do we need to achieve? 
 
Where are we right now? 
 
How are we going to get to the new place? 
The task of answering these questions constitutes the process of strategic plan-
ning. It can advance in the order outlined above, starting with a concept of 
the company’s ideal positioning that may come from the owner’s aspira-
tions, or industry shifts, or some breakthrough development within the 
company. This leads to the evaluation of the current situation in light of the 
new objective and appraisal of the gap that needs to be closed to attain new 

Chapter 34 | Principles of Strategic Planning 
 
288  
optimal conditions. Finally, you decide on the proper steps to take and re-
sources to allocate in order to achieve the desired result. 
Alternatively, the process can start with the second item on the list—the 
assessment of the company’s present state. This is a good approach for 
those entities that have reached a certain point of stagnation that may 
threaten its ability to keep up with the rest of the business world, or those 
already experiencing distinct problems. How you interpret the circum-
stances clarifies the vision of the direction the company needs to go. Finally, 
the step-by-step method of getting there is devised.     
Whichever approach shapes the strategy, the planning methodology consists 
of the three stages and results in the construction of three components: 
 
Definition of the strategic goal (a.k.a. vision or mission) 
 
Detailed description of the company’s status 
 
Outline of the action plan 
A strategic planning committee of a small or midsize company is very differ-
ent from what it is in a large public enterprise. More frequently than not, it’s 
just the boss and you. He randomly throws ideas at you whenever they 
come to him, while you consistently try to formalize the process and bring 
to the table only well-formulated proposals. Sometimes it’s a good thing and 
sometimes it’s not. The boss’s brainstorming may be brilliant, but the bur-
den of the subsequent groundwork falls entirely on you. This may stifle your 
own creativity. Moreover, there may be other people in the company with 
bright suggestions that never get heard. Ideally, your peers responsible for 
marketing, operations, and other crucial activities should be involved in the 
creative process and share the responsibilities of the assessment and plan-
ning stages.   
When you read books and articles discussing theories of organizational 
management, there seems to be a strong emphasis on the strategies of 
growth, advancement, and improvement. “How to excel?” is definitely a prev-
alent question. And it is understandable, because we have come to believe 
that only a constant movement upward constitutes an accomplishment. 
Thus, many people associate the very idea of strategic planning with novelty, 
innovation, expansion, and new frontiers. In reality, such questions as “How 
to survive?” or “How to maintain?” are just as crucial and frequently demand 
elaborate planning.   
It is important to remember that strategy development does not necessarily 
need to be triggered by special circumstances. Actually, it is apparent that 
those companies that make looking into the future their standard routine 

CFO Techniques 
 
289  
have a far greater chance for longevity and success. The conventional wis-
dom teaches us that we should prepare for life’s possibilities in advance. It 
applies to business as well. Whether you work for a young company on a 
fast growth track or for a mature one that reached a plateau, periodic reas-
sessment of objectives is a necessity. There used to be a time when every 
formal job interview, especially if conducted by a professional recruiter, 
ended with a standard question: “Where do you see yourself five years 
from now?” I don’t know if prospective employees can look that far ahead 
nowadays. Nevertheless, a good CFO must—not for her own sake, but for 
the sake of her employer. A rolling-forward five-year strategic plan with periodic 
performance evaluation, reassessment of objectives, and adjustments of related 
activities is a good practice.  
Theory of Strategic Planning 
Theorists of organizational management have been working for decades on 
formulating methods and developing tools of strategic planning. Since se-
lecting goals and devising specific action plans depend on various factors 
particular to each individual business, the majority of academic studies con-
centrate on techniques of business and situation analysis, which are much 
easier to standardize.  
The model that employs the most generalized approach is probably also the 
best known—SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats) analysis, 
credited to Albert Humphrey. It looks at two sets of opposing characteris-
tics and elements: 
 
Internal: 
 
Strengths within the business that give the entity an edge over 
the competition 
 
Weaknesses within the business that put it at a disadvantage 
 
External: 
 
Opportunities opened to the business in the current  
environment 
 
Threats that could prevent business from succeeding 
The theoretic value of the SWOT model is rooted in its universality. You 
can apply it to any type of strategy and use it to evaluate the powers in-
fluencing a company’s financial plans, market position, distribution prospects, 
and so on. You can even enrich your hiring process by applying the analysis 

Chapter 34 | Principles of Strategic Planning 
 
290  
to the way you read resumes, turning candidates’ qualifications into internal 
characteristics and your department needs into external factors.  
Notice how the model doesn’t dictate where and how to look for the indi-
vidual items of the assessments, giving you freedom to use your creativity 
and apply it to whatever planning task you need to accomplish. When it 
comes to external factors, for example, you could include both macro- and 
microeconomic aspects. 
In a very different way, such environmental scanning frameworks as PEST (po-
litical, economic, social, and technological), EPISTEL (ecological, political, in-
formational, social, technological, economic, and legal), and STEER (socio-
cultural, technological, economic, ecological, and regulatory) are used in stra-
tegic management for assessment of specific macro-external factors that may af-
fect business development. On one hand, the definite composition of these 
instruments simplifies the appraisal of the outside forces. On the other hand, 
these tools by themselves are obviously not sufficient for coherent strategic 
planning, because they leave out the company’s internal characteristics. 
Another important tool, the balanced scorecard (BSC), takes a completely 
opposite approach to strategic assessment and considers only the elements 
directly related to the company’s activities. Nevertheless, I consider it to be 
a unique tool, because it goes beyond situational analysis and combines the 
ongoing feedback with the impulse for new actions. Its core concept pro-
motes perpetual development of new adjusting and improving strategic 
steps based on the periodic assessment of the organization’s attainment of 
its mission. Originally developed by independent management consultant 
Art Schneiderman in 1987, it gained vast popularity in the English-speaking 
world and Scandinavian countries during the 1990s.  
As pictured in Figure 34-1, the BSC breaks down an entity’s overall strategy 
into four separate perspectives: sales and marketing, capital (finance), opera-
tions and administration, and organizational development. In each section, 
the model employs the same structure: formulating strategic purpose, meas-
uring achievements, adjusting and/or expanding new goals, and outlining ac-
tions to reach them. As a performance evaluation instrument, the BSC’s 
framework is all about finding the right metrics, creating proper methods of 
collecting relevant data, and setting the targets that will advance the com-
pany toward fulfillment of its mission.  
 

CFO Techniques 
 
291  
 
Figure 34-1. An interpretation of the BSC concept  
Even though powerful, none of these theoretical methods are 100% perfect. 
Trying to jam a live business organism into one or another framework 
without any adjustments and practical considerations would be a mistake.  
Practical Applications of Future-Planning 
Methods 
I’ve come to learn for myself that the best approach is to be flexible and not 
to stick to one particular standard model or reject another because it 
doesn’t fully apply to your situation. It is important to weigh all shortcomings 
and drawbacks of each instrument you may use. Assess the applicability of 
each tool to your particular case and use it as a template. Keep an open 
mind and find your own combination of the best features of different models. 

Chapter 34 | Principles of Strategic Planning 
 
292  
As I always advise, try to use common sense and digest the best techniques 
into your own methodology of strategic planning. 
The practical value of SWOT analysis, for example, lies in its potential for 
multipurpose utilization. By identifying strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, 
and threats possibly affecting a particular strategy, you simultaneously eval-
uate the viability of its objective: if it is impossible to manage the four forces 
in order to realistically attain the established goal, you have to go back to 
the drawing board. Assuming the objective is decided to be feasible, the 
same characteristics and factors of the current situation can serve as guide-
lines for developing the steps of the action plan: 
 
How to match the company’s strengths with the opened  
opportunities? 
 
What to do to overcome the weaknesses and avoid the threats? 
When using environmental scanning analyses, you must remember that the 
importance of one or another set of factors included in the mix significantly 
varies from company to company, depending on the industry, locality, mar-
ket sector, products, and so on. For example, consumer-products compa-
nies are always affected by social factors, while food-and-drug manufacturers 
and distributors, even though targeting consumers as well, place highest pri-
ority on the regulatory and legal factors. Remember, no matter how many 
letters there are in the abbreviations of these instruments, none of them as-
sesses a company’s own business characteristics. It is a good idea to use 
them in combination with SWOT analysis. 
When it comes to BSC, most executives and professional management 
coaches use it in its standard version, as if it were set in stone. However, 
you can modify the model to fit your needs. A company that depends on 
the constant introduction of new products and services in order to keep 
up with technological advancements may consider replacing “organizational 
development” with “product development.” Moreover, it may decide to 
split the “operations and administration” category into three groups to 
separate R&D, implementation, and production. A company trading high-
demand natural commodities does not necessarily consider a customer pol-
icy to be a strategic item, while procurement is highly important. In this 
case it would be advisable to adjust the model and replace 
“sales/marketing” with “procurement.”    
Also, companies frequently utilize this instrument as a narrow performance 
evaluation mechanism, limiting initiatives to instructions on achieving the set 
parameters. Some companies even employ this model as criteria for deter-
mining the sales commissions. However, you can use BSC as a first step of 

CFO Techniques 
 
293  
the strategic planning process—to evaluate the entity’s business conditions 
through performance analytics in order to establish new goals and develop 
an action plan. Don’t forget about the practical drawback of the BSC ap-
proach—the fact that it only looks at the internal factors. For the purpose 
of strategic planning it must be used in combination with one of the envi-
ronmental scanning analyses, such as PEST or STEER. 
Your company’s solution could be as eclectic as it needs to be. For example, 
after formulating the strategic goal that has a potential to bring about suffi-
cient benefits to justify allocation of various resources, the planning process 
may follow this sequence of steps: 
1. Identify parts of the business crucial for this strategy in BSC’s 
manner. 
2. Determine missions and goals for each part as the subset of the 
overall goal (BSC). 
3. Identify the company’s weaknesses and strengths in terms of ac-
complishing the goal (SWOT). 
4. Perform environmental scanning analysis for those external factors 
that apply to your company (along the lines of STEER). 
5. Identify specific industrial and market barriers and opportunities 
relevant to your company (SWOT). 
6. Develop the action plan, distributing responsibilities and estimating 
the timeline. 
7. Plot the allocation of required resources. 
8. Identify the implementation milestones and formulate the perform-
ance metrics to measure progress at each stage (BSC).  
Get Your Voice Heard 
The SOX guidelines for publicly traded corporations demand for a CFO to 
become an integral part of a strategic planning team. Hence, the big-time 
chiefs join in, so that yet another item on the compliance list can be checked 
off. Forget all that if you work for a privately held, especially small, company. 
Here, the privilege of proposing a new course or even voicing your opinion 
about the future of the company must be earned with years of dedication 
and hard work. If you establish yourself as someone with a strong commer-
cial sense and not just a “money person,” it will be easier to get your points 

Chapter 34 | Principles of Strategic Planning 
 
294  
across. Ideally, by the time you are ready to formulate your point of view, 
your fellow strategists should be prepared for something of value to come 
off your desk and be interested to hear what you have to say. 
If a novel idea about the organization’s future has been germinating in your 
head for a while and you want to present it for consideration, approach this 
task in the same way you would pitch an entrepreneurial idea to a group of 
investors. Maybe you don’t need to write a 30-page formal business plan, 
but you definitely must have well-formulated targets and benefits, sensible justi-
fication, obstacles and barriers analysis, and a feasible action plan. Try to antic-
ipate all possible quizzing directions. It’s hard to overcome people’s resis-
tance to new suggestions in the first place; don’t weaken yourself with un-
preparedness. At the very least you should be ready to hand out a compre-
hensive summary. One possible format is presented in Figure 34-2.  
Whether the decision group works on the strategy proposed by you or 
brought to the table by someone else, or born in a brainstorming session, 
when it comes to the process of step-by-step planning, a CFO’s role is three-
fold. This is different than the role of any other participant. First of all, as a 
businessperson a CFO should apply her commercial acumen and evaluate 
the strategy’s application to the entire complex of the company’s activities, 
while at the same time estimating its future benefits. Secondly, a CFO takes 
on the role of the economist in order to fulfill the requirements for collect-
ing, digesting, and interpreting various positive and negative external fac-
tors, forces, and opportunities. Finally, a CFO and her analysts have a 
unique responsibility to flesh out the proposed action plans by turning de-
scriptions and outlines into numbers. Various projections and models can 
be built in order to test the strategy’s viability, determine missing pieces, 
optimize resources, and find the best ways to reach the set goals. The next 
chapter provides highlights of analytical tools that can be utilized in strate-
gic planning. 

CFO Techniques 
 
295  
 
Figure 34-2. Example of strategy planning summary 

C H A P T E R 
35 
Practical Modeling 
and Forecasting 
Just like strategies and tactics, modeling and forecasting sound more intimi-
dating than they really are, at least in the realm of small and midsize busi-
nesses. Of course, there are uber-complicated models that require super-
powerful IBM machines and years of programming. They are primarily re-
lated to simulation of large, complex structures and organisms: national and 
world economies, various markets’ processes, or ecological and biological 
systems. Most Nobel Prize winners in economics achieved their honors by 
creating models to support their theories on such sophisticated matters as 
worldwide monetary dynamics, theory of incentives, game theory, optimum 
allocation of resources, and so forth. 
Part of my postgraduate work was developing a cost optimization model for 
a manufacturing cycle with multiple constraint factors—a system far less 
complicated than, let’s say, the currency market. Still, even with variable fac-
tors limited to eight, it was not a trivial task. It took a several-page-long al-
gorithm to describe the sequence of programming instructions to make my 
calculations automatic.  
However, operations and strategic plans of individual businesses are less com-
plicated—describing them in numerical format does not require special pro-
gramming skills or expensive software. And the only time heavy-duty hard-
ware is utilized is when we deal with very large volumes of data. For example, 
most companies that rely on call centers and online customer services as 

Chapter 35 | Practical Modeling and Forecasting 
 
298  
their revenue-generating sources (telemarketers, debt collectors, etc.) believe 
that the more phone lines they engage, the higher volumes they achieve. (I 
don’t agree with such econometrics, but that’s a separate conversation.) A 
model that reflects this head count–driven revenue notion is a very simple 
calculation. With only one factor of influence, technically you don’t even need 
a computer; calculate your historical average performance per employee and 
multiply it by the number of seats you want to fill. However, if you have 90 
locations in North America alone with 20 to 200 employees in each location, 
the volume becomes an issue—you need to start feeding the data into a digi-
tal machine and let it make those elementary calculations. 
Of course, not all small and midsize business processes and strategies can be 
described in simplistic ways, but their complexity most definitely does not 
go beyond the abilities of a seasoned CFO or controller. And at their cur-
rent level of capabilities, Excel and Access can definitely handle the quanti-
fication of most action plans. Moreover, the data pool is manageable within 
the personal computing environment.  
I have a dream that all business strategies pursued by companies in the free-
market economy should ultimately target one benefit: the increase of net 
profit. Not because it would streamline the task of forecasting and model-
ing, but because, at the end of the day, it is the most important performance 
indicator—pretty much the only factor that ensures a going concern. In re-
ality, however, plenty of strategic goals are set for other reasons. 
Public companies, of course, constantly make moves that impress market ana-
lysts and investors, but don’t necessarily affect their bottom lines in a positive 
way. Overhauling executive management is a strategy, and you can definitely 
model the market’s reaction to the change and its effect on the stock prices 
with a certain accuracy. But nobody seems to care whether it will make the 
company more profitable. The same is true for young, private companies in 
hot industries with their eyes on an IPO or a buyout—their business strate-
gies are concentrated on market positioning, so the models are built around 
volumes and customers’ acquisition.  
Privately held small businesses in mature industries are more EBITDA ori-
ented; after all, it’s the source of the owners’ compensation and retained 
capital. However, even among those entrepreneurs, an ambition to hit the big 
time frequently overtakes common sense. My advice is to supplement models 
of any strategic target with profitability estimates. It may actually have a very 
sobering effect. But before you embark on the task of transforming different 
parts of an action plan into numbers and mathematical operations, you must 
figure out whether it’s even worth your time. To do that you need to use a 
cost/benefit analysis. 

CFO Techniques 
 
299  
Cost/Benefit Analysis 
Essentially, cost/benefit analysis is a comparative tool. If there are several 
strategic development projects on the table, you can use it to rank their pri-
ority, giving preference to the ones with the potential for the highest contri-
bution to the company’s well-being. If it’s just one goal, but it can be achieved 
in different ways, the optimal choice is found through comparison of the 
cost/benefit profiles of corresponding action plans. And even if it’s a single 
goal with only one possible course of action, there is always the alternative 
of not pursuing it at all. In this case, the cost/benefit analysis becomes the 
study of the project’s feasibility and justifies its rejection or approval. 
Cost/benefit analysis is applicable to any future activity that requires evalua-
tion, because we always expect to derive certain benefits from our decisions, 
and everything we do has some sort of cost attached to it, even seemingly 
non-monetary efforts. For example, let’s consider HR’s strategy to eliminate 
employees’ tardiness by introducing a policy of docking a half-day’s vacation 
time for every incident of lateness. If we disregard the relatively immaterial 
expense of delivering a warning memo to all employees electronically and 
posting some notices in the common areas, there seem to be no other costs 
involved. The company has been using time-clock hardware and software to 
monitor attendance for a long time anyway. And the benefits are obvious—
either the utilization of the working day improves or the company saves 
money by reducing the paid vacation time. Yet there are far greater costs  
associated with the implementation of this strategy. Aside from the unac-
countable time the employees will spend discussing the “cruel ways of man-
agement,” such drastic measures will always result in the deterioration of mo-
rale and increased labor turnover, which subsequently leads to additional hir-
ing and training costs, as well as reduction of productivity during the learning 
period. It is just a matter of putting a number on these consequences. 
Actually, uncovering all possible costs and benefits of a project and quantifying 
them are the biggest hurdles of a cost/benefit analysis. Most of the cases we 
deal with in real business life are far more complicated than textbook exam-
ples of investing $50,000 and expecting $15,000 annual inflows for the next 
six years. It takes a full understanding of the entire organizational system and 
an investigative ability to search for every possible negative and positive im-
pact a strategy may have on the entity. Monetizing these factors into cash 
flows requires the combination of commercial acumen, economic astuteness, 
and financial expertise. Keep in mind that cost/benefit analysis is a cash-based 
method and never forget the principle of conservatism: estimate the inflows on 
the lower side and the costs on the higher side of the possible ranges. 

Chapter 35 | Practical Modeling and Forecasting 
 
300  
After you’ve assigned dollar signs to everything, including handshakes, and 
gotten all possible outflows and inflows in a row, you must find their com-
mon denominator in terms of time, because, as we all know, there is a big 
difference between today and tomorrow’s dollars. The financial notion of 
present value works as such an equalizer. To bring a future cash flow to its 
present value, we discount it using the rate of return that could have been 
earned in some other way, but in a similar risk environment. It’s relatively 
easy to find such interest equivalent in the investment world, but when it 
comes to an active business, the complex of risks is difficult to approximate.  
I believe that the company’s own weighted average cost of capital is the most 
accurate discount rate, at least for the purpose of project evaluation. It fairly 
reflects the idea that within the company’s operational system, the funds 
must grow sufficiently to cover the financing costs, and the risks are exactly 
the same. If, for example, the entity’s operational capital of $20 million con-
sists of a $10 million loan with 5% interest, a $5 million credit line at 8%, 
and $5 million of the firm’s own capital with an expected rate of return of 
15%, the weighted average cost of capital will be 8.25% annually. 
As long as the discount rate i is defined, you can calculate a present value of 
a cash flow Ct received t periods from now as follows: 
PV = Ct / (1+i)t 
The net present value (NPV), which calculates the present value of the sum of 
all positive (benefits) and negative (costs) cash flows, is the most popular 
and most comprehensive cost/benefit indicator. If it’s positive, then the pro-
ject is comparatively favorable. Negative NPV indicates that the costs will 
outweigh the benefits. 
Coming back to our discipline strategy example, let’s say that within the next 
three years the company will succeed in reducing the lateness across the 
board by 120 minutes a day, which, at the average pay rate of $20 per hour, 
will result in annual savings of $10,400. At 8.25% weighted average cost of 
capital, the present value of the savings in years one, two, and three, respec-
tively, are $9,607.39, $8,875.19, and $8,198.79, or a total of $26,681.37. At 
the same time, the turnover rate has increased and the company lost in each 
of the three years five, four, and three employees above the historic average. 
The recruitment cost is approximately $500 per employee, and the training 
and adaptation periods with 50% reduction of expected productivity has  
averaged to 10 weeks (still at $20 per hour). The present values of these hid-
den costs amount to $20,785.22, $15,360.90, and $10,642.66 per respective 
year, or $46,788.78 total. Thus, the NPV of this seemingly progressive initia-
tive is negative $20,107.41. Definitely a bad idea. 

CFO Techniques 
 
301  
 Tip  The utilization of the cost/benefit analysis is not limited to just planning stages. At the start 
we deal with estimates and assumptions, but after a project is approved and the implementation 
stages begin, it is advisable to come back to cost/benefit analysis as actual costs are realized. 
When the goal is reached and all benefits are materialized, you can use the analysis to compare 
the results with the original expectations, as well as the opportunity cost of foregoing other strate-
gies in favor of the one chosen.   
Modeling and Forecasting Simplified 
To remove any mystery from the concept of modeling, let me say that it is 
nothing more than an attempt to represent something through different 
means. A child uses plastic LEGO pieces and translates buildings, airplanes, 
and even people into toy representations. Then he plays with them, simu-
lating interactive events. I always say that one of the best modeling tools 
available to financial professionals is the yellow pad: you can sketch a dia-
gram depicting a business process or ballpark a project’s profitability in a 
manner of minutes. It’s not dynamic, but it’s still on-the-spot modeling. 
Most of the models constructed by financial executives and their analysts 
during the strategic planning process, though, belong to the category of 
quantitative (mathematical) modeling. They use variable and constant pa-
rameters, and define correlation among them through mathematical con-
cepts and relationships, thus simulating processes within the system. Input 
variables and constants can be both external and internal factors. Output 
variables, obtained as the results of the model’s mathematical operations, 
represent strategic goals, objectives, and targets. Unlike strict academic 
models replicating abstract processes, frameworks reflecting commercial 
probabilities frequently use subjective information and rely on expert intui-
tion, professional experience, and common sense. 
As was mentioned before, in principle, you can turn everything into num-
bers and translate any business process into a model. Even a vaguely defined 
strategy such as “improvement of customer service quality” can be broken 
down into individual tactical activities, such as the implementation of call-
monitoring software, periodic review sessions, development of new scripts 
and protocols, and maybe simply scheduling executive pep talks. All of these 
steps have obvious and hidden costs associated with them. Benchmark re-
search and expert perception can be used to estimate their incremental 
benefits and interrelationships with key factors. For example, you can have a 

Chapter 35 | Practical Modeling and Forecasting 
 
302  
test run of training sessions, using the resulting data of changes in the can-
cellation rates, numbers of repeat orders, and so on, for modeling the long-
term strategic plan. 
 Note  A meaningful translation of the strategic goals and controlling factors into the numerical 
parameters and an accurate definition of the correlation among them are the most important as-
pects of successful modeling. When done correctly, it will guarantee that the resulting model will 
become a crucial tool in executive decision-making and strategic planning.   
Like modeling, forecasting and projecting both attempt to predict events that 
have not happened yet. However, when it comes to business planning, there 
is a vital distinction in the perceptive quality of these two methodologies. 
When we create models of functional systems with a particular achievement 
in mind, we try to shape the future—we look for the combination of factors 
that may produce the desirable result. Forecasts, on the other hand, are far 
more focused and deterministic—they usually examine a particular parame-
ter (market demand, prices, currency rates, revenues) at a specific point in 
time and conclude (with a degree of uncertainty) that this is what will happen. 
To come up with such conclusions, forecasting methods use various explicit 
techniques usually divided into several categories and subcategories that can 
be classified into two broad groups: qualitative and quantitative. The most 
popular examples of the former are informed opinions (which many busi-
ness execs give daily without even knowing that they’re employing a scien-
tific method), expert judgments, historical analogies, surveys, and the Delphi 
method (several rounds of questionnaires answered by a panel of experts 
with a statistical mean or median representing the result).  
The quantitative methods, regardless of the variety of mathematical tech-
niques they utilize, all boil down to construction of trends based on the his-
torical data. Decades of development have resulted in a variety of number-
grinding formulas and computer programs of various complexities, some 
even using artificial intelligence technology. Moving average, extrapolation, 
linear prediction, weighted moving average, and exponential smoothing are 
the ones that don’t require writing computer code, and can be expressed by 
formulas in an Excel environment. The examples in Figure 35-1 show 
monthly revenue and gross margin trends developed based on 42 months of 
historical data using a 12-month weighted moving average formula. With all 
other commercial factors being equal, it proved to be a fair tool for esti-
mating these indicators for the next 12-month period. The more data is ac-
cumulated, the higher accuracy of predictions can be expected. 

CFO Techniques 
 
303  
 
Figure 35-1. Projections of revenue and gross margin trends 
In my experience, the synergy of modeling and forecasting methods pro-
duces the best strategic planning tools, especially when a model incorpo-
rates the time factor. For example, if you are developing a revenue model 
for rolling out a new product in the next 24 months, you can establish cor-
relation between variable factors in order to achieve monthly goals, while 
incorporating historical data to predict such external inputs as resource 
prices, wage and benefit costs dynamics, and so on. 
Emphasis on Sensitivity 
Regardless of the nature and substance of whatever we attempt to visualize 
and interpret, one fundamental concept of modeling must be always in the 
front of our minds: that it replicates a system driven by variable parameters. 
The responsiveness of the objective to the input is the pivotal feature that 
must be built into every model, so that you can see what kind of results you 
receive if one, or another, or all of those key factors are changed. 
Commonly known as sensitivity analysis, this method of creating a construct 
that responds to changes in inputs by producing different scenarios of results 
is an integral part of strategic planning. A good model design should reflect 
this principle both structurally and visually. It is advisable to draw attention 
to the factors of change and the variations of outcomes they induce in a 
manner similar to the way it’s done in Figure 35-2, which provides an illustra-
tion with two simple models of similar design, built for the same strategy 
(utilization of Internet advertising), but with two different objectives in mind. 
The first model reflects an action plan that pursues a goal of increasing rev-
enue by $6,000,000 annually. Depending on the company’s choices of per-
click price and the ad placements, which affect the conversion rate (percen-
tage of clicks that translates into customers’ acquisitions), the company can 

Chapter 35 | Practical Modeling and Forecasting 
 
304  
achieve this revenue objective at different costs. By changing the sensitivity 
variables, you can produce different scenarios of required investments. 
ABC Company
Strategy: Internet Advertising
Additional Annual Revenue Goal
$6,000,000
Sensitivity Variables:
Cost per Click
Conversion Rate
$           2.50
5%
Product 5
Required Investment
Total Cost
$2,085,619
Cost per Acquisition
$             50.00
Products
Historical Product Demand
Revenue Goal Distribution
Price
Customers Acquisitions Requirement
Clicks (Visitors Traffic) Requirement
Advertising Cost
Product 1
Product 2
Product 3
Product 4
Product 6
Product 7
TOTAL
Product 5
Product 1
Product 2
Product 3
Product 4
Product 6
Product 7
TOTAL
35%
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$3,513,000
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
$
2,100,000
199
10,553
211,055
527,638
26%
1,560,000
399
3,910
78,195
195,489
17%
1,020,000
59
17,288
345,763
864,407
13%
780,000
99
7,879
157,576
393,939
240,000
4%
149
1,611
32,215
80,537
180,000
3%
599
301
6,010
15,025
699
120,000
2%
172
3,433
8,584
6,000,000
100%
41,712
834,247
2,085,619
ABC Company
Strategy: Internet Advertising
Investment Cap
$1,000,000
Sensitivity Variables:
Cost per Click
Conversion Rate
Benefits Expectations
Additional Revenue
Revenue per Click
3%
7.03
2.00
Products
Historical Product Demand
Advertising Cost Distribution
Attainable Clicks (Visitors Traffic)
Customers Acquisitions Expectations
Price
Expected Additional Revenue
35%
350,000
175,000
5,250
199
1,044,750
26%
260,000
130,000
3,900
399
1,556,100
170,000
17%
85,000
2,550
59
150,450
130,000
13%
65,000
1,950
99
193,050
4%
40,000
20,000
600
149
89,400
3%
30,000
15,000
450
599
269,550
20,000
2%
10,000
300
699
209,700
100%
1,000,000
500,000
15,000
3,513,000
 
Figure 35-2. Examples of sensitivity analysis models (courtesy of E&D CC) 

CFO Techniques 
 
305  
The second model assumes a limited investment resource with an annual In-
ternet advertising budget capped at $1 million. In this case, the model is de-
signed to show how much additional revenue such an investment can bring 
depending on the choices of per-click prices and possible conversion rates. 
Note that both models incorporate forecasting techniques by extrapolating 
historical data of demand for various products. An expert judgment is used 
in assuming that it will hold up with the new form advertising as well. 
It’s clear that the profitability of the proposed course of action is not ad-
dressed in either of the cases. The purpose of the modeling here was to re-
produce the correlation between the cost of advertising and the additional 
revenue benefits depending on several modifying factors. If you want to per-
form a feasibility test, you need to conduct a cost/benefit analysis. For a 
more detailed picture you can extend these models to include all compo-
nents of cost, including new Internet advertising expenses, and see if the  
additional sales will be profitable. 
 Note  Of all different personal ideas and observations I share here, this one is probably the most 
important, and it’s only fitting to place it within the part of the book that deals with strategic plan-
ning. What separates a truly versatile CFO with expert knowledge of the fundamental principles 
and a set of easily transferable skills from an average accounting professional is the capacity for 
conceptual thinking. An ability to see the big picture, recognize similar patterns and hidden rela-
tions, apply past knowledge to new situations, identify key differentials and trends—these are the 
qualities we must cultivate in order to achieve new professional heights. These are not abstract, 
but rather very practical notions: with suitable variations you can use the same report design for 
hundreds of different analyses, or the same modeling principles for strategies that seemingly have 
nothing in common. Instantly recognizing similarities and coming up with solutions make you look 
almost like a magician, but it’s nothing more than hard-earned expertise.  

C H A P T E R 
36 
New Ventures 
 
Consider yourself lucky if you work for someone who is dynamic and am-
bitious, and, more importantly, understands that only the diversification of 
business opportunities guarantees a company’s survival in a volatile eco-
nomic environment. The strategic plans of enthusiastic entrepreneurs go 
beyond those that are focused only on necessary internal developments 
such as operational improvements and marketing undertakings. When a 
business owner’s mind is set on longevity and growth, it is inevitable that 
the introduction of new products, expansion into related industries, acquisi-
tion of competing and complementing companies, and venturing into new 
commercial territories will be within his business prospects. These new ho-
rizons exponentially increase opportunities for a CFO’s professional growth, 
which always comes hand in hand with an increased workload. Even at the 
planning stages, it requires deeper research, more analysis, and a wider vari-
ety of modeling. And that’s just the beginning. 
A classic example of expansion through diversification is Amazon.com. 
Launched in 1995 as an online bookstore start-up, little by little the company 
pursued all venues of growth and development: adding products like CDs 
and DVDs, already sold by traditional booksellers along with books; going in-
ternational by buying competing companies in some countries and setting up 
local versions of Amazon in others; acquiring sites that seemed to be in a dif-
ferent cyber realm, such as IMDb, but turned out to be perfect media for di-
rect links to Amazon’s products; creating its own proprietary electronics; 
and so on. Amazon’s visionary founder Jeff Bezos will not hesitate to com-
pete in any market: with Apple in music and video streaming, with eBay as a 

Chapter 36 | New Ventures 
308  
consumer products marketplace, or with Groupon on the special deals in 
your neighborhood. 
Of course, the scale of Amazon’s success is unprecedented—it grew to be a 
$32 billion company. However, there is nothing new about the routes the 
company took to get there. And there are plenty of small and midsize busi-
nesses that, on a more modest scale, assured their stability and prosperity by 
exploiting one or several of those methods. I hope you get a chance to work 
for a company that goes through corporate transformations, because it’s a 
very exhilarating experience. But, what happens right after all cost/benefit 
analyses are done, all possible scenarios are modeled, the action plan is de-
tailed, and the new venture’s deal is underway? In all likelihood, as one of the 
first steps of the implementation agenda, you will need to either set up a new entity 
or absorb an existing one into your corporate structure.  
Actually, in case of the absorption typical of merger and acquisition (M&A) 
transactions, the decisions about the way the entities are combined are usu-
ally made during the preliminary negotiations process. At the end they are 
all formalized by legal agreements. This makes the fulfillment of the struc-
tural changes more streamlined. Of course, there is still plenty of work re-
lated to setting up operational, functional, communicational, and reporting 
interactions; policies and procedures; and taxation issues. But the legaliza-
tion of the establishment will be more mechanistic than intuitive.  
 Note  In many M&A situations, such as in the Amazon example, you end up with subsidiaries 
that retain their corporate identities, and sometimes even names, assuming they carry brand-
recognition value. However, if the buyer is only interested in assets and/or the operational sub-
stance, the acquired company will cease to exist. The departing entity then must get tax authorities 
clearance by filing all applicable final tax returns, submit articles of dissolution to the state of its 
original incorporation, and report corporate resolution of liquidation to the IRS.  
In many instances, a new venture strategy calls for the creation of an entity 
from scratch, which means that you have to lay down the corporate founda-
tion before embarking on all those other functional tasks. And this is not 
necessarily a very complicated exercise, but it is fairly elaborate. Of course, 
in big companies with large purses, scores of attorneys surround every new 
deal, and they take care of everything. (This does not guarantee a perfect 
execution, by the way.) However, in the cost-saving world of smaller enti-
ties, many actions can be undertaken by CFOs and their staff, especially 

CFO Techniques 
 
309  
now, when so many formalities can be accomplished online. (Sometimes I 
stop for a second and remember that less than 15 years ago people still 
needed to go to city halls to file corporate applications and spend hours on 
the phone trying to get through to the IRS to obtain an Employer’s Identifi-
cation Number [EIN]. The time consumption terrifies me.) Even if you en-
gage outside help, being aware of the details that comprise the formation 
and setup of new entities will allow you to monitor the process. The per-
sonal participation is very crucial, because this first implementation stage is a 
combination of decision-making and execution of meticulous routine tasks. 
These decisions will have an impact on taxation, consolidation, financial re-
porting, and further strategic moves that may take place in the future.  
Checklist for a New Domestic Entity Setup 
The following checklist is an outline of basic steps necessary for legitimizing 
a new business entity into a recognizable and functional artificial being. It’s 
compiled with a generic new venture in mind. The list is based on the as-
sumption that you are starting something that has not existed before. 
Hence, it begins with the initial steps any new business must take before it 
starts operating. Depending on your actual situation, you may disregard the 
items that don’t apply. For example, if the new venture involves an existing 
company, you will obviously want to skip the incorporation steps and pick 
up from any point after. On the other hand, all internal setups are applicable 
not only to domestic entities, but to international entities as well. That said, 
it is impossible to predict all specific circumstances surrounding the birth of 
a new establishment and cover all possibilities that may arise. Therefore, the 
list is illustrative, but not exhaustive. As I always advise, one needs to be 
flexible and use common sense when applying general suggestions to partic-
ular situations.  
 Establish the preferable entity type: corporation, limited liability 
corporation (LLC), or limited liability partnership (LLP).  
 Clarify the ownership of the new entity: whether it will be a subsidi-
ary owned by the existing company, or a related entity owned by 
the same shareholders. If outside investors are involved, follow the 
agreement to identify their percentage of ownership. 
 Establish the state of incorporation. It does not necessarily need to 
be the same as the state where the business operates. However, for 
tax purposes it will be considered the entity’s state of domicile. In 
all other states it will be considered a foreign entity. 

Chapter 36 | New Ventures 
 
310  
 File a Certificate of Incorporation in the elected state (practically all 
states have online portals for corporate filings). Note that selecting 
a unique name will speed up the process of incorporation, as the 
state will not accept a name that is too similar to one that they al-
ready have in their databases.  
 Obtain corporate book, seal, and stock certificates. 
 Have an attorney draft the bylaws and the corporate charter. Alter-
natively, you can use reasonably priced services such as LegalZoom 
to prepare standard corporate documents for you. 
 Prepare shareholders’ meetings to resolve whatever specific organi-
zational issues must be included in the corporate charter, but first 
and foremost to elect corporate officers with the signatory rights.  
 Note that meeting resolutions become integral parts of bylaws. 
 Apply to the IRS online for an EIN (www.irs.gov/businesses). 
 Check with the state whether it requires a separate state identifica-
tion number or charter and apply accordingly. 
 Determine the new entity’s states and localities of operations, 
which include all jurisdictions where facilities will be located and 
employees will be hired, as well as those associated, for example, 
with opening bank accounts.  
 Obtain Certificate of Authority or foreign entity qualifications in all 
states identified in the previous item, where the entity is considered 
out-of-state (foreign)—that is, in the jurisdictions other than the 
state of incorporation (online portals are available in most states). 
Note that if you incorporate in Delaware, but want to open a busi-
ness account in New York, a Certificate of Authority will be one of 
the documents requested by the bank officer. 
 Decide whether the entity qualifies and would benefit from a Sub-
chapter S (individual shareholders and estates) or Qualified S (cor-
porate shareholders) designation.  
 If required, file IRS form 2553 to elect S corporation status, or form 
8860 for qualified Subchapter S subsidiary election. Note that for 
the election to take effect in the current tax year, these forms must 

CFO Techniques 
 
311  
be filed before March 15; if filed later, the status will take effect only 
at the beginning of the following year.  
 Research federal, state, and local industry regulations, licensing and 
permit requirements, consumer rights, and fair business practices 
(see www.sba.gov). 
 Apply to obtain applicable licenses. 
 Open the new entity’s bank account(s). 
 Decide whether the payroll will be managed internally or outsour-
ced to ADP, Paychex, or a similar service. Even if you intend to use 
external services, the next two steps should be completed—if not 
for payroll, then for business taxes. 
 Enroll as an online business taxpayer with the Electronic Federal 
Tax Payment System (EFTPS) to be ready to start remitting your 
payroll tax liabilities. Note that the enrollment process requires a 
valid verifiable bank account, which is why you need to open at least 
one bank account first. 
 Enroll for online tax payments and filings in all states where you plan 
to employ staff or need to pay business taxes. Note that the en-
rollment and bank verification time varies from state to state, so it 
is better to be proactive and not delay this process. Many states 
make electronic payments mandatory nowadays. The processing de-
lay will not be accepted as an excuse for a late payment/filing, and 
penalties will be incurred. 
 Implement HR policies and procedures, including the selection  
of benefits. 
 If it is not a new manufacturing or retail facility, decide whether  
the new entity needs a separate space, or will sublease from head-
quarters.  
 If needed, lease operational and/or office space. 
 Decide whether the new entity will have access to the headquarters’ 
shared services (including HR, billing, credit and collections, general 
accounting, legal, IT, customer service, travel and office supplies pro-
curement, etc.), or will be required to set up its own departments to 
cover the corresponding needs.  

Chapter 36 | New Ventures 
 
312  
 Decide on centralized or decentralized treasury—that is, whether 
the new entity will be required to remit its collections to the head-
quarters and either have its payables paid there or receive a peri-
odic allotment to satisfy them, or whether it will manage its cash 
flows independently.  
 If applicable, define the nature of intercompany sales/purchase 
transactions. 
 If applicable, establish transfer pricing; outline billing and payment 
procedures. 
 Identify other possible intercompany transactions (e.g., capital fi-
nancing) and translate them into recording procedures. 
 Establish physical and digital locations of the new entity’s books and 
records. If your operational software can accommodate multiple en-
tities, the company can be set up within the main system. Other-
wise, a separate application will be required. In either case, the ac-
cess will be determined by the decisions above on centralization and 
shared services.  
 Set up the new company in the operating system. 
 Set up a chart of accounts accommodating structural and transac-
tional decisions. 
 Enter beginning balances for cash and capital accounts. 
 Establish control mechanisms: even if the new entity is treasury in-
dependent, it is advisable that the executive and financial manage-
ment is centralized, providing operational guidelines and financial 
control in order to make sure that the activities do not contradict 
the overall mission. 
 Establish the new entity’s operational and fiscal policies, procedures, 
and internal controls. 
 Set up the new entity’s budget. 
 Establish standards for periodic operational communications on 
managerial and functional levels. 
 Establish standard financial-reporting procedures. 
 Establish periodic performance-data flow. 
Now the new entity is ready to operate. 

CFO Techniques 
 
313  
Foreign Entity Concerns 
Today, for many enterprises of different shapes and sizes, expansion means 
going abroad. In search of more economic means of conducting business, 
companies produce, export, import, distribute, and procure raw materials, 
pre-products, finished goods, labor, and services in foreign countries. Finan-
cial executives of companies with various international structures have to 
deal with a unique complex of issues that, even though they are different 
depending on the particular country, have certain common attributes.  
In some cases, it’s not necessary to buy or form a full-fledged overseas en-
tity to accommodate your international needs. If your local interests are 
primarily of a networking nature—making contacts, finding distribution 
channels, or coordinating outsourcing efforts—a registered representative 
office may suffice. However, if a company is involved in any type of opera-
tional or commercial transactions in a foreign country, such as manufactur-
ing, purchasing, bringing goods through the border, or selling products or 
services within its territory, some sort of a corporate presence in that 
country is most likely an unavoidable requirement. 
Establishing foreign entities usually calls for engagement of people with local 
expertise and extensive knowledge of regulations, especially if you plan on 
hiring employees. Employment laws are very complicated in most foreign 
countries, and American companies frequently run up huge fines due to 
various violations. In some countries, even though you are paying your own 
employees, salaries and wage taxes must be submitted to an appointed gov-
ernment agency, which then pays the after-tax nets to employees on specific 
days. In others, a one-year trial period turns into “permanent employment,” 
assuming you decide to retain an employee. After that threshold, you can-
not fire anybody without paying him or her a severance package equal to a 
full year salary plus benefits, even if there is a legitimate cause. The intrica-
cies of arrangements vary from country to country.  
Value-added taxation (VAT) and cross-border commercial relationships 
within the European Union are the other two major hurdles of conducting 
business in Europe. Both definitely require significant advisory services and 
employment of local accountants and tax specialists. At the same time I do 
recommend that CFOs of companies with international subsidiaries spend 
some time familiarizing themselves with VAT principles—you cannot effec-
tively manage your foreign counterparts without understanding their basic 
responsibilities. 
With the exception of arts and antiques, exports are generally encouraged 
by most governments because they positively affect a country’s trade balance 

Chapter 36 | New Ventures 
 
314  
and its international economic status. Clearly, imports work in exactly the 
opposite way, both overseas and in the United States. Customs duties are 
not the only means of the governments’ protectionism. In many countries, a 
lower scale of importation tariffs is applied to domestic corporations as op-
posed to foreign companies with local branches. If circumstances permit, this 
factor frequently provides an incentive to set up a related entity with com-
mon ownership or enter a joint venture with a local company rather than 
creating a 100% owned subsidiary overseas. 
The intercompany transactions, which are subject to special consolidation 
rules between domestic related parties anyway, become an acute issue 
when foreign entities are involved. International transfer prices are some of 
the most complicated and ambiguous taxation concerns. In theory, related 
companies can bill each other at whatever prices they wish to establish, cre-
ating a loophole for the manipulation of taxable income on each side of the 
transaction. Under the Internal Revenue Code, a US exporter selling goods 
or services to its foreign subsidiary or parent has an opportunity to justify 
its transfer prices by filing with the IRS an economic review (commonly 
known as 482 review after the governing law 26 USC 482). Other countries 
heavily involved in international trade, including China, the United Kingdom, 
Canada, and India, publish their own regulations on this subject. 
There are different ways of ensuring that your foreign operations are com-
pliant with local regulations and function in an optimal business environment 
that a particular country can provide. Countries in which international enter-
prises customarily come to incorporate or register their overseas opera-
tions—such as Belgium, Switzerland, the Netherlands, the Republic of Ireland, 
and China—have a well-developed network of consulting and legal companies 
that perform an array of services—from registration and incorporation to 
bookkeeping, tax returns preparations, and government filings. If there is no-
body in your network that can recommend a service like that, you can find 
them online, but be cautious—check them out and ask for references.  
Already mentioned in Chapter 29’s discussion on the selection of auditors, 
opting for one of the Big Four CPA firms is another good way to gain access 
to professionals with local knowledge, as they have offices all over the 
world. They can also assist with the financial reporting hurdles of interna-
tional consolidations, such as foreign currency translations and adaptation of 
IFRS by all subsidiaries, which allows unification of the preparation of finan-
cial statements.  
As I said in the beginning of the chapter, if your employer ventures into new 
business realms, you will be blessed with incredible opportunities for plung-
ing into seas of new knowledge and professional growth potentials. 

C H A P T E R 
37 
Exit Strategies 
 
With the possible exception of blue chips,1 practically all companies, whether 
private or public, at one point or another undergo strategic transformations 
that alter the entity in a cardinal manner. There are numerous possibilities for 
changes to occur in companies with publicly traded stocks. There are hostile 
takeovers. Stockholders vote for mergers, acquisitions, restructurings, and di-
vestitures every day. For one reason or another, public stock may lose its 
value and a company dissolves or gets privatized through equity buyouts. 
For the current owners of a small, privately held company, some sort of a 
getaway plan is simply inevitable. They may keep it to themselves, but 
whether you want to admit it to yourself or not, your bosses have an exit 
strategy. Successfully implemented growth and expansion tactics could be 
preparatory steps for making the business an attractive candidate for going 
public or a sell-off. If cashing out is not in the cards for the owners, even-
tually they will get to the point when their interests shift to some other en-
deavor or they want to retire. That usually opens only two possibilities: 
passing the business to the next generation or dissolving it altogether. And 
then there is the worst-case scenario—going out of business despite every-
one’s hardest efforts to survive.  
Granted, none of this may happen during your tenure at a particular com-
pany, but the probability of a CFO or controller experiencing at least one of 
                                                
1 A nickname used on the stock market to describe a public corporation with a worldwide 
reputation for an ability to equally sustain stable performance during good economic condi-
tions and weather difficult times of recessions. It originates from poker terminology, which as-
signs the highest value to blue-colored chips.  

Chapter 37 | Exit Strategies 
 
316  
the exit scenarios in the course of her career is very high, and you should 
be prepared for it.  
Business for Sale 
Practically every business owner has this fantasy hidden deep inside—to 
trade the fruits of his hard labor for a tidy sum and retire to “the islands.”  
In this direct and pure form, it is a difficult (and for many an impossible) task 
to accomplish. Disposing of business assets is a fairly straightforward proc-
ess. It’s not much different than selling stuff on eBay: you describe them, 
benchmark the price with comparable items on the market, package them, 
put a pretty bow on top, and announce that these items are for sale. But an 
entire business is a complex living organism that carries values beyond its 
plants, equipment, inventory, and receivables. Its true worth is afflicted by 
the elusive notions of goodwill and future returns. And, therefore, the concept 
of “selling business” is broad and may include a variety of different deals and 
transactions. 
Solicitations of public and private equity investments, already discussed in 
Part 3 as a means of capital resourcing, are sales of business stakes and fu-
ture gains in exchange for immediate cash, which allow the business to con-
tinue operating and expanding. Challenges associated with finding and han-
dling stock markets’ underwriters, hedge funders, and capital backers were 
detailed in Chapters 12 through 15. It seems reasonable, though, to re-
iterate here that, with the possible exception of angel and venture capital 
investments in technology start-ups, it usually takes several years of hard 
work to prep a company as an attractive public or private investment op-
portunity. The burden of these labors primarily rests on the shoulders of 
the company’s financial team, spearheaded by a CFO. 
Yet the purpose and outcomes of these deals rarely result in the owners in-
stantaneously cashing out and retiring. IPOs are always complemented with 
lock-up agreements. These are binding legal contracts between underwriters 
and the company’s insiders (private investors, founders, and other original 
shareholders) that prevent the latter from selling their stock during a fixed 
period of time, normally ranging from 180 to 365 days. And who knows 
what may happen in a year’s time? The memory of the Internet bubble 
burst, which erased 50% of dot-coms from existence, is still fresh.  
When it comes to private equity deals that actually come to fruition, more 
frequently than not the owners sell out primarily in exchange for the oppor-
tunity to continue working hard and survive. Whatever cash funds are in-
volved become the operating capital, while the sellers’ stock ownership is 

CFO Techniques 
 
317  
restructured. Alternatively, the transaction may be designed in such a way 
that on paper the sellers are paid for their original shares, but the closing 
conditions require the proceeds to be reinvested in the new stock. The end 
result is the same: the original owners have a vested interest in the com-
pany’s success. Ultimately preoccupied with an exit strategy of their own 
(an IPO or a resale), the backers, in exchange for their money, usually de-
mand that the active CEOs dive straight back into building the revitalized 
entity’s value by having them sign long-term employment agreements.  
On the other hand, M&A transactions are principally different. First of all, 
the role of the buyer is played not by a moneyed individual or a financing 
organization interested in gainful placement of its money, but by a business 
keen on expanding its operations and frequently operating in the same or a 
related market sector. The buyer either becomes the acquired company’s 
parent or absorbs the seller altogether.  
For example, on the day this part of the chapter was written, the top M&A 
deal in the news was the acquisition of a privately held and relatively small 
Irish cloud-content provider, NewBay, by the maker of BlackBerry—
NASDAQ-listed Canadian company Research in Motion (RIM). Considering 
the nature of the two companies involved, it would be a fair guess to as-
sume that NewBay will become a wholly owned subsidiary of RIM. In con-
trast, the never-ending movements within the banking industry we’ve all 
been observing result in the complete swallowing of the seller by the buyer. 
Either way, M&A transactions lead to significant restructuring and some-
times complete dismantling of the sold company’s infrastructure as dictated 
by the new owners.  
Most acquisitions executed between private companies involve actual cash 
payments. In the case of a public company’s participation, besides cash it can 
offer as a part of the payment its stock, which has easily identifiable market 
value. This way, the parent’s executives create a stimulus for the newly ac-
quired child’s executives to continue building the company’s value past the 
acquisition and drive the share prices up. It is most likely that the price of 
NewBay, $100 million according to some analysts, will be paid by RIM as a 
cash/stock composite.  
That said, M&A transactions are the only ones that can result in the outright 
cashing out by the private stakeholders (both owners and backers). Bloom-
berg’s Global Mergers and Acquisitions Legal Advisory Rankings report for 
the third quarter of 2011, issued on October 1, 2011, showed that 64.5% of 
deals constituted company takeovers. Cash was a predominant form of pay-
ment, accounting for 69.3% of all transactions. During just that one quarter 
in North America alone, 3,846 deals were concluded, with the total value of 

Chapter 37 | Exit Strategies 
318  
payments amounting to over $313 billion. Most of the acquired companies 
(97%) were small and midsize, with the average deal under $500 million. 
Family Business 
Family-owned businesses are frequently based on proudly upheld traditions 
carried out generation after generation. Business dynasties have been built 
by humans since the beginnings of time. Children went into trades their fa-
thers inherited from their ancestors as apprentices, because that’s what was 
expected of them, and it gave them an opportunity to make a living. This is 
how the families of silversmiths, jewelers, welders, textile workers, and 
farmers were built. That’s why even today we still have medical, legal, pub-
lishing, and other business clans. Early in the film The King’s Speech, Prince 
Albert (Colin Firth) tells King George V (Michael Gambon), “Father, we are 
not a family, we are a firm.” And the king replies, “We’re the oldest, most 
successful corporation in the world and sitting on thrones is our business!” 
Keeping the business in family hands is not necessarily a bad thing. A steady 
supply of power successors sustains, to certain extent, the business’s conti-
nuity. Only a handful of companies develop to become attractive acquisition 
targets. The rest must either find other means to survive past the current 
owners’ retirement, or fold. My very first controller position happened to 
be in a manufacturing company that was a family business in its fourth gen-
eration. My boss, who by then was in his 60s, carried a burning grudge 
against his father for forcing him into running the company. Himself a father 
of three, he deliberately stayed away from his children’s career choices and 
they all succeeded elsewhere. As a person I support the same principles re-
garding freedom of choice. Nevertheless, I was sad to lose the job when the 
company closed after we celebrated the owner’s 65th birthday. 
I believe that the tightening of the current job market will increase the flow 
of owners’ children into the relative safety of familial enterprises. Many of 
those kids, who originally might have planned independent careers, will dive 
under the parental wing instead of competing with their peers for the few 
positions available for well-educated recent graduates. Some of them will 
even have business degrees. 
Regardless of whether the young ones were prepared for it since childhood 
or came on board due to the lack of better opportunities, when the old 
guard exercises the exit strategy and yields power to the next generation, 
the event constitutes a change of command and further metamorphoses 
may follow. At least, in the case of a company with a long-held tradition, you 

CFO Techniques 
 
319  
work there knowing that such a change will be coming. Many CFOs and 
controllers who stay with the same companies for a long time watch their 
future bosses grow and mature, interacting with them for years. And even if 
it’s unexpected, no changing of the guard happens overnight. You usually do 
have time to prepare for it.  
If you want to stay on the job after your current boss departs, use this time 
to your advantage by taking on the role of an educator and a hand-holder. 
This has nothing to do with “sucking up” or lowering yourself to flattery. 
This is a survival mechanism that takes the form of a proud tutelage. If you 
want to continue to be instrumental to the endurance of the company  
under the new executive management, you’d better make sure that the 
leaders are qualified and that they know where to go for support. This is 
especially important if you care about the business itself and the people it 
employs. Moreover, if you do it in a subtle, unobtrusive way, your peers and 
subordinates will understand that your efforts are directed toward protect-
ing everybody’s jobs, not showing off.  
Finally, if you are good at it, you may actually succeed in creating excellent 
executive material capable of further advancing the company’s mission. 
These efforts are especially rewarding when the heir is worthy of the 
cause—bright and willing to learn and evolve.  
Winding Up 
I wish that none of my readers ever have to go through the process of closing 
a business. It’s a heartbreaking experience. With the exception of Chapter 7 
bankruptcy filings, which are usually employed to liquidate a severely debt-
ridden business and thus require the participation of at least one attorney and 
a judge, most of the time the process of winding the business up, unfortu-
nately, becomes the responsibility of the top financial person in the company.  
The need to close a business could derive from the owners’ conscious, 
planned, and well-prepared decision to get out, or from an M&A transaction 
with an acquiring company only interested in the target’s tangible and in-
tangible assets. Or it can be the painful conclusion of a drawn-out battle to 
survive, tarnished by painful commercial contraction, numerous bouts of 
layoffs, months and months of stretching payables and dodging creditors, 
lease-agreement interruptions, abandonment of office equipment, and such 
similar unpleasantness. Regardless of the reason, it is painful to come to an 
empty office and administer the last rites to the company that has been your 
second home for some time. Frequently, there is not even an office to come 
to anymore, and you have to deal with it from home. 

Chapter 37 | Exit Strategies 
 
320  
When it comes to small corporations, there are many instances of owners 
firing everyone and simply walking away from everything, leaving behind en-
tities that still exist on paper and assuming that relatively small unpaid obli-
gations here and there will just dissipate. Frequently it works—if a lawsuit’s 
costs may exceed the debt, the creditor will just write it off. However, it is 
highly advisable to take proper steps to officially close the business. The 
boss’s life does not end there, and it is important to explain to him or to 
her that it is wise to have a clean slate for future possibilities. 
I would suggest that, under more or less optimal circumstances, the follow-
ing minimum number of actions is required to wind the business up in order 
to avoid any future automatically generated filing and payment obligations: 
1. Create and sign a written agreement, if there is more than one 
owner (partner), resolving to liquidate the business. 
2. Comply with labor laws. Make sure that there are no outstanding 
wages. Check if your state requires that employees be paid for un-
used time off. If you have more than 100 employees, the law de-
mands that you notify them of the business closure 60 days in ad-
vance. In some states it applies to the smaller businesses as well. 
3. Satisfy all payroll-tax obligations and file employment returns expli-
citly marked as “final” with all federal, state, and local authorities. If 
some agencies had required you to obtain separate EIN numbers, 
they need to be revoked. Cancel workers’ compensation insurance. 
4. Liquidate remaining business assets, including return of the leased 
equipment. It is not easy to get rid of office equipment and such 
things by yourself, but there are specialized services you can use 
that will take a cut from the proceeds as their fee. Whatever money 
you can get from it is better than leaving stuff behind and being 
billed for its removal. 
5. Cancel business credit cards as well as services with automatic and 
monthly billings. 
6. Satisfy whatever business debts you can. 
7. Cancel all registrations, permits, licenses, and trade names. 
8. File the final corporate tax returns with the IRS and state and local 
jurisdictions, also marking them “final.” 
9. File corporate dissolution documents with your state. (This is usu-
ally done through the same agency that’s responsible for incor-
poration of new entities.) 

CFO Techniques 
 
321  
10. After the final tax return is accepted and cleared, cancel the EIN 
with the IRS—this provides the government with a conclusive no-
tice that the company has discontinued employment activities. 
11. Close all bank accounts.  
12. Provide the owners with the records reflecting closing procedures. 
Thankfully, nowadays they can fit on a pocket-size external hard 
drive and you don’t have to ship boxes of papers somewhere.  
Face the Reality 
And the reality is that any of the exit strategies, not just dissolution, may re-
sult in the ending of your term with the company. It’s not an absolute cer-
tainty, but it’s a reasonable possibility. If it happens, remember that it’s not a 
reflection on your performance, loyalty, or the scope of your professional 
knowledge. Moreover, it will not make much difference that you have 
treated the business as if it were your own, investing your time and heart in 
it. It’s simply how things work—at the end of the day, you are just an em-
ployee and there may be no place for you in the post-conversion stage. 
The investment bank’s underwriter may demand that a CFO of a public com-
pany have an MBA from an Ivy League school to make a good impression in 
the prospectus. Private equity firms may want someone who they know as 
their watchful eye. It didn’t matter whether Eduardo Saverin was a good CFO 
or not; Facebook’s venture capitalists would have found a way to get rid of 
him because they were only interested in the idea-generating and code-
writing founders like Mark Zuckerberg. When companies are absorbed by 
their new parents after M&A transactions are concluded, many positions be-
come redundant—there could be only one CFO, controller, COO, or CIO in 
a centralized corporate structure. And who knows, maybe your boss’s son 
promised his wife that she could be the CFO as soon as he took over.  
The issue is that, when it comes to exit situations, a CFO or controller’s 
position is probably the most difficult one. Regardless of the personal pros-
pects resulting from the upcoming changes, our fiduciary duties obligate us 
to do our best and make it happen for our bosses. When I personally had to 
go through the business-closing process, I couldn’t start looking for the next 
job even with the full knowledge that the current one was about to be 
over—loyalty prevailed and I still worked until 8:00 p.m. without a break on 
the very last day. 
It’s tough and I can only offer a few items of practical advice. First of all, taste-
fully network as much as discretion allows without being pushy. In today’s 

Chapter 37 | Exit Strategies 
 
322  
working environment, this is important for any job, under any circumstances. 
Stay in touch with your external contacts and let them know that you are 
open to new opportunities. LinkedIn has grown into a real international out-
let for professional connections. I know it’s a lottery, but you never know 
what may happen.  
Secondly, don’t burn any bridges. When employments end, the emotions 
are usually raw on all sides—you have to exercise incredible restraint not to 
fall into outright hostility. Try to preserve as much civility as the other peo-
ple will allow you (it’s not always just up to you). Ask for reference letters. 
It’s sort of an old-fashioned tool, but the truth is, in a privately held com-
pany, a top financial executive reports only to owners. So, when you are 
asked to provide “supervisor” references, you will need to put down the 
contact information for your former presidents and CEOs, who are always 
busy or difficult to reach, or don’t want to be bothered. Then the letters 
will come in handy.  
Most importantly, no matter what the circumstances are, work hard and 
display your best strategic abilities and professional skills—not for anybody 
else, but for the sake of your own dignity and self-respect.  
 
 

P A R T 
IX 
Administration: 
The Organization 
of People 
 
Many functions discussed so far are essential parts of business administra-
tion and organizational management: development of policies and proce-
dures, enforcement of performance criteria, planning, controlling, and so on. 
Managing human resources, both as a set of routine tasks and as a process 
of dealing with actual people, is probably the most idiosyncratic of job re-
quirements for financial executives. We try very hard to stay within the 
comfort zone of accounting principles and financial concepts, abstracting the 
labor units and titles on organizational charts from the individuals they rep-
resent. Yet the impact of the human factor on the company’s activities is 
too significant to ignore. So, in order to succeed in this functional realm we 
have no choice but to summon the most diverse complex of abilities: prac-
tical expertise, specialized knowledge, psychological acumen, behavioral 
awareness, and people skills.      
 
 
 
 
 

C H A P T E R 
38 
Acquisition of 
Human Resources 
 
The challenges associated with tasks essential to the administration of HR 
are reflected in the multiple meanings of the term itself. From an opera-
tional and monetary standpoint, labor is a resource not much different from 
capital or equipment, but its quality may be somewhat unpredictable. Its 
proper maintenance depends on expensive and time-consuming nurturing. 
At the same time, the individual units of this resource constitute the sub-
stance of the organizational structure and, as such, require efficient place-
ment, streamlining, and coordination. It’s a regulated commodity governed 
by labor laws and the taxation code. Yet, up close, a company’s employees 
are unique human beings with their personal traits, quirks, backgrounds, 
home lives, and so on. 
For a CFO or a controller, HR has an additional dimension. On one hand, 
HR management is an organizational function, with company-wide policies 
and tasks related to payroll, benefits, incentives, reprimands, and so on. To-
day, it frequently falls within the financial executives’ scope of responsibilities. 
On the other hand, as a supervisor you are ultimately in charge of acquiring, 
maintaining, training, and managing members of departments and groups un-
der your command—your direct and indirect reports.  
One way to tackle the obvious complexity of the matter within the limits of 
a single book section is to select key functional aspects and address them in 

Chapter 38 | Acquisition of Human Resources 
 
326  
a structural manner. Generally speaking, any operational resource, before 
being converted into a company’s final product, passes through two stages: 
procurement and utilization. Accordingly, this chapter deals with acquisition 
of HR. The next chapter will outline those important facets of HR functional 
management that can impact the effectiveness of its usage. Finally, I cannot 
leave the people factor out of the discussion, and have to give some space in 
the last chapter to the behavioral side of a CFO’s job, interpreting HR as 
human relations. 
Procurement Practices 
If we take into account the full spectrum of possibilities, a business can fulfill 
its labor needs in different ways. Phil Knight, the cofounder and chairman of 
Nike, is considered to be a pioneer of Asian outsourcing (he started in Indo-
nesia). Since the company was founded in 1964, not a single pair of the fa-
mous sneakers has been produced in the United States. It was as if he had 
rediscovered the Orient and opened the door for manufacturers of all cali-
bers into a source of labor with a price tag adjusted to exotic workday 
standards and cost of living.  
Manufacturing labor was only the beginning. Rapid developments in com-
munication technologies opened opportunities for the cost-saving outsourc-
ing of labor-intensive services with easily scripted routines: telemarketing, 
customer service, technical support, and debt collection. In turn, the tech-
nological advancements required enormous amounts of programming and 
web designing, creating a window of opportunity for utilization of foreign 
high-tech services. Then followed large-volume billing processing, bookkeep-
ing, and so on. Today, a virtual-company scenario with an idea-generating 
entrepreneur managing all his outsourced operational and overhead labor 
from his home office is a conceivable reality.  
Companies looking for exceptional sets of skills difficult to find locally (e.g., a 
combination of US taxation expertise with fluent Japanese) may engage in 
importing of labor resources from other countries by providing foreign nation-
als with employment sponsorships secured by H-1B work visas. From time 
to time, the national job market experiences severe shortages of workers in 
a particular profession. The deficit of nursing professionals, for instance, con-
sistently affects the health industry. During the Internet bubble at the end of 
1990s, a similar situation presented itself with the insufficient availability of 
programmers and web designers. These conditions are usually remedied by 
the government issuing additional allotments of work visas with specific oc-
cupational criteria.  

CFO Techniques 
 
327  
Even without going abroad, companies have various opportunities to effici-
ently satisfy their labor needs. Temporary employees can close interim gaps in 
required skills or provide reinforcement for fixed-term projects. Moreover, 
essentially all businesses practice what I call functional outsourcing when they 
opt for engaging services of external providers instead of hiring an in-house 
specialist to cover a specific area of expertise. For example, only larger en-
terprises have a need for and can afford in-house counsel. Instead, most 
companies have relationships with law firms that provide them with advice 
whenever the need arises. The same is true for IT administration—it makes 
more sense to sign an annual support contract with a service provider pre-
pared to address whatever tasks may arise than hoping that the problem will 
fall within an internal employee’s breadth of knowledge.  
Business owners and managers should recognize the value of this pattern and 
try to utilize it in less obvious areas as well. Programming a relatively small 
but helpful tool for the automatic uploading of time card data into the payroll 
module does not call for hiring a full-time database specialist. There are 
plenty of small and large firms that can send somebody to execute this task. 
Similarly, when a company finds itself desperate for executive reporting and 
performance analytics, CEOs and CFOs are frequently tempted to replace 
their good, but somewhat limited, controllers and accounting managers with 
ones who possess more diverse experience. Usually, such persons come 
with higher salary demands. However, as soon as all creative work is accom-
plished, they settle into performing routine tasks. A more sensible way of 
approaching this situation would be to hire an outside service for the devel-
opment and implementation of the analytical instruments that subsequently 
can be utilized by the existent staff. At the end of the day, it’s cheaper to pay 
a higher contract rate on a short-term basis than take on a salaried employee 
that you cannot properly utilize full-time.  
Still, for small and midsize companies in many industries, “permanent” hiring 
of salaried employees continues to be the predominant mode of acquiring 
HR. I’ve used quotation marks because, under the prevailing practices of at-
will employment, nobody is permanently attached to his job. The distinction 
between permanent and temporary employment refers more to a position 
itself rather than the status of the employee within an organization. Thus, 
“permanent job” signifies a role that is necessary for the business’s func-
tioning unless economic conditions force layoffs or the company undergoes 
restructuring. People filling the permanent positions may come and go of 
their own accord or be replaced by the management. 

Chapter 38 | Acquisition of Human Resources 
 
328  
The Search Process 
The adepts of social networking frequently talk about its impact on the  
employment market, but no matter how vast your web of connections, it 
cannot possibly access millions of people on a job hunt. And we cannot ar-
gue with the rules of statistical probability: the larger your selection pool, 
the higher your chances of finding the right person. Talent search is a time-
consuming and difficult task. It does not require special training (most fi-
nance and accounting headhunters are CPAs), but its success definitely de-
pends on a combination of practical know-how and a certain knack for pick-
ing the good melon, so to speak.  
This does not mean that you must resort to using employment agencies just 
because they are full of people who do this job for a living. There are sev-
eral reasons for staying away from that option. First of all, I don’t know who 
nowadays can afford to pay 15 to 30% of a hired person’s annual compen-
sation in recruitment fees. It’s a taxing proposition even for a large corpora-
tion, but for small and midsize companies it’s an unacceptable expense.  
Secondly, the recruitment industry itself has undergone a lot of changes. In 
an effort to cut their own head counts and improve margins, agencies have 
computerized practically their entire resume-combing process by employing 
automated applicant tracking systems (ATSs). This software crunches thou-
sands of resumes, searching not for achievements and accomplishments, but 
for a combination of words selected by people who don’t know anything 
about your business. Human touch is reserved exclusively for those who 
match the algorithms, leaving behind talented people who just used different 
words to describe their experience.  
Finally, the variety of user-friendly and comprehensive products available to 
employers on the Internet at very reasonable rates renders the professional 
headhunter nearly obsolete. You just need to familiarize yourself with the 
spectrum of possibilities and tailor a search campaign that suits your needs. 
Simply put, tools for compiling a selection pool fall into two categories: a 
passive publicizing of job openings, and an active search for suitable can-
didates among those who make their availability openly known. Depending 
on their disposition, some hirers use either or both approaches.  
Posting jobs is essentially advertising, and today it is not limited just to well-
known boards such as Monster, CareerBuilder, and TheLadders, where you 
can list an opening at a flat fee for a certain period of time. There are two 
other major players in employment publicity worthy to be explored. Linked-
In, the worldwide professional network with over 120 million members,  

CFO Techniques 
329  
offers strategic placement of recruitment ads in its individual, group, and 
corporate profile pages as one of its “Corporate Recruiting Solutions.” Of 
course, if you are determined to go beyond the confines of a particular site, 
Google AdWords pretty much dominates online advertising and gives you 
an opportunity to have your ads appear anywhere on the Internet through 
association of the relevant content. 
It is important to understand that all of these outlets are essentially search 
engines, and therefore, the composition of your postings plays a crucial role 
in the efficiency of this recruitment method. Search engine optimization 
(SEO) is the most important aspect of Internet exposure, and it relies exclu-
sively on the selection of the right keywords. These words must respond to 
job seekers’ inquiries on specific sites, as well as tag your ads to appropriate 
pages on the Web. 
I personally, however, prefer the active mode of searching through candi-
dates’ publicized resumes made possible by such products as Monster’s 
Power Resume Search, CareerBuilder’s resume database access, and Linked-
In’s unlimited recruitment search. Instead of leaving the application choice up 
to the candidate, this method provides an employer with the possibility of 
making her own decisions about whom to contact. This way you also exclude 
solicitations of professional headhunters, as well as applications from those 
people who forward their resumes en masse without reading job descrip-
tions. You can customize the search criteria to be as narrow or as broad as 
you need in order to yield the results that closely match your requirements.  
 Unless you are looking for an incredibly unique combination of skills, the 
passive posting will produce hundreds of applications. Even with a well-
defined and smartly keyed active search, each opening will result in a sig-
nificant number of resumes that will need to be reviewed. For larger com-
panies and those with high rates of labor turnover, it makes sense to have 
an in-house hiring specialist who can take on the responsibility of initial 
screening. Businesses with occasional recruitment needs may consider func-
tional outsourcing and engage an HR consultant on a short-term basis.  
Yet, in the majority of small and midsize companies, staffing is entirely the re-
sponsibility of functional executives. You can help yourself by delegating the 
preliminary work to one of your junior employees. To preserve fairness, the 
task should be to score rather than to eliminate. You can compile a list of key-
words to look for in the resumes and assign the priority scores to each of 
them. Don’t limit the list to ten words—it should be sufficiently broad. Your 
employee’s assignment is to analyze each resume highlighting all the words 
from the list (this is important, because you will want to see them too) and 
adding up their priority scores. On your side, you can have a preliminary-

Chapter 38 | Acquisition of Human Resources 
 
330  
round minimum score number that will allow you to make the first cut. If you 
actually work on the list and come up with sensible criteria for the items that 
are crucial for the job, your second round will be significantly less taxing.  
The Interviewing Process 
Eventually, reviewing yields the top resumes. People behind these papers be-
come the initial group of candidates qualified for interviewing. The intricacies 
of a job interview have been analyzed many times over by HR professionals, 
behaviorists, psychologists, and sociologists. They have written volumes and 
volumes on the subject. I am more concerned with the logistics of the proc-
ess, because it’s my experience that many managers are not aware of the 
most effective elimination steps that may lead to better-informed hiring deci-
sions. Here is a suggestion for a five-stage selection process.  
1. Since emailing has become a predominant mode of recruitment com-
munications, it provides employers with an excellent opportunity for 
the first round of contacts. Compose three questions you would like 
the candidates to answer in writing. These inquiries should be rele-
vant to the position and fairly specific. Your purpose here is to test 
each applicant’s interpretation of the job’s key responsibilities. I 
strongly advise to state the word count limit: on one hand, you don’t 
have time to read long essays; on the other hand, if you expect at 
least 200 words per answer and receive one sentence, that will make 
your position clear. 
2. The second round is the phone interview. The hardest part of this 
step is the time limit. The optimal length is considered to be 15 
minutes, but my personal experience shows that it’s not only diffi-
cult to keep the interviewee from nervous rambling, but it’s also  
not easy for the interviewer to stay the course. The key is prepar-
edness. Many people make the mistake of going over past jobs on 
the phone—this can be left for the personal interview. Instead, you 
should address the candidate’s few specific qualifications and ask 
precise questions that could be answered in a few sentences. One 
of my favorite phone inquiries is asking to describe one most impor-
tant accomplishment. 
3. The first personal interview must be all about the candidate. The role of 
the interviewer should be limited to guiding the prospective em-
ployee’s description of his background, past employment, and exper-
tise highlights with as few questions as possible. Listen and absorb 

CFO Techniques 
 
331  
your impressions. At this point you may also want to assess if the 
person in front of you is a proactive and eager professional—ask if he 
has looked up your company on the Internet and what he found out. 
4. In recruitment practices, testing is usually reserved to either entry-
level employees or those whose duties involve particular skills, like 
writing macros in Excel, or performing translations from Serbian to 
Farsi. However, I believe that appropriate tests can be designed for 
everybody—even executive-level applicants. It’s not necessary to 
announce it as a test, and you can try to make it appear to be a 
natural phase of the interviewing process. For example, while look-
ing for my own replacement at one point, I gave candidates one of 
the KPI reports and asked them what they derived from it, and 
where, in their opinion, the data came from. The answers don’t 
need to be 100% right, but the intellectual process can reveal vol-
umes about the person’s aptitude for excelling at the job. 
5. During the second interview, you can let yourself talk more, outlining 
the company’s business and detailing specifics of the job. At this 
point, you need to look for the candidate’s understanding of what is 
expected of her. It’s your job to make sure that, if the offer is made, 
the position is accepted consciously. 
It’s quite frequent that, in their eagerness to get the job on one side and to 
finally fill the position on the other, neither the candidate nor the employer 
goes past the compensation discussion and into the details of employment 
conditions, such as working hours, benefits, and so on. That’s a big mistake 
that may lead to unpleasant surprises and discontent later on. It’s a good 
idea to have a written summary of these details, so that it can be attached 
to the job offer.  
What Am I Really Looking For? 
Clearly, recruiting people to whom you will delegate functions, for which 
you are ultimately responsible, is an excruciatingly difficult and demanding 
task. Even in the buyer’s market it’s hard to find good candidates. And that’s 
just a start. After hiring, you have to ease the new employee into his func-
tions, fill him with missing knowledge, and perfect his ability to perform the 
tasks (i.e., develop your new staff member into an asset).  
Unfortunately, what frequently happens is that after spending your precious-
ly scarce time looking through resumes and interviewing candidates, all you 
want is to remove the recruitment issue from your agenda. As a result, you 

Chapter 38 | Acquisition of Human Resources 
 
332  
cave in and make the mistake of hiring the wrong person simply because 
you are tired of the process, and you waste the entire effort. Such failure is 
damaging to the company, to your own success, and to your staff’s morale. 
That is why it is crucial to define your own criteria of “quality hire.”  
When it comes to the general parameters, I am actually very flexible. I 
don’t hold industry-specific experience in much regard. As a matter of fact, 
I believe in the benefits of diversity. Those workers who have exposed 
themselves to a variety of industrial and organizational specifics usually have 
deeper understanding of business, sharper commercial acumen, and the 
ability to adapt to any new circumstances. I also believe that the quality of 
education depends on the person, not the school—the university’s tier is 
never my concern.  
What I am looking for, first and foremost, is the spark in the eyes, the sign 
of intelligence that you cannot fake. I search for people capable of system-
atic thinking—the ones that can be given explanations pertaining to one 
problem and later independently apply the new knowledge to a different 
task. I seek those who consciously make an effort to build a platform of fun-
damental knowledge that allows them to create a set of flexible, transferable 
skills. These kinds of candidates are hard to come by, but they are there, 
and you can find them if you take the search seriously.  
 

C H A P T E R 
39 
Managing Human 
Resources 
 
As discussed in Chapter 6, the legal and factual aspects of the HR function 
are usually summarized in the employee handbook. This document forma-
lizes the relationship between a corporate entity and people that comprise 
its labor force. It usually consists of general policies and rules that define the 
company’s conduct with respect to its employees and vice versa: how peo-
ple are hired, compensated, and terminated; how the company complies 
with labor laws and OSHA regulations; how the employees should treat the 
company’s property, their responsibilities, each other, and so on.  
The quintessential tasks and procedures associated with the recording of HR 
activities and the processing of payroll transactions were detailed in Chapter 
8. And the business’s obligations with respect to employment taxation were 
addressed in Chapter 33. 
However, these mechanistic topics do not exhaust the extent of HR manage-
ment in its broader sense—as a function that deals with the effective utiliza-
tion of a valuable resource in the business process. The labor force consists 
of various people separated from each other by their own personal ambi-
tions and needs. Yet, together they must be integrated into a system focused 
on facilitation of the employer’s strategic goals. An ability to bond disparate 
individuals into a collective power distinguishes true managerial talent. 
Achieving such unification requires a combination of considerable efforts in 
the organization, development, and retention of employees. 

Chapter 39 | Managing Human Resources 
 
334  
Organizing Human Resources 
In my experience, many workers confuse the employer’s rationale for hiring 
them with their own reasons for seeking employment. Businesses don’t em-
ploy people to pay them salaries, so that they can put food on their families’ 
tables and pay rents and mortgages. It is actually the other way around: if a 
company could sustain its existence without tasks performed by one or an-
other employee, it would do so and save the money paid as compensation. 
But it is crucial for the company that the jobs are done, and with sufficient 
quality, and that is why it retains employees.  
There is a reason we call payments received from employment earnings—
they are to be earned. The successful fulfillment of functions, essential to op-
erational process, by a competent person compensated for his efforts, con-
stitutes the basis of workforce utilization. Understanding that they come to 
work to earn their wages by doing their jobs well changes employees’ per-
spectives regarding their daily activities. It is the managers’ job to show their 
subordinates that the company’s growth coincides with their personal inter-
ests, that the company’s prosperity will benefit them materially and provide 
them with a sense of self-worth. To facilitate the effective labor utilization 
that leads to high-performance results, managers must organize people and 
tasks in the most efficient way.  
 Note  While attending to organizational matters, don’t forget that you are not an outsider, but an 
integral part of the system as well. You have your own functions and relations to other team mem-
bers (i.e., other units of labors to incorporate into the working organism).  
The first step of departmental organization is the creation of a logical struc-
ture that accommodates functional processes. In accounting and finance, the ba-
sic structuring occurs naturally because tasks can be grouped into distinct 
cycles: billing, AR, AP, payroll, treasury, general accounting, and so on. With 
small departments consisting of three to five people, the exercise never ex-
tends beyond this elemental level. Organizing a larger staff with an elaborate 
division of labor is a more demanding undertaking. At the very least it in-
volves the following activities: 
 
Defining the scope of responsibilities for each position, assigning spe-
cific tasks to individual employees, and providing them with corre-
sponding timelines and schedules. 

CFO Techniques 
 
335  
 
Establishing procedural interrelations among employees to complete 
functional cycles.  
 
Coordinating individual employees into an integrated framework that 
ensures the efficiency of the entire department.  
 
Designating clear subordination chains.  
 
Creating precise absence relief arrangements to ensure that all cru-
cial tasks are covered in case one or another staff member is away 
from the office.  
 
Implementing control and status-update mechanisms, including perio-
dic activities reports (daily, weekly, etc.). 
 
Setting sensible communication channels and protocols.  
 Note  In small businesses with flat organizational structures, we frequently deal with the ab-
sence of middle management, or with situations in which a higher-level employee single-handedly 
covers the entire function. An AP manager, taking care of all related tasks, from entering vouchers 
to paying bills and dealing with vendors, is a common position. Still, some supervisory layers may 
be introduced. A strong accounting manager with general accounting and reporting responsibilities, 
for instance, can devote some of his time to directing AP and AR functions. 
Of all the complexities of administrative function, the most difficult task, in 
my opinion, is finding the right fit between an employee and a job. It is an intui-
tive process that requires a general understanding of human nature and 
thorough knowledge of your staff. Pay attention and study the people who 
work for you. What motivates them? Do they know their jobs well? Do 
they dread certain assignments? What do they do best? Which projects 
cause them to procrastinate? Are their duties properly matched with their 
abilities? It is rarely possible to create perfect combinations, especially if you 
are limited by the size of your staff, but you can try to do your best. For ex-
ample, if you have a choice, don’t assign AR collections to an introverted 
person with analytical aptitude—it would be painful and unproductive. Being 
mindful of employees’ capabilities will give you a chance to exponentially in-
crease the efficiency of your departments. 
In a fast-paced, intense environment of small and midsize businesses, com-
munication concerns are not limited to decisions about what information 
goes to whom, when, and in what format. People’s proximity to each other 
instinctively encourages direct contact. At the same time, everybody is  

Chapter 39 | Managing Human Resources 
 
336  
usually preoccupied with his or her own work, so a single conversation feels 
like a significant interruption. It’s not surprising that the accessibility of 
CFOs and controllers is an acute HR issue. Because many of us are so busy, 
we are perceived to be unapproachable, and that, unfortunately, results in 
employees’ avoiding addressing vital problems with us. 
I keep my door open and my subordinates see me all day long attending to 
my scheduled tasks, addressing issues, and solving problems. I am consumed 
by work. Yet, every time one of them needs me and comes to my door, they 
ask me the same question, “Are you busy right now?” Of course I am busy, 
but it doesn’t mean that I am not available to discuss their problem immedi-
ately, if it’s of high priority. Or, if not, scheduling them for a later time slot. 
At staff meetings, I teach them to approach this situation in a more sensible 
manner: come, state your issue, and let me decide if it requires immediate 
attention. I also initiate everyone into my personal protocol that ranks com-
munication modes against urgency of the issue:  
 
Low-level urgency calls for an e-mail. It doesn’t immediately inter-
rupt whatever I am doing and gives me an opportunity to attend to 
the problem when I have time. 
 
Moderate urgency can still be accommodated by an e-mail, but it 
needs to come with a red flag, signifying its importance, and the 
word urgent in the subject field. 
 
High urgency warrants the use of an instant messenger, which I can 
see right away, but can answer whenever I am able to do so. 
 
When an issue is super-urgent, it’s OK to pick up the phone seeking 
an instant response. 
 
Only a fire that requires my unique firefighting skills justifies walking 
over and demanding my prompt attention. 
Speaking of staff meetings, many small-business CFOs and controllers forego 
these important means of assessing the department’s status just because 
they see and talk to practically all employees on a daily basis. This is a mis-
take. Regularly scheduled and properly conducted meetings, with every 
member of the staff present, formalize your agendas and give a different 
perspective to even the most ordinary issues. Moreover, they provide great 
opportunities for observations of the group’s dynamics.  
One of the most important factors of successful organizational management, 
delegation, is, unfortunately, one of the least developed skills among financial 
managers of small and midsize businesses. There are legitimate reasons for 
that. Great delegators are not born, they are made. Unfortunately, I have not 
seen a delegation course featured in any business school’s curriculum. There 

CFO Techniques 
 
337  
are organizational management courses, but these are primarily devoted to 
structures and general leadership formulas. It is my opinion that the propen-
sity for effective delegation can be developed only through on-the-job obser-
vation or self-education. It is easier to find a good reference point among 
many managers of a large organization. But if you have devoted your career 
to small entrepreneurial companies, it’s hard to come by a skillful touchstone.  
Yet, delegation is a mandatory instrument in a financial executive’s daily op-
erations. Mathematical rules of optimization and circus performances teach 
us that there is a limit to the number of items you can juggle at the same 
time without dropping them. So, let me offer my suggestions with respect 
to delegation:  
 
Your highest priority should be to attend to the tasks that will facili-
tate the achievement of your company’s mission—the ones that re-
quire your own unique, complex blend of expertise and abilities that 
cannot be found elsewhere within the organization. Hence, micro-
management is an enemy of business advancement and your individ-
ual progress. 
 
Don’t delegate the tasks that you don’t like, but only those that can 
be adequately performed by your subordinates. Especially at the be-
ginning, take into account the task’s time constraints—make sure to 
provide the employees with timelines that accommodate their work- 
ing pace and the possibility of redoing the job if it’s not done prop-
erly on the first try.   
 
At the same time, never perform your subordinate’s job just be-
cause you believe that you can do it faster and better. This is a bad 
mistake many of us make. When we do that, we damage ourselves 
in two ways: by wasting our own valuable time and by not letting 
our subordinates improve. 
 
Don’t hesitate to delegate important functions to capable subord-
inates because you are afraid that they will undercut you. If you are 
a good match for your position and do your job to the best of your 
abilities, you should be confident. Secondly, by overwhelming your-
self with extra tasks, you diminish your own efficiency and under-
mine yourself. 
 
Remember, shifting the decision-making down the line to your sub-
ordinates does not relieve you of the ultimate responsibility for the 
delegated work. You are accountable for everything that is done in 
your department(s). Therefore, before the task is delegated, make 
sure that it does not fall through the network of internal controls.  

Chapter 39 | Managing Human Resources 
 
338  
It took me a while to formulate these ideas for myself and even longer to 
start implementing them, but I can vouch for their effectiveness. 
Development and Evaluation 
As important as delegation is, it cannot be implemented if you are not ab-
solutely sure that the transferred tasks will be performed well. That is why it 
must go hand in hand with the staff’s development and training. Unlike a 
large corporation with its specially designed improvement programs and 
coaching seminars, most small and midsize companies rely on senior man-
agement for employees’ basic training, as well as their professional ad-
vancement. Even though it takes time, raising the level of the staff’s expertise 
greatly benefits CFOs and controllers. Not only because it makes delegation 
of duties possible, but also because it affects the overall performance quality 
and departmental efficiency. 
Some years ago I had a problem with a new employee with a worse-than-
moderate learning curve. My boss asked, “Why don’t you come with him on 
Saturday and spend a day teaching?” I recall thinking that it was not fair for 
me to spend my day off on this slow-starter. But at the end, a full day of in-
structions and demonstrations, without the mayhem of workday disturb-
ances, was a much shorter effort than all those long after-work hours spent 
correcting his mistakes. Always make time for training and advancement of 
your subordinates. By building strong and reliable accounting/finance staff, 
you better your own chances for success. 
Recently, the corporate accounting profession has experienced a strange 
phenomenon that has made training and on-the-job education especially im-
portant. There were times not long ago when in order to “work in ac-
counting” you had to have some formal knowledge of accounting rules. 
When one dealt with manual journals, and subsidiary and general ledgers, at 
minimum he had to understand the principles of double-bookkeeping. Tech-
nological advancements and computerization have changed all that. Now, 
anyone who knows some Excel, is quick to grasp menu-driven applications, 
and displays aptitude for basic math, is good enough to be employed in one 
or another accounting department.  
I know a CFO who took a position at a national law firm. The composition 
of the accounting-and-finance department she has inherited was as follows: 
an AP manager with no college degree and 20 years of experience paying 
bills, a payroll manager with a BS in business administration and prior expe-
rience in office management, one junior accountant with a BA in psychology 

CFO Techniques 
339  
and another one with a BA in special education. They were smart and 
hardworking people who mechanistically performed their routines as per 
the software operating manual without any understanding of fundamental 
accounting principles. Problems arose every time they encountered some-
thing more sophisticated than entering an invoice or cutting a check. To im-
prove the quality of their performance, the CFO ended up having individual 
sessions with each employee dedicated to explanations of the accounting 
theories behind the functions they performed.  
One of the most important catalysts for the improvement of a person’s work 
performance is the understanding of the organization’s mission, its commer-
cial scope, and the structure of the value chain, as well as understanding of his 
own place in the big picture. It seems like a simple idea, but it’s not always 
easy to achieve in—what is typical for small businesses—a need-to-know cul-
ture. It frequently becomes our responsibility to explain to our bosses the un-
fortunate effects of the employees’ disconnect from the company’s purpose—
mechanistic, disinterested performance instead of meaningful, productive 
work. Don’t hesitate to address this issue. You will be wasting your time try-
ing to teach your employees how to apply their expertise and education to 
the tasks you need them to perform if they are not aware of their relevance 
to the company’s prosperity, and consequently their own. 
Our efforts to raise the quality of HR may or may not result in improve-
ments. Whether the outcome is positive or negative, it needs to be meas-
ured, evaluated, and acknowledged, which in itself becomes a part of educa-
tional process for employees and managers alike. In a sense, when it comes 
to evaluating their subordinates’ performance, financial executives have a 
head start on other managers. That’s because they already have in place a 
system of internal controls mandatory for monitoring the accuracy and in-
tegrity of accounting and financial procedures. The detection of errors, 
omissions, and improprieties is a good starting point in assessing the value of 
HR. The impressions you collect through daily interactions form your over-
all judgment of the staff’s proficiency. Most of the time, when a problem oc-
curs, we address it with the responsible employee right away. Sporadically, 
we find a moment to express our appreciation of a job well done. For many 
small and midsize companies, those may be good enough HR actions.  
Still, I believe that, regardless of the organization’s size, formal periodic 
(quarterly or annual) performance reviews, addressing employees strengths, 
accomplishments, improvements in technical and communication skills, ac-
curacy, integrity, enthusiasm, and so on, are important milestones of each 
person’s evaluation as a company’s asset. These orderly assessments, sum-
marized in detailed documents, require the manager to rationally process 

Chapter 39 | Managing Human Resources 
 
340  
her thoughts and render a reasonable opinion. They carry far more value 
for both the employer and the employee than a reprimand or praise issued 
in passing. They also provide a justifiable basis for promotions and raises.  
Many CFOs and controllers subconsciously resist the idea of initiating con-
frontational situations and either avoid performance assessments altogether 
or, in larger companies, delegate it to the HR department. Of course, this 
tendency wouldn’t present itself if all employees deserved glowing reviews, 
but it’s not always the case. There are people who underperform and some 
of them are not capable of constructively accepting suggestions for improve-
ment. We deal with defensiveness and rationalization (a.k.a. making excuses) 
all the time. Some people become defensive at the slightest hint of criticism. 
Nevertheless, you should not hide from your responsibilities. What you can 
do is explain to defensive employees that their attitudes make them more 
vulnerable and expose their insecurities; that they need to be stronger and 
try to make the best of the critical suggestions. 
Employee Retention 
If you don’t remember it, go back to Chapter 3 and take another look at 
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs. Sustenance and shelter constitute the basis of 
human motivation for working. We cannot deny the fact that wages and bo-
nuses will always be the main factor in our efforts to retain the best em-
ployees. That’s why I never believe it when applicants say that it’s not about 
the salary for them. Let’s be real—maybe taking a job is not all about the 
salary, but compensation is definitely the primary consideration. I believe 
that, within the budget constraints, the good employees should be rewarded 
at competitive rates in accordance with their worth to the company, and 
every year I try my hardest to make it happen for those subordinates who 
are crucial to operational efficiency.  
Benefits, too, play an important role in efforts for retaining quality em-
ployees. Unfortunately, it gets more and more difficult to assemble a good 
package. I’ve been working with the same broker for nearly ten years now, 
and every year, when the time to renew the health insurance policies comes 
and I complain about 15 to 20% rate hikes, he says the same thing: “They 
are not going to go down, and the coverage will only get narrower.” And 
it’s not just health premiums; all rates go up—disability, long-term care, and 
life-insurance policies. Most small companies’ profit margins don’t have 
room to offer employees anything beyond basic health insurance.  
Nevertheless, there are ways to expand benefits offerings at a relatively low 
cost. For example, even if the company is not willing to match employees’ 

CFO Techniques 
 
341  
contribution to a qualified pension plan, simply having such a plan in place at 
the cost of a few hundred dollars of monthly maintenance fees gives people a 
significant tax-saving advantage. The same is true for contributions into flexi-
ble spending plans designated to out-of-pocket medical and transportation 
expenses. In recognition of the fact that employees frequently use sick days 
for other purposes, many companies are switching to a more progressive 
paid-time-off (PTO) concept, which combines the conventional categories of 
vacation, sick, and personal days into one pool, allowing workers to use their 
free time as they see fit. At the end of the day, the more benefits and perks 
you can fit into the budget, the lower turnover rates you can attain.  
Material stimuli aside, nurturing employees heavily depends on the working  
environment. Creating an atmosphere conducive to high levels of productivity 
and healthy morale doesn’t mean striving for warm, cozy, and family-like am-
bience, in which principles of subordination get blurred and negligence is for-
given. It means building an environment of objectivity, merit, and fairness. The 
work ethics of the supervisor herself play a big part in this process. As long as 
employees know that you set high standards for yourself, they will accept the 
same requirements applied to their own performance. Knowing that you will 
appraise their work objectively, they will not be apprehensive, but rather 
concerned about disappointing you with poor execution of their tasks.  
In such an environment, moral incentives start playing a more significant role 
in employees’ retention. Approval and recognition of one’s success lead to 
an enhanced sense of self-esteem, which becomes an important factor in a 
person’s attachment to the source of such self-actualization. That said, we 
must be realistic about the possibility that our efforts to create the optimal 
working conditions could be stunted by sometimes abrasive attitudes of 
CEOs/business owners. However, if you can install yourself as a sort of a 
buffer between the boss and the employees, you might be able to absorb 
most of the harshness and preserve the goodwill you strain to establish. 
 

C H A P T E R 
40 
The Behavioral 
Approach 
 
It’s only fitting to finish this book with a chapter devoted to a topic that not 
only permeates all functions of financial and accounting management, but 
also is relevant to everything we do inside and outside of our workplaces. 
The subject of human interactions goes far beyond the limits of HR man-
agement in its conventional definition. The ability to deal with various cate-
gories of people, handle different personality types, adapt your communi-
cation style to particular circumstances, and, in the process, achieve your  
intended purposes—these are critical faculties of any notable person, not 
just a successful CFO or controller.  
Many advertisements for financial executives’ positions list “excellent com-
munication skills” as one of the job requirements. In many cases it’s just a 
figure of speech copied from some template. In others, it’s a deliberate 
statement, but it can have diverse meanings: proficiency in written and ver-
bal expression, ability to adapt to the new environment, a team player’s atti-
tude, salesmanship, aptitude for influencing people, and even general like-
ability. In my opinion, all these skills are consequences of one fundamental 
prerequisite for establishing a successful human connection: knowing your 
audience. And to know people, you have to study them.  
The behavioral approach is based on the concept of explaining behavior through 
objective observation. Its application to human relations in general and to HR 

Chapter 40 | The Behavioral Approach 
 
344  
management in particular can be interpreted as analysis of people’s actions 
in order to identify their unique behavior patterns to better understand 
their personalities, motivations, priorities, strengths, and weaknesses. 
Behavioral assessment is one of the most important professional skills a suc-
cessful executive must develop and continuously improve. When dealing 
with your bankers, lawyers, auditors, peers, employees, and bosses, you 
should be able to gather insights into who they are, explain reasons behind 
their conduct, and anticipate their reactions. Only then can you take the full 
advantage of the communication process and successfully realize your inten-
tions. Understanding the person on the other side of the conversation al-
ways gives you the upper hand. 
Of course, the depth and the scope of the perceptive method’s application 
needs to be adapted depending on the categories of people with whom we 
come in touch throughout our daily routines. Personality profiling may not 
be necessary for finding the right key to a successful collaboration with ex-
ternal contacts. Such broad notions as enthusiastic or disinterested, friendly 
or brash, dynamic or passive, and so on, may suffice. However, a thorough 
understanding of the person’s position within her organization, and of her 
responsibilities and ambitions, is very valuable.  
If you know the person’s priorities with respect to your company, you can 
emphasize the corresponding benefits you can offer. For example, if your 
bank officer is inclined to expand your credit line, but asks for more trans-
parency, it should be clear to you that he needs something to support his 
case in front of the credit committee, because his reputation is at stake in 
case of default. You can help his case and yours by offering, let’s say, annual 
bank audits. The insights into your direct counterpart’s standpoint can also 
help you to stop yourself from using undue pressure in a situation where 
the outcome is beyond his power, thus helping maintain a good relationship.  
When it comes to our lateral peers, simple logic would dictate that, since we 
are all in the same boat, we should always put our differences aside and har-
moniously row forward for the sake of everyone’s well-being. But it would 
be naive to believe that all people are capable of doing so. Because depart-
mental managers feel that they are on an equal footing with each other, the 
behavioral guards are frequently weakened—this is the level of office interac-
tions where the majority of personality clashes occur. The competitive na-
ture of our culture has taught us to vie for first place since nursery school, 
and it is difficult for us to shake it off even in the face of issues that must be 
resolved in a collegial manner. The reason there is so much motivational ma-
terial devoted to the importance of the teamwork around us is because peo-
ple constantly need to be reminded about its benefits.  

CFO Techniques 
 
345  
Executive peers bicker over all kinds of issues. Whose function is more im-
portant? Whose idea is worth pursuing? Whose idea was it in the first place 
to do something that turned out to be a success? Why did that department 
get a bigger budget than this one? And everyone’s fighting for the boss’s ear. 
What we must recognize is that it’s an unfortunate waste of productive 
time, because sooner or later everyone must reconcile and cooperate. Even 
if you cannot extinguish the fire, at least don’t fuel it by perpetuating the ar-
gument, whatever it might concern.  
In these situations, understanding the reasons behind your coworker’s ag-
gressive attitude may help alleviate recurring problems. One of the most 
typical sources of controversy is someone whose desire to be appreciated 
has turned into uncontrollable attention-seeking behavior. A person like 
that would not stop at anything in order to put himself in the spotlight, in-
cluding taking credit for other people’s ideas. Let’s say it happened to you—
you worked on a project very hard and now somebody claims it as his 
original concept. My advice: Don’t argue. Instead, start asking detailed ques-
tions. Even better, suggest that they should spearhead the further develop-
ment. See what happens. In fact, clever exposure of improprieties is a good 
instrument for ending inappropriate behavioral patterns.  
Being a boss is a stressful position—a frequent source of anxiety and frus-
tration. In The Imperfectionists (The Dial Press, 2010), a novel composed  
as a psychological study of people connected to each other through their 
employment by a small English-language newspaper published in Europe, 
author Tom Rachman allots a separate chapter to the CFO. At one point 
the writer catches her with this thought: “As she closes her glass office 
door . . . a few staffers glance over, then look away. It’s strange to be the 
boss, knowing they discuss you, doubt you, resent you, and . . . complain, 
bitch, and moan about you.” This is an excellent insight by an aware 
supervisor.  
The very acknowledgment of people’s reaction to you is the first step to-
ward more adequate management. Why does this person act this way? Is it 
me? Do I need to adjust my attitude? Or maybe it has nothing to do with 
me. Why does this analyst, every time I talk to him, get defensive without 
any reason? What motivates this functional group manager to be here an 
hour before everyone else? You cannot be oblivious to these things and 
must try to make logical connections.  
Chapter 9 defined the human factor as the weakest link in the procedural 
flow due to people’s propensity for inaccuracy and inconsistency. Paradoxi-
cally, intellectual flexibility and critical reasoning also makes capable people 
the most valuable assets of any enterprise. It took generations of computing 

Chapter 40 | The Behavioral Approach 
 
346  
science’s evolution and nearly five years of IBM’s focused experimentation, 
with a price tag of over $100 million, to build a single computer, Watson, 
that could replicate a human’s congenital ability of processing natural lan-
guage. And it doesn’t even venture into the territories of subtext and sar-
casm. The unique mental facilities of our employees cannot be imitated by 
any computers. We should be able to utilize their strengths in the most 
beneficial way. If you pay attention and observe carefully, you will succeed in 
isolating people’s best abilities and analyze their motivations for acting in the 
particular ways they do.  
Knowing your employees’ most prominent characteristics and understand-
ing their internal priorities gives you an undeniable managerial edge and al-
lows you to optimize their performance efficiency. When a perfectionist 
under your supervision starts acting like an irritable child, ask yourself 
whether his drive for the highest possible quality conflicts with the deadline 
imposed on him. And if an enthusiastic and talented employee, who just fin-
ished developing and implementing an important analytical tool, starts dis-
playing passive-aggressive symptoms, see if you can give him a midterm per-
formance evaluation and express your appreciation. When you are attuned 
to nuances like that, noticing and correcting them don’t require a lot of ef-
fort. But leave them unattended and they may cultivate negativity that will 
challenge the balance of the entire department. 
When we are on the opposite side of the relationship, as subordinates 
whose work is surveyed by bosses, we are presented with a different set of 
challenges. Not only is the polarity of the dynamic reversed, but also people 
above CFOs and controllers, especially in privately held companies, fre-
quently represent the ultimate power within the corporate realms. Dealing 
with them requires special consideration and savvy. The intense responsi-
bility of guarding the personal wallet of a private owner who works in the 
office a few steps down from your own escalates the pressure and affects 
the relationship with that individual. It is not the same when the company’s 
owners are unknown mutual fund investors and your boss is an employee, 
just like you.  
Collectively, entrepreneurs constitute a very special type of people with dis-
tinct common characteristics. First of all, they take risks that result in the 
creation of jobs. They’ve got to be incredibly brave to go out in the world 
and implement their ideas, sometimes against all odds. If they succeed, they 
build companies that not only create products and services, but they also 
employ people and pay them salaries, including CFOs, controllers, and fi-
nancial directors—that is, us.  

CFO Techniques 
 
347  
Secondly, many of them possess untamed idea-generating minds that propel 
forward ahead of everybody and everything else. They want new tasks to be 
finished yesterday and consider those who bring up such practical considera-
tions as implementation timelines and the development of structures to be 
obstacles on their way to success. There are psychological studies proving 
that a “perfect entrepreneur” must possess a complex of somewhat erratic 
personality traits.1 CFOs and controllers—frequently those who voice rea-
sonable concerns—should be aware that they might be perceived as negative, 
uncooperative, and difficult. You can prevent possible future confrontations 
by establishing open lines of communication. But don’t wait for the boss to 
analyze your behavior. Such efforts may be beyond his sphere of interest. It’s 
your responsibility to persistently clarify to him what motivates you in these 
situations—your own drive to do the job right and make sure that the back 
office, finances, procedures, and controls can support his vision.  
 Note  Never cross the subordination line with your boss—regardless of how like-minded he and 
you are, how friendly and good-natured his attitude toward you is, how well you understand his 
thought process, or how precisely you can anticipate his reactions. Familiarity and disrespect have 
destroyed many excellent work relationships.  
Most professional aptitude tests contain a question about the subject’s pref-
erences on working with others or alone. The complexity of a financial ex-
ecutive’s job invalidates the relevance of such inquiry. Whatever your per-
sonal preferences were at some point, if you want to succeed as a CFO, a 
controller, a financial director, or an accounting manager, you must learn to 
adapt, seamlessly switching from toiling alone after-hours in the empty office 
on internal controls to giving a presentation in front of the bank’s credit 
committee; or from mapping out the cash flow optimization to participating 
in a heated brainstorming session with your strategy-developing peers. Such 
flexibility is basic to the job’s essence. Even if you feel most comfortable 
working with numbers on your computer screen, you end up spending a lot 
of time in one-on-one and group communication sessions.  
As with every function, task, and issue discussed in this book, the best way 
to achieve proficiency in the techniques of human interaction is to combine 
                                                
1 David Segal, “Just Manic Enough: Seeking Perfect Entrepreneurs,” New York Times, Septem-
ber 18, 2010. 

Chapter 40 | The Behavioral Approach 
 
348  
the understanding of fundamental theoretical principles with acute awareness of 
specific context, quick reaction to any situational changes, and an inquisitive atti-
tude that leads to acquisition of new knowledge. This formula is not compli-
cated, but it is very powerful. Absorb it into your professional philosophy, 
and it will amplify your ability to excel.  
  
 

  
I 
Index 
A 
A&E, 120 
Accounting, accrual basis of, 233 
Accounting cycles 
and structure of financial 
statements, 239–244 
balance sheets, 241–242 
income statements, 242–244 
with trial balance (summa 
summarium), 23 
Accounting/finance manager, 10-11 
Accounting firm selection criteria, 
251–256 
business sector specialization, 
253–254 
financial statements’ users, 
acceptability to, 254–255 
geographical exposure, 254 
price, 255 
purpose, 252–253 
quality control, 255–256 
reputation, 254 
Accounting management, 23–24 
Accounting modules, quality of, 188 
Accounting principles, 232–234 
conservatism, 233 
economic entity, 232 
full disclosure, 233 
going concern, 233 
historical cost, 233 
matching, 233–234 
materiality, 233 
monetary unit, 232 
recognition, 233 
time period, 232 
Accounting Principles Board 
(1959–1973), 236 
Accounting systems, cash forecasts 
by, 151–152 
Accounts payable, 57–58, 156 
Accuracy, 66 
in information processing, 48–49 
ACH. See Automatic Clearing House 
ACI. See American Credit Indemnity 
Active Network, The, 116 
Activity-based costing (ABC) 
model, 217 
Ad hoc reporting, 223–228 
due diligence processes, 225 
features, 223–224 
financial leader, key attributes, 224 
inventory dynamics report, 226 
three-year supplier analysis, 227 
Adjustment rules, 249–250 
Administrative policies, 41 
ADP, 180, 311 

Index 
350 
Aggregate annual budget, 78 
for manufacturing/trading 
companies, 81 
AICPA. See American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants 
Aka tariffs, 282 
Allocation principle, 217 
Amazon.com, 307 
American Credit Indemnity (ACI), 164 
American Express OPEN, 178 
American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA), 35, 236 
Angel investments vs venture capital, 
98–99, 126-127 
Angelsoft, 127 
Apple, 307 
Applicant tracking systems (ATSs), 328 
Arbus, Diane, 154 
Asian outsourcing, 326 
Aspirations, of CFO, 16–19 
CEO, freeing, 16–17 
prioritization rules, 19 
professional growth, 18 
role, transformation, 17–18 
time organization, 19 
Asset-based lending, 105–107 
Asset-heavy balance sheets, 118 
Assets, 241 
ATSs. See Applicant tracking systems 
Audit’s timing, 257–258 
Auditing standards, 258 
Auditors, 251–256 
accounting accuracy and 
completeness, 260 
accounting firm selection criteria, 
251–256 
business sector specialization, 
253–254 
financial statements’ users, 
acceptability to, 254–255 
geographical exposure, 254 
price, 255 
purpose, 252–253 
quality control, 255–256 
reputation, 254 
auditing standards, 258 
independent accounting firm, 256 
welcoming, 261 
Audits, 23–24, See also Fast and 
painless audits 
Authorization, in information 
processing, 47 
Authorize.net, 178 
Automatic Clearing House (ACH), 176 
Axapta, 193 
B 
Backers, 98 
Bad debts, 169, 272 
Balanced scorecard (BSC), 290–292 
Balance sheets, 241–242, 247 
Bank borrowing base (BBB), 133 
Banker(s), 137–138 
Banker’s acceptances (BAs), 109 
Banking, 59–60 
and capital resources, 22 
Bank of America Merrill Lynch, 176 
Bank references, 167 
BAs. See Banker’s acceptances 
BBB. See Bank borrowing base 
Behavioral approach, 343–348 
behavioral assessment, 344 
excellent communication skills, 
343 
lateral peers, 344 
objective observation, 343 
perfect entrepreneur, 347 
Benchmark research, 301 
Bezos, Jeff, 307 
Bill-approval procedures, 
implementation of, 87 

Index 
 
351 
Blue chips, 315 
Bond market, 103 
Bonds, issuance of, 103 
Bonuses. See Commissions 
Borrowing vs. sales, 110–111 
Bottom-line policies, 40, 41, 85 
Brand financing, 112 
Bravo, 120 
Break-even revenues, 217 
BSC. See Balanced scorecard 
Budget(s), 75 
aggregate annual budget, 78 
for manufacturing/trading 
companies, 81 
contradictions of, 78 
control, 80 
controlling, 78 
as control mechanism, 77–83 
detailed monthly budget, 78 
for technology/service 
companies, 83 
origination of, 77 
planning, 78 
traditional budget, 79 
Business 
facing reality, 321–322 
family business, 318–319 
policies 
finance and administration, 
40–41 
operations, 39–40 
selling, 316–318 
winding up, 319–321 
Business assets, disposing of, 316 
Business cards, 179 
Business intelligence, 203, 204 
Business interruption insurance, 267 
Business nature vs. financial resources, 
113–122 
construction company, 117–118 
content producers and 
distributors, 120–121 
correlation matrix, 115 
information, 121 
logistics company, 119–120 
manufacturing company, 117–118 
mining company, 117–118 
real estate and other rentals, 122 
services, 122 
Trading Company, 119 
utilities, 117–118 
Business Plan Pro, 126 
Business sector specialization, 253–254 
Business strategy, 287 
Business Week, 127 
C 
Capital financing, 95–112 
debt financing, 102–110 
asset-based lending, 105–107 
commercial credit facilities, 
103–105 
corporate bonds, 103 
trade finance, 107–110 
equity investments, 96–101 
founders’ investments and 
company’s own capital, 
100–101 
private equity, 98–100 
public equity, 97–98 
financial interests, sales of, 
110–111 
factoring, 110–111 
forfaiting, 111 
financing disguised as revenue, 
111–112 
Capital resources, and banking, 22 
CareerBuilder, 328 
Cash flow projection(s), 145–152 
cash forecasts, 151–152 
elements of, 149–150 
layout, 146–147 
business complexity, 146 
business nature, 146 
commercial tactics, 147 

Index 
 
352 
Cash flow projection(s) (continued) 
layout (continued) 
credit terms and payment 
forms, 147 
maturity stage, 146 
outside financing, 146 
principle of conservatism, 150–151 
purpose, 145 
structural concerns, 145–150 
Cash flow statement, 245–250 
direct method of, 247 
financing activities, 246 
indirect method of, 247 
investing activities, 246 
non-cash items in, 250 
operating activities, 246 
purpose of, 246 
Cash forecasts, by accounting 
systems, 151–152 
Cash management, 22 
Cash position, 153–159 
reports, 155–159 
CB Insights, 127, 128 
CBP. See Customs and Border 
Protection 
CEO. See Chief executive officer 
Certificate of Authority, 310 
Certified Public Accountants 
(CPAs), 251 
CFO. See Chief Financial Officer 
Chase Paymentech, 178 
Check 21 law, 177 
Chief executive officer (CEO), 12 
Chief Financial Officer (CFO), 15–19 
accounting and financial 
structure, 31 
aspirations, 16-19 
CEO, freeing, 16–17 
prioritization rules, 19 
professional growth, 18 
role, transformation, 17–18 
time organization, 19 
and controller(s), 18 
employee handbooks, 37 
mission, 16 
responsibilities of, 12-13 
role, 293–294 
CIF. See Cost, insurance, and freight 
CIT Group, 111 
Citi, 175 
Clean books and compliant 
statements, 231–237 
fundamentals, 232–234 
Incoterms, 234–235 
regulations, 235–237 
Cloud technology and SaaS, 192 
Coface Group, 164 
Cognos 8 BI, 200 
COGS. See Cost of goods sold 
Commerce, controlling, 85–91 
commissions, 90–91 
cost center control, 86–88 
transactional profitability control, 
88–90 
best point of control, 
determination of, 88–89 
control procedure, 90 
profitability calculation, 89–90 
profit criteria, establishment 
of, 90 
Commercial automobile insurance, 266 
Commercial credit facilities, 103–105 
Commercial documents, 109 
Commercial enterprise, 85 
Commercial risks, 271–278 
diversification, 277–278 
hedging, 272–277 
commodity hedging, 273–274 
foreign exchange hedging, 
274–276 
interest rate hedging, 276–277 
Commissions, 90–91 
Committee on Accounting 
Procedures (1936–1959), 236 

Index 
 
353 
Commodity hedging, 273–274 
Common-sense tests, 68–71 
Company performance reviews, 75 
Completeness, 66, 72–73 
in information processing, 47–48 
Compliance, 66 
Computer safety policy, 50 
Concentration, 277–278 
Conservatism, principle of, 150–151, 
233, 272 
Content producers and distributors, 
120–121 
Control accounts vs. transactional 
totals, 71–72 
Controller(s), 11-12 
and CFO, 18 
employee handbooks, 37 
in large companies, 11 
in start-up company, 11 
responsibilities, 11 
Control procedure, defining and 
implementing, 90 
Control processes, 21–22 
Corporate bonds, 103 
Corporate Recruiting Solutions, 329 
Corporate structure, study of, 28–29 
Corporate tax, 280 
Cost, insurance, and freight (CIF), 275 
Cost/benefit analysis, 299–300 
Cost center control, 86–88 
Cost drivers, 218 
Cost of goods sold (COGS), 240 
Covenants and utilization compliance, 
136–137 
CPAs. See Certified Public 
Accountants 
Credit application procedure, 164 
Credit approval procedure, 54–55 
Credit facility, cost structure of, 104 
Credit insurance coverage, EIN for, 
164–166 
Credit line renewal, 138 
Credit lines with monthly reporting, 
133–136 
Credit monitoring and collections, 
168–169 
Credit payables, 170–171 
Credit receivables, 161, 163–170 
delinquency, dealing with, 169–170 
extending credit, 164–168 
bank references, 167 
company’s ownership 
structure, 167–168 
D-U-N-S Number, 166–167 
EIN for credit insurance 
coverage, 164–166 
trade references, 167 
ongoing credit monitoring and 
collections, 168–169 
Credit sales, recording of, 233 
Credit Score Class, 166 
Crime insurance, 268 
Cross-border commercial 
relationships, 313 
Cross tabulation, 197 
Currency trading, 180 
Current assets, 241 
Current liabilities, 241 
Customer concentration, 277 
Customs and Border Protection 
(CBP), 282 
Customs duties, 282, 314 
Cutoff tests, 73–74 
D 
D&B. See Dun & Bradstreet 
Dashboard 
monthly sales, 212 
and visualization concerns, 
209–213 

Index 
 
354 
Database management, 192 
Data exportability, 189–190 
Data recovery, 49–51 
Data warehousing, 190 
Debt financing, 102–110 
asset-based lending, 105–107 
commercial credit facilities, 103–
105 
corporate bonds, 103 
trade finance, 107–110 
Delaware, 310 
Delegation, 336, 337 
Delinquency, dealing with, 169–170 
Demand deposit account services, 
174–176 
Detailed monthly budget, 78, 83 
Direct method, of cash flow 
statement, 247 
Director(s) 
of accounting/finance, 11 
in Europe, 11 
and officers insurance, 269 
in United States, 11 
Discount rates, 111 
Distressed business investment, 100 
Diversification, 277–278 
Documentary collection process, 109 
Documentation committee, 62 
Documenting procedures, 61–62 
Double-entry bookkeeping, 23 
Due diligence 
of lenders, 129 
with private equity, 128 
processes, 225 
Dun & Bradstreet (D&B), 166, 171 
D-U-N-S Number, 166–167 
Duties. See Segregation of duties 
Dynamics monitoring, 205 
Dynamics of results, 205 
E 
E&O insurance. See Errors and 
omissions insurance 
Earnings, 334 
Earnings before income taxes, 
depreciation, and amortization 
(EBITDA), 85, 217 
Earnings per share (EPS), 97 
eBay, 307, 316 
EBITDA. See Earnings before income 
taxes, depreciation, and 
amortization 
e-checks, 178 
Economic entity, 232 
EDGAR. See Electronic Data-
Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval 
system 
EFTPS. See Electronic Federal Tax 
Payment System 
EIN. See Employer’s Identification 
Number 
Eisenberg, Jesse, 112 
Electronic Data-Gathering, Analysis, and 
Retrieval system (EDGAR), 132 
Electronic Federal Tax Payment 
System (EFTPS), 311 
Electronic processing, 179 
E-mail communication, 19, 67 
Employee handbook, 37, 40 
Employee policies, 37–39 
Employee retention, 340–341 
benefits, 340 
moral incentives, 341 
working environment, 341 
Employees’ subdirectories, usage of, 50 
Employer’s Identification Number 
(EIN), 164–166 
Employment laws, in foreign 
countries, 313 

Index 
 
355 
Employment practices insurance, 269 
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
system vs. special-purpose 
applications, 187 
EOLIS, 164 
EPISTEL (ecological, political, 
informational, social, 
technological, economic, and 
legal), 290 
EPS. See Earnings per share 
Equity, 242 
Equity investments, 96–101 
founders’ investments and 
company’s own capital, 
100–101 
private equity, 98–100 
angel investments and venture 
capital, 98–99 
and mature businesses, 99–100 
public equity, 97–98 
ERP solutions, 180, 192 
ERP system. See Enterprise resource 
planning system 
Errors and omissions (E&O) 
insurance, 267 
Euler Hermes, 164 
Europe, Director in, 11 
Excel, 195–201 
bubble chart, 199 
calculable spreadsheet, 196 
conditional formatting capabilities, 
199 
database and analytical 
functionality, 196–198 
integration and beyond, 200–201 
latest versions, 196 
visualization tools, 199–200 
Excise tax, 281 
Executive reporting, 203–206 
Exit strategies, 315–322 
business for sale, 316–318 
facing reality, 321–322 
family business, 318–319 
winding up, 319–321 
Expenditures, 57–58 
Expert, definition of, 7 
Expert perception, 301 
Exports, 108, 313 
Express Xcelerator, 200 
External data, 204 
External risks, 271 
F 
Factoring, 110–111 
Family business, 318–319 
Fandango, 120 
FAS 95, 245 
FASB. See Financial Accounting 
Standards Board 
Fast and painless audits, 257–262 
audit’s timing, 257 
field examination, 261–262 
instructions, 260–261 
preparation, 258–260 
welcoming auditors, 261–262 
FCOJ. See Frozen concentrated 
orange juice 
Federal Insurance Contribution Act 
(FICA), 280 
Federal Reserve Wire Network 
(Fedwire), 175 
Federal Unemployment Tax Act 
(FUTA), 280 
Fedwire. See Federal Reserve Wire 
Network 
FICA. See Federal Insurance 
Contribution Act 
Filing Information Returns 
Electronically (FIRE) system, 283 
Finance, 59–60 
and administration, 40–41 
operational policies, 40 
VP of, 12 

Index 
 
356 
Finance manager, 10-11 
Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB), 232, 236, 245 
Financial conglomerates, 124 
Financial cost, 110 
Financial covenants, 136 
Financial director’s position, 11 
Financial functions structure 
for midsize company, 5 
for small company, 4 
for small-to-midsize company, 5 
Financial interests, sales of, 110–111 
factoring, 110–111 
forfaiting, 111 
Financial leader, key attributes, 224 
Financial professionals, in small 
companies, 9 
Financial relationship(s), 131–138 
bankers, 137–138 
credit line renewal, 138 
investor relations, 132–133 
lenders comfortability, 133–137 
covenants and utilization 
compliance, 136–137 
credit lines with monthly 
reporting, 133–136 
Financial resources vs. business 
nature, 113–122 
Financial sponsors. See Backers 
Financial statements, 23–24 
and transactional cycles, 239–244 
Financial statements’ users, 
acceptability to, 254–255 
Financial Stress Class, 166 
Financing 
in cash flow statement, 246 
definition of, 113 
features of, 105 
Financing/investing cycle, 243 
FIRE system. See Filing Information 
Returns Electronically system 
Firewall, necessity of, 50 
First Data Resources, 178 
First Union, 173 
Fiscal policy, 43–52 
data recovery, 49–51 
information processing, principles 
of, 46–49 
accuracy, 48–49 
authorization, 47 
completeness, 47–48 
IT security, 49–51 
physical controls, 49 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 51–52 
segregation of duties, 44–46 
Fixed assets, 60, 241 
Flat organizational structures, 4-5 
Floating-rate loans, 276 
Focus Pictures, 120 
Forecasting 
methods, 302 
qualitative, 302 
quantitative, 302 
and modeling, 297–305 
cost/benefit analysis, 299–300 
sensitivity, emphasis on, 
303–305 
simplified, 301–303 
revenue and gross margin trends, 
projections of, 303 
Foreign currency, 274 
management, 179–180 
Foreign entity concerns, 313–314 
Foreign exchange hedging, 274–276 
Forfaiting, 111 
Fortune 500, 142 
Forward contract, 273, 275, 276 
Founders, of private equity, 98 
Founders’ investments and company’s 
own capital, 100–101 
482 review, 314 
Fra Luca Bartolomeo de Pacioli, 23 

Index 
 
357 
Franklin, Benjamin, 279 
Freescale Semiconductor, 116 
Frozen concentrated orange juice 
(FCOJ), 273 
Full disclosure, 233 
Full-service investment banks, 124 
Functional distribution, study of, 31 
Functional outsourcing, 327 
Functional sectors, 21–25 
accounting management, 23–24 
administration and HR, 25 
audits, 23–24 
capital resources and banking, 22 
cash management, 22 
control processes, 21–22 
financial statements, 23–24 
information, importance of, 23 
managerial reporting, 23 
market analysis, 23 
policies and procedures, 
implementation of, 21–22 
risk management and 
compliance, 24 
strategic planning, 24–25 
Fusion-io, 116 
FUTA. See Federal Unemployment 
Tax Act 
Futures contracts, 274 
FxPro, 180 
G 
GAAP. See Generally accepted 
accounting principles 
Garfield, Andrew, 112 
General liability insurance, 266 
Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP), 23, 231 
Geographical concentration, 278 
Geometria, 23 
Global competition, in manufacturing 
sector, 118 
Global Finance, 175 
Global forfaiting, 111 
Global Mergers and Acquisitions Legal 
Advisory Rankings report 
(Bloomberg), 317 
Global Payment, 178 
Going concern, 233 
GoodAccountants.com, 253 
Google AdWords, 329 
Great Plains, 193 
Greenwood, Johnny, 17 
Gross profit, 217 
Groupon, 308 
Growth capital investment, 100 
H 
Handbooks, 38 
Hands-on management vs. micro 
management, 7 
Harley-Davidson, business structure 
of, 40 
Hedging, 272–277 
commodity hedging, 273–274 
foreign exchange hedging, 
274–276 
interest rate hedging, 276–277 
Hierarchy of Needs (Maslow), 15 
High-visibility position, 8 
Historical cost, 233 
Huffington Post, 111, 121 
Hulu, 120 
Human resources 
acquisition of, 325–332 
expectations, 331–332 
interviewing process, 330–331 
procurement practices, 
326–327 
search process, 328–330 
and administration, 25 

Index 
 
358 
Human resources (continued) 
management of, 325, 333–341 
development and evaluation, 
338–340 
employee retention, 340–341 
organization, 334–338 
Humphrey, Albert, 289 
I 
IBM Cognos, 151 
IFRS. See International Financial 
Reporting Standards 
Imperfectionists, The, 345 
Import, 108 
Income statements, 242–244, 246 
Incoterms (International Commercial 
Terms), 234–235 
Independent investment banks, 124 
Indirect method, of cash flow 
statement, 247 
Indirect tax, 281 
Inflows, 150–151 
Information, importance of, 23 
Information processing, principles of, 
46–49 
accuracy, 48–49 
authorization, 47 
completeness, 47–48 
Information technology decisions, 
185–194 
final considerations, 194 
software, weighing pros and cons, 
186–192 
accounting modules, quality 
of, 188 
ERP vs. special-purpose 
applications, 187 
online accessibility, 191 
price, 191 
reporting capability, 188–190 
vendor selection, 191–192 
software packages, 192–194 
large enterprise solutions, 192 
Microsoft Dynamics 
solutions, 193 
QuickBooks Pro, 193–194 
Initial public offering (IPO), 97 
Inland marine insurance, 267 
Insurable risks, 265–270 
business insurance products, 265 
classification, 265 
insurance, types of, 266, 269 
malpractice insurance, 266 
multiline insurance policies, 269 
umbrella policies, 270 
Insurance. See Specific insurance 
Interest rate cap, 276 
Interest rate collar, 277 
Interest rate floor derivative, 277 
Interest rate hedging, 276–277 
Interest rate swap, 276 
Internal control, 35–41, 65 
business policies 
finance and administration, 
40–41 
operations, 39–40 
components, 36 
employee policies, 37–39 
meaning of, 35 
monitoring, 66 
policies, 36 
Internal Revenue Code, 314 
Internal risks, 271–272 
International Accounting Standards 
Board, 236 
International currency trade, 274 
International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS), 23, 236 
International transfer prices, 314 
Internet, 174 
visibility, 6 

Index 
 
359 
Interviewing process, 330–331 
emailing, 330 
personal interview, 330–331 
phone interview, 330 
second interview, 331 
testing, 331 
Inventory and cost of goods sold, 59 
Investing activities, in cash flow 
statement, 246 
Investment, 59–60 
Investment bankers, 124–125 
Investor relations (IR), 132–133 
Investors, 123 
IPO. See Initial public offering 
IR. See Investor relations 
IT security, and data recovery, 49–51 
iVillage, 120 
J 
JIT. See Just-in-time inventory policy 
Jo-Ann Stores, 119 
Job descriptions vs. titles, 9-13 
Jordan Company, 117 
JPMorgan Chase, 104 
Just-in-time (JIT) inventory policy, 40 
K 
Key performance indicators (KPIs), 
75, 206–208 
King’s Speech, The, 318 
Knight, Phil, 326 
Knowledge prerequisites, 27–32 
corporate structure, 28–29 
existing policies and procedures, 32 
functional distribution, 31 
operational flow, 30 
organizational chart, 31 
value chain, 30 
KPIs. See Key performance indicators 
L 
Labor, 325 
Labor laws, in small business, 39 
Labor-reduction convenience, 179 
Labor resources, importing of, 326 
Large companies, controllers in, 11 
Large enterprises , 192 
vs. small enterprises, 6 
LBO. See Leveraged buyout 
LCs. See Letters of credit 
Legal rules, violations of, 24 
LegalZoom, 310 
Lenders, 117, 128–130 
comfortability, 133–137 
covenants and utilization 
compliance, 136–137 
credit lines with monthly 
reporting, 133–136 
Lending, 102 
Leonard Green and Partners, 119 
Leroy, Jean-Baptiste, 279 
Letters of credit (LCs), 41, 107, 110 
Leveraged buyout (LBO), 100 
Leverage ratio, 129 
Liabilities, 241–242 
Liaison, appointing, 261 
LIBOR. See London Interbank 
Offered Rate 
Licensing, 282 
LinkedIn, 116, 124, 322, 328 
Lists, for small and midsize 
companies, 63 
Lockbox, 176 
Lock-up agreements, 316 
Login passwords, treatment of, 51 
Logistics company, 119–120 
London Forfaiting Company, 111 

Index 
360 
London Interbank Offered Rate 
(LIBOR), 104 
Lone Pine Resources, 116 
Long-term liabilities, 242 
M 
Macromanagement, of treasury, 141 
Malpractice insurance, 266 
Managerial reporting, 23 
M&A. See Merger and acquisition 
transactions 
Manufacturing/trading companies 
aggregate annual budget for, 81 
Marine insurance, 267 
Market analysis, 23 
Marketing, 6 
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs, 15 
Materiality, 233 
Mature businesses, and private equity 
funds, 99–100 
Mature industries, small businesses 
in, 298 
Media company, 120 
Medici, Giovanni, 102 
Medici Bank, 102 
Merchant services, 177–178 
Merger and acquisition (M&A) 
transactions, 308, 317, 319 
MetLife, 272 
Micro-management 
vs. hands-on management, 7 
of treasury, 141, 143 
Microsoft Dynamics AX, 193 
Microsoft Dynamics GP, 193 
Microsoft Dynamics NAV, 193 
Microsoft Dynamics SL, 188, 193 
Microsoft FRx report designer, 193 
Microsoft SQL Analysis, 193 
Midsize company 
financial functions structure for, 5 
lists for, 62 
schedules for, 63 
Midway Games, 106 
Minimum net worth, 136 
Mission, of CFO, 16 
Mobile banking, 174 
Modeling and forecasting, 297–305 
cost/benefit analysis, 299–300 
sensitivity, emphasis on, 303–305 
simplified, 301–303 
Monetary unit, 232 
Moneylending, 102 
Monster, 328 
Multiline insurance policies, 269 
N 
NAICS. See North American Industry 
Classification System 
Napster, 121 
National City, 111 
National Venture Capital 
Association, 127 
Navision Financials, 193 
NBC Entertainment, 120 
NBC News, 120 
NBCUniversal, 120 
NDA. See Nondisclosure agreement 
.NET Framework, 48 
Net operating income, 280 
Net present value (NPV), 300 
Net profit, increase of, 298 
Netscape, 121 
Net worth, 129 
NewBay, 317 

Index 
 
361 
New domestic entity setup, checklist 
for, 309–312 
New Mountain Capital, 116 
New ventures, 307–314 
entity, creation of, 308 
foreign entity concerns, 313–314 
New Domestic Entity Setup, 
checklist for, 309–312 
New York Mercantile Exchange 
(NYMEX), 273 
New York Times, 121 
Nexia International, 254 
Nike, 326 
Non-cash items, in cash flow 
statement, 250 
Nondisclosure agreement (NDA), 168 
Nonrecourse transaction, 111 
North American Industry Classification 
System (NAICS), 113 
Notable procedures, 56–61 
accounts payable, 57–58 
banking, 59–60 
expenditures, 57–58 
financing, 59–60 
fixed assets, 60 
inventory and cost of goods sold, 59 
investing, 59–60 
month-end procedures, 60–61 
payroll, 57–58 
revenues and accounts receivable, 
56–57 
year-end actions, 61 
NPV. See Net present value 
Numeration formulas, 196 
Nursing professionals, deficit of, 326 
NYMEX. See New York Mercantile 
Exchange 
O 
Official documents, 109 
Online accessibility, 191 
Online banking, 174 
Online credit card payments, 178 
Operating activities, in cash flow 
statement, 246 
Operational flow and value chain, 
study of, 30 
Operational policies, 40 
Oracle, 192 
Orient, 326 
Outflows, 150–151 
Outsourcing, in manufacturing sector, 
118 
Owner’s proximity, 8 
P 
Paid-time-off (PTO) concept, 341 
Palo Alto Software, 126 
Patriarch Partners, 100 
Payables. See Credit payables 
Payables solutions, 178–179 
Paychex, 180, 311 
Payment gateway, 178 
Payment reputation, 178 
Payroll, 57–58 
management, 180–181 
tax, 280 
P/E. See Price-earnings 
Performance analytics, 203 
Performance reporting, 204 
Permanent vs. temporary 
employment, 327 
PEST (political, economic, social, and 
technological), 290 
Physical controls, in fiscal policy, 49 
Physical observation, in formal 
auditing, 67–68 
PIPE. See Private investment into 
public equity 

Index 
 
362 
Pivot table, 197, 198 
Plum Card, 179 
PNC Bank, 111 
Policies 
meaning of, 36 
operational, 40 
and procedures, implementation 
of, 21–22 
Political risk insurance, 268 
Politics, in companies, 8 
Power Resume Search 
(Monster), 329 
Price, 255 
Price/cost of system, 191 
Price-earnings (P/E), 97 
Principle of conservatism, 150–151 
Prioritization rules, 19 
Private equity, 98–100 
angel investments and venture 
capital, 98–99 
backers, 98 
due diligence with, 128 
firms, 127–128 
founders, 98 
funds, 99–100 
Private investment into public equity 
(PIPE), 100 
Procedure(s) 
designing, 54 
documenting, 61–62 
implementation of, 21–22 
layouts, 54–55 
meaning of, 36 
notable procedures, 56–61 
Product concentration, 278 
Production, 6 
Product liability insurance, 267 
Professional growth, 18 
Professional liabilities insurance. See 
Malpractice insurance 
Profitability, 85 
calculation, 89–90 
control point, 88 
Profit criteria, establishment of, 90 
Project profitability assessment step, 88 
Property insurance, 266 
Property tax, 281 
Proportioni et proportionalita, 23 
PTO. See Paid-time-off concept 
Public equity, 96–98 
Public stocks, 315 
Q 
Quality control, 255 
QuickBooks, 180 
QuickBooks Pro, 193–194 
Quintessential tasks, 53–63 
documenting procedures, 61–62 
key elements, 53–54 
notable procedures, 56–61 
accounts payable, 57–58 
banking, 59–60 
expenditures, 57–58 
financing, 59–60 
fixed assets, 60 
inventory and cost of goods 
sold, 59 
investing, 59–60 
month-end, 60–61 
payroll, 57–58 
revenues and accounts 
receivable, 56–57 
year-end actions, 61 
procedure layouts, 54–55 
scheduling, importance of, 62–63 
R 
Rachman, Tom, 345 
RDC. See Remote deposit capturing 
RDSs. See Remote deposit services 
Real estate and rentals, 122 

Index 
 
363 
Real-time liquidity management, 174 
Receivables solutions, 176–177, see 
also Credit receivables 
Recourse transaction, 111 
Remote deposit capturing (RDC), 177 
Remote deposit services (RDSs), 177 
Reporting capability, of software, 
188–190 
data exportability, 189–190 
data warehousing, 190 
drill-down features, 189 
ease of data querying, 189 
predefined system-generated 
reports, 188 
report writers, integration 
with, 190 
Report writers, integration with, 190 
Research in Motion (RIM), 317 
Resume database access 
(CareerBuilder), 329 
Return on equity (ROE), 97 
Return on investment (ROI), 96 
Revenue(s) 
and accounts receivable, 56–57 
creation, 85 
volume, 219 
Revocable LC, 109 
RIM. See Research in Motion 
Risk management and compliance, 24 
ROE. See Return on equity 
ROI. See Return on investment 
Rosenthal & Rosenthal, 111 
S 
SaaS. See Software as a Service 
Sales, 6 
vs. borrowing, 110–111 
and use tax, 281 
SAP, 192 
SAP Business One, 192 
Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act, 51–52, 
97, 125 
Schedules 
importance of, 62–63 
for small and midsize companies, 63 
Schneiderman, Art, 290 
Search engine optimization (SEO), 329 
SEC. See Securities and Exchange 
Commission 
Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 97, 132 
Segmental analysis, 215–222 
allocation hurdles, 218–219 
by location for service 
company, 220 
principles of, 216–217 
profitability analysis, 216–217 
organizational structure, 216 
profitability stimulants, 217 
revenue generation 
composition, 216 
purpose of, 215 
scenario, 219 
segmental chart of acounts, 
217–218 
Segmental chart of accounts, 217–218 
Segmentation exercise, 216 
Segregation of duties, 44–46 
for wire transfers and check 
payments, 45 
Self-actualization, 16 
Self-tracking mechanisms, 87 
Sensitivity 
analysis, 303, 304 
emphasis on, 303–305 
SEO. See Search engine optimization 
Server/client architecture, 192 
Service sector, 122 
SFAS. See Statements of financial 
accounting standards 

Index 
 
364 
Shipping documents, 109 
Sight LCs, 109 
Signature loans, 105 
Six-disks-a-week backup policy, 50 
Small business, 3–8 
flat organizational structures, 4-5 
hands-on-management, 7 
high concentration of duties, 6 
labor laws in, 39 
owner’s proximity, 8 
Small-business accounting systems, 151 
Small companies 
financial functions structure for, 
4, 5 
financial professionals in, 9 
vs. large enterprises, 6 
and midsize companies 
lists for, 62 
schedules for, 63 
Social Network, The (2010), 112 
Social networking, 328 
Software, weighing pros and cons, 
186–192 
accounting modules, quality of, 188 
ERP vs. special-purpose 
applications, 187 
online accessibility, 191 
price, 191 
reporting capability, 188–190 
vendor selection, 191–192 
Software as a Service (SaaS), 192 
Software packages, 192–194 
large enterprise solutions, 192 
Microsoft Dynamics solutions, 193 
QuickBooks Pro, 193–194 
Solazyme, 116 
Solomon, 193 
SOPs. See Statements of positions 
Sourcing concentration, 277 
SOX. See Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
Special permits, 282 
Spirit Airlines, 116 
Spot contract, 275 
Spreadsheets. See Excel 
Staffing, 329 
Start-up company, controller in, 11-12 
State payroll tax services Harrison, 
PA, 253 
Statements of financial accounting 
standards (SFAS), 236 
Statements of positions (SOPs), 236 
STEER (sociocultural, technological, 
economic, ecological, and 
regulatory), 290 
Stock trading, 97 
Strategic planning, 24–25, 287–295 
CFO’s role, 293–294 
example, 295 
future-planning methods, 291–293 
theory of, 289–291 
Strategy, definition of, 287 
Summa de arithmetica (1494), 23 
Super Bowl XLV, 121 
Sweep account, 144 
SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats) 
analysis, 289, 292 
T 
T-accounts, 69–71 
Talent search, 328 
Taomee Holdings, 116 
Tax and regulations compliance, 
279–284 
Taxation, 24 
Tax evasion, 282 
Tax offenses, 282–283 
TEC Group, 163, 170 
Technology/service companies, 
detailed monthly budget for, 83 

Index 
 
365 
Telemundo, 120 
Temporary vs. permanent 
employment, 327 
Term LC payments, 109 
Term sheet, components, 130 
Terrorism, in United States, 268 
Terrorism Risk Insurance Act 
(TRIA), 268 
TheLadders, 328 
Tilton, Lynn, 100 
Time organization, 19 
Titles vs. job descriptions, 9-13, 15, 
21, 27, 35 
accounting/finance manager, 10-11 
Chief Financial Officer, 12-13 
controller, 11-12 
Director of accounting/finance, 11 
VP of finance, 12 
Trade finance, 107–110 
Trade Finance group, 158 
Trade references, 167 
Trading company, 119 
Trading credit risk, 272 
Trading Places, 273–274 
TradingPoint, 180 
Transactional cycles, 56, 239, 240, 241 
and financial statements, 239–244 
Transactional profitability control, 
88–90 
best point of control, 
determination of, 88–89 
control procedure, 90 
profitability calculation, 89–90 
profit criteria, establishment of, 90 
Transactional totals vs. control 
accounts, 71–72 
Transparency, 97 
Transposing digits, mathematical 
effect of, 69 
Treasury function, 141–144 
Treasury management services, 
173–181 
demand deposit account services, 
174–176 
foreign currency management, 
179–180 
merchant services, 177–178 
payables solutions, 178–179 
payroll management, 180–181 
receivables solutions, 176–177 
TRIA. See Terrorism Risk Insurance 
Act 
Trial balance, 259 
Triton LLC, 180 
12-Month D&B PAYDEX, 166 
U 
UCC. See Unified Commercial Code 
Umbrella policies, 270 
Unified Commercial Code (UCC), 105 
Unilateral foreign currency 
transaction, 158 
United States, Director in, 11 
Universal Pictures, 120 
Unlimited recruitment search 
(LinkedIn), 329 
USA Networks, 120 
US business taxes, 280 
US Small Business Administration 
site, 284 
V 
Value-added taxation (VAT), 313 
Value chain, study of, 30 
VAT. See Value-added taxation 
Vendor selection, 191–192 
cloud technology and SaaS, 192 
Venetian method of bookkeeping, 23 

Index 
 
366 
Venture capital firms, 118 
Venture capitalists, 126 
Venture capital vs. angel investment, 
98–99 
Vice President (VP), of finance, 12 
Vistage, 163 
Voluntary SOX compliance, 52 
W, X 
Wachovia, 173 
Wachovia Bank Conference, 18 
Warner Brothers, 106 
Weakest link, 65–75 
common-sense tests, 68–71 
company performance reviews, 75 
completeness, 72–73 
control accounts vs. transactional 
totals, 71–72 
cutoff tests, 73–74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
human error, 66 
physical observation, 67–68 
Weighted average cost of capital, 300 
Wells Fargo, 111, 176 
Wire transfers, 176 
and check payments, 45 
Workers’ compensation 
insurance, 266 
Working capital, 141 
WorldCom, 121 
Y 
Yandex N.V., 116 
Yellow pad, 301 
Yorke, Thom, 17 
Z 
Zuckerberg, Mark, 12, 112, 321 

 
CFO Techniques 
A Hands-On Guide to  
Keeping Your Business Solvent and Successful 
 
 
Marina Guzik 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
CFO Techniques: A Hands-On Guide to Keeping Your Business Solvent and 
Successful 
Copyright © 2011 by Marina Guzik 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, record-
ing, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the copyright owner and the publisher. 
ISBN-13 (pbk): 978-1-4302-3756-3 
ISBN-13 (electronic): 978-1-4302-3757-0 
Trademarked names, logos, and images may appear in this book. Rather than use a 
trademark symbol with every occurrence of a trademarked name, logo, or image we 
use the names, logos, and images only in an editorial fashion and to the benefit of 
the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. 
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar 
terms, even if they are not identified as such, is not to be taken as an expression of 
opinion as to whether or not they are subject to proprietary rights. 
President and Publisher: Paul Manning 
Lead Editor: Jeff Olson 
Editorial Board: Steve Anglin, Mark Beckner, Ewan Buckingham, Gary Cornell, 
Morgan Ertel, Jonathan Gennick, Jonathan Hassell, Robert Hutchinson, Mi-
chelle Lowman, James Markham, Matthew Moodie, Jeff Olson, Jeffrey Pep-
per, Douglas Pundick, Ben Renow-Clarke, Dominic Shakeshaft, Gwenan 
Spearing, Matt Wade, Tom Welsh 
Coordinating Editor: Adam Heath 
Copy Editor: Damon Larson 
Compositor: Mary Sudul 
Indexer: SPi Global 
Cover Designer: Anna Ishchenko 
Distributed to the book trade worldwide by Springer Science+Business Media, LLC., 
233 Spring Street, 6th Floor, New York, NY 10013. Phone 1-800-SPRINGER, fax (201) 
348-4505, e-mail orders-ny@springer-sbm.com, or visit www.springeronline.com.  
For information on translations, please e-mail rights@apress.com, or visit 
www.apress.com.  
Apress and friends of ED books may be purchased in bulk for academic, corporate, 
or promotional use. eBook versions and licenses are also available for most titles. 
For more information, reference our Special Bulk Sales–eBook Licensing web page 
at www.apress.com/bulk-sales. 
The information in this book is distributed on an “as is” basis, without warranty. Al-
though every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this work, neither the 
author(s) nor Apress shall have any liability to any person or entity with respect to 
any loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by the in-
formation contained in this work. 

 
 
 
 
 
To Yana, 
the only person I ever wanted to impress. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


About the Author 
Marina Guzik’s career in finance and accounting spans 24 years, with the 
last 17 years in chief financial officer and controller positions in small and 
midsize companies. She has worked in both the public and private sectors, 
including manufacturing, global supply chain, e-commerce, professional serv-
ices, asset management, and consulting. Marina’s functional expertise spans a 
broad range of tasks and duties, from international treasury to mergers and 
acquisitions, and everything in between. She holds several academic degrees, 
including a master’s in business administration in accounting. She believes in 
the strength of fundamental knowledge and commercial acumen, which can 
be intelligently applied to any particular business model. 
 

 
viii 
About the Technical 
Reviewer 
Randy Krug is a CFO with over 25 years of finance and accounting experi-
ence in a diverse field of industries, including public accounting. His career 
features a 15-year stint with the world’s largest brewer, and he has actively 
engaged national board participation in technology and e-commerce strategy 
planning with all of America’s best-known brands. Randy enjoys peer net-
working as evidenced by over two decades of participation in a local finan-
cial executive network for continuing education, and he founded the na-
tional Anheuser-Busch Controller’s Roundtable for the purpose of best-
practice professional development. A product of Iowa’s agricultural heritage, 
he and his wife Sheila live near Cedar Rapids and are the proud parents of 
two adult sons. 

 
ix 
Acknowledgments 
I want to express my deepest gratitude to Jeff Olson, who found my blog, 
The Frustrated CFO, and saw the potential to share my expertise with fellow 
financial professionals working in small and midsize companies. Thank you, 
Jeff, for your unyielding confidence and support. I also want to thank every-
one at Apress who worked on the book and helped to bring it to the read-
ers. Special thanks to Yana Zosya and Hannah Max for being in my life.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

