
Challenges, Performances and Tendencies in
Organisation Management

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

World Scientific
Romanian Scientific Management Society
Challenges, Performances and Tendencies in
Organisation Management
Editors
Ovidiu Nicolescu
The Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Romania
Lester Lloyd-Reason
Anglia Ruskin University, UK

Published by
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224
USA office:  27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601
UK office:  57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Challenges, performances and tendencies in organisation management / edited by Ovidiu Nicolescu (The Bucharest 
University of Economic Studies, Romania) & Lester Lloyd-Reason (Anglia Ruskin University, UK).
	 		 pages cm
	 	 Includes bibliographical references and index.
	 	 ISBN 978-9814656016 (alk. paper)
	 1. Management.  2. International business enterprises--Management.  I. Nicolescu, Ovidiu.  II. Lloyd-Reason, Lester. 
	 HD31.C424  2015
	 658--dc23
	 		 	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
2015009071
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Copyright © 2016 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. 
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or  
mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval system now known or to be 
invented, without written permission from the publisher.
For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to photocopy is not required from the publisher.
In-house Editors: Dipasri Sardar/Li Hongyan
Typeset by Stallion Press
Email: enquiries@stallionpress.com
Printed in Singapore

v
Coordinators:
Prof. Ovidiu Nicolescu, The Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Bucharest, Romania
Prof. Lester Lloyd-Reason, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Editors:
Prof. Ovidiu Nicolescu, The Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Bucharest, Romania
Prof. Lester Lloyd Reason, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, United Kingdom
Scientific Board: 
Prof. Doina Banciu, National Institute for Research & Development in Informatics, Romania
Prof. Mihai Bocarnea, Regent University, USA
Prof. Zbigniew Bochniarz, Evans School of Public Affairs, University of Washington, Seattle, USA
Prof. Constantin Bratianu, Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Romania
Prof. Dan Candea, Technical University of Cluj-Napoca, Romania
Prof. Martin Henson, University of Essex, United Kingdom
Prof. Norbert Grunwald, Wiesmar University of Technology, Germany
Prof. Lars Hulgard, Roskilde University, Denmark
Prof. Soulla Louca, University of Nicosia, Cyprus
Prof. Dumitru Miron, Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Romania
Prof. Ovidiu Nicolescu, Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Romania
Associate Prof. Marian Nastase, Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Romania
Prof. Constantin Oprean, România, University “Lucian Blaga” of Sibiu, Romania
Prof. Hanns Pitchler, Wien Economics University
Prof. George Plesoianu, Bucharest University of Economic Studies, Romania
Prof. Lester Lloyd-Reason, Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK
Prof. Victoria Seitz, California State University, USA
Board Members

vi 
Board Members
Prof. Ion Stegaroiu, “Valahia” University of Targoviste, Romania
Prof. Lajos Szabo, University of Pannonia, Veszprem, Hungary
Prof. Blandine Vanderlinden, MIME-ICHEC, Brussels, Belgium
Scientific Secretary:
Lecturer Eduard Ceptureanu

vii
Contents
Foreword 
xi
About the Editor 
xiii
Part I. International Management and Cultural Diversity 
1
 Chapter 1.  The Role of Large Corporate Boards in the Context of Globalization 
and Smart Economy: Creating Value for All Stakeholders 
3
 
Mariana Gheorghe
 Chapter 2. New Management Tendencies and Their Impact on the Form of Capitalism 
11
 
Maria Negreponti-Delivanis
 Chapter 3. Trends and Developments of Diversity Management at the Global level 
19
 
Stegăroiu Ion, Mubeen Ştefania, Istrate Ciprian, Lile Ramona
 Chapter 4. Corporate Social Responsibility or Corporate Sustainability of Romanian Enterprises? 
25
 
Zaiţ Dumitru, Onea Angelica, Tătăruşanu Maria, Ciulu Ruxandra
 Chapter 5.  Re-Thinking Our Model of Management in the Light of the Cultural 
Dimension — A Systemic Approach to the Company 
35
 
Blandine Vanderlinden
Part II. Sustainable Development and Business Sustainability 
45
 Chapter 6.  Social Capital and Business Sustainability: Defining, Measuring, 
and Assessing its Impact on Cluster Performance in the Podkarpackie Region of Poland 
47
 
Zbigniew Bochniarz
 Chapter 7. Integrating Corporate and Academic Alumni into the Drive toward Sustainability 
55
 
Rodica Stefănescu
Part III. University Governance and Management 
65
 Chapter 8. Taxonomies of Internationalization for Higher Education 
67
 
Martin Henson
 Chapter 9.  The Most Pressing Challenges for Romanian Higher Education System 
in Line with the Bologna Process Values 
79
 
Dumitru Miron

viii 
Contents
Chapter 10. University Governance and Competitive Advantage 
89
 
Mihai Korka
Chapter 11.  Study Programs in English in Non-Anglophone Countries: 
Looking at Impacts and Challenges from a Romanian Perspective 
97
 
Mariana Nicolae
Chapter 12. Romanian Private Higher Education in the Current European Context 
107
 
Folcuţ Ovidiu, Grigore Ramona
Part IV.  Knowledge-Based Organization, Intellectual Capital, 
Information, and Management Documents 
115
Chapter 13. Contributions to the Evaluation of e-Learning Processes in Higher Education 
117
 
Doina Banciu, Monica Florea
Chapter 14. Evaluation of Knowledge Processes Within the Learning Organization 
125
 
Constantin Bratianu, Ruxandra Bejinaru
Chapter 15. Universities in Transition: Are Library Directors Facing Changed Demands? 
137
 
Arja Mäntykangas
Chapter 16. Knowledge Management in the Information Society — Case Study on e-Services 
143
 
Monica Anghel
Chapter 17.  Risk Awareness as Key Success Factor for more Efficient Management 
for Local Public Administrations 
151
 
Markus Bodemann, Marieta Olaru, Ionela Carmen Pirnea
Chapter 18. Information and its Entropy — A Measure of Market Complexity 
159
 
Camelia Oprean
Part V. Entrepreneurship, Social Enterprise, and SMEs 
167
Chapter 19. SME-Conducive Policy Formulation under Systemic Perspectives 
169
 
J. Hanns Pichler
Chapter 20. Particularities of the Procesual Organisation in the Medium Knowledge-Based Enterprise 
175
 
Ovidiu Nicolescu
Chapter 21.  Preparing Our Students for an Entrepreneurial Life: Are Universities Part of the Solution 
or Part of the Problem  
185
 
Lester Lloyd-Reason
Chapter 22. Difficulties in Improving Romanian Companies Management  
195
 
Corneliu Russu
Chapter 23. Contributions to Redesigning the Management System in Medium-Sized Enterprises 
203
 
Ion Verboncu, Ciprian Nicolescu
Chapter 24. The New Paradigm of Social Enterprise 
213
 
Ana-Maria Grigore

 
Contents 
ix
Chapter 25. Realities and Peculiarities of the Entrepreneurship in Brasov, Romania 
219
 
Camelia Dragomir, Stelian Panzaru, Carmen Lis
Chapter 26. ESF Interventions for Promoting Entrepreneurship in Romania 
227
 
Daniela Manuc
Chapter 27.  Contributions to the Development and Use of Information Programs Dealing 
With Human Resources in the Rural Area 
235
 
Simona Biriescu, Mariana Predişcan, Marian Năstase
Chapter 28. Management Particularities of the Romanian Social Enterprise  
243
 
Bibu Nicolae, Lisetchi Mihai, Nastase Marian
Chapter 29. The Evolution of the Romanian SMEs’ Perceptions Over the Last Decade 
261
 
Luminiţa Nicolescu, Ciprian Nicolescu
Part VI. Leadership and Human Resources Management 
273
Chapter 30.  The Relationship between Leadership Styles, Leader Communication Style, 
and Impact on Leader–Member Exchange Relationship within the Banking Sector 
in the United States 
275
 
Theodore G. Pacleb, Mihai C. Bocarnea
Chapter 31.  The Effect of Organizational Culture on the Responsiveness of Small 
and Medium-Sized Enterprises to Environmental Change: An Empirical Study in Romania 
289
 
Michael Stoica, Liviu Florea, Edit Lukacs
Chapter 32. Model Proposal for Cluster Implementation in Romania 
297
 
Ion Popa, Cristina Vlăsceanu
Chapter 33. Aspects of Human Resources’ Management within Organizations in Braşov, Romania 
303
 
Stelian Panzaru, Camelia-Cristina Dragomir, Tudor Pendiuc, Dan Cojocaru
Chapter 34. Managing Individual Performance Appraisal in Project Teams 
313
 
Florin-Ioan Petean, Bogdan Bâlc, Horaţiu Cătălin Sălăgean,
 
Răzvan Dimitrie Gârbacea, Diana Sopon
Chapter 35. The Relation between Labor Force Profitability and the Firm’s Personnel Policy 
319
 
Gabriel Sorin Badea, Constanta Popescu, Silvia Elena Iacob
Chapter 36. Analysis of Multinational Companies in Romania 
329
 
Eduard Ceptureanu, Sebastian Ceptureanu
Part VII. Management of Change, Innovation, and Quality 
339
Chapter 37.  Study Regarding the Correlation between the Changes in the Energy 
Economy and the Competitiveness of Companies in Germany and Romania 
341
 
Gregor Johannes Weber, Marieta Olaru, Georgiana Marin
Chapter 38. Management of Intangible Assets Valorization in Small and Medium Enterprises 
349
 
Constantin Oprean, Mihail Aurel Tîţu, Claudiu Vasile Kifor

x 
Contents
Chapter 39.  Comparative Management in the Field of Extracurricular Activities, 
Highlighting Instrument of Potential Change 
355
 
Oana Dumitraşcu, Emanoil Muscalu
Chapter 40. Study for Creating and Developing Regional Agrifood Markets in Romania 
363
 
Nicolae Istudor, George Plesoianu, Bogdan Bazga, Oana Georgiana Stanila, 
 
St. Alexandru Costin Cirstea
Chapter 41.  Comparative Analysis of the Factors Influencing the Development and Implementation
of European Projects 
373
 
Diana Elena Ranf, Liana Marcu, Dănut Dumitru Dumitraşcu
Chapter 42. Organizational Change — Managing Employees Resistance 
381
 
Viorel Cornescu, Roxana Adam
Chapter 43.  How to Reduce Supplemental Claims in Construction Industry — Selected 
Management Tools to Implement a Systematic Anti-Claim Management 
391
 
Martin Heinisch, Jörg-U. Muckenfuß, Dan Miricescu
Chapter 44. Implementation of Quality Management for Ecotouristic Operators in the Danube Delta 
399
 
Virgil Nicula, Simona Spânu
Chapter 45. Romanian Pre-University Educational Management in the Context of European Integration 
409
 
Ana Tuşa, Claudiu Sorin Voinia, Oana Dumitraşcu
Chapter 46.  Study on the Promotion and Implementation of Sustainable Development in Modern 
Management in National and Regional Economies, Case Study: Romania as EU Member 
417
 
George Plesoianu, St. Alexandru Costin Cirstea
Index 
427

xi
Foreword
The management is — without any doubt — one of the most important and the fast changing fields of the society. 
There is no component of the human activity — family, enterprise, town region, industry, country, a.s.o — which 
can perform without a good management. For this reason there are a lot of resources allocated to improve the man-
agement in the largest companies and to provide management research/education and training.
Transition to the knowledge-based economy, to the “smart economy” — the crucial mutation of our times — 
generates new requirements and opportunities for all management components. It is now under construction a new 
type of management, i.e., knowledge-based management.
The present book incorporates 46 chapters from more than 110, presented to the international conference 
“Challenges, Performances and Tendencies in the Organization Management” organized by Romanian 
Scientific Management Society — the most elitist Romanian professional management association, from 
June 22–24, 2014 in Danube Delta, Romania. The chapters have been selected by 20 scientific board members from 
9 countries — USA, UK, Austria, Belgium, Germany, Denmark, Hungary, Cyprus, and Romania. 
The book is structured in seven parts referring to the major management fields:
— International management and cultural diversity.
— Sustainable development and business sustainability.
— University governance and management.
— Knowledge based organization, intellectual capital, information, and management documents.
— Entrepreneurship, social enterprise and SMEs.
— Leadership and human resource management.
— Management of change, innovation and quality.
In each part there are several chapters dealing with significant elements of the management topics, having new 
theoretical and/or pragmatic contributions.
Every chapter is very methodically structured: introduction, theoretical background, methodology used, scientific 
and/or pragmatic management elements analyzed, and conclusions. Without any doubt the most part of chapters con-
tain new or less known management elements referring especially to the management in Central, Eastern, and Western 
Europe in a modern approach. Many chapters there are based on the recent empirical research in the companies.
This book presents major interest and utility for: 
— Management professors, students, trainers, and consultants.
— Managers and management specialists from the companies and public administration.
— Persons interested in management evolution in the last years in Europe and, especially, in the Central and 
Eastern Europe.

xii 
Foreword
Despite of the author’s efforts, of the scientific board members implication and of the book scientific coordina-
tors contribution, the book is not perfect and it could be further improved. Reader’s suggestions and observations 
are welcome.
Finally, we want to thank to each participant in this scientific work for their contribution and implication. 
Special thanks to the Romanian Scientific Management Society which made this book possible, to the scientific 
board, and to my colleagues in coordinating this book and to the scientific secretary, last but not least our thanks 
to the prestigious World Scientific Publishing specialists who have published the book.
September 22, 2014
Prof. PhD Ovidiu Nicolescu
President Romanian Scientific Management Society
Bucharest, Romania

xiii
About the Editor
OVIDIU NICOLESCU
Professor PhD Ovidiu Nicolescu from Economic University of Bucharest is President of 
Romanian Scientific Management Society, President of National Council of SMEs of 
Romania, the largest Romanian employers confederation, Vice President of European 
Association of Craft, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, Vice President of World 
Association for Small and Medium Enterprises. He has published 43 books as single or main 
author, 507 studies in Romania and other 22 countries and he has implemented in Romania 
6 new university courses. In 1990 he has founded in Romania the first private management-
consultancy company — Manager Institute. His last book co-authored in 2015 is White 
Charter of SMEs from Romania — 13 yearly research report.
LESTER LLOYD-REASON
Professor PhD Lester Lloyd-Reason from Anglia Ruskin University, Lord Ashcroft 
International Business School in Cambridge, UK is Director of the Center for Enterprise 
Development and Research CEDAR. His areas of expertise are Strategic Management, Small 
and Medium-sized Enterprises, Transition Economies, and Arts Management. Professor 
Lester Lloyd-Reason has published 3 books and more than 101 papers in books and reviews 
from 16 countries. He is a member of the European and International Council for Small 
Business, member of the Board of Directors of the Institute of Small Business Affairs. 
During the last 20 years he has been involved in many international activities of OECD, 
ASEAN, APO, WASME, a.s.o.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

Part I
International Management 
and Cultural Diversity

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

3
Chapter 1
The Role of  Large Corporate Boards 
in the Context of  Globalization and  Smart Economy: 
Creating Value for All Stakeholders
Mariana Gheorghe
CEO of OMV PETROM
In the context of globalization and smart economy, 
large corporate boards are very important for the devel-
opment of a company. The chapter aims to analyze the 
way in which a company can advance due to the vision 
of Corporate Boards. The used research methodology 
is the  case study. The case study distinctly presents 
the way in which OMV Petrom managed to deal with 
the new challenges arising from the privatization of the 
company. The analysis is carried forward in three 
dimensions: the complex socio-economic context, 
along with the more demanding stakeholders’ environ-
ment; adopting new technology and innovating; people 
changes and challenges. For the last 10 years, since 
privatization, the company has adapted itself through 
an almost radical and complex process of transforma-
tion and has created new opportunities for all of its 
stakeholders, while facing the challenges of this new 
era: the new economic and social order, both locally as 
well as internationally.
1. Introduction
Our new reality is shaped by three key dimensions 
that put a lot of pressure on all organizations and 
companies:
1.1.  The complex socio-economic context 
and more demanding stakeholders’ 
environment
It is well known that we operate in an increasingly com-
plex socio-economic context and a generally more 
demanding stakeholders’ environment, as we moved 
from a resource based economy to a knowledge based 
economy. Companies worldwide needed to adapt their 
strategies to this changing context and new solutions 
emerged as a result, in order to deal with the new priori-
ties of the corporate world. “Boards of directors perform 
a monitoring and advising role and ensure that manage-
ment is making decisions in a way that is consistent with 
organizational objectives” (Eccles et al., 2012: 7).
The financial crisis in recent years has brought a set 
of special circumstances and conditions that have also 
clearly put a mark on the general context and have 
influenced the behavior of companies and their stake-
holders, with a generally increased concern for impos-
ing stricter financial and operational discipline. 
“Researchers have also found correlations between 
stakeholder performance indicators and conventional 
measures of corporate profitability and growth” (Global 
Corporate Governance Forum, 2009: 9).

4 
M. Gheorghe
As a regional company based in Eastern Europe, 
with presence in Romania, Moldavia, Bulgaria, Serbia, 
and Kazakhstan, OMV Petrom has also had to addition-
ally face the inherent pressure coming from the general 
context of transition economies and the deep reforms 
undertaken to emerge from the socialist command 
based position to the market economy status.
The main stakeholders, all the parties impacting 
and driving our business in addition to the employees 
are: investors, authorities, banks, society, media, cus-
tomers and suppliers, our partner universities, which are 
constantly changing and evolving and we have noticed 
a major shift in their priorities. To give an example: the 
company’s customers were primarily interested in price 
before, but they became more sophisticated, with 
women and young generations being nowadays more of 
a decisive factor in the household purchase decisions, 
constantly seeking, in addition to product quality and 
prices, suppliers that are socially responsible and that 
have a reduced carbon footprint in society.
1.2.  Adopting new technology 
and innovating
“Industries and companies tend to globalize in stages, 
and at each stage, there are different opportunities for, 
and challenges associated with, creating value” 
(Kluyver, 2010: 41). The economic  globalization and 
the development of an economy where knowledge is 
prevalent could not have manifested without the plat-
form offered by technology. What strikes business cor-
porate boards across the world nowadays is, however, 
the extremely rapid and intense pace of the develop-
ment of new technologies and the information revolu-
tion creating a new dimension of organizational 
transparency and communication. “The company pro-
vides timely disclosure of information about its prod-
ucts, services, and activities, thus permitting stakeholders 
to make informed decisions” (Epstein & Rejc-Buhovac, 
2014: 22). The depth of the current levels of under-
standing real-time business operational information, 
empathizing with consumers and building a universe of 
connections with the environment in which the com-
pany operates was never seen before. This constant 
challenge to keep the pace with the rapid change of 
technologies and information creates a different scope 
of work for the business managers operating in the new 
economy.
The prerequisite for the development of the new 
economy and of all the technological and informational 
advancements remains energy — we cannot conceive 
of a modern society without having sustainable and 
affordable energy sources.
1.3. People changes and challenges
“One of the primary duties of every board is to ensure 
that its enterprise is heading in the right direction” 
(Tricker, 2012: 176). The last challenge is represented 
by the people dimension, present in all business 
aspects. The generation Y of our employees is no 
longer satisfied with just having an interesting job, they 
are looking for quick results, rapid evolution, and on-
the-spot reward and feedback. They are technologically 
savvy, more mobile, and constantly seek for a better 
work–life balance. Balancing between the need for 
speed of the generation Y employees and the more 
experienced generation X baby boomers puts additional 
pressure on boards and business executives in planning 
the workforce development by increasing motivational 
actions, and it will go a long way towards determining 
a company’s success in the future.
2. OMV Petrom Case Topics
The chapter will focus next on bringing to attention the 
OMV Petrom transformation  case study, as this year it 
celebrates 10 years since its privatization, along the 
three dimensions identified before: 
(a) Context: The evolution of Petrom with a strong 
impact on the Romanian transition economy;
(b) Integrating innovation and technology (owned and 
through partnerships);
(c) Stakeholders’ engagement and performance culture.
2.1.  Context: The evolution of Petrom 
with a strong impact on the Romanian 
transition economy
Romania is one of the earliest historically attested oil 
providers in the world, as in Romania the first oil 

 
The Role of Large Corporate Boards 
5
exploration was documented 150 years ago, earlier than 
those of US or Russia. So we hold the record for the 
first documented oil production in the world. 
Today, OMV Petrom is an operationally integrated 
oil and gas player, with a market capitalization of 
around EUR 6 bn, ranking as the largest company in 
South Eastern Europe and 16th in Central Eastern 
Europe. The Group turnover is EUR 5.5 bn and the total 
shareholders return based on dividend yield plus share 
price increase stands at 16% in 2013.
OMV Petrom has a complex shareholders struc-
ture: 51% OMV — Austria’s largest listed industrial 
company, an integrated oil and gas corporation with 
international presence; 20% the Romanian state, around 
19% Property Fund — a close end fund managed by 
Franklin Templeton from US, and around 10% 
Bucharest Stock Exchange Free Float.
OMV Petrom represents a challenging business 
proposition and epitomizes a player with strong 
economic and social impact. It is the largest private 
employer in Romania, with over 20,000 direct 
employees and more than 60,000 indirect jobs cre-
ated, at the same time being the main energy sup-
plier accounting for almost 40% of oil, gas, and fuel 
supply and up to 10% of the power generating 
capacity. 
OMV Petrom has a strong impact on the Romanian 
state budget, being the largest contributor, with a sig-
nificant equivalent of 11% contribution to the non-
consolidated annual revenues budget. This also 
represents a big responsibility for us, as the company 
generated and collected taxes amounting to around 
EUR 16 bn cumulated since 2005, the first year after 
the privatization.
OMV Petrom is also the largest investor in Romania, 
with EUR 10 bn cumulated investments over the past 
nine years, as almost 90% of company’s operational 
profit is reinvested each year.
These key performance indicators (KPIs) illustrate 
the successful turnaround of a state company into a 
performing privately owned, competitive company.
How was this transformation possible? Through a 
determined and dynamic change management process 
and a comprehensive risk management approach. As 
Board members of a large corporation, we are accus-
tomed to deal with change and risk daily in our opera-
tions and in our decision-making, particularly in the 
dynamic global and European context mentioned 
earlier. 
To make this turnaround possible, we have man-
aged our corporation through thousands of change 
projects: after privatization in December 2004, we 
identified all the dimensions of the organization which 
were not in line with what the market and the society 
required and with what the industry’s best practices 
were at the time. We have taken all our activities from 
operational processes to corporate functions, identi-
fied status quos and the best practice of the industry in 
each area and then implemented the required change, 
in order to take the organization to that ideal 
position. 
As this continuous effort for change became the 
standard norm, I was afraid, as the chief executive officer 
(CEO), of maybe pushing the organization too hard and 
I felt at times that we almost had a fatigue of change. But 
this is what it takes to turn around a large organization, 
as Petrom was before the privatization, into a very suc-
cessful, competitive, dynamic company that has now 
become a role model for the Romanian economy. 
The main dimensions of our change journey cover 
the areas of operational efficiency, management turna-
round, and corporate governance.
Fig. 1.  The economic situation of the company before and after privatization
Source: Created by the author. 

6 
M. Gheorghe
First, the company concentrated its operations on 
its oil and gas core and divested from large non-core 
businesses, at the same time embracing the latest tech-
nologies, modernizing facilities and processes. 
Concurrently, the health, safety, security, and envi-
ronmental standards were always in its focus and, as a 
result, the performance of these indicators improved 
dramatically over time. Given the concentration on core 
business and improved operational efficiency, ROACE1 
ratio reached 19% in 2013.
But the basic, fundamental change of this com-
pany has been possible because of the management 
turnaround. From the composition of the management 
team, to attracting and developing the right qualities 
and capabilities of the managers, to the management 
systems which we put in place and through the pro-
grams we initiated — all of these measures helped 
build a Performance mind-set in our management 
team and consolidated their commitment to 
excellence.
2.1.1. Corporate governance
The quality of the management was also manifested 
through diligent measures taken for the prevention 
of unethical behavior and improving corporate gov-
ernance in general, adhering to international stand-
ards and best practices and generally increasing 
transparency in order to protect stakeholders’ rights 
and interests, safeguard business value, and manage 
risks. These sustained efforts enabled us to build a 
professional organization based on a long term strat-
egy, best practices in process management, clear 
procedures, and clear decision-making processes, 
translated into a positive work environment and 
responsible external relationships with all company 
stakeholders.
OMV Petrom has a two-tier management system 
since 2007: a Supervisory Board representing key 
shareholders and an Executive Board providing strat-
egy and organizational direction and having overall a 
business administration role.  Audit and Risk 
Committees manage the financials and also the risks of 
1 Return on Average Capital Employed.
the business. Internal rules and procedures and man-
agement systems adhering to the highest industry 
standards ensure an optimal level of transparency and 
business ethics.
One of the most significant shifts in the organiza-
tion was the evolution from a state company mind-set, 
without a long term view, to a company with a long 
term vision and a strategy for the next decade, incor-
porating sustainability and cascaded through KPIs to 
all levels of the organization. OMV Petrom strategy 
includes not only operational and financial business 
objectives, but also integrates sustainability and peo-
ple development goals.
One of the company’s success stories proving the 
benefits achieved by having strong corporate govern-
ance in our organization was recorded in the peak of the 
recent financial crisis. In 2008, Petrom had already 
exhausted the capital advanced at the time of the pri-
vatization and developed an ambitious project portfo-
lio, ready to take the company to the next level of 
development. As the crisis hit, we have seen a collapse 
of our cash flows due to the decline from USD 140 
price per barrel of crude oil to USD 35 per barrel. So, 
although the company faced a major challenge, under 
this changed general business environment, we were 
still able to raise over 1.5 billion in bank financing, due 
to the credibility of the company’s management and its 
strategy. OMV Petrom has been recognized interna-
tionally, as well as nationally, for its corporate govern-
ance standards:
• Best Corporate Governance in Romania (World 
Finance, 2013);
• Most valuable company in Romania (ZF, 
2007–2013);
• Most appreciated company in applying Corporate 
Governance 
(2011) 
— 
Romanian 
Brokers’ 
Association (public’s vote);
• Most convincing and coherent strategy in Romania 
(2010) — Euromoney survey.
2.1.2. Risk management framework
Another management challenge for the company and 
the Board, was to manage complex strategic and 

 
The Role of Large Corporate Boards 
7
operational risks and to develop a framework, pro-
cess, and a reporting function in a company and in a 
country where the concept of risk management did 
not exist before 1989. In order to cope with the vola-
tility and uncertainty of the global and European 
markets, but also to mitigate the business volatility 
factors, the company has spent a lot of efforts in iden-
tifying, assessing, reviewing impact on cash flows 
and mitigating strategic and operational risks. This 
approach has ensured a solid base for our successful 
results.
2.2.  Integrating innovation and 
technology (owned and through 
partnerships)
This is the story of a transformation that has taken 
OMV Petrom, as an organization, 10 years to achieve, 
but this would not have been possible without having 
a very clear focus on technology and innovation. 
The company has built an innovative culture through-
out the organization and an approach where we always 
try to better ourselves and to increase our performance 
compared to the previous year, by continuously improv-
ing technologies, processes, and operations. The com-
pany develops and runs operational excellence and idea 
management programs to increase our efficiency and 
reduce waste in our operations. 
OMV Petrom invests substantially in training and 
developing our people, spending more than EUR 
10 mn annually on the training budget and we also 
develop R&D partnerships with universities to raise 
the skills and capabilities of our staff and of our com-
pany to cope with the challenges of the new economy. 
We now focus on creating the right organizational 
context in order for our people to be able to reach 
their full potential and to have the flexibility to cope 
with change. The company realizes that it can no 
longer predict what set of skills and abilities will be 
required in the next era, everybody knows how vola-
tile, how uncertain the future is, therefore what we 
want is more of a mental readiness of our people to 
cope with the change and adapt to the new realities. 
OMV Petrom integrates innovation opportunities 
also through our strategic partnerships with reputable 
international players: ExxonMobil, Hunt Oil, Repsol, 
Petrofac, PetroSantander, Expert Petroleum, in various 
onshore and offshore projects.
At the core of its operations, the company relies on 
values such as: Professionalism, Partnership, and 
Pioneering, and they represent our invigorated spirit 
and readiness to adapt to change.
Fig. 2.  Innovation and technology within OMV Petrom
Source: Created by the author.

8 
M. Gheorghe
OMV Petrom has a strong track record of integrat-
ing innovation and technology, owned and through 
partnerships:
 World record in shallow horizontal drilling: Suplacu de 
Barcau — mature oil field (NW Romania), on which the 
exploitation began in 1960 and supplies around 10% of 
Petrom’s oil production.
 Latest mature field technologies: steam, polymer, water 
injections;
 A total of 11 field redevelopment projects in development 
phase aimed at maximizing ultimate recovery totaling: EUR 
550 million investments.
 Deep water drilling: first exploration well in Neptun Deep 
successful, following largest 3D seismic program in the 
Romanian Black Sea, 1 billion to be spent before final rein-
vestment decision.
 CCPP Brazi power plant, EUR 530 mn: largest private 
Greenfield power generation project in Romania and the first 
of this size in the last 20 years;
 State-of-the-art, best available technical solutions in the field, 
energy efficient and flexible.
 Petrobrazi refinery modernization: Maximized integration 
value from conversion of Romanian crude only;
 2010–2014 investments of EUR 600 mn.
2.3.  Stakeholders engagement 
and performance culture
In the first years after the privatization, as OMV Petrom 
had embarked on its journey to increase performance, 
the initial focus has been on delivering results against 
stretched financial targets. But that was not enough, 
doing just what was required from a business and finan-
cial perspective does not build the differentiating fac-
tors in a company for the market place and for the 
community. So, in the next phase, the company focused 
on our pool of 1,100 managers, structured on six levels, 
as they constitute the driving engine of the business, 
cornerstone for building a solid organizational DNA 
that can take the company to the next level of 
development. 
The company aimed to grow and develop a strong, 
diverse and sustainable local managerial base, with 
60% of our top and executive levels being represented 
by Romanian managers, but also incorporated gender, 
age, and nationality diversity programs in our 
workforce strategy: 30% of our managers are women, 
although we are an industrial company; 28 nationalities 
work together in our headquarters: Petrom City, each 
bringing their own cultural and professional heritage, 
but together achieving the best results.
The company identified seven levers of interven-
tion, which were structured into change management 
projects, through which the company was able to 
start building the Performance Culture within the 
organization:
(1) Developing a vision and focused strategy and com-
municating 
it 
to 
all 
managers 
and 
the 
organization;
(2) Streamline decision processes;
(3) Communicate successes, as well as learning from 
mistakes;
(4) Make people development objectives as important 
as business objectives;
(5) Performance management based on measurable 
KPIs;
(6) Talent Management programs;
(7) Close the gap between headquarters and territories, 
as our organization has 1,600 working points 
throughout the country.
The next dimension of the company’s stakeholder 
engagement focus was translated in Resourcefulness — 
our concept of sustainability and responsible behavior. 
As an energy company administering natural resources, 
but also financial and human capital, we structure our 
approach to sustainability on three pillars: Eco-
Innovation, Eco-Efficiency, and Skills to Succeed — 
volunteering and local community programs. OMV 
Petrom developed an online platform for the dialogue 
and programs dedicated to support the 340 local com-
munities in which we operate. “Andrei’s Country” is our 
online community, a collection of programs through 
which citizens can concretely redesign the life of their 
community through:
(1) Ideas from Andrei’s Country — projects 
competition;
(2) Andrei’s School — national yearly schools pro-
gram and competition, including Andrei’s Camp 
for the winning teams;

 
The Role of Large Corporate Boards 
9
(3) Made in Andrei’s Country — the first social busi-
ness entrepreneurship program which attracted 500 
project proposals, trained social entrepreneurs to 
build and implement business plans, and financed 
10 of those projects.
More than EUR 5 mn overall financing has been 
granted in the four years of activity at this platform, 
over 2,500 projects were submitted and over 6,300 vol-
unteers participated in community projects. What was 
extremely important to us were the projects with 
schools and students: over 25,000 pupils and 1,700 
teachers learned about civic involvement, entrepreneur-
ship, project management, and even business 
communication.
These results not only give the company the com-
fort to claim a license to operate in the communities 
where we work, but also an opportunity for Romania to 
convert into a high performing economy through the 
development of entrepreneurship, small businesses, and 
local communities. OMV Petrom has received many 
prizes in recognition of its efforts for constantly devel-
oping its people but also mobilizing and bringing along 
other stakeholders and communities and raising the 
competitiveness of our economy:
• Best online community in Europe — European 
Digital Awards, Berlin 2013;
• Best volunteer program — PR Daily’s Corporate 
Social Responsibility Awards, USA 2013;
• Honorable mention for “Stakeholder engagement” — 
PR News CSR Awards, USA 2014.
3. Conclusions
It is obvious that we operate in an increasingly complex 
socio-economic context in which  globalization condi-
tions affect the activity of any company, fact that 
implies more and more knowledge of and alignment 
with the rules applicable at a global level. Basically, in 
order to become and remain competitive, it is required 
to take more and more into consideration the global 
climate in which we carry out our activities, without 
which we are doomed to self-isolation and low perfor-
mance. Another fact worth mentioning is that the eco-
nomic and financial crisis of the recent years has had a 
major impact over the developmental strategies of any 
company, especially over a company with a significant 
regional role like OMV Petrom. 
It is inconceivable to promote a sustainable devel-
opment strategy without considering the dialogue with 
the company’s stakeholders which, depending on the 
specificity of business, are more or less complex. 
Promoting a knowledge-based economy requires 
actions that call for high organizational transparency 
and continuous dialogue with stakeholders, these being 
also dependent on the environment in which a company 
conducts its activity.  
All these elements enforce any company to pro-
mote the principles of a sustainable development, and 
to permanently take into consideration its decisional 
process on the environment, the social, and the eco-
nomic factors. 
The development of any company is only viable if 
it uses the most precious resource it has, the human 
resource, especially by increasing the staff motivational 
activities. The focused  case study of OMV Petrom 
reveals a number of lessons to be learned when it comes 
to the transformations it suffered, given the fact that it 
functioned in a transition economy. Therefore, in order 
to lead the transformation to a good direction, some 
actions were required, as follows:
— Identification of the organizational issues that 
were not aligned with market mechanisms 
requirements;
— Evaluation, in order to find out the best interna-
tional industry practices, both at operational and at 
corporate functions level and establish the most 
appropriate actions and changes for implementing 
them;
— Focusing on operational efficiency, management, 
and corporate governance, as areas that suffered 
major changes, in order to support building a 
Performance mind-set in our management team 
and consolidate their commitment to excellence; 
— Adopting measures to ensure the promotion of the 
principles and specific Business Ethics rules and to 
improve the corporate governance in general, 
according to international standards. Thus, this led 
to the achievement of a company based on a long 
term strategy, on the best management practices, on 

10 
M. Gheorghe
clear procedures and mechanisms in order to adopt 
efficient and performance-oriented decisions;
— Assuring the transparency of implemented pro-
cesses and their adequate communication, which 
led to national and international recognition of 
OMV Petrom for its corporate governance 
standards;
— Adopting a management and risk mitigation frame-
work both at operational and strategic level, so that 
this approach allows the company to obtain suc-
cessful results; 
— Elaborating and implementing a well-defined pro-
gram which allows innovation and modernization 
at organizational level. For this purpose, OMV 
Petrom invested significant amounts for training 
and developing its own employees, as well as 
through its strategic partnerships with reputable 
international players in various onshore and off-
shore projects;
— Constantly promoting a change in management 
aspects, in order to enable the company to build the 
Performance Culture within the organization;
— Permanently improving the dialogue with the com-
munities in which the company operates, thus pro-
moting the concept of a sustainable and responsible 
conduct. This way, the company became known 
and appreciated for the projects it promotes in rela-
tion to communities, in various areas such as: edu-
cation, health, social business programs, and 
developing entrepreneurship, small businesses at 
local communities’ level.
For final conclusions, it is safe to say one of the 
main lessons learnt from transforming a large corpora-
tion like OMV Petrom and all the work it has taken the 
company over the last 10 years is that  large Corporate 
Boards need to focus towards managing more com-
plex strategic risks, be more technologically wise, and 
focus more on its people and stakeholders’ matters to 
adequately meet the challenges of the current markets 
and socio-economic and environmental changes.
At the same time, large organizations have a long 
term vocation and responsibility, having a strong 
impact on the social-economic indicators (such as eco-
nomic growth, state budget contributions, jobs’ crea-
tion, role models in the business environment, etc.). In 
addition, the corporate boards in Eastern Europe also 
have a role to bring their contribution to close the gap 
with the West and assist in the transformation of 
economies.
Studies show that those who take an active role in 
people development and in their communities tend to 
deliver higher capital returns. Large corporations are 
well placed to fulfill this role: they have significant 
research and innovation capabilities, a deep capacity to 
scale and mobilize, and a growing understanding of 
what it takes to build alliances across multiple 
stakeholders.
References
Clarke, T. & Rama, M. (2008), Fundamentals of Corporate 
Governance, London: Sage Publications.
Eccles, R., Ioannou, I., & Serafeim, G. (2012), The Impact of 
Corporate Sustainability on Organizational Processes 
and Performance, Cambridge: National Bureau of 
Economic Research Working Paper Series.
Global Corporate Governance Forum (2009), Stakeholder 
Engagement and the Board: Integrating Best Governance 
Practices, Washington: Focus 8.
Kluyver, C. (2010), Fundamentals of Global Strategy. 
A Business Model Approach, New York: Business Expert 
Press.
Rodriguez-Melo, A. & Mansouri, A. (2011), Stakeholder 
Engagement: Defining Strategic Advantage for 
Sustainable Construction, Business Strategy and the 
Environment.

11
Chapter 2
New Management Tendencies and Their Impact 
on the Form of Capitalism
Maria Negreponti-Delivanis
Docteur ès Sciences Economiques de la Sorbonne 
University of Macedonia
Académie des Sciences de la Roumanie
Delivanis’ Foundation
The chapter presents a new kind of hybrid company, 
which appeared and developed rapidly after 1980 and 
came to be known under the characteristic name of 
“distorporation”. The main difference between this new 
form of companies and the traditional ones with limited 
liability is the treatment of the shareholders who are 
losing their old privileges. These privileges are assured 
only for a few among them, called  oligarchs. But the 
most important change concerning the management of 
this new kind of companies is the fact that they do not 
keep any profit for investment, but distribute the whole 
to a few shareholders. As the profits are no longer chan-
neled towards investment, the distorporation companies 
are trying to cover the need of financing thanks to their 
presence on the Stock Exchange and no longer thanks 
to the saving of small savers. No problem was encoun-
tered during the high phase of economic cycle, but the 
same was not true during recession. It is certainly clear 
that this new management is just trying to avoid taxes 
and it was very successful until now. However, the dis-
torporation has negative results as it intensifies inequal-
ities which have reached unacceptable levels 
everywhere, thus destabilizing modern economies, 
encouraging recession because of insufficient demand, 
weakening the welfare state, and disrupting social 
cohesion. The higher profits assured by those compa-
nies and the almost complete avoidance of taxation, 
lead to a rapid increase of their number as the political 
parties of both sides, republican and democratic show 
no interest in distorporation businesses.
1. Introduction
Simultaneously with the prevalence of  globalization in 
the 1980s, mainly due to its combination with a fanati-
cal form of  neo-liberalism, which has been character-
ized by the author as “conspiratorial”, a new form of 
business emerged in the US. It is a type of business 
known as distorporation, or hybrid enterprise, because 
of its peculiar structure but mainly, because of its 
unprecedented type of management. This kind of busi-
ness, which developed rapidly after 1980, mainly in 
America, includes elements of traditional enterprises, 
such as the limited liability company, combined with 
important new additions, however, which are responsi-
ble for its generic title of distorporation. The spectacu-
lar growth of these firms since, which marginalized the 
presence and number of traditional companies with 

12 
M. Negreponti-Delivanis
limited liability (MLP = master limited partnership), is 
the by-product of basic beliefs and extreme neo-liberal 
views. More specifically:
 Taxation limits the freedom of individuals, with the 
consequence that institutions and measures aiming 
at reducing it or even eliminating it are favored.
 The state is generally vicious and ineffective, con-
trary to the private sector, and therefore should refrain 
from any form of intervention in the economy.
 Savage capitalism,1 in spite of leading to disparities 
of uncontrollable extent and intensity, is neverthe-
less valuable for the US, because it ensures the con-
duct of innovations, which does not remain within 
the borders of America, but spreads across the globe.
These distorporations, which as we shall see, are 
closely related to tax havens and perhaps even to the 
new digital currency Bitcoin,2 met the indifference of 
most politicians of both right and left wing parties. This 
lack of criticism as to the operation of distorporations, 
as well as to their significant macroeconomic implica-
tions, leaves the way open to their undoubtedly impres-
sive expansion, which thus manages to essentially 
remain in the shade. In seeking possible interpretations 
of this political lack of involvement with distorpora-
tions, one could argue that their successful, up to now 
attempts to intertwine themselves with the respective 
governments, and conceal their objectives, contribute to 
leaving them untouched for the time being. Also, the 
fact that any sort of discussion about this business is 
very recent, and is possibly linked to the public debt 
problem which is obviously becoming worse due to the 
fact that distorporations are able to evade taxes.
I will structure my chapter around two main parts. 
In the first part, I will try to highlight the key features, 
particularly those differentiating distorporations from 
traditional enterprises. The second part of my chapter 
will attempt to identify the changes which distorpora-
tions are expected to conduct — or have already con-
ducted — as to the mode of income and wealth 
distribution and the general form of capitalism now 
prevailing. 
1 Edsall (2013).
2 Tabuchi (2014).
2.  The Characteristics and Aspirations 
of Distorporations
The choice of the combination of characteristics, and 
the constant addition of new ones, if applicable, is 
directly linked to their aspirations, first and foremost of 
which is total  tax evasion. Zero taxation, if possible. It 
is therefore not too extreme to argue that distorpora-
tions are only marginally legitimate and that their exist-
ence is ensured only through the allocation of significant 
monetary sums to lawyers, accountants, and even poli-
ticians, in an attempt to circumvent the law. The activi-
ties of these enterprises, encouraging and somehow 
legitimizing speculation are generally justified under 
well-known arguments such as the state regulation of 
businesses is time-consuming, bureaucratic, and 
exhaustive, and even that a high corporate tax discour-
ages entrepreneurship.
Let us now briefly look at the distinguishing fea-
tures of these distorporations:3
 I would first like to mention that the defining fea-
ture and what distinguishes them from traditional 
enterprises is the total downgrading of the impor-
tance of shareholders in the management and 
decision-making of these new businesses. Indeed, 
in contrast to traditional enterprises, shareholders 
do not participate or participate minimally in the 
management, they have no voice, their demands are 
not met in general, their opinion is not taken into 
account, and they receive limited dividends.
 The reduction of the importance of shareholders is 
mainly due to the different structure of distorpora-
tions, which in spite of maintaining the traditional 
element of limited liability partnership, neverthe-
less participate in the stock market. Their involve-
ment in the stock market ensures, under certain 
competitive conditions, the ability to accumulate 
large investment funds. Thus, investment on the 
3 An important point to mention is that, due to the fact that the 
operation of distorporations remains in the shadows, there is no 
relevant literature. In fact, only one relevant article has been pub-
lished citing the various views of a number of researchers on the 
subject, under the title of: ‘Rise of the Distorporation’ (2013), The 
Economist (October 26).

 
New Management Tendencies 
13
part of distorporations is no longer dependent on 
small scale investors.
 Another, particularly important feature of distorpo-
rations is that they do not accumulate profits in 
order to invest them, but on the contrary, annually 
distribute the totality of their profits to their part-
ners — not to all of them, but to a select few who 
constitute the “oligarchy”. In this case, dividends 
are double or triple the size of the market average, 
they are not subject to regulations and controls and 
most importantly, are not subject to taxes. Tax 
avoidance is generally achieved, by representing 
dividends not as profits but as a return on capital.
The management of distorporations is almost 
omnipotent and has significantly more freedom of 
action in relation to traditional limited liability compa-
nies. But it would be wrong to assume that the manage-
ment of these new businesses is totally unregulated. 
This is due to the fact that, as long as distorporations 
are under the obligation of distributing all of their prof-
its, they are under the constant need of raising new 
funds for investment. These funds are the product of the 
distorporation’s shares in the stock market and their 
price depends on what those doing businesses think of 
its performance. The goal is obviously raising the high-
est possible funds from the stock market, in relation to 
the dividends paid. As an example, it is estimated that 
in 2012, this new form of business paid out 10% of total 
dividends, but raised approximately 30% of equity in 
the stock market.4
Their ability to raise money from the stock market 
relies on the fact that these companies function as a 
kind of fund or banks, capable of attracting substantial 
amounts even when representing small firms. And 
because they are willing to take high risks, which 
existing regulations prevent banks from taking, they 
fulfill the desires of Americans and not only, as to the 
achievement of high returns. It is obvious that all these 
hybrid enterprises exhibit varying degrees of risk and 
returns. Some promise a minimum return, up to 19% 
in many cases. Hi-Crush f.i. promised a minimum 
payout of 11%, which eventually exceeded 28%. 
4 Extract from ‘Hot New Wall Street Investment’, Investment 
Management Review, January 2013.
Other similar businesses do not promise specific 
returns, but in some cases, such as the groups of Acon 
Investments and TPG Capital LLC, these may shoot 
up to 45%, or in other cases, drop below 13%. In spite 
of the differences inevitably existing among these 
companies, their return is on average 6%, i.e., three 
times higher than the corresponding market average 
which does not exceed 2%. The high returns of hybrid 
cooperatives represent the main reason why they are 
high in the preference of investors. Obviously, the 
danger lurking for these hybrid businesses is the dif-
ficulty of securing funds, especially apparent in peri-
ods of economic recession.
The expansion of distorporations has indeed been 
spectacular since 1980 and was at the expense of tradi-
tional limited liability corporations. It is estimated that 
their total value already exceeds USD 1 trn, while they 
represent 9% of companies listed in the stock exchange. 
Also, based on estimates — since, due to the complex 
structure of these businesses, it is quite hard to acquire 
official data on them — distorporations already repre-
sent 2/3 of new businesses5 in the US. An additional 
indication of the rising importance of distorporations is 
the dramatic decline of traditional businesses, from 
7,306 recorded in 1997 to only 1,3696 today, precisely 
because of the rapid shift to new, non-traditional forms 
of business. According to other estimates,7 the percent-
age of distorporations represents 23% of the total com-
panies listed and 63% of total profits. The collective 
market-capitalization of MLPs now exceeds that of 
Exxon Mobil, the most highly valued energy company 
on the New York Stock Exchange.
The sectors, mainly incorporating this type of dis-
torporations are primarily capital-intensive industries 
such as energy, which even during the great crisis of 
2007 and up to now, managed to attract enormous 
funds. Another industry within which these new types 
of business have developed is real estate. The facilities 
of Walmart and New York Times, for example, belong 
to Real Estate Investment Funds.8
5 According to estimates by Professor Rodney Chrisman, Liberty 
University School of Law.
6 Based on the Vanguard index.
7 Inland Revenue Service.
8 The Economist, (October 26, 2013), op cit.

14 
M. Negreponti-Delivanis
I believe that a partial conclusion of the first part of 
my chapter should be the realization of an essentially 
unpleasant truth concerning these new types of busi-
ness. By this, I mean the realization that their existence 
is ensured through continuous efforts to circumvent the 
laws and rules that govern traditional businesses. 
Distorporations therefore, resort to an effort to conceal 
the details of their operation and their overall status 
through a number of complex and hard to understand 
details, making reporting them for illegal practices 
almost impossible. It is clear that, under these circum-
stances, distorporations operating on the margin 
between what is considered legitimate and illegitimate 
manage to remain afloat only thanks to their links with 
members of the respective governments, who take upon 
themselves to circumstantially regulate the legal frame-
work of their operation.
3.  The Effects of Distorporations 
on the Form of Capitalism
These major changes in the field of American business9 
and not only, as long as the US is the leading economy 
in the international arena and as such leads the way of 
change across the globe, result into numerous and com-
plex consequences throughout the macroeconomic 
spectrum of individual national economies. In particu-
lar, it would be interesting to investigate the possible 
changes in the fields of income distribution,  tax eva-
sion, and the mutations which the form of capitalism 
itself seems to undergo.
3.1. Distribution of income and wealth
Following the establishment of  globalization on earth, 
hand in hand with a fanatic form of  neo-liberalism, 
there was a rapid deterioration of the mode of income 
distribution, with unprecedented inequalities of unim-
aginable scale. And while the neo-liberals have been 
trying to ease these sad developments through the 
endearing, but due to several reasons of unfounded 
argument that “what is important is the increase of 
income, not its distribution,”10 the alarm is already 
9 As briefly outlined in part I.
10 Krugman (2013).
ringing, even from where least expected, such as the 
annual Davos summit of 2013.11 This is because the 
realization is dawning that the adverse effects of  inequal-
ity are not confined to the social realm, but also pose a 
risk to the smooth functioning of the economy when they 
rise past a critical threshold. And, furthermore, these 
disparities exacerbate the problem of unemployment and 
underemployment, which thus appears even more threat-
ening for the future, given the fact that according to 
estimates, 230 million staff posts in the US — and not 
only — representing an income of approximately USD 9 
trillion, are expected to mutate downward, thus decimat-
ing the middle class.12 The following overwhelming data 
show that this limit has long since been surpassed. These 
may be expressed through two essentially different 
approaches. The first is related to personal income distri-
bution whose inequalities are measured by the well-
known Gini indicators, and range from 0–1, while the 
second is related to the Cobb–Douglas function, repre-
senting the national income shares of labor and capital.
(a) Personal income distribution has witnessed crush-
ing developments after the imposition of globaliza-
tion and neo-liberalism, with 1% of the wealthiest 
people on earth controlling 45% of global wealth 
and 50% of the poorest people on earth having to 
share 1% of global wealth. Moreover, during the 
present crisis, the richest 1% of the world popula-
tion has increased its average income by 31.4%. It 
is predicted that the rate of control of the global 
elite will grow further after the crisis. Specifically, 
according to a relevant survey, global wealth will 
grow at an annual rate equal to 4.8% over the next 
five years.13 Another aspect of these uncontrollable 
disparities is expressed in the realization that the 
400 wealthiest Americans possess greater wealth 
than the poorest, amounting to USD 150 mn. The 
15% representing the poorest population segment, 
approximately 46 million people, belong to house-
holds earning less than USD 22,050 a year. In 2012, 
global wealth amounted to USD 135 trn. Around 
11 L’édition 2014 du World Economic Forum de Davos débute cette 
semaine. Lauener (2013).
12 Foroohar (2014). 
13 Boston Consulting Group.

 
New Management Tendencies 
15
1% of the wealthiest segment of the global popula-
tion controls USD 52.8 trillion of this sum. 
Furthermore, the 100 richest people in the world 
increased their wealth by USD 212 billion in 2012. 
This unchecked increase in the wealth of the world’s 
oligarchy, which is obviously reflected in the bank-
ruptcy and impoverishment of large socio-economic 
groups, originates — as might be expected — 
mainly in the price rise of shares in the telecommu-
nications sector. The assets of these 100 tycoons are 
estimated at USD 1.9 trillion. Before we leave the 
subject of these incredible disparities, let us also 
mention the following: on a global level, it has been 
estimated that 29 million people possess a wealth 
greater than USD 1 mn and they represent 0.6% of 
the world population. The total fortune of these few 
is therefore estimated at USD 87.5 trillion. Let us 
now consider those who could be defined as the 
sum of the wealthy of the world, i.e., those with 
assets between USD 100,000 and USD 1 mn. They 
are estimated to represent 7.5% of the world’s adult 
population and to own 43.1% of global wealth. If 
we now continue adding the wealthy and million-
aires, we will reach the really creepy conclusion 
according to which 8.1% of the world population 
dominates 82.4% of global wealth, while the 
remaining 92% of the world population is obliged to 
survive and be content with 18% of global wealth. 
Going further down, i.e., to the poor, who consist of 
more than 3 billion or 69.3% of the total adult popu-
lation, with a fortune of USD 10,000, we are led to 
the horrifying conclusion that they must survive on 
just 3.3% of global wealth.14 The culmination of 
these disparities, condemned on all sides, has seri-
ous adverse effects on the global economy, as I will 
mention in the following paragraphs. Also, the con-
tribution of distorporations in creating these dispari-
ties is undeniable and constantly rising. The 
distortions of these businesses, which assure returns 
of up to 50%, do not affect all the partners, but only 
a small group of select few who contribute to the 
excessive concentration of wealth in very small 
numbers. With the rapid pace at which distorpora-
tions displace traditional corporations, it should be 
14 Bloomberg and Crédit Suisse.
considered certain that their influence will continue 
growing in the future.
(b) The shares of labor and capital in national income, as 
expressed in the Cobb–Douglas function were con-
sidered as stable and non-changing up to 1980s, or 
else, up to the emergence of  globalization and the 
developments that accompanied it. However, the sub-
stitution of the primary aim of economic science, 
which was the welfare of the individual, for an 
aggressive form of competitiveness, completely over-
turned the foundations of the Cobb–Douglas func-
tion, especially the assumption concerning the 
stability of the shares of the two major production 
factors — labor and capital — in national income. 
Thus, the share of labor in global GDP, as well as in 
the GDP of individual national economies has 
declined dramatically in favor of capital, especially 
financial capital. Based on International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) estimates,15 the share of wages in the 
member countries of the G7 fell by 5.8% in the period 
1983 to 2006, and more specifically by 8.8% in the 
member states of the EU,16 by 9.3 points in France 
and 1317 points in Greece, respectively. In 51 of the 73 
countries for which statistical data were available, the 
share of wages has been declining over the last 20 
years. The largest reduction in this share is witnessed 
in Latin America and the Caribbean (−13 points), fol-
lowed by Asia and the Pacific (−10 points), while in 
the case of advanced economies this same study con-
cludes that the reduction amounts to an average of 9 
points. Rising unemployment which as I have been 
arguing for a long time18 is quite deliberate, undoubt-
edly contributes significantly to this decline.
3.2.  Tax evasion
Through the emergence, but especially with the dra-
matic growth of distorporations in the USA — and not 
only — are two very different categories of companies 
created: those that pay the legally prescribed corporate 
taxes, and those who systematically evade them. It is 
15 March 2008.
16 Commission Européenne.
17 1995–2004, INE-Labor Institute ΓΣΕΕ-ΑΔΕΔΥ.
18 Negreponti-Delivanis (1995). 

16 
M. Negreponti-Delivanis
clear that the very essence of competition is thus 
altered, both between firms operating within the same 
national market, but also internationally. Those not bur-
dened with taxes are able to secure special privileges 
over traditional companies and compete unfairly at the 
expense of the latter. Their coexistence is only possible 
because of the fact that, for the time being, they are 
largely operating in different business areas. 
Furthermore, the tolerance of the American government 
towards distorporations can only be explained on the 
basis of the inherent dislike of neo-liberal views to the 
obligation of paying taxes. It can effortlessly be assumed 
that with the predominance of conservatives across the 
globe, minimal taxation would have prevailed, in the 
absence of the relentless problem of public debt.
 Tax evasion on the part of distorporations, espe-
cially as the latter are rapidly replacing traditional com-
panies, risks having — and may already have — a very 
negative impact on the operation and sustainability of 
the welfare state. It is an undeniable fact that the latter 
is being challenged and restricted on all sides, not just 
in the US, where it never adequately developed, in con-
trast to Europe, where capitalism with a human face 
was something to make it rightfully proud of.
The very probable prevalence of distorporations in 
the future — when and if the debt problem has been suc-
cessfully addressed — will most likely result in the end of 
the welfare state and the return to Middle Ages societies.
3.3. The  mutation of capitalism
Capitalism is undoubtedly undergoing dramatic changes 
in the last few decades, mainly under the influence of 
unprecedented measures which individual national gov-
ernments consider — rightly or wrongly — that they are 
forced to impose in order to deal with the debt problem. 
To these we shall now have to add all those resulting from 
the gradual prevalence of distorporations, which we shall 
address in this section. First, the operation mode of distor-
porations and the special privileges they enjoy hinders 
accessibility to them, since this is only possible for the 
select few. However, the provision of no barriers to entry 
and exit of firms in the industry, is a sine qua non condi-
tion of free competition, which in turn is recognized as a 
cornerstone of capitalism and the free market. An oligar-
chic capitalism is thus established, which is not justified 
on the basis of higher qualifications on the part of the 
 oligarchs, but rather on privileges secured largely thanks 
to their complex interrelations. Please note that the oli-
garchs of distorporations are not related to the respective 
oligarchs in Herodotus, who were tolerated because they 
were recognized as the best of all.19 Another element of 
capitalist differentiation resulting from distorporations is 
the non-financing of corporations through profits, and the 
need to raise investment funds in the stock exchange. 
Numerous questions naturally arise such as where these 
profits are channeled, as long as they are not re-invested 
but paid out to the select few, as well as what are the con-
sequences of raising extra funds in the stock market. The 
profits of distorporations thus acquire a speculative origin 
and non-productive disposal, as long as they are not chan-
neled into productive uses but, most probably towards 
hoarding or tax havens. At the same time however, prob-
ably because of the network of complex interrelations in 
which they operate, distorporations manage to acquire 
additional investment funds, taking them away from other 
alternative uses, and thus, necessarily limiting the inten-
sity of potential economic activity.
4. Conclusions
Opponents of state intervention in the economy argue 
that the creation and rapid growth of distorporations 
may have positive effects on the economy such as allow-
ing capital to move where yields are higher, instead of 
remaining inactive in the form of retained earnings, as 
in the case of traditional businesses. This feature appears 
as the most attractive of all those defining the American 
model and enabling it to be productive and innovative. 
However, the extensive interplay between business and 
government in question, which seems to form the foun-
dations of the distorporate system, results in far-reach-
ing phenomena of corruption, which are formalized and 
explain many of the problems of modern economies. 
Moreover, distorporations intensify inequalities which 
have reached unacceptable levels everywhere, and 
which destabilize modern economies, are at the root of 
the second Great Depression, as in that of 1929,20 
encourage recession because of insufficient demand, 
19 Kemp (2011).
20 Negreponti-Delivanis (2008).

 
New Management Tendencies 
17
weaken the welfare state, and disrupt social cohesion. 
Any weak and uncertain positive consequences of dis-
torporations however, are only visible when addressed 
in a fragmentary manner and not as developments of the 
economy as a whole, which is being robbed of the pub-
lic sector. No type of economy however can function in 
a fair way if deprived of the cooperation and comple-
mentarities between private and public sector.
References
Edsall, T. B. (2013), Why can’t America be Sweden opiniator, 
19/5 (based on a paper by Daron Acemoglu “We cannot 
all be like the Nordics,” declaring, in a 2012 “Choosing 
Your Own Capitalism in a Globalized World”.
Foroohar, R. (2014), Time to talk about I World-Inequality 
isn’t just a social issue-it’s putting the future of the world 
economy in peril, Time 10/2.
Kemp, H. (2011), L’Oligarchie ça Suffit, Vive l’Oligarchie, 
p. 46, Paris: Seuil. 
Krugman, P. (2013), Why inequality matters, International 
New York Times (December 17).
Lauener, P. (2013), La question des inégalités sera au cœur 
du prochain Forum économique mondial de Davos qui 
se déroule du 22 au 25 janvier, Reuters.
Negreponti-Delivanis, M. (1995), Chômage-Un Faux 
Problème, Thessaloniki: Editions Sakkoulas (in Greek). 
Negreponti-Delivanis, M. (2002), Globalisation Conspiratrice, 
Paris: L’Harmattan (in Greek), and Mondializarea 
Conspiratoare, Bucurest: Editura Eficient (in Romanian). 
Negreponti-Delivanis, M. (2008), The Lethal Crisis, F. Delivanis 
and Livanis (eds.) (in Greek), also electronic publication 
in Lulu.
Tabuchi, H. (2014), Collapse of Bitcoin exchange brings 
both hope and caution, International New York Times 
(February 27).

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

19
Chapter 3
Trends and Developments of  Diversity Management 
at the Global Level
Stegăroiu Ion, Mubeen Ştefania and Istrate Ciprian
Valahia University of Targoviste
Lile Ramona
“Aurel Vlaicu” University of Arad
Diversity management has become a necessity in this 
era of knowledge. This chapter attempts to capture 
which are the global developments in this area. We will 
highlight the changes taking place in an organization 
from the perspective of several reasons, namely: 
respecting the law, ethics, the need for proximity to 
consumer (client), the need to create a climate of inno-
vation and  creativity in organizations, the need of 
change, not least the organizational performance. All 
these aspects will be analyzed from the perspective of 
 2020 strategy.
1. Introduction
The report “Trends and Developments of Diversity 
Management at the Global Level” is the point of view, 
intentionally speaking, of a research team from the 
Centre for Applied Scientific Research in the Field of 
Management and Marketing” (CASRMM) — “Valahia” 
University of Targoviste that has proposed to itself to 
make a more extensive research referring to the dimen-
sion, diversity of human resource management. It has 
been identified a causal relationship between diversity 
and organizational performance.
The report outlines the structure of the scientific 
approach:
 A — presentation of the European context of 
achieving the scientific approach;
 B — identification of the main categories of diver-
sity and the way how the integration of personnel is 
made in an organization;
 C — determine the impact of diversity on human 
resource management by emphasizing its strategic 
dimension: recognizing diversity and cultural 
dimension (universal values and local values);
 D — framing priority directions of action from the 
perspective of social responsibility of the organiza-
tion and establishing the strategies of diversity 
management.
2. Research Methodology
The scientific approach is conducted in the context of 
the 2020 Strategy, in the idea that we want to make a 
comparison between how the diversity is perceived in 
Romania and most of the other European Union (EU) 
member states.

20 
S. Ion et al.
The study will identify the contribution of organi-
zations to create a smart, sustainable, and inclusive 
growth. The objective is to obtain a high level of labor 
employment, productivity, and social cohesion.
Research method: sociological survey based on 
questionnaire; the analysis based on scores studied 
population: 
 67 superior managers and 904 middle managers
 Sample size — 971.
 Number of organizations — 25 multinational firms 
from Region 3 South-Muntenia.
 Epistemological positioning: positivist current, 
constructivist current.
Achieving the aimed scientific approach involves 
the dichotomy (exploration and test), to justify the steps 
that have to be taken in the reasoning that must be 
adopted:
— The first one, of inductive type and/or abductive. 
Inductive, in this case, refers to a circumstantial 
analysis, that means an analysis through which are 
identified and observed the facts from the environ-
ment under review. The exploration of the complex 
context occurs, setting as objective the proposal of 
new valid and strong theoretical conceptualizations, 
developed in a rigorous way (Thiétart, 2007: 61). 
They speak about an approach in four directions: 
• From particular to general;
• From facts to law;
• From the effect to the cause;
• From consequence to principles.
— The second one, of abductive type, that allows the 
researcher in management, using the analogy or 
metaphor, to form a judgement based on probable 
inference that establishes similarities between facts 
and processes that lead to the formulation of gener-
alizations in the efforts of finding optimal solutions 
for achieving some objectives (Delattre & Thellier, 
1979). Abduction is the making of observations on 
circumstances that agree to test the working hypoth-
eses and making the actual scientific research. 
(König, 1993: 7). In order to raise the qualitative 
level of the research, the use of the metaphor 
becomes, even, a necessity. This approach consists 
in describing a fact or phenomenon in the terms of 
another, highlighting the similarities and differ-
ences that will be the basis of some relevant conclu-
sions. The use of the metaphor in management 
science allows the analysis of the organization in all 
its complexity through the decoding of all its com-
ponents. The metaphor is seen as an effective tool 
raised at the level of research device: a machine, a 
body, a brain, and a culture (Morgan, 1990).
The aim is to achieve a scientific complementarity, 
the synthesis being presented as in Fig. 1.
3. Results and Discussions
3.1.  Identiﬁ cation of main diversity 
categories
In an increasingly globalized world and in an expand-
ing era of knowledge getting organizational perfor-
mance is part of quite a difficult approach for an 
enterprise. The questions we ask ourselves are: What 
do we have to do in order to perform?, what are the fac-
tors that must be taken into account? In this sense the 
report presents, actually a scenario that has set itself as 
objective of the approach of getting organizational per-
formance from the perspective of perceiving diversity 
by the employees of an organization.
Fig. 1.  Ways of judgement and scientific knowledge
Source: Chalmars (2007).
Universal laws and theories 
Inductive 
logic 
Deductive 
logic  
Conceptualizations 
(hypotheses, models, 
theories)
Abductive 
approach 
Hypothetical-
deductive approach 
Facts established through 
observations  
Explications and 
predictions 

 
Trends and Developments of Diversity Management at the Global Level  
21
Thus, the main categories of diversity have been 
identified: diversity of ages; diversity of ethnic origins; 
diversity of health; religious diversity; diversity of sex-
ual orientations; diversity of formal levels; diversity of 
clients; diversity of involved parties; diversity of jobs.
By diversity we understand what distinguishes one 
individual from another, one community from another, 
which means the differences of identity such as: age, 
sex, ethnicity, health status, education, and religion, etc.
The concept of diversity, from the point of view of 
managerial practice, is associated with the concept of 
integration which reflects the approach of implementa-
tion of diversity and the approach of getting organiza-
tional performance. This means creating a sense of value, 
respect, and commitment that represent the content of 
valorization, respect, commitment (VRC) paradigm.
3.2.  The impact of diversity on human 
resource management
The impact of diversity on human resource manage-
ment is approached from a double perspective:
 Recognizing diversity as experiments of solidarity, 
as an argument of equality, and freedom in an 
organization.
 Of the cultural dimension of diversity by identifying 
universal values (human rights) and local values 
shared by members of the organization (trust, recogni-
tion, self-esteem, social integration, reciprocity, etc.).
The impact of diversity on human resource man-
agement means respecting, in the organization, some 
principles such as:
 The principle of mutualism;
 The principle of collaboration between all the 
employees;
 The principle of listening to the employees.
The assessment of the impact of diversity on man-
agement is materialized in the following priority actions 
that can be undertaken in the organization:
 Elaborating a charter of diversity;
 Elaborating diversity politics;
 Insuring an organizational environment favorable 
to the development of work under mutual respect 
conditions.
3.3.  Classiﬁ cation of the priority directions 
of action from the perspective of social 
responsibility of the organization
Classification of the priority directions of action from 
the perspective of social responsibility of the organiza-
tion becomes a necessity for establishing the strategies 
of improving the management of diversity in an organ-
ization. The achievement of this objective is based on 
the fundamental question: Why the management of 
diversity? The answer for this question is rooted in the 
changes that took place in contemporary society, that 
means what it is today and where we are going in 
terms of an uncertain future for the safety of individu-
als. The following aspects will be taken into 
consideration:
 The demographic and composition changes of 
labor market with impact on the organization;
 The changes in the structure of society and in fam-
ily structures. In Romania there is a latent demo-
graphic crisis;
 The changes in the assembly of the needs, desires 
and expectations of the people, and the implica-
tions in the organizational behavior.
Developing a strategy to improve the management 
of diversity means knowing how it should be promoted 
from the perspective of several aspects:
 Of the variety of behaviors in an organization that, 
many times, leads to differentiation and induces a 
specific manner of valuation of all involved 
parties;
 Of practicing a flexible management by the organiza-
tion that must keep awake the feeling of integration 
and motivation of the employees within an organiza-
tion from the perspective of optimal balance between 
their interests and the interests of the organization;
 Of the organizational culture, by promoting these 
values shared by all of them, values that generate 
innovation and  creativity;

22 
S. Ion et al.
 Of the professional development through promot-
ing efficient and competent policies of personnel 
by the organization.
All these issues will be the four major themes of 
achieving the scientific approach proposed.
Another issue is the wage in terms of expression 
“from equal to equity pay” and has become a general 
principle in labor law. Equality must be understood in 
terms of a program of measures, increasingly more 
complex and complete that allows correction of 
inequalities. 
First, equal pay is not equal work equally paid. 
Equal pay must be ensured by equal qualifications: 
 Between men and women; 
 Between employees with permanent contract and 
fixed-term employees; 
 Between fulltime employees and employees’ part-
time proportion to the time worked.
Secondly, appears the issue of the non-discrimination 
regarding union membership and strike.
Thirdly, the labor of “equal value, equal pay”. 
This refers to the production of inequality due to dis-
ability age. 
EU labor codes provide a hierarchical level identity 
(classification, responsibility) and similar importance 
in the functioning of the company, any work involving 
load capacity and is a nervous comparable identical, if 
we talk about a work of equal value.
In this area we can draw payroll conclusions 
 The need to establish a trend of transition from 
logic of equality of payment inter-categorical equal 
treatment; 
 The  equal opportunities and actions that target a 
potential group discriminated against, like between 
male–female equality, integration of people with 
disabilities, seniors, and taking account of the ori-
gins of social, ethnic, and geographic entity;
 Doing a very fine segmentation of employees (each 
person in part) based on the peculiarities of labor 
(autonomy, responsibility) and taking care of the 
compliance of requirements on constraints, sched-
ules etc.;
 Human resource management should focus on 
managing that singularity of every employee is 
treated in all the characteristics.
There are four criteria that must be taken into 
account (Peretti, 2012: 130)
 Identify some situations when professional knowl-
edge are required for a particular function, title, 
degree, or professional practice;
 Identify the situations when the capabilities are 
required for the performance of certain functions, 
capabilities arising from the experience gained over 
time; 
 Identify professional responsibilities;
 Evaluation of candidates’ physical load or nerve 
arising from the exercise. 
These criteria may be supplemented by two: 
seniority and level of study. Differences result from 
work-related goals made, professional experiential, 
level of responsibility, possession of a proper worksta-
tion requirements, and actual responsibilities.
Case study 1
Creation of social networks 
— The usefulness of professional networks and wom-
en’s access to networks;
— The need for feminine social networks;
— Creating internal and external networks by increas-
ing the access of women.
Case study 2
Proposals to promote policies of social dialogue 
— Regulations in the EU;
— Proposal for national agreement on inter- professional 
diversity.
Case study 3 
Study regarding recruitment 
— Identify the multiplicity of possible attitudes on 
diversity;
— Confronting the candidates’ abilities with the exi-
gencies of the organization;

 
Trends and Developments of Diversity Management at the Global Level  
23
— Identify the obstacles to increasing the quality of 
development;
— Evaluation of the risk of conflict of interests;
— Ethical issues regarding the recruiter;
— Aspects regarding the management of diversity and 
recruitment. 
Multidisciplinary Design Optimization (MDO) is 
based on the idea that the recruitment process is the one 
that provides an identical tool for all the individuals in 
the group, that there are guidelines and identical behav-
iors. It aims to strengthen the visibility of the organiza-
tion and its impact on the labor market. It is determined 
from the following principles:
— Professional treatment of the candidates;
— Preparing the recruiters for the meeting with the 
candidates;
— The candidate receiving a report on the organization;
— Presentation and representation of the organization 
by the recruiter.
The fundamental principle = a uniform ethics for 
all the candidates from all recruiters
The main stages of achieving the recruitment 
process are:
— Identifying the vacant positions;
— Attracting and managing applications;
— Assessment of the candidates;
— Selecting and making proposals; and 
— Employment.
The scientific research will conclude with guide of 
good practices of diversity in an organization that will 
allow the realization of an efficient management of 
human resource within it. 
The guide of good practices will be designed on 
three dimensions: professional equality (gender), age, 
disability, cultural differences.
Diversity management must be, above all, a 
management of the people
4. Conclusions
The scientific research will materialize in a model of 
organizational diversity (MOD) whose implementation 
will allow the 25 multinationals from the Region 3 
South-Muntenia to promote the principle of non-
discrimination in all departments of human resource 
management (recruitment, training, advancement, pro-
motion). We will have to find answers to several ques-
tions: What is the current situation in the field of 
diversity? To what extent are the enterprises prepared 
in this area? The two major dimensions that will be 
taken into account in the design of MOD are: the 
establishment of a variable equality of chances within 
the organization (from diversity to  equal opportunities, 
making a social organizational balance that generates 
economic performance); taking pragmatic measures to 
facilitate the integration and management of differ-
ences (using the reporting indicators); communication 
and awareness of stakeholders in order to reach the 
highest level of social responsibility of the organiza-
tion and association of managers in this approach is 
more than necessary; professional training is consid-
ered a key factor given the fact that the population of 
target enterprises is, in proportion of 62% under 40 
years, 36% having medium education and knowing the 
fact that, often university graduates leave with qualifi-
cations and skills that are not relevant on labor 
market. 
Achieving performance in  diversity management 
represents a way through which the organization 
achieves its set goals referring to: the need to respect 
the legal frame, ethical exigency, the need for proximity 
to consumers, encouraging innovation and  creativity, 
diversity as factor of change.
Therefore, results the necessity in the organization 
to create a pro-diversity system of piloting capable and 
ensuring the promotion of integration, coordination, 
motivation, and conflict management strategies. The 
final conclusion that can be drawn is “diversity becomes 
a managerial tool in achieving performance of the 
organization”.
An enterprise can develop sustainably only by 
practicing an effective management (a balanced man-
agement of economic and social performances) and 
taking into account the needs and aspirations, 

24 
S. Ion et al.
sometimes contradictory, of all the stakeholders (cus-
tomers, employees, shareholders, suppliers, civil soci-
ety, environment).
Now the enterprise, assuming responsibility in the 
field of human resources and practicing a discretionary 
commitment to freedom, carries two main types of 
action (Peretti, 2012: 141). 
• 
Cross-cutting actions involving all employees and 
focus on business processes and practices, like: 
— Securing and adapting HR processes (recruitment, 
assessment career, development, remuneration); 
— Training and awareness (managers, human 
resources, partners, not involved parties); 
— Communication throughout the all approach; 
— Encouraging social dialogue regarding diversity; 
• 
Implementation of cross-cutting measures (market-
ing, purchases).
References
Baranga, L. (2013), The Social Responsibility of the 
Organization, Târgovişte: Bibliotheca Publishing.
Burlea Schiopoiu, A. (2007), The Communications Process 
in Virtual Teams, Economics Informatics, Paris: Senil.
Chalmars, A. (1987), What is Science, Paris: La Decouverte.
Delattre, P. & Théllier, M. (1979), Development and 
Justification of Models, Paris: Maloine.
Delmas Marty, M. (2010), Liberty and security in a danger-
ous world, toward a community of values.
Gavard-Perret, M.-L. et al. (2008), Research Methodology, 
Paris: Pearson Education.
Gravitz, M. (1996), Methods of Social Science (10th edn.), 
Paris: Précis Dalloz.
König, G. Production of knowledge and constitution of orga-
nizational practices, Revue de Gestion des Ressources 
Humaines.
Martis, D. & Sorescu, I. (2008), How do we promote diver-
sity management in the organization, CPE.
Morgan, G. (1986), Images of Organization, Beverly Hills: 
Sage Publications, translated into French, Images de 
l’Organisation, Québec: Presse de l’Université de Laval, 
1990.
Novethic (2006), Diversity: Ethnic Statistics Remain a 
Sensitive Topic, Paris:
Pauget, J. (2010), Integrate and Manage the Y Generation, 
Vuibert.
Peretti, J. M. (2006), Richness of Diversity, Vuibert.
Peretti, J. M. (2012), The Encyclopaedia of Diversity, Paris: 
EMS Edition.
Rojot, J. (2005), The Theory of Organizations, Paris: SSKA 
Edition. 
Thiétart, R. A. (2007), Methods and Research in Management, 
Paris: Dunod.
Vagu, P. & Stegăroiu, I. (2007), Motivation at Work, 
Târgovişte: Bibliotheca Publishing.
x x x — The RBC Strategy in Diversity 2002–2015.

25
Chapter 4
 Corporate Social Responsibility or  Corporate 
Sustainability of  Romanian Enterprises?* 
Zaiţ Dumitru, Onea Angelica, Tătăruşanu Maria 
and Ciulu Ruxandra
“Alexandru Ioan Cuza” University of Iaşi
The purpose of this chapter is to identify the relationship 
and the differences between the concepts of corporate1 
social responsibility (CSR) and corporate sustainability 
(CS), as well as the manner in which they are applied in 
the practice of Romanian enterprises. The approach is 
based on the extensive literature in the field and on the 
perceived insufficient cohesion and correlation between 
the two concepts. For this purpose, we used a methodo-
logy that includes qualitative methods, such as the criti-
cal analysis of Romanian and international literature on 
the topic, syntheses by various authors and abstraction. 
Results can be used by organizations and by people 
interested in understanding the interconnections between 
the two manners of expressing the concern for obtaining 
increased performance (corporate social responsibility 
[CSR] and corporate sustainability [CS]) in certain 
fields (social, economic, environmental) in order to 
ensure the development and even survival of Romanian 
enterprises in the long term.
* This research was conducted within the activities related to the 
project “ Sustainable development, social responsibility, organiza-
tional culture and performance”, Cooperation project Wallonia-
Brussels/ Romania 2012–2014, Reference WBI: GL/AS/CAS/SOR/
2012/70098.
1. Introduction
The theme of corporate responsibility towards the  envi-
ronment,  community, employees, society as a whole 
has had a major impact in the economic literature in the 
past few years, even if the first concerns appeared in 
ancient times (Wilson, 2003). As “social responsibility” 
it was approached almost 100 years ago, became an 
area of interest about 50 years ago. It has even become 
fashionable in the past 20 years, not to mention compul-
sory for big companies in India (The Economic Times, 
2014). Arguments for a behavior which would take into 
account the interests of other people/institutions affected 
by company actions reside in a few philosophical theo-
ries (Wilson, 2003). Therefore, the social contract the-
ory states that companies engage in contracts with other 
members of the society and receive resources, societal 
approval for operating in exchange of good behavior. 
The social justice theory takes into account the needs of 
all members of a society in order to build a fair society. 
At corporate level, it relies on equitable allocation of 
resources and results. The rights theory, considered as 
source of the corporate responsibility concept, is 
focused on human rights and property rights, the latter 
always coming in second place. When applied in the 

26 
Z. Dumitru et al.
field of corporate responsibility, we note that, when 
companies base their actions on property rights (share-
holders), they must take into account other stakeholder 
rights (local  community, employees, etc.), which rank 
first. The deontological theory is based on the belief 
that everyone, including corporations, has the moral 
duty of treating others respectfully, to listen, and to 
observe their needs.
Many terms have been used to define ethic com-
pany responsibilities in relation with their  environment, 
but some of the most successful ones in the past few 
years have been  CSR and  CS. Other terms refer to  sus-
tainable development (SD), durability, but these are 
used in relation with the general model of development 
at society level and with a way of approaching business 
on the long-term, a new paradigm of social and eco-
nomic development.
In the current chapter, we synthesized the literature 
in the field of corporate responsibility, we tried to 
clarify the terms and the relation among them, but we 
also analyzed the way in which  Romanian companies 
interpret and apply the concepts, starting from a study 
performed on three representative companies from 
three different sectors in Romania.
2. What About CSR?
Literature on CSR is extensive and highly fragmented. 
A large number of authors around the world have been 
trying to clarify concepts such as CSR, CS, or SD. 
Carroll’s work (1979, 1983, 1991, 1999) on CSR is 
often cited (Sabadoz, 2011; Wang, 2011; Hediger, 
2010; Garriga & Mele, 2004) and has become a bench-
mark in this field, Carroll being considered as one of 
the most prestigious specialists in the field of CSR 
(Garriga & Mele, 2004). In 1983, Carroll stated that 
CSR is composed of the four parts largely used nowa-
days: economic, legal, ethical, and voluntary or philan-
thropic, while, in 1984, Drucker made it very clear that 
organizations need to convert social responsibilities 
into business opportunities (Drucker, 1984).
One of the definitions provided by official bodies, 
such as the European Commission (2006) is highly 
referred to. The European Commission regards 
Corporate Responsibility as ‘a concept whereby 
companies integrate social and environmental concerns 
in their business operations and in their interaction with 
their stakeholders on a voluntary basis’ (European 
Commission, 2006). It becomes of interest to analyze the 
effect of making CSR compulsory in India for large 
companies and, basically, eliminating the ‘voluntary’ 
approach of CSR. More recently, Aguinis (2011: 855) 
states that CSR is about “context-specific organizational 
actions and policies that take into account stakeholders’ 
expectations and the triple bottom line of economic, 
social, and environmental performance.” Regardless of 
definitions and various approaches towards CSR, the 
concept is a reality of everyday life in most organizations 
worldwide and, moreover, Carroll (1999: 292) believes 
that it “has a bright future because at its core, it addresses 
and captures the most important concerns of the public 
regarding business and society relationships”.
3. CSR or CS: Together, but Separate
Wilson (2003) proves that CS takes over a few  elements 
which belong to different concepts: SD, CSR, stake-
holder theory, and corporate accountability theory. 
According to the same author, CS can be seen as a 
new paradigm of corporate management, a counter-
part to the traditional model of growth and profit 
maximization. He proves that CS acknowledges the 
importance of profit and growth, but requires taking 
into consideration other objectives (social, linked to 
SD —  environmental protection, social justice, equita-
bleness, and economic development). The author per-
forms a synthesis for the evolution of the concept from 
the point of view of fields involved and sources where 
different concepts evolved (Fig. 1).
The relationship CS–CSR is also analyzed, espe-
cially from the point of view of SD: if the need for SD 
is accepted, then companies have the ethical duty to act 
for this purpose. The author proves that the CSR con-
cept is based on philosophy and morals, sources that 
generated responsible corporate behaviors towards the 
society where they operate and obtain profits. Wilson 
defines CSR as a broad concept, which ‘deals with the 
role of the business in the society’ (Wilson, 2003), 
being focused rather on how much companies should 
take into account societal needs than on debating if they 
should or not have this duty.

 
Corporate Social Responsibility or Corporate Sustainability 
27
Lately, the terms of CSR, CS, and SD have been 
present in the literature, as well as in actions considered 
imperative by international organizations and govern-
ments. Basically, SD has become a need: nowadays, 
businesses must take into account the need to contrib-
ute to ensuring the reach of long-term ecologic balance 
(from resource point of view), economic balance, inter-
national organizations objectives working for economic 
development (that refer to reduction of poverty, involv-
ing local communities into company activity), while 
simultaneously observing objectives of economic 
growth and long-term company development.
Nowadays, CS is intermingled with CSR or includes 
CSR elements, being distinguished only based on the 
fact that any corporation needs to behave responsibly 
towards its  environment. At European level, there is the 
same substitution of CSR and CS. The CSR definition 
(European Commission, 2006) accentuates the volun-
tary action of companies and the willingness to contrib-
ute to solving social and environmental issues, as well 
as taking into account other stakeholders. In 2011, the 
European Commission redefined CSR and showed that 
~CSR is increasingly important to the competitiveness 
of enterprises. It can bring benefits in terms of risk man-
agement, cost savings, access to capital, customer rela-
tionships, human resource management, and innovation 
capacity (EC, 2011). In this approach, CSR is a means 
of supporting SD objectives of the EU, especially 
connected to the need to improve competitiveness, 
while solving issues that affect economy and society as 
a whole (unemployment, environmental pollution, need 
of social cohesion). Companies should create a process 
to integrate social, environmental, ethical, as well as 
human rights and consumer rights aspects into their 
business operations and global strategy, closely linked 
to their stakeholders (EC, 2011).
4. CSR and CS in  Romania
In our attempt to distinguish between CSR and CS, we 
generally noted that Romanian authors adopt or adapt 
the concepts present in the international literature. 
Therefore, our purpose is to extract the meaning they 
provide for the concepts, relying more on the context, 
on the manner of approaching the topic rather than on 
their definitions.
Inspired by European documents and foreign litera-
ture, Romanian authors (Stancu & Orzan, 2007; Dinu, 
2011; Borţun et al., 2011; Vintilă et al., 2012; Barbu 
et al., 2011; Hristea, 2011; Mihăilă, op cit.; Dobrea, 
2006) present the CSR concept in a similar manner with 
the one provided by the European Commission (2006). 
Still, there is a focus on multidimensional definitions 
of CSR, somehow neglecting those based on social 
marketing by accentuating economic, legal, ethical, 
and philanthropic responsibilities. The dimensions of 
Fig. 1.  Sources of CS concept 
Source: Adapted after Wilson (2003).

28 
Z. Dumitru et al.
the CSR in the  Romanian literature, based on the inter-
national literature in the field are Stancu & Orzan, 
2007; Covaş & Braguţa, 2009; Dinu, 2011; Hristea, 
2011; Barbu et al., 2011; Mihăilă, op cit.; Dobrea, 2006):
 CSR issues refer to  community problems and envi-
ronmental problems;
 CSR involves integrating elements into the busi-
ness strategy and operations; it is not a separate 
component, but one which is created by appropriate 
integration at each organizational level;
 CSR is displayed through voluntary actions;
 CSR takes into account the stakeholders;
 CSR involves harmonizing company activity with 
social values by bringing together economic, social, 
and environmental interests;
 CSR is not confounded with philanthropy, involv-
ing strategies which lead to gains for all 
stakeholders;
 CSR measures several types of results: financial, 
social, environmental;
 CSR is defined by transparency;
 CSR’s purpose is to be successful in business while 
being socially responsible and positively impacting 
on society; through CSR, companies go beyond 
legal requirements, being sensitive to social needs.
Also, we notice the association of CSR with long-
term orientation of the company (Gănescu, 2012; 
Hristea, 2011; Stancu & Orzan, 2007, etc.). Therefore, 
they suggest that through permanent CSR actions there 
can be reached SD of the company (see Fig. 2), the 
point where some authors confound CSR to CS and 
they do not obviously distinguish them. Benefits pre-
sented by the authors (good relations with the commu-
nity, influencing target audience, image improvement, 
better positioning, consumer fidelity, employee motiva-
tion, etc. — Toma, 2006) seen as CSR effects on the 
long-term confirm the idea that CS is seen rather as an 
advanced phase of CS or as strategic and long-term 
activity (Cristiana et al., 2011). Other authors simply 
present that, in the international literature, the terms 
CSR and CS have a rather similar meaning (Barbu et 
al., 2011, Gănescu, 2012). Also, Romanian authors 
fully understand that CSR can provide financial bene-
fits and that it can be used as an instrument for strategic 
marketing, having multiple roles and objectives 
(Dobrea, 2006).
The CS terms is rather seldom used by Romanian 
authors, who generally associate and analyze the CSR–
SD relationship or the CSR–corporate governance rela-
tionship. The CS content seems frequently equivalent 
to SD by means of translation, some authors omitting to 
define the level of analysis (micro or macro), which is 
why we will also analyze the SD meaning in the 
Romanian literature. For example, according to the 
European Commission (apud Borţun, 2011) SD refers 
to meeting society needs by honoring the natural  envi-
ronment and without jeopardizing the needs of future 
generations. On the other hand, CS refers to applying 
business strategies and performing activities that refer 
to the current needs of the organization and its 
Fig. 2.  Interaction between a responsible company and the environment 
Source: Hristea (2011).
Socially
responsible
company
External
environment
Nature
Community
Suppliers
Sustainability
Customers
Shareholder
Internal
environment
Employees

 
Corporate Social Responsibility or Corporate Sustainability 
29
stakeholders, while protecting human resources and 
natural resources needed in the future (International 
Institute for  Sustainable Development, 1992 apud 
Gănescu, 2012). These definitions are undertaken and 
do not clearly describe differences, even though the 
context created by the authors is rather clear. We also 
notice that, in most works of Romanian authors, SD is 
focused on environmental issues (Bejan & Rusu, 2007; 
Ştefănescu & Coturbaş, 2009; Manoleli, 2000). This 
can also be due to its dual character, anthropocentric 
(humans survival, continuous development of human 
kind, intergenerational equitableness) and biospheric 
(preserving the biosphere). The vision for the concept 
being influenced by the focus on one aspect or on the 
overall vision, which results also from one SD defini-
tion: development of a society which does not push the 
limits of the biosphere and does not destroy the natural 
basis of human life reproduction (Danilov-Dănilean 
apud Rusandu, 2008). Also, we notice that ecological 
systems are regarded as life support system, thereby the 
importance of their protection. Another explanation is 
linked to the SD vision: economical (at global level) or 
ecological. The integrative meaning of SD is interest-
ing, being understood as future form of co-evolutionary 
interaction of nature and society, which ensures their 
mutual existence (Rusandu, 2008). Where CS appears, 
it has either a connotation closer to the responsibility 
towards the  environment, focusing moreover on the 
impact of company actions on the environment (while 
CSR is focused on the social aspects) or it is seen as an 
advanced stage of CSR (as in Fig. 2). Therefore, 
authors do not distinguish CSR and CS, CS being 
the purpose of the CSR actions (Hristea, 2011, Barbu et 
al., 2011). Also, we encounter the vision that CS is a 
 corporate approach to SD (Gănescu, 2012).
We can distinguish between CSR, CS, and SD based 
on the stakeholder categories involved (Werther & 
Chandler apud Borţun, 2011): organizational (employ-
ees, managers, shareholders, unions); economic (custom-
ers, lenders, distributors, suppliers); social (communities, 
government, other organisms, not-for-profit organiza-
tions, environment). If CSR and CS appear to be linked 
rather to the first two categories of stakeholders (micro 
level or micro–macro, connecting the micro and macro 
levels), SD is more about the third category.
5.  CSR and CS Applied to  Romanian 
Enterprises
Hesitations or divergent opinions concerning the mean-
ing of different concepts presented in the literature or in 
established research in the field almost naturally relate 
to the activity of the Romanian enterprises nowadays. 
Still, there are significant differences between enter-
prises and the most obvious ones seem to distinguish 
current approaches and practices in those organizations 
based on their experience in the field, their field of 
activity, as well as the national or international cover-
age of their activities. Next to these three main varia-
bles, the profile of the top managers is always an 
essential element, providing or even imposing the posi-
tion towards CSR, CS, or SD. In order to test the con-
nection between the three main variables and the 
position of the enterprise towards the three concepts, as 
well as the manner of putting them into practice, we 
used the same three enterprises included in a previous 
study concerning the CSR–performance relationship in 
Romania.21 We maintained their symbols for this study: 
A for the pharmaceutical company; B for the metallurgi-
cal company; and C for the textile company. The three 
enterprises meet the requirements imposed in the selec-
tion: belonging to different sectors of activity, their 
experience in the field and the extent of their activities. 
Moreover, the three can be significantly differentiated 
through the profiles of their main managers.
To identify the positions of the three enterprises 
and their management concerning their approach and 
the specific actions towards the three concepts we per-
formed in-depth interviews based on a special guide, 
conceived and applied during a period of six months 
through direct meetings with a total number of eight top 
managers (at least two from each company). Generally, 
the dominant positions identified during the interviews 
outlined an accentuated preference for the CSR con-
cept, while the other two concepts were rather present 
in their comments, without outlining or identifying 
potential differences in any way. This is the reason why 
we felt the need to resume the synthetic table from our 
earlier chapter, a table expressing the position of the 
1 See Zaiţ et al. (2013).

30 
Z. Dumitru et al.
managers towards CSR (see Table 1). Therefore, we 
have a rather clear image about what those managers 
consider to be CSR.
In order to identify the dominating aspects regard-
ing the three concepts for the three companies, we 
deductively separated the corresponding elements from 
Table 1, according to the definitions of CSR, CS, and 
SD (see Chapters 1 to 3). We systemized the specific 
aspects of CSR, CS, and SD into Table 2. In our attempt 
to distinguish between specific actions and practices, we 
delimitated based on micro and macro-economic traits, 
as well as strategic and operational actions, that the 
interviewees identified in their answers or comments.
As we can notice, even based on our potentially 
subjective analysis, the aspects related to CS can be 
identified as following:
 Company A, a  Romanian company, is concerned 
mainly by social responsibility towards the  com-
munity, missing the connection with the benefits it 
may record from increasing CS based on CSR 
actions. At least for the moment, the company sees 
Table 1.  The synthesis of positioning towards CSR
Enterprise A
Enterprise B
Enterprise C
Observations
Employees
Recruitment, selection, 
training, health and 
security, performance
Explicit (productivity 
increase)
Training, recruitment, 
security and 
protection
Explicit (productivity 
increase)
Encouragement, rewards, 
special interest
Explicit (productivity 
increase)
Explicit positioning — 
productivity increase
Natural environment
Integrated management
system, waste collection, 
reducing polluting 
factors
Explicit (cost reduction, 
revenue increase)
Anti-pollution invest-
ments, using forms of 
renewable energy
Explicit (cost reduction)
Regulations, cost reduction
Implicit (cost reduction, 
customer satisfaction)
Dominantly explicit 
(cost reduction, reve-
nue increase)
Community
Charity, philanthropy, 
image
Low impact
Help, support for local 
development, involve-
ment in education
Explicit (formation 
facilities, mentality 
change, diminished 
losses and costs)
Charity, philanthropy, 
ethics, image
Mediated perception, low 
subjective impact
Diffuse — hesitation 
between favorable 
influence and image
Culture
Scholarships, book 
launches, conferences
Mediated perception
Education, local events
Mediated perception
Education, ethics, image
Mediated perception, low 
impact
Mediated perception — 
positive role through 
 generated effects
Health
First care, blood donations, 
modernizing hospitals 
(image)
Implicit (productivity)
Caring for the employees, 
security and protection
Implicit (productivity)
Routine check, care and 
hospitalization, insurance 
payment
Explicit (productivity, cost 
reduction)
Dominantly implicit — 
image, health of 
employees and of the 
community, cost 
reduction
Others (customers, 
suppliers, partners)
Sports
Mediated perception, 
image
Requests from partners, 
customers, local 
development actions
Implicit (revenue 
increase)
Requests from partners, 
customers, suppliers, 
social awareness and 
image
Explicit (revenue increase, 
improving market 
relations)
Diffuse — image, 
improving relations, 
 revenue increase

 
Corporate Social Responsibility or Corporate Sustainability 
31
CSR actions mainly as a cost, arguing that it is 
extremely difficult to quantify the benefits gener-
ated through CSR actions. In the past few years, the 
corporate strategy became more complex, incorpo-
rating CSR, and CS referred to mainly as SD.
 For company B, subsidiary of a well-known multina-
tional company, the CS component has a strategic 
role, being generally present in the micro–macro 
area of influence of the company (macro especially 
based on the effect generated by the company as a 
whole, through all of its subsidiaries), being 
extremely important, regarded as a purpose and inte-
grated in all activities. This integration is made pos-
sible with the help of the operational level, which 
includes all CSR actions and serves as basis for CS 
and SD. Therefore, we can conclude that the com-
pany understood that only the continuous strategic 
orientation towards responsibility (as a whole) can 
generate consistent positive results on the long term 
for the entity and for the  environment in which it acts 
and voluntary assumes its mission.
 Within company C, manufacturer of textile with a 
national and international presence, we can identify 
predominantly CSR elements referring to the level 
of impact and period for observing consequences 
of their actions. Also, elements concerning the atti-
tude towards responsible behaviors regarding the 
social, economic, and natural environment are inte-
grated at strategic level. The adoption of the CS 
concept in the current practice of this company can 
be reached in time, but the lack of CSR strategy and 
the punctual actions in the field (even the ones on 
the long-term are moreover a response to regula-
tions and partners’ demands) prove the lack of 
explicit interest at the moment.
Also potentially impaired, the aspects referring 
precisely to SD can be summarized as following:
 Company A sees itself as being on a mission for 
improving life in the communities where it is present. 
Locally or internationally, it gets involved into actions 
Table 2.  Systematic actions and practices related to CSR and CS
Company
Company A
Company B
Company C
Field of action
Strategic
Operational
Strategic
Operational
Strategic
Operational
Macro
Explicit
—
—
—
—
—
—
Implicit
—
Employees 
Environment 
 Community 
Culture Health 
Other
CSR
Environment 
Community
SD
Employees 
Environment 
Community 
Culture Health 
Other
CSR
—
Environment 
Employees Other
CSR
Micro
Explicit
Employees 
Environment
CS
Employees 
Environment 
Culture Health 
Other
CSR
Employees 
Environment 
Culture Health 
Other
CS
Employees 
Environment 
Culture Health 
Other
CSR
Employees 
Environment 
Health 
 Other
CS
Employees 
Environment 
Community
CSR
Implicit
—
Employees 
Environment 
Culture Health 
Other
CSR
—
Employees 
Environment 
Culture Health 
Other
CSR
Employees 
Environment 
Health 
Other
CSR
Employees 
Environment 
Community 
Other
CSR

32 
Z. Dumitru et al.
and projects to support communities (at operational 
level) and, more and more often, it integrates these 
actions into strategies. Still, it seems to lack a clear 
vision of its true ability to improve lives and of posi-
tively/negatively impacting the world we live in.
 For company B, SD is the result of getting involved 
at local, national and global levels (through the 
mother company). This component is also based on 
CSR activities, extended regionally and becoming 
permanent through CS. Unlike institutional, politi-
cal (national, regional) entities, who provide regu-
lations/strategic milestones about SD, company B 
assumes its strategic-operational role every time, 
being interested by putting into practice strategic 
plans of its own or in cooperation.
 In company C, we encounter CSR actions as 
unconscious support for SD objectives. Basically, 
the strategic plan includes elements that refer to 
partner dialogue, innovation, recruitment through 
long-term partnerships with educational organiza-
tions, training programs for the unemployed, 
investments in equipment for reducing pollution, 
which are all steps towards SD.
By overlapping the ensembles of specific elements 
for all three concepts, we can identify commonalities 
and differences in terms of CSR, CS, and SD for all three 
companies, which can even lead to an acceptable gener-
alization for the moment regarding the way this issue is 
perceived and approached. A suggestive figure (see Fig. 
3) can visually represent the few significant fields of the 
relation between elements included in the three concepts 
in the case of the Romanian enterprise nowadays.
6. Conclusions
Company A is still in search of its true identity in terms 
of CSR, CS, and SD. While it does have a clear strate-
gic vision, its connection with CSR is still not clearly 
established. Even if it has been performing CSR actions 
for many years and it has been involved in the lives of 
the communities in which it has been present, it needs 
to build a clearer vision for what CSR really stands for, 
as well as its connections with CS and SD. It needs to 
have a deeper understanding of the reasons for getting 
involved in CSR actions, to understand that CSR is 
more about benefits than costs and to clearly under-
stand its role in SD.
Company B benefits from the strategic vision and 
the expertise of the mother company. CS is the result of 
CSR actions on the long-term, organizationally and 
locally, while SD is the CS vision extended regionally. 
Strategic vision is obvious in all company activities. 
Differentiation between CS and SD is deducted from 
the area of influence of CSR activities, from a strategic 
point of view: internal and local  environment in the 
first case; external and regional environment in the 
second case. All CSR components (economic, social, 
and environmental) are considered by the firm, which 
proves the multidimensional vision for these concepts.
In the case of company C, we observe the orientation 
of CSR actions towards the internal environment, some 
of them being expressed as long-term goals and included 
in the company strategy. Also, the consequences of some 
actions that refer to the company responsibility towards 
the environment can be regarded locally (philanthropy, 
partnerships with local organizations …), but also region-
ally, nationally or internationally through the behavioral 
model used with business partners (paying the dues, 
reducing pollution, innovation).
As a basic idea for our study, we can conclude that 
both the Romanian literature in the field and the prac-
tice of Romanian companies prove, on one hand, good 
knowledge of concepts and ideas regarding CSR, CS, 
and SD, these constantly being updated. On the other 
hand, the acknowledgement of its importance for prac-
tice, the growingly intense concern for developing 
CSR activities (many already having a strategic role), 
which leads to CS (at organizational level) and SD (at 
macroeconomic level). Even if for most Romanian 
Fig. 3.  Differentiating CSR, CS, and SD actions and practices at 
the level of the Romanian enterprise nowadays (representation that 
could be generalized)
SD
CS
CSR

 
Corporate Social Responsibility or Corporate Sustainability 
33
companies (especially SMEs) activities are not highly 
extensive, the cumulative effect is worth to be taken 
into account.
References
Aguinis, H. (2011), Organizational responsibility: Doing 
good and doing well. In APA Handbook of Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, S. Zedeck (ed.), pp. 855–
879. Washington: American Psychological Association.
Barbu, I. A., Chirea, G., & Constantinescu, L. (2011), 
Caracteristicile responsabilităţii sociale corporative: De la 
etică şi transparenţă la performanţă, Revista de Marketing 
Online, 5(4), 94–103. Available at http://www.edituraura
nus.ro/marketing-online/54/pdf/8.pdf (Accessed 7 May 
2014).
Bejan, M. & Rusu, T. (2007), Exploatarea resurselor naturale 
şi conceptul de dezvoltare durabilă, Buletinul AGIR, 1, 
20–24. Available at http://www.agir.ro/buletine/245.pdf 
(Accessed 7 May 2014).
Borţun, D. (coord.), (2011), Parteneriate Sustenabile şi Bune 
Practici în Responsabilitatea Social, Bucureşti: JCI 
România.
Carroll, A. B. (1979), A three-dimensional conceptual model 
of corporate social performance, Academy of 
Management Review, 4, 497–505.
Carroll, A. B. (1983), Corporate social responsibility: Will 
industry respond to cutbacks in social program funding? 
Vital Speeches of the Day, 49, 604–608.
Carroll, A. B. (1991), The pyramid of corporate social 
responsibility: Toward the moral management of organi-
zational stakeholders, Business Horizons, 34(4), 39–48.
Carroll, A. B. (1999), Corporate social responsibility evolu-
tion of a definitional construct, Business & Society, 
38(3), 268–295.
Corporate Knights (2013), Corporate knights global 100 
most sustainable corporations announced in Davos. 
Available at http://www.corporateknights.com/article/
corporate-knights-global-100-most-sustainable-corpora-
tions-announced-davos (Accessed 10 May 2014).
Covaş, L. & Braguţa, A. (2009), Responsabilitatea Socială 
Corporativă — Aspecte Practice. Chişinău: Ivesa Grup. 
Dinu, V. (2011), Responsabilitatea socială corporativă — opor-
tunitate de reconciliere a intereselor economice cu cele 
sociale şi de mediu, Amfiteatrul Economic, XIII(29), 6–7.
Dobrea, R. C. (2006), Managementul organizaţiilor şi respon-
sabilitatea socială corporativă, Administraţie Şi 
Management Public, 7, 89–93.
Drucker, P. F. (1984), The new meaning of corporate social 
responsibility, California Management Review, 26, 
53–63.
EU (2014), A renewed EU strategy 2011–2014 for Corporate 
Social Responsibility, Brussels. Available at http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:
2011:0681:FIN:EN:PDF (Accessed 10 May 2014).
EU (2014), Corporate social responsibility (CSR). Available 
at http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sustainable-
business/corporate-social-responsibility/index_en.htm 
(Accessed 10 May 2014).
European Commission (2006), Implementing the partner-
ship for growth and jobs: Making Europe a pole of 
excellence on corporate social responsibility. Available 
at http://www.csreurope.org/data/files/eucommision_
csr_strategy_march_2006.pdf (Accessed 12 February 
2013).
Forbes (2014), The most responsible companies: Another 
ranking. Available at http://www.forbes.com/sites/susan-
adams/2011/09/16/the-most-responsible-companies-
another- ranking/ (Accessed 15 May 2014).
Garriga, E. & Melé, D. (2004), Corporate social responsibil-
ity theories: Mapping the territory, Journal of Business 
Ethics, 53, 51–71. 
Gănescu, M. C. (2012), Responsabilitatea socială a întreprin-
derii ca strategie de creare şi consolidare a unor afaceri 
sustenabile, Economie Teoretică şi Aplicată, XIX, 
11(576), 93–109. Available at http://store.ectap.ro/ 
articole/799_ro.pdf (Accessed 16 May 2014).
Global Reporting Initiative (2014), Reporting framework 
overview. Available at https://www.globalreporting.org/
reporting/reporting-framework-overview/Pages/default.
aspx (Accessed 15 May 2014).
Hediger, W. (2010), Welfare and capital-theoretic founda-
tions of corporate social responsibility and corporate 
sustainability, The Journal of Socio-Economics, 39, 
518–526.
Hristea, A. M. (2011), Responsabilitatea socială corporativă 
— între deziderat şi realitate, Economie Teoretică şi 
Aplicată, XVIII, 10(563), 56–73. Available at http://store.
ectap.ro/articole/650_ro.pdf (Accessed 7 May 2014).
Manoleli, D. (2000), Dezvoltarea durabilă (suport de curs). 
Available at http://lefo.ro/carmensylva/Carmensylva/
ppap/2000/an2/sem1/manolelidezdur.pdf  (Accessed 
7 May 2014).
Mihăilă, G. Responsabilitatea socială a întreprinderilor. 
Available at http://www.readbag.com/antreprenoriateract 
ivroconsult-ro-fw-files-file-iasi-responsabilitatea-socia
la-a-intreprinderilor-iasi (Accessed 2 May 2014).

34 
Z. Dumitru et al.
Rusandu, I. (2008), Probleme filosofice şi metodologice ale 
dezvoltării durabile (DD), Revista de Filosofie, Sociologie 
şi Stiinţe Politice, 3(148), 19–29. Available at http://iiesp.
asm.md/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/Revista-2008-3-
JIS-B5.pdf#page=19 (Accessed 2 May 2014).
Sabadoz, C. (2011), Between profit-seeking and prosociality: 
Corporate social responsibility as Derridean supple-
ment, Journal of Business Ethics, 104, 77–91.
Stancu, A. & Orzan, M. (2007), Responsabilitatea socială a 
companiilor româneşti — un pas pentru dezvoltarea 
durabilă/Social responsibility of Romanian companies: 
A stepping stone for national sustainable development, 
Revista de Marketing Online, 1(2), 49–53. Available at 
http://www.edumark.ase.ro/RePEc/rmko/2/6.pdf 
(Accessed 7 May 2014).
Ştefănescu, F. & Coturbaş, L. (2009), Sustainable develop-
ment and life quality, Annals: Economics Science Series, 
(XV), 530–537.
The Economic Times (2014), Corporate social responsibility man-
datory for corporates from April 1. Available at http://
articles. economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-01-29/news/
46782747_1_csr-policy-csr-committee-new-companies-
act (Accessed 15 May 2014).
Toma, S. G. (2006), De la calitate la responsabilitatea 
socială corporatistă, Amfiteatrul Economic, 20, 1–6. 
Available at http://www.amfiteatrueconomic.ase.ro/
arhiva/pdf/no20/articol_fulltext_pag145.pdf (Accessed 
7 May 2014).
Vintilă, G., Armeanu, Ş. D., Filipescu, M. O., Moscalu, M., 
& Lazăr, P. (2012), Studiu privind corelaţia politică 
fiscală — responsabilitate socială corporativă, Economie 
Teoretică şi Aplicată XIX, 4(569), 3–14.
Wang, Y. G. (2011), Corporate social responsibility and stock 
performance — evidence from Taiwan, Modern Economy, 
2, 788–799.
Wilson, M. (2003), Corporate sustainability: What is it and 
where does it come from, Ivey Business Journal, 67(6), 1–5.
Zaiţ, D., Onea, A., Tătăruşanu, M., & Ciulu, R. (2013), The 
social responsibility and competitiveness of the Romania 
firm, Procedia Economics and Finance, Special edition 
for the GEBA conference.

35
Chapter 5
Re-Thinking Our Model of  Management 
in the Light of the Cultural Dimension — 
A Systemic Approach to the Company
Blandine Vanderlinden
MIME-ICHEC
The hierarchical, mechanical, and rational model of 
management is no longer suited to our present complex 
and unpredictable business context. We propose that 
the current concerns of managers such as the style of 
management, change, innovation, organizational learn-
ing, cultural diversity, multicultural team management, 
corporate social responsibility (CSR), etc. be discussed 
in the light of a systemic approach to the organization 
where the cultural dimension is situated.  Culture is a 
complex concept that is not something that can be 
assessed as different, but as “Sensemaking”.  Corporate 
culture is more than just a set of values; it fulfills a 
double role with regard to construction of identity and 
to integration. The systemic approach views the organi-
zation in a holistic way and tries to see the various 
components of the company as a part of the whole 
(instead of looking at them separately), focusing par-
ticularly on their interactions and consistency in a clear 
and expressed global vision. All business functions can 
be seen in this double reading, the cornerstone of 
organizational analysis. This chapter is a condensed 
version of major ideas taken from an extensive research 
project conducted over several years by the team of 
MIME of the ICHEC, Brussels Management School. 
We invite the reader to read the book Au Coeur de la 
Dimension Culturelle du Management, by the authors 
Pierre Dupriez and Blandine Vanderlinden (under the 
supervision of), to be published soon.
1. The Relevant Managerial Issues
To meet contemporary managerial concerns, this chap-
ter proposes viewing organizations and management 
differently. Firstly, it clarifies the concept of culture and 
corporate culture as applied to management issues. 
Culture will not be considered as “difference” as it is 
more often presented in the literature and used by prac-
titioners, but as “Sensemaking”. Major methodological 
challenges will stem from this comprehensive approach 
to culture. Secondly, it proposes to address managerial 
concerns in a systemic approach, which is radically dif-
ferent from the classical, analytical, and mechanical 
perspectives.
We can observe that many companies, particularly 
in Eastern European countries, still work according 
to traditional models of management. They gener-
ally fit into a hierarchical, rational, and mechanical 
management approach in line with the teachings of 
famous “Organizational theories”. These theories,1 
developed by the Cartesian minds of Westerners, 
1 OST: Scientific Organization of Labor.

36 
B. Vanderlinden
adopt a “scientific” approach (OST) looking for the 
“One Best Way”. They were developed at the beginning 
of the industrial era in a stable and controllable context 
of relative certainty and are based on the major assump-
tion of rationality. They considered that the best way to 
organize work is through “ performance”. In that con-
text, it was sufficient that the decision maker — in sole 
command — make the “right” decisions in a frame-
work of humanly acceptable knowledge, that he opti-
mize the division and coordination of labor, make a 
good product or provide a good service for success to 
be guaranteed.
In this line of thinking, we find among others, 
Fayol (1916), whose main functionalist discourse 
shows that managerial responsibilities are essentially to 
produce, to organize, to direct, and to control. The 
human being is a “tool”, malleable and compliant (“the 
right man in the right place”). It is true that these early 
theories were subsequently complemented by more 
humanizing ones, called “human relations theories”, 
but the human being is represented as a contingent vari-
able and the organization remains a “machine”, how-
ever human; this is sometimes called a “soft-Taylorist” 
view of work.
However, the world and the context of business 
have changed radically since that time and as regards 
 management, globalization has radically altered these 
first premises.
This period of globalization is characterized by 
complexity and uncertainty, the more so because infor-
mation technology is constantly innovating and techno-
logical tools enable us to reach the entire planet at any 
level. All companies (even small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) working at a local level) are forced 
to operate at a global level and to be on constant 
standby, proactive, or very quickly react to the evolu-
tions of competitors and markets. In short, nothing is 
safe and everything changes all the time.
At an organizational level, in addition to the need 
for learning and for flexibility, companies face the chal-
lenges of differentiation to suit local markets coupled 
with the need for integration. Trying to find a balance, 
they often adopt contradictory approaches. On the one 
hand, to motivate the troops and be close to the mar-
kets, top managers talk about decentralized decision-
making, accountability, autonomy, creativity, …; on the 
other hand, to maintain the ship’s course and to ensure 
control, they develop and implement a panoply of pro-
cedures and processes that bureaucratizes and weighs 
down the  system. If control is vital to avoid the risk of 
fragmentation, it is even more difficult to ensure when 
partners are scattered all over the world and can be 
driven by interests that may be different because of 
geographical remoteness and particular interests. 
Furthermore, internet resources and social networks 
allow anyone to access information that can have an 
impact on the course of business and internal competi-
tion does not always get on well with cooperation.
At an individual level, in this context of constant 
change, people lose their bearings. On the one hand, 
they are asked to be open, learning, creative, flexible, 
autonomous,… and, on the other hand, they must con-
stantly be accountable for their performance at work 
(individual and collective) and they are stifled by the 
procedures, the rules, and standards they have to follow, 
as well as by the constant controls. Under this contra-
dictory pressures, workers do only what they are asked 
to do, and keep their nose to the grindstone, changing 
only because they have to. They no longer have the 
energy to step back and distance themselves from their 
work. The risks are high and they often fall into depres-
sion, burn-out, or even attempt suicide from simple 
exhaustion.
This context is well-known and academics, con-
sultants, and companies are trying their best to find 
solutions. They all come up with good ideas and good 
practices, and articles, books, conferences and training 
courses are available in abundance. There are also fash-
ions. Until recently we heard a lot about reengineering, 
quality, change management, etc.; today, discussions 
focus much more on leadership style and collaborative 
management, team management (multicultural), organ-
izational learning, social responsibility, innovation, etc. 
We are convinced that all these thoughts and discus-
sions are appropriate, necessary, and very interesting 
and that they provide solutions, in their own way, to 
certain corporate challenges. Our proposal is that all of 
them be integrated into a global approach which, as we 
will see, renews management.
On the one hand, it is a matter of taking into 
account the cultural dimension and in particular  corpo-
rate  culture that we will define as construction of 

 
Re-Thinking Our Model of Management 
37
meaning and that produces a double effect, identity, and 
integration (2.1) and, on the other hand, of adopting a 
systemic reading of the organization which enables us 
to focus attention both on the vision that directs and 
gives meaning and on the interactions and their coher-
ence (2.2).
2.  Rethinking  Management: 
Systemic Approach and Cultural 
Dimension
The new additions to this chapter aim to take into 
account the cultural dimension within a systemic 
approach to the company. We will see that all business 
functions may be found in this double reading, which is 
the keystone of organizational analysis in its search for 
coherence and meaning. Concerning  culture, given the 
diversity of approaches and the difficulty of grasping it, 
we want to start by reviewing its meaning and scope.2 
 Corporate culture will be then considered as a major 
company- system component.
2.1.  Culture and corporate culture: 
Construction of meaning
In the private, social, and business field, we can observe 
an intensification of the interactions between people of 
different cultural origins, and backgrounds. “Culture” 
and “cultural diversity” are words which are now on 
everyone’s lips. Yet, the concept is clear to very few 
people and if we ask people what culture is, answers are 
likely to be very vague and inconsistent. Answers tend 
to be about feelings “I can’t say, it is different” and 
experiences “they do/say/think differently from us”. Is 
not culture more than a simple matter of difference? At 
the company level, we speak about culture casually, and 
we would be able to enumerate a number of values, 
those that are overt. But what about culture as it is 
experienced? It therefore seems important to us to 
clarify the concept of culture and to show the scope of 
corporate culture.
2 To be brief in the context of an article, we invite the reader to look 
at Chapters 2, 3, and 4 of the book by Pierre Dupriez and Blandine 
Vanderlinden titled Au Coeur de la Dimension Culturelle du 
Management, forthcoming.
2.1.1.  Culture does not have to be perceived 
as different but as “Sensemaking”
It is widely accepted that culture is a coherent social 
construction, related to the action of humans on their 
environment and their relationships with others. This 
social construction is forged in early childhood in the 
relationship with parents and continues throughout life. 
How each person will respond to the questions of life 
depends on their system of values, and is the heart of 
any culture. This system of values appear both as a 
protection against external elements and as a condition 
of maintaining the internal balance of social relations 
(Dupriez, 2014: 10); and it is expressed through differ-
ent signs characteristic of the group culture.
From different responses to similar concerns related 
to management, Hofstede3 sought to identify some val-
ues that might explain those differences and he identi-
fied a number of well-known cultural dimensions 
(hierarchical distance, uncertainty avoidance, individu-
alism/collectivism, femininity/masculinity, long/short 
term orientation, … ). Hofstede went a part of the way 
in this, and his work is very interesting; he also recog-
nized the limits of his research. However, those limits 
are most often forgotten and the figures he provided are 
used inappropriately.
In his research, Hofstede sought to describe cul-
tures by comparison; his approach is comparative and 
is based on quantitative method using questionnaires. 
These choices have their limits. The questionnaires 
have been designed by Westerners; are they are thus 
able to consider the specificities of other ways of life, 
thoughts, and behaviors? Can questions that use Western 
concepts be understood in the same way by people 
from other cultures? Can those questionnaires take into 
account the complexities inherent in any culture? Can 
Hofstede’s dimensions enable us to understand what 
underlies the thoughts and behaviors? Raising these 
issues that obviously demand negative answers reveal 
that Hofstede’s dimensions can only show some “indi-
cations”, which may be useful but not sufficient to 
explain culture.
3 The early work of Geert Hosftede date from the 1970s; he con-
ducted a survey (more than 100,000 questionnaires) to IBM 
employees in over 70 different countries.

38 
B. Vanderlinden
Moreover,  culture is a coherent construction, and as 
Marcel Mauss recalled, a “total social fact”. This means 
that no aspect of social life can be understood alone 
“each of them has reality because each one is integrated 
in a  system” (Dupriez, 2014: 7). Therefore, taking into 
account one dimension or other in an isolated way can-
not explain the observed reality and get to the heart of 
culture. Finally, culture also has its “hidden dimension” 
(Hall, 1971, 1984) and in addition to the observed facts 
there is a whole world which belongs to the imagina-
tion (Godelier, 2007), to thought, and to the informal 
which need to be decoded rather than observed and 
which are understandable only by their cultural 
references.
In the footsteps of the anthropologists, the MIME 
of ICHEC offer a radically different approach to cul-
ture. It defines culture as “what makes sense” 
(Sensemaking). Looking for the meaning of social 
practices and questioning why specific behaviors occur, 
enables us to get to the heart of culture. “I use the word 
‘culture’ to refer to the set of representations and prin-
ciples that consciously organize the different areas of 
social life, as well as the values attached to these ways 
of acting and thinking. We see therefore that a culture 
arises first from the domain of the ideal but that it does 
not really exist until the elements of the ideal — prin-
ciples, representations, values — are linked firmly to 
social and material practices to which they give mean-
ing” (Godelier, 2007: 96).
This approach, opens to interdisciplinarity and is 
linked, among others, to psychology. “Culture operates 
in a fundamental domain for humans: units of meaning 
or of significations, which constitute the obligatory 
mediation for our access to reality; because no stimulus 
acts on us directly, but through the intermediary of a 
sense in which it is inevitably wrapped, consciously or 
unconsciously. So we are constantly moving in a sym-
bolic universe becoming variable. And it is this sense 
that decides, ultimately, our actions: we do not act the 
same way with adults, children, nature, the multitude of 
objects, disease, according to the meaning which we 
give them” (Camilleri, 1989: 24).
Ultimately, and regardless of the discipline within 
which the question is asked, addressing the notion of 
culture always brings us back to wondering what makes 
sense (Dupriez, 2014: 10).
This approach also has its methodological require-
ments and limitations. First, any field of study is unique 
and the criteria can only refer to the emic perspective: 
“each cultural unit must be understood and judged by 
its own logic in relation to its model which is a matter 
of emic perspective, as opposed to the etic perspective 
which makes judgments from outside” (Camilleri, 
1996). Secondly, it can only be appreciated through an 
anthropological approach using qualitative methods of 
data collection.
2.1.2.  Corporate culture is not just a question 
of values: It exercises a double function 
of construction of identity and integration
Our major concern being the company of what impor-
tance is its cultural dimension? Our detour via the gen-
eral concept of culture is not without purpose because 
our approach to it will also be a construction of 
meaning.
To start, let us emphasize that the company is a 
receptacle of many cultural influences in interaction 
with each other coming from the national culture where 
it is located, professional cultures, micro-cultures 
forged in social groups (for example, the departments), 
and the cultures of individuals (identities). These cul-
tural references may be conflicting or a source of ten-
sion and it is necessary to identify them. Secondly, by 
the intensity, the duration, and the complexity of human 
relationships being developed by the company while 
carrying out its functions also creates and embodies 
culture. “Corporate culture means then a set of stand-
ards, often implicit, organizing the relationships within 
a particular group, of modes of action and thought, 
invented by this group to meet its specific problems” 
(Dupriez, 2000).
“If we talk about corporate culture, it is ultimately 
because there is a continuing need to produce sense 
and meaning to act. Daily technical problems as 
much as the organizational complexities and com-
mercial constraints force us to engage in reflection, to 
call upon beliefs and motivating values, to subscribe 
to a mesh of solidarity and representations of those 
with whom it should collaborate. Without production 
of meaning, the company doesn’t coordinate its mem-
bers in the same direction of economic objectives” 

 
Re-Thinking Our Model of Management 
39
(Sainsaulieu, 1990: 58). How can we indicate more 
clearly the continuity between the two concepts,  cul-
ture in the general sense and  corporate culture, each 
one conveying and creating sense? We are thus 
immersed in the heart of “Sensemaking” and here the 
contribution of Karl Weick is fundamental.4
The creation of meaning is a highly social process 
(Weick, 1995) and this design leads us to review the 
traditional definition of the organization. “To act 
together, it is necessary to have not only a common 
goal, but at least a minimum agreement on the meaning 
of the situation, to allow the co-orientation of minds and 
the coordination of actions. Organizing oneself means 
(according to Weick) making sense together in and by 
means of joint activities” (Giroux, 2006: 32). So, as 
much as being a  system of production of goods and 
services, and according to Weick even more than being 
that, the organization should be a system facilitating the 
collective production of meaning (Giroux, 2006).
When corporate culture is discussed as a historical 
process and when we are interested in the experienced 
culture of the members of the organization, corporate 
culture tends to produce a double effect, of integration 
and of identity.
Integration implies a reciprocal loyalty of the work-
ers toward the company and the company towards its 
members (Dupriez, 2000). From the point of view that 
concerns us, participation in the collective creation of 
sense can explain individuals’ engagement in, or the 
disengagement from, operational, managerial, or strate-
gic actions (Vandangeon-Deng & Autissier, 2006: 170).
The expected identity effect of a culture searching 
for meaning is no longer the identification of the indi-
vidual with his or her company. In fact, this illusion is 
more utopian than real and it is interesting to remember 
the failures encountered by Westerners attempting to 
reproduce certain practices of socialization imported 
from other cultural areas. The expected effect is rather 
the individual construction of identity made up of rec-
ognition and belonging (Sainsaulieu, 1990), being rec-
ognized for what we are and for what we do; belonging 
4 The synthesis presented by Giroux (2006) has been a guide in the 
exploration of the paradoxical approach of Karl Weick; it highlights 
his original conception of creation of sense, of the organization and 
of the learning process.
to a group that shares the same search for meanings. We 
could thus claim that the issue of the production of 
sense is not only to understand what is happening in 
this or that situation, but that it could equally be, if not 
more likely to be, to produce a representation of what 
happens that conforms to what the person wants to be 
or wants to appear to be (Vidaillet, 2006: 117).
2.1.3.  Researching the cultural dimension 
of organizations also calls for a specific 
approach
Referring to this approach of culture within an organi-
zation, it is clear that corporate culture stems from a 
historical process rooted in a history and context which 
is unique in evolution. Therefore, our concern is to read 
corporate culture for what it is.
Decoding corporate culture is more complex than a 
simple survey of some items described as “cultural”. To 
do an in-depth study, it is necessary to move in stages 
and to use tools consistent with an anthropological 
approach which proceeds from the explicit to the 
implicit. That is to say, after recording cultural traits, 
we still need to consider what they mean to those who 
expressed them. Here, any researcher has to be 
extremely careful not to confuse the “stated” culture, 
the one the organization displays and that it wants to 
promote among its members and outside, with the 
“experienced” culture which is even more internalized 
than the “effective” culture and the only one in which 
reside the factors of group cohesion and adherence to 
the project of the company (Vanderlinden, 2009).
Identifying the cultural elements should be fol-
lowed by analysis. To do this, we need reading guide-
lines or models of analysis that place the observed 
elements in a cultural typology which, subsequently, 
enables us to point each type of culture in its organiza-
tional context. The MIME of ICHEC suggests tools, or 
rather an approach based on criteria recognized as rel-
evant to read the corporate culture in the specific con-
text of a given company. Indeed, as these tools cannot 
be universal, they have to be re-calibrated for each situ-
ation (Vanderlinden, 2009).5
5 Tools have been proposed to read some company’s situations in 
Romania; their making process is explained.

40 
B. Vanderlinden
2.2. The company, an open  system
“I hold it to be equally impossible to know the parts 
without knowing the whole, and to know the whole 
without knowing the parts.” It is from this dilemma 
stated by Pascal that the systemic approach was born. 
Our aim is to show that a  systemic approach to organi-
zations can provide a response to contemporary mana-
gerial challenges. But, first of all what is a systemic 
approach to organizations and what place does the 
cultural dimension have in this?
2.2.1.  Systemic approach: A search for coherence 
within a shared vision that gives sense
Joël de Rosnay defines the system as “a set of elements 
in dynamic interaction with each other organized so as 
to reach an objective” (de Rosnay, 1975). Concerning 
organizations, Morel and Ramanujal add: “Organizations 
are now routinely viewed as dynamic systems of adap-
tation and evolution that contain multiple parts which 
interact with one another and environment. Such a rep-
resentation is so common that it has acquired the status 
of a self-evident fact” (Morel & Ramanjual, 1999, cited 
by Fillol, 2006: 30) emphasizing here the interaction of 
the system with its environment.
The richness of the systemic approach is already 
evident. First of all, the system is perceived as a whole 
and with Edgar Morin, we bear in mind that “the whole 
is simultaneously greater and smaller than the sum of 
its parts” (Morin, 1990). Consequently, the organiza-
tion is teleological and the system is purpose-driven; 
the company participates in this logic (Moilanen, 
2001). Finally, Gérard Donnadieu recalls that openness 
is a major feature of complex systems (Donnadieu, 
1985; Donnadieu & Karsky, 2002).
Thus, adopting a systemic approach means adopt-
ing an approach that, instead of considering the differ-
ent parts separately, strives to understand holistically all 
the components of the system by focusing on their 
connections and their interactions. It also seeks to 
understand how each element contributes to the pur-
pose of the system while preserving its own identity 
(Yatchinovsky, 1999).
Applied to  management, this approach leads us to 
consider that “any organization composed of people in 
relationship to each other is a system” (Bériot, 2006: 294). 
Systems composed of human beings focus primarily on 
the relationships between these people even if inert ele-
ments, such as technology and conceptual tools, can inter-
act with users; these will be considered only in their 
relationships with the living elements, such as individuals, 
groups, or professional categories. Because they are alive, 
they may behave differently depending on the system of 
values to which they belong and their behavior will 
depend on the relationships they maintain with the other 
elements of the system (Bériot, 2006).
Now we turn to the notion of ramification of the 
systems. Any human system is always a subsystem of 
another broader system (Passet, 1979). Thus, a company 
consists of a set of subsystems one above the other: a 
team project is often more important than individual 
projects and this team project must fit into the compa-
ny’s project. But at the same time a kind of reverse 
direction is in operation: each overarching project gives 
meaning to the ones beneath it (Yatchinovsky, 1999).
Thus, we can consider any organization as a system 
which is complex, open to its environment, purpose-
driven and composed of subsystems in interrelations. 
We can represent it by the following Fig. 1. 
A company lives in an environment that influences 
it, has a purpose, determines strategic choices (strat-
egy), organizes itself to implement them (structure), 
benefits from skills (financial tools, legal, technologi-
cal, commercial,…) (techno structure) and is motivated 
by a  culture ( corporate culture).6
The interest of this approach comes from the 
dynamics inherent in any system. Indeed, one of its 
6 The figure can be completed by any other subsystem that concern 
management issues.
Fig.  1. A systemic approach of the company
Source: MIME, ICHEC.

 
Re-Thinking Our Model of Management 
41
major properties is its adaptability and therefore its 
ability to change but with a safeguard. A major condi-
tion for its survival, and its  performance, is maintaining 
its consistency.
In practice, this means that managers’ main focus 
should be on the interactions between subsystems and on 
ensuring their consistency. That is, when a change is 
made in the  system, at any level, it is essential to look at 
its potential impact on other subsystems. Thus, a change 
will only operate permanently in the company if it is done 
in an overall consistent way and if it meets the goals that 
the organization had clearly expressed in advance. It is 
the vision that will ultimately give meaning to the actions.
2.2.2.  Culture is a component of the system
In this systemic vision of the organization, the cultural 
dimension is taken into account at two different levels 
that complement each other. On the one hand, corporate 
culture is a subsystem of the complex system that is the 
company as a whole. On the other hand, culture acts on 
the system in its entirety since its role is to indicate the 
sense that the concrete actions and the proposed goals 
can have.
Ultimately, the concept of meaning is inseparable 
from that of globality. There is a possible meaning only 
when the actions and everyday daily life take place in a 
coherent whole. In a way, the need for meaning arises 
out of a need for consistency, which brings us back to 
the system as a whole.
Culture also intervenes at the level of individuals 
and their interactions, first through their cultural sensi-
tivity (Bennett, 1986, 1994),7 and then through the 
cultural traits that characterize them.
2.2.3.  Systemic approach, a key to approach 
all managerial concerns
The systemic approach invites us to take a holistic look 
at the company. To check the consistency of the system, 
a necessary condition for its performance, it is neces-
sary to develop tools allowing the relationships between 
7 Milton Bennett proposed a model with six sensitivity levels cor-
responding to the degree of openness to cultural differences; they go 
from refusal and negation of the differences to acceptance and 
integration of cultural specificities.
its various components to be analyzed on the one hand 
and on the other hand to be acted on.
MIME-ICHEC team has proposed a model of inter-
pretation by mobilizing various tools suggested in the 
literature. It is the result of a theoretical study which 
reviewed the compatibility or incompatibility8 between 
typologies for reading the strategy, the structure and the 
culture. This model is an operational tool enabling us to 
verify the consistency peculiar to any organizational 
system (Vanderlinden, 2009). But above all, it invites 
us to retain the method. In a very concrete way, within 
the system that is a company, for each business concern 
we must consider its interactions and effects with the 
various other subsystems.
Let us take some examples. To speak about coop-
erative  management essentially means that all stake-
holders are driven by a common goal that transcends 
their individual objectives. Therefore, it can only be 
considered within an organization that shares a strong 
culture of belonging, characterized by mutual trust, and 
constant interactions. At the same time strategy, struc-
ture, culture, human resources management, etc. must 
be mobilized adequately to promote this style of 
leadership.
To speak about a “learning company” also calls to 
mind a shared vision, a flexible structure encouraging 
teamwork and learning, a techno-structure allowing 
information to be easily shared, a culture based on 
strong relationships, sense of community, confidence, 
and cultural sensitivity.
To speak about CSR and not lapsing into superfi-
cial actions that have more to do with image, requires 
the concept to be closely integrated in the system.
We could give examples ad infinitum. Each com-
pany situation being unique, there is no master key and 
no one managerial model is better than the other. What 
matters here is the approach and we believe that, 
regardless of the chosen options, the coherence of the 
system must be present consistently at all levels of the 
company. With the vision as the starting point and 
passing through the teams it should be reflected in 
practices, tasks, and actions of each player/actor.
8 Bartlett & Ghoshal’s typology (1986, 1991) has been mobilized to 
examine international strategies.

42 
B. Vanderlinden
3. Contributions and Openings
We have tried to propose two new ideas. One concerns 
the concept of  culture and  corporate culture and the 
other aims to address the current companies’ concerns 
according to a systemic approach.
Thus, firstly, and against the currents of thought 
that have dominated the literature for decades, the 
MIME-ICHEC team suggests approaching culture as 
being what gives sense to the relationship of one person 
with other people and with their environment (Weick, 
1995; Dupriez & Simons, 2000; D’Iribarne, 2003, 
2008; Dupriez, 2006). Isn’t making sense, following an 
expression of Karl Weick’s “transforming a universe of 
experience into an intelligible world?” (Weick, 1993, 
cited by Giroux, 2006). Understanding a culture, is thus 
trying to find out what interpretation those who share 
this culture give to situations, events, and actions of 
others and to their own, and how they react to them 
(D’Iribarne, 2003; Sauquet & Vielajus, 2014).
The cultural dimension of  management can be seen 
in the continuity of this approach. Producing meaning 
and coordinating the activities of its members in one 
direction is without doubt the primary function of what 
has been called corporate culture (Sainsaulieu, 1990). 
The two concepts that of culture in its general sense and 
business culture, are not all two carriers and creators of 
meaning? (Dupriez & Vanderlinden, 2008, 2009, 2014).
At a research level, this way of addressing the cul-
tural dimension results in methodological choices that 
often vary from traditional practices. Going to the heart 
of culture and discovering what makes sense implies a 
deep and complex study that cannot be accomplished 
using ready-made tools. Going against the flow of the 
hypothetical-deductive approach, we adopt an abduc-
tive approach where, instead of being given, the theory 
is to be discovered. This leads to the use of a contextual 
approach, a constructivist and interpretative epistemo-
logical attitude, a data collection methodology which 
focuses on observation and interviews, and a qualitative 
processing of the information gathered (Dupriez & 
Vanderlinden, 2013, 2014).
Secondly, to answer the current concerns of the 
companies that are evolving in a context characterized 
by complexity and uncertainty, we have proposed a 
radically different approach to the current hierarchical, 
rational, and mechanical type of management.
The systemic approach strives to describe, to 
understand, and to support the interactions and their 
successive adaptations of all the components of the 
 system that contribute to the same purpose. On the one 
hand, these components which constitute subsystems 
must form a coherent whole to respond to the con-
straints and opportunities of the environment and, on 
the other hand, the system can only be consistent if it 
clearly defines its purpose. Corporate culture cannot be 
isolated from the other elements in which it operates 
and is constructed. As a creator of meaning, it is a key 
component of the company: it mobilizes, channelizes 
and has a double effect, it helps in the construction of 
identity and integration.
The systemic approach is therefore presented as a 
framework that allows us to express the implemented 
logic. Management style, change management, organi-
zational learning, management teams, and all other 
managerial concerns will be able to find an answer to 
their integration in this approach.
References
Bartlett, C. A. (1986), Building and managing the transna-
tional: The new organizational challenge. In Competition 
in Global Industries, M. E. Porter (ed.), pp. 367–401, 
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Bartlett, C. A. & Ghoshal, S. (1991), Le Management Sans 
Frontières, Paris: Éditions d’Organisation. 
Bartlett, C. A. & Ghoshal, S. (1998/2002), Managing Across 
Borders: The Transnational Solution, Massachusetts: 
Harvard Business School Press.
Bériot, D. (2006), Manager par L’Approche Systémique, 
Paris, Eyrolles: Éditions d’Organisation.
Bollinger, D. & Hofstede, G. (1987), Les Différences 
Culturelles Dans le Management: Comment Chaque Pays 
Gère-t-il ses Hommes ? Paris: Éditions d’Organisation.
Camilleri, C. (1989), La culture et l’identité culturelle: 
Champ notionnel et devenir. In Chocs de Cultures: 
Concepts et Enjeux Pratiques de L’Interculturel, 
C. Carmel and M. Cohen-Emerique (eds.), Paris: 
L’Harmattan, coll. Espaces culturels.
Camilleri, C. & Vinsonneau, G. (1996), Psychologie et 
Culture, Paris: Armand Colin.
De Rosnay, J. (1975), Le Macroscope: Vers Une Vision 
Globale, Paris: Seuil.
D’Iribarne, P. (1977), The usefulness of an ethnographic 
approach to the international comparison of organisa-

 
Re-Thinking Our Model of Management 
43
tion, International Studies of Management and 
Organisations, 26(4), 30–47. 
D’Iribarne, P. (1989), La Logique de L’Honneur, Gestion des 
Entreprises et Traditions Nationales, Paris: Seuil. 
D’Iribarne, P. (2003), Le Tiers-Monde qui Réussit: Nouveaux 
Modèles, Paris: Odile Jacob.
D’Iribarne, P. (2008), Penser la Diversité du Monde, Paris: 
Seuil. 
D’Iribarne, P. (avec Henry A., Segal, J.-P., Chevrier, S., & 
Globokar, T.) (1998), Cultures et Mondialisation: Gérer 
Par-delà les Frontières, Paris: Seuil. 
Donnadieu, G. (1985), L’approche systémique: De quoi 
s’agit-il?, Arts et Métiers Magazine ( November).
Donnadieu, G. & Karsky, M. (2002), La Systémique, Penser 
et Agir Dans la Complexité, Paris: Éditions Liaisons.
Dupriez, P. (2000), Culture et management, un vieux couple 
pour le meilleur et pour le pire. In La Résistance 
Culturelle: Fondements, Applications e Implications du 
Management Interculturel, P. Dupriez and S. Simons 
(eds.), Bruxelles: De Boeck, 2 ème édition, 2002.
Dupriez, P. (2005), Le couple culture et management dans un 
contexte de transition. In Entreprises Roumaines en 
Transition: Études de Cultures Organisationnelles, 
P. Dupriez (sous la direction de), Paris: L’Harmattan, 
Cedimes.
Dupriez, P. (2006), De Culture et de Sens: Orientations de 
Recherches en Management Interculturel, Textes et 
Réflexions, Bruxelles: MIME. 
Dupriez, P. (2014), Culture et cultures. In Au Cœur de la 
Dimension Culturelle du Management, D. Pierre and 
B.Vanderlinden (eds.), à paraître.
Dupriez, P. & Simons, S. (2000), La Résistance Culturelle: 
Fondements, Applications e Implications du Management 
Interculturel, Bruxelles: De Boeck, 2 ème édn., 2002.
Dupriez, P. & Vanderlinden, B. (sous la direction de) (2014), 
Au Cœur de la Dimension Culturelle du Management, à 
paraître.
Dupriez, P. & Vanderlinden, B. (2014), Culture d’entreprise, 
le dit et le vécu. In Au Cœur de la Dimension Culturelle 
du Management, D. Pierre and B.Vanderlinden (eds.), à 
paraître.
Fillol, C. (2006), L’émergence de l’entreprise apprenante et 
son instrumentalisation: Études de cas chez EDF, Thèse 
de doctorat, Université Paris Dauphine.
Giroux, N. (2006), La démarche paradoxale de Karl E. 
Weick. In Les Défis du Sensemaking en Entreprise, D. 
Autissier and F. Bensebaa (eds.), Paris: Economica.
Godelier, M. (1984), L’idéel et le Matériel: Pensée, Économie, 
Sociétés, Paris: Fayard. 
Godelier, M. (2007), Au Fondement des Sociétés Humaines: 
Ce Que Nous Apprend L’Anthropologie, Paris: Albin 
Michel.
Hall, E. T. (1971), La Dimension Cachée, Paris: Seuil. 
Hall, E. T. (1979), Au-Delà de la Culture, Paris: Seuil. 
Hall, E. T. (1984), Le Langage Silencieux, Paris: Seuil. 
Traduction française de ‘The Silent’.
Hofstede, G. (1984), Culture Consequences, Beverly Hills: 
Sage Publications. 
Hofstede, G., Neuijen, B., Daval-Ohayv, D., & Sanders, G. 
(1990), Measuring organisational culture: A qualitative 
and quantitative study across twenty cases, Administra-
tive Science Quarterly, (2), 286–316. 
Hofstede, G. (1994), Cultures and Organizations: Software 
of the Mind, London: Harper Collins.
Le Moigne, J.-L. (1990), Systémique et Complexité. In 
Numéro Spécial de la Revue Internationale de 
Systémique, co-direction avec M. Orillard (ed.).
Le Moigne, J.-L. (1995), Intelligence stratégique de la com-
plexité. In Numéro Spécial de la Revue Internationale de 
Systémique, co-direction avec M.Orillard.
Le Moigne, J.-L. & Morin, E. (1999), L’Intelligence de la 
Complexité, Paris: L’Harmattan.
Levi-Strauss, C. (1950), Introduction à l’euvre de Marcel 
Mauss. In Sociologie et Anthropologie, M. Mauss (ed.). 
Paris: PUF. 
Levi-Strauss, C. (1974), Anthropologie Structurale, Paris: 
Plon.
Livian, Y.-F. (2013), Pour en finir avec Hofstede: Renouveler 
les recherches en management intercultural. In Nouveaux 
Défis du Management International, V. Carbonne, 
S. Nivoix, and J.P. Lemaire (coordinateurs), Paris: Gualino 
et Atlas-AFMI. 
Mauss, M. (1950), Sociologie et Anthropologie, Paris: PUF. 
Meier, O. (2004), Management Interculturel. Stratégie: 
Organisation. Performance, Paris: Dunod. 
Mintzberg, H. (1982), Structure et Dynamique des 
Organisations, Paris: Éditions d’Organisation.
Moilanen, R. L. (2001), Diagnostic tools for learning organi-
zations. In The Learning Organization, pp. 6–20.
Moran, R. T. & Xardel, D. (1994), Au-delà des Cultures: Les 
Enjeux du Management Interculturel, Paris: Interéditions. 
Morin, E. (1990), Introduction à La Pensée Complexe, Paris: 
ESF.
Morin, P. & Delavallée É. (2000), Le Manager à L’Ecoute 
des Sociologues, Paris: Éditions d’Organisation.
Passet, R. (1979), L’Économique et le Vivant, Paris: Payot.
Quinn, R. E. (1991), Beyond Rational Management, 
Mastering the Paradoxes and Competing Demands of 

44 
B. Vanderlinden
High Performance, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass (first 
published in 1988).
Quinn, R. E. & Spreitzer, G. M. (1991), The psychometrics 
of the competing values culture instrument and an analy-
sis of the impact of organizational culture on quality of 
live, Research in Organizational Change and 
Development, 5, 115–142. 
Quinn, R. E., Faerman, S. R., Thompson, M. P., & McGran, 
M. R. (2002), Becoming a Master Manager: A 
Competency Framework (3rd edn.), Hoboken: John 
Wiley and Sons Inc. (first published 1990).
Sainsaulieu, R. (1987), Sociologie de L’Organisation et de 
L’Entreprise, Paris: Dalloz.
Sainsaulieu, R. (1990), Culture-Entreprise-Société. In 
Cultures d’Entreprise: Vous Avez dit Cultures? Louvain-
la-Neuve: UCL, Institut des sciences du travail.
Sauquet, M. & Vielajus, M. (2014), La démarche d’intelligence 
de l’autre: Observer, questionner, prendre en compte. In 
Au Cœur de la Dimension Culturelle du Management, 
P. Dupriez and B. Vanderlinden (eds.), à paraître. 
Schein, E. (1985), Organizational Culture and Leadership, 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Schneider, S. & Barsoux, J.-L. (1997), Managing Across 
Cultures, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall, Pearson 
Education Limited.
Schneider, S. & Barsoux, J.-L. (2003), Management Intercul-
turel (2nd edn.), France: Pearson Education Limited.
Selznick, P. (1957), Leadership in Administration: A 
Sociological Interpretation, New York: Harper & Row.
Skinner, B. F. (1971), Beyond Freedom and Dignity, New 
York: Knopf.
Sonnenfeld, J. A. (1988), The Hero’s Farewell: What 
Happens When CEOs Retire, New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Sonnenfeld, J. A., Peiperl, M. A., & Kotter, J. P. (1992), 
Strategic determinants of managerial labor markets: 
A career systems view. In Human Resource Strategies, 
G. Salaman et al. (eds.), London: Sage Publications 
(reprinted 1999).
Thevenet, M. (1986), Audit de la Culture D’Entreprise, Paris: 
Éditions d’Organisation.
Thevenet, M. (1993), La Culture D’Entreprise, Que Sais-Je? 
Paris: PUF. 
Triandis, H. C. (1972), The Analysis of Subjective Culture, 
New York: Wiley.
Triandis, H. C. (1994), Culture and Social Behavior, New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Triandis, H. C. (1995), Individualism and Collectivism, 
Boulder: Westview.
Triandis, H. C. (2002), Subjective culture. In Online Readings 
in Psychology and Culture, W. J. Lonner, D. L. Dinnel, S. 
A. Hayes and D. N. Sattler (eds.), Bellingham: Center for 
Cross-Cultural Research, Western Washington University.
Trompenaars, F. (1993), L’Entreprise Multiculturelle, Paris: 
Maxima.
Vandangeon-Derumez, I. & Autissier, D. (2006), Construire 
du sens pour réussir les projets de changement. In Les 
Défis du Sensemaking en Entreprise, D. Autissier and F. 
Bensebaa (eds.), Paris: Economica.
Vanderlinden, B. (2002), Expliciter l’implicite. À propos des 
structures implicites d’organisation. In Communication 
& Organisation, Bordeaux, Greco, (2nd trimester), 
pp. 98–119.
Vanderlinden, B. (2005), Outils d’analyse et d’interprétation 
des cultures organisationnelles.In Entreprises Roumaines 
en Transition. Études de Cultures Organisationnelles, 
P. Dupriez (ed.), Paris: L’Harmattan, Cedimes.
Vanderlinden, B. (2009), Cultures, Management et 
Performance: Leçons de Quelques Situations Roumaines, 
Târgoviste: Bibliotheca.
Vanderlinden, B. (2014), La culture, composante d’un sys-
tême ouvert. In Au Cœur de la Dimension Culturelle du 
Management, P. Dupriez and B. Vanderlinden (eds.), à 
paraître.
Vanderlinden, B. & Dupriez, P. (2009), Aux Sources du 
Management Interculturel, Brussels: ICHEC–MIME.
Vanderlinden, B., Fratila, C., & Croitoru, G. (2005), Privatisées 
ou nouvelle, trois sas d’entreprises. In Entreprises Roumaines 
en Transition. Études de Cultures Organisationnelles, P. 
Dupriez (ed.), Paris: L’Harmattan, Cedimes.
Vidaillet, B. (2006), Comment l’envie déclenche des proces-
sus de sensemaking dans les organisations. In Les Défis 
du Sensemaking en Entreprise, D. Autissier and 
F. Bensebaa (eds.), Paris: Economica.
Walker, D. M., Walker, T., & Schmitz, J. (2003), Doing 
Business Internationally: The Guide to Cross-Cultural 
Success (2nd edn.), New York: McGraw-Hill.
Weick, K. E. (1993), Sensemaking in organizations: Small 
structures with large consequences. In Social Psychology 
in Organizations: Advances in Theory and Research, 
K. J. Murnighan (ed.), pp. 10–37, Englewood Cliffs: 
Prentice Hall.
Weick, K. E. (1995), Sensemaking in Organizations, London: 
Sage Publications.
Weick, K. E. & Quinn, E. (1999), Organizational change and 
development, Annual Review of Psychology, 361–386.
Yatchinovsky, A. (1999), L’Approche Systémique: Pour 
Gérer L’Incertitude et la Complexité, Paris: ESF.

Part II
Sustainable Development 
and Business  Sustainability 

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

47
Chapter 6
 Social Capital and Business  Sustainability: 
Defining, Measuring, and  Assessing Its Impact 
on Cluster Performance 
in the Podkarpackie Region of Poland
Zbigniew Bochniarz
Evans School of Public Affairs, University of Washington
Over the last 30 years, social capital (SC) has become 
a popular subject of studies in social sciences. In devel-
opmental and regional economics, as well as in man-
agement, the category of SC is usually linked with 
development of industrial  clusters and their perfor-
mance. In 2006, the European Commission decided to 
allocate a significant portion of the European Union 
(EU) Regional Development Fund to support cluster 
initiatives in its financial perspective of 2007–2013. 
Since then, the category of SC, as a catalyst of cluster-
ing, became important for EU policy makers in both the 
public and private sectors when attempting to deter-
mine how to allocate limited resources effectively and 
efficiently. 
The objectives of this chapter are to define what SC 
means for economists and business leaders; how to 
measure its growth and assess its impact on cluster 
performance, particularly for business sustainability 
and regional prosperity; and how to improve policy 
making processes in resource allocation for cluster sup-
port in public and business sectors.
The first part of this chapter will clarify basic defi-
nitions of SC, sustainability, and  sustainable business. 
Based on the proposed definition, the main hypothesis 
will be presented: the size of accumulated SC and its 
growth positively impacts cluster performance produc-
ing synergetic effects — positive externalities — result-
ing from better cooperation and more trust among 
major actors within the cluster. In order to prove such a 
hypothesis,  measurements of social capital will be pro-
posed and verified through the 2014 pilot survey con-
ducted by researchers in the Podkarpackie Region of 
Poland. This chapter will summarize the pilot survey 
conducted, present methodological recommendations 
for further research on social capital, and will elaborate 
initial policy recommendations on assessing cluster 
performance, particularly cluster initiatives.
1. Introduction
There are thousands of publications devoted to examin-
ing SC and its roles in families, communities, and 
nations as well as regional and national economies. 
This has been a trendy subject investigated intensely by 
sociologists, ecologists, political scientists, and econo-
mists over the past 30 years. This chapter focuses on 
SC from the point of view of an economist involved in 
institutional and policy design, as well as management 
and ecology. The inspiration for this chapter was the 
desire to reflect on the author’s experiences in 

48 
Z. Bochniarz
designing and implementing an international research 
project on “Effective  Clusters — the Base for Innovation 
and the Source of Sustainable Regional Development.” 
This research began last fall in the Podkarpackie 
Region of Poland and is scheduled to continue in 
Washington State, USA in the Spring and Summer of 
2014 and summarized at an international conference 
planned in Poland for Spring 2015. The project is 
hosted by the Rzeszow School of Business (Wyzsza 
Szkola Zarzadzania w Rzeszowie) and the Evans School 
of Public Affairs at the University of Washington 
(Seattle), in collaboration with the Adam Mickiewicz 
University in Poznan (Poland) and the Free University 
of Amsterdam (The Netherlands). 
The main goal of this research project is to develop 
a methodology to analyze and evaluate cluster perfor-
mance and apply it to aerospace clusters in Poland 
(Dolina Lotnicza) and the US (Washington State 
Aerospace Cluster). The new cluster evaluation method-
ology will identify effective clusters and collect their 
best practices and problem solving procedures for key 
aerospace cluster stakeholders — business, public, and 
non-governmental sector leaders. These two clusters are 
the most advanced in their respective regions and are the 
major contributors to their regional economies. For that 
reason, the application of research findings should lead 
not only to significant improvement in these clusters’ 
performance, but also significantly contribute to sustain-
able regional development and prosperity.
Despite the growing significance of industrial clus-
ters in the Polish economy, their potential is still far 
behind the world’s leading economies. Effective cluster 
policy is particularly critical for the poorest European 
regions — among them the Podkarpackie Voivodship 
(one of 16 administrative regions in Poland) which had 
the country’s lowest GDP per capita in 2012. In order 
to help these regions improve competitiveness and 
innovation, the European Commission modified the 
rules of regional policy and decided to re-allocate the 
bulk of its resources to support existing and emerging 
clusters in its financial perspective for 2007–2013. This 
policy change significantly boosted the numbers of 
emerging clusters or cluster initiatives throughout the 
European Union (EU). In Poland, for instance, this new 
policy resulted in the establishment of about 250 clus-
ters and cluster initiatives by the end of 2012. 
Unfortunately, according to the Polish Agency for 
Enterprise Development (PARP), about 75% of their 
support for about 80 cluster initiatives failed to meet 
the promised objectives (PARP, 2012; Zachariasz, 
2012). France experienced a similar “success” ratio as 
Poland, while Finland, Germany and the UK reached at 
least 75–80% effectiveness in cluster support 
(Czyzewska, 2013). These facts from the EU cluster 
support policy motivated the research team to begin 
developing a new evaluation methodology and collec-
tion of best practices. 
Ineffective cluster support was not a problem in the 
Podkarpackie Region, which at the turn of the 21st 
century began to develop faster than most of the other 
poorest regions in Europe, thanks to visionary leader-
ship and entrepreneurship in all sectors and good gov-
ernance at the local and regional levels (Bochniarz & 
Sienko, 2008). As a result, industrial clusters started to 
emerge in the region and were further supported by the 
EU’s structural funds. One of the most dynamic and 
high-tech clusters in the region is called Dolina Lotnicza 
(Aviation Valley), with over 100 firms and over USD 
1 bn in revenue in 2012. It is worth mentioning that the 
initial resources for the Aviation Valley cluster support 
came out not from the governmental but from the cor-
porate sector — from the United Technology 
Corporation (UTC), which owned several large manu-
facturing firms in this region — with initial funding of 
USD 300,000 (split equally at USD 60,000) for five 
years since 2003. 
Today, Dolina Lotnicza hosts representatives of the 
major global aviation manufacturers (e.g., Airbus, 
Boeing, GE, Goodrich, Sikorsky, Whitney and Pratt, 
etc.) and is regarded as the future regional flagship. 
However, it is still far from reaching the necessary level 
of synergy to realize its full potential. Internal commu-
nication, management, and innovation are not yet oper-
ating at levels expected by its major stakeholders.
2.  Defining  Social Capital, 
 Sustainability and Effective Clusters
Although the term SC appeared sporadically in social 
 science literature in the 1970s, the real breakthrough in 
defining this category happened in the 1980s with con-
tributions from Bourdieu (1986), Coleman (1988), and 

 
Social Capital and Business Sustainability 
49
Lin (1986). The following decades saw an explosion of 
studies on SC. There is also an ongoing process of 
institutionalization of the category of SC as an impor-
tant factor influencing social and economic develop-
ment by international organizations such as the United 
Nations, International Monetary Fund (IMF), World 
Bank and Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD). 
In a comprehensive study on SC, Lin (2001) defines 
capital, as “investment of resources with expected 
returns in the marketplace” (Lin, 2001: 3). Making a 
clear distinction between capital and human capital, 
he then defines SC as “investment in social relations 
with expected returns in the marketplace” (op cit.: 19).
In a similar way, Pierre Bourdieu defined the SC as 
a private investment in social networks that brings the 
owner expected benefits such as wealth, and “symbolic 
capital” — representing symbols of social position/
strata (1986). Also James Coleman regarded SC as an 
individual good that could be traded through social 
networks for the advance of human capital or for get-
ting things done (1988).
Contrary to earlier researchers treating SC as an 
individual or private good, there is another group of 
authors defining SC as a collective or even public good: 
Fukuyama (1997, 2000), Grootaert (1997), Huber 
(2008), Putnam (2000, 2003), Rosenfeld (2007), Roman 
(2007), and Woolcock & Narayan (2000).
For Francis Fukuyama, SC is a set of informal 
norms and rules as well as ethical values shared by 
individuals and social groups that enable them to coop-
erate effectively (1999, 2002). For Robert Putnam, SC 
does not belong to anybody but is a public good repre-
senting a set of social norms and civic attitudes sup-
porting common actions and trust — both interpersonal 
and in public institutions (1993). In a similar way, SC 
is defined by experts from the OECD as, “networks 
together with shared norms, values, and understanding 
that facilitate cooperation within or among groups” 
(OECD, 2001). The World Bank team expands this 
definition further by adding “institutions, relationships, 
attitudes, and values that govern interactions among 
people and contribute to economic and social develop-
ment.” (Grootaert & van Bestelaer, 2002).
Interesting proposition of the SC concept offers 
Franz Huber defining it as “… resources embedded in 
social networks which can be potentially accessed or 
are actually used by individuals for action …” (Huber, 
2008: 19). Then he proposes in addition to this “inter-
nal  social capital (resources mobilized through rela-
tionships between members of the collectivity)” an 
“… external social capital (resources mobilized through 
relationships between members of the collectivity and 
actors outside of the collectivity)” (ibid.: 20). As an 
example for this dual character of SC Huber uses eco-
nomic  clusters, which depends on both — access to 
knowledge within the cluster and from other clusters 
and individuals outside. 
Phil Cook adds notions of reciprocity, trust and “… 
exchange for political or economic purposes” to his 
definition of SC (Cooke, 2007: 102), arguing that in 
knowledge-based industries businesses are more 
engaged than others in building and performing SC.
SC is defined in a similar way by Carlos Roman — 
a system of social relationships based on trust and work-
ing according to well-known rules (Roman, 2007). 
Roman’s methods of  measurements of SC will be dis-
cussed later this chapter.
Finally, Stuart Rosenfeld summarizes the notion of 
SC in clusters that gives opportunities to “know-who” 
leading to build “know-how” (2003). He also classifies 
SC from the point of view of openness as positive and 
negative SC (Rosenfeld, 2007). Positive SC creates 
economic advantages that are major forces for cluster-
ing. Negative SC could start developing when there are 
efforts to limit membership in clusters and cultivate 
insularity or lock-in.
In summary, we may conclude: SC is defined as a 
special type of capital resulting from investments in 
building relations, institutions and networks that 
produce collaborative attitudes, shared norms and 
values, mutual understanding and trust. These are 
critical factors for cooperation with other types of capital 
and thus contribute to sustainable development (SD).
There are many definitions of  sustainability. Often the 
term “sustainability” is used as a substitute for “sustaina-
ble development” (Adams, 2006) or as an intergenera-
tional equity (Ott, 2003). In fact, sustainability applied 
in many disciplines means maintaining a state of a 
dynamic balance in a system with its major elements 
interacting with each other and its relations with the 
higher system.

50 
Z. Bochniarz
In a biological system,  sustainability is related to 
securing necessary diversity and reproductive capacity. 
For the global environment, sustainability means that 
earth’s basic ecosystems are dynamically balanced and 
life on the planet is secure. 
For human beings, sustainability means the long-
term maintenance of their carrying capacity (life sup-
porting ecosystem) that secures their non-declining 
wealth and reproduction with limitation to natural 
endowments (natural capital), making the foundation 
for carrying capacity to secure intergenerational equity 
(Pezzey & Toman, 2002).
Economists have addressed conceptual problems of 
SD with respect to intergenerational equity (Solow, 1974; 
Hartwick, 1977), by requiring non-declining resource 
endowment and introducing the “Hartwick Rule”.
The UN World Commission on Environment and 
Development report defined SD as “development that 
meets the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs” (Brundtland, 1987: 43).
In order to operationalize, there are two approaches 
to sustainability: (i) maximizing wealth (usually based 
on GDP); and (ii) maintaining non-declining capital 
(non-declining total capital). 
Non-declining wealth is often measured by one of 
the two sustainability indicators:
• 
Non-declining income per capita (mostly GDP 
(PPP) per capita);
• 
Non-declining genuine (adjusted net) savings (gen-
uine domestic savings (GDS) or adjusted net sav-
ings (ANS)).
David Pearce introduced the GDS indicator in 1994 
and the United Nations adapted it in the UN Statistical 
Yearbook in 1999:
GDS =  GDP − C − Kmf D + EdI 
− EngD − MinD − ForD − CDD,
where GDS = genuine domestic savings; GDP = gross 
domestic product; C = annual consumption; Kmf D = 
capital fixed depreciation; EdI = education expendi-
tures (investment in human capital); EngD = energy 
resource depletion (depreciation of natural capital); 
MinD = mineral resource depletion (depreciation of 
natural capital); ForD = forest depletion (depreciation 
of natural capital); CDD = damage to the environment 
due to carbon dioxide emission (depreciation of natural 
capital).
Expanding the original concepts of Solow (1974), 
Hartwick (1977) and Pearce (1989), Bochniarz & 
Bolan (2005) introduced the Non-Declining Total 
Capital sustainability indicator which is based on four 
types of capital: 
TK = Km + Kn + Kh + Ks = constant (non-declining),
where Km = man-made capital (physical and financial); 
Kn = natural capital; Kh = human capital; Ks =  social 
capital.
 Sustainable business (SB), often referred to as 
green business, is an enterprise that is globally and 
locally environment friendly, socially responsible, and 
economically sound. For that reason SB is also described 
as an enterprise that strives to meet this triple bottom line.
In a popular definition endorsed by International 
Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) (Adams & 
Jeanrenaud, 2008), an SB or green business should match 
the following four criteria (Coon, 2009): (i) it incorpo-
rates principles of sustainability into each of its business 
decisions; (ii) it supplies environmentally friendly prod-
ucts or services that replaces demand for non-green prod-
ucts and/or services; (iii) it is greener than traditional 
competition; (iv) it has made an enduring commitment to 
environmental principles in its business operations.
From an economics point of view, SB means an 
enterprise that maintains its competitive advantage 
coming from its unique value chain (Porter, 2008). It 
requires a strategic approach to SB, including optimiza-
tion of the firms value chain and diamond of competi-
tion (Porter & Kramer, 2006).
The last category that has to be defined is  clusters. 
The research project embraced the most popular defini-
tion, credited to Michael Porter: Clusters are geographic 
concentrations of interconnected companies, special-
ized suppliers, service providers, firms in related 
industries, and associated institutions that can cooper-
ate and compete in particular fields (Porter, 2008: 213). 
There is an interesting dynamics in cluster devel-
opment based on their integration from functional 
clusters through clumps to working clusters described 
(Fig. 1) by Derik Andreoli (Bochniarz, et al., 2008). 

 
Social Capital and Business Sustainability 
51
Functional  clusters are spatial networks of like and 
functionally linked industries, which enjoy the basic 
positive externalities coming from co-location known 
in economics literature as Marshallian externalities 
(Runiewicz-Wardyn, 2013). The higher level of inte-
gration represent clumps, represented by groups of 
functionally linked firms in which the physical distance 
separating member firms does not prohibit the range of 
benefits that are made possible through frequent inter-
actions. The progress of integration moves up to the 
level of working clusters, where firms and other 
organizations, including academic, governmental, and 
other institutions, maximize benefits from synergetic 
effects coming from integration, cooperation, and com-
petition within the clusters — Porterian externalities 
(ibid.). Finally, there are some other externalities com-
ing from urbanization diversity, creating benefits from 
cluster openness and innovation spillover between 
 co-located clusters — Jacobsian externalities (ibid.).
Taking into account the dynamics of cluster devel-
opment and growing synergy along with cluster inte-
gration we came to formulate the following definition: 
The effective cluster is characterized by rich SC that 
enables all participants to efficiently cooperate, which 
leads to maximum generation of positive externalities 
coming not only from co-location but also from build-
ing collaborative synergy within the cluster and its 
openness for cooperation with other clusters, leading to 
knowledge spillovers among them and increasing 
innovations.
3. Research Hypothesis
Based on the above-mentioned assumptions and defini-
tions of the basic categories, as well as on several stud-
ies in this field including a.o. Kourtit & Nijkamp 
(2012), Caragliu & Nijkamp (2011), Westlund & Adam 
(2010), the researchers formulated the following three 
hypotheses to be verified:
• 
Hypothesis 1: The process of cluster development 
from its functional stage to the stage of the effective 
cluster is strongly influenced by increases in SC.
• 
Hypothesis 2: The integration process of a cluster 
fueled by SC has a positive effect on its economic 
performance. 
• 
Hypothesis 3: The progress in cluster development 
accompanied by growing SC contributes to the 
 sustainability of the regional economy.
At the end of February 2014, a field research pro-
ject began work to test these hypotheses.
4.  The Applied System 
of  Measurements
There are two basic approaches to measure the SC 
value — according to Fukuyama (1999) — either by 
conducting census of groups and their members or by 
using surveys (1999: 6). He proposed a third method 
based on a metrics, which could be applied within a 
private firm. Due to the interests of the project in meas-
uring SC within clusters, a combination of survey and 
census method will be applied. 
The economic value of SC depends on time 
invested in developing relations and networks, institu-
tions and shared values, attitudes and trust within a 
certain group of people. This begins at the micro level, 
for example a family, and continues through firms, 
clusters and regions, to the macro level of a nation or 
even global community (Bochniarz et al., 2008). A very 
similar approach to the measurement of SC was pub-
lished by Roman (2007), with a set of complex indica-
tors assessing its value mainly through surveys. For that 
reason, the research team adapted Roman’s following 
indicators and applied them to the Podkarpackie Region 
to verify their usefulness. 
Fig. 1.  Dynamics of cluster development
Sources: Andreoli (Bochniarz et al., 2008).

52 
Z. Bochniarz
There are four groups of indicators for measuring SC:
• 
Indicators measuring associations: assessing the 
size of the investment in SC.
• 
Indicators measuring trust: assessing one of the 
most desired impact of SC.
• 
Indicators measuring existing institutions: assessing 
business and political environment.
• 
Indicators measuring results:  assessing the impact 
of SC.
The four groups of indicators were split into a series 
of specific questions which included a variety of research 
methods — from simple surveys through in-depth inter-
views and participatory assessment workshops. In addi-
tion to primary information collection, a comprehensive 
desk study is underway based on the secondary data.
5. Assessing Initial Results
The first two stages of the field research — surveys and 
interviews — in the Podkarpackie Region have been 
recently completed. The initial results indicate that 
there has been a significant investment in SC by busi-
ness leaders of the Aviation Valley cluster in order to 
move toward the goal of higher efficiency. The initial 
interviews indicated that the top business leaders 
invested about 12.5% of their time for cluster activities, 
which was the equivalent of USD 900,000 in 2013. The 
cluster association hold regular monthly meetings, 
established many working groups to resolve emerging 
problems and/or to respond to future challenges and 
opportunities. As the result of their activities the trust in 
the association has significantly increased and is well 
illustrated by the number of cluster members, which has 
quadrupled since 2003, reaching 120 in April 2014. The 
monetary value of the SC created in 2013 measured by 
the time invested in building cluster relations, partici-
pating in joint activities, and resolving problems was 
3,180,000 PLN or over USD 1 mn. Taking these facts 
into account, we came to conclusions that this type of 
investment in SC supports the Hypothesis 1: increasing 
SC supports integration of the cluster and increases 
its synergies and positive externalities.
In terms of economic performance, the cluster has 
been growing drastically, with sales quadrupling during 
the period of 2003–2008 (Polish Information and 
Foreign Investment Agency et al., 2012). This unprec-
edented growth is closely tied to foreign direct invest-
ment (FDI), since the majority of sales came out of 
companies that were privatized by large multinational 
corporations. They invested more than USD 2 bn in 
new machines and technologies and introduced thou-
sands of new patents since 2003 (ResEco Firma, 2014). 
This information contributes to verification of 
Hypothesis 2: progressing integration of the cluster 
improves its economic performance.
Finally, one might notice that Polish aviation com-
panies from this poorest (according to GDP per capita) 
Polish region offer advanced products and services and 
are present in all major supply chains, to the extent that 
almost every passenger aircraft in the world is equipped 
with at least one part manufactured in Poland. Aviation 
Valley represents a very sophisticated and technologi-
cally advanced industry with over 90% of production 
targeted toward the most competitive global markets. It 
also means that this cluster has a well-educated and 
skilled workforce that is earning decent salaries and 
thus contributing to the wealth of the region and its  sus-
tainability. The number of employees in the cluster has 
increased significantly, from 9,000 in 2003 to 23,000 in 
2014. This positive picture is illustrated in economic 
terms by the total export sales from USD 250 mn in 
2003 to USD 2 bn in 2013 (ibid.). All these facts con-
tribute to the verification of Hypothesis 3: progress in 
cluster development accompanied by growth of its 
SC contributes to SD of the whole region.
6. Conclusions
The descriptive analysis of the initial results from the 
field looks promising, but it should be further verified 
by more rigorous quantitative analysis of the three 
hypotheses. There is no doubt that the cluster and the 
region as a whole are moving toward a more sustaina-
ble path of development. Completing the field research 
and desk studies will lay the foundation for deeper 
analysis and design of an appropriate cluster upgrading 
policy. This policy will be focused on further decreas-
ing the weak links within the cluster and enhancing its 
strengths to improve its competitiveness. It will also 
include the elimination of existing bottlenecks and 

 
Social Capital and Business Sustainability 
53
unnecessary red tape, and investment in necessary 
types of capital, including human and social ones. 
There is hope that this project will convince busi-
ness and political leaders that investing in SC helps the 
participating actors to advance from a functional cluster 
to an effective one by reaching a higher level of devel-
opment, better economic performance, and more effec-
tive contributions to the prosperity of the regional 
community.
References
Adams, W. M. (2006), The future of sustainability: 
Re-thinking environment and development in the 
twenty-first century, Report of the IUCN Renowned 
Thinkers Meeting, January 29–31. 
Adams, W. M. & Jeanrenaud, S. J. (2008), Transition to 
Sustainability: Towards a Humane and Diverse World, 
p. 108, Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.
Bochniarz, Z. et al. (2008), Clustering and social capital: 
Past and current research at the University of 
Washington and unanswered questions, at the Annual 
MOC Faculty Workshop of the Harvard Business 
School, December 7.
Bochniarz, Z. & Bolan, R. (2004), Building institutional 
capacity for biodiversity and rural sustainability. In The 
Role of Biodiversity Conservation in Rural Sustainability, 
S. Light (ed.), pp. 79–94, Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Bochniarz, Z. & Sienko, B. (2008), Globalization, clustering 
and innovation: Some regional aspects. In Enterprise 
Towards Global Challenges, A. Herman and Szablewski 
(eds.), pp. 152–168, Warsaw: SGH.
Bourdieu, P. (1986), The Forms of Capital, Handbook of Theory 
and Research for Sociology of Education. In Handbook of 
Theory and Research for the Sociology of Education, J. G. 
Richardson (ed.), New York: Greenwood Press.
Brundtland, G. H. (1987), Our Common Future, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Caragliu, A. & Nijkamp, P. (2011), The impact of regional 
absorptive capacity on spatial knowledge spillovers: The 
Cohen and Levinthal model revisited, Applied 
Economics, 44(11), 1363–1374. 
Coleman, J. (1988), Social capital in the creation of human 
capital, American Journal of Sociology, 94(95), 121.
Cooke, P. (2007), Social capital, embeddedness, and regional 
innovation. In Europe Reflection On Social Capital, 
Innovation And Regional Development: The Ostuni 
Consensus, A. Kuklinski, M. Landabaso, and C. Roman 
(eds.), pp. 162–175, Nowy Sącz: Wyższa Szkoła 
Biznesu- National-Louis University w Nowym Sączu, 
Oficyna Wydawnicza Rewasz.
Cooney, S. (2009), Build A Green Small Business: 
Profitable Ways to Become an Ecopreneur, New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Czyzewska, D. (2013), Empirical evidence and first assess-
ment of the competitiveness clusters policy in France, 
International Journal of Management and Economics, 39.
Dasgupta, P. & Serageldin, I. (2000), Social Capital: A 
Multifaceted Perspective, Washington, D.C.: The World 
Bank.
Flap, H. D. & Völker, B. (2005), Creation and Returns of 
Social Capital, London: Routledge.
Francois, P. (2002), Social Capital and Economic 
Development, London: Routledge.
Franke, S. (2005), Measurement of Social Capital: Reference 
Document for Public Policy Research, Development, 
and Evaluation. PRI Project Social Capital as a Public 
Policy Tool, Canada: Policy Research Initiative.
Fukuyama, F. (1999), Social capital and civil society. IMF 
lecture.
Fukuyama, F. (2002), Social capital and development: The 
coming agenda, SAIS Review, 22(1).
Grootaert, C. (1997), Social Capital: The Missing Link? 
World Bank, Expanding the Measure of Wealth: 
Indicators of Environmentally Sustainable Development, 
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Grootaert, C. & Van Bastelaer, T. (2002), Conclusion: 
Measuring impact and drawing policy implications. In 
The Role of Social Capital in Development, T. Van 
Bestelaer (ed.), Melbourne: Cambridge University Press. 
Hartwick, J. M. (1977), Intergenerational equity and the 
investing of rents from exhaustible resources, American 
Economic Review, 67(5), 972–974.
Huber, F. (2008), Social capital of economic clusters: Toward 
a network-based conception of social resources, 
Economic Geography Research Group, Working Paper 
Series No. 02.08, Cambridge.
Jacobs, J. (2000), The Nature of Economies, New York: 
Random House.
Kourtit, K. & Nijkamp, P. (2012), Creative firms as change 
agents in creative spaces, Quaestiones Geographicae, 
December.
Lin, N. et al. (eds.) (1986), Conceptualizing Social Support, 
Social Support, Life Events and Depression, Orlando: 
Academic Press.
Lin, N. (2001), Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure 
and Action, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marshall, A. (1920), Principles of Economics (8th edn.), 
London: Macmillan.

54 
Z. Bochniarz
Nijkamp, P. (2003), Entrepreneurship in a modern network 
economy, Regional Studies, 37, 395–405.
OECD (2001), The Well-Being of Nations: The Role of 
Human and Social Capital, Paris: OECD.
Ott, K. (2003), The Case for Strong Sustainability. In 
Greifswald’s Environmental Ethics, K. Ott and P. Thapa 
(eds.). Greifswald: Steinbecker Verlag Ulrich Rose.
PARP (2012), Cluster Benchmarking in Poland.
Pearce, D. (1989), Energy and environment: Editor’s intro-
duction, Energy Policy, Elsevier, 17(2), 82–83.
Pezzey, J. & Toman, M. A. (2002), Progress and problems in 
the economics of sustainability. In International 
Yearbook of Environmental and Resource Economics, 
T. Tietenberg and H. Folmer (eds.), pp. 265–232, 
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Polish Information and Foreign Investment Agency (2012), 
Invest in Poland. Available at http://www.paiz.gov.pl/
sectors/aviation.
Porter, M. (2008), On Competition: Updated and Expanded 
Edition, Boston: HBS Publishing.
Porter, M. & Kramer. M. (2011), Big idea: Creating shared 
value, Harvard Business Review, January–February.
Putnam, R. (1995), Bowling alone: America’s declining 
social capital, Journal of Democracy, 6, 65–78.
Putnam, R. (2000), Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Survival 
of American Community, New York: Simon and Schuster.
ResEco Firma (2014), Raport koncowy z badan w malych i 
srednich przedsiebiorstwach klastra lotniczego (Final 
Report from the Aviation Cluster SME) — Effective 
Clusters Project’s study.
Roman, C. (2007), Why social capital? What social capital? 
In A. Kuklinski, pp. 80–92. 
Rosenfeld S. A. (1997), Bringing business clusters into the 
mainstream of economic development, European 
Planning Studies, 5, 3–23.
Rosenfeld, S. (2007), The social imperatives of clusters. In 
A. Kuklinski, pp. 176–182.
Runiewicz-Wardyn, 
M. 
(2013), 
Knowledge 
Flows, 
Technological Change and Regional Growth in the 
European Union, New York: Springer.
Sobel, J. (2002), Can we trust social capital?, Journal of 
Economic Literature, 40, 139–154.
Solow, R. M. (1974), Intergenerational equity and exhaust-
ible resources, Review of Economic Studies, Symposium.
Sommers, P. (1998), Rural networks in the United States: 
Lessons from three experiments, Economic Development 
Quarterly, 12, 54–67.
Westlund, H. & Adam, F. (2010), Social capital and eco-
nomic performance: A meta-analysis of 65 studies, 
European Planning Studies, 18(6), 893–919.
Woolcock, M. & Narayan, D. (2000), Social capital: 
Implications for development theory, research, and pol-
icy, World Bank Research Observer, 15(2), 225–250.
Zachariasz, K. (2012), Pół miliarda I ... zaklajstrowane 
Klastry, Gazeta Wyborcza (December 1).

55
Chapter 7
Integrating Corporate and Academic Alumni 
into the Drive toward Sustainability
Rodica Stefănescu 
Certiﬁ ed Independent Senior Consultant in Management 
The chapter presents how alumni — both corporate and 
university, resources’ proper capitalization may sustain 
the respective organizations’ pursue towards sustaina-
bility. More, by integrating those two alumni categories 
and their management approaches in each of the two 
organizations’ cultures, each of them may increase their 
respective chances to sustainability, and also those of 
better contribution to sustainable development. 
Corporate and  university alumni concepts are, thus 
far, developed separately. It is our conviction that they 
can be joined together, in an integrative management 
approach. Both universities and corporations may learn 
from each other’s knowledge, experience, best prac-
tices, managerial instruments’ use, attitudes and skills, 
in their quest for improved capabilities and perfor-
mance. Alumni are just a human resource and capital, 
that each of the two types of organizations may hire, 
value and use, both for their benefit and for that of soci-
ety at large.
Our research is based on literature, websites’ data, 
and case studies survey, from both worldwide and 
Romanian experience, regarding corporate and univer-
sity’s current stage and methods in managing their 
respective specific alumni resources. The conclusion of 
the research is based on the idea that learning organiza-
tions and those which can best capitalize on all their 
resources may have better chances for sustainability. 
The chapter represents a theoretical approach, 
based on existing practices. Looking at ways to improve 
the capitalization of the alumni potentials through  inte-
grated management approaches, addressing a merge of 
both corporation and university attempts in this respect, 
is a fresh view. Especially in the globalization era, it 
can offer both corporations and universities even 
broader resources and largely improved competitive 
advantages. In addition, with joint efforts, through part-
nerships, in this respect, both sectors can grow in 
becoming stronger pillars of the society in its pathway 
towards sustainable development.
1. Introduction
If the notion of alumni defines the quality of graduates of 
a type of school (Webster, 2000), then  corporate alumni 
refers to former employees of a company (Business 
Dictionary, 2009). From our point of view, beyond high-
lighting, in a brief manner, the need and organizational 
benefits of creating, maintaining, preserving, and devel-
oping the relationship with specific alumni, we believe 
that it is important to point out two aspects of the neces-
sary overcoming of the conceptual limitations associated 
with those two notions. Thus, we consider that, if compa-
nies will be able to perceive and cultivate the notion of 
corporate alumni in the sense of “former” — not just 

56 
R. Stefănescu
employees, but also the collaborators, customers, sup-
pliers, partners, associates, consultants or experts, 
financiers, founders, honorary members, applicants for 
vacancies and interviews, maybe even competitors, 
etc., their interrelation basis would be much wider, and 
of a higher potential of benefits and of competitive 
advantage provision, at least at the social capital level. 
We consider the same kind of conceptual approach 
useful for educational structures as well. Their alumni 
are not only graduates but also former students, as well 
as all stakeholders with whom they were related at one 
time and whom they can attract and train towards the 
same aim of development and strengthening of their 
respective social capital (Stefanescu et al., 2010).
In this sense, any organization should focus on the 
formation and cultivation of the sense and feeling of 
community (Williams, 2009), of belonging to a family, 
both organizational as well as in regards to social 
responsibility, with, and towards all those with whom it 
interacts, as well as with and towards all those it serves.
The justification for this approach of extending the 
notion of alumni would be based on the educational 
dimension which any organization has, directly or indi-
rectly, willingly or unconsciously, over any category of its 
stakeholders, through its way of relating with them and as 
impact of its interactions. This educational component, of 
a training as well as learning nature, determines both the 
drive towards sustainability of any organization, as well 
as its role and contributions to the sustainable develop-
ment of society (Candea, 2007a), including through its 
members, be they internal or external.
From the two standpoints of extending the defini-
tion and the common perception of the concepts regard-
ing alumni, in a dynamic and flexible approach more 
suited to the evolutions marked by information technol-
ogy and communication, globalization, and of the 
influences of boundless interactions caused by these 
two coordinates of the present, including the impact of 
chrysies (economical, political, social, environmental, 
etc.), we consider that it becomes evident and logical 
that the two conceptual approaches should merge, 
being integrated into a management of excellence and 
in the sustainability strategy of any organizational 
structure.
We must not lose sight of the fact that, both univer-
sity and  corporate alumni are not only presented with 
(other) multiple possibilities of affirmation and evolu-
tion, but they represent, wherever they may be found, 
members of society and contributors to its becoming. 
That is why, once more, the way these “alumni” are 
trained in this sense of their role is also important, 
(especially in the extended view of the notion) by the 
organizations they have gone through at one time, but 
also in what way these organizations continue keeping 
them in their connection and attention network, includ-
ing in the sense of consciously assuming their own 
social responsibility (Candea, 2010).
If the universities are already beginning to acquire 
and apply corporate managerial approaches, for a pros-
perous existence, for unlimited time (Stefanescu et al., 
2011), we consider that corporations can also learn 
some practices that are useful for their evolution from 
university management, including regarding liaising 
with the alumni. In fact, any organization which, at the 
sustainability management of excellence level inte-
grates the understanding and conscious attitude of a 
learning organization, staying open to the accumulation 
of information and practices, from any area, at the same 
time sharing their own accumulated values, is an organ-
ization committed to a prosperous evolution, for unlim-
ited time (Oncica & Candea, 2010).
Therefore, in the following, we will attempt a run-
down of the advantages of capitalizing on corporate and 
academic alumni, as it manifests at present, both world-
wide and in Romania, then presenting how we view the 
possibility of integrating these management approaches, 
both for higher organizational benefits, and for their 
increased input in supporting the sustainable develop-
ment of society.
2.  Corporate and  University Alumni — 
Conceptual and in Practice 
Differentiation and Similarities 
By definition, corporate alumni means former employ-
ees, with whom the organization maintains connectivity. 
It can be said that using the notion of alumni, in this 
acceptability too, is justified by keeping, to an extent, 
the sense of the basic definition of alumni (The American 
Heritage Dictionary, 2000), namely that of a “product” 
of an educational (institutionalized) process. In fact, as 
in the case of university alumni, as long as some people 

 
Integrating Corporate and Academic Alumni 
57
have functioned within an organization, those members 
or employees have acquired a certain experience, had 
access to some information, were taught and learned 
certain rules, procedures, techniques, and technologies, 
as well as many other things, it was invested in them 
through programmatic training, experience exchanges, 
involvement in various contexts of connections, and 
responsibilities etc. Therefore, we consider it very natu-
ral that at the departure of any person from an organiza-
tion (corporate, educational, or of any other nature), its 
management should make every effort to keep in touch 
with them. It is an already earned, trained, and known 
human and social capital, which only needs to be culti-
vated and capitalized further.
As in the case of  university alumni, people who 
leave an organization already know the institution to 
which they belonged at one time, from the inside, from 
most points of view. Thus, in case of a need for hiring 
or collaborations, the institution in question can call 
upon former members, as known and accepted people, 
if not directly for employment, at least to make recom-
mendations, or to guide a new employee as a mentor 
(Spencer Lee, 2008).
Former employees or members can be of three types: 
unemployed, retired or active, steering towards new steps 
in their career (obviously we do not consider the negative 
cases of terminated collaborations). With all these, the 
organization will have to keep and maintain the connec-
tion, if it desires certain benefits. In any of the three posts, 
such persons may also be useful to the organization, pro-
viding both feedback and information from its external 
reality, and as a resource of ideas, new collaborations, 
and possible partnerships, but, more importantly, in 
strengthening the organization’s social capital and image, 
especially in knowledge based economy (McNamara & 
McLaughlin, 2009). Therefore, the way in which an 
organization structures its sustainability strategy (Candea, 
2007b), based on developing or strengthening its organi-
zational culture, its human resource management (current 
and potential — to create and/or to attract), and its com-
munication with stakeholders (Candea & Candea, 2009), 
can insure its thriving viability indefinitely or it can doom 
it to failure (Candea, 2009). 
Thus, regarding the relationship with alumni, the 
organization will have to take into account both an anti-
breakup strategy for its employees or members, 
concerning the maintenance of a communication and 
collaboration relationship, as well as a one after termi-
nating contractual ties (Koc-Menard, 2009). And this is 
valid and must also be transposed for universities, in 
regard to both their relationship with the students as 
well as to their staff or other stakeholders. 
This preoccupation and responsibility has as its aim 
that the mentality created within the organization will 
act in furthering natural cooperation and team relation-
ships with all its members, for the entire duration of 
their existence, be they within the organization, or not, 
and beyond these, even regarding their family mem-
bers, acquaintances, as well as their various community 
involvement and correlations. And that is because, as 
for university alumni,  corporate alumni can also play a 
role of organizations’ relevant stakeholders, due to their 
double quality of ex-interns, operating as externals.
As well, the same as for university alumni, corpo-
rate ones can also be agents of the organization as its 
representation in the society, marketers for it, and 
endorsers of its image and factors of its integration into 
society (Stefanescu et al., 2009). Therefore, the same as 
for universities, in the same capacity of multi-role 
stakeholders, corporate alumni also represent an organ-
izational resource that provides benefits, which the 
organization can draw on, and it would be very benefi-
cial for it to do so. McKinsey & Company (2013), for 
example, said that “Our alumni number nearly 27,000 
and work in virtually every business sector in 120 coun-
tries. Through formal events and informal networking, 
former McKinsey consultants make and sustain profes-
sional relationships. This dynamic network is a lasting 
benefit of a McKinsey career.”
As in the case of university alumni, the benefits of 
cultivating a relationship with corporate alumni, in par-
ticular as regards the recruitment of talents, have 
become so apparent, especially in statistical references, 
that it led to a rapid development of both a number of 
companies providing services in maintaining databases 
associated with the capitalization of corporate alumni 
resources communities (Expert Alumni, 2014), as well 
as the IT programs and consultancy in this regard. The 
slogan of one such service company (Insala, 2014), for 
example, is “Your Current Employees Are Your Future 
Alumni”, stating that “Ultimately, the success of any 
organization comes down to one thing: the engagement 

58 
R. Stefănescu
of its people, by expanding vision to include  corporate 
alumni in the HRM strategy.” At the same time, field-
specific studies exist or are being developed by groups 
of experts in the field (Xing, 2006).
The analysis of the similarities between the way in 
which both corporate and  university alumni can be use-
ful to the organizations that they are affiliates to can 
continue. What we consider important to remember is 
that both communities are valuable resources to be 
capitalized, both to the benefit of such organizations, as 
well as that of their respective alumni, and together, 
contributing to that of society. 
Beyond the conceptual definition, specific differ-
ences between corporate and university alumni (also) 
consist of: 
• 
The number of members that each of these com-
munities can have and its growth rate (if for univer-
sities the growth is annual and continues with each 
new promotion of graduates, for corporations that 
number is significantly low and random);
• 
The number of alma-maters (between 1 to 3–4 or 
so, if a person graduates more universities and/or 
also takes Masters, or PhD degrees too), versus 
corporate-mothers (which could be from 1 to as 
many as an individual’s career shall gather);
• 
History and the complexity of the range of means 
and methods by which each of these communities 
of alumni are capitalized.
2.1.  Beneﬁ ts of cultivating the corporation — 
corporate alumni relationship
Benefits for the corporation
• 
Alumni may represent a pool of already known, 
tested, and trained specialists from which to 
 re-recruit, to get recommendations for fresh recruit-
ments from, to receive feed-back information from 
the external environment, to use as mentors, coun-
cilors or support staff, with experience, in guiding 
new employees, or as consultants in particular 
projects, or even trainers for youth talents (Lorenz, 
2014);
• 
They may also facilitate connection with potential 
business partners, or to come up with creative ideas 
and innovative approaches in how to further develop 
the corporate business; 
• 
They could (now) have time or opportunity to 
become (more or less occasional) vendors, promot-
ers, or suppliers of some goods and services for the 
corporate business (Jones, 2010), especially if spe-
cifically further trained on; 
• 
They may become company’s ambassadors and its 
advocacy representatives, if well prepared to and 
properly treated for (Hoey, 2011); 
• 
They could possibly also undertake (now) an advi-
sory role of pointing out weaknesses and strengths 
of the company, up to their direct perceptions, 
which, most probably, they did not share with their 
leaders, during their employment;
• 
At the same time, this could also be a way in which 
the company may gain credit and trust on the line 
of social responsibility (Sullivan, 2009).
As Jones (2009) said: “The time has come for busi-
nesses to view ex-employees, as a commodity that can 
continue to be of value even after they have left”. As 
Laurano (2009) put it “Leveraging an alumni commu-
nity can be a win–win for an organization”. And, as an 
international report (IPR, 2003) states “Companies that 
are not actively viewing and treating their former 
employees as “alumni” — that is, staying in touch with, 
reaching out to, and providing networking and educa-
tional opportunities to former employees — are actu-
ally creating a competitive advantage for companies 
that do institute “alumni” programs. Progressive com-
panies — ones that are, in many cases, the leaders in 
their industries — are beginning to view former 
employees as stakeholders and are leading a shift in the 
way human assets are approached.” 
And, this is perfectly in line with what we have 
stated about the university alumni — they are a strate-
gic resource of competitive advantage for their alma-
mater (Stefanescu et al., 2010), as they also are to be 
found in all type of stakeholder categories (Stefanescu 
et al., 2011), so that they should be included in the 
human resources management strategy (Stefanescu 
et al., 2013), as well as in the university’s strategy for 
sustainability (Stefanescu et al., 2012). Adding here the 
alumni contribution to creativity and innovation 
(Stefanescu, 2012), the picture of similarities between 

 
Integrating Corporate and Academic Alumni 
59
the way  corporate alumni can be assets for a firm, as the 
 university alumni are a strategic resource for the sus-
tainable university (Stefanescu, 2011), is almost 
complete.
Benefits for the corporate alumni
• 
By setting up corporate alumni networks, these 
may further benefit of involvement in further pro-
fessional training sessions that the company may 
organize; keeping in touch among themselves, as 
well as with former colleagues; participating in 
corporate events or occasional community activi-
ties (the procedures in the army system, in this 
respect, for instance, may set an example of such a 
fruitful management of keeping together all cate-
gory members of their respective community);
• 
Recognition of professional capabilities and poten-
tial, including support in finding new jobs;
• 
Free invitations to company fairs or congresses, or 
discounts to the firm products (per life), thus mak-
ing them clients, as Microsoft does, for instance 
(Glazer, 2013).
Currently, most corporate alumni networks are man-
aged as LinkedIn or Facebook groups, hosted on 
the company servers (Doyle, 2014). Tracking which are 
the big corporations in the world that have developed the 
most comprehensive and visible public relations pro-
grams with their alumni, one can easily conclude that, 
renowned IT firms have the top places, or ones that have 
developed broad cooperative platforms and social net-
works through IT, or working in the field of information 
and communication technology services (Microsoft, 
IBM, Apple Inc., Google, Buzz Allen Hamilton, 
McKinsey, Accenture, Ernst & Young, KPMG, Deloitte & 
Touche, AT&T, Alcatel-Lucent, etc.).
Exactly like in the case of university alumni man-
agement (Stefanescu, 2013), corporate alumni man-
agement means having a strategy, a program, a 
designated responsibility, personnel trained in dealing 
with this community, a database and online networking 
platform — institutionalization. A differentiation of 
particularities between corporate and university alumni 
management is highlighted in the IPR report (2003) as 
“the need to compete to be the” alma mater. “Unlike 
academic institutions, whose alumni have only attended 
one or two other schools, companies have alumni who 
may have worked for five, six, or more organizations, 
many of which are competitors. This situation means 
that companies will be competing for the affinity of a 
former employee who may belong to multiple com-
munities. Hence, the fast have a real advantage over 
the sluggish.”
3.  Corporate and University Alumni 
Programs in Romania
From public information on company websites, men-
tions regarding corporate alumni, in Romania, are 
encountered only sporadically and in particular at com-
panies operating as representatives of foreign groups. 
More specifically, there appear present at companies 
where this trend towards corporate alumni comes from 
the mother-company’s policy and organizational cul-
ture. The following are to be mentioned in this respect: 
KPMG (2012) — that has created an association of 
alumni and issued a magazine intended for them, but 
also developed various activities, requesting that the 
2% contribution from the tax revenue be steered 
towards the company’s foundation, then Accenture 
(2014), Ernst & Young (2014), INSEAD (2013), 
Deloitte (2014), and even IBM (2014).
On April 23, 2012, IBM opens CCS–Corporate 
Service Corps Romania (IBM–CSC, 2012), meant to 
facilitate networking between the IBMers interested in 
finding out about the unique IBM volunteering program. 
On April 9, 2009, in Romania, the LinkedIn group for 
the alumni of Hachette Distribution Services — Romania 
under the brands of Inmedio, Relay and MOA (HDS, 
2009) team is created. A special case is the group of 
alumni of Japan International Cooperation Agency — 
JICA (2014), whose purpose is the support of ideas of 
new cooperation and programs (Japan–Romania). We 
should also mention Entrepreneur of the Year (EY), 
which launched in Romania a LinkedIn group for the 
EY/AA Alumni (2013), “to share their news, business 
achievements, and personal stories and to keep in touch 
as part of an online community”, numbering, at present, 
147 members.
As it regards university alumni, our research and 
doctoral studies have highlighted the fact that the men-
tion of alumni on institutional websites is found in 72% 

60 
R. Stefănescu
of the around 120 universities in Romania, but only 
approximately 10% of them also carry out some activi-
ties concerning liaising with the alumni, without, how-
ever, being a main incumbent concern of university 
strategy or to any formally assumed responsibility of its 
leadership (Stefanescu et al., 2011). But it is salutary to 
note the fact that, to date, there are at least 3–4 pro-
grams with financing from European funds that took 
place in Romania, through university’s consortiums, on 
goals underwriting the idea to facilitate a connection 
(post graduate) of alumni with the university and 
between them.
4.  What Could Integrative Corporate 
and  University Alumni Concepts 
Merging Bring in for the 
Organizational Pursue to 
Sustainability 
If the universities, especially those of world renown, 
are already familiar with the idea of the need to capital-
ize on the potential of their graduate community, a rich 
tradition and experience already existing, in this sense, 
they do not register official, programmatic, and system-
atic actions of capitalizing on the potential of former 
employees. Moreover, neither the managerial approach 
of the universities of investing in their employees, with 
respect to training and gaining their loyalty as members 
of an organizational family, is not very manifest, nor 
frequent. We believe strongly, however, that such a cul-
tural dimension of the management of their own human 
resources, to which to add an extension of concern in 
the sense of programs regarding  corporate alumni (the 
university also being a corporation, in fact), could only 
bring additional benefits to the university (Laufer, 
2009), in providing resources along the line of creating 
a competitive advantage and providing multi-talent 
support in its efforts toward sustainability. Anyway, it is 
already shown (in theory, in practice, and in statistics), 
that interaction between and over generations of people 
belonging to the same organization, especially as a 
training environment, is emulative and beneficial to all 
those involved. Enthusiasm merges with experience, 
the creative energies being stimulated by the conjuga-
tion of the efforts and expertise of the parties involved 
in dialogue and cooperation. And, of course, the wider 
the community of those involved in achieving the same 
objectives, the greater the chances of synergistic, con-
structive effects.
In addition, because the tendency, natural in our 
times, is for universities to be managed more and more 
by adapting methods and tools, approaches and con-
cepts from corporate management (Stefanescu, 2012), 
we do not see why the idea of developing programs 
relating to the capitalization of former employees and 
collaborators communities’ resources would not be part 
of this. The university, as a learning organization, 
which is also concerned with sustainability, is charac-
terized by a visionary, excellence management, which 
should harness all resources — both those available, as 
well as the ones that it can create, and those it can 
attract, to the up most (Stefanescu et al., 2010b).
On the other hand, we believe that no matter how 
aware is the organizational strategy and strongly mani-
fest is the management programs, liaising with corpo-
rate alumni, at companies, and institutions outside of 
schools, corporate management would also have much 
to learn from the practices and working methods of 
universities in their relationship with graduates (alumni, 
regarded as former students).
An interface area is the role that corporate alumni 
can have in influencing students towards specific pro-
fessional paths (Davis, 2014), including by promoting 
employment at companies they can represent, as well as 
in favor of recruiting young specialists. The practice of 
some companies to get involved in the recruitment of 
talent from universities, starting at the time they are still 
students is already known and quite widespread. Add to 
this the fact that many universities are both financially 
supported through donations from companies, as is the 
case with the University of Alabama, with the “corpo-
rate matching gift” program, carried out through its 
Alumni Association (UA Alumni, 2014), for example, 
but also involved in relationships of scientific and tech-
nical cooperation relating to their educational pro-
grams, with companies in the business sector, as is the 
case at Dalhousie University (Peters, 2013), for exam-
ple. It would only seem very natural that, from and 
through such partnerships, both organizations to be 
able to share from their own managerial experience, 
including on the liaising with specific alumni, and to 

 
Integrating Corporate and Academic Alumni 
61
teach each other, and to evolve, in this way, also as 
institutional structures. Moreover, because the univer-
sity prepares experts on various fields, it would be a gift 
for them to also institutionally apply what they impart 
during their training process and to continue to then 
receive, especially through networking with alumni, 
feedback from the practical reality. This would lead to 
both an increase in the pertinence of the educational 
process, as well as of the organizational evolution 
towards sustainability. And the same thing is true in the 
case of corporations (Vermeiren, 2009), or any other 
organizations. Continuous learning and integrated man-
agement of all resources imparts efficiency.
It is essential to highlight that sustainable develop-
ment cannot be aimed without relying on sustainable 
organizations (Candea, 2006). However, this means, 
among other things, openness towards communication, 
sharing of knowledge and practices, cooperation, part-
nerships and consortiums, including interdisciplinary 
ones, to learn and adapt, permanently, from own experi-
ences and from that of others, from anywhere, but also 
to join individual efforts into a chain of synergistic 
accomplishments, for global benefits.
So, with the strict applicability to universities and 
corporations concerning the capitalization of specific 
alumni communities, incorporating within a unified 
strategic vision, customized for each organization, the 
capitalization of the resources that the alumni commu-
nities in their extended sense represent, cannot but 
serve, every structure in increasing their capabilities 
and in turn, of their respective chances and opportuni-
ties towards sustainability. And, through this, also those 
of every individual and every organization to become 
significant pillars in the efforts (in common, but also 
joint) towards sustainable development.
5. Conclusion
Summarizing the above-mentioned sections:
(a) Both corporate and  university alumni:
• 
Possess the special feature of being a strategic 
resource of the organizations to which they may 
be affiliated, as ex-internal and (then) external 
stakeholders — who can also enter and fit into 
any category of capital (human, informational, 
relational, financial, of creativity and innovation, 
promotional, voluntary, social, of branding, men-
toring, community integration, and trust building 
etc.) that the organization may benefit from, 
being, at the same time, a most at hand resource, 
which can also, the easiest, be capitalized;
• 
Represent a continuous potential source of 
competitive advantages (for their respective 
organization) and, thus, the most available 
resource that the organization can relay on in 
its’ drive towards sustainability.
(b) Improved capitalization of their (extended) alumni 
resources, by any organization, presupposes going 
with an all resources integrative management of 
excellence, which involves, among others, to:
• 
Establish an organizational culture of sustainability;
• 
Keep learning (individually, as organization, as 
society);
• 
Maintaining uninterrupted open communica-
tion and sharing (of information, knowledge 
and experience — individually, as organiza-
tion, as society);
• 
Invest in human capital development, through 
education;
• 
Maintain the “family” (individual, organiza-
tional, and social) sustainable.
Therefore, both  corporate alumni, and university 
alumni are representatives (in society) of the organiza-
tions to which they belonged at one time. It is up to 
each individual organization how much it recognizes 
the importance and role of alumni, including as an 
extension of the sense of the notion, and to what extent 
they manage to capitalize the resources potential of 
these communities (both as human resources and as 
social capital).
“Brand ambassadors cannot be created overnight. 
Nor can they be created from a group of people who are 
disengaged and disconnected from your brand and your 
organization. If you are serious about your corporate 
alumni program, you have to be serious about your 
brand, your culture, and your employees’ level of 
engagement with both” (Insala, 2014b). 
A corporate alumni program, exactly like in the 
case of the university alumni strategy and program 

62 
R. Stefănescu
should be about: the organizational culture, its branding 
and the human resources (including alumni) forming 
and involving management. In essence, the internal 
culture comes out into the external brand — be it of an 
individual, an organization, or a nation.
In maintaining the organization — alumni relation-
ship and of communication with them, it is essential to 
keep the alumni interested in the network and in the 
organization. Keeping updated and relevant content on 
the website and on the online dialogue would be a must. 
Keeping them involved and participative could make 
the difference.
And, last but not least, maintaining the openness 
of the organization’s management and that of its 
entire team (of current, former and future members) 
towards continuous learning is defining for the quest 
toward sustainability, both individual and collective, 
as well as in the joint efforts towards sustainable 
development.
References
Accenture (2014), Alumni network. Available at https://
www.accenturealumni.com/web/guest/home (Accessed 
17 January 2014).
Alumni at KPMG in Romania (2012), Forget me not. 
Available at http://www.kpmg.com/RO/en/Alumni/
Documents/alumni_web.pdf (Accessed 11 March 2014).
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language: 
Fourth Edition (2000), Boston: Houghton Mifflin 
Harcourt.
Business Dictionary — online (2014), Available at http://
www.businessdictionary.com/definition/alumni.html 
(Accessed 23 January 2014).
Candea, D. (2006), From sustainable development to the sus-
tainable corporation, Intreprinderea Sustenabila, 1, iii, vi.
Candea, D. (2007a), Sustenabilitatea intreprinderii si respon-
sabilitatea sociala, Intreprinderea Sustenabila, 2, 1–6.
Candea, D. (2007b), Conjectures about the relationship 
among business sustainability, learning organization, 
and management systems integration, Keynote speaker 
address to the International Conference on Business 
Excellence ICBE-2007, Brasov, Romania.
Candea, D. (2009), Organizational challenges in building a 
sustainable enterprise, Keynote address at the 7th 
International symposium of the Romanian Regional 
Science Association, Universitatea de Nord, Baia Mare, 
Romania, June 12–13. 
Candea, R. & Candea, D. (2009), Comunicare corporativa 
integrata pentru sustenabilitatea afacerii, Intreprinderea 
Sustenabila, 4, 39–54. Available at https://sites.google.
com/site/organizatiasustenabila/.
Davis, C. (2014), Corporate alumni offer students networking 
opportunity, Finance & Investment, Features. Available 
at http://www.theaggie.org/2014/02/06/ corporate-
alumni-offer-students-networking-opportunity/ 
(Accessed 1 March 2014).
Deloitte Romania Alumni (2014), Available at https://www.
deloitte.com/view/en_RO/ro/alumni/index.htm (Accessed 
11 February 2014). 
Doyle, A. (2014), How to use corporate alumni networks to 
stay connected. Available at http://jobsearch.about.com/
od/networking-tips/a/corporate-alumni-networks.htm 
(Accessed 1 March 2014).
Expert Alumni, The Value of Experience (2014), Designing, 
developing and launching a corporate alumni programme 
Available at http://www.expertalumni.com/support-your-
corporate-alumni/ (Accessed 28 January 2014).
EY Romania Alumni (2013), Available at https://www.linke
din.com/groups?gid=5191191 (Accessed 3 July 2014).
Glazer, E. (2013), Leave the company, but stay in touch, 
Careers, The Wall Street Journal, April 12.
Hachette Distribution Services Romania (HDS) (2009), HDS 
inmedio alumni. Available at http://www.linkedin.com/
groups/HDS-Inmedio-Romania-Alumni-1893875/
about.
Hoey, J. K. (2011), Corporate alumni programs: Maintaining 
relationships & amp, enhancing reputation. Available at 
http://www.slideshare.net/JKHoey/corporate-alumni-
programs-maintaining-relationships-amp-enhancing-
reputation (Accessed 19 July 2014).
IBM– CSC Romania (2012), CSC alumni. Available at http://
www.linkedin.com/groups/IBM-Romania-CSC-alumni-
4391270? (Accessed 3 March 2014).
Insala (2014a), What your corporate alumni program has to 
do with employee engagement. Available at http://www.
insala.com/Articles/career-development/what-your-cor
porate-alumni-program-has-to-do-with-employee-engage 
ment.asp (Accessed 18 February 2014).
Insala (2014b), Corporate alumni: Targeted programs. 
Available at https://www.insala.com/corporate-alumni-
targeted-programs.asp (Accessed 2 March 2014). 
INSEAD (2013), iConnect-INSEAD Community IAA 
Romania. Available at https://iconnect.insead.edu/iaa/
ROU/Pages/Default.aspx (Accessed 12 January 2013).
IPR Strategic Business Information Database (2003), World: 
Hidden value of corporate alumni networks. Available at 
http://alumnichannel.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/

 
Integrating Corporate and Academic Alumni 
63
2008/09/hidden-value-of-corporate-alumni-networks.
pdf (Accessed 18 January 2014).
JICA (2008), Alumni Romania. Available at http://www.jica-
alumni.ro/ (Accessed 10 February 2014).
Jones, D. (2009), How to win back lost talent, HR Management.
Jones, S. (2010), Maintaining relationships with former 
employees: A look into corporate alumni networks: 
Managing Information for Innovation. Available at http://
infomgmt.wordpress.com/2010/02/09/ei2-maintaining-
relationships-with-former-employees-a-look-into-corpo-
rate-alumni-networks/ (Accessed 26 February 2014).
Koc-Menard, S. (2009), Knowledge transfer after retirement: 
The role of corporate alumni networks, Development 
and Learning in Organizations, 23(2), 9–11. 
Laufer, J. (2009), What universities can learn from corporate 
alumni programs, slides presentation at the Corporate 
Alumni Programmes — Nuffic Holland Alumni 
Conference. Available at http://www.slideshare.net/joe
inholland/what-universities-can-learn-from-corporate-
alumni-programs (Accessed 9 March 2014).
Laurano, M. (2009), Keep in touch: The power of alumni 
programs, Bersin by Deloitte (February 2).
Lorenz, M. (2014), “Grey’s Anatomy” and the case for corpo-
rate alumni programs; employment branding, referral 
programs, talent pipeline. Available at http://thehiringsite.
careerbuilder.com/2014/03/10/greys-anatomy-case-cor
porate-alumni-programs/ (Accessed 20 July 2014).
McKinsey & Company (2014), Alumni. Available at http://
www.mckinsey.com/alumni? (Accessed 23 February 
2014).
McNamara, Y. & McLaughlin, D. P. (2009), Corporate 
alumni networks and knowledge flows. Available at 
http://impgroup.org/uploads/papers/5906.pdf (Accessed 
18 July 2014).
Oncica-Stanislav, D. & Candea, D. (2010), The learning 
organization, a strategic dimension of the sustainable 
enterprise? Proceedings of the 6th European Conference 
on Management, Leadership, and Governance, Wroclaw, 
Poland.
Peters, K. (2013), Merging science and business, Dalhousie 
University, Canada. Available at http://alumni.dal.ca/
alumni-story/merging-science-and-business-kelly-peters/ 
(Accessed 18 July 2014).
Spencer Lee, K. (2006), The value of corporate alumni 
networks: Communication for information technology 
leaders. Available at http://www.cioupdate.com/career/
article.php/3602391/The-Value-of-Corporate-Alumni-
Networks.htm (Accessed 26 February 2014).
Sullivan, J. (2009), Corporate alumni and boomerang recruit-
ing programs are hot due to layoffs. Available at http://
www.ere.net/2009/03/02/corporate-alumni-and-boo
merang-recruiting-programs-are-hot-due-to-layoffs/ 
(Accessed 19 July 2014).
Stefanescu, R., Candea, D., & Candea, R. (2009), Alumni — 
a strategic resource for universities, Proceedings of The 
5th Balcanic and 2nd International Conference on 
Engineering and Business Education, 2, pp. 557–561, 
BRCEE&ICEBE — LBU Sibiu 2009/Romania. Available 
at http://www.cedc.ro/pages/english/conference-and-
journal/brcebe/the-5th-brcee.php.
Stefanescu, R., Candea, D., & Candea, R. (2010a), Alumni — 
a university’s resource for competitive advantage, 
Proceedings of the 6th International Seminar on Quality 
Management in Higher Education — QMHE 2010, 
pp. 343–346, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
Stefanescu, R., Candea, D., & Candea, R. (2010b), The sus-
tainable university, Review of International Comparative 
Management, 11(5), 841–852. Available at http://www.
rmci.ase.ro/.
Stefanescu, R., Candea, D., & Candea, R. (2011), A model for 
managing the university — alumni relationship strategi-
cally for sustainability, Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on Management of Technological Changes 
— MTC 2011, pp. 213–216, Alexandroupolis/Greece: 
Democritus University of Thrace, Book 2. 
Stefanesu, R., Candea, D., Candea, R., & Manolache, R. 
(2011), Relatia universitate — alumni, in opinia unor 
romani, din mediul academic autohton si international, 
Intreprinderea Sustenabila, 6, 65–106. Available at 
https://sites.google.com/site/organizatiasustenabila/.
Stefanescu, R. (2012), Managing university through business 
approaches, Proceedings of The 6th Balkan Region 
Conference and 5th International Conference on 
Engineering & Business Education, and 4th International 
Conference on Innovation and Entrepreneurship, 
pp. 247–252, BRCEE, ICEBE & ICIE — LBU Sibiu/
Romania. Available at http://www.cedc.ro/pages/eng-
lish/conference-and-journal/brcebe/the-6th-brcee.php.
Stefanescu, R. & Candea, R. (2012), Alumni inclusion as 
human resources into the strategic management of the 
university, Proceedings of the 5th International 
Management Conference on Managerial Challenges of 
the Contemporary Society — MCCS 2012, 4, pp. 17–175. 
FSEGA, Babes-Bolyai University of Cluj-Napoca. 
Stefanescu, R., Candea, D., & Candea, R. (2012), The sus-
tainable university: Adopting and adapting business 
management practices, Management of Sustainable 
Development Journal, 4. Available at http://www.cedc.
ro/pages/english/conference-and-journal/msd-journal/
papers/volume-4-no-22012.php.

64 
R. Stefănescu
Stefanescu, R. & Manolache, R. (2012a), Organizational 
creativity and idea generation through investing in 
alumni potentials capitalization, Journal of International 
Scientific Publications: Educational Alternatives, 10(1), 
212–219. Available at http://www.science-journals.eu/.
Stefanescu, R. (2013), Alumni si universitatea sustenabila, 
Intreprinderea Sustenabila, 7, 163. Available at https://
sites.google.com/site/organizatiasustenabila/.
University of Alabama (UA) (2014), Corporate matching gift 
program. Available at http://alumni.ua.edu/membership/
corporate-matching/ (Accessed 4 July 2014).
Vermeiren, J. (2009), What any organization can learn from 
great alumni programs. Available at http://janvermeiren.
wordpress.com/2009/03/28/what-any-organisation-can-
learn-from-great-alumni-programs/ (Accessed 22 July 
2014).
Wilson, G. (2009), Corporate alumni networks. Available at 
http://www.corporate-alumni.info/Corporate%20
Alumni%20Networks%20-%20overview%202.pdf 
(Accessed 14 January 2014).
XING (2006), Corporate alumni networks: leveraging intan-
gible assets, Gottlieb Duttweiler Institute (GDI), 
Rüschlikon, Zurich, Austria. Available at https://corporate.
xing.com/fileadmin/image_archive/survey_corporate_
alumni_networks_summary_english.pdf (Accessed 25 
February 2014).

Part III
University Governance and Management

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

67
Chapter 8
Taxonomies of  Internationalization 
for  Higher Education
Martin Henson
University of Essex
Internationalization is now of central importance for 
higher education institutions across the world, and the 
development of an  international strategy is high on the 
agenda. In this chapter we look at the complexities of 
 globalization and internationalization as they play out 
in the particular circumstances of higher education, and 
provide a number of taxonomic approaches that can 
serve to organize the range of responses to globaliza-
tion’s challenges, as possible precursors to strategy 
development and as aids to strategy revision and 
implementation.
1. Introduction
Internationalization is now of central importance for 
higher education institutions across the world, and the 
development of an appropriate international strategy is 
a matter that is high on the institutional agenda.
The external driver for internationalization is glo-
balization. In this chapter we describe and establish 
some taxonomic approaches that aim to provide mecha-
nisms by which an institution of higher education might 
organize its response to globalization’s challenges and 
to develop the architecture of an internationalization 
strategy — a strategy that aligns with the pressures of 
globalization as they apply to the particular circum-
stances of that institution. 
We begin in the next section by setting out the 
background and the context in which higher educa-
tion institutions now find themselves, and we move 
on, in Sec. 3, to examine the special complexities of 
globalization and internationalization in higher edu-
cation, by undertaking a very brief comparison with 
the retail sector. The remainder of the chapter then 
explores and evaluates taxonomies for organizing 
approaches and responses to globalization, classifica-
tion schemes that can be adapted to the very different 
circumstances of institutions in different higher edu-
cation sectors and at different levels of maturity. In 
Sec. 4, we examine four possible taxonomies for clas-
sifying international responses to global drivers: the 
first, based on the location of those responses; the 
second, based on the nature of the relationship 
between the international partners involved; the third, 
based on the approach taken to internationalization; 
and the fourth, based on the complexity of the part-
nership arrangements that pertain. We draw some 
conclusions in Sec. 5 and then our references to the 
literature complete the chapter.
2. Background and Context
The higher education community faces an uncertain 
future. No serious commentator, however, disputes that 

68 
M. Henson
 internationalization will be central to that future and 
key to the resolution of its current difficulties.
“An academic revolution has taken place in  higher 
education in the past half century marked by transfor-
mations unprecedented in scope and diversity. 
Comprehending this on-going and dynamic process 
while being in the midst of it is not an easy task.”
Universities, wherever they are located, are looking 
to secure themselves for the long term while simultane-
ously rethinking their purpose and reorienting their 
vision, so that these are appropriate for this uncertain 
future. In doing so they are recognizing that they oper-
ate in an increasingly global context, and that they are 
competing not solely within their regions or countries, 
but increasingly and inevitably on an international 
stage.
 “... going it alone is increasingly difficult, and ... part-
nerships ... build capacity and strength that few institu-
tions can muster on their own. Paradoxically, 
‘cooperation redefines the space in which higher edu-
cation competes’.” 
Internationalization can be thought of as the inter-
nal response to  globalization’s external threat (or, more 
optimistically: opportunity). It is not uncommon for the 
higher education sector to be viewed as lagging behind 
business and commerce, but here are some interesting 
facts: only 1% of US companies have an international 
presence (though the figure is somewhat higher else-
where in the developed world); only 3% of the work-
force comes from outside the country; and only 20% of 
Internet traffic crosses the national boundary. In stark 
contrast, the proportion of faculty members at most 
universities far exceeds 1% — for example, even by the 
academic year 2005–2006 there were 31,477 non-UK 
nationals holding academic positions in UK higher 
education institutions; this represents 19.1% of total 
academic staff. Furthermore, it hardly merits mention-
ing that almost all, if not all, higher education institu-
tions engage in some form of international activity — if 
restricted in type and lacking strategic oversight. And 
the idea that only one in five web pages consulted by 
faculty members and students comes from within country, 
is absurd. 
In the area of internationalization then, universities 
are not so much trailing in the wake of business and 
commerce, as leading from the front. Indeed, the levels 
of participation, in terms of international students, 
international faculty, and international activities, are 
generally so high that the one might be inclined to con-
clude that the gap between the external pressure of 
globalization and the internal move towards interna-
tionalization has more or less collapsed — that the 
boundary between the institution and its international 
context is already so transparent that there is no special 
strategic imperative to address. This, however, seri-
ously underestimates the complexities of globalization 
and internationalization in the higher education 
context.
These complexities, however, needs some unpack-
ing before we can usefully organize and evaluate pos-
sible responses in Sec. 4. So we first undertake a very 
brief comparison between the retail and higher educa-
tion sectors. 
3.  Global and International in Retail 
and Higher Education
3.1. Globalization
Let us begin with globalization. While complex enough 
outside the world of higher education, the situation 
inside is more complex still. If we take first-world 
retailing as a (counter) example, we find that the global 
forces at play are the pull factors of the increased pur-
chasing power of foreign consumers and the underde-
veloped retail sector in their countries. On the other 
hand the key push factors are the saturated retail mar-
kets of Europe and the US. Something analogous also 
operates within Higher Education — pull factors cer-
tainly include the increased capacity of the “consumers” 
of education in less-developed regions to pay for 
“products” from more-developed regions, and the push 
factors do indeed include a form of home-market satu-
ration — in this case arising from the gradual with-
drawal of public/state funding for higher education 
and, in some jurisdictions, artificial caps on (national) 
students numbers. But this misses so much more. The 
less-developed higher education sectors are themselves 
developing rapidly — thus giving consumers a choice 

 
Taxonomies of Internationalization for Higher Education  
69
of where to spend their resources. Perhaps there is an 
analogy between designer brands in the retail sector 
and highly-ranked universities — but the quality issues 
(and so the structure of decision-making) is very likely 
quite different. 
More significantly, the direct analogy here 
accords only with the recruitment of students which, 
while critical to institutional success, forces attention 
on the wrong target: the core businesses of  higher 
education institutions are education and research, for 
which there are no direct comparisons at all in the 
retail sector. The very broad range of activities we 
encounter in higher education lead to a variety of 
value outcomes — extending financial outcomes, 
something we will explore in more detail later. To 
make matters worse, there are significant differences 
between disciplinary areas and there are interactions 
between education and research that further compli-
cate the picture.
3.2.  Internationalization
Turning now to internationalization. For most higher 
education institutions, the majority of international 
activities are narrowly based and bilateral (we will 
explore this more in Sec. 4.4.1) and they are essen-
tially unplanned — at least at the level of the institu-
tion as a whole. In terms of human resources, the 
proportions of international students and faculty 
members turn out to be a poor surrogate as a measure 
of internationalization “at home”. Such measures are, 
however, part of the methodology of international 
institutional rankings, such as the QS Top Universities 
ranking, so that higher proportions contribute to a 
higher score under the subheading “internationaliza-
tion”. However, many Middle East and North Africa 
(MENA) countries, for example, lack a sufficient 
number of qualified faculty, and rely on ex-patriot 
labor — while compared to institutions in more devel-
oped higher education sectors, MENA higher educa-
tion institutions are much less engaged internationally. 
As we will see in the sequel, these few indicators 
(unplanned international activities, proportions of for-
eign faculty and students) barely scratch the surface of 
what is on offer under the rubric “internationalization” 
for universities and higher colleges.
Responses to global forces have led to a distinction 
between market-seeking and efficiency-seeking inter-
nationalization strategies. Furthermore, internationali-
zation can be classified according to the direction of the 
process as out-facing or in-facing. The former includes 
exporting and production overseas, including licensing 
and franchising. In-facing internationalization would 
include the sourcing of materials from overseas. 
Again, at the level of student recruitment, we can see 
similar processes at play in Higher Education. In-facing 
responses include the direct recruitment of faculty from 
overseas, whereas out-facing responses include the crea-
tion of branch campuses, validated degree programs, and 
franchised degree programs overseas. We will examine 
these options in more detail later.
However, the points at which this general model 
aligns with features of internationalization within 
Higher Education do not exhaust the full range of 
activities and responses to  globalization. We noted that 
the global push/pull factors in retail do not cover other 
core activities that exist within Higher Education, such 
as research, and the interaction between them. 
Unsurprisingly, therefore, these additional activities are 
not well covered by either the market seeking/effi-
ciency seeking models, or simply by asymmetric 
 in-facing/out-facing process flows.
Neither does this general model even properly 
account for student recruitment within Higher 
Education. To see this, imagine a manufacturer that 
imports raw fabric from an international supplier. This 
establishes two asymmetric internationalization strate-
gies — in-facing for the importing organization and 
out-facing for the exporter. The importer may subse-
quently export finished garments back to the interna-
tional market — thus enriching its internationalization 
strategy with out-facing activities. This looks tantaliz-
ingly similar to the education of international students 
in Higher Education. However, appearances can be 
deceptive — it is a false analogy.
The situation is particularly complicated because, 
while the geographic movement and in/out-facing flows in 
the manufacturing example aforementioned are covariant, 
the same flows in Higher Education are contra- variant, at 
least where international students are concerned: the 
movement of uneducated students (raw fabric) is, in fact, 
in-facing for the supplier and out-facing for the institution 

70 
M. Henson
which undertakes the education (which may import the 
students but is exporting education — consider the 
finances). And the return of educated students (the finished 
garments) involves no further financial transaction — and 
appears, therefore, not to be a feature of anyone’s  interna-
tional strategy. But of course it is — because the value of 
the returning student (perhaps with a PhD) is not measured 
in financial terms, but in terms of the capacities the 
returner has to teach, lead, and research: a variety of non-
financial value outcomes arising from value propositions 
offered by the educator. It is worth noting that this also 
illustrates the interactions between distinct aspects of core 
business. Finally, to completely undermine the false anal-
ogy: the institution that imports the students is, in fact, also 
engaged in a covariant in-facing activity. While the finance 
flows contra-variantly with the geographical movements, 
there are value propositions offered by the supplier to the 
educator that do not involve money. The incoming stu-
dents enrich the culture in which they are educated and 
provide access to other value outcomes in the international 
market — as ambassadors, providing access to research-
ers, and other partners of value. And as we saw earlier, the 
presence of international students within an institution 
makes a net positive contribution to scores in international 
league tables.
There is one further difference between  interna-
tionalization in retail and in  higher education. This 
concerns the value of intellectual resources within and 
between higher education sectors. The term intellectual 
arbitrage has been coined to capture the idea that a 
resource (which might be expertise rather than  physical) 
has a value to a partner that lacks it that is vastly greater 
than it has for a partner who possesses it. So much is 
true in the retail sector — a company that lacks 
resources that are readily available only overseas will 
import them — and may attach them a value that may 
be significantly higher than might apply within the for-
eign market itself. However, the value of the transaction 
is purely financial — and the asymmetry is such that it 
is the importer (the in-facing flow) that is the typical 
focus of the international activity in the literature, 
despite the fact that there is an exporter (the out-facing 
flow) — presumably because power in the transaction 
is more often located with the importer and the exporter 
is very much the dependent partner.
In higher education, however, there are many 
 significant value outcomes — finance being only one. 
Less well-developed higher education sectors often 
possess significant value even when they are more 
financially dependent. As a consequence, even when 
engaged in an asymmetric international partnership — 
one in which the in-facing and out-facing processes 
differ — the less well-developed partner is often not as 
dependent as may be imagined through the partial anal-
ogy with business generally — as described earlier.
Consider, for example, the value of an Indian uni-
versity’s access to the dying languages of the Andaman 
Islands to a western department of linguistics — or the 
value of access to desert plants in Saudi Arabia to plant 
biologists outside the region. Consider also the value of 
academic expertise in the social anthropology of Inuit 
culture to social scientists who lack that — or details of 
the study of micro-financed and social-sector-inspired 
business models that have gained such traction in Latin 
America, and Africa. On the other hand, there are 
developing higher education sectors, notably in the 
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), where finance is 
actually a strength, even compared to Western systems, 
but which are otherwise situated amidst weaknesses in 
capacity and resources — that is: other important value 
outcomes. The international playing field is, therefore, 
much more level than might be imagined at first glance.
In conclusion, we have illustrated that the drivers of 
 globalization and the responses of internationalization 
are both different from and more complex than those to 
be found in more traditional business contexts. As a 
consequence, even though, there are markers of inter-
nationalization in higher education that appear to be 
better developed than in the general context, the gap 
between global pressures and the responses of interna-
tionalization remains significant. In order to meet the 
challenges effectively, we need to understand the com-
plexities of the tools of, and approaches to, internation-
alization that we might deploy in response to 
globalization’s challenges. We now turn to that.
4. Taxonomies of Internationalization
4.1.  Internationalization at home 
and abroad
Someone who have an interest in better understanding 
internationalization in Higher Education and in finding 
ways of organizing the options, make a first cut in terms 

 
Taxonomies of Internationalization for Higher Education  
71
of  internationalization at home versus internationaliza-
tion abroad. 
4.1.1. Internationalization at home
At home we will interested in internationalizing the 
curriculum through the inclusion of international per-
spectives and relevant comparative content — making 
courses more interesting both for home and interna-
tional students. It will also include mechanisms to sup-
port foreign language learning for local students, and 
support for the language of instruction, foundation 
programs, inward international mobility (for study, 
work, or volunteering), summer schools, and other spe-
cialist services to improve the experience of interna-
tional students.
Internationalization at home also includes encour-
aging internationally informed research. That is, 
research that incorporates and is relevant to constituen-
cies outside the national boundary and that considers 
questions of global significance. 
Internationalization of the teaching and learning 
process will also feature at home. Such processes can 
incorporate appropriate pedagogies for differing educa-
tional cultures and make use of both international 
 students’ and international faculty members’ expertise 
and experiences. 
Where appropriate academic, administrative, and 
student services would be structured and delivered with 
a multicultural mix of stakeholders and core business 
activities in mind. Quality assurance processes, for 
example, would ensure that curricula and qualifications 
comply with international agreements, such as the 
diploma supplement and the ETCS credit system 
within the Bologna area.
Such internationalization — of curriculum, 
research, services, and educational approaches would 
naturally be supported by appropriate internationaliza-
tion of professional development activities. 
4.1.2. Internationalization abroad
Internationalization abroad covers more substantial 
activities and tends to appear after internationalization 
has taken place at home — just as out-facing interna-
tionalization activities tend to later follow in-facing 
internationalization activities in retail. 
Under this rubric authors include the recruitment of 
international students, outward student mobility (local 
students travelling abroad for study, work placements, 
or volunteering), alumni activities, outward faculty 
mobility, and joint academic appointments. 
Research is now encouraged to be internationally 
engaged — not simply informed — with corresponding 
support for international projects based on externally 
funded international strategic partnerships (academic, 
business, or governmental). This naturally leads to 
internationally co-authored publications — something 
that is now well known to add value through improved 
citation rates.
It is not only students and faculty members who 
can become internationally mobile, academic programs 
and indeed academic providers — institutions them-
selves — can become mobile.
Institutions can create mobile programs in a num-
ber of ways. First, they can validate the curricula of a 
foreign provider — awarding their own certification for 
study on a program designed and delivered by the for-
eign entity. Second, they can franchise their own pro-
grams to a foreign provider — awarding the same 
qualification for comparable (quality assured) study at 
an international site. Third, institutions can offer their 
programs, or courses from programs, at a distance 
through e-learning, supported by appropriate technol-
ogy. Fourth, pairs (or larger networks) of institutions 
can offer joint or double degree programs, or joint 
courses within programs. These programs might involve 
a mandatory period of overseas study for students who 
are enrolled and they could lead to a single award — 
offered by the partners together, or a dual award — 
offered by the partners separately. Smaller, joint courses 
might be co-taught across national boundaries and 
involve only virtual mobility through an e-learning 
experience.
Institutions themselves can become mobile in a 
number of ways. First, they may set up regional offices 
overseas. These may serve as a mechanism for profile 
raising, marketing and recruitment. They may also pro-
vide limited academic services, such as teaching in the 
language of instruction. Second, and more significantly, 
they may set up a branch centre abroad — covering a 
limited number of courses or subjects. Third, they may 
establish a comprehensive branch campus abroad, 
offering a substantial range of subjects and courses. 

72 
M. Henson
In both these cases, the academic and administrative 
staff may be entirely local to the branch, or supported 
to a greater or lesser extent by personnel from the home 
campus. Branch campuses of these kinds may be set up 
independently or they may be undertaken in partnership 
with local providers or local businesses.
4.1.3. Critique
While useful, this binary division of  internationalization 
in terms of in-facing and out-facing activities and pro-
cesses is rather crude. Moreover, it is not entirely clear 
whether there should be a distinction between out-facing 
activities that involve the institution alone from those 
which involve one or more partners. A third category 
internationalization together might be introduced — 
though we will look at other means for capturing the 
spirit of cooperative ventures in Secs. 4.2 and 4.4.
In addition, from a strategic perspective, there are 
two further weaknesses of this classification. First, 
there is a very significant difference in complexity 
between activities that fall under the same heading, 
especially under the rubric of internationalization 
abroad: a branch campus is a major project, while a 
jointly taught course is quite simple. Second, there is a 
difference between activities according to their context. 
For example, outward student mobility may be a simple 
bilateral arrangement with another provider, or it may 
be one of a larger set of interacting activities with that 
provider or consortium. The manner in which such an 
activity is managed will differ accordingly. We will sug-
gest an improved taxonomy in Sec. 4.4 to deal with this.
4.2. Symmetry and asymmetry
In Sec. 3, we recognized that each out-facing activity 
for one partner is an in-facing activity for another. 
Such, of course, is the case in  Higher Education. In 
some cases, the activity may be both in-facing and out-
facing — benefits and processes flowing seamlessly in 
both directions. One example of this might be airline 
alliances — where reciprocal arrangements are insti-
tuted between more-or-less equal partners. 
This leads us to consider activities and processes dis-
tinguished according to whether the relationship between 
the partners is symmetric or asymmetric. We will see that 
items within the two categories discussed in Sec. 4.1 are 
now reassigned across this new classification.
4.2.1. Asymmetric relationships
An asymmetric relationship is one in which the activity 
or process involved appears quite different for each 
partner. For example, fee-paying study abroad pack-
ages do not involve student exchange and are thus quite 
different international activities for the supplier of ser-
vices and for the supplier of students. 
Similarly, institutions that make use of government 
scholarships to up-skill their staff, a situation that is 
currently operating in, for example, Indonesia (DIKTI 
scholarships), Saudi Arabia (King Abdullah Scholarship 
Program), and Brazil (Science Without Borders), create 
a partnership with overseas institutions in which they 
are the more dependent partner.
Franchise arrangements and validation arrange-
ments, discussed in Sec. 4.1.2 are also examples of 
asymmetrical relationships — one in which the validated 
institution or franchisee are significantly dependent 
upon their international partners. 
Moreover, the benefits, across the range of value 
outcomes, are also asymmetrical. For example, in 
franchise or validation arrangements, the franchiser 
or validator benefits mainly in financial terms, the 
franchisee or validated institution benefits in brand 
association and through offering highly-valued quali-
fications. In some cases, such an arrangement benefits 
the franchisee through the meeting of local regula-
tions: in Oman, for example, private institutions must 
offer degrees in collaboration with a recognized inter-
national provider. 
Clearly, setting up a branch campus in collabora-
tion with an overseas partner — whether academic or 
business — is another example of an asymmetric 
arrangement.
4.2.2. Symmetric relationships
Symmetric relationships are those in which the activi-
ties and processes, and the value outcomes, are largely 
the same for the collaborating partners. 
Faculty and student exchange programs — the lat-
ter most often undertaken on a no-fee basis — are 

 
Taxonomies of Internationalization for Higher Education  
73
example of symmetric relationships. Jointly run courses, 
and dual or joint degree programs are also examples. 
Ambitious international alliances, whether bilateral 
or multi-lateral, are largely symmetric in nature. These 
we will describe in more detail in Sec. 4.4.
4.2.3. Critique
Once again, this classification does not capture the con-
text within which a single activity takes place. From a 
strategic perspective, thinking about how the relation-
ship, activity or process is managed, it makes a signifi-
cant difference whether the activity is, or is not, among 
a larger set of arrangements with the same institution or 
consortium.
The situation, even for joint degrees, is more com-
plex than the simple classification allows. For example, 
the recently completed Erasmus Mundus Program 
(Action 1 — joint programs) provided a means by 
which consortia made up of a number of institutions 
could design and deliver joint masters programs. This 
would seem to be a straightforward symmetric arrange-
ment of the collaborating institutions. However, 
although the activities are symmetric, national policies 
create asymmetries in the value outcomes: in the UK 
students pay fees for their education — whether they 
are national or international students. In Germany, 
however, education is (mostly) free. This creates practi-
cal difficulties that are often unanticipated by consortia 
who assume that they are dealing with a symmetric 
arrangement. 
4.3.  Internationalization by approach
A somewhat different classification, seeks to categorize 
international activities and processes in terms of the 
approach to internationalization they adopt or which is 
appropriate. 
Consideration of internationalization in terms of 
approach was initially introduced as a means by which 
an institution could characterize its entire attitude 
towards internationalization. The suggested categories 
are: Activity, Outcomes, Rationales, Process, Ethos, 
and Cross-border. 
Each of these approaches could lead to a further 
classification under its separate rubric — as we will 
outline in a moment. However, there is no reason why 
a classification could not be devised based on the set of 
approaches — if an institution felt that its response to 
 globalization required different approaches and differ-
ent responses under these.
4.3.1. Six approaches
The activity approach simply classifies internationali-
zation according to the activities it comprises — and 
we have already discussed many such activities: joint 
degree programs, international projects, student mobil-
ity, and so on. Many institutions already approach inter-
nationalization in this way, and there is, perhaps, an 
argument to be made that it is not so much an approach 
as simply a list that lacks overall strategic coherence.
The outcomes approach attempts to organize inter-
national activities in terms of desirable results. For 
example, a raised profile and better international visibil-
ity for the institution; internationalized qualifications; 
research projects and deliverables with international 
significance; income generation; students as global 
 citizens; and so on.
The rationales approach considers the drivers of 
internationalization — that is, the global forces at 
play (even if some are locally generated). These may 
involve identity building at the national, not simply 
institutional, level; the development of multicultur-
alism at the level of the citizen or civic society; it 
could involve human capital development — to meet 
national as well as individual demands; and other 
local and regional drivers: economic development, 
nation building and identity, national security, and 
so forth.
The process approach considers the institution 
holistically, asking how internationalization integrates 
within all aspects of core business, and the structures 
and processes that support them. This approach raises 
interesting questions regarding the architecture of insti-
tutional strategy: should internationalization be a core 
strategy — perhaps sitting alongside an education and 
a research strategy, or a supporting strategy — perhaps 
sitting alongside a finance and a human resources strat-
egy, or should it appear fully integrated within all core 
and supporting strategies, making an appearance within 
key strategic goals and objectives of each?

74 
M. Henson
The ethos approach focuses primarily on  interna-
tionalization at home — considering in particular the 
climate on the home campus, while the cross-border 
approach focuses on internationalization abroad, par-
ticularly the more adventurous asymmetric arrange-
ments such as franchising and branch campuses.
4.3.2. Critique
As discussed earlier, it is not clear that the activities 
approach amounts to more than a list of responses to 
 globalization’s challenges, while the ethos/cross-border 
axis rather resembles the at-home versus abroad clas-
sification of Sec. 4.1, with its attendant limitations as 
discussed in Sec. 4.1.3.
There seems much to be commended in the out-
comes and rationale approaches. Both keep globaliza-
tion’s imperatives in focus and so encourage responses 
that align with these.
Similarly, the process approach, while not perhaps 
providing a means to classify activities by scale or type, 
provides much encouragement towards a clear approach 
to institutional strategy development.
4.4. Types of partnership
Perhaps the main limitation that emerged from the dis-
cussion in Secs. 4.1.3 and 4.2.3 concerned the failure of 
those classifications to address the context in which 
specific international activities take place. Our final 
taxonomy seeks to address this weakness.
Figure 1, show a matrix in which the complexity of 
the international partnership appears along the y-axis 
and the complexity of the international activities 
appears along the x-axis. This gives us four cells in the 
matrix to serve as our classification. A word of caution: 
this is not a four-valued variant of the two-valued clas-
sification described in Sec. 4.1. As we will see in the 
sequel, and in contrast to the classification in Sec. 4.1, 
activities of a similar nature may appear in more than 
one cell of the matrix. This will become clearer as we 
proceed. 
4.4.1. Narrowly-based bilateral partnerships
The bottom-left of the matrix concern narrowly-based 
bilateral activities. These are generally mobility 
arrangements, for example symmetric or asymmetric 
flows of mobile students on exchange programs, study 
abroad periods, work placements, volunteering, or 
attending summer schools. In addition, this cell also 
represents a kind of faculty mobility, in particular, the 
individual relationships that most academics routinely 
have with colleagues usually in order to pursue research. 
As we noted in Sec. 3.2, these faculty relationships are 
largely (and probably wisely) unmanaged and, indeed, 
most institutions do not know how many relationships 
of this kind exist, who is involved, and which partner 
institutions are implicated.
Another narrowly-based bilateral activity is the 
joint or dual degree offered in collaboration with a sin-
gle partner. 
Activities appear in this cell of the matrix when 
they are not sub-activities of some more comprehensive 
relationship. As such, the simple faculty-to-faculty rela-
tionships are important to institutional performance but 
the lack of strategic oversight is not simply forgivable, 
it is probably appropriate. Similarly, most universities 
with a healthy level of international student mobility 
will engage in a large number of bilateral mobility 
agreements. Taken together they almost certainly repre-
sent the implementation of a strategic aim: to improve 
academic standards and employability through an inter-
national experience — but the details of specific bilat-
eral agreements are tactical rather than strategic.
4.4.2. Narrowly-based multi-lateral partnerships
Many institutions will be familiar with partnerships that 
occupy the top-left cell of the matrix. Examples here 
include research groups which have established 
Fig. 1.
MulƟlater
Bilater
Narrow
Broad
Mobility
Group
AcƟvity
InsƟtuƟonal
Alliance
Global
Alliance

 
Taxonomies of Internationalization for Higher Education  
75
partnerships with consortia of similar groups interna-
tionally — often supported by external funding.
Other examples include internationally engaged 
degree programs, offered by a consortium of institutions. 
The Global Studies Program offered by the University 
of Freiburg and its partners is one such example. 
“The Global Studies Program is a two-year Master 
program initiated in 2002 followed by an optional PhD 
initiated in 2008. The mission of the program is to study 
social sciences in various cultures and regions focusing 
on the global South. It is conducted jointly by the 
University of Freiburg, the University of Cape Town, 
FLACSO-Argentina (Buenos Aires), Chulalongkorn 
University (Bangkok), and the Jawaharlal Nehru 
University (New Delhi). Each institution belongs to the 
best in its region.” 
Another more recent example is the Center for 
Urban Science and Progress (CUSP) which brings 
together seven  higher education institutions, including 
New York University, from four countries, nine industry 
partners, and a number of civic/governmental agencies. 
It is located in Brooklyn and serves to create a hub for 
research and postgraduate study. It focuses on topics 
such as energy, infrastructure, and public safety.
CUSP currently awards a joint certificate in Applied 
Urban Science and Informatics while master-level 
degrees are awarded by the participating institutions 
separately. Students spend part of their study period in 
more than one geographic centre. CUSP is currently 
developing a PhD program and creating a research 
capacity. In this sense, it is beginning to move towards 
a Type 4 relationship — as described in Sec. 4.4.4.
4.4.3. Broadly-based bilateral partnerships
Partnerships that belong in the bottom-right cell are 
complex bilateral alliances between institutions. A recent 
example of such an alliance is the arrangement that has 
been established between the University of Warwick in 
the UK and Monash University in Australia. 
“… the partnership reveals a shift for the education 
sector. While it aims to deliver a seamless international 
experience for students, the advent of a range of jointly 
delivered degrees at both universities represents a 
departure from traditional educational partnerships 
and shows at least some of the hallmarks of cross-
border collaboration more commonly seen in the pri-
vate sector.” Monish Paul and Anveeta Shrivastava, 
Deloitte, Australian Financial Review, April 2, 2012.
The two universities began this project by each 
 committing a considerable financial investment. As a 
significant profile-raising project, the partnership rapidly 
secured further external funding from the UK and 
Australian governments. £ 500,000 was awarded by the 
UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC) under its “Building Global Engagements” pro-
gram to build connections in the physical sciences, 
£ 66,000 was received from the Australian Government 
to support student mobility, and £ 200,000 was commit-
ted by the Australian Research Council grant to build 
collaborations in engineering.
The relationship is bilateral but involves a large 
number of distinct activities: research in several areas, 
student mobility, a PhD program, joint degrees and 
other forms of student collaboration, including a peer-
reviewed journal for students.
Such relationships challenge the traditional model 
of the university and offer a new set of possibilities that 
address  globalization’s challenges. Clearly, they set 
enormous challenges for management and governance. 
In this case, the two universities have made a joint 
senior-level appointment to manage the partnership.
4.4.4. Broadly-based multi-lateral partnerships
In principle these are the most complex of all partner-
ships. There are many of these, perhaps the oldest and 
most established being Universitas 21. These bring 
together often large numbers of institutions to cooper-
ate over a large number of activities. 
Universitas 21 is a consortium of 24 member uni-
versities from 16 countries and counts some half a mil-
lion students under its members’ jurisdiction. It was 
founded in 1997 and serves both as a “think-tank” on 
higher education as well as delivering collaborative 
education, research, and mobility programs. 
In 2001, together with organizations outside higher 
education provision, the consortium launched an online 
university, Universitas 21 Global, based in Singapore. 

76 
M. Henson
The universities collaborate on many levels, under-
graduate and postgraduate research, and several hun-
dred students a year participate in the student exchange 
programs, the U21 Student Mobility Program. The 
management of this ambitious activity is so complex 
that a separate company U21 Pedagogica Ltd. was set 
up in the US to oversee the administration and quality 
assurance.
Other well established consortia are the 
International Alliance of Research Universities, 
the League of European Research Universities, and 
the Worldwide Universities Network. Some have a 
specific focus, for example, on research, others on the 
education or mobility of students. There is some doubt 
as to the productivity of the larger networks, as the 
space of potential collaborations is extremely high, 
and the resources and capacities available to negotiate 
the formidable range of interactions and differences in 
administration, policy and regulation, is limited. More 
recently, there has been more interest in growing 
much smaller partnerships — beginning, as Warwick 
and Monash have done, with a productive Type 3 
arrangement.
4.4.5. Critique
As we have stressed, this final taxonomy is not a four-
valued version of the two-valued classification pro-
vided in Sec. 4.1. In this matrix model, an activity or 
process belongs in a cell only when considered in rela-
tion to all activities with all partners. For example a 
mobility agreement belongs in the bottom-left cell just 
in case there are no other partners to that agreement and 
when there are no other activities with the partner to the 
agreement. 
This approach addresses the weaknesses we 
observed in Secs. 4.1.3 and 4.2.3 — that we cannot 
evaluate the strategic significance of an international 
activity if we consider it in isolation. In this model each 
activity belongs with related partners and related activi-
ties with those partners.
The model is also helpful in tracking the migration of 
partnerships as they develop. In Sec. 4.4.2, we described 
the CUSP project and noted that although it is currently 
a Type 2 arrangement, it is on a trajectory towards a Type 
4 partnership. As relationships evolve over time, their 
position in the taxonomy can be tracked — allowing 
appropriate changes to strategy to be triggered.
There does remain a weakness, one that we have 
not previously mentioned because the models of Secs. 
4.1 and 4.2 do not begin to provide a classification that 
might address it. The issue concerns collections of 
related activities that lie within the bottom-left cell and, 
perhaps to a lesser extent, the top-left cell. 
Although not a partnership, the collection of, for 
example, all bilateral student mobility agreements 
forms a natural type which requires strategic oversight, 
even though the individual agreements are essentially a 
tactical matter of implementation. Similarly, an indi-
vidual joint or double degree certainly requires quality 
oversight — but the institution’s collection of such 
degrees is a strategic matter and creates general liabili-
ties for quality management with concomitant implica-
tions for planning and resourcing. 
Perhaps this might be addressed by refining the 
matrix. Alternatively, a mixed-mode approach in which 
the matrix — which concentrates on the partnerships — 
is combined with aspects of the rationales and process 
approaches outlined in Sec. 4.3 to provide a means to 
organize activities across non-partnership dimensions.
4. Conclusions and Future Work
We have attempted in this chapter to show that  globali-
zation and  internationalization in  higher education have 
distinct contours and complexities when compared to 
more generic businesses. The complexities arise largely 
because the core business of institutions of higher edu-
cation is multi-faceted and, even within one aspect such 
as research, has distinct strands (by disciplinary area 
and specific subject) that are subject to different global 
drivers, and require a differentiated response. They 
arise also because there are, in higher education, several 
value outcomes that transcend the purely financial. 
A consequence of this complexity is that, despite 
being to a large extent inherently international organiza-
tions, it remains a significant challenge to find an appro-
priate  international strategy that can successfully address 
the global externalities. There is, in particular, a very 
large space of potential activities and processes that can 
be deployed, each of which requiring a different level 
of strategic or tactical oversight. 

 
Taxonomies of Internationalization for Higher Education  
77
A first step towards developing a strategy is a 
means by which this large space of activities can be 
tamed. We have looked, in this chapter, at a number of 
taxonomies that could be use to structure this organiza-
tional challenge, and evaluated them. 
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to address the 
next stage which must, therefore, remain as future 
work: that is, to relate the taxonomic approaches 
described here to the activity of strategy development, 
revision and implementation. An audit of  internation-
alization within one of more of these taxonomies will 
act, as a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats 
(SWOT) analysis would also contribute, as a precursor 
to stating strategic goals and objectives. A continuing 
process of activity capture and development within a 
taxonomy can serve as an aid when strategies are evalu-
ated and revised, and provide guidance for their opera-
tionalization. We have not touched upon many critical 
factors that need to be considered. The details are com-
plex, requiring the further elaboration of issues of man-
agement and governance (in particular an unusual 
dynamic found in universities: the interaction between 
the academic core business activities and the profes-
sional services that support them), and of quality assur-
ance and enhancement (which are fundamental to the 
success of complex partnership arrangements). We will 
cover all this in a separate publication.
References
Altbach, P. G., Reisberg, L., & Rumbley, L. E. (2009), 
Trends in global higher education: Tracking an aca-
demic revolution, A Report Prepared for the UNESCO 
World Conference on Higher Education.
Altbach, P. G. & Salmi, J. (eds.) (2011), The Road to aca-
demic excellence the making of world-class research 
universities, World Bank. 
Coclanis, P. A. & Strauss, R. P. (2010), Partnerships: An 
alternative to branch campuses overseas, commentary, 
The Chronicle. Available at http://chronicle.com/article/
Partnerships-a-Different-A/124286/ (consulted April 
2014).
De Gruyter, J., Anna-Kaarina, A., Kairamo Use, K., de Beeck, 
O., Rintala, U., & Van Petegem, W. (2011), Virtual 
mobility — a contribution to the internationalization of 
higher education, Article D3.9 of Internationalisation of 
Higher Education — An EUA/ACA Handbook.
Diploma Supplement. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/educa-
tion/lifelong-learning-policy/doc1239_en.htm (consulted 
April 2014).
Erasmus Mundus Action 1 — Joint programmes. Available at 
http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/erasmus_mundus/programme/
action1_en.php.
European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System. 
Available at http://ec.europa.eu/education/lifelong-
learning-policy/doc48_en.htm (consulted April 2014).
Ghemawat, P. (2011), World 3.0: Global Prosperity and how 
to Achieve it.
Global Studies Programme. Available at https://www.gsp.
uni-freiburg.de/aboutgsp (consulted April 2014).
Grant, C. (2012), Losing our chains? Contexts and ethics of 
university 
internationalisation, 
Stimulus 
paper, 
Leadership Foundation for Higher Education.
Hanf, J. H. & Pall, Z. (2009), Is retailing really unique? 
Insights into retail internationalization using business 
theories, 113th EAAE Seminar “A resilient European 
food industry and food chain in a challenging world”, 
Crete, Greece.
International Alliance of Research Universities. Available at 
http://www.iaruni.org (consulted April 2014).
Jaramillo, A. et al. (2011), Internationalization of higher 
education in mena: policy issues associated with skills 
formation and mobility, Report 63762-mna.
Kinser, K. & Green, M. F. (2009), The power of partnerships: 
A transatlantic dialogue, American Council on Education.
Knight, J. (2010), Internationalisation: Key concepts and ele-
ments, Article A1.1 of Internationalisation of Higher 
Education — An EUA/ACA Handbook.
Koutsantoni, D. (2006), Internationalisation in the UK: 
Leadership foundation for higher education, Briefing 
papers, London: Leadership Foundation for Higher 
Education.
Lawton, W. et al. (2014), Horizon Scanning: What will 
higher education look like in 2020?, Observatory on 
Borderless Higher Education Report 12, Available at 
http://www.obhe.ac.uk/documents/view_details?id=934 
(consulted April 2014).
League of European Research Universities. http://www.leru.
org/index.php/public/home/ (consulted April 2014).
Meyer, D. & O’Carroll, C. (2009), International collabora-
tion: The lifeblood of research and innovation, Article 
C 1.1 of Internationalisation of Higher Education — An 
EUA/ACA Handbook.
Middlehurst, R. & Woodfield, S. (2007), Responding to the 
internationalisation agenda: Implications for institu-
tional strategy, Research Report 05/06, New York: 
Higher Education Academy.

78 
M. Henson
Pearce, R. (2006), Globalization and development: An inter-
national business strategy approach, Transnational 
Corporations, 15(1), 39–74.
Talent Wars (2007), The international market for academic 
staff, Universities UK Policy Briefing.
Understanding the Methodology: QS world university rankings, 
QS top universities. Available at http://www.topuniversities.
com/university-rankings-articles/world-university-rankings/
understanding-methodology-qs-world-university-rankings 
(consulted April 2014).
Universitas 21. Available at http://www.universitas21.com 
(consulted April 2014).
Warwick/Monash Institutional Alliance. Available at http://
www2.warwick.ac.uk/about/partnerships/monash/ (con-
sulted April 2014).
Welch, L. S. & Luostarinen, R. (1993), Inward–outward con-
nections in internationalization, Journal of International 
Marketing, 1(1), 44–56.
Worldwide Universities Network. Available at http://www.
wun.ac.uk (consulted April 2014).

79
Chapter 9
The Most Pressing  Challenges for Romanian Higher Education 
System in Line with the  Bologna Process Values
Dumitru Miron
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
In this chapter, there were analyzed a number of issues 
related to the implementation of few changes in 
Romanian educational system, in order to internalize 
the values of the Bologna Process. The chapter presents 
some evidences which proves that the evolutions taking 
place in Romania over the last decades continue some 
traditions, are justified by the need for paradigm 
change, but they can hardly become undeniable achieve-
ments. The chapter supports the idea that adopting a 
common action plan and putting into practice the com-
mitments made in frame of Bologna Process, without 
having a highly professional academic management 
and without taking on the new university governance 
values, is not a smooth process and did not generate 
inspiring effects. The chapter will approach as main 
directions: the social dimension of education, continu-
ous education and professional development, employ-
ability, student-centered education, multiple-sourced 
financing and improved academic governance, quality 
assurance in higher education. 
1. Introduction
Depicting the manner in which the process of reform in 
the Romanian education is a complex endeavor, both 
provocative and useful. Besides the criticism regarding 
the quality and efficiency of tertiary education in 
Romania, we must point out that the Romanian higher 
education also capitalizes on a series of competitive 
advantages, some of them sustainable, which may 
become profitable only when their conditions are 
understood and actions are taken in the respective 
direction. Making higher education an active agent of 
the Romanian economic and social modernization 
depends on understanding and accepting the change in 
the dominant logics happening in the international and 
the European academic landscape. We need to be 
mainly concerned by the position in which we have to 
place the university in the process of modernization 
happening in education, especially now, when higher 
education is maybe the most globalized component of 
the social landscape. Enders & De Weert (2004) stated 
that “although many universities still seem to perceive 
themselves rather as objects of processes of globaliza-
tion, they are at the same time also key agents.” This is 
very specific for a country which is on a complex and 
painful path of transition from a social-political system 
to another, and which greatly needs to use its education 
system as a modern driver of change at the level of the 
dominant social logics. The people who make decisions 
about public policies related to higher education and 
those who decide at the universities level must take into 
consideration that in order for these policies to have 
consistency they need to internalize good practices, to 
be based on successful experiences, and to be charac-
terized by a dynamic continuity. The greatest attention 
must be paid to avoiding errors of interpretation of 
certain concepts and taken actions. The problem is 

80 
D. Miron
more sensitive having in mind that Romania is an 
European Union (EU) member country being obliged 
to implement the acquis communautaire. Regarding 
higher education, where EU has no elements of acquis 
communautaire, the position of EU is more complex 
because, as Corbett (2004: 12) stated “governments 
want to use Europe to introduce domestic reform. The 
Commission wishes to extend its competence in higher 
education. University presidents want recognition. 
They each bring elements of the solution, as embodied 
in Bologna.”
2.  The Need of an Appropriate Balance 
between More Harmonization and 
Traditional Benchmarks
Definitely, higher education is essential for creating 
knowledge, technological progress, communication, 
behavior change, and cultural mutation. After 1990, an 
important dilemma had to be handled with great 
sagacity: how one could keep the balance between 
more harmonization required by the acquiescence to 
the referential values of our European re-becoming 
and the obligation to maintain traditional benchmarks 
of the Romanian higher education. As it is shown in 
the specialized literature (Kurelic, 2009), the changes 
of landscape, fed by the logics of the  Bologna Process, 
are not always meant to improve and modernize edu-
cational practices which have proved sustainable in 
time, but to bring new untested ones which can lead, 
under certain circumstances, to collateral effects 
difficult to manage. The efforts to introduce the values 
of the process in national education systems seem to 
have been configured as if they had already been 
tested and they had proved their competitive advan-
tages. On the other hand, essential mutations at the 
level of education systems prove to be risky if the 
people required to enforce them are not seriously pre-
occupied by their urgency and relevance. From this 
perspective as well, the reality of the implementation 
in Romania of the reforms fed by the Bologna Process 
shows that the decision-makers have aligned them-
selves to most requirements without first doing an in-
depth analysis which would accentuate the urgency, 
the direction, the costs and the effects of the 
transformation processes. The problem has acquired a 
relevant importance in Romania’s efforts to try certain 
changes in paradigm.
Romania must move from a dominant logics 
based on conformity to one based on proactivity. 
Higher education is an area in which we can demon-
strate this change. The process is not an easy one 
because the EU has become a major player on the 
stage of higher education, promoting the phrase ‘the 
Europeanization of higher education’ in logics of inte-
gration, the positive and the negative one. (Craig & de 
Burca, 2011). As it is stated in the Article 165(1) of 
the Treaty of European Union (TEU), the EU member 
states remain responsible for organizing the national 
higher education systems, but this competence must 
be carried out in strict accordance with the community 
right. Education has proved to be an important area for 
both the Lisbon Strategy and the 2020 Europe Strategy 
(European Commission, 2010). In order to achieve an 
intelligent, sustainable, and inclusive economic growth 
by 2020, the EU will have to focus on five major 
directions among which education. It is expected to 
reach at least 40% of 30–34-year-olds completing 
third level education. Although the European-level 
cooperation is mostly on a voluntary basis, it is clear 
that the Member States’ education policies are becom-
ing more and more Europeanized. Specialized litera-
ture highlights that the developments concerning the 
Bologna Process seem to contradict the “traditional 
resistance of the EU Member States to any harmoniza-
tion policy in education and to increased Community 
competence” (Hackl, 2001: 2). Beyond rhetoric, close 
analysis of evolutions related to the Bologna Process 
shows that we can identify differentiation, as well as 
harmonization areas, perceived as standardization. 
This is the case of the educational scheme based on 
higher education cycles, which went beyond the limit 
of the vocational, as the study cycles and their length 
were agreed on. If some formal aspects were standard-
ized, maintaining diversity is still possible in the case 
of curricula content. Close analysis of the relationship 
between the evolution of the European integration 
process and that of the Bologna Process is required to 
identify basic interferences and understand causalities 
appropriately. Although the Bologna Process is not 
under its direct supervision, the European Commission 

 
The Most Pressing Challenges for Romanian Higher Education System 
81
used it to increase its technocratic influence on vari-
ous aspects of the education and professional develop-
ment processes. As highlighted by Keeling (2006: 
203), “the Commission’s dynamic association of the 
Bologna university reforms with its Lisbon research 
agenda and its successful appropriation of these as 
European-level issues has placed its perspectives 
firmly at the heart of higher education policy debates 
in Europe.” In Romania’s case the question is whether 
the originality elements of its higher education system 
should be kept or it would be more comfortable to 
increase even more the Community’s involvement in 
this sensitive social and economic area. If one consid-
ers Romanian decision-makers’ concerns, there seems 
to be no resistance to adopting the Community’s regu-
lations in this field. Overcoming the compliance-
based approach requires public strategies and policies 
that are adopted and implemented professionally, 
coherently, and consistently by experts who are able to 
represent us where projects and framework documents 
are discussed, as well as behavioral changes to ensure 
a culture of quality, entrepreneurship, and efficiency. 
The  Bologna Process is related not only to the 
European integration process — sometimes to the 
point of juxtaposition — but also to evolutions taking 
place at the level of multilateral trading system 
(Huisman & van de Wende, 2004: 34–35). It is pos-
sible to say that some operational entities from the 
European education system comply with the institu-
tional format specific to the World Trade Organization 
(WTO). A good example in this respect is represented 
by the European Network of Quality Assurance 
Agencies (ENQA), which according to Furlong 
(2005: 5) have the features of the WTO operational 
system and an essential role in the framework of the 
Bologna philosophy. 
In terms of rhetoric, governments support inter-
governmental philosophy, pleading for maintaining the 
delimitation between the European integration process 
and the Bologna Process. In terms of practice, govern-
ments benefit from the increased convergence between 
education systems, a process which can stimulate and 
support achieving objectives related to intelligent and 
sustainable economic growth. Ravinet (2008: 357) 
showed that the difference between the objectives 
assumed in the framework of the Bologna Process and 
those derived from the dynamics of European eco-
nomic integration is determined by “where they derive 
their authority and importance from, at least partly 
explaining why their use contributes so much to a sense 
of bindingness.” Similarly, Fejes (2005: 219) claims 
that “planet speak rhetoric such as the ideas of the 
knowledge society, employability, lifelong  learning, 
quality assurance and mobility [...] constitute a way of 
thinking that makes participation in the Bologna 
Process and the implementation of its objectives a 
rational way to act.”
Taking into consideration concerns determined by 
the structural crisis of European welfare state, the 
employability of graduates and the need to create an 
educational model which is affordable and globally 
attractive, the Bologna Process became an interesting 
mix of inter-governmental and supranational elements 
due to which actions undertaken by EU organizations 
are influenced by cooperation between states. The 
main objectives of the European Higher Education 
Area (EHEA) are: to facilitate the speedy entrance of 
educated professionals into the job market through 
shortened degrees; to enhance the cross-border mobility 
of students and job seekers; to increase the competi-
tiveness of European higher education internationally 
(Sedgwick, 2003). The comparative analysis of national 
educational policies and the values of the Bologna 
Process reveal many areas of compliance, but even 
more transgressions from the dominant values of the 
process. The first transgression from the intrinsic logic 
of the vocational character of the Bologna Process was 
that many times it seemed that the implementation of 
commitments assumed in the framework of this pro-
cess was a precondition of a country’s accession to the 
EU, which was not only untrue, but also sometimes 
counter-productive. Such an approach was adopted by 
Romania.
3.  The Most Important Thematic 
Areas — Future Research Directions
The pivotal idea of the Bologna Process is the coagula-
tion of EHEA having as referential drivers: the knowl-
edge economy, European citizenship, employability, 
and cross-border mobility. Each state participating in 
this exercise of multi-level integration is committed to 

82 
D. Miron
proceed autonomously in reforming their educational 
systems. 
3.1.  Social dimension of education: Access, 
equity, and studies graduation
This goal was scored for the first time, in the commu-
nication adopted at the Ministerial Conference in 
Prague in 2001 and was operationalized by educational 
policies focused towards equity, undistorted access, and 
graduation in higher education. What it desired to 
achieve was, “strengthen policies of widening overall 
access and raising completion rates, including meas-
ures targeting the increased participation of underrep-
resented groups,” ministers of the participating countries 
are committed to “work to enhance employability, life-
long  learning, problem-solving and entrepreneurial 
skills through improved cooperation with employers, 
especially in the development of educational pro-
grams.” At the London Conference of 2007, participat-
ing States reaffirmed the principle of fairness and the 
need for students to be able to complete their studies 
without encountering obstacles related to their social 
and economic status.  Challenges which we must 
respond and Romania aims: setting measurable targets 
for widening access to higher education and take appro-
priate measures to achieve these objectives, increasing 
graduation rates and scroll for university studies; 
increasing participation of under-represented groups in 
higher education; implementation of national strate-
gies, action plans, and measures efficacy. 
3.2.  Education and life-long
learning (LLL)
The Prague Communication in 2001 stated stringency 
of adoption of national strategies through which to face 
the challenges coming from the direction of the new 
competitiveness, the use of new technologies, social 
cohesion, equal opportunity, and improved quality of 
life. In the London Communication, in 2007, national 
delegations assumed recognition of life-long transfera-
ble credits, pledging to set clear and appropriate fund-
ing mechanisms and improving academic governance. 
Other commitments in this direction are to include the 
LLL in the European and national frameworks of 
qualifications. In Leuven in 2009 it was agreed that 
LLL encouraged by national policies to be reflected 
in the practices of higher educational institutions. 
The new legislation in higher education (National 
Education Law No. 1/2011) has provisions of con-
sistency in this direction, but their consistency and 
especially insufficient methodological instructions 
make them unclear, unworkable, and ineffective. 
3.3. Employability
This goal defined in the Bologna Follow Up Group 
(BFUG ) as “the ability to hold an initial job, to main-
tain the job and to be mobile on the labor market ” has 
been identified as a priority at ministerial conferences 
starting the London Communiqué (2007), in which the 
signatory states intends to improve the employment 
rate of graduates. Ministerial conferences that followed 
have been undertaken by both specific targets, such as 
those related to the employment in a compatible man-
ner within the public sector with the three cycles sys-
tem or reducing the rate of youth unemployment, and 
public policy commitments, such as those related to 
cooperation with representatives of employers or pro-
fessional practice program integration in curriculum 
architectures or the compatibilization process of the 
careers in public administration with the new education 
system structured on three academic cycles. At Leuven, 
in 2009, the focus was on: including internship periods 
in university programs and workplace education, and 
improving career counseling services. At the Conference 
held in Bucharest in 2012, specific targets were assumed 
on reducing youth unemployment, improving employ-
ability, and personal and professional development of 
graduates, improving cooperation between employers, 
students and higher education institutions in order to 
develop programs of academic studies which will fur-
ther stimulate the entrepreneurship, the innovation and 
the research potential of the graduates. In Romania, 
there remains a structural difference of perception 
between the representatives of academia and the ones 
of the business environment in relation to the compati-
bility between the requests of employers and competen-
cies, cognitive skills, and abilities of the graduates of 
university programs; the employers considering them 
inappropriate. It overlooks the fact that, in order to 

 
The Most Pressing Challenges for Romanian Higher Education System 
83
maximize the compatibility level it is necessary for 
employers to anticipate and identify professional pro-
file elements defining each skill, to discuss them with 
the decision-makers in academia so that they are 
included in the portfolio of skills, and to adopt curricular 
designs that contribute effectively to minimize this gap. 
And academia needs to be at the forefront of proactive 
referral trends occurring in human capital and contrib-
ute to the adequate preparation of graduates. 
Examination of the Romanian societal landscape indi-
cates incoherence, inconsistency, lack of rigor, and 
reactive rather than pro-active habits at almost all levels 
of decision and action.
3.4. The student-centered education
An ongoing challenge that universities had to face was 
related to what a graduate student needs to know and be 
able to do after graduation, based on what the study 
programs offered. Student-centered education has not 
been a topic directly addressed at the beginning of the 
 Bologna Process, but it was addressed as a transversal 
concept. With the adoption of the Leuven Communiqué, 
an increasing focus was put on the mission of teaching/
 learning of the institutions of higher education, the 
reform of university curricula and the introduction of 
learning outcomes as a tool in the teaching process. The 
Conference from Bucharest, in 2012, agreed to inten-
sify efforts in order to ensure that: higher education 
institutions make the connection between study credits, 
learning outcomes, and effort of students and to include 
the acquisition of learning outcomes into assessment 
procedures; to promote innovative teaching methods 
and to involve students as active partners in their own 
training. In Romania, decision-makers often mistak-
enly believe that they have fulfilled all obligations with 
the implementation of the system of financing educa-
tion-equivalent student. Academic staff remains tribu-
tary to the traditional teaching methods maintaining the 
teaching logic and being reluctant to move to learning 
logic. The students also have a simplified understand-
ing of what student-centered learning really means and 
they are still maintaining low levels of proactivity, stay-
ing out of the development of the training process 
and being unconcerned for entrepreneurship, critical 
and creative thinking, innovation capabilities, and 
diversification of extracurricular and volunteering 
activities. Moving towards to a student-centered learn-
ing system involves changes in the strategies and poli-
cies at attitudinal level, at the educational infrastructure 
level, and in terms of relational mechanisms between 
the different categories of stakeholders. 
3.5.  The international opening
of education systems
Given the  challenges package fueled by globalization, 
the higher education institutions implementing the 
Bologna Process assumed, increasingly obvious, the 
internationalization process of their activities as a refer-
ential strategic component. In this respect, since the 
first ministerial statement it is assumed to promote the 
European dimension, in particular for the development 
of curricula, inter-institutional cooperation, or partner-
ships for mobility and joint degree programs. In Berlin 
in 2003, commitments were made to the implement 
scholarship programs for young people from outside 
Europe. In Bergen, in 2005, commitments were made 
to exchange best practices in collaborative programs 
with neighboring countries and in London in 2007, 
commitments concerned the exchange of information 
and further efforts to increase the attractiveness and 
competitiveness of the EHEA. At Leuven, in 2009, 
ministers have pledged to boost higher education insti-
tutions in their countries to internationalize their activi-
ties and to engage in global collaboration for sustainable 
development. Analysis reveals significant backlogs in 
this direction. The attractiveness of Romanian universi-
ties educational offer is extremely low due to the poor 
placement of their international rankings, the small 
number of join degree programs, and endemic parochi-
alism of the behavior of decision-makers at the univer-
sity level. Invoking financial reasons but sacrificing the 
strategic nature objectives, the Romanian universities 
seldom attend or are not attending at all in major inter-
national education fairs have less offensive promotional 
policies and often sacrifice long-term ambitions in 
favor of short-term goals. The main challenge that lies 
in front of universities in Romania refers to the 
dramatic fall in the number of potential students. The 
analysis of this phenomenon shows the complexity of 
its causalities. Often, the management of universities is 

84 
D. Miron
limited to demographic reasons and seeks circumstan-
tial solutions that will prove later on to be extremely 
expensive from medium and long term perspective. For 
treating those vulnerabilities it is necessary to move 
from university management to leadership and aca-
demic governance.
3.6.  The mobility of university community 
members
The main  challenges that the member states need to 
face are related to: the portability of grants study and 
loans; recognition of study periods in other universities; 
minimizing financial barriers for the mobility of stu-
dents and teachers; increase the flexibility of  learning 
paths. In London in 2007, it was revealed that it is the 
responsibility of governments to facilitate the granting 
of residence and work permits. By Leuven Communiqué 
of 2009, a clear target in the  Bologna Process has been 
adopted, i.e., at least 20% of those who have completed 
a university program have to benefit by 2020 from a 
period of study or training abroad. On this occasion it 
was pointed out that career structures must be adapted 
to facilitate mobility of teachers, researchers, and 
administrative staff. Working conditions must be estab-
lished in order to ensure appropriate access to social 
security and to facilitate the portability of pensions and 
of additional rights for staff involved in mobility. In 
Bucharest, in 2012, it was agreed to adopt the strategy 
of “Mobility for better learning.” Ministers agreed that 
the requirements for mobility are: flexible learning 
paths, active information policies, full recognition of 
learning outcomes, study support and full portability of 
grants and loans. In this respect, Romania can act at the 
level of the promotion criteria and evaluation of aca-
demic performance by increasing indicators covering 
the period of study abroad, involvement in interdiscipli-
nary research teams, visiting professor status. Romanian 
Universities should be encouraged through public fund-
ing schemes, to increase the proportion of teachers 
from other EU member states and their number of 
teachers who teach abroad. It is necessary to develop 
and operationalize motivational schemes that include 
financial incentives for intra-national and international 
mobility of academic staff. There is much to do in the 
direction of increasing the share of students attending 
one or more semesters of study at foreign universities 
partner. It is imperative to provide the academic cur-
ricula with mandatory periods of study or internship 
abroad.
3.7. Improved academic governance
Financing higher education system was central point 
of the Bologna Process with the adoption of the 
Leuven Communiqué, where the national delegations 
assumed that public funding remains the main priority 
which guarantees equitable and sustainable develop-
ment of autonomous higher education institutions. At 
the same time, searching of other diversified funding 
sources and methods were also carried on. The 
Bucharest Communiqué reiterates the need for public 
funding at the highest possible level, while describing 
other appropriate sources. In terms of governance of 
higher education system, the Bologna Process states 
from the beginning the attendance of students, teach-
ers, and non-teaching administrative staff to the 
decision-making process at all levels and the exist-
ence of a legal framework to ensure such participa-
tion. The Communiqué Budapest/Vienna, in 2010, 
referred to staff and student participation in decision-
making at European, national, and institutional levels. 
Communique from Bucharest is the first programmatic 
document that makes clear reference to governance 
structures, noting the need to develop effective man-
agement structures. In the new conditions of inter-
university competition, the development of the more 
effective governance management structures of higher 
education institutions becomes essential. At the mag-
nitude of the economic and financial global crisis, 
Romania was among the EU member states that have 
reduced by over 20% allocations for education and 
academic research demonstrating that politicians and 
decision-makers did not understand that in times of 
crisis one should not operate pro-cyclical measures but 
inverse with anti-cyclical measures. The budget finan-
cial and statistical engineering will not replace the 
smart, structured, and consistently applied financing 
schemes and the non-switching process to the European 
logic of multi-annual financial perspectives in the 
financing of higher education, will deprive this sector 
from the strategic approach absolutely necessary to 

 
The Most Pressing Challenges for Romanian Higher Education System 
85
ensure the quality and sustainability at its level. One of 
the most significant vulnerabilities of the Romanian 
higher education system is the structural deficit in the 
university governance which makes the coexistence of 
at least three major confusion: the confusion between 
documents bearing the title and genuine political strat-
egy or strategies and policies in education; confusion 
between real manager with management capabilities 
and complex educational process and people demo-
cratically elected or appointed to fill managerial func-
tions and skills without binding it, the confusion of 
true educational  paradigm shift that requires behavio-
ral changes involving all stakeholders of education 
and cosmetic changes in the institutional and regula-
tory architectures which are not addressing the nuances 
of cultural nature. 
3.8. Qualiﬁ cations framework
One of the main objectives of the  Bologna Process 
was the transition to three-cycle system, since 2005. 
The participating States have also undertaken the 
mission to develop and implement national qualifica-
tions frameworks compatible with the European 
Qualifications Framework, which describe what a 
student should know, understand, and be able to 
achieve on the basis of that qualification. The main 
purpose of implementing these measures is to ensure 
coherence, consistency, and international compara-
bility of qualifications and titles acquired during 
higher education process in Europe. Even in 2003, in 
Berlin, it was expected that the first university course 
to provide access, for the purposes of the Lisbon 
Recognition Convention, to second cycle of studies 
and the second cycle to give access to doctoral stud-
ies. Within the Berlin Communiqué it is declared that 
“... The quality of higher education has proven to 
beat the heart of the setting up of a European Higher 
Education Area” (European Ministers of Education, 
Berlin, 2003). To the Bergen meeting it was stated 
that: “We commit ourselves to introducing the pro-
posed model for peer review of quality assurance 
agencies on a national basis, while respecting the 
commonly accepted guidelines and criteria” 
(European Ministers of Education, Bergen, 2005). In 
London, in 2007, the commitments aimed: proper 
implementation of European Credit Transfer and 
Accumulation System (ECTS) based on the  learning 
results and students workload and full implementa-
tion of national qualifications frameworks to the EQF 
certificate of EHEA by 2010 as preparing for self-
certification QF–EHEA by 2012. In Bucharest, in 
2012, participants were committed that the qualifica-
tions giving access to higher education should be 
considered as part of the European Qualifications 
Framework (EQF) level 4, or equivalent (for coun-
tries that are not related to EQF but include national 
frameworks) and award the first, second and third 
cycle, levels 6, 7, and 8 of the EQF. Nationally, there 
were developed and certified skills scales obtained 
through successful completion of a bachelor degree 
or Master program. Based on these skills grids (1), in 
case of certain university programs and grids 1 — bis 
there were assigned to each competence and adjacent 
descriptor, disciplines and their respective credit 
points. It’s time to start the reverse process conducted 
to date, one in which, having as landmark the already 
nationally approved competences grids, the curricula 
programs should be revised and to further include in 
it those disciplines that really contribute to the 
announced competences, to carefully consider the 
intracurricular synergistic correlations and to elimi-
nate redundancies which is also reflected in the 
records of disciplines (syllabus). It becomes manda-
tory to agree with representatives of employers the 
curriculum content, to early involve both specialists 
in science education and those from social and eco-
nomic environment, in all stages of the ambitious 
process of development of a truly modern and con-
sistent with best European and international prac-
tices, curricula architecture. Romanian educational 
reality show as time goes by that universities face 
more complex  challenges. To be able to respond pro-
actively and intelligently to this, universities need to 
know how to: be practical as well as transcendent, 
assist immediate needs and pursue knowledge for its 
own sake and both add and question value. Academic 
governance structures must find the means by which 
they make the community members understand that: 
higher education is not about results in the next quar-
ter, but about discoveries that may take-and last-
decades or even centuries; higher education has the 

86 
D. Miron
responsibility to serve not just as a source of eco-
nomic growth, but as society’s critic and conscience; 
universities are meant to be producers not just of 
knowledge but also of (often inconvenient) doubt. In 
the last decade there has been a shift both in the 
political discourse and in the academic research from 
the process of education and implicitly of teaching 
requiring external intervention from a whole system, 
towards the  learning process learning which is a pro-
foundly individual act (Peter and Humes, 2003).
3.9.  Quality assurance in higher education 
system
One of the most important objectives of the  Bologna 
Process was to develop the aspects of quality assur-
ance, in particular the common general criteria for 
compatibility of national systems of quality assurance. 
In the Berlin Communiqué, in 2003, it is predicted that 
by 2005 national quality assurance systems should 
include: a definition of the responsibilities of the stake-
holders and institutions involved, an evaluation of pro-
grams or institutions including internal assessment, 
external student participation and publication of results, 
a system of accreditation, certification or comparable 
procedures, international participation, cooperation and 
networking. In this respect, the Bergen Communiqué 
adopted standards and trends for quality assurance in 
the EHEA, document designed by the European 
Association for Quality Assurance National Agencies 
which includes provisions on quality assurance at insti-
tutional level, external quality assurance and standards 
for national agencies. In London Communiqué, in 
2007, the participating States decided to support the 
founding of a European register of  quality assurance 
and in 2012, in the Bucharest Communiqué, the 
national agencies are encouraged to apply for registra-
tion. In Romania, it has been made important steps 
towards the operationalization of regulatory and insti-
tutional framework required to ensure the quality of 
education, the educational effectiveness and ensuring 
internal and external evaluation of compliance with 
quality criteria. From the formal point of view, the 
Romanian universities carry out self-evaluation quality 
assurance process of the study programs, have their 
own institutional structures required by the quality 
assurance and evaluation of study programs offered and 
they began to implement the vectors   quality culture. 
Almost all Romanian universities proceeded external 
quality assessment procedures for higher education, 
went through institutional assessment and implement 
the recommendation of expert evaluators. What has to 
be done as next steps is overcoming the purely quanti-
tative criteria check stage, that may be irrelevant, and 
passing to a prevalent qualitative assessment in order to 
certify that it has been made the move from teaching to 
learning, was enthroned a culture of quality of study 
programs whose values are assumed by all members of 
the university community and that the status quo has 
close connections with the process itself.
4. Conclusion
We can conclude the Bologna Process represents 
undoubtedly a revolution of European academic land-
scape meant to generate significant medium and long-
term effects. The most important drivers of this process 
are: the enthronement and intelligent management of a 
new culture of quality in higher education and the con-
tribution of tertiary education to the increase of flexibil-
ity and adaptability of intellectual capital. What should 
be regulatory clarified, understood at the academic 
governance level and implemented in the conduct of 
university community members is whether the values 
of this process should be regarded as endogenous fac-
tors of higher education systems or as their exogenous 
determinants. The central issue of this process remains 
the  paradigm shift from a model of higher education 
systems based on the accumulation and transmission of 
knowledge to a new model of tertiary education based 
primarily on providing competencies (general, special-
ized and transverse competencies), cognitive skills and 
abilities. This fundamental change must take into 
account a number of transformations taking place at the 
Romanian educational landscape also. Among these, 
the most notable are: the massification and marketiza-
tion of higher education; changing background of pro-
fessional training processes nature, of the appetite for 
learning among young people and of their range of 
expectations; the deepening need for attracting in the 

 
The Most Pressing Challenges for Romanian Higher Education System 
87
functional and assessing decision-making process of a 
growing number of interest groups (stakeholders); 
deepening urgency to change the quality of the educa-
tional culture; the rapid advancement of the process of 
internationalization in higher education, which has 
generated greater mobility of the members of the uni-
versity community and has sharpened the need for 
transparency of activities. The need to “provide com-
mon European answers to common European  chal-
lenges”, is more acute than ever. 
For Romania, aligning with the European objective 
further requires: the adoption of a clear educational sys-
tem, rigorous, logically articulated and feasible, taking 
into account the requirements of current and future 
human capital market and to internalize best practices 
enshrined at international and European level; promoting 
an international dimension to the higher education sys-
tem and ensuring conditions for unrestricted mobility of 
Romanian students and those from other countries, of the 
teaching and research staff and of other members of the 
university community; promoting cooperation at 
European and international level in matters of ensuring 
high quality standards in higher education; promoting at 
all university cycles the defining values for the European 
identity; raising the attractiveness of Romanian universi-
ties for the citizens of the European Economic Area; 
modernization of doctoral programs in what their content 
and purpose is concerned, in order to ensure the desirable 
synergy between education and scientific research, 
essential in the context of an knowledge and creativity 
based economy.
References
Bucharest Communiqué (2012), Making the most of our 
potential: Consolidating the European Higher Education 
Area. Available at http://www.ehea.info/news-details.
aspx?ArticleId=266.
Corbett, A. (2004), Europeanization and the Bologna 
Process — A preliminary to a British study, Paper pre-
sented to the One day conference co-sponsored by the 
ESRC and UACES.
Craig, P. & Burca, G. de. (2011), EU Law, Text Cases and 
Materials (5th edn.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Enders, J. & De Weert, E. (2004), The international attractive-
ness of the academic workplace in Europe — synopsis 
report. In The International Attractiveness of the 
Academic Workplace in Europe, J. Enders and E. de 
Weert (eds.), Frankfurt: Herausgeber und Bestelladresse.
European Ministers of Education (2003), Realizing the 
European Higher Education Area, Berlin: Communiqué 
of the conference of ministers responsible for higher 
education.
European Ministers of Education (2005), The European 
Higher Education Area — Achieving the Goals, Bergen: 
Communiqué of the conference of ministers responsible 
for higher education.
European Ministers of Education (2007), Towards the 
European higher education area: Responding to chal-
lenges in a globalized world, London. 
European Commission (2010), Europe 2020: A strategy 
for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, COM 2020, 3. 
Fejes, A. (2005), The Bologna process — governing higher 
education in Europe through standardization. Paper 
 presented at the third conference on Knowledge and 
Politics — the Bologna Process and the Shaping of the 
Future Knowledge Societies.
Feyerabend, P. (1987), Science in a Free Society, London: 
Verso. 
Furlong, P. (2005), British higher education and the Bologna 
process: An interim assessment, Politics,  25(1), 53–61.
Garben, S. (2010), The Bologna process from a European 
law perspective, European Law Journal,  16(2), 186–
210.
Garben, S. (2013), The Future of Higher education in 
Europe: The case for a stronger base in EU law. LEQS 
Paper No. 50.
Hackl, E. (2001), Towards a European area of higher educa-
tion: Change and convergence in European Higher 
Education, EUI Working Paper, RSC No. 2001/09. 
Huisman, J. & van de Wende, M. (2004), The EU and 
Bologna: Are supra- and international initiatives threat-
ening domestic agendas? European Journal of Education, 
39(3).
Keeling, R. (2006). The Bologna Process and the Lisbon 
Research Agenda: The European Commission’s expand-
ing role in higher education discourse, European Journal 
of Education,41(2), 203–222. 
Kuhn, T. (1970), The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Kurelic, Z. (2009), How not to defend your tradition of 
higher education, Političkamisao,  46(5), 9–20.
Luijten-Lub, A. van der Wende, M., & Huisman, J. (2005), 
On cooperation and competition: A comparative analy-
sis of national policies for internationalization of higher 

88 
D. Miron
education in seven Western European countries, Journal 
of Studies in Higher Education, 9(2).
Marginson, S. (2004), Globalization and higher education: 
Global markets and public goods. In The International 
Attractiveness of the Academic Workplace in Europe, 
J. Enders and E. de Weert (eds.). Frankfurt: Herausgeber 
und Bestelladresse.
Ravinet, P. (2008), From voluntary participation to moni-
tored coordination: Why European countries feel 
increasingly bound by their commitment to the Bologna 
Process, European Journal of Education, 43(3). 
Reinalda, B. & Kulesza, E. (2005), The Bologna Process — 
Harmonizing Europe’s Higher Education, Opladen & 
Bloomfield Hills: Barbara Budrich Publishers.

89
Chapter 10
 University Governance and  Competitive Advantage
Mihai Korka
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
Modern universities are complex institutions, with mul-
tiple functions in the society and specific organizational 
and managerial structures. Universities fulfill their pub-
lic mission only by integrating into their respective 
civic, economic, cultural and scientific environment 
and playing an active role in the sustainable progress of 
the smaller or larger scale communities they serve. As 
society is under a continuing transformation and com-
petition among the providers of higher education ser-
vices becomes stronger, universities engaged a 
multifaceted modernization process as they wanted to 
keep their role as strong growth engines in the society. 
Changes might be observed in the way universities 
accomplish their mission and public functions. Changes 
are noticeable also in terms of management structure 
and decision-making, in organizational behavior and in 
the way universities connect with the world beyond 
their respective campuses. New university governance 
concepts and principles are discussed and implemented 
in a variety of models everywhere in the academic 
world. Even the ways of approaching competitive 
advantages of universities register a certain diversifica-
tion as risks and opportunities are so different from a 
region to another, as internationalization is embedded 
in sustainable development strategies.
The chapter reiterates some of the observed changes 
in the university governance and discusses practices 
which trigger the competitive advantage of universities. 
As cost  leadership appears to have limited application 
field, specialization of university functions and 
 readiness for quick adaptation to the ever changing 
needs of the society are presented as possible ways of 
cultivating competitive advantage of institutions for 
their sustainable development. The background for the 
discussion on university governance and competitive 
advantage refers to existing positive and negative legal, 
institutional and behavioral factors in the  Romanian 
higher education sector.  
1. Introduction
Change is probably the single stable element of life on 
earth whether one looks to an individual or to a smaller 
or larger community. However, the speed and depth of 
the change register amazing dimensions at present and 
in the predictable future their intensification appears to 
be a normal extension of the current situation. Change 
will affect even more facets of human presence and life 
and will continue to shape the interaction of the society 
with the natural environment. Korka affirms that “on a 
2025 horizon the society itself will continue to change. 
On one hand, individual interests and consumerism are 
becoming stronger but on the other hand social capital 
becomes more influential as awareness of ecological, 
civic and political rights for individuals and communi-
ties are on the agenda of each and everyone. Common 
interests and new communication channels supported 
by last generation hard- and software stimulate global 
interconnectedness in almost all the aspects of the day 
to day life and work” (2013: 49–59). 

90 
M. Korka
Universities have been created a millennium ago 
and still exist as constituent part of the society with 
specific public functions which answer current and 
future requirements of the society. In the dynamic and 
challenging context of the fast changing societal envi-
ronment, universities have undergone more or less vis-
ible transformation processes. Some of the universities 
proofed to be more dynamic, showing an explicit pro-
pensity to change under the strain of the extra academic 
world. Some others were more rigid showing resistance 
to change. This is why these universities were qualified 
as ivory towers. The second part of the last century 
revealed the fact that even ivory towers were challenged 
by the society and invited to better respond to the needs 
and expectations of their stakeholders. By discussing 
the drivers of increased role of universities in the future 
progress of the society, Scott states that “The prospects 
for the next half century are for an acceleration of both 
drivers — to include access to higher education among 
the basic entitlements enjoyed by citizens in democratic 
societies; and to “put knowledge at work” in order to 
generate wealth and to improve the quality of life” 
(1998: 18–20).
Universities will continue and even strengthen the 
transformation process as they want to keep and dem-
onstrate their real potential as growth and wealth 
engines in the society. The traditional  competitive 
advantage of universities as knowledge and skills pro-
viders cannot be defended by stiff attitudes towards the 
multiple and complex changes in the society. Under the 
competition pressure of new innovative providers enter-
ing the higher education sector, many universities have 
engaged in consistent re-engineering of teaching and 
learning; there are also coherent attempts to re-organize 
the research activities and the provision of services to 
the local, regional, national, and/or global society. 
Changes in university life might be also observed in 
terms of management structure and decision-making, in 
organizational behavior and in operating the interface 
with the world of stakeholders and clients beyond the 
respective campuses. Additionally, new  university gov-
ernance concepts and principles are discussed and 
implemented in a variety of models everywhere in the 
world. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to dis-
cuss the impact of the changing world on Romanian 
universities in a prospective approach. Korka mentions 
five different dimensions of these changes: deep func-
tional specialization, flexible and efficient organiza-
tional models, entrepreneurial spirit, systemic 
communication, and networking and performance ori-
ented university governance (2013: 61–80). Specifically, 
the chapter offers a review of these predictable changes 
from the perspective of competitive advantage. 
2.  Deep Functional Specialization 
of Universities
The global changes in the social, cultural, natural, com-
munication and information environment, the continu-
ing evolution of the national and international legal, 
political and diplomatic setting in which universities 
exist and function generate numerous yet different 
responses. Some of these responses have already turned 
to practice in the most dynamic universities, others are 
only anticipated. Without doubt, some responses of the 
university communities are not or cannot be anticipated 
because the mix of factors and circumstances cannot be 
always predicted, nor can their results.
As they have been so far, universities will continue 
to operate as higher learning and training organizations, 
as research and innovation hubs which promote and 
disseminate science and culture, as service providers to 
the society or to the business community. In all these 
functions, universities fully apply and promote the 
human rights and the principles of democratic 
citizenship. 
One of the outcomes of the transformations in the 
Romanian higher education after December 1989 is 
the increase of the number of public universities and the 
emergence of private providers. As a consequence, 
the study opportunities for Romanian and international 
students appear to be highly segmented and amazingly 
repetitive. Many study programs are operated by tens of 
higher education institutions. Even in the same town 
the same study profile is present in more than one uni-
versity. The higher education applicants are confused 
by this multiplication of learning opportunities and, in 
the absence of transparent information regarding qual-
ity or learning outcomes differentiation, they might 
make inappropriate choices. 
The Romanian National Education Law No. 1/2011 
provides a grouping of Romanian universities into 

 
University Governance and Competitive Advantage 
91
three categories according to the prevalence of research 
or higher education in the total volume of activities car-
ried out by each of the organizations. The aim of the 
grouping is to offer a more substantial financial support 
to advanced research and education universities, and a 
less beneficial financing to the other two categories — 
education and research universities and, respectively to 
only education universities. 
However this grouping proves to meet only par-
tially the diversification expectations of the present and 
especially of the future society. A profound functional 
specialization could better answer the needs of the soci-
ety than a grouping which appears to be too simple, too 
generalist when compared to the diversity of the pre-
sent and future expectations and needs. On the other 
hand, this grouping generates an explicit disadvantage 
for most of the higher education institutions and ends 
up with a differentiated treatment of the right of appli-
cants to a sound and quality education.
By the profile of their activity, advanced research 
and education universities do not have the capacity of 
enlisting for studies all the people interested in higher 
education, nor do they wish to sacrifice excellence in 
research in favor of initial training of a large number of 
students. In order to promote excellence in research, 
some of these universities have taken the step to signifi-
cantly reduce the number of people enrolled in the first 
study cycle (undergraduate) alongside with the attrac-
tion of an increased number of Master and PhD stu-
dents, with a careful selection of applicants based on 
intellectual performance. Other universities of the first 
group have introduced from the first study year disci-
plines or modules which develop research aptitudes in 
students and train them as research assistants. It means 
that advanced research and education universities trig-
ger their  competitive advantage by pointing on talent 
(research expertise of the staff and strong selection 
criteria of students) and/or on cost  leadership (under-
graduate students are trained to become from an early 
stage of their presence on campus competent, creative 
and entrepreneurial research assistants). Altbach & 
Salmi enumerate three pre-requisites for reaching aca-
demic excellence in research: talent, resources and 
governance. Their innovative mix could support a uni-
versity on its road to academic excellence. The authors 
point to the fact that “a key success factor in building a 
top research university is the ability to attract, recruit, 
and retain leading academics” (2011: 323–333).
But society does not only need advanced research 
competencies, nor is the students’ learning potential 
uniform. Alongside with the advanced research and 
education universities, society will always need other 
types of higher education institutions which should be 
capable to demonstrate excellence in their field of 
activity. The universities of education and research 
which offer excellence in higher education and profes-
sional training are already greatly appreciated in the 
society. Their main goal is the students’ professional 
and intellectual development, so that they may prove 
the personal and social effectiveness of their training as 
specialists which are successfully entering the labour 
market based on their learning outcomes. They also 
successfully enter social life, having acquired the set of 
competencies and values which allow them to take 
roles and responsibilities in the democratic society. The 
competitive advantage of some of these education and 
research universities resides in diverse and flexible cur-
ricula and in the quality of the career orientation and 
assistance services provided throughout the study 
period, for acquiring knowledge and skills useful to 
society. Student-focused learning involves taking into 
consideration the individual or group demands and 
expectations of the students, who aim at an advanced 
professional training and also at their intellectual devel-
opment, at cultivating their personality as a highly 
qualified specialist, critically-minded, bright, creative, 
capable to communicate in an intelligent manner, to 
assert themselves and to integrate at the workplace and 
in the community, to assume leadership and the results 
of their decisions. International experience points to the 
fact that the competitive advantage of this type of uni-
versities can also be strengthened by the quality of life 
and services on campus, by the diversity of the possi-
bilities of (multi)cultural and artistic education, by 
sports and extra-curricular activities. Such a mission 
assumed by some of the education and research univer-
sities responds to the expectations of quite a number of 
students of today and much more of tomorrow. Besides 
strictly acquiring a professional qualification, they have 
other personal or societal motivations to attend higher 
education courses. In fact, the increased complexity of 
the future society recommends conceiving and 

92 
M. Korka
implementing interdisciplinary curricula, which should 
develop inter-professional and inter-cultural competen-
cies of communication and interaction.
The education-research binomial is and remains in 
the foreseeable future the only guarantee of a universi-
ty’s attractiveness and competitiveness in any domain 
of knowledge. As every element of the binomial will 
improve in complexity, due to the diversity of concrete 
elements assembled in the curricula and the adjustment 
to the requirements of society; a single university will 
not be able to concomitantly cover all the types of 
demands, either in the domain of higher education or in 
the domain of scientific research, without the risk of 
losing excellence.  Competitive advantage of education 
and research universities can be strengthened by a bal-
anced specialization of the public functions of the 
organization. The university management with the sup-
port of the academic community has to adapt to the 
long run specialization opportunities existing in the 
wider society the university serves and to face chal-
lenges build up by local and international competitors 
in each of the functions. Based on a sound analysis of 
the risks and advantages, the entire university commu-
nity will have to make its choices in establishing those 
ones which better support the sustainable institutional 
development.
As regards the third type of higher education insti-
tutions, there will be no universities exclusively dedi-
cated to education, without any research or knowledge 
development activity. Higher education simply does not 
exist without a concern for fundamental or applied 
research connected to the teaching activity. Every uni-
versity will have to continue to identify human, infor-
mational, technical and financial resources in order to 
preserve and increase through research the value, rele-
vance and quality of the training offered to students. 
Otherwise, it will be exposed to the risk of losing its 
identity and its role in the society.
The variety of requirements of people interested in 
initial and further higher education will determine both 
the flexibility of the study duration and the diversifica-
tion of the study formats. The rigid duration of the 
study programs, formalized by the present national 
legal framework as well as by some international agree-
ments will be reconsidered in the immediate future. 
More flexible pathways will be implemented in the 
initial higher education concomitantly with new teach-
ing and learning methods. Evaluation of knowledge and 
skills will undergo a significant improvement focusing 
on the problem solving aptitudes and attitudes of 
students. 
On the other hand, there are successful interna-
tional examples of universities offering training pro-
grams to graduates which are interested to acquire 
useful competencies after they get work experience. 
These are life-long and life wide programs of variable 
duration and formats which are tailored according to 
the needs of the attendance. The interest for higher 
education of people belonging to different age-groups 
represents a reasonable motivation for Romanian uni-
versities to find appropriate and advantageous methods 
to make the tertiary professional and intellectual train-
ing more flexible in terms of access and delivery. In the 
context of the shrinking trend in new intakes from the 
regular student cohorts, some of the higher education 
institutions could even decide on for a specialization in 
tertiary lifelong study programs.
The variety of the local/regional or international/
global opportunities of sustainable institutional devel-
opment, the different visions of the university commu-
nities about their role and mission in the society as well 
as the human and financial resources which can be 
attracted to the institutional sustainable development 
project will determine a much deeper functional spe-
cialization of universities as in present days. The mis-
sions and functions of universities will be much more 
divers than they are today. The main drivers of the 
specialization are competition forces and the perma-
nent search for competitive advantage.
Treacy & Wiersema analyze three main “value dis-
ciplines” assuring the competitive advantage of a com-
pany: product  leadership, operational excellence and 
customer confidence (1993 and 1995). By adapting 
these concepts to the academic world, Korka observes 
that product leadership should be a permanent goal to 
be followed by the university management team along 
all the phases of the life-cycle of each study program 
(from the design of the curriculum, throughout delivery, 
quality control, and cost effectiveness), while opera-
tional excellence depends on the relevance of the learn-
ing outcomes, the variety of educational formats and 
the appropriateness of the internships. Finally, customer 

 
University Governance and Competitive Advantage 
93
confidence can be nourished via soft or emotional argu-
ments (satisfaction of graduates, success rates in enter-
ing the labor market, etc.) and hard or factual ones 
(international accreditation and recognition of diplomas 
and certificates). Showing  readiness to adapt to the ever 
changing needs of the real and potential students and 
learners could also increase comfort and confidence of 
the customers (2011: 117–125).  
3.  Flexible and Efficient Organizational 
Models
The traditional organizational model of Romanian uni-
versities is based on rigid disciplinary division of the 
academic activity and on highly bureaucratic adminis-
tration. Driven by the global race for students and 
resources, universities adopt different organizational 
models, which focus on the principles of organizational 
flexibility and efficiency.
Whatever the organizational model may be, univer-
sity will have to take on the  organizational behaviour of 
an enterprise confronted with competition, as it is, in 
fact, an organization which continuously strives for 
recognition and the promotion of its products (whether 
we mean graduation diplomas, registered patents or 
other research-development-innovation results, or the 
services rendered for the welfare of the community), 
for excellence and visibility in its field, for preserving 
and, if possible, for expanding its own activity of inter-
action with society in the country and/or abroad.
The universities of excellence promote the adho-
cratic model, respectively, the organization of their own 
employees and of those attracted to temporary teams 
centred on problem solving and interdisciplinary asso-
ciation of experts, which stimulates a strong creative-
innovative spirit. From the perspective of the knowledge 
society, flexibility, and the permanent competition 
among specialists represent the fundamental principles 
of an efficient organization. 
Already present in international practice, the matrix 
model makes a clear distinction between the role of 
departments, which pool human resources involved in 
academic activities according to subjects, and the inter-
disciplinary demand administered by schools and/or 
research centres. The department focuses on the affili-
ated disciplines and on continuous updating of 
disciplinary pedagogy, while the administration of the 
study programs and of the research projects is entrusted 
to centres, which are created ad hoc to cover the activi-
ties enlisted in the university portfolio. Actually, this 
model is based on the idea that a university cannot 
efficiently respond to the contextual needs of society 
other than by flexibility, by rapidly adjusting the inter-
nal organization of “production”. The model of the 
universities organized on the matrix basis will gain 
ground in the future, but it will not be generally applied.
The alternative model of a hybrid organizational 
structure is present in most systems of higher education 
which are highly dependent on state financing. These 
universities show departments organized according to 
disciplines, consolidated administration structures of 
the study programs (faculties/schools) or of the research 
projects (centres of excellence) and a large bureaucratic 
sector of auxiliary services, which administrates the 
activities on the real or virtual campus and operates the 
financial — accounting department. The supremacy of 
rigid professional bureaucracy over the intellectual 
activity eliminates from the competition for excellence 
all those universities which apply this model. Recent 
years prove that even the success in the competition for 
students and for resources might be jeopardized by 
heavy bureaucratic procedures.
In order to avoid such a perspective, the organiza-
tional model adopted by the university community 
should rely on a simple, operational hierarchic struc-
ture, with minimum bureaucratic mechanisms, yet 
transparent and efficient, capable of adapting to the 
inevitable increase in the complexity of activities car-
ried out in the university of a future society, with much 
more numerous and more varied needs and expecta-
tions (even including individual demands) than at pre-
sent. The impeccable articulation and good functioning 
of the university management informational system 
represent a clear option for all the universities deciding 
to become involved, on the one hand, in the intra-secto-
ral competition for a better position and, on the other 
hand, in a dynamic international dialogue of turning 
to account the opportunities of inter-institutional 
cooperation.
To sum-up, a significant increase in the university’s 
organizational complexity is anticipated, brought about 
by the diversification of the portfolio of activities and 

94 
M. Korka
by the need for flexible structures involved in adequate 
and efficient solutions for the commitments made by 
the institution. This increase in organizational complex-
ity goes hand in hand with the review of the internal 
quality management system and the gradual introduc-
tion of a new quality culture at institutional and indi-
vidual level.
4. Entrepreneurship and Networking
Entrepreneurial esprit of the members of the academic 
community, excellent communication skills, and inter-
institutional networking represent intangible assets 
with a strong contribution to the increase of the  com-
petitive advantage of a modern university. 
Romanian universities’ entrepreneurial propensity 
has developed under the conditions in which they real-
ized that the resources distributed by the state can only 
partially cover the running costs, despite the internal 
efforts to prioritize the various categories of expenses. 
In the foreseeable future, the (co)financing of higher 
education from private sources will have a larger share 
than it has at present. In order to attract financial 
resources, all the functions of the universities in their 
interaction with the rest of the world will put at work. 
In the initial higher education, (co)financing has 
become current practice in the late 1990’s. The tertiary 
training of adults will become a significant source of 
complementary income with the specialization of some 
of the universities in this type of provision. The training 
of adults is financed by employers to a great extent, 
while further higher education with a view to satisfying 
personal interests will develop based on tuition/attend-
ance fees. It is important for universities to implement 
flexible durations and appropriate forms of interaction 
with this heterogeneous category of clients.    
On its side, scientific research of universities will 
continue to be financed from various public and private 
sources mobilized locally or internationally. The scar-
city of available resources enhances the intensity of the 
competition but also nurtures the entrepreneurial spirit. 
The growth of the institutional and functional complex-
ity of universities, the diversification of the communi-
cation channels, the increase in costs of scientific 
research and the expenses specific to internationaliza-
tion point to the fact that Romanian universities will 
have to dedicate a part of their creativity–innovation 
effort to identify alternative sources for their own sus-
tainable development. International experience under-
pins the positive role of the many services carried out 
for business partners and the applied research projects 
and civic services ordered and financed by the local and 
regional communities. They are an everlasting source 
of additional financing of universities, but they might 
increase both amplitude and thematic diversity of the 
intellectual work.   
Unsurprisingly, the location of the university, its 
socio-economic, cultural and natural environment, the 
institutional, communication and transportation, infra-
structure represent favoring premises for increased 
entrepreneurial spirit. However, the main source of 
entrepreneurship lies in the will of every community 
member to identify new means of solving the problems 
the university faces, to identify activities and action 
partners in diverse circumstances which could add to a 
better valorisation of the existing creative potential. It is 
anticipated that the current resistance to that diversifi-
cation of goals and clientele will considerably decrease 
in Romanian universities. On the other hand, the inter-
action with the private investors will bring certain chal-
lenges to the university management, but this will not 
determine academic communities to give up their edu-
cational ideals, the ethical principles of scientific 
research dedicated to the progress of mankind.
Networking with other universities and with part-
ners from the local and international businesses and/or 
institutions also helps a university to overcome short-
ages in human and financial resources, in getting 
involved in new projects. It also increases the visibility 
of the organization in the local and international market 
which strengthens its attractiveness and competitive 
advantage.
5. Institutional Governance
Successful universities have an efficient task solving 
structure, with a reduced formalization of conduct and 
of working relations among the members of the organi-
zation and the management team. Nevertheless, they 
show a high horizontal professional specialization of 
the academic and non-academic staff, which triggers 
the 
organizational 
flexibility 
and 
favor 
the 

 
University Governance and Competitive Advantage 
95
interdisciplinary cooperation focusing on creativity and 
innovation. Such universities are genuine models of 
 organizational behaviour comparable to successful 
companies of the knowledge society. In these academic 
communities teaching and research freedom as well as 
traditional values of universities are promoted by all 
members of the staff on each layer of the decision-
making process. At the same time, high quality profes-
sional involvement and accountability are freely 
respected basic principles of life and work on campus.
The leaders of high performance universities 
increasingly rely on a flexible combination between 
professional management principles applied in com-
plex multifunctional organizations with flexible aca-
demic coordination of teaching and research. In the 
design of sustainable development plans as well as in 
the strategic decision-making, leaders involve in a con-
sultation process all the members of the academic com-
munity and as many as possible business and institutional 
stakeholders.  University governance is based on this 
combination of top down professional management 
with bottom-up open consultation assure. 
The university senate, consisting of professors, 
students, and researchers elected by their peers loses 
ground to university governance mostly because it 
enjoys visibility and recognition only in the academic 
environment, while in most cases it lacks the high pro-
fessional competencies necessary for running in the 
most effective manner such a complex and dynamic 
organization as a university. Members of the university 
senate might show education and/or research excel-
lence but usually they lack the competencies needed for 
decision-making in financial or accounting issues, in 
negotiating commercial contracts, in dealing with 
banking arrangements or in establishing partnerships 
which affect the university’s tangible or intangible 
assets.
At the same time, the increasing diversity of prob-
lems a university has to cope with in its interaction with 
public administration institutions, with various catego-
ries of stakeholders and with the society in its whole 
ask for a professional management of the organization. 
The increasing costs of education and research as well 
as the legal, administrative, logistical and financial con-
sequences of the internationalization of education and 
research also demand a professional management, 
capable to evaluate the present situation, to elaborate 
financial strategies and action plans aiming at attracting 
new institutional partners and stakeholders, as well as 
new resources which could contribute to the sustainable 
development of the university. 
Obviously, such an “enterprise” needs a leader, 
respectively, a person endowed with personal authority, 
holding a set of professional and managerial competen-
cies, which are freely recognized by the members of the 
academic community as being beneficial for the inter-
ests of the university. Korka observes (2003: 50–51) 
that a university leader should be not only in best health 
and showing a stable temperament; he or she should be 
a sociable, honest, modest person, and exhibit a strong 
and credible character, a visionary spirit and a strong 
entrepreneurial propensity, openness to new and crea-
tive solutions/ideas; the leader should be capable of 
coagulating the necessary critical mass in order to pro-
mote and administer change, of understanding the need 
for flexible structures in the organization and of sharing 
responsibility with the other members of the managing 
team. At the same time, the  leadership should prove 
understanding, respect, and support for the mission 
assumed by the community, for the academic freedom 
and for the ethical conduct in research and education. 
On the road to academic excellence, Romanian 
universities will appoint to a greater extent their leader-
ship by means of competition based on public hearing 
and comparative analysis of institutional projects and 
managerial programs forwarded by aspirants. The win-
ner of such a contest signs a management contract with 
the university senate. The provisions of the contract 
detail by means of objectives and performance indica-
tors the role of the professional management in the 
accomplishment of the mission and functions of the 
university. The consequences of the contractual relation 
between the parties will acquire increased relevance in 
the dialogue between the university community and the 
leadership. The leading team will be responsible for 
possible adverse results and for not reaching the perfor-
mance indicators. It can be dismissed by the university 
senate before the traditional four year term of office is 
over. Thus, public accountability will succeed in deter-
mining the rationality of the decisions referring to all 
financial and logistic aspects of university activity. On 
the other side, the management team will avert the 

96 
M. Korka
university senate on the risks and cost consequences of 
some of its specialization options in the field of teach-
ing programs or research networking. That dual decision-
making process introduces equilibrium between the 
academic aspirations and the available means to be 
involved in their fulfilment and prevents universities 
from possible institutional risks. 
6. Final Remarks
Romanian universities will differ functionally and 
organizationally in the foreseeable future from the pre-
sent over standardized pattern. They will capitalize on 
the great number and variety of opportunities offered 
by the global knowledge society. While fundamental 
academic values will be preserved, the  university gov-
ernance will show much more interest for specializa-
tion and diversification of the public functions for the 
benefit of spiritual and material wealth of all the mem-
bers of the academic community as well as for the 
sustainable development of the local, regional, national, 
and international/global society. 
The concrete means of action of every university 
depend on the academic community and the profes-
sional  leadership, on the vision, mission and functions 
assumed, on the art of combining resources in order to 
prove performance in every field of specialization, on 
the continuous and consistent inter-connectivity and 
communication both on campus and in the relation with 
the extra-university environment.
References
Altbach, P. & Salmi, J. (2011), The Road to Academic 
Excellence: The Making of World-Class Research 
Universities, Washington: The World Bank.
Korka, M. (2008), Re-engineering partnership and leadership 
in universities: Change leadership in Romania’s new 
economy, Theoretical and Applied Economics, May 
Supplement.
Korka, M. (2011), Turning competitive master’s degree pro-
grammes, Quality Assurance Review for Higher 
Education, 3(2), September.
Korka, M. (2013), Viziune Asupra Mediului în Care Vor 
Acţiona Universităţile şi Asupra Stării Lor la Orizontul 
de Timp 2025, Viziunea “Universitatea Orientată Spre 
Tqm În Anul 2025”, Iaşi: Sedcom Libris.
National Education Law No. 1/2011, Monitorul Oficial al 
Romaniei (Romanian Official Gazette), Year 179 
(XXIII), No. 18, Bucharest, January 10. 
Scott, P. (1998), Shaking the Ivory Tower, Paris: The 
UNESCO Courier.
Treacy, M. & Wiersema, F. (1993), Customer intimacy and 
other value disciplines, Harvard Business Review, 
Reprint 93107. 
Treacy, M. & Wiersema, F. (1995), The Discipline of Market 
Leaders: Choose Your Customers, Narrow Your Focus, 
Dominate Your Market, Perseus Books Group.

97
Chapter 11
Study Programs in English in Non-Anglophone 
Countries: Looking at Impacts and Challenges 
from a Romanian Perspective
Mariana Nicolae
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
 Developing new study programs required by the 
dynamically changing educational market is a matter of 
both university  governance and faculty management. 
There has been lately a new and increasing trend to 
develop English language study programs as an answer 
to some university development issues. The back-
ground to this trend is the rapid pace of economic 
development that requires new language skills con-
stantly. However, this language competence develop-
ment involves on the one hand, very intimate processes 
that transcend the individual and belong to the capacity 
of societies to develop intelligently and, on the other, to 
the capacity of the educational system to be agile on the 
educational markets. This chapter will explore the ten-
sions between offering study programs in English, 
which decrease in an unexpected way the language 
diversity of students, and the need for multilingual and 
multicultural graduates from our universities as the 
policies and jargon of the European Union suggest. The 
present study will also look at the complex compe-
tences needed in order to put together such study pro-
grams by university administrators and how to rally the 
important stakeholders into approving them. The issues 
are connected both with specific university structures 
and also with the larger educational system which, in 
Romania, seems unable to cater for interdisciplinarity 
other than in discourse. This chapter will explore some 
of the impacts and challenges that the author perceives 
as critical for the awareness of decision-makers in the 
educational field.
1. Introduction
The challenges of higher education in the whole world 
almost are important today. From the pressure of uni-
versity rankings where the Anglophone countries are 
the most significantly represented to the constraints of 
financial accountability the types of pressure are varied 
and continually increasing. That is why in certain eco-
nomic environments there are numerous discussions 
about the end of the university system as we know it 
today. The higher education bubble is already a com-
mon place in the mainstream discourse of most 
researchers, practitioners, or policy-makers (Leach, 
2012). When and how the bubble will burst is a matter 
that keeps people and specialists guessing while vari-
ous scenarios are being proposed and rejected. A larger 
and more refined range of stakeholders are increasingly 
concerned that what we still call higher education, with 
the university as its main representative but also includ-
ing other types of institutions, has started on a clear 
road to become an organizational form that needs 

98 
M. Nicolae
reinvention. Some people have called this process the 
democratization of higher education. Some others have 
preferred terms such as massification, or educational 
markets, competitive advantages of universities, entre-
preneurial universities, quality assurance, ranking of 
universities, teaching and research higher education 
institutions, and the list can continue. For the general 
public as well as for the policy makers those concepts 
are generally positive and motivating building up a 
vision of an enlightened knowledge society in which 
innovation and creativity are key elements of social life. 
For an increasing number of people working within the 
various systems of higher education those concepts also 
carry darker connotations. They reveal the battles for 
university expansion. Those battles may be less evident 
than those in the economic field, but they are as impact-
ful. And since policy and decision-makers have started 
giving increased importance to the profitability of 
higher education we are witnessing expansion in terms 
of number of students, geographical areas from where 
those students are drawn as well as in terms of the 
social prestige of their academics, prestige that is mate-
rialized in income and influence. And by academics the 
author understands teaching and, mainly, research staff. 
The emphasis on research staff and the devaluation of 
teaching, and by contagion of learning (Popenici, 
2013), is relevant for the present chapter. 
Peter Drucker (Forbes, 1997) was drawing atten-
tion to the high costs of running traditional campuses 
and of hiring academic and administrative staff. He was 
warning that big university campuses would become 
relics and universities would not survive in the form we 
know them today. What Drucker was saying was that 
continuously higher and “totally uncontrollable expen-
ditures, without any visible improvement in either the 
content or the quality of education, means that the sys-
tem is rapidly becoming untenable. Higher education is 
in deep crisis... Already we are beginning to deliver 
more lectures and classes off campus via satellite or 
two-way video at a fraction of the cost. The college will 
not survive as a residential institution.” And this was 
before the arrival of the MOOCs (Massive Open Online 
Course) and their growing (The Economist, 2013) 
although the real influence of MOOCs over education 
is still under scrutiny. 
Another significant challenge to education world-
wide is a less mainstream theme for academic 
discussions, rather than a more specialized theme for 
applied linguistics. However the phenomenon that I 
have in mind is the one referred to as  English as lingua 
franca of academias. The phenomenon refers to the fact 
that English has clearly become the lingua franca of 
academic exchange all over the world. Lecturers in a 
large diversity of subject areas are now more and more 
delivered in English. This is a consequence, among oth-
ers, of the student and staff mobility which makes study 
program accommodate a highly diverse and interna-
tional student audience. That student audience requires 
instruction through the medium of English. Therefore, 
English as Medium of Instruction (EMI) has become an 
important benchmark in the process of university inter-
nationalization. An advertisment for a British Council 
new course in EMI claims that “in 2012, 4,646 higher 
education institutions offered English taught master’s 
courses across Europe. In 2013, that number has risen 
to 6,407.” On the other hand, an issue of great concern 
to the universities, lecturers but mainly to the students 
is the quality of academic teaching and, consequently, 
learning that take place in this new context. 
Another pressure on the way universities develop 
their strategies is demographics. Even from 2010, 
Standard & Poor’s in their Global Ageing Report 
showed that “no other force is likely to shape the future 
of national economic health, public finances, and poli-
cymaking as the irreversible rate at which the world’s 
population is aging”. One answer to that challenge was 
the expansion of mainly western universities towards 
Asia and the emerging countries, with again the need 
for EMI. Another challenge is the realization of some 
regional or national universities that their pool of stu-
dents is decreasing fast due to demographics, but also 
due to students’ mobility and to the convenience to 
choose international universities.
2.  Changes in Romanian Higher 
Education — To What Purpose?
The Romanian landscape of higher education has been 
changing rapidly and some stakeholders will say rela-
tively chaotically as reactions to external political com-
mands. Even during the period before 1989 there have 
been changes in the Romanian education system. Some 
of those significant changes were the introduction of 
national exams and standardized qualifications to enter 

 
Study Programs in English in Non-Anglophone Countries 
99
university through an extremely selective and severe 
admission process. Due, however, to excessive central 
planning in all fields and consequently also in educa-
tion, with the exception of a brief period of liberaliza-
tion of the Romanian society of the early 1970s (Seitz 
& Nicolae, 2014), universities were forced to give up 
certain study program (sociology, psychology) and to 
reduce their enrolment capacity according to the quota 
allotted by the ministry of education. Consequently, 
after 1989 the country faced a shortage of experts in 
many subject areas mainly in social sciences and 
humanities which obviously had a negative impact on 
its capacity to engage in the international dialogue 
meaningfully in order to catch up with other countries. 
This led, after 1989, to the realization that Romania 
needs state-of-the-art education. Therefore, the country 
started to implement, somehow naively, educational 
reforms based on the self-evident reasoning that one of 
the main drivers of economic and social development 
was higher education. Democratic societies of today 
can hope to become significant in the global market 
only with a competitive tertiary education. Various 
examples, such as South Korea (Johnson, 2002) and 
China (Narayana & Smyth, 2006), clearly point to the 
importance of serious investment in higher education, 
but also to a change in mentalities and values. 
It is not easy, however, to make the right choices, 
when the Romanian society at large finds itself in con-
tinuous crises and there is an international concern 
about the direction that universities need to take in the 
future. Those choices need to be made not only by 
visionary leaders of the higher education system, but 
also by well-trained individuals who are able to cope 
with a system that has become more complex because 
of the pressures, among others, of the Bologna Process. 
What happens instead is that leadership positions are 
filled by elections in a collegial system of  governance 
that allows at best dedicated researchers and at worst 
opportunistic academics promoting personal agendas. 
None of those are useful for the system of education, 
but among them manage to contribute to the complica-
tions of an already too complicated higher education 
system and to the perverse effects that initially well-
intended actions actually have.
Seitz & Nicolae (2014) show that Romania was one 
of the first Central and Eastern European countries to 
set up in 1993, by law, a “quality assurance” institution 
(Damian, 2011). However, the curricula with the range 
of courses supplied and their contents continued to be 
approved by the Ministry of Education. Today, the 
higher education system in Romania is still centrally 
planned and although many of the provisions of the 
Bologna Process have been implemented, academic 
values have been adopted mainly as lip service to the 
official European discourse and as political clichés. The 
Law of National Education of 2011 introduces the con-
cept of “values” for the first time in relation to educa-
tion without identifying what they are. Article 2, para. 
1 stipulates that “the law has as vision an education 
oriented to values” while in Article 3 it enumerates 21 
“principles” governing education in Romania. Among 
those 21 principles academic autonomy and freedom 
are on position 11 and 12 respectively and their mean-
ing is not clear. Why is this relevant for the present 
discussion? Because it explains the otherwise difficult 
to grasp bureaucratic difficulties to develop new study 
program. The law itself, in Article 131, para. 1, gives 
the authority to set up study programs to the faculty, 
even if in the next paragraphs cites exceptions that 
allow the government to propose such program. Since 
the law neither defines the values it mentions for educa-
tion nor clarifies what the 21 principles actually mean 
in practical terms, it leaves room for speculation and 
interpretation. In practice it allows plenty of opportuni-
ties for administrative and bureaucratic hassle when-
ever initiatives are taken at the department or faculty 
levels. As an example, in the section referring specifi-
cally to higher education, there is an attempt to clarify 
university autonomy as “the right of university com-
munities to establish their own mission, institutional 
strategy, structure, activities, organization and function-
ing, managing their own material and human resources, 
in strict compliance with the current legislation” 
(Article 123, para. 2). All the Articles that seem to 
allow and encourage decentralization are completed by 
variations of the phrase “in strict compliance with the 
current legislation”. Most of the issues related to teach-
ing staff recruitment, promotions, budgets and new 
study program must therefore be approved by the 
Ministry. 
The author is well aware and firmly believes that 
university autonomy does not mean lack of accounta-
bility to higher bodies. It is, however, the author’s 
understanding, based on her personal/international 

100 
M. Nicolae
experience, that university autonomy means encourag-
ing or at least allowing institutions to fulfill their mis-
sion based on their strengths. This obviously is not the 
case in Romania were the legislation continues to place 
the final approval for all university efforts with the 
Ministry of Education. As stipulated in the law, the 
Ministry “controls the way in which universities exer-
cise their university autonomy and their public respon-
sibility and assume the general mission as their own” 
(Law on National Education, 2011). True, some pro-
gress has been made and the law states that universities 
may “establish their own mission, institutional strategy, 
structure, activities, organizations, and operation and to 
manage their own material and human resources in 
strict compliance with the legislation in force.” In other 
words, no matter how we look at things, the final deci-
sion regarding the development and execution of 
Romania’s higher education policy rests with the 
Ministry of Education which is invested with the 
authority to set up, change and close down universities. 
This approach to university autonomy limits the poten-
tial of Romania’s higher education system and the abil-
ity of its individual institutions to be agile on a dynamic 
international education market.
At present, Romania has over one hundred institu-
tions of higher education. These very diverse organiza-
tions of higher education are still given all the 
responsibility but not the authority or, as important, the 
financial resources to function. The Ministry of 
Education should allow and trust institutions to estab-
lish their strategic mission within the limits of the Law 
of National Education. It is difficult to imagine an 
attempt at standardization at all levels. Each university 
has different strengths and resources. The university 
governance and administration should collaborate to 
establish and develop its overall priorities and define its 
profile, its lines of accountability, and its own human 
resource policies within the framework established by 
appropriate bodies within the respective institution. The 
many and diverse aspects regarding curriculum devel-
opment, allocation of resources, staff recruitment, and 
promotion are best left in the care of the institution 
which knows them best. The Law of National Education 
(2011) provides an improved and healthy framework 
for the organization of universities. It has built in 
important check points to maintain balance within the 
institution through Board of administration, University 
Senate, and various faculty advisory groups. New study 
programs, curriculum development, staff recruitment, 
and promotions are internal to a university and need to 
be decided there. 
One of the weakest areas for higher education in 
Romania has been the funding of institutions with all 
the issues that lack of adequate finance triggers. 
According to the Law of National Education (2011), 
Romania proposes to allocate 6% of its GDP from the 
state and local authorities for higher education and 1% 
to research. This again has been a political statement 
and this percentage has not been reached while univer-
sities continue to be underfunded (Duguleana & 
Duguleana, 2012). The aspects discussed earlier rela-
tive to university autonomy would also translate into 
institutional capacity to develop revenues that would, in 
turn, contribute to funding programs, updating curric-
ula, supporting research and supporting students and 
teaching staff. Although higher education is still enjoy-
ing high esteem in Romania it is severely under-funded. 
The legislation provides the necessary framework, but 
the mechanisms of implementing the political decisions 
are not yet fully operational. The entrepreneurial efforts 
of individuals and institutions need encouragement and 
support from the state. Universities should be allowed 
to use the money they attract through partnerships with 
businesses, institutes, and fundraising efforts for their 
own programs. 
Romania’s higher education reform has been 
funded through various sources. Curaj et al. (2012) 
determined that there have been four periods of reform 
in the Romanian higher education system to this point: 
(i) between 1990–1995 reparatory reforms were initi-
ated to clear the curriculum from its heavily inherited 
political components and to re-introduce study pro-
grams forbidden before 1989 (the faculties of sociol-
ogy, psychology and international business were 
re-opened in the early 1990s); (ii) between 1995–2002 
the first wave of systemic reforms were introduced and 
were aimed at developing higher education and research 
based on programs financed by the World Bank and by 
Phare and managed to put in place some autonomy for 
universities; (iii) between 2002 and 2009 was a period 
of fragmented changes triggered by the Bologna 
Process and a time known as the missing opportunities 

 
Study Programs in English in Non-Anglophone Countries 
101
period; and lastly, (iv) from 2009 on the second wave of 
systemic reforms in Romania were implemented. These 
higher education reforms in Romania can be seen from 
different but overlapping perspectives: from a broad 
European perspective set by the Bologna Process and 
from Romania’s own national perspective. The reforms 
of this second wave, still being implemented, are 
financed through structural funds that the European 
Union allows its newly accepted members to absorb to 
catch up with the development levels of older 
members. 
The five strategic projects that had been financed 
through the European Social Fund include: (i) Quality 
and Leadership for Romanian Higher Education, 
(ii) Doctorate in Centers of Excellence, (iii) Doctoral 
Studies in Romania — Organization of the Doctoral 
Schools, (iv) Improving  University Management and 
(v) National Student Enrollment Registry Project. 
Those projects attracted much participation among aca-
demics, key stakeholders of the Romanian higher edu-
cation system, as well as international consultants 
which offered the hope that implementation of those 
reforms would align higher education to international 
quality standards and prepare to compete on the global 
education market. The very existence of those projects 
had been an attempt to recover the public trust in the 
Romanian education system, trust that continues to be 
seriously eroded due to complex causes from real prob-
lems in the system to the contribution of the media that 
covers mainly the critical incidents taking place par-
ticularly during the periods of national examination. 
Between 2012 and 2014 two more strategic projects are 
implemented with international involvement to support 
public policy making in Romania in the field of higher 
education. (i) “Performance in research, performance 
in teaching. Quality, Diversity and Innovation in 
Romanian Universities” and (ii) “Ready to innovate, 
ready to better answer local needs” are the two projects 
through which Romanian universities continue to align 
themselves to the European ones in an attempt to con-
tribute to the education of the young as well as address 
the needs of the life-long learner.
The conclusion to this section of the present chap-
ter is that the Romanian higher education went through 
a lot of change that had clear positive effects in aligning 
the system to international expectations, even though 
mainly at a declarative level, but had also created a lot 
of confusion among its various stakeholders. The 
author would attempt to state that all in all, given a 
wise, responsible and entrepreneurial management, the 
present situation of the Romanian higher education 
allows hopes for a significant contribution of the indi-
vidual higher education institutions to the intelligent 
development not only of the Romanian society but, 
given the mechanisms of globalization, also of the 
European society at large.
3.  Introducing New Study 
Programs — a Solution or 
Another Challenge?
The introduction of new study programs in the curricu-
lum of Romanian universities has been considered an 
appropriate answer to the dynamics of the national 
labor market and to the changes in the international 
higher education landscape. The former is self-evident 
while the latter is manifested through the requests of 
candidates who are nowadays more internationally 
mobile and, therefore experienced and knowledgeable, 
but still prefer to study in their home country. This pro-
cess of setting up new study programs has gone through 
multiple versions both in terms of getting approvals and 
also of quality assurance. The legal modifications after 
1990 permitted the quick appearance of a large variety 
of private higher education institutions as well as the 
creation of campuses belonging to or associated with 
international providers of higher education. The univer-
sity establishment answered to those market and politi-
cal commands by introducing accreditation for the new 
higher education institutions, focusing heavily on 
capacity factors, especially staff numbers and appropri-
ate facilities. 
The various periods of changes in higher education 
that have been referred to in the previous section have 
led to a large number of regulations meant to provide 
order and transparency in what has become a chaotic 
system. This process is at present, in the author’s opin-
ion, over-regulated and highly centralized in Romania 
which does not mean that it is a process that should be 
left at the discretion of the individual higher education 
institutions, whether public or private. Also, the author 

102 
M. Nicolae
firmly believes, that it is a healthy situation that new 
study programs have to go through a transparent, well-
structured and public procedure of authorization and 
accreditation by an external, independent body or 
agency that has no direct invested interests in the pro-
cesses that it evaluates. 
The term university study program has been intro-
duced in the Romanian higher education discourse and 
defined by the Law of National Education (2011, 
Article 137, para. 1) as “a group of teaching, learning, 
research, practical applications and evaluation curricu-
lum units, designed to lead to a university qualification 
certified through a diploma and a diploma supple-
ment”. A study program can be, therefore, defined 
within the various education cycles. In this chapter we 
are looking at an undergraduate study program that has 
been designed and implemented by the Faculty of 
International Business and Economics of the Bucharest 
University of Economic Studies as an answer to the 
various signals coming towards the managerial team of 
the faculty. The study program we are considering here 
is called Applied Modern Languages to International 
Business and Economics and was authorized in May 
2013 by ARACIS (The Romanian Agency for Quality 
Assurance in Higher Education). It was offered to the 
public in the admission sessions of July and September 
2013 and is running at present having 60 students 
enrolled. 
Why was such a program initiated and launched? 
The reasons have been various and have appeared and 
accumulated in time. Some of the reasons were due to 
external factors such as a pressure for the internation-
alization of universities, including the need for attract-
ing foreign students both for the benefits of diversity 
and for institutional financial benefits as well. In terms 
of financial benefits the interest of Romanian universi-
ties is to attract foreign students as compared to inter-
national students. Foreign students are students who 
come from non-EU countries and have higher tuition 
fees than Romanian students, while international stu-
dents are students who come from EU countries and 
have the same financial obligations as Romanians. At 
present this situation is more relevant at graduate and 
post-graduate levels rather than at undergraduate level, 
but there are indications that even undergraduate pro-
grams will attract international and foreign students if 
they are offered through the medium of English. 
Among the internal factors contributing to the setting 
up of the Applied Modern Languages (AML) study 
program was mainly the realization that the language 
skills of the graduates of the Faculty of International 
Business and Economics have on the general deterio-
rated due to the reduction in the curriculum of the 
school of the language study from 6 hours per week to 
4 and starting with Bologna only 2 hours per week per 
language (Nicolae, 2013). 
Another reason was the successful existence on the 
mature educational markets of interdisciplinary pro-
grams called International Business and Modern 
Languages or BSc in international business administra-
tion and modern Languages or International Business 
Communication with a Modern Foreign Language. 
These programs are offered, somehow expectedly, in 
the UK and/or the US, which use the advantage of 
using English as a first language, and have always had 
a more flexible educational offer in which students can 
choose their tracks of specialization, (http://www.aston.
ac.uk/study/undergraduate/courses/school/aston-busi-
ness-school/international-business-modern-languages/, 
http://www.uclan.ac.uk/courses/ba_hons_interna-
tional_business_communication_with_a_modern_for-
eign_language.php), but also, and this comes as an 
interesting development, in non-Anglophone countries, 
which do not have the advantage of native English lec-
turers, like Denmark (http://www.sdu.dk/en/uddan-
nelse/bachelor/bsc_in_international_business_
administration_and_modern_languages), 
Germany 
(http://www.uni-giessen.de/cms/study/courses/ba/
mlcb) or Latvia (http://www.lu.lv/eng/istudents/degree/
study/bachelor-modernlanguage/). 
Another reason for creating such a program in our 
university was the increasing demand for AML at other 
Romanian higher education institutions and the deci-
sion of those institutions to accept only a very small 
number of the applicants. In other words identifying a 
gap in the market and addressing it. Still another rea-
son, this time from the perspective of the teaching staff, 
was the need to balance the drop in applications for 
higher education caused by demographic changes and 
to create new offers. 
All the above reasons and some others led to the 
decision of the dean’s office and the management of 

 
Study Programs in English in Non-Anglophone Countries 
103
the Department of Modern Languages and Business 
Communication (DMLBC) in the Bucharest University 
of Economic Studies to start the internal process to 
get the approvals to ask for the authorization of such 
a program. The Dean asked the DMLBC to provide an 
offer for such a program. A task force was put 
together by the DMLBC, coordinated by a senior per-
son, a reader in applied linguistics with a doctorate in 
the UK in applied linguistics, who had worked for a 
long period of time for the British Council Romania. 
The group worked under the direct supervision of the 
head of department and of the dean while consulting 
with a large number of experts. The result of their 
work was presented and approved at the various levels 
within the faculty (department and faculty councils) 
and then university (Board of Administration and uni-
versity Senate). The following is an abstract and a 
discussion of the group’s opportunity report on such a 
development. 
The report states that “such an interdisciplinary 
program offers students a competitive set of abilities 
which combine the knowledge and use of English and 
other foreign languages in international business and 
entrepreneurship while understanding and applying 
business principles in corporations. The program offers 
integrated education in the theory and practice of 
applied linguistics combined with the theory of busi-
ness, particularly international business administration. 
Advanced language skills will allow students to com-
municate effectively in a variety of professional situa-
tions — customer care, marketing and advertising, 
media and public relations.” 
The arguments were organized in two sets: aca-
demic and practical ones. The academic arguments are 
important and relevant for the present Romanian higher 
education system because of focusing the discussion on 
the presence and the status of applied linguistics in the 
Romanian academic landscape. Applied linguistics is a 
discipline that has been fully recognized in the large 
majority of the European educational contexts. 
Nevertheless the situation is different in Romania 
where the discipline is at best neglected or worse over-
looked in the faculties of languages or linguistics in the 
country. This means that wherever it is acknowledged 
and exists, AML is a second-hand division in a larger 
administrative unit. There are still few undergraduate 
studies organized in the field, though the situation has 
improved lately, and those study programs are not con-
tinued with master and doctoral studies. This is a major 
handicap both for students and academics. There are 
only relatively few master programs in Romania in the 
field. One of the portals that offer students information 
on what is new on the Romanian higher education mar-
ket lists 15 master programs under the title AML master 
(http://www.studentie.ro/Master/Master-limbi-
moderne-aplicate-d3-s14). However, only some of 
them are clearly addressing their marketing title, while 
others have obviously another mission (Master in 
Comparative and World Literatures). For students who 
want to continue their specialization in relevant, prag-
matic and industry oriented master programs it is a real 
challenge. The main challenge here is, however, the 
academics’ own professional development which 
clearly starts from a philological background with a 
certain type of research interests which are not con-
nected to what the field of AML considers as relevant 
research. Therefore, academics in the field that is still 
called in Romania with the umbrella term of philology, 
though the international research community considers 
that “philology” remains largely synonymous with 
“historical linguistics” or, more generally, with the 
study of language grammar, history and literary tradi-
tion (Morpurgo Davies, 1998), have an understandable 
reluctance to shift their life-long research focus to 
another area. This, however, reflects on the larger 
higher education management and administration poli-
cies as it is important to find a balanced way between 
personal research interests and the complexity and 
dynamics of the international field and is generally set-
tled through the emergence of inter-disciplinarity. The 
issue of interdisciplinarity is however a difficult one 
from an administrative point of view in Romania and 
has been addressed in-depth by Cojanu (2014). For the 
present chapter what is important is the faculty decision 
to apply for the authorization of the AML program in 
the field of philology as there was no procedure to 
evaluate interdisciplinary programs by ARACIS (The 
Romanian Agency for Quality Assurance in Higher 
Education). 
The author of this chapter together with the team 
leaders were advised to choose one of the already exist-
ing fields — either international business and 

104 
M. Nicolae
economics or philology. Examples were provided 
underlining that what most similar international pro-
grams (presented earlier as examples in this chapter) 
have in common is the open acknowledgement of their 
interdisciplinary characteristic which is perceived and 
marketed as a plus. For example the Latvian program 
says on its website: “The program is interdisciplinary 
and is designed to prepare graduates for international 
careers in enterprises and organizations where knowl-
edge of several languages and business is required. The 
program offers three language modules (…) as well as 
general and business aspects of the module language. 
The program provides cultural studies (…), business 
studies through the basic management courses such as 
Marketing, Management Theory, Accounting Theory, 
Entrepreneurship in the EU, as well as the EU and 
international market specific study courses. Upon 
graduation, students are able to continue education in 
Master degree programs and second level professional 
study programs.” 
After careful consideration and analysis the institu-
tional choice was to ask for the authorization of the 
AML program in the field of philology — for a number 
of reasons that are outside the scope of the present 
chapter. 
Another important argument for the setting up of 
the program was the lack of capacity to coordinate doc-
toral research in applied linguistics in Romania. This 
has a serious direct effect on the career path of teaching 
staff in non-philological university departments, like 
the one in our own university. In practical terms this 
means that young academics have to pursue doctoral 
research in areas with little if any relevance to their 
daily professional activity and, not less important, to 
their evaluation and promotion chances. The relevance 
of this issue for the setting up of an undergraduate pro-
gram maybe not easily seen, but it exists. Romanian 
legislation and regulations require for granting institu-
tional permission to organize doctoral studies in a cer-
tain field to have all also undergraduate study programs 
in that specialization. This provision is, therefore, rele-
vant both for the teaching staff and for the students who 
can continue their studies in their chosen field. Since 
the beginning of the 1990s there were lots of efforts 
made in this respect both by the British Council and, 
later on, by the professional community of specialists 
in applied linguistics. The results are still almost 
non-existing. 
The Bucharest University of Economic Studies has, 
within the Faculty of International Business and 
Economics, the largest and most diverse department of 
modern languages and business communication in 
Romania. With 65 full-time teaching staff (7 profes-
sors, 12 readers, 22 lecturers, and 24 teaching assis-
tants), 20 associate/part-time teaching staff and 9 
admin and support staff, the DMLBC has the profes-
sional capacity to develop study programs for applied 
linguistics in accordance with the present international 
best-practices (Nicolae, 2013). 
The practical arguments start from acknowledging 
a clear and growing interest of university prospective 
candidates for applied studies of modern languages. 
The existence of a study program that combines lan-
guage study and business studies fills a gap in the 
Romanian higher education market. The Bucharest 
University of Economic Studies has the obvious advan-
tage of having academics from both areas and the insti-
tutional capacity to provide and promote such a 
program. 
It is important to note at this point that the distinc-
tion between academic and practical arguments that the 
author has borrowed from the opportunity report of the 
task group is purely theoretical and was used for the 
sake of argumentation. It is clear that the two sets of 
arguments overlap being difficult to discuss in a chapter 
of this length the complexity of the mix of history 
developments, personal mentalities and organizational 
cultures and mainly of the Romanian legal 
environment.
4.  Tensions between Study Programs 
in English and the Need for 
 Multilingualism and 
Multiculturality?
The upward trend to establish English language study 
programs is clearly visible across Europe and beyond 
as already shown in the introduction to this chapter. 
However, the attitudes of individual academics from 
non-Anglophone countries towards this trend are 
diverse and belong as pointed out by Mureşan & 

 
Study Programs in English in Non-Anglophone Countries 
105
Llantada (2013) to realities shaped by the historical, 
political, social and linguistic, educational, socioeco-
nomic and institutional local contexts. While Mureşan & 
Llantada (2013) focus on the attitudes and challenges 
of publishing internationally, Mureşan & Nicolae 
(2014) look closer at the Romanian context underlining 
new angles and presenting some of the tensions that 
arise between the various stakeholders of the process: 
the individual academic, the higher education institu-
tion and the larger research needs of the Romanian 
society. Those tensions take place against a background 
of continual changes in the Romanian higher education 
system which makes institutional development and 
career planning very difficult.
The international literature documenting the issues 
related to English as a medium for instruction is rich 
and growing. Starting with Krishnamurti (1990) who 
discusses the Indian dilemma of regional language ver-
sus English as the medium of instruction in higher 
education and up to the present moment there is a con-
stantly growing body of research and articles as pre-
sented in the February 2013 reference list of TIRF, the 
International Research Foundation for English 
Language Education. The list, which is selective, 
includes 90 titles and points to a diversity of topics, 
approaches and geographies. TIRF is a non-profit 
organization whose mission is to generate new knowl-
edge about English language teaching and learning as 
professed on their website http://www.tirfonline.org. 
From their mission statement one particular item is 
relevant for the present chapter by showing the con-
cerns that the professional communities world-wide 
have towards EMI. TIRF acknowledge the tensions 
documented by the individual researchers and academ-
ics and set itself as a goal to “influence the formation 
and implementation of appropriate language education 
policies, recognizing the importance of indigenous lan-
guages and cultures worldwide, and of English as an 
international language” (http://www.tirfonline.org/
about-us/). 
Some of those tensions include, but are not limited 
to, the following: (a)  multilingualism and multicultural-
ism as important values of the European Union are 
threatened by the use of only one language; (b) the 
optimism of using  English as a lingua franca in 
the global village or merely in the single market of the 
European Union has various effects on both individuals 
and businesses; (c) communication is difficult and even 
distorted when those involved use another language 
than their own; (d) creativity and innovation as main 
drivers of progress are best functioning when people 
use their own language.
5. Conclusions
In this chapter, I have looked at the challenges and 
opportunities of  developing new university study pro-
grams as required by the dynamics of the educational 
market. I have shown that in the Romanian higher 
 education system this is not a simple process and it 
requires both good university governance and wise fac-
ulty management. 
I have underlined that this is a process in line with 
the newest and increasing European trends to develop 
English language study programs as an answer to, basi-
cally, the general decrease in the number of potential 
students that universities can attract. This trend is pow-
erful as it is backed by the rapid pace of international 
economic development that requires new language 
skills constantly. The chapter has explored the tensions 
between offering study programs in English, which 
decrease in an unexpected way the language diversity 
of students, and the need for multilingual and multicul-
tural graduates of society. The chapter also looked at 
some of the competences needed by university staff and 
administrators in order to put together such study pro-
grams. I have underlined issues that are connected both 
with specific university structures and also with the 
larger educational system which, in Romania, seems 
still unable to cater for inter-disciplinarity other than in 
discourse. 
As a general conclusion I would attempt to state 
that the Romanian higher education went through a lot 
of change in the last two decades that had clear positive 
effects in aligning the system to international expecta-
tions, even though mainly at a declarative level, but had 
also created a lot of confusion among its various stake-
holders and affected in severe ways the academics 
themselves. However, as in most cases in the history of 
Romanian education, wise, responsible, and entrepre-
neurial individual academics, who make up the man-
agement of institutions if organizations have chosen in 

106 
M. Nicolae
an educated way, demonstrate that things can be done 
even in an unpredictable system. 
References
 Cojanu, V. (2014), Interdisciplinaritatea în ştiinţele sociale ca 
problem, de management/ Interdisciplinarity in social 
sciences as a management problem, Revista de Politica 
Ştiintei si Scientometrie — Serie Noua, 3(1), 30–35. 
Available at rpss.inoe.ro/articles/124/file. 
Krishnamurti, B. (1990), The regional language vis-à-vis 
English as the medium of instruction in higher 
 education: The Indian dilemma, Multilingualism in 
India, 61, 15–24. Available at apud http://www.
tirfonline.org.
Leach, M. (2012), Bursting bubbles in higher education. In 
Blue Skies: New Thinking about the Future of Higher 
Education. A Collection of Short Articles by Leading 
Commentators, L. Coiffat (ed.), pp. 58–60, London: 
Pearson. 
Morpurgo Davies, A. (1998), Nineteenth-century linguistics. 
In History of Linguistics, Vol. IV, G. Lepschy (ed.), 
London: Longman.
Mureşan, L. M. & Pérez-Llantada, C. (2013), English for 
research publication and dissemination in bi-/multiliter-
ate environments: The case of Romanian academics, 
Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2. Available 
at http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2013.10.009.
Mureşan, L. M. & Nicolae, M. (2014). The Challenge of 
Publishing Internationally in a Non-Anglophone 
Academic Context: Romania — A Case in Point. In print.
Nicolae, M. & Maftei, M. M. (eds.) (2013), Istoria Limbilor 
Moderne în ASE: O Perspectivă Centenară, pp. 136–137. 
Bucharest: Editura ASE. 
Popenici, S. (2013), Devaluation of teaching and learning: 
The Popenici blog. Available at http://popenici.
com/2013/10/10/teaching/ (Accessed 21 March 2014).
Seitz, V. & Nicolae, M. (2014), The role of academic values 
in higher education convergence in Romania: A new 
approach. In Handbook of Research on Trends in 
European Higher Education Convergence, in publica-
tion with IGI Global. Available at http://www.igi-global.
com/book/handbook-research-trends-european-
higher/97340.
Standard & Poor’s (2010), Global ageing report. Available at 
http://www.cfr.org/aging/standard-poors-global-aging-
2010-irreversible-truth/p23299 (Accessed 19 March 
2014). 
The Attack of the MOOCS, The Economist, 20 July, 2013. 
Available 
at 
http://www.economist.com/news/
business/21582001-army-new-online-courses-scaring-
wits-out-traditional-universities-can-they (Accessed 21 
March 2014).

107
Chapter 12
Romanian Private  Higher Education in the Current 
European Con text
Folcuţ Ovidiu and Grigore Ramona
Romanian American University
European Union’s  (EU’s) potential to generate smart 
growth depends on the quality of higher education sys-
tem, contributing also to a sustainable and inclusive 
growth. In this context, the aim of this chapter is to 
present the main trends in European higher education 
and to assess the main challenges for Romanian private 
higher education providers in the current European 
economic, political and social environment. Since their 
emergence in the early nineties, the Romanian private 
higher education institutions have become an important 
feature of the higher education landscape, their fast 
expansion being a common trend among central and 
eastern European countries. The analysis highlights 
also some examples of good practices in the field that 
can contribute to the improvement of the Romanian 
private higher education outcomes, although “one size 
fits all” approach may not be appropriate for higher 
education.
1. Introduction
Since the Bologna Declaration has been signed, in 
1999, the European higher education is continuously 
transforming, seeking for more quality, transparency 
and coordination within the European Higher Education 
Area (EHAE). Under the Bologna Declaration’s provi-
sions, all countries have made efforts to create a func-
tional European Higher Education Area able to serve an 
increasing range of societal demands, promote and 
support staff and student mobility, develop appropriate 
quality assurance systems and efficient higher educa-
tion structures, facilitate grater compatibility and com-
parability of higher education systems in order to 
increase the international competitiveness of European 
higher education (The Bologna Declaration (EHAE), 
1999). 
Although the Bologna process is considered the 
most important driving force behind the unprecedented 
reform dynamics both at European higher education 
level, but also at national level, contributing to more 
convergence within the EHEA, there is still a signifi-
cant degree of diversity within and across higher educa-
tional systems. (OECD, 2009) Among them, the OECD 
report on higher education is mentioning: different 
lengths of cycles across countries and disciplines, dif-
ferent ways of using the degree titles and also different 
status of the bachelor degree in national systems, dif-
ferent supply systems for diploma supplements, different 
approaches regarding quality assurance mechanisms, 
some being based on institutional audits, while others 
on program accreditation, some with more emphasis on 
quality enhancement than quality control. Thus, in this 
context marked more by variety than convergence, the 
success of the next stage of the Bologna process is 
mostly determined by a series of factors, the most 
important being the need for coherence in establishing 

108 
F. Ovidiu & G. Ramona
process’s phases and priorities and correlate them with 
the appropriate financial support.
The level of variety that still exists among partici-
pants is to some extent understandable and foreseeable 
as long as the EHEA countries have to implement poli-
cies in different economic, political and social condi-
tions. One of the diversity’s components is represented 
by the type and number of  higher education institu-
tions. Thus, higher education institutions can be public 
or private, academically or professionally oriented, 
these typologies influencing the Bologna process’s 
understanding and implementation. 
In the last two decades, the mix between public and 
private higher educational institutions has gathered 
attention of many researchers, as long as for example in 
the vast majority of the EHEA countries there are both 
public and private higher education institutions, the 
weight of  private institutions being different among 
countries (EHEA, 2012). Private higher education 
(PHE) has been gradually a permanent feature of the 
higher education landscape not only in developing 
countries, but also in many developed countries (OECD, 
2009). Prior to 2010, many research studies empha-
sized, more or less enthusiastic, the unprecedented 
PHE’s expansion, especially in central and Eastern 
Europe, as a regional component of a global trend 
towards higher education privatization (UNESCO, 
2009; OECD, 2009). Since 2010, important declines in 
PHE have emerged, different social and political factors 
contributing to the magnitude of this process (Levy, 
2011). Even if is going through a challenging period, 
PHE remains an important feature of many higher edu-
cation systems in Central and Eastern Europe, conse-
quently with an important contribution to the Bologna 
process’ s success.
2. Private Higher Education in EU
The emergence of PHE in Europe is mainly a recent 
phenomenon with different growth paths from one 
country to another, due to different national economic, 
political and social conditions. After the fall of the 
communism system in 1989, a major surge in private 
institutions emerged in Central and Eastern Europe, 
private higher education gradually becoming a signifi-
cant feature of the higher education system in this 
region. Prior to 1990, some forms of private higher 
institutions existed in Germany, Italy, Portugal, and 
Spain but also in Bulgaria (Wells et al., 2007). However, 
analyzing the emergence and evolution of private 
higher institutions in Europe and worldwide is a chal-
lenging task as long as is becoming more and more 
difficult to make an accurate distinction between pri-
vate and public higher institutions. According to the 
OECD definition, the distinction between public and 
private institutions is made by taking into account the 
conditions of operation and relationships to public 
authorities and their stakeholders but also the source of 
funding. Using the source of funding as the main dis-
tinction criteria seems the easiest way to make a clear 
distinction between public and private institutions, or 
not. Depending on their sources of funding, some pri-
vate institutions are government-dependent while 
 others are independent private institution. By OECD 
definition, government-dependent private institutions 
receive more than 50% of their core funding from gov-
ernment agencies, while independent private institu-
tions are generally referred to as private. Usually, both 
public and government-dependent private institutions 
are generally perceived as public institution (OECD, 
2009). 
In the most part of the EHEA countries there are 
both private and public higher education institutions. 
All institutions are considered public in Denmark, 
Finland, Greece, Italy, and Belgium (French Community). 
(EHEA, 2012) A clear distinction between public and 
private is difficult to make, as long as, for example, in 
Italy there are also private higher institutions, but they 
are very similar with the public ones and thus assimi-
lated to public higher institutions. In the United 
Kingdom, higher education institutions are considered 
public, even if they are mostly government-dependent 
private institutions. The same situation is in Netherlands, 
where public higher institutions have been gradually 
transformed after 2004 in government-dependent pri-
vate institutions due to some chances in the composition 
of the governing boards of universities, the new legisla-
tion raising the number of the members coming from 
non-governmental organizations. (OECD, 2009) When 
referring to private higher institutions, the analysis in 
this chapter takes into account only independent private 
institutions. 

 
Romanian Private Higher Education in the Current European Context 
109
Among EU member states, the weight of private 
higher institutions differs. In Western European coun-
tries, the contribution of  private institutions to  higher 
education is lower than in Central and Eastern European 
Countries, in which the general trend in the last 20 
years has been towards more participation of private 
institutions to higher education. 
As Table 1 shows, Portugal remains the only case in 
western Europe with a strong private higher education 
sector, which reached 27% of total enrolment in higher 
education in 2004, representing 106,754 enrolled stu-
dents. In 1996, the share was even higher, reaching 36% 
after a continuous increase since 1971, when the private 
institutions emerged. Since 2004, the private enrolment 
has decreased to 24% in 2009 and 20% in 2012, repre-
senting 78,699 enrolled students. According to Teixeira 
& Amaral (2008) most Portuguese private institutions 
registered a rapid decline after the mid-1990s, in some 
cases the decrease being above 50% of their maximum 
enrolment. The most important factors that contributed 
to this decline were the demographic patterns, an 
increasing quality attitude of the policy-makers and also 
a market saturation for certain specializations, espe-
cially those in which the private sector was perceived as 
demand-absorbing — social sciences, commerce, law, 
and education. Facing these challenges, the Portuguese 
private sector seems to have limited survival alterna-
tives. Finding some demand niches, restructuring 
through mergers and acquisitions, programs diversifica-
tion, especially for mature students, developing research 
capacity are the main solutions proposed by Teixeira & 
Amaral (2008). No matter the alternatives chosen, the 
private institutions have to concentrate more on quality 
improving activities by investing in their academic staff 
and a stronger commitment to research activities. While 
in Portugal, the entire private sector is under pressure, 
in other western countries, the share of the private sec-
tor has increased in 2003–2012 period. Thus, in France 
the private sector reached 17% in 2012, in Spain the 
share of the private sector was 13% and in Italy it 
reached 9%. Although the shares of private higher edu-
cation in these countries are lower than those presented 
for Portugal, the role of private higher education is ris-
ing even in regions traditionally associated with public 
Table 1.  Private enrolment in EU higher education institutions (%)
Country/Year
2003
2009
2012
Country/Year
2003
2009
2012
Austria
 0
 0
 0
Bulgaria
13.4
21.3
18.5
Belgium
 0
 0
 0
Croatia
 2.5
 6.9
 7.1
Cyprus
70.3*
71.7
62.3
Czech Republic
 3.8
12.1
12.2
Denmark
 0
 0.1
 0.1
Estonia
20.3
18.0
11.0
Finland
 0
 0
 0
Hungary
 0
 0
 0
France
13.5
16.1
17.3
Latvia
22.9
32.6
28.7
Germany 
 0
 0
 0
Lithuania
 5.0
12.1
10.8
Greece
 0
 0
 0
Poland
28.3
33.4
29.6
Ireland
 6.2
 3.1
 2.2
Romania
21.3*
42.3
22.9
Italy
 6.5
 7.6
 9.4
Slovakia
 0.4
13.2
17.9
Luxembourg
 0
 0
 0
Slovenia
 2.4
 7.2
 7.5
Malta
 0
 0
 0
Netherlands
 0
 0
13.4
Portugal
27.0*
24.3
20.2
Spain
11.4
 9.7
13.0
Sweden
 1.2
 0
 0
UK
 0
 0
 0
* 2004.

110 
F. Ovidiu & G. Ramona
education providers. For France, Italy, and Spain, 
among the factors that have contributed to this increase 
the most important can be related to the changes 
occurred in the finance and management of public insti-
tutions, but also to the steady attractiveness of provi-
sion, especially for foreign students. However, the 
existence of private higher institutions in western 
European countries remains minimal, despite the 
increasing willingness of policy-makers to adopt mar-
ket-like mechanism in  higher education (Teixeira et al., 
2004). Nevertheless, the Portugal’s case can offer some 
important lessons for some central and eastern European 
countries, private higher education facing multiple chal-
lenges in this region after almost 20 years of continuous 
expansion. 
Looking at Table 1, the existence of private higher 
institutions seems a common feature of the higher edu-
cation systems in central and eastern European coun-
tries, except Hungary. Not only the existence of  private 
institutions is common, but also the fact that those 
institutions have gradually become a permanent feature 
of the higher education systems in these countries in a 
relatively short period of time. There are also other 
common particularities among these countries when 
speaking about the emergence and rising of the private 
higher education system. 
First, in most of these countries none of the private 
higher institutions existed before 1990. The growth 
from zero to substantial in the first half of the 1990s is 
considered the most dramatically concentrated spurt 
ever seen in any region, Central and Eastern Europe 
being one of the regions with the highest PHE enrol-
ment shares after Asia and Latin America (Bjarnason 
et al., 2009). In 2009, the private enrolment share 
reached 42% in  Romania, 33% in Poland, 32% in 
Latvia, 21% in Bulgaria and 18% in Estonia. Lower 
shares were registered in Slovakia (13%), Czech 
Republic and Lithuania (both with 12%), Croatia and 
Slovenia (7%). For most of these countries, the period 
between 2008 and 2010 was associated with the highest 
private enrolment shares. 
Another common feature of the PHE in these coun-
tries can be correlated with the factors that contributed 
to this continuously growing process, at least until 
2009–2010. After the communism fall, there was a per-
sistent high demand for higher education which has led 
to the so-called massification of higher education. In 
this context, a gradual privateness of the higher educa-
tion system became a second alternative which offered 
a fertile ground for the development of the PHE institu-
tions. Most of the newly created private institutions 
followed a demand-absorbing and non-elite pattern 
supported by the strong social demand and also by lax 
regulatory forces. Thus, for many private institutions 
quantity became more important than quality in their 
strategies (Levy, 2011). Also, this demand-absorbing 
pattern has lead private institution to concentrate more 
on study fields generally associated with low infra-
structure costs and little investment, such as social sci-
ences, economics and law (Amaral et al., 2007; OECD, 
2009). As a consequence, the PHE institutions are 
considered to be more oriented to student market than 
the labor market (Wells et al., 2007). This approach it 
seems to be outdated nowadays, as the demographic 
pattern is constantly contributing to the slowing down 
of demand in most countries. Since 2010, the decline of 
the PHE is becoming a common feature for most of the 
central and eastern European countries, except Slovakia, 
Slovenia, and Croatia where the private enrolment is 
still growing. Romania registered the highest negative 
chance, from 42% in 2009 to 23% of enrolment in 
2012. A significant decrease was also in Poland, from 
more than 33% in 2009 to 29% in 2012, and Estonia, 
from 18% in 2009 to 11% in 2012. The decline seems 
to be weaker in Bulgaria, Latvia, and Lithuania. 
In this new challenging environment the future of 
the private higher institutions is uncertain. In Poland, 
under a pessimistic scenario up to 75% of private insti-
tutions will gradually disappear by 2020 (Siwinska, 
2011). Demographic and financial pressures will make 
private institutions very vulnerable and it will be 
increasingly difficult for them to compete with the pub-
lic sector. Some solutions might come from the policy-
makers, even if many private institutions do not rely 
very much on them. In 2010–2011 some policy propos-
als in Poland included large-scale public bids for teach-
ing services, open to both public and private sectors in 
order to stimulate inter-sectoral competition between 
public and private providers, thus treating on equal 
footing all higher education institutions (Kwiek, 2010). 
In Lithuania, under some reforms launched since 2009, 
the also state finances private institutions’ students, 

 
Romanian Private Higher Education in the Current European Context 
111
implementing the money follow the student mechanism. 
Even if some support measures for the entire  higher 
education sector might come from the policy-makers, 
 private institutions have to concentrate more on finding 
their own successful survival solutions. This current 
decline in PHE can determine the emergence of a more 
innovative behavior of the private institutions, as they 
were expected to have (Geiger, 1986). Thus, private 
institution have to concentrate more on raising the qual-
ity of their teaching and research activities, finding 
niche programs, improving attractiveness for foreign 
students, orientation towards labor market needs instead 
of student market, improving business and research 
networks. 
3.  The Rise and Fall of the Romanian 
Private Higher Education
The history of the PHE in  Romania has started soon 
after the fall of the communism, in 1989. In 1991 there 
were already 17 private institutions, the number rising 
to 40 by the mid-1990s, while the number of public 
institutions slightly changed from 48 in 1990 to 50 in 
1995 (Reisz, 1997). The process was impressive not 
only in terms of the number of private institutions 
established, but also in terms of the number of students 
enrolled. In 1992, about 85,000 students were enrolled 
in private institutions, representing 36% from the total 
students enrolment (Wells et al., 2007). The rapid 
expansion of the private sector makes Romania one of 
the leaders in the privatizing of higher education, 
alongside Poland (Lewis et al., 2003). As Reisz (1997) 
highlighted, the framework for the emergence and 
development of the private higher education in Romania 
was characterized by the under-development of the 
whole higher education sector.
After the communism fall, the higher education 
landscape has been mostly influenced by an increasing 
demand for higher education services. The factors that 
contributed to this expanding demand for higher educa-
tion can be associated with the large number of high 
school graduates from past generations who aspired to 
get access to higher education, an overall liberalization 
of the system and a general perception that a university 
diploma was a prerequisite for getting better jobs in the 
labor market (Nicolescu, 2003). Thus, the individuals’ 
behavior coupled with the lax regulatory forces have 
made higher education an attractive market first for 
private institutions, but also for the public institutions, 
later, when they started to increase the number of 
 tuition-fee-paying students. 
The private higher education sector is expected to 
bring more, different and better education, as Geiger 
noted in 1986, but in Romania, in the first decade of its 
existence, the private sector was generally perceived as 
a second-best option for students failing admission to 
state universities, questionable quality, with many 
semi-elite and even non-elite institutions, as profit-ori-
ented sector having mainly a demand-absorbing orien-
tation, even if the level of quality and social legitimacy 
has increased since the introduction of the accreditation 
system in 1993 (Nicolescu, 2005; Bjarnason et al., 
2009). However, the emergence and the development of 
private institutions brought the most significant differ-
entiation in the Romanian higher education system, the 
weight of the private sector in higher education sector 
becoming more and more important after 2000. The 
private enrolment reached its peak in 2008/2009 aca-
demic year, the number of students enrolled in private 
institutions was 410,859, representing over 46% of the 
total enrolment in higher education. The student enrol-
ments increased both in private and public institutions, 
but the number of the students enrolled in private insti-
tutions significantly increased starting with 2005/2006 
academic year. Since 2009, a decline in higher educa-
tion has occurred. For private institution the student 
enrolments dropped from 410,869 students in 2008 to 
99,676 in 2012, private institutions contributing only 
with 21% to higher education. The negative trend in 
higher education enrolments hit also the public institu-
tions, but the magnitude of the decline has been lower, 
even if it emerged one year earlier than in the private 
sector. From 526,844 enrolled students in 2007, the 
public sector reached 364,916 students in 2012. While 
for the public institutions the level of enrolments in 
2012 was slightly lower than the level registered in 
2000, for the private ones the level was close to that 
registered in the mid-1990s (around 100,000 students). 
Analyzing the level of enrolments by field of study, 
those that have been affected by the decline were 
mainly economics and law. The concentration of the 
private sector mainly on economics and law, finally 

112 
F. Ovidiu & G. Ramona
made it vulnerable to changes in  higher education 
demand. 
The decline that has emerged since 2009 in the 
student enrolments levels has not affected the number 
of the  private institutions. In 2008 there were 50 private 
higher institutions, and in 2012 their number reached 
51 units. The number remained stable since 2007, after 
reaching its peak in 2002 when the number of private 
institutions was 70. Some chances occurred regarding 
the number of the faculties within the private institu-
tions which decreased from 207 in 2009 to 191 in 2012. 
The negative impact might be deeper in terms of num-
ber of programs offered within different faculties. 
The reasons behind the decline that started in 2009, 
both in private and public higher institutions are mainly 
related to demographic patterns, like in many other 
central and eastern European countries. The stagnant 
low birth rates after 1991 have negatively affected 
higher education only since 2009, and are expected to 
have the same impact in the following years. Besides 
this demographic pattern, there are also other possible 
factors that have contributed to this decline. One of 
them can be associated with some degree of market 
saturation for some study fields, mostly those in which 
the private sector offered the highest number of gradu-
ates since 2007, namely economics, law and humani-
ties. In 2010, the number of the graduates coming from 
the private institutions reached 97,422, half of them in 
economics, higher even than the number of public insti-
tutions’ graduates. In this context, lower levels of enrol-
ments were predictable to some extent taking also into 
account the labor market needs. Another factor that has 
negatively influenced higher education is correlated 
with the number of pupils who graduated the schools 
leaving examination. In the last three years only around 
half of them passed the baccalaureate. Thus, the num-
ber of potential candidates sharply decreased affecting 
both private and public institutions. Moreover, an 
increasing number of Romanian students have chosen 
to study abroad, especially in western European coun-
tries. The above mentioned factors have affected both 
private and public institutions, but for the private ones 
another one can be added, namely the gradual privatiza-
tion of the public sector. The number of the fee-paying-
students in public institutions steadily increased to 
almost 50% of total enrolment, while the other half is 
subsidized. Thus, the level of privatization of higher 
education in  Romania is much higher. Moreover, in 
2011 and 2012 the number of subsidized places in pub-
lic institution could cover more than half of the bacca-
laureate graduates. In this context, the competition for 
students become stronger and the private institutions 
have to pay more attention to their tuition-fees, as the 
lower fees was one of the main advantage offered to 
those students that failed to get a subsidized place in 
public institutions.
After 20 years of expansion, the future of the 
Romanian private higher institutions is full of chal-
lenges which threaten their existence. This difficult 
period might be for some of them a survival test. 
Some might pass, some not, the result mostly depend-
ing on their capacity to find innovative responses to 
all these challenges. Going back to Geiger’s approach 
regarding the role of the private education (more, dif-
ferent, and better education) probably during the last 
20 years much has been done in terms of more higher 
education and less regarding different and better edu-
cation. The shift to different and better education can 
be a solution for private institutions. For those private 
institutions that didn’t neglected quality during their 
expansion, the shift will be easier but still requires 
more orientation towards quality, both in teaching and 
research activities. To some extent the decline brought 
also a positive effect on the private higher education. 
During its peak period, within the private sector the 
average student/teacher ratio was very high, reaching 
84 students/teacher in 2008. In 2012, the average stu-
dent/teacher ratio decreased to 27, double than the 
ratios in public sector. However, this new environ-
ment of doing education might be the appropriate 
ground for private institutions to concentrate more on 
the quality of the educational services they are provid-
ing which will differentiate good private universities 
and eventually will be a good argument for raising 
tuition fees.
Another trend can be also beneficial for private 
higher education sector overall. The privatization of the 
educational services becomes a common feature of 
other levels of education, especially in pre-school edu-
cation, but also in primary and secondary education and 
high schools. This increasing privatization process that 
takes place at all levels of education, can gradually lead 

 
Romanian Private Higher Education in the Current European Context 
113
to more widespread acceptance of private education as 
a better alternative to public education. Especially 
among kindergartens, the private ones are already per-
ceived as different and better alternative for education. 
This process will determine an increasing demand 
sophistication which will be gradually transferred to 
other levels of education. Thus, greater openness 
towards private education can be an opportunity for 
private higher institutions as long as they will be capa-
ble to offer different and better education than other 
institutions.
4. Conclusions
After 20 years of expansion, the Romanian private 
 higher education has gone on a declining path since 
2009. The demand-absorbing growth that has charac-
terized the emergence and the development of  private 
institutions is no longer sustainable, due mainly to 
demographic trends but also to other factors that have 
made higher education a much more complex environ-
ment. However, private higher education remains an 
important feature of the Romanian higher education 
landscape, as in other central and eastern European 
countries. Although the current decline in higher educa-
tion sector threatens the existence of many private 
institutions, it can also determine the emergence of a 
more innovative behavior from them. After almost two 
decades of doing just more education, the private 
higher institutions have to concentrate more on doing 
different and better education through raising the qual-
ity of their teaching and research activities, finding 
niche programs, improving attractiveness for foreign 
students, more orientation towards labor market needs 
and improving business and research networks.
References
Bjarnason, S. et al. (2009), A new dynamic: Private higher 
education, World Conference on Higher Education, 
UNESCO.
EHEA (1999), The Bologna Declaration of 19 June 1999, 
Joint declaration of the European Ministers of Education.
EHEA (2009), The Bologna Process 2020 — The European 
Higher Education Area in the new decade, Leuven and 
Louvain-la-Neuve: Communiqué of the Conference of 
European Ministers Responsible for Higher Education 
(April, 28–29).
EHEA (2012), The European Higher Education Area in 
2012: Bologna Process Implementation Report, Brussels: 
EACEA P9 Eurydice.
Geiger, R. (1986), Private Sectors in Higher Education, Ann 
Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
Geiger, R. (1988), Public and private sectors in higher educa-
tion: A comparison of international patterns, Higher 
Education, 17(6), 699–711. 
Kwiek, M. (2010), The public/private dynamics in Polish 
higher education. Demand-absorbing private sector 
growth and its implications, Center for Public Policy 
Studies, 20.
Levy, D. C. (2011), The decline of private higher education, 
PROPHE Working Paper Series No. 16. 
Lewis, D. R., Hendel, D., & Demyanchuk, A. (2003), Private 
Higher Education in Transition Countries, Kiev: 
Publishing House KM Academia.
Nicolescu, L. (2003), Higher education in Romania — 
 evolution and views from the business community, 
TEAM Tertiary Education and Management, 9, 77–95.
Nicolescu, L. (2005), Private versus public in Romania: 
Consequences for the Market, International Higher 
Education, The Boston College Center for International 
Higher Education, 39, 12–13.
OECD (2009), Higher Education to 2030, Volume 2, 
Globalisation, Centre for Educational Research and 
Innovation, Paris: OECD.
Reisz, R. (1997), Private higher education in Romania, 
Tertiary Education and Management, 3(1), 36–43. 
Siwinska, S. (2011), Europe: Tired pioneers in Eastern and 
Central Europe, University World News (November 13).
Teixeira, P., Rosa, M. J., & Amaral, A. (2004), Is there a 
higher education market in Portugal? Higher Education 
Dynamics, 6, 291–310.
Teixeira, P. & Amaral, A. (2008), Can private institutions 
learn from mistakes? — Some reflections based on the 
Portuguese experience, Die Hochschule Journal fü r 
Wissenschaft und Bildung, 17(2), 113–125. 
Wells, P. J., Sadlak, J., & L. Vlasceanu (eds.) (2007), The 
Rising Role and Relevance of Private Higher Education 
in Europe, Bucharest: UNESCO–CEPES.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

Part IV
Knowledge-Based Organization, Intellectual 
Capital, Information, and Management 
Documents 

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

117
Chapter 13
Contributions to the Evaluation of  e-Learning 
Processes in  Higher Education
Doina Banciu
Institutul National de Cercetare Dezvoltare in Informatica
Monica Florea
Siveco Romania
The chapter refers to general aspects of e-learning 
 processes with focus on the higher education’s charac-
teristics. Several  models for evaluation of the quality of 
the e-learning processes are analyzed. As a result of the 
analysis, a new conceptual model is defined, taking into 
consideration the characteristics of both learning and 
teaching processes.
1. Introduction
According to The e-Learning Action plan (2001): 
Designing tomorrow’s education: “e-Learning is the 
use of new multimedia technologies and the Internet to 
improve the quality of learning by facilitating access to 
resources and services as well as remote exchanges 
and collaboration.” Nowadays, e-Learning is of strate-
gic importance for education. The expansion of 
e-learning initiatives in higher education is driven by 
the increase of learn ers who prefer flexibility in geo-
graphic location, scheduling, and also access to courses 
resources. 
2. e-Learning Platforms
An e-learning platform is a system for management 
of content and teaching, being made of several 
components:
• 
Learning Management System (LMS);
• 
Learning Content Management System (LCMS);
• 
Human and Knowledge Management System 
(HKMS);
• 
Virtual class (synchrone learning);
• 
ePortfolio.
The first model of e-learning was also called 
e-Learning 1.0. Starting with Web 2.0 technologies 
(“Web as a platform” was first called web 2.0 by 
O’Reilly in 2004), the second generation of web 
development and design, aiming to support and 
improve the communication, information exchange, 
information security, interoperability, and collabora-
tion on World Wide Web, a new e-learning model 
arises: e-Learning 2.0. 

118 
D. Banciu & M. Florea
As Downes mentioned: WEB 2.0 is an attitude, not 
a technology, meaning that we are not facing a techno-
logical revolution, but a social revolution.
e-Learning 2.0 uses Web 2.0 technologies for edu-
cational purposes, some of the features used are:
• 
Social networks;
• 
Wikis: a webpage or set of web pages that can be 
easily edited by anyone who is allowed access;
• 
Chats;
• 
Blogs: simple webpage consisting of brief para-
graphs of opinion, information or links, called 
posts, arranged chronologically;
• 
Really Simple Syndication (RSS) reader pages;
• 
Social bookmarking: allow users to create lists of 
‘bookmarks’ or ‘favorites’, to store these centrally 
on a remote service); 
• 
Multimedia-sharing: facilitate the storage and shar-
ing of multimedia content;
• 
Folksonomy (a collection of tags created by an 
individual for their own personal use) versus col-
labulary (collective vocabulary);
• 
Group work spaces etc.
e-Learning 2.0 is based on the following concepts:
• 
Standards and technology;
• 
Sharing local and external resources;
• 
Process and governance;
• 
Organization culture and education;
• 
Abilities and competences.
The new e-learning generation: e-Learning 3.0, being 
called also Edutainment or Entertainment-Education. 
e-Learning 3.0 is based on:
• 
Cloud computing: distributed computing, increased 
data storage and retrieval, easy access to tools and 
services that enable personalized learning, 
self-learning;
• 
Collaborative Learning: e-Learning 3.0 will facili-
tate collaborative learning through predictive intel-
ligent filtering, intelligent agents, multi-user 
participative features;
• 
Mobile intelligent technologies: the extension of 
intelligent mobile technologies will play an impor-
tant role in e-Learning 3.0. Using smart phones and 
better connected network services (wireless, satel-
lite), education and learning will be accessible to 
learners anytime and anywhere;
• 
3D visualization and interaction: the development 
of 3D multi-touch interfaces and multi-gesture 
devices will facilitate exploration of virtual spaces, 
manipulation of virtual objects, fine motor skills 
interaction.
Among the advantages of e-learning systems versus 
traditional learning, we can mention:
• 
Accessibility and mobility;
• 
Flexibility;
• 
Adaptability;
• 
New dynamic technologies;
• 
Reduced costs;
• 
The courses are organized on the subjects/topics, 
not on the age groups like traditional courses.
We have noticed some interrelated transformations in 
the e-learning field over the next few years:
• 
e-learning becomes more than “e-training”;
• 
e-learning moves to the workplace;
• 
Blended learning is redefined (combining formal 
training with non-formal training);
• 
e-learning is less course-centric and more 
knowledge-centric;
• 
e-learning adapts differently to different levels of 
mastery;
• 
Technology becomes a secondary issue.
3. e-Learning in  Higher Education
More than two-thirds of academic leaders consider that 
online learning is critical to the long term mission of 
the institution for institutional growth and increased 
access. According to a report of EDUCAUSE Center 
for Analysis and Research, some key finding on the 
state of e-learning in higher education encounters:
• 
Almost all higher education institutions have a major 
interest in e-learning. Over 80% of institutions offer 
at least several courses online and more than half 
offering a significant number of courses online.

 
Contributions to the Evaluation of e-Learning Processes in Higher Education 
119
• 
For a successfully large-scale implementation of 
e-learning in mature institutions, a centralized 
model is more efficient and offers an easier integra-
tion of e-learning. However, for some institutions, 
a distributed model allows for more innovation and 
individualization for specific e-learning programs.
• 
There is a need to double the number of e-learning 
staff in central IT. The most-desired positions 
include course designers, professional development 
staff, and app designers. IT is involved in the man-
agement of e-learning services in almost two-thirds 
of institutions.
• 
The greatest concern about e-learning is the tech-
nological know-how of faculty’s staff.
• 
In general, institutions are most mature in their 
synergy of e-learning systems and are least mature 
in assessing e-learning outcomes.
• 
Maturity in e-learning involves seven factors: poli-
cies/governance ongoing evaluation, training, syn-
ergy, priority, outcomes assessment, readiness and 
investment in faculty/staff.
• 
The most important factors in selecting technolo-
gies for e-learning are reliability, the security of 
student data, ease of use for both faculty and stu-
dents, and effectiveness.
There are different ways to deliver e-learning services in 
higher education institutions depending on the mission, 
organization management and the size of the institution: 
• 
Deliver e-learning services through central IT;
• 
Deliver e-learning services through distributed sys-
tems (multiple departments);
• 
Deliver e-learning services through mixed approach.
Web 2.0 can support learning in various ways:
• 
Single sign on;
• 
Students/teachers should decide which application 
fits the best their purpose;
• 
LMS provides structured content;
• 
Blogs offer the possibility to collect, share or to 
discuss the content;
• 
Web 2.0 applications are usable via various ways 
(application program interface (API), Widget, RSS, 
hyper text transfer protocol (HTTP)).
3.1. Quality in  higher education
The problem of quality of e-learning has gained 
increasing interest due to the widespread use of 
 distance learning in universities, and due to the fact 
that e-learning has become an instrument of interna-
tionalization of education. Quality assurance in 
higher education is a fundamental aspect of the 
 ongoing internationalization of higher education. 
Following the recommendation [98/561/EC] in 
September 1998, the European Union Council began 
developing a transparent quality assessment and qual-
ity assurance in higher education, based on the follow-
ing principles:
• 
Bodies responsible for the assessment and quality 
assurance must be independent.
• 
Assessment procedures include self — assessment 
and also external experts’ assessment.
• 
Results should be published.
Success factors for e-learning programs depend on: 
student characteristics, instructor skills, technological 
infrastructure, and support of the university.
The European Network for Quality Assurance in 
Higher Education (ENQA) was created in 1999 by the 
European Union Council of Ministers. The investiga-
tion conducted by ENQA shows that eight types of 
assessment are used in Europe, in descending order of 
frequency: assessment programs, accreditation pro-
grams, institutional audit, evaluation institutional, insti-
tutional accreditation, assessment disciplines, reference 
systems software, and reference systems disciplines. 
According to the recommendations of the Council of 
Europe, the four-phase model used by independent 
agencies has the following characteristics: autonomy 
and independence of the assessment in relation to insti-
tutions, self-evaluation, external evaluation, publication 
of a report.
4.  Assessing Quality in e-learning 
Platforms
“E-learning platforms” is a term covering a variety of 
different products, all of which support learning in 
some way by using electronic media (Ferl).

120 
D. Banciu & M. Florea
Quality in e-learning has a twofold significance in 
Europe: 
• 
First, e-learning is associated with an increase in 
the quality of educational opportunities, ensuring 
that the shift to the information society is more suc-
cessful, namely “quality through e-learning”. 
• 
Second, there is a separate but associated debate 
about ways of improving the quality of e-learning 
itself, referring to “quality for e-learning”.
• 
e-learning systems’ quality is made of the follow-
ing components (Garvin, 1988):
• 
Performance — the e-learning system should per-
form in a efficient manner, taking in consideration 
the user’s requirements; 
• 
Functionalities according to the requirements;
• 
Reliability;
• 
Conformity with the standards (technological 
standards, industrial standards, educational 
standards);
• 
Durability: the e-learning system should be rele-
vant also from pedagogical perspective, and easy to 
be updated;
• 
Flexibility: the system should be easy to be repaired 
and adjusted according to the requirements;
• 
Aesthetic;
• 
Perceived quality.
Due to their multidisciplinary nature, the assessment of 
e-learning platforms requires the collaboration of 
experts from different domains as: computer science, 
information systems, psychology, education, educa-
tional technology, etc.
The evaluation of e-learning platforms requires a 
measure of self-review of the institution on the follow-
ing areas:
• 
Institutional cultural change towards the adoption 
of e-learning platform;
• 
Content management: identification, storage, and 
retrieval of digital content;
• 
Communication and collaboration (inside and out-
side the institution);
• 
Learner information: assure an effective manage-
ment of learner data;
• 
Administration: network access and users and 
groups management;
• 
ICT resources: security, access, administration 
rights, methods of data storage, filtering, etc. 
In the literature, there are defined a series of conceptual 
models (frameworks) to assess the quality of e-learning 
systems. These conceptual models can be grouped 
according with the e-learning systems’ aspects that are 
envisaged:
• 
Models to assess the quality of the content 
(information)
• 
Models to assess the quality of the e-learning 
services
• 
Models to assess the quality of the e-learning 
programs
• 
Models to assess the quality of the e-learning 
institutions
• 
Models to evaluate the acceptance of e-learning 
technologies (extending the general conceptual 
models of technologies’ acceptance to e-learning 
technologies)
• 
Models for evaluation of e-learning systems 
student-centric
• 
Models for evaluation of e-learning systems 
using standards specifications (e.g., SCORM 
specifications).
5.  Models to Assess the Information 
Quality in e-Learning Platforms
5.1.  The ﬁ ve pillars of quality online 
education (Sloan Consortium) 1
Sloan Consortium (Sloan-C) is comprised of accredited 
institutions of  higher education and organizations that 
have interest for quality online education, www.sloan-
c.org. The consortium has established five pillars that 
underpin online education: learning effectiveness, stu-
dent satisfaction, faculty staff satisfaction, cost effec-
tiveness, access. Based on these pillars of the Sloan-C, 
a framework for measuring and improving online edu-
cation programs for any institution has been developed. 
Best practices on each pillar of quality are published on 
the website of the consortium, http://www.sloan-c.org/
effectivepractices. The consortium built a tool based on 
1 Lorenzo & Moore (2002).

 
Contributions to the Evaluation of e-Learning Processes in Higher Education 
121
empirical evidence, representing best practices in online 
education programs for universities.
In the context of user-centric web, e-learning 3.0 
faces the great challenge of adapting the evaluation 
standards, methods of evaluation and metrics to the 
features of new education era. One of the key issues is 
the Intellectual Property Rights of the digital content.
5.2.  Model assessment of e-learning systems 
based on nine categories of quality 
criteria
There are many models of quality content for e-learning 
systems. Under the new generation of e-learning, 
e-learning 3.0 (Edutainment), assessing the quality 
content is a challenge. Although quality is an important 
content in the evaluation of e-learning, has not reached 
a consensus on evaluation methods and criteria for 
assessing the information in e-learning systems. New 
features should be considered when evaluating the 
e-learning systems, such as personalized learning, nov-
elty, and attractiveness of content, etc. Based on the 
analysis of several conceptual models on information 
quality assessment, quality of electronic services, qual-
ity education systems, the author2  proposed a model 
that takes into account nine categories of quality, 
grouped into subcategories, which contain relevant 
quality criteria e-learning systems.
The model has two components:
• 
Evaluation of e-learning platforms (LMS), taking 
into account quality five categories: management, 
collaboration, management and impact of interac-
tive learning objects, the adjustment path of learn-
ing, ease of use.
• 
Evaluation of digital content. To assess the content 
will be used as the following four categories: lan-
guage, terminology, compliance, pedagogical fea-
tures, functional features and technical, aesthetic 
and ergonomic value.
Depending on the parameters above, the weights asso-
ciated criteria (dimensions) of assessment that take into 
account the evaluation of e-learning platforms. These 
criteria can be updated by the institution intends to 
2 Floera (2011).
assess e-learning platform, depending on the objectives 
it wishes to achieve. However, the criteria must be in 
accordance with e-learning standards in force, any 
change in standards resulting in the appropriate update 
criteria for evaluation. Evaluation criteria are grouped 
into categories, the weights being given both categories 
of criteria and each criterion within one group. Each 
criterion is given a note on a metric measurement, or 
assessment.
For each of the nine categories is assigned a relative 
weight reflecting the relative importance of the cate-
gory for scenarios covered in the assessment.
The first component of the model was applied to 
evaluate the two platforms for eLearning: Moodle plat-
form (open source) and Advanced eLearning or AeL 
platform (developed by SIVECO Romania) for three 
scenarios: a blended learning course, online course 
evaluation, and a professional training course. 
AeL obtained higher scores than the Moodle plat-
form for all categories of criteria, except criterion of 
ease of use, where AeL obtained score 81, while the 
score obtained Moodle platform 94, but the utility cri-
terion score of AeL is 44, being significantly higher 
score Moodle platform (18). It can be concluded that, 
once mastered, users of AeL have greater benefits than 
if they use the Moodle platform. Based on the results 
following the evaluation platform based on Moodle and 
AeL first group of five quality criteria (evaluation 
e-learning platforms), and the weights for each of the 
five quality criteria in the three scenarios used in the 
assessment: blended learning, distance learners and 
professional training, we obtain the following scores 
for the two platforms:
Platform score
Blended 
learning
Distance 
learners
Professional 
training
Moodle
23.50
28.05
31.00
AeL
26.40
29.70
31.20
5.3. AeL platform
Complete integrated platform computer assisted 
instruction and content management, AeL platform3 is 
an integrated teaching, learning and content manage-
ment based on modern educational principles. AeL is 
3 www.advancedelearning.com.

122 
D. Banciu & M. Florea
the platform developed by SIVECO Romania SA 
(www.siveco.ro). AeL platform supports teaching and 
learning, testing and evaluation for content manage-
ment, monitoring of education and curriculum design. 
AeL eContent is organized in reusable learning objects 
(RLOs) that are structured in learning content pack-
ages. The main idea of “learning objects” is to break 
educational content down into small chunks that can be 
reused in various standard-compliant learning environ-
ments. The concept of content re-usage is based on 
description formats of the XML packing, having the 
necessary elements, in order to import and export con-
formable the MathML, SCORM, and IMS standards. 
AeL eContent library contains over 16,000 interactive 
lessons covering over 21 subjects. AeL eContent pro-
vides teachers and students with true-to-life lab experi-
ences in a safe environment. The digital learning 
content is pedagogically-sound and makes it easy for 
teachers to convert any regular computer classroom 
into an interactive lab, simply by launching the appro-
priate digital unit for students. The educational soft-
ware allows students to repeat experiments as many 
times as needed to understand a certain topic.
5.4.  Moodle platform (Modular 
object-oriented dynamic learning 
environment)
Moodle4 is a platform for open source e-learning, pro-
viding support for security and administration by a 
community of users and developers. Moodle has its 
origins in an educational project developed by Martin 
Dougiamas in Curtin University of Technology, from 
idea to improve the management system provided by 
the WebCT platform.
6. Conclusions
Due to the advantages offers to the users, almost all 
 higher education institutions have a major interest in 
e-learning services. More than two-thirds of academic 
leaders consider that online learning is critical to the long 
term mission of the institution for institutional growth 
and increased access. The shift to e-learning 3.0 opens a 
4 www.moodle.org.
debate on the assessment and assuring the quality in 
e-learning systems. The quality of the e-learning services 
and processes in higher education is still a challenge tak-
ing into account the standards and methods of evaluation 
for information quality in such systems. 
References
Anderson, P. What is Web 2.0? Ideas, technologies and 
implications for education, JISC reports. Available at 
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/techwatch/
tsw0701b.pdf2007.
Banciu, D. & Florea, M. (2011), Information Quality — A 
Challenge for e-learning.
Bartolomé, A. (2008), Web 2.0 and new Learning paradigms, 
eLearning Papers, 8(April). Available at www.advance-
delearning.com.
 Bichsel, J. (2013), The state of e-learning in higher educa-
tion: An eye toward growth and increased access 
(Research report), Louisville, EDUCAUSE Center for 
Analysis and Research. Available at http://www.edu-
cause.edu/library/resources/.
Ebner, M., e-Learning in Higher Education — A Concept for 
Future?, Graz University of Technology.
Ehlers, Ulf-Daniel, Goertz, L., Hildebrandt, B., & Pawlowski, 
J. M. (2005), Quality in e-learning. Use and dissemina-
tion of quality approaches in European e-learning: 
A study by the European Quality Observatory.
Ferl, (2005). Evaluating Learning Platforms.
Florea, M. (2011), Contribution to the evaluation of e-learn-
ing systems, PhD thesis.
Garvin, D. (1988), Managing Quality, New York: Macmillan.
Ikhattabi, M., Neagu, D. & Cullen, A. (2011), Assessing 
information quality of e-learning systems: a web min-
ing approach, Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 
862–873.
Kahn, B. K. Strong, D. M., & Wang, R. Y. (2002), 
Information quality benchmarks: Product and service 
performance, Communications of the ACM, 45(4), 
184–192.
Klein, B. D. (2002), When do users detect information qual-
ity problems on the World Wide Web? American 
Conference in Information Systems.
Knight, S. A. & Burn, J. M. (2005), Developing a framework 
for assessing information quality on the world wide web, 
Informing Science, 8, 159–172.
Lorenzo, G. & Moore, J. (2002), The Sloan Consortium 
Report to the Nation: Five Pillars of Quality Online 
Education, November.

 
Contributions to the Evaluation of e-Learning Processes in Higher Education 
123
McGilvray, D. (2008), Executing Data Quality Projects: Ten 
Steps to Quality Data and Trusted Information, Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers.
O’Reilly, T. (2007), What Is web 2.0: Design patterns and 
business models for the next generation of software. 
Available at http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/4580/.
Rosenberg, M. J. (2006), Beyond e-learning: Approaches 
and technologies to enhance organizational knowledge, 
learning and performance. Available at http://www.
marcrosenberg.com/images/What_Lies_Beyond_
E-Learning_ASTD.pdf.
Soumplis, A., Koulocheri, E., & Xenos, M. (2011), The 
twobility factor, the 7th International Conference 
eLearning and Software for Education, Bucharest.
Wang, R. Y. & Strong, D. M. (1996), Beyond accuracy: What 
data quality means to data consumers, Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 12(4), 5–34.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

125
Chapter 14 
Evaluation of Knowledge Processes 
Within the Learning Organization
Constantin Bratianu
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
Ruxandra Bejinaru
University “Stefan cel Mare” of Suceava
The purpose of this chapter is to present a synthesis of 
our research on  learning organizations performed in the 
North-Eastern region of Romania. We go beyond the 
metaphor of knowledge as an object or flow, consider-
ing knowledge as a field. That means that in each 
organization we may consider a field of cognitive 
knowledge, a field of emotional knowledge, and a field 
of spiritual knowledge. These three fields are dynam ic 
and in a continuous interaction. Based on these fields of 
knowledge we conceived a questionnaire to identify 
and evaluate the main factors able to influence the 
organizational learning and to transform a company 
into a learning organization. We distributed our ques-
tionnaires to companies based in the North-Eastern 
zone of Romania, and then processed the answers using 
the Statistical Package for Social Science (SPSS) pack-
age. We performed a factorial analysis and found that 
the main factors to influence organizational learning 
are the following: vision and mission, knowledge trans-
fer, and knowledge creation. Also, the leadership plays 
an important role as an integrator and fundamental fac-
tor in transforming a company into a learning 
organization.
1. Introduction
Knowledge has been a favorite topic in philosophical 
discussions and today fulfills a similar role in scientific 
research. Since the time of ancient Greek philosophers, 
views regarding knowledge and the concept of knowl-
edge were shared. In Plato’s view knowledge that we 
are convinced, that we have about a particular thing is 
not absolute knowledge because there is a possibility, 
however small it may be, to get deceived. In this chap-
ter we consider the following perspective on knowl-
edge: knowledge is processed information in order to 
better understand the phenomena that occur around us 
(Brătianu, 2008a, 2008b).
Referring to the concept of  knowledge dynamics 
we approached the description of knowledge conver-
sion phenomenon through every step of conversion 
(Brătianu, 2013a, 2013b). In the literature, the 
dynamics of knowledge has become a concept that is 
identified by four conversion processes that occur 
between tacit and explicit knowledge. The first pro-
cess is  socialization. Knowledge is gathered from 
tacit knowledge of another person. Learning occurs 

126 
C. Bratianu & R. Bejinaru
not by speech or training, but through observation 
and imitation.  Socialization process is considered, by 
Nonaka, as the most important type in the knowledge 
transfer cycle because it involves the transmission 
and transformation of key knowledge generated at 
individual level (Polanyi, 1983).  Externalization is 
transforming tacit knowledge into explicit knowl-
edge through the use of metaphors and analogies or 
gestures and body language.  Combination is the third 
process and is seen as a stage in which knowledge is 
mixed and new explicit knowledge are structured to 
integrate the body of explicit knowledge already pre-
sent (Brătianu & Orzea, 2010). The last process is the 
 internalization, the newly perceived explicit knowl-
edge will be transformed back into tacit knowledge. 
Internalization closes the cycle of knowledge crea-
tion and is an ongoing process that is based on social 
interaction.
Recently, debates about  knowledge dynamics put 
emphasis on Brătianu’s model in terms of which it pre-
sents a series of new concepts (cognitive-emotional 
knowledge dyad, the principle of thermodynamics) that 
we believe bring an important added value for under-
standing this phenomenon. This new paradigm is 
needed in order to integrate the emotional dimension of 
knowledge within organizational knowledge. If para-
digm based on Newtonian dynamics allowed the 
approach of transfers between tacit and explicit knowl-
edge, the thermodynamic paradigm brings a consider-
able advantage namely it supports the reflection of 
another dimension of knowledge, called intensive 
dimension (Brătianu, 2011).
In essence, the new paradigm of thermodynamics 
is much stronger and better reflects the knowledge 
properties and types of processes that occur between 
them. Knowledge can be better understood through 
metaphors that have as source field the thermody-
namics paradigm. The benefits of this new set of 
metaphors are:  knowledge management can integrate 
emotional knowledge and emotional intelligence in 
a new organizational framework; organizational 
knowledge dynamics can be explained by a more 
appropriate manner and the decision process can be 
understood both from the rational and the emotional 
perspective.
2.  Emphasizing the  Learning 
Organization’s Dynamic 
Characteristics
Today we are in a dynamic world, in all aspects of life 
that is rapidly changing concepts and always challenges 
us to adapt. It is understandable that economic life is in 
the same process, except that players are more aggres-
sive than ever, competition is tough, the rules are differ-
ent, the stakes are getting higher. In a changing world, 
organizations must continuously reach for adaptation. 
This becomes much easier if the organizational culture 
of a company values  the knowledge, knowledge that 
can help employees to follow the company’s vision 
through all their efforts.
The organization is a social invention, a systematic 
arrangement of people gathered together to achieve 
specific goals. After more than a century ago, studies 
about organizations emphasized that there is, or should 
be, an organization suitable for every purpose designed 
(Drucker, 2000). Experience has shown that the model 
of a suitable organization has changed several times, as 
the business itself has changed. It is this continuous 
change in the business environment that has led organi-
zations to adopt a lifelong learning process, in order to 
maintain themselves effective and efficient over time. 
A learning organization is “an organization that con-
tinually expands its capacity to create the future. For 
such organizations, it is not enough to survive on the 
market” (Senge, 1990).
Orientation towards knowledge and “learning 
organization” are not easily achievable steps. Managers 
need to be leaders, positive personal example should 
prevail, internal structures must promote sustainable 
development and exchange of information between 
employees — in order to obtain a competitive advan-
tage in a highly competitive market. Many researchers 
and many organizations have recognized the impor-
tance of organizational learning — the notion of “learn-
ing organization” as the impetus for the progress, 
development, and achieve competitive advantage. Many 
authors have tried to create ideal templates or ideal 
forms according to which organizations may attempt to 
adapt their own structure. In this sense, the learning 
organization is an ideal toward which the organization 

 
Evaluation of Knowledge Processes Within the Learning Organization 
127
must evolve to meet the different pressures through 
individual and collective learning (Easterby-Smith 
et al., 1999). 
In this context, for all economic agents, adaptation 
becomes a condition for survival, and the way this is 
done is the performance condition. We observe more 
about the intelligent organization, the  learning organi-
zation, the networked organization, the democratic 
organization, the expressive organization, generally an 
organizational world that values  to a much greater 
extent than in the past knowledge, talents, motivations 
and innovative spirit. The success of these organiza-
tions depends on effective use of talented people and 
how they are encouraged to develop permanently. 
Although there have been many discussions on account 
of this topic is relatively difficult to find examples in 
practice. This might explain the fact that the results of 
this concept are not tangible on a short-term, it is a long 
process that some managers may believe that it is not 
relevant to the organization requirements and dynam-
ics. Secondly, focus on creating a template and the need 
to present it in an attractive form for commercial con-
sultants and authors, led to a decrease of the theoretical 
framework of learning organizations. There is a strong 
contrast to the study of organizational learning.
For a long time, the learning organization has 
developed towards the same direction as organizational 
learning. Writings about organizational learning 
focused on analysis of processes involved in individual 
learning and collective/group learning inside organiza-
tions; while, literature about the learning organization 
is action oriented and intends to use specific diagnose 
instruments and methodological evaluation that may 
help to identify, promote, and evaluate the quality of 
learning process in organizations. It may be said that 
organizational learning is the process and the activity 
through which organizations eventually reach the ideal 
of learning organizations. This is why we cannot sepa-
rate the two concepts that intertwine both in theory and 
practice (Easterby-Smith & Araujo, 1999). 
Since 1960, there have been elaborated more defi-
nitions of this concept. Simon (1991) talks about 
organizations characterized by a more and more pro-
found approach of organizational issues, preoccupied 
by restructuring through the effort of the individuals 
inside it; Stata (1989) brings to light an organization 
characterized as more intuitive and that shows new 
behaviors; Senge (1990) describes the organization as a 
group of persons that work together to improve the col-
lective capacities, in order to obtain the desired results.
It has been a while since we do not consider any-
more the learning organizations as a physical structure 
but on the contrary as a theory, a culture, a context, or 
a paradigm. When the organization concentrates 
towards purposes as adaptation to change and organiza-
tional learning, we may say that the organization has a 
dynamic perspective. Thus, the learning organization 
does not refer only to learning. Sommerville & 
McConnel-Imbriotis (2004) note that a learning organi-
zation has eight features. These were formulated as 
follows: commitment to lifelong learning, a systematic 
approach to learning, common vision, flexibility and 
adaptability, participation in a cooperative business 
environment, a clear management structure, a broad 
perspective on learning and management acceptance as 
that work and learning are interrelated/combined.
Considering the fascinating paradigm of the learn-
ing organization, it becomes more and more important 
for the ability of organizations to compete and develop 
in the actual business environment. Traditionally speak-
ing it was considered that the basic ingredients of suc-
cess were the impressive quantitative results and 
rigorous administration. Today, the learning organiza-
tion defies this view by the fact that it focuses on creat-
ing quality and value, involving every member of the 
organization in this endeavor as it becomes increasingly 
true that an organization is only as strong as its weakest 
employee. 
In this century characterized by rapid changes and 
sometimes radical, it is impossible to resist without 
adaptation, both for people and organizations. 
Everything is subject to change: law, technology, cus-
tomer needs, even the system of values. It is therefore 
necessary, both on behalf of the organization and staff, 
a new way of thinking based on continuous change 
through the integration of lifelong learning in the 
organizational culture. It is necessary in these condi-
tions, the orientation of organizations to lifelong learn-
ing, learning that, experts say, is the only way to 
determine the achievement of significant competitive 

128 
C. Bratianu & R. Bejinaru
advantages. Thus, learning must be a way of life for all 
staff of the organization, regardless of age, background 
or level of seniority, considering that the new philoso-
phy adopted by the organization is the guarantee of 
organizational change success. 
3.  Key Factors Within the  Learning 
Organization
Currently, the identification of the factors with major 
influence on the success of an organization is based on 
the well-known perspective of Senge (1990), namely 
that learning is one of the most important factors for 
achieving sustainable competitive advantage. According 
to this theory, organizations succeed to evolve and 
develop only through learning. Learning within an 
organization occurs through processes that create new 
knowledge or processes that use and transform existing 
knowledge. From this perspective, a vital resource for 
organizations is knowledge and learning is a vital pro-
cess. However, learning in an organization will mostly 
happen under the coordination of leadership. Concern 
for organizational learning should be initiated from the 
top of the organization and spread to the bottom of the 
organizational hierarchy.
An organization’s actions must be directed through 
learning so that they become able to design and create 
their own future. The vision of these organizations must 
design their desired future and such their efforts will be 
directed towards developing those strategic resources 
and dynamic capabilities needed to generate sustaina-
ble competitive advantage. Integrating perspectives on 
the learning organization and  knowledge management 
we have identified that one of the most important 
dynamic capabilities is organizational learning. In this 
view of dynamic capability, organizational learning is 
the organizational capacity to integrate individual 
learning of each employee in an organizational process 
starting with adherence to a common vision and cul-
tural values. Learning outcomes succeed and evolve on 
an increasing scale. Learning is a dynamic process that 
is based on its capacity to reinvent itself through inno-
vation and performance by changing coordinates.
At this stage of the work, considering the specific 
driving forces of knowledge management, we reinvent 
a variant by identifying and pointing complementarities 
with the principles of a learning organization. Internal 
forces acting in support of organizational learning and 
its amplification of the learning organization are: 
(i) leadership, (ii) organizational learning processes, 
and (iii) specific organizational culture. We appreciate 
that the significance and importance of leadership in the 
context of a learning organization is to define the vision 
and motivation that create mechanisms to engage all 
employees in order to share this vision and work within 
the gravitational field that it creates. The existence of 
learning processes and organizational mechanisms is 
essential though they are different for each business 
area separately. We believe that it is based on the 
dynamics of organizational knowledge and teamwork. 
Regarding organizational culture, the most important is 
it to support the efforts of management and employees 
so as to form a convergence towards a common goal.
Dynamic capabilities of the organization can take 
various forms but the shared key mechanism of organi-
zational learning and learning organization is the trans-
lation of knowledge, information and data at the 
individual, group and organizational level and ulti-
mately be reflected in the success of the business. As a 
conclusion of the above ideas, dynamic capabilities can 
be developed only through learning and as result will 
be obtained sustainable competitive advantage of the 
organization.
4.  Key Research Methodology and 
Evaluation of Knowledge Processes
Contributions found in the literature are of a mainly 
theoretical or empirical approach using methodologies 
based mostly on qualitative data. Therefore the out-
come of literature review resulted in the extraction of 
the main ideas on knowledge processes in organiza-
tions that were used as variables in questionnaire 
design: the vision, motivation, stimulating new ideas 
and projects, generation/creation of knowledge, the 
creation of databases, conducting analyzes, training 
programs, transfer of knowledge, empowerment (par-
ticipation in decision-making of employees) trust and 
knowledge acquisition. The questionnaire was con-
structed in order to assess the level of importance as 
perceived by each respondent on several factors, varia-
bles drawn from the literature, assumed to affect 

 
Evaluation of Knowledge Processes Within the Learning Organization 
129
knowledge processes within the  learning organization. 
The section to which we refer in this paper includes 
administration and knowledge transfer, knowledge 
creation, and knowledge  combination.
The questionnaire was filled by managers and 
employees of small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs) in the North-East of Romania. The question-
naire was composed of two parts. The first part of the 
questionnaire contained statements including factors 
suspected to affect knowledge processes. Indicators 
obtained from statistical processing of the question-
naires reflect the respondent’s level of agreement on the 
existence of indicators included in the statements with 
regard to the respondents’ work environment. In this 
sense it was used a Likert scale measuring six steps, 
where 1 is strong disagreement and 6 representing 
strong agreement.
To make it as easy completing the questionnaire, 
the items were going to be perceived as simple state-
ments about the variables of interest and respondents 
were faced with expressing the measure/extent of their 
agreement or disagreement. Research variables have 
been translated into a common language accessible to 
most respondents. The second part of the questionnaire 
aimed profiling respondents and was devoted to identi-
fying details about (age, gender, position in the organi-
zation, number of years in the organization) using 
closed-choice questions with unique choice. The 
response rate was 42%, being considered by specialists 
large enough to get relevant results even at regional 
level. Data collection was done through several meth-
ods such as interviewing respondents, distributing 
questionnaires by mail, telephone and email complet-
ing of questionnaires.
Among the reasons that some representatives of 
organizations refused to participate in the conduct of 
the study we mention lack of time and/or interest in the 
field of  knowledge management and learning organiza-
tion and certain policies relating to privacy and infor-
mation within the organization. Distrust of respondents 
that data will be used only for academic research could 
lead to some incorrect answers, to determine the distor-
tion of the results, which is one of the limitations of the 
research. Through questionnaire, have been assessed 
personal agreement/disagreement to statements 
included in the survey, and not the actual situation of 
the organization. The results thus obtained in the pro-
cess of collecting data were analyzed using IBM 
SPSS version 19 and Amos v. 18.
The results of a questionnaire-based survey are 
considered empirical results, and we have presented 
these from two perspectives. On the one hand, the 
analysis of data collected through the descriptive statis-
tics materialized. Descriptive statistics provides a pro-
file of the organizations that participated in the study 
and also have identified their common aspects. In this 
work descriptive statistics presents less importance in 
relation to its size and objectives so that we will not 
dwell on it.
The second part of the analysis of the data was to 
identify factors influencing knowledge processes in 
organizations by means of exploratory and confirma-
tory factor analysis. Exploratory factor analysis has 
the role to highlight the factors that may be identified 
in the claims under review. Confirmatory factor 
analysis is to confirm the model of the factors identi-
fied in the first phase of exploratory factor analysis, 
and thus to demonstrate/argue based on the correla-
tion between the indicators, assumptions and 
findings.
Exploratory factor analysis can be achieved through 
two methods or data analysis options. Principal 
Component Analysis is based on a mechanism that 
breaks the original data set into a set of linear variable 
data. With this method are identified only linear com-
ponents that belong to the set of data. Principal Factor 
Analysis uses a derived mathematical model through 
which estimates some factors. It is considered that only 
the main factor analysis is able to identify true latent 
factors in the purview of a data set.
In the second part, the method chosen to investigate 
whether the forty-five statements are identifiable fac-
tors was exploratory factor analysis. Factorial analysis 
bases on the premise that the variables are correlated. 
Therefore, the variables measured have a high similar 
degree of correlation, while those that measure differ-
ent sizes that have low degree of correlation.
The reviews are based on the values of verification 
benchmarks for making observations step by step 
regarding research trajectory. To check the appropriate-
ness of the sample we applied the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin 
(KMO) test. Test KMO measures the extent to which 

130 
C. Bratianu & R. Bejinaru
there are correlations between  variables. Its value 
attests that when applying a factor analysis, the factors 
extracted explain to a very large extent the variation, 
thus validating the correctness of using factor 
analysis.
In Table 1 it can be seen that, just as in the case of 
the test KMO, spherical Bartlett’s test had a high 
value and a level of significance of less than 0.001 (or 
Sig. 0.000), confirming the accuracy of the analytical 
method used. The null hypothesis is rejected, result-
ing in the matrix of correlations that there are signifi-
cant correlations between variables. KMO test 
provides us information on sample size. The mini-
mum value of this test for the sample to be considered 
adequate is 0.5. Kaiser (1974) provides information 
on the test values. Thus, values below 0.5 are unac-
ceptable, values between 0.5 and 0.7 are mediocre, 
values between 0.7 and 0.8 are good, values between 
0.8 and 0.9 are excellent, values between 0.9 and 1 are 
“superb”. Therefore, the present sample can be char-
acterized as “excellent”, with KMO test value of 
0.853 (Table 1).
The objective at this stage was to group the data 
and obtain a minimum number of factors needed. In 
this case, it was decided to use the graph (Scree Plot) 
to extract the number of factors, resulting in 11 fac-
tors that correspond to nine dimensions of  knowl-
edge management in the  learning organization. This 
decision was made by viewing the inflection point of 
the curve to which they have found a number of 11 
factors (Fig. 1).
At the point indicated by the arrow on the graph, 
the curve shows the last major peek, then it flattens. 
As can be seen the curve decreases uniformly after 
the 11th point, factor. Thus we conclude that the 45 
independent variables were grouped into a number of 
11 factors, namely groups of variables. Grouping of 
these items reveals strong similarities in terms of 
the significance/meaning of the questionnaire in the 
 perception of their respondents. 
To represent the original data set we chose the 
Principal Components extraction method. Examining 
the number of extracted factors associated with eigen-
values and using the rule to retain only factors with 
eigenvalues greater than or equal to 1, 11 factors were 
used for the next step. By running SPSS software were 
obtained extensive information on factor analysis. Due 
to the limited structure of this chapter, we present only 
the very important results, the rest can be discovered in 
a future chapter. Following factor analysis protocol 
steps have resulted from running the program matrix 
correlations between items, matrix level of signifi-
cance for these correlations and the determinant of the 
matrix.
In order that the items get grouped in clusters, they 
must be correlated but do not have their level of cor-
relation very high. If the items are strongly correlated 
(more than 0.9), they can lead to errors. In our research 
correlation index is not very strong, and the value of 
the determinant of the matrix is also within the recom-
mended limits, namely Determinant = 8.29–005 
(< 0.00001). Therefore none of items has to be 
removed. In Table 1 Kaiser–Meyer presents test 
results — Olkin (KMO) and Bartlett’s test. We 
Fig. 1.  Influence and pressure groups for public administration
Source: Developed by the authors based on SPSS results.
12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0
1
3
5
7
9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23
Component Number
Eigenvalue
Scree Plot
25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45
Table 1.  KMO and Bartlett’s test
Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin Measure of Sampling
0.853
Adequacy
Bartlett’s Test of Shericity
Approx. Chi-Square
24328,686
df
0.990
Sig.
0.000

 
Evaluation of Knowledge Processes Within the Learning Organization 
131
processed into SPSS v.19 factor analysis and decided 
what variables contribute to factors. In our case we see 
that groups of items are formed and which are the fac-
tors of major influence in terms of knowledge pro-
cesses within a  learning organization.
Varimax Rotation optimizes the structure of fac-
tors. The relative importance of factors is balanced. 
After the first Varimax rotation, components matrix 
after rotation, contains the 11 factors identified by the 
program and which consistence can be seen in Table 2. 
Following items’ posts that form each factor we note 
that they converge to a certain idea. Let us consider the 
statements that are found for Factor 1: in the organiza-
tion there is a constant concern for her future, Managers 
are concerned with identifying business opportunities. 
Managers talk with employees about their vision on the 
future of the company. We note that these statements 
convey the concern of managers and employees for the 
future of the company and on development opportuni-
ties. In the same factor we identified items aimed at 
organizational perspective on creativity, innovation, 
and free speech.
In this context, to strengthen the structure of fac-
tors we decided to run a Varimax rotation with preset 
number of factors, namely 6. Thus, after rotation, the 
program will redistribute items that operate on the 
same principle, namely grouping those items whose 
responses had similar variations. The advantage of 
obtaining a lower number of factors is that we can 
make observations and specific actions to be appli-
cable to the business environment in the region stud-
ied. Among the main arguments that led to a second 
rotation with predetermined number of factors we 
mention: (a) influence of some items can be found 
within several factors but in weights significantly 
different, and (b) the value of Cronbach Alpha was 
supposed to fall in order to show a better consistency 
of factors. 
In the second-components matrix after rotation 
we observed that contains grouping items into six fac-
tors and that significantly decreased the cases where 
the same item is under the influence of several factors. 
We have not included the second-components matrix 
after rotation within this paper because of space limi-
tations. For items that do arise with weights of influ-
ence for two factors is noted that this is not an 
impediment to decide which factor is assigned to that 
item, as the difference between the weights of influ-
ence is significantly high. For example, if the second 
item in the matrix (corresponding the statement — 
employees are stimulated to use some of their time for 
study and professional training specialization) note 
that it has a weighting of 0.735 for Factor 1 and a 
share of 0.342 in Factor 4, which indicates that this 
item has the most influence for Factor 1. We passed 
through this filter every item and we concluded the 
structure of the six influence factors calculated by the 
rotation matrix.
5. Analysis Results
Factors matrix after rotation shows us in a much more 
concise and fast manner towards what channel the 
respondents’ options regarding the survey topic. Factors 
matrix after rotation must be analyzed as follows: must 
be analyzed questions that are grouped and thus form 
factor 1 and subsequently must be identified their com-
mon aspects. Following we present on which bases 
were formed the three factors and what do they reveal 
about the researched sample.
Factor 1: The first column in the “Component” factors 
matrix after rotation contains a total of 10 values 
(which are called saturation coefficients) from a total of 
10 items of the questionnaire used in the statistical 
Table 2.  Influence statistics on internal 
consistency
FACTOR 1 
Reliability Statistics
Cronbach’s Alpha
No. of Items
0.861
10
FACTOR 2 
Reliability Statistics
Cronbach’s Alpha
No. of Items
0.860
11
FACTOR 3 
Reliability Statistics
Cronbach’s Alpha
No. of Items
0.842
9

132 
C. Bratianu & R. Bejinaru
research. Looking closely to saturation coefficient val-
ues that were formed to Component 1 or Factor 1 we 
see that they are higher than most other values that the 
program calculated for other factors. This is easily 
observed due to the display in descending order of satu-
ration coefficient values. Also, there is a significant 
difference between this factor that consists of 10 items 
and the other five factors. The formula that is found 
after the factors rotation phase in the exploratory factor 
analysis procedure leads to the conclusion that the 
questionnaire was designed to cover a balanced range 
of organizational issues broad enough to faithfully 
reflect the reality of the organization but not so large as 
to dilute the influence of opinions and to disperse into 
too insignificant factors.
The first factor contains items indicating cohesion 
of respondents’ views regarding the vision of the 
organization and encouragement of creativity. 
Regarding vision, this is reflected in aspects such as 
interest of managers for the future of the company, 
openness of managers for leading the company in 
direct collaboration with employees, practice of freely 
discuss issues adopted by the company, etc. The items 
that make up the first factor contain the fundamental 
ideas about the existence, the organization and func-
tioning of the company that essentially reflects the 
vision of the organization. Through the items within 
this factor we identify the interest and attention shown 
by managers in terms of creativity and learning 
processes. 
In the context of this research, formation of this 
factor has brought a real acknowledgment of the impor-
tance of learning and creativity within an organization. 
This factor contains the association of the following 
items: staff participate in training programs to develop 
their new skills, managers encourage employees to 
express their honest opinions and beliefs, and employ-
ees are encouraged to use part of their time to study and 
professional training.
Factor 2: We called this factor — structuring and trans-
fer of knowledge, as it is composed of items that relate 
precisely the steps and processes of knowledge organi-
zation and management within the firm. In the question-
naire there were a number of questions that reflect how 
the organization manages its databases. The contents of 
the eight items that have the most significant saturation 
coefficients, of the second factor, asked respondents 
their opinion on issues such as whether within the firm 
are created and updated databases on internal resources 
and business conducted on competitors, on suppliers 
and customers, if within the company are held discus-
sions with experts in the business environment for the 
dissemination of new knowledge in the field or if it 
provides the necessary support for new technologies 
acquired by the firm. All these items are following the 
path of knowledge from outside to inside the organiza-
tion, between departments within the organization and 
outside the organization towards the business 
environment.
Factor 3: The items that are included in this factor 
have in the foreground the idea of creating knowledge 
and we named factor 3 — encouragement of knowl-
edge creation. The message that emerges from putting 
together these items, namely factor analysis 3, is to 
stimulate awareness and knowledge creation process. 
In order of decreasing saturation coefficients, we see 
that the most important aspect that is related to knowl-
edge creation is stimulation of developing methods and 
production processes. For this research is particularly 
important and relevant that this item has a value so 
high for the saturation coefficient of 0.816. The follow-
ing items retrieved with high values of this factor in 
considering whether the firm organizes group creative 
sessions to generate new ideas and solve complex 
problems (0.639); if the company organizes training 
programs for managers (0.634); and if the company 
encourages sharing their own experiences and not their 
monopoly (0.626).
The grouping items that emerged from the explor-
atory factor analysis reveal that they correctly pointed 
concrete issues important to the current work of 
organizations in the North-East of Romania. The 
respondents’ trend is clear and we can easily see the 
outcome of factor analysis and of course on the basis 
of factors rotation matrix. Following discussions and 
reasoning in the preceding paragraphs, we present 
below Table 3. Regarding the three factors and items 
that make them up to be more easily viewed and the 
relevance of each factor in the composition of the 
investigation as a whole.

 
Evaluation of Knowledge Processes Within the Learning Organization 
133
Table 3.  Correlation of the three factors and items, according with the components of the matrix after rotation
Factors
Items
1 Vision and 
 encouragement 
of creativity
The company is preoccupied about its future
Within the organization is encouraged honest expression of opinions, even diverging ones
Employees are incentivized to use some of their time for study and professional training 
Managers are preoccupied with identifying business opportunities
Within the organization is encouraged knowledge transfer between generations 
Managers discuss with employees their vision about the company’s future 
Employees participate to training programs in order to develop new abilities 
Within the organization are analyzed both performances and failures in order to learn from others mistakes 
The firm focuses on the acquisition of information and knowledge through subscriptions to magazines and 
 international databases
The company’s employees are not penalized for their mistakes. They are stimulated to analyze such mistakes to 
learn from them
2 Structuring and 
 transfer knowledge
The company creates and updates databases regarding internal resources and business conducted
The company creates and updates databases regarding competitors 
The company creates and updates databases regarding customers
The company organizes discussions with experts from the business environment for the dissemination of latest 
knowledge in areas of interest
Technological changes within the company are accompanied by corresponding training programs 
Within the company are organized training programs for professional re-conversion
The company creates and updates databases regarding suppliers
Within the organization is encouraged knowledge transfer between different departments
Within the organization is encouraged the creation of new products and services
Managers encourage employees to learn from their mistakes and to propose solutions to avoid them in the future
Managers discuss and analyze business problems with employees
3 Encouragement of 
knowledge creation
The company organizes creativity group sessions in order to generate new ideas and complex  problems solving
The company stimulates the development of new methods and production processes
Within the company are organized training programs for managers
The firm encourages sharing of experiences and knowledge and not their monopoly
The company creates and updates databases regarding the best practices in the domain
The company is taking steps to correct operational discrepancies between results and objectives
The company has achieved a state of transparency for all employees
Employees are stimulated to consider the problems they have to solve as new opportunities for learning 
Within the organization has developed an atmosphere of trust between employees
6. Conclusions
We consider that  knowledge dynamics processes may 
be a strategic tool for achieving many purposes of the 
organization. As we presented, each type of knowledge 
process generates some specific effects which, due to 
the complexity and dynamics of knowledge, each time 
are different because for every process the knowledge 
involved/combined is different. The outcomes of 
knowledge processes have to be carefully read as, even 
if they seem alike, they are not identical and this par-
ticularity is very important in order to create a strategic 

134 
C. Bratianu & R. Bejinaru
and competitive advantage.  Knowledge dynamics’ pro-
cesses are real and continuous and they represent an 
endless source of innovation. We propose that organiza-
tions should have a well-determined protocol of moni-
toring/channeling the knowledge trajectory and effects 
within the organization and also towards the external 
environment. Furthermore, the benefits of knowledge 
thermodynamics principle consist in the fact that, in 
this view,  knowledge management can integrate emo-
tional knowledge and emotional intelligence in a new 
organizational framework; organizational knowledge 
dynamics can be explained by a more appropriate man-
ner and the decision process can be understood both 
from the rational and the emotional perspective. 
Knowledge and learning are certainly interdepend-
ent in theory and practice. Learning within an organiza-
tion means to use knowledge (existing knowledge) in 
order to create knowledge (new knowledge) weather 
for experienced employees or for new comers. The fac-
tors that we discovered that influence knowledge man-
agement within a  learning organization are real and 
reveal the power of certain actions that take place 
within the organization. Considering the previously 
mentioned, lifelong learning involves more than the 
formal education system, which, in the wrong way, we 
call learning. Therefore, the learning organization con-
tinually senses and responds to changes in the internal 
and external environment in order to ensure its survival 
and development.
Once again it is worth to mention that dynamic 
capabilities of the organization can take various forms 
but the shared key mechanism of organizational learn-
ing and learning organization is the translation of 
knowledge, information and data at the individual, 
group and organizational level and ultimately be 
reflected in the success of the business. The fascinating 
theoretical approach and hypothesis with respect to the 
controlling the influence intensity of factors within an 
organization lead our research towards investigating the 
role of dynamic capabilities.
Through this research chapter we aimed to present 
and highlight specific issues of knowledge management 
within the learning organizations in the North–East of 
Romania. In the first instance, based on literature analy-
sis we scaled the principles and processes of a learning 
organization. Out of these, we bring to your attention 
the following: principles that support lifelong learning 
and learning from mistakes; principles that support the 
sharing of knowledge and not their monopoly; princi-
ples supporting confidence and stimulate ideas among 
employees; principles that support flexibility in think-
ing and adaptability in any situation of change.
Descriptive analysis, exploratory factor analysis 
and confirmatory factor analysis showed that there is a 
major impact of knowledge management factors at the 
individual and organizational learning within an organi-
zation, thus validating the four formulated hypotheses, 
in accordance with the following:
— Validation of (IP1) and (IP2) is achieved simultane-
ously since it refers to specific operating principles 
of a learning organization and processes that take 
place within it; 
— Validation of (IP3) is achieved by confirmatory fac-
tor analysis which certifies that a learning organiza-
tion evolution is in a close interdependence with 
the implementation of knowledge management and 
its specific processes;
— Validation of (IP4) is achieved by the fact that the 
factors derived from exploratory factor analysis 
have weights that vary according to the variables 
they contain, hence we deduce that whatever the 
variables rearrangement within factors, their influ-
ence persists per/over the whole organization.
The content of this chapter combines theoretical 
descriptions and proposals with experimental analysis 
and argumentation. Throughout intertwining theoreti-
cal descriptions and proposals with experimental analy-
sis and argumentation we debated upon concepts like 
knowledge dynamics, knowledge management or learn-
ing organization. Our aim was to shape up a different 
view upon organizational knowledge processes and of 
course to point out the critical aspects of these. The 
discussion sections were also mixed from a theoretical/
conceptual view and a pragmatic/statistical perspective. 
The research results reveal several specific aspects of 
knowledge transfer processes within the learning 
organization. The results of the research combined with 
the conclusions of this paper could successfully con-
tribute to increasing the performance of organization 
and to help them develop in the direction they want. 

 
Evaluation of Knowledge Processes Within the Learning Organization 
135
Therefore, this chapter might be of interest both for 
theoreticians and practitioners. 
Although problematic, the ideal  learning organiza-
tion seems to promise much to organizations seeking to 
change the rigid hierarchical structures, communication 
systems with restrictions and authoritarian leadership, 
as lifelong learning seems to be a great ideal. Thus we 
consider that the purpose of  knowledge management is 
to support and guide the processes within the organiza-
tion, becoming an imperative tool support.
References
Brătianu, C. (2008a), Knowledge dynamics, Review of 
Management and Economic Engineering, 7(5), Special 
Issue, 103–107.
Brătianu, C. (2008b), A dynamic structure of the organiza-
tional intellectual capital. In Knowledge Management in 
Organizations, M. Naaranoja (ed.), pp. 233–243, Vaasa: 
Vaasan Yliopisto.
Brătianu, C. (2011), Changing paradigm for knowledge 
metaphors from dynamics to thermodynamics, Systems 
Research and Behavioral Science, 28, 160–169.
Brătianu, C. (2013a), The triple helix of the organizational 
knowledge, Management Dynamics in the Knowledge 
Economy, 1(2), 207–220.
Brătianu, C. (2013b), Nonlinear integrators of the organiza-
tional 
intellectual 
capital. 
In 
Integration 
of 
Practice-Oriented Knowledge Technology: Trends and 
Perspectives, M. Fathi (ed.), pp. 3–16, Heilderberg: 
Springer.
Brătianu, C. & Orzea, I. (2010), Organizational knowledge 
creation, Management & Marketing, 5(3), 41–62.
Drucker, P. (2000), Inovare şi Spirit Întreprinzător, Bucureşti: 
Teora.
Easterby-Smith, M., Burgoyne, J., & Araujo, L. (eds.) 
(1999), Organizational Learning and the Learning 
Organization, London: Sage.
Nicolescu, O. & Nicolescu, C. (2011), Organizaţia şi 
Managementul Bazate pe Cunoştinţe, Bucureşti: PRO 
Universitaria.
Nonaka, I. (1991), The knowledge-creating company, 
Harvard Business Review, 69(6), 96–104.
Polanyi, M. (1983), The Tacit Dimension, Gloucester: Peter 
Smith.
Senge, P. M. (1990), The Fifth Discipline: The Art and 
Practice of the Learning Organization, London: Random 
House.
Simon, H. A. (1991), Bounded rationality and organizational 
learning, Organization Science, 2(1), 125–134.
Sommerville, M. & McConnel-Imbriotis, A. (2004), 
Applying the learning organization concept in a resource 
squeezed organization, Journal of Workplace Learning: 
Employee Counselling Today, 16(4), 1–15.
Stata, R. (1989), Organizational learning — the key to man-
agement innovation, Sloan Management Review, 30(3), 
63–75.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

137
Chapter 15
 Universities in Transition: Are Library Directors 
Facing Changed Demands?*
Arja Mäntykangas
Lucian Blaga University
This1 chapter focuses on the current re-organization 
trend among universities in Sweden and other countries. 
It is also related to the author’s ongoing thesis on the 
contribution of library directors to the information soci-
ety in different countries. The demands and the pressure 
on universities to increase their efficiency are high-
lighted as a driving force. In the academic world, sev-
eral conferences call for discussions about the role and 
function of universities, with titles such as “Higher 
Education: Against all Greater Inequality?”, in Finland, 
“Nordic Model in Times of Crisis: What Is at Stake?”, 
in Norway and “Universities in Transition”, in Italy. 
Obviously, there are demands for  reforms. These 
demands can also be seen as connected to needs for 
reforms in management in universities with an academic 
culture. This is an interesting phenomenon, a question 
of diverse aspects: cultural change in leadership styles 
resulting from re-organization, and the role of support 
functions of course as a part of resources of a university. 
Libraries are often included among support functions, 
but not necessarily. In this chapter I will propose con-
ceivable implications of re-organization on the changing 
roles of and qualifications required of library directors. 
The  New Public Management (NPM) movement is used 
as a theoretical framework of understanding. Even the 
* Thanks to Heather Howey, Certified Translator, for translation and 
comments.
question of visions and values is mentioned in relation 
to the idea of breaking with tradition. Some experiences 
from Sweden, Norway, and Finland are described as 
done by Almqvist in Sweden, Temmes in Finland, and 
Frølich in Norway. The idea of reform is central in this 
context and the term NPM is used to describe the move-
ment. Central themes for NPM are competition expo-
sure and the market, management by contract and 
internal control and decentralization/management by 
objectives. In this chapter NPM is discussed from the 
point of view of management and the use of common 
resources. 
1.  Ongoing Change and Issues 
Discussed in This Chapter
In this chapter, the author aims to describe changes in 
the thinking on higher education in relation to leader-
ship and management. That a critical change of some 
degree is under way in current thinking about this func-
tion is illustrated by the names of conferences, sympo-
sia and the like. One example is the conference “Nordic 
Model in Times of Crisis: What Is at Stake?” that took 
place in Norway in 2014. The key issue of this confer-
ence is whether it is even possible to still speak of a 
“Nordic model” such as has been used as a model of a 
successful welfare state. The forces of change that led 
to this issue are said to be “the pressure of rising 

138 
A. Mäntykangas
unemployment amongst young people across the globe, 
processes of increased privatization, global competition 
for talent as well as the increasing focus on more excel-
lence in knowledge production push towards greater 
differentiation”. (Source: www.nifu.no/en/nfhe).
A Finnish conference highlights a similar issue but 
in a different light. This conference, which is to take 
place in August 2014, will focus on the theme of “Higher 
Education: Against All Greater Inequality?” As pointed 
out in the conference description, Finnish higher educa-
tion has undergone significant  reform in the past decade. 
Particular emphasis is now placed on the phenomenon of 
competition — for rankings between  universities, for 
tenured positions, for better salaries, and for external 
funding — that undermines collegiality and introduces a 
focus on individuality-centred managerial approaches 
(Source: https://ktl.jyu.fi/symposium2014).
A third example is from Italy (the 27th Annual 
Consortium of Higher Education Researchers (CHER) 
Conference). This conference is called “Universities in 
Transition”. Boundaries serve as the theme of this 
conference:
One emerging issue in higher education studies organi-
zations, the institutions and the academic profession is 
changing organizational boundaries … Several signals 
of shifting boundaries can be envisaged, such as the 
replacement of permanent involvement of firms with 
research groups, networking with non-academic organi-
zations (e.g., public or private research organizations, 
firms), as well as universities participating in private 
companies or agencies … Shifting boundaries are also 
investigated as changing relationships between aca-
demic scientists and the marketplace …” (Source: http://
www.triumphgroupinternational.com/event/27thcher).
The above-mentioned examples touch on many 
issues. NPM is often mentioned in connection with 
discussions on management and supervision of univer-
sities. In the final analysis it is a matter of a shift in 
strategy, of wanting to change a university’s manage-
ment. From that it follows that fundamental values and 
visions are also being reconsidered. This chapter will 
address the following issues:
• 
Where does the management orientation often 
called NPM actually come from?
• 
What does it entail?
• 
In what way can the management mentality be 
reflected in academic libraries?
2.  Management in the Spirit 
of the NPM
Hood (1995) describes the movement toward NPM on 
the macro level. The doctrines on which management in 
the public sector is based are guided by NPM. Various 
approaches based on NPM will be discussed, below. 
According to Hood, NPM is a question of a movement 
“from policy-making to management skills, from a 
stress on process to a stress on output, from orderly 
hierarchies to an intendedly more competitive basis for 
providing public services, from fixed to variable pay 
and from a uniform and inclusive public service to a 
variant structure with more emphasis on contract provi-
sion” (p. 95).
In his conclusions, Hood (1995) finds that much of 
NPM is based on an idea of homeostatic control, and 
refers to the “clarification of goals and missions in 
advance, and then building the accountability systems 
in relation to those pre-set goals” (p. 107). He explains 
that the effects of NPM are not unambiguous; rather, 
they vary from country to country (p. 107).
2.1. Sweden
Almqvist (2006: 13) describes NPM as consisting of 
three primary theories: competition exposure and the 
market; contract management, and internal control and 
decentralization/management by objectives. On the basis 
of practical examples (with support from Hood) and the 
above, he arrives at seven general observations on NPM. 
Essentially, his conclusions regarding NPM are that it 
can work — it can lead to desirable results — but that 
implementing NPM sometimes backfires and the lack of 
improvement is worse than before the implementation. 
According to him, based on empirical observations, it 
can be safely said that NPM can also have had a positive 
effect, even though it may not have been expected [2006: 
126–127]. This aspect could be designated “unpredicta-
bility”, which is related to the fact that the interaction of 
dissimilar factors is complex. 

 
Universities in Transition 
139
The complexity of the actual circumstances is a 
complication in the application of theoretical con-
structs. A theory could reasonably be considered a 
construction based on available knowledge obtained 
through studies and proven experience? The aforemen-
tioned conclusions can also make it impossible to have 
a theory of the NPM; instead there must be several 
locally adapted theories with generalizable knowledge 
and non-generalizable edge knowledge that must be 
retrieved from the local context. “Context is King” — 
an expression that the author of this paper finds neatly 
summarizes the conclusions described by Almqvist and 
Hood. The aim of achieving efficiency and better use of 
common resources is context-dependent. Almqvist 
claims that is this true not only on the macro level but 
on the micro level as well. Almqvist addresses another 
dimension of NPM in his concluding discussion, stress-
ing that NPM is more an icon that has a value as an 
organizing symbol that helps focus the organization’s 
energy. According to him, competition, contracts and 
management can be value-laden and symbolize change 
and operational development (Almqvist: 141). 
2.2. Finland
Temmes (1998) describes NPM in Finland. In his article 
he states that NPM “does not describe individual  reform 
projects or ideas but a combination of interconnected 
reform policies and ideas which, as a whole, form an 
administrative doctrine” (p. 441). According to Temmes, 
the scientific basis of this is partly economics — the 
machinery of the welfare state has not been effective. 
One of the key ideas is managerization, that is, “the 
making of managerial know-how one of the central ele-
ments of public management” (p. 442).
Temmes identifies further critically reflective 
views: public administration can undergo significant 
changes that are ignored by media and even by aca-
demic research. He believes it is difficult to judge 
whether it is politicians or civil servants who have been 
the driving force behind these reforms, since they fre-
quently work together (p. 443). It is peculiar to Finland, 
according to Temmes, that it was the civil servants who 
played an extraordinarily important role in building up 
and defending the country’s autonomy after it had 
received a guarantee of its own autonomy. According to 
Temmes, their role and status has remained strong 
throughout the period of independence (p. 144).
Temmes (p. 449) presents a comparison of admin-
istrative policies in 1987 and 1997. It is relevant to the 
issues addressed by this chapter to look at the situation 
in 1997 — that is, closer to the first decade after 2000. 
Temmes and Kiviniemi claim that “the profession of 
public managers then being created, and there will be 
emphasis on the development should be placed to pub-
lic services on customer direction, quality and costs”. 
Attention should, according to Temmes (1998), 
be focused on the political administrative whole. He 
also identifies the culture of administration as the 
“main issue”.
2.3. Norway
Frølich (2005: 223–224) describes the implementation 
of NPM thinking in Norwegian  universities. Above, 
Temmes stressed the importance of culture. Frølich, too, 
addresses culture and cultural theory to explain value 
conflicts on the implementation of NPM in Norwegian 
universities. She believes, taking support from theories 
that different cultures can never agree as they are based 
on different premises, but that cultural theory is suitable 
to analyze the above implementation. 
The conclusions that Frølich presents are that dif-
ferent universities use arguments regarding the reform 
question. She even refers to it as a “normative mis-
match between managerialism and academic organiza-
tions (p. 228)”. The conclusion she reaches by using the 
framework of cultural theory regarding the implemen-
tation of NPM in Norwegian universities is summa-
rized with the following: firstly, promotion of NPM is 
based on the combination of two discourses — hierar-
chy and individualism. In her view, the combination 
gives added value to the established description of 
NPM as an introduction to market culture in public 
management. Secondly, she believes that NPM in 
 universities is justified by reference to a third discourse, 
egalitarianism. It reveals the complexity of the promo-
tion of this reform. It can also be viewed as that this 
reform could be justified through reasons that would 
seem to conflict with the primary ideas of NPM. 
Thirdly, the investigation shows that uniform values 
gave support to resistance to the reform. In this way, the 

140 
A. Mäntykangas
author came to the assumption that the idea in academic 
culture seemed to be in conflict with NPM. Fourthly, 
the analysis shows there is a complexity in academic 
and administrative decisions to introduce or oppose 
NPM (pp. 228–229). 
3.  Library Management
With NPM, it is, as mentioned, about competition expo-
sure and the market, management by contract and internal 
control and decentralization/management by objectives. 
The public libraries are — usually, at any rate — attached 
to their parent organizations. They are often considered as 
support functions. A support function is operated and 
monitored by the surrounding organization. How the 
library/library director asserts his or her role in  reforms, 
or strivings to achieve reform, depends on how well the 
ideas underlying the reform are understood, and how well 
the culture surrounding the local context is understood. 
Contracts imply a management approach; competition is 
a market force and cannot be excluded regardless of what 
it is called. Competition exists about libraries as idea, 
space and financial structure. Internal control and decen-
tralization/management by objectives applies to support 
functions as well, perhaps to an even higher degree sim-
ply because they are support functions. That they are 
considered as such in many cases may be culture-depend-
ent; to break such a connection in associations entails a 
change to traditional chains of thought. The library is also 
an icon. There is actually no self-evident reason why 
libraries cannot be viewed as core operations. It could 
simply be a matter of library directors noting a lack of a 
“language” in an environment characterized by theories 
from an area of competence rather than management. 
This requires in-depth “language courses” and a desire to 
analyze to understand and “localize” the use of resources 
(human, technical, financial, knowledge-related) in as 
efficient and effective manner as possible. 
One example of reforms in the library world into 
which NPM thinking seeps is the amalgamations of 
libraries that are occurring in Finland, with the Tritonia 
Academic Library in Vaasa, Fellmania Information and 
Library Services in the Lahti Regional Consortium, 
and Lappeenranta Academic Library and the Lapland 
University Consortium. Palonen et al. (2013) describes 
this development as “integration,” as “joint libraries.” 
NPM thinking can be discerned in the conclusions. The 
authors contend as follows:
Joint libraries for  universities and polytechnics serve 
both sectors equally. They produce joint services and 
especially tailored services according to needs and pos-
sibilities. Administratively, the existence of joint librar-
ies is based on contracts between universities and 
jointly compiled statutes (2013: 240).
The authors’ financial discussion also addresses the 
components of costs, personnel, and decentralization/
centralization. All of these are central issues in 
management. 
4. Summary
The term “managerial” has been used above in confer-
ence descriptions, management and supervision, and even 
money, market, private, competition, strategy, set. These 
terms also naturally belong to management theories and 
thinking. At the above conferences, it is implicitly all 
about a threat that must be averted. The averting may take 
place by opposing the central themes of NPM — compe-
tition exposure and the market; contract management and 
internal control and decentralization/management by 
objectives simplified, it should be possible to summarize 
this as the central aspect of the force field in the questions 
articulated in the aforementioned conferences. 
In this chapter, NPM has been the object of close 
descriptions based on earlier studies. Almqvist and 
Hood stress that NPM operates in a complex situation, 
a situation that varies from country to country, as well 
as on the micro level. Almqvist address NPM as icon 
and symbol, unifying and focusing. There is of course 
an opening for another type of interpretation in 
Almqvist’s description. The problems involved in 
reform demands and demands of efficiency-enhance-
ment may vary from one context to another and be 
based on different grounds.
NPM identifies and promotes the attitude that there is 
also a financial reality and that the common resources 
could be used more efficiently. Research shows and some 
current conferences suggest, in line with this research, that 
the NPM movement also generates counter movements. 
Library management is facing the demands of knowing 
two libraries: one for management and one for libraries.

 
Universities in Transition 
141
References
Almqvist, R. (2006), New Public Management — Om 
Konkurrensutsättning, Kontrakt och Kontroll [New 
Public Management: Competition, Contracts and 
Control], Liber: Malmö. 
Frølich, N. (2005), Implementation of new public management 
in Norwegian universities, European Journal of Education, 
40(2), 223–234.
Hood, C. (1995), The new public management in the 1980s: 
Variations on a theme, account, Accounting, Organization 
and Society, 20(2/3), 93–109.
Palonen, V., Blinnikka, S., Ohvo, U. & Parikka, S. (2013), 
Joint academic libraries in Finland: Different models of 
integration, Advances in Librarianship, 37, 223–241. 
Temmes, M. (1998), Finland and new public management, 
International Review of Administrative Sciences, 
441–456.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

143
Chapter 16
 Knowledge Management in the Information 
Society — Case Study on  e-Services
Monica Anghel
National Institute for Research and Development 
in Informatics — ICI Bucharest
The era we live in is often referred to as the “age of 
information” or the “age of the  information society”, 
therefore “information science”, “information manage-
ment”, and “knowledge management” have emerged as 
highly valued disciplines, as a logical reaction to the 
requirements of this age. In this context, universities, 
learning centers, various educational institutions, and 
research institutions all over the world, have revised 
their curricula/adapted their research interest domains 
in accordance with the demands of the new century and 
defined the discipline as “Information and Document 
Management”. The most imperative explanation behind 
this conversion has been the boundless utilization of 
computerized data and machine based engineering. 
Nowadays, at the point when a lot of data is made 
accessible online and when the data engineering rela-
tionship is at such a great level as it has never been all 
around its history, data and report administration divi-
sions throughout learning institutions, hold an extremely 
imperative place in helping and making the adjustment 
procedure to these new times a simpler one.
The purpose of the creation and introduction of the 
“Information and Document Management” discipline 
(within learning institutions) is to prepare the labor 
force fundamental for “knowledge administration” that 
includes the aggregation, association, access, and dis-
tribution of data and data assets. This labor force is 
taught to end up data and report chiefs who will oversee 
libraries, documents, documentation focuses, data 
focuses, and so forth; they will seriously utilize data 
and 
correspondence 
innovations 
(Information 
Technology and Communications (IT&C)), they will 
have the capacity to show systems and strategies 
required to get to data, and they will have the capacity 
to assess fields with respect to the regulation of and 
access to data science with a business and administra-
tion approach.
1. Context and Premises
Knowledge Management (KM) is a concept and a term 
that rose to prominence approximately two decades 
ago, roughly in the 1990s. To put it simply, one might 
say that it means organizing an organization’s informa-
tion and knowledge comprehensively.
Early on within the KM movement, T. Davenport1 
offered the much quoted definition: “Knowledge man-
agement is the process of capturing, distributing, and 
effectively using knowledge.” Out of the stack of exist-
ing definitions, this one has the virtue of being simple, 
stark, and to the point. 
1 Davenport (1994).

144 
M. Anghel
A few years later, consultants of the Gartner Group2 
created a second definition of KM, which is perhaps one 
of the most frequently cited one (Duhon, 1998)3: 
“ Knowledge management is a discipline that promotes an 
integrated approach to identifying, capturing, evaluating, 
retrieving, and sharing all of an enterprise’s information 
assets. These assets may include databases, documents, 
policies, procedures, and previously un-captured exper-
tise and experience in individual workers.”
Both definitions share a very organizational, and 
very corporate orientation, since KM, verifiably in any 
event, is basically about dealing with the information of 
and in associations.
However, in this day and age, in this perpetual 
paradigm change, we can now argue that KM is not 
only the attribute of private organizations and/or pub-
lic institutions, but it is also making an impact within 
the scholarly world, as many learning institutions 
within Europe and have included this subject in their 
curricula. Whether it may be entitled as “knowledge 
management” or “document management” or “infor-
mation management”, these names all reflect the same 
2 http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/km-knowledge-management.
3 http://management.simplicable.com/management/new/10-knowledge-
management-definitions.
purpose: teaching students (the next generations) 
about the importance of collecting, storing and sharing 
valuable, re-usable information assets, from which all 
can benefit from.
The4 operational birthplace of KM, as the term is 
seen today, emerged inside the consulting community 
and from that point the standards of KM were some-
what quickly spread by the counseling associations to 
different controls. The counseling associations imme-
diately understood the capability of the “intranet” kind 
of the “internet” by connecting together their topo-
graphically scattered and information based associa-
tions. When having picked up skill in how to exploit 
intranets to join over their associations and to impart 
and oversee data and learning, they then comprehended 
that the mastery they had picked up was an item that 
could be sold to different associations. The new result 
obviously required a name, and the name picked, or in 
any event the name they landed at, was Knowledge 
Management.
The timing was favorable, as the excitement for 
intellectual capital in the 1980s, had prepared for the 
distinguishment of data and information as fundamen-
tal stakes for any association.
Perhaps the most central thrust in KM is to capture 
and make information available, so it can be used by 
others in the organization, the information and knowl-
edge that is in people’s heads as it were, and that has 
never been explicitly set down.
4 http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-Luxembourg/Local%20
Assets/Images/Business%20Graphics/Channels/km/lu_kmgraph_
400x400_160412.jpg.
Fig. 1.  
Source: http://brainstormingbusiness.files.wordpress.com/2013/11/blog.gif.
Build
    extra
        knowledge on
important topics
and divest
obsolete
knowledge
       Assess
     future
information and
  knowledge needs
          to fit the
        organisation’s
             strategy
Sharing of knowledge
and insights with other
members of the
organisation
   Gather
       additional
            information and
      enrich the deliverable
with more insights
to increase its
added value
Search and collect
basic information
from various sources
Use
and exploit
     the collected
        information to
            respond to the
              client’s request
Knowledge
items
Co
ll
ec
t
Us
e
E
n
r
i
c
h
A
s
se
ss
S
h
a
r
e
B
ui
ld
/s
us
ta
in
/d
iv
es
t
1
2
3
4
5
6
Fig. 2.  
Source: “Deloitte” Luxemburg.4

 
Knowledge Management in the Information Society 
145
What is still probably the best table to try to set 
forth what KM is constituted of, is the mnemonic one 
developed by IBM for the use of their KM consultants, 
based on the distinction between collecting “stuff” — 
content and connecting people, presented here with 
minor modifications:
The mnemonic table is useful because it places a 
focus on knowledge as an actual asset, rather than as 
something intangible. In so doing, it enables the organi-
zation to better protect and exploit what it knows, and 
to improve and focus its knowledge development 
efforts to match its needs. 
In other words:
• 
It helps organizations learn from past mistakes and 
successes; 
• 
It better exploits existing knowledge assets by 
 re-deploying them in areas where the organization 
stands to gain something, e.g., using knowledge 
from one department to improve or create a product 
in another department, modifying knowledge from 
a past process to create a new solution, etc.; 
• 
It promotes a long-term focus on developing the 
right competencies and skills and removing obso-
lete knowledge;
• 
It enhances the organization’s ability to innovate; 
• 
It enhances the organization’s ability to protect its 
key knowledge and competencies from being lost 
or copied.
Unfortunately, KM is an area in which organiza-
tions/institutions are often reluctant to invest because it 
can be expensive to implement properly, and it is 
extremely difficult to determine a specific return on 
investment (ROI). 
Moreover, KM is a concept, the definition of which 
is not universally accepted, and for example, within IT 
one often sees a much shallower, information-oriented 
approach. 
However, as stated in the beginning of this article, 
the very premise of this investigation is the increased 
degree of introduction of this concept within learning 
institutions as a course. Therefore, even though KM is 
not a domain in which firms are willing to invest, uni-
versities are (as it seems to appear) the new promoters 
of the KM concept and are quite interested in teaching 
students about this discipline, as are students interested 
in learning about it — as reports have shown, more and 
more of the young generation take and graduate this 
course.
2.  Knowledge Management 
in  e-Services
2.1. Context
Nowadays, more information is uploaded on the 
World Wide Web than information has been produced 
since the beginning of recorded human  history! Thus, 
the Internet is literally “bombarded” with over 4Tb 
of video, audio and written information on a daily 
basis.
Along with this huge quantity of uploaded informa-
tion, we are also experiencing the changing of human 
Table 1.  
Collecting (Stuff) & Codification
Connecting (People) & Personalization
Directed information and knowledge 
search 
Exploit
Databases, external and internal content 
 architecture information service support 
(training required) data mining best practices/
lessons learned/after action analysis
(HARVEST)
Community & learning; directories, “yellow 
pages”; (expertise locators)/findings & 
 facilitating tools, groupware response teams
(HARNESS)
Serendipity and browsing 
Explore
Cultural support current awareness profiles 
and databases selection of items for alerting 
purposes/push data mining best practices
(HUNTING)
Cultural support spaces — libraries & 
lounges (literal & virtual), cultural support, 
groupware travel & meeting attendance
(HYPOTHESIZE)
Source: Tom Short, Senior consultant, Knowledge Management, IBM Global Services.

146 
M. Anghel
behavior, seen as how, society is changing at a much 
faster pace and adapting abilities are the most sought 
after in this day and age. Therefore, we have seen the 
dawn of the “ digital natives”5 — children younger than 
2/3 years of  age that can handle an electronic device/
gadget much faster and much better than young adults 
that were born in the 1980s for example. 
People from all walks of life, and regardless of age, 
can now pay taxes on the internet, read their news, and 
find out important information about the weather on 
Internet, at a global level.
More than that, within the European Union, thanks 
to the  European Commission’s initiatives and co-
financing programs, citizens can also benefit from elec-
tronic public services. Ever since 2009, the European 
Commission has co-financed five Large Scale Projects 
(LSPs) in five different domains that have steadily risen 
the level of digital awareness and strived to bridge the 
digital divide within the European Union (EU).
The LSPs develop practical solutions tested in real 
government service cases across Europe. 
Many public services such as personal documents, 
tax claims, company registration or value added tax 
(VAT) are available online but this is not always the 
case across borders. Just like digital services in the pri-
vate sector, cross-border digital public services are 
building blocks to a Connected Continent and a 
real Digital Single Market.
LSPs have been developed and run under the 
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) 
Policy Support Program in five main areas; eID, ePro-
curement, eBusiness, eHealth, and eJustice to engage 
public authorities, service providers and research cent-
ers across the EU.
Seven LSPs are piloting a number of solutions, or 
building blocks, that enable cross-border digital services 
5 http://workdesign.co/2012/02/digital-natives-a-tech-savvy-
generation-enters-the-workplace.
in the above-mentioned policy areas. Each block con-
sists of a number of components (common code), uses a 
number of standards and specifications, and all share a 
key characteristic: they are intended to be taken up as 
part of online services which make these online services 
‘cross-border enabled’. To expand the LSPs and to make 
the building blocks re-usable in other policy areas is one 
of the challenges for the future in order to fully imple-
ment cross-border digital public services.
Four such LSPs are still currently running:
• 
e-SENS — moving services forward;
• 
e-CODEX — making justice faster;
• 
epSOS — making healthcare better; 
• 
STORK 2.0 — making access smarter through a 
single European electronic identification and 
authentication area.
and three are completed:
• 
SPOCS (making business easier) has finished, and 
offers its Starter-Kit.
• 
PEPPOL (eProcurement) has been transferred to 
the non-profit international association Open 
PEPPOL AISBL to sustain the developed struc-
tures and results.
• 
STORK (making access smarter) has been finished 
but results are taken-up by STORK 2.0.
These solutions are bringing down the digital bor-
ders in Europe, many years after the physical barriers 
were already removed.
2.2.  Case Study — Electronic Simple 
European Networked Services (e-SENS) 
Motto: “People and businesses should be able to trans-
act within a borderless Digital Single Market, that is 
the value of the Internet.”
Neelie Kroes
e-SENS is a new large-scale project that embodies 
the idea of European Digital Market development 
through innovative ICT solutions. The project will con-
solidate, improve, and extend technical solutions to 
Fig. 3.  
Source: http://www.immigrationpolicy2.eu/sites/default/files/picture.jpg. 

 
Knowledge Management in the Information Society 
147
foster electronic interaction with public administrations 
across the EU. 
Travelling, doing business or living abroad often 
involves administrative procedures. e-SENS will facili-
tate cross-border processes within the EU by:
• 
Making it easier for companies to set up business 
electronically.
• 
Enabling electronic procurement procedures for 
businesses.
• 
Creating seamless access to EU legal systems.
• 
Making it easier to use healthcare services abroad 
in cases of emergency.
The project will develop the digital infrastructure 
for improving the quality of public services in EU. 
e-SENS will support the implementation of European 
policies, in particular the Digital Agenda for Europe. 
2.3.  Knowledge Management in e-SENS
Desire grows to embed KM in the flow of work, as this 
represents the next step for the efficiency improvement 
of online collaborative work on European funded 
projects.
KM’s technology portfolio expanded, and within 
the project, team members use the following platforms 
for collaborative work:
• 
Basecamp6 dominates as a standard KM platform;
• 
Enterprise social networking (Facebook, LinkedIn) 
and microblogging (Twitter) are also firmly repre-
sented and made use of — with a special team 
member as a Social Media Officer especially dedi-
cated to this activity;
• 
Mobile access: BSCW7 — work document server 
of the Ministry of Justice of North-Rhine Westphalia 
is firmly used as a sharing platform regarding con-
fidential documents;
• 
Using analytics to tie results to KM.
6 https://basecamp.com/.
7 https://public.bscw.de/pub/.
Fig. 4.  Knowledge management practices along the hype cycle
Source: http://www.pumacy.de/en/knowledge_management_trends.html. 

148 
M. Anghel
3. Conclusions
3.1.  Knowledge management trends 
2014–2023: What practitioners 
use and visionaries expect
The trend study of Pumacy Technologies AG answers 
the question of which knowledge management 
approaches have a chance to succeed in practice. The 
authors have examined all practices for their applica-
tion and distribution by applying a hype cycle approach. 
The hype cycle illustrates the different phases of public 
attention that an innovation goes through during market 
introduction. For each method and technology the chart 
shows whether it is already being used in practice or is 
still subject to development. In addition to this data, the 
study shows when the different knowledge manage-
ment trends will become established. The respondents 
are all knowledge management practitioners and vision-
aries, most of them in managing or executive positions 
in large companies.
The Hype-Cycle-Study on knowledge management 
trends by Pumacy Technologies AG shows that most of 
the examined knowledge management practices have 
already reached operative corporate use. The study’s 
authors conclude that the still-young discipline of knowl-
edge management is becoming a part of operational pro-
cesses across industries — at least in larger companies. 
Most practitioners generally agreed about classifi-
cation of the knowledge management practices. Some 
practices were subject to high variance (spread of the 
answers) as illustrated in the respective sub-chapters. 
Therefore, four specific categories were developed 
to classify the practices as follows according to their 
results on the market — based on the hype cycle of 
Gartner Inc.
Our new information era is characterized by the 
exciting transition from single-node to Cloud Computing, 
from fixed-line to mobile Internet, from discrete to Big 
Data, and from the physical to the virtual world. 
Worldwide, we enjoy 24/7 mobile access regard-
less of enterprise network boundaries. Cloud Computing 
technologies enable on-demand service provisioning at 
lightning speed, and social network technology has 
turned precision marketing into reality. Security threats 
are at the very top of the concerns to be considered in 
this new era. 
Visualizing the entire domain of knowledge and 
tracking the latest developments of an important disci-
pline are challenging tasks for researchers, professors 
and teachers. Thus, this article tries to build an intellec-
tual structure by examining some publications, blogs 
and vlogs8 in the KM field beginning from 1995 up to 
2010. 
Document co-citation analysis, pathfinder network 
and strategic diagram techniques are applied to provide 
a dynamic view of the evolution of knowledge manage-
ment research trends, as this article aims to provide a 
systematic and objective means of exploring the devel-
opment of the KM discipline, and its introduction 
within various universities across the globe. 
This chapter not only drew its findings from a 
decent amount of data sets, but also presented a longi-
tudinal analysis of the development of the KM related 
studies. The results of this study reflects that the cover-
age of key KM papers has expanded into a broad spec-
trum of disciplines, including European funded research 
projects in various domains — such as  e-Services. 
References
Davenport, T. H. (1994), Saving IT’s soul: Human-centered 
information management, Harvard Business Review, 
March–April, 119–131. Available at http://www.knowl-
edge-management-tools.net/about_me.html; http://www.
knowledge-management-tools.net/why-is-knowledge-
management-useful.html#ixzz2wLHSJVyM; http://www.
pumacy.de/en/knowledge_management_trends.html; 
http://workdesign.co/2012/02/digital-natives-a-tech-
savvy-generation-enters-the-workplace/.
Davenport, T. H. & Leibold, S. (2006), Voelpel, Strategic 
management in the innovation economy. Strategy 
approaches and tools for dynamic innovation capabili-
ties, Wiley, p. 441.
Davenport, T. H. & Prusak, L. (2000), Working knowledge: 
How organizations manage what they know, Harvard 
Business School Press, 240.
Davenport, T. H. (2008), Enterprise 2.0: The new, new 
knowledge management? Harvard Business Online 
(February 19). 
Liu, S. (2014), Agile networks providing unmatched intelli-
gent defense, ICT Insights, 9 (March).
8 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Video_blog.

 
Knowledge Management in the Information Society 
149
Lee, M. R. & Chen, T.T. (2012), Revealing research themes 
and trends in knowledge management: From 1995 
to 2010, Knowledge-Based Systems Magazine, 28, 
pp. 47–58. 
Malhotra, Y. From information management to knowledge 
management: Beyond the “Hi-tech hidebound” systems. 
In Knowledge Management for the Information 
Professional, K. Srikantaiah & M.E.D. Koenig (eds.), 
pp. 37–61, Medford: Information Today Inc.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

151
Chapter 17
Risk Awareness as Key Success Factor 
for more Efficient Management for Local  Public 
Administrations
Markus Bodemann, Marieta Olaru, and Ionela Carmen Pirnea
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
Since the last 30 years public administration is dominated 
by the notion and realization of reforms and reengineer-
ing of objectives, outputs, and processes.  Risk manage-
ment is one of the private sector management tools for 
evaluating current and future situations for transferring to 
public sector; it is legally demanded and applied in the 
most private organizations. Although there are similari-
ties, there are differences between both private and public 
manager also. Decisions under no uncertainty combined 
with probabilities and potential damages are often made 
with inappropriate knowledge or awareness about the 
consequences. Missing risk awareness and the traditional 
kind of behavior of public managers are attempts to 
explain the yearly deficits in the public balance sheets and 
the rising debt level. Regulations or models similar to 
private sector are not introduced for  risk management, but 
will contribute if appropriate applied.
1. Introduction
Since the last 30 years public administration is domi-
nated by the notion and realization of reforms and 
reengineering of objectives, outputs and processes. 
Risk management is one of the private sector manage-
ment tools for evaluating current and future situations 
for transferring to public sector; it is legally demanded 
and applied in the most private organizations. Although 
there are similarities but also differences between both 
private and public manager, decisions under no uncer-
tainty combined with probabilities and potential dam-
ages are often made with inappropriate knowledge or 
awareness about the consequences. Missing risk aware-
ness and the traditional kind of behavior of public man-
agers are attempts to explain the yearly deficits in the 
public balance sheets and the rising debt level. 
Regulations or models similar to private sector are not 
introduced for risk management, but will contribute if 
appropriate applied.
2.  Current Approaches Regarding the 
Risk Management in Public Sector 
New Public Management (NPM) is based on the 
assumption that within limits characters from private 
sector could contribute to more effectiveness and  effi-
ciency in public sector. O’Flynn (2007: 353–366) 
described the characters as follows: 
• 
Results and managerial responsibility;
• 
Economic principles;
• 
Modern management theory and practices;
• 
Service delivery.

152 
M. Bodemann, M. Olaru & I. C. Pirnea
Bodemann (2011, 2014), Novell (2009), Rainey & 
Bozeman (2000), and Alison (1980) have shown that 
according to ongoing comparisons of both sectors, vari-
ous management tools have been transferred to fit in 
public sector. Because of the tasks of societies that they 
depend on, survival and ongoing prosperity the tool of 
 risk management can be used in  public administration 
as well. From different angles different definitions are 
used for risk: one of the more technical notion comes 
from Cottin & Döhler (2013: 5): For them risk is a valu-
able object which is subject to a potential future altera-
tion applying to period of time or the determined 
decision situation. Buehler et al. (2009: 3) suggest that 
risk management is considering both sides of a situa-
tion with no certainty, recognizing an opportunity to 
create value. 
 Efficiency in the context of this work is used in the 
meaning to consider deviations of  public value in 
the case of potential gains and losses. Risk is used in 
the meaning of opportunities/chances and dangers/ 
threats as desired or undesired results of a decision 
under no certainty (Fig. 1). 
In private sector risk management is determined by 
different rules for auditing and for appropriate transpar-
ency. For example a rare risk management framework is 
demanded for New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) 
enlisted companies by the Sarbanes–Oxley Act (SOX), 
for German private sector companies it is codified by the 
German Corporate Sector Supervision and Transparency 
Act (KonTraG) of 1998. Although in Germany since the 
beginning of the 21st century, in Switzerland since 
the 70’s of the last century, and currently in Austria the 
accrual accounting system is introduced, concrete deter-
mination of risk management is absent. At least the 
municipal code (GO) of North Rhine-Westphalia in 
Germany includes a short notice about content of a risk 
recognition system. While the strategic management in 
private sector tries to fit between one’s organization and 
the external environment to operate, main focus in pub-
lic sector remains the control of tax revenues, sustain 
operation and justice and fairness according to Moore 
(2013: 33). So the National Audit Office in the United 
Kingdom (2000: 3) states that: “the main focus of 
 private sector risk management is on maintaining and 
enhancing profitability — in contrast in departments the 
focus is on implementation of objectives and services to 
the citizenry.” 
3.  Measurement of Risk and Efficiency 
in Public Administration
The term and the consequences for public administra-
tion in the case of decisions under no certainty are simi-
lar to private sector. Political and societal outcomes are 
more important, the utility for society, for the citizenry. 
Alford & Hughes (2008) considered that public value is 
a matter of who consumes it. Furthermore Arrow & 
Lind (1970) mentioned that risk preferences must be 
established in accordance with other evidence of social 
objectives. Benefits and costs depend upon how large is 
each individual’s share of these benefits and costs 
according to Arrow & Lind (1970). Hansson (2002: 27) 
put the grade on risk in a ranking: the last in the list is 
the best fitting and reflects the situation an individual 
stands for: “Nobody should be exposed to risk unless it 
is part of an equitable social system for risk taking that 
works to her advantage.” 
A risk imposition is acceptable in the case that the 
total benefits that it gives risk outweigh the total costs 
or disadvantages. The numerical determination will 
give a better notion of the exposure to risk, with both 
sides of a possible development. Gomez & Meynhardt 
(2009) mentioned that the society has to accept that 
public administration has to search and use new ways 
to restore trust in the processing the output and the 
 outcome and their measurement of risks. Risk manage-
ment for public administration will be ineffective with-
out a convergence considering tools to measure expected 
and undesired outcomes, especially the numerical sta-
tus. Expressed by a measurable value of public value 
and/or economic values in currency is useful for an 
analysis and as orientation for public managers and 
Fig. 1.  Relationship of risk and outcomes
Source: Monahan (2008).

 
Risk Awareness as Key Success Factor 
153
politicians. According to Hohan et al. (2011: 250) “the 
manager of risk informs permanently the leaders of the 
organization and it will brief them on the risks identi-
fied and actions seeking approval for the treatment of 
these risks”. 
4.  Research Methodology Applied for 
Defining the Limits for Transfers 
and Loans by Private Sector
In order to analyze the limits for transfers and borrowings 
by private sector, the following steps have been done:
• 
Literature review on the current status of scientific 
literature about  risk management in  public 
administration;
• 
Survey based on a questionnaire during 2009–2012 
in 30 selected local public administrations in 
Austria (5), Germany (23), and Switzerland (2);
• 
Identification of the limits for transfers and borrow-
ings by private sector. 
5. Research Results
(a)  Risk means to have a change to gain something as 
desired result
Considering the origin and fundamental objectives and 
function of the public sector, i.e., to contribute to a 
steady increase of welfare state, gain and loss have dif-
ferent meanings and consequences. The question occurs 
what and who are affected. For example the US Public 
Accounts Committee (1994) predicted in 1994 that 
reduction of investments in highways will save a lot of 
money, but on the long run this decision could lead a 
reduction of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) by 
3.5% and a 2.2% increase in unemployment. 
Decisions affect the society as a whole and collec-
tively. Just the results of the decision can affect one as 
part of the society. The effects of a decision are directed 
not to the organization itself. Therefore the organiza-
tion itself is not affected, only the public managers or 
employees as part of the society but not as part of the 
organization. The outcome of a decision will not hit the 
internal construct. That differs from private sector, 
where decisions of strategy have effects to the 
organization itself. In addition desired results are 
directly linked to legal and political determination. 
Grades of freedom to act freely are very limited. 
As Mussari (1996) already 15 years ago stated that 
the local governments believe to find the reason and the 
justification for their existence within themselves; he 
suggested that the ramification of decisions made under 
no certainty and consequences to bear will not endan-
ger the existence of a department or a local administra-
tion, neither the functional leaders nor the politicians. 
What will be desired and undesired results depends on 
the expectation on the decision level. 
It will be too complex to discuss the relationship of 
output and outcome and the structure to communicated 
and process individual and collective values and interests. 
That should be discussed in further considerations about 
goals and values for private and public organizations in 
the context of measuring of the impact of risks of both.
(b)  The manager has to be in a decision situation 
within a freedom to choose
Rules and regulation provide a framework, what allows 
relatively limited freedom to act, based on the Weberian 
Bureaucratic Model. This model works with fixed and 
determined processes and the tendency of objectivity 
and fairness, according to Weber (2006). Without the 
authorization for fast and autonomous separated deci-
sions, the classical function of a public manager is to 
execute orders and follow regulations while implement-
ing governmental programs.
Different to private sector urgent and important 
decision and opportunities are delegated to the priority 
of the political mandate. This leads to the conclusion 
that risk management in public administration is more 
focused to pure risks, in the meaning to avoid and to be 
prepared for situations with exclusive negative conse-
quences, regarding operations or financials.
One effective improvement would be to determine 
indicators to provide the managers with appropriate 
authorization to decide in the parliamentarian or politi-
cal majored way (Fig. 2). 
(c) Managers focus on rational behavior
Decisions to make under recognition of uncertain 
developments and influences have to be based on a 
rational behavior by the managers. In private sector this 
is amongst others the sustainable operation and 

154 
M. Bodemann, M. Olaru & I. C. Pirnea
existence of the organization or enterprise. Main focus 
in private sector is based and measured on yearly prof-
its, increased market shares or other indicators. On 
governmental level to local administration it has to be 
increasing welfare and sustainable operations to pro-
vide public services and products. These objectives are 
measurable by economic indicators, like average 
income, employment rate or economic growth on 
 federal level. Similar to the question of desired results 
remains the answer to the question what is rational 
behavior: On a superficial way, following political pro-
grams and executing mandatory tasks is a kind of 
rational behavior, based on the traditional paradigm of 
implementation of political ground plans, as O’Flynn 
states (2007: 360). But rational behavior is endangered 
by a more individual oriented rational behavior. O’Flynn 
(2007: 355) has also shown that Boyne (1998), Walsh 
(1995) and Rosly (1995) complain on bureaucracy that 
leads to resource wastage and budget maximization in 
the pursuit of power, status, income, ideology, patron-
age, discretionary power and ease of management. 
These downsides of bureaucracy produce allocative 
inefficiency and oversupply. 
(d)  The manager handles based on a specific 
information structure and validated inputs
Excuses are partly based on the vision that the public 
sector has to handle unique projects in unique environ-
ments, considering planning, financing, steering, final-
izing and controlling. To cope with this situation 
Flyvberg (2007) advocates the “Reference Class Model” 
for orientation and for better evaluation of potential 
threats or ramifications in the case of undesired devia-
tion from the planned path, concerning time and budget. 
Loevenich (2011) demands a concentration and standard 
of data processing and publishing, oriented on Basel II 
or the Standards of the German Minimum Requirements 
for  Risk Management (MaRisk). Knight’s (2006) sepa-
ration is used to distinct between different stages in a 
decision situation. Risk combines a known probability 
and an expected gain or loss (Fig. 3). 
That leads to a classification of decisions to make 
and a comparison with already executed steps to get a 
better estimation of future ramifications. For a situation 
under uncertainty other ways for estimation are neces-
sary, although all of the results will remain vague.
(e)  The manager is forced to decide future-oriented 
and active
In a case of a decision under no certainty, the manager 
has to act in a way including freedom to choose. 
Because of the combination of legal framework, poli-
tics and procedural determination that kind of freedom 
is organization-wide limited. Priority and privilege of 
politicians are involved in almost every notable deci-
sion, partly directly linked to a process of involving 
politics for further decisions. Because the  public 
administration is an executive organ there is a regula-
tory reservation to make decision of one’s own. This is 
intentionally given by the privilege of the politicians 
as representatives of the citizenry by the constituency; 
further they are elected to compress individual to col-
lective interests. Van der Wal et al. (2008) proved in an 
empirical research that the values. a public manager 
applies executing his tasks, differ from the managers 
in private sector. First accountability is ranked in the 
meaning of acting willingly to justify and explain 
actions to the relevant stakeholder, in the kind of 
demand of an explanation. Similar results Pečarič 
(2013) presents in his research considering applied 
Fig. 2.  Influence and pressure groups for public administration
Source: Developed by the authors, based on interviews flanking the 
questionnaires.
Influence and pressure groups for public administration
Markets for
services/
products
Citizen/
citizenry
Inhabitans
Public administration
as institution and
function
Public–
private
partnership
EU/federal/
state
government
Private
business
Clubs/
associations,
interst groups
Politicians/
political
streams
Fig. 3.  Distinction between certainty and uncertainty
Source: Knight (2006). 
Certainty
Certain future
developments
Risk
known volume of gain or loss
and known probability
Uncertainty
Not known gain or loss,
not known probability

 
Risk Awareness as Key Success Factor 
155
values in private and public sector. But accountability 
has another meaning than the expected responsibility 
as the explanation of SOX or KonTraG demands. This 
specific quality affects the risk awareness as funda-
mental character for an effective  risk management.
(f)  There has to be an acceptable relationship between 
reward and loss
Alteration means a deviation from the predicted and 
desired path. In the case of a decision situation the 
deviation in a positive way means a reward, in a nega-
tive way a loss. Losses in the meaning of risk are 
human, financial, and material kind, but also nonmate-
rial significance, for example trust and reputation. All 
consequences, material or nonmaterial, have to been 
taken into consideration in the decision process. For 
private sector, economic values are priority; those pro-
vide existence and development. Especially material 
losses or rewards have another meaning to public 
administration caused by the model of funding activi-
ties and products, and services. In Bozeman’s (2007) 
opinion this leads further to the evaluation and com-
parison of economic and  public values. 
(g)  Acceptance of risk has to be oriented to objective 
and goals of an organization
The acceptance of risk in  public administration is on a 
cross road: Should the public administration be enabled 
to search for opportunities under acceptance of a threat 
in the meaning of loss can occur? 
Coupon swaps leasing was publicly discussed in 
Germany over the last years. The use of this instrument 
had caused several millions of losses for the public sec-
tor. In the discussion about the authorization of public 
managers, in this case of the Chief Financial Officers 
(CFO or former treasurer) to invest in that kind of not 
certain bank transactions, they are not accused and 
blamed for choosing, but they are mainly accused for 
an obvious insufficient research and knowledge for that 
very complex coupon swaps. Similar, but more ori-
ented to increase local public, utility guarantees are 
given for investing; for example new sport grounds or 
associations as substitutes of administrative services. 
The given guarantees are taken as acceptable loss in 
comparison to an expected potential increase of public 
utility (Table 1).
Because of the objectives it sounds inappropriate to 
discuss reward and loss, because of the statutory task 
the financial frame should enable to provide the legal 
obligations. A smaller part should be used for individ-
ual, local, and political targets or programs. Losses in 
the meaning of risk management could be human, 
financial, and material resources, all direct or indirect. 
In this abstract consideration all losses will lead, at 
least, to financial effects; costs for restoration, costs for 
expanding projects or routine duties. 
(h) The organization uses measurable objectives
As pointed out above performance measurement is an 
ongoing discussion according to Van Thiel & Leeuw 
(2002). Consequences in a concrete numerical value or 
ranking are hard to measure. First because measurement 
of output in public sector is hard to define; but on the 
other hand the outcome of decisions have a different 
impact to each individual in the citizenry. The citizenry 
and therefore the representative of public interest is an 
inhomogeneous complex subject. Sensors and indica-
tors for measurement will lead to diffuse results. 
Without steady surveys and scientific fitting indicators 
the ramification of a decision are hard to measure with 
abstract results. The introduction of quality reports as 
flanking measurement during the introduction of the 
German Diagnostic Related Groups (gDRGs) is one 
Table 1.  Given guarantees in proportion to annual budget
Guarantees given to third persons
n = 13
Total amount 
of given 
 guarantees (€)
Annual 
budget (€)
Proportion 
to annual 
budget (%)
 1.
10.316
48,781.000
0.1
 2.
50.000
4,000.000
1.3
 3.
574.000
35,000.000
1.6
 4.
7.262838
350,000.000
2.1
 5.
2,400.000
86,500.000
2.8
 6.
15,000.000
204,000.000
7.4
 7.
1,900.000
24,056.000
7.9
 8.
23,422.000
200,000.000
117
 9.
35,602.724
210,000.000
17.0
10.
4,500.000
20,000.000
22.5
11.
25,100.000
45,000.000
55.8
12.
22,825.471
37,000.000
61.7
13.
99,500.000
76,000.000
130.9

156 
M. Bodemann, M. Olaru & I. C. Pirnea
example to get information of accomplishment of 
expectations of customers, in this case patients. O’Flynn 
(2007) offers the expression of collective preferences. 
The political level mediates expressions of collectively 
determined preferences. That leads to the notion what 
the citizenry determines as valuable. Orientation to pure 
numerical indicators is an alternative, but it neglects the 
main focus to improve welfare. Unemployment rate, 
average income and others are valuable indicators and 
have to be considered to analyze and process the public 
interest. Using the term  public value and the expected 
deviations as gain or loss is one alternative for using 
internal and external benchmarks. 
(i) The manager is held responsible
 Public administration is a system of organized non-
responsibility. With this provocative assumption Banner 
already in 1991 described his impression of responsi-
bility in public organizations. Banner summarizes the 
personal involvement from the initial point of a deci-
sion to the evaluation of the outcomes. Moore (2013) 
demands in his model of public value a sharper focus to 
outcomes of government agencies and to call both man-
agers and employees to account for productivity. 
Similar to Van der Wal et al. (2008) and their approach 
to compare private and public sector managerial values: 
They use the term accountability as act willingly to 
justify and explain. In private sector under ideal condi-
tions the manager is held responsible for the ramifica-
tion of a decision once made. For example, SOX was 
especially introduced to bind the board; explicit 
acknowledgement and confirmation in the yearly report 
is demanded to underline the responsibility and to 
avoid any evasive action from being held responsible 
according to some authors like Lander (2004) or 
Bainbridge (2007). Because of the split authority of 
politics and administration, responsibility is seldom to 
locate and to allocate to a function or process. 
(j)  There are tools to influence the development and 
the range of probabilities, rewards, and losses
The settlement of different strategies is depending on 
the grade of influence and the grade of variability of the 
given goals by the influencing framework. The sur-
veyed public administration ranked the influence 
spheres as it can be seen in Table 2.
The ranking shows that most important the 
resources are. The focus to input for executing remains. 
Remarkable is the ranking of the influence of the 
European politics.
On local level the strings to the European Central 
government are evaluated with less priority. That 
depends on the one hand to the organizational distance 
between central government and administration but also 
on the intermediary role of federal and state  governments. 
Although some mislead financial transaction under-
mined the trust in the competence to treasurer’s influ-
ence to the execution by the negative developments in 
the case of existing financial transactions are lowest 
ranked. 
(k)  Acceptance of risk has to be oriented to objectives 
and goals of an organization
Should the public administration be enabled to search 
for opportunities under acceptance of a threat in the 
meaning of loss can occur? In the discussion about the 
authorization of public managers in the case of coupon 
swaps, the Chief Financial Officers (CFO or former 
treasurer) are mainly accused for insufficient research 
and knowledge for that very instrument. Similar, but 
Table 2.  Ranking of threats for operations
Ranking of influence to public administration
 1.
Declining tax income
2,42
 2.
More duties without 
adequate compensation
4,17
 3.
State politics
6,54
 4.
Delayed necessary 
investments
7,00
 5.
Limited freedom to act
7,08
 6.
Attraction of location
7,35
 7.
Federal politics
7,46
 8.
Demographic change
7,58
 9.
Deficits by shares
8,17
10.
European politics
8,42
11.
Addition political 
expectation
8,67
12.
Less qualified employees
9,04
13.
Increasing demand by 
society
9,38
14.
Climatic change
10,87
15.
Negative development of 
financial transactions
12,95

 
Risk Awareness as Key Success Factor 
157
more oriented to increase that local public utility are 
guarantees given for example for funding new sports 
ground or associations. The results later act as substi-
tutes of administrative services as presented in Table 1.
The given guarantees are taken as acceptable loss; on 
the other hand the utility of the supporting of external 
projects is ranked higher or at least equal. 
Investment bottlenecks are on a considerable level. 
Especially postponing money for infrastructure is wide 
spread as shown in Table 3. Remarkable is also the 
human resource development status. All bottlenecks in 
the declared domains can inflict mayor complications, 
but are tolerated. 
Because of the objectives of  public administration 
it is inappropriate to discuss reward and loss and 
because of the statutory task the financial frame should 
enable to provide the legal obligations. A smaller part 
should be used for individual, local and political targets 
or programs. 
6. Concluding Remarks
The results of the research undertaken showed that 
more interested citizenry, more and more complex 
duties, increasing competition with private companies 
which try to overtake government sponsored duties, 
and the current financial situation of the public sector 
in general forces the public sector to react.
Also be noted that public sector has to cope with 
internal and external events, but neither the legal frame-
work provides help nor it is distinctively formulated. 
There are lacks in the system of public administrations 
which prevents to organizations to accept fully value of 
 risk management and the positive effects for opera-
tional steering and strategic planning. The case of a 
realized guarantee in combination of an insufficient 
grade of reserves is one significant example for neces-
sary change to get a valid status report in finances and 
potential threats, depict in monetary values for  fore-
casts and planning. 
Research results showed that the transfer of risk 
management as part of a control system from private to 
public administration will not bring the expected results. 
Further a company-wide awareness, introduced by per-
sonal involvement, accompanied by more and more 
dynamic authorization, and incentives could transfer 
existent systems to work properly in the public sector. 
On the other hand, a result of the research showed 
that public managers have to be given more freedom to 
act and to decide; they have to be held responsible in 
success as well as fail. This model has to be transferred 
gradual to all levels and means a rejection of the prede-
termined model of Weber. In addition it means a drop 
of political influence to win more dynamic processes 
and the search for economic opportunities in pursuit of 
the political goals and objectives. With information 
lines all over the organization and a personal interest, 
not only functional interest, internal and external events 
could be detected and the ramification avoided to better 
contribution to increase welfare. 
These results may provide a starting point for 
future research to increase the risk awareness so that 
the local public administrations used it as a key success 
factor for more efficient management.
References
Alford, J. & Hughes, O. (2008), Public value pragmatism as 
the next phase of public management, The American 
Review of Public Administration, 38(2), 130–148.
Alison, G. T. (1980), Public and private management: Are 
they fundamentally alike in all unimportant respects? 
Journal of Public Management, 127(1), 27–38.
Arrow, K. & Lind, R. (1970), Uncertainty and the evaluation 
of public investment decisions, American Economic 
Review, 60(3), 364–378.
Bainbridge, S. M. (2007), The Complete Guide to Sarbanes–
Oxley, Avon: Adams Business.
Banner, G. (1991), Von der Behörde zum Dienstleistung-
sunternehmen: Die Kommunen brauchen ein neues 
Steuerungsmodell. Verwaltungsführung, Organisation, 
Personalführung, 1, pp. 6–11.
Benington, J. & Moore, M. H. (eds.) (2011), Public 
Value — Theory & Practice, Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Bodemann, M. (2011), Risk Awareness als Schlüssel zum 
einem erfolgreichen Risikomanagement. In Risiken im 
Table 3.  Investment bottlenecks
Bottlenecks in public administration
Buildings
Infrastructure
Personnel
Others
N = 30
36.67%
40.00%
20.00%
3.36%

158 
M. Bodemann, M. Olaru & I. C. Pirnea
Öffentlichen Bereich, A. Niedostadek, R. Riedl, and 
J. Stember (eds.), Berlin: Lit Verlag.
Bodemann, M. & Olaru, M. (2014), Responsibility to cus-
tomers in the context of public value management — a 
German case study, Amfiteatru Economic, 35, 171–186.
Bovens, M., Schillemans, T. & Hart, P. (2008), Does public 
accountability work? An assessment tool, Public 
Administration, 86(1), 225–245.
Bozeman, B. (2007), Public Values and Public Interest: 
Counterbalancing Economic Individualism, Washington, 
D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Buehler, K., Freeman, A., & Hulme, R. (2009), The new 
 arsenal of risk management. In Harvard Business Review 
on Managing External Risk, Boston: Harvard Business 
School Printing.
Cottin, C. & Döhler, S. (2013), Risikoanalyse, Wiesbaden: 
Springer Spektrum.
F. A. Z. Öffentliche Schulden liegen bei 2,058 Billion Euro. 
[online]. Available at http://www.faz.net/suche/?query=
%C3%96ffentliche+Schulden%2B&resultsPerPage=20
&suchbegriffImage.x=0&suchbegriffImage.y=0 
(Accessed 10 September 2013).
Ferlie, E., Lynn, L. E. Jr., & Pollitt, C. (eds.) (2005), The 
Oxford Handbook of Public Management, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Flyvberg, B. (2007), Eliminating bias through reference class 
forecasting and good governance, Norges tekrisk-natur-
vitenskapelige universitet, Concept Report No. 17.
Flyvberg, B., Holm, M. K., & Buhl, S. L. (2005), How (in) 
accurate are demand forecasts in Public Works Projects, 
Journal of the American Planning Association, 71(2), 
131–146.
Forrer, J., Kee, J. E. Newcomer, K. E., & Boyer, E. (2010), 
Public–private partnerships and the public accountabil-
ity question, Public Administration Review, May–June, 
475–484. 
Gomez, P. & Meynhardt, T. (2009), Public value: Gesell-
schaftliche wertschöpfung im fokus der führung. 
In Führung neu denken — Im Spannungsfeld Zwischen 
Erfolg, Moral und Komplexität, S. Seiler (ed.), Zurich: 
Orell Fuessli.
Hansson, S. O. (2002), Philosophical perspectives on risk, 
Delft University.
Hohan, A., Olaru, M., & Pirnea, C. (2011), Case study regard-
ing the implementation of an integrated risk management 
system in local public administration, Supplement of 
Quality-Access to Success, II(125), 246–251.
Knight, F. H. (2006), Risk, Uncertainty and Profit, New 
York: Dover Publications. 
Lander, G. P. (2004), What is Sarbanes–Oxley? New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Loevenich, B. (2011), Der Umgang mit operationellen 
Risiken in Kreditinstituten — vorbild für öffentliche 
verwaltungen? In Risiken im Öffentlichen Bereich, A. 
Niedostadek, R. Riedl, and J. Stember (eds.), Berlin: Lit 
Verlag.
Manski, C. F. (2013), Public Policy in an Uncertain World: 
Analysis and Decision, Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press.
Monahan, G. (2008), Enterprise Risk Management, Hoboken: 
John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Moore, M. H. (2013), Recognizing Public Value, Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press.
Mussari, R. (1996), Autonomy, Responsibility and New 
Public Management, St. Gallen: Conference on New 
Public Management in International Perspective.
National Audit Office (2000), Supporting Innovation: 
Managing Risk in Government Departments, London: 
National Audit Office.
Novell, G. (2009), Public vs. private managers: A new per-
spective, Journal of Business Economic Research, 7(3), 
1–6.
O’Flynn, J. (2007), From new public management to public 
value: Paradigmatic change and managerial implica-
tions, The Australian Journal of Public Administration, 
66(3), 353–366.
Pečarič, M. (2013), Personal establishment and accomplish-
ment of public service values, Transylvanian Review of 
Administrative Sciences, 38E, 25–143.
Loosemore A. M. (2006), Risk allocation in the private pro-
vision of public infrastructure. International Journal of 
Project Management, 06(005), 2–10. 
Rainey, H. G. (2009), Understanding and Managing Public 
Organizations, San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons.
Rainey, H. G. & Bozeman, B. (2000), Comparing public and 
private organisations: empirical research and the power 
of the a priori, Journal of Public Administration Research 
and Theory, 10(2), 447–469.
Van der Wal, Z., de Graaf, G. & Lasthuizen, K. (2008), 
What’s valued most? Similarities and differences 
between the organizational values of the public and pri-
vate sector, Public Administration, 86(2), 465–482.
Van Thiel, S. & Leeuw, F. (2002), The performance paradox 
in the public sector, Public Performance & Management 
Review, 25(3), 267–281.
Weber, M. (2008), Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, NeuIsenburg: 
Wunderkammer Verlag.

159
Chapter 18
Information and its Entropy — 
A Measure of Market Complexity
Camelia Oprean
Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu
One of the main tasks of managers is to identify sources 
of  information so that, through information-processing, 
they may secure an edge over other managers. To deter-
mine the information available on the market in a more 
comprehensive and structured manner, we define in this 
chapter the main informational groups concerned with 
the production and spreading of information on finan-
cial markets.
Charging an ordered structure with a minimum 
degree of uncertainty (lack of knowledge) and a disor-
dered, chaotic structure with a maximum degree of 
ignorance, in this chapter we also coined the term  infor-
mation entropy as a measure of the degree of uncertainty 
within a system (the market). The link between a certain 
level of complexity and the  efficient market hypothesis 
is the following: if we consider an efficient market (a 
weak form one), then prices follow the random-walk 
pattern. In quantitative terms, such a white noise process 
has the highest level of complexity; conversely, if the 
efficient markets hypothesis is not accepted, then prices 
are not a random-walk process and, therefore, the com-
plexity of the market will be lower. Taking into consid-
eration the explanations aforementioned, in this chapter 
we see entropy as a measure of informational efficiency 
of markets. In the terms of information entropy, market 
efficiency is equivalent to having maximum entropy, 
complexity, or uncertainty levels. To measure the infor-
mational efficiency of markets, we use the Shannon 
Entropy methodology. We start from the basic assump-
tion that, on an efficient market, prices reflect all avail-
able information. The Shannon entropy is assessed for 
8 emerging countries, 4 European Union (EU) countries 
(Romania, Hungary, Estonia, the Czech Republic) and 
the 4 BRIC emerging countries (Brazil, Russia, India, 
and China). Using this methodology, we rate these 
emerging countries on the basis of the entropy value 
obtained.
1.  Asymmetric Information 
in Financial Markets
Over a decade ago, in 1999, Peter Drucker stated: “The 
one thing we can be sure of is that the world that will 
emerge from the present rearrangement of values […] 
will be different from anything today imagines. That the 
new society will be both a non-socialist and a non- 
capitalist society is practically certain. And it is certain 
also that its primary resource will be knowledge.” In 
fact, in this emerging society, knowledge has become 
the key to competitive and economic success. The 
industrial revolution that occurred in the past centuries 
relied mainly on the traditional factors of production — 
land, labor, capital, which were chiefly physical. Thus, 
ever since the earliest times, wealth and power have been 
associated with the possession of physical resources; 
hence, the need for knowledge was limited. Unlike in 

160 
C. Oprean
those times, “wealth and power” now derive primarily 
from intangible intellectual resources, capital of knowl-
edge and  information. Nowadays, these assertions are 
even more pertinent when it comes to the management 
of stock exchange securities portfolios. One of the main 
tasks of portfolio managers is to identify sources of 
information so that, through information-processing, 
they may secure an edge over other investors.
Financial market information has a number of fea-
tures (apud Duţescu, 2000: 16), such as:
— The very low cost of information transfer due to the 
use of sophisticated telecommunication technolo-
gies that enable the free access of those interested;
— The results of information production are not always 
the desired ones (the intended information recipi-
ents are not the sole users) since there are no laws in 
this area to provide proper protection. Thus, the 
analysts who process the information may face real 
difficulties in obtaining compensation for their 
work. Even though a specific segment of investors 
resort to their services, information is also indirectly 
transferred to the public, who bears no costs. As a 
result, some investors may mirror the behavior of 
those who are informed, without the need of obtain-
ing information themselves (Dragotă, 2009: 93);
— Information is often a highly perishable product 
and this has lately resulted in the increase in the 
speed of its distribution and use;
— A real information market with supply and demand 
for information has emerged (Dragotă, 2009: 92). 
Information supply (including information produc-
tion, storage, and processing) requires a number of 
distinctive skills and sophisticated technologies, 
the degree of specialization in this area being 
extremely high. Information bidders must be con-
cerned not only with covering information purchas-
ing and processing costs, but also with deriving a 
profit. Information demand has become increas-
ingly widespread and varied. Information buyers 
must be interested in purchasing it only insofar as 
they may benefit from it in the future, by increasing 
its utility function.
The available information must first be processed 
and interpreted, since not only the availability 
of information is important, but also the investors’ 
capacity to use it to the best of its ability to support the 
most favorable investment decisions. Given that any 
piece of information may be of use to the portfolio 
manager, obtaining and processing some pieces of 
information that later turned out to be inaccurate or use-
less is at risk of generating loss. Thus, information 
asymmetry is one of the main causes identified so far 
for the gaps between the investors’ profits and may lead 
to abnormal returns for some capital market operators. 
Nevertheless, it is extremely difficult to identify spe-
cific situations when certain people have owned an 
advantageously strategic position in the informational 
flow with a view to deriving abnormal gains. These are, 
rather than certitudes, mere suppositions, not validated 
by statistic tests (Dragotă, 2009: 91). 
We have focused so far on those models in which all 
participants have access to the same information at the 
same time. Even if the requirements of equal access of 
investors to the available information have been met, 
information asymmetries between various agents are 
real, being the consequence of the differences that occur 
between the ability to interpret information as well as of 
the uneven degrees of information. The 2001 Nobel 
Prize winners in Economics (Akerlof, Spence, Stiglitz, 
2001) reiterated the importance of information asymme-
try that may lead to adverse selection and moral hazard.
Adverse selection occurs at the stage of investment 
decision-making. The investors will make the most 
advantageous decision based on the information they 
hold, without knowing whether the information is accu-
rate or not; as a result, they may make wrong decisions 
(agents are incapable of distinguishing between pro-
jects characterized by varying performance degrees). In 
the field of capital markets, an application of the theory 
of adverse selection is the issue of shares. Managers 
have an interest to issue shares precisely when these are 
overvalued on the market. Since following the issue of 
shares their price will tend to decrease, the investors 
who have already purchased these shares at a higher 
price than their intrinsic value will be at a disadvantage 
as they will obtain a lower return than that forecasted in 
an accurate essential analysis carried out at the time of 
the security purchase.
Unlike adverse selection, moral hazard occurs after 
the decision has been made. It consists in changing the 

 
Information and its Entropy 
161
behavior of business partners after signing an agree-
ment, which leads to the worsening of their position. 
Moral hazard may generate abnormal returns for cer-
tain market operators. An example of moral hazard 
occurring on capital markets is that of the investor 
purchasing shares on the basis of an analysis of the 
performance indicators that have as yet been registered 
by the issuing company. If in the future the issuer’s 
behavior as reflected by the indicators at the time of the 
purchase changes for the worse, shareholders may wit-
ness a decrease in their assets (in the case when the 
management may make hazardous decisions regarding 
company strategy, etc. in dealing with their business 
partners). 
When they ground their investment decisions, 
investors are generally tempted to resort to “additional” 
 information, i.e., processed information, such as statis-
tical or feasibility studies. However, this process may 
turn out to be expensive, the cost of obtaining the infor-
mation sometimes being higher than the profit derived 
from using it. Hence, the process of determining the 
value of information, during which one may assess the 
extent to which the search for information is actually 
advantageous, seems to be more suitable. 
The value of information depends on its impact on 
future decisions, hence the high degree of subjectivity 
of its interpretation and use. A piece of information is 
valuable provided that it its users may turn it to good 
account in making decisions that lead to the desired 
results. Thus, to determine the value of a piece of infor-
mation, one may determine who its user is and what the 
purpose for using that particular piece of information 
is. It is virtually impossible to reach consensus by sub-
stantiating a general decision-making model since it is 
difficult to aggregate individual, subjective utilities 
(each investor may differently assess the importance 
that a piece of information has in making a decision). 
A phenomenon that occurs on financial markets 
refers to the managers’ tendency to improve the appear-
ance of publicly distributed information. Faced with 
this, the market more often than not fails to distinguish 
between the actual changes in the state of a company 
and the “cosmeticized” information. This procedure is 
common in many countries and shows the manner in 
which company managers move away from the concept 
of faithful image by putting their companies in the most 
advantageous light, for instance by “enhancing” the 
solvency and profitability ratios by means of account-
ing policies, but without resorting to any illegal act. 
Another reality of financial markets refers to the exist-
ence of false or “poisoned” information (Stoica, 2002: 
36), usually spread by people who are keen on influ-
encing the market (usually majority shareholders). 
More often than not, most small shareholders are those 
who fall prey to false rumors. Manipulating exchange 
rates is considered in many countries an offence and is 
punished as such, although punitive measures have not 
been successful in annihilating it completely.
2.  Producing and Spreading 
Information
Even though all information may be useful in the 
decision-making process, it does not mean that all pub-
lic or private statements, representations, or data can be 
regarded as information. First, information requires 
judgement — i.e., it is vested with authority — that 
makes it inherently asymmetrical. Secondly, informa-
tion generates uncertainty (in other words, it generates 
informational surprises), requiring further action.
To determine the information available on the mar-
ket in a more comprehensive and structured manner, we 
define the main informational groups (adapted from 
Preda, 2010: 122) concerned with the production and 
spreading of information on financial markets, as 
follows:
1. Groups specialized in producing and spreading 
relational and transactional information as a com-
modity — in other words, groups concerned with 
producing and selling informational items. These 
include service providers such as Reuters and 
Bloomberg, other news agencies, rating agencies, 
etc.
2. Groups specialized in producing and spreading 
information in the context of the financial market, 
in relation to the traded entities: for instance, stock 
market websites, field-specific websites (e.g., 
kmarket.ro), or analyst reports. Almost all financial 
intermediaries offer their customers the analytical 
reports providing information on the key events 
occurring on the market, forecasts, etc. These 

162 
C. Oprean
reports are usually sent free of charge only to the 
intermediaries’ customers, although they may also 
make available to the general public some of their 
reports on their own websites.
3. Groups belonging to non-economic organizations, 
generally specialized in producing and spreading 
economic  information. For instance, information 
offered by the Romanian National Institute of 
Statistics, the National Bank of Romania, the 
Ministry of Economy, valid legal regulations, etc.
4. Groups specialized in producing and spreading 
information in the context of the financial market, 
as part of it. These groups include company eco-
nomic analysts. Thus, the major sources of infor-
mation are provided by the regular public 
announcements made by company spokespersons 
and published in annual balance sheets, related 
primarily to the following:
— The results of the financial year: the chief question is 
not whether these announcements are informative to 
investors, but rather refers to the impact that expected 
and unexpected announcements regarding returns 
have on prices. Company announcements regarding 
returns may or may not be new information to the 
investors. If the returns are expected, the prices have 
already been corrected with the notified income mar-
gin at the time the announcement is made public. If 
the notified returns are not expected, the price needs 
to be adjusted. In this case, if markets are efficient, 
the price adjustment will be instantaneous. If they 
are inefficient, there will be a delay in the adjustment 
and, therefore, the likelihood of speculative profits;
— Management forecasts: the management may occa-
sionally produce forecasts of earnings per share 
prior to the publication of financial reports. 
Generally, these forecasts have informative content 
only if they differ from market expectations, 
although recent studies have revealed that market 
rates tend to anticipate favourable and unfavourable 
announcements. 
5. Groups producing informational items with this 
activity as an end in itself, without necessarily aim-
ing at any immediate application. This is the case 
of academic economics, whether we refer to spe-
cialty books or to scientific studies. These consist 
in professional approaches to financial market 
phenomena, the uninformed finding it very difficult 
to select those that are both useful and relevant for 
the financial market in question.
6. Groups specialized in producing market informa-
tion and spreading it to the public at large: for 
instance, the views of a number of specialists pub-
lished in various specialized newspapers or broad-
cast on television. Even if these may act as useful 
landmarks in making an investment decision, this 
kind of information is often subjective, the journal-
istic style sometimes prevailing over scientific 
accuracy, for reasons that regard the provision of 
marketability and accessibility of information for 
as wide an audience as possible.
The informational groups described earlier may be 
classified in relation to one another by ranking them on 
the basis of their prestige, which impacts on the infor-
mation produced by these groups, granting additional 
legitimacy to the decisions based on them. Thus, this 
information is endowed with various levels of authority. 
A statement on inflation made, for instance, by the 
Chief Economist of the National Bank will carry more 
weight than the same statement made by the chief 
economist of a local bank. Since it is vested with 
authority, the information will pass as a judgment. 
Nevertheless, not only will the judgment have different 
influences, but it may also be disputed in various ways. 
A scientific study may be signed by a renowned econo-
mist, yet it may be judged by the public as a rather 
worthless product.
An important procedure used by all portfolio man-
agers involves their ability to classify publicly available 
information into information groups that allow for its 
better management. The professional experience they 
have accumulated as well as their subjectivism may 
facilitate the classification of available information 
according to specific criteria, such as its degree of use-
fulness (useful/useless) (Dragotă, 2009: 94), and to its 
legitimacy and level of authority (legitimate/illegiti-
mate). These information groups are illustrated in Fig. 1. 
If we assume that money has informative value and 
that prices are an information medium, then, within the 
context of the financial market, prices are essential 
information. Thus, quotations of financial assets are 

 
Information and its Entropy 
163
essential knowledge, particularly to those who use the 
tools of technical analysis. The quotations are available 
on the web pages of stock exchanges where these assets 
are traded. 
The  information needed to ground decisions of 
investing into securities must take into account not only 
the state of the company concerned, but also the state of 
the business segment and of the entire economy, with-
out losing sight of the global economic situation. The 
volume of information is much larger for essential 
analysis users. Essential analysis may comprise infor-
mation on macroeconomic developments; forecasts on 
the development of the business sector; the general 
trend of the capital market; the financial results of the 
company issuing the securities; the transaction volume; 
the cyclicity of the business or of the company activi-
ties; the analysis of product quality and market outlets; 
the quality of the analysed company management; the 
ownership structure; the strategy set for the future, etc. 
A theoretical rate of the securities based on the finan-
cial statements, similar to the market value, may be 
calculated. This correlation indicates whether the secu-
rities are overvalued or undervalued, supporting the 
investor in making the appropriate decision.
If we assume that prices are information, then, on 
an efficient market, investors capable of studying prices 
in a centralized and unified way will have the same type 
of information. Yet this does not preclude temporary 
deviations: for instance, in some cases, some investors 
will access relevant information before others. However, 
on the whole and in the long run, no investor will con-
stantly secure relevant information so as to have a 
transactional edge repeatedly. This can be inferred from 
the impossibility of making a capital out of monopolies 
of knowledge (Preda, 2010: 137), so that no long-term 
abnormal returns can be derived on an efficient 
market. 
Market efficiency involves the following elements 
in terms of available information and its processing: 
— Information observation (in the case presented, 
price information) must be accessible to all 
investors;
— There must be common procedures to translate 
information into prices. This means that stories, 
rumors, data interpretation and other such sources 
should work to influence share lists through the 
interaction of market participants. Thus, for infor-
mation to be reflected in share lists, there must be 
market-specific interaction procedures which 
should not be subject to a monopoly (a group can 
monopolize the contents of a rumor for a while, but 
not how to spread the rumor). Thus, market effi-
ciency would require the public availability of 
market interaction authorized procedures; 
— To make possible the conceptualizing of the trans-
lation of information into prices, it is necessary that 
we regard certain features of market participants as 
features of rational agents. The assumption that all 
agents display the same features (e.g., rationality) 
and, therefore, should be treated as equals, facili-
tates general pattern-making, diverting attention 
from the participants’ interaction. The main postu-
lation of this assumption refers to the fact that 
agents have rational expectations, i.e., they make 
accurate use of all relevant information. Being a 
rational market participant means being driven by 
self-interest and making calculations based on the 
assumption that the future will not necessarily look 
like the past. 
3.  Information Entropy — A Measure 
of Financial Market Complexity
Entropy is the measure of both the uncertainty and the 
complexity of a system, with many applications in 
physics (the second principle of thermodynamics), in 
information theory, in biology (the complexity of DNA 
Fig. 1.  Classification of financial market information
LEGITIMATE
AND
USEFUL
INFORMATION
LEGITIMATE
AND
USELESS
INFORMATION
ILLEGITIMATE
AND
USEFUL
INFORMATION
ILLEGITIMATE
AND
USELESS
INFORMATION
ILLEGITIMATE INFORMATION
LEGITIMATE INFORMATION
USEFUL INFORMATION
USELESS INFORMATION

164 
C. Oprean
sequences), in economics (system complexity). In other 
words, high levels of entropy are obtained in situations 
of deep uncertainty, while low levels of entropy are 
associated with low uncertainty situations.
3.1. Entropy-speciﬁ c issues
In the context of the physical and mechanical approach 
to the economic phenomenon, the original meaning of 
the word entropy has its roots in the second principle of 
thermodynamics: heat always moves from a warmer 
body to a cooler body and never the other way round. 
Thus, in a metaphorical way, to reconnect with thermo-
dynamics, we consider a certain “temperature” of a 
system, which increases as the complexity increases 
and vice versa (Dinga, 2009: 49). Simplifying the prob-
lem, we further state that an uninsulated system, having 
a higher temperature than that of the environment, 
spontaneously and irreversibly tends to reach thermal 
equilibrium with the environment, in the process lead-
ing to an increase in entropy, measurable as heat. The 
organized energy naturally and irreversibly turns into 
disorganized energy. Hence, the modern interpretation 
of the law of entropy, by which in any system there is a 
tendency of continuous transformation of order into 
disorder or chaos.
The exception to the rule of entropy exchange 
described previously is made by dissipative structures (a 
concept coined by the 1977 Nobel Chemistry Prize win-
ner Ilya Prigogine), which are those independent systems 
that resist the natural tendency to reach equilibrium, man-
aging to keep in a state of imbalance through an exchange 
of matter and energy with the environment. These far-
from-equilibrium systems may maintain their structure as 
long as the intake of energy/matter from the environment 
is greater than the entropy exported by the system. Such 
negative entropy systems, called negentropy systems, 
are living organisms because they need to import low 
entropy resources (strongly structured energetic  elements) 
from the environment and export high entropy matter 
 (destructured matter).
In  information theory, negentropy is used as a 
measure of the distance to normality. Of all distributions 
with a given dispersion, normal (or Gaussian) distribu-
tion is the one that requires the highest entropy, because 
the more random the variables are, the higher the 
entropy will be. Negentropy measures the difference in 
entropy between a given distribution and the normal 
distribution with the same dispersion, so we can state 
that negentropy is a “measure of non-Gaussianicity”. 
Thus, negentropy can also be calculated as the differ-
ence between the entropy of the random variable with 
normal distribution H(Ygauss) and the entropy of the 
random variable H(Y) (we consider how to determine 
the entropy information through the Shannon Entropy 
further in this chapter) as follows:
J(Y ) = H(Ygauss) − H(Y ) ≥ 0. 
(1)
Thus, negentropy will always take positive values  and 
will be equal to zero only provided that variable Y 
 follows a normal Gaussian distribution.
3.2.  Information entropy
Information, which is essential to the functioning of the 
stock market, determines the organization of the system 
and shapes its behavior, counteracting the effects of the 
law of entropy and preserving the system characteris-
tics: openness, dynamism, complexity, and determinis-
tic chaos.
The link between a certain level of complexity and 
the  Efficient Market Hypothesis is quite clear: if we 
consider an efficient market (a weak form one), then 
security prices follow the random-walk pattern, i.e., the 
returns series is a white noise process. In quantitative 
terms, such a white noise process has the highest level 
of complexity; conversely, if the efficient markets 
hypothesis is not accepted, then prices are not a ran-
dom-walk process and, therefore, the complexity of the 
market will be lower. For instance, if the security price 
is a purely deterministic, predictable process, the level 
of complexity is minimal; if price is a completely 
unpredictable random-walk process, then we are deal-
ing with the highest level of complexity. Taking into 
consideration the explanations earlier, we can see 
entropy as a measure of informational efficiency of 
financial markets. In the terms of information entropy, 
market efficiency is equivalent to having maximum 
entropy, complexity, or uncertainty levels.
To measure the informational efficiency of finan-
cial markets, we use the Shannon Entropy (This is the 
inability to predict, on average, a random-walk variable 

 
Information and its Entropy 
165
equivalent to its  information content. The concept was 
coined by Claude E. Shannon in his 1948 work 
“A Mathematical Theory of Communication”.). We 
start from the basic assumption that, on an efficient 
market, prices reflect all available information. As a 
result, we notice that the returns of efficient market 
securities are not predictable. Measuring efficiency 
involves two stages. First, we represent returns for us to 
be easier to detect their changes over the analyzed 
period. In the second stage, we apply and calculate the 
Shannon entropy to measure the amount of information 
contained in the returns series. Using the symbolic time 
series analysis (Symbolic Time Series Analyses — 
Daw et al., 2003, A Review of Symbolic Analysis of 
Experimental Data), we can get more data from a nor-
mal time series, as we turn the normal data with very 
different values  into a series symbolized by just a few 
distinct values.
The problem of the symbolic series is that there is 
no formal method by which to define time series sym-
bols. However, in our case, we are interested in combi-
nations of the positive and negative values  of the 
returns series. Consequently, we denote negative returns 
by (0) and positive ones by (1). In fact, in this case, the 
process is a sequence of Bernoulli trials ((0) and (1)).
Thus, we define a time series of size T defined as 
(R1, R2, R3, …, RT), Rt being the security returns at time 
t, where t = 1, 2, 3, …, T.
The returns were measured using the first differ-
ence of logarithmic values  of daily prices (the arithme-
tic and logarithmic returns are not equal, but they are 
approximately equal for small returns. The difference 
between them is high only when the relative change of 
the rate is high):
 
Rt = d loge(Ct) = loge(Ct)−loge(Ct−1). 
(2)
We then turned the series of returns into a symbolic 
series in accordance with the following notations:
 
 
<
=
≥
=
⎧
⎨
⎩
if R
 ,s
t
t
if R
 ,s
t
t
0
0
0
1. 
(3)
We thus obtained the following symbolic series (s1, s2, 
s3, …, sT), which is actually the same original series, 
but presented as a sequence of 0 and 1, as indicators of 
price decreases and increases. In an efficient market, the 
assumption is that it is not possible to forecast future 
security prices (or their related returns) using historical 
values. Thus, the probability of having positive  (negative) 
returns the next day is ½ and the Shannon entropy level 
is the highest.
To analyze the uncertainty level, we implement the 
Shannon entropy (H) as a measure of informational 
efficiency. This indicator can take a maximum value of 
1, when the process is completely random, and a mini-
mum value of 0, when referring to a sure event. Here is 
the theoretical expression of H for two events, p (the 
probability of having negative returns) and 1− p (the 
probability of having positive probabilities) (we used 
Risso’s methodology, 2008): 
 
H = −[p ∗ log2 p + (1 − p) ∗ log2(1 − p)] . 
(4)
Since the above-mentioned equation is concave, the 
maximum (H = 1) is obtained for p = 1/2 (maximum 
uncertainty) and the minimum is obtained when one of 
the events is a sure event (p = 0 or p = 1). In the latter 
case, it means that the market is not efficiently infor-
mational and the Shannon Entropy value (H) will be 
less than 1.
3.3.  Applying  information entropy 
to emerging ﬁ nancial markets
The Shannon entropy was assessed for 8 emerging 
countries, 4 EU countries (Romania, Hungary, Estonia, 
the Czech Republic) and the 4 emerging countries 
Brazil, Russia, India, and China (BRIC). The data used 
in this analysis consists of the main stock indexes 
traded on the stock exchanges of these countries, so we 
chose the following indexes: BET for Romania, OMX 
Tallinn for Estonia, PX for the Czech Republic, BUX 
for Hungary, IBOVESPA for Brazil, RTSI for Russia, 
Sensex for India and Shanghai Composite Index for 
China. The data series cover a period of 10 years, from 
October 2003 to October 2013. The data sample con-
sists of about 2,500 daily values  of the price of each 
separate stock index.
Using the methodology outlined earlier to deter-
mine the Shannon Entropy, we rated these emerging 
countries on the basis of the entropy value obtained, as 
shown in Table 1 and Fig. 2.

166 
C. Oprean
The results obtained indicate that, in general, all eight 
emerging countries are characterized by weak informa-
tional efficiency, if we take into account the value that 
is quite close to 1 of the Shannon entropy obtained in 
all cases. However, the most efficient financial market 
in terms of  information seems to be the Chinese mar-
ket, followed by the Hungarian market. The least effec-
tive market in terms of information, using the Shannon 
entropy as an indicator of appreciation, is the Estonian 
financial market, which has the lowest entropy value.
4. Concluding Remarks
Charging an ordered structure with a minimum degree 
of uncertainty (lack of knowledge) and a disordered, 
chaotic structure with a maximum degree of ignorance, 
we coined the term  information entropy as a measure 
of the degree of uncertainty within a system. There is a 
direct relationship between the degree of organization 
of a system, the amount of information stored, and 
information entropy, expressed by the law of negative 
entropy: within systems, there is a tendency of the 
degree of organization to increase in direct proportion 
to the increase in the amount of information stored in 
the system. In other words, the organization of the sys-
tem is directly proportional to the amount of informa-
tion stored and inversely proportional to the entropy 
information of the system (Ghilic-Micu, 2002: 232).
However, a more comprehensive analysis of the 
degree of financial market informational efficiency 
could be produced if we calculated the Shannon 
Entropy for emerging countries, but compared to that of 
developed countries. Furthermore, the study could be 
improved by calculating the entropy in different periods 
of time in order to draw comparisons of market effi-
ciency in such times as those before the crisis, during 
the crisis, and after the crisis. Finally, we can extend the 
analysis by calculating the modified Shannon Entropy 
(following Risso’s methodology, 2008), which involves 
calculating the entropy for time windows of different 
lengths (day sequences).
References
Akerlof, G. A., Spence, A. M. & Stiglitz, J. E. (2001), 
Markets with Asymmetric Information, Nobel Prize in 
Economics documents 2001–2002, Nobel Prize 
Committee.
Dinga, E. (2009), Studii de Economie, Bucureşti: Editura 
Economică. 
Dragotă, V. (coordinator) (2009), Gestiunea portofoliului de 
Valori Mobiliare, Ediţia a Doua, Bucureşti: Ed. 
Economică. 
Drucker, P. (1999), Societatea Postcapitalistă (traducere 
după: Post-Capitalist Society), Bucureşti: Image. 
Duţescu, A. (2000), Informaţia Contabilă şi Pieţele de 
Capital, Bucureşti: Economică. 
Ghilic-Micu, B. (2002), Strategii pe Piaţa de Capital, 
Bucureşti: Economică. 
Preda, A. (2010), Introducere în Sociologia Pieţelor, 
Timişoara: Polirom.
Risso, W. (2008), The informational efficiency and the finan-
cial crashes, Research in International Business and 
Finance, 22, 396–408.
Stoica, O. (2002), Mecanisme şi Instituţii ale Pieţei de 
Capital, Bucureşti: Economică. 
Table 1.  Classification of indices according to recorded entropy 
value
Rank
Index
Country
Entropy (H)
3
BET
Romania
0.998014
2
BUX
Hungary
0.998616
4
PX
The Czech Republic
0.996222
8
OMX TALLINN
Estonia
0.946398
5
IBOVSPA
Brazil
0.996099
7
RTSI
Russia
0.990961
6
SENSEX
India
0.994193
1
SHANGHAI_C_I
China
0.999945
Fig. 2.  Value of Shannon entropy from 2003 to 2013
Shannon entropy — H

Part V
 Entrepreneurship, Social Enterprise, 
and  SMEs

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

169
Chapter 19
 SME-Conducive Policy Formulation 
under Systemic Perspectives
J. Hanns Pichler
Austrian Institute for SME Research
Vienna University of Economics and Business
“Why are SMEs so important … Because high employ-
ment growth in SMEs in the last decade has prevented 
unemployment rising … in the European Economy 
Area”.
The European Observatory for SMEs
The very topic raises an ever challenging question: that 
is, of the role and significance, if not to say “survival” 
of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and 
related structures within an environment of forces 
which — particularly in the sphere of industry — on 
first sight tend to favor the “big” rather than the 
“small”. This at the same time points at the underlying 
aspects and challenges of broader socio-economic and 
structural dimensions with a concomitant need for 
appropriate formulation of more differentiated and spe-
cifically designed business policies in general.
1. Introduction
The very topic raises an ever challenging question: that 
is, of the role and significance, if not to say “survival” 
of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and 
related structures within an environment of forces 
which — particularly in the sphere of industry — an 
first sight tend to favor the “big” rather than the 
“small”. This at the same time points at underlying 
aspects and challenges of broader socio-economic and 
structural dimensions with a concomitant need for 
appropriate formulation of more differentiated and spe-
cifically designed business policies generally.
Such challenges and related problems today are to 
be seen from an inseparably intertwined and multi-
pronged point of view:
• From a more and more international point of view, 
not the least, a strategic ingredient of development to 
be recognized as perception of the role and exposure 
of SMEs in their sector-related structural signifi-
cance nationally, regionally and nowadays, in fact, 
globally.
• Then, from a closer to the skin view of developments 
related to on-going restructuring in our European 
and — when speaking of SMEs — in many ways 
regionally unique business environment.
Finally, under overriding socio-economic and sys-
tems-related aspects of a more comprehensive SME-
specific policy formulation.
Globally, evidence of a new and growing recogni-
tion of the role of SMEs is provided by a profound reori-
entation in development policy over the last decades 

170 
J. Hanns Pichler
with a distinct change in strategies toward fostering 
sector-related diversification for more balanced long-
term growth and economic welfare under sustainable 
conditions generally.
In speaking of strategies, there is today an ever 
growing awareness worldwide of the role of  SMEs both 
as a factor of sustaining economic stability and as sim-
ply indispensable a catalyst for fostering economic 
dynamics and welfare. Experience and recognition 
thereof has triggered a more broadly based rethinking 
and change in outlook quite in contrast still to post-war 
decades, when sustained economic buoyancy, business 
dynamics, and growth in considerable measure tended 
to blur the need for any more subtle structural consid-
erations. Yet, underlying economic realities and the 
very characteristics of any SME structured business 
environment, in the end, were not to be neglected with 
impunity indefinitely.
Altogether — and not the least from an European 
angle — this largely has disproved more orthodox and 
seemingly ill-conceived notions of any inherent superi-
ority of the “big” vis-à-vis the “small”, thus recogniz-
ing the specific role of SMEs in the context of a more 
subtle and diversified approach toward “structural 
development”.
2.  Economic and Social Importance 
of SMEs
In geographically narrowing our focus and taking a 
closer look now at the specificity of the European 
business environment: a unique, richly structured, and 
indeed highly diversified SME “landscape” emerges. 
A landscape with manifold facets is vividly being illus-
trated again and again by the “European Observatory 
for SMEs”. Thus, in its current (sixth) issue it is being 
shown that SMEs (defined as up to 250 employees) 
within the “European Space” in a broader sense number 
somewhere close to 20 milli-units, against only about 
40,000, or just 0.2%, larger firms (with more than 250 
employees); this makes for an average of some 50 (non-
primary) business establishments per 1,000 inhabitants! 
Furthermore, these millions of smaller — in consider-
able part craft dominated micro-enterprises — over the 
past years continuously have tended to outperform 
larger enterprises in terms of job creation. This at the 
same time demonstrates that without such relatively 
high employment growth and intensity on part of 
SMEs, the European unemployment syndrome would 
have been even more pronounced!
While illustrating thereby the economic and social 
importance of SMEs in a European context, this further 
implies — as stated in the 1996 “Observatory” — that 
over the years an estimated 1.5 million Europeans 
annually decide to start a business of their own; and this 
way, over half a decade or so, the number of (mostly 
small to very small) enterprises increased by about 9%, 
while the European Union (EU) population grew by 
only some 2%.
In country-specific terms it is quite typical too 
when, e.g., in Austria — and similarly in Germany, in 
Switzerland and elsewhere — nearly 99% of all non-
agricultural business establishments have less than 100 
employees; and of those again close to 90% have less 
than 10, and just about 2% have 100 or above. 
Moreover, in terms of sustaining employment the SME 
sector on the whole — due to its flexibility and adapt-
ability — over the 1980s and well into the 1990s, in a 
period of profound industrial restructuring, was able to 
by and large absorb, and thereby compensate for, on-
going layoffs in the larger public sector dominated 
industries to the tune of some 80,000 employees (or 
nearly 3% of Austria’s total work force).
While recognizing such proven strength not only 
structurally but also as providing a certain measure of 
resilience against business cycle volatilities one might 
take note of the fact that it is exactly in the sphere of 
SMEs as well where — due to their more immediate 
socio-economic exposure — conflicts of interest (not 
free at times from certain partisanship) do arise and are 
being fought out; conflicts implying both positive and 
negative repercussions as to sector-related policy for-
mulation with concomitant institutional implications. 
Frequently, this indeed resembles the arena where in 
essentially market based systems “the very action” is; 
where policy challenges and demands are being articu-
lated in ever so many nuances and facets.
Sheer existence and sustained survival of SME 
structures with their complexities as mirroring the very 
reality of economic life itself, also contradicts once 
widely spread “prophecies” of the ultimate demise of 
small businesses as a predicament under both “classical” 

 
SME-Conducive Policy Formulation under Systemic Perspectives  
171
and, of course, Marxian doctrines. Historical evidence 
and today’s systemic transformation processes at our 
doorsteps in Central and Eastern Europe clearly point to 
the opposite; the very essence of restructuring going on 
there more than ever calls for speedy creation or revival 
of sound and diversified  SME structures as simply indis-
pensable an ingredient for any sustained recovery as one 
of the strategically most challenging issues.
All too easy at times, as it seems, the inherent 
wealth of diversity as so typical for the European busi-
ness scenario merely is being taken for granted; this 
perhaps too, because we somehow are used to the fact 
that SMEs always have been or simply ought to be 
there anyway. Yet, for any more conscious policy con-
siderations this, in fact, is not really so self-understood; 
it rather does call for continued awareness to assure that 
underlying resilience and adjustment capabilities con-
stantly are being safeguarded.
Such adjustment capabilities to changing business 
conditions and, at times, volatile cyclical movements 
quite typically are characterized also by structural per-
meability both upward and downward: that is to say, by 
way of adjusting — and in today’s scenario all the more 
relevant — to forces of regional (or even global) inte-
gration with implicit restructuring of business sizes. 
Such restructuring, by its very nature, is not one- sidedly 
to be interpreted as simply a tendency toward “concen-
tration” only; rather, and more objectively so, it is 
equally to be seen as a process of opening up oppor-
tunities also “downstream” in terms of structural deep-
ening as markets and, in particular, size of markets 
change.
Insights of modern industrial economics give cre-
dence to such complexities in the course of structural 
adjustment with, in part, new evidence as to criteria of 
“optimal” business sizes being induced, e.g., by techno-
logical developments. Thereby, placing emphasis not 
so much on economies of “scale”; rather more on ele-
ments such as SME-specific diversification or differen-
tiation rendering classical returns to “scale” no longer 
so valid an argument as against economies of “scope”. 
More pointedly still, it implies conscious recognition of 
such complexities as, e.g., regional specifics and mar-
ket differentiation, locational spread including relative 
density of businesses relating to given demand and sup-
ply patterns, with implications again for product/
market orientation and diversification of size structures 
as relevant for both forward and backward linkages of 
respective business activities.
Any  SME policy addressing such complexities 
finally has to do with what one might subsume under 
contributing to “quality of life” and to conditions of 
welfare in a broader sense. Endowment with diversified 
business structures and, thereby, with enhanced eco-
nomic opportunities, productive capacities and 
increased potential for catering to differentiated, indi-
vidualized patterns of demand finally needs to be 
judged with a view to such qualitative aspects. (A study 
to this effect conducted in Austria, e.g., depicts regional 
differences in relative SME density between 40 and 80 
per 1,000 inhabitants as clearly correlating with respec-
tively higher or lower levels of economic welfare, 
incomes and purchasing power.)
3. SMEs Policy
Over and above mere economic considerations, rele-
vance of SMEs, finally, is to be viewed also from a more 
broadly based socio-economic point of view; that is, 
SMEs being seen as a driving force of structural change 
on the one hand, and as a stabilizing factor for safe-
guarding a given economic setting with its institutional 
framework in the dynamics of change on the other.
For any freedom — and as such market — oriented 
socio-economic order as a form of life, this unequivo-
cally implies a commitment to entrepreneurial initia-
tive, to guaranteeing both free and autonomous pursuit 
of business opportunities; implies furthermore a com-
mitment to market criteria of performance with quite 
legitimate a claim for adequate return under due con-
sideration of social (including environmental) responsi-
bility in the conduct of business as such. It also means 
that any such policy inescapably becomes part and 
parcel of shaping socio-economic conditions as condu-
cive a framework wherein SMEs, with their diversified 
structures and patterns of performance, can thrive as 
indispensable for guaranteeing and sustaining welfare 
conditions for society as a whole (as no doubt constitut-
ing a policy challenge at any time anywhere).
Such policy ought not to shy away from the very 
“nitty gritty” either: such as, e.g., avoiding to burden 
SMEs in a discriminatory manner with unremunerated 

172 
J. Hanns Pichler
administrative tasks by public authorities. A more 
recent study to that effect in Germany demonstrates 
that the relative impact in terms of cost and manpower 
to be allocated proves up to 22 times (!) and, thus, quite 
disproportionately higher for  SMEs as compared to 
larger enterprises. In a somewhat more sarcastic vain, 
but pointing essentially in the same direction, the US 
Small Business Administration some time ago pointed 
out that the then roughly 10 million businesses under its 
constituency got inundated yearly by well over 300 
million forms with up to 1 billion pages containing 
more than 7 billion questions; altogether entailing unre-
munerated costs averaging some USD 3,000 — or more 
per firm. Gracefully perhaps, a similar EU related 
assessment has not, as yet, been carried out!
If on the other hand — as often quite “liberally” 
being claimed — it is to be recognized that SMEs 
indeed represent the mainstay or very “trade mark” of 
any market oriented economy; and if it is true further, 
as variously being claimed, that — due to the sheer 
existence of more diversified SME structures — econo-
mies over and over again could prove their adaptive 
capabilities for both overcoming even severe policy 
mistakes and at the same time taking on new chal-
lenges, then it would be only consequential for any 
related policy to attain a certain measure of “natural” 
legitimacy of its own.
4. Conclusions
Upon closer scrutiny of such pronouncements and 
arguments though, one might be left wondering whether 
this kind of demands or recommendations not remain 
pretty much on the surface and, thus, tend to fall way 
short of recognizing more profound issues involved; 
whether indeed — if argued from a systems-related 
point of view — not more deeply probing questions as 
to the really crucial “building stones” of any SME-
specific policy were to be addressed, as e.g.,
 Questioning, with a view not the least to prevailing 
structures, whether “classically” defined strategies of 
blatant “marketeering” indeed make for adequate 
and sensitive enough a policy, taking proper cogni-
zance of underlying diversities and complexities?
 Questioning further, whether sheer prevalence of 
SME diversification with related institutional structures 
rather not might call for an equally differentiated 
policy; a policy which — within an essentially mar-
ket-based framework — just as well allows for 
appropriate multiplicity of cooperative (corporatist) 
or in various ways subsidiary forms of business 
organization and relationships as a kind of “natural” 
ingredient, if not enrichment of any economic sys-
tem pointing beyond simple supply and demand 
mechanisms at the very micro level?
 Considering finally, and without wanting to seem 
“heretical”, whether or not — and possibly quite 
legitimately so — to foster and thereby acknowledge 
also intermediate forms of business association at 
the meso-level as a reflection or simply inescapable 
a feature of institutionalization for any sound  SME 
policy recognizing, in principle:
— For one, that competition as a coordinating 
“mechanism” via markets constitutes only one — 
but not the only — criterion or instrument govern-
ing business conduct and, depending on given 
sectoral or structural conditions, not necessarily is 
to take center stage; or in putting it more bluntly: 
that acceptance of an essentially competitive, 
market oriented economic order for SMEs equally 
requires an appropriate framework of institutions 
going along with;
— Furthermore, that cognizance of such specifics 
with implicit forms of institutionalization may 
prove more conducive to SME related business 
conduct than any undifferentiated plea for cut-
throat competition at micro level, by emphasiz-
ing and bringing to bear economies of “scope” 
rather than of “scale”; or in short: considering 
SMEs not merely as “beautiful”, but also 
as being “efficient” in a more comprehensive 
sector-specific understanding;
— And finally, that necessary autonomy of SMEs 
within a spectre of larger entities is to be con-
stantly safeguarded, not the least by way of 
sector-related forms of institutionalization in 
duly recognizing role and relevance of the SME 
sector as a whole from an overriding socio- 
economic perspective.

 
SME-Conducive Policy Formulation under Systemic Perspectives  
173
Any self-conscious, not to be confused with self-
righteous,   SME policy conceived under such auspices 
should — in view of the legitimate claims and issues 
involved — ultimately be articulated more aggressively 
still, as quite essential an element within the realm of 
economic policy formulation generally.
References
Akokangas, P. (1998), Internationalisation and resources: An 
analysis of processes in Nordic SMEs, Acta Wasensia 
No. 64, Vaasa.
Aiginger, K. & Tichy, G. (1984), Die Groeße der Kleinen: 
Die Ueberraschenden Erfolge Kleiner und Mittlerer 
Unternehmungen in den Achtziger Jahren, Vienna: 
Signum Verlag.
Anderson, I. (1982), Small industry in developing countries, 
World Bank Staff Working Papers 518.
Bamberger, I. & Pleitner, H. J. (eds.) (1988), Strategische 
ausrichtung kleiner und mittlerer unternehmen, 
Internationales Gewerbearchiv, 2.
Bamberger, I. (ed.) (1994), Product/Market Strategies of 
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, Avebury: 
Aldershot.
Becattini, G. (1999), Flourishing small firms and the re-
emergence of industrial districts, Keynote, 44th ICSB 
World Conference, Naples (mimeo).
Belak, J., Kajzer, S., Mugler, J., Senjur, M., Sewing, N., & 
Thommen, J.-P. (eds.) (1997), Unternehmensentwicklung 
und Management Unter Besonderer Beruecksichtigung 
der Klein-und Mittelbetriebe, Zurich: Versus.
Buckley, P. & Ghauri, P. (eds.) (1993), The International-
ization of the Firm: A Reader, London: Academic Press.
Crauser, G. (1999), Enterprise policy — quo vadis? 
Challenges and prospects for the year 2000 and beyond, 
Opening Address, 44th ICSB World Conference, Naples 
(mimeo).
Dahiya, S. B. (1991), Theoretical Foundations of Development 
Planning, 5 Vols., New Delhi. 
de Vries, B. A. (1980), Industrialization and employment:. 
The role of small and medium-sized manufacturing 
firms. In International Economic Development and 
Resource Transfer, Kiel: Institute of World Economic.
Donckels, R. & Miettinen, A. (eds.) (1997), Entrepreneurship 
and SME Research on its Way to the Next Millennium, 
Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.
ENSR/EIM (1996, 1997, 2000), The European Observatory 
for SMEs; esp. Fourth to Sixth Annual Reports, 
Zoetermeer: EIM Business and Policy Research.
Froehlich, E. & Pichler, J. H. (1998), Werte und typen 
 mittelstaendischer Unternehmer. In Beitraege zur 
Ganzheitlichen Wirtschafts- und Gesellschaftslehre, 
J. H. Pichler (ed.), Berlin: Duncker & Humblodt.
Froehlich, E. A., Hawranek, P. M., Lettmayr, C. F., & Pichler, 
J. H. (1994), Manual for Small Industrial Businesses: 
Project Design and Appraisal, Vienna: UNIDO 
Publication, General Studies Series.
Gibb, A. A. (1993), Key factors in the design of policy sup-
port for the small and medium enterprise development 
process: An Overview, Entrepreneurship and Regional 
Development, 5.
Gutersohn, A. (1977), Das Gewerbe in der Freien 
Marktwirtschaft, 3 Vols. (1954–1974), Berlin–Munich–
St. Gallen.
Gutersohn, A. (1981), Zur Belastbarkeit der gewerblichen 
unternehmen mit gesetzlichen vorschriften, administra-
tiven Auflagen und mit abgaben. In Klein-und 
Mittelbetriebe: 
Chancen, 
Probleme, 
Loesungen, 
W. Kemmetmueller, W. Sertl (eds.), Vienna.
Haahti, A. J. (1993, 1995), INTERSTRATOS. International-
ization of strategic orientations of European small and 
medium enterprises, EIASM Reports 93-01 and 95-01, 
Brussels. 
Haahti, A., Hall, G., & Donckels, R. (eds.) (1998), The 
Internationalization of SMEs: The Interstratos Project, 
London: Routledge.
Heinrich, W. Wirtschaftspolitik, 2 Vols. (1948–1954) (2nd 
edn.), Berlin 1964–1967.
Heinrich, W. (1964), Probleme der Klein- und Mittelbetriebe 
(1962) (2nd edn.), Muenster.
Hirschman, A. O. (1958), The Strategy of Economic Development 
(10th edn.), New Haven: Yale University Press.
Institut fuer Gewerbe- und Handwerksforschung (IfG) 
(1992), Gewerbe und handwerk 2000. Perspektiven und 
szenarien, schriftenreihe des wirtschaftsfoerderungsin-
stitutes 216, Vienna.
Institut fuer Gewerbe- und Handwerksforschung (IfG) 
(1994), Internationalization of strategic orientation in 
European small businesses. Austrian Results 1991/93, 
INTERSTRATOS Report, Vienna.
Institut fuer Gewerbe- und Handwerksforschung (IfG) 
(1998), Das burgenlaendische gewerbe und handwerk, 
Szenario 2005, Auswirkungen der EU-Osterweiterung, 
Vienna.
Kailer, N. & Mugler, J. (eds.) (1998), Entwicklung von 
Kleinen und Mittleren Unternehmen: Konzepte, 
Praxiserfahrungen, Perspektiven, Vienna.
Kao, R. W. Y. (1984), Small Business Management: A Strategic 
Emphasis, Toronto: Holt, Reinhart, and Winston. 

174 
J. Hanns Pichler
Kao, R. W. Y. (1985), Entrepreneurship: A Wealth-Creation 
and Value-Adding Process, New York.
Kemmetmueller, W. & Sertl, W. (eds.) (1981), Klein- und 
Mittelbetriebe: Chancen, Probleme, Loesungen, Vienna.
Larcon, J.-P. (ed.) (1998), Entrepreneurship and Economic 
Transition in Central Europe, Boston: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers.
Lehtimaeki, A. & Ahokangas, P. (1993), Foreign market ori-
entation and international operations of European SMEs 
in 1990, Working Paper 7, University of Oulu.
Levy, B. (1993), Obstacles to developing indigenous small 
and medium enterprises: An empirical assessment, 
World Bank Economic Review, 7(1).
Little, I. M. D. (1987), Small manufacturing enterprises 
in developing countries, The World Bank Economic 
Review, 1(2).
Muegge, H. (1988), Entwicklungshilfe fuer kleine und mit-
tlere unternehmungen aus der Sicht der UNIDO, IfG 
Mitteilungen. 
Mugler, J. & Schmidt, K.-H. (eds.) (1995), Klein- und 
Mittelunternehmen in einer dynamischen Wirtschaft: 
Ausgewählte Schriften von Hans Jobst Pleitner, Berlin–
Munich–St. Gallen: Duncker und Humblodt.
Mugler, J. (1993), Betriebswirtschaftslehre der Klein- und 
Mittelbetriebe (3rd edn.), Vienna-New York: Springer.
Neck, P. (ed.) (1977), Small Enterprise Development: Policies 
and Programmes, Geneva: ILO.
Pichler, J. H. (1981), Der klein- und mittelbetriebliche Sektor 
als 
Herausforderung 
und 
Anliegen 
weltweiter 
Entwicklungsstrategie. In Klein- und Mittelbetriebe: 
Chancen, Probleme, Loesungen, W. Kemmetmueller 
and W. Sertl (eds.), Vienna.
Pichler, J. H. (1988), Gewerbe und Entwicklung. Die Rolle der 
Kleinbetriebe in Entwicklungsländern, lfG Mitteilungen. 
Pichler, J. H. (1994), Toward a Technology Scenario: 2000 
and beyond. A systems-related approach geared to small 
business development. In Small and Medium-sized 
Enterprises on their Way into the Next Century (2nd 
edn.), 20th International Small Business Congress 
(1993), IGW, St. Gallen.
Pichler, J. H. (1995), Consequences of a Larger Europe for 
SMEs. In Quest of SMEs Specific Policy Formulation. 
In European Yearbook, Vol. XLI, P. Drillien (ed.), 
Dordrecht: Council of Europe. 
Pichler, J. H. (1996), European Small Businesses Responding 
to the Larger Market. Entrepreneurial “profiles” in the 
context of business life cycles. In Versicherungen, Risiko 
und Internationalisierung. Herausforderungen fuer 
Unternehmensfuehrung und Politik, Festschrift fuer 
H. Stremitzer, J. Mugler and M. Nitsche (eds.), Vienna.
Pichler, J. H. (1996), SMEs at the frontiers of development: 
Assessing success factors for policy formulation, The 
UNIDO Manual as a Guide. An Overview, in Proceedings, 
Vol. 11, 415t ICS13 World Conference, Stockholm.
Pichler, J. H. (1997), KMU als dynamischer erfolgsfaktor im 
entwicklungsprozeß. In Unternehmensentwicklung und 
Managment unter besonderer Beruecksichtigung der 
Klein- und Mittelbetriebe in den Reformlaendern, 
J. Belak and S. Kajzer et al. (eds.), Zurich.
Pichler, 
J. 
H. 
(1998), 
SME 
internationalization: 
Entrepreneurial profiles and patterns of strategic adjust-
ment, Piccola Impresa, 2. 
Pichler, J. H. (ed.) (1993), Oekonomische Konsequenzen 
eines EG-Beitritts Oesterreichs, Berlin: Duncker & 
Humblodt.
Pichler, J. H., Pleitner, H. J., & Schmidt, K.-H. (eds.) (2000), 
Management in KMU: Die Fuehrung von Klein- und 
Mittelunternehmen (3rd edn.), Bern: Haupt.
Pleitner, H. J. (ed.) (1989), Neue Problemperspektiven und 
neue erfolgsaussichten fuer kleine und mittlere unterne-
hmen, Internationales Gewerbearchiv, 3, Berlin–Munich–
St. Gallen.
Pleitner, H. J. (ed.) (1992), Die Veraenderte Welt — 
Einwirkungen auf Die Klein- Und Mittelunternehmen, 
Beitraege Zu Den Rencontres De St-Gall, IGW, St. Gallen. 
Pleitner, H. J. (ed.) (1994), Small and Medium-Sized 
Enterprises on Their Way into the Next Century, 20th 
International Small Business Congress (1993) (2nd 
edn.), IGW, St. Gallen.
The STRATOS Group (1990), Strategic Orientations of 
Small European Businesses, Aldershot [etc.].
UNIDO (1979), Industry 2000 — New Perspectives, 
New York.
Van der Burg, B. I. & Nijsen, A. F. M. (1998), How Can 
Administrative Burdens of Businesses be Assessed? 
Different Methods: Advantages and Disadvantages, 
Zoetermeer: EIM.
World Bank: World Development Report, Washington D.C. 
(annually since 1978; in the given context esp. 1987 on 
“Industrialization”, 1991 on “The Challenge of 
Development”, 1996 on “From Plan to Market”, 2000/01 
on “Attacking Poverty”).
World Bank (1978), Employment and development of small 
enterprises, Sector Policy Paper.
World Bank (1986), Industrial restructuring, Working Paper, 
Washington, D. C.
World Bank/CFS (1994), Eastern European experience with 
small-scale privatization, CFS Discussion Paper Series, 
No. 104, Washington, D. C.

175
Chapter 20
Particularities of the Procesual Organisation 
in the Medium  Knowledge-Based Enterprise
Ovidiu Nicolescu
Romanian Scientiﬁ c Management Association (RSMS)
Transition to the  knowledge-based economy — the 
fundamental mutation of the present times — generates 
a lot of changes in all fields. One of this is the develop-
ment of the knowledge-based enterprises, which 
became the main components of the knowledge-based 
economy. 
Knowledge-based enterprise is very different from 
typical capitalist enterprise (Angela & Oxbrow, 2002; 
Amaravadi & Lee, 2005). It presents many specific 
structural, functional, and performance characteristics. 
The main objective of our chapter is to identify and 
to analyze the major characteristics of the medium 
knowledge-based enterprise from procesual organisa-
tion point of view. We select medium enterprise because 
in this type of company the evolution to the knowledge-
based economy is more advanced comparative with 
micro and small enterprises and, because at the world 
level they represent the most numerous groups of 
knowledge-based companies. Our analyse is focused on 
the procesual organisation because the changes in this 
field have major influence on all other features of the 
company and on its management and performance. 
The paper is structured in five parts:
• 
The organizational changes occured at the level of 
all enterprise’s functions — research and development 
(R&D), commercial, production, financial-account-
ing, and  human resources (personnel). 
• The new configuration of the functions in the 
medium sized companies based on knowledge, 
revealing the apparition of two new organisation 
functions —  knowledge function and  training 
function. 
• The presentation of the knowledge function charac-
teristics in medium knowledge-based company and 
its nine main activities. 
• The presentation of the 10 characteristics of the new 
training function. 
• The identification and the presentation of the main 
particularities of the classical enterprise functions — 
 R&D function, commercial function, production 
function, finance-accounting function, human 
resource function — in the medium knowledge-
based company. 
All mentioned elements represent novelties in the 
international literature dedicated to the SMEs in the 
context of the transition to the knowledge-based 
economy.
1. Introduction
Transition to the knowledge-based economy — the 
fundamental mutation of the present times — generates 
a lot of changes in all fields. One of this is the develop-
ment of the knowledge-based enterprises, which 

176 
O. Nicolescu
became the main components of the  knowledge-based 
economy.
 Knowledge-based enterprise is very different from 
typical capitalist enterprise (Angela & Oxbrow, 2002; 
Kessels, 2001). It presents many specific structural, 
functional, and performance characteristics.
The main objective of our chapter is to identify and 
analyse the major characteristics of the medium knowl-
edge-based enterprise from procesual organisation 
point of view. We select medium enterprise because in 
this type of company the evolution to the knowledge-
based economy is more advanced comparative with 
micro and small enterprises and, because at the world 
level they represent the most numerous groups of 
knowledge-based companies. Our analyse is focused 
on the procesual organisation because the changes in 
this field have major influence on all other features 
of the company and on its management and 
performance.
The paper is structured in five parts:
• The organisational changes occured at the level of all 
enterprise’s functions —  R&D, commercial, produc-
tion, financial-accounting, and  human resources 
(personnel).
• The new configuration of the functions in the 
medium sized companies based on knowledge, 
revealing the apparition of two new organization 
functions —  knowledge function and  training 
function.
• The presentation of the knowledge function charac-
teristics in medium knowledge-based company and 
its nine main activities.
• The presentation of the 10 characteristics of the new 
tarining function.
• The identification and the presentation of the main 
particularities of the classical enterprise functions — 
R&D function, commercial function, production 
function, finance-accounting function, human 
resource function — in the medium knowledge-
based company.
All mentioned elements represent novelties in the 
international literature dedicated to the SMEs in the 
context of the transition to the knowledge-based 
economy.
2. Changes in All Enterprise Functions
Our analysis has identified the following major 
changes:
• Internationalization of work process inside enter-
prise, of course not all at the same level, but very 
consistent in each company function.
• Knowledge becames an essential input in the com-
pany, representing the strategic raw material for all 
enterprise activities.
• Increase in the creative dimension of the work pro-
cess within each enterprise’s functions and 
activities.
• Amplification of the work productivity, which deter-
mines much better knowledge-based company’s 
performance, comparative with the previous period.
• Externalization of certain specific enterprise activi-
ties which are not part of the value chain in the 
organization and, concomitently, internalization of 
certain activities which incorporate the essential 
knowledge needed in the enterprise chain value.
• Focalization of the enterprise activities on the 
 essential knowledge creation, share, use, and 
valorification.
• Transfer of the management emphasis from work 
process to the knowledge involved — both explicit 
and implicit knowledge — and to their owners” 
(knowledge-based specialists).
• Intensive informatization of the enterprise work pro-
cesses determined by the essential role of the knowl-
edge creation, use and valorization, replacing the 
emphasis on work (cazon) discipline, predominantly 
in the classic capitalist enterprise.
The synergetic result of all mentioned changes is 
the superior functionality of companies activities and of 
their procesual organization.
3.  New Organizational Configuration 
in the Knowledge-Based Medium 
Enterprises
The systemic dimension of the organization’s functions is 
not only maintainned, but it is even amplified. In the 
same time, importance and impact of certain functions 

 
Particularities of the Procesual Organisation 
177
on the company’s performance increase comparatively 
with classical capitalist enterprise. 
•  R&D function and, especially, technical activity 
becomes vital for the enterprise. Innovation in prod-
uct and technology increases and accelerates. As a 
consequence of this evolution, the role of the techni-
cal creativity processes amplifies and, concom-
itently, their integration with activities of the 
production and commercial functions.
• In the context of the hyper-concurrence and of the 
continued modification of the market requirements, 
the commercial function, in its components, espe-
cially marketing activity (Lindsey, 2002) get more 
impact on the enterprise competitivity.
• Transformation of modern companies in the learning 
organizations determines a significant increase in the 
size and in the impact of the  human resource func-
tion and especially of the training activity. As a con-
sequence, certain specialists (Fisk) have started to 
consider the training activity as becaming an autono-
mous function, outside of human resource function. 
In parallel — we observe a rapid and consistent 
development of numerous and heterogeneous processes 
focused on the knowledge treatement. All these pro-
cesses constitute a new organization function —  knowl-
edge function. Processes incorporated in the knowledge 
function are presented in two ways:
(a) As processes itself, without overlapping with other 
company’s activities. For example, the creation of 
new knowledge within the design department.
(b) Processes of knowledge treatment integrated in 
other companies activities — sale, supply, fabrica-
tion a.s.a.
In the context of the  knowledge-based economy 
development, in the knowledge-based organisation, 
both ways intensify, generating more functionality and 
sustainability.
As we already mentionned, training activity 
amplifies its role, size, impact, and performances and 
becames an autonomous function of the enterprise. 
This chapter is supported by the scientific work of the 
International Labour Organisation specialists. The 
intensification of the organisational and individual 
learning processes in knowledge-based company and 
their increasing impact on the enterprise functionability 
and performance represent a valuable proof in this 
aspect. In Fig. 1, we present the specific configuration 
of the organisation functions in the medium and large 
 knowledge-based enterprises.
4. Knowledge Function
All informations presented so far argues that knowl-
edge represent the determinant element for the func-
tionality of the knowledge-based enterprise.
The knowledge function could be defined as the 
all organization processes focused on the knowledge 
treatment, which provide the necessary knowledge, use, 
develop, protect, and valorize them, making a decisive 
contribution to the generation of the competitive prod-
ucts and to the competitivity and sustainability of the 
company. In Fig. 2, we present the main activities 
which make up the knowledge function. In the next 
paragraphs we shortly present the content of each 
activity.
• Identification of the knowledge necessary to the 
enterprise and its components, in order to achieve its 
objectives. Identification of the necessary knowledge 
is realized both inside and outside of the organiza-
tion, in its environment. Identification of the knowl-
edge necessary to the company employees involves 
special actions in certain fields of the company envi-
ronment, where it is probable and possible to dis-
cover these knowledges, in the condition of the best 
relation price-quality. An important role in this 
Fig. 1.  Specific configuration of organization functions in the 
knowledge-based enterprise
Knowledge 
FUNCTIONS
Research- 
development
(R&D)
Commercial
ProducƟon
Finance-
accounƟng
Human
resources
Training

178 
O. Nicolescu
activity is played by the knowledge intermediaries — 
knowledge stewardesses, knowledge brokers, knowl-
edge researchers a.s.a.
• Knowledge purchase is used by company only 
when the necessary knowledge has been identified in 
other organizations or to knowledge specialists out-
side the company. The knowledge aquisition, in 
order to be successful, should be very well prepared 
and the knowledge price and other knowledge char-
acteristics should be corelated with the company’s 
necessities, possibilities, and priorities. The main 
role in the knowledge aquisition should be played by 
the company specialists in the field of knowledge, 
who shall use them.
• Knowledge learning and assimilation by the com-
pany and its employees. Knowledge identification 
and knowledge purchase are not enough (sufficient) 
for the organisation. All these knowledges should be 
assimilated (integrated) using learning processes by 
the company  human resources. Knowledge learning 
could be a formal process, using special training 
courses or informal processes, realized by individual 
specialists efforts, and endeavors. Practices in 
medium enterprises demonstrate that the most part 
of new knowledge are obtained by employees using 
informal ways.
• Knowledge creation is necessary for company 
objectives achievement when the present knowledge 
is not sufficient and when the knowledge purchase is 
not possible or is too expensive. Knowledge creation 
is very common in the  knowledge-based enterprises 
because usually there are focused on innovation and 
their specialists have high creativity abilities. 
Knowledge creation in medium knowledge-based 
companies has a decisive role in getting its competi-
tive advantage and sustainability.
• Knowledge storage, refers to the company’s own 
knowledge and the purchased knowledge is a very 
important activity for the company. Knowledge stor-
age should be very well conceived in order to assure 
the company specialists and departments easy access 
to knowledge and the low costs with knowledge 
store and protection.
• Knowledge share represents — according to many 
specialists (Amaravadi & Lee, 2005; Calrero & 
Calrero, 2005; Hutzschnreuter & Harstkotte, 2010) 
one of the most important, difficult, and complex 
work processes based on knowledge. Knowledge 
productivity and value depends on their common 
access, assimilation, debate, analysis, and use of the 
interested company’s specialists and departments. 
Knowledge share is based both on formal and infor-
mal approaches. Formal approach consists in special 
company messages (announcements) regarding the 
knowledge existence, knowledge distribution to the 
specialists interested, organization of special knowl-
edge presentation and discussion a.s.o. Informal 
approach refers to the spontaneous discussion, 
exchange of views, and other usually communica-
tion ways among the company employees. To large 
extend it depends on the company culture and the 
personal example of managers.
• Knowledge use is, without any dought, a key pro-
cess which quantitatively is quite often used, pre-
dominantly in the company’s work processes. In 
Fig. 2.  Activities contained by organization knowledge function
Knowledge idenƟﬁcaƟon
Knowledge purchase
Knowledge learning and assimilaƟon
Knowledge creaƟon
Knowledge storage
Knowledge share
Knowledge use
Knowledge protecƟon
Knowledge valorisaƟon

 
Particularities of the Procesual Organisation 
179
order to be effective and efficient the knowledge use 
should be done by competent employees, in the 
optim period, in the certain company departments, 
and using right ways and tools.
• Knowledge protection is increasingly becoming an 
important company activity. The main reasons for 
this evolution are the following: rapid proliferation 
of the explicit knowledge in company; knowledge 
essential capacity of demultiplication, which allows 
the same knowledge to be used in the same time by 
many specialists; electronic storage of an important 
part of company’s knowledge, which is very difficult 
to stop the access of unauthorized users. Knowledge 
protection should be organized (done) without mak-
ing its access difficult and with the help of the com-
pany specialists’ involvement.
• Knowledge valorization could be done directly inside 
the company by producing new or better products and 
services. This is the most used way to valorize the 
company knowledge. The second way of company’s 
knowledge valorization is to sell them to other compa-
nies. The knowledge’s high fluidity and the rapid 
moral depreciation could be faced by company deploy-
ing fast feed-back and using performant commercial 
and technical skills. Knowledge valorization should 
provide the financial resources necessary to assure 
company’s current work and its sustainability.
5.  Training Function
According to our analysis, the new training function 
in the medium knowledge-based companies is different 
from training activity in classical companies from 
many points of view (see Fig. 3).
The support for these characteristics is represented 
to a large extend — by the sustainable education con-
cept (Fien et al., 2009) developed during last few years. 
Strong specificity of the knowledge-based company 
training is reflected with the appearance of the new 
knowledge-based specialist — organizational learning 
agent (Skyrme, 2002) — who has the following 
features:
• Proactive in action, but reflexive in thinking.
• High aspiration for training and performance, but 
realistic regarding the company’s limits.
• Critic in analysis, but constructive and dedicate in 
solutions and actions.
• Independent in thinking, but cooperant with others in 
training activities.
Company practice demonstrates that organisational 
learning agents could have a substantial contribution to 
the high performant training. In training function in the 
knowledge-based company there are used a large vari-
ety of training ways (formal, informal, in company or 
outside a.s.a.). Naturally, the programs’ content is dif-
ferent to a large extend from one company to other, or 
for the same organization from a period to another. 
According to the specialists (Dalkir, 2008; Singh, 
2009) even in these conditions the following elements 
should be used in company training programs:
(a) Up-to-date ways and tools to create, purchase, 
share, use, valorize, protect a.s.a. the knowledge.
(b) Changes in informatics and communication 
technologies.
(c) Last evolutions in the company markets and its 
local, regional, national, and international  
environment.
(d) Recent changes and tendencies in the technical and 
technological fields of the company and other 
related branches.
Fig. 3.  Characteristics differentiating the training in the medium 
knowledge-based enterprises and the training activity in the classi-
cal medium enterprise
Approached as a 
strategical activity 
Based on the closed 
conglomeration of 
managers with human 
resources specialists
Realized by intensive 
participation of each 
employee in the design, 
selection, and runing of
the training 
Achieved by using the 
multiple learning ways 
Focalized on the 
knowledge treatment 
necessities  
Based on many new 
learning methods and 
tools 
Correlated with present 
and future changes in 
company 
Based on the new 
organizational culture 
and individual 
behavior 
Subordinated to the 
present and future 
company objectives 
Realized as a permanent 
company activity 
1
1
2
3
9
8
7
4
5
6

180 
O. Nicolescu
6.  Main Particularities of the 
“Classical” Enterprise Functions
Based on the elements presented in the previous para-
graphs and on the other analysis (Boissot, 1998) we 
shall reveal the main particularities of the five classical 
functions in the medium  knowledge-based enterprise.
6.1.  R&D function
Main particularities of the R&D function — which 
contains pre-vision activity, technical design (concep-
tion) activity, and organisation activity — within 
knowledge-based company are the following:
• Size increasement of its three main activities, both 
absolutelly and relatively, based on the intensive 
participative approach and knowledge-based spe-
cialists competence.
• Knowledge-based experts — to a large extent — are 
working in R&D activities.
• Change speed of the R&D activities; content and 
ways are higher in the knowledge-based enterprise.
• New products generated by the R&D activities 
incorporate large knowledge quantity, which are 
determinant factors for obtaining competitive advan-
tage and enterprise sustainable development.
• R&D activities are quite frequently achieved by 
enterprise knowledge-based communities.
• Knowledge-based R&D function impact is increas-
ingly an imporatnt determinant on the enterprise’s 
functionality and performance.
6.2. Commercial function
Commercial function, made up of marketing, pur-
chase, and sell activities, presents the following major 
particularities:
• The commercial function’s importance and com-
plexity is amplifying constantly, asking for more 
knowledge with a high specificity, which the smaller 
size companies are finding it very difficult to have 
and to develop profitably.
• Externalization of the marketing work processes 
using very high quality knowledge is a strong 
tendency in the last decades in medium knowledge-
based enterprise.
• Externalization of many purchase and sell activities, 
especially those using very specialized equipments 
and knowledge.
• Amplification of the marketing, purchase, and sell 
actions which focused on the international markets.
• Commercial functional impact on the medium enter-
prise functionality and performance increases because 
of the internationalization and the hyper-concurrence.
6.3. Production function
This function is made of several activities — produc-
tion schedule, fabrication or exploitation, quality con-
trol, equipment maintenance and repair, production of 
the utilities. Its main particularities are the 
followings:
• Size of the work processes has the tendency to 
decrease because of highly automatized equipments 
and of very modern technologies used in knowledge 
medium size companies.
• Rapid intellectualization of work processes within 
production function; physical work having the ten-
dency to dissappear in production activity.
•  Human resource used has high level skills, medium 
companies using to a large extend knowledge-based 
specialists, increasingly with university degrees.
• Innovative dimension of the production activities is 
amplifying, quite often they generate new knowl-
edge integrated in new products, services, and 
technologies.
• Production activities are focalized on the company 
chain value and in the same time certain work pro-
cesses regarding repairing, maintenance, or utilities 
production are frequently externalized.
• Production function — which in many medium-sized 
companies in the industry, agriculture, or construc-
tion remain predominantly quantitative — continue 
to have a high impact on their performances.
6.4. Finance — accounting function
This medium company function has three main 
activities — finance, accounting, and financial-control 

 
Particularities of the Procesual Organisation 
181
(audit). According to our analysis, the main particulari-
ties of finance-accounting function are the followings:
• Size of work processes decreases because of infor-
mation codification, financial documents standardi-
zation, informatization and/or externalization of 
certain specific work processes, especially in finan-
cial audit and accounting.
• Financial activity has the tendency to dominate this 
function, both qualitatively and quantitatively, using 
more sophisticated financial, business and mange-
ment knowledge.
•  Human resources involved in finance-accounting 
work processes are very high-skilled and few in 
number.
• Amplification of information categories are taken 
into consideration in the design and achievement of 
financial processes, because of the business interna-
tionalization and of the rapid changes in finance and 
banking systems at national and international level.
• Impact of financial-accounting function on the 
knowledge-based organization’s functionality and 
performances remains high, having a tendency to 
increase in periods of economic crisis and during 
companies’ economic stress.
6.5. Human resources function
Personnel or human resources company function con-
tains the followings main activities: provision of neces-
sary human resources; enterprise personnel calification; 
human resources selection; personnel integration in the 
company; human resources evaluation; personnel moti-
vation; enterprise’s employee training; personnel pro-
motion; human resources protection. According to our 
analysis, the most relevant particularities of human 
resources function in the medium knowledge-based 
company are:
• Size and complexity of human resources’ activities 
amplify because of the increasing role of human 
resources mainly made of knowledge-based employ-
ees in the obtaining, sharing, using, valorizing a.s.o. 
of the organization’s knowledge.
• Human resource function is extending its actions to 
the main company stakeholders (clients, buyers, 
bankers, consultants a.s.a.) in order to atract, share, 
use and valorize their knowledges.
• Content of each human resource activity is changing 
because the organization’s management is focused 
more and more on knowledge, the main source of 
obtaining competitive advantage.
• Training processes have a decisive impact on the 
knowledge-based company functionality and perfor-
mance, becoming (as we already mentioned) an 
autonomus company function in large and medium-
sized companies.
• In motivational activity occurs major changes, its 
framework and content are remodelated, in order to 
facilitate a better knowledge use, development, and 
valorization.
• Overall impact of the human resources function in 
the medium knowledge-based companies increases 
on organization functionality and competitivity, 
because they posses the most part of the company 
knowledge.
7. Concluding Remarks
Based on the elements presented in previous para-
graphs we could formulate several concluding 
remarks regarding knowledge-based medium enter-
prise and its management.
• The numerous and deep changes in organization’s 
functions demonstrate that the medium  knowledge-
based enterprises is very different from the medium 
classic capitalist enterprise. We have a new configu-
ration 
of 
enterprise 
functions 
with 
many 
particularities.
• New functions configuration of the knowledge-
based medium enterprises demand new types of 
organization structure, able to facilitate and contrib-
ute to a performing organisation system.
• Knowledge-based community is the main compo-
nent of knowledge-based organization system.
• New functions configuration determines many 
changes in the company’s decisions at the entire 
organisational level and at the level of each proce-
sual and structural component. As a result, deci-
sional system of knowledge-based medium enterprise 
should be remodelated.

182 
O. Nicolescu
Management, financial, commercial, juridical a.s.a. 
methods and tools used in medium enterprises should be 
changed to a large extent. The specialists already have 
conceived a lot of new specific methods and techniques 
focussing on knowledge treatment. Among them we 
enumerate: Kim model (Kim, 2003) best practice method 
(Melcrum Research Report, 2002), informational space 
model elaborated by Boissot, People-Capacity Model 
(P-CMM), knowledge audit (Nicolescu & Nicolescu, 
2011),  social network analysis (Nicolescu & Nicolescu, 
2005), knowledge matrix (Powell, 2004) a.s.o. 
• Concomitantly, most part of management, finance, 
commercial, informatic a.s.o. methods and tech-
niques started to change in order to be able to valor-
ize the knowledge-based company specificities 
(Melcrum Research Report, 2002). Practically, in 
knowledge-based medium enterprise we redesign a 
new methodologic system.
• Information system in the knowledge-based com-
pany also change deeply. Information system is 
redesigned in order to be able to process large quan-
tity of knowledge, mainly explicit knowledge and 
especially to valorize them. In order to achieve this, 
information system should modify deeply its struc-
ture and functional characteristics.
•  Human resource system of the  knowledge-based 
enterprise should be modified in order to determine 
the company employees and its main stakeholders to 
create, learn, obtain, share, use, and valorize the high 
quality of knowledge necessary to the company.
Redesigning of the five management subsystems — 
organizational, methodological, decisional, informa-
tional, and human resources — demands a new 
management system, radically different from those of 
previous period. The principles and basic rules to be 
used in designing or redesigning the knowledge man-
agement system have been already elaborated by man-
agement specialists (Friedman, 2002; Jennex; King, 
2006; Prothmann & Clarke, 2005; Russ, 2010).
All elements presented in this chapter argues the 
necessity to promote a new type of management — 
 knowledge-based management — to be able to assure 
the functionality and the competivity of the knowledge-
based medium enterprise.
References
Angela, A. & Oxbrow, N. (2002), Competing with Knowledge, 
pp. 20–24, London: Library Association Publishing. 
Amaravadi, C & Lee, I. (2005), The dimensions of process 
knowledge, Knowledge and Process Management, 
12(1), pp. 24–25.
Boissot, M. (1998), Knowledge Assets, pp. 64–92, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Calrero, F. & Calrero, A. (2005), Fostering knowledge shar-
ing through people management practices, International 
Journal of Human Resource Management, 6(5).
Dalkir, K. (2008), Knowledge Management in Theory and 
Practice, pp. 94–104, Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Fien, J., McLean, R., & Port, M. (2009), Work, Learning and 
Sustenable Development, pp. 382–392, Tokyo: Springer. 
Fisk, P. (2004), Genii în Marketing, pp. 18–20, Bucureşti: 
Editura Meteor Press. 
Friedman, V. (2002), The individual as agent of organiza-
tional learning, California Management Review, 44(2), 
pp. 147–150.
Hutzschnreuter, T. & Harstkotte, J. (2010), Knowledge trans-
fer to partners: A firm level perspective, Journal of 
Knowledge Management, 3, pp. 246–252.
Jennex, M. (2002), Knowledge management system succes 
factors. In D. Schwartz, pp. 436–441.
Kessels, J. (2001), Learning in organization: A corporate 
 curriculum for the knowledge economy, Futures, 33(6), 
pp. 74–77.
Kim, M. (2003), A knowledge management model for SMEs 
în 
the 
knowledge 
based 
economy. 
In 
xxx, 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation in the Knowledge 
Based Economy: Challenges and Strategies, pp. 18–19, 
Tokyo: APO. 
King, W. (2006), Knowledge sharing. In Encyclopedia of 
Knowledge Management, D. Swartz (ed.), pp. 493–498, 
Hershey: Idea Group Reference.
Lindsey, K. (2002), Knowledge Sharing Barriers. In D. 
Swartz, pp. 499–506.
Melcrum Research Report (2002), Learning and Development, 
in the Electronic Age. 
Nicolescu, O. & Nicolescu, L. (2005), Economia, Organizaţia 
şi Managementul Bazate pe Cunoştinţe, pp. 103–110, 
Bucharest: Economica Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O. & Nicolescu, C. (2011), Organizaţia şi 
Managementul Bazate pe Cunoştinţe, pp. 110–142, 
118–124, 312–317, 222–228, Bucureşti: ProUniversitaria. 
Powell, T. W. (2004), The knowledge matrix: A proposed 
taxonomy for entreprise knowledge. In Knowledge 
Management Lessons Learned — What Works and What 

 
Particularities of the Procesual Organisation 
183
Doesn’t, E. Michael, D. Koenig, and T. Srikantaiah 
(eds.), pp. 227–237, Medford: Information Today Inc.
Prokopenko, J. (1998), Management Development, A Guide 
for Profession, pp. 340–348, Geneva: ILO. 
Prothmann, M. T. & Clarke, S. (2005), Use and methods of 
social network analysis in knowledge management. 
In Encyclopedia of Communities of Practice in 
Information and Knowledge Management, E. Coakes 
(ed.), pp. 565–574, Hershey: Idea Group.
Russ, M. (2010), Knowledge Management Strategies for 
Business Development, pp. 64–83, Hershey: Business 
Science. 
Skyrme, D. J. (2002), Best Practices in Best Practices, 
pp. 10–24, New York: David Skyrme Associates.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

185
Chapter 21
Preparing Our Students 
for an Entrepreneurial Life: Are Universities 
Part of the Solution or Part of the Problem
Lester Lloyd-Reason
Anglia Ruskin University
In a report recently produced by the National Council 
for Graduate  Entrepreneurship (NCGE), the National 
Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts 
(NESTA) and the Council for Industry and Higher 
Education (CIHE) concluded that “ Entrepreneurship 
education is currently taught primarily through mod-
ules in business school courses and extra-curricular 
activities. Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) need to 
enhance the perception and relevance of entrepreneur-
ship education, so students and staff recognize t he 
value of its combination of innovation, creativity, col-
laboration, and risk-taking skills to a wide range of 
disciplines.”
This chapter will firstly explore the key issues 
raised by the policy community and others calling into 
question the appropriateness of the way in which enter-
prise and entrepreneurship is taught. It will then look at 
the way in which universities are responding to these 
comments. The chapter will call for a change in the way 
universities around the globe respond to the challenges 
of the 21st century in terms of entrepreneurship educa-
tion and will conclude with a number of examples of 
both pedagogical and projects delivered by academics 
and entrepreneurs by way of an example of best 
practice.
1. Introduction
Over the last 20 years or so, there has been an ever 
increasing level of academic and policy interest in the 
role of higher education institutions (HEIs) as agents of 
economic and social development, through not only 
their research and teaching activities but also their 
engagement with individuals and businesses in the 
wider local and regional economy. The 2008 report 
from the Council for Industry and Higher Education 
(CIHE), 
the 
National 
Council 
for 
Graduate 
Entrepreneurship and National Endowment for Science, 
Technology and the Arts (NESTA) in the United 
Kingdom notes that ‘HEIs have increasingly become 
more involved in regional economic and social devel-
opment (through closer business, industry, and third 
sector collaborations …) and activities such as the com-
mercialization of intellectual property’ (NESTA, 2008).
Across a range of developed market economies, 
there have been a number of policy statements which 
have outlined ways in which the outreach or ‘third leg’ 
activities of HEIs can be enhanced and supported. In 
the United Kingdom, for example, the Innovation 
White Paper (Department for Innovation, Universities 
and Skills (DIUS), 2008a), the Enterprise Strategy 

186 
L. Lloyd-Reason
(BERR, 2008) and the Employer Engagement Reforms 
(DIUS, 2008b) all outline different scenarios for HEIs 
supporting the development of the capabilities and 
skills of individuals and businesses to survive and 
thrive. At a Pan-European level, The Oslo Agenda for 
 Entrepreneurship Education in Europe (2006) calls for: 
better integration across subject areas, improved prac-
tice-based pedagogical tools, and better approaches to 
teamwork, whether internal or external (through col-
laboration with industry and business). In the UK, in 
2008, the department of Business, Enterprise and 
Regulatory Reform developed a new strategy as part of 
the UK government’s vision to ‘make the UK the most 
enterprising economy in the world and the best place to 
start and grow a business (BERR, 2008).
In 2010 the current UK administration reiterated 
this vision leading to the 2011 White Paper for Higher 
Education ‘Students at the Heart of the System’ which 
emphasized entrepreneurship education. At a global 
level, the need to promote entrepreneurship education 
has been recognized and promoted by a great number 
of governmental and non-governmental bodies such as 
the World Economic Forum report to the Global 
Education Initiative in 2009 titled “Educating the Next 
Wave of Entrepreneurs: Unlocking entrepreneurial 
capabilities to meet the global challenges of the 21st 
Century” and The United National Conference for 
Trade and Development (UNCTAD) 2010 report “The 
importance of entrepreneurship”. 
2. The HEI Response
This policy narrative has manifested itself in programs 
of support and funding streams including the Higher 
Education Reach Out into the Business and Community 
Fund, the Science and Enterprise Challenge Fund, and 
the Higher Education Innovation Fund. Reflecting this 
need to encourage small firm activity, universities in the 
United Kingdom have been encouraged to participate 
in programs to increase the numbers of students of 
enterprise and assist them in starting their own busi-
ness. As a result, HEIs have introduced a range of 
activities and initiatives to support students and staff in 
engaging with their community and vice-versa. 
Incubation spaces, technology transfer offices, business 
planning competitions and business development pro-
grams are now common across the HEI landscape. 
Evidence from economies such as the United States 
highlights the potential contribution of enterprising stu-
dents to competitiveness and productivity, particularly 
through facilitating organizational change and business 
start-up. By the year 2000, business and entrepreneurial 
development had been listed by Universities UK as one 
of four strategic goals for British Universities. Hannon 
et al. (2004) report on statistics from the United States 
that demonstrates that business start-ups by graduates 
accounts for between 6% and 8% of national GDP. 
More recently, the European Directorate General for 
Enterprise and Industry’s report, Effects and Impact of 
Entrepreneurship Programs in Higher Education (2012), 
presents results that clearly indicate that entrepreneur-
ship education in higher education makes a difference. 
It has impact on intention, competence and employabil-
ity and generally benefits society and the economy. The 
report underlines the importance of developing effec-
tive educational capacity across all disciplines.
As a guide to the skills requirement of enterprise 
students, the QAA Framework for Higher Education 
Qualifications (England) in General Business and 
Management states that ‘Preparation for business 
should be taken to mean the development of a range of 
specific business knowledge and skills, together with 
the improved self-awareness and personal development 
appropriate to graduate careers in business with the 
potential for management positions and to employabil-
ity in general. This includes the encouragement of posi-
tive and critical attitudes towards change and enterprise, 
so as to reflect the dynamism and vibrancy of the busi-
ness environment’.
However, despite the policy initiatives, qualifica-
tion guidelines and a huge increase in enterprise and 
entrepreneurship provision within HEIs, there is much 
evidence of a mismatch between the supply of gradu-
ates and the skills required to success within the con-
temporary business environment. Research undertaken 
by CIHE demonstrates a gap between perceived impor-
tance and levels of satisfaction in terms of commercial 
awareness and communication skills. Archer & Davison 
(2008) note that:
It appears that while many graduates hold satisfactory 
qualifications, they are lacking in the key “soft” skills 
and qualities that employers increasingly need in a 
more customer focused world.

 
Preparing Our Students for an Entrepreneurial Life 
187
In their 2008 report, the NCGE, the NESTA and the 
CIHE concluded that ‘ Entrepreneurship education is 
currently taught primarily through modules in business 
school courses and extra-curricular activities. HEIs 
need to enhance the perception and relevance of entre-
preneurship education, so students and staff recognize 
the value of its combination of innovation, creativity, 
collaboration and risk-taking skills to a wide range of 
disciplines’.
In the intervening years since these reports were 
published, the groundswell of policy advice, supported 
by an increasingly sophisticated range of university 
initiatives and developments in the area of enterprise 
and entrepreneurship education, does not appear to 
have adequately addressed the problem of producing 
graduates with an appropriate enterprising skills set. In 
the Wilson Report (2012), a review of Business–
University collaboration conducted by Prof. Sir Tim 
Wilson the message was loud and clear, although per-
haps somewhat diplomatically expressed:
“Universities should reflect on the strategies they use 
to ensure that students have the opportunity to 
develop enterprise skills both through the formal cur-
riculum and through optional study or practice, and 
reflect on the integration of enterprise education in 
the professional development programmed for aca-
demic staff.”
3.  So Where are We Now: The Current 
State of Play within the Higher 
Education Sector
The 
European 
Commission 
Green 
Paper 
on 
Entrepreneurship (2008) states that within university 
entrepreneurship training should not only be for MBA 
students it should also be available for students in other 
fields. However, with a few notable exceptions this has 
not happened within the Higher Education sector. Indeed 
even within Business schools the whole enterprise agenda 
has been undervalued resulting in an uneven offering 
across the sector where in the main enterprise as a subject 
remains on the periphery offered either as an option elec-
tive or at best bolted on to the pervading corporate model 
of education to create a degree program that has enter-
prise/entrepreneurship the title, but with little change in 
the content and none in teaching methodology.
There has in business schools been an attempt to 
define the subject area for example is teaching for 
enterprise or about entrepreneurship. These words are 
often seen as synonymous; however, entrepreneurship 
is in essence about starting a new venture. Enterprise is 
the whole concept of how students need to think in a 
completely different way to face the challenge of work 
in the 21st century. It is important therefore to define 
what we mean by “Enterprise Education” and 
“Entrepreneurship Education” (QAA, 2012).
Enterprise is defined here as the application of 
creative ideas and innovations to practical situations. 
This is a generic concept that can be applied across all 
areas of education. It combines creativity, ideas devel-
opment and problem solving with expression, commu-
nication and practical action. This definition is distinct 
from the generic use of the word in reference to a pro-
ject or business venture.
Enterprise education aims to produce graduates 
with the mindset and skills to come up with original 
ideas in response to identified needs and shortfalls, and 
the ability to act on them. In short, having an idea and 
making it happen. Enterprise skills include taking the 
initiative, intuitive decision-making, making things 
happen, networking, identifying opportunities, creative 
problem solving, innovating, strategic thinking, and 
personal effectiveness. Enterprise education extends 
beyond knowledge acquisition to a wide range of emo-
tional, intellectual, social, and practical skills.
Entrepreneurship is defined as the application of 
enterprise skills specifically to creating and growing 
organizations in order to identify and build on 
opportunities.
Entrepreneurship education focuses on the devel-
opment and application of an enterprising mindset and 
skills in the specific contexts of setting up a new ven-
ture, developing and growing an existing business, or 
designing an entrepreneurial organization.
Entrepreneurship education aims to produce 
graduates who are capable of identifying opportunities 
and developing ventures, through setting up new busi-
nesses or developing and growing part of an existing 
venture. It focuses on encouraging students to apply 
enterprising skills and attributes to a range of different 
contexts, including new or existing businesses, chari-
ties, non-governmental organizations, the public sector, 
and social enterprises.

188 
L. Lloyd-Reason
If we accept therefore, that enterprise is about the 
development of an enterprising skill set, the ‘soft’ skills 
so craved by employers, and that  entrepreneurship rep-
resents the application of that skills set in the recogni-
tion and exploitation of business opportunities. In terms 
of the development of appropriate academic programs 
within the Higher Education sector, this translates into 
a need for course that are ‘about’ rather than the more 
traditional courses which are more ‘about’ courses.
“About” courses are intended to help students to 
assimilate and reflect upon existing knowledge and 
resources that enhance their understanding of a topic or 
theme, for example, venture creation and business 
growth strategies. They tend to draw upon a more tradi-
tional pedagogy involving lectures and set texts to 
explore the theoretical underpinnings of enterprise and 
entrepreneurship. Students may learn how enterprise 
and entrepreneurship has evolved as a discipline and be 
able to critically evaluate the relevant literature.
“For” courses focus on creating enterprising mind-
sets in graduates and help them to discover what it is to 
be enterprising, as well as offering insights into being 
an entrepreneur. These courses are normally delivered 
via experiential learning opportunities that engage and 
enhance the student’s abilities and skills, set within a 
meaningful and relevant context. They challenge the 
student to think about the future and visualize opportu-
nities. Learners will typically be engaged in scenarios 
that challenge their thinking and make explicit the need 
for creativity and innovation. As with all academic dis-
ciplines, practice should be underpinned by theory, so 
an ideal combination is to include learning both “about” 
and “for” within the curriculum.
In other words, the value of current knowledge and 
its delivery in an environment where change occurs at 
great pace and the ability to harvest knowledge as and 
when needed becomes more important than being reliant 
on facts and figures. To put it another way, what is a cor-
rect solution today may not be a correct solution tomor-
row. In this complex learning environment, despite the 
abundance of information, processing it and linking and 
connecting becomes the imperative, not merely recalling 
it. Self-efficacy, for example, the confidence to try 
something out and to survive repeated failures is often as 
reliant on motivational drivers as it is knowledge. 
We need to help our students to develop an entre-
preneurial mindset, to not just feel comfortable with 
ambiguity, but to thrive in it, to understand the value of 
creative thinking, and to be able to generate creative 
solutions. Within our universities, there is a need for 
enterprise to triumph over process, for innovation to be 
regarded as more important than systems thinking. Yet 
the reality is that enterprise and innovation are discour-
aged, frowned upon and those seeking to promote them 
at best tolerated and at worst regarded as disruptive 
influences. The expert psychologist Theresa Amabile 
has suggested that those of us working within universi-
ties need to check what we are doing in terms of moti-
vational activities such as being creative and trying new 
things out for ourselves:
“Creativity is undermined unintentionally every 
day in work environments that were established for 
entirely good reasons to maximize business imperatives 
such as coordination, productivity and control … in 
working toward these imperatives, they may be inad-
vertently designing organizations that systematically 
crushes creativity” (Amabile, 1997).
Of course, not everyone will want to start a busi-
ness, but all students need to be enterprising both for 
success in the work place and to add value to society. 
Therefore business schools need to change the way 
they both structure and deliver enterprise education. 
They have not thus far taught enterprise skills except 
where they are seen as relevant to understanding new 
venture creation, thus making it appear that this “spe-
cial few” who are entrepreneurial have or need such a 
capability. Indeed most of such entrepreneurial pro-
grams are formulaic in structure and traditionalist in 
methodology, which only serves to underpin the view 
that entrepreneurs are different to the rest of main-
stream business. This has been and still is a very dan-
gerous weakness in the understanding shown by 
universities about the enterprise agenda and it is impor-
tance to their collective futures.
There has then to be a major cultural change in the 
way universities operate if they are to face these 
changes that are coming. Acceptance that there needs to 
be a move to a model of integrated learning with more 
student management of the process and a wide and 
more innovative use of technology is essential. 

 
Preparing Our Students for an Entrepreneurial Life 
189
Universities have to move rapidly from an educational 
orthodoxy based on separate disciplines being taught in 
silos and managing the learning process by and arcane 
approach to teaching and learning that is reliant on 
didactic teaching approach and the production of ever 
more obtuse work books to an educational methodol-
ogy that embraces the concept of enterprise and inte-
grated business skills thus placing them at the center of 
the curriculum and not on the periphery.
Further there has to be a much deeper understand-
ing that such activities as creativity, problem solving, 
understanding innovation, risk management and culture 
change coupled with decision-making and confidence 
building which in turn leads to self reliance, open 
minded respect for evidence and a willingness to take 
on responsibility, are the absolute core issues of the 
enterprise concept. 
In order to achieve this change, universities need to 
interact more with the entrepreneurial world by bring-
ing successful enterprising people into the development 
and delivery process. This is something again which 
many universities have not embraced due to a culture of 
academic insulation that if not changed will render 
them increasingly non competitive.
4.  Embedding Practitioner Experience: 
A Case Study — BA (Hons) in 
Enterprise and Entrepreneurial 
Management
4.1. Background to the course
The objective behind the development of this course 
was to address many of the issues identified above 
through establishing a benchmark program in the area 
of enterprise and entrepreneurial management. It pro-
vides the students with conceptual and theoretical 
insights into enterprise, innovation and entrepreneurial 
management, as well as the practical abilities and skills 
to apply this understanding within a range of different 
business, community and organizational contexts. 
It has been developed by the Centre for Enterprise 
Development and Research (CEDAR) within the Lord 
Ashcroft International Business School (LAIBS), 
Anglia Ruskin University, Cambridge, UK. CEDAR is 
the first UK Institute for Enterprise and Entrepreneurs 
(IOEE) Centre for Excellence and has run programs 
promoting enterprise development and enterprise edu-
cation across the world. 
With regard to curriculum design, CEDAR worked 
in close conjunction with a wide range of successful 
entrepreneurs from Cambridge in the UK and elsewhere 
to ensure that the course from conception to delivery suc-
ceeded in blending theory and practice in a meaningful 
way to develop a coherent academic program. The exten-
sive academic and entrepreneurial networks at CEDAR 
allowed practitioners to be involved from the outset. An 
‘entrepreneur in residence’ network was established to 
ensure that leading entrepreneurs were closely embedded 
in the fabric of the course from the start, playing a very 
active role in the continued development of the curricu-
lum, content, and delivery of the academic program. In 
this way the course blends theory and practice to provide 
graduates of the program with the skills, attitudes and 
aptitude required if they are to thrive in a highly com-
plex, fast changing business environment. 
It is important to stress that the aim in developing 
the ‘entrepreneur in residence’ network is to embed 
enterprise and the experiences of entrepreneurs within 
the academic program. This allows for the strong, theo-
retical underpinning of a university academic program 
to be interlaced with the insights and experiential learn-
ing brought into the lecture room by this group of world 
class entrepreneurs. 
A key role of the entrepreneur is one of mentoring 
the students. In addition to the Personal Tutor appointed 
under the University Personal Tutoring system, each 
student on the course is allocated a member of the 
‘entrepreneur in residence’ network who acts as their 
personal mentor for the duration of the academic pro-
gram. The Personal Tutor and the entrepreneur will 
then work closely together to support the ongoing 
learning needs of the student. This creates a very strong 
link between the Personal Tutor system and the ‘entre-
preneur in residence’ network whist at the same time 
providing the student with a very powerful learning 
support structure. 
Before briefly describing the academic program, 
below is a brief profile of some of the entrepreneurs 
involved in the course. 

190 
L. Lloyd-Reason
Walter Herriot
Director of the Entrepreneur in 
Residence Network, Managing 
Director, St. John’s Innovation 
Centre
Walter Herriot built St. John’s 
Innovation Centre into one of the 
most successful business incuba-
tors in the world. Regarded as one of the founders of 
the Cambridge Phenomenon, Walter is Chair of the 
Cambridge Chamber of Commerce, Chairs both the 
EEDA Enterprise Hubs in the East of England and 
Enterprise East and is a member of the steering com-
mittee of the Greater Cambridge Partnership. A former 
Cambridge Evening News “Businessman of the Year”, 
in 1999 Walter was awarded an OBE for services to 
enterprise.
Billy Boyle
Co-founder/Director Owlstone Ltd
Billy Boyle is co-founder and 
director of Owlstone which devel-
ops and commercializes MEMS 
chemical sensors for industrial 
and military use. Founded in 
2004, Owlstone currently employs 
30 people, has raised USD 10 mn in the USA and has 
won a USD 3.7 mn contract from the US Department 
of Defence. Billy is first and co-author on numerous 
conference and journal papers, has presented at a num-
ber of prestigious international conferences and is co-
inventor of 19 patents.
Peter Taylor
Managing Director, TTP Group 
plc
Peter, a Cambridge physicist, is 
Managing Director of TTP 
Group, the holding company for 
a number of international high-
technology companies supplying 
products, R&D services and venture capital. He is 
Chairman of The Technology Partnership plc, Europe’s 
leading independent technology development and 
licensing business and TTP Group’s principal operating 
subsidiary. In 1987, he was one of the founders of TTP 
and subsequently built the science-based half of the 
business. Peter has been responsible for product and 
technology developments in major markets including 
healthcare, communications, and consumer products, 
including the formation of several jointly or wholly-
owned companies. Peter was responsible for develop-
ing the company’s business in Japan and in the field of 
Digital Printing.
Giulio Cinque
Giulio Man and Woman
Having started working on a 
market stall, Giulio has built his 
designer clothing retailer busi-
ness into one of the most highly 
regarded designer boutiques in 
the UK. Now part of a 250 strong 
global designer clothing network, over 30% of all rev-
enues are generated outside of the UK. 
Natalie Haywood
Founder of Leaf Tea Shop and 
Bar
Natalie is the founder and man-
aging director of the Leaf Tea 
Shop and Bar, an innovative, 
award winning tea shop and bar 
concept, based in Liverpool, UK. 
She has considerable marketing experience working 
with small and medium-sized enterprises and is a 
Chartered Marketer and Young Enterprise Ambassador. 
Natalie has recently opened two further venues — 
‘The Garden’ a vegetarian focused café and meeting 
place and ‘Oh Me Oh My’ a Parisian teahouse, wed-
ding venue and events space. Natalie is regarded as one 
of the leading  young entrepreneurs in the UK, and has 
been the recipient of numerous awards. She was 
recently featured in the 2013 Accelerate 250 as one of 
the 250 fastest growing businesses in the UK.

 
Preparing Our Students for an Entrepreneurial Life 
191
Paddy Bishopp
Co-founder of Paddy and Scotts
“Paddy’s and Scott’s Seriously 
good coffee. A guy who shares a 
passion for great coffee. Paddy 
used to own a café which was 
voted The Best Deli/Café in 
Suffolk in the UK and harbored a 
longing desire to roast his own coffee. He strongly 
believes business should be fun, but producing coffee 
does have a serious side. Being a father he understands 
the importance of education and nurturing children. In 
many situations it is the children in the plantation areas 
who are forgotten and they end up with very little or no 
education. By working with organizations such as Fair 
Trade and Utz Certified the company ensures these 
communities can invest in future generations. 
Amy Mokady
Entrepreneur
Amy Mokady is a serial entrepre-
neur who has held senior sales, 
marketing and business develop-
ment roles in start-ups and multi-
national companies. She was a 
co-founder and marketing direc-
tor of STNC Ltd., which was acquired by Microsoft in 
1999. Following roles working at the forefront of the 
mobile industry at Microsoft, QUALCOMM and 
Hutchison 3G, more recent start-ups include Pogo 
Mobile Solutions, Light Blue Optics and Mo. Jo. Amy 
is also a Director and mentor of several early-stage 
technology start-ups, a Director of the Greater 
Cambridge Partnership, and a Board Member of the 
Cambridge Angels.
Micah John Styles
Managing Director CLR Global 
Group
Micah is founder and Managing 
Director of the CLR Global 
Group, a visionary Group of spe-
cialist international recruitment 
consultancy companies, which has been operating on a 
truly global scale since 2001. A “Born Global” entre-
preneurial business, the CLR Global Group has opera-
tions in Qatar, China, Brazil and Mauritius. Prior to 
founding the CLR Global Group Micah worked in 
senior finance positions in Media companies in the UK 
and South Africa and currently directs his commercial 
endeavors and oversees his worldwide interests from 
his home in the South of France.
4.2.  The academic program
With regard to the coverage of key academic areas for 
the subject, the majority of existing enterprise and 
 entrepreneurship degree programs are either highly 
practical in nature or ‘knowledge’ based. The ‘about’ 
courses. This course takes the approach of marrying 
these two together through developing an enterprising 
skills set alongside the practical application of those 
skills. Schools and Colleges increasingly report that 
‘enterprise clubs’, ‘run your own business’ schemes 
and other programs tend to capture the attention of 
those students alienated from more traditional subjects 
and who are likely to drift away from education. 
Having been persuaded to stay within the education 
system, upon entering University these students again 
typically encounter traditional functional subjects such 
as finance, marketing and HRM. For many students this 
is perfectly appropriate, but for the type of student 
likely to be attracted to enterprise and entrepreneurship 
this fails to capture their imagination, their interest is 
again lost and they tend either to drift out of the educa-
tional system or to badly underperform due to lack of 
interest or motivation.
This course, through a highly innovative and radi-
cal approach to curriculum design and delivery aims to 
capture the passion and imagination of this neglected 
group of students. At the outset, the students are intro-
duced to the concept of enterprise through two innova-
tive modules ‘Foundations of Enterprise’ which 
provides an understanding of enterprise as a discipline 
and ‘Enterprise in Action’ which allows for the initial 
development of core enterprising abilities and skills. 
The ‘Enterprise in Action’ module, as the name 
suggests, is a very practical, hands on module. To this 
end, the development team worked in partnership with 

192 
L. Lloyd-Reason
Virgin Money to provide the students with an opportu-
nity to work on a real business opportunity. Virgin 
Money had for some time been exploring the potential 
market for a new product. Virgin Money provided the 
students with their market intelligence and provided a 
dedicated liaison person and the students were required 
to prepare an outline business plan for the market 
potential and the best route to market. This plan was 
then presented to the senior management at Virgin 
Money in their boardroom at the conclusion of the 
module. A remarkable opportunity for first year under-
graduate students. 
In the second semester the students are placed 
within an entrepreneurial business, not on a traditional 
student placement where low level tasks are often 
undertaken, but to provide exposure to the trading reali-
ties facing the entrepreneurial enterpriser and to offer 
opportunities for personal skills development through 
such mechanisms as mentoring and shadowing. This is 
the first stage in the students’ outside journey and is 
called ‘Learning in Residence’. 
Keith Hermann, Deputy Director of the National 
Council for Education and  Entrepreneurship, has 
described the “Leaning in Residence” module as 
“a fabulous invention and although there are numerous 
schemes which encourage work-based learning for stu-
dents via placements, the design of this element of the 
program is fundamental to its success.”
In the final year, rather than having to produce a 
dissertation, the students have the opportunity to man-
age a charity event. The students have to engage with 
the charity of their choice and then select and run a 
fund raising event. This challenging module requires 
the students to put into practice many of the ‘soft’ skills 
developed over the three years of the course such as, 
team work, leadership, creative thinking, problem solv-
ing, risk assessment and risk management as well as 
developing a solid understanding of the concept of 
networks. The most recent group of final year students 
organized a black tie dinner and auction raising over 
£7,000 for water aid.
Consistent with the highly innovative nature of this 
course, an innovative approach is taken to the learning 
and teaching methods used to achieve the learning out-
comes. That is, the differentiator is not ‘what’, but 
‘how’. There are no lectures or tutorials, rather, teaching 
is undertaken in full day blocks, often away from the 
University within entrepreneurial businesses and other 
locations. For example, Paul Bourne, Artistic Director 
of Menagerie Theatre Company, Managing Director of 
Ensemble Training and Visiting Fellow at CEDAR 
takes the students to a theater to take part in the creative 
process of developing a piece of theater from scratch.
5. Some thoughts in Conclusion
This chapter has identified a number of policy initia-
tives aimed at promoting the development of skills and 
capabilities required by graduates if they are to survive 
and thrive within the modern fast paced, highly com-
petitive entrepreneurial environment. Evidence of the 
contribution made by enterprising students to competi-
tiveness and production, particularly through facilitat-
ing organizational change and business start-up has 
been cited. However, the key issue underpinning this 
paper is that HEIs have demonstrated relatively few 
offerings able to provide students with an awareness of 
the abilities, behaviors and skills required to compete 
within different employability contexts.
In recent years there has been growing interest in 
the area of enterprise education, resulting in a huge 
increase in the academic literature in the area. This 
body of work appears to suggest that within universities 
there largely remains a focus on traditional teaching 
methods and learning pedagogies such as lectures and 
case studies. In the paper we note that there is a lack of 
insight as to how practitioners can be embedded within 
the development and delivery of enterprise education 
offerings. 
The case study presented here is one of many 
examples of good practice to be found within the 
Higher Education sector. Such programs, however, that 
embed practitioners into the teaching of enterprise and 
entrepreneurship appear to be the exception rather than 
the rule. This chapter contends that there are significant 
weaknesses in the way universities in general approach 
the teaching of enterprise and entrepreneurship. 
The writing is on the wall for those universities in 
the developed world who may think they lead the way 
with regard to enterprise and  entrepreneurship educa-
tion. The UNCTAD spent three years investigating what 
makes an entrepreneurial eco system, concluding that 

 
Preparing Our Students for an Entrepreneurial Life 
193
education was one of the key six pillars that policy mak-
ers needed to address, the prime call being to “Mainstream 
the development of  entrepreneurship awareness and 
entrepreneurial behaviors starting from primary school 
level”. UNCTAD’s Chief of Entrepreneurship reports 
that many developing countries are more engaged than 
countries with more traditional approaches to education, 
and that based on research developed from the Global 
Economic Monitor, “entrepreneurial dynamism has 
been shifting to developing countries”.
We would argue that if universities in the developed 
world wish to counteract this shift, they need to move 
from a model of educational orthodoxy to a more inte-
grated based approach which interacts in a much more 
meaningful way with the entrepreneurial world. One of 
the ways this can be achieved is by bringing successful 
enterprising people into the development and delivery 
process. The case study above provides an example of 
how this can be done efficiently and effectively.
References
Amabile, T. (1997), How to kill creativity, Harvard Business 
Review, 77.
An Education System fit for an Entrepreneur (2014), Fifth 
Report by the All-Party Parliamentary Group for Micro 
Businesses.
Archer, W. & Davison, J. (2008), Graduate Employability: 
What Do Employers Think and Want? London: Council 
for Industry and Higher Education.
Department of Business, Enterprise and Regulatory Reform 
(BERR) (2008), Enterprise: Unlocking the UK Talent, 
London: The Stationery Office.
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills (2006), 
UK Skills: Prosperity for All in the Global Economy — 
World Class Skills, London: The Stationery Office.
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills (2008a), 
Innovation Nation, London: The Stationery Office.
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills (2008b), 
Higher Education at Work: High Skills, High Value, 
London: Department for Innovation, Universities and 
Skills.
European Commission (2012), Effects and Impact of 
Entrepreneurship Programmes in Higher Education, 
Brussels: Directorate-General for Enterprise and 
Industry/European Commission.
Gibb, A. A. (2005), Towards the entrepreneurial university, 
Policy Paper No. 3, NCGE, Birmingham.
Hannon, P. (2004), Making the journey from student to 
 entrepreneur: A review of existing research into graduate 
entrepreneurship, Final Report for the National Council 
for Graduate Entrepreneurship, Birmingham: Institute 
of Small Business Affairs Consortium.
Hannon, P. (2007), Enterprise for all? The fragility of enter-
prise provision across England HEIs, Journal of Small 
Business and Enterprise Development, 14(2), 183–210.
Hartshorn, C. & Sear, L. (2005), Employability and enter-
prise: Evidence from the North East, Urban Studies, 
42(2), 271–283.
Leaning and Skills Development Agency (2002), The Howard 
Davies Review of Enterprise and the Economy in 
Education, London: HMSO. 
NESTA (2008), Developing Entrepreneurial Graduates: 
Putting Entrepreneurship at the Centre of Higher 
Education, London: NESTA, National Council for 
Graduate Entrepreneurship and Council for Industry and 
Higher Education.
National Council for Graduate Entrepreneurship (2007), 
Enterprise and Entrepreneurship in Higher Education, 
Birmingham: 
National 
Council 
for 
Graduate 
Entrepreneurship.
Mugione, F. (2013), Joint Inter-Governmental Conference 
Parliamentary Assembly of the Mediterranean & United 
Nations Inter-Agency on Trade and Productive Capacity, 
Geneva.
QAA (2012), Enterprise and Entrepreneurship Education: 
Guidance for UK Higher Education Providers.
The Oslo Agenda for Entrepreneurship Education in Europe 
(2006), European Commission, Brussels.
Wilson, T. (2011), The Wilson Review of University–Business 
Collaboration.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

195
Chapter 22
Difficulties in Improving Romanian 
Companies  Management
Corneliu Russu
At the current stage of economic development of the 
countries of the world, firstly the major industrialized 
ones, professional potential, strategic vision, and crea-
tive ability of managers of companies is one of the most 
effective springs to ensure sustainable development, 
modernization of economic activity, and significant 
competitiveness growth. In the era of globalization, 
global confrontation of economies, companies and their 
products/services, the role of this resort is decisive, 
determinant for successful chances of maintaining in 
the planetary competition. 
The present circumstances are profoundly changed 
in comparison with those specific to the second half 
of the last century, and impose to managerial activity 
significant improvements in dynamism, flexibility, 
approaches rationality, forecasts realism, rapid response 
to change.
1. Introduction
At the current stage of economic development of the 
countries of the world, firstly the major industrialized 
ones, professional potential, strategic vision and crea-
tive ability of managers of companies is one of the most 
effective springs to ensure sustainable development, 
modernization of economic activity and significant 
competitiveness growth. In the era of globalization, 
global confrontation of economies, companies and their 
products/services, the role of this resort is decisive, 
determinant for successful chances of maintaining in 
the planetary competition. 
The present circumstances are profoundly changed 
in comparison with those specific to the second half of 
the last century, and impose to managerial activity sig-
nificant improvements in dynamism, flexibility, 
approaches rationality, forecasts realism, rapid response 
to change.
2.  Management Challenges of Today 
and Its Responses
The present period of Romanian society and economy 
evolution is characterized, in terms of company man-
agement, by the existence of some major challenges to 
its address:
— Strategic — consisting in urgent requirement to 
have “strategic visions”, to anticipate the changes 
that will occur, and to outline on this basis the most 
appropriate strategies to be followed: (i) to achieve 
the critical size necessary of getting a high level of 
competitiveness (economies of scale), (ii) to de-
specialize and re-specialize on a wider and more 
competitive product range (economy of range), 

196 
C. Russu
(iii) to outsource related activities, which includes 
the development of subcontracting and production 
services;
— Technological — developing the technological 
capacity of firms, stimulating and appropriate capi-
talization of their creative potential, in order to 
improve products and their distribution, and to 
increase managerial and trade capacity;
— Social — ensuring balance between economic and 
social, collective, and individual objectives, grow-
ing and deepening the social responsibility of com-
panies to the immediate community and society in 
general, adopting corporate governance to generate 
plus value for all the stakeholders in welfare of 
firms and society;
— Organic — nurturing care for the environment of 
existence and action of firms, rational use, and 
preservation of resources, ensuring the conditions 
for firms sustainable development, intensive pro-
motion of “eco-efficiency”; 
— Psychological — the requirement to imprint a 
modern spirit of discipline, efficiency and superior 
productivity to all staff, promoting “the cult of 
labor”, change of passive mentality, specific to 
assistance role of the State, into an active one, 
imposed by the company exposure to discipline 
and rigors conditions on international markets;
— Cultural — deepening and strengthening “enter-
prise culture”, its adaptation to general societal 
evolution, increasing cultural homogeneity of com-
panies by unitary sharing of their staff of superior 
values reflected in the concepts, attitudes and 
behaviors.
In relation to these challenges,  management activ-
ity in Romanian companies presents conflicting aspects, 
consisting, on the one hand, mainly, in marked differ-
ences of quality and competitiveness between that spe-
cific to public companies and to private companies, and 
on the other hand, between that specific to the foreign 
firms operating in Romania and of the companies with 
local capital; these contradictory aspects are deter-
mined by inertial perpetuating concepts and attitudes 
specific to centralized economy, and considerable abil-
ity of many managers, especially young people, to 
respond adequately to the mentioned challenges.
In general, the answer of the Romanian medium 
manager, especially one from the public-owned firms, 
to these complex and unavoidable challenges, turns out, 
unfortunately, still disappointing, empirical evidence of 
worsening economic and financial performance of a 
large part of firms still in the public sector, but also 
many in the private sector, being a convincing confir-
mation in this sense.
Explanations for reduced capacity of a large part of 
Romanian companies’ managers to adequately respond 
to the mentioned challenges, and achieve inspiring and 
accelerated restructuring of their units, are multiple.
(a) The strategic response: modest results recorded in 
economic agents restructuring were determined, to 
a large extent, by the lack of economic and social 
development strategy of the country, coherent and 
consistently followed regardless of the electoral 
cycles, for clarifying government’s vision on future 
configuration of the Romanian economy and how 
economic and financial tools will be used to gradu-
ally forge this configuration. The absence of this 
strategy and related industrial policy has made the 
strategic response of firms to be devoid of clear 
reference landmarks, difficulty emphasized by the 
onset of the global financial and economic crisis 
in 2008;
(b) The legislative and regulatory response: regula-
tory framework instability continuously manifested 
after 1990 and accelerated in recent years, prevents 
crystallization of strategic visions on which plans 
and programs of restructuring and modernization 
of firms activity are set;
(c) The financial response: companies restructuring is 
a process that requires considerable financial 
resources necessary to achieve certain deep techni-
cal, technological, and organizational changes; in 
the circumstances of drastic contraction of demand 
in domestic and international markets, a poor or 
negative cash flow, termination of welfare role of 
the State, financial resources are insufficient or 
lacking, which is a formidable obstacle on the path 
of firms activities modernization;
(d) The professional response: despite participation in 
numerous training programs in business manage-
ment, a good part of managers are still far from a 

 
Difficulties in Improving Romanian Companies Management 
197
scientific basis of their managerial actions (meth-
ods, techniques, and tools of modern  management), 
indispensable for successful “piloting” companies 
in a highly competitive environment internally 
(dealing with imports products and foreign-owned 
firms) and internationally;
(e) The psychological response: mentalities specific to 
centralized economy, with assistancy role of the 
State, still remain strong, avoiding risk — consist-
ing in the absence of engaging in aggressive strate-
gies, capital-risk insurance, etc. — continuing to be 
a negative feature of the Romanian management;
(f) The moral response: failure of many managers of 
public enterprises to observe managerial ethics and 
professional deontology led, by extension, to form 
a widely shared opinion about the moral deficit of 
the “class” of managers; if one add to this authority 
crisis the painful social impact of the restructuring 
programs, uncorrelated with those of retraining and 
regional and local development, clearly appears as 
one of the reasons for lack of determined commit-
ment of many managers to initiate comprehensive 
restructuring programs. 
It is obvious that in the generation and perpetuation 
of a good part of these disturbances the role of manag-
ers of firms in such situations is crucial, despite liabili-
ties under management contract.
3.   Difficulties Faced by the 
Management of Romanian 
Companies
Shown responses to the challenges specific to the man-
agement of Romanian companies in the current period, 
many of them poor responses, as well as reviewed dis-
functionalities, have, in large part, obvious explana-
tions in existence of endogenous and exogenous 
dificulties, whose outrunning requires resolute, firm 
actions, consistent and coherent at the government and 
the microeconomic level. Highlighting these difficul-
ties provides necessary benchmark to judicious direct-
ing efforts to eradicate them, as a sine qua non 
condition of profound restructuring enterprises’ activ-
ity, in order to achieve significant productivity, effec-
tiveness and efficiency growth.
3.1. Endogenous difﬁ culties
(a) Shortage of skilled managerial knowledge, which 
continues to be a critical dimension for a very 
important segment of Romanian managers at all 
levels, the effects of this situation being felt more 
acutely at the upper level. Although the supply of 
management training programs of state and private 
universities, under the form of postgraduate courses, 
and managerial training specialized centers, includ-
ing presence of training staff from Western coun-
tries, is considerable, and programs are attended by 
a growing number of managers, at global scale, the 
level of management knowledge is still insufficient 
in comparison with the companies management 
requirements under functional market economy 
and international competition globalization. 
Moreover, some of the failures in the market con-
duct of state-owned companies mentioned earlier 
have their immediate cause or contributory factor 
in poor management training, which does not pro-
vide essential knowledge range for successful 
piloting companies activity;
(b) Continued use of a limited, outdated, manage-
rial tools by a large part of Romanian managers 
and called with low frequency to make major deci-
sions for the firms activity, as a natural conse-
quence of the scarcity of expertise mentioned in 
the precedent point. The explanation of this condi-
tion are numerous and represent as many obstacles 
to achieving higher managerial benefits: scarcity 
in many enterprise of information necessary to 
support sound decision; the reluctance of many 
managers to use seemingly complicated methods 
and techniques; the short time available for major 
decisions making; perfunctoriness of participation 
in management training programs of many manag-
ers and specialists with promotion prospects, 
and so on;
(c) Shortage of managerial culture that is inter-
twined in a mutually reinforcing relationship with 
the managerial expertise, also significantly threaten 
managerial activity of public-owned companies. 
Management culture, which means all representa-
tions and conceptual, moral and actionable values 
dominant in a particular managerial environment 
(Nicolescu & Verboncu, 2007), is currently 

198 
C. Russu
confusing and contradictory, being very difficult to 
outline the archetype of such a culture specific to 
Romanian environment.
 
The practices specific to centrally planned 
economy removed managerial culture elements 
progressively accumulated and sedimented in many 
reference companies in the interwar period until 
1948. Political pressures and ideological dilettan-
tism in the  management of State-owned enter-
prises, the ideological compromising and, 
especially, misapplication of modern management 
methods and techniques have emptied driving acts 
in centralized economy of the content that really 
had to have, and have gradually outlined a manage-
rial culture” characterized by improvisation, gro-
tesque miming management science and practice, 
deliberate distortion of economic and financial 
performance, lack of purpose, and low overall 
efficiency.
 
After 1989, the profound transformations expe-
rienced by the Romanian society and economy 
offered few reference landmarks and favorable 
conditions for recovery of losses over five decades 
and accelerated crystallization of a managerial cul-
ture that draws nearer to Western standards. Efforts 
devoted to creating appropriate institutional frame-
work and operational mechanisms of a functioning 
market economy were made in the absence of a 
clear strategy for the evolution of Romanian soci-
ety and the national economy. Also, they were slow 
and much delayed and not accompanied by efforts 
for crystallization and strengthening a culture of 
modern management, consistent with the new eco-
nomic realities and able to provide significantly 
increase of activity efficiency and competitiveness. 
In these circumstances, outlining specific type of 
Romanian management is  difficult;
(d) The importance of power relations, which is 
much higher compared to the situation in the 
consolidated market economies, in the sense that 
the social status of each person remains preponder-
ant dependent on its relations with the “power”, 
i.e., managers, and much more less dependent on 
its professional capacity, his/her performance and 
the role he/she really plays in the organization. 
“Power” dependence, taken from the centralized 
economy and inertially continued, caused degrada-
tion of managerial authority and the existence of 
personal value scale unrelated to the real moral and 
professional value. Moreover, the position of man-
ager has suffered from exaggerated importance of 
power relations in two ways: on the one hand, 
managerial activity is not regarded as one special-
ized, as a profession, but as a true social status, as 
a privileged position within the firm; on the other 
hand, the managers themselves perceive their posi-
tion as one of a leader and not as professional who 
occupy it a limited period;
(e) Chronic distrust in the effectiveness of state 
institutions, due to the instability of the legislative 
and institutional framework, the existence of paral-
lel economy, bureaucratic practices that favor 
bureaucratic relationships customization, abuse, 
and corruption. This distrust leads to increasing 
personal relationships role in business manage-
ment, frequent avoidance of formal, official chan-
nels for problem solving in relations with the State 
institutions, and the deliberate distortion of infor-
mation conveyed within these relations;
(f ) Cleavage between generations is becoming 
increasingly manifested among Romanian manag-
ers: young managers, expert of English language, 
and Anglo-Saxon management literature, attach 
great importance to the cognitive component of 
managerial culture that sometimes leads to a high 
skill carrying out; managers over 45 years show a 
certain cognitive limitation, maintain theirs adap-
tive skills learned in the old regime, and capability 
of simulation managerial roles they must play;
(g) Instability of leadership styles, a feature noted by 
many foreign specialists who have come into con-
tact with the realities of the Romanian economy 
and the peculiarities of the Romanian management 
model; it consists of the fact that many Romanian 
managers readily pass into relations with subordi-
nates from a rigid attitude to one of excessive toler-
ance; explanation is given for maintaining skills of 
the old centralized economy regime, professional 
insecurity and lack of true managerial vocation of 
many managers;
(h) Managerial self-training: many managers have 
managerial experience acquired through their own 

 
Difficulties in Improving Romanian Companies Management 
199
effort in the sense of occasional knowledge accu-
mulation, participation in short training programs, 
and cultivation of native inclination toward entre-
preneurial or managerial activities. The typical 
profile of these self-trained managers presents the 
following features: are mostly graduates of techni-
cal education and people over 45 years; highly 
appreciate the role of personal experience and tal-
ent in resolving current problems, and thoroughly 
gather evidence when faced with special situations; 
give small importance to the knowledge regarding 
economy, human resources and organization of 
production, considering that they can solve the 
problems specific to these fields based only on their 
own experience; believe that through graduation in 
attended  management training programs gained 
just little or no knowledge; pursue management 
information disseminated through the media in 
smaller proportion than other managers; believe 
that made personal efforts larger than others to 
train; consider that the main causes of managerial 
inefficiency are snugness, conservatism and stupid-
ity; consider that the translation and dissemination 
of published works of successful managers from 
other countries would substantially contribute to 
the development of managerial skills;
(i) Inappropriate organization by many managers 
of their own activities, irrational use of working 
time, focusing on secondary, unessential issues, 
poor delegation of authority to solve problems 
of secondary importance, unbalanced coverage 
of the range of managerial roles, misuse of 
Secretariat and collaborators. Inappropriate use 
of these pathways and tools that, in a large meas-
ure, determine management “productivity”, consti-
tute a formidable obstacle whose overcoming 
requires appreciable efforts to significantly extend 
best practices, to assimilate managerial „automa-
tisms” which are common currency in firms man-
agement in advanced economies.
3.2. Exogenous difﬁ culties
(a) Lack of national strategy for economic and 
social development and industrial policy. The 
lack of these key documents essential for the future 
development of any country profoundly affect 
firms’ management in the sense that they do not 
provide landmarks to guide their business plans, 
and realistic evolution objectives. Benchmarks pro-
vided by the mentioned documents consist of the 
major coordinates of the Government’s vision on 
economic and social development of the country at 
national, regional and sectoral level, economic 
structure configuration perspective, economic and 
financial instruments to be used for progressively 
“forging” desired economic structure, international 
agreements to be concluded, and so on. 
 
These benchmarks should be clear signals 
given to foreign and domestic investors on 
Government’s intentions, its philosophy, the ways 
it will follow; in the absence of such guidelines, 
outlining “strategic vision” of the company man-
agement is an approach without full required sub-
stantiation, limited, therefore, only to fragmentary 
estimates of domestic and external demand;
(b) Legislative instability is a deficiency with pro-
found adverse effects on the whole society, which 
also prevents managers to establish strategies, 
plans and programs for sustainable activities devel-
opment of their companies. One single example of 
this is enlightening for the pace and scope of legis-
lative changes facing even organic laws: Labor 
Code, approved by Law No. 53/2003 (Legea nr. 
53/2003 Codul Muncii, 2003), amended and sup-
plemented by Law No. 480/2003, Law No. 
541/2003, Government Emergency Ordinance no. 
65/2005, Law No. 241/2005, Government 
Emergency Ordinance No. 55/2006, Law No. 
237/2007, Law No. 202/2008, Government 
Emergency Ordinance No. 148/2008, Law No. 
331/2009, Law No. 49/2010. Therefore, in eight 
years there were 10 changes to a very important 
and sensitive law for the society, which gives a 
convincing image on this pernicious practice of the 
Parliament and the Government, which, although 
repeatedly condemned by the ruling authorities of 
the European Union, continues to be manifested 
and have serious effects at the societal level;
(c) The existence of many onerous, restrictive pro-
visions of the legislative framework. Numerous 
legislative regulations significantly restrict the 

200 
C. Russu
scope of managerial action, hampers materializing 
managers initiatives, often reduce their speed of 
response decisions, and hinders their efforts to 
restructure the business of firms they run. 
Requirements to simplify administrative proce-
dures, reduce para-fiscality and the number of per-
mits, notifications, notices, and licenses for 
businesses were made consistently over the years, 
but the Government and local authorities reactions 
were almost nil. A 2010 survey carried out in com-
panies, preponderantly SMEs, signaled the follow-
ing obstacles and difficulties they faced in running 
current affairs (Munteanu, 2010): high taxes — 
64.7% of respondents; bureaucracy — 64.6%; 
decrease in domestic demand — 41.6%; high inter-
est rates on loans — 41.3%; difficult access to 
loans — 38.5%; corruption — 38.1%; delayed 
payment of invoices — 37.8%; hiring, training, and 
keeping staff — 33.6%; excessive controls — 
30.9%. The situation remained unchanged, despite 
the politicians’ rhetorics who repeatedly promised 
significant improvements. Illustrative examples can 
be given in various fields.
 
Law No. 40/2011 amending and supplement-
ing Law No. 53/2003 — Labour Code (Legea nr. 
40/2011 pentru modificarea si completarea Legii 
nr. 53/2003 — Codul Muncii, 2011) contains 
many provisions favoring employees and con-
straining employers, particularly at the conclusion 
of collective work contracts and dismissal of 
employees who have professional, disciplinary or 
ethics deficiencies. Provisions that unbalanced 
protecting employee, multiple and cumbersome 
procedures to be strictly followed, the frequent 
prospect to solve labor disputes by legal way det-
rimental to employers induce justified reluctance 
among managers to commit into effective actions 
for organizational restructuring of companies fac-
ing financial difficulties, with drastic reductions 
in productivity or sales. For example, Article 29, 
para. 4, provides that “the employer can request 
information about the person seeking employ-
ment from his former employers, but only on the 
activities performed and the duration of employ-
ment, and only with the informing respective 
person”; the provision is restrictive, preventing 
the hiring manager to ask all information on the 
previous performance and behavior of the 
applicant.
 
The system of taxes is characterized by: their 
poor collecting; inefficient  management of funds 
collected accompanied by excessive bureaucracy; 
relatively low tax base, with many exceptions and 
statutory deductions; high fiscal evasion; high 
share of indirect tax revenue in total tax revenue (in 
2011 — 46.3% as compared to EU average — 
33.1%) and low of direct taxes (21.3% as compared 
to EU average — 31.8%), while the share of reve-
nue from social contributions was 32.4% as com-
pared to EU average — 27.4%. The tax burden is 
reduced on income and profit tax, but companies 
pay one of the highest VAT in the EU.
 
As for social contributions, Romania is at the 
top of the hierarchy of countries with the highest 
taxes on income from work. According to a copub-
lication of The World Bank and the International 
Finance Corporation (The World Bank & IFC, 
2013), a company in Romania makes 41 payments 
each year to the State on account of taxes, three 
times more than the EU average, which lost 216 
hours for, the bulk of the tax burden is distributed 
on work; should be added that some charges have 
a high cost of administration which often exceeds 
the tax.
 
High frequency of inspections of different 
kinds — financial, fiscal, accounting, social, envi-
ronmental, etc. — hinders considerably the activity 
of all categories of enterprises, especially SMEs. 
For companies managers, checks carried out in the 
current conditions, in addition to being a cause of 
increased stress, distract them from their current 
work, forcing them to stay continuously at the dis-
posal of control bodies. Serious failures generated 
by the current system of corporate control activity 
determined Economy Ministry to initiate a law 
draft amending and supplementing Law No. 346/
2004 regarding the SMEs stimulation, by propos-
ing their financial and fiscal inspection no more 
than once in a period of three years. The measure, 
welcome, must, undoubtedly, be followed by others 
with the same goal of simplifying and easing con-
trol system. 

 
Difficulties in Improving Romanian Companies Management 
201
(d) The arrears are, by their permanent existence and 
growth, a formidable difficulty for the efforts of 
managers of “accurate” companies to improve their 
work, as they create unequal competitive condi-
tions between companies, especially in relation to 
the state-owned companies, for which, if they fail 
to streamline their activity, the Government should 
intervene to support them with resources. The out-
break of the global crisis in 2008 increased the 
overall arrears, to higher levels in State-owned 
companies compared with private ones.
 
The State-owned companies are the largest 
debtors to the national social security budget, the 
remaining debt to consolidated general budget rep-
resenting 1.9% of GDP in December 2012; moreo-
ver, arrears of State-owned companies registered in 
relations with the private sector create for latter 
serious problems of liquidity and, hence, develop-
ment. It is known, in fact, that the profitability of 
state-owned enterprises is significantly lower than 
that of private companies: according to calculations 
made in 2012 by the Fiscal Council (Consiliul 
Fiscal, 2012), profit margin was — 3.0% for the 
firsts and 0.7% for seconds, and rates of operations 
were, respectively, 0.8% and 3.3%. Significantly 
reduced capacity of state-owned companies to 
 generate profits led to other negative result: 
reduced ability to pay debts and new investment 
(in  2012: state-owned companies — 1.3%, the 
main source of funding is the budget, private 
companies — 4.8%).
(e) Tax evasion. Accounting for 13.8% of GDP in 
2012, tax evasion has the same effect on  manage-
ment of “accurate” companies as the previous dif-
ficulty, their managers facing, on the one hand, 
excessive tax they must bear, and on the other hand, 
the unequal situation in which they are placed in 
relation to companies that practice tax evasion or 
register growing arrears. The largest share stands 
for the evasion of VAT, 8.3% of GDP in 2012, fol-
lowed by contributions to social assurances, about 
3.3%, mainly due to “black labor” (workers in the 
informal economy).
Related to tax evasion is the degree of compliance 
with the main duties and taxes, which is the ratio 
between actual revenues to budget and theoretical rev-
enues (which also include tax evasion and actually 
received revenues); in 2012, it was of 64.3% (in 2006 it 
was of 76.1%).
The figures demonstrate the persistence of serious 
disfunctionalities in the Romanian economy, adversely 
affecting economic and financial performance of com-
panies that follow the rules of correct market economy 
functioning, fully and timely pay their debts, behave 
ethically in the marketplace. For the management of 
these companies, unfavorable operating environment is 
characterized by numerous challenges with negative 
influences, the removal of which the central and local 
Governments should have the decisive role.
Exogenous difficulties reviewed are the most 
important from wider range of those facing managers 
of Romanian companies. Prospects for reducing these 
difficulties, in which the governmental measures are 
essential, are nevertheless encouraging, given that it 
is anticipated that the main engine of economic 
growth will be the domestic demand, inflation will 
continue to decline, public investment will increase 
by improving absorption of the EU funds, the 
Government and private consumption will increase 
gradually to accelerate the pace of structural adjust-
ment under increasing pressure of accumulated imbal-
ances (Russu et al., 2008). At the same time, we must 
take into account the worrying realities of late struc-
tural reforms in education, health and management of 
state-owned companies, failure to timely reach targets 
set by the IMF, which significantly decrease local and 
foreign investors’ confidence and economic growth 
potential.
4. Conclusions
Management practiced in Romanian companies reveals 
contradictory aspects, which clearly differentiate, in 
terms of activity quality and financial and economic 
performances, public and private companies, especially 
foreign companies, by far in favor of the latter.
Numerous  difficulties presented by the manage-
ment of a large part of the Romanian firms, localized, 
predominantly, in the public sector, are determined by 
both endogenous difficulties — lack of appropriate 
expertise of many managers, poor management 

202 
C. Russu
culture, exaggerated importance of power relations, 
fluctuating leadership styles, poor self-organizing 
managerial work, etc. — and exogenous difficulties 
— instability of the legal framework, existence of 
numerous restrictions provided by law for business 
 management, phenomena of arrears and tax evasion, 
widespread corruption, etc.
Exogenous difficulties deeply hinder, especially, 
right companies management, that behave properly on 
market and promote higher quality values, being, there-
fore, disadvantaged in dealing with companies that use 
shady practices.
To perpetuate many difficulties from the regime of 
centralized economy and generate new ones in the sys-
tem of market economy, the main responsibility is 
incumbent upon the Legislature and the Government, 
which failed to properly improve the business environ-
ment and ensure transparency and fairness for plenary 
affirming truly efficient company management. 
References
Codul Muncii (2003), Legea nr. 53, României: Monitorul 
Oficial. 
Codul muncii (2011), Legea nr. 40 Pentru Modificarea si 
Completarea Legii nr. 53, României: Monitorul Oficial. 
Consiliul Fiscal (2012), Report Annual 2012, p. 77.
Munteanu, C. (2010), Impactul Crizei Economice Asupra 
Percepţiei Întreprinzătorilor Români cu Privire la Mediul 
de Afaceri, Sfera Politicii, 148(Junie).
Nicolescu, O. & Verboncu, I. (2007), Managementul 
Organizaţiei, Biblioteca de Management 20, Bucureşti: 
Editura Economică.
Russu, C. (coordinator), Dumitrescu, M., & Pleşoianu, G. 
(2008), Calitatea Managementului firmei: Evaluare şi 
Interpretare, Bucureşti: Editura Economică.
The World Bank & IFC (2013), Doing Business 2013: 
Smarter Regulations for Small and Medium-sized 
Enterprises. Comparing Business Regulations for 
Domestic Firms in 185 Economies (10th edn.), p. 190.

203
Chapter 23
Contributions to  Redesigning the Management System 
in  Medium-Sized Enterprises
Ion Verboncu and Ciprian Nicolescu
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
One major way to change and increase competitiveness 
of the Romanian organizations is redesigning of the 
management system — a complex strategic approach to 
reinforce the decisive role of management in achieving 
economic  performance.
As the most comprehensive way of managerial 
change, redesigning of the management system starts 
from the premise that a radical, fundamental, and spec-
tacular change of work processes, based on the princi-
ple “all or nothing” is a condition for success. Focusing 
management on processes “in line” with specific 
mechanisms for quality management systems is the 
central idea of reengineering, promoted about two dec-
ades by the Americans M. Hammer and J. Champy and 
other specialists.
For medium-sized enterprises within the small and 
medium-sized enterprise (SME) sector, such a solution 
takes into account their characteristics, and through a 
rigorous methodological scenario —  objectives, pro-
cesses, structures, people, results — provides rethink-
ing and redesigning of the management, overall and at 
level of components (organizational, decisional, infor-
mational, methodological, and human resource man-
agement) in terms of  efficiency,  effectiveness, and 
competitiveness. We recommend this kind of demarche 
to medium-sized enterprises that are in economically 
and managerial declining, to the ones that “are going 
well”, but are threatened by imminent danger that 
“comes” from inside or outside (national and interna-
tional environment) or the ones that are “going well” 
but want to strengthen their position in a particular 
market or to “enter” in other markets.
1. Introduction
Reengineering or  business process reengineering 
(BPR) has become one of the most commonly used 
terms by management specialists and managers who 
want to amplify their business efficiency and effective-
ness. Officially launched in the 1990s by Hammer & 
Champy (1993), reengineering has revolutionized the 
theory and practice of management at company level, 
by focusing on the fundamental, spectacular, deep, and 
radical rethinking and redesign of work processes, 
especially on those generating added value. The key 
concept around which gravitates this unique way of 
change is represented by “the process” to which, we 
must admit, Romanian management referred too little, 
until the development and the promotion of the quality 
management systems. 
We will present the most representative contribu-
tions, mainly American, regarding the concept, the 
principles, 
and 
especially 
the 
reengineering 
methodology.
Although the term itself was established by the 
famous work Reengineering the Corporation: A 

204 
I. Verboncu & C. Nicolescu
Manifesto for Business Revolution, (Hammer & 
Champy, 1993),  reengineering has been used in litera-
ture since 1990, both by Hammer (1990) and by 
Davenport & Short (1990). Famous specialists have 
conferred similar meanings to the reengineering: the 
fundamental rethinking and radical redesign of 
business processes to achieve outstanding improve-
ments of the indicators which today are considered 
critical in assessing  performance, such as cost, qual-
ity, service, and speed (Hammer & Champy, 1993); 
critical analysis and design of production flows and 
processes within the organization and between 
organizations (Davenport & Short, 1990); reengineer-
ing business processes consists in radical transfor-
mation of organizational processes using information 
technology in order to achieve major improvements 
in quality and productivity (Bergeron & Falardeau, 
1994).
The most important principles promoted by this 
new conception in management, concerns orientation 
towards process, ambitious management, breaking old 
rules, and creative use of information technology 
(Hammer & Champy, 1993).
Methodology of promotion and application of BPR 
can be found in a variety of variants, most of which are 
developments or adaptations of the methodological 
concepts of the two American promoters, Hammer and 
Champy. Some of them are presented by C.S. Stan in 
the book Reengineering — A New Philosophy of 
Management (Stan, 2007). Thus:
• 
Hammer & Champy (1993) propose a methodol-
ogy structured into six stages: (i) Reengineering 
launching, in the sense of specifying the need and 
opportunity of reengineering, of major factors 
requiring restoration of business processes from the 
perspective of company’s  efficiency; (ii) Setting 
the “map of company’s processes”, which graph-
ically highlights the types of existing work pro-
cesses at the moment of reengineering launching, 
the links between them and the impact, positive or 
negative, on the manner and degree of achieving 
 objectives; (iii) Establishing the processes sub-
ject to reengineering. From this point of view 
there can be several situations: processes which are 
to be redesigned and reengineered refers to the firm 
as a whole; it is approached only one group of 
 processes (e.g., activities embedded in a function); 
reengineering aims a single process which is repre-
sentative and has a high impact on the functionality 
and efficiency of the company. The fundamental 
principle of reengineering “all or nothing” has its 
explanation in the fact that the redesigned process 
or processes should be addressed in their complex-
ity and entirety; (iv) Forming overall image on 
processes or process subject to reengineering, 
exploiting the information detached from analysis 
of its/their viability, weaknesses and strengths 
which are characteristic to it/them, causes that gen-
erated them, links to other processes as shown in 
the map of processes; (v) Reengineering of busi-
ness processes/process, in the sense of rethinking 
and redesign. In fact, occurs a redesign of business 
processes/process in terms of their/its role in 
achieving some goals, especially strategic, and its/
their  processual, structural, organizational, and 
human resizing; (vi) Operationalizing of the pro-
ject regarding the processes/process radically 
changed by reengineering and hence remaking of 
processes map;
• 
Davenport and Short formulated a partially changed 
version, but we must underline that it was launched 
in the literature three years earlier than the version 
which we already mentioned (Davenport & Short, 
1990): developing of business vision and pro-
cesses objectives, identifying processes that need 
to be redesigned, understanding and measuring 
existing processes, identifying facilities offered 
by new technologies, designing and construction 
of a prototype for new processes;
• 
Beauchemin (2002), a Canadian specialist, has 
shown that reengineering should be applied based 
on a methodological scenario structured in nine 
steps, as follows: identifying and designing a new 
process, obtaining the cooperation and involve-
ment of stakeholders (participatory approach), 
viewing the process and identifying all activities, 
even the obvious ones, examining the value 
added by each activity, studying the new pro-
cess, testing the new process, implementation 
of the new process, follow-up and evaluation, 
dissemination of results;

 
Contributions to Redesigning the Management System 
205
• 
Manganelli & Klein (1994) consider that  reengi-
neering process should follow several stages such 
as: introduction, identification of processes, 
developing a vision, developing a solution (tech-
nically and socially), transformation;
• 
Durlik (1998) also believes that reengineering must 
be done on the following trail: establishing of pro-
ject activities, making a graphical representa-
tion of the process and deciding on the scope of 
the project, radical rescheduling of planned 
processes, simulation and evaluation of options, 
choosing the best option, implementation;
• 
Polish Cempel (2005) identifies in his doctoral the-
sis, four major phases of the methodology for 
 process reengineering (with focus on logistic pro-
cess): the phase of scope and qualification — 
 understanding the current state, identifying the 
need for change, setting the team responsible for 
change at strategic level, introduction of reengi-
neering approach, reinventing or updating the 
organization’s mission and creating the vision, 
defining the scope of change, selecting the process 
for reengineering; the phase of research and 
modelling optimal solutions — setting up the 
team which is responsible for changing at the 
operational level, modelling a new process, detail-
ing and realigning the new process (engagement/
involvement of users); the phase of creating 
instructions, diagrams and characteristics of the 
new process, project planning and achieving; phase 
of verification and evaluation — measuring 
results, comparing results with the objective/ 
purpose of changing, changing organizational cul-
ture (continuous improvement of the process);
• 
French specialists Brilman & Herard (2006) insist 
on the three key points of reengineering — an 
objective of rupture, innovation and approach 
through processes — as well as on specific phases 
and stages of such an approach: phase of study 
and redesign, in which forming the reengineering 
team is crucial and the phase of implantation, 
involving restructuring, merging some existing pro-
cesses, creating new processes, training staff 
involved in the implementation of these new pro-
cesses, reducing staff, operationalizing of informa-
tion systems, so on. Also, the two specialists 
outline the conditions for reengineering success — 
total commitment of the company’s management 
within a clear strategy, approach of customer — 
oriented processes, setting targets of rupture, 
 forming multidisciplinary teams made of the best, 
stimulating creativity, involving computer scien-
tists from the beginning, careful selection of the 
first operations which are specific to the processes 
chosen to be redesigned so on.
2.  Contributions of Romanian School 
to Managerial Redesigning
BPR, as theory and practice, quickly spread to Europe 
and, consequently, in Romania, through translation and 
publication of the famous work Reengineering the 
Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution, 
published in the USA in 1993, under the signature of 
M. Hammer and J. Champy.
Paradoxically, the first Romanian achievements in 
the field were recorded before the publishing year of 
this book and aimed the microeconomic management 
practice, not theory(!). In 1992, some of the representa-
tives of the School of Management at the Academy of 
Economic Studies (Prof. PhD O. Nicolescu, Prof. PhD 
E. Burduş, Prof. PhD I. Verboncu, Prof. PhD G. 
Căprărescu, Prof. PhD I. Cochină) started a research 
project for a representative company of the Romanian 
industry at the time — STEROM SA Câmpina — 
focused on  redesigning management system, but with-
out focusing on business processes.
The methodology used for the first time in Romania 
was divided into the following steps:
• 
Managerial and economic diagnosis;
• 
Formulating the strategy (fundamentation, elabo-
ration and implementation of the strategy at the 
level of vision, mission,  objectives, strategic 
options, resources, terms, and competitive 
advantage);
• 
Redesigning management system and each of its 
components (methodological, decisional, informa-
tional, organizational, and human resource man-
agement) following specific methodologies;
• 
Implementing the new management system;

206 
I. Verboncu & C. Nicolescu
• 
Evaluating the  efficiency of the  redesigned 
 management system. 
The methodology was satisfactory but, during the 
subsequent approaches of management redesign, in 
which were involved other large and medium sized 
companies — S.C. ELECTROPUTERE S.A. Craiova, 
S.C. IMMUM Baia Mare, S.C. RESIAL S.A. Alba 
Iulia, S.C. PLEVNEI S.A. Bucharest, S.C. Alro S.A. 
Slatina, S.C. PRINCO GROUP S.A. Buciumeni so 
on — it has been improved in the sense of changing 
the redesign order of some management subsystems or 
in terms of content enrichment of some phases related 
to the redesign of methodological component. Pragmatic 
experience gained along with these companies’ mana-
gerial redesign, allowed the theoretical completion of 
this methodological alternative and its insertion in 
“Management based on profit centres” (Nicolescu & 
Verboncu, 1998) and later in “Management methodolo-
gies” (Nicolescu & Verboncu, 2001; Nicolescu & 
Verboncu, 2008). 
As worldwide the book “Reengineering the 
Corporation” (1993), published in the USA under the 
signature M. Hammer and J. Champy, made waves 
through the new proposed guidance to management, 
that of management on processes, professor Ion 
Verboncu considered that the use of these elements in a 
redesign methodology would be very appropriate. 
Consequently, Verboncu has developed and pub-
lished a new variant of methodology regarding 
managerial redesign, able to integrate BPR, which 
we are trying to present in the following paragraphs 
(Verboncu, 2008, 2011).
3.  New Romanian Methodological 
Variant to Redesign 
the Management System 
of Medium Sized Companies
Although in our country the number of companies sub-
ject to management redesign is relatively low and 
restructuring/reorganization practices outrun this new 
and modern attitude and approach towards novelty, we 
consider that especially in times of crisis and post cri-
sis, such organizational change should be reconsidered. 
For the success of this complex strategic approach 
 certain conditions are needed, such as:
• 
Reshaping organizational culture by transforming 
it into a favorable mechanism for managerial 
change; 
• 
Existence of managers and specialists truly 
professional;
• 
Use of consultancy services, which provides the 
methodology, ensures accomplishment of manage-
rial redesign study and offers expert assistance dur-
ing the implementation of the new management 
system.
Regarding medium-sized companies, the redesign-
ing of management system must take into consideration 
characteristics of their organizational systems, com-
parative with large enterprises: more reduced size and 
complexity, typological diversity, intense human 
dimension, lower formalization, strong interweaving of 
formal and informal elements, relative  processual and 
structural simplicity, high flexibility, entrepreneurial 
customization, more intense centralized decision- 
making, etc.
The methodological scenario to redesign the 
 management system of medium sized companies 
is structured in several sequences:  objectives — 
 processes — structures — people (managers and 
executives) — results ( performance). In the following 
we will make a brief presentation of this methodologi-
cal approach (Verboncu, 2008, 2011).
The starting point in such a complex approach is 
the diagnosis study, resulted from a rigorous methodo-
logical approach, which highlights causal strengths and 
weaknesses, determine the economic and management 
viability potential and ends with strategic and tactical 
recommendations. 
3.1. Objectives
The first step — objectives — refers to targets of the 
new management system and takes the form of a sys-
tem of objectives, resulted from the development of 
global and partial strategies and policies. Fundamenting 
and elaborating of fundamental, derived, specific and 
individual objectives as a result of promoting realistic 

 
Contributions to Redesigning the Management System 
207
strategies and policies, involves a radical change of 
attitude of the organization and its management towards 
its present and future.  Objectives empower individuals 
and groups of individuals, imposing a strong strategic 
and tactical dimension, required for a proper position-
ing on the specific market and — finally — represent 
very good benchmarks for assessing the functionality 
and  performances.
Objectives must meet simultaneously several 
 conditions: to be specific (S), measurable (M), achiev-
able (A), relevant (R), and timed (T).
SMART 
requirements 
translate 
into 
the 
followings:
• 
The objective must be specific, accurately reflect-
ing what we want to achieve; such a requirement is 
verified through answers to questions like who? 
what? when? how? or who is the target group?
• 
Must be measurable, quantifiable; questions to 
which must be answered to verify compliance with 
this requirement are like how much? or how many?
• 
The objective should be affordable/attainable, 
that can be achieved;
• 
It should be relevant, real; in other words, the 
objective allows obtaining the expected results;
• 
Finally, the objective should be framed in time, 
meaning the time needed to achieve it must to be 
accurately determined; verifying compliance with 
this feature is provided by answers to questions like 
when?, until?, in which period?
In return, professor Popa (2004) considers that the 
objectives — especially strategic ones — must meet the 
requirements of measurability, acceptability, flexibil-
ity, comprehensibility, tangibility, and motivability.
Important clarification is needed: in our opinion, 
the objectives should not be confused with the purpose 
or purposes of the organization or of its  processual/
structural components, because the objectives are the 
quantitative and/or qualitative expression of the pur-
pose for which it was founded and operates the organi-
zation (or a component of it). The “father” of 
management by objectives, Drucker (2001) pointed out 
that profitable companies set their goals in several “key 
areas for performance”: position on the market, innova-
tion, productivity, physical and financial resources, 
profitability, development of management performance, 
work attitude and performance, public responsibility.
3.2. Processes
Processes are defined as logical sequence of activities, 
attributions or tasks exercised/performed in order to 
achieve assumed objectives in conditions of  efficiency 
and  effectiveness. “Bridge” between strategic manage-
ment and management redesigning is translated through 
link between the strategic objectives (plus the other 
categories of objectives derived from them) and pro-
cesses needed for their achievement. Such a connection 
and, especially, its reconsidering, triggered a true revo-
lution in management, through the appearance and 
development of BPR. This broad movement that com-
prises both the theory and practice of management has 
as content the radical, deep and spectacular restoration 
of work processes so as to create the necessary prem-
ises for achieving the objectives. 
Delimitating and sizing the processes must be cor-
roborated with the provisions of Organization and 
Functioning Regulation which approach the organiza-
tional structure of the organization by “floors”, as 
follows:
• 
Upper floor, related to strategic management and 
occupied by participatory management bodies;
• 
Medium floor, for the tactical management, 
includes functional and operational compartments;
• 
Lower level (operational management) belongs to 
the compartments which produce true economic 
substance.
From this perspective, work processes should be 
treated both on the vertical side of management system 
(transverse) as well as on horizontal (performed at the 
level of one compartment or of two or more compart-
ments, depending on their complexity).
Due to the fact that a compartment can be the 
depositary for a part of a process (irrespective of its 
type and nature), for a whole process or, frequently, for 
several processes, it is difficult to associate it (compart-
ment) with an objective. Therefore, the connection 
objectives — processes is more direct, more realistic, 

208 
I. Verboncu & C. Nicolescu
and facilitates the steps for managerial design or 
redesign.
The arrangement “process-based management” is 
justified precisely when this link, individual, group and 
organizational responsibilities become real.
Moreover, outsourcing decisions will target pro-
cesses (obviously auxiliary or support) and not com-
partments. Please note that in any organization processes 
are divided into:
• 
Main processes which give consistency to the 
object of activity of the organization, creating 
value, economic substance;
• 
Secondary processes (support), that support the 
conducting of main processes and can be executed 
within or outside the organization;
• 
Management processes.
Processes that are targeted for outsourcing — to 
the extent that they are costly or their execution is of 
low quality — are mainly from the category of support-
ing processes (auxiliary), although in some cases, 
even one or another of the basic processes can have 
such a “fate”.
It is important that the main processes to be 
designed and constructed so that their exercise to gen-
erate economic  efficiency, to be effective and therefore 
the targeted  objectives to be accomplished.
In order to achieve this, the main, auxiliary and 
management processes, must meet simultaneously 
three conditions:
• 
To be sized accordingly from  processual point of 
view (if the process is defined at function level, 
it must have activities and if it is focused on one 
activity then it shall include appropriate 
attributions);
• 
To be structural and organizational dimensioned, 
exercised by a position/compartment or positions/
compartments which have the required official and 
processual authority;
• 
To be human sized, meaning that people (manag-
ers and executives) involved in their ongoing must 
have professional and managerial competence 
required by volume, complexity and nature of the 
respective work processes.
Work processes are not static but, on the contrary, 
any change in the system of objective causes changes in 
their typology and manner of exercise. Therefore, not 
even process map — representative document in the 
management of business processes — is not a static 
document/instrument, but a dynamic one, able to reflect 
and support the changes and achieving objectives.
It is interesting from this perspective, the link 
between BPR and BPM (management based on pro-
cesses or Business Process Management), two concepts 
and at the same time, complex managerial practices, 
indispensable to organizational change by  reengineer-
ing and quality management at organization level. 
Why? Because:
• 
Both must be approached systemic and together as 
ways to streamline work processes;
• 
Both aim the efficiency and  effectiveness of pro-
cesses, increasing managerial and economic 
 performance;
• 
Processes, defined within the quality management 
system according to SR EN ISO 9001:2008, are the 
support of reengineering, of organization as it was 
described by Americans Hammer & Champy 
(1993);
• 
Processes approach allows identification of their 
contribution to getting value, in achieving perfor-
mance and continuous improvement, in the context 
of combining two major trends: increasing value 
added and improving customer satisfaction;
• 
The organization has a choice between several 
approaches regarding the typology of processes: 
PRAXIOM RESEARCH GROUP limited (2010), 
the conception of Secretariat ISO TC 176/SC 
(2009) and TUV CERT conception, the last one 
being taken into consideration by us, processes 
being divided in main processes, auxiliary or 
support processes and management processes.
We emphasize that in order to achieve the objec-
tives are required, adequate working processes with 
different degree of aggregation. Their delimitation and 
dimensioning in business processes (main), support 
processes and management processes are determined 
by the complexity of the objectives to whose achieve-
ment are directly involved. Due to the fact that building 

 
Contributions to Redesigning the Management System 
209
the system of  objectives is made “top-down”, and  pro-
cessual edifice necessary to its achieving is made from 
complex to simple. As such, the processual remodeling, 
reflected in the appearance of new work processes, 
developing existing ones, reducing or eliminating oth-
ers, aims to ensure full correspondence between objec-
tives and processes by developing a “process map” 
where are listed the main activities which generate 
added value. Will be approached with priority main 
processes identified as vulnerable in terms of participa-
tion to added value, uneconomic or of lower signifi-
cance in the economy of the firm.
3.3. Structures
Work processes, regardless of the degree of aggrega-
tion, must have adequate structural — organizational 
support, namely a favorable organizational structure 
to achieving objectives. This is why the third step in 
managerial redesign is represented by the structural 
redesign materialized in resizing the need of jobs and 
functions, regarding to management and execution, 
functional and operational compartments, along with 
“arranging” them in a pre-established configuration 
through the medium of hierarchical levels, hierarchical 
weights and organizational relationships. It is also nec-
essary to design a convenient organizational formula 
based on dimensional and functional characteristics of 
remodeled processes and contextual influences — more 
flattened structure, holonic type of structure, in which 
holons can be cost centers delimited mainly processual 
or structural — organizational. Team of specialists 
which ensures managerial redesign of the organization 
has two options: either finalize the organizational 
 formula at this stage, or gives shape to a preliminary 
version, which is to be completed under sequence 4 
(“People”), depending on the changes made in other 
managerial subsystems but especially in managerial 
instruments. For example, promoting management 
based on profit centers causes major organizational — 
structural changes generated mainly by managerial and 
economic decentralization at cost centers level.
Regarding organizational documents we insist at 
this stage on completion of function descriptions and 
job descriptions, while organizational chart and 
Regulation of organization and functioning will be final 
after applying decisional informational and even organ-
izational and structural changes, imposed by the mana-
gerial tools used to exercise management processes.
3.4. People
The next step is crucial to ensure high viability of the 
organization as it aims to “equip” management and 
execution positions with people who have the right 
competences. Fitting right people with right jobs is 
done through competence and represents the key ele-
ment. Personal authority given by knowledge, skills 
and managerial and professional aptitudes must sat-
isfy formal authority, namely the right to make deci-
sions which is related with managerial positions. 
Consequently, the next managerial component subject 
to redesign is human resource management, a highly 
dynamic and vulnerable managerial “area”, in which 
the recruitment, selection, hiring, evaluation, motiva-
tion, perfection, promotion and protection of employ-
ees and shaping organizational culture are key 
activities. 
Through high quality of human resources is ensured 
professionalization of management, because:
• 
Managers are directly involved in the process of 
fundamentation and making of decisions; in order 
to do this, they use managerial tools and relevant 
information transmitted through rationalized 
ascendant communication channels;
• 
Employees initiate actions needed for operational-
izing decisions, by exploiting information transmit-
ted mainly on descendent routes.
That is why the quality of decisions and actions is 
dependent on not only the manner and ways of deci-
sional redesign, but also on methodological-managerial 
and informational redesign solutions.
Regarding the decisional component of manage-
ment there are required fundamental changes, material-
ized in:
• 
Rigorous delimitation and sizing of formal author-
ity or competences on hierarchical levels;
• 
Improving the quality of decisions through their 
judicious scientific fundamentation, through their 

210 
I. Verboncu & C. Nicolescu
“empowering”, through ensuring  effectiveness of 
their adopting and operationalizing and through 
proper formulation;
• 
Improving the quality of decisions, by their judi-
cious scientific substantiation by “empowering” 
them, ensuring timeliness, and formulating appro-
priate adoption and implementation;
• 
Typologically improving of decisions taken, raising 
the weight of strategic and tactical decisions, of 
decisions taken under risk and uncertainty at supe-
rior hierarchical levels.
In turn, informational redesign includes:
• 
Improving the quality and quantity of information;
• 
Rationalize informational situations and routes of 
communication;
• 
Increasing the computerization of business, sup-
port, and management processes through the pro-
motion of performing systems;
• 
Sophistication of informational procedures.
Since without a judicious structured methodologi-
cal and managerial component cannot be achieved 
scientification of the managers work, special attention 
should be paid to methodological subsystem redesign 
by promoting a modern managerial tools — with 
accent on management by  objectives or its upgraded 
version, management based on profit centers — and on 
rigorous general or specific methodologies. This fourth 
step of redesign methodology ensures shaping of the 
new management system configuration, whose 
functioning has to bring more  efficiency and 
effectiveness.
Operationalization of essential changes, sometimes 
radical, in the area of processes, requires appropriate 
changes in structural and organizational configuration 
in the sense of restoring the organizational structure 
and promoting specific management tools — job 
description, Regulation of organization and function-
ing — with dynamic content. This is possible to deter-
mine further changes in the conditions in which is 
decided the use of management by objectives or man-
agement by profit centers or even in situations that 
produce some significant changes in systems of 
 decision, informational or of human resources manage-
ment. For each of the aforementioned situations careful 
monitoring is required to ensure application of advanced 
solutions and their properly correction when 
necessary.
3.5. Results
Redesigned management based on this methodological 
and operationalized scenario generates results, which 
normally should end in managerial  performances, 
which, in turn, causes economic performances. If 
responsibility in achieving managerial performances 
lies exclusively to managers, for the accomplishment of 
economic performance are responsible both managers 
and employees.
4. Conclusions
Taking into consideration the foreign methodological 
variants for  reengineering, presented at the beginning 
of the chapter, we elaborate some conclusions:
• 
Most, if not all of them, are adaptations/develop-
ments/diversifications of the Americans Hammer 
and Champy’s methodology, who are considered 
“parents” of reengineering;
• 
All have a core axis which gives them the same 
approach of the complex mechanism of change 
through reengineering — presentation, analysis, 
rethinking and redesign (reengineering), imple-
mentation, evaluation;
• 
The essence of change regarding business pro-
cesses, plus auxiliaries (support) and management 
processes, although these last two categories are 
not “attractions” for the promoters of such meth-
odological scenarios. A limitation of reengineering 
methodologies can be considered the lower focus 
or, in some cases, neglecting processes that do not 
contribute directly to achieving economic 
substance;
• 
None of the options presented does not “tackle” in 
depth all components of the organization's manage-
ment system, at the level at which it happens such 
a profound change. The focus is explicitly on 

 
Contributions to Redesigning the Management System 
211
 processual organization (processes), structural 
organization (organizational structure) and organi-
zational culture, the latter more through the condi-
tions imposed by the change;
• 
Each of the methodological concepts known in this 
domain and presented earlier — some of them sig-
nificant from our point of view — outlines the dif-
ference between reengineering and quality 
management systems, both based on processes. 
Reengineering and continuous improvement of 
quality management are at some points tangential, 
have much in common, but they are different ways 
of managerial and organizational modernization and 
 efficiency;
• 
Putting in place any of presented methodological 
variants has the same outcome: a significant 
improvement in managerial, economic and finan-
cial  performance indicators in the context of obtain-
ing competitive advantage;
• 
Through their content, complexity and impact, 
each of the existing reengineering scenarios can be 
treated as a model for reengineering;
• 
There is a tendency to generalize the role of BPR 
and to treat it like some kind of miraculous solution 
for competitiveness, efficiency and  effectiveness. 
In fact it has indeed many advantages, but also seri-
ous limitations and should be approached differ-
ently from case to case, depending on the particular 
structural and functional characteristics of the 
 company and its management.
Regarding the new Romanian methodology, we 
concluded that a rigorous and serious operationaliza-
tion of the methodological scenario for managerial 
redesign of  medium-sized enterprises, focused on 
 objectives, processes, structures, people and result, is 
able to ensure both the effectiveness of this category of 
SMEs, as well as a revival of the SMEs’ sector in terms 
of contribution to obtained GDP.  Redesigning of man-
agement system is a way to get out of the crisis, an 
important way to mitigate or eliminate “vicious circles” 
encountered in business operation and to replace them 
with genuine “virtuous circles” generating economic 
substance/added value. Also, regardless of the eco-
nomic situation of companies, managerial redesigning 
is particularly effective within medium enterprises 
where occur rapidly major changes, with strong innova-
tive character, based on identifying and capitalizing on 
economic opportunities. 
Professionalization of managers in medium-sized 
companies, enterprises resulting from development of 
smaller businesses or from the restructuring/reorgani-
zation of larger businesses, is one of the conditions to 
generate success in managerial redesign. Of course, 
managerial methodologization, continuous manage-
rial training and appealing to management consulting 
are variables which have to be exploited in this 
context.
References
Bergeron, F. & Falardeau, J. (1994), The Reengineering of 
Business Processes within Canadian Organizations, 
Montré al: Les Éditions Transcontinental.
Brilman, J. & Herard, J. (2006), Best Management Practices 
in the New World Economic Context, Paris: Editions 
d’Organisation.
Cempel, W. (2005), Reengineering methodology in engineer-
ing industry, Politechnika Poznańska, Poznań (Doctoral 
thesis).
Davenport, T. H. & Short, J. E. (1990), The new industrial 
engineering: Information technology and business pro-
cess redesign, Sloan Management Review, 31(4), 11–27.
Drucker, P. F. (2001), Management Strategic, Bucharest: 
Teora Publishing House.
Durlik, I. (1998), Restructuring Business Processes: 
Reengineering, Theory and Practice, Warszawa: Agencja 
Wydawnicza Placet.
Hammer, M. (1990), Reengineering work: Don’t automate, 
obliterate, Harvard Business Review, July–August, 
68(4), 104–112.
Hammer, M. & Champy, J. (1993), Reengineering the 
Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution, 
New York: Harper Collins.
Manganelli, R. & Klein, M. (1994), The Reengineering 
Handbook: A Step-By-Step Guide to Business Trans-
formation, New York: AMACOM.
Nicolescu, O. & Verboncu, I. (1998), Management Based 
on Profit Centres, Bucharest: Tribuna Economică 
Publishing House.
Nicolescu, O. & Verboncu, I. (2001), Management Meth-
odologies, Bucharest: Tribuna Economică Publishing 
House.

212 
I. Verboncu & C. Nicolescu
Nicolescu, O. & Verboncu, I. (2008), Management 
Methodologies, Bucharest: Universitară Publishing 
House.
Popa, I. (2004), Strategic Management, Bucharest: 
Economică Publishing House.
Stan, C. S. (2007), Reengineering — A New Philosophy of 
Management, Bucharest: Expert Publishing House.
Verboncu, I. (2008), Methodological variants for managerial 
re-projection of the organisation — compared approach, 
Review of General Management, 2, 33–46.
Verboncu, I. (2011), Organizational Change by Reengi-
neering, Bucharest: ASE Publishing House.

213
Chapter 24
The New Paradigm of  Social Enterprise
Ana-Maria Grigore
University of Bucharest
It appears that the world’s problems are outstripping 
our ability to address them, but what may be more 
accurate is simply that traditional institutions are no 
longer sufficient.
The idea of social enterprise as an alternative busi-
ness model has arisen as a response to the relentless and 
ever-changing economic and political swings the world 
has endured over the past two centuries. Since the 
beginning of the Industrial Revolution (and even 
before), two broad ideological models have been con-
tinuously battling against each other for supremacy: 
capitalism and socialism. The institution of the social 
enterprise provides us with a viable opportunity to 
break off from this dizzying swing of extremes, and 
balance the best of all ideologies. 
This solution was not easily reached, because in a 
way it contradicts human nature, which is individualis-
tic at its core. It was reached dialectically, which is to 
say at the end of a cause and effect evolution. And it 
was reached because the alternative to this solution is 
the control of society through dictatorship and totali-
tarianism, an alternative both tried and disproved by 
modern history. 
The aims of this chapter are to examine in brief the 
concepts of the social enterprise and  entrepreneurship, 
and to highlight the role of social entrepreneurship in 
 economic development and for society. The methodo-
logical approach is literature review.
1. Introduction
The idea of social enterprise as an alternative business 
model has arisen as a response to the relentless and 
ever-changing economic and political swings the world 
has endured over the past two centuries. Since the 
beginning of the Industrial Revolution (and even 
before), two broad ideological models have been con-
tinuously fighting each other for supremacy: capitalism 
and socialism (Serafinn, 2013). 
Drucker (1993) introduced the term “social sector” 
in “Post-Capitalist Society” when discussing the need 
for a sector in addition to the “private sector” of busi-
ness and the “public sector” of government to satisfy 
social needs, and provide a meaningful sense of citizen-
ship and community.
Social Enterprise Alliance states that the institution 
of the social enterprise provides us with a viable oppor-
tunity to break from this dizzying swing of extremes, 
and balance the best of all ideologies. It addresses 
social concerns, more efficiently than government, 
which no longer has the mandate or resources to solve 
every social problem; more sustainably and creatively 
than the non-profit sector, which faces declining fund-
ing streams and increased demands for innovation; and 
more generously than business, which is mandated to 
place pre-eminence on shareholder returns, but which 
also realizes it cannot succeed in a decaying world. 

214 
A.-M. Grigore
The idea of “social  entrepreneurship” has struck a 
responsive chord. It is a phrase well suited to our times. 
It combines the passion of a social mission with an 
image of business-like discipline, innovation, and 
determination commonly associated with, for instance, 
the high-tech pioneers of Silicon Valley. The time is 
certainly ripe for entrepreneurial approaches to 
social problems. Many governmental and philanthropic 
efforts have fallen far short of our expectations. Major 
social sector institutions are often viewed as inefficient, 
ineffective, and unresponsive. Social entrepreneurs are 
needed to develop new models for a new century 
(Dees, 1998).
The language of social entrepreneurship may be 
new, but the phenomenon is not. We have always had 
social entrepreneurs, even if we did not call them that. 
They originally built many of the institutions we now 
take for granted.
There is a long history of entrepreneurs with social 
motivations — from the chocolate maker J. Cadbury & 
Sons with its Quaker values, to the jam maker Wilkin & 
Sons. More recently Body Shop, Lush, and Timberland 
have managed to successfully combine business and 
social values — and in the process, to enhance their 
brand image. But always the commercial objective 
came first. In contrast, social entrepreneurship is about 
putting the social objective first and utilising commer-
cial skills to achieve it, in an entrepreneurial way. This 
also has a long history from Victorian hospitals to the 
modern-day hospice movement. Civic entrepreneur-
ship, on the other hand, is to do with putting entrepre-
neurial behavior into public sector. The two concepts 
have often been used in an almost interchangeable way, 
but they are different. This link is through the voluntary, 
community and not-for-profit sectors that straddle the 
public and private sectors (Burns, 2011).
It is estimated that in the UK, 3.3% of the popula-
tion is involved in social entrepreneurial activity. In the 
USA, the non-profit sector is much larger than in 
Europe and represents some 7% of GDP, probably 
twice the size of the UK’s (Burns, 2011).
The chapter is structured into five sections. The 
second section focuses on the literature review about 
 social enterprise. The third section focuses on the social 
entrepreneurs. The fourth section presents social 
enterprise as the “missing middle”. And the fifth sec-
tion presents the conclusions of the chapter. 
2. Social Enterprise
European Commission states that social enterprises are 
positioned between the traditional private and public 
 sectors. Although there is no universally accepted defini-
tion of a social enterprise, their key distinguishing char-
acteristics are the social and societal purpose combined 
with the entrepreneurial spirit of the private sector 
(http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/promoting-
entrepreneurship/social-economy/social-enterprises/
index_en.htm).
Social enterprises are businesses whose primary 
purpose is the common good. They use the methods 
and discipline of business and the power of the market-
place to advance their social, environmental, and 
human justice agendas.
Social enterprises devote their activities and rein-
vest their surpluses to achieving a wider social or com-
munity objective either in their members’ interest or a 
wider one. Social enterprises exist in all Member States. 
However, there is no single legal model for these enter-
prises. Many social enterprises are registered as private 
companies, others are in the form of social co-opera-
tives, associations, voluntary organizations, charities or 
mutuals, and some organizations are unincorporated.
In the UK, the Government defines social enter-
prises as “businesses with primarily social objectives 
whose surpluses are principally reinvested for that pur-
pose in the business or in the community, rather than 
being driven by the need to maximize profit for share-
holders and owners.” As with all businesses, they com-
pete to deliver goods and services. The difference is 
that social and environmental purposes are at the very 
heart of what they do, and the profits they make are 
reinvested towards achieving those purposes (http://
www.socialenterprisemark.org.uk/the-mark/what-
is-social-enterprise).
Social enterprises operate in almost every industry, 
from health and social care to renewable energy, from 
retail to recycling, from employment to sport, from 
housing to education. Whatever they do, they do it dif-
ferently from typical business, because they are driven 

 
The New Paradigm of Social Enterprise 
215
by a social and environmental mission, and they are 
focused on the community they serve. 
Pearce (2003) characterizes the  social enterprise as: 
• Having a primarily social purpose, with a secondary 
commercial activity;
• Achieving that purpose by engaging in trade; 
• Not distributing profits to individuals but reinvesting 
profits either in the enterprise or new social 
ventures; 
• Democratically 
involving 
members 
in 
its 
governance; 
• Being openly accountable to a defined constituency 
and a wider community.
Social enterprises’ drive, innovation and support 
for grassroots, home-grown talent are commendable, 
but overemphasis on them as the sole solution to pov-
erty eradication risks to cast a tricky light over the 
development landscape: ultimately the politics would 
and should take responsibility, which is as much about 
power and social structures as it is about service deliv-
ery. Social enterprises are by nature often apolitical, 
taking an uncritical view of the limitations of markets, 
and solving short-term needs at the expense of long-
term, governance-based transformation. Social enter-
prises, however, seem to be beyond critique. Instead of 
being lumped together with the rest of the development 
sector, they are hailed as the solution.
3. Social Entrepreneurs
“What business entrepreneurs are to the economy, 
social entrepreneurs are to social change. They are the 
driven, creative individuals who question the status 
quo, exploit new opportunities, refuse to give up, and 
remake the world for the better” (Bornstei, 2007).
Though the concept of “social  entrepreneurship” is 
gaining popularity, it means different things to different 
people. There are many definitions out there for social 
entrepreneurship. Burns (2011) says that social entre-
preneurship is an emerging but ill-defined concept. It 
can be loosely defined as the use of entrepreneurial 
behavior for social rather than profit objectives. 
Social entrepreneurs therefore differ from business 
entrepreneurs in terms of their mission. Their primary 
purpose is to “create superior social value for their 
 clients” (Mort et al., 2003). 
Social entrepreneurs are those exceptional individ-
uals who dream up and take responsibility for an inno-
vative and untested idea for positive social change, and 
usher that idea from dream to reality. What enables 
social entrepreneurs to make lasting impact on the most 
difficult problems is a special combination of ground-
breaking creativity and steadfast execution.
Social entrepreneurs are innovative, resourceful, 
and results-oriented. They draw upon the best thinking 
in both the business and non-profit worlds to develop 
strategies that maximize their social impact. These 
entrepreneurial leaders operate in all kinds of organiza-
tions: large and small; new and old; religious and secu-
lar; not-for-profit, for-profit, and hybrid.
On the Ashoka site (the largest network of social 
entrepreneurs worldwide), social entrepreneurs are 
individuals with innovative solutions to society’s most 
pressing social problems. They are ambitious and per-
sistent, tackling major social issues and offering new 
ideas for wide-scale change. Rather than leaving soci-
etal needs to the government or business sectors, social 
entrepreneurs find what is not working and solve the 
problem by changing the system, spreading the solu-
tion, and persuading entire societies to move in differ-
ent directions. Social entrepreneurs often seem to be 
possessed by their ideas, committing their lives to 
changing the direction of their field. They are visionar-
ies, but also realists, and are ultimately concerned with 
the practical implementation of their vision above all 
else (https://www.ashoka.org/social_entrepreneur).
Just as entrepreneurs change the face of business, 
social entrepreneurs act as the change agents for soci-
ety, seizing the opportunities that others miss to 
improve systems, invent new approaches, and create 
solutions to change society for the better. While a busi-
ness entrepreneur might create entirely new industries, 
a social entrepreneur develops innovative solutions to 
social problems and then implements them on a large 
scale. Social entrepreneurs have many of the same 
qualities as business entrepreneurs. However, they also 
need a heightened sense of accountability to the wide 
range of stakeholders involved in a social enterprise.

216 
A.-M. Grigore
Social entrepreneurs identify resources where peo-
ple only see problems. They view the villagers as the 
solution, not the passive beneficiary. They begin with 
the assumption of competence and unleash resources in 
the communities they are serving (Bornstei, 2007).
A social entrepreneur identifies and solves social 
problems on a large scale. Just as business entrepre-
neurs create and transform whole industries, social 
entrepreneurs act as the change agents for society, 
seizing opportunities that others miss in order to 
improve systems, invent, and disseminate new 
approaches and advance sustainable solutions that cre-
ate social value. 
Unlike traditional business entrepreneurs, social 
entrepreneurs primarily seek to generate “social value” 
rather than profits. And unlike the majority of non-
profit organizations, their work is targeted not only 
towards immediate, small-scale effects, but sweeping, 
long-term change. 
The job of a social entrepreneur is to recognize 
when a part of society is stuck and to provide new ways 
to get it unstuck. He or she finds what is not working 
and solves the problem by changing the system, spread-
ing the solution, and persuading entire societies to take 
new leaps. The past two decades have seen an explosion 
of  entrepreneurship and a healthy competition in the 
social sector, which has discovered what the business 
sector learned from the railroad, the stock market, and 
the digital revolution. Nothing is as powerful as a big 
new idea if it is in the hands of a first class entrepreneur 
(http://www.pbs.org/opb/thenewheroes/whatis/).
Social entrepreneurs operate in markets, but these 
markets often do not provide the right discipline. Many 
social-purpose organizations charge fees for some of 
their services. They also compete for donations, volun-
teers, and other kinds of support. But the discipline of 
these “markets” is frequently not closely aligned with 
the social entrepreneur’s mission. It depends on who is 
paying the fees or providing the resources, what their 
motivations are, and how well they can assess the social 
value created by the venture. It is inherently difficult to 
measure social value creation. How much social value 
is created by reducing pollution in a given stream, by 
saving the spotted owl, or by providing companionship 
to the elderly? The calculations are not only hard but 
also contentious. Even when improvements can be 
measured, it is often difficult to attribute them to a spe-
cific intervention (Dees, 1998).
4. The “Missing Middle”
 Social Enterprise Alliance states that social enterprise 
is emerging as the “missing middle” sector between 
the traditional worlds of government, non-profits, and 
 business. It addresses social concerns:
• More efficiently than government, which no longer 
has the mandate or resources to solve every social 
problem;
• More sustainably and creatively than the non-
profit sector, which faces declining funding streams 
and increased demands for innovation, proof of what 
works, and collaboration; and
• More generously than business, which is mandated 
to place pre-eminence on shareholder returns, but 
which also realizes it cannot succeed in a decaying 
world.
As social needs continue to spike in light of shrink-
ing government budgets, employment rolls, and social 
safety nets, social enterprise is emerging as a self- 
sustaining, market-based, business-like, and highly 
effective method of meeting social needs.
Social enterprises produce higher social returns on 
investment than other models. On the other hand, they 
produce direct, measurable public benefits. A classic 
employment-focused social enterprise, for example, 
might serve at least four public aims:
• Fiscal responsibility — It reduces the myriad costs 
of public supports for people facing barriers, by pro-
viding a pathway to economic self-sufficiency for 
those it employs.
• Public safety — It makes the community in which it 
operates safer, by disrupting cycles of poverty, 
crime, incarceration, chemical dependency, and 
homelessness.
• Economic opportunity — It improves our pool of 
human capital and creates jobs in communities in 
need of economic renewal.
• Social justice — It gives a chance to those most in 
need.

 
The New Paradigm of Social Enterprise 
217
Yet, almost magically,  social enterprises produce 
these benefits while reducing the draw on public and 
philanthropic funds. 
Social enterprises are revenue-generating busi-
nesses with a twist. Whether operated by a non-profit 
organization or by a for-profit company, a social enter-
prise has two goals: to achieve social, cultural, commu-
nity economic, or environmental outcomes; and to earn 
revenue. On the surface, many social enterprises look, 
feel, and even operate like traditional businesses. But 
looking more deeply, one discovers the defining charac-
teristics of the social enterprise: mission is at the centre 
of business, with income generation playing an impor-
tant supporting role (Centre for Community Enterprise).
5. Conclusion
In essence, social entrepreneurs are entrepreneurs in a 
social or not-for-profit context. The difference is that their 
prime motivation, aims, and mission are social rather 
than commercial. They still pursue opportunities and 
continually innovate, but for the purpose of serving their 
social mission. Social entrepreneurs have many of the 
same qualities as business entrepreneurs; however they 
also need a heightened sense of accountability to the wide 
range of stakeholders involved in a social enterprise. 
A social enterprise is a business set up primarily for 
social objectives whose surpluses are reinvested in the 
business or in the community for that purpose. The 
mixing of social and economic objectives within a 
social enterprise can be dangerous. There are difficul-
ties in accounting for the two objectives and in particu-
lar making trade-offs between the two. It should be 
clearly understood that we speak and we plead for very 
well defined structures, in the sense that every ambigu-
ous venture should be put apart in order to avoid pos-
sible temptations of corruption.
Social enterprise is emerging as the “missing mid-
dle” sector between the traditional worlds of government, 
non-profits, and business. Social enterprises produce 
higher social returns on investment than other models. 
They produce direct, measurable public benefits.
This solution was not easily reached, because in a 
way it contradicts human nature, which is individualistic 
at its core. It was reached dialectically, which is to say 
at the end of a cause and effect evolution. And it was 
reached because the alternative to this solution is the 
control of society through dictatorship and totalitarian-
ism, an alternative both tried and disproven by modern 
history.
References
Bornstein, D. (2007), How to Change the World: Social 
Entrepreneurs and the Power of New Ideas, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Burns, P. (2011), Entrepreneurship and Small Business, 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
Dees, G. J., (1998), The meaning of “social entrepreneur-
ship”. 
Available 
at 
http://www.caseatduke.org/
documents/dees_SE.pdf.
Drucker, P. (1993), Post-Capitalist Society, New York: 
Harper Business.
Mort, G. S., Weerawardena, J., & Carnegie, K. (2003), Social 
entrepreneurship: 
Towards 
conceptualisation, 
International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector 
Marketing, 8(1). 
Pearce, J. (2003), Social Enterprise in any Town, Calouste 
Gulbenkian Foundation.
Serafinn, L. (2013), Goodbye old economy — enter the new 
era of social enterprise. Available at http://the7graces
ofmarketing.com/2013/08/goodbye-old-economy-
enter-the-new-era-of-social-enterprise/.
xxx Social Enterprise Alliance, Social enterprise: the “miss-
ing middle”. Available at https://www.se-alliance.org/
what-is-social-enterprise.
xxx Centre for community enterprise, What is social enter-
prise. Available at: http://www.centreforsocialenterprise.
com/what.html.
xxx European Comission. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/
enterprise/policies/sme/promoting-entrepreneurship/
social-economy/social-enterprises/index_en.htm).
xxx Social enterprise. Available at http://www.socialenter-
prisemark.org.uk/the-mark/what-is-social-enterprise.
xxx Ashoka Innovators for the Public, Available at https://
www.ashoka.org/social_entrepreneurMeet the new 
heroes, What is social entrepreneurship. Available at: 
http://www.pbs.org/opb/thenewheroes/whatis/Center for 
advancement of Social Entrepreneurship. Available at 
http://www.caseatduke.org/about/sedefinition.htm.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

219
Chapter 25
Realities and Peculiarities of the  Entrepreneurship 
in  Brasov,  Romania
Camelia Dragomir and Stelian Panzaru
“Spiru Haret” University, Faculty of Management
Carmen Lis
“Lucian Blaga” University
Nowadays, the entrepreneur and entrepreneurship terms 
are becoming better known and used by people who 
work in the area of economy. The entrepreneurship 
entails to identify the economic opportunities and to 
use them by starting a new business or taking over and 
developing the existing business. In recent years, the 
terms have been extended to include social and political 
forms of entrepreneurial activity. 
Entrepreneurship refers to an individual’s ability to 
turn ideas into action. The  entrepreneurs are committed 
with resources (innovations, money) in an effort to 
transform innovations into economic goods. This activ-
ity implies creativity, sense of initiative, innovation and 
risk-taking, as well as the ability to plan and manage 
projects in order to achieve objectives. 
The objective of the chapter is to investigate the per-
ceptions of the entrepreneurs from Brasov County, 
Romania, about the factors that play an important role in 
the entrepreneurial development. The importance of entre-
preneurship development upon economy was stressed by 
analyzing the factors that encourage or discourage the 
entrepreneurship. The following aspects were taken into 
consideration: (a) the important factors in the decision to 
start/take over a business; (b) the risks in business devel-
opment; (c) barriers to entrepreneurship development. 
The study is based on interviews with 85 entrepreneurs 
and managers from Brasov County. The conclusions with 
regard to the Romanian  business environment and the 
development of entrepreneurship were drawn based on 
this analysis. The chapter also presents aspects that need 
to be strengthened for shaping the conditions for the 
development of entrepreneurial performance.
1. Introduction
The entrepreneurship is regarded as one of the most 
important sources of competitive advantage for all 
countries. The development of entrepreneurship has 
important benefits, both economically and socially. The 
expression of this reality is represented by the European 
Union (EU) priority which perceives entrepreneurship 
as one of the key elements of a sustainable development 
in economy. The entrepreneurial initiatives are signifi-
cant at national level for job creation and economic 
growth. In other words, promotion of entrepreneurial 
spirit equals promoting investments, new jobs, innova-
tion, and competitiveness of business. 
For a long period of time, in Romania, the role of 
entrepreneurship in economic and social development 
has often been underestimated. However, in the last 

220 
C. Dragomir, S. Panzaru & C. Lis
years, there has become increasingly apparent that 
 entrepreneurship is core objective helping to increase 
economic and social development. Based on these 
aspects, the chapter aims to analyze the main issues 
concerning the perceptions of the  entrepreneurs from 
 Brasov County about the factors that encourage or dis-
courage their activity. The empirical research aims to 
capture the views of a representative group of 87 entre-
preneurs and managers from Brasov County. The main 
conclusions of the chapter provide interesting and 
 useful data regarding the realities and the peculiarities 
of the entrepreneurship environment. The importance 
of entrepreneurship was stressed by analyzing the 
 factors that influence the activity of Brasov County’s 
entrepreneurs. 
2.  Relevance of Entrepreneurship 
Concept in the Specialty Literature
The entrepreneurship constituted the topic of several 
specialty studies. The subject attracts many researchers 
that have made an important contribution to the devel-
opment of the entrepreneurship concept. This interest is 
determined by the importance of entrepreneurship for 
economic progress. In time, the authors had not only 
different methods and terms in defining the entrepre-
neurship, but also various angles of approaching its 
repercussions on the economic development. 
Presented as a generator of economic growth and 
job creation, the entrepreneurship is a means to make 
economies more competitive. The relevance of entre-
preneurship for national economy is expressed by 
Michael Porter: “Invention and entrepreneurship are at 
the heart of national advantage” (Porter, 1990: 125). 
In the global competition of economy, the entrepre-
neurship development is the main factor that will 
stimulate economic development. In other words, eco-
nomic growth is bound to slow unless there is an ade-
quate supply of entrepreneurs looking out new ideas, 
and willing to take the risk of introducing them” 
(Lewis, 1955: 182). 
The European Commission recognizes entrepre-
neurship as a key vehicle by which a region’s competi-
tiveness can be stimulated (Kitson et al., 2004; European 
Commission, 2009). There are many empirical studies 
regarding the relation between entrepreneurial activity 
and economic growth. The Global Entrepreneurship 
Monitor data (GEM provides annual assessments of the 
national level of entrepreneurship) suggests that there 
are no countries with high levels of entrepreneurship 
and low levels of economic growth (Reynolds et al., 
2002: 7, 24). Also, Caree & Thurik (1998), who exam-
ine how the share of small firms affects subsequent 
industry output growth, show that industries with a high 
share of small enterprises relative to the same industries 
in other countries performed better in terms of output 
growth. In other words, smaller firms appear to be bet-
ter suited to cope with the conditions of increased glo-
balization, since they show higher flexibility and 
propensity to innovation and are an outstanding vehicle 
for channeling the entrepreneurial ambitions of indi-
viduals (Audretsch & Thurik, 2001; Carree & Thurik, 
2002). The impact of entrepreneurship on economic 
growth is supported by other empirical studies (Nickell, 
1996; Nickell et al., 1997; Thurik & Wennekers, 2001), 
as well. These studies suggest that entrepreneurship has 
a positive effect on economic growth.
The most authorized points of view of the specialty 
literature approach the notion of entrepreneurship from 
various perspectives. For Reynolds (2005), entrepre-
neurship can be conceptualized as the discovery of 
opportunities and the subsequent creation of new eco-
nomic activity, often via the creation of a new organiza-
tion. The functional roles of entrepreneurs include, in 
Friijsetal et al.’s opinion (2002) and Jääskeläinen’s 
(2000), coordination, innovation, neutralization uncer-
tainty, supply of capital, decision-making, property and 
resource allocation. Summarizing the roles of entrepre-
neurs, Wennekers & Thurik (1999: 46–47) define the 
entrepreneurship as “... the ability and willingness of 
individuals, on their own or in teams, within and out-
side of existing organizations, to perceive and create 
new economic opportunities (new products, new pro-
duction methods, new schemes of organization, and 
new product-market combinations) and introduce their 
ideas in the market, despite uncertainty and other obsta-
cles, by making decisions about location, form and use 
of resources. and institutions.” According to Sharma & 
Chrisman (2007), entrepreneurship covers the occur-
rence of organizational creation or innovation that 
occur inside or outside the existing organization, whilst 
entrepreneurs are individuals or groups of individuals 

 
Realities and Peculiarities of the Entrepreneurship in Brasov 
221
that act independently, or as part of a corporatist sys-
tem, that create new organizations or instigate renewal 
or innovation within an existing one. Essentially,  entre-
preneurs are focused on investments, innovation, devel-
opment, production increase, new jobs creation.
Many authors consider that  entrepreneurship has a 
determinant role in economic progress by creating  new 
firms, by exploiting business opportunities and by 
improving life quality. Similar to this is the approach of 
Schumpeter (1911), that states that “everyone is an 
entrepreneur when he actually carries out new combi-
nations” by creating new firms, by identifying business 
opportunities, by job creation. Stevenson & Jarillo 
(1990: 23) define the entrepreneurship as “a process by 
which individuals — either on their own or within 
organizations — pursue opportunities”. In fact, the 
entrepreneurial function implies the discovery, assess-
ment, and exploitation of opportunities, in other words, 
new products, services, or production processes; new 
strategies and organizational forms, and new markets 
for products and inputs that did not previously exist 
(Shane & Venkataraman, 2000). From the point of view 
of Knight (1967) and Drucker (1970) the entrepreneur-
ship is defined as the activity of people willing to risk 
their careers, activity, and funds available to put a new 
idea into practice. Many entrepreneurs undertake risks 
as a condition for the business success. Usually, 
obtained results are proportional with the risks under-
taken. The entrepreneurs must adequately respond to 
the risk and uncertainty situations. The unfavorable 
business environment contains many threats and diffi-
culties for companies: excessive taxation; high inflation 
rates; heavy bureaucracy and corruption; low level of 
internal demand; excessive administrative controls; 
instability of national currency; poor quality of infra-
structure; unpaid invoices by state institutions, etc. 
(Nicolescu & Nicolescu, 2013). An unfavorable busi-
ness environment amplifies the action and the conse-
quences of all types of risks the company is exposed to, 
from the perspective of the diversity of forms under 
which they appear and due to the magnitude of the 
effects they generate. Risk and uncertainty can be asso-
ciated to each and every type of business and also, they 
can be traced, so that their level should be framed 
within manageable bounds. It is necessary for entrepre-
neurs to manifest a strong enterprising spirit, to adopt 
decisions in a short time, to elaborate anti-risk meas-
ures, when facing multitudes of tensions which may 
appear in their entrepreneurial activity. The risk requires 
courage, but the offensive spirit itself is not enough for 
success. Courage means responsibility for the accom-
plished actions (Dragomir, 2012: 166). Entrepreneurs 
can learn from both their own activity and others’ 
 successes and failures, which enable them to improve 
their skills and adapt their attitudes (Carree & Thurik, 
2002). The capacity of facing the challenges and learn-
ing from any defeat is a component part of the entrepre-
neurial spirit. Additionally, the entrepreneurial spirit 
signifies innovation, flexibility, adaptability to change, 
dedication, self-discipline, initiative, and vision. These 
are essential features in order to survive and develop 
companies that have business success. From this point 
of view, entrepreneurial behavior is seen as behavior 
that manages to combine innovation, risk-taking and 
pro-activity (Miller, 1983).
Entrepreneurs are highly creative and innovative 
individuals with a tendency to imagine new solutions. 
They develop something innovative inside an organiza-
tion, contributing to its development and improvement. 
Transforming ideas into economic opportunities is an 
essential element for economic progress and for improv-
ing the wellbeing of society. 
Consequently, whatever definition is given to entre-
preneurship, it is increasingly apparent that entrepre-
neurship generates innovation, leads to new job creation 
and contributes to economic development. 
Based on the aforementioned highlighted aspects, 
we have achieved an empirical research that analyzes 
the realities and the peculiarities of the entrepreneur-
ship development in  Brasov County,  Romania. In the 
next paragraphs we present shortly a part of the results 
of the research. 
3.  The Study Regarding the Realities 
and Peculiarities of Entrepreneurial 
Activity in the Brasov County, 
Romania
3.1. The research purpose
The purpose of this study was to analyze the realities 
and peculiarities of entrepreneurial activity in the Brasov 

222 
C. Dragomir, S. Panzaru & C. Lis
County. We have investigated a representative sample of 
 entrepreneurs regarding their perceptions of the factors 
that encourage or discourage the activity of the entrepre-
neurs. A total of 87 entrepreneurs from  Brasov County 
were the respondents of this study. All respondents work 
in the real economy and are daily confronting different 
problems of the business environment. 
More aspects were targeted. Of these, our analysis 
focuses on the following elements: (a) the important 
factors in the decision to start/take over a business; 
(b) the risks in business development; (c) barriers to 
 entrepreneurship development. We consider that, all 
the elements mentioned influence the development of 
the entrepreneurship. The questions were addressed 
and formulated online, as not to induce subjective 
responses. 
3.2. The results of research
(a)  Analysis of the important factors in the 
decision to start/take over a business
The objective of the section is to investigate the factors 
that play an important role in the decision to start/take 
over a business. The decision to start or take over a 
business is not easy and depends on numerous factors. 
Of these, the respondents believed that the most impor-
tant factors relate to:
(1) The funds needed to start/take over the business;
(2) Dissatisfaction with previous work;
(3) Identifying the best business ideas; 
(4) Correct prediction of chances of success and risks 
involved in a business;
(5) Resolution regarding unmet environmental and 
social needs.
For the entrepreneurs interviewed, the financial 
means and an appropriate idea are the most important 
factors in the decision to start or take over a business 
(Fig. 1). 
Difficult access to financing has been reported as a 
barrier in the decision to start/take over a business. 
Thus, financial resources are considered important in 
the decision to start/take over a business for 87% of 
respondents. A best business idea is important for 
18.39% of respondents. This can be identified through 
the complex analysis of the market and identification of 
consumers’ needs which were not satisfied. 
Dissatisfaction with the previously workplace is an 
important factor in the decision to start/take over a busi-
ness for 10.25% of respondents. Many times, the indi-
viduals are trying to start businesses because they have 
no job options. The risk of failure and its consequences 
for professional and personal lives are regarded as a 
serious obstacle in the decision to start a business for 
10.36% of the respondents interviewed.
The results of the investigation show that solving 
social and environmental unmet needs are an important 
factor in decision to start/take over a business. 
Around 7% of entrepreneurs interviewed have the opin-
ion that the resolution of unmet social and environmen-
tal needs is important in their decision to start a 
business. The percentage is a proof of interest for the 
quality of life and for solving the environmental prob-
lems. In fact, in Brasov County there are many entre-
preneurs who have decided to be actively involved by 
integration of environmental policies into their business 
activities and to develop strategies to transform the 
company into a responsible business from the point of 
economic and social view (Dragomir et al., 2013: 63).
(b) Analysis of risks in business development
The business risk comprises the entire set of threats that 
can negatively influence the accomplishment of the 
aimed objectives. The development of the business 
amplifies the action and the consequences of all types 
of risks to which the company is exposed. The entrepre-
neurs must integrate more variables in their managerial 
decisions, which are difficult to control. 
Fig. 1.  The important factors in the decision on starting/taking 
over a business
The funds 
needed to 
start/take over 
the business
54%
Dissatisfaction 
for the 
previously 
workplace 
10.25%
Identify the best 
business ideas 
18.39%
The risk of 
failure 
10.36%
The settlement of 
social and 
environmental 
7%

 
Realities and Peculiarities of the Entrepreneurship in Brasov 
223
Asked to mention the risks that scare them the 
most, 45.5% of  entrepreneurs interviewed noted, in first 
place, the risk of bankruptcy. The risk of bankruptcy 
and its consequences are regarded as a serious obstacle 
for the development of a business (Fig. 2). The risk of 
losing the property is an obstacle for 22.17% of the 
respondents and the risk of fluctuating, irregular 
income gain is an obstacle for 16.33% of the respond-
ents. About 11.15% of the respondents say they the risk 
of suffering a personal failure worries them.
The entrepreneurs are exposed to uncertainty situa-
tions that are strongly felt in their professional and 
particular lives. The need to devote too much energy or 
time for business, to the detriment of personal life is 
particularly worrying for 5.85% of entrepreneurs 
interviewed.
Survey data reveal a high percentage of respond-
ents who fear the risk of suffering personal failures and 
their consequences for professional and personal lives 
(11.15% of respondents). These concerns are explained 
by the fact that in our entrepreneurial culture we meet 
a pronounced aversion towards risk-taking and a greater 
desire for safety and stability. The aversion towards 
risk-taking is higher especially when it affects the fam-
ily’s expectations of the future. Fear of these risks is 
more amplified by the economic and financial crisis, 
which does not encourage the  entrepreneurship 
activity. 
Companies, regardless of their size, must face the 
risks. The risks, which the entrepreneurs are facing, are 
diverse and difficult to control. The capacity of facing 
the challenges means courage and responsibility for the 
accomplished actions. It is necessary for entrepreneurs 
to manifest a strong enterprising spirit and to elaborate 
anti-risk measures. 
Regarding the fear of risks, the empirical studies 
(Kan & Tsai, 2006; Sánchez, 2011), show that the 
school education helped develop some risk tolerance. 
From this point of view, the entrepreneurs interviewed 
agree that their entrepreneurial education helped them 
reduce the fear of risks. 
(c)  Analysis of the barriers that mark 
the development of business
This section examines the specific issues that constitute 
direct barriers to entrepreneurial activity. According to 
the survey conducted, most barriers and difficulties 
which confront entrepreneurs refer to: 
(1) Lack of financial resources, financial blockage, 
sometimes; 
(2) Administrative complexity, bureaucracy; 
(3) Insufficient qualified staff;
(4) Difficulties in obtaining the necessary information. 
Lack of financial resources is a major barrier to 
progress/development of business. This is confirmed 
by the large number of respondents in  Brasov County. 
A total of 54.63% of the entrepreneurs interviewed 
have mentioned lack of finance as the most important 
barrier to their entrepreneurial activities (Fig. 3). 
The data reveals that the percentages of entrepre-
neurs that have financial difficulties in their business 
are extremely high. Regarding the perceived lack of 
financial support, small businesses rarely meet the con-
ditions for accessing bank loans and other traditional 
financing instruments. Owing to the risk involved, 
these firms are rarely supported by the banking sector.
Fig. 2.  The risks in business development
Irregular not
guaranteed
income 
Risk of losing the
property home 
Risk on bankrupt 
The risk of 
suffering a 
personal failure 
The need to
devote too much
energy or time  
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Fig. 3.  The barriers in business development
Lack of financial 
resources, financial 
blockage 54.63%
Administrative 
complexity, 
bureaucracy 23.11% 
Difficult to obtain 
sufficient 
information
9.24%
Low-skilled 
workers 13.02%

224 
C. Dragomir, S. Panzaru & C. Lis
Many  entrepreneurs agree that it is difficult to start 
a business because of the complexity of the administra-
tive process. The administrative complexity and diffi-
cult bureaucratic procedures were reported by 23.11% 
of respondents. Public administration, central and local, 
determines, to a large extent, the functionality and the 
performance of the  entrepreneurship activity. Two of 
the major ‘diseases’ of the  business environment — 
bureaucracy and corruption — are the result of interac-
tion between central and local administration and other 
components of economy and society (Nicolescu & 
Nicolescu, 2013). 
Insufficient qualified staff is perceived as a barrier 
in the business development for 13.02% of respond-
ents. Also, regarding the difficulties in obtaining the 
necessary information, 9.24% of entrepreneurs inter-
viewed see it as a barrier that marks the development of 
business.
4. Concluding Remarks
Creating a favorable environment for the development 
of entrepreneurial skills has been a core objective for 
any country.  Romania perceives entrepreneurship as 
one of the key enablers of sustainable economic 
growth. Although the role of entrepreneurship has often 
been underestimated, currently, the status of the entre-
preneur enjoys a good reputation. Most of Romanians 
see entrepreneurship as one of the solutions that can 
provide economic and social independence. A large 
majority believes that entrepreneurs are creators of new 
jobs, products, and services that benefit everyone. For 
 Brasov County the entrepreneurial development has 
been a powerful engine of economic growth that led to 
enhanced quality of life in this region. The purpose of 
the research was to gather information about the factors 
that encourage or discourage the entrepreneurs’ activity 
in the Brasov County. The recorded data provides inter-
esting information about the entrepreneurial behavior, 
attitudes, perceptions, and concerns of the entrepre-
neurs interviewed. The information and the analysis 
from this study allow us to formulate certain conclu-
sions about the three elements investigated: (a) the 
important factors in the decision to start/take over a 
business; (b) the risks in business development; (c) bar-
riers to entrepreneurship development. All of the data 
explains the necessity to develop a favorable entrepre-
neurial environment, to determine the good functional-
ity of the economy and social life in Brasov County.
The decision to start or take over a business is a 
complex process and it involves many aspects that must 
be taken into account. The recorded data indicates the 
necessity for reducing administrative burdens, simpli-
fying bureaucratic procedures, and reducing tax obsta-
cles. There are many useless bureaucratic rules that cost 
time and money and that reduce the efficiency of the 
entrepreneurial activity. The transition from the con-
servative and rigid mentalities and practices to the val-
ues and attitudes that encourage entrepreneurship is a 
process to be completed as soon as possible by the 
Romanian public administration system. Consequently, 
it is necessary to make the transition from bureaucracy 
to the new public management, to determine the normal 
functionality of the business environment. 
Regarding the funds needed to start/take over the 
business, the political and administrative bodies must 
improve the entrepreneurial framework conditions by 
increasing access to finance and by creating supportive 
programs to start up own businesses and by creating a 
proper environment for entrepreneurial activities. Also, 
there is need for programs that focus on the small busi-
nesses. To have an impact, these programs should be 
well focused. One way to achieve this is by unlocking 
the economic resources and entrepreneurial potential.
On the other side, we consider that entrepreneurs 
need to develop entrepreneurial knowledge and compe-
tences. Consequently, education in entrepreneurship 
can be successfully developed by the involvement of 
the education system in partnership with the business 
environment. In Brasov County, there are promoted 
entrepreneurial skills and attitudes through education 
and training programs. The entrepreneurs interviewed 
admit that school education helped them to develop 
their administrative and financial skills. Also, we con-
sider that there is need to promote entrepreneurship 
through information programs and through the share 
experience of best practices among the EU countries.
With all the information taken into account, this 
study tries to emphasize the idea that Romania needs to 
make some changes in the economic and administrative 
environment in order to support the access to financial 
resources, to reduce the administrative burdens and tax 

 
Realities and Peculiarities of the Entrepreneurship in Brasov 
225
obstacles, and to create a favorable environment for the 
 entrepreneurship development in  Brasov County. 
Without these elements the economic and social pros-
perity in this region is not possible.
References
Audretsch David, B. & Thurik, R. (2001), Linking 
Entrepreneurship to Growth, Paris: OECD Directorate 
for Science, Technology and Industry Working Papers. 
Carree, M. & Thurik, A. R. (2002), The impact of entrepre-
neurship on economic growth. In International 
Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research, Z. Acs and 
D. B. Audretsch (eds.), Boston/Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers.
Dragomir, C. (2012), Causes generating risks in the business 
management, Review of General Management, 16(2), 
160–167.
Dragomir, C., Ionescu, E., & Pânzaru, S. (2013), Economic 
sustainable development and eco-development, Review 
of General Management, 18(2), 58–68.
Drucker, P. (1970), Entrepreneurship in business enterprise, 
Journal of Business Policy, 1, 59–86. 
European Commission (2009), European Competitiveness 
Report 2009, Brussels: DG Enterprise and Industry.
Friijsetal, C., Paulsson, T., & Karlsson, C. (2002), 
Entrepreneurship and Economic Growth: A Critical 
Review of Empirical and Theoretical Research, 
Östersund: Institutet för Tillväxtpolitiska Studier. 
Jääskeläinen, M. (2000), Entrepreneurship and Economic 
Growth, Helsinki: Institute of Strategy and International 
Business.
Kan, K. & Tsai, W. D. (2006), Entrepreneurship and risk 
aversion, Small Business Economics, 26, 465–474.
Knight, K. (1967), A descriptive model of the intra-firm 
innovation process, Journal of Business of the University 
of Chicago, 40, 158–169. 
Kitson, M., Martin, R., & Tyler, P. (2004), Regional com-
petitiveness: An elusive yet key concept? Regional 
Studies, 38(9), 991–999.
Lewis, W. A. (1955), The Theory of Economic Growth, 
London: Routledge Publisher.
Miller, L. (1983), The correlates of entrepreneurship in three 
types of firms, Management Science, 29, 770–791.
Nickell, S. J. (1996), Competition and corporate perfor-
mance, Journal of Political Economy, 104(4), 724–746. 
Nickell, S. J., Nicolitsas, D., & Dryden, N. (1997), What 
makes firms perform well? European Economic Review, 
41, 783–796. 
Nicolescu, O. & Nicolescu, C. (2013), Entrepreneurs’ per-
ceptions of the state implication in the business 
environment: Modelling in Romania, Transylvanian 
Review of Administrative Sciences, 38, 106–124.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) (2002), Benchmarking: Fostering Firms 
Creation and Entrepreneurship, Paris: OECD. 
Porter, M. E. (1990), The Competitive Advantage of Nations, 
New York: Free Press. 
Reynolds, P. D., Bygrave, W., Cox, L. W., & Hay, M. (2002), 
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2002 Executive 
Report, Wellesley: Babson College/London Business 
School. 
Reynolds, P. D. (2005), Understanding business creation: 
Serendipity and scope in two decades of business cre-
ation studies, Small Business Economics, 24, 359–364.
Sánchez, J. C. (2011), University training for entrepreneurial 
competencies: Its impact on intention of venture cre-
ation, International Entrepreneurship Management 
Journal, 7(2), 239–254.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1911), The Theory of Economic 
Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, 
Interest and the Business Cycle, 1934 translation, 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Shane, S. A. & Venkataraman, S. (2000), The promise of 
entrepreneurship as a field of research, Academy of 
Management Review, 25, 217–226.
Sharma, P. & Chrisman. J. (2007), Toward a reconciliation of 
the definitional issues. In The Field of Corporate 
Entrepreneurship in Entrepreneurship: Concepts, 
Theory and Perspective, A. Cuervo, D. Ribeiro, and 
S. Roig (eds.), Heidelberg: Springer. 
Stevenson, H. H. & Jarillo, J. C. (1990), A paradigm of entre-
preneurship research: Entrepreneurial management, 
Strategic Management Journal, 11, 17–27.
Thurik, R. & Wennekers, S. (2001), A Note on 
Entrepreneurship, Small Business and Economic 
Growth, Rotterdam: Erasmus Research Institute of 
Management Report Series.
Wennekers, A.R.M. & Thurik, A.R. (1999), Linking entre-
preneurship and economic growth, Small Business 
Economics, 13, 46–47.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

227
Chapter 26
ESF Interventions for Promoting 
 Entrepreneurship in Romania
Daniela Manuc
Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources Development
The chapter examines the role of the  European Social 
Fund (ESF) in promoting entrepreneurial culture and 
adaptability by supporting skilled, trained, and adapta-
ble labor force and enterprises. 
The Sectoral Operational Program Human 
Resources Development 2007–2013 (SOPHRD) 
finances projects targeting the objective of making 
entrepreneurship a career option for everybody, as an 
important solution for counterbalancing the negative 
effects of the structural adjustments and industry 
restructuring process, generating economic and social 
alternatives, and improving the economic status of a 
significant number of people.
The chapter focuses on how specific results pro-
duced by ESF interventions contribute to increasing 
competitiveness and modern  management systems with 
emphasis on conceptual human resources management, 
especially in small and medium enterprises. 
The proposed methodology focuses on analyzing 
different SOPHRD financed projects relevant for pro-
moting entrepreneurship. The key area of intervention 
(KAI) 3.1 of the SOPHRD — promoting entrepre-
neurial culture targets both managers who learn how to 
make best use of the opportunities existing on the mar-
ket, on the success factors that increase business’ com-
petitiveness, management, and marketing strategies, as 
well as individuals interested in starting up a business 
as self-employed or employers, in providing the 
necessary information on business opportunities. 
However, the examples given will also cover projects 
financed through other relevant KAIs. Promoting part-
nership is a specific area of intervention under priority 
axis 3, but it is encouraged under all other priority axes, 
as a horizontal principle, wherever deemed relevant.
A key element in the SOPHRD financed projects is 
the role of partnerships in promoting new methods and 
models aiming at changing both present traditional 
arrangements and attitudes towards entrepreneurship. 
This chapter concludes that ESF financed interven-
tions contributed to a great extent to developing the 
entrepreneurial culture as well as to encouraging new 
start-ups, including in the field of  social economy. 
1. Introduction
European Social Fund (ESF) is an important instrument 
used by the Member States to make Europe’s work-
force and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
better equipped to face new and global challenges. 
ESF-funded initiatives in the field of entrepreneurship 
consist in providing career advice, promoting entrepre-
neurial culture, and training for the self-employed 
and entrepreneurs. ESF has provided assistance to 
SMEs through a variety of ways, such as incentives 
for business start-ups, activities to support organiza-
tional changes, and innovation and subsidies 

228 
D. Manuc
for self-employed persons and SMEs. A significant 
contribution was brought in the field of inclusive 
 entrepreneurship,1 where the Community of practice 
developed with ESF support played an important role.2
The chapter examines the role of the ESF in pro-
moting entrepreneurship and adaptability by supporting 
skilled, trained, and adaptable labor force and enter-
prises. The chapter focuses on how specific results 
produced by ESF interventions in Romania contribute 
to increasing competitiveness and developing modern 
 management systems with emphasis on human 
resources management, especially in SMEs, with a spe-
cial focus on the health sector.
In Romania, the Sectoral Operational Program 
Human Resources Development (SOPHRD) 2007–
2013 finances projects targeting the objective “to make 
entrepreneurship a career option for everybody, as an 
important solution for counterbalancing the negative 
effects of the structural adjustments and industry 
restructuring process, generating economic and social 
alternatives and improving the economic status of a 
significant number of people.”3
The chapter envisages specific ESF operations, 
with no intention of stating general conclusions, in the 
absence of any recent interim evaluation on the imple-
mentation of SOPHRD in Romania or of any impact 
evaluation conducted so far. The purpose is to provide 
a specific overview on how ESF funding opportunities 
contribute to promoting entrepreneurship and to 
improving management systems. At the same time, it is 
worth mentioning that SOPHRD is currently in 
Romania one of the main financing instruments for 
developing the  social economy sector.
2. Methodology
The proposed methodology focuses on analyzing dif-
ferent SOPHRD financed projects relevant for promot-
ing entrepreneurship. The choice of this approach is 
justified by the lack of recent evaluation data regarding 
1 EC, The COPIE Toolkit for Inclusive Entrepreneurship. Available at 
http://www.cop-ie.eu/sites/default/files/COPIE_Toolkit_ FINAL.pdf.
2 http://www.cop-ie.eu/.
3 The Framework Document for the Implementation of the 
Implementation of the Sectoral Operational Program Human 
Resources Development 2007–2013.
the implementation of different interventions funded 
through SOPHRD. 
At the same time, it is not to be argued that the 
chosen projects are under any criteria representative for 
the results obtained in the entrepreneurship sector with 
ESF support. They were chosen on the grounds that 
they were considered to be successful interventions on 
the Romanian labor market, with a significant contribu-
tion to developing skills and employability of the target 
group.
The analysis of the case studies was based on desk 
research. Secondary data was gathered on the basis of 
official information available on the official project 
websites.
Given the scope of this chapter, no interviews or 
questionnaires were conducted with the project manag-
ers or project beneficiaries. This approach would be 
considered necessary in case of an impact evaluation 
(although no impact indicators are available in the 
SOPHRD) for this sector, but for the scope of this chap-
ter the questionnaires and interviews would have pro-
vided limited results. 
3.  ESF Interventions Supporting 
Modern Management and 
Entrepreneurship
The structure of this chapter is based on the specific 
outcomes identified in various SOPHRD funded pro-
jects, relying primarily on the types of contributions 
that ESF interventions produced in the area of entrepre-
neurship and management systems. This approach does 
not intend to produce any general conclusions at the 
level of the program (SOPHRD). 
The main axes of the analysis focus on: awareness 
raising measures in the field of entrepreneurship; the 
role of training programs in support of new start-ups 
and for developing management skills; the new IT sys-
tems in support of modern management and entrepre-
neurship; inclusive entrepreneurship and supporting 
women in business. 
(a) Awareness raising measures in the field of 
entrepreneurship
The need to foster entrepreneurial mindsets has imposed 
itself as a priority on the EU political agenda, being a 

 
ESF Interventions for Promoting Entrepreneurship in Romania 
229
cornerstone of the employment and education strategies 
and action plans. In this respect, ESF has contributed to 
making  entrepreneurship a key concept of many aware-
ness campaigns, putting entrepreneurial culture at the 
heart of the “inclusive growth”.
In Romania, SOPHRD has ensured the proper 
framework for financing awareness raising measures in 
the field of entrepreneurship, as one of the key eligible 
actions for many projects implemented under KAI 3.1. 
A relevant case study is the project called “DACIE”4 
(Entrepreneurial Development for Competitiveness 
through Innovation and Eco-efficiency), financed from 
the SOPHRD 2007–2013 — KAI 3.1. The project part-
ners cover civil society organizations and business 
environment representatives. The general objective of 
the project focuses on the development of entrepre-
neurial culture, managerial skills. and innovative spirit 
among entrepreneurs, managers, employees, in order to 
set up new SMEs and to strengthen the existing ones, 
especially in the new economic sectors, using eco-effi-
cient and information technology and communications 
(ITC) technologies. The project was implemented in 
four development regions in Romania. The target group 
included 75 new entrepreneurs to develop business 
start-up plans and over 1,000 managers and employees 
trained. One of the main activities of the project was the 
implementation of an awareness raising campaign for 
1,500 people on the benefits of entrepreneurship. This 
measure has ensured that entrepreneurship can be 
understood as a career option for everybody, and that 
specific instruments are available for addressing indi-
vidual needs to develop managerial skills and start new 
businesses. 
Besides, the entrepreneurship competence was pre-
sented in most ESF campaigns as being more about 
adaptability and anticipation of labor market trends, 
meaning thinking employment as constant evolution. 
This can lead to a great impact in terms of awareness, 
as not all individuals can imagine themselves business 
owners, while the idea of becoming more adaptable in 
the meaning of entrepreneurial spirit and the idea of 
thus becoming able to cope with the challenges of mod-
ern labor markets are things which individuals can eas-
ily assimilate. This can trigger a better response to 
4 http://www.dacie.ro/index.php.
awareness raising measures, making the individuals 
feel closer to the objectives projected under those spe-
cific awareness raising tools. However, this estimated 
impact is based on direct observation of the specific 
case studies analyzed, and it is not based on the analy-
sis of a representative sample. All in all, the final 
SOPHRD evaluation will probably deliver specific 
conclusions on this point.
(b) The role of training programs in support of new 
start-ups and for developing  management skills
Economic growth is influenced both by the number of 
business start-ups and their adaptability to global chal-
lenges. This factor needs to be coupled with a proper 
understanding of how modern management techniques 
could contribute to making the most out of the existing 
human and financial resources. This framework has 
ensured a specific impetus to making entrepreneurship 
training a key element in implementing ESF interven-
tions under KAI 3.1. — promoting entrepreneurial 
culture. As mentioned in the SOPHRD, the main output 
indicator for measures financed under this KAI is the 
number of trainees in business start-up. 
The project “Entrepreneur in the third millennium”5 
co-financed through the ESF and implemented by the 
Foundation “Centre for Entrepreneurship and Executive 
Development — CEED ROMANIA” and the com-
pany MBM Software & Partners SRL during July 
2010–April 2013 addressed to a target group of over 
1,150 people from urban communities — managers and 
employees — who wanted to start their own business. 
The people with disabilities were also considered when 
selecting the target group, one of the projects objectives 
being to provide them with training in entrepreneur-
ship, business management, project management, and 
the introduction of new technologies. In the project 
management field, the PCM guidelines developed by 
the EC constituted an important training tool.6
The training provided to the target group focused on 
key issues related to entrepreneurship, such as the legal 
relevant framework, requirements for setting up a start-
up, and how to get funds for developing the start-up, 
5 http://www.im3.ro/.
6 ECPCM guidelines. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/
multimedia/publications/documents/tools/europeaid_ adm_pcm_
guidelines_2004_en.pdf.

230 
D. Manuc
the use of ICT for the business, project  management. 
The theoretical knowledge presented was combined 
with practical modules in order to contribute to the target 
group better understanding on how to run a business 
and how to apply the knowledge into their daily work. 
Training in business management was conducted as well 
with the purpose of developing the participant skills in 
developing and running new established start-ups.
Therefore, it could be concluded that in the context 
in which the initiatives for setting up new firms are 
strongly encouraged by the European Commission, 
Romania financed through SOPHRD 2007–2013 clear 
measures that increased the number of entrepreneurs. 
Many SOPHRD beneficiaries provided training courses 
that improved the knowledge and developed the skills 
of the individuals that wanted to establish a start-up. 
As a result, more individuals were willing to take 
the risks for setting up a new firm. Administrative 
requirements which often discourage individuals in set-
ting up a new firm did not seem to be a significant 
burden any more as trained people knew how to comply 
with these requirements. In the same time, it could be 
argued that the projects financing training for promot-
ing better management succeeded to some extent to 
help managers to adapt their businesses to the competi-
tive and challenging context and even to improve their 
businesses by applying better management techniques.
(c) The new IT systems in support of modern man-
agement and  entrepreneurship
Many projects financed under KAI 3.1 from the 
SOPHRD have ensured accompanying measures to 
tackle the need to develop entrepreneurial skills. These 
measures included in most cases dedicated IT tools 
meant to support the access to specialized information 
regarding business opportunities, dedicated training 
programs, individualized counseling on business 
start-ups. 
The case study analyzed covered a project imple-
mented by the Foundation “Center for Entrepreneurship 
and Executive Development — CEED ROMANIA”, 
and the company MBM Software & Partners SRL. The 
project title was “Entrepreneur in the Third Millennium”, 
co-financed by the European Social Found through the 
SOPHRD 2007–2013.
The project ran from July 2010 until April 2013 and 
had the overall objective of developing entrepreneurship, 
management skills and skills in information technology 
for Romanian entrepreneurs, in view to foster the estab-
lishment and development of new companies and job 
creation. 
The main IT tools developed through this project 
covered: the Virtual Office for Entrepreneurial 
Development, as an electronic platform that allowed 
the target group to consult information resources on 
fields of expertise relevant to the business community 
and contribute to its continued development (www.e-
birouvirtual.ro); the Virtual SME Demonstrator, as a 
modern instrument offering an experimental environ-
ment for implementation and testing of management 
systems such as customer relationship management 
and problem management (www.immvirtual.ro), and 
online consulting services provided by a team of spe-
cialists in business management and information tech-
nology, that shared best practices and the knowledge 
gained in over 10 years of experience, aggregating 
them into a package of dedicated consultancy, and tak-
ing questions from those interested to turn them into 
solutions.
The impact of the project has been significantly 
boosted through these electronic platforms. Thus, 
according to the official project website, approximately 
350 beneficiaries were assisted for free via the Virtual 
SME Demonstrator, more than 750 beneficiaries were 
assisted with the Virtual Office for Entrepreneurial 
Development, and of these, approximately 370 have 
downloaded materials developed during the project and 
posted on the Virtual Office on topics of interest for busi-
ness creation and use of ICT in business management.
Over 4,000 beneficiaries have increased awareness 
and information on the benefits and opportunities 
offered by ICT in launching and management of a busi-
ness, through the information campaign: email (2,365 
people), telephone (200 persons), electronic platform 
(1,217 people), awareness events (185).
These results prove that specific ESF projects suc-
ceed in targeting a wide audience and delivering spe-
cialized management instruments which would not 
have been accessed by that particular target group in 
other circumstances, with relevant results in supporting 
senior entrepreneurship.7
7 EC (2012).

 
ESF Interventions for Promoting Entrepreneurship in Romania 
231
(d) Inclusive  entrepreneurship and supporting 
women in business
 Social economy is a key pillar in ensuring long term 
development opportunities for local communities.8 
SOPHRD became over the last years one of the main 
instruments for promoting social economy in Romania. 
However, the development of this sector was limited 
due to the lack of any supporting legal framework dur-
ing the past years, the potential financing from SOPHRD 
being to a great extent wasted, as only a limited number 
of social enterprises were set up through this program. 
At the same time, it can be argued that partnership was 
a key element in the implementation of KAI 6.1 — 
developing social economy, with the aim of empower-
ing vulnerable groups “in what concerns promoting 
positive action for the people belonging to vulnerable 
groups at community level, as well as gaining financial 
independence based on the income generating types of 
activities carried out in social economy entities.”9 The 
partnerships developed allowed for a better understand-
ing of the shared responsibilities at local level, develop-
ing innovative  management networks for inclusive 
entrepreneurship initiatives, and also contributed to 
raising awareness on the importance of social 
entrepreneurship. 
One of the projects implemented under the KAI 6.1 
that focused on creating and promoting social economy 
structures is the project “First step to become independ-
ent” implemented by the Foundation “Close to You”. 
The project was implemented starting with October 
2008 till October 2011. This non-governmental organi-
zation (NGO) addressed the needs of vulnerable groups 
(such as HIV/AIDS-infected and affected people older 
than 18 years old) by providing the individuals from the 
target group with training in order to facilitate their 
integration into the labor market as well as by establish-
ing social economy structures. Some of the people that 
followed training programs got jobs in the social econ-
omy structures established by this NGO. The products 
made by the employees as well as their prices were 
made available on a website in order to be sold. 
However, without public support and fiscal facilities it 
8 EC (2013).
9 SOPHRD, p. 106. Available at http://www.fseromania.ro/images/
downdocs/sop_hrd11.pdf.
is very difficult for the social economy structures to 
survive the challenges generated by the competitive 
economic environment.
In the context of the global socio-economic crisis, 
having in mind the serious difficulties that the people 
belonging to the vulnerable groups have in finding jobs 
as well as the challenges faced by the social economic 
structures to survive and to be competitive on the labor 
market, it is highly important that the state provide sup-
port to the social economy structures. 
Another dimension of inclusive entrepreneurship 
covers measures targeting to empower women in the 
business sector. SOPHRD had more clear-cut results in 
this area, with a relatively high number of beneficiaries 
and success stories. Under KAI 3.1, there were relevant 
projects targeting women entrepreneurs.
The project “ANTRES Entrepreneurship and the 
Equality of Chances an Inter-regional Model of Women 
School of Entrepreneurship”, financed from SOPHRD, 
KAI 3.1, was implemented from May 2009 to May 
2011. The project beneficiary was the Faculty of 
Economic Sciences, University of Oradea, and the part-
ners were: West University of Timişoara; “Aurel Vlaicu” 
University, Arad; North University of Baia-Mare; 
“Eftimie Murgu” University, Reşiţa; Commercial 
Academy of Satu Mare; Management Scientific Society 
of Romania and The National Agency for Equal 
Opportunities between Women and Men. This project 
was considered a success story both by the SOPHRD 
Managing Authority and the European Commission.10
The project was especially designed to address the 
needs of developing entrepreneurial skills among 
women, while the selection of the target group rigor-
ously identified those women for whom entrepreneur-
ship was a realistic career option. In this respect, the 
candidates were subject to an initial screening for the 
determination of socio-professional and motivational 
profile. The project covered a large number of women: 
1,800 were trained in specific business-related fields, 
while 108 women participating in the training program 
were awarded the necessary financing for their busi-
ness plans.
10 http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/projects/stories/details_new.
cfm?pay=RO&the=51&sto=2085&lan=7&region=ALL&obj=ALL
&per=ALL&defL=EN.

232 
D. Manuc
Inclusive  entrepreneurship on the two axes pre-
sented (social entrepreneurship and supporting women 
in business) is a key feature of the SOPHRD interven-
tions in Romania, with a visible impact in raising aware-
ness in the business environment. Considering the legal 
limitations of developing this sector, it can be argued 
that SOPHRD has laid the foundations for future ESF 
interventions in the next programming period, and that 
some of the partnerships developed at local level will 
benefit from future financing in this area.
4. Conclusions
The impact of ESF interventions in Romania is yet to 
be established. In terms of relevance, efficiency, and 
effectiveness, the second interim evaluation and the 
 ex-post evaluations of SOPHRD will indicate to what 
extent this program has produced results which are 
consistent with the objectives set and in accordance 
with the socio-economic context. However, consider-
ing individual ESF interventions, as it was argued in 
this analysis, it can be underlined that particular ESF-
financed measures have impacted significantly on the 
specific target group, creating opportunities that could 
not have been produced in other circumstances.11 This 
is the case with measures financed under KAI 3.1 — 
promoting entrepreneurial culture. 
As it was indicated in this chapter, the main meas-
ures financed from SOPHRD under KAI 3.1 covered 
awareness raising measures in the field of entrepreneur-
ship, training programs in support of new start-ups, the 
development of IT systems in support of modern  man-
agement and entrepreneurship, promotion of inclusive 
entrepreneurship, and supporting women in business. 
For each of these axes of intervention, the specific pro-
jects presented in this chapter have proven to impact on 
a relatively high number of people, creating specific 
circumstances favorable to entrepreneurship promotion 
and business development. 
ESF has produced a clear shift in understanding 
how entrepreneurship can be approached, becoming 
11 EC, The  European Social Fund and Entrepreneurship, http://
ec.europa.eu/employment_social/esf/docs/sf_ entrepreneurship_
en.pdf.
more a “career option for everybody” and less the 
generic concept applying to a limited number of busi-
ness owners. 
SOPHRD projects have laid the foundations for 
developing the entrepreneurial culture in Romania, 
both in the competitive sector of the economy and in 
the  social economy area, allowing for a relatively high 
number of people to develop skills, build networks, 
discover business opportunities, overcome traditional 
ways of thinking about vulnerable groups and approach 
the labor market with a new understanding of how man-
agement principles can be applied to serve the widest 
range of entrepreneurship opportunities, even in the 
service of social inclusion. 
As a result, SOPHRD supported entrepreneurship 
and self-employment in the direction of creating jobs, 
developing skills, and giving unemployed and disad-
vantaged people an opportunity to fully participate in 
society and the economy. 
The second interim evaluation and the ex-post 
evaluation of SOPHRD will provide further basis for 
drawing relevant conclusion on this subject. At the 
same time, it is important to underline that a counter-
factual evaluation of the interventions financed through 
SOPHRD in the entrepreneurship sector would be a 
very useful tool to draw the relevant conclusions in 
order to better fine-tune the next operational program. 
All in all, in the perspective of the conclusions to 
be drawn from the ex-post evaluation, it is obvious that 
the SOPHRD will definitely constitute an important 
input for better designing the new ESF Human Capital 
Operational Program for the 2014–2020 programming 
period.
References
ECPCM guidelines. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/europe-
aid/multimedia/publications/documents/tools/
Europeaid_adm_pcm_guidelines_2004_en.pdf.
EC (2012), Policy Brief on Senior Entrepreneurship Entre-
preneurial Activities in Europe.
EC (2013), Social economy and social entrepreneurship, 
Social Europe guide, Vol. 4, March.
EC, The COPIE Toolkit for Inclusive Entrepreneurship. 
Available at http://www.cop-ie.eu/sites/default/files/ 
COPIE_Toolkit_ FINAL.pdf.

 
ESF Interventions for Promoting Entrepreneurship in Romania 
233
EC, The European Social Fund and Entrepreneurship. 
Available at http://ec.europa.eu/employment_social/esf/ 
docs/sf_ entrepreneurship_en.pdf.
http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/projects/stories/details_
new.cfm?pay=RO&the=51&sto=2085&lan=7&region=
ALL&obj=ALL&per=ALL&defL=EN
http://www.cop-ie.eu/
http://www.dacie.ro/index.php
http://www.im3.ro/
Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources 
Development, p. 106. Available at http://www.fseroma-
nia.ro/images/downdocs/sop_hrd11.pdf.
The Framework Document for the Implementation of the 
Implementation of the Sectoral Operational Programme 
Human Resources Development 2007–2013.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

235
Chapter 27
Contributions to the Development 
and Use of Information Programs Dealing 
With Human Resources in the  Rural Area
Simona Biriescu and Mariana Predişcan
The West University of Timisoara
Marian Năstase
The Bucharest University of Economic Studies
Innovation-based economic renewal evolved geospatial 
contrary. Advances in knowledge are favored and intimate 
related to the possibilities of communication. Consequently, 
they are supported by communication infrastructure and 
communication technologies. Long history of communi-
cation technologies showed the transformation of trans-
mission technologies, leading to solution focused on 
communication technologies in communication centers 
that become centers of economic renewal through 
research, innovation, and  technological focus. 
Romania’s aspiration to integrate all the Community 
approach for sustainable development is a natural 
expression of the identity of ideals, values, and princi-
ples, therefore his vocation is that of a democratic 
country deeply rooted in its traditions, culture, and the 
European civilization.
This chapter’s objectives deal with revealing the 
gap between rural and urban in terms of access and 
opportunities for education, emphasized by this study 
and with designing an intervention program in rural 
areas of Romania, especially in disadvantaged areas, 
based on an extensive use of informational programs 
and  databases. The program should cover initial 
education, as well as adult education and community 
education, and all components. A series of objectives 
and action directions in education that we propose is 
already recorded in educational policy and reform 
benchmarks since education is, also, and objectives of 
ongoing projects.
The methodology used is based on field research 
and literatures review that reveals the important role in 
the county of the  information system, as it is for instance 
the “common database”. Common database consists of 
interconnecting local databases and existing county or 
in progress. This will allow the effective communication 
within the network of institutions and an effective pro-
motion of the counties of the region by providing easy 
access to public information and promoting business 
opportunities and economic cooperation at regional, 
county, and local levels.
1. Introduction
The starting point for addressing the criteria of eco-
nomic reform and its implementation strategy is the 
analysis, even briefly, of the general characteristics of 

236 
S. Biriescu, M. Predişcan & M. Năstase 
conducting this process in our country. Based on these 
characteristics and consequences of current economic 
reform somebody could draw some conclusions regard-
ing the action of the general principle of “destructive 
creation”, detaching the elements/processes perennial, 
with a continuing need to traverse the entire current 
period, of the random, temporary — a result of circum-
stances national/international economic, social, and 
unfavorable political or governmental errors. 
Growth in natural environmental conditions is 
marked by efforts to make society avoid degradation of 
nature. While achieving economic growth is a tendency 
to increase the external costs they incur first who caused 
degradation of the natural environment. To speak about 
education research in areas and trying to develop this 
subject is one of the most daring and ambitious ideas. In 
 rural area “school” is not a specialized institution for car-
rying out the pedagogical objectives of education, deter-
mined by the policies in education (Porter, 2009), but it is 
rather embedded in the hearts of children and villagers. 
The concern for the analysis of the village educa-
tion perspective of inequality of opportunity, poverty, 
and lack of interest is part of a trend already estab-
lished, especially since Europeanization and globaliza-
tion after 1989 triggered a series of profound changes. 
These changes have disrupted the life of Romanian 
villages, people had to adapt to conditions of a decent 
life non-specific and often the expectations linked to 
their efforts — a situation that is characteristic of the 
current educational system. 
The precariousness of specific education in rural 
areas is due to lack of guidance for development and 
indifference of Romanian political forces to develop 
projects affirmative action, as long as insufficient fund-
ing is focused on the problem, rather than the correct 
use of existing funding.
Managers create a plan to attract and retain people 
with skills needed by the organization. Implementing the 
plan involves the recruitment, selection, integration, 
training, rewarding, and choosing the most appropriate 
benefits and ongoing assessment of performance to ver-
ify that organizational targets are met. These activities 
are components of  human resource management. Lack of 
qualified personnel or under size herd, the age structure 
of employees within an organization, but many are unde-
sirable situations that arise in business management. 
2.  The Needs for TIC Tools in the 
Professional Assessment of Human 
Resources
Needs assessment and human resource planning is 
strongly recommended by most specialists, in many 
competitive organizations or companies. This is part of 
the long-term success of any organization that can 
assure a mix of the right people at the right place and 
right time (Pinder & Stuart, 1997; Turban, 2001). The 
employment decision is based on information required 
for a proper selection that has two basic principles. 
The first principle claims that the candidate’s previ-
ous behavior is the best indicator of future behavior. 
This principle is not determined, an employee who was 
better than the others in previous employment, a benefit 
may be mediocre in a new position, and a poor student 
in the beginning of the year can change and become 
one of the best by theyear end.
Knowing what people have done in the past, it is 
not necessarily a very fair indication of what they will 
do in the future, accepting that people can change 
(Jolivet, 1996). When it is considered a soft one crite-
rion, it refers to the maintenance of the purposes of 
adapting to the needs of organizations (Figer, 2007) and 
at the time, when the unit is considered a quality soft-
ware product, it must meet two requirements: to be 
easily implemented and tested, and be easily main-
tained and modified.
A software and  database design can play a critical 
role in achieving good information about human 
resources because it is seen as a set of interrelated files. 
Intercorrelationis identified and represented by links 
between relations, conceptual, and logical data models 
(Dalotă, 2000; Dănăiaţă, 1998). This is the starting 
point in designing physical database design that pre-
ceded the physical files. Computer programming can 
be accomplished using several methods. Therefore it is 
necessary to take account of some essential things. 
When designing database, architecture must be taken 
into account several aspects of the system size. In fact, 
architecture highlights ways of defining and structuring 
data. Selecting appropriate enterprise architecture 
(rural) is the task where database analysts and system 
analyst playsan important contribution. Finally, data-
bases evolve as important programs.

 
Contributions to the Development and Use of Information Programs 
237
The program can be defined either as an entity that 
can be executed on the computer, or as a means of 
 communication with the computer to solve a problem, 
a description of an algorithm and associated data for 
execution on the computer, so their representation 
given restrictions imposed by the computer.
The time schedule also has other meanings, depend-
ing, in particular by the performance of the equipment. 
A special technical performance is the emergence of 
computer systems with multiple CPU processors in 
order to have the possibility of multiple processing 
programs. An important role in the county  information 
system it is “common  database” (Dalotă & Dalotă, 
1999). Common database consists of interconnecting 
local databases and existing county or in progress. 
This will allow the effective communication within 
the network of institutions and an effective promotion 
of the counties of the region by providing easy access 
to public information and promoting business opportu-
nities and economic cooperation at regional, county, 
and local levels (Boddy & Buchanan, 2007).
Transmission of information from county and 
regional level will be through Internet/intranet. 
Interconnected equipment and management of data 
bases and banks at county and regional purchase is 
provided by the project related to appropriate intercon-
nection supplied by technical solution. Databases of 
local government and the specialized promotion and 
economic  development are considered mandatory for 
initial stage and the project will be built up based on the 
uniformity specifications to be carried out in the project 
(Dalotă, 1998).
3.  Education and  Human Resources 
Management in the  Rural Areas
The role of education in a civilized society is very 
important. First, because education contributes to the 
formation and development of individual and group 
personality (Delnet, 2003). So, the economic develop-
ment of a country depends on the education of citizens, 
so we need a clear conception of the role of education 
in society. 
Today, the objectives of education and educational 
processes are so complex that only a concentration of 
efforts by several institutions, reflected in what some 
have called “educational city” by “redistribution” of 
education by several factors, could create actions 
whose results are satisfactory (Damanpour & Evan, 
1984), that a restructuring of work in different sections 
of the society, on educational requirements, seems to be 
a good sign. The gap between rural and urban in terms 
of access and opportunities for education, evident by 
this study requires an intervention program priority in 
rural areas of Romania and, especially in disadvantaged 
areas. The program should cover initial education, as 
well as adult education and community education, and 
all components. A series of objectives and action direc-
tions in education that we propose is already recorded 
in educational policy and reform benchmarks since 
education is, also, and objectives of ongoing projects. 
Human Resource (HR) plan for rural is created in 
accordance with the strategic plan of the organization. 
As the organization identifies developmental opportu-
nities available, it is necessary to correlate them with 
skills that will be needed to cover them. Recruiting, 
training, and reward programs are designed to attract, 
develop, and retain people with the skills. HR develop-
ment in rural areas involves a process of training people 
to perform the tasks needed in the organization. 
The problem lies in identifying the type of training 
that employee’s need. All decisions must take into 
account the training of motivated employees. There are 
a number of training techniques and elements required 
for a training program to be effective. The performance 
evaluation is important as behavior considered appro-
priate evaluation and those inappropriate and granting 
equitable rewards. To create healthy relationships 
between management and employees. HR is conduct-
ing a number of activities such as conflict management, 
strengthening relations with trade unions or employee 
representatives and counseling employees. As they 
develop size, any organization faces problems need 
human resources. If the organization is growing, it has 
to establish methods for finding and hiring people who 
possess the required skills (Robinson, 1997). This is 
usually reflected in a form of human resource 
planning. 
Analyzing the organization’s projects and future 
trends, it is estimated the number of people needed and 
the type of skills they require for any vacancies. Part of 
this process is the managerial succession, process that 

238 
S. Biriescu, M. Predişcan & M. Năstase 
determines the number of managers who will retire and 
the extent to which the organization has talented people 
to replace them (Fruja & Jivan, 2006).
After developing a human resource plan it must 
follow a number of steps required to implement the 
plan. The first essential part of the implementation is to 
determine the number of people with specific skills 
needed at some point. The next step is recruiting — 
a procedure used to attract qualified people to apply for 
vacancies within the organization. After people have 
been drawn from applying, selection procedures are 
used for determining the persons who will actually per-
form the tasks in the organization and be engaged. 
New employees in  rural areas should be taught the 
rules and standards of the organization and is used for 
this type of program integration or orientation. After 
people were integrated into the system, it is usually 
necessary to help them update their skills, attitudes and 
powers, bringing them the right to organize are consid-
ered through training and development of employees. 
Then, the people began to work in the organization 
according to the problem at their appropriate reward 
(Porter & Robin, 1983).
Considered wages are set correctly for people with 
certain skills and job responsibilities and appropriate per-
formance evaluation procedure by which management can 
make informed decisions for granting rewards offered 
under the form of salary or promotion. As rural people in 
the organization are established, they become concerned 
with benefits (health insurance, sick leave and rest, pension 
funds) are offered. As employees we can choose repre-
sentatives to join a union to protect the rights and promote 
the interests and therefore there is a need to employ col-
laboration with these structures (Deaconu, 2007).
When conflicts arise skilled interventions are nec-
essary to manage and resolve them constructively. 
Counseling in various aspects should also be granted to 
employees of the managers or specialists. All these 
activities constitute the substance of employees — 
management relations.  Human resource management in 
urban areas should coincide with human resource man-
agement in rural areas and should be complex oriented 
activities efficiency staff use an organization aiming to 
achieve both objectives and employee needs. The indi-
vidual country, its structure, the feelings, mentality, 
culture, motivation, desires, and particularly through 
self-awareness, is the great unknown of a system, can 
prevent or, conversely, may potentiate the action, pro-
cess, activity. Moreover, the nature of social being, he 
lives and works in the community, part of some group 
that feels more or less attached to groups which in turn 
interact with other groups, depending on some and 
exerting influence on others. Therefore, the successful 
initiation and conduct of the activities of various organ-
izations depend overwhelmingly on the extent to which 
it is understood, motivated and coordinated human fac-
tor. Human resources are the creative, active and coor-
dinator of the activity within organizations, they 
decisively influencing efficacy of material, financial 
and informational (Jaba, 1999). Describing people as 
“resources” it emphasizes the importance and shows 
that their management requires high levels of genuine 
concern for people and their professionalism. The evo-
lution of managerial practice and thinking led to the 
displacement factor specialists’ attention to human 
resource material. It came to the conclusion that the 
individual is more than a simple component as a pro-
ductive factor! And human resource management prin-
ciples about rigid asset of the management company 
have to be replaced and the management must take into 
account a number of features missing in economic cal-
culation. Only taking into account all aspects that 
define human personality, skills, knowledge, aspira-
tions, temperament, and character traits, the manage-
ment may be able to lead most precious resource, the 
only resource equipped with the ability to know and 
defeat their role limitation. Emphasizing HR does not 
mean, however, an understatement of other resources. 
Company’s system design involves addressing interde-
pendent resource from fundamental objectives whose 
achievement contributes together, substantive connec-
tions that exist between them. Exacerbation of human 
resources at the expense of the other resources affects 
the dynamic equilibrium of the organization (Popescu, 
1995). Only by meeting the needs of the employee will 
be able to get involvement in achieving the organiza-
tion’s objectives and only contributing to the success of 
the organization’s employees will be able to satisfy the 
needs of the work they perform. Only when those 
involved understand the relationship of human resource 
management occupies an important position within the 
organization and contribute to its success. Essential 

 
Contributions to the Development and Use of Information Programs 
239
principles of  human resource management in the  rural 
areas are:
• 
Assessment of the human factor as a vital resource;
• 
Linking in an integrated manner, policies and 
human resources systems with the organization’s 
mission and strategy;
• 
Concern sustained concentration and targeting 
capabilities and individual efforts to achieve effec-
tive mission and objectives set;
• 
Developing a healthy organizational culture.
The objectives of HR management are:
• 
Increase efficiency and effectiveness of staff 
(increased productivity);
• 
Reduced absenteeism, turnover, and number scale 
and strike movement;
• 
Increase job satisfaction of employees;
• 
Increase capacity for innovation, problem solving 
and organization change.
Recruitment and selection of HR in rural areas are 
complementary activities in the staffing process:
• 
Recruitment — refers to the confirmation of the 
need to hire new staff, location, and attract those 
interested in applying for jobs offered;
• 
Selection — is the final stage of the recruitment 
decision, it representing the whole process by 
which people choose what meets the qualities, 
knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to achieve 
the objectives, tasks, powers and responsibilities 
circumscribed to certain posts.
Phases of this work are:
• 
Define the job that results in a job description are 
detailed job requirements and the types of skills 
needed to meet these requirements and profile of 
the ideal candidate.
• 
Attracting candidates — recruitment may be inter-
nal or external organization. External recruitment 
takes place in educational institutions through con-
sulting firms and recruitment (so-called “head-
hunters”), employment agency employment, 
advertisements in the media, based on recommen-
dations made by employees of the company.
• 
Selection — candidates may be asked to send a cur-
riculum vitae (CV), a motivation letter (of intent) 
and letters of recommendation. CV can be free or 
standardized format and handwritten letter must 
necessarily quite often it is subject to handwriting 
expert.
Among the candidates who have submitted these 
documents retained as interesting group of candidates 
for the firm may be asked:
— An interview (telephone or face to face) that may 
occur after the tests (medical, aptitude, intelli-
gence, training etc.). Many companies use aptitude 
tests, interest and personality to compare job 
requirements with certain characteristics of candi-
dates. One of the most known and used such tests 
is Myers Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI);
— A series of interviews (with the direct, human 
resources manager, general manager).
In conducting the interview can be approached dif-
ferent strategies: honest and friendly approach, the 
approach focuses on the candidate’s past behavior 
driven approach to problem solving (situational inter-
view) approach aimed at creating a stressful environ-
ment. In practice, a combination of these strategies is 
used. How selection interview is about meeting people, 
it does not remove the risk of making decisions based 
on first impressions, or human error (Abrudan, 2009).
Some candidates with good technical skills can fare 
poorly in the interview selection, becoming angry or 
excited, leaving the wrong impression. Research shows 
that interviewer experience enables him to overcome 
these factors and take the right decisions. Candidates 
can expect questions like: What do you know about the 
industry in which the company operates? What contri-
bution can you make to achieving organizational objec-
tives? What problems do you think the company will 
face in the coming years? What strengths do you see? 
Are you satisfied with your career so far? What crisis 
have recently encountered and how you solved it? What 
decisions do you find difficult to make? Why do you 
want to go (you go) to the current (old) job? Why do 
you want to work in this company? After having con-
sidered all the evidence (CV, tests, letters of 

240 
S. Biriescu, M. Predişcan & M. Năstase 
recommendation, interviews), the final decision is 
taken. It made a job offer to the selected candidate, 
which he can accept or reject. The hiring process is 
attempted harmonization of job candidates with the 
skills and capabilities to ensure success in the new posi-
tion of that person (Appleby, 2010).
4.  Human Resources Program 
that Support the HR Strategy 
in  Rural Areas
Recognition and promotion of this strategy involves 
development of modern tools for knowing about and 
attracting and keeping the good employees. With such 
a strategy, the function staff actively contributes to the 
development and achievement of company strategy.
If we pay attention to the HR strategy, in correla-
tion with different categories of resources, we could ask 
the following question: What markets could be 
approached with the human potential from the rural 
area? In order to demonstrate in a concrete way, it is 
necessary to have some data and information that are 
connected to the variables specific to HR in the rural 
area and that make the object of the use of this elabo-
rated software. 
This program can be used, with some adjustments 
by entrepreneurs and managers from larger companies. 
It is based on different questionnaires that reveal the 
characteristics of the personnel that is interested in 
being employed in the rural and even urban areas.
The application is spread on more sheets within a 
file where all the macros are grouped in Visual Basic 
for Application. This is a facility of Microsoft Excel, 
allowing testing the solutions and analyzing fast the 
results. 
This program works with a  database from Access, 
providing different information about an individual. 
Each menu has one or two submenus for introducing 
the necessary data for HRM in the rural areas.
Private Sub MNUEXIT_Click()
Unload Me
End Sub
Private Sub MNUFIS_Click()
Form2.Show
End Sub
Private Sub MNUFISA_Click()
Form3.Show
End Sub
Private Sub MNUPSI_Click()
Form4.Show
End Sub
Private Sub MNUSANAT_Click()
Form5.Show
End Sub
Private Sub Command1_Click()
SPIRIT_DE_OBS = Text1.Text
CAPACITATE = Combo1.Text
GANDIRE = Combo2.Text
INTUITIE = Text2.Text
CUNOASTERE_MET = Text3.Text
VEDERE_SPATIU = Text4.Text
NUME_PRENUME = Text5.Text
Print “NUME SI PRENUME”, NUME_PRENUME
Print “SPIRIT DE OBSERVATIE”, SPIRIT_DE_OBS
Print “CAPACITATE”, CAPACITATE
Print “GANDIRE”, GANDIRE
Print “INTUITIE”, INTUITIE
Print “CUNOASTERE METODA”, 
CUNOASTERE_MET
Print “VEDERE IN SPATIU”, VEDERE_SPATIU
End Sub
Private Sub Command2_Click()
End
End Sub
Private Sub Form_Load()
Combo1.AddItem “CAPACITATE DE ANALIZA”
Combo1.AddItem “CAPACITATE ABSTRACTA”
Combo1.AddItem “CREATIVA”
Combo2.AddItem “GANDIRE ABSTRACTA”
Combo2.AddItem “GANDIRE CONCRETA”
End Sub
Dim INTELIGENTA_GENERALA As Integer

 
Contributions to the Development and Use of Information Programs 
241
Dim FLEXIBILITATE_IN_GANDIRE As Integer
Dim PERSEVERENTA As Integer
Private Sub Command1_Click()
INTELIGENTA_GENERALA = Text1.Text
COORDONARE_IDEATICA = Text2.Text
STRUCTURI_OPERATIONALE_ALGORITMICE = 
Text3.Text
FLEXIBILITATE_IN_GANDIRE = Text4.Text
ASUMARE_DE_RISCURI = Text5.Text
PERSEVERENTA = Text6.Text
RECEPTIVITATE_LA_NOU = Text7.Text
MOTIVATIE_INTRISECA = Text8.Text
APTITUDINI_DE_CONDUCERE = Combo1.Text
If Option1.Value Then TEMPERAMENT = DA
If Option2.Value Then TEMPERAMENT = NU
TRASATURI_DE_CARACTER = Combo2.Text
NUME = Text9.Text
PRENUME = Text10.Text
REZULTAT = INTELIGENTA_GENERALA + 
FLEXIBILITATE_IN_GANDIRE + 
PERSEVERENTA
Text11.Text = REZULTAT
If REZULTAT > 100 Then
MsgBox “persoana corespunde”
End If
If REZULTAT < 100 Then
MsgBox “persoana nu corespunde”
End If
End Sub
Private Sub Command2_Click()
End
End Sub
PRIVATE SUB FORM_LOAD()
COMBO1.ADDITEM “PREVIZIONALE”
COMBO1.ADDITEM “DECIZIONALE”
COMBO1.ADDITEM “ORGANIZATORICE”
COMBO1.ADDITEM “COORDONARE SI 
CONTROL”
COMBO2.ADDITEM “EXIGENTA”
COMBO2.ADDITEM “SUBIECTIVITATE”
COMBO2.ADDITEM “FERMITATE”
COMBO2.ADDITEM “SPIRIT CRITIC”
COMBO2.ADDITEM “MODESTIE”
COMBO2.ADDITEM “CONSECVENTA”
COMBO2.ADDITEM “CINSTE”
End Sub
It is very important the relationship between urban 
and  rural areas as these places change the countries all 
over the world. While some of the issues, like changing 
agricultural systems are universal, other aspects of the 
process are specific to certain countries or regions 
(Abrudan, 1999). Urban and rural land uses in these 
countries are no longer mutually exclusive, but rather 
exist on a continuum of community types that are 
increasingly interconnected. Migration and settlement 
patterns are changing as new forms of urban, suburban 
and exurban development alter patterns of community 
development. 
The population is increasingly decentralized as 
suburbanization is being replaced by exurban develop-
ment, characterized by low-density growth where 
households with fewer people are living on larger 
pieces of land further from urban centers. Development 
patterns influence national and world views, the vision 
of governments about the use of natural and financial 
resources and the development of different systems in 
order to improve the living standards. This develop-
ment is largely enhanced by the use of information 
technology and different programs that are addressed to 
the  rural areas, especially. 
Much of this development and the resulting land 
use and lifestyle clashes occur in peri-urban areas once 
dominated by agriculture. As non-farm growth in rural 
and peri-urban areas competes with agriculture for 
land, tensions arise between farmers and non-farmers.
The focus in many developing countries should 
also be on rural areas as it is promoted the idea that 
there is a clear division between urban and rural areas, 
fact that distorts the realities of urban and rural and the 
increasingly important peri-urban areas, where both 
urban and rural characteristics can be found. 
Rural areas depend on urban areas for secondary 
schools, post and telephone, credit, agricultural expansion 

242 
S. Biriescu, M. Predişcan & M. Năstase 
services, farm equipment, hospitals, and government ser-
vices. Greater access to information technology, better 
roads, improved education, and changing economic reali-
ties are increasing the movement of people, goods and 
services, waste and pollution and blurring the boundaries 
between urban and  rural areas. 
As incomes from agriculture decrease, rural house-
holds are forced to develop new and more complex 
livelihood strategies that include both agricultural and 
non-agricultural incomes, including remittances from 
seasonal and permanent migrants. 
At the same time, low income households in urban 
areas may rely on agricultural goods from rural relatives 
to supplement their income. Current changes in the 
global economic, social and political context, including 
structural adjustment programs and economic reform, 
have resulted in deepening social polarization and 
increasing poverty in both urban and rural areas. 
As a general conclusion we could say that such soft-
ware will amplify the knowledge and use of HR poten-
tial in the rural areas and will impact both the people’ 
choice for a job, but also the HRM and the competitivity 
and profitability of companies in this geographical area.
References
Abrudan, I. (1999), Sisteme Flexibile de Fabricaţie: Concepte 
de Proiectare şi Management, Cluj-Napoca: Ed.Dacia. 
Abrudan, D. (2009), Excelenţa în Managementul Resurselor 
Umane, p. 132, Timisoara: Editura Eurobit.
Anonymous (2006), Publications tires a part — corps profe-
soral du groupe ESC, Bordeaux.
Appleby, R. C. (2010), Modern Business Administration, 
London: Ed. Pitman.
Blake, R. & Mounton, V. (1998), La Troisieme Dimension de 
Management, Paris: Les Edition d’Organisation.
Boddy, D. & Buchanan D. A. (2007), Managing New 
Technology, Oxford: Editura Basil Blackwell Ltd.
Dalotă, S. (2000), Identificarea şi selecţia metodelor infor-
matice necesare planificării sistemului informaţional, 
Buletin Ştiinţific al doctoranzilor, Univ. Politehnica din 
Timişoara, Ediţie omagială, Timişoara.
Dalotă, S. & Dalotă, M. (1998), Excel in Sprijinul Managerului 
Modern, Timişoara: Editura Softlibris Sedona.
Dalotă, S. & Dalotă, M. (1999), Aspecte actuale în manage-
mentul recompenselor materiale, Studii Economice, 
Univ.de Vest din Timişoara, Facultatea de Ştiinţe 
Economice, XX(2).
Dalotă, S. & Dalotă, M. (1999), Introducere în Planificarea 
Strategică a Întreprinderii, Timişoara: Editura Eubeea.
Damanpour, F. & Evan, W. (1984), Organizational innova-
tion and performance: The problem of organizational 
lag, Review of Administrative Science Quarterly, 29(3).
Dănăiaţă, D. (1998), Informatica în Sprijinul Managementului, 
Timişoara: Mirton.
Deaconu, A. (2007), Diagnostic şi Evaluarea Întreprinderii, 
Deva: Editura INTELCREDO. 
Delnet (2003), Specialization course in management of local 
development — October 2003 (Training Units), Centrul 
Internaţional de Instruire ILO.
Figer, J. P. (2007), Informations et Adaptation de L’Entreprise, 
Paris.
Fruja, I. & Jivan, A. (2006), Economia Serviciilor, Timisoara: 
Editura Mirton.
Jaba, O. (1999), Analiza Strategică a Întreprinderii, Iaşi: 
Sedcom Libris.
Jolivet, F. (1996), Informatique et Information Aapplique a 
la Gestion, Touluse. 
Oprea, D., Andone, I., & Airinei, D. (1990), Bazele 
Informaticii Economice, Iaşi: Univ. Alexandru I. Cuza.
Oprean, D., Racoviţan, D., & Oprean, V. (1994), Informatică 
de Gestiune şi Managerială, Oradea: Ed.Eurounion.
Otava, M. E. (2006), Formarea si Utilizarea Resurselor de 
Munca din Mediul Rural, Timisoara: Editura Eurostampa.
Otiman, P. I. (2006), Dezvoltare Rurala Durabila in Romania, 
Bucuresti: Editura Academiei Romane.
Otovescu, D. (2010), Principalele Probleme Sociale ale 
Comunităţilor Rurale din România, Craiova: Editura Beladi.
Pinder, M. & Stuart, M. (1997), Consultanţă în Afaceri, 
Bucureşti: Editura Teora.
Popescu, D. (1995), Conducerea Afacerilor, Bucureşti: 
Editura Scripta.
Porter, M. (2009), Competitive Strategy: Techniques for 
Analysing Industries and Competitors, London: Editura 
Free Press.
Porter, M. & Robin, M. (1983), The new programmer — the 
next wave of computer innovation in North American 
Business, Business Quarterly, 48(4).
Robinson, S. (1997), Management Financiar, Bucureşti: 
Editura Teora.
Turban, E. (2001), Decision Support and Expert Systems 
Managerial Perspectives, New York.
www.managementul resurselor umane.org
www.managementul resurselor umane.com
www.dezvoltare regionala.ro
www.feaa.uaic.ro/cercetare/simpozioane/24_26_oct_2002/
strategii
www.dezvoltare teritoriala.ro

243
Chapter 28
 Management Particularities of the Romanian 
 Social Enterprise
Bibu Nicolae
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration (FEAA), West University
Lisetchi Mihai
Romania Faculty of Economics and Business Administration (FEAA), West University
Nastase Marian
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
The economic and social environment become more 
and more complex as the human needs diversify and 
organizations struggle to find new ways to meet them. 
The globalization process brings together more people 
and organizations, the cultural values collide, the 
resources flow freer across the borders, and the speed 
of innovation and change permanently increase.
The modern leaders have to appropriately face all 
these challenges that are brought by a fast changing 
world. One major trend is related to building up a 
new type of management vision that is translated into 
practice under the forms of social enterprise (SE), 
social management, social enterpreneurship, and 
 social economy.
The chapter investigates the main concepts related 
to the social entrerprise, revealing also the important 
features of this type of organization through a research 
carried out in Romania. The research methodology is 
based on desk and field research and semi-structured 
interviews that allowed the researchers to draw up 
valuable conclusions about the topic approached.
1.  The SE and Related Concepts
During the last years, in the international academic 
debate a discussion evolved around a number of inter-
connected concepts which intrinsically include two 
apparently contradictory dimensions: social and eco-
nomic. Among them, the most visible are the  social 
entrepreneurship, social enterprise (SE), and social 
economy concepts. While the differences between 
these concepts continue to generate debates, both 
scholars and practitioners show an increasing interest 
towards those concepts.
In the USA, SE represents the organizational cate-
gory 
with 
the 
highest 
growing 
(Austin 
et al., 2006). This could be one of the reasons, among 
others, generating such an increased interest for social 
performance, development of the stakeholder approach, 
spread of the concept of Corporate Social Responsibility, 
e.a. In the same respect, business schools and universi-
ties across the world are nowadays operating a diversity 
of educational programs (undergraduate, postgraduate, 

244 
B. Nicolae, L. Mihai & N. Marian
and doctoral studies) on  social entrepreneurship and SE 
(Hulgard, 2010). 
As a terminological clarification, within this chapter, 
we consider “enterprise” and “organization” as 
synonyms.
1.1.  The concepts of SE and  social economy
Generally, when the economic growth declines, new 
social forces emerge, reinventing solidarity in produc-
tion relations, in order to respond to the failures of 
formal distribution mechanisms (Moulaert & Ailenei, 
2005). In this respect, in an attempt to provide appro-
priate solutions to human needs when the disturbed 
market or the less flexible state system fail to satisfy 
them, different initiatives and forms of the social econ-
omy, with a considerable impact, emerged during the 
last two centuries. Different scholars reported the exist-
ence of a link between the socio-economic crises and 
the emergence of different  social economy organiza-
tions. For instance, according to Monzón Campos 
(1997), at the end of the 19th century were established 
the “pillars of the social economy”: associations, co-
operatives, and mutual support companies, which rep-
resent, since then, “the core of the social economy”. 
Despite the fact that the purpose of all economic 
activity is the satisfaction of human needs, nor the market 
or the public sector is able to satisfy them completely 
(Weisbrod, 1988), especially when the potential benefi-
ciaries are made of vulnerable groups. Actually, all 
these social needs represents “the sphere of action of 
the Social Economy” (Monzon & Chaves, 2008). On 
one hand, these needs can be satisfied by the market, 
through a commercial business, and this is how almost 
all the mutual societies and co-operatives get most of 
their resources. On the other hand, such needs can also 
be satisfied by non-market services developed by asso-
ciations and foundations, almost all of which usually 
get the majority of their resources from donations, 
membership fees, subsidies, etc. From a structural per-
spective, the Social Economy is made of two major 
sub-sectors: (i) the commercial market or business 
 sub-sector and (ii) the non-commercial market or the 
non-business sub-sector (Monzón & Chaves, 2008).
As a working definition, we consider organiza-
tional responsibility as the responsibility of the organi-
zation toward accomplishing its organizational 
fundamental goal. For a graphic presentation, we con-
sider a continuum defined by the organizational respon-
sibility. One end of this continuum (left) is represented 
by the responsibility towards community, reflected by 
the organization’s stakeholders (social responsibility) 
while the other end (right) is the responsibility towards 
shareholders. Private organizations are distributed 
along this continuum based on their mission and funda-
mental organizational goals (Fig. 1).
Table 1 presents and overview of the landscape of 
private organizations structured according to the 
 following criteria: main organizational goal, organiza-
tional-juridical form, nature of activities, organizational 
responsibility, and possibility of profit sharing. 
All economic and social sectors are encompassed 
by the concept of social economy. It includes usually 
associations, foundations, cooperative enterprises, and 
mutual societies (Lukkarinen, 2005). The social econ-
omy is populated with “people-centered organizations 
and enterprises companies, owned and run by the mem-
bers on the basis of their needs”, their aims being 
socially, democratically, and solidarity based. These are 
civic values and such approach transcends the logic of 
Fig. 1.  Organizational responsibility continuum 
Source: Own concept.
shareholders
(commercial
goal)
Organizational responsibility
community
(social/public
goal)

 
Management Particularities of the Romanian Social Enterprise  
245
Table 1.  The landscape of private organizations 
Main 
organizational 
goal
Social/public interest 
organizations
Socio-commercial (hybrid) 
organizations
Commercial organizations
Organizational- 
juridical form
NGOs
Mutuals
Cooperatives
Commercial companies
Nature of 
activities
Without commercial 
activities
Including commercial 
activities (social 
business)
Without commercial 
activities
With commercial 
activities
With commercial activities
Organizational 
responsibility
Toward stakeholders/
members*
Toward stakeholders/
members*
Toward members
Toward members 
(and stakeholders)
Toward stake holders 
and shareholders**
Toward shareholders 
and stakeholders***
Toward 
shareholders****
Possibility of 
profit sharing
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Multitude of social economy organizations (social economy sector)
Social economy
Market economy
Non-commercial 
subsector
Commercial subsector
Exchange economy
* Priority established based on the type of served interest: private or public.
** Like in the case of the work integration SEs.
*** Social corporate responsibility.
**** “Pure” commercial organizations.
Source: Own concept.

246 
B. Nicolae, L. Mihai & N. Marian
profit-maximization, more important being the valori-
zation of social, cultural, and environmental resources. 
Therefore, “the fields of the  social economy are the 
social and democratic and participative enterprises, 
qualitative employment, social inclusion, local devel-
opment, and social protection” (Lukkarinen, 2005).
There are many definitions of the social economy 
concept in the literature. We found that some of the 
most visible are related to the organizational forms 
belonging to the social economy and not to their activi-
ties (e.g., 1998 European conference on social economy 
titled International Centre of Research and Information 
on the Public, Social and Cooperative Economy 
(CIRIEC), Social Economy Charter. See Annex 1). In 
these respect, we propose the next working definition: 
social economy is made of the totality of processes of 
production, distribution, and consumption developed 
by the multitude of private organizations aiming at 
solving a social need, regardless of the commercial or 
non-commercial nature of their activities. We empha-
size the fact that “social need” concerns the society at 
large.
 Social economy organizations (SEO) are the organ-
izations populating the social economy. Concerning the 
relation between  social enterprise concept and the SEO, 
from a theoretical perspective and based on different 
criteria, as we will present further down, SE are identi-
fied as either part of, either the integral multitude of 
organizational forms used for the incorporation of the 
social economy organizations.
1.2.  The SE and the social 
entrepreneurship
Generally, when the economic growth declines, new 
social forces emerge, reinventing solidarity in production 
relations, in order to respond to the failures of formal 
distribution mechanisms (Moulaert & Ailenei, 2005). In 
this respect, in an attempt to provide appropriate solu-
tions to human needs when the disturbed market or the 
less flexible state system fail to satisfy them, different 
initiatives and forms of the social economy, with a con-
siderable impact, emerged during the last two centuries. 
Different scholars reported the existence of a link 
between the socio-economic crises and the emergence of 
different social economy organizations. For instance, 
according to Campos (1997), at the end of the 19th cen-
tury were established the “pillars of the social economy”: 
associations, co-operatives and mutual support compa-
nies, which represent, since then, “the core of the social 
economy”. 
In the development of a  social entrepreneurship pro-
cess, the main element is a problem society is facing. 
This is why, examples of social entrepreneurship are to be 
found in all the sectors: non-profit, for-profit, and 
public. 
Based on the typological variety and organizational 
behavior in the case of SEs, Hulgard (2010) reports “a 
mixture of common trends and backgrounds” and “a 
considerable amount of variation in the ways social 
entrepreneurship is emerging” as a “result of changing 
balances and relations between state, market, and civil 
society in the provision of welfare services and work 
integration”.
From a statistical perspective, considering both, 
their number and their socio-economic impact, the larg-
est category of organizations generated by social entre-
preneurship is made of non-profit non-governmental 
organizations (usually called NGOs), here being 
included both, associations (i.e., organizations built on 
persons) and foundations (i.e., organizations built on 
patrimony) (Bibu et al., 2012). In this respect, accord-
ing to Hulgard (2010), a relevant aspect of the social 
entrepreneurship within the non-profit sector, both in 
Fig. 2.  Relation between social entrepreneurship, SE and social economy
Source: Own concept.
Social economy
organizaƟons /
(SEs included)
Social
entrepreneurship 
Social
economy

 
Management Particularities of the Romanian Social Enterprise  
247
Europe and USA, is the transformation of the non-
profit organizations into market agents and public wel-
fare services providers. This process leads to increased 
impact of the sector in society. 
1.3. The social value concept
As far as it concerns the “social value” concept, not at 
all surprisingly, there is no unanimously accepted defi-
nition. In a common understanding social value is per-
ceived as being opposed to “individual value” (Dees, 
1998) and implies expectations concerning the genera-
tion of “social, economic, and community develop-
ment” (Reis, 1999). In other words, social value implies 
to produce “social change” (Mair & Marti, 2006) 
through complete or partial satisfaction of the “social 
need” (ibid.). Sometimes is described as “social good” 
(Cukier et al., 2011) or “collective good” (Murphy & 
Coombes, 2009). In our view, social value represents a 
positive output of solving social needs. According to 
Baker et al. (2005), social value is of subjective nature 
and vary a lot based the context.
In a more restrictive approach, in the case of a spe-
cific group of people, the social value is made of princi-
ples and standards of human interaction which are 
considered by the members of the group as being valua-
ble, important or relevant for the group (www.education.
com, 2012).
1.4. The SE concept
As far as it concerns the “social value” concept, not at 
all surprisingly, there is no unanimously accepted defi-
nition. In a common understanding social value is per-
ceived as being opposed to “individual value” (Dees, 
1998) and implies expectations concerning the genera-
tion of “social, economic, and community develop-
ment” (Reis, 1999). In other words, social value implies 
to produce “social change” (Mair & Marti, 2006) 
through complete or partial satisfaction of the “social 
need” (ibid.). Sometimes is described as “social good” 
(Cukier et al., 2011) or “collective good” (Murphy & 
Coombes, 2009). In our view, social value represents a 
positive output of solving social needs. According to 
Baker et al. (2005), social value is of subjective nature 
and vary a lot based the context.
Apparently, Drucker (1979) was the first author 
who coined the term ‘ social enterprise’ while advocat-
ing ethical responsibilities of corporations (Trivedi, 
2010). The definition of a SE and its position within the 
 social economy organizational landscape as reflected in 
the literature vary depending on several criteria: (i) 
development of commercial activities, (ii) existence of 
paid staff, (iii) maximal profit sharing limitation, (iv) 
minimal commercial incomes limitation, (v) existence 
of a collective property, and (vi) existence of a collec-
tive leadership.
Regarding the first criterion, namely the develop-
ment of commercial activities, there are two approaches: 
first, a restrictive one, e.g., Finland, Ireland, UK (Defourny 
& Nyssens, 2010), considering as SE only the organiza-
tions developing commercial activities (exclusively or 
complementary to non-commercial activities) and sec-
ond, an inclusive one (Monzon & Chaves, 2008), inte-
grating, also, the organizations with only non-commercial 
activities in the multitude of the  social economy 
organizations. 
In other words, in the restrictive approach pre-
sented in Table 2, among the social economy organiza-
tions, only those developing commercial activities 
(non-commercial activities not excluded) are consid-
ered to be SEs. 
For operational reasons, the percentage of the com-
mercial activities incomes within the total incomes of 
the organization is used by the law as a criterion to 
determine if an organization fits the “social enterprise” 
label. Its value may vary from country to country (for 
instance, in UK is 50%). The question is why, in the 
case of two organizations with identical goals, identical 
activities, addressing identical target groups, one would 
be considered as SE only based on the commercial rela-
tions between the organization and its beneficiaries 
(philanthropic relations not excluded), while the other 
organization is not qualifying as a SE based on the fact 
that it develops only philanthropic relations with its 
beneficiaries.
A similar perspective, implying, also, a restrictive 
approach (e.g., CIRIEC, EMES) and an inclusive one, 
may be built considering as a criterion the existence of 
paid staff operating an organization. And, again, ques-
tion is why, in the case of two organizations with identi-
cal goals, identical activities, addressing identical target 

248 
B. Nicolae, L. Mihai & N. Marian
groups, one would be considered as SE based on the 
existence of paid staff (volunteers not excluded), while 
the other organization is not qualifying as a SE based 
on the fact that it develops activities with volunteers 
only.
A similar perspective, implying, also, a restrictive 
approach and an inclusive one, may be build consider-
ing as a criterion the existence of the maximal limita-
tion of the profit sharing when it comes to incomes 
from commercial activities. In the same manner, ques-
tion is why, in the case of two organizations with iden-
tical goals, identical activities, addressing identical 
target groups, when it comes to incomes from com-
mercial activities, one would be considered as SE 
based on certain value of the profit sharing limitation 
(e.g., 50% in UK), while the other organization is not 
qualifying as a SE because overpassing the profit shar-
ing limitation (with 1%, for instance).
Similar perspectives, implying, also, a restrictive 
approach and an inclusive one, may be build consider-
ing other above mentioned criteria (see Table 3). Similar 
questions could, also, be raised.
As far as it concerns the definition of the SE and 
the positioning of the concept related to the multitude 
of  social economy organizations, we are advocating for 
an inclusive approach. Therefore, considering the afore-
mentioned discussion, we propose the next working 
definition:  social enterprise is a private organization 
having the explicit organizational goal of aiming at 
solving a social need, regardless the commercial or 
non-commercial nature of its activities. We emphasize the 
fact that “social need” concerns the society at large.
2.  Particularities of the SE 
 Management
For any organization, its primary purpose determines 
the organizational behavior and accordingly, its man-
agement. For example, in the case of the for profit 
organizations, the primary purpose is to develop ser-
vices and products to sale to a particular group of 
consumers in terms of efficiency and effectiveness 
and having as the main performance criterion the 
profit maximization (Bibu & Lisetchi, 2011). By 
Table 2.  Defining “social enterprise” label based on different criteria 
Criterion
SEOs status
Type of approach
Restrictive
Inclusive
Commercial activities
Without commercial activities
Non-SE
SE
With commercial activities
SE
SE
Existence of paid staff 
(volunteers not excluded)
No paid staff (only volunteers)
Non-SE
SE
Maximal profit sharing limitation
At least a certain number of paid staff
SE
SE
Comply with profit sharing limitation
Non-SE
SE
Overpass the profit sharing limitation
SE
SE
Minimal commercial incomes 
limitation (noncommercial 
incomes not excluded)
No commercial incomes limitation
Non-SE
SE
Existence of a collective property
Commercial incomes limitation
SE
SE
No collective property
Non-SE
SE
Collective property
SE
SE
Existence of a collective 
leadership
No collective leadership
Non-SE
SE
Collective leadership
SE
SE
Source: Own concept.

 
Management Particularities of the Romanian Social Enterprise  
249
comparison, in the case of SEs, development of ser-
vices and products for sale could be one of the ways 
to achieve their main organizational goal. This differ-
ence is reflected by various aspects of the organiza-
tional behavior. 
Comparing to the other categories of organizations 
which operate in the community, we may conclude that 
SE resemble to private commercial entities concerning 
the way they function, but their goals and objectives 
are focused on social needs. On the other hand, like in 
the case of other types of organizations, SE vary much 
in terms of mission, size, mode of operation, and 
impact. 
What are the managerial particularities do SE have 
for performing an independent responsible examina-
tion of social problems and the associated approaches 
to resolve them is an important question to be 
answered.
2.1. The research methodology
No data was available for this study. In order to find the 
SE specific management particularities, the research 
methodology includes: documentation (desk and field 
research), data analysis, non-participant observation, 
field notes, semi-structured interviews, and analysis of 
documents and materials. 
The target group for this research is made of SE 
located in the city of Timisoara (over 300,000 inhabit-
ants), Romania. 
2.2. Desk research ﬁ ndings
No data was available for this study. In order to find the 
SE specific  management particularities, the research 
methodology includes: documentation (desk and field 
research), data analysis, non-participant observation, 
field notes, semi-structured interviews, and analysis of 
documents and materials. 
The target group for this research is made of SE 
located in the city of Timisoara (over 300,000 inhabit-
ants), Romania. 
In the initial phase, our analysis of the literature 
revealed nine particularities being specific to SE man-
agement (development of the model described by 
Noya & Clarence, 2007).
The first particularity is the organizational goal. In 
the case of SEs, the organizational goal is a social need 
of a specified or ascertainable group, relevant to the 
community, or of the community at large (Noya & 
Clarence, 2007). In other words, it is a social goal. In 
the case of commercial activities, the development of 
services and products for sale is a method that leads to 
achieving the social goal of the organization. The 
Table 3.  The level of practice of specific SE management particularities revealed by theory
Specific SE management particularities revealed by theory
Level of practice as is (%)
First particularity
The organizational goal is a social need of a specified or ascertainable 
group or of the community at large
100
Second particularity
The governing board must also assume the role of representative of the 
market
0
Third particularity
 The decision-making power is divided equally between the members of 
the decision-making bodies
100
Fourth particularity
The volunteer work of the leaders in favor of the organization 
100
Fifth particularity
A more balanced power relationship between the executive and govern-
ance structure of the organization
40
Sixth particularity
Disadvantaged beneficiaries do not pay for their benefit or pay less than 
the market value
100
Seventh particularity
To obtain the necessary resources, SE can appeal to a multiplicity of ways, 
including both non-commercial activities and commercial activities
40
Eighth particularity
SE use a mix of types of human resources: both paid and volunteer staff
50
Ninth particularity
Limited or no distribution of the financial profit
100

250 
B. Nicolae, L. Mihai & N. Marian
non-profit social goal increases the public trust in such 
organizations, generating legitimacy and thus, creating 
value for these organizations. 
Second particularity refers to the role of the gov-
erning board. In terms of representation of the clients’ 
interests and needs, SE beneficiaries may not be in a 
position to reveal their preferences (e.g., people with 
disabilities, children and older people), nor able to pay 
prices that cover the cost of service delivery (Anheier, 
2000). In this respect, sometimes SE operate in a 
“muted market”. Related to beneficiaries’ needs and 
interest’s representation, Carver (1997) suggested that 
boards should act as the “market” to determine ser-
vices by setting mission and policies. This is why, 
sometimes, for a proper design of strategic decision in 
the case of SEs, the governing board must also assume 
the role of representative of the market.
The third particularity reflects the power distribution 
within the decision-making bodies (boards, general 
assembly, etc.). Compared to for-profit companies, 
generally, within the SE the decision-making process is 
not based on shares. More precisely, in general, the 
decision-making power is divided equally between the 
members of the decision-making bodies (Noya & 
Clarence, 2007). This is determined by the need for 
organizational legitimacy.
A fourth particularity refers to leaders’ compensa-
tion. The SE board members act on a voluntary basis, 
with no material compensation for their activity.
The fifth particularity reflects the distinction 
between the organizational competences of the board 
and the executive. The governing body is mainly con-
cerned with achieving the mission of the SE, namely 
monitoring strategic objectives and observing organiza-
tional policies (non-financial indicators). By contrast, 
the executive focuses on operational aspects and finan-
cial matters in running the organization. This situation 
reflects a more balanced power relationship between 
the executive and governance structure of the organiza-
tion. Meantime, comparing to SEs, for-profit organiza-
tions delegate more decision-making power to 
executives and owners, and less to their employees, 
consumers, families, boards of directors, and commu-
nity representatives. Although the differences are, gen-
erally, small, they support the hypothesis that 
decision-making is allocated to different groups based 
on the broad objectives of the organization (Ben-Ner & 
Ren, 2010).
The sixth particularity concerns the service-market 
couple. Many times, the cost of a product or service 
provided by a SE to a disadvantaged group has not 
been determined in relation to the cost of product or 
service delivery so that disadvantaged beneficiaries do 
not pay for their benefit or pay less than the market 
value. This is possible when there is a third party 
involved, the funder, which subsidizes, in whole or in 
part, products or services provided to beneficiaries by 
the SE. The funder is not a direct beneficiary of the 
provided products or services. This is determined by 
the weak financial potential of the SEs’ beneficiaries 
and in connection of the SE with their social goal. Such 
an approach allows deprived or vulnerable groups to 
receive with no costs or reduced costs services and 
products which they would not get other way.
The seventh particularity is about the ways SE is 
getting resources. To obtain the necessary resources for 
operating their activities, SE can appeal to a multiplicity 
of ways, including both non-commercial activities (i.e., 
attracting grants) and commercial activities (Noya & 
Clarence, 2007). This is determined by the week finan-
cial potential of the SEs’ beneficiaries and in connec-
tion with their social goal.
The eights particularity refers to human resources. 
Comparing to for-profit companies, SE may use a mix 
of types of human resources: both paid and volunteer 
staff. This implies a complex motivational structure of 
staff, volunteers and stakeholders, and the interplay 
between altruistic and egotistical goals (Anheier, 2000). 
This is determined by the weak financial potential of 
the SEs’ beneficiaries and in connection with their 
social goal.
The ninth particularity concerns the limited or no 
distribution of the financial profit. It may be obtained 
from commercial activities or as surplus from non-
profit incomes, if they exist. Comparing with for profit 
firms, such “profit”, either cannot be appropriated by 
owner or associates (the case of absolute restriction), 
either does exist a regulation limit of “profit” distribu-
tion (partial restriction). The difference remains for the 
social organization to achieve its social goal.
It should be noted that the particularities of the 
above-mentioned particularities are not absolute, 

 
Management Particularities of the Romanian Social Enterprise  
251
neither in terms of their existence in the entire mass 
of SEs, nor in terms of their uniqueness only for this 
category of organizations. For example, working 
with volunteers can be done in public institutions 
too, but in this case, volunteers are found only at the 
operational  management level and, more impor-
tantly, have no role in the decision-making process. 
On the other hand, the aforementioned items are the 
most representative and thus defining for SE opera-
tion mode.
2.3. The Pilot Research
In order to see how the above-mentioned theoretical 
findings are reflected in SEs’ practice and, simultane-
ously, to test the proposed research methodology, a 
pilot research was carried on by a partnership involving 
the Agency for Information and Development of 
Nongovernmental Organization (AID–ONG), the 
Management Department, Faculty of Economics and 
Business Administration (FEAA) and the Faculty of 
Political Science, Philosophy and Communication 
Studies of West University, Timisoara (Romania). The 
research sample consists of ten organizations (the list is 
presented in Annex 3) and the structure of the sample 
is based on the NGO typology described in the 
International Classification of Non-profit Organizations 
(ICNPO) (see Annex 4). More precisely, the ten organi-
zations are covering eight of the twelve groups 
described in ICNPO. The selection of these organiza-
tions is based on their public notoriety as identified 
through phone interviews conducted with relevant 
leaders of the SE community in Timisoara. 
The pilot research objective was the identification 
of the theoretical SE specific management particulari-
ties in the practice of the target group. 
Three questionnaire based interviews were con-
ducted (in Romanian) in every organization: one with a 
board member, one with the CEO, and one with a grass-
roots staff representative (like volunteers, for example) 
in order to create a complex perspective on the manage-
ment process within each organization. A total of 30 
filled questionnaires covering 10 organizations were 
the first results of our field investigation.
The questionnaire was built around the nine par-
ticularities revealed by the academic literature as being 
specific to SE management and included both, closed 
(multiple choice, all that apply) and open questions. 
First of all, data was aggregated for each organiza-
tion by processing the three questionnaires describing the 
organization. In the second phase, data was aggregated at 
the level of the pilot project sample organizations.
The outputs of the calculations are presented in 
Table 3. 
While the findings completely validated some of 
the particularities revealed by the academic literature as 
being specific to SE management, some were only par-
tially validated, while some others were not validated at 
all. There are several comments to be made based on 
the findings of this research.
First particularity: in the case of SEs, the organi-
zational goal is a social need of a specified or ascer-
tainable group or of the community at large. Regardless 
the size or complexity of their target group, all the 
organizations are stating a social need as their goal. 
Second particularity: the governing board must 
also assume the role of representative of the market. 
None of the organizations has such role imposed by 
their bylaws and none of the interviewed representa-
tives mentioned this as a common practice. On the 
other hand, in a broader context, involving the benefi-
ciaries in the organization’s decision is a good practice 
principle in the case of SE. The present situation might 
reflect a week participatory culture and it may be 
related to the former socialist past of the country. In the 
same time, in the specific case of SE serving vulnerable 
groups, the governing board might assume the role of 
representative of the market without a clear norm in 
their bylaw. 
Third particularity: the decision-making power is 
divided equally between the members of the decision-
making bodies. Regardless their size or activity domain, 
all the organizations are reporting an equal distribution 
of the decision-making power between the members of 
their decision-making bodies. 
Fourth particularity: the volunteer work of the 
 leaders in favor of the organization. In all the organiza-
tions, board members do not get tangible rewards for 
their work as leaders of the organization.
Fifth particularity: a more balanced power rela-
tionship between the executive and governance struc-
ture of the organization. Apparently, in more than half 

252 
B. Nicolae, L. Mihai & N. Marian
of the SE, the role of the board and related activities 
reflect a mixture of governance and operational activi-
ties. The present situation might reflect both an authori-
tarian behavior of the leadership and/or a lack of trust 
in delegating authority within the organization and they 
may be related to the common culture of the society 
(another heritage of the socialist period).
Sixth particularity: disadvantaged beneficiaries do 
not pay for their benefit or pay less than the market 
value. Regardless their size or activity domain, all the 
organizations are reporting that the cost of their pro-
vided products or services is subsidized and thus repre-
senting less than the cost of product or service delivery.
Seventh particularity: to obtain the necessary 
resources, SE can appeal to a multiplicity of ways, 
including both non-commercial activities (i.e., attract-
ing grants) and commercial activities. Apparently, 
despite the huge need of means to accomplish their 
mission, less than half of the SE consider commercial 
activities as a way of obtaining resources. The present 
situation may be related to the rather week economic 
entrepreneurship culture in Romania.
Eights particularity: SE use a mix of types of human 
resources: both paid and volunteer staff. Apparently, 
only half of the SE use employed workers to carry on 
their activities. This situation may be connected to the 
fact that these organizations have larger incomes than 
average Romanian SE. 
Ninths particularity: limited or no distribution of 
the financial profit. Regardless their size or activity 
domain, all the organizations are reporting limited or no 
distribution of the financial profit (if any). 
3. Conclusions
Crossing knowledge boundaries determines the devel-
opment of science and society. Such crossing of bound-
aries strengthened civil society studies through the time 
the sub-discipline has existed. The research field has 
accommodated scholars from different main stream 
disciplines and has thus gained a much wider perspec-
tive of society than what is possible only inside one 
discipline (Muukkonen, 2009). 
As contradictory as they seem, “ social economy 
and commercial economy emerge not as opposite poles 
to each other but as parts of a continuous spectrum”. 
From this perspective, the study of the social economy 
implies “studying the commercial aspects of the 
socially-dominated economy and also the social ele-
ments of the commercially-dominated economy”. Such 
conclusions appear to be in conflict with most of the 
definitions political bodies and scholars are using 
(Westlund, 2003). Meantime, they are in line with the 
one saying that everything is related to each other and 
all the distinctions are only analytical (Muukkonen, 
2009).
We can deal the contradictory definitions of SE in 
two ways. In the restrictive approach, we can try to find 
what different concepts have in common. In practice, 
this leaves only a short list of organizations as a core of 
the social economy sector. It will leave outside majority 
of the organizations that may be studied under the con-
cept presented above. In an integrative approach, we 
accept organizations that have some  elements in com-
mon with the others. In terms of SE environment (i.e., 
managing diverse constituencies, stakeholders and 
multiple revenue sources including commercial reve-
nues, donations, fees and charges, and public sector 
payments like subsidies, grants and contracts), and its 
internal components (i.e., board, staff, volunteers, cli-
ents, and users) the  management of SE becomes more 
complex than the case of a for profit company of simi-
lar size. This is why SE are considered to be several 
organizations or organizational components in one and 
this heavily impact on SE operation mode.
SE are largely innovating in the way managerial 
activities are performed by their constituents. At organ-
izational level, SE are solving in new and innovative 
ways the tasks of planning, organizing, leading, moti-
vating, and controlling resources and people in order to 
achieve effectively and efficiently/virtuously their 
social purpose and organizational objectives, and thus 
creating social value.
The reported SE management particularities come 
to improve organizational models and management 
methods. They were determined by an array of factors: 
public sector and market failure, human solidarity, need 
for collective empowerment, type of market the SE 
serve, the need for organizational legitimacy, the SEs’ 
social goal and their implicit operating mode, the week 
financial potential of the SEs’ beneficiaries, etc. They 
represent changes which increase the public trust in 

 
Management Particularities of the Romanian Social Enterprise  
253
such organizations, generating legitimacy and thus, 
creating value for these organizations.
Our chapter contributions are the following: first, 
elaborating the continuum of organizational responsibility 
model; second, clarifying the rational connections 
between SE and its complementary concepts:  social 
entrepreneurship and  social economy; third, an compre-
hensive typology of the SEO was elaborated; fourth, 
clarifying the position of the SE within the multitude of 
 social economy organizations; fifth, inclusive working 
definitions were elaborated for each of the concepts: 
social entrepreneurship, SEs, and social economy; sixth, 
the specific particularities of the SE  management were 
identified and, based on them a new theoretical model 
was created for the SE management. 
4. Appendices
Appendix A: Definitions of social economy
Appendix B: Selected definitions of social entrepreneur 
and social entrepreneurship
Appendix C: Centralized data on SE consisting the 
research sample

254
“The social economy brings people together in associa-
tive bodies based on free membership and voluntary 
commitment revolving around a common pur-
pose” European conference on social economy, 1998.
[Social economy is made of ] “cooperatives, mutual 
organizations as well as voluntary organizations, asso-
ciations and foundations which remunerate work” 
CIRIEC (International Centre of Research and 
Information on the Public, Social and Cooperative 
Economy).
[Social economy is] “the set of organizations that 
do not belong to the public sector, operate democrati-
cally with the members having equal rights and duties 
and practice a particular regime of ownership and dis-
tribution of profits, employing the surpluses to expand 
the organization and improve its services to its mem-
bers and to society” The Social Economy Charter 
(Charte de l’économie sociale).
Appendix A
Definitions of  Social Economy

255
Author(s) & year
Definition of social entrepreneur
Ashoka 
Social entrepreneurs are individuals with innovative solutions to society’s most pressing social problems. 
They are ambitious and persistent, tackling major social issues and offering new ideas for wide-scale 
change. 
Bornstein, D. (2004)
A path breaker with a powerful new idea, who combines visionary and real-world problem solving 
creativity, who has a strong ethical fiber, and who is ‘totally possessed’ by his or her vision for change.
Dees, J. G. (2001)
Social entrepreneurs play the role of change agents in the social sector, by: 
Adopting a mission to create and sustain social value (not just private value);
Recognizing and relentlessly pursuing new opportunities to serve that mission;
Engaging in a process of continuous innovation, adaptation, and learning;
Acting boldly without being limited by resources currently in hand;
Exhibiting heightened accountability to the constituencies served and for the outcomes created.
Light (2006) 
A social entrepreneur is an individual, group, network, organization, or alliance of organizations that seeks 
sustainable, large-scale change through pattern-breaking ideas in what or how governments, non-profits, 
and businesses do to address significant social problems. 
Martin, R. L. & Osberg, S. 
(2007)
The social entrepreneur should be understood as someone who targets an unfortunate but stable 
equilibrium that causes the neglect, marginalization, or suffering of a segment of humanity; who brings 
to bear on this situation his or her inspiration, direct action, creativity, courage, and fortitude; and who 
aims for and ultimately affects the establishment of a new stable equilibrium that secures permanent 
benefit for the targeted group and society at large.
PBS’ “The New Heroes”
A social entrepreneur identifies and solves social problems on a large scale. Just as business entrepreneurs 
create and transform whole industries, social entrepreneurs act as the change agents for society, seizing 
opportunities others miss in order to improve systems, invent, and disseminate new approaches and 
advance sustainable solutions that create social value.
Schwab Foundation
What is a Social Entrepreneur? A pragmatic visionary who achieves large scale, systemic and sustainable 
social change through a new invention, a different approach, a more rigorous application of known 
technologies or strategies, or a combination of these. 
Skoll Foundation 
The social entrepreneur as society’s change agent: a pioneer of innovation that benefits humanity. Social 
entrepreneurs are ambitious, mission driven, strategic, resourceful, and results oriented. 
Thompson (2002)
People with the qualities and behaviors we associate with the business entrepreneur but who operate in the 
community and are more concerned with caring and helping than “making money.”
Appendix B
Selected Definitions of Social Entrepreneur 
and  Social Entrepreneurship
(Continued)

256 
B. Nicolae, L. Mihai & N. Marian
Author(s) & year
Definition of social entrepreneur
Austin, J., Stephenson, H., & 
Wei-Skillern, J., (2006) 
 Social entrepreneurship is an innovative, social value-creating activity that can occur within or across the 
non-profit, businesses, or government sectors. 
Johnson (2000)
Social entrepreneurship is emerging as an innovative approach for dealing with complex social needs. 
With its emphasis on problem solving and social innovation, socially entrepreneurial activities blur the 
traditional boundaries between the public, private, and non-profit sector and emphasize hybrid model of 
for-profit and non-profit activities. 
Nichols, A. (2007)
Social entrepreneurship entails innovations designed to explicitly improve societal well-being, housed 
within entrepreneurial organizations which initiate, guide or contribute to change in society. 
Mair, J. & Marti, I. (2006)
Social entrepreneurship: Innovative models of providing products and services that cater to basic needs 
(rights) that remain unsatisfied by political or economic institutions. 
Source: Cukier et al. (2011).
(Continued)

257
Crt. no.*
Name of the SE**
Internet address
Email
Social character 
of the goal
1
Eco Club Timisoara
www.ecotimisoara.ro
contact@ecotimisoara.ro
Yes
2
Serviciul de Ajutor Maltez Filiala 
Timişoara
www.maltez.ro 
tmsamr@yahoo.com
Yes
3
Asociatia Timisoara — Capitală 
Culturală Europeană
http://timisoara2020.wordpress.com/
timisoara2020@gmail.com
Yes
4
Asociaţia Studenţilor Europeni 
(Aegee) — Timişoara
www.aegeetm.ro
aegee.tim@gmail.com
Yes
5
Asociaţia Generaţia Tânără
www.generatietanara.ro
office@generatietanara.ro
Yes
6
Asociatia Romana Antisida — 
Filiala Timisoara 
www.arasnet.ro
aras.tm@arasnet.ro
Yes
7
Institutul Intercultural Timişoara
http://www.intercultural.ro/rom
iit@intercultural.ro
Yes
8
Fundaţia Filantropia Timişoara
www.fft.ro
adrian.ghiran@yahoo.com
Yes
9
Centrul Euroregional Pentru 
Democratie
www.regionalnet.org
office@regionalnet.org
Yes
10
Clubul Rotaract Timisoara
http://www.timisoara.rotaract.ro 
—***
Yes
Notes:
 * The same current number was used to list SEs’ names in the following tables of this annex;
 ** No particular order when listing the SEs’ names; 
*** Means no data available.
Appendix C
Centralized Data on  Social Enterprises Consisting 
the Research Sample

258 
B. Nicolae, L. Mihai & N. Marian
Last year annual budget [euro]
Crt. 
No.
No. of 
permanent 
employees
No. of 
temporary 
employees
No. of 
active 
volunteers
Till 1.000
1.001–10.000
10.001–50.000
Over 50.000
1
0
0
25
No
Yes
No
No
2
28
0
66
—
—
—
—
3
0
1
10
Yes
No
No
No
4
0
0
20
Yes
No
No
No
5
39
0
180
No
No
No
Yes
6
0
0
—
No
Yes
No
No
7
10
20
30
No
No
No
Yes
8
10
12
40
No
No
No
Yes
9
6
0
10
No
No
Yes
No
10
0
0
40
No
Yes
No
No
Commercial 
incomes
Non-commercial 
incomes
Subsidized 
products 
Crt. 
No.
Commercial 
activities
(%)
Non-commercial 
activities
(%)
No subsidy
Partially
Completely
1
No
0
—
100
No
No
Yes
2
Yes
—
Yes
—
No
Yes
Yes
3
No
0
Yes
100
No
No
Yes
4
No
0
—
100
No
No
Yes
5
No
0
Yes
100
No
No
Yes
6
No
0
Yes
100
No
No
Yes
7
Yes
10
Yes
90
No
No
Yes
8
No
0
Yes
100
No
No
Yes
9
Yes
40
Yes
60
No
No
Yes
10
Yes
50
Yes
50
No
No
Yes
Distribution of the decision-making power 
between the members of the 
 decision-making bodies
Board members’ 
rewards
Crt. 
No.
Role of 
the board
Equal
Unequal
Existence of criterions 
for unequal distribution
Financial
Non-
financial
Role of 
the CEO
Limited or no distribution 
of the financial profit
1
GO
Yes
No
NA
No
Yes
O
Yes
2
GO
Yes
No
NA
No
Yes
O
Yes
3
GO
Yes
No
NA
No
Yes
O
Yes
4
GO
Yes
No
NA
No
Yes
O
Yes
5
GO
Yes
No
NA
No
No
O
Yes
6
G
Yes
No
NA
No
Yes
O
Yes
7
G
Yes
No
NA
No
No
O
Yes
8
G
Yes
No
NA
No
No
O
Yes
9
G
Yes
No
NA
No
No
O
Yes
10
GO
Yes
No
NA
No
No
O
Yes
Notes:
GO — Governance and operations;
G — Governance;
O — Operations.

 
Centralized Data on Social Enterprises Consisting the Research Sample  
259
References
Austin, J., Stevenson, H. & Wei-Skillern, J. (2006), Social 
and commercial entrepreneurship: Same, different, or 
both? Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 30(1), 
1–22. Available at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
10.1111/j.1540-6520.2006.00107.x/full.
Baker, T., Gedjlovic, E., & Lubatkin, M. (2005), A frame-
work for comparing entrepreneurial processes across 
nations, Journal of International Business Studies, 36, 
492–504.
Ben-Ner, A. & Ren, T. (2010), A comparative study of allo-
cation of decision-making across stakeholder groups: 
The case of personal care industries, Annals of Public and 
Cooperative Economics. Available at http://econpapers.
repec.org/article/blaannpce/v_3a81_3ay_3a2010_
3ai_3a4_3ap_3a611-630.htm (Accessed 13 June 2011).
Bibu, N. & Lisetchi, M. (2011), Particularities of the Strategy 
Approach within Nongovernmental Organizations: 
A Literature Review, Proceedings of international con-
ference “Managerial Challenges of the Contemporary 
Society”, June 3–4, 2011, Cluj Napoca, Romania.
Bibu, N., Lisetchi, M. & Nastase, M. (2012). “Socializing” 
economic concepts: the entrepreneurship, Proceeding of 
international conference EURAM 2012: “Social Innovation 
for Competitiveness, Organisational Performance and 
Human Excellence”, Rotterdam, June 6–8, 2012.
Cukier et al. (2011), Social entrepreneurship: A content 
analysis, Journal of Strategic Innovation and 
Sustainability, 7(1), 99–119. Available at http://usasbe.
org/knowledge/proceedings/proceedingsDocs/2009/
PaperID187.pdf (Accessed February 2012).
Dees, J. G. (1998), Enterprising non-profits: what do you do 
when traditional sources of funding fall short? Harvard 
Business Review, January–February, 5–11.
Defourny, J. & Nyssens, M. (2010), Conceptions of social 
enterprise and social entrepreneurship in Europe and the 
United States: Convergences and divergences, Journal 
of Social Entrepreneurship, 1(1), 32–53.
Drucker, P. (1979), The Practice of Management, London: 
Pan Books. Available at http://www.education.com/defi-
nition/social-values/ (Accessed February 2012).
Ghenea, M. (2011), Entrepreneurship (original title: 
Antreprenoriat. in Romanian), p. 61, Editura Universul 
Juridic, Colectia Business.
Hulgård, L. (2010), Discourses of social entrepreneur-
ship — variations of the same theme?, Working Papers 
Series, no. 10/01. 
EMES European Research Network, Belgium: Liege. 
Available at http://www.emes.net/fileadmin/emes/PDF_
files/Working_Papers/WP_10-01_Hulg_rd__web_pdf 
(accessed February 2012).
Lukkarinen, M. (2005), Community development, local eco-
nomic development and the social economy, Community 
Development Journal, 40(4), 419–424.
Mair, J. & Marti, I. (2006), Social entrepreneurship research: 
A source of explanation, prediction, and delight, Journal 
of World Business, 41(1), 36–44. Available at http://link-
inghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1090951605000544 
(Accessed February 2012).
Monzón Campos, J. (1997). Contributions of the social 
economy to the general interest, Annals of Public and 
Cooperative Economics, 68, 397–408. 
Monzon, J. L. & Chaves, R. (2008), The European social econ-
omy: Concept and dimensions of the third sector, Annals of 
Public and Cooperative Economics, 79, 549–577. 
Moulaert, F. & Ailenei, O. (2005), Social economy, third sec-
tor and solidarity relations: A conceptual synthesis from 
history to present, Urban Studies, 42(11), 2038.
Murphy, P. J. & Coombes, S. M. (2009), A model of social 
entrepreneurial discovery, Journal of Business Ethics 
(87), 325–336.
Muukkonen, M. (2009), Framing the field: Civil society and 
related concepts, Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector 
Quarterly, 38(4), 684. Available at http://search.pro-
quest.com/docview/231488153?accountid=30274.
Reis, T. (1999), Unleashing the New Resources and 
Entrepreneurship for the Common Good: A Scan, 
Synthesis and Scenario for Action, Battle Creek: W. K. 
Kellogg Foundation.
Trivedi, C. (2010), A Social entrepreneurship bibliography, 
Journal of Entrepreneurship, 19(1), 81–85. Available at 
http://joe.sagepub.com/content/19/1/81 
(Accessed 
February 2012).
Weisbrod, B. (1988), The Nonprofit Economy, Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press. Available at http://www.new-
worldencyclopedia.org/entry/NGO.
Westlund, H. (2003), Form or contents? On the concept of 
social economy, International Journal of Social 
Economics, 30(11), 1192–1206.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

261
Chapter 29
The Evolution of the Romanian  SMEs’ 
Perceptions Over the Last Decade
Luminiţa Nicolescu and Ciprian Nicolescu
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
This chapter aims to highlight key issues regarding the 
evolution of entrepreneurs’ perceptions within small 
and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) sector from 
Romania in the period 2003/2004–2012/2013. Given 
the fact that the SMEs’ sector has a major role in any 
economy, bringing a considerable contribution to the 
achievement of GDP, job creation, collection of the 
revenues for the state budget, generation of technical 
innovations applicable in the economy, etc., the presen-
tation of the evolution of perceptions associated to 
SMEs from Romania in the last decade, has a special 
importance. The dynamic analysis of the perceptions 
afferent to SMEs sector in Romania is more interesting, 
considering that the last 10 years were marked by eco-
nomic boom, the integration of Romania into the 
European Union (EU), and a period of economic  crisis. 
The research in dynamic of few relevant issues to 
SMEs — assessments of Romanian  business environ-
ment, economic opportunities and  difficulties encoun-
tered, effects of EU integration, impact of economic 
crisis,  training, and using of external consultants — 
was achieved by studying annual results of nationwide 
investigations, based on questionnaires and conducted 
on representative samples of SMEs. Taking in consid-
eration the dynamic approach to the study of entrepre-
neurs’ perceptions, there were identified some trends in 
the evolution of SMEs and were formulated some 
proposals and recommendations for the improvement 
of the Romanian entrepreneurial environment. 
1.  The Approach of the Research
This research is focused on the small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs), as they are defined by Romanian 
Law No. 346/2004, with subsequent amendments. Taking 
into 
consideration 
the 
European 
Commission 
Recommendation 2003/361/EC, Romanian regulations 
stipulate that SMEs are those entities which have less 
than 250 employees and, simultaneously, have the turno-
ver up to EUR 50 mn or the total assets up to EUR 43 mn. 
We used for documentation of 10 editions of White 
Charter of Romanian SMEs, from 2004 till 2013, books 
that are co-authored by one of this chapter’s authors. 
The annual surveys based on questionnaires were con-
ducted on representative samples of SMEs (see Table 1), 
which incorporated micro, small, and medium enter-
prises, having all forms of legal organization and of all 
ages, coming from all branches of activity and develop-
ment regions of Romania.
During the period of time considered, investigations 
based on questionnaires have been designed as surveys, 
on stratified samples. This research method ensures bet-
ter quality of information and a higher degree of knowl-
edge of the realities investigated. Annually, this kind of 

262 
L. Nicolescu & C. Nicolescu
survey is organized in the first quarter of the year, and 
therefore, many of the entrepreneurs’ answers from 
the respective year’s edition reflect the situations/
perceptions corresponding to the previous year. For 
instance, the results presented in White Charter of 
Romanian  SMEs 2013 are considered as being relevant 
for the year 2012/2013 and recorded as such. 
2.  Assessment of Romanian Economic 
Environment
The evaluations of the Romanian  business environment 
made by entrepreneurs (Table 2) reflect to a large extent 
the way how the environment actually evolved in the 
analyzed period. We observe that favorable views on the 
economic environment registered an ascendant trend 
until 2008, (the year of the  crisis’ start), when more than 
half of deciders from SMEs considered that conditions 
from Romania were friendly for business. This percep-
tion is explained by the positive evolution of Romanian 
economy during 2004–2008, characterized, as Nicolescu 
& Nicolescu (2008) shown in ‘‘Entrepreneurship and 
Management of SMEs”, through: 
• 
Reviving industrial activity; 
• 
The rapid growth of the service sector; 
• 
Continuing the dynamic evolution of trade and 
construction; 
• 
Increment of foreign and domestic investments;
• 
The rapid growth of imports and exports;
• 
The proliferation of the acquis communautaire and 
the transition to its consistent implementation; 
• 
Rise of the convergence of the Romanian economy 
and the European Union (EU) economy as a result 
of the pre-accession process and the effective inte-
gration of Romania into the EU; 
• 
Modernization and rapid diversification of the 
banking system, decreasing substantial differences 
between Romania and developed countries.
In 2009 and 2010 a decrease in the percentage of 
favorable assessments took place, generated by the 
international and national economic crisis, manifested 
through compressing domestic demand, reduction in 
the volume of industrial production, decreasing invest-
ments, increasing budget deficit, rising unemployment, 
declining purchasing power of the population, etc. 
Also, it is worth to be mentioned that in 2009 and 2010 
came into force the mandatory minimum tax — a pay-
ment obligation for all companies regardless their 
financial results — resulting in the obligation to pay the 
minimum tax even when the company had zero income. 
Table 1.  Dimension of the SMEs samples in the period 2004–2013
Year
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
Number of SMEs in the 
sample
1,378
1,398
1,306
1,178
1,256
1,099
1,485
1,723
1,716
1,858
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a). CNIPMMR, White Charter of SMEs from 
Romania, Editions 2004–2013.
Table 2.  Entrepreneurs’ assessment of the Romanian economic environment 2004–2013
Status of the 
economic 
environment
2004 (%) 2005 (%) 2006 (%) 2007 (%) 2008 (%) 2009 (%) 2010 (%) 2011 (%) 2012 (%) 2013 (%)
Favorable to 
business
16.89
25.50
30.01
42.91
51.61
17.13
3.91
7.73
11.81
15.34
Neutral
28.95
29.86
35.07
35.11
28.56
24.69
17.96
20.66
33.74
41.28
Detrimental to 
business 
development
54.17
44.64
34.92
21.98
19.83
58.18
78.13
69.61
54.45
43.38
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a). CNIPMMR, White Charter of SMEs from Romania, 
Editions 2004–2013. 

 
The Evolution of the Romanian SMEs’ Perceptions 
263
This led to a substantial growth of  SMEs which have 
suspended business. 
We underline that the perceptions of entrepreneurs/
managers regarding  business environment, have a large 
impact on the way they act, react, and decide for their 
firms, influencing functionality, competitiveness and 
performance at micro, mezzo, and macro level.
3.  Main  Business Opportunities 
and  Difficulties for SMEs 
in Romania
Entrepreneurs’ perceptions of business opportunities 
are very important, because they can be starting points 
for future actions and strategic processes of SMEs.
The surveys point out that the main business oppor-
tunities perceived by SMEs for 2003/2004–2012/2013 
period were increasing sales on the internal market, 
assimilating of new products, entering on new mar-
kets, creating business partnerships, using new tech-
nologies, obtaining a grant and the growth of exports. 
Table 3 shows how the perceptions of SMEs on economic 
opportunities evolved during the 10 years under study. 
The growth of sales in the domestic market was 
perceived most frequently as the main opportunity in 
the entire analyzed period, with the exception of the 
year of Romania’s integration in EU (2006/2007), 
when most of respondents were optimistic and focused 
towards penetrating new markets. 
Whilst, the entering on new markets and assimilating 
new products were perceived over time in close percent-
ages as being opportunities, other aspects, such as obtain-
ing a grant, increasing exports or operationalization of a 
business partnership have fluctuated quite significantly. 
As far as the opportunity of getting a grant is con-
cerned, we observe that over half of the deciders from 
SMEs were enthusiastic at the time Romania adhered to 
EU while in the subsequent years, the perception over 
this opportunity has known diminishing trends. This situ-
ation can be explained by the difficulties related to 
accessing the European grants: bureaucracy in Romania, 
deficiencies at the Romanian authorities level on the 
administration of EU funds (preferential treatment, lack/
shortcoming of information, etc.), insufficient know-how 
of the entrepreneurs/managers from SMEs about the spe-
cific aspects of the application process and the require-
ment to contribute with relatively considerable funds at 
the project’s total budget in order to obtain co-financing.
Considering selling of products/services in other 
countries, we find low proportions of firms for whom 
exports’ growth is seen as an economic opportunity, with 
a minimum of 7.28% of the SMEs for 2010/2011. One 
Table 3.  Business opportunities for SMEs in Romania in 2003/2004–2012/2013
Business 
opportunities
2003/
2004 (%)
2004/
2005 (%)
2005/
2006 (%)
2006/
2007 (%)
2007/
2008 (%)
2008/
2009 (%)
2009/
2010 (%)
2010/
2011 (%)
2011/
2012 (%)
2012/
2013 (%)
Increasing sales in 
the domestic 
market
64.01
66.67
64.70
36.93
69.75
64.88
68.01
78.08
64.34
64.67
Assimilating new 
products
53.05
51.79
54.59
46.60
46.34
40.22
51.3
48.27
45.16
50.75
Penetrating new 
markets
50.15
46.99
51.15
58.15
44.43
41.77
46.94
47.58
44.99
44.40
Creating a business 
partnership
38.97
43.99
41.81
15.03
35.27
33.39
33.27
28.54
30.89
26.93
Using a new 
technology
36.94
38.77
34.53
47.11
34.55
31.94
26.40
28.03
30.01
26.37
Obtaining a grant
11.18
12.59
13.71
55.26
20.30
23.66
16.43
15.12
12.65
11.31
Increasing exports
10.96
8.30
9.34
16.72
8.84
20.56
9.97
7.28
11.77
7.32
Others
2.47
2.72
1.61
2.21
1.51
3.09
2.56
1.53
0.34
2.64
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a). CNIPMMR, White Charter of SMEs from Romania, Editions 
2004–2013. 

264 
L. Nicolescu & C. Nicolescu
explanation can be that most  SMEs, especially microen-
terprises, work at local, and regional levels and do not 
have the economic power to operate on foreign markets.
Taking into consideration the high percentages of 
enterprises that assimilated new products (about 
40–54% in the last decade) and the only slightly lower 
proportions of firms that use new technologies (espe-
cially in 2012/2013 and 2009/2010 with percentages of 
26.37% and 26.4% respectively) we can appreciate that 
SMEs are open to activities oriented on induction of 
new, although with few exceptions, they do not have a 
strong innovative character.
We note that between 0.34% (2011/2012) and 
3.09% (2008/2009) of entrepreneurs did not refer at 
any of the opportunities listed in Table 3 and identified 
other sources of economic opportunities such as: diver-
sification of products and services, reviving the bank 
credits, stability/loyalty of customers, subcontracting 
activities in projects financed by the EU, increasing 
prices of certain products, stabilizing of the exchange 
rate, development of real estate market, changes in tax 
laws, employee stability, increasing imports, renting 
spaces/equipment on favorable terms, external financ-
ing, implementation of mandatory standards, growth of 
sales in the foreign market, reduced competition in 
some areas, opening new outlets, transparency of pub-
lic tenders, developing collaborative relationships with 
stakeholders, attracting investments for modernization, 
the existence of staff with high levels of skills, a.s.o. 
Perceived business  difficulties faced by Romanian 
SMEs are relevant for entrepreneurs/managers, as they 
contribute to the design of corresponding actions and 
strategies, and are relevant for politicians, as knowing 
them, can contribute to the improvement of public poli-
cies. Table 4 presents the frequency with which differ-
ent aspects have been appreciated to be business 
difficulties during last 10 years.
The most frequently encountered difficulties by 
SMEs in 2013/2014 were high taxation, bureaucracy, 
decrease in the internal demand, inflation, excessive 
controls, difficult access to credits, raised costs for 
credits, lack/delays in paying invoices, and corruption.
The examination of the business difficulties per-
ceived by Romanian deciders in the analyzed period 
reveals that there are a number of aspects that have 
evolved different over time. Thus:
• 
Percentages of respondents who faced a decrease in 
the domestic demand were lower in 2006/2007 
(28.61%) and 2007/2008 (31.21%) and reached a 
maximum of 70.08% in 2012/2013;
• 
Bureaucracy was indicated in the highest propor-
tion in 2006/2007 (71.65%) and in the lower pro-
portion in 2009/2008 (36.21%) and 2013/2012 
(36.33%) as a business difficulty;
• 
Weights of entrepreneurs who reported excessive 
fiscal taxes decreased annually till the beginning of 
the economic  crisis, from 72.93% in 2003/2004 to 
the minimum of 41.40% in 2008/2009;
• 
Inflation was recorded as a difficulty more fre-
quently in 2003/2004 (51.89%) and rarely in 
2006/2007 (19.78%);
• 
Proportions of SMEs who reclaim excessive con-
trols diminished year by year from 2003/2004 
(35.78%) until 2008/2009 (17.83%) and increased 
afterwards annually until 2012/2013 (41.50%);
• 
Difficult access to credits, high interest rates, and 
other costs for credits, delays in paying invoices by 
private companies and the lack/delay of payment of 
invoices by the state were registered in lower pro-
portions in 2011/2012 and 2012/2013 as being 
business difficulties;
• 
Corruption was claimed less frequently in 
2003/2004 (11.18%) but more often in 2011/2012 
(41.14%); 
• 
Knowledge about and the compliance with the 
acquis communitaire is perceived less as a business 
difficulty starting 2008/2009, as compared to the 
previous periods, due to the intensification of 
European regulations implementation at country 
level and the improvement of the level of informa-
tion of the employers and employees. 
At the first glance, it might be interpreted that it is 
a contradiction between the high proportions of entre-
preneurs who considered increasing sales in the internal 
market as being a major opportunity during 2003/2004–
2012/2013 and the raised frequencies of respondents 
who opined that one of the main business difficulties 
was the decrease in the domestic demand, especially 
starting with 2009/2008. On the one hand, augmenta-
tion of sales on internal market was the main possible 
opportunity for many SMEs for the entire investigated 

 
The Evolution of the Romanian SMEs’ Perceptions 
265
Table 4.  Major difficulties for the SMEs activity in Romania: 2003/2004–2012/2013
Major difficulties 
for SMEs
2003/
2004 (%)
2004/
2005 (%)
2005/
2006 (%)
2006/
2007 (%)
2007/
2008 (%)
2008/
2009 (%)
2009/
2010 (%)
2010/
2011 (%)
2011/
2012 (%)
2012/
2013 (%)
Excessive fiscal taxes
72.93
68.24
64.70
60.27
42.52
41.40
54.61
48.44
51.69
54.25
Decrease in the 
domestic demand
46.52
39.13
41.58
28.61
31.21
62.06
66.20
67.77
60.55
70.08
Inflation
51.89
29.33
29.79
19.78
33.92
33.76
36.70
44.40
49.59
50.27
Excessive controls
35.78
34.84
30.93
30.48
24.92
17.83
26.13
31.15
40.56
41.50
Bureaucracy
57.47
66.24
64.62
71.65
47.37
36.21
47.07
41.39
52.86
36.33
Corruption
11.18
38.77
38.13
37.69
33.12
23.20
36.8
36.10
41.14
30.95
High interest rates 
and other costs for 
credits
37.74
38.13
41.27
41.51
33.36
35.30
25.86
27.80
19.17
16.58
Difficult access to 
credits
31.35
42.49
38.51
38.88
23.09
24.57
30.51
25.53
20.22
14.59
Delays in paying 
invoices by private 
companies
—
—
—
—
—
36.12
26.80
27.52
15.79
12.92
The lack/delay of 
payment 
of invoices by the 
state 
37.95
40.41
37.83
42.44
33.84
14.83
12.32
13.47
7.40
5.49
Competition of 
imports 
23
19.10
24.73
28.10
20.70
20.20
18.11
14.38
22.90
16.95
Hiring, training and 
 maintaining staff
—
36.55
33.61
43.72
35.03
18.84
19.06
22.91
29.94
28.53
Increase in the level 
of wage expenses 
—
—
—
—
29.62
21.47
20.34
19.56
9.62
25.46
The relative instability 
of the national 
currency
—
12.59
12.33
8.49
24.36
31.76
18.25
21.15
19.00
17.81
Poor quality of 
infrastructure
—
—
—
—
13.46
13.47
15.35
15.86
4.90
12.00
Decrease in the 
export demand
—
—
—
—
—
12.73
6.94
5.06
7.17
5.54
Getting the necessary 
 consultancy and 
training
—
—
9.65
11.63
7.96
6.46
3.5
4.09
5.24
5.87
The knowledge about 
and the compli-
ance with the 
acquis 
communautaire
—
—
7.73
10.87
12.10
4
2.90
1.82
2.27
3.44
Others
5.01
5.01
2.60
1.53
0.56
1.18
1.35
0.97
0.93
0.59
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a).

266 
L. Nicolescu & C. Nicolescu
period, due to their difficulty to valorify at superior 
level other aspects as opportunities (exporting, obtain-
ing grants, using new technologies s.o.). On the other 
hand — even though few entrepreneurs indicated it 
before 2008 as a difficulty, the real decrease in the 
domestic demand for many products and services was 
an immediate consequence of the economic  crisis, a 
trend that continued in the subsequent years. Therefore, 
the entrepreneurs put their hopes for economic recov-
ery in the increase of the domestic demand, so that they 
would reach the pre-crisis levels of sales, considering it 
among the  business opportunities expected to occur in 
the near future.
4.  The Effects of Romania’s 
Integration in the EU 
Romania’s integration in EU in January 2007, gener-
ated changes both before and after adhering, changes 
that affected  SMEs. Investigation reveals that Romania’s 
accession into EU was generally seen positively by 
entrepreneurs/managers in spite of all inherent  difficul-
ties arising from the alignment to European standards 
and requirements in areas like labor relations, con-
sumer protection, health and safety, environmental 
preservation, etc.
Analyzing the evolution of the perceptions of SMEs 
on EU integration (Table 5) we observe the following:
• 
Weights of deciders from SMEs that considered 
that EU accession had no significant influence on 
their activities grown over 50% in 2009/2010–
2011/2012, denoting an increasing neutral per-
ceived character of the economic integration 
process in recession period; 
• 
Percentage of entrepreneurs who perceived  European 
integration as a major opportunity augmented quite 
enough in 2012/2013 (54%), that can be explained 
through decisions adopted within EU concerning 
substantial support for few member states;
• 
Proportion of respondents who appreciated that EU 
integration represents a major threat reached a 
maximum of 26.84% in 2005/2006 and recorded 
the lowest level in 2012/2013 (3.90%). 
The investigations revealed that the main positive 
effects of Romania’s integration in the EU are: higher 
access to markets, potentially cheaper and better sup-
pliers, improved legislation and regulations, superior 
access to technologies, accessing structural funds, bet-
ter cooperation for innovation, and more transparent 
and fair public acquisitions procedures. Taking into 
account the evolution of aspects seen within SMEs as 
being positive effects of Romania’s adherance to the 
EU (Table 6), we can emphasize that:
• 
The proportion of entrepreneurs who indicated bet-
ter access to markets decreased annually from 
2008/2009 till present;
• 
Perceptions regarding improved legislation/regula-
tions recorded in generally increasing trends since 
the integration in EU, comparative with previous 
years;
• 
The access to potentially cheaper and better suppli-
ers was reported as a positive effect in the highest 
proportion in 2012/2013 (42.54%) and in the lower 
proportion in 2005/2006 (19.76%); 
• 
The percentage of respondents who refer to more 
transparent and fair public acquisitions procedures 
peaked in year of Romania’s integration and 
decreased afterwards annually;
• 
Higher access to technologies was recorded more 
frequently in 2006/2007 (32.51%) and rarely in 
2005/2006 (5.14%);
Table 5.  The perceptions of the effects of Romania’s integration in the EU
Perception on the effects 
of EU integration
2004/
2005 (%)
2005/
2006 (%)
2006/
2007 (%)
2007/
2008 (%)
2008/
2009 (%)
2009/
2010 (%)
2010/
2011 (%)
2011/
2012 (%)
2012/
2013 (%)
Major opportunity
40.10
40.19
47.05
46.47
46.67
38.80
40.11
38.46
54.00
Major threat
22.43
26.84
11.28
9.18
10.99
9.18
6.34
6.23
3.90
No significant influence
37.46
32.97
41.67
44.34
42.35
52.02
53.55
55.31
42.10
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a).

 
The Evolution of the Romanian SMEs’ Perceptions 
267
• 
Better cooperation for innovation registered the 
highest percent in 2012/2013 (19.74%) and the 
lowest percent in 2005/ 2006 (3.43%);
• 
The accession of structural funds was indicated in 
higher percentage in 2008/2009 and less frequently 
in the last two years. 
5.  The Impact of the Economic  Crisis 
on  SMEs 
The economic recession that started in 2008 has gener-
ated multiple negative effects in Romania. Many spe-
cialists believe that a considerable number of countries 
are still faced with unfavorable economic evolutions, 
even if they had increases of Gross Domestic Product in 
different periods. In this context, revealing the impact 
of the internal/international economic crisis over the 
sector of SMEs from Romania is highly significant. 
Considering the dynamics of the SMEs activity in 
2008/2009–2012/2013 (Table 7) we find the following:
• 
SMEs which reduced their activity registered the 
highest proportion in 2008/2009 (57.58%) and the 
lowest proportion in 2013/2012 (37.20%);
• 
The companies that have been bankrupted recorded 
the maximum percentage in 2009/2010 (27.91%) 
and decreased afterwards annually; 
• 
The frequency of respondents who declared that 
their firms have increased activity is the most 
reduced in 2008/2009 (4.23%) and the highest in 
2012/2013 (13.85%).
Table 6.  The positive effects of Romania’s integration in the EU for SMEs
The positive effects of 
Romania’s integration 
in the EU for SMEs
2003/
2004 (%)
2004/
2005 (%)
2005/
2006 (%)
2006/
2007 (%)
2007/
2008 (%)
2008/
2009 (%)
2009/
2010 (%)
2010/
2011 (%)
2011/
2012 (%)
2012/
2013 (%)
Potentially cheaper and 
 better suppliers
29
25.58
19.76
41.85
38.54
36.49
41.08
32.29
26.22
42.54
Better access to markets 
31
36.06
35.67
41.68
43.47
46.41
43.16
42.44
41.32
40.93
Improved legislation 
and regulations
17
19.48
31.67
32.0
35.35
32.30
32.46
40.82
32.11
35.33
Better access to 
technologies
10
12.79
5.14
32.51
28.34
22.75
19.73
19.78
13.29
21.16
Accessing structural 
funds
—
—
—
24.11
32.64
32.85
23.64
24.22
20.40
19.71
Better cooperation for 
innovation
4
4.91
3.43
11.88
12.02
10.74
8.08
9.04
10.26
19.74
More transparent 
and fair public 
 acquisitions 
procedures
—
—
3.76
15.53
12.82
12.19
9.76
8.81
5.83
5.33
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a).
Table 7.  The impact of the economic crisis on SMEs
The dynamics of SMEs activity
2008/2009 (%)
2009/2010 (%)
2010/2011 (%)
2011/2012 (%) 2012/2013 (%)
SMEs that have reduced their activity
57.58
43.95
39.22
40.83
37.20
SMEs that bankrupted
14.80
27.91
24.02
20.39
18.98
SMEs that have the same activity
23.39
20.82
27.25
24.32
29.97
SMEs that have increased their activity
4.23
7.32
9.51
9.27
13.85
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a).

268 
L. Nicolescu & C. Nicolescu
Concerning the psychological influences of the 
economic  crisis on entrepreneurs, we observe that:
• 
A great majority of respondents declared that they 
are impacted by the recession.
• 
Only 4.15–6% of the deciders from  SMEs opined 
that there were no emotional influences.
• 
With the exception of 2013 over 40% of respond-
ents were affected in medium/large enough extents 
by the crisis.
• 
Proportion of persons who felt to a great extent 
(large or very large) the effects of recession was 
lowest in 2011/2012 (23.65%) and the highest in 
2012/2013 (33.46%).
• 
Over one-fifth of the entrepreneurs were low/very 
low affected by the negative contextual evolutions 
during the investigated period, reaching a maximum 
percentage of 31.95% in 2012/2013. 
Further information is given in the Table 8.
We conclude that, even though Romania registered 
only in 2009 and 2010 decreases of GDP, the negative 
economic evolutions at international level, the uncer-
tainties related to current economic situation every year 
and the unpredictability of the future developments had 
a considerable impact on the a large part of the entre-
preneurs (Nicolescu et al., 2013a).
6.  Training and  Consultancy in SMEs 
Taking into account that training and consultancy could 
have a considerable positive impact on functionality, 
sustainability, and performance of enterprises, it is 
important to point out the frequency in which SMEs 
have accessed this kind of services during 2004–2013.
Examination of the average number of working 
days per employee dedicated annually to training by 
SMEs during period 2003/2004–2012/2013, show the 
following aspects:
• 
Percentages of companies that have not invested in 
training of employees increased year by year after 
the outset of crisis, respectively from 35.04% in 
2008/2009 to 83.13% in 2012/2013 (magnifying by 
2.37 times);
• 
Proportions of SMEs that allocated 1–5 working days 
to training activities registered a descendent trend, 
starting with the year of Romanian integration in EU, 
from 51.12% in 2007/2006 to 12.35% in 2012/2013;
• 
The proportion of firms which dedicated more than 
10 days yearly per person for training decreased in 
2013/2012 compared to 2009/2008 by 13.33 times 
(from 12.27% to 0.92%).
See more information in Table 9.
As far as the dynamics of using consultancy  services 
by SMEs is concerned, during the period 2004–2013 
(Fig. 1), the surveys highlight the following: 
• 
Comparing the first and the last year of the ana-
lyzed period, it was noticed a reduction of almost 
three times of the proportions of companies using 
external consultants (from 30.06% in 2004/2003 to 
10.13% in 2012/2013);
• 
In 2009/2010 it was registered the largest contrac-
tion of accessing consultancy services, more than 
two times compared to the previous year;
• 
In the period between the year of integration in EU 
and year of the crisis’ start, the trend of consultants’ 
usage was ascendant; 
Table 8.  The psychological impact of the crisis on entrepreneurs
The psychological impact of the crisis
2008/2009 (%)
2009/2010 (%)
2010/2011 (%)
2011/2012 (%)
2012/2013 (%)
Very large
—
13.95
14.16
10.25
13.51
Large
24.22
18.10
16.51
13.40
19.95
Medium/large enough
42.92
41.77
42.21
47.30
28.59
Low/very low
27.26
20.85
22.75
24.90
31.95
No impact
5.60
5.33
4.36
4.15
6.00
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a).

 
The Evolution of the Romanian SMEs’ Perceptions 
269
• 
In 2011/2012 it was recorded the lowest percent of 
firms (7.55%) that resort to this kind of services.
It can be seen that in the last years, the frequency of 
consultancy and  training services within  SMEs regis-
tered a descendent evolution, due to the period of reces-
sion, which generated reducing financial potential of 
many enterprises, but as well due to negative attitudes of 
some entrepreneurs who do not apprehend the impor-
tance and necessity of accessing  consultancy/training 
for them and their employees (Nicolescu, 2013).
7.  Conclusions and Recommendations 
Taking into account the evolution of the entrepreneurs’ 
perceptions, there were identified few characteristics of 
the SMEs’ sector for the period 2003/2004–2012/2013: 
• 
Assessments of the SMEs on the  business environ-
ment evolved quite close to dynamics of Romania’s 
GDP. Thus, the favorable evaluations of entrepre-
neurs about economic environment registered 
ascendant trend before integration in the EU, a 
descendent tendency when the  crisis began and an 
upward evolution after GDP started to increase 
(Fig. 2 and Table 2);
• 
Regarding  business opportunities we observed that 
some aspects were revealed relative constantly by a 
considerable number of entrepreneurs (penetrating 
new markets, assimilating new products) and other 
aspects have been pointed under the impact of contex-
tual evolutions such as economic recession or integra-
tion in EU (increasing exports, obtaining a grant); 
• 
Concerning the views of companies deciders regard-
ing the major  difficulties of SMEs, we distinguish 
different tendencies in the analyzed period, with 
some aspects of the economic environment deterio-
rating in recent years (decrease of internal demand, 
inflation, excessive controls), few problems 
Table 9.  Dynamics of average working days per employee allocated to training within SMEs in Romania during period 2004–2013
Average number of 
working days, dedicated 
to  training within SMEs
2004/
2005 (%)
2005/
2006 (%)
2006/
2007 (%)
2007/
2008 (%)
2008/
2009 (%)
2009/
2010 (%)
2010/
2009 (%)
2011/
2010 (%)
2012/
2011 (%)
2013/
2012 (%)
None 
45.00
34.17
40.68
34.68
35.04
35.25
60.88
62.52
70.70
83.13
1–5 days
34.00
43.00
41.00
51.12
44.46
36.61
24.88
23.46
21.35
12.35
6–10 days
21.00
22.83
18.32
14.20
11.44
15.87
7.20
7.87
4.34
3.61
More than 10 days
9.06
12.27
7.04
6.16
3.61
0.92
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013a).
Fig. 1.  Dynamics of using consultancy services by SMEs during 
period 2004–2013
Sources: Nicolescu et al. (2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 
2012, 2013a).
30.06% 
18.84% 19.41% 
13.07% 13.73% 
24.35% 
11.29% 9.46% 7.55% 
10.13% 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
Fig. 2.  The evolution of real GDP in Romania in the period 
2004–2013
Source: http://www.mdm.ro/2014/evolutia-pib-romaniei-pentru-perioada-
2004–2013/.
−10.00%
−5.00%
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
8.50%
4.20%
7.90%
6.30%
7.30%
−6.60%
−1.10%
2.30%
0.60%
2.20%

270 
L. Nicolescu & C. Nicolescu
remaining more or less alike over time (corruption, 
excessive fiscal taxes, competition of imports) and 
some aspects improving (bureaucracy, cost of cred-
its, lack/delays of invoices payments, the knowl-
edge over the acquis communautaire); 
• 
Evaluations of entrepreneurs on the  European inte-
gration effects outline that on overall, the adhering 
of Romania to EU represents a major opportunity, 
less respondents considering it without significant 
influence and only a low part of persons (with ten-
dency of further diminishing), appreciated the inte-
gration as a threat;
• 
The impact of economic recession both on the 
dynamics of  SMEs activities and psychological 
state of entrepreneurs was higher in the years of 
decreasing GDP;
• 
Intensity of  training and  consultancy registered a 
negative trend within the sector of SMEs, but noting 
that in last year increased slightly the proportion of 
companies which use independent consultants;
Considering the evolution of the entrepreneurs’ per-
ceptions, especially of those referring to business  diffi-
culties, we formulated few recommendations in order to 
support development of SMEs sector (Nicolescu & 
Nicolescu, 2014 and Nicolescu et al., 2013b):
• 
Designing of “National Plan for the implementa-
tion of the Small Business Act for Europe” with 
the purpose to put into practice the 10 principles 
stipulated by the Small Business Act, a relevant 
European document and avoiding discrimination of 
Romanian SMEs as compared to SMEs from coun-
tries that apply SBA. Small Business Act for 
Europe (SBA) aims to improve the overall approach 
to entrepreneurship and was enacted by the EU 
Commission in 2008 and revised in 2011. This very 
important document recognises the central role of 
SMEs in the EU economy and for the first time puts 
into place a comprehensive SME policy framework 
for the EU and its Member States; 
• 
The amelioration of fiscal conditions through 
measures like immediate implementation of reduc-
ing/eliminating of taxes on reinvested profit, intro-
ducing regulations of payments afferent to VAT in 
the moment of collection, not on billing/selling, 
decreasing of taxation levels on social contributions, 
diminishing of the excise duties, etc. 
• 
The enhancement of the support for Romanian 
SMEs in order to access EU structural funds. 
Concretely, we recommend: improving informa-
tion levels concerning the availability of EU struc-
tural funds at territorial level through local 
authorities; perfecting assistance for SMEs to clar-
ify the different aspects of the application process, 
including specialized consultancy and training; 
higher correlating between SMEs’ necessities and 
EU programs dedicated to small and medium sized 
enterprises; ameliorating Romanian administrative 
processes for accessing EU funds, by means of 
simplifying procedures, standardizing of eligibility 
criteria for different programs, better and clearer 
communication with applicant, etc.; founding a 
special fund in order to increase SMEs access to 
finance, by providing co-financing SMEs that 
access structural funds;
• 
Reestablishment of a ministry for SMEs, with a 
higher degree of autonomy in elaborating and 
implementing strategies and policies for small and 
medium sized companies, conjunction with increas-
ing the number of territorial offices for SMEs so 
that to get closer to SMEs and their needs at local 
level;
• 
Specific measures focused on SMEs, to support 
them to cope with  business environment difficul-
ties, such as: assisting the exchanges of best prac-
tices and creation of business contacts at national 
and international level; perfecting the crediting 
system for SMEs, founding of a state bank dedi-
cated exclusively to SMEs; stipulating regulations 
to provide postponement of charges/debts toward 
the state for SMEs that were affected by lack/
delays of payments from public/state entities, etc.
Translating into practice these proposals represents 
in our opinion an urgent necessity, that could contribute 
to improving the economic environment in which small 
and medium sized firms operate, taking into account 
that SMEs, although represent the most dynamic, flex-
ible and innovative sector of economy, are more vulner-
able and need specific support in order to survive and 
develop.

 
The Evolution of the Romanian SMEs’ Perceptions 
271
References 
Nicolescu, C. (2013), Romanian SMEs in context of national 
and international complex evolutions, Proceedings of 
International Management Conference — New 
Management for the New Economy, November 2013, 
Bucharest, Romania.
Nicolescu, O., Chirovici, E., Dumitrache, B., Maniu, A. I., 
Maniu, I. I., Nicolescu, C., & Anghel, F. (2005), White 
Charter of Romanian SMEs 2005, Bucharest: Olimp 
Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O., Chirovici, E., Dumitrache, B., Maniu, A. I., 
Maniu, I. I., Nicolescu, C., & Anghel, F. (2006), White 
Charter of Romanian SMEs 2006, Bucharest: Olimp 
Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O., Haiduc, I. C., Nancu, D., Maniu, A. I., Drăgan, 
I. I., Nicolescu, C., Bâră O. M., Borcoş, M. L. & Anghel, 
F. (2010), White Charter of Romanian SMEs 2010, 
Bucharest: Olimp Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O., Haiduc, I. C., Nancu, D., Maniu, A. I., Drăgan, 
I. I., Nicolescu, C., Bâră O. M., Borcoş, M. L. & Anghel, 
F. (2011), White Charter of Romanian SMEs 2011, 
Bucharest: Sigma Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O., Maniu, A. I., Maniu, I. I., Nicolescu, C. 
Anghel, F. (2007), White Charter of Romanian SMEs 
2007, Bucharest: Olimp Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O., Maniu, A. I., Maniu, I. I., Nicolescu, C. 
Anghel, F. (2008), White Charter of Romanian SMEs 
2008, Bucharest: Olimp Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O., Maniu, A. I., Maniu, I.I., Nicolescu, C. 
Anghel, F. (2009), White Charter of Romanian SMEs 
2009, Bucharest: Lidana Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O., Maniu, A. I., Drăgan, I. I., Nicolescu, C., Bâră 
O. M., Borcoş, M. L. Lavric, V., Anghel, F. (2012), 
White Charter of Romanian SMEs 2012, Bucharest: 
Sigma Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O., Maniu, A. I., Drăgan, I. I., Nicolescu, C. Bâră 
O. M., Borcoş, M. L. Lavric, V. (2013a), White Charter 
of Romanian SMEs 2013, Bucharest: Sigma Publishing 
House.
Nicolescu, O., Maniu, A. I. Popa, I., Nicolescu, C., & 
Anghel, F. (2004), White Charter of Romanian SMEs 
2004, Bucharest: Olimp Publishing House.
Nicolescu, O., Popa, I., & Nicolescu, C. (2013b), Health 
Management in Romania 2012, Bucharest: Pro 
Universitaria Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, O. & Nicolescu, C. (2008), The Entrepreneurship 
and Management of SMEs, Bucharest: Economică 
Publishing House. 
Nicolescu, L. & Nicolescu, C. (2014), Trends in the develop-
ment of European SMEs. The case of Romanian SMEs, 
Proceedings of the International Conference — European 
Entrepreneurship in the Globalizing Economy, 
Preparation of New Generation of Entrepreneurs and 
Business Leaders, June 2012, Sozopol, Bulgaria, 
pp. 115–135.
http://www.mdm.ro/2014/evolutia-pib-romaniei-pentru-
perioada-2004–2013.
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/small-business-
act/index_en.htm.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

Part VI
 Leadership and Human Resources 
Management

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

275
Chapter 30
The Relationship between  Leadership Styles, 
Leader  Communication Style, and Impact on 
Leader–Member Exchange Relationship 
within the  Banking Sector in the United States
Theodore G. Pacleb and Mihai C. Bocarnea
Lincoln Memorial University
School of Business and Leadership
Regent University
Proceeding from the assumption that leadership is a 
socially constructed relationship, the purpose of the 
study was to examine (a) the direct causal link between 
leadership styles and leader communication styles, 
(b) the direct causal link between leadership styles and 
quality of leader–member exchange (LMX) relation-
ship as well as (c) the extent to which leader communi-
cation styles mediates the relationship between 
leadership styles and LMX. Using hierarchical multiple 
regression analysis, three regression models were esti-
mated on data drawn from 213 domestic bank employ-
ees in the United States. The findings indicated that the 
transformational leadership style is negatively related 
to the communication style of verbal aggressiveness 
and positively related to preciseness. Furthermore, ver-
bal aggressiveness and preciseness partially mediated 
the relationship between transformational leadership 
and LMX. The findings also suggested that verbal 
aggressiveness leads to low quality of LMX, while pre-
ciseness leads to high quality LMX. Finally, results 
indicated that transactional leadership is significantly 
related to leader expressiveness, questioningness, and 
preciseness, which, in turn, explain the relationship of 
transactional leadership with quality of LMX. The cur-
rent study concluded that leadership is enacted through 
different leader communication styles. The implica-
tions of the findings draw attention to the importance of 
leader communication styles in building productive and 
enduring dyadic relationships with followers in the 
workplace. Moreover, the findings underscore the role 
that leader communication plays in influencing the 
work environment in manners of conveyance that 
impact proximal and power relationships. 
1. Introduction
In a typical communicative discourse on leadership 
within organizations, the dialogues rarely focus on 
leadership in terms of how relationships evolve. Only 
recently have some scholars called for a more integra-
tive and comprehensive definition of leadership that 
encompasses the main locus of leadership theories 

276 
T. G. Pacleb & M. C. Bocarnea
(leader, follower, dyad, and context) as well as the 
mechanisms such as traits, cognitions, behaviors, and 
affects (Hernandez et al., 2011) that influence the  lead-
ership process. Although Hernandez et al. (2011) 
pushed for a more integrative and comprehensive 
understanding of where leadership comes from and 
how it is transmitted, one could lament the fact that the 
literature on leadership has largely relegated the role of 
communication as the primary and central enactive 
mechanism of building relationships along the margins 
of leadership research. Neufeld, Wan, and Fang (2010) 
stated, “Without effective communication, leadership is 
essentially irrelevant” (p. 241). To put it differently, 
leadership is a communicative process. Leadership 
theories explain leadership behavior but they do not 
explain how the leader expresses and conveys the 
behavior, yet the basis of such expression and convey-
ance is communicative by nature (Bambacas & 
Patrickson, 2008, 2009; De Vries et al., 2010; Gaines, 
2007; Hamrefors, 2010). The purpose of this quantita-
tive study was to examine the relationship between 
leadership style (transformational/transactional), leader 
 communication styles, and effect of leader communica-
tion style on the quality of LMX relationship among 
employees drawn from bank organizations. The current 
study linked the following theories: (a) transforma-
tional and transactional leadership, (b) leader commu-
nication styles, and (c) LMX theory.
2. Transformational Leadership
Transformational leaders mutually stimulate and ele-
vate in a way “that converts followers into leaders and 
may convert leaders into moral agents” (Bass, 1990, 
p. 23). Followers become aware of the importance of 
their work and induces them to transcend self-interest 
for organizational (Kovjanic et al., 2012) interest 
through the activation of their higher-order needs of 
self-esteem and self-actualization (Yukl, 2010). 
Transformational leaders accomplish these follower 
outcomes through articulation and role modeling (Bass, 
1990). Bass (1985) and Bass and Avolio (1990, 1997, 
1998) identified four measureable behavioral dimen-
sions of transformational leadership: (a) idealized 
influence, (b) individualized consideration, (c) intel-
lectual stimulation, and (d) inspirational motivation. 
The four behavioral dimensions of transformational 
leadership suggest that it is a relations-oriented leader-
ship approach that focus on the mutual development of 
the leader and follower (Burns, 1978), and that mutual 
development depends on interpersonal communication 
styles (De Vries et al., 2010).
Although the preponderance of studies in transfor-
mational leadership focuses on outcomes and effect 
(e.g., Carmelli et al., 2011; Cheung & Wong, 2011; 
Dimaculangan & Aguiling, 2012; Jiao et al., 2011; 
Mitchell & Boyle, 2009) the role of leader rhetoric 
expressed in different communication styles is a critical 
factor in the transformational leadership process 
(Conger, 1991; Den Hartog & Verbug, 1997; Shamir et 
al., 1994). Rhetoric is the ability of a person to persuade 
others to “accept new ideas and undertake some specific 
activities” (Bonet & Sauquet, 2010: 121). Rhetoric is 
expressed in forms of impression management strate-
gies (Gardner & Cleavenger, 1998; Sosik & Jung, 2003) 
and other forms involving symbols, slogans, imagery, 
and metaphors (Amernic et al., 2007; Conger & 
Kanungo, 1998; Holladay & Coombs, 1994; Yukl, 
2010), and may be conveyed in epideictic form (Bonet & 
Sauquet; Den Hartig & Verbug, 1997; Sheard, 1996; 
Summers, 2001), which may involve emotional expres-
sivity (Groves, 2006; Riggio, 1992). The use of good 
rhetorical devises may lead to the attribution of trans-
formational abilities and quality dyadic relationships 
(Conger, 1991; Sidani, 2007). De Vries et al. (2010) and 
Bryman (1992) suggested that charismatic-transforma-
tional leaders may be attributed certain communication 
styles differentiated from other forms of  leadership 
styles. Thus, the following hypotheses were tested:
• H1a: Transformational leadership style is negatively 
related to the leader communication style of 
expressiveness.
• H1b: Transformational leadership style is negatively 
related to the leader communication style of verbal 
aggressiveness.
• H1c: Transformational leadership style is negatively 
related to the leader communication style of 
questioningness.
• H1d: Transformational leadership style is positively 
related to the leader communication style of 
preciseness.

 
The Relationship between Leadership Styles 
277
• H1e: Transformational  leadership style is positively 
related to the leader  communication style of 
emotionality.
• H1f: Transformational leadership style is positively 
related to the leader communication style of impres-
sion manipulativeness.
3. Transactional Leadership
Transactional leadership takes on a different form of 
dialogic discourse because the emphasis is not on rela-
tional building but on behavioral compliance 
(Whittington et al., 2009), thus communication may be 
more direct, unambiguous, and less contextual on task 
performance. Transactional leaders are more task- 
oriented than relational because the basis of rewards 
and punishments are on the successful completion of 
tasks (2009). Bass & Avolio (1990) advanced this lead-
ership concept by identifying three behavior dimen-
sions to measure transactional leadership: (a) contingent 
reward, (b) active management by exception, and (c) 
passive management by exception. The forms of com-
munication tend to be directive, controlling, and power 
oriented (De Vries et al., 2010), which are inversely 
related to loyalty and innovativeness (Lee, 2008), crea-
tive performance (Wei et al., 2010) and quality of LMX 
(Yrle et al., 2002). De Vries and colleagues (2010) 
suggested that the communication style of task-oriented 
leadership approaches tend to be more assuring, pre-
cise, and with some level of verbal aggressiveness. 
Thus, the following hypotheses were tested:
• H2a: Transactional leadership style is positively 
related to the leader communication style of 
expressiveness.
• H2b: Transactional leadership style is positively 
related to the leader communication style of verbal 
aggressiveness.
• H2c: Transactional leadership style is positively related 
to the leader communication style of questioningness.
• H2d: Transactional leadership style is positively 
related to the leader communication style of 
preciseness.
• H2e: Transactional leadership style is negatively 
related to the leader communication style of 
emotionality.
• H2f: Transactional leadership style is positively 
related to the leader communication style of impres-
sion manipulativeness.
4. Communication Styles
Kellerman (1987) stated, “Social interaction depends 
on communication. The form, the purpose, the out-
come, and the participants in social interaction may 
vary; communication remains the vehicle” (p. 188). 
The axiom that a person “cannot not communicate” 
(Watzlawick et al., 1967: 51) captures the autonomic 
nature of communication. One cannot possibly begin to 
understand the leadership process unless one under-
stands how the leader communicates; yet, to date, the 
central role of communication as a key element in lead-
ership as a relational process has only been examined 
as expressions of personality and predictors of some 
leader outcomes (Bakker-Pieper & De Vries, 2013; De 
Vries et al., 2011; De Vries et al., 2010; De Vries et al., 
2009, 2013) and, for some, has not been given due 
importance in the leadership process (Fairhurst & Uhl-
Bien, 2012).
Leader communication as a variable is treated as a 
general construct rather than specific leader communi-
cation styles reflecting a positive or supportive commu-
nication in a high-LMX situation (Maslyn & Uhl-Bien, 
2001) and dominance-like and restricted communica-
tion in a low-LMX situation (Fairhurst et al., 1987). De 
Vries and colleagues (2010), however, found significant 
support for the importance of communication style in 
the leadership process. Yet, there remains a critical gap 
in leadership research that places leader communication 
style as the central and underlying mechanism of the 
leadership process in terms of its influence on the qual-
ity of the dyadic relationship. Thus, the current study 
tested the following hypotheses:
• H3a: Lexical leader communication style of expres-
siveness is negatively related to the quality of LMX 
relationship among transformational leaders but 
positively related among transactional leaders.
• H3b: Lexical leader communication style of verbal 
aggressiveness is negatively related to the quality of 
LMX among transformational but positively related 
among transactional leaders.

278 
T. G. Pacleb & M. C. Bocarnea
• H3c: Lexical leader  communication style of ques-
tioningness is negatively related to the quality of 
LMX among transformational leaders but positively 
related among transactional leaders.
• H3d: Lexical leader communication style of precise-
ness is positively related to the quality of LMX 
among transformational and transactional leaders.
• H3e: Lexical leader communication style of emo-
tionality is positively related to the quality of LMX 
among transformational but negatively related 
among transactional leaders.
• H3f: Lexical leader communication style of impres-
sion manipulativeness is positively related to the 
quality of LMX among transformational leaders and 
transactional leaders.
5. Leader–Member Exchange Theory
Founded upon social exchange theory (Blau, 1964), 
LMX theory is the social exchange process in a  leader-
ship context where leader and follower define their 
roles in a reciprocal interaction involving mutual evalu-
ation and exchanges of resources valuable to each 
party, leading to the development of a relationship 
(Brandes et al., 2004; Dansereau et al., 1973; Dansereau 
et al., 1975; Graen & Schiemann, 1978; Graen & Uhl-
Bien, 1995; Klein & Kim, 1998). The emphasis is on 
the construction of a relationship through social inter-
action built upon communication (Graen & Scandura, 
1987; Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1991, 1995; Uhl-Bien, 2006). 
Proximal relations (close or distant) are essential to 
LMX relationship (Brandes et al., 2004). The theory 
suggests that high LMX is a close relationship between 
supervisor and subordinate in a way that the reciprocal 
relationship mutually benefits both (Graen & Uhl-Bien, 
1995) but low LMX suggest a dysfunctional form of 
exchange (Othman et al., 2010). In a dysfunctional 
form of exchange, reciprocity is negative (Uhl-Bien & 
Maslyn, 2003), which means that the leader and subor-
dinate are exchanging negative behaviors such as 
restrained and aggressive communication (e.g., disre-
spect), avoidance and non-commitment, misinterpreta-
tions and misunderstanding, marginal follower 
performance, low commitment, motivation, and pro-
ductivity. Proceeding from the assumption that LMX is 
a “communicatively constructed” (Fairhurst, 1993: 
322) relationship, the current study examined the medi-
ated relationship of leadership style and LMX by test-
ing the following hypotheses: 
• H4a: Transformational leadership style predicts the 
quality of LMX relationship.
• H4b: Transactional leadership style predicts the 
quality of LMX relationship.
• H5a: Lexical leader communication styles mediate 
the relationship between transformational leadership 
style and quality of LMX.
• H5b: Lexical leader communication styles mediate 
the relationship between transactional leadership 
style and quality of LMX.
6. Method
The sample was drawn from domestic banks in the 
United States. Respondents were invited in person, 
online through panel services, social networking site 
(e.g., LinkedIn), and by email to individual social rela-
tions (e.g., family, friends) working in domestic banks. 
The survey instruments were distributed via 
SurveyGizmo, an Internet based research survey dis-
tributor. A total of N = 213 usable surveys were col-
lected representing a 37.3% response rate. The age 
(M = 2.61, SD = 0.88) distribution shows that 24 
(11.3%) were 18 to 24 years old, 67 (31.5%) were 25 to 
34 years old, 90 (42.3%) were 35 to 54 years old, and 32 
(15%) were above 55 years old. In education (M = 1.59, 
SD = 1.00), 167 (78.4%) hold Bachelor’s degrees, 41 
(19.2%) hold Master’s degrees, and 5 (2.4%) hold 
Doctorate degrees. For employment (M = 2.51, SD = 
1.38), 18 (8.5%) had less than a year with the bank, 42 
(19.7%) had 1 to 2 years, 45 (21.1%) had 3 to 4 years, 
29 (13.6%) had 5 to 6 years, and 79 (37.1%) had over 6 
years. Gender (M = 1.66, SD = 0.47) shows that 72 
(33.8%) were male and 141 (66.2%) were females. 
Supervisors (M = 1.63, SD = 0.48) comprised 78 
(36.6%) of the respondents and 135 (63.4%) were 
non-supervisors. 
The current study used the Multi-Factor Leadership 
Questionnaire (MLQ-5X Rater Form) to measure the 
independent variables, transformational and transac-
tional  leadership styles. Internal reliability for TF and 
TL leadership styles are α = 0.91 and α = 0.71, 

 
The Relationship between Leadership Styles 
279
respectively. The  Communication Style Inventory (CSI 
Rater Version) was used to measure the mediating vari-
ables leader communication styles. All six sub-scales of 
the CSI demonstrate acceptable internal reliabilities 
ranging from α = 0.69 to α = 0.87. The Leader–Member 
Exchange Questionnaire (LMX-7) was used to measure 
the dependent variable quality of LMX relationship. 
Internal reliability is α = 0.88.
6.1. Results
Using hierarchical multiple regression, three regression 
equations were estimated to examine the mediated rela-
tionship (Baron & Kenny, 1986) of  leadership styles, 
leader communication styles and LMX, controlling for 
age, education, employment, gender, and position. The 
first regression equation (Model 1, Table 1) shows that 
the model is significant, F(7, 205) = 14.97, p < 0.01. 
Leadership styles explained 58% (R = 0.58, p < 0.01) 
of the variance in leader communication styles. The 
second regression equation shows that the model is 
significant, F(7, 205) = 33.14, p < 0.01. Leadership 
styles explained 72% (R = 0.72, p < 0.01) of the vari-
ance in LMX. The third regression equation, which 
shows that the addition of leader communication styles 
as mediating variables, is significant, F(13, 199) = 
25.24, p < 0.01. The model explains 79% (R = 0.72, 
p < 0.01) of the variance in LMX and indicating the 
presence of mediation effect. As Hair et al. (2010) rec-
ommended however, the current study used the esti-
mated regression model for prediction only and 
examined the bivariate correlations “to understand the 
independent-dependent variable relationship” (p. 205).
The bivariate correlations show that transformational 
leadership has significant positive correlations with expres-
siveness (r = 0.46, p < 0.01), preciseness (r = 
0.66, p < 0.01) and questioningness (r = 0.41, p < 0.01) 
but significant negative correlations with emotionality (r 
= −0.17, p < 0.05), impression manipulativeness (r = 
−0.26, p < 0.01) and verbal aggressiveness (r = −0.57, p 
< 0.01). The results of the correlation with expressiveness 
and questioningness are in the negative direction of the 
hypothesized model, thus H1a and H1c are not supported. 
The results support the proposition that transformational 
leadership is negatively related to verbal aggressiveness, 
thus H1b is supported. The results also show 
that transformational leadership is positively related to 
preciseness, thus H1d is supported. Emotionality and 
impression manipulativeness were hypothesized to have a 
Table 1.  Hierarchical multiple regression models (N = 213)
Step
Model 1β
Model 2β
Model 3β
Step 1
(Control variables) 
 
 
 
Age
−0.20
−0.04
−0.04
Education
0.10
−0.01
−0.01
Employment
−0.03
0.15
0.15
Gender
−0.11
0.05
0.05
Position
−0.29**
−0.03
−0.03
Step 2
(Unmediated model)
Age
−0.18**
0.00
0.00
Education
0.07
0.03
0.03
Employment
−0.04
0.09
0.09
Gender
−0.09
−0.04
−0.04
Position
−0.20**
0.06
0.06
Transformational
−0.20**
0.74**
0.74**
Transactional
0.50**
−0.03
−0.03
Step 3
(Mediated model)
Age
0.01
Education
0.02
Employment
0.05
Gender
−0.01
Position
−0.01
Transformational
0.31**
Transactional
0.05
Emotionality
0.26**
Expressiveness
0.09
Impression 
manipulativeness
−0.16*
Preciseness
0.18*
Questioningness
0.11
Verbal 
aggressiveness
−0.31**
R
0.58
0.72
0.79
F
14.97***
33.14***
25.24***
df
(7,205)
(7,205)
(13,199)
R2 change
0.17***
0.51***
0.09***
Note: Model 1 predicted leader’s communication style and represents the 
first regression equation of the mediation model. Models 2 and 3 predicted 
LMX and represents the second and third regression equation of the media-
tion model.
* p < 0.05. ** p < 0.01. *** p < 0.001.

280 
T. G. Pacleb & M. C. Bocarnea
positive relationship with transformational  leadership, but 
the results were significant in the negative direction, thus 
H1e and H1f are not supported. The results for transac-
tional leadership shows significant positive correlations 
with expressiveness (r = 0.37, p < 0.01), questioningness 
(r = 0.38, p < 0.01), and preciseness (r = 0.60, p < 0.01), 
thus supporting H2a, H2c, and H2d. Significant negative 
relationships were found on verbal aggressiveness (r = 
−0.57, p < 0.01) and impression manipulativeness (r = 
−0.28, p < 0.01), thus H2b and H2f are not supported. 
Emotionality is positive but not significant (r = 0.06, p > 
0.05), thus H2e is not supported.
The causal propositions of the current study argued 
that the relationships of leader  communication styles 
with LMX would follow the causal (linear) proposi-
tions of transformational leadership, H1a to H1f, and 
transactional  leadership styles, H2a to H2f. The results 
for transformational leadership show that only two of 
six leader communication styles followed the causal 
propositions of H1a to H1f (Table 2). Expressiveness is 
positively related to LMX but significant in the oppo-
site (negative) direction of H1a, thus H3a is not sup-
ported. Verbal aggressiveness is negatively related to 
LMX and follows the direction of H1b, thus H3b is 
supported. Questioningness is positively related to 
LMX but significant in the opposite direction of H1c, 
thus H3c is not supported. Preciseness is positively 
related to LMX and follows the direction of H1d, thus 
H3d is supported. Emotionality is not significant, thus 
H3e is not supported. Lastly, impression manipulative-
ness is negatively related to LMX but significant in the 
opposite direction of H1f, thus H3f is not supported.
The results for transactional leadership show that 
three leader communication styles followed the causal 
propositions of H2a to H2f for the U.S. sample 
(Table 3). Expressiveness is significant and followed 
the causal proposition of H2a, thus H3a is supported. 
Verbal aggressiveness is not significant, thus H3b is not 
supported. Both questioningness and preciseness are 
positively related to LMX, which follows the causal 
propositions of H2c and H2d, thus H3c and H3d are 
supported. Emotionality is not significant in relation to 
LMX, thus H3e is not supported. Lastly, although 
impression manipulativeness followed the causal prop-
osition of transactional leadership, H2f, it is negatively 
related to LMX, thus H3f is not supported. 
Table 2.  Directional results of bivariate correlations
Variable
Causal 
propositions
Transformational
LMX
Results
H1a/H3a Expressiveness
−
+
+
NS/NS
H1b/H3b Verbal aggressiveness
−
−
−
S/S
H1c/H3c Questioningness
−
+
+
NS/NS
H1d/H3d Preciseness
+
+
+
S/S
H1e/H3e Emotionality
+
−
NS
NS/NS
H1f/H3f Impression manipulativeness
+
−
−
NS/NS
Note: S = Supported, NS = Not Supported.
Table 3.  Directional results of bivariate correlations
Variable
Causal 
propositions
Transactional
LMX
Results
H2a/H3a Expressiveness
+
+
+
S/S
H2b/H3b Verbal aggressiveness
+
ns
−
NS/NS
H2c/H3c Questioningness
+
+
+
 S/S
H2d/H3d Preciseness
+
+
+
S/S
H2e/H3e Emotionality
−
+
ns
NS/S
H2f/H3f Impression manipulativeness
+
+
−
S/NS
Note: S = Supported, NS = Not Supported, ns = non-significant.

 
The Relationship between Leadership Styles 
281
As shown in Model 2, transformational  leadership 
style predicted LMX, β = 0.74, p < 0.01. Thus, H4a is 
supported. Although the regression coefficients of trans-
actional leadership, β = −0.03, p > 0.05 was not signifi-
cant, the bivariate correlations however are significant, 
thus predictive of LMX, r = 0.36, p < 0.01. Thus, H4b 
is supported. In Model 3, leader  communication styles 
partially mediated the relationship between transforma-
tional leadership and quality of LMX relationship. 
Thus, H5a is supported by three leader communication 
styles. Although transactional leadership was not sig-
nificant in Model 2 and Model 3, thus no mediation 
effect, possibly due to high multicollinearity with trans-
formational leadership, the overall models were signifi-
cant, F(7, 205) = 33.14, p < 0.01 and F(13, 199) = 
25.24, p < 0.01, respectively. An examination of the 
correlation of transactional leadership with LMX, r = 
0.36, p < 0.01, and regression coefficient of transac-
tional leadership, β = 0.05, p > 0.05 suggest that in a 
simple regression with leader communication styles as 
mediators, a mediation effect would occur and may be 
attributed to emotionality, impression manipulativeness, 
and verbal aggressiveness. Thus, H5b is supported.
7. Discussion
Scholars in leadership and communication have agreed 
that communication is the interactive pathways in a 
network of social relationships. The findings indicate 
that leader communication styles enact leadership 
behavior and have a direct causal effect on respondents’ 
perceptions of their relationship with leaders in a 
dyadic exchange process. In a series of estimated 
regression models transformational leadership pre-
dicted two leader communication styles — preciseness 
and verbal aggressiveness — that predicted the quality 
of LMX relationship. As expected, the positive effect of 
preciseness increases the variance on LMX, while the 
negative effect of verbal aggressiveness decreases the 
variance on LMX, which suggests that preciseness 
leads to high LMX while verbal aggressiveness leads to 
low LMX. Transactional leadership also predicted three 
leader communication styles — questioningness, 
expressiveness, and preciseness. All three, in turn, pre-
dicted the quality of LMX relationship. In contrast to 
transformational 
leadership, 
all 
the 
predicted 
relationship of transactional leadership with these 
leader communication styles proceeded in the positive 
direction, which is a clear indication that the increase in 
variance on LMX suggests that these ways of commu-
nicating would lead to high LMX. A general conclusion 
could be drawn that transformational and transactional 
styles of leadership are enacted through leader com-
munication styles and that the quality of the dyadic 
relationship are determined significantly, in part, by 
certain ways of communicating. The relevance of the 
findings of this study can be situated in several aspects 
of leadership studies such as proximal relations and 
power relations.
a. Proximal relations
The current research supports the theory that the quality 
of dyadic relationship between a leader and follower is 
determined to a significant extent by the communication 
style of the leader, more specifically his or her manner 
of verbal expressions. Leader communication styles 
determine proximal relations in LMX relationships. The 
fundamental premise of LMX theory is that the quality 
of LMX depends on the distance of the leader and fol-
lower to each other in terms of relationship. When a 
follower is close to the leader, he or she gains access to 
social capital necessary to achieve his or her instrumen-
tal objective of career success (Seibert et al., 2001). The 
leader, however, initiates the proximal relationship in 
that he or she must convey to the follower that it is 
worth it to draw close to the leader. The conveyance 
comes in the form of advice, encouragement, task assis-
tance, rewards, and mutual influence (Fairhurst & 
Chandler, 1989; Klein & Kim, 1998). In other words, 
close proximal relations depends on supportive com-
munication (Eisenberg et al., 2007), while non-supportive 
communication such as verbal aggressiveness, question-
ingness, and emotionality may push followers to main-
tain some distance in interacting with the leader. 
Supportive communication creates a climate of recipro-
cal behavior, both in-role and out-role, because of the 
higher quality of LMX (Brandes et al., 2004), but 
derogatoriness in verbal aggressiveness, argumentative-
ness in questioningness, and tension in emotionality (De 
Vries et al., 2009, 2013) creates the opposite condition. 
The extent to which followers will reciprocate behavior 
in a climate of fear, conflict, and tension restrain 

282 
T. G. Pacleb & M. C. Bocarnea
follower motivation, which in effect limit the extent of 
their performance to the formal requirements of their 
work (Yukl, 2010). These manners of communication 
lead to a heightened level of pressure, stress, and inse-
curity in the workplace, which undermines mutual 
dependence, loyalty, commitment, and support. The 
low-level mutual influence perpetuates a work climate 
where the quality of LMX would be low. Followers will 
continue to perform despite distant proximal relations, 
but productivity would correspond with low LMX.
If verbal aggressiveness, questioningness, and 
emotionality create distance, then preciseness and 
expressiveness could draw leader and follower toward 
a closer relationship because these manners of commu-
nication promote information exchange, which is 
essential to creating certainty. When followers know 
exactly what they need to do, which means they are not 
confused about responsibilities and priorities, then the 
probability of high-level performance would be greater 
(Yukl, 2010), and success at performance brings a sense 
of accomplishment that spills over toward a favorable 
view of work and the leader. The structure, thoughtful-
ness, substance, and conciseness that a leader expresses 
in communicating with followers creates conditions of 
reciprocal behavior because they know exactly what to 
expect, thus drawing leader and follower closer to each 
other. Expressiveness offers a similar implication on 
proximal relations. Expressiveness is a way of self-
disclosure in the form of talkativeness, humor, conver-
sation, and informality (De Vries et al., 2009, 2013). 
Social penetration theory describes a means of increas-
ing or escalating intimacy in a relationship (Roloff, 
1981). Within the context of LMX, this manner of com-
municating would permit followers to gain a deeper 
familiarity with the leader, and when the rewards of 
self-disclosure exceed the costs of being reserved or 
distant, they would move to a closer relationship. The 
information gained in expressiveness is used to predict 
reward and cost outcomes in the future (Littlejohn & 
Foss, 2011). For as long as rewards exceed the cost in 
proximal relations, the relational interaction progresses 
toward a deeper relationship.
b. Power relations
Leader  communication styles are expressions of power 
in the form of compliance-gaining messages or strategies 
(Marwell & Schmidt, 1967). Compliance-gaining strate-
gies includes making threats, promising rewards, dis-
playing friendliness, calling in a debt, attributing positive 
and negative feelings, asking for favors, and showing 
positive esteem by saying to the person that he or she 
will be liked by others if he or she complies or hated 
when he or she does not comply (1967). In a power rela-
tionship such as LMX, these message strategies are typi-
cal communication goals that leaders pursue. The whole 
idea of compliance-gaining messaging is based on 
exchange theory. Recognizing that people will comply in 
exchange for something, individuals in positions of 
power and authority will attempt to influence compli-
ance through three types of general power: (a) manipu-
lating the consequences or the giving out of rewards and 
punishments, (b) taking advantage of relational position 
by being a supervisor, and (c) defining values and obliga-
tions or telling followers what is acceptable and not 
acceptable (Littlejohn & Foss, 2011). When followers 
perceive any of these powers through any of the specific 
compliance-gaining messaging strategies they would 
feel compelled to act or not to act. Thus, as an expression 
of power, the leader would typically use the verbal man-
ner that invokes his or her power.
The results also support the theory that as an 
expression of power, the communication style or man-
ner of linguistic form is different between a supervisor 
and a subordinate. Individuals in positions of power 
and authority tend to be less polite, and those under the 
authority tend to be more polite (Morand, 2000). 
Politeness is a communication goal or a linguistic ges-
ture or behavior that individuals pursue in order to meet 
the face needs of self and of others. Face is the image 
that individuals project in public (Ting-Toomey, 1994). 
In dyadic interactions, face-threatening acts are a nor-
mal part of everyday interactions, such as requests or 
impositions. It is expected that face-threatening acts 
would flow between leader and follower in either direc-
tion, thus both would be sensitive to politeness gesture. 
Given the results, verbal aggressiveness, questioning-
ness, expressiveness, and emotionality may be consid-
ered impolite because some facets of these 
communication styles are face-threatening acts. Face-
threatening acts are serious considerations in intercul-
tural relations because cultures determine the types of 
identities that are acceptable and unacceptable, thus 

 
The Relationship between Leadership Styles 
283
manners of communication, or  communication styles, 
become the most important element when culture is a 
factor in building relationships (1994).
c. Limitations 
Empirical research has several limitations. First, supri-
ous effects cannot be completely removed in ex-post 
facto research (Jarde et al., 2012). In ex-post facto 
research, the conditions or causes that the researcher 
assumes in the prediction model makes the plausibility 
of explanation dependent on uncontrolled information, 
which opens the possibility for other causal explana-
tions outside of the model (Kerlinger & Lee, 2000). 
The inherent presence of post hoc fallacy derived from 
ex-post facto data “can and often does, lead to errone-
ous and misleading interpretations of research data” 
(Kerlinger & Lee, 2000: 558). Second, in models of 
prediction, the predicted casual results may not always 
follow the direction of the causal propositions even 
when conceptually or theoretically supported. Hair et 
al. (2010) stated that even when the selection of inde-
pendent and dependent variables are based on empirical 
evidence and theoretically relevant, the basic tenets of 
predictive model development might be violated. In the 
current study, some of the leader communication styles 
did not follow the direction of the causal predictions, 
but the bivariate relationships were significant. Lastly, 
the generalizability of the results is limited to the target 
population of domestic bank employees, which is a 
criterion of research design (Kerlinger & Lee, 2000). 
d. Future research
The causal model investigated in the current study is a 
modification of the model investigated by De Vries 
et al. (2010) in which leader communication styles 
were mediators rather than predictors. In the current 
study leader communication styles were mediators. No 
implications should be drawn from this divergence in 
model findings because each study examined different 
predictors and outcomes. Nevertheless, the divergence 
in findings suggests that the causal path needs further 
investigation. In addition, there were twice as many 
female respondents in the sample. With language as 
gendered, further investigation is needed to ascertain 
differences on the impact of feminine communication 
styles on the quality of dyadic relationships. The results 
also open opportunities to further research  leadership 
rhetoric. Following a constructivism perspective 
(Littlejohn & Foss, 2011) such as personal construct 
theory (Kelly, 1955) personal similarities and differ-
ences may be examined to explain how rhetoric may 
influence the choices of communication strategies and 
tactics to gain compliance. Lastly, along the same lines 
of examining rhetoric and perception, examining fur-
ther the relationship between impression management 
and compliance-gaining strategies contributes to how it 
affects the work environment and quality of dyadic 
relation ships. The construction of social realities in the 
workplace is formed through a system of meaning and 
discourses that lead to a psychological state destructive to 
the work enviroment and employees (Lutgen-Sandvik & 
Tracy, 2012). To the extent that workplace environ-
ment has a lot to do with leader behavior, leader 
communication styles become a primary means of 
determining workplace environment, thus some com-
munication styles may fall within the category of 
workplace bullying. This deserves further investiga-
tion by extending the current study into the realm of 
qualitative methods. 
8. Conclusions
The findings indicate that certain leader communica-
tion styles — preciseness, verbal aggressiveness, 
expressiveness, and questioningness explains how lead-
ership behavior of transformational and transactional 
leadership affect the quality of dyadic relationships. It 
provides a model that builds upon the concept of lead-
ership as relational and contributes to the overall effort 
to shift the focus of leadership studies from trait-based 
to examining how leader–member dyadic relationships 
are built or constructed. The model provides a frame-
work to guide in further investigating the importance of 
leader communication styles in creating social realities 
within the workplace that contribute to either produc-
tive work or workplace toxicity. The research model 
highlights the role that leader communication style 
plays in proximal relations and power relationships. 
The model upholds the fundamental premise that rela-
tionships are built through communication. It affirma-
tively confirms that leadership is communication. 

284 
T. G. Pacleb & M. C. Bocarnea
Communication is the pathway and mechanism by 
which  leadership is enacted.
The enactment of leadership is more pronounced in 
communicative expressions. Leader  communication 
styles would be the first environment cue that shapes 
the dyadic interaction, and determines the path of the 
LMX relationship. A communicative behavior that is 
precise, aggressive, expressive, or questioning clearly 
leads to different outcomes of relationships, but in gen-
eral, one that promotes either a close or distant relation-
ship. Perceptions of leadership and proximal 
relationships, in this regard, would be dependent on 
manners of conveyance, and will shape to some extent 
perceptions of power behavior in terms of deference to 
politeness and sensitivity to face concerns. Face con-
cerns are particularly important in cross-cultural inter-
actions. The relational effect of manners of conveyance, 
in verbal and non-verbal forms, will not be universally 
similar across cultures. Preciseness may be perceived 
as too directive in a collectivist society but appreciated 
in an individualistic society. The para-verbal dynamics 
of how people communicate in one society will elicit a 
different form of reaction in another. In other words, 
beyond the choice of words, tonal differences will 
affect the path and direction of the relationship out-
come, that is, whether it draws the interactants closer or 
farther apart.
How perception of  leadership styles, proximal rela-
tions, and power relations are influenced by leader com-
munication styles largely depends on the nature of the 
manner of conveyance itself. The nature of preciseness 
is uncertainty avoidance. Leader communication behav-
ior that is highly structured, concise, thoughtful, sub-
stantive, and expressed in an unambiguously clear 
manner reduces the amount of uncertainty inherently 
present in communication. The higher level of certainty 
of precise communication tends to lead towards a posi-
tive and productive interaction. Dealing with and man-
aging uncertainty is one of the most important predictors 
of leadership outcomes because of the inherent tension 
that exists in relationships. Inherent in relationships, 
particularly in the theory of relational dialectics, are ten-
sions involving integration versus separation, closeness 
versus distance, similarity versus difference, and cer-
tainty versus uncertainty. The tension of certainty and 
uncertainty deals with the interplay of predictability and 
consistency versus being spontaneous and different. 
These tensions are complex dynamic of contradictions 
that defines and redefines relationships. Preciseness of 
leader communication would influence and shape the 
outcome of in any transformative effort because the 
ability of a transformative leader to precisely communi-
cate a sense of urgency, the need for radical change, 
powerful vision and inspirational goals are necessary in 
elevating levels of motivation, inspiration, commitment, 
satisfaction, and productivity. Regardless of the focal 
emphasis of transformational and transactional leader-
ship styles, precision in the articulation of vision and 
precision in conveying expectations of task performance 
have a significant positive effect on the quality of LMX. 
Verbal aggressiveness creates a different field of 
relationship. It creates the conditions that directly affect 
a follower’s inclination for attachment with the leader, 
and generally considered a form of abusive behavior by 
the supervisor. The undesirability of this manner of 
conveyance leads to attachment avoidance and work-
place aggression in the form of retaliatory behaviors on 
the part of the follower. The farther a follower is to the 
leader in terms of relationship, the less safe and 
attached the follower is to the leader. The resulting 
anxiety and fear are psychological threats and barriers 
that prevent the formation of quality relationships. The 
intimidation and fear individuals develop removes their 
sense of security in the relationship. The result is a 
natural inclination to avoid, but may also lead to coun-
ter-aggression or retaliation. Verbal aggression not only 
pushes individuals away but also directly challenges 
their self-control capacity by heightening their emo-
tional sensitivity and weakening their capacity for 
rational thinking and reaction. These negative effects 
diminish an individual’s sense of worth. In the work-
place where productivity depends on employee empow-
erment, lack of self-worth typically leads to feelings of 
insecurity. Insecure employees manifest counter- 
productive behaviors cooperation and coordination. 
They tend to limit and avoid social interactions, thus 
difficulties in adaptive behaviors. The difficulty of 
relating or adapting positive and productive behaviors 
consequently creates conflict in the workplace. The 
negative chain of effects that verbal aggressiveness cre-
ates directly affects the ability of followers to form 
quality relationship with leaders.

 
The Relationship between Leadership Styles 
285
Questioningness forms a different perception of 
leader behavior. It conveys a broad range of behavior 
where the quality of the LMX relationship may be high 
or low, positive or negative. Questioningness is an 
expressive manner of conveyance. An expressive who, 
engages in philosophical or inquisitive dialogue reveals 
more of himself or herself to his or her followers. The 
self-disclosure gives followers the ability to judge and 
evaluate the character of the leader, which either draws 
them closer to the leader or maintains a certain distance. 
Questioningness also involves being argumentative. 
The risk of being argumentative is that it tends to create 
distance or separation when hostility is involve. When 
argumentative manners of conveyance are confined to 
exchanges of differences in ideas, it may lead to better 
understanding, which in turn permits movement or con-
vergence towards mutual agreement and unity. When 
people argue, they begin the process of working through 
divergence or disagreements about certain things or 
may be engaged in trying to resolve interpersonal con-
flict. Questioningness, in this regard, becomes a posi-
tive way of strengthening and deepening a dyadic 
relationship or resolving relationship problems. 
References
Amernic, J., Craig, R. & Tourish, D. (2007), The transforma-
tional leader as pedagogue, physician, architect, 
commander, and saint: Five root metaphors in Jack 
Welch’s letters to stockholders of general electric, 
Human Relations, 60(12), 1839–1872. 
Bakker-Pieper, A. & De Vries, R. E. (2013), The incremental 
validity of communication styles over personality traits 
for leader outcomes, Human Performance, 26(1), 1–19. 
Bambacas, M. & Patrickson, M. (2008), Interpersonal com-
munication skills that enhance organisational commitment, 
Journal of Communication Management, 12(1), 51–72. 
Baron, R. M. & Kenny, D. A. (1986), The moderator–media-
tor variable distinction in social psychological research: 
Conceptual, strategic, and statistical Considerations, 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(6), 
1173–1182.
Bass, B. M. (1985), Leadership and Performance beyond 
Expectations, New York: Free Press.
Bass, B. M. (1990), Bass & Stogdill’s Handbook of 
Leadership: 
Theory, 
Research, 
& 
Managerial 
Applications (3rd edn.), New York: The Free Press.
Bass, B. M. & Avolio, B. J. (1990), The implications of trans-
actional and transformational leadership for individual, 
team and organizational development, Research in 
Organizational Change and Development, 4, 231–272.
Bass, B. M. & Avolio, B. J. (1997), Full range leadership 
development manual for the multifactor leadership ques-
tionnaire, Palo Alto, CA: Mindgarden.
Bass, B. M. & Avolio, B. J. (1998), Improving organizational 
effectiveness through transformational leadership. 
In Leading Organizations: Perspectives for a new era, 
G. R. Hickman (ed.) (pp. 135–140). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Blau, P. M. (1986), Exchange and Power in Social Life, New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Bonet, E. & Sauquet, A. (2010), Rhetoric in management and 
in management research, Journal of Organizational 
Change Management, 23(2), 120–133. 
Brandes, P., Dharwadkar, R., & Wheatley, K. (2004), Social 
exchanges within organizations and work outcomes: The 
importance of local and global relationships, Group 
Organization Management, 29(3), 276–301. 
Bryman, A. (1992), Charisma and Leadership in Organiza-
tion, London, UK: Sage.
Burns, J. M. (1978), Leadership, New York, NY: Harper & 
Row.
Carmeli, A., Atwater, L., & Levi, A. (2011), How leadership 
enhances employees’ knowledge sharing: The interven-
ing roles of relational and organizational identification, 
Journal of Technology Transfer, 36(3), 257–274. 
Cheung, M. F. & Wong, C. (2011), Transformational leader-
ship, leader support, and employee creativity, Leadership & 
Organization Development Journal, 32(7), 656–672. 
Conger, J. A. (1991), Inspiring others: The language of lead-
ership, Academy of Management Executive, 5(1), 31–45.
Conger, J. A. & Kanungo, R. N. (1998), Charismatic 
Leadership in Organizations, Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Dansereau, F., Cashman, J., & Graen, G. (1973), 
Instrumentality theory and equity theory as complemen-
tary approaches in predicting the relationship of 
leadership and turnover among managers, Organizational 
Behavior and Human Performance, 10, 184–200.
Dansereau, F., Graen, G. B., & Haga, W. (1975), A vertical 
dyad linkage approach to leadership in formal organiza-
tions, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 
13(1), 380–397. 
De Vries R. E., Bakker-Pieper, A., & Oostenveld, W. (2010), 
Leadership = communication? The relations of leaders’ 
communication styles with leadership styles, knowledge 

286 
T. G. Pacleb & M. C. Bocarnea
sharing and leadership outcomes, Journal of Business 
and Psychology, 25(3), 367–380. 
De Vries, R. E., Bakker-Pieper, A., Konings, F. E., & 
Schouten, B. (2011), The Communication Styles 
Inventory (CSI): A six-dimensional behavioral model of 
communication styles and its relation with personality, 
Communication Research. Advance online publication. 
De Vries, R. E., Bakker-Pieper, A., Siberg, R. A., van 
Gameren, K., & Vlug, M. (2009), The content and 
dimensionality of communication styles, Communication 
Research, 36(2), 178–206. 
De Vries, R. E., Bakker-Pieper A., Siberg, R. A., van 
Gameren, K., & Vlug, M. (2013), The content and 
dimensionality of communication styles, Communication 
Research, 40(4), 506–532. 
Den Hartog, D. W. & Verburg, R. M. (1997), Charisma and 
rhetoric: Communicative techniques of international 
business leaders, Leadership Quarterly, 8(4), 355–391.
Dimaculangan, E. D. & Aguiling, H. M. (2012), The effects 
of transformational leadership on salesperson’s turnover 
intention, International Journal of Business and Social 
Science, 3(19), 197–210.
Eisenberg, E. M., Goodall, H. L. Jr., & Trethewey, A. (2007), 
Organizational Communication: Balancing Creativity 
and Constraint (5th edn.), Boston: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Fairhurst, G. T. (1993), The leader–member exchange pat-
terns of women leaders in industry: A discourse analysis, 
Communication Monographs, 60(4), 321–351.
Fairhurst, G. T. & Chandler, T. A. (1989), Social structure in 
leader-member interaction, Communication Monographs, 
56(3), 215–239.
Fairhurst, G. T., Roger, L. E., & Sarr, R. A. (1987), Manager 
subordinate control patterns and judgments about rela-
tionships. In Communication Yearbook, M. McLaughlin 
(ed.), (Vol. 10, pp. 395–415), Beverly Hills: Sage.
Fairhurst, G. T. & Uhl-Bien, M. (2012), Organizational dis-
course analysis (ODA): Examining leadership as a relational 
process, Leadership Quarterly, 23(6), 1043–1062. 
Gaines, K. A. (2007), A communicative theory of leadership 
practice (Doctoral dissertation). Available from ProQuest 
Dissertations and Theses database. (UMI No. 3285362)
Gardner, W. L. & Cleavenger, D. (1998), The impression 
management strategies associated with transformational 
leadership at the world-class level: A psychohistorical 
assessment, Management Communication Quarterly, 
12(3), 3–41. 
Graen, G. & Scandura, T. (1987), Toward a psychology of 
dyadic organizing, Research in Organizational Behavior, 
9, 175–208.
Graen, G. & Uhl-Bien, M. (1991), The transformation of 
work group professionals into self-managing and par-
tially self-designing contributors: Toward a theory of 
leadership-making, The Journal of Management Systems, 
3(3), 25–39.
Graen, G. B. & Schiemann, W. (1978), Leader–member 
agreement: A vertical linkage approach, Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 63(2), 206–212.
Graen, G. B. & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995), Relationship-based 
approach to leadership: Development of a leader–mem-
ber exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 years. 
Applying a multi-level domain perspective, Leadership 
Quarterly, 6(2), 219–247.
Groves, K. S. (2006), Leader emotional expressivity, vision-
ary leadership, and organizational change, Leadership & 
Organization Development Journal, 27(7), 565–583. 
Hair, J. F., Jr., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. 
(2010), Multivariate Data Analysis (7th edn.), Upper 
Saddle River: Prentice Hall.
Hamrefors, S. (2010), Communicative leadership, Journal of 
Communication Management, 14(2), 141–152. 
Hernandez, M., Eberly, M. B., Avolio, B. J., & Johnson, M. D. 
(2011), The loci and mechanisms of leadership: 
Exploring a more comprehensive view of leadership 
theory, Leadership Quarterly, 22(6), 1165–1185. 
Holladay, S. J. & Coombs, W. T. (1994), Speaking of visions 
and visions being spoken: An exploration of the effects of 
content and delivery on perceptions of leader charisma, 
Management Communication Quarterly, 8(2), 165–189.
Hosking, D. (1988), Organizing, leadership, and skillful pro-
cess, Journal of Management Studies, 25(2), 147–166.
Jarde, A., Losilla, J. M., & Vives, J. (2012), Suitability of 
three different tools for the assessment of methodologi-
cal quality in ex post facto studies, International Journal 
of Clinical Health & Psychology, 12(1), 97–108.
Jiao, C., Richards, D. A., & Zhang, K. (2011), Leadership 
and organizational citizenship behavior: OCB-specific 
meanings as mediators, Journal of Business and 
Psychology, 26(1), 11–25. 
Kellerman, K. (1987), Information Exchange in Social 
Interaction. In Interpersonal Processes: New Directions 
in Communication Research, M. E. Roloff and G. R. 
Miller (eds.), pp. 188–219, Newbury Park: Sage.
Kelly, G. (1955), The Psychology of Personal Construct, 
New York: North.
Kerlinger, F. N. & Lee, H. B. (2000), Foundations of 
Behavioral Research (4th edn.), Belmont: Cengage.
Klein, H. J. & Kim, J. S. (1998), A field study of the influ-
ence of situational constraints, leader member exchange, 

 
The Relationship between Leadership Styles 
287
and goal commitment on performance, Academy of 
Management Journal, 41(1), 88–95.
Kovjavic, S., Schuh, S. C., Jonas, K., Van Quaquebeke, & 
Van Dick, R. (2012), How do transformational leaders 
foster positive employee outcomes? A self-determination-
based analysis of employees needs as mediating links, 
Journal 
of 
Organizational 
Behavior, 
33(8), 
1031–1052. 
Lee, J. (2008), Effects of leadership and leader–member 
exchange on innovativeness, Journal of Managerial 
Psychology, 23(6), 670–687. 
Littlejohn, S. W. & Foss, K. A. (2011), Theories of Human 
Communication (10th edn.), Long Grove: Waveland 
Press.
Lutgen-Sandvik, P. & Tracy, S. J. (2012), Answering five key 
questions about workplace bullying: How communica-
tion scholarship provides thought leadership for 
transforming abuse at work, Management Communica-
tion Quarterly, 26(3), 3–47. 
Marwell, G. & Schmitt, D. R. (1967), Dimensions of compli-
ance-gaining strategies: A dimensional analysis, 
Sociometry, 30(4), 350–364.
Maslyn, J. & Uhl-Bien, M. (2001), Leader–member exchange 
and its dimensions: Effects of self-effort and other’s 
effort on relationship quality, Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 86(4), 697–708.
Mitchell, R. J. & Boyle, B. (2009), A theoretical model of 
transformational leadership’s role in diverse teams, 
Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 
30(5), 455–474. 
Morand, D. A. (2000), Language and power: An empirical 
analysis of linguistic strategies used in superior–subor-
dinate communication, Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 21(3), 235–248. 
Neufeld, D. J., Wan, Z., & Fang, Y. (2010), Remote leader-
ship, 
communication 
effectiveness 
and 
leader 
performance, Group Decision and Negotiation, 19(3), 
227–246. 
Othman, R., Ee, F. F., & Shi, N. L. (2010), Understanding 
dysfunctional leader–member exchange: Antecedents 
and outcomes, Leadership & Organization Development 
Journal, 31(4), 337–350. 
Riggio, R. E. (1992), Social interaction skills and nonverbal 
behaviors. In Applications of Nonverbal Behavioral 
Theories and Research, R. S. Feldman (ed.), pp. 3–30, 
Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Roloff, M. E. (1981), Interpersonal Communication: The 
Social Exchange Approach, Beverly Hills: Sage.
Seibert, S. E., Kramer, M. L., & Liden, R. C. (2001), A social 
capital theory of career success, Academy of Management 
Journal, 44(2), 219–237.
Shamir, B., Arthur, M. B., & House, R. J. (1994), The rheto-
ric of charismatic leadership: A theoretical extension, 
a case study, and implications for research, Leadership 
Quarterly, 5(1), 25–42.
Sheard, C. M. (1996), The public value of epideictic rhetoric, 
College English, 58(7), 765–794.
Sidani, Y. M. (2007), Perceptions of leader transformational 
ability, The Journal of Management Development, 26(8), 
710–722. 
Sosik, J. J. & Jung, D. I. (2003), Impression management 
strategies and performance in information technology 
consulting, Management Communication Quarterly, 
17(2), 233–268. 
Summers, 
K. 
(2001), 
Epideictic 
rhetoric 
in 
the 
“Englishwoman’s Review,” Victorian Periodicals 
Review, 34(3), 263–281.
Ting-Toomey, S. (ed.) (1994), The Challenge of Facework: 
Crosscultural and Interpersonal Issue, New York: State 
University of New York Press.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2006), Relational leadership theory: Exploring 
the social processes of leadership and organizing, The 
Leadership Quarterly, 17(6), 654–676. 
Uhl-Bien, M. & Maslyn, J. M. (2003), Reciprocity in manager–
subordinate relationships: Components, configura tions and 
outcomes, Journal of Management, 29(4), 511–532.
Watzlawick, P., Beavin, J., & Jackson, D. (1967), Pragmatics 
of Human Communication: A Study of Interactional 
Patterns, Pathologies, and Paradoxes, New York: 
Norton.
Wei, F., Yuan, X., & Di, Y. (2010), Effects of transactional 
leadership, psychological empowerment and empower-
ment climate on creative performance of subordinates: 
A cross-level study, Frontiers of Business Research in 
China, 4(1), 29–46. 
Whittington, J. L., Coker, R. H., Goodwin, V. L., Ickes, W., & 
Murray, B. (2009), Transactional leadership revisited: 
Self-other agreement and first consequences, Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 39(8), 1860–1886. 
Yrle, A. C., Hartman, S., & Gale, W. P. (2002), An investiga-
tion of relationships between communication style and 
leader-member exchange, Journal of Communication 
Management, 6(3), 257–268. 
Yukl, G. (2010). Leadership in Organizations (7th edn.), 
Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

289
Chapter 31
The Effect of  Organizational Culture 
on the  Responsiveness of  Small and Medium-Sized 
Enterprises to Environmental Change: 
An Empirical Study in Romania 
Michael Stoica and Liviu Florea
Washburn University School of Business
Edit Lukacs
Dunarea de Jos’ University of Galati
This empirical study examines the relationship between 
organizational culture and responsiveness, in a special 
setting: an economic environment in transition to a free 
market system, in particular the environment of 
Romanian small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). 
Romania offers a business context with many changes 
over the last two decades, a challenge and an opportu-
nity for researchers. Firm’s responsiveness represents an 
important concept related to both company performance 
and market environment. While there are studies that 
show the relationship between responsiveness, business 
environment and performance, there is less work done in 
investigating its relationship with the four archetypes of 
organizational culture: adhocracy, clan, market driven, 
and hierarchy. Using multivariate analysis to test the 
hypotheses, we found that the combination of entrepre-
neurial cultural characteristics, planning, and goal ori-
ented managerial styles best suits successful companies. 
A market-driven type of culture, focusing on competi-
tiveness and goal achievement, has the best coordination 
and is best positioned to deliver customer-centered 
 versatility, while adhocracy, centered on entrepreneur-
ship and creativity, helps businesses respond quickly to 
changes in the market environment. 
1. Introduction
Responsiveness is the action taken in response to the 
relevant information generated and filtered previously 
(Kohli et al., 1993). In a system context, responsiveness 
can be defined as the outcome that can be achieved when 
institutions and institutional relationships are designed 
in such a way that they are cognizant and respond appro-
priately to the legitimate expectations of individuals 
(Sharma et al., 1999). Responsiveness means speed and 
coordination with which actions are implemented and 
periodical reviews product/service development. It also 
refers to evaluation of over- or under-filling of goals and 
correcting accordingly, including interdepartmental 
cooperation and coordination (Kohli et al., 1993).

290 
M. Stoica, L. Florea & E. Lukacs
Garrett et al. (2009) developed a framework in 
which they hypothesized a relationship between  respon-
siveness and market pioneering. In their model, learn-
ing strengthens the relationship. Our study is analyzing 
responsiveness in an environment characterized by 
multiple and rapid changes, thus having elements of 
market pioneering. Garrett et al. (2009) suggested that 
future research should explore relationships between 
responsiveness, learning and culture. Accordingly, this 
study investigates relationships between responsiveness 
and culture.
Following the Fall of Iron Curtain, the economic 
development of Central and Eastern Europe countries, 
such as Romania has been contingent on changes in 
economic systems and government policies (Hisrich & 
Drnovsek, 2002; Utsch et al., 1999). Given the rapidly 
changing competitive positioning and consumer prefer-
ences and demand, dependence on obsolete economy, 
and dramatically changing legal system (Uhlenbruck 
et al., 2003), Romanian business environment has all 
the key characteristics of an  emergent economy and a 
high degree of market turbulence. As such, it provides 
an interesting opportunity to observe and analyze the 
adaptability of companies to both radical economic and 
radical social changes.
Researchers have devoted considerable effort to 
examine the impact of dispositional (e.g., entrepre-
neurial personality) and contextual variables (e.g., 
social network, environmental conditions) on the 
growth and financial performance of companies (Liao 
et al., 2003). Knowledge, information gathering, learn-
ing, and responsiveness are increasingly mentioned as 
being critical for the survival of  SMEs (Chaston et al., 
2001). The way knowledge is produced and used is less 
than adequate (Baker & Sinkula, 2005; Pelham, 2000), 
especially in the SMEs context.
Meanwhile,  organizational culture has an impact 
on the way companies process information and adapt 
to changes (Pelham, 2000; Liao et al., 2003). Cultures 
that emphasize the value of flexibility and have an 
external focus tend to benefit the creation of informa-
tion through innovation and its successful implemen-
tation. While many studies examine generation and 
dissemination of information, less attention was paid 
to responsiveness. Swanson (1999) considered 
responsiveness, along with responsibility, in an 
attempt to integrate normative and descriptive 
approaches to business. Her perspective on respon-
siveness is value based and qualitative. Responsiveness 
is often limited to “response time” (Thompson & 
Strickland, 2001). 
From a system perspective, most of existing studies 
focus on “input–output” links in the context of busi-
nesses. Therefore, one of the reasons for the literature’s 
inconclusiveness is the omission of process elements, 
most importantly the processes of information scan-
ning, knowledge generation and dissemination, and 
organizational response formulation (Rafaeli et al., 
2007). Laden with many contingencies, this research 
appears to be divergent.
Our empirical research aims to fill the gap by inves-
tigating the complexity of the organizational respon-
siveness concept, identifying factors that determine 
responsiveness and exploring their relationships to 
organizational culture. It addresses important research 
questions: Are culture and responsiveness related? Is 
there a particular type of culture that favors a high level 
of responsiveness? What are the relationships between 
these components and culture?
2.  Theoretical Background 
and Hypotheses Development
2.1. Organizational responsiveness
Narver et al. (2004) and Kara et al. (2005) developed 
scales to measure the concept of market orientation 
using information processing as key element for their 
scales. While the concept is one-dimensional for Narver 
et al. (2004), it is three-dimensional for Kara et al. 
(2005), developed based on Kohli et al. (1993) market 
orientation scale, integrating intelligence generation, 
intelligence dissemination, and responsiveness. 
Organizational responsiveness is the action taken in 
response to the relevant information generated and dis-
seminated previously (Venaik et al., 2004), is related to 
organizational learning and performance (Luo & Peng, 
1999), and is a predictor of SMEs success. Respon-
siveness, according to Kara et al. (2005), includes the 
speed and coordination with which actions are imple-
mented and periodical reviews of product/service 
development.

 
The Effect of Organizational Culture 
291
The MARKOR scale (Kara et al., 2005) measures 
market orientation, and consists of four parts: general 
market orientation, intelligence generation, dissemina-
tion, and  responsiveness. The field findings indicate 
that responsiveness takes the form of selected target 
markets, designing and offering products that cater to 
current and anticipated needs, and producing, distribut-
ing and promoting the products in a way that elicits 
favorable end-customer response. Virtually all depart-
ments participate in responding to market trends in the 
firm. The factor analysis, performed in this study, iden-
tified three components of responsiveness: speed (S), 
coordination (C), and customer-centered versatility 
(CCV). In Table 1, the extraction method was Principal 
Component Analysis and Rotation Method was Varimax 
with Keiser Normalization.
2.2.  Organizational Culture
Across management research areas, organizational cul-
ture is defined as the pattern of shared values and 
beliefs that help individuals understand organizational 
functioning, and provide behavioral norms. Hofstede 
et al. (2010) defined culture as “mental software” (p. 5), 
emphasizing its role as an interactive aggregate of com-
mon characteristics that influence any group’s response 
to the environment.
Culture and tradition represent key factors that may 
influence SMEs’ responsiveness. Jung developed the 
culture paradigm in 1923, in which he described several 
archetypes of culture, further developed by Cameron & 
Quinn (2011). Two key dimensions were used to clas-
sify organizational culture: the continuum from organic 
Table 1.  Factor analysis of organizational responsiveness (alphas = 0.83/0.81/0.85)
Items
Extraction
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Speed
Coordination
Customer centered 
versatility
A.  It takes us more time than needed to decide how to respond to our 
 competitors’ price changes
0.81
0.20
−0.00
B.  For one reason or another we tend to ignore changes in our customers’ product 
or service needs
0.25
−0.01
0.72
C.  We periodically review our product development efforts to ensure that they are 
in line with what customer want
0.022
0.86
−0.03
D.  Several departments get together periodically to plan a response to changes 
taking place in our business environments
0.014
0.65
−0.00
E.  If a major competitor were to launch an intensive campaign targeted at our 
customers, we would implement a response immediately
0.72
0.30
0.03
F.  The activities of the different departments in this business unit are well 
coordinated
0.15
0.62
−0.16
G.  Customer complaints fall on deaf ears in this business units
−0.27
0.16
0.69
H.  Even if we came up with a great market plan we probably would not be able 
to implement it in a timely fashion
0.62
0.20
0.19
I.  When we find that customers would like us to modify a product or service, the 
departments involved make concerned efforts to do so
0.20
0.63
0.38
J.  We evaluate the over- or under-fulfilling of our goals and adapt accordingly
0.10
0.23
0.75
Cumulative Variance
62.95%

292 
M. Stoica, L. Florea & E. Lukacs
to mechanistic processes and the relative emphasis on 
internal maintenance versus external positioning. The 
resulting quadrants are called market culture, adhoc-
racy, clan, and hierarchy.
The adhocratic culture centers on entrepreneurship, 
creativity, and adaptability. It represents a composite of 
risk-propensity and spirit of initiative. Accordingly, 
adhocracy favors flexibility and tolerance, and values 
new markets and new sources of growth. The clan cul-
ture values cohesiveness, participation and teamwork 
highly. Correspondingly, employees’ commitment is 
achieved through participation, and cohesiveness and 
personal satisfaction are more valuable than financial 
goals. The hierarchic culture stresses order, rules, regu-
lations, administrative procedures, accountability and 
predictability, as well as tracking and control. Finally, 
the market-driven culture focuses on competitiveness 
and goal achievement, and places emphasis on produc-
tivity and  responsiveness to environmental changes. 
The number of rules and routines are dependent upon 
the type of culture (Cameron & Kim, 2011). Speed of 
response to environmental changes that determine a 
higher performance is also culturally dependent.
2.3.  Organizational culture and 
organizational responsiveness
Information processing and culture are related (Baker & 
Sinkula, 2005). In traditional bureaucracies and hierar-
chies learning is based on institutionalized experience 
rather than market information. In this case, SMEs expect 
to grow and survive, but at a higher level of efficiency and 
predictability, and to continue the same behavior that 
worked in the past (Baker & Sinkula, 2005). By contrast, 
in SMEs with a market or adhocracy culture, learning is 
focused on adaptive behavior. However, SMEs with mar-
ket-driven culture may be more systematic in information 
search than the adhocracy ones. Also, Cameron & Kim 
(2011) found that competing values of market culture out-
perform clan values, while adhocracy outperformed values 
of the diagonally opposing hierarchy. Entrepreneurial 
behavior encouraged by adhocracy dominates. Therefore:
Hypothesis 1: Responsiveness is related to organiza-
tional culture. SMEs with market driven culture will 
be more responsive, followed by adhocracy, clan, and 
hierarchy.
Speed of Response and Culture. The items that 
define speed relate to the way SMEs respond to competi-
tors’ price changes and promotional campaigns, and 
timely implementation of strategies. For example, the 
adoption of Quick Response (QR) in textile and apparel 
industries represents a Just-In-Time system that helps 
QR to changes in the marketplace (Sullivan & Kang, 
1999). Culture and competitive environment determine 
the speed of response and therefore the QR adoption. A 
market-focused company responds more quickly than a 
hierarchical one.
Hypothesis 2: Speed of response to market signals is 
higher in SMEs with adhocracy, followed by market-
driven, clan, and hierarchy.
Coordination and Culture. Coordination refers to 
the concerted efforts to allow smooth business opera-
tions. Components of coordination include periodical 
review of business practices, cross-departmental meet-
ings, team planning and implementation of projects, 
team analysis and change. Organizational culture is 
central for coordination. Although there is no empirical 
evidence, it appears that a higher level of coordination 
is characteristic to organizations that have a formal 
planning system and a hierarchical type of culture. 
Similarly, goal-driven companies show good coordina-
tion (Cameron & Kim, 2011). Market-driven culture 
focuses on competitiveness and goal achievement. 
Therefore we hypothesize that:
Hypothesis 3: SMEs with a market-driven culture show 
a better coordination, followed by hierarchy, clan and 
adhocracy.
Customer-Centered Versatility (CCV) and Culture. 
CCV items are shown in Table 2. Culture evolves in 
relation to its capacity for learning and retention from 
the external environment (Minguzzi & Passaro, 2001). 
Organizations with external focus tend to show high 
level of CCV, whereas market-driven organizations 
display more CCV than hierarchies. Therefore:
Hypothesis 4: SMEs having a market-driven culture 
will demonstrate better customer-centered versatility, 
followed by adhocracy, clan and hierarchy.

 
The Effect of Organizational Culture 
293
3. Research Methodology
3.1. Procedure and research sample
We used mail surveys because of their relative efficiency. 
For the two mailings used, the response rate is 29% and 
obtained a sample of 134 businesses. The survey was 
translated into Romanian with two iterations of transla-
tion-back translation. The majority of businesses were 
registered as limited liability companies (LLC). Almost 
half of the respondents, 43.3% represent manufacturing 
businesses, 23.1% are service businesses, 14.4% are 
retailers, and 5.8% are construction companies.
3.2. Measures
Organization  responsiveness. This study considers 
responsiveness as the action taken in response to rele-
vant information previously generated and filtered 
(Kara et al., 2005). Examples of items used for measur-
ing responsiveness are: speed and coordination with 
which actions are implemented; the periodical review 
of product/service development, the evaluation of over-
fulfillment or under-fulfillment of goals, and coordina-
tion between departments. The perception of the 
respondent is the main element used so far in the litera-
ture to evaluate responsiveness. The scale for respon-
siveness developed by Kara et al. (2005) was adopted 
for this study. A 12 level Likert scale is used to measure 
responsiveness.
SMEs’  organizational culture. The measure of cor-
porate culture is adopted from Cameron & Kim (2011). 
Respondents were asked to assess four descriptions for 
their organization along the four lines given by the four 
archetypes: adhocracy, clan, market, and hierarchy and 
to distribute 100 points according to the similarity 
between their company and the models described. The 
culture archetype that received the highest scores was 
coded as the dominant culture of the SME. SMEs that 
received two equal scores on two or more culture arche-
types were subsequently deleted from the sample.
4. Results
The responsiveness scale is robust and reliable, with a 
value of 0.83 for Cronbach alpha coefficient. A factor 
analysis was performed (Table 1) that identified three 
components of responsiveness: speed of response, 
coordination, and consumer-centered versatility. 
Regression with dummy variables was adopted to test 
the hypotheses Tables 2 and 3), using the four culture 
archetypes as categorical variables. 
Significant differences were found across all four 
culture archetypes in all dimensions of responsiveness. 
The means for adhocracy and market driven cultures are 
higher than for clan and hierarchy. Hypothesis 1 stated 
that SMEs with market driven culture have the highest 
level of responsiveness, followed by adhocracy, clan, 
and hierarchy. Results partially support the hypothesis. 
Table 2.  Corporate culture influence on responsiveness
Dependent variable
Independent variables
Adj. — R 
square
Beta coefficients
(standardized)
ANOVA F — Statistic
Speed
DUMMY_Clan
DUMMY_Adhocracy
DUMMY_Hierarchy
Constant
0.19
−0.16**
0.22**
−0.28*
11.47*
Coordination
DUMMY_Clan
DUMMY_Adhocracy
DUMMY_Hierarchy
Constant
0.12
−0.01
−0.43**
0.77**
5.67***
Customer Centered Versatility
DUMMY_Clan
DUMMY_Adhocracy
DUMMY_Hierarchy
Constant
0.17
0.02
−0.19*
−0.25*
15.80*
Note: ** p < 0.01, * p < 0.05.

294 
M. Stoica, L. Florea & E. Lukacs
Indeed, the hierarchical type of cultures will display the 
lowest level for  responsiveness. However, the entrepre-
neurial SMEs, i.e., businesses with adhocracy as their 
dominant type of culture, showed the highest levels of 
responsiveness. Market-driven and clan companies are 
positioned in between adhocratic and hierarchical SMEs. 
These results provide partial support for Hypothesis 1.
Hypothesis 2 predicted that the speed of response 
to market signals is higher in SMEs with adhocracy, 
followed by market-driven, clan, and hierarchy. The 
hypothesis is fully supported. Speed of response varies 
significantly among the SMEs’ four culture archetypes. 
While entrepreneurial SMEs have the highest speed of 
response, clan companies have the lowest speed.
Hypothesis 3 stated that small businesses having a 
market-driven culture show a better coordination, fol-
lowed by hierarchy, clan, and adhocracy. The hypothe-
sis is partially supported. Coordination varies 
significantly with the culture type. However, while 
market-driven SMEs have the best coordination, hierar-
chical companies show, surprisingly, the lowest level. 
Finally, hypothesis 4 predicted that SMEs with a 
market-driven culture demonstrate better customer-
centered versatility. We also predicted that they are 
followed in order by adhocracy, clan, and hierarchy. 
Substantial differences in the degree of customer-
focused versatility exist between market-driven, adho-
cratic, and hierarchical SMEs. However, market-driven 
and clan SMEs have means that are close to each other.
5.  Conclusions and Management 
Implications
Businesses that have developed a hierarchic type of cul-
ture could be considered thinking “inside the box.” They 
are slow to respond to external stimuli, show poor coordi-
nation, and display a low level of consumer-centered ver-
satility. Indeed, Baker & Sinkula (2005) mentioned that 
companies that have an excessive number of rules and 
routines manifest difficulties in adapting. Responsiveness 
is part of the adaptation process. Adhocracy, clan and 
market driven cultures are all “located outside the ‘box’ ” 
for at least one dimension. However, a closer look indi-
cates that the companies that have developed clan as their 
dominant type of culture, while displaying good coordina-
tion and having high level of customer-focused versatility 
exhibit low speed of response.
According to Venaik et al. (2004) managers of 
businesses competing in a global environment face the 
central issue of integration of their operations in the 
presence of forces for national responsiveness. Locally 
responsive businesses perceive pressures to respond to 
local needs. This study extended the analysis of local 
SMEs, finding relationships between responsiveness 
and  organizational culture. Organizational culture and 
its transfer overseas are important in the context of cor-
porations that conduct business globally; therefore, the 
need to understand and analyze local organizational 
cultures (Hofstede et al., 2010).
Organizational culture differences have been exam-
ined by Pothukuchi et al. (2002) in a general context of 
international joint venture performance. This study went 
one step further and found differences between the ways 
companies respond to signals from their marketplace 
based on their dominant type of organizational culture. 
Companies that developed an entrepreneurial (adho-
cratic) culture are the only ones that show high levels 
for all three dimensions of responsiveness. However, the 
best culture mix would be the adhocratic — market 
driven one. The combination of entrepreneurial charac-
teristics and the planning and goal oriented managerial 
style will suit best companies that want to be successful 
in the marketplace. Indeed, the market-driven type of 
culture SMEs will have the best coordination and are 
best positioned to deliver customer-centered versatility 
while adhocracy will make businesses respond fast to 
Table 3.  Types of dominant culture
Variable
Level
Type of culture
Speed
High
ADHOCRACY 
MARKET DRIVEN
CLAN
Low
HIERARCHY
Coordination
High
MARKET DRIVEN 
CLAN
Low
ADHOCRACY 
HIERARCHY
Customer 
Centered 
Versatility
High
CLAN, MARKET 
DRIVEN 
ADHOCRACY
Low
HIERARCHY

 
The Effect of Organizational Culture 
295
changes in the market environment. High level of 
 responsiveness will lead to superior performance. 
Indeed, Minguzzi & Passaro (2001) state that the entre-
preneurial culture with its composite of personal values, 
managerial skills, and risk-propensity combined with a 
market-driven, goal oriented management and a system 
of relations between firm and market will determine the 
firm’s competitiveness.
Further research is needed to enhance the under-
standing of the responsiveness-culture relationship. 
Other criterion variables for future research include 
national culture, organizational strategy, and organiza-
tional structure. An important area of future research 
concerns the analysis and evaluation of the interplay 
between  organizational culture and national culture, as 
well as the meanings that the responsiveness concept 
takes in different cultural environments. Ethnographic 
studies are particularly useful in evaluating the mean-
ing of this concept in different environments and rela-
tionships between responsiveness and culture. There is 
also need for field experiments to identify and evaluate 
the effect of extraneous variables, such as organiza-
tional strategy and organizational structure on the rela-
tionship between responsiveness and culture. It would 
be also useful to investigate these relationships in cross-
cultural study with multinational corporations.
This study extends the analysis of locally respon-
sive firms finding relationships between responsiveness 
and organizational culture. Limitations of this study 
include the use of a convenience sample and a relatively 
small sample size. Still, the results seem to provide 
strong support to our conclusions.
References
Baker, W. E. & Sinkula, J. M. (2005), Market orientation and 
the new product paradox, Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 22, 483–502.
Cameron, K. S. & Quinn, R. E. (2011), Diagnosing and 
Changing Organizational Culture: Based on the 
Competing Values Framework (3rd edn.). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.
Chaston, I., Badger, B., & Sadler-Smith, E. (2001). 
Organizational learning: An empirical assessment of 
process in small U.K. manufacturing firms, Journal of 
Small Business Management, 39(2), 139–152.
Garrett, R. P., Covin, J. G., & Slevin, D. P. (2009), Market 
responsiveness, top management risk taking, and the 
strategic learning as determinants of market pioneering, 
Journal of Business Research, 62(8): 782–788.
Hisrich, R. D. & Drnovsek, M. (2002), Entrepreneurship and 
small business research: A European perspective, 
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 
9(2), 172–222.
Hofstede, G. H., Hofstede, G. J., & Minkov, M. (2010), 
Cultures and Organizations: Software for the Mind (3rd 
edn.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Kara, A., Spillan, J. E., & Kumar, K. (2005), The effect of 
a market orientation on business performance: A 
study of small-sized service retailers using MARKOR 
scale, Journal of Small Business Management, 43(2), 
105–118.
Kohli, A., Jaworski, B., & Kumar, A. (1993), MARKOR: A 
measure of market orientation, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 30(3): 467–477.
Liao, J., Welsch, H., & Stoica, M. (2003), Organizational 
absorptive capacity and responsiveness: An empirical 
investigation of growth-oriented SMEs, Entrepreneurship 
Theory and Practice, 28(1), 63–85. 
Luo, Y. & Peng, M. (1999), Learning to compete in a transi-
tion 
economy: 
Experience, 
environment, 
and 
performance, Journal of International Business Studies, 
30, 269–296.
Minguzzi, A., & Passaro, R. (2001). The network of relation-
ships between the economic environment and the 
entrepreneurial culture in small firms. Journal of 
Business Venturing, 16, 181–207.
Narver, J. C., Slater, S. F., & MacLachlan, D. L. (2004), 
Responsive and proactive market orientation and new-
product success, Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 21(5), 334–347.
Pelham, A. (2000), Market orientation and other potential 
influences on performance in small and medium-sized 
manufacturing firms, Journal of Small Business 
Management, 38(1), 48–67.
Pothukuchi, V., Damanpour, F., Choi, J., Chen, C., & Park 
(2002), National and organizational culture differences 
and international joint venture performance, Journal of 
International Business Studies, 33, 243–266.
Rafaeli, S., Raban, D. R., & Ravid, G. (2007), Knowledge 
sharing market, International Journal of Knowledge and 
Learning, 3(1), 1–11.
Sharma, S., Pablo, A. L., & Vredenburg (1999), Corporate 
environmental responsiveness strategies, The Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science, 35(1), 87–108. 

296 
M. Stoica, L. Florea & E. Lukacs
Sullivan, P. & Kang, J. (1999), Quick response adoption in 
the apparel manufacturing industry: Competitive advan-
tage and innovation, Journal of Small Business 
Management, 37(1), 1–15.
Swanson, D. (1999), Toward an integrative theory of busi-
ness and society: A research strategy for corporate social 
performance, Academy of Management Review, 24, 
506–521.
Thompson, A. & Strickland III, A. J. (2001), Strategic 
Management, Boston: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Uhlenbruck, K., Meyer, K. E., & Hitt, M. A. (2003), 
Organizational transformation in transition economies: 
Resource-based and organizational learning perspec-
tives, Journal of Management Studies, 40(2), 257–282.
Utsch, A., Rauch, A., Rothfuss, R., & Frese, M. (1999), Who 
becomes a small scale entrepreneur in a post-socialist 
environment: On the differences between entrepreneurs 
and managers in East Germany, Journal of Small 
Business Management, 37(3), 31–43.
Venaik, S., Midgley, D. F., & Devinney, T. M. (2004), A new 
perspective on the integration-responsiveness pressures 
confronting 
multinational 
firms, 
Management 
International Review, 44, 15–48.

297
Chapter 32
Model Proposal for  Cluster Implementation 
in Romania*
Ion Popa and Cristina Vlăsceanu
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
The most prominent objective of the present chapter is 
to highlight the advantages of cluster implementation in 
Romania in the context of  knowledge based economy. 
The research method used was based on both a quanti-
tative analysis as well as on a qualitative analysis, 
which resulted on a series of observations and conclu-
sions that were used to develop a cluster implementa-
tion model proposal. 
The main result and contribution of the current 
chapter is the outlining and creation of a model for clus-
ter implementation in Romania (a guide for cluster 
implementation). The relevance and importance of this 
particular model is given, on one hand, by the necessity 
and opportunity of such a project in Romania (since the 
Romanian economy is currently undergoing a transition 
process towards a knowledge based economy and is 
also trying to catch up to the more advanced economies 
worldwide), and on the other hand, by the fact that clus-
ters have proven to have a great and real impact on the 
positive outcome of a country’s development (in par-
ticular, clusters are considered to have a positive influ-
ence on  competitiveness,  innovation, knowledge and 
know-how transfer,  economic growth,  regional develop-
ment, and so on – the impact of strong cluster portfolios 
improving the outcome of the overall economic perfor-
mance of the country in which they are present). 
The main conclusions of the following chapter 
revolve around the important role that clusters have and 
around the fact that a guide for cluster implementation 
in Romania can only be beneficial, by acting as a foun-
dation of knowledge and aid (assistance) for the eco-
nomic agents, in their pursuit to create and develop 
clusters, and ultimately achieve performance.
1. Introduction
In today’s context of knowledge-based economy, clus-
ters are becoming increasingly more important and they 
are being seen as tools for sustainable development. 
Both at the European Union level and globally, we can 
see a clear relationship of interdependence between the 
power of the state economy and the number of clusters 
in that country. This concept represents a viable tool for 
development, both in terms of the economic agents and 
in terms of the national economies. 
The desire of creating a cluster  implementation 
guide in Romania had as starting point a necessity felt 
in the Romanian business environment. Given that 
* This work was co-financed from the European Social Fund through Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources Development 
2007–2013, project number POSDRU/159/1.5/S/142115 “Performance and excellence in doctoral and postdoctoral research in Romanian 
economics science domain”.

298 
I. Popa & C. Vlăsceanu
Romania’s economy is currently in a process of transi-
tion towards a  knowledge-based economy and the need 
for increasingly specialized, refined and capable human 
resources, and for their utilization in research, develop-
ment and  innovation activities that will bring added 
value is felt more and more,  clusters representing an 
extremely relevant instrument in terms of facilitating 
the fulfillment of this need. 
2. Clusters — Theoretical Framework
According to Nicolescu & Verboncu (2006) a cluster is 
a network of firms, inter-correlated at a high level, 
which enables it to act as an embedded system, accu-
mulating, at a high level, both the advantages of diver-
sification and complementarities of the networks, as 
well as the intense intertwining between the involved 
activities, similar to great extent to those of a big com-
pany (Nicolescu & Verboncu, 2006: 337).
A cluster is a network of companies that use all 
forms of knowledge sharing and exchange. Determinant 
in defining a cluster is knowledge, considered both as a 
resource and as a key product of the group of compa-
nies involved (Popa, 2006: 22).
“By starting activities close to what is already 
going on in the cluster, all new spin-offs — newcomer 
or local independent entrepreneur alike — can safely 
skip the burdensome and costly process of gathering a 
lot of circumstantial knowledge about the business 
environment otherwise crucial. When it works for the 
neighbor why shouldn’t it also work for me? New start-
ups are thus given for free the advantages of a business 
environment tailored to their specific needs, even in 
situations when they might still be unaware of what 
these needs might be of how they may be best accom-
modated” (Maskell, 2001: 933).
“Members of a cluster benefit from the comple-
mentary products and services. Firms are privy to the 
new technological developments and information about 
changing market demands. Successful clusters provide 
firms with specialized suppliers and a technologically 
skilled workforce. Innovation is partly driven by the 
competitive pressures within clusters but firs and insti-
tutions also often mitigate risk and lower the costs of 
innovation through the development of joint R&D pro-
jects” (Mackenzie et al., 2005: 8).
Another key player in the development of clusters 
is the government of a given state. It has the ability to 
influence cluster creation and development through its 
policies and strategies.
“By focusing policy tools on clusters, government 
can better focus on areas where it impacts the  competi-
tiveness of several companies simultaneously. And it 
can reap additional benefits from the spillovers in the 
cluster that were triggered through the policies. Rather 
than improving competitiveness company by company 
(with a danger of intervening in competition), a cluster-
based use of economic policy instruments reaches 
entire groups of companies. Cluster initiatives are a 
way to organize economic policies in a more efficient 
and mutually reinforcing way” (Ketels & Memedovic, 
2008: 384).
3. Benefits of Clusters
The advantages of these commercial clusters are multiple, 
some consisting of the following (Vlăsceanu, 2011: 654):
• Reduce individual costs of each cooperative enter-
prise network;
• Better chances at competing with larger companies;
• Reduce unit costs through economies of scale at the 
cluster level;
• Network members cover their deficiencies in 
resources, skills and qualities to each other;
• Perform external economies, working together for a 
certain purpose (joint resources);
• The potential for obtaining competitive advantage is 
higher in terms of complementarities and synergy of 
goods and services between companies;
• A better opportunity for the member companies to 
invest in research-development;
• Play a decisive role in raising the standards of living 
among both residents and management bodies;
• Determine the collection of large sums of money 
to local/central budget, thus creating a positive 
and competitive national economy, regional and 
local;
• Can better defend mutual interests based on sustain-
able and competitive principles;
• Encourages the transfer of managerial know-how 
between the components;

 
Model Proposal for Cluster Implementation in Romania 
299
• Reduce the time needed to manufacture and increase the 
turnover of companies by jointly providing products;
• Promotes organizational learning;
• Gives the companies a chance to develop and enter 
new international markets;
What needs to be remembered is that competitive 
advantage and  innovation are more likely to be created 
by a regional agglomeration of companies, research cent-
ers, institutes, universities, institutions and organizations, 
etc., rather than individual companies or entities; also a 
region’s favorability towards development needs to be 
taken into account, this being a two-edge knife, meaning, 
 clusters are more likely to appear in a more developed 
region, but cluster also lead to the development of the 
region in which they act (Vlăsceanu, 2014: 55).
4.  Model Proposal for Cluster 
Implementation in Romania
The present model (guide) is, essentially, a tool for 
implementing clusters in Romania, also this proposal 
providing the economic agents from Romania an 
informative guidance on the most important steps in the 
creation and development of clusters. Therefore, the 
 implementation guide for clusters in Romania 
includes the following steps:
Step 1. Popularization of the cluster concept in Romania 
(Bringing awareness on the importance of clusters in 
Romania).
Step 2. Identification of potential areas (regions) suit-
able for the development of clusters in Romania. 
Step 3. Identification of industries in Romania, located 
in the same geographical area, which present opportu-
nities for the development of clusters. 
Step 4. Development of policies and strategies for the 
formation and development of clusters. 
Step 5. Implementation. 
Step 6. Operationalization.
These six steps (each step containing the methods 
and actions needed to be achieved in the particular 
stage of implementation) will be further detailed in the 
following paragraphs for a better understanding of the 
phases that need to be followed for a proper develop-
ment of clusters in Romania:
Step 1.  Popularization of the cluster concept 
in Romania
• Organization of events, conferences, seminars, fairs 
to inform operators about the benefits and advan-
tages produced by cluster membership (through 
partnerships with universities, research centers, 
institutions);
• Reducing resistance to change in Romanian compa-
nies in terms of possible associations and collabora-
tive and cooperative activities;
• Conducting outreach programs organized by special-
ized authorities (Ministry of Economy,  Regional 
Development Agencies, Chambers of Commerce);
• Creating training, mentoring, and coaching pro-
grams for managers of Romanian businesses;
• Increasing cooperation between companies and uni-
versities, research centers, local authorities;
• Raising awareness on the benefits of belonging to a 
cluster — by using the experience of existing clus-
ters and by presenting the evolution of the economic 
agents within the cluster.
Step 2.  Identiﬁ cation of potential areas suitable 
for the development of clusters in Romania
• Identifying the development regions in Romania 
with the greatest potential for implementation of 
clusters by regional development agencies; 
• Identifying the companies in the same development 
region that are performing collaborative activities 
with other firms, universities, research centers, pub-
lic institutions (research, training, etc.). 
• Conducting outreach activities on the benefits of 
association in the form of clusters for companies 
located in the same development region; 
• Improving regional infrastructure (transport, com-
munication, etc.).
Step 3. Identiﬁ cation of industries in Romania, 
located in the same geographical area, which present 
opportunities for the development of clusters 
• Identifying companies in the same industry that can 
conduct collaborative and cooperative activities with 

300 
I. Popa & C. Vlăsceanu
universities and research centers in the same field or 
related areas; 
• Channeling the efforts of  regional development 
agencies in identifying geographical concentrations 
of firms in the same industry and informing and sup-
porting them in terms of association in the form of 
 clusters; 
• Establishing industrial policies and strategies on the 
8 development regions in Romania to meet the spe-
cific of each area.
Step 4. Development of policies and strategies for the 
formation and development of clusters
• Adaptation of cluster policies from other countries 
with successful innovative clusters to the specific of 
each region in Romania; 
• Creating tax incentives for businesses that want to 
associate in the form of a cluster; 
• Increasing state efforts regarding the creation and 
development of clusters and transparency of the 
process; 
• Developing a business environment that facilitates 
cooperation and transfer of know-how between firms 
and entities.
Step 5. Cluster implementation in Romania
• 
Establishing the founding members of the cluster 
and their involvement in the implementation pro-
cess (identifying participating companies, universi-
ties, public institutions — regional development 
agencies, county councils, and research centers); 
• 
Creation of a cluster management, which will deal 
with the successful implementation of the cluster; 
• 
Establishment of the purpose and objectives of the 
cluster by the management of the cluster; 
• 
Preparing the implementation plan containing the 
cluster’s core activities, intermediate objectives 
(milestones) and time horizons; 
• 
Applying the implementation plan of the cluster; 
• 
Intermediate evaluation of the implementation of 
the cluster.
Step 6. Operationalization of clusters in Romania
• Detailed and objective analysis of the performance 
of the cluster; 
• Adaptation of the cluster development strategy based 
on objectives and performance; 
• Further development of the cluster by attracting new 
members; 
• Implementation of professional development pro-
grams for employees of the cluster; 
• Development of advanced research and development 
teams in the areas of interest to all members of the 
cluster that can produce  innovation; 
• Designing of projects of interest to the members of 
the cluster; 
• Capitalization of R&D results.
After following the steps proposed in the afore-
mentioned model regarding the implementation of 
clusters in Romania and therefore, after creating new 
clusters, a number of advantages appear, directly 
resulted from this process. 
Further we present a series of key benefits felt as a 
result of cluster implementation in Romania, alongside 
some observations and conclusions regarding the rele-
vance and actuality of this subject, in terms of the direct 
effects of each of the six developed steps, of which the 
guide consists of. 
5. Conclusions
The guide for cluster implementation in Romania can 
be used both as a tool for implementing clusters in 
Romania and as an informative guide for businesses on 
the most important steps for the creation and develop-
ment of clusters.
By popularizing the concept of cluster in Romania 
we will gradually reach an understanding of the cluster 
concept at the level of the economic agents in Romania, 
which will facilitate the implementation and develop-
ment of clusters. 
The identification of areas suitable for the develop-
ment of clusters in Romania will help to harness to a 
higher level the opportunities by particularly focusing 
efforts and attention on these areas. Therefore, the main 
advantage of cluster mapping is the creation of a data 
base containing information on areas where there are 
potential opportunities for implementing clusters. Thus, 
both companies and public authorities, institutions, 
research and development centers, universities in the area 

 
Model Proposal for Cluster Implementation in Romania 
301
will be able to identify entities with geographical proxim-
ity that are willing to associate in the form of  clusters. 
Identification of the industries in Romania that are 
in the same geographical area also creates opportunities 
for the implementation and development of clusters by 
facilitating the creation of policies and strategies for the 
industries identified as being conducive to the creation 
of clusters. 
The major benefit experienced as a result of the 
development of specific cluster strategies and policies 
is the improvement and intensification of the efforts of 
the Romanian Government and Parliament to promote 
and implement clusters in the country’s eight develop-
ment regions (respectively: North–West region, Centre 
Region, North–East Region, South–East Region, 
South–Muntenia Region, Bucharest-Ilfov Region, 
South-West Oltenia Region, and West Region). Specific 
cluster strategies and policies are one of the most 
important ways of supporting businesses that want to 
form clusters, and this is demonstrated by the experi-
ences of other European countries that have established 
and implemented such strategies and policies, the direct 
effect being the increase of the number of clusters and 
the growth of the strength of cluster portfolios. 
The actual implementation of clusters in Romania 
will result in obtaining the already well-known advan-
tages that are a direct outcome of cluster membership 
and association. Among these we mention the follow-
ing, which we consider as being the most important and 
relevant:  economic growth,  innovation,  regional devel-
opment, improvement of capacities and resources, 
reducing costs incurred by enterprises, increased poten-
tial for obtaining competitive advantage and synergy 
between companies.
Another aspect that should not be ignored is that 
the management of each cluster implemented must 
conduct continuous evaluation of the performance 
obtained by the cluster and must also ensure at all times 
that these results are in line with the objectives of the 
cluster and the priorities and vision of the cluster mem-
bers. Operationalization itself protects and enhances 
the successful development of a cluster, maintaining 
as the central point the original purpose of the creation 
of the cluster.
In conclusion, it is without a doubt that clusters 
bring major benefits in terms of the economic develop-
ment of a country and proper implementation and fur-
ther development of this concept in Romania is not 
only necessary, in the context of  knowledge-based 
economy, but it also causes major advantages for the 
economic agents and the overall economy.
References
Ketels, C. H. M. & Memedovic, O. (2008), From clusters to 
cluster-based economic development, International 
Journal of Technological Learning, Innovation and 
Development, 1(3), 375–392.
Mackenzie, M., Sheldrick, B., & Silver, J. (2005), State 
Policies to Enhance the New Economy: A Comparative 
Analysis, Winnipeg: Canadian Centre for Policy 
Alternatives.
Maskell, P. (2001), Towards a knowledge-based theory of the 
geographical cluster, Industrial and Corporate Change, 
10(4), 921–943.
Nicolescu, O. & Verboncu, I. (2006), Metodologii 
Manageriale, Bucureşti: Tribuna Economică.
Popa, I. (2006), Clusterul de firme, Tribuna Economică, 
17(13), 22.
Vlăsceanu, C. (2011), The advantages of implementing busi-
ness networking and clusters in Romania, In Proceedings 
of the 5th International Conference Modern Approaches 
in Organisational Management and Economy, Bucharest: 
Editura A.S.E.
Vlăsceanu, C. (2014), Impact of clusters on innovation, 
knowledge and competitiveness in the Romanian econ-
omy, Revista Economia, Seria Management, 17(1), 
50–60.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

303
Chapter 33
Aspects of  Human Resources’ Management 
within Organizations in Braşov, Romania
Stelian Panzaru and Camelia-Cristina Dragomir
“Spiru Haret” University
Tudor Pendiuc
Constantin Brancoveanu University
Dan Cojocaru
“George Baritiu” University
The human factor has an important role in the compa-
ny’s growth. In the process of redesigning and rethink-
ing the economic structures it is necessary to know the 
problems of employment and the effective use of labor.
The problem of knowledge resources, the ways and 
means to shape employees, to optimize their creative 
potential, tends to occupy, today, a priority in all the 
concerns of science and practice management 
organizations.
Cultivating a spirit of responsibility, motivation and 
behavior, according to ethical solicitation, can contrib-
ute to the increase of the human resources capacity to 
endure the stressful action of the disturbing factors and 
to engage the company’s human resources in order to 
participate within the organization’s management.
Within the organizations numerous and complex 
activities take place, mainly aiming at achieving 
objectives in conditions of feasibility. In this pro-
cess, relations are formed between employees and 
working groups who consist of individuals with dif-
ferent personalities, mentalities, educations, value 
systems and behaviors. In such circumstances, it is 
difficult to maintain a perfect harmony. There may 
appear many difficulties, which can transform into 
 conflicts, with numerous and complicated conse-
quences. In this respect, there appears the need for 
the manager to understand the place and role of con-
flicts in the human resources management, their 
nature and form of manifestation, the causes generat-
ing conflicts, the consequences and the effective 
means to prevent them.
This chapter aims to demonstrate, with arguments, 
the contribution that human resources management has 
to achieve greater competitiveness organizations in the 
Brąsov County. Also, from the impact of human 
resources management on economic  performance of 
the company, the chapter wants to emphasize the per-
spective of internationalization practices of human 
resources management of the need to ensure conver-
gence, adaptation and integration of markets under the 
sign of economic globalization.
The chapter analyses the determining role of the 
management of human resources, through a case study 
in the organizations within Brasov County.

304 
S. Panzaru et al.
The drafting methodology of the study aimed to 
use the specific methods and instruments of the mana-
gerial scientific investigation: the observation, the 
investigation, the analysis, the synthesis and the model.
1. Introduction
1.1. Purpose of the chapter
The chapter refers to overall implementation of research 
results on the peculiarities of  human resource manage-
ment in Brasov. The study was conducted through a 
questionnaire applied to a total of 78 representatives 
belonging to organizations from Brasov County. 
Anonymous questionnaires were used in order to get 
honest answers and to conduct impartial investigation. 
The questionnaire contains 20 questions covering the 
following aspects of human resources in Brasov County: 
(a) the role of human resources in the organizations; 
(b) the specificities of human resources’ activity at 
 different levels; (c) attitude towards business managers 
of human resources; (d) continuous professional role; 
(e) conflict management in human resources activity.
1.2. Characteristics of the research
The purpose of the study was to identify shortcomings in 
the management of human resources is often the organi-
zations Brasov and propose solutions to improve it.
Objectives of the research: identifying the role of 
human resources in organizations; analyzing the involve-
ment of managers in human resource management; 
identifying causes of conflict generated by human 
resource management in organizations from Brasov. 
1.3. The research methodology
The research methodology involved the use of scien-
tific methods and tools: investigation managerial, 
observation, questionnaires, surveys, analyses, synthe-
ses, and models.
The questions in the survey had a closed character, 
with several variants of answers. This type of survey 
was used for the ease of the recording of the answers, 
as well as for the subsequent operative manner of 
analysis and processing of the collected data. For the 
same reasons, the questionnaire was conceived in a 
concentrated form that would allow gathering the rele-
vant information for the issue that interested us. The 
survey was pre-tested on 10 subjects. After the pre-
testing, four questions were reformulated.
1.4. Originality of the research
Diagnosis consists of human resource management in 
some organizations in Brasov; in order to propose fea-
sible solutions regarding the implementation of modern 
models of human resource management in organiza-
tions in the County of Brasov.
1.5. Practical character of the research
The research has the following practical applications: 
improving the quality of human resource management 
in organizations in Brasov County, and can be extended 
to other communities; development of competence and 
skills of human resources managers; creating a climate 
of trust and openness in relations between staff and 
their supervisors; contribute to the development strat-
egy of modern management in human resources.
2.  Considerations Regarding the 
Management in Human Resources
2.1.  Role of management in 
human resources
Human resources designate individuals that make up 
a system — country region, city, organization
Nicolescu, 2011: 536
Effective management of an organization’s employees 
is arguably the most difficult task, more complex, 
ambiguous, but the most important facing managers. 
Management is an area of policy that is not charac-
terized by the globally accepted professional stand-
ards and rigorous. This is true for at least four 
reasons (Coyle-Shapiro et al., 2013: 13): human 
resources policies relate to human behavior as com-
plex and culturally dependent; There are many tools 
for human resource different policies and practices; 
success or failure of the various human resources 
 policies, programs and plans are difficult to assess. 

 
Aspects of Human Resources’ Management within Organizations in Braşov 
305
Many managers believe that managing people is just 
 common sense.
An important role in  human resources management 
is playing and ensuring satisfaction at work for the 
organization members. Job satisfaction attitudes offer 
different perspectives on this aspect (Naumann, 1993; 
Maslow, 1987).
Human resource management is defined as a category 
of management which consists of the whole process of 
developing and implementing strategies and policies 
that enables organizations to deliver their preview, pro-
viding  training, development, evaluation, promotion, 
protection and use of human 
Nicolescu, 2011: 34
Human capital has a duty to find the most appropri-
ate for integration, orientation, and organization objec-
tives (Petrescu, 2006: 399).
Regarding the involvement of human resource 
management, we outlined some pragmatic approaches, 
such as increasing the size of the participating employ-
ees; content redefining organizational relationships 
between organizational subdivision located on different 
levels; human resources’ involvement in decision-
making; staff evaluation under a system of  performance 
indicators; limiting monopoly on human resource 
decision-making; promoting efficiency and competi-
tiveness in organizations, etc.
These approaches provide the starting point for 
some lines of action in organizational change, such as: 
management professionalization of human resources; 
establishment and implementation of certain standards 
and of a performance indicators’ system for each 
employee; monitoring results; extension of the use of 
the participative management style; rigorous use of 
human resources (Panzaru, 2012).
Lopez-Nicholas & Merono-Cerdan (2011) have 
shown that the human resources manager should antici-
pate that, in the future, employment will determine the 
human resources on the long term. The need for human 
resource forecasting is required. Reality shows that, in 
many organizations, the concerns, in this regard, are 
almost non-existent.
 Strategic planning needs human resources organi-
zation and is essential to its economic performance. 
However, the strategy for estimating human resource 
requirements should be consistent with changes in the 
market economy, competition and finance.
Human Resources Management must fulfill the 
role of a catalyst in order to bring performance in line 
with the individual talents as for the employees to meet 
objectives. The vast majority of specialists in this field 
believes that human resources management, like any 
other field of scientific research is the result of speciali-
zation and entered the already known path, of relatively 
rapid development and diversification in many fields 
(Petrescu, 2007: 156).
Human Resources Management is the science and 
art development and implementation of strategy and 
staff policy, as to achieve maximum efficiency for the 
enterprise objectives. Human Resources Management 
is a science, with formulated concepts, laws, principles, 
rules, methods, techniques and tools of leadership and 
arts. For their application in practice, one must take into 
account the specific conditions of each company 
(Manolescue et al., 2004: 58).
The contents of human resource management is 
given and the multitude of activities to be carried out, 
linked and harmonized human resources, activities that 
are more or less connected and have a great impact on 
results. In attempts to specify, as precisely and com-
pletely as possible, the main areas of activity of human 
resource management were many opinions expressed, 
in their great majority, the country bears the hallmark 
of origin of authors.
Thus, the American Society for Training and 
Development (American Society for Training and 
Development) identifies nine main areas of activity of 
human resource management: training and develop-
ment; organization and development; organization/job 
design; human resource planning; selection of person-
nel and insurance; research and information systems 
personnel; rewards/benefits or aid; advice on personal 
problems of employees; union/labor relations. 
Strategies of human resources shall appoint all 
long-term objectives on human resources, the main 
ways of achieving them and the necessary resources or 
appropriations, which ensure that the structure, values 
and culture of the organization and its staff will be used 
to help achieve the general objectives of the 
organization.

306 
S. Panzaru et al.
The preparation must start from the organizational 
objectives and the content of  human resource manage-
ment, and use an appropriate methodology of investiga-
tion to ensure rational targeting efforts in this area.
Areas where strategies can be established: insur-
ance and selection of staff; development of employees; 
relationships with employees. The wide variety of 
organizations and concepts of specialists in this field, is 
reflected in the diversity of strategies in human 
resources.
Therefore, an interesting approach to the strategies 
of human resources is presented by Rolf Buhner who, 
depending on the degree of dependency on company 
strategy, three different types of staffing strategies, pre-
sented the following (Buhner, 1994: 149): strategy-
oriented personal investment; strategy oriented personal 
value; strategy-oriented personnel resources.
As for the human resources policy to meet the goals 
the organization it must meet the following require-
ments: be consistent with the policy and strategy of the 
organization; cover the most important fields of person-
nel; ensuring the transmission and understanding of 
policies at all levels of the organization; comply with 
legal requirements; be very transparent, clearly defined, 
preferably in writing, to not allow interpretation.
Stages of drafting a policy for human resources are: 
analyzing and understanding the culture of existing 
organizations and the amount accepted it; policy analy-
sis of existing staff; analysis of external influences in 
the organization; consulting senior manager on their 
opinions; consulting staff and unions on staff policy.
In order to implement a staff policy one must be 
accepted by managers to become operational by their 
decision and dissemination at all levels of the 
organization.
2.2. Continuous  training of personnel
The ability of the 21st century organizations to adapt to 
the contemporary society, characterized by high com-
plexity and change, is generally given by their attitude 
towards knowledge, as an essential condition of reaching 
the top. One cannot promote and develop this type of 
company, focused on the values of knowledge, without 
developing permanent training programs and the sub-
stantial intervention of knowledge based management 
practices. In conclusion, permanent accumulation of 
knowledge through continuous training represents one of 
the main characteristics of the contemporary organiza-
tions and a mandatory condition for a competitive econ-
omy to function properly.
To build a strong organization, employee compe-
tences need to be developed and retained through effec-
tive human resources management (Ulrich & Lake, 
1991; Pfeffer, 1994; Becker & Gerhart, 1996; Boxall & 
Purcell, 2003). Sustained competitive advantage can be 
achieved through human resources management. The 
achievement of organizational success through people 
requires an attitudinal change of managers towards 
their workforce and employment (Pfeffer, 1994).
Continuous training has become an essential 
requirement in all organizations, regardless of the field 
in which they operate. The training programs are 
designed and the needs arising from their internal 
organization are consistent with its overall objectives. 
Only in this way, training and upgrading, the two com-
ponents of the training, can be truly effective, solving 
current and future problems of the organization.
Further training aims at improving the capacity 
already held by employees (retraining, acquisition of 
new skills on the job or in the same field).
Training can be organized in various forms within 
the organization, in specialized units or institutions of 
higher education. In developing a training program, the 
specialist in human resources and other specialists 
involved in the preparation will be needed.
Determining the results of a training program or 
refresher training is one last step you will be interested 
in solving in the evaluation process of the training 
courses.
In any training,  performance evaluation is required. 
It is distributed throughout a program. Normally, a 
course evaluation at the beginning and the end is one 
way that can also set points after completing an evalu-
ation module.
Objectives staff performance evaluation shows a 
great diversity, given the support of many organiza-
tional functions and activities of human resource man-
agement. Defining a more precise evaluation of 
performance objectives and understanding the degree 
of complexity of them presents a particular importance, 
and their implementation on a legal basis to protect 

 
Aspects of Human Resources’ Management within Organizations in Braşov 
307
both the organization and on its employees (Dragomir, 
2013).
There are several ways of making the assessment: 
through the managers, by colleagues who occupy 
equivalent positions, self-assessment by specialist 
assessors or a combination.
2.3.  Causes of conﬂ ict occurrence 
in  human resource management
In human resource management frequently  conflicts 
may occur. The conflict represents an incident pro-
voked by the existing divergences between the atti-
tudes, means and methods of action regarding a 
situation or a phenomenon which represents the object 
of the analysis.
The conflict, from a psychological and social point 
of view, appears as a form of the human interaction 
through which two or various members partially or 
totally disagree in one or various economical or social 
matters of the organization management, by attempting 
its re-evaluation usually through the concession of one 
of the party towards the other. The presence and the 
action of the interpersonal conflictual rapports prove 
the necessity of their acknowledgement for the continu-
ous improvement of the institution’s management and 
of the human resources management. The conflict is 
accompanied by an atmosphere of tension and 
competitions.
Conflict styles are typically seen as a response to 
particular situations. By contrast, we argue that individ-
ual conflict styles may shape an employee’s social envi-
ronment, affecting the level of ongoing conflict and thus 
his or her experience of stress (Friedman et al., 2000).
There are certain causes in all the specific conflicts 
of the human resources. The most significant causes are 
the followings:
— The distribution of the resources which, irrespec-
tive of the institution’s dimensions, are limited. We 
are referring mainly to the fact the manager is 
obliged to distribute the material, the human and 
financial resources among different subunits and 
departments and to mobilize the factors which can 
train them for the achievement of the purposes of 
the organization. With respect to its meaning and 
difficulty in the managerial reality, this process 
constantly generates different types of conflicts;
— Promotion of staff in different functions based on 
subjective or political aspects;
— The interdependence of the tasks, acknowledged as 
a possibility of a conflictual state appearance, is 
present in all the situations in which the personnel 
depends on the accomplishment of the task by 
another persons. The consequences of this cause — 
factor of conflictual states becomes complicated 
when connected to the systematic characteristic 
from a horizontal and functional point of view of the 
organization. As the entire organizational constitu-
tive parts represent the constitutive parts of that 
specific system, in the case of an inappropriate 
activity of one of the subunits the independence to 
which we refer can be constituted as a conflictual 
state generating factor;
— The different appreciations regarding certain situa-
tions or states of the managerial process or of an 
action conceived by the manager, usually subjective, 
generated by an analysis of the superficial  situation 
discussed, can lead to the over-appreciation of cer-
tain alternative points of view and aspects which
can be favorable for the micro-group, but unfavora-
ble for the organization;
— The communication insufficiency, especially the 
defective transmission of the information, can be 
considered both the cause and the consequence of 
the conflictual states;
— The differences encountered in the professional 
 training, the capacity of effort, the stress endur-
ance, present in every organizations lead in reality 
to the transmission of various and harder tasks to 
the competent and dedicated persons. As a conse-
quence, there appears a feeling of injustice and 
revolt which, in the majority of the cases, generates 
conflicts;
— The differences from the point of view of the char-
acter and of the work style influence the compati-
bility of the employee with his job and his group, 
due to the fact that the work collectives are formed 
of shy people, for example melancholic and phleg-
matic persons and dynamic, opened and cordial 
persons, a phenomena which gives birth to states of 
irritation and conflict during the work period. 

308 
S. Panzaru et al.
— The ambiguous definition of the individual and 
derived objectives, the ambiguity in the decisions’ 
transmissions, the existence of certain parallelisms 
between departments and jobs, the imprecision in 
the establishment of the tasks, authorities or respon-
sibilities of certain jobs or of the activities and 
attributions can generate conflictual states which 
accompany the battle for power which appear in the 
abnormalities of which we are referring;
— The discontent regarding the social status which 
grants greater and more honorable chances to cer-
tain groups;
— The environment differences which impose certain 
clothing, work hours, special work conditions, 
attract privations or privileges capable of leading in 
the end to  conflicts;
— The incomplete description of the job or position;
— The unbalanced load of tasks;
— The lack of accordance between the official author-
ity and requested responsibility;
— The discordance between the material and moral 
rewards and the level of the work results;
— The lack of cohesion inside the informal group;
— The motivation differences between the members 
of the informal collective.
3.  Analysis of Human Resources in the 
Organizations of Brasov County
The study highlights the key role of human resources in 
organizations belonging to Brasov County (82.58%). 
Around 17.42% of the respondents believe that 
money is the most important aspect in the work of an 
organization (Fig. 1).
The scientific investigation conducted has pointed 
out the fact that, at the level of the organization of Brasov 
Country, the organizational change is achieved through a 
democratic management of the human resources, favora-
bly perceived by the employees. Thus, the results of the 
survey by questionnaire carried out on a representative 
sample of employees show that 69.45% of the employees 
consider the style of  human resources management to be 
democratic, while only 18.36% perceive it as an authori-
tarian and autocratic management. Moreover, only 
12.19% consider that subordinates have complete free-
dom of decision and action — permissive style (Fig. 2).
The relations between the leaders and the employ-
ees of subordinated departments are exceptional in 
proportion of 2.11%, very good in proportion of 17.36% 
and good in proportion of 72.42%. We have to empha-
size that a quite high percentage of the employees — 
namely 7.43% — have declared that the relations are 
tensed, and 1.68% of the participants in the survey 
by questionnaire perceive such relations as being 
 inadequate (Fig. 3).
It should be noted that 6.16% of the questioned 
samples of employees have declared that the decisions 
related to human resources have always been made fol-
lowing the consultation of the employees, while 62.74% 
maintained that such decisions are more often not made 
following the consultation of the employees. About 
28.24% of the questioned employees have declared that 
Fig. 1.  Role of human resources in organizations within Braşov 
County
Role of 
human 
resources 
82.58% 
The role of 
money 
17.42% 
Fig. 2.  Styles adopted by the human resources management of the 
organizations of Braşov County
Democratic
style
69.45%
Autocratic style 
18.36%
Permissive
style 
12.19%
Fig. 3.  Types of relations in the human resources management
Exceptional 
relations 
2.09% 
Very good 
relations 
17.19% 
Good relations 
71.70% 
Tense relations 
7.36% 
Inadequate
relations 
2,78% 

 
Aspects of Human Resources’ Management within Organizations in Braşov 
309
decisions are sometimes made with the consultation of 
the employees and 2.86% of the employees seldom 
answered, if ever (Fig. 4).
Regarding the  training of  personnel management 
26.25% of the respondents are very satisfied with the 
way the activity is carried out. 64.46% are satisfied and 
9.29% are dissatisfied with the way in which work is 
performed by training (Fig. 5).
Conflict management is assessed as very good by 
the respondents (72.34%) in their organizations. 23.11% 
think that it is well managed and 4.55% believe that this 
activity is improperly managed (Fig. 6).
The main causes of disputes in organizations 
were presented as: unbalanced load tasks (11.34%); 
promotion of staff in different functions based on 
subjective or political aspects (46.24%); manager’s 
style of the human resources (24.21%); vertically and 
horizontally faulty communication (9.17%); training 
differences between members of the organization 
(9.04%) (Fig. 7).
Focusing on the implications of  human resources 
management on fostering change, the conducted 
research has pointed out the following lines of action: 
alignment of human resources management with the 
institution’s management; adjustment of organizational 
culture to change processes; development of a diversity-
friendly culture; correct understanding of the manager’s 
role in human resources; consolidation of a pro-active 
culture in supporting sustainable  performance; creation 
and maintenance of a climate of confidence and coop-
eration within the organization; encouraging employees 
to seek continuous improvement and to develop their 
potential. 
Within the framework of the applicative research, 
the questioned subjects have pointed out, as relevant 
for a good human resources manager, the following 
qualities: competence and professionalism; authority; 
visionary ability; ability to quickly adapt to changes; 
responsibility for public welfare; capacity to listen 
and convey messages, both within the institution and 
the community, and outside the sphere thereof; cor-
rectness and honesty; concern for community and 
employees.
A series of obstacles to the change of the human 
resources management of the organizations of Brasov 
County were identified: inflexibility; conformism; obe-
dience; psychological inhibition in the face of newness; 
single response; fear of making mistakes.
Another issue taken into consideration within the 
scope of the research was the extent to which the 
knowledge of the organizational culture elements deter-
mines a greater involvement of the employees in the 
fulfillment of their tasks. The expressed opinions con-
veyed the idea that the elements which make up the 
Fig. 4.  Opinions of the decision-making process of human 
resources management
Always made
following the 
consultation
6%
Not following
the consultation
63%
Sometimes with
the consultation
of the employees
28%
Seldom if ever
3%
Fig. 5.  Assessment training management personnel
Very satisfied
relations 
26.25% 
Satisfied 
64.46% 
Dissatisfied 
9.29%
Fig. 6.  Conflict management in human resources management
Very good
72.34%
Good 
23.11%
Improperly 
4.55%
Fig. 7.  Causes of conflict in human resource management
Unbalanced
load tasks
11.34%
Promotion
subjective or
political
46.24%
Style of the
human
resources
manager
24.21%
Faulty
communication
9.17%
Training
differences
9,04%

310 
S. Panzaru et al.
organizational culture are, to a large extent, known and 
observed by the employees, these ensuring the rigorous 
character of the measures adopted at this level of social 
organization. Changes are also manifested in manage-
rial behavior, being given concrete expression in a clear 
and deep perception of the need to develop and consoli-
date an organizational culture intended to fully support 
and foster the process of modernization and to generate 
clear-cut and categorical options to achieve organiza-
tional change.
4. Conclusions
The purpose of our approach was to come up with fea-
sible managerial solutions regarding the possibility of 
stimulating human resources management, in such a 
manner that it could significantly influence the actions 
and decisions aimed at increasing  performance in the 
sphere of activities of the organization.
The originality of the research resides in the 
approach of the specificity of human resources man-
agement at the level of the County of Brasov.
The results of the research have led us to a series of 
recommendations which shall give the managers a 
more qualified and realistic perception of the complex 
issues raised by  human resources management. These 
recommendations are aimed at:
•  Training personnel in view of the transition to a new 
model of development based on knowledge and 
innovation;
• Achieving the transfer of knowledge, information 
and technical solutions at the level of the industrial 
sector;
• Encouraging continuous education;
• Actions focused on the training and stabilization of 
the workforce and on the motivation of employees 
and managers;
• Actions intended to give citizens a sense of respon-
sibility as regards their prevention role and the col-
laboration with the environmental regulatory 
agencies;
• Improving the skills of managers;
• Securing the access to European funds destined for 
personnel organizations training;
• Redefining the content of the relations between 
organizational subdivisions situated on different 
hierarchical levels; 
• Enhancing transparency in the management of com-
munity affairs;
• Creating a climate of confidence and openness 
towards of the members of the organization;
• Correctly informing members of the organization about 
actions regarding the human resources management;
• Improving the learning and continuous training pro-
cesses intended for the members of the organizations 
of the County Brasov;
• Adopting efficient models of human resources 
management.
In order to efficiently collaborate with his subordi-
nates and this way to prevent the conflictual states, to 
acknowledge the following recommendations:
• To grant the collaborators sufficiently large compe-
tences in order for them not to feel obliged to con-
tinuously demonstrate their need of amplification, 
but not too large because, in this case, they would 
often have to justify the unfulfilling of certain tasks;
• To underline with skill the competences of all the 
subordinated managers, in order to make a simulta-
neous and equivoque appreciation of the qualities;
• The responsibility degree of the collaborators must 
be in accordance with the level of their authority, 
verifying that the attributed tasks are real;
• To grant the department and section managers the 
liberty of dividing the tasks to people, as they better 
know each one’s possibilities;
• Not to exaggerate in the adoption of his solutions as 
being optimized;
• The prevention of the conflictual state must be 
directly connected to the training of the manager in 
the assuming of the effective responsibility regard-
ing every subordinate and every professional activity 
developed under his lead. In this matter, the manager 
must know exactly the processes of service perfor-
mances as well as the tasks and the capacities of the 
collaborators asked to develop them;
• In order to avoid the conflict due to failure in meeting 
the expectations, it is recommended that the manager 

 
Aspects of Human Resources’ Management within Organizations in Braşov 
311
receives the number of claims demanded from his col-
laborators, makes fewer promises, clearly expresses his 
expectations, reviews and actualizes his expectations 
and uses them as a basis for a periodical retrospective 
analysis, for the prevention of the conflictual state;
• The persistence over the detailed knowledge of peo-
ple, which can be obtained in various manners: with 
the help of science, with the help of certain observa-
tions and systematical verifications, accomplished 
mainly during the concrete activities and, finally, 
through impression and intuition;
• Regarding the way to reaction of manager to the 
disagreements among other persons, he or she 
should not let himself or herself to be implied in 
such situations, in which he or she does not deserve 
to be implied or which can be solved by them. In 
some cases, the manager is recommended to appeal 
to a third party for mediation or negotiation. Other 
measures may also have results, such as: eliminating 
the situation which produced the conflict, solving of 
misunderstandings, attracting parties in a general 
interest, objective or real issues, high lightening that 
everything is a simple misunderstanding;
• Every manager must analyze by his or her own pre-
occupation in managing without  conflicts, establish-
ing if the organization of the effort corresponds to 
the aim so that in the end, to be able to combat the 
conflictual states and ensure the organization’s 
development.
Management without conflicts has as a last objec-
tive the mobilizations of all the personnel in order to 
achieve the economic and social tasks, to take part with 
maximum efficiency in the organization’s economic 
and social life.
The results of the survey indicate that the managers 
of organizations have acted for the  human resources 
management’s improvement. But, the managers of 
organizations in the Brasov County should lay more 
emphasis on the improvement of their managerial skills 
as a factor likely to enhance  performance in the activi-
ties carried out.
References
Becker, B., Gerhart, B. (1996), The impact of human resource man-
agement on organizational performance: Progress and 
prospects, Academy of Management Journal, 39(4), 779–801.
Boxall, P. & Purcell, J. (2003), Strategy and human resource 
management, ILR Review, 57(1), 145–146.
Bühner, R. (1994), Personnel Management. Landsberg: 
Verlag Moderne Industrie.
Coyle-Shapiro, J., Hoque, K., Kessler, I., Pepper, A., 
Richardson R., & Walker, L. (2013), Human Resource 
Management, London: University Publishing House.
Dragomir, C. (2013), Role of lifelong learning in develop-
ment of the organizations based on knowledge, Review 
of General Management, 17(1), 78–84.
Friedman, R., Tidd, T. S., Currall, S., & Tsai, J. (2000), What 
goes around comes around: The impact of personal con-
flict style on work conflict and stress, International 
Journal of Conflict Management, 11, 32–55.
Lopez-Nicholas, C. & Merono-Cerdan, A. L. (2011), 
Strategic knowledge management, innovation and per-
formance, International Journal of Information 
Management, 31(2), 502–509.
Manolescu, A., Marinas, C., & Marin, I. (2004), 
Managementul Resurselor Umane: Aplicaţii. Bucharest: 
Economica Publishing House.
Maslow, A. (1987), Motivation and Personality, New York: 
Harper/Row.
Naumann, E. (1993), Organizational predictors of expatriate 
job satisfaction, Journal of International Business 
Studies, 24(1), 61–80.
Nicolescu, O. (ed.) (2011), Dicţionar de Management, 
Bucharest: Pro Universitaria Publishing House.
Pânzaru, S. (2012), Considerations on some factors that 
influence organizational structures, Review of General 
Management, 16(2), 177–186.
Petrescu, I. (2006), Managementul Crizelor, Bucharest: 
Expert Publishing House.
Petrescu, I. (2007), Managementul Capitalului Uman, 
Bucharest: Expert Publishing House.
Pfeffer, J. (1994), Competitive advantage through people, 
California Management Review, 36, 9–28.
Ulrich, D. & Lake, D. (1991), Organizational capability: 
Creating 
competitive 
advantage, 
Academy 
of 
Management Executive, 5(1), pp. 77–92.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

313
Chapter 34
Managing  Individual Performance Appraisal 
in  Project Teams
Florin-Ioan Petean, Bogdan Bâlc, Horaţiu Cătălin Sălăgean,
Răzvan Dimitrie Gârbacea, and Diana Sopon
Babeş-Bolyai University
The business environment in which organizations are 
struggling today, is a mosaic of transformations and 
perpetual changes, therefore, in this context of the 
dynamics of complex business processes, is absolutely 
necessary the presence of an effective base of perfor-
mance appraisal to continuous employee motivation for 
organizations to register success. This chapter is look-
ing at how supporting project teams define and monitor 
performance, achieves business results, and provides a 
strong base for good human resource practices, such as 
 performance manage ment and appraisal systems. 
The processes of performance appraisal are analyzed 
using the view of organizational justice, as seen by 
human resource directors, project managers, and pro-
ject team members in their efforts to increase the 
engage ment and productivity in project-based organiza-
tions. More and more, Romanian organizations recog-
nize projects and  project management as a strategic tool 
to optimize strategy execution by reducing product cycle 
durations and optimizing other critical dimensions as 
quality and costs. The strong Romanian industries like 
automotive, energy and the new star, software, are active 
promoters for modern project management techniques. 
Multidimensional client pressures — better quality at 
reduced costs and faster results — are translated into 
major tensions for organizational programs and projects. 
Project managers are forced to translate client require-
ments into project objectives, and the available resources 
seem to be scarce. There is a large volume of published 
studies describing the role of performance management 
approaches, concepts, and tools. However, one question 
that needs to be asked is how organizations should adapt 
their classical performance management processes 
(including appraisal) to the dynamic and fast pace 
changing realities of project management. This chapter 
comprises the conclusions related to a research executed 
in companies from automotive industry (15 project man-
agers and 2 human resource managers), from IT (5 pro-
ject managers and 1 human resource manager), and 
consultancy (3 project managers and 1 human resource 
manager).
1.  Changes in Project Management 
Practices
One of the most productive responses to the rapid speed 
and rhythm of change seem to be one of the reasons 
that determined companies to adopt the definition of 
programs and projects a functional way for implemen-
tation of strategic goals.

314 
F.-I. Petean et al.
Successful companies realize that more and more 
of their activities are unique and temporary, so decided 
to act at tactical level by projects, where organizational 
boundaries are more permissive, as they integrate vari-
ous contractors and clients’ representatives and multi-
ple work locations in order to assure success while 
maximizing the results. 
The positive experiences encouraged companies to 
expanding their learning in  project management and to 
increasingly use portfolios — a diverse range of related 
and unrelated projects and programs — as a strategic 
tool to success and as instruments to maximize results 
within resource and funding constraints.
The project management techniques were valued 
and turned into a strategic dimension of portfolio 
 management, where companies define and relate, link, 
and optimize various programs and projects. The link 
between the critical quality dimension and work in pro-
jects (Ilies, 2003) was operationalized by the large com-
panies from the above-mentioned industries that use 
portfolio management so they extended the scope of 
their utilization, from monitoring and report progress 
(oriented on the past) to investment decisions and proac-
tive responses oriented to the future market demands.
1.1.  Evolution in strategy — changes 
in organisational structures
Crawford & Cabanis-Brewin define three stages in the 
project management evolution:
(1) Individual; 
(2) Division or department-level; and
(3) Enterprise/corporate-level (strategic).
1.1.1.  Performance management and 
organisational justice
Fairness at work, which is known also as the organiza-
tional justice (Byrne & Cropanzano, 2001) seems to be 
a major influencer for individual commitment.
1.1.2.  Various dimensions of organisational 
justice
• 
Distributive: feelings of fairness surrounding the 
allocation of organizational resources, including 
pay, bonuses, terminations, or any other resource 
that an organization can provide to employees 
(Adams, 1965; Deutsch, 1975). 
• 
Procedural: feelings of fairness regarding the pro-
cedures (promotions, terminations, performance 
ratings, bonuses, or anything else of value) used in 
an organization (Leventhal et al., 1980; Thibaut & 
Walker, 1975). 
• 
Interactional: feelings of fairness regarding how 
one is treated (truthfully and with respect as they 
were terminated, given a bonus) Bies & Moag 
(1986), with two dimensions suggested by 
Greenberg (1993a).
• 
Interpersonal: based on dignity and respect 
(Colquitt, 2001) from those in power position 
(authority, expertise, etc.).
• 
Informational: based on justification and truthful-
ness (Bies & Moag) and also on adequate 
CEO
Operations
Finance
IT
Appl Dev
Systems
Support
Type 3
Strategic
Project Office
Type 2
Business Unit
Project Office
Type 1
Project Control
Office
IT Project
Office
Enterprice
Project Office
Projects
PO
Fig. 1.  Stages in the project management evolution — after 
Crawford
Interactional
Justice
Interpersonal
Justice
Interformational
Justice
Procedural
Justice
Distributive
Justice
Pay
Satisfaction
Perceived
Organizational
Support
Leader-
Member
Exchange
Fig. 2.  Dimensions of organisational justice — after Roch & 
Shanock, 2006: 303

 
Managing Individual Performance Appraisal in Project Teams  
315
information regarding procedures and outcomes 
(Colquitt, 2001).
Warokka et al. (2012), in a study performed in 
emerging markets, connected “the employees’ percep-
tion on fair performance appraisal and organizational 
justice-considered practices to job satisfaction and 
work performance”, using the following conceptual 
framework for their study. 
2.  Performance Management and 
Appraisal in Projects
In performing interviews and collecting data was used 
Lockett (Lockett, 1992) definition of performance man-
agement as “development of individuals with compe-
tence and commitment, working towards the achievement 
of shared meaningful objectives within an organization 
which supports and encourages their achievement”. It 
seems that the above-mentioned definition comprise the 
critical aspects of the performance management pro-
cess. The aforementioned dimensions were recognized 
by various managers (from project managers to top 
executives) as a critical for increasing productivity and 
to harmonize workplace communications.
Wright (2003) shows that performance manage-
ment has a critical role in helping companies to ensure 
competitive advantage. Functional managers declare 
that at individual and team level, performance appraisal 
is recognized as a central human resource instrument. 
An appraisal system that is perceived as fair gets 
engagement and commitment, and those are the only 
underutilized reserves all companies seem to have and 
an important sustainable resource for competitive 
advantage.
However, the current formal systems to appraise 
performance in cycles (six months, one year) are seen 
by most of the interviewed project managers as occa-
sions to generate information for the official organiza-
tional systems and to review the performance for the 
previous cycle (usually six months), and with less influ-
ence on performance improvement. 
The interviewed project managers recognized their 
orientation on performance, but many of them reported 
difficulties (both conceptual — “what should we do” 
and practical “how to really do it”) in managing the 
individual performance within the coordinated  project 
teams. 
Gavrea et al. (2011) propose new ways of thinking 
the project performance management appraisal and 
other complementary measures are sought by both pro-
ject managers and other stakeholders, HR managers, 
and the academic community.
McGregor (1957) was one of the first who pro-
posed a shift in the appraisal methods from one ori-
ented on improving underperformance (past-based) to a 
future-oriented approach based on strengths.
Different terms were proposed during time, and 
some companies, in their desire to mark the change in 
their practices were eager to adapt and promote new 
concepts and words, like: “analysis” instead of 
“appraisal” or performance management as a system-
atic, on-going process, within a performance cycle, 
instead of performance appraisal, which is seen as more 
administrative. 
The underutilized reserve seems to stay into the 
skill and will of human resources (including project 
managers’ skill and will). 
New ways to define success and appraise individ-
ual members are required to improve and define pro-
ductivity and encourage innovation. 
Due to their complex nature, the success of projects 
depends on the clarity of understanding and acceptance 
by the team members of the desired outcomes and the 
readiness to define, adapt, and follow common ways 
(tools, work procedures, etc.) to accomplish them. 
The project team members are more and more spe-
cialized in terms of knowledge and they have to face 
increasingly complex problems, and the increasing 
interdependency of team members to.
Organizational
justice in
Performance
Appraisal System
Distributive
Performance
Appraisal
Satisfaction
Work
Performance
Procedural
Interactional
Fig. 3.  Conceptual framework for linking organisational justice, 
appraisal and performance — after Warokka et al. 2012

316 
F.-I. Petean et al.
3.  Best Practices for  Performance 
Management
Examples Of Best Practices acting as a contextual sup-
port for performance management collected from 
Romanian companies successful in using  project man-
agement orientation at company level, are the 
following:
(1) The very existence of the supporting organiza-
tional structure that contains: 
 
(a) A strategic committee;
 
(b) A strategy management support department.
(2) Well — designed critical responsibilities for coor-
dination and implementation at different strategic 
levels:
 
(a)  Corporate-level (strategic) — general orienta-
tion, operating philosophy, coordination of 
various programs and major projects;
 
(b)  department level — tactical dimension of pro-
gram management and resource optimization;
 
(c) individual (project level). 
(3) Clear reporting responsibilities for project manag-
ers (either functional or to higher level projects or 
programs) within the management structure.
(4) Pro-active orientation, long-term based — using 
the past and current results as a strong base for 
future decision and implementation.
(5) Simple mechanisms for implementation in stand-
ardized forms like Plan — Do — Check — Act 
cycles, milestone analysis.
4.  Fairness Associated Difficulties 
in Performance Management
Some Difficulties in Performance management that are 
major influences of perceived fairness in project ori-
ented companies were reported by both functional and 
project managers: 
(1) Functional managers
 
(a)  Role conflicts — team members are perform-
ing tasks in different simultaneous projects, 
and an overall performance appraisal is diffi-
cult to made; 
 
(b)  Conflicting priorities — many task projects 
have high priority — extra efforts are required 
to respond (e.g., to quality and time 
constraints);
 
(c)  Competition for resources; 
 
(d)  Projects have a life of their own — the tradi-
tional methods of defining objectives (and 
KPI’s attached to them) are very difficult for 
many domains that are not related to operations 
(e.g., production).
(2) Project managers
 
(a)  Team efficacy in projects is difficult to be 
encouraged — it has been shown to positively 
affect team performance (Knight et al., 2001);
 
(b)  Restricted resources to compensate — project 
managers have often limited (if any) resources 
to compensate efforts;
 
(c)  Limited formal authority — team members 
are often coordinated by their functional 
managers.
5. Conclusion
Participants interviewed for this research were employ-
ees of well-established Romanian companies, with 
experience in managing and administering performance 
management systems.
A limitation of the study is the relatively small 
sample size. However, the findings of this study are still 
valuable because they offer a base for further research, 
and by the insights into a less studied fairness dimen-
sions (but critical dimension) of performance manage-
ment and appraisal in projects. 
This research has thrown up many questions in 
need of further investigation, in some major 
directions: 
(1) How should the strategic levels support fairness 
(organisational justice) in projects? 
(2) What are the new components of the performance 
management system needed to support a project-
oriented organization? 
How can be operationalized (in the form of project 
managerial tools) the above to sustain a team oriented 
appraisal and reward system.

 
Managing Individual Performance Appraisal in Project Teams  
317
References
Bies, R. J. & Moag, J. S. (1986), Interactional justice: 
Communication criteria for fairness. In Research on 
Negotiation in Organizations, B. Sheppard (ed.), 
pp. 43–55. Greenwich: JAI.
Byrne, Z. S. & Cropanzano, R. (2001), The history of orga-
nizational justice: The founders speak. In Justice in the 
Workplace: From Theory to Practice, Cropanzano (ed.), 
pp. 3–26, Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Colquitt, J. A. (2001), On the dimensionality of organiza-
tional justice: A construct validation of a measure, 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 386–400.
Crawford, K. J. & Cabanis-Brewin, J. (2011), The Strategic 
Project Office, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group.
Gavrea, C., Ilies, L., & Stegerean, R. (2011), Determinants of 
organizational performance: The case of Romania, 
Management & Marketing, 6(2), 285–300.
Ilies, L. (2003), Managementul Calităţii Totale, Cluj-Napoca: 
Editura Dacia. 
Knight, D., Durham, C. C., & Locke, E. A. (2001), The rela-
tionship of team goals, incentives, and efficacy to 
strategic risk, tactical implementation, and performance, 
Academy of Management Journal, 44(2), 326–338.
Lockett, J. (1992), Effective Performance Management, 
London: Kogan Page.
McGregor, D. (1957), An uneasy look at performance 
appraisal, Harvard Business Review, May–June, 89–94.
Miller, J. S. & Cardy, R. L. (2000), Self-monitoring and perfor-
mance appraisal: Rating outcomes in project teams, Journal 
of Organizational Behavior, 21(6), 609–626. Available at 
http://search.proquest.com/docview/224883661?
accountid=1553.
Roch, S. G. & Shanock, L. R. (2006), Organizational jus-
tice in an exchange framework: Clarifying organizational 
justice distinctions, Journal of Management, 32, 
299–322.
Warokka, A., Gallato, C. G., & Moorthy, T. A. (2012), 
Organizational justice in performance appraisal system 
and work performance: Evidence from an emerging 
market, Journal of Human Resources Management 
Research, 1–18. Available at http://search.proquest.com/
docview/1446292526?accountid= 15533.
Wright, P. M., Gardner, T. M., & Moynihan, L. M. (2003), 
The impact of HR practices on the performance of busi-
ness units, Human Resource Management Journal, 
13(3), 21–36.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

319
Chapter 35
The Relation between Labor Force Profitability 
and the Firm’s  Personnel Policy
Gabriel Sorin Badea, Constanta Popescu 
and Silvia Elena Iacob
Valahia University of Targoviste
Academy of Economic Studies
Often, in the economic practice, when the decision to 
diminish the  number of employees is not substantiated 
using calculations and analyses, the increase of both 
labor  productivity and labor volume do not succeed. 
So, frequently, a firm’s leadership — without adequate 
analyses — believe that they will increase their labor 
productivity by lowering their number of employees. 
Applying a personnel policy without rigorous analy-
ses, such leaderships have found themselves faced 
with an unfavorable situation: both their labor produc-
tivity and the physical volume of their production 
decreased. The evolution of the production process is 
explained by the fact that the  physical production vol-
ume largely depends on the labor force volume. The 
high degree of dependence of the labor productivity 
and of the physical production on the labor force fac-
tor can be the effect of an inadequate technical endow-
ment, i.e., the result of a low level of investments in 
the modernization of the production process. Labor 
productivity is a partial efficiency indicator, being 
considered a main element of the system of economic 
efficiency indicators. The main flaw of this kind of 
indicator consists in the fact that it attributes the 
global result (output), obtained by the combined 
action of different factors, to a partial effort (input) 
expressed by one of the production factors that were 
combined.
1.  Introduction: Theoretical 
Approaches
A firm’s personnel policy may sometimes contain 
measures that do not lead to the increase of the labor 
force  productivity: the increase of the number of 
employees (T ) should occur only in the circumstances 
of a  marginal productivity (Wmg) above the  average pro-
ductivity (W ), i.e., when the marginal productivity line 
is above the average productivity line, i.e., Wmg > W (see 
Fig. 1, the area on the left of optimal number of employ-
ees (TM)). In Fig. 1, one can also notice that the optimal 
number of employees (TM) is determined by the inter-
section of the  marginal productivity line and the average 
productivity line, i.e., by the equation Wmg = W.
The policy of increase of the firm’s number of 
employees leads to positive economic and social conse-
quences, beneficial for the employees’ families and/or 
households. 
A special case, given the negative social and eco-
nomic consequences it determines, is represented by 
the policy of job cuts.

320 
G. S. Badea, C. Popescu & S. E. Iacob
The main consequences determined by such a pol-
icy are:
— Decrease of the population’s (families’, house-
holds’) revenue and standard of living;
— Unsatisfied demand for goods and services because 
of the decrease in productivity, respectively in the 
offer of goods and services, if there have been no 
investments to modernize the production process;
— Increase of the prices for goods and services 
because of the decrease in the offer of goods com-
pared to the demand;
— Decreased labor productivity, if there has been no 
investment to modernize the production process.
Consequently, considering the relation between 
average labor  productivity (W ) and  marginal productiv-
ity (Wmg) (see Fig. 2, the area on the right of TM), the 
decrease of the  number of employees must be opted for 
only when the marginal productivity line, i.e., Wmg is 
situated below the  average productivity line (W ), i.e., 
Wmg < W.
We can see that the optimal number of employees 
TM is recorded in conditions similar to the case of 
the option of increase in the number of employees 
(W = Wmg).
Next, we will demonstrate that the employee num-
ber increase/decrease policy in a firm has to be realized 
considering the elasticity of labor productivity in rela-
tion to the number of employees (EW−T). The approach 
is achieved for the case of a homogeneous  physical 
production and, obviously, labor  productivity measured 
in physical units.
It is known that the physical production level (Q) 
can be established using the relation between labor 
productivity (W ) and the number of employees (T ): 
Q = W ∗ T.
The physical production volume is influenced by 
two factors: an extensive one (T ) and an intensive one 
(W ). It can be demonstrated that the policy of modifica-
tion of the labor force volume (T ) can contribute to the 
increase of the physical production volume if the fol-
lowing conditions are met:
— T increases and productivity is elastic (EW−T > 1),
— T decreases and productivity is inelastic (EW−T < 1).
On the basis of the relation presented in the previ-
ous paragraph, between the physical production vol-
ume and the factors that influence this volume, for a 
given production volume Q0, between the labor produc-
tivity level and the number of employees there is a rela-
tion of inverse proportionality: 
0
0
.
Q
Q
W T
W
T
=
∗→
=
For different values of the physical production 
(Q0), the relation 
0
Q
T
W =
can be represented graphi-
cally (see Fig. 3).
Fig. 1.  
w
M
Fig. 2.  
w
M
w

 
The Relation between Labor Force Profitability and the Firm’s Personnel Policy  
321
The  physical production level increases gradually, 
as the isoquant moves away from the origin of the axes 
OT and OW.
Analyzing the graph, one can easily notice that the 
same production level can be achieved with an infinite 
number of combinations (T, W ), with the following 
consequences:
— The increase of the  number of employees (T ) can 
lead to a decrease in productivity;
— The decrease of the number of employees (T ) can 
lead to an increase in productivity.
However, the evolutions in labor productivity also 
depend on conditions related to the labor  productivity 
elasticity level in relation to the number of employees.
The labor productivity elasticity level is determined 
by the productivity dynamics and the dynamics of the 
number of employees measured using the modification 
rhythm (R).
.
W
W T
T
R
E
R
−
=
If there is a relation of inverse proportionality 
between productivity and the number of employees, 
then the elasticity level will acquire negative values, 
while if the relationship between these indicators is 
directly proportional, then the elasticity level will be 
positive.
Previously, it has been stated that the labor produc-
tivity elasticity influences the dynamics of the physical 
production. In order to demonstrate it, we will do the 
following calculations.
From the relationship Q = W ∗ T, we deduce a 
dynamics relationship expressed using dynamics indi-
cators expressed as a decimal:
iQ = iw ∗ iT .
Between the dynamics indicator and the modifica-
tion rhythm there is the relationship: 
i = R + 1.
Replacing the modification indicators with the 
rhythms, the dynamics relationship between physical 
production, labor  productivity, and number of employ-
ees can be written as follows:
RQ + 1 = (RW + 1)(RT + 1).
From the last relationship, we deduce that an 
increase in physical production will be recorded if the 
physical production rhythm is positive, i.e., RQ > 0.
Since RW and RT represent very low values, then the 
product of RW ∗ RT is much lower than any of the terms 
of the equation and it can be neglected (RW ∗ RT → 0) and 
the relation becomes: RQ ≈ Rw + RT.
Taking into account that 
W
T
R
W T
R
E
−
=
 we can write 
that: RW = EW–T ∗ RT, and the dynamics relationship 
deduced previously becomes:
(
)
1
.
W
T
W
T
T
Q
T
W T
T
T
T
W T
R
R
R
E
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
E
−
−
=
+
=
+
∗
=
+
∗
=
+
The final dynamics relationship is:
RQ = RT ∗ (1 + EW–T).
The above-mentioned formula can be used to deter-
mine the relationship between production elasticity 
(EQ−T) and productivity elasticity (Ew−T) measured in 
relation to the volume of the labor factor (T ):
(
)
* 1
:
1
1
.
/
Q
T
Q
T
W T
W T
T
Q T
Q
Q T
T
W T
R
R
R
E
E
R
R
E
E
R
E
R
−
−
−
−
−
=
+
→
= +
→
= +
→
=
∗
The calculation formula for  productivity elasticity 
will be submitted to an analysis that will allow us to 
draw vital conclusions on the consequences of the 
 personnel policy on the labor force volume.
Fig. 3.  
W
sense of the producƟon growth
Q1 > Q0
Q1

322 
G. S. Badea, C. Popescu & S. E. Iacob
Depending on the values of the elasticities EQ−T 
and EW−T, several cases can be delineated. 
(a) The case (1 + EW−T) = 0:
 
→ EQ−T = 0, rigid production, 
 
→  EW−T = −1, productivity with an elasticity equal 
to one and having a relation of inverse propor-
tionality with the labor force factor.
(b) The case 0 < (1 + EW−T) < 1:
 
→  0 < EQ−T < 1, inelastic production and in a rela-
tion of direct proportionality with the labor 
force factor, 
 
→  −1 < EW−T) < 0, inelastic productivity and in a 
relation of inverse proportionality with the 
labor force factor.
(c) The case (1 + EW−T) = 1:
 
→  EQ−T = 1, production with an elasticity equal to 
one and in a relation of direct proportionality 
with the labor force factor, 
 
→  EW−T = 0, rigid productivity.
(d) The case 2 > (1 + EW−T) > 1:
 
→  2 > EQ−T > 1, elastic production and in a relation 
of direct proportionality with the labor force 
factor,
 
→  1 > EW−T > 0, inelastic productivity and in a 
relation of direct proportionality with the labor 
force factor.
(e) The case (1 + EW−T) = 2:
 
→  EQ−T > 2, elastic production and in a relation of 
direct proportionality with the labor force 
factor,
 
→  EW−T = 1, productivity with an elasticity equal 
to one and in a relation of direct proportionality 
with the labor force factor.
(f) The case (1 + EW−T) > 2:
 
→  EQ−T > 2, elastic production and in a relation of 
direct proportionality with the labor force 
factor,
 
→  EW−T > 1, elastic productivity and in a relation 
of direct proportionality with the labor force 
factor.
(g) The case −1 < (1 + EW−T) < 0:
 
→  −1 < EQ−T < 0, inelastic production and in a 
relation of inverse proportionality with the 
labor force factor, 
 
→  −2 < EW−T) < −1, elastic productivity and in a 
relation of inverse proportionality with the 
labor force factor.
(h) The case (1 + EW−T) = −1:
 
→  EQ−T = −1, production with an elasticity equal 
to one and in a relation of inverse proportional-
ity with the labor force factor, 
 
→  EW−T = −2, elastic productivity and in a relation 
of inverse proportionality with the labor force 
factor. 
(i) The case −2 < (1 + EW−T) < −1:
 
→  −2 < EQ−T < −1, elastic production and in a rela-
tion of inverse proportionality with the labor 
force factor, 
 
→  −3 < EW−T < −2, elastic productivity and in a 
relation of inverse proportionality with the 
labor force factor.
( j) The case (1 + EW−T) = −2
 
→  EQ−T = −2, elastic production and in a relation 
of inverse proportionality with the labor force 
factor,
 
→  EW−T = −3, elastic productivity and in a relation 
of inverse proportionality with the labor force 
factor.
(k) The case (1 + EW−T) < −2:
 
→  EQ−T < −2, elastic production and in a relation 
of inverse proportionality with the labor force 
factor,
 
→  EW−T < −3, elastic productivity and in a relation 
of inverse proportionality with the labor force 
factor.
Taking into account the cases presented above, the 
tendencies of the  physical production and of the labor 
productivity have been determined (see Table 1) based 
on the relationships below:
RQ = EQ–T ∗ RT, RW = EW–T ∗ RT.

 
The Relation between Labor Force Profitability and the Firm’s Personnel Policy  
323
From the analysis of the values recorded in 
Table 1, it can be noticed that the physical 
production and labor  productivity increase simultane-
ously (RQ > 0, RW > 0) under the following 
circumstances:
(a) For RT < 0 → Ew−T < −1, respectively EQ−T < 0 (the 
 number of employees will be reduced if  produc-
tivity elasticity is negative and productivity is 
elastic),
(b) For RT > 0 → Ew−T > 0, respectively EQ−T > 1 (the 
number of employees will be increased if produc-
tivity elasticity is positive and productivity is ine-
lastic or elastic).
If the values of the productivity elasticity are 
between −1 and 0, i.e., –1 ≤ EW–T ≤ 0, then there is no 
simultaneous increase in  physical production and labor 
productivity. 
Such situations can be explained based on the rea-
soning in the following paragraph. In order to achieve 
it, dynamics calculations have been used, where the 
modifications have been expressed using the dynamics 
indicators:
.
Q
W
T
i
i
i
=
The intensity and sense of the modification in 
physical production and number of employees will 
determine the sense and intensity of the modification in 
labor force productivity. The intensity and sense of 
modification of the indicators analyzed are measured 
using the dynamics indicators (i) or the rhythm of 
modification (R).
The relationships between the dynamics of the 
physical production (iQ) and the number of employees 
(iT) will influence the dynamics of labor  produc tiv ity 
(iw).
⇒ When physical production increases (iQ > 1), while 
the number of employees is kept constant or 
decreases (iT = 1, iT < 1), labor productivity will 
increase, as the value of the fraction increases, i.e., 
the indicator of dynamics for labor productivity 
becomes bigger than one (iw > 1).
⇒ When the production volume increases (iQ > 1), 
and the number of employees is maintained con-
stant or increases (iT = 1, iT > 1), in order for the 
labor  productivity level to increase (iW > 1) it is 
necessary for the physical production dynamics to 
be bigger than the dynamics of the number of 
employees (iQ > iT).
⇒ If the production volume decreases (iQ < 1), and the 
number of employees is kept constant or increases 
(iT = 1, iT > 1), the labor productivity level will 
decrease, as the value of the fraction decreases, 
respectively the dynamics indicator becomes lower 
than one (iw < 1).
Next, we will analyze the cases when the physical 
production level and the number of employees 
decrease. In the case when both the number of 
employees and the physical production decrease (iT < 
1, iQ < 1), the rhythms of modification of the two indi-
cators acquire negative values (RT < 0 and RQ < 0). It 
is obvious that the intensity and sense of modification 
in physical production and number of employees will 
determine the sense and intensity of the modification 
in labor force productivity.
Table 1.  Effects of the labor productivity elasticity on the physical production dynamics
Indicators
Indicator level
EW−T
< −3
–3
−3 → −2
–2
−2 → −1
–1
−1→ 0
0
0 → 1
1
>1
EQ−T
< −2
–2
−2 → −1
–1
−1→ 0
0
 0 → 1
1
1 → 2
2
>2
RQ for RT < 0
>0
>0
>0
>0
>0
0
<0
<0
<0
<0
<0
RW for RT < 0
>0
>0
>0
>0
>0
>0
>0
0
<0
<0
<0
RQ for RT > 0
<0
<0
<0
<0
<0
0
>0
>0
>0
>0
>0
RW for RT > 0
<0
<0
<0
<0
<0
<0
<0
0
>0
>0
>0

324 
G. S. Badea, C. Popescu & S. E. Iacob
⇒ If the production volume is kept constant (iQ = 1), 
and the  number of employees is decreased (iT < 1), 
the labor force  productivity level will decrease 
(iW < 1). 
⇒ If the decrease of the  physical production volume is 
more intense than the reduction of the labor force level 
( |
|
|
| ,
0,
0
),
Q
T
T
Q
Q
T
R
R
R
R
R
R
>
<
<
→
>
 then the 
labor force productivity level will decrease (RW < 0);
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.
Q
Q
W
w
T
T
Q
T
w
w
i
R
i
R
i
R
R
R
R
R
+
=
< →
+ =
<
+
→
+ <
+
→
+ < →
<
This case is the most unfavorable in the firm’s  per-
sonnel policy because it triggers a decrease in physical 
production, a decrease of the economically active pop-
ulation, a decrease in labor productivity, a lowering of 
the population’s revenues and consequently a decrease 
of the population’s standard of living.
⇒ If the decrease of the labor force volume is higher 
than the decrease of the production level 
( |
|
|
| ,
0,
0
),
T
Q
Q
T
T
Q
R
R
R
R
R
R
>
<
<
→
<
 t h a t 
will trigger an increase in the labor productivity 
level (Rw > 0); 
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.
Q
Q
W
w
T
T
Q
T
w
w
i
R
i
R
i
R
R
R
R
R
+
=
> →
+ =
>
+
→
+ >
+
→
+ > →
>
This last case of the firm’s personnel policy repre-
sents a false revitalization in economy. We have charac-
terized this condition of the economic activity as a false 
revitalization in economy because the increase of the 
labor productivity level under these circumstances is 
only a result of calculations, without generating benefi-
cial effects for society. 
2.  Case Study: Labor  Productivity at 
the Branch Petrom S.A. Târgovişte
2.1.  Labor productivity level and dynamics 
at the Branch Petrom S.A. Târgovişte
In the equations presented in the theoretical part and 
used in the analyses carried out for the Branch Petrom 
S.A. Târgovişte, the following notations have been 
used:
→ 0 for the indicator of the year 2009;
→ 1 for the indicator of the year 2011.
Because the productivity level includes as well the 
influence of the prices from one year to the next, it is 
advisable either to calculate productivity in real terms 
(by deflating the production value or the productivity 
value), or by calculating labor force productivity based 
on physical production. 
In the present study, we have chosen to calculate 
labor force productivity based on physical production.
As far as the dynamics of the physical production 
on production sections is concerned (see Table 2) a 
decrease of the physical production for all the sections 
has been recorded, the most significant decreases being 
recorded at Gura Ocniţei (−29.42%) and Ochiuri 
(−28.58%) while at Măneşti the decrease was lower 
(−15.79%).
In relation to the negative evolution of the physical 
production, the evolution of the number of employees in 
the production sections also has a decreasing tendency. 
Table 2.  Evolution in physical production (Q) and number of employees (T ) on production sections 
 during the years 2009 and 2011
Production 
volume — TO∗
Employee 
number — T∗
Section
2009
2011
2009
2011
IQ (%)
RQ (%) 
IT (%)
RT (%)
Ochiuri
51,100
36,500
230
205
71.42
−28.58
89.13
−10.87
G. Ocniţei
62,050
43,800
264
212
70.58
−29.42
80.30
−19.70
Măneşti
69,350
58,400
135
99
84.21
−15.79
73.33
−26.67
Total
182,500
138,700
629
516
76.00
−24.00
82.03
−17.97
Source: ∗Data from the accountancy of the Branch Petrom S.A. Târgovişte.

 
The Relation between Labor Force Profitability and the Firm’s Personnel Policy  
325
The most significant personnel decrease was recorded at 
Măneşti section (−26.67%). For the whole economic 
unit, the personnel decrease was of −17.97%, while the 
production decrease was of −24%.
For the calculation of the physical productivity we 
have used data that are part of the firm’s accountancy, 
and in order to analyze labor productivity (measured in 
physical units) in the production sections and for the 
entire company (Branch Petrom S.A. Târgovişte) we 
have used the data of the years 2009 and 2011 (Table 3).
The negative evolutions of the  physical production 
and of the  number of employees influenced the level 
and dynamics of labor productivity. The only section 
where an increase in labor productivity has been 
recorded was the section from Măneşti (+14.83%). 
For the other sections, the decrease in labor productiv-
ity was much higher than the one recorded for the entire 
company. So, on the whole, the firm’s productivity 
recorded a decrease of −7.36%, and below this negative 
rhythm we find the sections of Ochiuri (−19.87%) and 
Gura Ocniţei (−12.1%). 
The increase in productivity from Măneşti section 
can be explained by the very significant decrease in the 
number of employees (−26.67%), and the less signifi-
cant decrease in the physical production (–15.78%). 
The increase in labor productivity from Măneşti section 
was not able to compensate for the very significant 
productivity decreases from the other production sec-
tions (Ochiuri and Gura Ocniţei).
The dynamics in labor productivity for the period 
2009–2011 was influenced by the modifications in vol-
ume and structure both concerning physical production 
(Q) and concerning the number of employees (T ). 
Analyzing the centralized data from Table 3, we can 
notice different evolutions in the production structure 
and in the structure of the employees.
Concerning the structure of the labor force on sec-
tions, according to the data presented in Table 4, we can 
notice an increase of the share of employees from 
Ochiuri, while for the sections of Gura Ocniţei and 
Măneşti, the share of employees decreased.
Concerning the  physical production, for the sec-
tions of Ochiuri and Gura Ocniţei, the production share 
decreased, while for the section of Măneşti the produc-
tion share increased.
For the period 2009–2011, the physical production 
shares of each production section changed as follows:
— For the section of Ochiuri, a decrease from 28% to 
26.33% was recorded;
— For the section of Gura Ocnitei, a decrease from 
34% to 31.57% was recorded;
— For the section of Manesti, an increase from 38% 
to 42.10% was recorded.
2.2.  Correlation  marginal productivity — 
 average productivity
The marginal productivity is an indicator explaining the 
tendency of the average labor force productivity and at 
the same time influencing the production elasticity in 
relation to the labor force factor. 
In order to calculate the marginal productivity, we 
used the data from Table 2. 
A specific feature of the company under analysis is 
the decrease in the  number of employees and produc-
tion. That is why the evolution of the average produc-
tivity (calculated for the production sections and for the 
entire company) will be influenced by the existing rela-
tionship between the average productivity (w0) and the 
marginal productivity of the period analyzed (wmg) and 
Table 3.  Physical productivity level and dynamics for each 
production section during the years 2009 and 2011
W (TO/
employee)
Section
2009
2011
Iw (%)
Rw (%)
IQ (%)
IT (%)
Ochiuri
222.17
178.04
80.13
−19.87
71.42
89.13
G. Ocniţei
235.03
206.60
87.90
−12.10
70.58
80.30
Măneşti
513.70
589.89
114.83
14.83
84.21
73.33
Total
290.14
268.79
92.64
−7.36
76.00
82.03
Table 4.  Structure in point of physical production (gQ) and 
employees (gT) for each production section during the years 2009 
and 2011
gQ —%
gT —%
Section
2009
2011
2009
2011
Ochiuri
28
26.33
36.56
39.72
G. Ocniţei
34
31.57
41.97
41.09
Măneşti
38
42.10
21.57
19.19
Total
100
100.00
100.00
100.00

326 
G. S. Badea, C. Popescu & S. E. Iacob
by the descending tendency in the  number of 
employees.
The data in Table 5 highlight the following evolu-
tions of the  average productivity:
— For the sections of Ochiuri, Gura Ocniţei and for 
the whole company, because the marginal labor 
productivity is above the average productivity of 
the year analyzed — 2009(w0), and the number of 
employees is decreasing, the  average productivity 
will decrease during the following period (w1 < w0);
— For the section of Măneşti, because the marginal 
labor force productivity is below the average pro-
ductivity (w0), and the number of employees is 
decreasing, the average productivity will increase 
during the following period (w1 > w0).
In order to evaluate the influence of the labor force 
using production elasticity we have used the data in 
Table 6.
Labor force productivity is the intensive factor that 
influences the production volume, while the number of 
employees is the extensive factor.
In order to highlight the sensitivity of the produc-
tion in relation to the labor production factor, we calcu-
lated the production elasticity in correlation to this 
factor (EQ−T) both on production sections and for the 
entire company.
0
0
0
0
0
0.
mg
Q
Q
Q
T
Q T
T
T
Q T
mg
Q
w
R
E
Q
w
R
T
T
w
w
E
−
−
Δ
Δ
Δ
=
=
=
=
Δ
→
=
∗
While for the sections of Ochiuri, Gura Ocniţei and 
for the entire company the production is elastic in rela-
tion to the labor force (EQ−T is bigger than one), for the 
section of Măneşti the production is inelastic (EQ−T is 
below one).
The highest elasticity level was recorded at the sec-
tion of Ochiuri (2.62), and the lowest at the section of 
Măneşti (0.59). For the whole company, an average 
elasticity of 1.33 was recorded.
We must notice the fact that the calculated elasticity 
level is recorded under the circumstances of a decrease 
both in point of production and in point of the  number 
of employees. The largest production decrease was 
recorded at the section of Gura Ocniţei (−29.42%), and 
the most significant decrease in the number of employ-
ees was recorded at the section of Măneşti (−26.67%).
The production elasticity level in relation to the 
labor force factor explains as well the difference of 
productivity (difference between the average productiv-
ity measured for the year 2009 and the  marginal pro-
ductivity calculated for the period 2009–2011).
The differences between the average productivity 
and the marginal productivity determine the production 
elasticity level in relation to the labor force factor:
0
.
mg
Q T
w
E
w
−=
The fact that the average labor force productivity 
for the production sections of Ochiuri, Gura Ocniţei 
and for the whole company for the year 2009 is lower 
than the corresponding marginal productivity will trig-
ger high production elasticity levels.
Table 5.  Marginal productivity level and its effects on the average 
productivity
Section
ΔQ
ΔT
Wmg ΔQ/ΔT)
W0
W1
Ochiuri
−14600
−25
584.00
222.17
178.04
G. Ocniţei
−18250
−52
350.96
235.03
206.60
Măneşti
−10950
−36
304.16
513.70
589.89
Total
−43800
−113
387.61
290.14
268.79
Table 6.  Table for the calculation of EQ−T
Section
IQ (%)
IT (%)
RQ = IQ − 100 (%)
RT = IT − 100 (%)
EQ−T = 
RQ/RT
W
— 
0 = 
Q2007/T2007 
Ochiuri
71.42
89.13
−28.58
−10.87
2.62
222.17
G. Ocniţei
70.58
80.30
−29.42
−19.70
1.49
235.03
Măneşti
84.21
73.33
−15.79
−26.67
0.59
513.70
Total
76.00
82.03
−24.00
−17.97
1.33
290.14

 
The Relation between Labor Force Profitability and the Firm’s Personnel Policy  
327
For the section of Măneşti, the productivity for the 
year 2009 is higher than the  marginal productivity, 
determining the lowest level of the production elasticity 
as well.
The sections’ (average and marginal) productivi-
ties, as well as the negative rhythms of modification in 
the  number of employees triggered modifications in 
the  average productivity of the following period, as 
 follows (see Fig. 1):
— When the marginal productivity was higher than 
the average productivity of the base period, and the 
number of employees decreased, this created the 
necessary grounds for the average productivity of 
the current period to decrease (see the sections of 
Ochiuri, Gura Ocniţei and the whole company).
— When the average productivity of the base period 
was higher than the marginal productivity, and the 
number of employees decreased, this created the 
necessary grounds for the average productivity 
of the  current period to increase (see the section of 
Măneşti).
2.3.  Productivity elasticity
The analysis in point of labor productivity can be deep-
ened using productivity elasticity. So, on the basis of 
the data obtained from the firm, we calculated the pro-
ductivity elasticity level on production sections and for 
the whole economic unit (see Table 7). The results of 
the calculations for the productivity elasticity level 
(EW−T) will be used to substantiate from a theoretical 
viewpoint the adequate  personnel policy. The personnel 
policy adopted will substantiate the modification of the 
number of employees (RT), so as to assure a positive 
dynamics for the labor force productivity level (RW) 
and the  physical production volume (RQ). The policy 
related to the number of employees is substantiated 
using the formulas below:
(
)
0
,
*
1
z
0
,
,
.
*
W
W T
W
W T
T
T
Q
T
W T
W
Q
R
E
R
E
R
R
R
R
R
E
R
−
−
−
>
→
=
=
>
=
+
Naturally, between labor force productivity and 
labor force level there has to be a relation of inverse 
proportionality, when the physical production level is 
kept constant. However, concerning the firm under 
analysis, we can notice that a directly proportional rela-
tionship appeared between the two indicators, a fact 
that contributed to the decrease in physical production 
and labor productivity when the labor force volume 
decreased. The directly proportional relationship deter-
mined as well the existence of the negative values of the 
labor productivity elasticity, contrary to the hypothesis 
emitted in the theoretical part of this chapter.
The analysis of the data obtained following the 
calculations allows us to notice that the personnel poli-
cies were sometimes non-beneficial for some produc-
tion sections and for the whole company.
The leadership of the company practiced the reduc-
tion of personnel in all the subunits of the branch, which 
led to a decrease in physical production in all these subu-
nits, the only subunit that recorded an increase in labor 
productivity being the section of Măneşti. This evolution 
of the production process is explained by the fact that the 
physical production volume is largely dependent on the 
labor force volume (the production is elastic in relation 
to the labor force factor for all the sections and for the 
entire branch except for the section of Măneşti — see 
Table 7). The high degree of dependence of the labor 
Table 7.  Table for calculating productivity elasticity (EW−T)
Practical personnel policy
Theoretical personnel policy
Section
RW (%)
RT (%)
EW−T 
= RW /RT
1 + EW−T
RQ (%)
RT for 
RW > 0 → RT 
∗ EW−T > 0
RT for 
RQ > 0 → RT 
∗ (1 + EW−T) > 0
Ochiuri
−19.87
−10.87
1.827
2.827
−28.58
RT > 0
RT > 0
G. Ocniţei
−12.10
−19.70
0.614
1.614
−29.42
RT > 0
RT > 0
Măneşti
14.83
−26.67
−0.556
0.444
−15.79
RT < 0
RT > 0
Total
−7.36
−17.97
0.409
1.409
−24.00
RT > 0
RT > 0

328 
G. S. Badea, C. Popescu & S. E. Iacob
productivity and of the  physical production on the labor 
force factor can be the effect of an inadequate technical 
endowment, i.e., the result of a low level of the invest-
ments for the modernization of the production process.
Positive dynamics in labor productivity and physical 
production would have been recorded if the firm’s man-
agement would have ensured, according to the data from 
Table 6, an increase in the  number of employees. A 
decrease of the number of employees should have been 
achieved only if some funds had been allotted for the 
modernization of the production process, which in turn 
would have contributed to a decrease of the high level of 
the production elasticity in relation to the labor force 
factor (see Table 7). 
3. Conclusions
Labor productivity is a partial efficiency indicator, 
being considered a main element of the system of indi-
cators concerning economic efficiency. The main defi-
ciency of this type of indicator consists in the fact that 
it attributes the global result (output), obtained through 
the combined action of different factors, to a partial 
effort (input) expressed by one of the production factors 
that were combined.
In essence, the activity deployed by such a firm 
leads to a decrease of the internal offer of goods and 
services and to the decrease of the number of the eco-
nomically active population, with serious socio-eco-
nomic consequences on the population’s standard of 
living. The economic activity being a form of human 
activity, it is determined by human needs, and its results 
should have a beneficial character for society. It is not 
acceptable for the economic activity to be generated by 
human needs, and yet by its effects to have a negative 
influence on the bearers of human needs by lowering 
their standard of living. 
References
Andrei, L. (2011), Economie, Bucuresti: Economica.
Badea, G. S. (2006), Resursele de Muncă-Măsurare şi 
Analiză Statistică: Bibliotheca.
Badea, G. S. (2009), Microeconomie, Târgovişte: Valahia 
University Press.
Mayeur, d’ A. (Coordinator) (2013), Microeconomie, France: 
Nathan.
Popescu, C. (Coordinator), Badea, G. S., & Croitoru, G. 
(2006), Microeconomie: Teorie si Aplicatii, Târgovişte: 
Bibliotheca.
Popescu, C. (2009), Economie, Târgovişte: Bibliotheca.
Sowell, T. (2011), Basic Economics, New York: Basic 
Books.
Schiller, B. (Coordinator) (2012), The Micro Economy Today, 
New York: McGraw-Hill Series Economics/Irwin.

329
Chapter 36
Analysis of  Multinational Companies in  Romania*
Eduard Ceptureanu and Sebastian Ceptureanu 
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
Multinational companies generate a substantial contri-
bution to the development of the world economy by 
integrating their systems to the trade, the production 
process, and the monetary and financial structures.
This chapter aims at investigating the impact of 
multinational companies in the Romanian economy, by 
customizing effects on some important economic indi-
cators. Functioning of the global economy, character-
ized by the expression of a tendency to open national 
markets can be better explained by analyzing the for-
mation process of multinational companies, the causes 
of this process, the size and, location of their problems 
related to the functioning, as well as presenting the 
effects generated on the national economy.
Multinational companies generate a substantial 
contribution to the development of the world economy 
by integrating their systems to the trade, the production 
process and the monetary and financial structures.
Occurred since the late 19th century, in time, mul-
tinational companies have imposed relatively fast 
becoming the next period of the Second World War not 
insignificant factor in the world economy, often they 
are presented as such representative organization for 
post-industrial thinking. Complexity of this process of 
internationalization of firms as is proven by the large 
number of names and ways of defining their specialized 
of renowned experts in the field.
This chapter aims at investigating the impact of 
multinational companies in the Romanian economy, 
by customizing effects on some important economic 
indicators.
In the context of increased globalization and the 
growing interest shown for multinational companies, 
which tend to be a “fashionable concept”,  management 
field is constantly growing during the past decade gain-
ing a significant scale among theorists and practitioners 
in Management Science and enjoying the attention of 
the visible and administrative bodies and public sector 
in developed countries through the great amount of 
human, financial, and material taken from this area.
1. Introduction
Functioning of the global economy, characterized by 
the expression of a tendency to open national markets 
can be better explained by analyzing the formation pro-
cess of multinational companies, the causes of this 
process, the size, and location of their problems related 
* This work was co-financed from the European Social Fund through Sectoral Operational Programme Human Resources Development 
2007–2013, project number POSDRU/159/1.5/S/142115 “Performance and excellence in doctoral and postdoctoral research in Romanian 
economics science domain”.

330 
E. Ceptureanu & S. Ceptureanu
to the functioning, as well as presenting the effects 
generated on the national economy.
 Multinational companies generate a substantial 
contribution to the development of the world economy 
by integrating their systems to the trade, the production 
process and the monetary and financial structures.
Occurred since the late 19th century, in time, mul-
tinational companies have imposed relatively fast 
becoming the next period of the Second World War not 
insignificant factor in the world economy, often they 
are presented as such representative organization for 
post-industrial thinking. Complexity of this process of 
internationalization of firms and is proven by the large 
number of names and ways of defining their specialized 
of renowned experts in the field.
This paper aims at investigating the impact of multi-
national companies in the Romanian economy, by cus-
tomizing effects on some important economic indicators.
In the context of increased globalization and the 
growing interest shown for multinational companies, 
which tend to be “fashionable concept”  management 
field is constantly growing during the past decade gain-
ing a significant scale among theorists and practition-
ers in Management Science and enjoying the attention 
of the visible and administrative bodies and public 
sector in developed countries through the great amount 
of human, financial and material taken from this area.
2.  Analysis of Multinational
Companies
2.1.  Evolution of turnover (2002–2013)
In the analyzed multinationals, global turnover in the 
period 2002–2013 was at the EUR 281,255,7 mn. If 
we want to do a ranking according to Activity-Based-
Costing (ABC) methodology, we find that the first 
10% of companies as turnover (OMV Petrom SA, 
Arcelor Mittal Galati SA, Rompetrol Rafinare SA, 
METRO CASH & CARRY  ROMANIA SRL, 
Automobile Dacia SA, Romtelecom SA ) contributes 
with 38% (EUR 107,661.7 mn) to generate the results 
above- mentioned. The next 20% of companies 
(ORANGE ROMANIA SA, Vodafone Romania SA, 
GDF Suez Energy Romania SA LUKOIL  ROMANIA 
SRL, Rompetrol Downstream, PETROTEL LUKOIL 
SA, British American Tobacco (ROMANIA) 
TRADING, Porsche Romania SRL, CARREFOUR 
ROMANIA SA, SELGROS CASH & CARRY Ltd., 
Coca Cola HBC Romania SRL, OMV ROMANIA 
MINERALOEL SRL) generates 30.4% of total turno-
ver (EUR 85,639,38 mns). In quadrant C we included 
the remaining 70% of companies that contributes 
only in a proportion of 31.6% to generate the global 
turnover.
Table 1.
No.
Company
Field
of activity
Total turnover — EUR
in mns 
 1.
OMV PETROM SA
Oil
36324,22
2.
AUTOMOBILE DACIA SA
Auto
16652,86
3.
ROMPETROL RAFINARE S.A.
Oil
16596,15
4.
ARCELOR MITTAL GALATI SA
Industry
14773,06
5.
METRO CASH & CARRY ROMANIA SRL
Retail
13193,46
6.
ROMTELECOM S.A.
IT
10121,96
7.
ORANGE ROMANIA SA
IT
 9535,63
8.
ROMPETROL DOWNSTREAM SRL
Oil
 9153,33
9.
VODAFONE ROMANIA SA
IT
 8908,69
10.
LUKOIL ROMANIA SRL
Oil
 8348,54
(Continued )
2.2.  Ranking multinational companies 
by turnover

 
Analysis of Multinational Companies in Romania 
331
Table 1.  (Continued )
No.
Company
Field
of activity
Total turnover — EUR
in mns 
11.
GDF SUEZ ENERGY ROMANIA S.A
Energy
 8302,65
12.
BRITISH AMERICAN TOBACCO (ROMANIA) TRADING
Retail
 7653,44
13.
PETROTEL LUKOIL SA
Oil
 6625,75
14.
CARREFOUR ROMANIA SA
Retail
 6614,69
15.
SELGROS CASH&CARRY SRL
Retail
 5552,93
16.
PORSCHE ROMANIA SRL
Auto
 5340,44
17.
KAUFLAND ROMANIA SOCIETATE IN COMANDITA SIMPLA
Retail
 5001,18
18.
NOKIA ROMANIA SRL
IT
 4602,11
19.
JT INTERNATIONAL (ROMANIA) SRL
Retail
 4257,9
20.
JTI MANUFACTURING SA
Retail
 3983,55
21.
COCA COLA HBC ROMANIA SRL
Retail
 3777,2
22.
CONTINENTAL AUTOMOTIVE PRODUCTS SRL
Auto
 3519,85
23.
MEDIPLUS EXIM SRL
Pharma
 3432,1
24.
MOL ROMANIA PETROLEUM PRODUCTS SRL
Oil
 3425,6
25.
E.ON GAZ ROMANIA S.A.
Energy
 3369,59
26.
REAL,- HYPERMARKET ROMANIA S.R.L.
Retail
 3306,71
27.
CEZ DISTRIBUTIE SA
Energy
 3123,97
28.
ENEL ENERGIE SA
Energy
 3034,75
29.
OMV ROMANIA MINERALOEL SRL
Oil
 2795,96
30.
PHILIP MORRIS TRADING S.R.L.
Retail
 2731,09
31.
MICHELIN ROMANIA SA
Auto
 2651,73
32.
DAEWOO-MANGALIA HEAVY INDUSTRIES SA
Industry
 2567,99
33.
ROMANIA HYPERMARCHE SA
Retail
 2408,63
34.
BILLA ROMANIA SRL
Retail
 2335,14
35.
RENAULT INDUSTRIE ROUMANIE SRL
Industry
 2131,37
36.
LAFARGE CIMENT (ROMANIA)SA
Retail
 2097,19
37.
HEINEKEN ROMANIA SA
Industry
 2093,85
38.
TOP BRANDS DISTRIBUTION SRL
Retail
 2078,59
39.
HOLCIM (ROMANIA) SA
Industry
 2071,71
40.
COSMOTE ROMANIAN MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SA
IT
 1908,86
41.
URSUS BREWERIES S A
Industry
 1905,41
42.
ARCTIC SA
Industry
 1887,59
43.
TAKATA-PETRI ROMANIA
Auto
 1799,54
44.
CEZ VANZARE
Energy
 1701,52
45.
CARPATCEMENT HOLDING SA
Industry
 1678,79
46.
FARMEXPERT DCI SA
Pharma
 1645,49
47.
PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTION SRL
Retail
 1600,81
48.
PRAKTIKER ROMANIA SRL
Retail
 1530,4
49.
ALFRED C.TOEPFER INTERNATIONAL (ROMANIA) SRL
Agriculture
 1507,69
50.
SCHAEFFLER ROMANIA SRL
Auto
 1503,57
(Continued )

332 
E. Ceptureanu & S. Ceptureanu
Compared to the field, it appears that the most  multina-
tional companies are operating in trade (16 companies), 
followed by energy and industrial areas (by 9 companies), 
and oil (6 companies). The situation reflects the structure 
of the  Romanian economy, oriented mainly to areas with 
low added value and exploitation of natural resources.
To increase the relevance of our analysis, we also 
consider the issue by the field of activity for the sample 
of the analyzed companies.
It can be ascertained that the largest weight in 
developing the global turnover of the 58 multinational 
analyzed is in the oil area (29.6%), which indicates 
relatively low level of development of the national 
economy, based mainly on primary operation natural 
resources, to which multinationals were oriented. The 
retail domain is following (24.2%), then IT (12.5%), 
and industry (10.6%). Although the situation may 
seems surprising, the change of positions held by 
retail and industry is caused by the change of orienta-
tion of the Romanian economy from one of production 
to one of consuption. It can be seen the very low per-
centage in agriculture domain (1.6%) to create overall 
turnover.
2.3.  Variation of turnover at the analyzed 
multinational companies
Regarding to this criterion, it can be observed that the 
highest positive change for the entire analyzed period 
is 
at 
the 
company 
called 
CONTINENTAL 
AUROMOTIVE PRODUCTS SRL (678571%) due 
to expanding business in Romania by opening new 
factories especially in Transylvania, followed by 
ROMPETROL DOWNSTREAM SRL (274559%) — 
this is caused by the expansion of retail activity (open-
ing of new stations), entering in the markets of 
neighboring countries and even in France by acquiring 
a chain of gas stations. CARPATCEMENT HOLDING 
SA is holding the third position (130 176%), its 
increase is due to the acquisition and modernization of 
production facilities and exports to the regional  market. 
In the fourth position is the back network of retailers 
SELGROS CASH & CARRY SRL (53,793%) — 
increase in turnover, in this case, is generated by the 
increasing of Romanian customer’s purchasing power 
and the expanding in national distribution. It is impor-
tant to note that 30 companies (51.72% of the ana-
lyzed sample structure) recorded, in the period of 10 
years, a growth in turnover below 10%, which indi-
cates the hardships faced in domestic business 
development.
Table 2.
No.
Domain
Number
of companies
1.
Agriculture
 3
2.
Auto
 6
3.
Energy
 9
4.
Industry
 9
5.
IT
 5
6.
Oil
 7
7.
Pharma
 3
8.
Retail
16
No.
Company
Field
of activity
Total turnover — EUR
in mns 
51.
BUNGE ROMANIA SRL
Agriculture
 1469,98
52.
CARGILL AGRICULTURA SRL
Agriculture
 1398,74
53.
REWE ROMANIA SRL
Energy
 1341,56
54.
E.ON MOLDOVA FURNIZARE SA
Energy
 1046,15
55.
SENSIBLU SRL
Pharma
  980,18
56.
HOLZINDUSTRIE SCHWEIGHOFER SRL
Industry
  772,93
57.
ENEL ENERGIE MUNTENIA S.A.
Energy
  637,55
58.
DISTRIGAZ SUD RETELE SRL
Energy
  443,38
Table 1.  (Continued )

 
Analysis of Multinational Companies in Romania 
333
2.4.  The evolution of gross proﬁ t for the 
sample of analyzed companies
It appears that 42 companies, representing 72.41% of the 
sample size were recorded profit in the analyzed period, 
the cumulative volume for all companies in the sample 
during the analyzed period being EUR 16,465,15 mn. 
Around 16 companies recorded operating loss in this 
period, the estimated volume being EUR 3169,37 mn.
Among the performers we would particularly high-
light OMV PETROM SA with a level of EUR 4.275 
mn, representing 25.96% of the total profit of the 
analyzed companies in those 10 years. In fact, if we 
were to classify firms according to the principle of 
ABC, the first five companies that make profits gener-
ates a contribution of 66.86% (EUR 11,009,22 mn) to 
complete this indicator. When referring to losses, we 
find that the highest loss record is at ROMPETROL 
RAFINARE (EUR −1122,247 mn) followed by 
COSMOTE 
 ROMANIAN 
MOBILE 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SA (EUR −418,291 mn), 
and PETROTEL LUKOIL SA (EUR −396,121 mn). 
Total losses in the analyzed companies are EUR 
−3169,37 mn.
Table 3.
No.
Company name
Level of the profit/
loss EUR mn
1.
OMV PETROM SA
4275,023
2.
ORANGE ROMANIA SA
3108,308
3.
VODAFONE ROMANIA SA
2269,092
4.
LAFARGE CIMENT (ROMANIA)SA
811,229
5.
PORSCHE ROMANIA SRL
545,57
6.
CARPATCEMENT HOLDING SA
509,962
7.
ROMTELECOM S.A.
500,086
8.
GDF SUEZ ENERGY ROMANIA S.A
461,856
9.
METRO CASH & CARRY ROMANIA SRL
448,044
10.
COCA COLA HBC ROMANIA SRL
424,044
11.
BRITISH AMERICAN TOBACCO (ROMANIA) 
TRADING
414,812
12.
AUTOMOBILE DACIA SA
257,032
13.
HOLCIM (ROMANIA) SA
252,262
14.
CEZ DISTRIBUTIE SA
243,479
15.
HEINEKEN ROMANIA SA
215,439
16.
ENEL ENERGIE SA
191,211
17.
SELGROS CASH&CARRY SRL
159,339
18.
URSUS BREWERIES S A
144,455
19.
CONTINENTAL AUTOMOTIVE PRODUCTS 
SRL
143,766
20.
ARCTIC SA
132,814
21.
NOKIA ROMANIA SRL
104,501
(Continued )
2.5. Proﬁ tability ranking

334 
E. Ceptureanu & S. Ceptureanu
No.
Company name
Level of the profit/
loss EUR mn
22.
CARREFOUR ROMANIA SA
101,166
23.
MEDIPLUS EXIM SRL
100,341
24.
BILLA ROMANIA SRL
83,715
25.
MOL ROMANIA PETROLEUM PRODUCTS SRL
78,808
26.
ROMANIA HYPERMARCHE SA (CORA)
61,413
27.
OMV ROMANIA MINERALOEL SRL
47,789
28.
HOLZINDUSTRIE SCHWEIGHOFER SRL
46,288
29.
FARMEXPERT DCI SA
45,236
30.
E.ON MOLDOVA FURNIZARE SA
42,25
31.
PHILIP MORRIS TRADING S.R.L.
36,659
32.
PRAKTIKER ROMANIA SRL
35,386
33.
REWE ROMANIA SRL
34,93
34.
ENEL ENERGIE MUNTENIA S.A.
32,075
35.
KAUFLAND ROMANIA SOCIETATE IN 
COMANDITA SIMPLA
28,294
36.
PROCTER & GAMBLE DISTRIBUTION SRL
23,943
37.
LUKOIL ROMANIA SRL
20,002
38.
E.ON GAZ ROMANIA S.A.
11,051
39.
RENAULT INDUSTRIE ROUMANIE SRL
9,772
40.
TOP BRANDS DISTRIBUTION SRL
8,159
41.
DISTRIGAZ SUD RETELE SRL
4,831
42.
ALFRED C.TOEPFER INTERNATIONAL 
(ROMANIA) SRL
0,72
43.
CEZ VANZARE
−1,085
44.
SENSIBLU SRL
−7,834
45.
JTI MANUFACTURING SA
−14,715
46.
TAKATA-PETRI ROMANIA
−23,703
47.
CARGILL AGRICULTURA SRL
−31,729
48.
JT INTERNATIONAL (ROMANIA) SRL
−32,127
49.
SCHAEFFLER ROMANIA SRL
−54,698
50.
BUNGE ROMANIA SRL
−58,373
51.
ROMPETROL DOWNSTREAM SRL
−79,43
52.
MICHELIN ROMANIA SA
−99,985
53.
REAL,-HYPERMARKET ROMANIA SRL
−175,023
54.
DAEWOO-MANGALIA HEAVY INDUSTRIES 
SA
−278,539
55.
ARCELORMITTAL GALATI SA
−339,466
56.
PETROTEL LUKOIL SA
−369,121
57.
COSMOTE ROMANIAN MOBILE 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SA
−481,291
58.
ROMPETROL RAFINARE S.A.
−1,122,247
Table 3.  (Continued )

 
Analysis of Multinational Companies in Romania 
335
As shown in Table 3, the highest proportion in cre-
ating global profits of analyzed  multinational compa-
nies is held by the oil field (47.53%), followed by Auto 
sector (20.92%), and Retail (12.02%). The Table 5, 
relative to the turnover is illustrative:
Regarding the correlation of the turnover and prof-
itability contribution in generating the total output is a 
contradictory situation.
So, the oil field maintain its supremacy in terms of 
contributing to the overall turnover for the analyzed 
multinational companies and has a correlation in profit-
ability level also. Auto field, even if it has only the 
fourth contribution to the creation of annual global 
turnover is growing rapidly in terms of profitability.
An evolution of the same type with the record of oil 
field is also in the retail field, which ranks third in the 
ranking of profitability with the second contribution to 
the creation of global turnover.
Regarding the correlation of the turnover with the 
losses, we can observe that the energy field is on trend 
of increased risk (1st at loss) in the conditions of gen-
erating an average contribution to the formation of 
overall turnover (6th), and level of profit is also medium 
(position 6). This position is surprising because the lit-
erature considers that this area is one of the most active 
in generating higher added value.
A high level of risk (2nd at losses) associated with 
a higher profitability (1st place at profit), is recorded by 
the industry field, in the conditions of an average con-
tribution to the creation of total turnover (5th), identical 
with the profitability ranking. It appears that two fields 
(IT and Oil) does not have companies with losses.
2.6. Losses ranking
Table 4.
No.
Field name
Profit — in mn EUR
%
Loss — in mn EUR
%
1.
Agriculture
—
—
−234,113
7.39
2.
Auto
3437,344
20.92
−59,458
1.88
3.
Energy
587,697
.58
−2064,93
65.15
4.
Industry
910,234
5.54
−383,836
12.11
5.
IT
1610,706
9.80
—
—
6.
Oil
7811,228
47.53
—
—
7.
Pharma
100,341
0.61
−363,169
11.46
8.
Retail
1975,527
12.02
−63,856
2.01
TOTAL
16433,077
100
−3169,362
100
Table 5.
No.
Field
Turnover — places
Profit — places
Loss — places
1.
Agriculture
PLACE 8
PLACE 8
PLACE 4
2.
Auto
PLACE 4
PLACE 2
PLACE 6
3.
Energy
PLACE 6
PLACE 6
PLACE 1
4.
Industry
PLACE 5
PLACE 5
PLACE 2
5.
IT
PLACE 3
PLACE 4
PLACE 7-8
6.
Oil
PLACE 1
PLACE 1
PLACE 7-8
7.
Pharma
PLACE 7
PLACE 7
PLACE 3
8.
Retail
PLACE 2
PLACE 3
PLACE 5

336 
E. Ceptureanu & S. Ceptureanu
2.7. Top of the proﬁ tability rate
It appears that only a total of 11 companies representing 
18.9% of the sample size showed a profit rate higher than 
10%. Among them stands out a group of companies 
(Lafarge Ciment ( Romania) SA, ORANGE ROMANIA 
SA, CARPATCEMENT HOLDING SA, VODAFONE 
ROMANIA SA) which recorded a higher level of 
 profitability of 30%. If at first sight is surprising the 
case of LAFARGE CIMENT (ROMANIA) SA and 
CARPACEMENT HOLDING SA, because they come 
from an industry where traditionally, the profitability rate 
is lower compared to the level achieved. I think it is better 
to rethink the position of this companies in the context in 
which they were involved, according to the Competition 
Council, in a monopoly investigation made in national 
market. A similar situation is recorded also for ORANGE 
ROMANIA SA and VODAFONE ROMANIA SA, 
investigated by the institution aforementioned.
After this is a group of seven companies with a 
profit rate situated between 10−15% (Holcim (Romania) 
SA, Coca Cola HBC Romania SRL, HEINEKEN 
ROMANIA SA, Ursus Breweries SA, PORSCHE 
ROMANIA 
SRL, 
OMV 
Petrom 
SA, 
CEZ 
DISTRIBUTION SA ) which are operating in heteroge-
neous domains (industry, retail, energy).
Note the presence of a group of 17 companies 
(29.3% of the sample) which did not make profits in the 
analyzed period, and also the existence of a group of 26 
companies (44.8% of total sample) with a profit rate 
between 1−5%.
On economic sectors, the situation is as follows:
Table 7.
Profit rate%
[38–16]
[15–10]
[9–1]
Companies 
with losses
COMPANIES
 TOTAL
4
7
30
17
Agriculture
—
—
 1
 2
Auto
—
1
 2
 3
Energy
—
1
 6
 2
Industry
1
3
 3
 2
IT
2
—
 2
 1
Oil
—
1
 3
 3
Pharma
—
—
 2
 1
Retail
1
1
11
 3
3. Conclusions
• 
It appears that there is a considerable disproportion 
between Bucharest (53% of representative  multina-
tional companies) and the rest of the country. On 
the second place is situated the Ilfov county (14%) 
receiving position near the capital and easy access 
to its infrastructure. The following is an array of 
five heterogeneous counties in terms of geographi-
cal location (Arges, Brasov, Constanta, Cluj, Dolj) 
which shows an appetite of some companies for 
some local opportunities generated by the afore-
mentioned cities.
• 
Analyzing the territorial distribution of multina-
tionals reported to the number of counties in the 
country we find that only 16 counties (38% of the 
national total) benefit from the presence of these 
powerful organizations, creating jobs and generat-
ing synergy at local level by subcontracting activi-
ties through the Romanian companies.
• 
In the multinationals analyzed, the global turnover 
between 2002–2013 was situated at EUR 
206.712,22 mn. It is found that the top 10% of the 
companies like turnover contributes with 45% 
(EUR 89958,1 mn) to generate the final result. 
Next 20% of the companies generates 30% of 
global turnover (EUR 62092,88 mn). The remain-
ing 70% of companies contributes with only 25% 
to create global turnover.
• 
In terms of the object of activity, 28% of multina-
tional companies are operating in the Retail, fol-
lowed by the energy and industry with 15%. 
Lowest interest is in the fields of agriculture and 
Pharma (3%).
• 
Contribution of the activity fields to create global 
turnover for analyzed period shows that oil has the 
highest contribution (31.1%), followed by retail 
industry (22.8%), and IT (12.6%). The lowest 
recorded contributions are in the Pharma (1.9%) 
and Agriculture (1.4%).
• 
It is important to note that 41 companies (70.6% of 
the analyzed sample structure) recorded in the 
period of 10 years a growth in turnover below 10%, 
which indicates the hardships faced in business 
development on local market.
• 
Around 43 companies, representing 74.1% of the 
sample size were recorded profit in the analyzed 

 
Analysis of Multinational Companies in Romania 
337
period, this volume cumulated for all the compa-
nies from the sample in the analyzed period being 
EUR 13506,73 mn.
• 
A total of 15 companies recorded operating losses 
in the mentioned period, their volume is estimated 
at EUR −2273,38 mn.
• 
Top five companies that make profits generates a 
contribution of 65.83% (EUR 8891,49 mn) to 
achieve the global profit for the analyzed period.
• 
The highest share of global profit creation of the 
analyzed  multinational companies is in oil field 
(31%), followed by energy (25%), and Pharma 
(17%).
• 
Regarding the correlation contribution in turnover 
and profitability in generating total output, the situ-
ation is contradictory. So, while the oil field main-
tains its supremacy in terms of contributing to 
overall turnover for analyzed multinational compa-
nies and it has a correlation in the level of profita-
bility, the energy, even if it contributes only in a 
small proportion to create the global turnover, it has 
a rapid growth in terms of profitability. An evolu-
tion of the same type is also recording by the 
Pharma field, which is ranked No. 3 in our rankings 
even if it contributes only to a limited extent in 
creating turnover.
• 
Regarding the correlation of turnover and losses in 
activity is found that the IT field has a trend of 
increased risk (1st at loss) in condition of generat-
ing a significant contribution to create global turno-
ver (No. 3) and registering a level of profit below 
expectations (8th). A high risk (No. 2 at losses) 
associated with a higher profitability (1st place at 
profit), is recorded by the energy, in condition of a 
modest contribution to create the global turnover 
(No. 6).
• 
As profit rate, it appears that only a total of 11 com-
panies representing 18.9% of the sample size 
showed a profit rate higher than 10%. After them is 
a group of seven companies with a profit rate 
between 10–15%.
• 
Note the presence of a group of 17 companies 
(29.3% of the sample) did not make profit in the 
analyzed period, and the existence of a group of 26 
companies (44.8% of total sample) with a profit 
rate between 1–5%.
References
Andreff, W. (1996), Les Multinationales Globales, Paris: 
Editions La Decouverte. 
Caves, R. (1982), Multinational Enterprise and Economic 
Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ceptureanu, S. I. & Ceptureanu, E. G. (2012), Knowledge 
based management trends in Romanian companies, 
Knowledge Based Organization The 18th International 
Conference, Academia Fortelor Terestre Sibiu, Iunie 
14–16.
Cowling, K. & Sugden, R.(1996), Capacity, transnational 
and industrial strategy. In Creating Industrial Capacity, 
J. Mitchie and J. Grieve Smith (eds.), Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Dunning, J. (1997), Alliance Capitalism and Global Business, 
London: Routledge.
Dunning, J. (1993), Multinational Enterprises and the 
Global Economy, Addison-Wesley.
Kessels, J. (2001), Learning in organisations: A corporate 
curriculum for the knowledge economy, Futures, 33.
Lawrence, R. (1994), Multinationals, trade and labour, 
Discussion Paper 4836, National Bureau of Economic 
Research, New York.
Mazilu, A. (2002), Multinaţionalele şi Competitivitatea: O 
Perspectivă 
Est-Europeană, 
Bucureşti: 
Editura 
Economică.
Mereuţă, C. (2004), Analiza Nodală a Sistemelor de 
Companii, Bucureşti: Editura Economică.
Mereuţă, C. (2006), Model de analiză a dinamicii 
performanţelor sistemului naţional de companii: 
Proiectul Centre de Excelenţă, Ministerul Educaţiei şi 
Cercetării.
Mereuţă, C. (2009), Particularităţi ale repartiţiilor cotelor de 
piaţă ale companiilor active pe pieţele clasificate din 
perspectiva gradului de concentrare, Seminarul de 
Macromodelare Economică Nr. 102301.
Mereuţă, C. şi colab. (2003), Sistemul Naţional de Companii 
şi Performanţa Acestora în Dezvoltarea Economică a 
României, Bucureşti: Editura Academiei Române.
Mereuţă, C. et al. (2003), România 2007: Industria 
Prelucrătoare Românească. Pieţe şi Potenţial. Bucureşti: 
Editura Finmedia.
Mereuţă, C. & Ciupagea, C. ş.a. (2000), Industria 
Prelucrătoare Românească 1990–1998: Diagnostic 
Structural. Bucureşti: Editura Expert.
Nicolescu, O., Plumb, I., Pricop, M., Vasilescu, I., & 
Verboncu, I. (2003), Abordări Moderne în Managementul 
si Economia Organizaţiei, Bucureşti: Editura Economică. 

338 
E. Ceptureanu & S. Ceptureanu
Pfeffer, J. (2005), Working alone: Whatever happened to the 
idea of organisations as communities. In America at 
Work ― Choises and Challenges, E. Lawer III and J. 
O’Toole, London: Palgrave MacMillan.
Popa, I. (2003), Reţele de firme şi clustere. In Sistemul 
Organizatoric al Firmei, O. Nicolescu (ed.), Bucureşti: 
Editura Economica.
Porter, M. (1980), Competitive Strategies, New York: Free 
Press. 
Puiu, A. (1996), Management în Afacerile Economice 
Internaţionale, Bucureşti: Independenta Economica. 
Rieder, W. J. (2006), Corporate dealings with network econ-
omy, Futures, 38.
Rugman, A. & Hodgets, R. (1995), International Business — 
a strategic approach, International edition, New York: 
Mc-Graw Hill Publi sher.

Part VII
Management of Change, 
Innovation, and Quality

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

341
Chapter 37
Study Regarding the Correlation between 
the Changes in the  Energy Economy 
and the  Competitiveness of Companies 
in  Germany and  Romania
Gregor Johannes Weber, Marieta Olaru and Georgiana Marin
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
This chapter is part of a first year doctoral research of 
current state of knowledge in energy economics and its 
impacts to  enterprises in Europe. Its aim is to highlight 
the relationship between the changes in the energy eco-
nomics and the competitiveness of the companies in 
Germany and Romania.
In order to show this relationship, feedback of com-
panies in Germany and Romania were gathered through 
a questionnaire-based field study in June 2013 with 
2,394 replies in Germany and 103 in Romania.
In the first section, the interviewees were asked to 
provide general data as well as a general judgment of 
the changes in the energy economics to their business. 
The second section focused on the importance of the 
changes of selected energy factors during the last 
12 months. To conclude, the companies were asked to 
judge the changes in the energy economy during the 
observation period generally.
The collected data was evaluated following a quan-
titative one dimensional frequency scale, a methodol-
ogy recommended for such researches by several 
authors in the literature.
It was found out that, correlation between the 
amount of energy prices and the importance of energy 
efficiency measures exists; especially in Germany with 
its much higher energy price levels. For energy supply 
interruptions on the other hand no direct correlation 
was recognized.
The impact of the changes in the energy economics 
on the competitiveness of their company was generally 
rated neutral with a slight trend to negative by the 
German respondents; the Romanian enterprises how-
ever, assessed this impact much more negatively.
Concluding, correlations between the changes in 
the energy economy and the competitiveness of compa-
nies could be confirmed in both countries. The higher 
the electricity prices are the more important energy 
efficiency measures become.
1. Introduction
The German energy transition is in the worldwide focus 
and is differently assessed. Some researchers believe it 
is a risky journey; others rate it as a reverent power, and 
as an opportunity.
The energy economics in Germany started a long 
journey of change, starting with the establishment of 
the EU policy for the privatization of the power indus-
try into the national law (Kemfert, 2013: 44). This pro-
cess of change finally turned 2010 into a national 

342 
G. J. Weber, M. Olaru & G. Marin
energy concept. The government based this plan on 
several studies, which confirmed that the German 
energy transition can be realized. The energy concept of 
the German government (Prognos, EWI, GWS, 2010: 
188–193) presented scenarios confirming the technical 
feasibility for a change to a primary renewable energy 
production by 2050, also being confirmed by additional 
studies.1 Furthermore, the mentioned scenarios con-
firmed that compared to other energy sourcing strate-
gies, this process also offers benefits to the national 
economy. The decision to pull-out from the nuclear 
energy production was followed by studies researching 
electricity cost, greenhouse gas development, and the 
projected electricity imports (BET, Ökoinstitut, ZNES, 
Greenpeace, R2B Energy Consulting).2
In the following years, the feed-in-tariff system had 
to undergo several minor changes accompanied by a 
debate on high electricity prices. Right now, the EEG 
2.0 (major change to the renewable energy law in 
 Germany) is being debated strongly with the objective 
for parliament approval by August 01, 2014 (BMWi, 
2014); changes to the levels of electricity prices are 
hereby again to be expected.
Whereas the renewable energy labor market in 
Germany was called to be a rising star in the job mar-
ket, a booster for economic growth and employment 
(BMU, 2012: 18) during the earlier years (BMU, 
2012), company close-downs, and a decrease in employ-
ment resulted from the political activities during the 
following years (BMU, 2013). A high electricity price 
level combined with decreasing feed-in-tariffs caused a 
major problem for the  competitiveness of such  enter-
prises being active in the construction business for 
power plants for renewable energies in Germany. This 
effect was caused by the reluctance of investors and 
banks to finance such power plants within the uncertain 
financial frame. As a study, IZA recently detected 
(IZA, 2013) the long-term development of this trend 
needs to be further observed in order to be confirmed.
Another result of the activities in changing the 
energy system, are the steadily increasing electricity 
1 (Ökoinstitut, Prognos, 2009), (SRU — Sachverständigenrat für 
Umweltfragen, 2011), (DLR, Fraunhofer IWES, IfnE, 2010), 
(Umweltbundesamt, 2010).
2 (BET, 2010), (ZNES (Zentrum für nachhaltige Energiesysteme), 
2011), (Greenpeace, 2011), (R2B, 2011), (Ökoinstitut e.V., 2010).
prices in  Germany, currently among the highest in 
Europe (statista, 2012), (BDEW, 2013). Compared to 
 Romania, the electricity prices for German enterprises 
are in average 50% higher. This pressure to the German 
industry is partially caused by Germany being one of 
the countries with the highest levels for electricity tax 
in Europe, as researched by the BDI (German associa-
tion of the industry) in 2011 (BDI & VCI, 2011: 31). 
Whilst the prices for electricity in Germany are on this 
uncompetitive high level, direct neighbor states can 
offer a much more competitive position (Bureau, et al., 
2013: 4). Enterprises in France and the United Kingdom 
for example, benefit from much lower prices for elec-
tricity mainly produced through nuclear power plants.
The discussion on energy prices for the industry 
however should be seen in the correct context (Bureau 
et al., 2013). Energy prices for the industry consist of 
several components. On one hand there are direct and 
fixed costs for the production process, on the other 
hand, there are the so called add-on-cost; the latter ones 
being taxes, grid usage cost, VAT (Value Added Tax), 
and various additional allocations (BMWi, 2013). 
A market that is influenced by artificially controlled 
electricity prices (regulated prices) is reflecting a false 
image of the real cost situation. Enterprises acting in 
such a man-made environment will base their manage-
ment decisions on wrong assumptions leading to ineffi-
cient energy sourcing choices on one hand and to 
uneconomic decisions on energy efficiency measures on 
the other hand; furthermore, strategically these enter-
prises will struggle to changes to that regulated system.
This is the case currently in Germany. The pressure 
on the German industry is being strongly debated in the 
context of uncompetitiveness comparing the electricity 
prices in the industry amongst its European partners. 
A comparison of the electricity tax level by the BDI 
(German association of the industry) in 2011 (BDI & 
VCI, 2011: 31) highlights Germany with a substantial 
electricity tax disadvantage to its partners. In order not 
to overstress companies, exceptions from the EEG-
allocation3 were approved by the German government 
for those companies with large electricity consumption 
3 EEG-allocation: With the introduction of renewable energies in 
Germany, the EEG (law for renewable energies) defined the feed-in 
tariffs. The EEG-allocation was introduced in order to finance the 
feed-in-tariff system.

 
Study Regarding the Correlation 
343
to help them stay internationally competitive. 
Consequently, the remaining companies and public con-
sumers have to compensate the value/amount of these 
exceptions. The European Commission recently opened 
a case against the German government with the objec-
tive to evaluate whether these exceptions to the EEG-
allocation allow a competitive advantage to German 
companies in the European context, which would be 
acceptable, being a market distortion. In this context, it 
is very important to ensure a European wide coordina-
tion for such activities and exceptions, especially once 
grid costs are concerned (Bureau et al., 2013: 6).
The gas market appears in a similar situation with 
gas prices in  Germany being double the level of the 
prices in  Romania (AHK Germany-Romania, 2013: 22) 
turning the energy price levels for Germany generally 
to an extraordinary uncompetitive level not only com-
pared to Romania.
There are many studies available already. An inves-
tigation on the perception of the changes in the energy 
economics comparing the  enterprises in Germany and 
Romania was so far not performed though. Filling that 
gap, a questionnaire-based field research was per-
formed interviewing the members of the German 
DIHK4 and the corresponding German–Romanian 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry (AHK) Bucharest 
in Romania. The resulting 2,394 answered question-
naires in Germany and 103 in Romania were analyzed 
regarding whether the changes in the energy economics 
over a 12 months period were perceived more as a risk, 
or an opportunity by the participating enterprises in the 
selected countries as well as on the correlation between 
the changes in the  energy economy and the competi-
tiveness of companies in Germany and Romania.
2.  Current Trends Regarding 
Changes in the Energy Economy
The changing conditions in the energy economics com-
bined with the accompanying measures in the political 
4 DIHK — Association of German Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (Deutscher Industrie und Handelskammertag, DIHK 
(DIHK, 2014)) representing 80 Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry, CCI (Industrie und Handelskammern, IHKs) in Germany 
with more than three million entrepreneurs of companies of all 
sizes.
surroundings clearly illustrate a high level of impact on 
competitive objectives. Interruptions in the energy sup-
ply also need to be considered in the context of the level 
of supply security.
Price competiveness is a key element for enter-
prises to be successful in the market. Factors that influ-
ence this increase in production can be labor cost, 
transport cost, distribution cost, as well as energy cost. 
In the short-term, the increase in production costs nega-
tively affects the price of the companies activities 
(Bureau et al., 2013: 7) and with that their  competitive-
ness. If the enterprise follows a revenue focused strat-
egy, the result will be a reduction in sales volume. In 
case the market share is the driving element for their 
business decisions, a decreased margin will come out. 
In both cases, at one point, the decision needs to be 
taken whether to stop the activities or not.
One option during this process is to take measures 
to reduce energy costs by reducing the energy con-
sumption. This can be realized by a more conscious 
consumption of energy on one hand; another option is 
to push for energy efficiency measures. As mentioned 
before, this effect could be observed in the case of the 
respondent enterprises in Germany. With the uncom-
petitive level of the electricity price in Germany com-
pared to Romania, energy saving measures became 
more important than ever to the German companies, 
which also proves the direct correlation between these 
two elements.
A high level of energy prices (electricity as well as 
gas) is forcing companies to counteracting measures in 
the area of energy efficiency activities. In Romania, 
however, this trend is due to the low level of energy 
prices. Caused by the high level of energy prices, being 
among the highest in Europe, especially Germany, the 
amount of the energy prices plays a very important fac-
tor. The effect of the rising energy prices in Germany 
naturally, also has negative effects on the labor market, 
which is confirmed by a recent study of (IZA, 2013).
Changes of energy prices in general should be 
announced in a reliable way. On one hand, planning and 
building of power plants is a long-lasting process. 
Reliability, here is very important for planners as well 
as credit institutes for their feasibility studies and calcu-
lations. On the other hand, enterprises also need plan-
ning security through long-term energy price levels, to 

344 
G. J. Weber, M. Olaru & G. Marin
be able to properly plan their production processes and 
pricing/positioning strategies in a global market place.
In order to counteract the negative effects of energy 
price increases, appropriate measures on energy effi-
ciency are to be undertaken. On the other hand, activi-
ties in R&D are also required, in order to keep the level 
of innovation high (Bureau et al., 2013: 12; Berk et al., 
2006: 4). This will ensure a high level of  competitive-
ness, as well as an advantage of being a leader in key 
technology, which will strengthen the economies posi-
tion towards competing economies.
In a study performed by the Netherlands Environ-
mental Assessment Agency (PBL), (Berk et al., 2006) 
several impacts of technological options on various 
policy objectives were investigated. One of the men-
tioned policy objectives was the competitiveness, 
detailed in the two factors costs and EU-innovation. 
The technological options were clustered in the groups 
such as efficiency, energy production forms (nuclear, 
renewable, fossil), carbon capture and storage, fuel 
switch, and others (public transport, emission 
controls, etc.).
From the cost point of view, the impacts were 
mainly rated insignificant with a trend to negative, 
which needs to be compared to the analysis performed 
in this chapterfor the German and  Romanian  enter-
prises in the context of the lower level of energy costs 
in the Romanian market compared to Germany. From 
an EU-innovation point of view, most of the impacts 
were rated neutral with a trend towards positive. All 
elements with the highest cost / investment require-
ments were rated positively regarding innovation 
(advanced cars, hydrogen, photovoltaic energy, and 
emission controls). This study is already eight years 
old,its results are still accurate today. They also indicate 
that a financial effort through R&D into innovative 
energy production and efficiency measures in the short-
term, is perceived as a negative impact to the compe-
tiveness of an economy. In the long-term however, this 
investment will pay out and ensure a lower cost level 
through competitive advantage (Berk et al., 2006: 7).
3. Research Methodology
In order to highlight the relationship between the changes 
in the energy economics and the competitiveness of the 
companies in  Germany and Romania, a questionnaire 
based research has been carried out by the German 
DIHK (Deutscher Industrie und Handelskammertag) 
and the German–Romanian Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry (AHK), Bucharest in Romania in June 2013 
with 2,394 replies in Germany and 103 in Romania. The 
questionnaires focused on several aspects.
One aspect addressed the collection of general data 
concerning branch of activity, number of employees, 
the share of energy costs in general and the electricity 
costs in particular on the overall turnover, as well as the 
general judgment of the changes in the energy 
economics.
The second section focused on the importance of 
selected factors during the last 12 months.
To conclude, the companies were asked to judge 
selected political measures according to their energy 
supply security, affordability, and environmental 
friendliness.
The data was evaluated following a quantitative 
one dimensional frequency scale, a methodology rec-
ommended by several authors in the literature.5
For the performed analysis, the relative frequencies 
[pi] of the selected elements and their related subcate-
gories were calculated based on the absolute frequen-
cies [ni] and the sample size [n] following the context 
“
ni
i
n
p =
” and transferred into visual bar diagrams for 
interpretation.
4. Research Results
4.1.  Change of importance selected elements 
of the  energy market
In order to understand the importance of the energy 
market evolution, selected elements have been ana-
lyzed, namely:
• 
Amount of electricity price;
• 
Amount of energy price;
• 
Fluctuation of energy prices;
• 
Energy savings;
• 
Interruptions in electricity supply;
• 
Interruptions in gas supply.
5 Koch (2012, p. 194), Herrmann & Homburg (2000), Olbrich et al. 
(2012), Christof & Pepels (1999), Grunwald & Hempelmann 
(2012), Altobelli & Hoffmann (2011), Homburg & Krohmer 
(2009), Wöhe (1986), Kotler (1982).

 
Study Regarding the Correlation 
345
Focusing on the lower three pillars in Fig. 1, in all 
cases, the decreasing importance is the least distinctive. 
Only in the case of supply interruptions (gas and elec-
tricity) the decreasing pillar is handing a little share to 
the increasing pillar. The only big exception is the ele-
ment of energy savings: whereas in Germany, energy 
savings became more important, Romania shows an 
unchanged level of importance.
Supply interruptions do not show remarkable 
changes.
Fluctuations of energy prices as well the levels of 
energy prices (be it the amount for energy in general or 
electricity) show a trend towards increased importance 
for  enterprises in both countries. On top, electricity 
prices and energy savings are more distinctive in 
 Germany compared to  Romania, which is a result of the 
much higher energy prices in Germany compared to 
Romania as outlined earlier.
4.2.  The impact of changes in the energy 
economics on the  competitiveness
of the company
Being asked to provide a general statement of the changes 
in the energy systems during the last 12 months on the 
competitiveness of the companies, the German respond-
ents provided mainly a neutral (41.2%) to negative 
(26.6%) rating, with the industry branch pushing the 
overall trend towards negative (34.7%). Comparing the 
enterprises by the number of employees in the German 
companies, a significant impact could not be discovered.
In Romania, a negative judgment became with 42.7% 
apparent and more significant, being mainly driven by the 
branches Industry (46.9%) and Service (50%). The com-
panies with a larger number of employees indicated with 
50% a higher level of negative judgment.
The fact that the changes in the energy system are 
already for a longer period of time present and publicly 
discussed in Germany, the companies already were in a 
Fi g. 2.  Impact of the changes in the energy economics on the 
competitiveness of the company
Source: Developed by the authors.
45.0%
General Judgement of the Changes in the Energy
Economics during the last 12 months
40.0%
35.0%
30.0%
25.0%
20.0%
15.0%
10.0%
5.0%
0.0%
no input
very
positive
positive
Germany
Romania
neutral
negative
don't know
very
negative
electricity price
Germany
100%
Change of the Importance of Selected Factors
during the last 12 months
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Romania Germany Romania Germany Romania Germany Romania Germany Romania Germany Romania
energy price
increasing
no change
decreasing
don't know
no input
fluctuation of
energy prices
energy savings
interruptions
electricity supply
interruptions gas
supply
Fi g. 1.  Change of the importance of the  energy market selected elements
Source: Developed by the authors.

346 
G. J. Weber, M. Olaru & G. Marin
position to adjust to the changing energy, economy 
system, and prices. Consequently, they are already a 
step ahead and the system changes are rated already 
with a higher level of “normality” compared to 
 Romania. This is resulting into a less extreme judgment 
of the energy transition. However, the pendulum still is 
tending to be on the negative side.
5. Conclusion
The research carried out that electricity prices and 
energy savings are more distinctive in  Germany com-
pared to Romania. This is the result of much higher 
energy prices in Germany compared to Romania.
Another finding highlights the need to take meas-
ures in order to reduce energy costs by reducing the 
energy consumption. This can be realized by a more 
conscious consumption of energy. Another way of 
reducing the energy consumption is to undertake selected 
procedures in the production processes as well as the use 
of energy efficient equipment and the introduction of an 
energy management system according to ISO 50001.
The results showed that interruptions in the energy 
supply are not the major concern of the respondents. 
Fluctuating energy prices and a high the price level for 
energy are causing headaches to the entrepreneurs in 
both countries; Germany more than in Romania, due to 
its higher energy price levels.
Being asked on their judgment on the changes in 
the  energy economy, the respondents in both countries 
indicated different trends. In Germany, the opinion on 
the changing energy environment is predominantly 
neutral, mainly as the energy transition is already on 
everyones’ schedule for some time. In Romania how-
ever, these changes are still new, which explains a more 
concerned feedback from the Romanian  enterprises.
In general, the atmosphere concerning the changes 
in the energy economics tends to be negative for both 
countries. In Germany, where these changes have some 
history, the enterprises are already more prepared/used 
to these challenges. In Romania, where the energy sys-
tem also starts to undergo changes during the adapta-
tion process with the rest of Europe, the enterprises are 
facing a new situation.
Summarizing, it could be confirmed that changes 
in energy economics are very important to the 
 competitiveness of the enterprises in both countries. 
These findings directionally also confirmed the out-
come of the NEAA-study on trade-offs and synergies 
between energy security, competitiveness, and environ-
ment mentioned in Chapter 1 (Berk et al., 2006).
The information gained from this research will be 
used in a later stage in order to develop recommenda-
tions to politics and well to the enterprises for a 
smoother and sustainable rebuild of the energy systems 
in both countries as well as in Europe. In order to reach 
to that level, the replies to several additional questions 
will be analyzed throughout this doctoral research and 
reported in additional chapters.
References
AHK Germany–Romania (2013), Industrieeffizienz, proz-
essindustrie und logistik in rumänien [pdf]. Bucharest: 
Deutsch-Rumänische industrie- und handelskammer. 
Available at http://www.efficiency-from-germany.info/
EIE/Redaktion/Datenmigration/marktanalyse-rumae-
nien-2013-industrie,property=pdf,bereich=eie,sprache=
de,rwb=true.pdf (Accessed 10 March 2014).
Altobelli, C. F. & Hoffmann, S. (2011), Grundlagen der 
Marktforschung, Konstanz: UVK Verlagsgesellschaft mbH.
BDEW, (2013), Strompreisanalyse Mai (2013), [pdf] 
Available at http://www.bdew.de/internet.nsf/id/123176
ABDD9ECE5DC1257AA20040E368/$file/13%20
05%2027%20BDEW_Strompreisanalyze_Mai%20
2013.pdf (Accessed 02 March 2014).
BDI & VCI, (2011), Die Steuerbelastung der unternehmen in 
deutschland — fakten für die politische diskussion 2011 
[pdf], Köln, Germany: institut der deutschen wirtschaft 
köln medien GmbH. Available at http://www.bdi.eu/
download_content/BDI_VCI__Steuerbelastung_der_
Unternehmen_2011.pdf (Accessed 10 March 2014).
Berk, M. M., Bollen J. C., Eerens, H. C., Manders, A. J. G., 
& van Vuuren, D. P. (2006), MNP report 500116001/2006, 
Sustainable energy: Trade-offs and synergies between 
energy security, competitiveness, and environment. 
Available at http://pblweb10.prolocation.net/sites/
default/files/cms/publicaties/500116001.pdf (Accessed 
11 March 2014).
BET, (2010), Marktplatz energie — kernkraftwerk laufzeit-
verlängerung. Available at https://www.yumpu.com/de/
document/view/2944268/marktplatz-energie-10-2010-
bet-aachen (Accessed 05 July 2013).
BMU, (2012a), Erneuerbare energien — Motor der ener-
giewende. [pdf] Berlin: Bundesministerium für umwelt, 

 
Study Regarding the Correlation 
347
naturschutz und rektorsicherheit. Available at http://
www.erneuerbare-energien.de/fileadmin/Daten_EE/
Dokumente__PDFs_/Motor_der_Energiewende_bf.pdf 
(Accessed 10 March 2014).
BMU, (2012b), Erneuerbar beschäftigt! Kurz — und lang-
fristige wirkungen des ausbaus erneuerbarer energien 
auf den deutschen arbeitsmarkt [pdf] Berlin: 
Bundesministerium für umwelt, naturschutz und reak-
torsicherheit. Available at http://www.bmub.bund.de/
fileadmin/Daten_BMU/Pools/Broschueren/EE_
beschaeftigt_bf.pdf (Accessed 10 March 2014).
BMU, (2013), Renewable employed — impacts of the 
expansion of renewable energy on the German labour 
market [pdf]. Available at http://www.bmub.bund.de/fil-
eadmin/Daten_BMU/Pools/Broschueren/erneuerbar
_beschaeftigt_faltblatt_en_bf.pdf (Accessed 10 March 
2014).
BMWi, (2013), Energiedaten: Ausgewählte grafiken [pdf]. 
Available at http://www.bmwi.de/BMWi/Redaktion/
PDF/E/energiedaten-ausgewaehlte-grafiken,property=
pdf,bereich=bmwi2012,sprache=de,rwb=true.pdf 
(Accessed 11 March 2014).
BMWi, (2014), Eckpunkte für die reform des EEG [pdf]. 
Available 
at 
www.bmwi.de/DE/Themen/
energie,did=617196.html (Accessed 10 March 2014).
Bureau, D., Fontagné, L., & Martin, P. (2013), Energy and 
competitiveness [pdf]. Available at http://www.cae-eco.
fr/IMG/pdf/cae-note006-en.pdf (Accessed 11 March 
2014).
Christof, K. & Pepels, W. (1999), Praktische quantitaive 
marktforschung, München: Verlag Franz Vahlen GmbH.
DIHK, (2013), Faktenpapier — Strompreie in Deutschland 
[pdf]. Available at http://www.ihk-energieeffizienz.de/
media/upload/initiativerheinlandengerie/imap/20121129/
121129DIHKFaktenpapier_Strompreise.PDF (Accessed 
14 March 2014).
DIHK, (2014), DIHK Facts. Available at http://www.dihk.de/en 
(Accessed 03 March 2014).
DLR, Fraunhofer IWES, IfnE, (2010), Leitstudie 2010 [pdf]. 
Available at http://www.fvee.de/fileadmin/politik/bmu_
leitstudie2010.pdf (Accessed 14 March 2014).
Greenpeace, (2011), Der Plan — Deutschland ist erneurbar 
[pdf]. Available at http://www.greenpeace.de/fileadmin/
gpd/user_upload/themen/energie/20110501-Der-Plan-
Energiewende-ohne-Atom-und-Kohle.pdf (Accessed 17 
February 2014).
Grunwald, G. & Hempelmann, B. (2012), Angewandte 
Marktforschung, München: Oldenbourg verlag.
Herrmann, A. & Homburg, C. (2000), Marktforschung, 
Wiesbaden: Betriebswirtschaftlicher verlag gabler GmbH.
Homburg, C. & Krohmer, H. (2009), Marketing manage-
ment, Wiesbaden: Gabler GWV fachverlage GmbH.
IZA (Institute for the Study of Labour), (2013), Labor 
demand effects of rising electricity prices: Evidence for 
Germany [pdf].Available at http://ftp.iza.org/pp74.pdf 
(Accessed 10 March 2014).
Kemfert, C. (2013), Kampf um Strom, Hamburg: Murmann-
Verlag.
Koch, J. (2012), Marktforschung, Nürnberg: Oldenbourg 
wissenschaftsverlag GmbH.
Kotler, P. (1982), Marketing management, Stuttgart: J.B. 
Metzlersche verlagsbuchhandlung und carl ernst poe-
schel verlag GmbH.
Ökoinstitut, 
E.V. 
(2010), 
Erste 
auswertungen 
der 
“Energieszenarien für ein energie-konzept der bundesr-
egierung”. Available at http://www.oeko.de/publikationen/
forschungsberichte/studien/dok/657.php 
(Accessed
17 February 2014).
Ökoinstitut, P. (2009), Modell Deutschland, Klimaschutz bis 
2050 [pdf]. Available at http://www.wwf.de/fileadmin/fm-
wwf/Publikationen-PDF/WWF_Modell_Deutschland_
Endbericht.pdf (Accessed 17 February 2014).
Olbrich, R., Battenfeld, D., & Buhr, C.C. (2012), 
Marktforschung, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Gabler 
Verlag.
Prognos, ewi, gws. (2010), Energieszenarien für ein ener-
giekonzept der bundesregierung, Basel, Köln, Osnabrück: 
BMWi.
R2B, (2011), Energieökonomische analyze eines ausstiegs 
aus der kernenergie in Deutschland bis zum Jahr 2017, 
Köln: BDI e.v.
SRU Sachverständigenrat für Umweltfragen, (2011), Wege 
zur 100% erneuerbaren stromversorgung, Berlin: Erich 
Schmidt Verlag GmbH.
Statista, (2012), Strompreise für industriekunden in Europa 
2012. Available at http://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/
studie/151260/umfrage/strompreise-fuer-industriekun-
den-in-europa/ (Accessed 02 March 2014).
Umweltbundesamt, (2010), (2050): 100% Strom aus erneur-
baren energien, Dessau-Roßlau: Umweltbundesamt.
Wöhe, G. (1986), Einführung in die allgemeine betrieb-
swirtschaftslehre, München: Verlag franz vahlen GmbH.
ZNES (Zentrum für nachhaltige Energiesysteme), (2011), 
Atomausstieg 2015 und regionale versorgungssicher-
heit, Flensburg/Berlin: Deutsche umwelthilfe, universität 
flensburg.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

349
Chapter 38
Management of  Intangible Assets Valorization 
in Small and Medium Enterprises
Constantin Oprean, Mihail Aurel Ţ îţu, and Claudiu Vasile Kifor
Lucian Blaga University
In the context of the knowledge-based economy, 
investment in intangible assets represents the suc-
cessful alternative for attaining economic growth and 
increasing the quality of economic performances. 
SMEs represent the main worldwide drive for eco-
nomic development, innovation and flexibility.
The aim of this study is to draw up an EU approved 
methodology for intangible assets valorization in 
SMEs. Such a methodology is the outcome of analyses 
and proposals submitted by representatives of the 
research community like HEIs, State Office for 
Inventions and Trademarks, Chambers of Commerce, 
Industry and Agriculture, Financial and Banking insti-
tutions, as well as representatives of SMEs.
The main goal is to facilitate funding, based on 
thorough criteria for  SMEs evaluation in view of 
achieving a significant increase in the absorptive capac-
ity of the knowhow generated by the research commu-
nity in order to support the innovation process of new 
products and technologies, and, on the long run, lead to 
economic growth.
1. Introduction
Market economy represents that competitive economy 
based on the market laws generated by the plurality of 
the ownership forms in which private property is pre-
dominant, and which determines organizations to take 
part in a global competition. In order to become 
 competitive, organizations are forced to mandatorily 
promote entrepreneurship and innovation, to signifi-
cantly use the intangible assets, meaning the informa-
tion and to transform it into knowledge.
The level of the organizations’ steps for innovation 
can be taken into account and evaluated. A global indi-
cator of innovation, which would represent a sum of the 
global indicators of the organizations in a country, can 
also constitute an image of the steps for innovation of 
that country.
In the context of meeting the Europe 2020 Strategy 
and the objectives aimed at, the European Parliament, 
The Council, The European, and Social Committee and 
the Committee of the Regions 2013 show that the focus 
of efforts on innovation constitute a rational undertak-
ing of the organizations’ sustainability and of the coun-
tries in question (The Commision to the European 
Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and 
Social Committee and the Commitee of the Regions 
2003. Brussels: COM). Improving these performances 
will contribute to the intelligent growth. Such an indi-
cator of measuring the results of innovation at country 
level (Fig. 1) or at organizational level (Fig. 2), refers 
to: technological innovation measured in patents, 
which shows the ability of an economy to transform 
knowledge into technologies and the increased acces-
sibility to the values of the intellectual property (IP) 

350 
C. Oprean, M. A. Ţîţu & C. V. Kifor
system; the investment in education and training that 
will ensure the human resource with skills and compe-
tences to generate innovation; the competitive level of 
the goods and services made based on knowledge and 
the volume of employees from the innovative sectors in 
companies characterized by rapid growth.
The present chapter aims at estimating the potential 
value of the intangible capital, represented especially 
by the invention patents in the small and medium enter-
prises through facilitation procedures accepted by all 
interested parties: research institutions, banks, small, 
and medium enterprises, etc.
2.  The Win–Win Partnership 
in Processing the Intangible Assets
The partnership represents a correlation between par-
ties, with rights and obligations to accomplish a com-
mon objective, from which all parties will win according 
to their level of participation and contribution.
When the knowhow transfer occurs, regarding 
 intangible assets, it is necessary for us to approach the 
identification of all partners that intervene in the life 
cycle of such an intangible asset, out of which, the most 
representative is, the invention, whose owner is certi-
fied by the invention patent which ensures the intellec-
tual ownership right represented by the exclusive right 
of producing and commercializing it.
A graphic representation of the life cycle of evalu-
ating the intangible asset, such as the invention patent 
from its creation to its transformation into a product 
that is useful to the society, with all involved partners, 
is represented in Fig. 3.
However, one must mention that together with the 
IP (patents, codified knowledge, data bases, proce-
dures, commercial marks and brands, drawings and 
models) in the complete understanding of intangible 
assets the human resources (entrepreneurial experi-
ence, education and the competences of the staff, the 
know-how and the tacit knowledge, the motivation, and 
loyalty of the staff) must also be considered. The organ-
izational capital (methods and production procedures, 
supply of services, certifications, tools, and manage-
ment systems, the administrative system) and the rela-
tional capital (attracting the client, management of the 
client portfolio, suppliers’ management, cooperation 
and networks).
Fig. 1.  Degree of innovation at living standards
Technological
innovation
(patents)
Level of 
competitivity of
goods and services
Volume of
employees in the 
innovative
organizaƟons
Investment in
education for
innovation and
entrepreneurialship
Fig. 2.  Degree of innovation at organizational level
Technological
innovation
Employees with
university degrees
Employees with
entrepreneurial and
innovation training
Level of competitivity
of products
Fig. 3.  The life cycle of evaluating the intangible assets
OSIM 
Research 
insƟtute 
UniversiƟes 
Legal and 
private 
individuals 
Patent 
Banks 
Financial capital 
Technical assistance
Technological transfer
Execution and 
commercializaƟon 
Financial results 
Financial 
insƟtutions 
Technical 
and 
technological 
design 
structures 
SMEs 
Control and 
approval 
bodies
Budget 

 
Management of Intangible Assets 
351
3.  Valorization of the Intellectual 
Property in the SMEs
The chapter aims at offering rapid and efficient solu-
tions of know-how transfer represented by the inven-
tion patent, the most representative element of IP in the 
small and medium enterprises, organizations that con-
stitite the motor of the economy of any country. Their 
ability to grow constitutes the determinant key of the 
economic health for the future of any country.
In the last years the investments in businesses in the 
field of  intangible assets, especially in the IP, have 
increased, much more than in the fixed and physical 
assets (Tomlison & Fai, 2013).
As opposed to the material resources, which have 
the tendency of growing, the intangible resources are 
inexhaustible and increasing. This is the reason why the 
investment in the intangible assets is the best solution 
for the sustainability of the organizations and of the 
entire society.
The SMEs that have the capacity to absorb the kno-
whow and even to create inventions and new processes 
are known as innovative SMEs. “These organizations 
have the potential of substantially contributing to the 
increase of competitiveness, productivity and techno-
logical progress in their sectors of activity and in the 
entire economy” (Pederzoli et al., 2013) and “they can 
be identified through their patenting activities and 
through the high degree of flexibility which allows 
them to answer more actively the market demands” 
(Thomä & Bizer, 2013).
In the innovation process the SMEs need collabora-
tion and pragmatic partnerships with the representa-
tives and suppliers of scientific research, such as 
universities and research institutes (Zeng et al. 2010) 
but also with the financial institutes and banks that can 
ensure the financial support for transforming ideas into 
a real, commercial product.
Additionally, the country governments need to 
offer subsidies for the investments in those inventions 
that ensure development and commercialization 
(Brant & Lohse, 2013).
In order to ensure the framework necessary for the 
rapid and efficient transfer of the IP at the SME level and 
transforming it in competitive products, a methodology 
dedicated to the financial and economic evaluation of the 
 intangible assets of the SMEs in partnership with the 
financial institutions in the vision of the researches done 
within the European project EVLIA (South East Europe 
Transnational Cooperation Programme, 2012). EVLIA-
Making full value of good ideas by leveraging intellec-
tual assets for financing SMEs in SEE), in which Lucian 
Blaga University of Sibiu is partner, is suggested.
Generally, in the case of the loans for the valorisa-
tion of a project, the warranties are ensured through the 
tangible assets because their value is easier to quantify 
than the value of the intangible assets. In this case, the 
banks and the financial institutions aim at considerably 
reducing the risk of getting the loan back. However, in 
the past years the intangible assets start to play the role 
of loan warranties for banks and financial institutions in 
the case of the SMEs and the patent markets are 
growing.
The patent market can become one of the main ele-
ments of innovation because it facilitates the spreading 
of innovative ideas through its capacity to encourage 
the circulation of patents between a large number of 
organizations.
Generally, banks are reluctant in accepting intangi-
ble assets as warranties to the loan, as foreseen by the 
Basel Regulations.
The investment in knowhow remains the most 
important success strategy even if the risks are consid-
erable. That is why, the manner in which we evaluate 
this risk cannot lead to extraordinary results based on a 
performant risk management, taking into account the 
market, cost, and income approaches.
The utility of all evaluation approaches and the 
frequency of using them vary according to the scope 
aimed at.
The cost approach is the most suitable for evaluat-
ing out of financial accounting and profit taxation 
reasons, the income approach is chosen with the pur-
pose of evaluating inheritance taxes and for collaterals 
that concentrate on the future generated income, the 
market approach is for the evaluation of an internal 
management purpose which usually requires the mon-
etary value of the IP in order to allocate some resources 
and to evaluate the performances.

352 
C. Oprean, M. A. Ţîţu & C. V. Kifor
According to the EVLIA analysis, the  intangible 
assets can be divided into:
• 
Relevant and available assets;
• 
Relevant and unavailable assets;
• 
Irrelevant and available assets;
• 
Irrelevant and unavailable assets.
The management phases of the intangible assets 
refer to:
• 
Creation (how was the asset obtained);
• 
Functioning (it is being presently used and what 
benefits it supplies);
• 
Planning (is the regeneration of assets being 
managed);
• 
Transferability (the value transferred to another entity).
From the point of view of the creation the evaluation 
aims at:
• 
The investments in the research-development (time 
and financial capital);
• 
The ability to create inventions;
• 
The number of patents reported to years;
• 
The number of patents registered;
• 
The number of valid patents;
• 
Geographical coverage;
• 
The context of implementation.
From the point of view of the functioning the evalu-
ation refers to:
• 
The management and the protection of inventions;
• 
The effect of the inventions on the volume of sales (%);
• 
Exploitation of the inventions according to the 
potential (%).
In evaluating the level of programming one follows:
• 
The management and the updating and monitoring 
level;
• 
The control activities on the competition;
• 
Planning the activities in order to complete or to make 
the exploitation more effective and more efficient.
Regarding the evaluation from the point of view of 
transferability one looks if:
• 
The inventions are related to certain special goods 
of the enterprise;
• 
If 
there 
is 
interest 
for 
the 
competitive 
organizations;
• 
If there is interest for the non-competitive organiza-
tions or for other sectors.
In the SME evaluation by the financial institutions 
and banks, drawing up and presenting the business plan 
is a mandatory condition in order to know their level of 
sustainability. The evaluation of the innovative organi-
zation has in its center the evaluation of the patents, 
which requires for several questions to be answered. 
These are related to:
— Legal status:
• 
Which is the legal status of the patents’ family?
• 
Which is the validity of the patent?
• 
Is there a protection term for the patents’ family?
• 
How extended and comprehensive are the demands?
• 
Does the patents’ family ensure geographical coverage 
for relevant markets?
• 
Are the patents monitored regarding infringements?
• 
Is there opposition or legal procedures (infringe-
ments/invalidity) widely spread in the patented field?
• 
Is the patent used for licensing?
• 
Is the patent intended to be used as a tool of the 
business?
• 
Is the patent destined to: block the technological 
developments of the competitors in this field; 
secure room for one’s own development activities?
• 
Is the exploitation of technology dependent on 
licensing agreements with third parties?
• 
Is the solution of the patent or the technology 
related to a product or service specific to the 
organization?
• 
Do you make the agreement known when you 
negotiate the solution of the patent or technology?
• 
Do you want a continued existence until the end of 
the project?
• 
Do you know of any legal risk verification about 
the patent?

 
Management of Intangible Assets 
353
— Status from a technological point of view:
• 
Does the invention constitute a key technology?
• 
Is the invention technical superior from the alterna-
tive technologies?
• 
In what phase was the invention tested?
• 
Does the patented technology require new skills, 
qualification or production facilities?
• 
How much time does the patented technology need 
in order to be commercialized?
• 
Is it easy to make counterfeits?
• 
Can the counterfeited products be easily defected?
• 
Does the technology offer benefits to the client or 
does it raise problems for the client?
• 
Based on the available documentation of intellec-
tual assets, how feasible is the reproduction of the 
intellectual asset?
• 
Can the type of technological problems raised by 
the intellectual assets be defined?
• 
What percentage does the technological part 
represent?
• 
How feasible is the technology?
• 
What percentage does human security represents 
by using the technology?
• 
What percentage does environmental protection 
represent by using the technology?
• 
What percentage does the economical part repre-
sent by using the technology?
• 
What type of technical problems does the applica-
tion of technology raise?
— The market related status:
• 
How high is the market increasing rate in the business 
segment in which the patented technology is applied?
• 
How big is the potential income in the respective 
business segment?
• 
Are special licences required for the commercial 
activities?
• 
Is the patent related to the basic activities of the 
applying organization?
• 
How big is the contribution of the patented technol-
ogy to the value of the profit?
• 
How big is the market in the business segment in 
which the patented technology is applied?
• 
How high is the competitiveness of the market 
existing products in the business segment in which 
the patented technology is applied?
• 
How easy is the market access?
• 
Is there a list of licensed potential?
• 
Is there a plan of exploiting the patent?
• 
How detailed is the exploitation plan?
— The status related to the strategy:
• 
Which are the marketing options for the patented 
technology?
• 
Which is the duration of the life cycle of the pat-
ented technology in the market?
• 
Are there competitive products or substitutes in the 
market?
• 
Does the patented technology offer a potential 
income?
• 
The patent intends to broaden the existing markets 
from a technological point of view?
• 
Does the patent intend to open new markets?
• 
Does the patent intend to build an image of the 
organization?
• 
Is there an interaction between the patent and the 
organization’s business strategy?
• 
Does the organization have an image and a 
mission?
• 
Does the organization have a strategy for the next 3 
years?
• 
Does the organization have a business plan?
• 
Does the organization have a financial strategy?
• 
Does the organization have a marketing strategy?
• 
Who is involved in approaching the strategy?
• 
How often was the strategy revised in the last 5 years?
• 
Can you list the first 5 competences of the 
organization?
• 
Do you expect changes in the management?
• 
Does the organization have a clear organizational 
structure?
• 
Do the employees have their job tasks clearly 
defined?
The answers to these questions are quantifiable for 
everyone on a scale from 0 to 100 points. The maxim 
score corresponds to the most favoring aspect for the 

354 
C. Oprean, M. A. Ţîţu & C. V. Kifor
pragmatism and effects of applying the patent. By sum-
ming up a score is ensured which offers a clear image 
regarding the organization’s sustainability. The higher 
the score, the more sustainable is the organization.
4.  Conclusions
The  intangible assets created in the innovation processes 
represent the important part of the value of today’s busi-
nesses. The evaluation of these intangible assets gives 
the investors the opportunity to better understand the 
business and the value of the organization and the key to 
ensure the decision-making based on the concrete infor-
mation and to decide if the IP applies or it needs to be 
patented. (European Commision. Directorate General 
for Research and Innovation, 2014: 5).
In the center of the intangible assets of an organiza-
tion the intellectual property represented mainly by the 
patented invention is found.
The evaluation of the innovative organization 
through the prism of the IP, represented by the patented 
invention and suggested in this chapter, represents a 
complete approach under legal and technological 
aspect, of the position on the market and the strategy, 
that can constitute a model of an evaluation procedure, 
which can be generalized.
It can be stressed again the fact that the knowledge 
based society capitalizes the innovative organization 
which possesses an important percentage of intangible 
assets.
The development of the intangible assets represents 
the real support of the organizations’ and society 
sustainability.
Both the need to increase the level of credibility 
and to encourage banks and the financial institutions to 
award credits based on the results of the correct evalu-
ation of the intangible assets, arise. It has to be sus-
tained through a chart of warranting the risk divided 
between the creditor and the credited.
Elaborating an evaluation methodology of the 
intangible assets standardized at international level can 
be a solution in a globalized world and it can lead to the 
inclusion of the intangible assets portfolio in the organ-
ization’s balance.
In order to make a correct evaluation, the creation 
of a professional organization for evaluating the intan-
gible assets, that will enclose accredited evaluating 
experts, is required, and, last but not least, the mission 
of the universities in the future is to introduce in the 
university curriculum subjects that will tackle in detail 
the intangible assets of an organization.
References
Brant, J. & Lohse, S. (2013), Enhancing intellectual property 
management and appropriation by innovative SMEs. 
Innovation and intellectual property series, 1, 31–39.
European Comision, Directorate General for Research and 
Innovation, (2014), Final Report from the Expert Group 
on Intellectual Property Valuation, Luxembourg: 
Publications Office of the European Union.
Pederzoli, C., Thoma, G., & Torricelli, C. (2013), Modelling 
credit risk for innovative SMEs: The role of innovation 
measures, Journal of Financial Services Research, 44, 
111–129.
South East Europe Transnational Cooperation Programme, 
(2012), EVLIA — Making full value of good ideas by 
leveraging intellectual assets for financing SMEs in SEE 
Project Code SEE/D/0237/1.2/x.
The Commision to the European Parlament, The Council, 
The European Economic and Social Committee, and the 
Commitee of the Regions, (2013), Measuring Innovation 
Output in Europe: Towards a New Indicator, Bruxelles: 
COM.
Thomä, J. & Bizer, R. (2013), To protect or not protect? 
Modes of appropriability in the small enterprise sector, 
Research Policy, 42, 35–49.
Tomlison, P. R. & Fai, F. M. (2013), The nature of SME co-
operation and innovation: A multi scalar and 
multi-dimensional analysis, International Journal of 
Production Economics, 141, 316–326.
Zeng, S. X., Xie, X. M., & Tom, C. M. (2010), Relationship 
between cooperation networks and innovation perfor-
mance of SMEs, Technovation, 30, 181–194.

355
Chapter 39
 Comparative Management in the Field 
of  Extracurricular Activities, Highlighting 
Instrument of Potential Change*
Oana Dumitraşcu and Emanoil Muscalu
Lucian Blaga University
The purpose of this chapter is to present the similarities 
and differences in the field of extracurricular activities, 
comparing universities from Germany with those from 
Romania, with a purpose to identify the potential inno-
vative leisure activities that can be implemented at the 
Romanian universities. Also the influence of the extra-
curricular activities on the attractiveness of the univer-
sity and the potential factors that could increase the 
university image will be identified. This study gives 
recommendations for increasing the attractiveness of 
the study area through the development of extracur-
ricular activities at Romanian universities. The study 
has been accomplished using the bibliographic study, 
using various secondary and primary sources and using 
the methodology of qualitative research and of quanti-
tative research, based on a questionnaire.
This chapter includes a research, based on a ques-
tionnaire realized at the German university environment. 
Thus, the northern region of Germany is analyzed, 
including University of Applied Sciences Flensburg, 
University of Applied Sciences: Technology, Business 
and Design Wismar and University of Applied Sciences 
Kiel. A research based on the Romanian university envi-
ronment is also realized, where the University 
“1 Decembrie 1918” Alba Iulia, the University “Lucian 
Blaga” Sibiu and the University “Petru Maior” Târgu 
Mureş are studied.
Using the methodology of comparative management, 
the region of northern Germany is analyzed in compari-
son with the center region of Romania. The work high-
lights the similarities and differences between regions 
and between the studied universities, their characteristics, 
and especially their concerns. Qualitative studies define 
the nuances of the issues identified, and the quantitative 
studies confirm or infirm the hypotheses.
Through quantitative analysis based on the ques-
tionnaire and comparative management method the 
major problems identified during the research are high-
lighted and studied. Identifying the gaps regarding the 
extracurricular activities offer at Romanian universities 
compared to that of German universities basically iden-
tifies achievable goals through an efficient, effective 
 change management and adapted to the conditions in 
Romania.
* This work was supported by the strategic grand POSDRU/159/1.5/S/133255, Project ID 133255 (2014), co-financed by the European 
Social Fund within the Sectorial Operational Program Human Resources Development 2007–2013.

356 
O. Dumitraşcu & E. Muscalu
1. Introduction
According to the bibliographical results of studies that 
were the basis of this chapter, like Heine (2008: 23) 
also mentioned, the attractiveness of the study location 
is influenced by the good reputation of a university, its 
facilities, study offer, but also by the  extracurricular 
activities offer and the university atmosphere. These 
aspects influence the potential student’s decision in 
choosing a study location.
Therefore, we consider appropriate that among the 
targeted objectives, this article should also analyze the 
effect of extracurricular activities on the attractiveness 
of the location study, capturing aspects of compared 
management in the case of universities from northern 
Germany, the University of Applied Sciences 
Flensburg, the University of Applied Sciences: 
Technology, Business and Design Wismar and the 
University of Applied Sciences Kiel and in the case of 
universities in the central area of Romania, the 
University “1 Decembrie 1918” Alba Iulia, the 
University “Lucian Blaga” Sibiu and the University 
“Petru Maior” Târgu Mureş. The data were collected 
in the year 2012 with the aid of the questionnaire and 
analyzed using univariate and bivariate analysis. 
Capturing similarities and differences between 
Germany and Romania recommendations were issued, 
which contribute to a  change management leading to 
performance.
In the analysis the students’ participation at extra-
curricular activities has been captured, in general but 
also by category, as such the extracurricular activities 
offer was evaluated in the field of sport and recreation. 
The students’ opinion has been identified in regards to 
these fields and likewise their potential of 
improvement.
From our point of view, concerns on this topic 
are necessary and appropriate also out of the desire 
to identify the cultural, economic, social and educa-
tion differences for the two countries, such studies, 
bringing new contributions to the field knowledge. 
Hence, the comparative method applied in manage-
ment is the perfect method, helpful and necessary 
for this work, in which the availability of the data 
from Germany was facilitated by studies undertaken 
by us in 2012–2013. Dumitraşcu & Grünwald 
(2012), Dumitraşcu & Şerban (2013) and Grünwald 
& Dumitraşcu (2012) mention that, they do not con-
sider the comparison between the two regions 
(Northern Germany and Central Region Romania) 
forced, because there are many similarities: a part of 
the concerned German region has been part of 
Democratic Germany, its development is still pre-
carious, the culture, mentality, and values of citizens 
still having influences from the old regime. From the 
economic point of view, differences between the two 
regions exist, are untestable, but are not very large, 
and perhaps the most important aspect, found 
through observation and direct implication, the qual-
ity of education (its aspects of curricular order) is 
similar.
Nicolescu (1997: 30) stated that “ Comparative 
management is the science that studies processes and 
managerial relations from organizations operating in 
different national cultural contexts, focusing on identi-
fying and analyzing the similarities and differences of 
management in order to facilitate the international 
transfer of managerial know-how and increase usabil-
ity, effectiveness and efficiency organizations”. This 
definition can be characterized by the fact that just the 
elements of management constitutes the subject which 
lies at the base of the comparison, the multinational 
cultural vision represents the specific of the analysis, 
requiring that management be approached differently, 
depending on the cultural context of each country. 
Comparative analysis focuses on some similarities and 
differences between the theoretical and practical aspects 
of management, and the objectives followed within a 
comparative management study are of a pragmatic 
nature.
In regards to this chapter, the utility of comparative 
management, is given by the availability of information 
from outside the country, from different cultures, with 
larger and longer experience in extracurricular activi-
ties. Comparison as a method and comparative evalua-
tion as an instrument enable experience take over, 
sometimes adaptation of them to the environment and 
culture in which the implementation is desired. It is also 
our case, by comparing the extracurricular activities 
offer in universities from Romania and Germany and 
identifying ways to change in the sense of 
development.

 
Comparative Management in the Field of Extracurricular Activities 
357
2.  Result Description and Evaluation 
Based on the  Comparative 
Management Method
2.1.  Description of the sample analyzed 
in Germany
The analyzed sample from Germany is formed by stu-
dents enroled at the university from Wismar, at the 
university from Kiel and the one from Flensburg, was 
taken at random. In total 120 responders have been 
interviewed, from which 40 from the University from 
Wismar, 40 from the one in Kiel and 40 from the one 
from Flensburg. Out of these 120 subjects, 41.7% were 
female and 58.3% male.
Flensburg is situated in the north of Germany, in 
the Schleswig-Holstein region, at the border with 
Denmark. At the University of Applied Sciences 
Flensburg are approximately 4,000 students enrolled. 
The study offer is focused on technics and economics 
(University of Applied Sciences Flensburg).
Kiel is the capital of the Schleswig-Holstein region 
and has direct access to the North Sea–Baltic Sea 
Canal. The University of Applied Sciences Kiel was 
established in 1969 as a merger of several state owned 
engineering schools and technical schools. This is the 
largest university from Schleswig-Holstein, with 
approximately 6,400 students (University of Applied 
Sciences Kiel).
The city of Wismar is a port city on the Baltic Sea. 
Baldauf (2010) and Borowski (2010) mention that, the 
University of Applied Sciences: Technology, Business 
and Design Wismar comprises three faculties, the 
Faculty of Engineering, Faculty of Economics and 
Faculty of Design where approximately 6,900 students 
are enroled.
2.2.  Description of the sample analyzed 
in Romania
The sample from Romania is composed of students of 
the “Lucian Blaga” University Sibiu, “Petru Maior” 
University Târgu Mureş and “1 Decembrie 1918” 
University Alba Iulia, and it was chosen randomly. In 
total 146 students were surveyed, of which 51 from the 
“Lucian Blaga” University Sibiu, 50 from the “Petru 
Maior” University Târgu Mureş and 46 from the “1 
Decembrie 1918” University Alba Iulia. Of the students 
surveyed, 43% are female and 57% male.
At the “Lucian Blaga” University Sibiu there are 
approximately 14,500 students enrolled, the university 
being split into nine faculties. In the study of “Lucian 
Blaga” University Sibiu (2011–2012: 4), is stated that 
the majority of students study within the Faculty of 
Engineering or at the Faculty of Economic Sciences. 
The “Petru Maior” University from Târgu Mureş is 
composed of three faculties, Faculty of Engineering, 
Faculty of Sciences and Letters and the Faculty of 
Economics, Law, and Administration Sciences. This 
university was established in 1960 and has approxi-
mately 5,200 enrolled students. (Romanian Agency for 
Quality Assurance in Higher Education: 12).
At the “1 Decembrie 1918” University from Alba 
Iulia there are approximately 4,500 students enrolled, 
and it is divided into four faculties, Faculty of History 
and Philology, Faculty of Science, Faculty of Law and 
Social Sciences and the Faculty of Orthodox Theology. 
(“1 Decembrie 1918” University Alba Iulia).
2.3.  Students’ implication in  extracurricular 
activities — Comparison between 
Romania and Germany
The analyzed data shows that 37% from the Romanian 
students participate in  extracurricular activities, in 
comparison with 50.8% of the German students. For 
both samples the preferred extracurricular activity is 
sport, this being often practiced in Germany. German 
students participate in students’ organizations or vol-
unteer activities less, compared with those from 
Romania. In line with the previous finding, nearly a 
third of Romanian students prefer attending student 
events, in comparison with not even 10% of German 
students.
In general, the main cause of non-participation to 
extracurricular activities is time. Students are occupied 
with study, courses, job and friends. But, in the same 
time, as the study reveals, the lack of involvement may 
be caused by the low attractiveness of the extracurricu-
lar activities offer and the lack of students’ information 
in regards to this bid. Specifically, lower involvement 
of the Romanian students in such activities, 

358 
O. Dumitraşcu & E. Muscalu
comparative with German students, may be due to a 
much lower diversity and attractiveness of the extracur-
ricular offer and a poorer media coverage, compared to 
Germany.
Generally the reason of Romanian students’ impli-
cation in  extracurricular activities is for them to com-
plete their professional experience, specially the 
professional one, the majority of them consider extra-
curricular activities important in their personal 
development.
2.4.  Comparison of extracurricular activities 
offered in the ﬁ eld of sports between 
Romania and Germany
Similarly with the students from the Romanian univer-
sities, two thirds of the German students consider 
sports to be important or even very important.
Students’ participation is low in regards to sports 
activities, most of them being uninformed about the offer. 
The study shows that neither the German students do not 
seem to be fully aware of the sports activities, although 
they are more informed than the Romanian ones.
Most of the Romanian students are willing to pay for 
activities such as swimming, football, fitness, dances in 
comparison with German students who would prefer to 
pay for sailing, surf, fitness and swimming. But perhaps 
the type of activity is not important in this case, because it 
depends on the study area and natural possibilities offered. 
Instead, an aspect we consider to be relevant, is the fact 
that the average amount Romanian students would like to 
pay for practicing sport activities is between RON51–100, 
the amount that can be found in equal proportions also at 
the German students. Taking into consideration, the finan-
cial opportunities of Romanian students in comparison 
with German students, it can be noted that the interest of 
Romanian students to participate in sports activities is 
higher than of German students, which may be due to the 
lack of some sports activities until present time at their 
university, or of the general low attractiveness of the offer.
The fact that 80% of students from the “Lucian 
Blaga” University consider sport as being important 
or very important indicate that they are very interested 
in regards to these activities. Although, their participa-
tion is low, the most likely cause being the poor infor-
mation on the sports activities offered. Regarding the 
payment of some activities, students from the “Lucian 
Blaga” University are willing to pay a fee for fitness, 
swimming and football. For “Lucian Blaga” University 
to stand up to the standards of other universities and 
ideally to the standards of those from Germany, 
strictly for this one it is recommended to provide the 
basic sports activities: volleyball, basketball, football, 
table tennis. And because students would be willing to 
Fig. 1.  Opinion regarding the sports offer in Romanian universities
Notes:
Lucian Blaga University Sibiu = 51.
Petru Maior University Tg.Mureş = 50.

 
Comparative Management in the Field of Extracurricular Activities 
359
Fig. 2.  Opinion regarding the sports offer in German universities
Notes:
University Wismar = 40.
University Flensburg = 40.
University Kiel = 40.
pay a monthly fee between RON 51 and 100 for par-
ticipating to sports activities, it is recommended to 
implement a charge for additional sport activities, 
respectively swimming, fitness, dances, and aerobics. 
To increase demand, this offer has to be well publi-
cized especially on the website of the faculties and 
universities with the purpose of promoting student 
involvement.
Among the analyzed German universities, the offer 
of the Flensburg University is the most appreciated. 
From the Romanian universities, “1 Decembrie 1918” 
University from Alba Iulia is the most appreciated, 60% 
of the questioned students having a favorable or very 
favorable opinion in comparison with approximately 
one third of students from other universities.
2.5.  Comparison Romania — Germany 
regarding the  extracurricular activities 
offered in the ﬁ eld of recreation
In general, the participation of students from the ana-
lyzed Romanian universities is lower than of German 
students. Romanian students wish for more trips as well 
as organizing parties and recreational activities, the 
majority of Romanian students surveyed being very 
interested to participate in such activities. The most 
favorable opinion out of the analyzed Romanian 
universities about this offer is found at the University of 
Alba Iulia, followed by Târgu Mureş, University of 
Sibiu was ranked last. The number of students in 
Romania which have appreciated this offer as favorable 
or very favorable is higher than in Germany.
Information, and as a result the participation of stu-
dents at the “Lucian Blaga” University Sibiu is much 
lower in terms of theatrical activities, musical activities 
or competitions, compared to that of other Romanian 
universities. In return, they have heard and participate to 
the orientation program for 1st year, the opening festiv-
ity of the academic year, trips and carnivals. Surprising 
is that the University from Sibiu is the last among the 
analyzed Romanian universities in terms of students’ 
opinion in regards to the extracurricular activities offer 
in the field of recreation. We consider this finding as a 
negative one that can be improved in a further research, 
as in a city as Sibiu, as former European Capital of 
Culture in 2007, in which the cultural activity is a stra-
tegic priority at city and county level, the offer is very 
large from a quantitative point of view, spread as 
deployment of time and diverse as typology.
3. Conclusions and Recommendations
From the analysis it is shown that in general, Romanian 
students’ involvement in extracurricular activities is 

360 
O. Dumitraşcu & E. Muscalu
Fig. 3.  Opinion regarding extracurricular activities offer in the field of recreation at Romanian universities
Notes:
N“Lucian Blaga” University Sibiu = 51.
N“Petru Maior” University Tg. Mureş = 50.
Fig. 4.  Opinion regarding extracurricular activities offer in the field of recreation at German universities
Notes:
NUniversity Wismar = 40.
NUniversity Flensburg = 40.
NUniversity Kiel = 40.
lower than that of German students. The majority of 
students with an unfavorable or totally unfavorable 
opinion about the  extracurricular activities offer are 
students from “Lucian Blaga” University from Sibiu. 
This may be due to the low attractiveness of the extra-
curricular activities offer and the lack of students’ infor-
mation, on one hand and on the other hand to the 
increased demand, greater willingness to participate in 
such activities, thus the offer demand rapport being 
disproportionately in favour of the demand. The com-
parative analysis shows that a university offer that is 
more diverse, more attractive and better mediatized can 
influence students’ involvement. For example, the offer 
in Germany is more diversified and better promoted as 
the one in Romania, students’ implication being thus 
higher. Romanian students are more interested to 
 participate in extracurricular activities, probably 
because they did not have the possibility so far, due to 

 
Comparative Management in the Field of Extracurricular Activities 
361
the reduced extracurricular offer. Especially the sports 
offer is very different in Romania as to Germany. Thus, 
also the desire of students to participate and introduce 
some new activities is different.
For, in terms of  extracurricular activities, Romanian 
universities to get closer to the standards of the German 
ones, and consequently the general students’ implica-
tion in such activities to rise, it is recommended to 
increase the supply of extracurricular activities by 
diversification and increasing the attractiveness, a more 
performing marketing and management of them, a 
change of organizational culture, in which the social 
relations and activities involving teams to be restored as 
important. As suggested by students to increase their 
interest it is particularly recommended to promote 
extracurricular activities, involvement of professors in 
these activities among students, development of sports 
activities, career guidance activities, but also various 
seminars, and professional trainings.
Generally, perhaps Sibiu less, which has a rich offer, 
the offer in the field of recreation should be improved 
towards developing cultural, musical, and theatrical 
activities. In cooperation with related organizations and 
student clubs, diverse events can be organized, competi-
tions and exhibitions, in which students with common 
interests may assert their ideas, potential and develop 
their talents. Likewise, the development of summer 
schools is extremely beneficial and is recommended as 
a way to develop new skills, because within them, pro-
grams can be conceived that blend various types of 
extracurricular activities.
A very important conclusion, through which fore-
sees a targeting of research towards the correlation of 
extracurricular activities — academic performance — 
performance management, is that, students with 
higher academic averages participate at such activi-
ties, more than students with lower averages, from 
which we can deduce that either extracurricular 
activities have a positive influence on academic per-
formance, either that only students above the perfor-
mance average have the capacity and desire to engage 
in such activities. We do not exclude and we even 
believe that the assumptions made are synergic in 
nature, they are supporting and developing each other. 
It remains for this statement to be proven in a subse-
quent step of our research.
A recommendation with a purpose to improve the 
quality of extracurricular activities and satisfying stu-
dents’ needs, refers to the fact that satisfaction studies 
in regards to extracurricular activities should be carried 
out periodically (half-yearly) thus, as a result of the 
findings, through improving the offer of extracurricular 
activities, in the sense of its attractiveness, through an 
effective management of marketing, given by a man-
agement of change, in the sense of continuous improve-
ment, the university image can be improved, the 
attractiveness for good students will rise, and as such 
the quality spiralling towards academic performance.
References
Romanian Agency for Quality Assurance in Higher Education 
(2010), Petru Maior University Targu Mures; translated from
“Agenţ ia Română de Asigurare a Calităţ ii în Învăţ ământul 
Superior” (2010), Universitatea Petru Maior din Târgu Mureş.
Agenţia Română de Asigurare a Calităţii în Învăţământul 
Superior, (2010), Universitatea Petru Maior din Târgu 
Mureş, Available at http://proiecte.aracis.ro/fileadmin/
ARACIS/Publicatii_Aracis/Brosuri_proiect/Etapa_II/
Brosuri_proiect/002_Interior_Brosura_UPM_27_pre-
view.pdf (Accessed 8 March 2014).
Baldauf, K. (2010), Hochschule Wismar, Available at http://
hs-wismar.de/index.php?id=leitbild&L=0 (Accessed 8 
March 2014).
Borowski, K. (2011), Hochschule Wismar, Available at http://
hswismar.de/index.php?id=4901&L=0 (Accessed 8 
March 2014).
Dumitraşcu, O. & Şerban, A. (2013), Present state of research 
regarding university choice and attractiveness of the 
study area, 20th International Economic Conference — 
IECS 2013, Sibiu.
Dumitraşcu, O., Grünwald, N., & Bassus, O. (2012), Wirkung der 
Freizeitangebote auf die Attraktivität des Studienstandortes 
und der Studienmotivation der Studierenden, Master Thesis, 
Germania: University Wismar.
Fachhochschule Flensburg. Available at http://www.fh-flens-
burg.de/fhfl/hochschule.html (Accessed 8 March 2014).
Fachhochschule, K. Available at http://www.fh-kiel.de/index.
php?id=28 (Accessed 08 March 2014).
Grünwald, N. & Dumitraşcu, O. (2012), Influence of leisure 
activities on the attractiveness of the study region, MSD 
Journal, 4. Available at http://www.cedc.ro/media/MSD/
Papers/Volume%204%20no%202%202012/Grunwald.
pdf (Accessed 8 March 2014).

362 
O. Dumitraşcu & E. Muscalu
Heine, C. (2008), Studienanfänger in den alten und neuen 
Ländern: Gründe der Hochschulwahl und Bewertungen der 
Hochschulregionen West- und Ostdeutschland. Available at 
http://www.hochschulkampagne-ost.de/dateien/
HIS-Studienanfaenger-Hochschulwahl-und-bewertung.
pdf (Accessed 8 March 2014).
Nicolescu, O. (1997), Management Comparat, Uniunea 
Europeană, Japonia şi S.U.A., Bucureşti, Editura 
Economică.
“Lucian Blaga” University Sibiu. (2011–2012), translated from 
“Universitatea Lucian Blaga Sibiu, Departamentul integrat 
de comunicaţ ii şi marketing biroul de marketing, 2011–
2012, Studiu privind profilul studenţ ilor din cadrul 
ULBS”, Available at http://www.ulbsibiu.ro/ro/universitate/
publ_interne/documente/raportprofilul-studentilor_
2011-2012.pdf (Accessed 8 March 2014); in “Lucian 
Blaga” University Sibiu (2011–2012), Department of inte-
grated marketing communications and marketing office, 
Study regarding ULBS students’ profile. Available at http://
www.ulbsibiu.ro/ro/universitate/publ_ interne/documente/
raport-profilul-studentilor_2011–2012.pdf (Accessed 8 
March 2014).
“1 Decembrie 1918” University Alba Iulia”, translated from 
“Universitatea, 1 Decembrie 1918”, Alba Iulia, Available 
at http://www.uab.ro/despre/index.php (Accessed 8 
March 2014).

363
Chapter 40
Study for Creating and Developing Regional 
Agrifood Markets in Romania
Nicolae Istudor, George Plesoianu, Bogdan Bazga, 
Oana Georgiana Stanila, and St. Alexandru Costin Cirstea
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
Taking into account the present context in which the 
global joint efforts are directed towards identifying 
feasible and pragmatic solutions for transfer to a new 
model of development — a sustainable one — and 
after long debates with specialists in food chain, we 
have considered as being neccessary to study and 
implement a new sustainable model for food produc-
tion, and consumption, adapted to the Romanian spe-
cific conditions.
This study primarily aims to analyze the opportuni-
ties for creating and developing regional agrifood mar-
kets in Romania, as an alternative to the negative effects 
of globalization and as a pre-requisite for ensuring the 
 food security and safety through local and regional 
food production. A second objective consists in analyz-
ing the current situation of the level of food markets 
functioning in Romania, compared to the developed 
countries of the EU. The third pragmatic objective of 
the study is creating a pilot model of Regional Agro-
Food System, integrated in the food chain and based on 
best practices from developed countries.
The main research methods used in this study are: 
Synthesis documentation of the recent reports and 
studies conducted by international organizations Food 
and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations 
(FAO), Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), World Health Organisation 
(WHO), which studied the importance of small and 
medium farms reorientation in ensuring food security 
and safety at the local/regional levels, models of exist-
ing regional food markets at European and interna-
tional level (Germany, France, Polandand USA); 
statistical analysis to identify the current situation in 
Romania, compared with the EU and simulation of 
socio-economic effects to create a pilot model of 
Regional Agro-Food System, adapted to the specific 
situation of Romania.
1.  The Opportunities of Creating 
and Developing  Regional Agrifood 
Markets (RAM)
In the current context of Romania when the food markets 
are dominated by super and hypermarkets and traditional 
markets had a strong fall, is required a careful analysis of 
the effects of this situation and design a new model of 
integrated development of food production and consump-
tion, which has to be sustainable. This premise is sup-
ported by the fact that Romania has a high agricultural 
potential, which can meet demand of agricultural prod-
ucts from local and regional agricultural production.

364 
N. Istudor et al.
From our documentation resulted that currently, 
international organizations involved in agriculture and 
food, such as FAO and OECD orient their efforts toward 
finding solutions for ensuring  food security and safety 
in Europe and globally. These efforts are concentrated 
especially in the small and medium-sized farms, which 
can satisfy the local and regional food needs. This justi-
fies studying the opportunity of creating a new Model of 
Agrifood System in Romania, oriented to promote inte-
grated agricultural production at regional level.
The first part of the study presents the opportunity 
to analyze the creation and development of regional 
agrifood markets in response to the negative effects of 
globalization, which generated dependence with large 
global networks of agricultural products suppliers, the 
inability to ensure food security and safety from local 
and regional products. In our opinion, the main oppor-
tunities and advantages of designing and developing 
regional agrifood markets in Romania are:
• 
High potential of revival the agricultural and food 
production that can ensure — qualitative and quan-
titative — the domestic need for food and may 
gradually shrink super and hypermarkets competi-
tion through strict control of product quality and 
traceability;
• 
The possibility and necessity of easy monitoring 
and traceability of the food products origin, thus 
leading to increase their quality and to an effective 
management of activities within the food chain;
• 
Reorganization of activities within the food chain 
and the possibility of using and upgrading existing 
infrastructure by local manufacturers/processors;
• 
Creating professional networks for product confir-
mity verification through independent laboratories 
to confirm the quality of local food products;
• 
Ability to access European projects funded through 
the National Rural Development Program 2014–
2020, which supports the need for better integration 
of agrifood producers in the market, through short 
supply chains. For smaller producers, emphasis 
will be placed on encouraging association and 
improving access to credits for investments, while 
the big players need to invest in modernization and 
in compliance with EU requirements, focusing on 
sectors that have the highest added value and the 
greatest potential for export (Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development, 2014);
• 
A premise and opportunity that can be exploited in 
order to create and develop RAM is also the inter-
national initiatives to promote and support small 
family farmers who produce for local, and/or, 
regional markets. Thus, according to the resolution 
of the European Council of Young Farmers, pro-
moting small farms at the European level has many 
advantages, both in terms of ensuring food security 
and safety, diversity of food products, and the 
increased competition on the market, adding value 
in food sector and increasing the number of jobs for 
rural young people (European Council of Young 
Farmers, 2013).
• 
At the same time, at european level is aimed the 
rejuvenation of population occupied in agriculture, 
as a prerequisite for the creation and development 
of regional food markets, especially as, on average, 
young farmers are more productive, oriented to 
technological innovation and better informed 
(European Council of Young Farmers, 2013).
Based on recent studies conducted by a group of 
professors and consultants from Bucharest University 
of Economic Studies was found that this new approach 
is appropriate and is within the vision and directions of 
the new Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) 2014–
2020 (European Commission, 2013) recently launched 
by the EU and has a significant importance in:
• 
Harnessing natural resources at local/regional level 
by local producers;
• 
Stimulating rural farmers to associate in production 
and conditioning products in centers of collecting, 
sorting, and packaging that contribute to revenue 
growth of small and medium farms and, conse-
quently, the growth of quality life in rural areas. 
Also required is the establishment and operation of 
marketing and sales associations, to provide raw 
materials for food processing units and final prod-
ucts for supermarkets and other local and regional 
retail chains, especially stable and moving market 
places, retail units and e-commerce;

 
Study for Creating and Developing Regional Agrifood Markets 
365
• 
Strong decrease in the level of imports of agricul-
tural products due to the establishment and devel-
opment of units which offer local and regional 
products in regional agrifood markets and includ-
ing small and medium-sized farms as providers of 
these networks;
• 
Increasing  food safety and ensuring traceability on 
the whole agricultural chain, from producer to 
consumer;
• 
Development of SMEs for processing natural and 
healthy food products, with small and medium pro-
cessing capabilities, operating in the proximity of 
agricultural production basins and urban localities;
• 
Development with strategic projects of regional 
transport and storage, proper for agricultural prod-
ucts and food, including support services for 
regional agrifood markets development (credit 
unions, laboratories for product certification, IT 
systems and advertising).
By implementing the above measures will create 
prerequisites for developing a new model of sustainable 
food production and consumption, which will effec-
tively exploit the natural resources available at local 
and regional level and will provide safe and sufficient 
food products for domestic needs. Furthermore, this 
new model of sustainable development can lead to the 
modernization of food sector, increasing innovation 
through new technologies and promoting research, 
development and innovation in the field, and use of best 
practices for production and processing of agricultural 
products in accordance with the requirements of envi-
ronmental conservation.
2.  The Comparative Analysis 
of the Actual Situation of RAM 
between Romania and Developed 
Countries in EU
Further in the study, an analysis of the current state of 
international trade with food products in Romania, 
compared to the developed countries of the European 
Union is presented.
Table 1 gives an overview of the evolution of 
imports with agricultural products in Romania com-
pared with some developed countries in the European 
Union (France, Germany, Poland, UK, Austria).
From the analysis of data presented in Table 1, it is 
found that all the analyzed countries have registered 
ascending values of agrifood imports. The highest 
import on food products is recorded by Germany, with 
values exceeding 50 billion across the analyzed period, 
followed by France and the UK, which recorded values 
over 30 billion across the analyzed period. On the 
opposite side is Romania, the country with the lowest 
level of agricultural products imports, with maximum 
values of about 4 billion euros (in 2012).
To ensure the relevance of this analysis in Table 2 
is presented, an overview of the evolution of agrifood 
exports in the same states discussed.
From the analysis of data presented in Table 2, it 
is found that, unlike imports, exports of agricultural 
products in most countries analyzed have been oscil-
lating. Thus, in Germany, France, Poland, UK, and 
Austria, 2009 represented a year of decrease in the 
level of exports with agricultural products, one of the 
reasons being represented by the manifestation of 
Table 1.  The evolution of imports with agrifood products (mn EUR)
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Romania
2,975
3,764
3,364
3,288
3,743
4,105
France
32,877
35,420
34,638
36,687
39,911
41,558
Germany
50,602
53,620
51,554
55,421
61,036
63,610
Poland
7,091
—
8,066
9,599
10,739
11,546
UK
38,231
38,214
35,961
39,115
41,627
45,525
Austria
7,322
7,959
7,693
8,250
8,973
9,620
Source: Eurostat.

366 
N. Istudor et al.
financial crisis in the EU countries, which recorded its 
maximum in 2009.
Similar to imports, France and Germany have the 
highest levels of exports throughout the period ana-
lyzed, with values exceeding EUR 40 bn in each of the 
analyzed years. On the opposite side is Romania, which 
recorded the lowest levels of exports of agricultural 
products in the analyzed period.
Next on the study will be presented the evolution of 
agrifood trade balance in Romania and analyzed EU 
countries, as the difference between the exports and the 
imports (Table 3 and Fig. 1).
From the analysis of data presented in Table 3 and 
Fig. 1, it is found that from all the states analyzed, only 
France and Poland registered during 2007–2012 levels 
of positive trade balance with food products, which 
highlights the high performance of food systems prac-
ticed in these states and capitalization of local and 
regional natural resources available for agricultural 
production. We consider that these patterns should be 
taken also in our country in order to increase the com-
petitiveness of the agrifood sector and decrease depend-
ence on imports and on big providers of food products.
Although Germany and UK had negative trade bal-
ance with food products, the high value of imports and 
exports indicate the existence of a strong and dynamic 
food system based on exploitation of local and regional 
resources that help ensure food security and safety.
In Romania there is a steady reduction in the trade 
deficit from EUR 2,121 mn (as it was in 2007) to EUR 
752 mn (as reached in 2012), which is a positive phe-
nomenon that gives us hope that in the near future, 
Romania will have a positive trade balance for food 
products.
For Romania to be able to align the performances 
of the developed EU countries, we consider absolutely 
necessary taking good practices from other developed 
countries in the EU and the world, as for example, the 
USA case.
3.  The Model of USA Regional 
 Food Hubs
One of the priorities of public policies promoted by the 
USA is to improve the access of small farmers to the 
food market and strengthen their position in the food 
chain in response to the disappearance of small farms 
because of large corporations and the need to ensure 
food security and safety.
In these conditions, lately, various models have been 
developed to streamline the agro chain from producer to 
consumer in the US regional food system, which are 
called food hubs. These are entities that manage the col-
lection, storage, processing, distribution, and marketing 
of locally and regional produced food but also provides 
technical assistance to small farmers working in other 
vital areas of their business: Marketing, farm manage-
ment, consulting for start-ups (Toderita, 2013).
Food hubs is an innovative tool for developing 
regional food systems as an intermediary between pro-
ducer and consumer, operating both in the area of sup-
ply and demand.
In the food supply area, hubs advise farmers for 
production planning, offer technical consulting, mar-
keting consulting, organic certification, verifying prod-
uct confirmity, so that farmers can adapt to market 
demands and achieve satisfactory income from agricul-
tural activity.
Table 2.  The evolution of exports with agrifood products (mn EUR).
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Romania
854
1,582
1,755
2,352
2,917
3,353
France
42,498
45,480
40,815
44,758
51,778
53,406
Germany
43,432
48,002
46,050
49,495
54,722
58,123
Poland
9,451
10,899
10,788
12,708
14,280
16,671
UK
16,967
17,094
16,259
18,679
20,869
22,082
Austria
7,469
8,067
7,356
7,959
8,755
9,212
Source: Eurostat.

 
Study for Creating and Developing Regional Agrifood Markets 
367
In terms of meeting the demand for food products, 
 food hubs conducts contracting with distributors, pro-
cessors, wholesalers and direct to consumers, so there 
are three areas/levels at which they operate:
• 
Farm to business/institution (commercial and 
logistics support services). This category collects 
agricultural products from farmers and distribute 
them to large retail chains, SMEs processing of 
agricultural products, public institutions, restau-
rants. Thus, the small farmers have access to new 
markets that they would not be able to access with-
out association in food hub.
• 
Farm to Consumer (conditioning and distribu-
tion services). This category collects agricultural 
products from farmers and distribute them (after 
preparation and packaging) directly to consumers. 
This model includes local and regional commercial 
networks, online platforms, home delivering com-
panies, and regional mobile markets.
• 
The hybrid model. This category conducts sales 
both to intermediaries and consumers.
Food hubs are financed by government through 
federal agencies in both start-up and subsequent opera-
tion phase. Also, food hubs are financed by various 
philanthropic foundations and private donors (those 
who finance these activities). They have a number of 
facilities such as tax breaks and low-interest loans and 
subsidized interest for equipment purchasing.
Next, a few examples of food hubs will be pre-
sented in the category of Farm to business/Institution 
that we consider appropriate for Romania too.
3.1.  Farm-to-table-Co-Packers (F2TCP) 
(Toderita, 2014 )
Set in a former IBM cafeteria, F2TCP is a private food 
hub which buys various products (especially fruits and 
vegetables) from small and medium farmers in New 
York State and gives them added value by freezing, 
preservation and/or processing.
F2TCP is also an incubator for agrifood industry, as 
it gives farmers consulting services for recipes and 
phytos anitary procedures, marketing and provides 
Table 3.  The evolution of trade balance with agrifood products (mn EUR)
 
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
Romania
−2,121
−2,182
−1,608
−936
−826
−752
France
9,621
10,060
6,177
8,071
11,867
11,848
Germany
−7,170
−5,618
−5,504
−5,927
−6,314
−5,487
Poland
2,359
10,899
2,723
3,109
3,541
5,125
UK
−21,264
−21,120
−19,702
−20,435
−20,758
−23,443
Austria
147
108
−336
−291
−218
−408
Source: Eurostat.
15000
10000
5000
0
–5000
–10000
–15000
–20000
–25000
–30000
Romania
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
France
Germany
Poland
UK
Austria
Fig. 1.  The evolution of trade balance with agrifood products (mn EUR)

368 
N. Istudor et al.
warehouse and refrigeration equipment for hire. The 
Food hub is totally owned by a consortium of compa-
nies and obtained a loan in the amount of USD 230,000 
from the State of New York.
3.2.  Philadelphia wholesale produce
market (Toderita, 2014 )
This is the second wholesale market in the US in size, 
extending over an area of 65,000 sqm. The construction, 
privately owned, was funded through a mix of public 
funds, both federal and local. The space is split and rented 
by 26 wholesalers, 13 of them being part on the Board of 
Directors. The market space contains also refrigerated 
containers, cooking rooms and offers re-packaging, bro-
kerage, and sales of food products from local producers.
3.3.  Common market (Toderita, 2014)
Common Market is a non-profit social enterprise that 
collects crop and animal production of over 100 small 
farmers from local and regional level, within a distance 
of 120 km from Philadelphia. The purpose of this food 
hub is to support local agriculture and provide quality 
food at affordable prices to low-income population in the 
suburbs of Philadelphia through public institutions and 
traders serving the disadvantaged population in the area.
The food hub enroll in the “Farm to Institution” cat-
egory, as it distribute fresh food to a network of 240 clients 
which are public institutions: schools, colleges, universi-
ties, hospitals, some restaurants, and food cooperatives.
Basically, the food hub regularly buys agricultural 
products from local farmers at a negotiated price. The 
relationship is not validated through written contracts, 
but by verbal agreements, operating on trust that the 
hub has developed in time with the farmers, and also 
due to the flexibility in price negotiations. Common 
Market farmer pays to the farmers on average 76% of 
the sale price — compared to only 20–30% as they 
receive through conventional distribution networks.
3.4.  Reading terminal market 
(Toderita, 2014)
Reading Terminal Market is a market located in a for-
mer train depot in the center of Philadelphia, which 
rents ‘stands’ at advantageous tariffs to local and 
regional producers and traders for valuing agricultural 
output directly to final consumers.
4.  The  Regulatory Impact Assessment 
of RAM Needs in Romania
In the efforts to transfer to a food system model based 
on regional food markets functioning in Romania, there 
are required the promotion and processing of pragmatic 
approaches based on the methodology of Regulatory 
Impact Assessment (RIA), through interdisciplinary 
studies of emphasizing needs to create regional food 
markets. Although there are formally accepted in gov-
ernmental and sectoral structures, currently no regula-
tions impact studies are done following internationally 
established methodology, in order to commensurate 
opportunities and needs of the population, farmers, and 
processors in the food chain.
We also state that Romanian law generally, and the 
food sector, in particular, is still in a continuous change 
and accepts too many exceptions, which led to a incon-
sistent legislative conglomerate affecting the food busi-
ness environment, especially small farmers, generating 
excessive bureaucracy, with negative effects on stake-
holders from the entire agrifood chain.
All these loopholes and the lack of a strategy for 
industrialization of food products contributed indirectly 
but essentially, to major investments in the processing 
of agricultural products in Romania, without being 
related to the possibility of obtaining materials for cov-
ering these capabilities (far reaching to cover less than 
40% of processing capacity), which resulted to the 
drawn of food sector in our country. This phenomenon 
is accompanied with poor quality landowners and for-
eign investors in agriculture and food industry, and 
refusal of foreign banks to provide loans to support 
agriculture, which transformed Romania from an 
exporter into a net importer of agricultural and food 
products (with a comeback in recent years, but which 
hasn’t stopped the trade deficit).
There is, however, a positive aspect regarding food 
sector in our country, represented by Romanian inves-
tors who have created integrated production systems 
able to cope with the tough competition in the European 
Union and beyond, such as: Insula Mare a Brăilei, 

 
Study for Creating and Developing Regional Agrifood Markets 
369
Interagro, Agroindustriala Vaslui, Comcereal Dolj. Yet, 
as shown above, the problems arise from small and 
medium farmers for whom it have to be found solutions 
for marketing in terms of economic efficiency, to be 
stimulated in agricultural production.
This situation necessarily requires the development 
of macroeconomic impact studies, to properly assess 
the directions of development of Romania’s agricul-
tural sector in the medium and long term.
Currently, although  Regulatory Impact Assessment 
(RIA) was performed through technical assistance with 
international financing, there is not yet a body of pro-
fessionals specialized in interdisciplinary RIA studies 
at the macroeconomic level who know the issues facing 
the agrifood sector. Also, existing bodies dealing with 
public policies within relevant ministries are still in a 
phase of bureaucratic hesitation, consisting in appre-
hending details of laws provisions of the Articles and 
some post factum warnings, which are rarely consid-
ered by experts in the field.
In our opinion, the aforementioned elements can be 
a challenge to institutionalize consistent and profes-
sionally elaborate studies on impact assessment, in 
accordance with the methodology agreed at EU level to 
substantiate all strategic requirements, as a prerequisite 
for moving to a food system model based on exploita-
tion of natural resources, and products locally and 
regionally, according to international best practices 
implemented in the field.
5.  Model of Integrated Regional 
Agrifood System
Based on the above considerations and proposals, we 
have designed an  integrated model of Regional Agrifood 
System, similar to those in the US, and developed coun-
tries in Europe, which consider all the links in the chain, 
starting from providing necessary inputs for agricultural 
production, primary production, transport and storage 
of agricultural products, processing and trading on vari-
ous channels and providing support services for each 
link of the chain (management consulting, legal and 
financial consulting, independent laboratories for analy-
sis, and certification of food products).
Also, we consider that in Romania it is necessary to 
create associations, such as  food hubs, to provide to 
small farmers a number of basic services for the devel-
opment of their activities. It is necessary, first, provid-
ing technical advice for acquisition and use of 
agricultural inputs required to obtain good quality pri-
mary products. Next, is needed transportation, storage, 
packaging, and transport to the next link, which is 
needed to broker the sale of agricultural products.
To increase the added value, are required process-
ing units of agricultural products in small and medium 
capacities, in accordance with Hazard Analysis and 
Critical Control Points (HACCP) standards specific for 
food system. Implementation of HACCP and the crea-
tion of independent professional networks of public and 
private surveillance is one of the priority in the func-
tioning of regional food markets, in order to monitor 
compliance and quality of food products and thus to 
increase food safety.
Implementation of HACCP is promoted at the 
European level through Directive 178/2002 which con-
tains a number of principles and general requirements 
for  food safety. The priority objectives of this regula-
tion are (Craciunescu & Ciobanu, 2009):
• 
The availability of safe and healthy food products 
that come from local and regional sources;
• 
Ensure a high level of human life and health protec-
tion, through product quality monitoring on the 
whole food chain.
For the creation and development of agricultural 
processing units, we propose accessing European 
funded projects through the new National Rural 
Development Program 2014–2020, measure: “Support 
for investments in processing and marketing of agricul-
tural products” — as a dedicated tool to implement a 
new model based on the creation and operation of 
regional agrifood markets.
The next link in the chain — food marketing — can 
be achieved through several local and regional channels 
such as:
• 
Networks of supermarkets locally and/or regionally;
• 
Networks of small shops locally and/or regionally;
• 
Stable and mouving market places;
• 
Online, with home delivery;
• 
Schools and other institutions and private companies.

370 
N. Istudor et al.
For the proper functioning of the new regional 
agrifood system, it is necessary that each link of the 
chain to benefit from a number of underlying services, 
such as management consulting, legal consulting, 
financial advisory, audit and assurance services, veteri-
nary and phytosanitary services, independent laborato-
ries for analysis and quality certification of agricultural 
and food products provided locally and/or regionally.
Fig. 2. shows a template of our contribution to cre-
ating a pilot Model of Integrated Regional Agrifood 
System.
6.  Conclusions
In conclusion, future functioning, in Romania, of the 
Integrated Regional Agrifood System, which includes 
all links in the food chain from the local/regional level 
may lead to a more efficient use of natural resources 
and a gradual reduction in food trade dependence from 
international suppliers. This has the condition of 
providing support networks of cooperation between 
producers/processors/sellers and promote pragmatic 
quantifiable and stimulating policies of bridging facili-
ties and agricultural subsidies with the need to develop 
production and sales of food commodities.
To implement this synergic project of agrifood sys-
tem development in Romania are required joint efforts 
from the Government and authorities (all actors involved 
in food policies in Romania).
In this context it becomes obvious that all food 
market players must contribute to finding solutions for 
the production, collection and marketing of these prod-
ucts, mainly for small and medium producers. Of these, 
worthy of consideration are the following:
• 
Valorification of the agricultural potential of the 
country, which is able to provide quality raw mate-
rials to processors, for which can be achieved trace-
ability and reduce dependence on imports of 
agricultural products with questionable quality;
Fig. 2.  Model of Integrated Regional Agrifood System
PROCESSING
PRIMARY PRODUCTION-
NATURAL
SELLING
Transport.
Preserv.
MARKETING AND SALES
Romanian Brands on local and
regional markets
INTEGRATED SYSTEM:
Hotel, Restaurants 
and catering (HORECA)
Agrotourism
Small shop networks
Selling to people through 
e-commerce
Processing and conservation
in special units
In small/medium capacities,
according to HACCP
standards
Law Consultancy
SUPPORT SERVICES
Take-force/Tink-tank
Research-Development
Management
Technology
Management Consultancy
Financial and Insurance Consultancy
Veterinary and phyto-sanitary services
Laboratories for products analysis and
certification
Agriculture
LIVESTOCK
FOREST PRODUCTS
Cereals
Vegetables
Fruits
Sheeps,cows,goats, new
species
Vegetals
Animals
Beekeaping
Other products
Schools and small
restaurants
Logistics
Transport.
Supermarkets
Trade
networks
Agro-
markets
Retail
Online
Preserv.
Logistics

 
Study for Creating and Developing Regional Agrifood Markets 
371
• 
Participation of integrating economic organizations 
(the sphere of distribution and processing of agricul-
tural products) to support small and medium farmers 
through win–win contracts between the two sides;
• 
Create new collection systems that can bring on 
private consumer market, food products made in 
the classical system (without allocation of pollutant 
inputs) by small and medium farmers, as shown in 
the proposed model;
• 
Create marketing chains composed of small shops 
that sell mainly fresh local products;
• 
Forbid the supermarkets opening in the inner cities 
and keeping them at a reasonable distance from 
populated areas, correlated with their orientation 
towards the purchase of local food products;
• 
EU funding of integrated projects in which funds 
are allocated to traders and processors, if they 
stimulate domestic production (in this way the pro-
duction capacity can effectively be used and the 
domestic production is stimulated);
• 
Conversion to authorized individuals (at least, if 
not economic) of all “so called direct producers” 
who sell on the traditional markets, which will help 
reduce tax evasion and encourage the establishment 
of producer groups.
References
Brown, L. R. (Earth Policy Institute), (2011), Lumea pe mar-
ginea prăpastiei — Cum să prevenim colapsul ecologic 
şi economic, Bucharest: Ed. Tehnică.
Craciunescu, V. & Ciobanu, E. (2009), Siguranta alimentului 
pe intelesul tuturor. Ghid realizat prin proiectul PHARE 
2006/018-147.04.02.02.01.713 Finantat de Uniunea 
Europeana 
si 
Guvernul 
Romaniei, 
Bucharest: 
COMETAM Ltd.
European Comission (2002), General food law regulation. 
Available at http://www.aptus.ro/images/stories/Regula 
mentul-CE-nr._178_2002.pdf (Accessed 1–10 April 2014).
European Commission (2013), Overview of CAP Reform 
2014–2020. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/
policy-perspectives/policy-briefs/05_en.pdf (Accessed 
1–10 April 2014).
European Council of Young Farmers (2013), Draft supporting 
chapter for family farming consultation. Available at http://
ec.europa.eu/agriculture/consultations/family-farming/
contributions/ceja_en.pdf (Accessed 1–10 April, 2014).

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

373
Chapter 41
Comparative Analysis of the  Factors Influencing 
the Development and Implementation 
of European  Projects
Diana Elena Ranf and Liana Marcu
Romanian-German University of Sibiu
Dănuţ Dumitru Dumitraşcu
Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu
The chapter is a conclusive part of a complex work that 
attempted to identify the factors of negative  influence 
on the two stages of the cycle of European projects: 
Initiating European projects and implementation of 
European projects. The main objectives of the article 
are: Identifying the weights of each environmental fac-
tor into the influence on  European projects, prioritizing 
them according to the degree of influence and making 
a comparison between the two stages analyzed from the 
factors identified.
The information that has enabled this analysis were 
obtained by conducting a research to identify the main 
problems and shortcomings encountered by beneficiar-
ies of projects financed by European funds due to the 
negative influence of certain categories of factors. This 
research has resulted in an analysis of the practice of 
project management in  public institutions in Region 
7 Center and how it has resulted in successful projects.
This chapter is an ordering of the original results 
obtained from the research conducted on the topic, the 
validation of certain assumptions and awareness of 
deficiencies in the previous approach to the sector 
under investigation and suggesting new areas of 
research. Therefore, the data processed by means of 
statistical methods such as frequency analysis, corre-
spondence analysis, and correlation analysis of the 
independent variables with the dependent variables 
allowed to obtain information that would lead to the 
development of models to increase  performance in 
European projects.
One of the most relevant conclusion of the article 
resulted from the comparative analysis of the stages of 
European projects based on the degree of influence of 
environmental factors. There has thus been identified a 
decrease in the degree of influence of the absorption 
phase of the projects, with percentages up to 300%, 
therefore an improvement in the ability to combat nega-
tive factors with overcoming the stage of accessing 
projects.
1. Introduction
A preliminary study of literature in the field of projects 
in general, is shown in an abundance of books, studies 
and researches conducted in projects. From foreign lit-
erature, especially the American authors (Lewis, PJ, 

374 
D. E. Ranf, L. Marcu & D. D. Dumitraşcu
Morris, P., Portny, E., Kerzner, H., etc.) and continu-
ing with Romanian literature (Mocanu, M. & Schuster, 
C. Neagu, C. Dumitrascu, D. & Pascu, VR) we have 
identified a variety of books in project  management. 
But, very few authors have touched the issue of 
 European funded  projects. European projects have a 
specificity that makes them different from other pro-
jects and they have been the subject of study for a 
small number of authors. The author Bârgăoan Alina 
treated European projects in a number of books and 
studies that have contributed both in the practice and 
theory of projects.
The need for a study to evaluate the results obtained 
at the end of the 2007–2013 funding period occurred as 
a result of reduced  performance registered since then. 
Therefore, our country has a degree of absorption that 
has not crossed the threshold of 30%, remaining at the 
bottom of the classification of Community countries. 
Each funding period 2007–2013, 2014–2020, and so 
on, can be designed to help increase experience in the 
field. Thus, these periods may be associated with devel-
opment cycles of six years in which Romania has the 
chance to improve certain skills, starting from the stage 
of development of strategic documents that program 
the funding process for the preparation of administra-
tive structures that will become responsible for manag-
ing funds until improving skills in project management, 
which have a great contribution in accessing and 
absorbing European funds.
At the end of each period, particular importance is 
given to an analysis of the positive and negative diag-
nosis that led to the obtained results. This analysis is 
intended to help improve the results that Romania 
might get in the future in this area.
The population of interest for the study, namely the 
population from which the sample was selected, is 
made up of  public institutions (municipalities, county 
councils, foundations, government, prefectures) or 
NGOs located in Region 7 Center. From this sample, 
two target groups were formed: institutions that have 
accessed European funds for identifying problems and 
difficulties in accessing and implementing and institu-
tions that have not accessed European funds to identify 
potential causes of low level of access.
These two studies have allowed the identification 
of categories of environmental  factors that have influ-
enced the planning and implementation of projects, and 
on whose analysis and control may depend on the 
results that will be obtained in the funding period start-
ing in 2014.
2.  Share of the  Influence of 
Environmental  Factors on the 
Implementation of European
 Projects Developed by the Social 
Actors from Region 7 Center
This share occurs by identifying the degree of influence 
that environmental factors have had on each stage of 
the cycle of European projects, namely the definition, 
planning and implementation stages. Table 1 correlates 
the influence factors with the stages of the project 
through the problems in each stage and which were 
caused by one of the factors. The table contains only 
those factors from the internal and external environ-
ment whose influence has contributed to problems in 
the implementation of projects by the social actors in 
Region 7 Center.
To identify the factors of influence listed in the 
table, the problems faced by institutions were grouped 
according to of factors that caused them, namely:
• 
Problems like the lack of specialists in the field of 
 projects, budgetary restrictions, understaffing, etc. 
encountered in the planning phase of projects are 
considered to be the result of internal environmen-
tal influence factors and were classified in the cat-
egory “resources”;
• 
Problems like poor legislation, mismatch between 
the guide and the law in force, long periods of time 
required to obtain permits, etc. have been classified 
as external environmental factors, specifically the 
“political and legislative factors.”
Following this method, the classification of prob-
lems into categories of environmental factors, infor-
mation that have allowed comparing the phases of the 
 European projects depending on the action of the 
influence factors was obtained. As it can be seen from 
Fig. 1, internal factors outperform the external factors 
in terms of the influence on European funded projects. 
Resources have the most obvious influence and the 
categories of financial and human resources should be 

 
Comparative Analysis 
375
Table 1.  Influence of the environmental factors on the development of projects
Filling in the 
application form
Contracting
Technical and 
financial reporting
Total problems/
factor
Internal 
 environment
Resources
19
15
15
49
Management
2
2
3
7
Organisational culture
2
—
—
2
Total
23
17
18
—
External environment 
 (Micro-environment
+
 Macro-environment)
Suppliers
9
10
8
27
Economic factors
—
3
—
3
Political and legislative 
factors
20
6
3
29
Socio-cultural factors
1
—
—
1
Technological factors
2
—
—
2
Total
32
19
3
—
Total problems
55
36
21
—
Fig. 1.  Effects of environmental factors on projects
50
45
19
15
9
10
20
6
1
2
3
8
3
2
23
15
2
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Resources
Management
Organizational culture
Internal
environment
External environment
Supplies
Economic factors
Political and legislative factors
Socio-cultural factors
Tecnological factors
Filling in the application from
Contracting
Technical and financial
reporting
0
emphasized. It is actually quite known the lack of 
funds from public institutions, personnel restructuring 
that took place and the large number of vacancies that 
are still blocked. They have all brought a fairly high 
intake on the  performance of these institutions in vari-
ous fields, including  European  projects. It should be 
mentioned here, the lack of financial motivation, espe-
cially of existing staff who increasingly manifest 
disinterest in engaging in activities, which require 
extra work and effort.
From the external environmental  factors, the high-
est share is held by the political and legislative factors, 
the effects of their  influence being highlighted in the 
research conducted in chapters six and seven. Suppliers 
are an important source of problems, generating a fairly 
high number of problems.

376 
D. E. Ranf, L. Marcu & D. D. Dumitraşcu
In the category of suppliers, there were included 
the companies providing services, including consult-
ing services and state institutions dealing with the 
coordination of  European funds in Romania, namely 
the Intermediary Bodies which keep direct contact 
with project beneficiaries. They were blamed quite 
frequently by respondents for poor communication, 
damaging important  projects undertaken by them. 
Also, consulting firms contracted by the institutions 
have been accused of lack of professionalism and 
fairness.
Figure 3 contains a hierarchy of  influence  factors 
from the general and specific external environment in 
regard to the action of the institutions in Region 
7 Center. The ranking of external factors was based on 
the results of the research through which the problems 
faced by social actors in Region 7 Center and their 
shares carried out above have been identified.
Figure 4 outlines the  influence of political and leg-
islative factors, external factors that have a strong influ-
ence on institutions having accessed European funds in 
Region 7 Center based on problems reported by 
respondents in the research.
According to the answers of respondents who 
 represent the institutions in the development Region 
7 Center, political and legislative factors represented 
the category of external factors with the strongest nega-
tive influence on the running of projects by them. This 
conclusion results from the multitude of problems they 
have encountered, most of them having as cause the 
poor legislation and heavy bureaucracy, some with 
 disastrous effects on projects. The disparity between 
legislation and guide entails a number of shortcomings 
both in the access and in project implementation.
Another category of factors influencing projects 
are, the stakeholders. Even by definition, these are 
 factors that influence or are influenced, whether we 
refer to the context of an organization or of a project. 
Chapter five of the thesis deals with the categories of 
stakeholders who can have an impact on projects.
Figure 5 examines both the positive and negative 
effects that partners can have on the project. Partners 
are a group of stakeholders with significant importance 
in the projects developed from European funds, this 
also being obvious because a large number of problems 
encountered by the social actors from Region 7 Center.
Fig. 2.  Share of influence that environmental factors have on the 
carrying out of projects
31%
2% 2%
19%
Resources
Organizational culture
Suppliers
Economic factors
Political and legislative
factors
Socio-cultural factors
Technological factors
Management
18%
9%
8%
11%
POLITICAL AND LEGISLATIVE FACTORS
FINANCIAL RESOURCES
HUMAN RESOURCES
SOCIAL ACTORS OF CENTRE REGION
INFORMATIONAL RESOURCES
INSTITUTIONAL MANAGEMENT
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE
SUPPLIERS
ECONOMIC FACTORS
TECHNOLOGICAL FACTORS
SOCIO-CULTURAL FACTORS
EXTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
Degree of influence
Degree of influence
Degree of influence
Degree of influence
INTERNAL ENVIRONMENT
Fig. 3.  Hierarchy of factors depending on the influence on running projects of social factors from Region 
7 Center

 
Comparative Analysis 
377
Fig. 5.  The influence partners may have on the projects in which they were involved
Expertise in
project
management
Expertise in
the area of the
project
Division of
oo sts
Positive influence
PARTNER
Negative in fluence
Failure to comply with
assumed obligations
Division of tasks
and responsibilities
Late notification of
amendments
Lack of
commitment
Failure to submit
appropriate
documentation to
the requirements
Failure to comply
with the time
schedule of the
project
Problems encountered by beneficiaries of projects in Region 7
Centre from the partners (identified through research)
Fig. 4.  The negative effect of the political and legislative factors’ influence on the course of the European projects developed by the social 
actors in Region 7 Center
The guidelines
is not
consistent with
the application
Ambiguity of
the guidelines
Inconsistency
between the
guidelines and
legislation
Changing the
guidelines after
publication
Framing difficult
chapters of
expenditure
Eligibility guide
is not explicit
Late
procurement of
permits
Poor
legislation
Ambiguous
legislation
Poor
organization of
public
procurements
Long terms for
public
procurements
POLITICAL AND
LEGISLATIVE
FACTORS
Overcoming the
tender period
projects
Modification of
the guidelines
during the
programe

378 
D. E. Ranf, L. Marcu & D. D. Dumitraşcu
Table 2.  Comparison between access and absorption of funds according to the degree of influence of environmental 
factors
Internal environment
Total
External environment
Total
Resources (%)
Institutional 
 management (%)
Organiational 
 culture (%)
Suppliers (%)
Economic factors (%)
Political and  legislative 
 factors(%)
Socio-cultural 
 factors (%)
Technological factors (%)
(%)
Accessing European 
 funds
19
18
9
46
9
8
32
3
2
54
Absorption of 
 European funds
41
6
2
49
22
2
24
1
2
51
3.  Comparison between the Stages 
of Planning and Implementation 
of  Projects Based on the Degree of 
 Influence of Environmental  Factors
The identification of the negative influence of environ-
mental factors on the small degree of accessing 
 European funds allows us a comparison of the extent to 
which they will influence the absorption of funds and 
access to funding. Therefore, Table 2 contains the per-
centages of factors that have influenced the decision to 
access funds and European funds absorption, percent-
ages identified according to the methodologies 
described.
Table 2 shows that the influence that environmen-
tal factors have on the decision to access European 
funds is also maintained on the development of pro-
jects. In some cases there is emphasized, for example, 
the lack of resources affecting 19% of access to funds, 
which is felt more acutely in the implementation of 
projects, their influence having increased to 41% and 
affecting project implementation by causing various 
problems.
The influence of suppliers of services is felt also in 
the implementation of projects, but there are categories 
of factors whose influence decreases, for example, the 
institution’s management reduces its negative influence 
and also the organizational culture improves, and the 
political and legislative factors are no longer perceived 
as negative, though, they are still the sources of multi-
ple problems, as highlighted in the previous chapter.
Figure 6 highlights the evolution of the influence fac-
tors in the two stages of projects: access of projects (plan-
ning) and absorption of funds (project implementation). 
As it can be noticed, the categories of factors that remain 
constant in the two stages are the technological factors. 
Resources and suppliers are two categories whose influ-
ence grows in the stage of accessing the projects. The rest 
of the factors analyzed are characterized by a decrease in 
the degree of influence projects in the absorption stage, 
with a percentage of up to 300% (the economic factors).
4. Concluding Remarks
It can thus be concluded that, once the institutions man-
age to write projects and extend beyond the access 
period, they improve their ability to resist the negative 
impact of certain categories of factors.
Investigations made, can be helped identify certain 
aspects that may contribute to increased  performance in 
European projects, but which have been neglected by the 
target group investigated, becoming the cause of a large 
number of problems in the implementation of projects. 
Therefore, Fig. 7 highlights ways that applicants for 
projects can follow to develop successful projects.
The recommendations from these reviews take into 
account the entire community of projects analyzed in the 
scientific 
enterprise 
approach, 
namely: 
project 

 
Comparative Analysis 
379
developers, institutions managing  European funds in 
Romania and other stakeholders (state, consulting com-
panies, etc.):
• 
Awareness of the funding opportunities and hence 
the development opportunities that European funds 
offer to national and institutional levels, a condition 
of modernization and progress in Romania;
• 
Formulating and defining an investment policy in 
line with the strategic development coordinates set 
by institutions that would materialize in fine fund-
able European funds (eligible);
• 
Training and professional training of the staff 
involved in  public institutions for the accumulation 
of skills on several levels, including project 
 management;
• 
Adoption of a high level of professionalism at the 
institutional level and particularly in the field of 
project management through rigorous application 
of methods and techniques depending on the 
requirements of each project;
• 
Identifying ways to motivate employees to increase 
institutional  performance, an example that could be 
the development of a career management 
Fig. 6.  Evolution of the influence of factors on projects from the stage of accessing the projects to the absorption stage of funds
Accessing funds
59.09%
53.6%
33.3%
Constants
200%
200%
250%
300%
Absorption of funds
Suppliers
Technological factors
Political and legislative factors
Socio-cultural factors
Organizational culture
Institutional management
Economic factors
Resources
Fig. 7.  Aspects which contribute to increased performance in European projects
European project
management
Focus on the aspects
Increased training in projects
Public – Private
Partnerships
Cost sharing
Outsourcing of some activities
Decreasing the number of pro-
blems in implementation projects
Increased demand
for funds
Increased absorption of European
funds
Creating an organizational culture
based on performace
The advantage of private
sector expertise
Continuous information
Anticipating risks
Economic forecastes
Resource assessment

380 
D. E. Ranf, L. Marcu & D. D. Dumitraşcu
professional or plotting an explicit occupational 
path for those working on  projects;
• 
Since projects in the public field show an increased 
risk, being developed in a hostile environment, it is 
vital to make a preliminary analysis of potential 
negative  factors that may affect the success of the 
project and to identify means to counteract risk 
generating factors;
• 
Decentralization of state institutions by reducing 
bureaucratic regulations and rigid hierarchical 
structures to help the document workflow implied 
by the project  management cycle become more 
flexible;
• 
Simplification of procedures for accessing  European 
funds to facilitate access to a growing number of 
institutions both in the public and private sector 
which would receive support and assistance 
throughout the project;
• 
Increasing the level of professionalism in negotiat-
ing priority areas investment by covering invest-
ment real needs of our country;
• 
To reach a level of maturity in projects at company 
level, it is important that the contribution made by 
each institution whose specific activity allows it to 
organize projects, but very important is the support 
of state institutions, which carry out the most com-
plex projects, may provide examples of good prac-
tice and may involve private organizations in the 
implementation of projects.
The combination of projects and European funds 
meant to help improve the practice of project  manage-
ment based on the experiences made in the field of 
social actors from Region 7 Center. Achieving project 
 management maturity contributes to the ability to face 
the dynamism and complexity of the environment in 
which we live and operate.
References
Bârgăoan, A. (2009), European Funds — Strategies to 
Promote and Use, Bucureşti: Tritonic Publisher House.
Dumitrascu, D. & Pascu, V. R. (2005), Project Management, 
Sibiu: ULBS Publisher House.
Kerzner, H. (2005), Proiect Management — Planning, 
Scheduling and Control, Milano: Italian Edition by 
Ulrico Hoelipi Publisher House.
Mocanu, M. & Schuster, C. (2004), Project Management, 
Bucuresti: All Beck Publisher House.
Lewis, P. J. (2010), Project Planning, Scheduling and 
Control, SUA: McGraw Hill Publisher House.
Morris, P. & Pinto, J. K. (2007), The Wiley Guide to Project 
Program and Portofolio Management, New Jersey: 
Wiley & Sons Publisher House.
Neagu, C. (2007), Project Management, Bucuresti: Tritonic 
Publisher House.
Portny, E. S. (2010), Project Management for Dummies, 
SUA: Wiley Publishing.
Ranf, D. & Dumitraşcu, D. (2012a), Study on the problems 
in the stages of filling out the application form and 
technical-financial reporting encountered by the public 
institutions in the center region in accessing european 
funds, annals of the University of Oradea. Economics, 
No.1/156/2012, pp. 1059–1065.
Ranf, D. & Dumitraşcu, D. (2012b), Case study on the state 
of projects accessed by public institutions in center 
region, Studies in Business and Economics, 64(6), 
96–106.

381
Chapter 42
 Organizational Change — Managing 
 Employees Resistance
Viorel Cornescu
“Nicolae Titulescu”  University
Roxana Adam
National Institute of Economic Research 
Romanian Academy
This chapter presents a theoretical perspective concerning 
the management of change and innovation and corre-
lates it with aspects of employees’ reactions to change. 
The central proposal of the chapter is that  resistance to 
change is a basic human characteristic and it strongly 
depends on every individual’s nature. Each organiza-
tional change induces a certain level of resistance in 
employee behavior which may in turn affect its imple-
mentation and the smooth running of things. The 
review shows that change is uncomfortable and manag-
ers need to find new ways of thinking and doing it, 
ways that should lead the organization to solve its prob-
lems in the most efficient manner. The chapter derives 
its originality from the fact that it exceed the focus on 
the technical elements of change and it brings to the 
forefront the key human element which is central to the 
successful implementation of change in organizations. 
The case study presents the orientation of a Romanian 
university towards organizational change. It reveals the 
most common types of organizational change among 
faculties and some significant factors that could con-
tribute to block the change. Analyzing the nature of the 
successful methods used in producing new ideas or to 
increase individuals’ creativity, the study reveals the 
importance of financial and non- financial incentives in 
motivating employees.
1. Introduction
Organizational change emerges from the dynamics of 
the environment and is inevitable in a society based on 
fast technological development. Organizations change 
when the market demands it and often represents the 
organizations’ intention to grow and or to achieve its 
objectives. Managing organizational change is a difficult 
phase in an organizations life, because it involves a trans-
fer from a “known” to an “unknown” situation. Starting 
from the assumption that these changes are not once-  
in-a-lifetime technological or structural revolutions that 
involve mass layoffs or the elimination of traditional 
professions, we consider that organizational changes 
lead on to an increase in productivity which, in a com-
petitive market, may be vital to business progress.
Rieley & Clarkson (2001) suggested that if organi-
zations were not constantly changing, its performance 
could not be effective or improved. However, during 
the past years, due to the large number of new or 
improved products and services for more and more 

382 
V. Cornescu & R. Adam
organizations change is vital. Let’s think a little bit to 
the story of Kodak Company. A considerable number of 
authors wrote about Kodak and its years of success and 
also about its failure. Gavetti et al. (2004) analyzed the 
situation of Kodak Company through time. Starting 
from 1993, when George Fisher was chosen as chief 
executive, the Kodak Company was oriented to an 
 organizational change process, yet in 1997 “the old-line 
manufacturing culture continues to impede Fisher’s 
efforts to turn Kodak into a high-tech growth company. 
Fisher has been able to change the culture at the very 
top. But he hasn’t been able to change the huge mass of 
middle managers, and they just don’t understand this 
[digital] world.” (Gavetti et al., 2004). The company 
tried also an open discussion in the Motorola style, 
Kodak executives tended to be very polite and things 
looked much easier than they actually were. Kodak’s 
 employees didn’t like confrontation and venerated 
authority […] Fisher tried to introduce the Motorola-
style of open discussion, but change was difficult 
(Gavetti et al., 2004).
Luecke (2003) claimed that to be effective and able 
to improve performance people need routines, therefore 
we consider that people need habits to become 
acquainted with a new process, but at the same time, in 
the new era of fast technology, change is a requirement, 
it’s the way to performance. Organizational change is a 
process that should come as a response to the organiza-
tions’ needs, while taking account of its employees and 
in accordance with a well-established schedule. 
Organizational change is influenced by contextual fac-
tors and there is not a recipe for success to prescribe the 
amount of time needed since an organizational change 
took place before another organizational change. 
Change is not about regularity in time, it’s about organ-
izational and employee’s needs, about performing or 
surviving in a competitive market. It is wrong to con-
sider change itself to be inherently good (Hultman, 
1979), or bad, because change can only be evaluated 
after its goals were or not achieved and its conse-
quences. However, sometimes employees predict con-
sequences based on the perceived information or on 
their past experiences.
From a theoretical perspective, change is character-
ized most often by how it comes about. When change is 
being characterized, a large number of chapters refer to 
planned and emergent change (Bamford & Forrester, 
2003). Planned change refers to a premeditated, agent-
acilitated intervention intended to modify organiza-
tional functioning for a more favorable outcome (Lippit 
et al., 1958) and it is the most common type of change. 
The planned action of a change agent (individual or 
group) to create something new is characterized by: 
A main and rational purpose, The method used in the 
change process influences the quality and Direction of 
change and in any change process, the adoption rate is 
different. According to the Emergent approach, change 
is a continuous, dynamic and contested process that 
emerges in an unpredictable and unplanned fashion. 
For Weick (2000), the advantages of Emergent change 
include: “… sensitivity to local contingencies; suitabil-
ity for on-line real-time experimentation, learning, and 
sense making; comprehensibility and manageability; 
likelihood of satisfying needs for autonomy, control, 
and expression; proneness to swift implementation; 
resistance to unraveling; ability to exploit existing tacit 
knowledge; and tightened and shortened feedback 
loops from results to action” (Burnes, 2009).
According to Burnes (2004), the two approaches 
share a common, and major, difficulty, which is that 
whilst both claim to be universally applicable; they 
were developed with particular change situations, 
organisations types and environments in mind. The 
Planned approach appears to be predicated on the 
assumption that organisations operate in stable or rela-
tively predictable environment, the managers can iden-
tify where change is required, that change projects are 
concerned primarily with group attitudes and behav-
iors, and the change is about moving from one fixed 
point and that the steps or phases in between are rela-
tively clear and realisable. He also claims that the 
Emergent approach, on the other hand, assumes that 
organisations are open and fluid systems that operate in 
unpredictable and uncertain conditions over which they 
have little control. It further assumes that change is a 
continuous process of adaptation which, because of its 
speed and frequency, managers can neither fully iden-
tify nor effectively control centrally (Burnes, 2004).
With minor differences, both theories consider that 
managers and employees are oriented towards change. 
They are characterized as willing to change, competent 
and adaptable, ready to implement change. Skipping 

 
Organizational Change 
383
the theoretical aspects, what actually happens is that no 
matter the type of change, change creates challenges 
for us all. It brings stress and anxiety, as well as the 
possibility for optimism (Carnall, 2007). Due to its 
uncertainty, change creates challenges for employee 
and managers, being a difficult process also for those 
who are managing change.
2.  Resistance to Change
Although change is intended to be a benefit for the 
organization or its  employees, the employees’ behavior 
it is not always for change. Resistance to change is the 
employees’ natural reaction to the change process. When 
a change is introduced in organization, it produces a 
range of reactions due to the inherent uncertainty or to 
the incentives that alter human behavioral patterns such 
as: status quo, anxiety, lack of tolerance, etc.
Frequent resistance to change is defined as, a reac-
tion of human behavior against undesired consequence 
of change, in other words a natural reaction caused by 
losing control — anxiety. Ford et al. (2002) in a review 
of the literature say that resistance occurs because it 
threatens the status quo, or increases fear and the anxi-
ety of real or imagined consequences including threats 
to personal security and confidence in an ability to 
perform.
Resistance is a natural phenomenon in the change 
process; it is not necessarily towards change itself, but 
towards the implications of the change. The process of 
passing from known to unknown implies uncertainty, 
therefore individuals’ perceived threats towards a state 
which they knew, controlled and it was a satisfactory 
stage. Change menaces the way people make sense of 
their actions, bringing into question their rationality, 
values and their understanding or assessment of the 
situation at different stages. In organizations, moreover, 
people resist change because they: Perceive negative 
effects to their interests; the uncertainty of the future 
situation determinates a high degree of discomfort; are 
attached to the organizational culture, lack of conven-
tion or clarity to what is needed; they just dislike the 
change or due other contextual situations, personal 
characteristics, and organizational goals.
Resistance to change represents an obstacle to in 
any change initiatives. The specific features of change, 
a high degree of ambiguity or risky parameter, can lead 
to a lack of participation and transmission of correct 
information among those involved. Resistance to 
change is divided into three groups of factors (Mabin 
et al., 2001): Individual, roup and Organizational.
An interesting approach to the individual’s resist-
ance is Kotter & Schlesinger’s (1979) research, the 
authors suggest that people resist change for various 
reasons, but the most common reasons for resisting 
change are:
— Individuals interests, people are characterized by 
their own interests and by the desire not to give up 
something of value;
— A misunderstanding of the change and its 
implications;
— A belief that the change does not make sense for 
the organization;
— Low tolerance for change.
From the literature, Coch & French (1948) focused 
their research on individual factors by analyzing psy-
chological factors such as — fear, feelings of failure, 
resentment, frustration, and low motivation. Other stud-
ies have approached factors like — habit, tradition, 
stability, insecurity (Watson, 1969) or selective percep-
tion, economic implications, fear of the unknown, loss 
of freedom (Mullins, 1999) and other auxiliary factors.
According to Mabin et al. (2001) divisions of resist-
ance to change into three groups of factors, we associate 
the Watson orientation on conformity to norms, sys-
temic and cultural coherence, vested interests, sacred 
values, and rejection of outsiders (Gravenhorst, 2003) to 
the group factors approach and Mullins orientation on 
organization culture, maintaining stability, investment 
in resources, past contracts and agreements, and threats 
to power or influence (Gravenhorst, 2003) to the organi-
zational factors approach. Resistance is a normal stage 
in change progress, it is a natural defense mechanism. 
Regarding human behavior, resistance is a common 
reaction of individuals because people are naturally 
wary of change.
Individuals’ reactions to change are a result of their 
emotions with respect to change (Liu & Perrewe, 2005). 
Also, recent studies have provided evidence of a com-
plex relationship between employees’ emotions and 

384 
V. Cornescu & R. Adam
their reactions to change (Avey et al., 2008; Hareli & 
Rafaeli, 2008). Starting from the conceptual framework 
of the operationalizing cognitions of Bovey & Hede 
(2001), we have schematized the individual’s cognitive 
process at the impact of the change (See Fig. 1).
Research indicates that irrational ideas are signifi-
cantly and positively correlated with  employees’  resist-
ance to change. Individuals tend to have automatic 
thoughts that incorporate what has been described as 
faulty, irrational, or “crooked thinking” (Bovey & 
Hede, 2001; Wittig, 2012). The individual’s cognitive 
process at the impact of the change shows that employ-
ees have their own ideas of what it means the particular 
change. The ideas might be rational, as well as irra-
tional. Ellis and Harper (1975) defined irrational ideas 
through examples, some of them are: the approval 
from all important people in a person’s life; fears of 
failure request a high degree of competency; the indi-
vidual is preoccupied with anxiety, self-blame or that 
people are acting unfairly; they don’t control their own 
feelings and destiny; it is easier to avoid life’s difficul-
ties than facing them, today behaviors’ and feelings of 
individuals are influenced by their own past experi-
ences, etc.
Starting from individual cognition and passing 
through the information offered by the organization 
regarding the change, leads each employee to draw a 
personal map, according to his perception about the 
change process. The designed map of the change 
impact together with the individuals’ ideas creates pow-
erful emotions. Later, based on these emotions, employ-
ees will decide to adopt or to resist  organizational 
change. Eisenberger et al. (1990) in their empirical 
study have demonstrated that employees’ perceived 
organizational support is related to various attitudes 
and behaviors. Other authors (Vakola et al., 2004) iden-
tified multiple studies in which the positive  attitudes of 
employees toward change were vital in achieving suc-
cessful  organizational change initiatives.
3.  Managers, Employees, 
and Organizational Change
Organizational change is an ambitious objective which 
involves different actors of organizations, often employ-
ees and managers. From the managements’ perspective 
resistance is the behavior of organization’s members 
who refuse to adopt an organizational change (Chew 
et al., 2006; Cheng & Petrovic-Lazarevic, 2004; 
Coghlan, 1993).
Resistance to change was studied through various 
models of resistance and the two most important are: a 
psychological model and a systems model. The psycho-
logical model of resistance states that in basic human 
characteristics resides the source of resistance to 
change: personalities, perceptions, and needs. The idea 
of change suggests itself for most people a kind of 
manifestation of resistance response, often caused by 
uncertainty, lack of tolerance and threatened self-
importance. The basic principle of the systems model 
of resistance is that resistance to change shows that the 
members of the organization feel uncomfortable with 
the modifications required by the change, it is not a 
change per se that people resist but the changes associ-
ated with it, such as losing their comfort or something 
that are satisfied with.
There are also others models which study resistance 
to change, such as: organization’s culture, institutional-
ized resistance to change, and so on. When it comes to 
the organizations’ culture, employees are sharing com-
mon organizational standards and norms which influ-
ence their behavior and any attempt to change its core 
elements must be thoroughly designed because other 
ways might meet employee resistance. While the insti-
tutionalized resistance to change explains that the 
organizational members perceive the change as being 
unnecessary and therefore they manifest resistance to it.
Besides these theoretical models, in reality resist-
ance may be summarized as any employee actions 
perceived as attempting to stop, delay, or alter change 
(Bemmels & Reshef, 1991). Resistance to change is not 
Fig. 1.  Individual’s cognitive process at the impact of the change.
Perception
(Impact of
Change)
Cognitions
(Irrational
Ideas)
Affect
(Emotion)
Resistance
(Behavioural
Intentions to
Resist)

 
Organizational Change 
385
the fundamental problem to be solved. Rather, any 
resistance is usually a symptom for more basic prob-
lems underlying a particular situation (Singh & Waddell, 
2004). Resistance can therefore serve as a warning 
signal (Judson, 1966) for managers. There are a variety 
of factors which can lead to resistant behavior, accord-
ing to their nature we can classify in: psychological, 
economic, and social factors. An important role in 
 organizational change it is played by social factors, 
furthermore by the management factors. Inappropriate 
or poor management style also contributes to resistance 
(Judson, 1966).
Ansoff (1988) defined resistance as a multifaceted 
phenomenon which introduces unanticipated delays, 
costs, and instabilities into the process of a strategic 
change, therefore management may greatly benefit 
from techniques that prudently manage resistance, by 
utilizing or overcoming it.
In the managerial context, at the beginning, resist-
ance was presented as an enemy of positive changes 
that were to bring organizational progress and growth 
(Azad et al., 2013), later more advanced sociological 
and psychological researches have approached posi-
tively the concept, in a strong contrast to the traditional 
viewpoint, revealing its utility as a way to actually 
improve management of change in modern organization 
(Azad et al., 2013).
Resistance can reveal aspects of change which may 
prove to be inappropriate, or they might reveal a prob-
lem in the organization’s method of communication. 
The big issue for managers is not how to eliminate 
resistance, rather to identify its cause.
According to Singh & Waddell (2004), managers 
must be aware that  employees manifest resistance due to 
the different aspects of the change, in addition they should 
be encouraged to re-evaluate the change and its implica-
tions. They should regularly communicate and consult the 
organizations’ employees, to search alternative methods 
of introducing change. An important role in the change 
process is that managers should involve employees in the 
change project, requiring feedback to ensure support. 
Therefore the natural outcome of people’s internal defense 
mechanism (Bovey & Hede, 2001) could be used by 
 management in the favor of the change process.
As Yue (2008) mentioned, some employees will 
find developing a broader set of relationships at work to 
be a stimulating new challenge and personally fulfill-
ing; however, others may find these new relationships 
to be incompatible with their more restricted concept of 
self, and experience increased role strain and stress.
When the organization is on the verge of 
 implementing change, the employees’ behavior must 
be  analyzeddand monitored by managers. Through a 
brief passing in specialized literature, we have selected 
the most three common recommended methods to 
 overcome or manage the resistant behavior:
(a) Improving information and communication — the 
best alternative when managers identify that the 
primary cause of resistance is lack of information;
(b) Employees involvement and participation — 
employees’ involvement in the change process 
leads to promotion of the change process, a promo-
tion made by organizations’ employees. Resistance 
is unlikely to come from employees that took part 
in the change process and they provide useful infor-
mation to improve the implementation of desired 
change;
(c) Management assistance and support — when 
employees encounter problems adapting to change, 
leading to a resistant behavior, in order to facilitate 
the transition management representatives should 
guide employees in this regard.
An effective change requires management 
approaches that enhance change through employees’ 
participation, motivation, and a correct perception of 
information. To encourage employees’ participation, 
managers have to offer material, moral, and emotional 
support according to the circumstances encountered. In 
a change process, managers also ought to attempt to 
know what can influence employees’ behavior, the most 
important ways to motivate them, such as: Job satisfac-
tions, gains or other intrinsic or extrinsic motivation. 
Another sensitive part is that managers should be able 
to interpret the inputs of the employees’ black box and 
to ensure the information and organization objec-
tives have been correctly perceived. We can conclude 
that, depending on the relationship between managers 
and subordinates, resistance may be managed in favor 
of change and overcome. Is this a problem about rules, 
about skills about managers’ characteristics? We can’t 

386 
V. Cornescu & R. Adam
claim one or another, theoretically it’s about all that 
implies this relationship, and in reality it’s a complex 
process depending on many factors, circumstances, and 
most important, human characteristics. Moreover  resist-
ance to change in organizations occurs when it creates 
too much role incapability for  employees.
Zeffane (1996) argues that change can only succeed 
if it is based solidly on an understanding of how people 
behave, what motivates them, and how improved positive 
attitudes can be developed. In  organizational change 
good communication between managers and employees 
should be developed, it is preferable that everyone who 
is affected by change to be involved in planning and 
implementing change. As we have already mentioned, 
employees are an important component in organizational 
change, it is useful to know their concerns and fears, 
because, through an appropriate management style, it is 
possible to diminish the impact of change in order to 
avoid loss of productivity and decreased performance.
4. Case Study
Purpose: This study presents the organizational change 
in the academic environment. It presents the profile of 
a Romanian  university regarding the process of change, 
the management approach towards change and the 
main factors which influence organizational change.
Research limitations/implications: This study assumes 
that universities are similar to companies, with various 
hierarchical levels. It examines the organizational 
change at only one time point in faculties of one univer-
sity. The reference period is the currently mandate and 
perceptions of the change may differ over time.
Methodology: Participants include the faculty govern-
ing body, one representative for each faculty of the 
studied university. An online questionnaire was used in 
order to obtain representative data, by identifying dif-
ferent aspects of the organizational change in faculties 
to describe the university orientation towards organiza-
tional change.
A preliminary study showed that the university is a 
promoter of the “new” and “change”. The preliminary 
study took the form of informal interviews with 20 
Romanian professors from different universities and 
was conducted as a preliminary step to the present 
work, therefore, after the interviews we designed the 
framework of the current research. The University is an 
institution which produces ideas and knowledge. It gen-
erates new insights, which in one way or another will 
inevitably lead to change. Romanian higher education 
system is oriented toward a knowledge-based  society 
and the universities are pursuing the valorization of 
staff (professors) creativity, and also to train young 
 specialists with an opening towards: apply the “new”, 
create the “new”, and mitigate,or eliminate resistance to 
change of organization members.
We have divided the main organizational change 
which can be found in universities into three groups: 
changing the occupational area and content of staff 
faculty duties (e.g., new tasks, new working methods, 
equipment and new programs, etc.), changing the status 
of university employees (e.g., didactic promotion, sal-
ary increase, delegating managerial, professional devel-
opment, etc.) and changing the formal and informal 
social relations within the faculty staff (e.g., restructur-
ing the micro-groups, informal leaders revaluation, 
increasing cohesion between groups, reducing  conflicts, 
modify faculty employees value, etc.).
The  University, as an organization, is not exempted 
from resistance to change, which may take the form of: 
The university management’s resistance to faculty’s 
employees’ proposals (faculty management or profes-
sors), employee resistance to management’s proposal or 
to students’ proposal. Since universities are operating at 
different hierarchical levels, we have associated universi-
ties’ structure with a pyramid at the top of which the 
Academic Senate and the Rector can be found, in the 
middle are the university faculties and at the bottom are 
all the departments of each faculty. The tip of the pyramid 
is represented by the legal provisions which are limiting 
the university activities, and the pyramid base line is rep-
resented by students. Because the general operating dia-
gram of Romanian universities is too complex, and 
resistance to change can manifest from the bottom up, 
and also in the other direction, from the top of the pyra-
mid down, we have chosen to investigate only the changes 
that may occur within the university, the main  influence 
factors and the employee (professors) resistance.
Findings: Based on the survey response from the 
 faculty governing body of 13 faculties of the same 

 
Organizational Change 
387
Romanian  university, the results of the statistical 
analysis show that the studied university is oriented 
towards change, all the faculties acted to change the 
occupational area and content of staff faculty duties, 
85% of faculties claimed to change the status of 
university  employees and more than 90% claimed to 
change the formal and informal social relations 
within the faculty staff.
For the  organizational change within the universi-
ty’s faculties, the most important objectives were: 
improving learning conditions for students and improv-
ing communication and information exchange across 
the university or with other institutions or organiza-
tions. Other significant objectives have been: to improve 
teaching methods, to improve learning conditions for 
students, and to improve the ability to develop new 
educational approaches.
During the reference period of the study, the 
 implementations of changes within the three change 
categories were:
— Aim to change the occupational area and content of 
staff faculty duties: 54% have been accepted and in 
a proportion of 46% have been implemented;
— Aim to change the status of university employees: 
77% have been implemented, 15% have been 
accepted and 8% refused;
— Aim to change the formal and informal social rela-
tions within the faculty staff: a proportion of 46% 
have been implemented, 38% accepted, 8% refused, 
while for a proportion of 8% no change were 
necessary.
Most of the changes regarding the content of teach-
ing and staff duties introduced in university were: the 
addition of new tasks for employees with the same 
career positions, significantly improved or new work-
ing methods and new bachelor/master programs. In 
most of the cases, changes were initiated and supported 
by faculty heads and professors.
Regarding the change of employees’ position 
within university, most of the introduced changes were: 
the collaboration with external experts, employees’ 
promotion, attracting new employees for new positions 
and investments in research and development. Also this 
time, the changes were initiated and supported mostly 
by faculty heads and professors.
For the third organizational change type, chang-
ing the formal and informal social relations within the 
faculty, the most common changes within university 
were: to reduce the within-group conflicts and 
increase cohesion between groups. The actions were 
initiated and supported mostly by faculty heads and 
professors.
Most of the changes at faculty level already existed 
in other university’s faculties; the organizational 
changes that have been recorded in faculties with no 
precedent in university mostly were focused on the 
formal and informal social relations change, within the 
faculty staff.
The most significant factors that have prevented the 
university’s faculties to accept change or which have 
blocked it were cost factors, such as: lack of university 
or faculty funds and lack of funding from external 
sources. Another significant factor was the discouraging 
legislative regulation, while employees though lack of 
motivation and complacency had a significant impact.
Of the analyzed faculties 92% used various meth-
ods to stimulate new ideas and creativity among profes-
sors. The nature of the successful methods used in 
producing new ideas or to increase creativity have been: 
 financial incentives for the creation and development of 
new ideas and non-financial incentives such as free 
time, public recognition, mobility, honorary titles, etc.
Practical implications: These findings suggest that the 
main problems encountered in achieving organizational 
change were determined by higher cost, discouraging 
legislative regulations and human capital. We also 
observed that financial and non-financial incentives 
were successful methods used in producing new ideas 
and increase creativity. Therefore, we consider that a 
possible cause of employee resistance or disinterest 
toward organizational change within university may be 
low motivation due to lack of financial and non-financial 
incentives.
Originality: This study shows that the analyzed univer-
sity is oriented toward change, by adopting several 
organizational changes. A nationwide study may bring 
to the forefront important factors for the Romanian 
education system which may contribute to the develop-
ment of a knowledge-based society.

388 
V. Cornescu & R. Adam
5. Conclusions
The  organizational change creates challenges for man-
agers and  employees, and therefore change has a big 
impact on individuals in the organization. The theoreti-
cal aspects characterize individuals as willing to change 
and adapt, moreover ready to implement change. We 
consider that effective management of change is based 
on a clear understanding of human behavior in the 
organization.
Through the literature review presented we have 
shown that some of the organizational change issue and 
a positive perspective regarding  resistance to change. 
Due to the challenge of change, individuals may have a 
defensive or negative attitude and to resist to change. 
Therefore, successful implementation of change in 
organization demands a good knowledge of the features 
and a high orientation towards analyzing the employ-
ees’ behavior.
The case study has shown the orientation of a 
Romanian  university towards organisational change. 
Analyzing the three organisational change types, the 
factors that could lead to a resistance to change or 
which may block it and, by identifying the change pro-
moters, we have created the profile towards organisa-
tional change of one university. The study also suggests 
an assumption for future research: Increasing employ-
ees’ motivation to get involved in the organizational 
change process, minimize employees resistance to 
change. Considering that in most of the cases, changes 
were initiated and supported by faculty heads and pro-
fessors, we consider that the proper employees’ motiva-
tion may contribute in a constructive manner to a 
positive organizational change.
In conclusion, involving individuals directly in the 
organizational change process may bring out good 
change ideas and contribute towards organizational 
change acceptance. Therefore change agents should con-
sider the behavior characteristics of individuals in order 
to achieve effective and successful organizational 
change.
References
Ansoff, H. I. (1988), The New Corporate Strategy, New 
York: John Wiley and Sons, Revised-Edition (February, 
1988), 202–217.
Avey, J. B., Wernsing, T. S., & Luthans, F. (2008), Can posi-
tive employees help positive organizational change? 
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 44(1), 48–70.
Azad et al. (2013), Resistance to change: A blessing or a 
curse? Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary 
Research In Business, 4(12), April.
Bamford, D. R. & Forrester, P. L. (2003), Managing planned 
and emergent change within an operations management 
environment, International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, 23(5), 546–564.
Bernard Burnes, (2004), Managing Change: A Strategic 
Approach to Organisational Dynamics, Harlow: 
Financial Times Prentice Hall.
Bernard Burnes, (2009), Managing Change, Harlow: 
Financial Times Prentice Hall.
Bemmels & Reshef, (1991), Manufactoring employees and 
technological change, Journal of Labour Research, 
12 (3), 231–246.
Bovey, Wayne, H., & Hede, A. (2001), Resistance to organi-
zational change: the role of cognitive and affective 
process, Leadership & Organization Development 
Journal, 22(8), 372–382.
Cheng, J. S. L. & Petrovic-Lazarevic, S. (2004), The role of 
effective leadership in doing more with less in public 
universities, Chapter presented at Global Business and 
Technology Association Sixth Annual Conference, Cape 
Town, South Africa, June.
Chew, M. M. M., Cheng, J. S. L., & Petrovic-Lazarevic, S. 
(2006), Managers’ role in implementing organiza-
tional change, Journal of Global Business and 
Technology, 2(1), 58–67.
Coch, L. & French, J. R. P., Jr. (1948), Overcoming resis-
tance to change, Human Relations, 1, 512–532.
Coghlan, D. (1993), A person-centerd approach to dealing 
with resistance to change, Leadership & Organization 
Development Journal, 14(4), 10–14.
Carnall, C.A. (2007), Managing Change in Organization 
(5th edn.), London, UK: Prentice Hall.
Eisenberger, R., Fasolo, P., & Davis-LaMastro, V. (1990), 
Perceived organizational support and employee dili-
gence, commitment, and innovation, Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 75, 51–59.
Ellis, A. & Harper, R.A. (1994), A new guide to rational liv-
ing, North Hollywood, CA: Wilshire Book Company.
Gavetti, G., Henderson, R., & Giorgi, S. (2004), Kodak (A), 
February 18, Harvard Bussiness School.
Gravenhorst, K. M. B. (2003), A different view on resistance to 
change, Chapter for “Power Dynamics and Organizational 
Change IV” Symposium at the 11th EAWOP Conference 
in Lisbon, Portugal, 14–17 May.

 
Organizational Change 
389
Hultman, K. (1979), The Path of Least Resistance, Learning 
Concepts, Denton, TX.
Hareli, S., & Rafaeli, A. (2008), Emotion cycles: On the 
social influence of emotion in organizations, Research in 
Organizational Behavior, 28, 35–59.
Ford, J. D., Ford, L. W., & McNamara, R. T. (2002), Resistance 
and the background conversations of change, Journal of 
Organizational Change Management, 15(2), 105–121.
Judson (1966), A Managers Guide to Making Changes, 
London: John Wiley & Sons.
Kotter, J. P. & Schlesinger, L. A. (1979), Choosing strategies 
for change, Harvard Business Review, 57, 106–114.
Lippit, R., Watson, J., & Westley, B. (1958), The Dynamics 
of Planned Change, New York: Harcourt Brace.
Liu, Y. & Perrewe, P. L. (2005), Another look at the role of 
emotion in the organizational change: A process model, 
Human Resource Management Review, 15, 263–280.
Mabin, V. J., Forgeson, S., & Green, L. (2001), Harnessing 
resistance: using the theory of constraints to assist 
change management, Journal of European Industrial 
Training, 25(2/3), 168–191.
Mullins, L. J. (1999), Management and organisational behav-
ior (5th edn.), London: Financial Times/Prentice Hall.
Rieley, J. B. and Clarkson, I. (2001), The impact of change 
on performance, Journal of Change Management, 2(2), 
160–172.
Singh, M. & Waddell, D. (2004), E-Business Innovation 
and Change Management, PaperBack, Waddell, Idea 
Group Inc.
Vakola, M., Tsaousis, I., & Nikolaou, I. (2004), The role of 
emotional intelligence and personality variables on atti-
tudes toward organizational change, Journal of 
Managerial Psychology, 19(2), 88–110.
Watson, G. (1969), Resistance to change. In The Planning of 
Change, W. G. Bennis, K. D. Benne & R. Chin (eds.), 
(2nd edn., pp. 488–498), New York: Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston.
Wittig, C. (2012), Employees’ reactions to organizational 
change, OdPractioner,  44(2), 23–28.
Zeffane, R. (1996), Dynamics of strategic change: critical 
issues in fostering positive organizational change, 
Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 17(7).

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

391
Chapter 43
How to Reduce  Supplemental Claims in Construction 
Industry — Selected Management Tools to Implement 
a Systematic Anti-Claim Management
Martin Heinisch
MHI Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH;
ULBS Sibiu Department of Industrial 
Engineering and Management
Jörg-U. Muckenfuß
MHI Ingenieurgesellschaft mbH
Dan Miricescu
“Lucian Blaga” University of Sibiu, Industrial Engineering 
and Management Department, Romania
Contemporary anti-claim management requires a 
 permanent collection of actual data. Only those who are 
aware of the projects status and all relevant interfaces 
within the project may take early effective action to 
minimize deviations. In case of disrupted planning and 
processes, changes, and additions to the project, one can 
provide solutions to minimize damage as well as testing 
and evaluating contractors claims. Only few construc-
tion projects can be realized without changes and dis-
ruptions of the construction schedule. To make them 
transparent and to counteract them, a functioning sys-
tem of measures and control mechanisms is called for. 
The case of the  new Kaiser Wilhelm tunnel (NKWT) is 
used as an example to demonstrate various aspects of 
anti-claim management on the client’s side.
1. Introduction
Only few construction projects can be realized without 
changes and disruptions of the construction schedule. 
To make them transparent and to counteract them, a 
functioning system of measures and control mecha-
nisms is called for. The new Kaiser Wilhelm tunnel 
(NKWT) is used as an example to demonstrate various 
aspects of anti-claim management on the client’s side.
The terms “claim management” and “anti-claim 
management” are not part of the VOB-oriented termi-
nology (VOB: German Standard Building Contract). 
This terminology derives from the Anglo-American 
language regions, where often other forms of contracts 
dominate than the unit price contract favored in Germany.

392 
M. Heinisch, J.-U. Muckenfuß & D. Miricescu
Nevertheless, these terms can be found frequently 
in many construction projects, both on the client’s and 
the contractor’s side. Particularly the internationally 
operating construction companies have so-called 
“claims teams”, which exclusively deal with the identi-
fication, preparation, and enforcement of claims.
2. Definitions
Claims management is the collective term for all meas-
ures taken to identify and record deviations, modifica-
tions, and amendments of a construction and to enforce 
them on an economic scale.
Therefore, anti-claim management comprises all 
measures taken by the client on the one hand to have as 
few deviations and modifications of the contract as pos-
sible and on the other hand to process inevitable claims 
such that optimal, economic, and schedule-related 
results are achieved.
3.  Constructing the “ New Kaiser 
Wilhelm Tunnel” (NKWT)
The existing, double-tracked Kaiser Wilhelm tunnel 
(length: 4,205 m) is located on the Koblenz–Perl line, on 
the Koblenz–Mosel–(Ehrang) line section between the 
Cochem station (Bf) and the corresponding sub-station 
(Bft) in Ediger–Eller. Due to railroad operation and 
safety reasons, a second tunnel tube with a connection to 
the existing  tunnel is presently under construction and 
will mainly run in parallel to the existing tunnel.
The planning segment has an overall length of 
approximately 5 km. The conversion project starts north 
of the Cochem station area. The line crosses a bridge 
and leads to the Northern Portal of the Kaiser Wilhelm 
tunnel which is located in an elevated position in 
the Cochem urban area and passes a tunnel through the 
“Cochemer Krampen” mountain ridge towards the 
South. The southern tunnel portal is located in 
the unpopulated area north of the Ediger–Eller sub-
station. The remaining track section of about 400 m is 
using an overground track.
Parts of the NKWT construction project are pre-
liminary measures, various services for the develop-
ment of the construction site, the construction of the 
new tunnel tube with connecting structures, various 
bridge constructions and the expansion of the tunnel’s 
superstructure and electro-technical systems.
4.  Anti-Claim Management — 
Implementing Tools of Preventive 
and  Active Anti-Claim Management
4.1.  Framework of implementing 
anti-claim management
Only few building projects can be realized without 
modifications and amendments of the scope of service, 
and without disruptions to the construction schedule. 
The approach of planning, tendering, and contracting 
the construction target exactly as the actual building is 
planned and specified, is a rather theoretical one.
The reasons for this also derives from the spheres of 
risks on the client’s side. They comprise, in particular, 
risks related to quantities, completeness, coordination, 
interfaces and subsoil, as well as technical or official 
requirements, third-party influences, but also incom-
plete or faulty planning services and inadequate service 
descriptions and modifications due to own additional 
requests. Investigations conducted by our engineering 
company confirm the causes for  supplemental claims 
referred to in relevant literature so far. Significant vari-
ations can be established with regard to the supplemen-
tal claims volume in respect of the original order total. 
These range between 5–100%. No valid statements can 
be made as to the extent of claims that were approved.
It is quite common that contractors find it difficult 
to submit supplemental claims before or during the 
construction work, that comply with the required for-
mal quality. This applies to both modified services 
according to VOB, Part B, Paragraph 2, Sec. 5 and to 
any additional services according to VOB, Part B, 
Paragraph 2, Sec. 6.
With regard to additionally required tasks, contrac-
tors in most cases just inform the client of the need for 
further services without quantifying the amount. Such 
notification is not required in case of changed services. In 
this case, the client is deemed not to be in need of protec-
tion. This circumstance results in the fact that a large 
number of claims (often more than half of all claims) will 

 
How to reduce supplemental claims in construction industry 
393
have to be dealt with, after the construction works are 
completed and are only submitted belatedly, and in some 
cases together with the final invoice. For the client, this 
means that on-site cost updating is not possible.
Anti-claim management can be organized in two 
stages:  Preventive anti-claim management in the run-up 
to the proper construction work and  Active anti-claim 
management during the execution of the construction 
up to final accounting.
4.2. Preventive anti-claim management
When using anti-claim management, the emergence of 
possible claims is detected and reduced during the run-
up to the project realization phase, and contributes to 
improving the initial situation. First of all, this includes 
a critical analysis of the contractual conditions, the 
choice of project partners, existing management struc-
tures, possible risks, and own weak points.
The main focus of the activities is on the contrac-
tual conditions or — to be more precise — on scrutiniz-
ing the quality of tender documents submitted by the 
planning experts with regard to their practicability, 
inconsistencies, and completeness as well as on the 
analysis of any required services, which might have 
been described twice or forgotten altogether.
One of the principal reasons for  supplemental 
claims is an inadequate planning implementation in the 
service description. This calls for monitoring 
Fig. 1.  Portal on the Eller side, construction works for the 
New Kaiser Wilhelm tunnel extension, mid of May, 2012, © 
R. Pellenz/nkwt.de
measures in order to gain as much as possible from a 
high potential for optimization.
The aim is preventing additional costs deriving 
from an insufficiently determined quantity structure 
of costs and from gaps or errors in the construction 
task descriptions. Further potential for  supplemental 
claims arises from faulty or incomplete as-built docu-
ments, and from the realization of the so-called 
 subsoil risk.
A structured approach towards preventing claims in 
advance can take place both in the tendering and plan-
ning sector and during the execution of the construction 
work, but the impact is considerably higher when the 
measures are applied before the start of the construction 
works.
During the preliminary planning and preparation of 
the tender, it is necessary to conduct an ongoing analy-
sis of the project-specific requirements on planners and 
to elaborate work Phases 1 to 3. The planning must be 
conducted on the basis of guaranteed approvals. 
 Preventive anti-claim management can be applied by 
setting up control functions responsible for the supervi-
sion of planning quality. Another important principle is 
the strict separation of work Phases 1 to 7 and of object 
monitoring in work Phases 8 and 9.
Supplemental performance claims can be prevented 
by: formulating of clear project fundamentals, assess-
ment of the quality of the as-built documentation, safe 
implementation of project contracting in project plan-
ning, analysis of how permit issues are implemented in 
the planning, comparison of planning documents with 
tender documents, examination of the tendered quantity 
structure of costs, strategic handling of risk potentials 
(e.g., sub-soil risk), and prevention of intervention in 
the construction schedule.
Supplemental performance claims can be prevented 
by: imposing an adequate construction schedule (with 
buffer time) — which also includes the service schedule 
of contractors involved before project start — sufficient 
exploitation of optimization potential based on the con-
tractors’ know-how (alternative proposals), limitations 
only to those milestones that are absolutely necessary, 
start of construction works based on permits and safe 
implementation of structured decision-making pro-
cesses, minimization of risks in advance.

394 
M. Heinisch, J.-U. Muckenfuß & D. Miricescu
Further areas of work are the assessment of variant 
solutions during the tender phase, providing advice in 
the contract awarding proposal and the verification of 
the contract awarding specifications. At the end of the 
process, unavoidable supplemental risks shall be identi-
fied and assessed.
On the part of the contractors, the investigation of 
existing  supplemental claims potentials is also con-
ducted during the quotation processing phase. This is 
done by studying the contract, surveying the site, 
determining and checking the tendered quantities, 
checking specifications for completeness and incon-
sistencies, and by checking the calculation of direct 
and indirect costs. A common situation is to draw up 
two order calculations — one for submittal to the client 
and a more detailed version for future supplemental 
claims.
On both the client’s and contractor’s side, a review 
of the price-determining main quantities is absolutely 
essential.
 Preventive anti-claim management ends with the 
conclusion of the construction contract and passes into 
the  active anti-claim management phase.
In the presented example of NKWT, an active pre-
ventive anti-claim management was implemented as 
early as the invitation to tender for the first contract 
packages.
The construction task described was subdivided to 
the effect that the construction services were split up 
into several contract packages, which assigns all con-
struction tasks to site-related or time-related segments.
Therefore, one of the key tasks in preventive anti-
claim management is to define the relevant interfaces 
between the individual contract packages in close 
coordination with the project management on the cli-
ent’s side, to implement them in the corresponding 
performance description and to check the whole tender 
documents for completeness.
Moreover, anti-claim management had a positive 
effect on the tendering process to the effect that tender 
documents were critically assessed with regard to pos-
sible inconsistencies, double entries, and omissions. In 
this case, the use of comparable methods currently in 
use in the construction industry led to the publication of 
a high-quality invitation to tender.
4.3. Active anti-claim management
In the context of active anti-claim management, the 
first step is to assess if the submitted  supplemental 
claims comply with formal requirements. The term of 
supplemental claim is not part of the VOB. The con-
tractual construction targets are determined by the sum 
of all construction services to be rendered by the con-
tractor in accordance with the tendered conditions and 
construction circumstances.
The supplemental claims processing commences 
with the notification of order changes and requires 
careful justification of grounds for the supplemental 
claim including the description of the additional/
changed services. The description shall be comprehen-
sible and shall describe the issue in a clear, unambigu-
ous, and an obvious manner.
5.  Requirements for Supplemental 
Claims
5.1.  Req uirements for supplemental 
claims justiﬁ cation
Anti-claim management begins with checking whether, 
and to, what extent the submitted claim is complete and 
verifiable. The examination of claim basis starts with 
establishing deviations from the contractually agreed 
Fig. 2.  Portal on the Eller side, construction works for the tunnel 
extension, mid of May, 2012, © R. Pellenz/nkwt.de

 
How to reduce supplemental claims in construction industry 
395
construction targets and the corresponding legal basis. 
Moreover, it is necessary to determine if the contractor 
has submitted cost notifications in due time and if the 
client has issued orders to that effect. The next step is 
to determine the level of prices for the contract and pos-
sible process risks.
The verifiability of the claim “on the grounds of” 
requires a documentation of the modified services (the 
additional, omitted, or changed services) with a descrip-
tion of the effects. This documentation shall contain a 
reference to a contractual position together with the 
determination of possible similar contractual services.
5.2.  Requirements for supplemental 
claims calculations
The calculation of claims shall be based on the order cal-
culation and must be plausible. The implementation and 
use of factors determining the contractual performance 
level ensures that the quoted services meet with the con-
tractual level stipulated by the order calculation.
We recommend the following calculation systematic:
• 
Determination of the difference regarding the scope 
of service and conditions.
• 
Determination of the new scope of service, com-
parison of tendered and new services.
• 
Recording of the difference.
• 
Determination of individual costs of the partial 
service based on the order calculation, either as a 
claimed supplement or as a replacement item.
• 
It must be determined whether the omission or 
change of certain services will result in the accrual 
of individual costs from the scope of partial ser-
vice, which cannot be avoided — direct costs that 
cannot be reduced.
• 
It must be determined whether the modified ser-
vices have an impact on the direct costs for other 
items or whether the construction conditions will 
change, thus resulting in additional costs.
Fig. 4.  Cochem side: From the Pinnerkreuz side, early June, 2012, 
© R. Pellenz/nkwt.de
Fig. 3.  Anti-claim management process
critical analysis of the contractual conditionas
choice of project partners
management structures
possible risks and own weak points
formulating of clear project fundamentals
imposing an adequate constrction schedule
assessment of variant solutions
risks analize
examination of claim basis
determine the level of prices
calculation of claims
Project Planning
Tender Phase
Contract
Project execution
Implementation Phase
ACTIVE
ANTI-CLAIM MANAGEMENT
PREVENTIVE
ANTI-CLAIM MANAGEMENT
Construction Contract
reated to:
quantities, completeness,
coordination, interfaces and subsoil,
technical or offcial requirements,
third-party influences,
incomplete or faulty planning services
inadequate service descriptions
modifications due to own
additional requests
Risks on the client side

396 
M. Heinisch, J.-U. Muckenfuß & D. Miricescu
• 
Adoption of the surcharge rates as previously deter-
mined in the order calculation for the allocation 
and addition to the direct costs of the partial ser-
vices of the supplemental claim.
In a claim calculation review, the contractual price 
level is verified and an impact forecast for the claim is 
drawn up, which covers possible process risks.
The stipulation that claims shall be closely related 
to a construction contract prevents claims being formu-
lated as a mere cost reimbursement.
In the NKWT construction project examined here, 
the client’s project management was, and is still being 
provided, with support in the assessment of the submit-
ted claims. In discussions with the contractor, an ade-
quate assessment of the grounds for, and amounts of the 
submitted claims based on the construction contract 
could be substantiated with regard to the technical or 
contractual reasons.
6.  Supplemental Claims Due 
to Hindrance Issues
Claims due to hindrance issues result from a change of 
the construction circumstances, which do not allow a 
direct recourse to the construction contract and con-
struction target; where appropriate, construction site 
facilities are an exception.
Hindrance issues result from complications, dis-
ruptions, postponement of construction start, construc-
tion period extension and from acceleration orders.
Further grounds are project-related claims due to 
changes of the scope of delivery, belated planned 
deliveries, delays in the construction-related decision-mak-
ing processes, missing or faulty preliminary work, faulty 
material orders, hindrances due to parallel works or external 
incidents such as weather, changes of rules or regulations, 
and pending clearances.
When dealing with claims on the grounds of hin-
drances in the context of anti-claim management, it is 
essential to establish whether formal requirements were 
complied with during the construction period (such as 
submission of qualified hindrance notifications, or if 
certain issues were addressed in the reports). This also 
includes provisos and the consideration of disruptions 
in the updating of schedules. The hindrance notifica-
tions have to be clearly distinguished from one another 
to be able to rule out overtaking causality.
The extension of the construction period can be 
evidenced through critical path analysis. It serves to 
enhance transparency of the details of a local disrup-
tion, but requires a clear delimitation of case-related 
disruption periods and the presence of hindrance 
notifications.
Each disruption incident requires precise costing 
based on the order calculation or the ascertainment 
of damage. At first, proof of an adequate and suffi-
cient order calculation has to be furnished. 
Alternatively, it is also possible to utilize conclusive 
derivation of determining factors in the event of 
missing calculation elements. The following cost 
elements are frequently a part of claims on the 
grounds of hindrance issues:
Fig. 6.  At the Cochem side: View from above on the large-scale 
construction site, early June 2012, © R. Pellenz/nkwt.de
Fig. 5.  Tunnel breakthrough in the year 2011, © Alpine

 
How to reduce supplemental claims in construction industry 
397
Fig. 7.  At the Cochem side: The backfilling work between the 
mountainside and building structure is nearly finished; early June 
2012, © R. Pellenz/nkwt.de
• 
Site overhead costs.
• 
Overhead expenses.
• 
Expenses for downtime shifts (staff/equipment).
• 
Costs for underperformance.
• 
Costs for acceleration performances.
In anti-claim management, the assessment and 
refutation of such claims require, that the hindrance 
notifications are processed promptly and that the indi-
cated causes are either eliminated or refused. 
Furthermore, it is necessary to put the contractor (if 
possible) in default. Schedule tracking in conjunction 
with an active project management is absolutely essen-
tial as a final step.
Thus, the assessment of “soft claims” starts with a 
preliminary check that involves an overall analysis for 
a comparison of schedule and budget. This is followed 
by a plausibility check to assess the relationship 
between the supplemental claim and the main contract. 
A preliminary check shall be conducted to differentiate 
between issues that are to be attributed to the client and 
such issues that have arisen due to the contractor’s own 
negligence.
Then a detailed verification serves to check formal 
requirements and to analyze the main contract (with 
regard to schedules, owed performances, shutdown 
periods agreed with the contractor) for a determination 
of claims (in view of the claimed remuneration, com-
pensation, or damages). The following step serves to 
determine if the order calculation is based on correct 
assumptions.
Based on these results and in due consideration of 
the limiting conditions of the construction contract it is 
now possible to conduct a parallel calculation of an 
acceptable claim for remuneration. Due to the fact that 
the examination of such claims will often be conducted 
at the end of a construction project, the ongoing docu-
mentation of the construction work is of the essence.
The main documentation means for a building 
site are:
• 
Documentation of performance changes as a cause 
for hindrances.
• 
Determination of schedule.
• 
Monitoring of the scheduled list of deliveries.
• 
Statements in the daily construction reports.
• 
Photo documentation.
• 
Construction meeting reports.
• 
Hindrance notifications.
Monitoring is very important because in most (and 
often contractually agreed) cases, the contractor sub-
mits a construction schedule within an appropriate 
period following the awarding of the contract, which 
shall be updated — if possible — on a monthly basis 
and shall include all disruptions and hindrances.
In addition to processing of the  supplemental 
claims, the systematic identification, development and 
enforcement of counterclaims is a central task. Therefore, 
the regulations of DB AG include the following meas-
ures (according to directive 134 300):
• 
Early detection.
• 
Documentation.
• 
Tracking.
• 
Negotiation.
• 
Use of existing forms.
• 
Maintaining a supplemental claims database.
7. Conclusions
The development of an effective counterclaims man-
agement cannot prevent the cause for claims, but they 
can be significantly reduced. On the client’s part, this 
calls for a detailed documentation of the construction 
process, as the basis for counterclaims management 

398 
M. Heinisch, J.-U. Muckenfuß & D. Miricescu
and also for the assessment of claims, to prevent having 
to rely on third-party records only.
References
Dumitrascu, D. & Pascu, R. (2008), Managementul 
Proiectelor, Romania: Editura Universităţii Lucian 
Blaga din Sibiu.
Heinisch, M. (2013), Systematic anti-claim management 
reduces supplemental claims, Proceedings of the 6th 
International Conference on Manufacturing Science and 
Education, MSE 2013.
Heinisch, M. (2007), Faires nachtragsmanagement durch das 
bilden von vertragsniveaufaktoren bei der fortschreibung 
der auftragskalkulation für geänderte und zusätzliche 
leistungen, Der Eisenbahningenieur, No. 03/2007.
Heinisch, M. (2006), Grundlagen des Bauvertrags/Nachträge 
beim Bauvertrag, Romania: Eigenverlag.
Miricescu, D. (2011), Study on temporal influences on man-
agement and managers of business organizations, 
Proceedings of the 2nd Review of Management and 
Economic Engineering Management Conference 
(RMEE), 15th–17th September, 479–490, Romania: 
Todesco Publising House.
Ţuţurea, M., Miricescu, D., Moraru, G., & Grecu, V. 
(2010), Leadership în Organizaţii, Romania: Editura 
Universităţii Lucian Blaga din Sibiu.
VOB, (2012), German Construction Contract Procedures, 
DIN, DVD, April.

399
Chapter 44
Implementation of  Quality Management 
for  Ecotouristic Operators in the Danube Delta
Virgil Nicula and Simona Spânu
“Lucian Blaga” University of Sibiu
The present chapter is analyzing the way in which the 
elements/processes of a quality system contribute to 
obtaining some quality  ecotouristic products.
This chapter aims at identifying the main particu-
larities of the quality management with ecotouristic 
operators, outlining the role, and importance of quality 
management in organizing and functioning of ecotour-
istic operators in the Danube Delta in view of drawing 
up a performant system of implementing the quality 
management in a touristic agency.
The implementation of quality management is the 
most adequate way to ensure the competitivity of prod-
ucts and services for the touristic firm on the market. 
The quality of the touristic services depends on the 
training of the employees, of their managerial quality, 
of that “culture” regarding the firm and which gives 
flexibility, velocity, initiative in activities.
The methodology and research techniques used 
aimed at putting into force the politics and strategies 
of quality management within tourism agencies in 
order to highlighted the degree of knowledge and use 
of elements specific for quality management and to 
propose a performant system of implementing quality 
management.
The necessity to focus the attention on the quality 
of the touristic product relies on at least three aspects: 
the increase of the offer for touristic products in each 
country and at the level of world economy and this 
determines an increase regarding the number of users, 
the growth in quality within the competition of touristic 
products on the national and international market, the 
decisive influence of quality on the other economic 
indicators of the touristic firm.
The implementation of the quality management to 
an ecotouristic operator insures the coordination of the 
activity in the direction of performance and implicitly 
to obtain the sustainable competitive advantage.
1. Introduction
Diversity and quality are the main factors of competi-
tiveness and, as logical consequence they also represent 
the fundamental problems facing the tourism industry 
in general, and reception of international tourism in 
particular (Cosmescu & Nicula, 2004).
At this time, current tourism consumer demands 
grow continuously, particularly concerning quality, but 
also such characteristics as technical, psycho-sensory 
economic issues related to the availability of products on 
interrelations, Sanogenesis characteristics, and the rela-
tionship with environment. Through a seemingly glo-
balized care for the local environment, lately, it is several 
international organizations, such as the (World Travel & 
Tourism Council) WTTC, the Green Globe Program, the 
(International Hotels Environment Initiative) IHEI, 
(International Hotel & Restaurant Association) IH & RA, 

400 
V. Nicula & S. Spânu
(European Confederation of National Associations of 
Hotels and Restaurants of the European Union) HOTREC 
have voiced concerns for a proper application of quality 
requirements in  ecotourism, ensuring greater protection 
and conservation of tourism resources, some of which are 
unique worldwide.
Increasing competition in terms of prices as well as 
an organized network of destinations and cheaper offers 
from other continents has emphasized pressure on the 
European tourism sector and traditional tourism desti-
nations, as in the case of the Danube Delta.
Based on the role and importance of  quality man-
agement in the organization and functioning eco-tour 
operators, an efficient system of quality management in 
the travel agencies or tour operators can be devised and 
implemented as this system can also include reception 
and accommodation structures located in Delta.
The introduction of a new quality management 
system in eco-tourism services aims to improve the 
quality of services provided in establishments of this 
kind; such a system can help to increase customer sat-
isfaction and the possibility of using this symbol for the 
promotion and recognition of units on a national and 
international level.
2.  Danube Delta — General 
Coordinates
The Danube Delta covers 2.5% of the country. The 
reservoir is situated in the territory of Tulcea county 
(51.88% of the county), Constanta county (2.89% of 
the county) and Galati (0.098% of the county). Within 
this perimeter, 18 strictly  protected areas have been 
identified, occupying an area of 50,600 ha (8.7%), con-
sisting of natural ecosystems, terrestrial, and aquatic 
reserves and buffer zone — a total area of 223,300 ha. 
Landscape is valued by tourism activities, both by spe-
cialized companies and through local population.
The Delta’s complexity is determined primarily by 
its biodiversity, containing a third of the number of 
plant species that live in Romania. Natural habitats in 
the Delta are the most varied in Romania and are home 
to a great diversity of plant and animal communities, 
whose numbers were estimated at 30 types of ecosys-
tems with 5,429 species, 1,839 of which are flora and 
3,590 of which are fauna.
In the Danube Delta, we can find many medicinal 
plants, and large areas are covered with reeds — the 
largest area in the world. Letea and Caraorman consists 
of secular trees and Mediterranean lianas, which are 
unique in Europe. However, the greatest wealth is the 
bird fauna, found within the reserve, either coming to 
this area during migration, as birds chose the Delta as 
a place of feeding, nesting, and rearing. These unique 
elements make the Delta an invaluable space for the 
world’s natural heritage, a research laboratory and 
observation point for researchers around the world, as 
well as a place for nature lovers and tourists visiting 
the Delta in search of natural areas and unique 
species.
The Delta’s protected area status prompted a reor-
ganization of tourism that takes place in this region, in 
the context of a required sustainable exploitation of 
natural resources and in particular landscape resources, 
so as to have a minimal impact on the integrity of natu-
ral ecosystems. The main components of Delta’s land-
scape are nearly 400 lakes of various sizes, reeds, 
forests of oak and ash, sand dunes, beaches, seaside 
marine deltaic environments; all this gives a particular 
spatial diversity and variety. However, human settle-
ments, through their unique and specific architecture, 
make for outstanding attractions.
The diversity of these resources makes it possible 
to practice biosphere conservation in the Danube Delta, 
but also tourism, in its various forms:
— Travel for leisure and recreation, tourism practiced 
by companies through hotels, through reservation, 
and even floating hotels, combining trips on scenic 
canals, lakes and seawater, sunbathing on the 
beaches located along the Black Sea coast;
— Knowledge tours (itinerant), practiced either indi-
vidually or through organized tours, suitable for 
smaller groups of visitors who have the opportunity 
to explore the variety of wild landscapes, combin-
ing boating channels through manually propelled 
boats with scenic hiking along the canals or fluvial 
and marine ways, etc.
— Specialized tourism (Scientific) for ornithologists, 
specialists, researchers, students;
— Special programs for youth, for knowledge, under-
standing, and appreciation of nature;

 
Implementation of Quality Management 
401
—  Ecotourism, with a role in promoting sustainable 
use of biodiversity, by generating income, jobs and 
business opportunities, along with an equitable dis-
tribution of the benefits to the population and the 
local community;
— Rural tourism (in which guests are hosted and 
guided by locals) and which has tradition in the 
Danube Delta Biosphere Reserve, home to many 
local families and visitors coming to the Danube 
Delta. This type of tourism has an important poten-
tial to improve incomes of local people;
— Travel for water sports, photography, safaris;
— Travel for fishing, which is highly appreciated by 
visitors of all ages, in any season, for any species of 
fish, and hunting.
3.  General Considerations Concerning 
the Quality System Certification 
of Ecotourism Services
The objective of quality certification of ecotourism ser-
vices is to implement a new set of regulations concern-
ing the quality of services in the tourism related 
activities for: equipping them with systems of internal 
and external services, so to act as effective tools for 
management and quality assurance; providing a basis 
for continuous improvement, adapting to the new man-
agement system needs, but also to satisfy customer 
requirements and expectations. (Hornoiu, 2009).
Since the issue of service quality of tourist facilities is 
a matter of survival for them, managers in the hospitality 
industry should provide quality services on the market, at 
various prices, so that they can retain customers and even 
gain new customers in order to increase turnover, profit, 
and customer loyalty. Ecotourism providers to obtain a 
differential advantage must consider improving service 
quality, so as to exceed customer expectations and improve 
their perception. To this end, tourism structures must iden-
tify the determinants of service quality expectations of 
customers who use their services and the appropriate way 
to measure customers’ satisfaction. (Honey, 2002).
Quality means meeting the needs of tourists, and 
for this, tourism enterprises need to study the market 
(segments of tourists, competition, etc.), then try to 
adapt their services to the requirements of their envi-
ronment (level of ambition and needs of tourists).
In conducting all necessary stages in implementing 
this  quality management system,  ecotourism operators 
must involve all members of the organization.
The first step is to analyze the current situation 
(quality audit). At this stage, they evaluate all relevant 
aspects of a product. The methods that can be used are: 
analysis through management quality levels, obtaining 
customer feedback, which is achieved through question-
naires of opinion and registration of customer, employee 
or supplier complaints; they must also value opinion 
makers, using boxes for suggestions and employee feed-
back, observations concerning leadership, management, 
customer interaction, management of employees through 
internal benchmarking (activity/process), functional 
(activities), general activities (processes, products/ser-
vices, procedures in relation to leaders, indirect com-
petitors and/or non-competitors) and compared analysis 
(relative to direct competitors).
The second step is to develop a quality strategy; 
however it is necessary to first establish a quality level, 
in order to meet the target consumer groups’ expecta-
tions. Secondly, actions must be taken to achieve the 
desired level and the third step is to control the level of 
performance, through a series of actions to address 
identified deficiencies.
Next, they must formulate an improvement plan 
that aims to: raise awareness and education for quality 
and quality management improvement actions based on 
priorities, internal and external communication through 
the development of an effective intra-departmental 
 network; inter-departmental, customers, and public 
linking. They must introduce and integrate the quality 
problem, accompanied by a communication plan and 
monitoring system, to conclude the presented steps.
Applying technology in determining the quality of 
tourism services has proven to be difficult, as the quality of 
provided services cannot be separated from the unit which 
produces them. It is therefore necessary to define and verify 
the quality of management processes and required proce-
dures to ensure the ultimate quality of tourism services.
When developing a quality system, the first step is 
to set standards of product/service, according to appli-
cation needs.
The development of quality systems ensures: the 
designing of specific rules for each unit, specific proce-
dures for maintaining and improving quality planning 

402 
V. Nicula & S. Spânu
and analysis procedures for making decisions about the 
gathered information, assessment tools and training of 
human resources.
The ultimate goal is the mark of quality systems, 
standards and procedures that certifies the final fulfil-
ment: a system that should define a unit of the hospital-
ity industry. Quality of services should be popularized, 
to be used as a criterion in choosing the right service 
provider, as appropriate homologation of  ecotourism 
operators and ecotourism products (Classification 
Acorns).
The National Tourism Authority has proposed the 
program to improve the quality of tourism services and 
a new approach to the development of the tourism sec-
tor, based on the principles of  quality management, 
aiming to design and implement quality management 
systems on a pilot group of tourism units in Romania, in 
order to align with European requirements for develop-
ment, requirements for  sustainable development. Also, 
it aims to increase the attractiveness and competitive-
ness of Romania as a tourist destination. (Nicula, 2012).
The new guidelines and requirements acknowl-
edged internationally and in the European Union rec-
ommend, in order to ensure and improve the quality of 
tourism services, a voluntary implementation of stand-
ardized management systems — quality, food safety, 
environmental protection and information security — 
which proves their efficiency and effectiveness in time, 
such as (quality management system) ISO 9001, (Food 
Safety Management System), ISO 22000, (Environmental 
Management System) ISO 14001, (Information Security 
Management System) ISO 27000. The implementation 
of such quality management systems is the only national 
management approach that can help to align tourism 
facilities in Romania (compatibility, reliability, com-
petitiveness), to European ones.
Certification of quality management system must 
be done in accordance with the international standard 
SR EN ISO 9001:2001 and should be the same for all 
participants within the industry, including tour opera-
tors and agencies, as a confirmation that all processes 
in the organization are in compliance with the afore-
mentioned standard. Based on this standard, a quality 
management system can be implemented in any tour-
ism organization (travel agency, hotel, restaurant), so 
also for  ecotourism operators.
The introduction of a quality system benefits all 
parties involved (tourist destination, entrepreneurs, 
consumers, and intermediaries and will result in the 
improvement of marketing: higher customer loyalty 
which will lead to their establishment and repeated 
visits due to increased satisfaction levels; new sales 
through recommendations from satisfied customers, a 
competitive advantage over competitors by improving 
image quality, higher revenues by increasing sales 
prices and attracting a clientele less sensitive to price.
In turn, consumers and intermediaries, as well as 
travel agencies that sell  ecotourism will benefit from the 
application of quality systems as follows: information 
regarding products and services which the client can 
expect, the quality guarantee system which is proof of 
the quality of products and services, ensuring that the 
product and service is sold as norms and standards men-
tion it; this would represent an important milestone in the 
process of comparing similar vacation offers, as it is also 
critical to inform the customer as he/she wants to be sure 
he/she made a good choice to spend the most important 
period of the year. The implementation of such a quality 
management system in ecotourism operators shall coor-
dinate work, towards higher performance and therefore 
obtaining a sustainable competitive advantage. Tourists 
demand to purchase products/services at prices related to 
the quality of the supply, and so ecotourism operators 
can answer the increasingly higher demands by optimiz-
ing the quality/price ratio. Small and medium tourism 
enterprises are forced to fight for survival in the face of 
competition, promoting embedded destinations, working 
with world-class professionals of tourism, and which 
have a strong functional organization which can achieve 
significant savings, superior to those of any small, iso-
lated businesses. On the other hand, these small busi-
nesses have to cope with increasing pressure, must move 
towards cooperation, innovation, specialization, and 
creation of brand products of high quality.
The Romanian Ecotourism Association (AER) has 
approved the Ecotourism Guesthouses Initiative, as a 
measure to counter such effects. The Ecotourism 
Certification System of AER adapts international expe-
rience in Romania’s context. It was developed in accord-
ance with the Program for Nature and Ecotourism 
Accreditation, promoted by the Australian Association 
of Ecotourism (NEAP is the first accreditation system in 

 
Implementation of Quality Management 
403
 ecotourism) and Nature’s Best of the Swedish Association 
of Ecotourism (the first accreditation system in ecotour-
ism in the Northern hemisphere). The Ecotourism 
Certification System applies to two different categories: 
ecotourism programs offered by tour operators or guides 
(maximum 15 participants); small hostels in rural areas 
and natural areas (maximum 25 rooms) (Rondelli & 
Cojocariu, 2005).
AER has identified a number of benefits that may 
result from the implementation of the certification sys-
tem, such as allowing customers to better identify those 
products that can offer amazing experiences related to 
nature and rural culture, contributing to higher levels of 
trust in eco products in Romania on the international 
market, becoming a marketing tool for tour operators 
and owners of guesthouses, which ensures a higher level 
of service quality and actively contributes to nature con-
servation and  sustainable development at the local level 
along with supporting local governments in areas pro-
tected with minimal impact on tourism development. It 
provides a platform for joint activities between the busi-
ness sector and nature conservation organizations.
4.  Implementation of  Quality 
Management for Ecotourism 
Operators in the Danube Delta
Romanian ecotourism product quality requires the 
application of flexible strategies, diversification of tour-
ism benefits, and differentiation of the tourism product 
offered compared to competitive offerings (Tuclea, 
Padureanu & Hornoiu, 2008). The strategy allows flex-
ibility and adaptation following the evolution of tourism 
and demand tourism benefits depending on the specific 
variations, as well as being consistent with the natural 
environment and tourist vocation of the area. The role 
of the product differentiation strategy in ecotourism 
versus competitive offerings related to other forms of 
tourism is to enable the development of ecotourism 
product originality through creative ways of living 
space and tourism with spiritual meanings and country 
specific characteristic applied to regions or localities.
The development of tourism in the Danube Delta 
calls for special attention to be paid to environmental 
demands, representing the “raw material” scope and 
conduct of business travel.
The AER has approved two tourism products in the 
Delta: “House of Willows” and Canoeing tour operated 
by groups such as Tioc Nature & Study Travel.
“House of the Willows”, located in the village of 
Uzlina Murighiol, has 12 rooms, terraces, two water-
front gazebos, patio, swimming pool, children’s play-
ground, fishing pond, parking on shore and boats 
(catamaran, motor boats, rowing boats). The initial 
building was intended to be a holiday home for family 
and friends relaxing at the pond, but also intended for 
fish lovers and has become, in just a few years, a 
small guesthouse that wants to personalize human 
contact with nature, bringing tourists closer to the 
spirit and peaceful life of these places. The daily 
menu includes fish dishes, prepared through site-
specific recipes, and meals based on other products, 
established by agreement with the tourists. The 
Canoeing tour operated by Tioc Nature & Travel 
Study suggests canoe trips through wildlife on request 
and is subject to availability.
Specialized studies carried out by UNWTO have 
identified key megatrends that are recorded in the tour-
ism sector which will enhance the perspective of the 
2020s. Among the most significant aspects are: the 
number of tourists concerned about environmental 
issues is constantly increasing, while the demand for 
new destinations increases as well; also, tourists become 
more experienced and sophisticated, expect good qual-
ity attractions, facilities and services at high quality and 
suitable prices in their travels.
The existing literature (Chafe, 2005), notes that is a 
close connection between eco-label and consumer 
behavior. For example, 69% of Dutch tourists stay in 
hotels labelled as Green Key, and stated they would be 
willing to pay more to benefit from facilities that have 
implemented an eco-label. Meanwhile, 86% of Dutch 
tourists prefer a star rating system that combines envi-
ronmental performance and quality of services. Over 
62% of Italian tourists and 42% of German tourists 
believe that environmental performance is a key factor 
for a successful holiday.
The Danube Delta has all the ingredients necessary 
for the development of ecotourism, but the essential con-
dition for the sustainability of the tourism phenomenon 
is the existence of quality certification of ecotourism 
services.

404 
V. Nicula & S. Spânu
Table 1.  Number of tourist arrivals in Romania in Danube Delta
Country/Total Tourists
Total tourists from 
abroad
No. abroad tourists in Danube Delta, 
including city of Tulcea
Germany
228,592
6,146
Italy 
181,894
1,223
France
118,649
1,710
Hungary
99,261
146
Israel
96,615
203
UK
92,756
369
USA
91,625
288
Spain
66,375
997
Poland
64,152
3,074
Austria 
58,765
707
Holland
47,378
240
Bulgaria
43,751
408
Greece
39,360
142
Turkey
38,375
131
Republic of Moldavia
33,668
76
Belgium
30,299
168
Russian Federation
29,302
62
Czech Republic
22,246
160
Switzerland
20,556
292
Ukraine
17,227
109
Japan
16,974
76
Sweden
15,049
126
Norway
14,242
3,865
Canada
13,967
22
Serbia
13,959
125
China
13,329
142
Slovakia
11,678
32
Denmark
11,004
510
Albania
10,884
154
Portugal
10,145
472
Other countries
162,461
615
Total tourists from abroad
1,714,538
22,790
Source: Eurostat, 2014.
An analysis of the number of tourist arrivals in 
Romania in the Danube Delta demonstrates a prefer-
ence for this destination, especially for tourists from 
Germany, Norway and Poland.
The European Commission (EC) presented in early 
February 2014 a Euro Barometer result entitled “Towards 
Preferences of European Tourism” (EuroBarometer, 
2014). The tourism based Euro Barometer consists of 
telephone surveys made on samples of more than 
26,500 people across the European Union from January 
10th to January 14th, out of which 1003 people are 
Romanian. From the analysis of this report regarding 

 
Implementation of Quality Management 
405
Romanians’ preferences in terms of tourism and the 
forecast for 2014, we notice a series of conclusions from 
which we selected those for choosing a valence for  eco-
tourism destinations such as Danube Delta.
— Among the reasons for which most Romanians 
traveled in 2013, we have sunny destinations (seaside, 
beach), a reunion with family and friends (37%), and 
spending time in nature (34%).
— Natural resources of a destination would cause 
most Romanians to return to a destination (40%).
— Recommendations from friends, family and col-
leagues are the most important source of inspira-
tion Romanians when deciding their travel 
planning (48%), followed by travel websites 
(23%). The Romanian market is somewhat atypi-
cal compared to other European markets, meaning 
that tourism websites, brochures and catalogues 
matters less in travel decisions.
— Romanians most used the Internet (35%) to organize 
the trip and have enlisted the help of a friend (22%).
— Romanians (34%) bought isolated travel packages 
(up 9% compared to 2012), and purchased tour 
packages (27%), which saw an increase of 3%, 
while the purchases of services of all-inclusive type 
(27%), saw an increase of 6%.
— Romania is among the countries that grew most in 
terms of tourists’ satisfaction on the quality of tour-
ist services (8%), followed by satisfaction with the 
purchase of accommodation (5%).
— Increased satisfaction lead Romanians to appreciate 
the general price level (11%), but Romania was the 
country which fell the most in terms of satisfaction 
about such services for people with disabilities.
— Most Romanian made short trips of 1–3 nights, and 
Romania is among the countries whose citizens are 
the least to travel for 13 or more consecutive 
nights.
— Romanians are amongst the least staying Europeans 
in accommodations, with more than 20 seats 
(27%), the majority preferring small accommoda-
tion units (44%). The number of Romanians who 
opt to stay in camping also decreased by 6%.
Analysis of these preferences reveals opportunities 
to develop ecotourism in the Danube Delta and the 
implementation of quality system would generate an 
increase in tourist arrivals in the area.
Statistical data on the evolution of tourism indica-
tors in Tulcea County, in 2009–2013, shows increasing 
interest manifested both among tourists from Romania 
and abroad (International Standards Office, 2008).
From the analysis of this data, it is obvious that 
tourists are increasing demands for tourism products in 
the Danube Delta. The  ecotourism sector’s develop-
ment and prosperity will lead simultaneously to 
increases in other sectors of the economy: food, trade, 
transport, etc. As the demand for ecotourism is perma-
nent and on a steady global growth, and as a continuing 
trend that influences the tourism market and local com-
munities, it is the interest of local communities to pro-
mote the creation of  sustainable development models.
The positive effects or what determines the correct 
application and implementation of  quality management 
in any establishment providing travel services are more 
likely to repeat visits, increase financial performance, 
given that attracting new customers is 5–10 times more 
expensive than keeping customers at existing costs and 
avoiding complaints; better employee motivation, posi-
tive external effects chain (promotion, consistency in 
business and winning new markets).
The strategy of major service providers in terms of 
the quality of provided services is limited to the follow-
ing three steps:
— First, to divide the market very carefully and 
develop services to meet customer needs as they 
noticed that not all customers who buy the same 
product or service have the same needs;
— Second, they realized that only the client knows 
what he wants, so they pay attention to what the 
customer says;
— Third, they are careful to meet customer expecta-
tions at optimum levels; they promise less and offer 
more.
Service providers should not try to guess the wishes 
of the customer, nor his/her expectations, but must try to 
determine them as accurately as possible, by referring 
directly to the consumer in connection with his percep-
tion of quality, satisfaction, value of tourism product 
— through surveys. The next step is to harmonize this 

406 
V. Nicula & S. Spânu
Table 2.  Tourist arrivals in units with functions of tourists’ accommodation guesthouses and agro type
Units with functions 
of tourists’ 
accommodation
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov. Dec.
2009
Guest houses
216
279
—
270
223
343
723
511
402
206
242
114
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
—
949
491
859
47
315
160
105
—
—
2010
Guest houses
239
45
158
140
466
193
306
240
116
96
15
5
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
—
24
391
211
107
302
452
19
55
—
2011
Guest houses
—
37
1
3
5
149
148
157
75
26
10
27
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
5
59
151
235
377
1291
700
198
92
14
2012
Guest houses
11
25
31
29
75
174
206
102
61
41
25
11
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
—
28
125
279
546
592
490
92
—
—
2013
Guest houses
9
10
—
—
—
—
58
62
57
38
27
—
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
—
20
608
948
787
853
156
109
20
—
Table 3.  Establishments of tourists’ facilities with functions of tourist accommodation, such as guesthouses and agro type
Units with functions of 
tourists’ accommodation
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
2009
Guest houses
244
356
—
373
271
343
930
619
515
247
290
126
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
—
1979
1039
1928
47
861
467
115
—
—
2010
Guest houses
305
47
185
163
630
249
440
295
144
116
15
5
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
—
38
671
478
246
999
1161
44
139
—
2011
Guest houses
—
45
5
20
12
196
206
157
75
45
11
27
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
10
149
149
530
935
3,011
1621
647
298
42
2012
Guest houses
11
32
37
35
87
230
395
246
73
52
28
11
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
—
77
318
640
1,792
1,372
1,138
231
—
—
2013
Guest houses
—
25
—
—
—
—
58
62
57
38
27
—
Agritouristic guest houses
—
—
—
28
1,842
2,001
2,624
2,818
367
284
59
—

 
Implementation of Quality Management 
407
data with the quality perception of the management 
team to improve service quality.
Tourist companies should establish a permanent 
evaluation and measuring of customer satisfaction. This 
assessment must identify reactions, both positive and 
negative, and their likely incidence on future activities 
of the company (Ioncica, 2006). Both the blog and the 
forum are very useful for communication within tourist 
accommodation structures and beyond: the company 
can interact with potential clients can exchange infor-
mation, they can learn new things. One advantage of 
using them as integral parts to a web site is that visitors 
can express their ideas, opinions, or provide solutions 
to solving problems. Another advantage is the ease with 
which information can be accessed.
5. Conclusion
It can be concluded that the performance is due to the 
ongoing concern of managers to improve the quality of 
products and customer service. For these companies, 
quality is not only a requirement, but has become a 
value, an essential component of organizational culture.
Quality assurance as part of quality management 
means creating confidence among tourists interested in 
purchasing  ecotourism programs, and can be consid-
ered as an evaluation of different perspectives on how a 
tourism business operates and the way it needs to pro-
vide quality products to its customers.
We can state that the majority of tourists consider 
tourism products within the following quality parame-
ters: competence, safety, hygiene, availability for the 
customer, accurate and timely information, timeliness, 
reliability, trust, safety, etc. Management methods and 
techniques of  quality management are scientifically 
based on management tools, organizations which pro-
mote the marketing of quality products that meet pre-
sent and future needs of customers.
References
Chafe, Z. (2005), Ecotourism and sustainable development, 
www.ecotourismcesd.org. (Accessed 19 March 2013).
Cosmescu, I. & Nicula,V. (2004), Diversitatea şi Calitatea 
Serviciilor Turistice în Bazinul Mării Negre, Sibiu: Constant.
Honey, M. (2002), Ecotourism and Certification: Setting 
Standards in Practice, Washington, D.C: Island Press.
Hornoiu, R. I. (2009), Ecoturismul — Orientare Prioritară 
în Dezvoltarea Durabilă a Comunităţilor Locale, 
Bucureşti: ASE.
Ioncică, M. (2006), Economia Serviciilor, Bucureşti: Uranus.
Nicula, V., Simona, S., & Ciotea G. (2012), Ghidul 
Ecopensiunii Agroturostice, Sibiu: ULB.
Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, V., & Berry, L. (1988), SERVQUAL: 
A multiple item scale for measuring customer perceptions 
of service quality, Journal of Retailing, 64 (1), pp. 12–43.
Rondelli, V. & Cojocariu, S. (2005), Managementul Calităţii 
Serviciilor Dinturism şi Industria Ospitalităţii, Bucureşti: 
THR–CG.
Table 4.  Net use index of accommodation places
Units with functions of 
tourists’ accommodation Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Apr.
May
Jun.
Jul.
Aug.
Sep.
Oct.
Nov. Dec.
2009
Total county
10.5
12.8
15.6
22.9
20.9
28.0
30.8
39.1
25.1
13.9
16.9 11.7
2010
Total county
8.2
9.5
11.4
15.5
24.2
19.8
25.8
32.4
21.5
17.5
15.9 11.4
2011
Total county
9.4
10.2
11.5
14.0
28.2
25.6
28.6
34.6
31.4
20.0
18.6 12.4
2012
Total county
9.0
9.4
18.2
18.4
25.1
20.0
22.4
32.1
27.7
18.7
16.6
8.1
2013
Total county
9.1
10.1
11.9
18.0
28.8
34.4
39.7
46.2
36.5
30.1
23.2
—

408 
V. Nicula & S. Spânu
Ţuclea, C., Pădureanu, M., & Hornoiu, R. (2008), A certifica-
tion system for ecoturism servicies in romania, encuentros 
2nd days of touristica, Portoroz, New Europe — New 
Tourist Destination, Colegge of Tourism, Slovenia.
INCDT (2009), Strategia de Dezvoltare a Ecoturismului in 
Romania, Bucureşti.
International Standards Office (2008), ISO 9001 — Quality 
management systems — Requirements, Geneva: ISO.
International Standards Office (2009), ISO 9004 — Managing 
for the Sustained Success of an Organization. A Quality 
Management Approach. Geneva: ISO.
Eurobarometer, www.ec.europa.eu/ (Accessed 20 March 
2014).
Eurostat, http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/
statistics/search_database.

409
Chapter 45
Romanian Pre-University  Educational Management 
in the Context of  European Integration
Ana Tuşa, Claudiu Sorin Voinia, 
and Oana Dumitraşcu
“Lucian Blaga” University of Sibiu
The issue of educational management has become sig-
nificant in the current social environment in which all 
aspects of education begin with quality and efficiency 
of the systems and, above all, educational activities.
The research objectives were aimed at analyzing 
and explaining the phenomena of the school manage-
ment in order to improve intervention techniques and 
thus improve the quality and performance of the man-
agement process.
Research methods are combined, such as explora-
tory, qualitative, and quantitative methods. Subjects 
interviewed and surveyed belong to decision-makers 
from the analyzedd systems, namely of schools in EU 
countries. Using the comparison method of manage-
ment systems, some data were obtained on the state and 
trajectory of European countries in terms of  school 
education and were used to establish lines of action for 
our country. Thus, the logical line of this chapter con-
sists of the following steps:
 Identifying factors determining the performance 
management role in school education;
 Analyzing them within the systems performing EU 
countries and determining specific aspects;
 Determining the defining aspects of the Romanian 
system of  educational management, and in com-
parison with the systems’ performance;
 Establishing the necessary recommendations in 
systemic improvement process.
The bibliographical study undertaken in the univer-
sity management based research was completed with 
performed  comparative studies on various management 
systems practices in pre-university education institu-
tions in EU countries.
One of the most important factors with determining 
role in achieving managerial performance is the  school 
manager himself.
Considering the previously analyzed determinants of 
 performance, but not being a model taken literally for 
Romanian pre-university education, some key elements of 
the management for Romanian education were high-
lighted and afterwards compared with other European 
educational systems from the point of view of systems and 
resources and concerning the quality of management.
Out of all, the recommendations resulting from the 
comparison of the Romanian university management 
system with that existing in various EU countries, we 
emphasized those relating to:
 Development of partnerships between schools and 
public institutions, businesses, institutions abroad;
 Financial resources of the school unit;
 Human Resources Management;

410 
A. Tuşa, C. S. Voinia & O. Dumitraşcu
 Strategic planning process and preparation of the 
Institutional Development Plan;
 Internal and external  evaluation process;
 Decentralization of  school education;
 Improve managers.
1. Introduction
In the recent years,  educational management, in gen-
eral, and specificifically secondary education have 
gained increasing importance, both in Romania and in 
European society, so that the role of school manage-
ment has become an important topic of debate at 
European level.
This chapter aim to obtain a better picture of school 
education management in Romania compared to EU 
countries. Moreover, the issue of school education 
management has become significant in the current 
social environment in which all aspects of education 
begin with quality, efficiency systems and educational 
activities.
This chapter addresses the pre-university  educa-
tional management, analyzing  performance of the func-
tions, relations management, analysis methods and 
techniques, design strategies, determining the position 
of the Romanian educational management in regards to 
European requirements, their needs and finding ways to 
share in order to enhance performance.
In the development of school education, both at 
national and at European level, a particularly important 
question is the appropriate management framework 
typology in this field. Therefore, choosing the appropri-
ate undergraduate management models constitute one 
of the fundamental factors of efficiency and perfor-
mance objectives.
Consistent with these goals, this chapter attempts 
to find applicable ways and tools, in order that educa-
tional management meet its current needs in relation to 
the requirements of European university education, 
requirements identified through studies and direct 
measurements on subjects from various countries of the 
European Union.
The research objectives were aimed at analyzing 
and explaining the phenomena of the school manage-
ment in order to improve intervention techniques and 
thus improve the quality and  performance of the 
management process. Research methods are combined, 
such as exploratory qualitative methods and quantita-
tive methods. Subjects interviewed and surveyed belong 
to the decision-makers from the analyzed systems 
namely, of schools in EU countries. By comparison 
method, management systems data were obtained on 
the state and trajectory of European countries in terms 
of  school education. The data were then used to estab-
lish lines of action for Romania.
2.  Conceptual Elements Regarding 
the Management of Pre-University 
Education
Educational management is evidenced by the ability to 
reflect the art and science of management and the 
scheme to create an effective action concerning the 
problem identification, solution preparation, imple-
mentation,  evaluation, and development of a new 
decision.
Educational management  performance is given by 
the efficiency and effectiveness of the process, provid-
ing resources and effective coordination of activities 
within it.
Dragomir states that educational management can 
be defined as both “science and art” to prepare human 
resources to train staff, according to the individual and 
finally accepted by society or a particular community. 
(2001: 23).
According to Jinga (2003: 400),  educational man-
agement comprises a set of principles and functions of 
management standards and methods for achieving the 
objectives of the educational system (as a whole or the 
components), the quality and efficiency as high as 
possible.
The concept of management of school education, 
component of the educational process, has acquired 
multiple meanings and is used frequently in theory 
and practice. Analyzing this concept means the deter-
mination and the elements and directions that define 
it. Management education is presented as an action 
performed in an organized manner for processing 
learners personality according to finality, initially 
established. In full accordance with management edu-
cation, pre-university management shall focus on the 
quality of education, i.e., the ratio between the results 

 
Romanian Pre-University Educational Management 
411
obtained and those shown and its effectiveness con-
ceived as the ratio between the results obtained and 
those used.
These concepts create the logical line of this chap-
ter, namely:
(1) Identifying factors with determining role of  perfor-
mance management in pre-university education;
(2) Their analysis in systems performing EU countries 
and determining specific aspects;
(3) Determining the defining aspects of the Romanian 
system of pre-university management, and in com-
parison with the systems  performance;
(4) Establish necessary recommendations in a systemic 
improvement process.
3.  Determinant Elements of Managerial 
Performance in Pre-University 
Education
3.1.  Regarding the system and resources
Bibliographical study undertaken in the management of 
pre-university made the research base, completed then, 
by the performed  comparative studies on various man-
agement systems practiced in pre-school education in 
the European Union. Thus, Hallinger (2003: 67) noticed 
that, in Europe different practice management systems 
are applied in schools namely:
 Partnerships between school systems — various 
agencies and organizations — very important to 
“put school into the community service”;
 A modernization of curricula;
 Systems that provide centralization of attributions 
by the school management;
 Situations that encourage expansion of extracur-
ricular activities, their achievement involving other 
stakeholders;
 Systems with very limited autonomy — cases 
where schools do not set their own goals to achieve 
their curricula (in Europe there are still a sufficient 
number of schools in the selection, remuneration of 
staff or implementing changes required in transfor-
mations from the external environment are limited 
as power of decision).
 Systems with some autonomy, which award grants 
to the management teams for the results (e.g., 
facilitating open communication, stimulating crea-
tive thinking and innovation, motivate staff and 
students to achieve competitive results, motivating 
lifelong learning, etc.).
In the pre-university education, the management 
relationships are very complex. Besides general man-
agement relations presented in any organization, in pre-
university school units, some specific types are 
crystalized which focus on student attention as Stan N. 
stated (1999: 9).
The management relations are conditioned by vari-
ables influenced partly and influenced totally, namely:
 Degree of automation of processing the information;
 Characteristics of the educational process;
 Design managers on the school board;
 Human resources;
 Provided material;
 School size;
 Law school;
 Type of school.
3.2.  Regarding the quality of 
management
One of the most important factors with determining 
role in achieving managerial  performance is the  school 
manager himself. Compared with other managers, the 
school occupies a distinct place, its specificity is given 
by occupational category in which it is formed, namely 
the teacher. According to studies, in the majority of EU 
Member States, the school manager is a teacher, but his 
title varies depending on the education system decen-
tralization and the type of school.
The work efficiency of a school manager depends 
on the knowledge and proper application of methods, 
techniques, and principles of general management, 
knowledge and education domain specificity. A school 
manager must have the ability to understand educa-
tional policies at the macro-social trends of integration 
with the European–Romanian education.
Porter & Lawer have shown in Managerial Attitudes 
and  Performance (2008: 112) that the ability to lead 

412 
A. Tuşa, C. S. Voinia & O. Dumitraşcu
effectively is influenced by: the personality of the man-
ager, the intellectual and behavioral structure, the edu-
cational manager being a model. According to another 
study by Joiţă E. (2000: 312) students’ achievement and 
teachers’  performances are influenced by global busi-
ness  school manager, so that the selection, training and 
promotion of school managers are of utmost impor-
tance and priority.
Boboc (2002: 3) discussed the fact that a Romanian 
pre-university education manager is different from the 
managers in the European Union as he is not just a 
manager but also the administrative coordinator of the 
entire business establishment, both of the educational 
and the actual administration.
In Romania, school managers have administrative, 
financial, educational, and school responsibilities to 
society. Given the complexity of the tasks and respon-
sibilities of school managers, the areas of its work 
comprise at the same time:
 Curriculum: application, development, and  evaluation;
 Human resources: recruitment, use, motivation, 
training, assessment, availability, setting an appro-
priate organizational climate;
 Non-human resources: physical, financial, infor-
mational, time;
 Organizational performance, organizational devel-
opment, and community relations.
Therefore to achieve the performance, skills, and 
capabilities of the school manager will be required in 
accordance with the duties listed above and to be 
acquired through specialized education in school man-
agement. As Mintzberg (1983: 149) specified, “mana-
gerial competence highlights broadly the ability of 
management to perform specific activities of expected 
performance”. He also stated that high performance 
managerial skills are as follows:
 Search for information;
 Concept formation;
 Conceptual flexibility;
 Interpersonal research;
 Interaction management;
 Development orientation;
 Impact;
 Self-confidence;
 Communication;
 Putting into practice;
 Orientation towards success.
As we have already mentioned in our study, the key 
element of managerial  performance is, in fact, the man-
ager. His designation is particularly important and, as 
mention in the Eurydice Report in 2010, differs in each 
EU country.
Most countries apply a consistent set of criteria to 
designate one person as the head or director of an edu-
cational institution, as mention by Neacşu & Felea 
(2005: 11) taking into account the:
 Professional experience in education;
 Experience in administrative/managerial posts;
 Special vocational training;
 Moral qualities;
 Health estate.
4.  Conclusions from Romanian 
Pre-University Education 
Assessment Management
Considering the previously analyzed determinants of 
performance, but without a model being taken literally 
for Romanian pre-university education, the study is 
further trying to emphasize some key elements of the 
management of Romanian pre-university education and 
then compare them with those existing in other 
European educational systems.
4.1.  Regarding the system and resources
Out of the total amount of Romanian  school managers 
interviewed, a proportion of 92% felt that they have 
very little autonomy in the management process, which 
is due to poor management of schools. According to the 
respondents, as a solution to revive the Romanian pre-
university education and implicitly the managerial 
activity, a decentralization of education and increasing 
autonomy are needed.
The transition of education to the financing of local 
budgets generally led to a close collaboration with local 

 
Romanian Pre-University Educational Management 
413
schools, yet in some cases it appeared that there was no 
real communication between  school managers and local 
authority representatives.
Regarding the resource management, the study 
revealed a lack of resources in general, and, espe-
cially, in human resource issues such as the inability 
to select the human resources in a strong connection 
with the lack of autonomy. This finding comes, some-
what, inconsistent compared with the findings of a 
strong point, as 88% of managers highlighted the 
importance of the quality of human resources, appro-
priate level of qualifications, training and  performance 
of good teachers. In fact, the study shows that highly 
qualified teachers played an important role in the 
management of classroom and school management in 
general.
4.2. Regarding the quality of management
Our study also revealed that, in Romania, the biggest 
criticism of the school manager is that, managerial 
activity is carried out by directors who do not have 
knowledge of management, which is clearly visible in 
poor leadership and lower quality of education. The 
study shows that school managers’ knowledge of 
school management goes towards a percentage of 
35.50%.
Directors therefore exercise managerial act intui-
tively, without scientific basis, although in general they 
are interested in the system undertaking specialized 
training to ensure the appropriate qualifications.
The study shows that the activity in schools func-
tions from inertia, observing that very few schools have 
a strategic management thinking. We can state that 
because of the decline of the demographic index, many 
schools will disappear and only those who are inter-
ested in designing strategies and translating them into 
practice, knowing very well their potential and objec-
tives will remain.
Following the assessment of management in pre-
university education by aligning  performance indica-
tors and descriptors of the European framework, this 
scientific approach revealed that Romanian pre-univer-
sity education management values are fully compatible 
with those promoted by the European  educational man-
agement, some changes being necessary.
5. Recommendations
Knowing that a copy of European models is impossible 
and sometimes dangerous for the system to be rede-
signed, improvement proposals are only the result of 
benchmarking, without claiming to sketch a general 
model.
Comparison method was found to be particularly 
useful in identifying strengths and weaknesses, spe-
cificities and common elements, all of which form 
the basis of departure for subsequent determination 
of appropriate methods and tools to implement 
European policies, following as results obtained in 
undergraduate units, an efficient management, com-
parable to European countries. In conclusion, our 
study provides the following recommendations on a 
real basis:
Developing partnerships between schools and public 
institutions, businesses, institutions from abroad:
 Increasing stakeholder involvement at the local or 
regional level of school activities and adapting cur-
riculum to community needs. Developing profes-
sional skills of students through internships 
conducted in economic activity whose area corre-
sponds to the interests of the school;
 Identifying funding sources by accessing European 
funds and European programs such as Comenius, 
Leonardo, cross border cooperation programs 
financed by the European Social Fund (ESF).
Regarding the financial resources of the school:
 Modernization of educational activity is directly 
influenced by the existence of an incentive system 
for allocating funds. That is why the distribution by 
schools and levels is needed to be made, depending 
on the specific training of students in each school. 
Allocation of funds in this way would lead to 
autonomy and thus to the responsibility of each 
school on the effective use of received funds;
 Compliance with the methodology of the income 
and expenditure budgets and compliance with all 
phases of the budget process leads to an efficient 
use of funds available to the school.

414 
A. Tuşa, C. S. Voinia & O. Dumitraşcu
Human Resources Management:
 Due to rapid and permanent changes in Romanian 
society, optimum use of existing staff in each unit, 
training and development, establish collaborative 
relationships and promote educational experiences 
are required;
 The practice of scientific management, based on a 
correct and complete set long-term goals and 
rewards based on continuous assessment and  per-
formance indicators;
 Compliance with legislation regarding the prepara-
tion of job descriptions, performance  evaluation 
sheets of the staff;
 The need for professional development must take 
into account both the needs of the school and the 
needs of each person;
 Completing the continuing education required for 
specific training sessions to solve problems arising 
in each school and not on the purely theoretical 
basis.
Strategic planning process and preparation of the 
Institutional Development Plan:
 Effective communication both inside and outside 
the school unit and participation in human resources 
team in the preparation of the Institutional 
Development Plan (IDP). IDP strategy approaches 
to start from the tradition of each school and the 
means of action that should be chosen based on the 
resources of the school unit.
Internal and external  evaluation process:
 Self-evaluation is the basis of culture, and the man-
agement should enable schools to identify strengths 
and weaknesses by comparing performance year 
after year. Internal assessment is based on the inter-
pretation of evidence and not of the views of those 
involved in the educational process;
 The external evaluation starting point represent the 
findings and data obtained from internal  evalua-
tion. If self-evaluation is performed incorrectly 
also external assessment results are as erroneous. 
Following an  evaluation based on real and objec-
tive situations, the true weaknesses can be identi-
fied and thus measures can be taken to improve 
them;
 Creating their own textbooks, formalized operational 
procedures, approved by management unit systems 
and the creation of risk registers at each school;
 Creating and developing their systems of internal 
control/management and development of their 
development programs, according to the 25 man-
agement standards approved by the (Ministry of 
Finance Order) O.M.P.F. No. 946/2005 amended 
and supplemented by O.M.F.P. No. 1649/2011;
 Participation of employees involved in the creation 
and development of internal control/ management, 
forms of training in this field.
Decentralization of pre-university education:
 Decentralization aims to create an organized edu-
cational system, managed and financed according 
to the European requirements, so that the power of 
decision should be shared, clearly defined and well 
balanced between local communities and the min-
istry of education coordinated institutions.
Increasing the quality of managers:
 Qualification of managers through the specializa-
tion in  educational management by studying spe-
cific elements of educational management;
 Through all recommendations resulting from the 
comparison of the Romanian school management 
system with the one practiced in different countries 
of the European Union, results a programmatic and 
practical nature of the work, both in the management 
of schools, local authorities, and the upper level of 
the field. Expected results are to improve quality and 
production  performance system operation.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the strategic grand 
POSDRU/159/1.5/S/ 133255, Project ID 133255 
(2014), co-financed by the European Social Fund 

 
Romanian Pre-University Educational Management 
415
within the Sectorial Operational Program Human 
Resources Development 2007–2013.
References
Boboc, I. (2002), Management reform in the European 
Schools, Education Tribune December 17.
Building Europe of Knowledge, Innovation and Technology 
Transfer 1, (1999).
Dragomir, M. (2001), Glossary of Educational Management, 
Cluj Napoca: Publishing House Hyperbora.
Eurydice, Report (2010), The information network on educa-
tion in Europe, European Glossary on Education, 3. 
Available 
at: 
http://eacea.ec.europa.eu/education/
eurydice/ documents/all_publications.pdf. (Accessed 
March 2014).
Hallinger, P. (2003), Reshaping the Landscape of School 
Leadership Development, Amsterdam: Swets and 
Zeitlinger.
Jinga, I. (2003), Management Education, Bucharest: ASE 
Publishing House.
Joiţă, E. (2000), Teacher–manager Roles and Methodology, 
Bucureşti: EDP.
Mintzberg, H. (1983), The Nature of Managerial Work, New 
York: Harper&Row.
Neacşu, I. & Felea, G. (2005), Romanian European Values 
and Projects in Quality Assurance in Higher Education 
(2nd edn.), Galati Publishing House. Galati.
Porter, L. W. & Lawer, E. E. (2008), Managerial Attitudes 
and Performance, Homewood: Irwin.
Stan, N. (1999), Elements of the School Management, Olt 
CSI Publishing House.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

417
Chapter 46
Study on the Promotion and Implementation 
of  Sustainable Development in Modern Management 
in National and Regional Economies. Case Study: 
Romania as EU Member
George Plesoianu and St. Alexandru Costin Cirstea
Bucharest University of Economic Studies
The study’s main objective is to highlight the stringent 
need to implement a model of sustainable development 
at the societal level, based on the efficient use of avail-
able local resources, recovery the main economic sec-
tors, with modern and environmental friendly 
technologies and maintenance of national and regional 
specific through: the homogeneity and the characteris-
tics of each population, the own needs of development, 
production and consumption, the environmental and 
socio-economic system peculiarities through a sustain-
able development positive approach, and also the tradi-
tions and aspirations of the populations living in the EU 
countries. As a final objective, we intend to elaborate a 
feasible scenario for the application of these concepts in 
the case of Romania.
For the research study were used analysis and 
selective documentation synthesis of a series of recent 
and innovative works of the most renowned specialists 
and promoters of sustainable development and studies 
on the economic sectors, but also the strategy docu-
ments at EU and national level. On this basis, it was 
elaborated a comparative analysis between the interna-
tional, the EU and the national approaches, in the 
implementation of sustainable development.
The results have led to a set of priority measures 
and strategic actions, as case studies for Romania, in the 
four integrated policies for sustainable development, 
considered in the study. In our opinion it is necessary to 
harmonize these policies through pragmatic approaches 
of Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA), by developing 
interdisciplinary studies, to highlight the specific policy 
priorities and quantify their impact on the social groups 
and stakeholders.
The professional elaboration of these studies, 
according to the methodology promoted and supported 
at EU level, with special attention on those which cause 
discrimination in business environment and in the 
legitimate rights of citizens, is an absolutely necessary 
premise for the promotion of sustainable development 
policies.
1. Introduction
Sustainable development is a complex reality, a major 
challenge to human society, based on a relatively new 
concept and a stable model of integrated development 
of human civilization, and the natural environment in 
sustainable conditions. Modern concepts of  sustainable 

418 
G. Plesoianu & A. C. Cirstea
development can be considered as a new paradigm 
(Soderbaum, 2004), driven by the need to perpetuate 
and development of human society in a healthy natural 
environment, with maintaining the national and regional 
specificities in each country and geographical areas, the 
homogeneity, and the characteristics of each popula-
tion, the needs of development, production and con-
sumption, the environmental peculiarities the traditions 
and aspirations of life, etc., which can be a pragmatic 
criteria for modeling and implementation the concept 
of sustainable development.
In this context, sustainable development must 
ensure the maintenance and improvement of living con-
ditions for the vast majority of the community members 
in terms of a dynamic equilibrium and flexible macro 
system components ecosphere, including macrosystem 
itself. (Leca & State 1997).
Sustainable development is a relatively new con-
cept in the world, appeared in the last decades of the 
second millennium, designed primarily as a process 
that relies on positive changes in people’s mentality, in 
pursuit of a new vision for resource management and 
economic development (Smith & Fistung, 2005).
As it is evident that the existence of significant differ-
ences between countries and geographical areas, both in 
terms of natural conditions and cultural and linguistic 
levels, it appears obvious the need for configuration, 
development and implementation of “sustainable devel-
opment policies” specific to each country or region, in a 
climate of rational international cooperation — from 
positions of equal partnership and honest decision — to 
solve mutual problems by implementation of sustainable 
development programs. Thus it will be ensured a uniform 
and gradual implementation of the common objectives of 
sustainable development for the medium and long term.
The progresses in sustainable development man-
agement led us, on the basis of a comparative analysis, 
to support comprehensive and integrated approach of 
this concept, which aims to integrate four systems: 
Economic, Social, Environmental, and Technological 
in sustainable integrated public policies (Fig. 1).
2.  Sustainable Economic Policies
One of the most redoubtable experts and promoters of 
sustainable development, Lester Brown, notes that 
during the 6,000 years since civilization began, mankind 
has lived on sustainable productivity of the natural sys-
tems of the Earth. In recent decades, however, human 
society has exceeded the consumption of natural 
resources that can support these natural systems, which 
may soon affect the continuity of human civilization that 
is threatened to become unsustainable (Brown, 2011).
The impact of these new challenges is thought to be 
differentiated from one sector or area of activity to 
another, so that some areas will have to “reinvent” or 
gradually disappear, while others will benefit from new 
business opportunities generated from these challenges.
Currently, worldwide there is a triple crisis: the 
global financial crisis, the economic crises of countries 
with large budget deficits, high unemployment and sig-
nificantly public debts, and also the irrational and 
vicious crisis of environment management (Wijkman, 
Rockström, 2013). To these three will add a fourth, the 
food sector, which we believe it has an equally negative 
impact at global level.
This situation with a lot of obvious imbalances lead 
clearly to the conclusion that the current socio-economic 
model fails to fulfill its role. The way that international 
organizations and national governments acted in the past 
20 years on climate and natural environment protection, 
environmental issues, and on. Economic and social sus-
tainability has become a major topic of debate and one 
of the most important and most frequently subject com-
mented by analysts and researchers.
Fig. 1.  The integration of sustainable development policies
SUSTAINABLE
ECONOMIC
POLICY
SUSTAINABLE
ENVIRONMENT
POLICY
SUSTAINABLE
SOCIAL POLICY
SUSTAINABLE
TECHNOLOGICAL
POLICY
INTEGRATED
SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT
POLICIES

 
Study on the Promotion and Implementation of Sustainable Development 
419
These analyses show that the current economic 
model is based on economic and social policies that 
originated in the early stages of the industrial age, 
although it is obvious that, now, we face urgent and 
crucial economic and social demands for the rebalanc-
ing of human civilization but we have technological 
solutions able to support another reality. The popula-
tion is over seven times higher and is estimated to 
increase by at least two billion people by the year 
2050. Meanwhile, various long-term economic fore-
casts show that the world economy will continue to 
grow rapidly to reach by the year 2100, 15 up to 
20 times its current size, given that the planetary 
resources are still limited.
In these circumstances, the use of non-conventional 
energy transfer acceleration and stopping waste and 
inefficiency in resource management are keys for 
developing a new economic model, in agreement with 
the principles of  sustainable development.
At European level, the EU proposes to work with 
all stakeholders both on a European and global con-
sensus for developing a methodological framework 
of feasible scenarios for launching a modern indus-
trial policy, to support entrepreneurship and to curb 
corporate and financial abuses. These strategic 
actions are considering the design of sustainable and 
environmentally friendly industrial policies that pro-
mote competitiveness of primary industries, to the 
processing and services ones, to take advantage of 
the opportunities created by globalization and the 
green economy, integrated into a programmatic doc-
ument called Europe 2020. Europe 2020 is launching 
a new vision for Europe’s economy this decade, 
based on enhanced coordination of economic poli-
cies in the EU, in order to obtain growth and an 
increase in labor employment, to help economic 
recovery and EU financial sustainability.
This new strategy focuses on the following key 
areas: knowledge and innovation, a viable and sustain-
able economy, high employment rate and social inclu-
sion of disadvantaged categories.
The role of external representation of the Europe 
2020 strategy is essential to ensure an adequate response 
to the challenges of the globalization. It requires a 
strong EU support on solving urgent issues of vital 
interest and priority, such as the sharp decrease in 
carbon dioxide emissions, regulation of financial mar-
kets, energy security, and intellectual property law.
Europe 2020 Strategy focuses on three priorities:
• 
Developing an economy based on knowledge and 
innovation, so a rational and intelligent increase, 
which is also a sustainable;
• 
Promoting an efficient economy in terms of 
resource used, greener and more competitive, so a 
sustinable increase;
• 
Promoting an economy that ensure a substantial 
increase in corporate and SMEs social responsibil-
ity, with a high rate of employment, able to ensure 
economic, social, and territorial cohesion, accom-
panied by accelerated growth of social inclusion.
2.1.  Case-Study at National Level — 
Romania
From the analysis of the existing situation in implement-
ing the strategies and policies of industrialization and 
de-industrialization in Romania, resulted, in our opin-
ion, some priorities to be aligned with the Europe 2020 
objectives and that we consider necessary and feasible:
1. Drastic simplification and reduction of obligations 
and administrative documents that currently stifles 
small and medium businesses by taking over the 
best practices used in the developed European 
countries, so that the costs of these activities to be 
transferred in technological innovation;
2. Reconsidering with EU funded programs, the pri-
ority sectors producing added value, such as agri-
culture and forestry, sectors in which natural 
resources are wasted. The social component of 
these programs is essential for Romania and have 
the effect of the gradual return of emigrants that 
serve agriculture in other European countries and 
their participation in maintaining biodiversity and 
restore the natural potential of land, and thus com-
bating extreme weather events in Romania;
3. Reforming and relaunching the tourism sector in 
Romania, which really put the potential of a generous 
and attractive nature for all kind of tourism, which 
currently is in a state of crisis. Through focused 
actions, supported by EU funding programs for travel 

420 
G. Plesoianu & A. C. Cirstea
and tourism in collaboration with major networks 
from Europe, significant progress can be made in a 
relatively short time with consistent contributions 
that will sustain investment in increasing protected 
areas and creating a healthy natural environment.
3.  Sustainable Social Policies
Global vision of  sustainable development indicators should 
relate to the quantification of clear human welfare — for 
example, increasing the number of jobs, adequate health 
services, reliable education systems in agreement with 
labor market needs, equitable distribution of income and 
so on. A favorable increase of social inclusion involves 
ensuring self-sustaining for citizens and communities 
through higher rates of employment, so gradually to reach 
almost complete occupation rate of the active population.
To achieve this goal, are required coordinated edu-
cation programs and lifelong learning skills and hence, 
poverty reduction, ensuring an acceptable standard of 
living for all citizens.
It is envisaged the rational restructuring of local 
and regional labor markets through sociological 
research opportunities and needs for products and ser-
vices on this basis, planning and organization of train-
ing systems and integrated social protection, allowing 
people to focus training correlated with market require-
ments. In this way, it will get progressively balancing 
the supply of labor in the communities and regions and 
will be enhanced solidarity and efficient movement of 
labor as much as possible close to communities.
At European level, the EU strategic objective is to 
harness the full potential of workforce development, 
managing to cope with the challenges of an aging popu-
lation and rising global competition. Special attention 
should be given to the trend of chaotic mass population 
transhumance in EU countries only because of too large 
differences of gains in developed countries to emerging 
new EU entrants. This phenomenon, which seems to be 
favorable for the economy of developed countries, 
whereas in certain sectors and categories of hard and 
polluting activities benefit from cheap labor force, is a 
violation of international principles of business ethics. 
A good example of this phenomenon is that in Romania, 
the agricultural lands are uncultivated, while hundreds 
of thousands of Romanian people working in the same 
sector, in Western countries (especially in Spain and 
Italy). A second wave is the construction workers who 
arrived in Britain. Therefore will be required active 
policies to promote equal opportunities between women 
and men in the labor market, which will also contribute 
to enhance social cohesion.
3.1.  Case-Study at National Level — 
Romania
In Romania, for the implementation of sustainable 
development programs with greater economic effi-
ciency and sustainable on medium and long term, are 
required some priorities related on social initiative that 
we consider feasible:
1. Creation and implementation of effective models of 
work organization in companies assisted by digital 
systems, especially in the SMEs sector, leading to 
increased productivity and significantly increase 
the level of security assurance work. It is envisaged 
exchange of experience from developed countries 
in Europe where such models have already been 
implemented. Putting into practice these measures 
will have the advantage that workers in Romania 
will have skills compatible with their peers from 
developed EU countries;
2. Promoting monitoring systems of the labor move-
ment on fields and specialties between the EU coun-
tries and design “win–win” patterns for ensuring 
fairness and reciprocity benefits between partners;
3. Acquiring learning skills required in the labor mar-
ket trades, which must be achieved through a close 
collaboration between schools and SMEs, by creat-
ing workshops, laboratories, simulators where 
practitioners directly transfer these skills and abili-
ties to young workers;
4. Improving regulations on minorities, particularly 
the Rome minority, requiring emergency assistance 
by local authorities (municipalities) primarily by 
official registration and their inclusion in the legal 
market labor;
5. Improving through restructuring the public systems 
of social protection — currently bushy, inconsistent 
and unproductive — for sustaining the creation of 
new jobs in Romania;
6. Launching campaigns that promote the develop-
ment of SMEs in rural areas and small towns by 

 
Study on the Promotion and Implementation of Sustainable Development 
421
providing special facilities, so they should be able to 
provide self-administration, thereby also creating 
new jobs.
4.  Sustainable Technological Policies
Worldwide, a sufficient supply of affordable energy is 
essential for any economic activity. An example is the 
rapid growth of living standards that occurred during 
the 20th century due to cheap oil resources. But if 
access to high quality energy will shrink gradually — 
which is a likely consequence of the depletion of oil 
and other conventional resources worldwide — a nega-
tive impact on economic development would be imme-
diate and catastrophic. Analyses made by the Pentagon, 
the Ministry of Defence in Germany and the 
(International Monetary Fund) IMF suggest that the 
world economy is extremely vulnerable both to disrup-
tions in energy supply and the continuous increase in 
energy prices (Wijkman & Rockström, 2013).
Conclusion is that efforts should be intensified to 
broaden both the range of alternatives to conventional 
energy sources and energy efficiency measures for the 
development of new innovative technologies, environ-
mentally friendly, which plans to become a strategic 
priority in  sustainable development.
To achieve smart growth by enhancing the transfer 
of knowledge and innovation as drivers of sustainable 
growth in Europe was found to be needed improve-
ments in education and educational research perfor-
mance growth, promote innovation and knowledge 
transfer between EU countries, rational use of modern 
information and communication technologies and the 
transfer of research results and innovative ideas into 
practice. These measures have to generate new tech-
nologies and reliable products and services, which in 
turn generates economic growth, new jobs and help 
tackle structured challenges currently facing both 
European countries and international human society.
4.1.  Case-Study at National Level — 
Romania
In Romania, we consider it necessary several priorities 
related to technological component of  sustainable 
development, of which we mention:
1. Substantial improvement of business structure, pay-
ing particular attention to the entrepreneurship and 
innovative SMEs, creating “clean” technologies or 
providing environmentally friendly products, which 
are given tax incentives and reasonably financing, 
comparable to those granted in the developed 
European countries;
2. Develop joint partnership of modern technologi-
cal parks, operating on the principles of sustaina-
bility (solar parks, wind energy, plant cultivation 
energy etc.);
3. Developing technological clusters on economic 
chains with pilot projects funded with support from 
European funds.
5.  Sustainable Environmental Policies
Global awareness of the intensifying human activity 
increases the pressures on the environment, either through 
the uncontrolled consumption of resources and space, 
and by producing of waste that nature can not absorb 
without major negative effects, has led the international 
community to pass the initiation and supporting concrete 
actions to prevent, counteract, and eliminate disturbing 
factors repercussions of ecological balance. Because the 
main causes of degradation of the ecosphere are related 
to production systems and consumption of industrial 
society, it is imperative that solutions be initiated by the 
technical, economic and social positions integrated, giv-
ing it more importance and all other stakeholders, such as 
the social, moral and cultural ones. Unfortunately, in the 
technological and economic development, the environ-
ment and natural resources were considered as mere 
instruments serving growth and not as a natural support 
which needs maintenance and preservation. (Adapted 
from Smith et al., 2005.)
In Europe, economic recovery in the EU countries 
and sustainable socio-economic growth needs the exist-
ence of a competitive, long-term sustainable and effec-
tive economy, through rational use and conservation of 
natural resources, strong open to the introduction of 
ecological approaches and “clean” technologies, 
assisted by “smart” digital networks for communica-
tion and operation.
Special attention should also be given to extensive 
manufacturing and service sectors in SMEs to quickly 

422 
G. Plesoianu & A. C. Cirstea
transfer at large scale the R&D results and digital tech-
nology to the entire population.
A strategic importance have also activities against 
natural environmental degradation, leading to biodiver-
sity loss as a result of the reckless use of fossil resources.
Another strategic priority is to accelerate the transi-
tion to an efficient economy based on judicious use of 
natural resources and reduce pollution drastically, 
mainly carbon dioxide emissions. An essential objec-
tive is to give up economic growth based on irresponsi-
ble use and focus on renewable natural resources 
(mainly solar, wind, geothermal, biomass), thereby 
achieving a drastic reduction in CO2 emissions. All 
these actions will ensure economic competitiveness and 
energy security of EU countries.
5.1.  Case-Study at National Level — 
Romania
From the analysis of the existing situation in implement-
ing the strategies and policies for  sustainable develop-
ment in Romania resulted several priorities aligned with 
the Europe 2020 objectives, that we consider feasible 
for the environmental policy (Decalogue for Romania):
 1. Ensure effective and coordinated implementation 
of infrastructure projects, harmonized with existing 
networks in Central European countries, which will 
make a decisive contribution to increasing the effi-
ciency of transport systems in Romania, both for 
smooth movement of goods and people;
 2. Launch pilot projects to optimize urban transport in 
an intermodal effective approach that actually con-
tribute to streamlining the transport of persons and 
goods and the drastic reduction of carbon dioxide 
emissions generated by conventional vehicles;
 3. Priority development of energy infrastructure and 
intelligent transport, upgraded and fully intercon-
nected, assisted by digital monitoring systems, 
ensuring optimization of energy use;
 4. Regulation and implementation of stringent energy 
performance standards on urban constructions, 
civil engineering and monitoring through new mar-
ket instruments that continuously monitor the level 
of pollution and waste generated by these activities, 
to be taxed as additional costs for environment;
 5. Promoting organic farming biomass generators 
through priority allocation of European funds for 
agriculture and rural development and the gradual 
reduction of the allocation of funds to large indus-
trial farms that can sustain themselves. In this way, 
it will provide significant support to action of 
relaunching small and medium farms, which is the 
target of the new Common Agricultural Policy;
 6. Creating an integrated ecological and urban settle-
ment with systems of industrial and domestic waste 
collection and processing in biomass as alternative 
energy sources at the local level;
 7. Campaigns for accelerate the re-forestation, espe-
cially in the areas endangered by desertification 
and other vulnerable areas of the hill–mountain or 
around major towns;
 8. Provision of special facilities for SMEs active in 
environmental, biodiversity, non-conventional 
energy, “clean” technologies, the design and imple-
mentation of “green” as well as engineering design 
and consulting firm specializing in sustainable 
development and sustainable enterprise;
 9. Promoting new market-based instruments to phase 
out subsidies for environmentally harmful emis-
sions activities and providing some documented 
cases of minorities exceptions and disadvantaged 
areas;
10. Implementing a set of coherent and flexible fiscal 
mechanisms, to stimulate oriented greening pro-
duction technologies, processing and consumption 
and rewarding SMEs by facilitating organic pro-
cessing of their products or services.
6.  Comparative Analysis of Sustainable 
Development Models between 
Romania and Global Vision
Next, we present a comparative analysis between the 
TSA Earth Policy Institute in Washington USA, pre-
sented in the report “Plan B” and the Sustainable 
Development Strategy of Romania — Horizons 2013–
2020–2030, in effect, developed in 2008.
A synoptic and synthetic presentation of this analy-
sis is shown in the table below, developed by the 
authors, which has considered as comparison criteria 
the vision, overall strategy and priority objectives.

 
Study on the Promotion and Implementation of Sustainable Development 
423
Table 1:  Comparative analysis of sustainable developments models between Romania and global vision 
Plan B — Lester brown earth policy institute
Romanian sustainable development strategy 2013–2020–2030
VISION
VISION
Global vision, pragmatic, and operational oriented sustainable 
solutions.
Detailed bureaucratic approach of the EU Sustainable 
Development Strategy, the 2006 version with some specific 
 elements for Romania.
STRATEGY
STRATEGY
Pragmatic strategies for four major interconnected strategic areas 
that can become reality.
General strategic assessments and qualitative measures and levels 
below the EU, even in 2030.
OBJECTIVES
OBJECTIVES
I. Environment
1. 80% reduction in CO2 emissions by 2020,
  Increase energy efficiency by restructuring the transport 
sector;
  Stopping emissions from the energy sector classic fossil 
fuels, (oil, coal, natural gas) and the gradual replacement 
with renewable energy (wind, solar, geothermal).
2.  Restoring natural systems of the planet by: reforestation, soil 
conservation, regeneration of fish shoals, stabilize 
groundwater.
I. Environment
1.  Skyline 2020. National Objective: To reach the average level of 
EU countries on the main parameters for responsible 
 management of natural resources.
2.  Skyline 2030. National Objective: Approximation significant 
environmental performance of other EU Member States.
II. Social component
1.  Stabilizing population and eradicating poverty through 
 community action and recovery of natural systems of the 
planet, which will help eradicate poverty by creating jobs. 
Eradicating poverty leads to stabilization of population and 
 cultural efforts to accelerate the sizing of families 
(less numerous).
Final indicator: The ability to feed 8 Billion people and reach a 
 balance eco-food in 2020.
II. Social component
1.  Skyline 2020. National Objective: To promote consistency in 
the new legislative and institutional framework, the EU norms 
and standards relating to social inclusion, equal opportunities 
and actively supporting disadvantaged categories
2.  Skyline 2030. National Objective: To come close to the average 
level of other EU member states in terms of social cohesion 
and quality of social services.
III. Economic component
1.  Assigning additional expenditure of about $ 200 billion 
 annually to restore the natural systems of the planet.
Sources may come entirely from updating the concept of national 
security and the reallocation of a portion of the security budget 
of the major powers; only the reduction of military arsenals 
 currently unworkable and unnecessary.
III. Economic component
1.  Skyline 2020. National Objective: Decoupling growth from 
environmental degradation by reversing the relationship 
between resource consumption and value creation.
2.  Skyline 2030. National Objective: Proximity to the average 
level of EU countries in terms of sustainable production and 
consumption.
IV. Technological component
1.  Restructuring the energy sector based on “clean” energy and 
renewable energy through green certificates, additional carbon 
taxation, economic offset by lower income taxes.
2.  Proposal to introduce a carbon tax of $200/t by 2020, 
 accompanied by gradual clearing taxation.
IV. Technological component
1.  Skyline 2020. To ensure the efficient and safe of national 
energy system, reaching the current average level of the EU in 
the intensity and energy efficiency.
2.  Skyline 2030. National Objective: Align the average performance 
of the EU climate and energy indicators, fulfilling commitments 
for reducing emissions of greenhouse gas emissions in line with 
international agreements and Community rules and implement 
adaptation measures to climate change.

424 
G. Plesoianu & A. C. Cirstea
In the present context, the main lines of action for 
ensuring in Romania the economic recovery and for our 
country to become an active, competitive and respected 
partner, are related to the existence of a  Sustainable 
Development Strategy for boost the economic crisis 
and stimulate domestic and foreign investors’ participa-
tion in implementing social and economic policies for 
sustainable development.
Developing an own strategy for sustainable devel-
opment by involving real macroeconomic authorities is 
necessary because in this way, every investor will know 
the details of the offer investment, the economic sectors 
considered as priorities for economic recovery and sus-
tainable development concept by Romanian creating 
sustainable business in the medium and long term.
Based on these approaches and consistent measures 
of support, investors may participate on equal terms in 
various development projects whose goals are known 
and accepted.
In conclusion, the investment policy of our country 
should be so oriented as to ensure macroeconomic sta-
bility, sustainable economic growth based on sustaina-
ble business environment and oriented on rational and 
efficient growth rates.
We believe that a competitive advantage can be 
preserved in Romania, especially because it have a rela-
tively cheap labor force and skilled environment, an 
advantage that should not be missed in the promotion 
of economic and social recovery process.
Also, in the context of the transfer to a model of 
sustainable development Romania needs to promote a 
set of pragmatic approaches based on the methodology 
of (Regulatory Impact Assessment) RIA, by develop-
ing interdisciplinary impact studies for policies in 
Romania.
Romanian legislation is still in constant change and 
accept too many exceptions and changes, which led to a 
inconsistent conglomerate in legislation, affecting busi-
ness and citizens, creating excessive bureaucracy with 
chain effects on stakeholders to all levels of society.
A representative example is the bushy and restric-
tive tax system with changes almost daily, which is 
very hard to bear, both for businesses and citizens. Tax 
Code is changing and complicating in a nearly frantic 
pace, based on lobbying influences without preliminary 
assessment in practice through impact assessment RIA, 
generating adverse effects, such as excessive 
consumption of time for taxpayers, accompanied by 
significant unnecessary expense, translated into an 
unsustainable and inefficient model. This situation indi-
rectly contributed significantly to the deindustrializa-
tion of Romania and to the fall of agro-food sector, the 
appearance of landlords and poor quality foreign inves-
tors and foreign banks, which turned Romania from an 
exporter in an importer of goods and services.
This situation necessarily requires the development 
of macroeconomic impact studies that substantiate 
judicious directions of future development in Romania.
Currently, although RIA has been proposed by 
international assistance, there is not yet a professional 
body, specialized in interdisciplinary RIA studies 
impact at the macroeconomic level and existing bodies 
empowered as the Legislative Council and the 
Government General Secretary and Public Policy Units 
within ministries are still in a phase of bureaucratic 
hesitation in apprehending details of laws impact. A 
representative example can be the aggressive and 
changing tax system, with strong effects on SMEs, 
which are not encouraged to develop profitable manu-
facturing and service activities.
In our opinion, the aforementioned elements can be 
a challenge to institutionalize the elaboration of profes-
sionally consistent regulatory impact assessment stud-
ies, in accordance with the methodology agreed at EU 
level to substantiate all strategic requirements and/or all 
those causing discrimination among both businesses 
and citizens, as a pre-requisite for moving to a model of 
sustainable development, in accordance with interna-
tionally accepted principles in the field.
7. Concluding Remarks
In this new approach to  sustainable development as a 
public policy that promotes performance, modern and 
sustainable management, which we consider a premise 
for a priority strategic vision for Romania, we present 
below some opinions and proposals that emerged from 
our research:
1. Progress in studying the evolution of the concept of 
“sustainable development” has led us, on the basis 
of a comparative analysis, to complex and inte-
grated approach of this concept, which aims to 
integrate four systems: economic, social, natural, 

 
Study on the Promotion and Implementation of Sustainable Development 
425
and technological concept unanimously accepted 
by experts politicians and business;
2. Interpretation of the evolution of “ sustainable devel-
opment” concept has led us to opt for an integrated 
strategy, agreed during the 40 years of debate, which 
aggregate between the four aforementioned systems;
3. Review by updating and completing the National 
Strategy for Sustainable Development of Romania 
— Horizons 2013–2020–2030, by introducing the 
concept of the four integrated systems and the 
elaboration of benchmarking analysis for assessing 
the progress achieved to date, and on this basis, 
development of a new cross-sectors development 
program, updated and aggregated for Sustainable 
Development of Romania until 2030;
4. Designing a strategic model and its implementation 
methodology with interdisciplinary approach that 
takes into account the socio-economic, environ-
ment and natural resources as well as existing and 
potential technological system, as a new paradigm 
devoted to implementation of the new sectoral and 
aggregate Sustainable Development of Romania 
with horizons in 2020–2030;
5. Following our research revealed that in Romania mac-
roeconomic and regulatory stability is a prerequisite 
for the implementation of a Sustainable Development 
Program as a key factor for achieving the goal of a 
sustainable economy and efficiency modern market, 
in microeconomic and social practice;
6. Recent developments in the socio-economic envi-
ronment in Romania, under international financial 
crisis and especially those in Europe, raises seri-
ous issues and imperative requirements to effec-
tively manage human resources available and 
require coherent and appropriate strategies under 
the responsibility of the Government to counter-
act poverty and social disparities that affect health 
and work capacity of disadvantaged populations.
For enhancement of the natural resources and 
strengthening of sustainable consumption and produc-
tion, we believe that Romania will have to consider 
these strategic development axes:
• 
Reinforce agriculture sector; In this area, the sources 
provided by the structural funds are relatively gener-
ous and should be directed primarily to small and 
medium-sized farms to produce crops and livestock, 
ensuring the domestic regional market share of food 
needed for household consumption from national 
sources, in accordance, and consensus with recently 
launched Common Agricultural Policy of the EU;
• 
To launch campaigns for reforestation on surfaces 
exposed to degradation by erosion, which will make 
an important contribution to maintaining temperate 
climate and reducing carbon emissions, and pro-
moting rational use of diversified products that 
ensure their professional exploitation of forests;
• 
To stimulate the development of non-agricultural 
activities in rural communities and small towns, 
mainly using cohesion and development funds 
from the EU budget and contributions in order to 
rejuvenate and re-populate these areas, taking into 
account the benefits of returning to a number of 
Romanian citizens who have emigrated and will be 
interested to return, if they have secured and attrac-
tive jobs in Romania.
Another important issue for the operation of these 
genuine strategic growth engines of Romania, absolutely 
necessary and requested by civil society is cutting red 
tape and modernize business and investment systems by 
taking models of best practices from the developed coun-
tries of Europe, such as the UK, Germany, France, etc.
All these examples show that, in a pragmatic and 
sustainable approach with relatively little investment 
and substantial contributions from European funds can 
revive and complete the programs of vital importance 
for sustainable development.
References
Barac, L. (2009), Management Judiciar, Bucharest: Ed 
Hamangiu.
Brown, L. R. (Earth Policy Institute), (2011), Lumea pe mar-
ginea prăpastiei — Cum să prevenim colapsul ecologic 
şi economic, Bucharest: Ed. Tehnică.
Leca, A. & Statie, E. (1997), Dezvoltarea durabilă, Aspecte 
conceptuale şi elemente de strategie, (15), 39–51.
Soderbaum, P. (2004), Democracy, markets and sustainable 
development: The european union as an example, Journal 
of European Enviroment, Wiley InterScience, 14(16), 
p. 343.
Wijkman, A. & Rockstrom, J. (2013), Falimentarea naturii — 
negarea limitelor planetei, Bucharest: Ed. Compania.

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

427
Index
Symbols
2020 strategy, 19
Academic library management, 140
active anti-claim management, 392–394
adoption readiness, 89, 93
average productivity, 319, 320, 325–327
Banking Sector, 275
Bologna Process, 79–81, 83–86
Brasov, 219–225
business environment, 261–263, 269, 270
business opportunities, 263, 266, 269
business process reengineering, 203–205, 208, 210
case study, 3, 4, 9
challenges, 79, 82–85, 87
change management, 355, 356
cluster, 47–51, 297–301
combination, 126, 129
communication style, 275–284
community, 25, 26, 28, 30, 31
comparative management, 355–357, 409, 
411
competitive advantage, 89–92, 94
competitiveness, 297, 298, 341–346
conﬂ icts, 303, 307, 308, 311
consultancy, 265, 268–270
corporate alumni, 55–61
corporate culture, 35–40, 42
corporate management, 329, 330
corporate social responsibility, 25, 26
corporate sustainability, 25, 26
creativity, 19, 21, 23
crisis, 261, 262, 264, 266–269
culture, 35–42
database, 235–237, 240
developing study programs, 97, 105
difﬁ culties, 261–264, 266, 269, 270
digital age, 146
digital natives, 146
diversity management, 19, 23
economic development, 213
economic growth, 297, 301
ecotourism, 400–405, 407
Eco touristic operator, 399
ecotouristic product, 399
educational management, 409, 410, 413, 414
effectiveness, 203, 207, 208, 210, 211
efﬁ ciency, 151, 152, 203, 204, 206–208, 210, 211
efﬁ cient market hypothesis, 159, 164
e-learning process, 117
emergent economy, 290
employees, 381–388
energy economy, 341, 343, 346
energy market, 344, 345
English as a lingua franca, 98, 105
enterprise, 341–346
entrepreneurial education, 185–187
entrepreneurs, 219–224
entrepreneurship, 167, 185–188, 191–193, 213–216, 
219–225, 227–232
entrepreneurship education, 192
environment, 25–29, 31, 32
environment business, 219, 224
equal opportunities, 22, 23
e-Services, 143, 145, 148
European, 373–376, 378–380
European Commission Initiatives, 146
European integration, 266, 270, 409
European Social Fund, 227, 232

428 
Index
evaluation, 410, 412, 414
Externalization, 126
extracurricular activities, 355–361
factors, 373–376, 378, 380
ﬁ nancial incentives, 381, 387
food-hubs, 366–369
food safety, 365, 369
food security, 363, 364
forecasts, 157
Germany, 341–346
globalization, 3, 4, 9, 11, 14, 15, 67–70, 73–76
higher education, 67–70, 72, 75, 76, 107–113, 117–120, 
122
Higher education governance, 97, 99
Human resource, 181, 182
human resource management, 175–178, 180, 236–239, 
303–311
Impact Assessment, 47, 52
implementation guide, 297, 299
Individual Performance Appraisal, 313
inequality, 14
inﬂ uence, 373–376, 378
inﬂ uence factors, 386
information, 159–166
information entropy, 159, 163–166
information society, 143
information system, 235, 237
innovation, 297–301
intangible assets, 349–352, 354
integrated alumni management, 55
Integrated Model of RAM, 369
internalization, 126
internationalization, 67–74, 76, 77
international strategy, 67, 70, 76
knowledge based economy, 175–177, 297, 298, 301
Knowledge based enterprise, 175–178, 180–182
knowledge based function, 175–177
knowledge based management, 182
knowledge dynamics, 125, 126, 133, 134
knowledge management, 126, 128–130, 134, 135, 143–145, 
147, 148
large Corporate Boards, 3, 10
leadership, 89, 91, 92, 95, 96, 273, 275–281, 283, 284
leadership styles, 275, 276, 278–280, 284
learning, 81–86
learning organization, 125–131, 134, 135
management, 35–37, 40–42, 195–202, 227–232, 243, 248, 
249, 251–253, 329, 330, 374, 379, 380
Management Challenges, 195
managerial difﬁ culties, 197, 198, 201
marginal productivity, 319, 320, 325–327
measurement, 47, 49, 51
medium sized enterprise, 203, 211
multilingualism, 104, 105
multinational companies, 329, 330, 332, 335–337
mutation of capitalism, 16
neo liberalism, 11, 14
new ﬁ rms, 221
new Kaiser Wilhelm tunnel, 391, 392
New Public Management, 137
number of employees, 319–321, 323–328
objectives, 203–211
oligarchs, 11, 16
organizational behaviour, 93, 95
organizational change, 381, 382, 384–388
Organization Culture, 289–295
paradigm shift in education, 85, 86
performance, 36, 41, 203–208, 210, 211, 303, 305, 306, 
309–311, 373–375, 378, 379, 409–414
performance management, 313–316
personnel management, 309
personnel policy, 319, 321, 324, 327
physical production, 319–325, 327, 328
Preventive anti-claim management, 393, 394
private institutions, 108–113
processual, 204, 206–209, 211
project management, 313, 314, 316
projects, 373–376, 378, 380
project teams, 313, 315
protected area, 400
public administration, 151–157
public institutions, 373, 374, 379
public value, 152, 155, 156
quality culture, 86
quality evaluation models, 117
quality management, 399–403, 405, 407
railway tunnel, 392
R&D function, 175–177, 180

 
Index 
429
redesign of management system, 203, 205, 206, 211
reform, 137–140
Regional Agrifood Markets (RAM), 363
regional development, 237, 297, 299–301
Regulatory Impact Assessment, 368, 369
resistance to change, 381, 383, 384, 386, 388
responsiveness, 289–295
risk management, 151–155, 157
Romania, 25–30, 110–112, 219, 221, 224, 341–346
Romania business environment, 329, 330, 332, 333, 336
Romania’s higher education sector, 89
rural area, 235–242
school education, 409, 410
school manager, 409, 411–413
small and medium-sized enterprises, 289, 290
Smart Economy, 3
SME policy, 171–173
SMEs, 167, 169–173, 261–264, 266–270
SMEs evaluation, 349
social capital, 47–50
social economy, 227, 228, 231, 232, 243–248, 252, 253, 
255
social economy organizations, 244, 246–248, 253
social enterprise, 213–217, 243, 246–248, 258
social entrepreneurship, 243, 244, 246, 253, 256, 257
socialization, 125, 126
Strategic planning, 305
supplemental claims calculation, 391–394, 396, 397
sustainability, 45, 47–52
sustainable business, 47, 50
sustainable development, 25, 26, 29, 402, 403, 405, 417, 
419–422, 424, 425
sustainable economic policy, 418
sustainable environment policy, 421
sustainable social policy, 420
sustainable technological policy, 421
system, 36–42
systemic approach to organizations, 40
tax evasion, 12, 14–16
training, 261, 268–270, 305–307, 309, 310
training function, 175, 176, 179
universities, 137–140
university, 381, 386–388
university alumni, 55–61
university governance, 89, 90, 95, 96
university management, 101, 356, 361
work force productivity, 319–321, 323, 324
work productivity elasticity, 321, 323, 327
young entrepreneurs, 190

