CHANGING TAPS 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Basic plumbing skills would be useful. Good agility and 
dexterity are essential to work in cramped conditions. 
  
 
 
Ensure all metal pipes and the bath (if metal) are bonded to 
a common earth. Take care when using a blowlamp. Keep 
naked flames away from flammable material. Make sure that
the water is off and well drained before placing a lead lamp 
near the underside of the taps. If possible, use a water-
resistant double-insulated lamp. When working upside down,
wear eye protection. 
  
 
 
Changing taps can give a new lease of life to a bathroom 
suite or kitchen, and modern fittings make the job a lot 
easier than it used to be.  
  
The most difficult part is removing old taps which, in 
bathrooms, may be puttied in. On a workbench it would be a 
fairly easy job but the inaccessibility makes it awkward, so 
don't rush into it. Invest a little time in getting comfortable, 
and you will work faster with less strain. Get a good light so 
you can see exactly what you are doing and, if you have to 
lie on your back, use a cushion for your head. 
 
2  -  Getting Started  
Make sure you turn the water off properly before you begin. 
Once the old taps are out, things become easier because you
can use new, user-friendly fittings. 
 
 
 
If you are fitting new taps at the same time as fitting a new 
sink or bath, it is easier to fit the taps before you put the 
sink/bath in place. Sometimes you can attach whole sections
of pipework as well.  
 
 
 
Not all taps are suitable for British-style low-pressure 
systems which use a tank in the loft. So check before 
buying. Continental taps are made for mains pressure. If 
you have an unvented water cylinder or combination boiler, 
then Continental taps should work well. If you have a tank in
the loft, it is best to stick to British-made taps.  
 
3  - Service valves 

Tap connectors can be 
substituted for integral 
service valves to provide an 
easy means of shutting off 
the water. The top end fits 
onto the tap and the bottom 
end is a compression fitting 
for the pipe. The valve can b
turned off for re-wash
and servicing the tap (1).  
e
ering 
 
 
 
If access is difficult, use Speedfit hand-tightenable tap 
connectors with integral 'O' rings. The pipe pushes into the 
end of the fitting once it has been screwed onto the tap. 
Fibre washers can be held in place by wrapping a few turns 
of PTFE tape around them and the top of the connector. This 
also helps make a better seal.  
 
4  - Preliminary checks 
New taps are all made to standard dimensions, but check 
the hole distances in old baths or sinks, as they aren't 
always compatible with mixer taps. Mixer-tap holes for baths
should be approximately 180mm (7.25in) apart, and 195mm
(7.75in) apart for sinks. If they aren't standard, you will 
need to buy adjustable union taps with swivels.  
 
 
 
Check that the spout is long enough to deliver water into the 
bath or basin without dribbling over the side. If you have an 
old bath with non-standard tap-hole centres, you can buy a 
mixer with adjustable cranked swivel tails. Alternatively, fit 
individual taps.  
 
 
 
You may also find that the holes in a basin, sink or bath are 
square (set like diamonds). A new smaller bodied tap 
doesn't always cover the hole. The only way around this is to
buy some chrome cover plates and put them on first.  
 
 
 
Some bath taps are connected directly to lead pipes with a 
wiped joint. The lead can be cut back to a straight section 
and joined with a special mechanical fitting. Don't try to 
solder copper fittings on to the lead. Where the lead goes 
back to a galvanized-iron pipe, it will be easier to unscrew 
the lead completely and use new flexible tails or lengths of 
plastic pipe.  
 
 

 
If you want to fit a bath/shower mixer, make sure that both 
 
 - Removing old taps 
 pipes through the taps. If 
ith 
 
Use a claw spanner to undo 
ith 
 
 
You can cut a notch in a piece 
ver 
 
 
 
emove old taps and the complete waste fitting if the new 
the existing taps are fed from the low-pressure tank-fed 
system. A quick check can be made by turning on the tap
and holding your thumb over the end immediately. If the 
pressure pushes your thumb off it is most likely to be a 
mains-fed tap.  
 
5 
Turn off the water and drain the
possible, open other taps lower on the system to drain any 
remaining water in the pipes. Check that the water is 
completely shut off - it isn't easy or pleasant to work w
water still dribbling through the pipes.  
 
 
the tap connectors and back 
nuts on the underside of the 
sink, bath or basin (2). If the 
taps begin to turn, get 
somebody to hold them w
a wrench or block of wood.  
 
of wood and use it as a le
to hold the taps steady. 
Alternatively, mark two holes 
where the spouts are 
positioned and drill two holes
so the piece of wood can be 
slipped over both spouts to 
hold the taps steady (3).  
 
R
taps incorporate a pop-up waste.  
 
 
 

If the taps won't budge, it is 
often easier to cut through 
the brass back-nut with a 
hacksaw, and then prise the 
nut open with an old 
screwdriver. When this is 
impossible due to lack of 
space, the taps can be drilled 
from the top (4).  
 
 
 
Select a drill of the same diameter as the back-nut under 
the tap. This will be a 3/4in drill for a 1/2in basin or sink tap 
or a 1in drill for a 3/4in bath tap.  
 
 
 
Remove the whole of the head-work and carefully drill 
straight down through the body of the tap. Be careful that 
the drill doesn't snag. It is best to use a drill with torque 
control if you aren't sure you can hold it.  
 
 
 
Don't try turning basin taps in their holes while you hold the 
back-nut steady or you might damage the china or enamel.  
 
 
 
Undo the head mechanisms of taps before fitting and check 
the inside is free of swarf. A surprising number of new taps 
contain debris which can damage 'O' rings and washers.  
 
6  - Fitting new taps 
Single taps sometimes twist when they are turned off. They 
should have anti-rotation washers to hold them steady. 
Alternatively, you can bed the taps in silicone sealant and let
the whole assembly dry for 24 hours.  
 
 
 
Clean the area around the taps. If the bath is metal and 
there are signs of rust, use a rust remover before fitting the 
taps. Fit the new taps by placing them through the hole with 
the rubber anti-rotation washer on the upper side. Hot goes 
on the left, cold on the right.  
 
 
 

It is easier to reach the far tap under a bath if you unscrew 
the overflow pipe from the hole in the bath. Remember to 
replace it afterwards.  
 
 
 
Place a plastic top-hat spacer washer (if fitting to a thin 
sink) on the underside and hand-tighten the back nuts. Hold 
the tap steady and tighten the back nuts with a wrench or 
box spanner.  
 
 
 
If the old pipework fits, you 
can use it, but replace the 
fibre washers in the tap 
connectors (5). If the old 
pipes don't fit, or are 
awkward, it is easier to cut 
the pipes back and fit new 
connectors.  
 
 
 
The easiest connectors to fit are the braided flexible type. 
Make sure they have rubber or fibre washers in them before 
you screw them on.  
 
 
 
Single-hole mixers have f
flexible copper tails (6). Yo
can bend them slightly bu
don't try bending them any 
more than 45 degrees or you 
will kink the pipe. The tails 
are easier to connect because 
they are longer, and you ca
see what you're doing. Us
compression fittings or p
fit fittings to join the 
pipework to the taps.  
airly 
u 
t 
n 
e 
ush-
 
 
 

Two-hole mixer taps need to 
be sealed above the bath or 
sink with the special washers 
provided. Check the holes a
a standard distance apart (7
re
).
 
 
 
Connect the tap end of flexible connectors before attaching 
them to the supply pipes.  
 
 
 
Flush pipes through with the taps open before closing them 
off. If a tap doesn't shut off properly, don't force it or you 
will damage the washer or disc. Open it up fully, run the 
water and then close it again. This should clear any debris.  
 
7  - Three-hole basin and bidet mixers 
Assembling a three-hole mixer is done by placing each 
section through the holes in the basin or bidet and 
connecting the pipes underneath (8). Full instructions come 
with the tap.  
 
 

 
 
8  - Final checks 
If you get a leak there is always a reason, so don't try to 
force the nut on further than it should go. It is better to turn 
off the water and undo the fitting so you can see exactly 
where the problem lies. Examine the surfaces of the metal 
and look closely at the sealing washers. Check the pipes are 
squarely aligned and screw the tap connectors back on. You 
should find this does the trick!  
 

