

P ENGUIN BOOKS 
CHANCES ARE . . . 
Michael Kaplan studied European history at Harvard and 
Oxford. After a stint as producer/director at WGBH, he has 
been an award-winning writer and ﬁlmmaker for corpora­
tions, governments, museums, and charities. He lives near 
Edinburgh, Scotland, with his wife and son. 
Ellen Kaplan trained as a classical archaeologist and has 
taught math, biology, Greek, Latin, and history. She and her 
husband, Robert, run the Math Circle, a nonproﬁt founda­
tion dedicated to joyous participatory learning, and are the 
authors of The Art of the Inﬁnite. 

Michael Kaplan and Ellen Kaplan | Penguin Books 

I
! 
CHANCES ARE . . . 
ADVENTURES N PROBABILITY 

PENGUIN BOOKS 
Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. • Penguin 
Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) • Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, 
England • Penguin Ireland, 25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books 
Ltd) • Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia 
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) • Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community 
Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi – 110 017, India • Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, 
Mairangi Bay, Auckland 1311, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) • Penguin 
Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa 
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England 
First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin, 
a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. 2006 
Published in Penguin Books 2007 
Copyright © Michael Kaplan and Ellen Kaplan, 2006 
All rights reserved 
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission 
to reprint excerpts from the following copyrighted works: 
“Law Like Love” from Collected Poems by W. H. Auden. Copyright 1940 
and renewed 1968 by W. H. Auden. Used by permission of Random House, Inc. 
“Choruses from ‘The Rock’ ” from Collected Poems 1909–1962 by T. S. Eliot. 
Copyright 1936 by Harcourt, Inc. and renewed 1964 by T. S. Eliot. Reprinted by permission of 
Harcourt, Inc. and Faber and Faber Ltd.  
“Hope” by Randall Jarrell. Copyright 1945 by Randall Jarrell, renewed 1990 by Mary von 
Schrader Jarrell. Reprinted by permission of Mary von Schrader Jarrell. 
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGED THE HARDCOVER EDITION AS FOLLOWS: 
Kaplan, Michael. 
Chances are— : adventures in probability / Michael Kaplan and Ellen Kaplan. 
p. cm. 
Includes index. 
ISBN: 1-4406-8087-6  
1. Probabilities—Popular works. I. Kaplan, Ellen. II. Title. 
QA273.15.K37 2006 
519.2—dc22 
2005058471 
The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means with­
out the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized 
electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materi­
als. Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated. 

To Jane, who likes probability, 
Bob, who likes chance, 
and Felix, who likes risk 

Acknowledgments 
W
e live in wonderful times, where shared interests can make new 
friends instantly across the globe. We want most of all to thank the 
many people who agreed to be interviewed for this book, or who offered 
their particular expertise in person or by telephone, letter, or e-mail. We 
came to regard the enthusiastic help of strangers as one certainty in an 
uncertain world. 
Peter Ginna, friend to both generations, provided the impetus that 
set the work going. Each of us relied to such a degree on the talents avail­
able in our own homes that this should be considered the work of an ex­
tended family. 
Rick Kot and his associates at Viking saw the manuscript through to 
its ﬁnal form with enthusiasm, professionalism, and dispatch. They, like 
the others, helped give the book its virtues; its faults are ours alone 


Contents 
Acknowledgments vii 
1 | Thinking 
2 | Discovering 
12 
3 | Elaborating 
33 
4 | Gambling 
57 
5 | Securing 
83 
6 | Figuring 
111 
7 | Healing 
149 
8 | Judging 
176 
9 | Predicting 
207 
10 | Fighting 
238 
11 | Being 
277 
Index 
303 
1 


CHANCES ARE . . . 


1 | Thinking 
The present is a ﬂeeting moment, the past is no more; and our prospect of 
futurity is dark and doubtful. This day may possibly be my last: but the 
laws of probability, so true in general, so fallacious in particular, still 
allow about ﬁfteen years. 
—Gibbon, Memoirs 
W
e search for certainty and call what we ﬁnd destiny. Everything is 
possible, yet only one thing happens—we live and die between 
these two poles, under the rule of probability. We prefer, though, to call 
it Chance: an old familiar embodied in gods and demons, harnessed in 
charms and rituals. We remind one another of fortune’s ﬁckleness, each 
secretly believing himself exempt. I am master of my fate; you are dicing 
with danger; he is living in a fool’s paradise. 
Until the 1660s, when John Graunt, a bankrupt London draper, pro­
posed gauging the vitality of his city by its Bills of Mortality, there were 
only two ways of understanding the world: inductively, by example; or 
deductively, by axiom. Truths were derived either from experience—and 
thus hostages to any counterexample lying in ambush—or were beauti­
ful abstractions: pure, consistent, crystalline, but with no certain rele­
vance to the world of mortals. These two modes of reasoning restricted 
not just the answers we had about life, but the questions we could ask. 
Beyond, all else was chance, fortune, fate—the riddle of individual 
existence. 
Graunt was the ﬁrst to unearth truths from heaps of data. His inven­
tion, eventually known as statistics, avoided alike the basic question of 
Being (“all things are possible”) and the uniqueness of individual exis­
1 

2 
Chances Are . . . 
tence (“only one thing happens”). It got around the problem of uncer­
tainty by asking: “Well, exactly how right do you need to be just now?” 
In that same inventive decade, Blaise Pascal was working both on 
dice-throwing puzzles and on his own, far more compelling, problem: 
“What shall I do to be saved?” Again, neither induction nor deduction 
could provide the answers: God and the dice alike refuse to be bound by 
prior behavior. And yet, and yet . . . in  the millennia since Creation, the 
world has tended to be a certain way, just as, over a thousand throws of a 
die, six tends to come up a certain proportion of times. Pascal was the 
ﬁrst to see that there could be laws of probability, laws neither ﬁt for Mo­
saic tablets nor necessarily true for any one time and place, but for life en 
masse; not for me today, but for mankind through all of time. 
The combination of the tool of statistics and the theory of probabil­
ity is the underpinning of almost all modern sciences, from meteorology 
to quantum mechanics. It provides justiﬁcation for almost all purposeful 
group activity, from politics to economics to medicine to commerce to 
sports. Once we leave pure mathematics, philosophy, or theology be­
hind, it is the unread footnote to every concrete statement. 
And yet it goes against all human instinct. Our natural urge in seek­
ing knowledge is either for deductive logical truth (“Happiness is the 
highest good”) or for inductive truths based on experience (“Never play 
cards with a man called Doc”). We want questions to fall into one of 
these categories, which is one of many reasons most of us ﬁnd probabil­
ity alien and statisticians unappealing. They don’t tell us what we want 
to know: the absolute truth. Their science is right everywhere but wrong 
in any one place: like journalism, it is true except in any case of which we 
have personal knowledge. And, while we may be willing to take a look at 
the numbers, we rebel at the idea of being one—a “mere statistic.” 
But there are people in the world who can dance with data, people 
for whom this mass of incomplete uncertainties falls beautifully into 
place, in patterns as delightful and revealing as a ﬂock of migrating 
swans. Graunt, Pascal, the Reverend Thomas Bayes, Francis Galton, 
R. A. Fisher, John von Neumann—all are ﬁgures a little to the side of life, 
perhaps trying to puzzle their way toward a grasp of human affairs that 

Thinking 
3 
the more sociable could acquire glibly through maxim and proverb. The 
people who use probability today—market-makers, cardplayers, magi­
cians, artiﬁcial-intelligence experts, doctors, war-game designers—have 
an equally interesting and oblique view of the human affairs they analyze 
and, to an extent, control. 
If you have ever taken a long car journey with an inquisitive child, you 
will know most of the difficulties with formal reasoning. Questions like 
“How do you know that?” and “What if it’s not like that?” pose real 
problems—problems that have kept philosophy hard at work for over 
two thousand years. “How do you know?” is particularly tricky: you 
“know” that protons are composed of quarks, or that the President 
spoke in Duluth because he’s courting the union vote—but is this 
“knowing” the same as knowing that the angles of a triangle add up to 
180 degrees, or that you have a slight itch behind your left ear? Intuition 
says they are not the same—but how do you know? 
This was the great question in Plato’s time, particularly because the 
Sophists insisted that it was no question at all: their idea was that persua­
sion was the basis of knowledge, and that therefore rhetoric was the form 
of proof. The Sophist Gorgias promised to give his students “such ab­
solute readiness for speaking, that they should be able to convince their 
audience independently of any knowledge of the subject.” Conviction was 
enough, since, he believed, nothing actually existed; or if it did, it could 
not be known; or if it could, it was inexpressible. This view offered the 
advantage that we could know everything the same way—protons to 
presidents—but had the disadvantage that we knew nothing very well. 
Plato and his circle hated the Sophists for their tort-lawyer cockiness 
and their marketing of wisdom, but most of all for their relativism. Pla­
tonists never accept that things are so just because someone has had the 
last word; some things are so because they have to be. A well-constructed 
pleading does not make 3 equal 5. Plato’s student Euclid arranged his 
books of geometry into deﬁnitions of objects; axioms, the basic state­
ments of their relations; and theorems, statements that can be proved by 
showing how they are only logical extensions of axioms. A demonstra­

4 
Chances Are . . . 
tion from Euclid has a powerful effect on any inquiring mind; it takes a 
statement, often difficult to believe, and in a few steps turns this into 
knowledge as certain as “I am.” 
So why can’t all life be like Euclid? After all, if we could express every 
ﬁeld of inquiry as a consistent group of axioms, theorems, and proofs, 
even a president’s speech would have one, incontrovertible meaning. 
This was Aristotle’s great plan. The axioms of existence, he said, were 
matter and form. All things were the expression of form on matter, so 
the relationship between any two things could be deﬁned by the forms 
they shared. Mortality, dogness, being from Corinth, or being the prime 
mover of the universe—all were aspects of being that could be set in 
their proper, nested order by logical proof. Thus, in the famous ﬁrst syl­
logism of every textbook: 
All men are mortal. 
Socrates is a man. 
Therefore Socrates is mortal. 
This must be so; the conclusion is built into the deﬁnitions. Aristo-
tle’s syllogisms deﬁned the science of reasoning from his own time right 
up to the beginning of the seventeenth century. But there is an essential 
ﬂaw in deductive reasoning: the difference between the valid and the 
true. The rules for constructing a syllogism tell you whether a statement 
is logically consistent with the premises, but they tell you nothing about 
the premises themselves. The Kamchatkans believe that volcanoes are 
actually underground feasting places where demons barbecue whales: if 
a mountain is smoking, the demons are having a party; there is nothing 
logically wrong with this argument. So deductive logic is conﬁned to de­
scribing relations between labels, not necessarily truths about things. It 
cannot make something from nothing; like a glass of water for Japanese 
paper ﬂowers, it simply allows existing relationships to unfold and blos­
som. Today, its most widespread application is in the logic chip of every 
computer, keeping the details of our lives from crashing into contradic­
tion. But, as computer experts keep telling us, ensuring that the ma­
chines are not fed garbage is our responsibility, not theirs. The premises 
on which automated logic proceeds are themselves the result of human 

Thinking 
5 
conclusions about the nature of the world—and those conclusions can­
not be reached through deduction alone. 
You’ll remember that the other awkward question from the back seat 
was “What if it’s not like that?” Instinctively, we reason from example to 
principle, from objects to qualities. We move from seeing experience as a 
mere bunch of random stuff to positing the subtly ordered web of cause 
and effect that keeps us fascinated through a lifetime. But are we justi­
ﬁed in doing so? What makes our assumptions different from mere 
prejudice? 
Sir Francis Bacon fretted over this question at the turn of the seven­
teenth century, projecting a new science, cut loose from Aristotle’s apron 
strings and ready to see, hear, feel, and conclude for itself using a method 
he called “induction.” Bacon was Lord Chancellor, the senior judge of 
the realm, and he proceeded in a lawyerly way, teasing out properties 
from experience, then listing each property’s positive and negative in­
stances, its types and degrees. By cutting through experience in different 
planes, he hoped to carve away all that was inessential. Science, in his 
scheme, was like playing “twenty questions” or ordering a meal in a for­
eign language: the unknown relation was deﬁned by indirection, pro­
gressively increasing information by attempting to exclude error. 
Induction actually has three faces, each turned a slightly different 
way. The homely village version is our most natural form of reasoning: 
the proverb. “Don’t insult an alligator until you’re over the creek”; “A 
friend in power is no longer your friend.” Everything your daddy told 
you is a feat of induction, a crystal of permanent wisdom drawn out of 
the saturated solution of life. 
Induction’s second, more exalted face is mathematical: a method of 
amazing power that allows you to fold up the inﬁnite and put it in your 
pocket. Let’s say you want to prove that the total of the ﬁrst n odd num­
bers, starting from 1, is n2. Try it for the ﬁrst three: 1  3  5  
9  32; so far, so good. But you don’t want to keep checking individual 
examples; you want to know if this statement is true or false over all ex-
amples—the ﬁrst billion odd numbers, the ﬁrst googol odd numbers. 
Why not start by proving the case for the ﬁrst odd number, 1? Easy: 

6 
Chances Are . . . 
1  12. Now assume that the statement is true for an abstract number n; 
that is: 1  3  5  . . . up to n odd numbers will equal n2. It would 
probably help if we deﬁned what the nth odd number is: well, the nth 
even number would be 2n (since the evens are the same as the 2 times 
table), so the nth odd number is 2n  1 (since the ﬁrst odd, 1, comes be­
fore the ﬁrst even, 2). Now we need to show that if the statement is true 
for the nth odd number, it will also be true for the n  1st; that is: 
Assuming that 
1  3  5  . . .   2n  1  n2 
show that 
(1  3  5  . . .   2n  1)  (2n  1)  (n  1)2 
Let’s look more closely at that (n  1)2 on the right. If we do the 
multiplication, it comes out as n2  2n  1. But wait a minute: that’s 
the same as n2, the sum of the ﬁrst n odd numbers, plus 2n  1, the next 
odd number. So if our statement is true for n odd numbers it must be 
true for n  1. 
But, you may be asking, aren’t you just proving a relation between 
two imaginary things? How is this different from deduction? It’s differ­
ent because we already know the statement is true for the ﬁrst odd num­
ber, 1. Set n equal to 1; now we know it’s true for the second odd, 3; so we 
can set n equal to 2, proving the statement for the next odd, 5—and so on. 
We don’t need to look at every example, because all the examples are 
equivalent; we have constructed a rule that governs them all under the ab­
stract title n. Away they go, like a row of dominoes, rattling off to inﬁnity. 
The third, inscrutable, face of induction is scientiﬁc. Unfortunately, 
very little in the observable world is as easily deﬁned as an odd number. 
Science would be so much simpler if we could consider protons, or pri­
ons, or pandas under an abstract p and show that anything true for one 
is bound to be true for p  1. But of course we can’t—and this is where 
probability becomes a necessity: the things we are talking about, the 
forms applied to matter, are, like Aristotle’s axioms, deﬁned not by them­

Thinking 
7 
selves but by us. A number or a geometrical form is its own deﬁnition— 
a panda isn’t. 
Our approach to science follows Bacon’s: look and see, question and 
test. But there are deep questions hiding below these simple instruc­
tions. What are you looking for? Where should you look? How will you 
know you’ve found it? How will you ﬁnd it again? Every new observa­
tion brings with it a freight of information: some of it contains the vital 
fact we need for drawing conclusions, but some is plain error. How do 
we distinguish the two? By getting a sense of likely variation. 
This makes scientiﬁc induction a journey rather than an arrival; 
while every example we turn up may conﬁrm the assumption we have 
made about a cause, we will still never reach ultimate truth. Without 
repetition we could never isolate qualities from experience, but repeti­
tion on its own proves nothing. Simply saying “The sun is bright” re­
quires, in all honesty, the New Englander’s reply “Yep—so far.” 
All swans are white—until you reach Australia and discover the black 
swans paddling serenely. For science built on induction, the counterex­
ample is always the ruffian waiting to mug innocent hypotheses as they 
pass by, which is why the scientiﬁc method now deliberately seeks him 
out, sending assumptions into the zone of maximum danger. The best 
experiments deduce an effect from the hypothesis and then isolate it in 
the very context where it may be disproved. This falsiﬁability is what 
makes a hypothesis different from a belief—and science distinct from 
the other towers of opinion. 
For everyone, not just scientists, induction poses a further problem: 
we need to act on our conclusions. For those of us who must venture out 
into the world, wagering our goods on uncertain expectations, the coun­
terexample could well be the storm that sinks our ship, the war that 
wrecks our country. In human affairs, we cannot hope either to predict 
with certainty or to test with precision, so we instead try to match the 
complexity of the moment with the complexity of memory, of imagina­
tion, and of character. In studying history we are doing induction of 
a kitchen rather than laboratory style. When Plutarch contrasted the 

8 
Chances Are . . . 
characters of great Greeks and Romans, or Thomas à Kempis urged us to 
imitate Christ in all things, they were setting out a line of reasoning by 
which the complexities of life, seen through the equally complex ﬁlter of 
a virtuous character, could resolve into a simpler decision. 
But now that our village walls encompass the whole world, we have 
exemplars ranging from Mahatma Gandhi to General Patton, which 
shows the weakness of a purely humanist form of induction. We need a 
method of reasoning that can offer both the accountability of science 
and the humanities’ openness to untidy, fascinating life. If it is to be ac­
countable, it needs a way to make clear, falsiﬁable statements, or we are 
back wrangling with the Sophists. If it is to reﬂect life, it needs to em­
brace uncertainty, since that, above all else, is our lot. 
Woe’s me! woe’s me! In Folly’s mailbox 
Still laughs the postcard, Hope: 
Your uncle in Australia 
Has died and you are Pope, 
For many a soul has entertained 
A mailman unawares— 
And as you cry, Impossible, 
A step is on the stairs. 
—Randall Jarrell 
The science of uncertainty is probability; it deals with what is repeated 
but inconsistent. Its statements are not the deﬁnitive all or no of deduc­
tive logic but the nuanced: most, hardly, sometimes, and perhaps. It sepa­
rates normal from exceptional, predictable from random and determines 
whether an action is “worth it.” It is the science of risk, conjecture, and 
expectation—that is, of getting on with life. 
Yes, but why does probability have to be numerical? Both laypeople 
and mathematicians groan at the mere mention of probability—the 
mathematicians because the messiness of the subject seems to sully the 
discipline itself, leaving it provisional and tentative, a matter of recipes 
rather than discoveries; and laypeople for the excellent reason that it’s 
hard to see the value for real life in an expression like: 

Thinking 
9 
P (B A) 
¯
P (AB)  P (A )  {P (B A)  P (A )}  {P (B A¯)  P (A)} 
And yet this is an important statement about the way we come to believe 
things. 
Abstraction, modeling—putting interesting things in numerical 
terms—can seem like freeze-drying, leaving the shape of life without the 
ﬂavor. But there is no avoiding number. It is needed to set real things in 
order, to compare across variety of experience, to handle extremes of 
scale, and to explore regions our intuition cannot easily enter. It is not 
intrinsically more true than other kinds of discourse—a mortality table 
is no closer to life than is Death in Venice. Nor is speaking numerically a 
cure for speaking nonsense, although it does offer a more convenient 
way to detect nonsense once it is said. Numbers make statements about 
likelihood falsiﬁable, extend our understanding of experience beyond 
our local habitation to the extremes of time and space, and give us an 
elastic frame of reference, equally suitable to this room and the universe, 
this instant and eternity. 
Probability, meanwhile, gives us a method of deﬁning a belief as it 
ought to exist in a reasonable mind: Truth within known limits—and 
here, too, number offers a transferable standard by which we can judge 
that truth. 
Why do we need such an abstract standard? Because our senses can 
fail us and our intuition is often untrustworthy. Our perception of nor­
mal and abnormal depends crucially on our ﬁeld of attention: In a re­
cent experiment, subjects who had been asked to count the number of 
times basketball players on one team passed the ball failed to spot a man 
in a gorilla suit running around the court. Even when we are trying to 
concentrate on an important matter of likelihood—in a doctor’s office, 
in a court of law—our instincts can lead us astray, but probability can get 
us back on track. The economists Tversky and Kahneman devised a sce­
nario closer to real life: a taxi sideswiping a car on a winter night. There 
are two taxi companies in town: Blue and Green. The latter owns 85 
percent of the cabs on the road. A witness says she saw a blue taxi. Inde­
pendent tests suggest she makes a correct identiﬁcation 80 percent of the 

10 
Chances Are . . . 
time. So, what color was the taxi? Almost everyone says that it was blue, 
because people concentrate on the reliability of the witness. But the real 
issue is how her reliability affects the base fact that a random taxi has an 
85 percent chance of being green. When those two probabilities are 
combined, the chance that the taxi in question was green is actually 59 
percent—more likely than not. It’s a conclusion we could never reach 
through intuition—it requires calculation. 
If we want a numerical model of uncertainty, we need a way of counting 
the things that can happen and comparing that total with what actually 
does happen. “How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.” I can love 
you or not—that’s two possibilities—but Elizabeth Barrett could love 
you for your wit, gravity, prudence, daring, beauty, presence, experience, 
or innocence. How could all these aspects, existing to a greater or lesser 
degree in everyone, have combined so perfectly in just one—brilliant 
Mr. Browning? How big would London have to be before she could be 
sure to meet him? 
This study of mixed characteristics is called combinatorics. It origi­
nated with a remarkable thirteenth-century Catalan missionary, Ramon 
Llull, who saw his vocation as converting the Muslims through logic. 
He began with nine aspects of God that all three monotheistic reli­
gions agree on: Goodness, Greatness, Eternity, Power, Wisdom, Will, 
Virtue, Truth, and Glory. He then grouped relations (such as Concor­
dance, Difference, and Contrariety) and divine beings and personiﬁca­
tions (God, Angels, Hope, Charity). He went on to show that you could 
assemble statements from elements of these three sets, chosen at ran­
dom, and always come up with a convincing result consonant with 
Christian doctrine. 
Substituting letters for these elements of theology, Llull wrote them 
on three concentric, independently movable disks: a sort of doctrinal 
one-armed bandit. Spinning the disks at random would produce a valid 
statement. Moreover, the disks made every combination of elements 
possible, so that no awkward proposition could be suppressed by a 
sneaky missionary. Ideally, Llull need simply hand over his machine to a 
skeptical Muslim and let him convert himself. 

Thinking 
11 
While God’s qualities may be omnipresent, uniform, and sempiter­
nal, the disks that deﬁne secular events have intrinsic gaps or ratchets 
that complicate our calculations. This is the ﬁrst challenge in making a 
model for probability: can you devise a machine that encompasses (or, at 
the very least, names) all that might happen? What combination of ele­
ments makes up the event that interests you? Do these elements affect 
one another or do they occur independently? Finally, do all of them al­
ways contribute to the event? 
These are the questions we shall be examining in this book, because 
they crop up whenever we consider things that don’t always happen or 
seek what turns up only every so often. These questions underline the 
difference between what we think we know and what we come to 
know—and even then, may not believe. Daniel Ellsberg ran an experi­
ment in which he showed people two urns. One (he told them) con­
tained 50 percent red and 50 percent black balls; the other, an unknown 
proportion of red to black balls. He offered $100 to any subject who 
drew a red ball from either urn. Which urn would they choose? Almost 
all chose the known proportion over the unknown. Then Ellsberg of­
fered another $100 for a black ball; the same subjects still chose the 
known, 50-50 urn—even though their ﬁrst decision suggested that they 
thought the “unknown” urn had fewer red balls than black ones. 
The question remains “How right do you need to be?”—and there 
are large areas of life where we may not yet be right enough. A deeper 
worry, whether probability can really be truth, still looms like an aveng­
ing ghost. Einstein famously remarked that he did not believe God 
would play dice with the universe. The probabilistic reply is that perhaps 
the universe is playing dice with God. 

2 | Discovering 
Even chance, which seems to hurtle on, unreined, 
Submits to the bridle and government of law. 
—Boethius* 
A
nyone can talk to God; it’s getting an answer that’s difficult. Few of us 
can regularly count on divine guidance, and experience shows that 
going to an intermediary is not always satisfactory. The Lydian ruler 
Croesus planned to invade Persia, so he prudently checked with the 
oracle at Delphi. “If Croesus crosses the Halys, he will destroy a great 
empire,” said the crone in the fume-ﬁlled cavern. A true prediction— 
but the empire was Croesus’ own. Pressed by his enemies, Saul went to 
the witch of Endor and had her call up the ghost of Samuel. Samuel was 
hardly helpful: “The Lord hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and 
given it to thy neighbor.” The king must have left feeling like a stressed 
executive told by his doctor to exercise more and eat less. It’s easy to see 
the appeal of a mechanism that would restrict Destiny to simpler, less 
irritating answers. 
Many things happen unpredictably, on the larger scale (defeats, dis­
asters) and on the smaller (things dropped, things ﬂipped). It is almost a 
given of human nature to posit a connection between the two scales: be­
tween local accident and universal doom. Sortilege—telling fortunes by 
casting lots or throwing dice—is a tradition that dates back almost with-
*Anicius Manlius Severinus, last of the classical minds, whose desperate attempt to summarize all 
ancient knowledge was cut short by imprisonment, torture, and death at the hands of Theodoric 
the Ostrogoth. 
12 

Discovering 
13 
out change to before the dawn of writing. Fine cubic ivory dice (with 
opposite sides adding up to seven, just as in Monte Carlo or Las Vegas) 
accompanied pharaohs into their tombs. Even then, dice must have 
been a form of amusement as well as a tool of divination. What, after all, 
would a pharaoh need to predict in the afterlife? Pausanias, the Baedeker 
of the ancient world, nicely captures this double role of dice. He de­
scribes the great hippodromos at Elis, where, in the jumble of memorials 
and victory tributes, stood the Three Graces, resplendent in giltwood 
and ivory, holding a rose, a sprig of myrtle—and a die, “because it is the 
plaything of youths and maidens, who have nothing of the ugliness of 
old age.” Perhaps that is the secret of this shift of dice from oracle to 
game: the young are too busy living to be interested in fate; the old know 
the answer all too well. 
Dicing became the universal vice of the Roman aristocracy: the em­
peror Augustus, otherwise the pattern of self-restraint, spent whole days 
gambling with his cronies. Claudius wrote a book on dice and had his 
sedan chair rigged for playing on the move. Caligula, of course, cheated. 
Meanwhile, in the dense, whispering forests across the Rhine, the 
Germans gave themselves completely to gambling—with savage literal­
ness. Tacitus said: “So bold are they about winning or losing, that, when 
they have gambled away all else, they stake their own freedom on the 
ﬁnal throw.” 
The pure gambling games played in Roman times all seem to have 
been variants of hazard, the progenitor of modern craps, played with ei­
ther dice or the knucklebones of sheep. Wherever the Roman armies 
camped you ﬁnd hundreds of dice—a fair proportion loaded. In Augus­
tus’ favorite version of hazard the highest throw (all dice showing differ­
ent faces) was called Venus, appropriately for a pastime that was also a 
conversation with the gods. But even with the gods, humans seek an 
edge: Venus was the highest throw, but also the most likely. After all, we 
don’t go to the temple to add to our bad luck: all divination retains its 
popularity only as long as it gives a high proportion of favorable answers. 
And once you know that daisies usually have an odd number of petals, 
you can get anyone to love you. 

14 
Chances Are . . . 
Condemned to live but one life and yet be aware of time beyond it, we 
have always looked upward for clues to the future. Astronomy was the 
ﬁrst natural science, and the most continuously studied: the Babylonian 
planetary observations began four thousand years ago as a record of 
oracular events. Amid the ruin of ancient knowledge, the great lesson of 
the Babylonians was never lost: all phenomena in the solar system repeat 
and, by careful combinations of cyclical calculation, can be predicted. 
Even in the darkest days of the seventh century, the rudiments of this 
skill were preserved, if only to calculate the date of Easter—which, be­
cause of its original connection with Passover, remains an awkwardly 
lunar event in the solar year. 
The ability to anticipate the movements of the solar system was not yet 
a science, though, because it said nothing about the principles that govern 
those movements. Medieval learning differed in essence from modern: it 
concerned itself with aspects of things, starting with the ten categories in­
herited from Aristotle: Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Position, 
Place, Time, State, Action, and Affection. Medieval Nature was not a real­
ity in itself, to be investigated until its laws became apparent; it was The 
Creation, with Man at its center, and its only law was God’s will. 
Why is an apple sweet? Ask four students lounging in the sunlight in 
a quadrangle of the Sorbonne, seven hundred years ago, and you could 
receive four answers: 
“It is sweet because it is formed from the apple blossom, which is 
sweet-smelling.” 
“It is sweet because, being held high above the earth, it is 
compounded of the lighter elements—air and ﬁre—with which 
sweetness is associated.” 
“It is sweet so that it may be nourishing to men and preserve them 
in health.” 
“It is sweet so that we may be reminded of the constant temptation 
to sin, as Adam sinned in Eden.” 

Discovering 
15 
The point is not whether any of these answers is correct; it is that they 
were all correct, depending on what aspect of Creation was being dis­
cussed. The test of a statement’s truth was not evidence from experiment 
or even from observation: it was logical consistency with received texts. 
Dicing for money and amusement continued throughout the Middle 
Ages, among the high as well as the low. Even Chaucer’s pious Man of 
Law expressed his wish that the wise might prosper using gambling terms: 
O noble, prudent folk, as in this case, 
Your bagges be not ﬁll’d with ambes ace, 
But with six-cinque, that runneth for your chance 
At Christenmass well merry may ye dance. 
“Ambes ace” we’d now call snake eyes; “six-cinque” is, as you may 
well guess, eleven. A modern craps shooter would ﬁt right in on the road 
to Canterbury. 
People inevitably pay close attention to something they have money 
on: throughout the Middle Ages, there was a growing awareness of the 
innate patterns of the game—of the number of different results you 
could get by rolling two or three dice. In 1283, King Alfonso the 
Learned of Castile, patron of astronomy, produced a set of seven treatises 
on dice and board games. The work is steeped in mystical numerology: 
seven books combine the earthly elements with the celestial trinity; the 
section on chess is divided into sixty-four parts; that on dice into six. 
Chess, for Alfonso, was a noble game, the image of the king’s struggle for 
conquest. Dice-playing, however, was the province of tricksters; indeed, 
the prohibitions in Alfonso’s law code revealed a surprising variety of 
cheating techniques. 
We have come to an important moment in the history of probabil­
ity: in order to cheat at a game involving repetition, you must already 
have a good sense of what should normally happen. Dice are the earliest 
and simplest form of random event generator: when you throw two dice 
any one of 36 combinations can occur. 

16 
Chances Are . . . 
2
3
3 4 
4 
4 
5 
6 
5 
5 
5 
7 
6 
6 
6 
6 
8 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
9 
8 
8 
8 
8 
10 
9 
9 
9 
11
10 
10 
12 
11 
To inﬂuence the course of play in your favor—whether you do so by 
shaving the dice out of true, loading them unevenly, gluing boar bristles 
to their edges, or simply changing their spots—you must ﬁrst know the 
reality you intend to subvert. You must have all the probabilities in 
mind, which means you must believe (and this goes against every tenet 
of belief in divine providence or gambler’s luck) that, were it not for your 
knavery, each of those 36 possible combinations would have an equal likeli­
hood of happening on any single throw. 
Medieval dice players, honest as well as roguish, must have devel­
oped just this sophisticated view of their game. In the mid-thirteenth 
century, a hundred years before Chaucer’s characters danced and diced, 
a poem appeared called De vetula. It is the ﬁrst text that makes clear the 
tricky but essential distinction between totals and permutations in dice 
playing. 
De vetula describes the 216 possible outcomes from throwing three 
dice. But wait—before you take our word for it, are there 216 events? 
Imagine you have three dice in your hand; look at them for a moment 
and think about the roll to come. There are sixteen different totals that 
can turn up, from the minimum of three aces to the maximum of three 
sixes—that’s clear enough. There are also some totals that can be made 
in different ways: a 9 could be 1  3  5 or 2  2  5, for example. 

Discovering 17 
How can we calculate the number of sets of numbers that add up to a 
given total? By starting at the ends and working toward the middle: 
3  1  1  1 (There’s no other way to do it; symmetrically, 18 
appears only as 6  6  6.) 
4  1  1  2 (Similarly, 17  6  6  5.) 
5  1  1  3 (But it can also be 1  2  2; 16  6  6  4, 
or 6  5  5.) 
Continue in this vein, adding up the unique throws, or sets of num­
bers, that produce each total, and you will ﬁnd that there are only 56 of 
them. So was De vetula wrong—just another piece of medieval number 
magic? 
No, indeed; it established instead a point so subtle that even the 
great mathematician d’Alembert, author of the article on dice in the En­
cyclopédie of 1751, mistook it: sequence is as important as set. 
4  1  1  2, but it also equals 1  2  1 and 2  1  1. This may 
seem like pointless wordplay, but you will see its truth if, instead of 
imagining throwing three dice, you imagine throwing one die three 
times. In that case, you’d probably agree that these three sequences, al­
though they add up to the same total, are different events—especially if 
you had a bet riding on one of them. 
Once when I was in Venice, I lost some money at dice; on the fol­
lowing day I lost the rest, for I was in the house of a professional 
cheat. . . . I  impetuously slashed his face with my poignard, though 
not deeply. 
This may not be how most mathematicians now spend their time, 
but Girolamo Cardano was by no means a typical mathematician. 
Born in 1501, the illegitimate son of a prominent Milanese lawyer 
and scholar, he fought constantly—against poverty, against his own 
ﬂaws, and, most of all, against Fortune. His eldest son married badly, 
poisoned his adulterous wife, and was beheaded; his daughter sank into 
prostitution; his younger son is said to have denounced Cardano to the 
Inquisition in exchange for the post of public executioner. 

18 
Chances Are . . . 
There was something obsessive about Cardano: he lists not just his 
100 works, published and unpublished, and his 60 “familiar sayings,” 
but also the 73 times anyone spoke well of him in public. He was in­
tensely interested not only in himself but in the world around him. He 
took nothing on faith—and here, decades before Galileo, we begin to 
see the willingness to ﬁnd and widen little cracks in the shining orb 
of medieval certainty that would lead, eventually, to what we now call 
science. 
Cardano’s mind contained many trains of thought that we would 
now consider to be on collision courses. There were, he said, three com­
pletely different kinds of knowledge—the fruits of observation, the re­
sults of logic, and divine revelation—and one aspect of his life required 
all three: gambling. Betting was no mere gentlemanly recreation for Car­
dano. It was an obsession, and it ﬁlled him with shame. Yet he diced for 
twenty-ﬁve years and, through “a certain shrewdness in hazards, and 
something of skill in play,” he managed to avoid ruin, because he com­
bined logical skill with a sharp eye for the shape of games and a convic­
tion that divinity and chance were different things. His guardian angel 
might warn Cardano to avoid Mantua, but the dice themselves could 
tell him the way to bet. 
What the dice told him is summed up in his Liber de ludo aleae 
(Book of Games of Chance). This treatise is no piece of academic slum­
ming: it reveals Cardano’s mastery of the facts underlying a gambler’s in­
stinct. He began with the correct understanding of the number of 
possible throws with one, two, or three dice: 6, 36, and 216. He called 
these “circuits” and implied that in an ideal Platonic world, we would 
see each of the possible throws come up once in a circuit. We mortals are 
doomed, however, to sit in our cave watching only the shadows of per­
fection, and so must put up with the fact that in six throws of a die we 
are unlikely to see the six different points: some will repeat, and some 
will not turn up at all. 
At this obvious statement, most previous writers would have signed 
off with a short cadenza on the inconstancy of fate. Not Cardano: he 
persists in the idea that if all cases are equally likely, one can expect them 
to come up in equal proportions, given enough trials—if not in one cir­

Discovering 
19 
cuit, then in several. He then goes further and states that if, say, 108 of 
the 216 possible throws of three dice are favorable to your bet, you can 
expect to win about half the time—provided your pockets are deep 
enough to play a lot of games. 
Moreover, Cardano was the ﬁrst to calculate correctly the odds of 
doing the same thing more than once: if the chance of throwing an ace 
with one die is 1/6, you might think that the chance of throwing a deuce 
with two dice would be the same. But we have seen that there is only one 
2 in the 36 possible outcomes with two dice: the chance of throwing an 
ace twice in a row is thus 1/6  1/6, or 1/36; the chance of doing it four 
times in a row would be 1/6  1/6  1/6  1/6, or 1/1296. This is now 
known as the “power law”: the probability of repeated successes in sev­
eral independent trials is calculated by multiplying their individual 
probabilities. 
A neat way of illustrating the power law is the old conﬁdence game 
in which the trickster tips each horse in a ten-horse race to a different 
group of a hundred mugs—a thousand mugs in all. No matter which 
horse wins, one group, 1/10 of the total number of mugs, will think: 
“Hey, this tipster’s OK.” The con man then tips each horse in another 
ten-horse race to groups of 10 from the winning group; one horse wins, 
and 10 suckers, 1/100 of the original bunch of mugs, will think: “Wow, 
this tipster’s pretty hot.” Tip each horse in the next ten-horse race to one 
of these 10 selected super-rubes and one of them, 1/1000 of the original 
sample, will conclude: “This tipster’s a genius”—and will pay good 
money for a ﬁnal, worthless, tip. So to convince one person that you 
have been right three times at a 1/10 chance, you need 1,000 suckers to 
begin with: 
1
1
1
1 
1 
10  10  10  103  1000 
Oddly, Cardano failed to understand the inverse of this reasoning. 
He was interested, for instance, in how many times you would need to 
throw a single die to have an even chance of its coming up a six. He felt 
that since the chance on one throw would be 1/6, then two throws 

20 
Chances Are . . . 
should have twice the likelihood and three throws should produce a 
probability of 3/6: an even chance. 
This reckoning may seem straightforward enough, but it is funda­
mentally ﬂawed. If, for instance, you extended Cardano’s argument be­
yond six throws, the likelihood of throwing a six would be larger than 
1/1: a certainty greater than perfection. What’s wrong? The events are 
not mutually exclusive: throwing a six on the ﬁrst throw does not prevent 
you from throwing another six on the next. We need to rephrase the 
question: how many throws produce an even chance of throwing at least 
one six? 
To answer this, we can perform a neat piece of mathematical inver­
sion; in probability, at least one is the opposite of none: the chance that 
something will happen is the inverse of the chance that it will never hap­
pen. So if we want to know the chance of throwing a six on the ﬁrst 
throw or the second or the third (and so on), it should be the inverse of 
the chance of not throwing a six on the ﬁrst throw and not on the second 
and not on the third (and so on). That inverse is simple to calculate 
using the power law, since our chance of not getting a six in one throw 
must be 5/6. Then our chance of not throwing a six in three successive 
throws is 5/6  5/6  5/6  125/216 or around 0.5787. This means 
that the chance of throwing at least one six in three throws will be 1  
0.5787 or 0.4213. This isn’t quite the even chance that Cardano 
expected—indeed, it is further off fairness than the house advantage at 
most casino games. Probability is not an intuitive science. 
You’ll note that Cardano was trying to calculate even odds; one char­
acteristic of his analysis—and of all early work on probability—is that it 
is centered around the balance of expectation, not simply the chances of 
events happening. The problems are posed in terms of the prospects for 
success or failure in a certain number of attempts, or making a wager 
that truly reﬂects the likelihood of an event. One might think this is 
Cardano as practical gambler, giving the world the ﬁrst in a long tradi­
tion of “beat the casino” handbooks. In fact, the issue is more compli­
cated; and it brings us back to the man whose themes have inspired so 
many variations in Western culture: Aristotle. 

Discovering 
21 
The Nicomachean Ethics has only recently relinquished its claim to 
underlie all moral philosophy. Indeed, its clarity, radicalism and coura­
geousness in proposing morality without divine sanction suggest that 
perhaps the claim was given up too soon. Central to the work is equity as 
the desired state: Aristotle is forever proposing ways to establish or main­
tain fairness in life’s relationships. How can we keep friendship with 
those who are richer, poorer, more intelligent, less beautiful, more inﬂu­
ential, less shrewd than ourselves? By exchanging superiorities, giving 
that of which we are capable in just proportion to what we receive— 
effectively, ﬁtting our wager on the game of life to the odds we live under. 
As an Aristotelian, Cardano saw probability not as a science of the 
behavior of things but as the way to rebalance a world out of kilter, to 
even the odds so that Fortune becomes what it ought to be: equal 
chances of equal results, as fair as the ﬂip of a coin. But, Cardano com­
plained, calculating chances in gambling is like trying to understand the 
signiﬁcance of supernatural events: “the system comes to naught or is 
ambiguous.” Caught between ancient authority and modern empiri­
cism, baffled by the distinct but overlapping qualities of the subjects he 
covered, beaten down by Fortune, and ﬁnally silenced by the Church, he 
slipped the Liber de ludo aleae into his strongbox, where it lay forgotten 
for more than a century. 
The healing years pass and the stars wheel by, suggesting in their calm, 
imperturbable rotation that no idea is lost forever. The decades that fol­
lowed Cardano’s death saw astronomy give to human thought the great­
est legacy since consciousness itself: the notion of physical law. The 
rapid-ﬁre revelations of Copernicus, Galileo, Kepler, and Newton im­
plied that the most fundamental movements of the universe could be 
not just predicted but explained—in the clear, unambiguous language 
of mathematics. 
René Descartes (whose belief that staying in bed until noon was es­
sential to the proper working of his brain has made him the hero of 
every well-read adolescent) gave science both deﬁnition and language. 
Before him, all investigation of the natural world bore the same relation 

22 
Chances Are . . . 
to modern physics that cooking does to chemistry. After him, scientists 
everywhere could deﬁne the scope of their work and reduce it to a form 
that was transferable and directly applicable to the work of others. 
Descartes made this possible through two accomplishments: inventing 
an algebraic geometry and reserving a place for God. 
By sliding a grid over a plane, and thus assigning coordinates (x,y) to 
every point on that plane, Descartes showed that curves can be written 
as equations and equations drawn as curves: these two mathematical ob­
sessions are, in fact, one. The pressing geometrical questions in the new 
astronomy (“What is the area inside this orbit?” “What is the farthest 
point of this trajectory?”) could now be solved by algebra, the language 
of equations. Similarly, the behavior of new, exotic equations could be­
come clear through the shapes they revealed as graphs. Pictures were 
numbers; numbers, pictures. Things seen through eye, telescope, or mi­
croscope could be expressed and manipulated with the precision and ﬁ­
nality of mathematical proof. It was the end of the medieval sorting of 
knowledge by qualities. 
Descartes’ other vital contribution was separating the physical from 
the spiritual. As long as the ﬁnal answer to “Why?” was “God so wills it,” 
theology governed every question asked about the world—as Galileo 
found to his cost. Descartes’ mathematics shaped a new dispensation. 
His graph gives us a means to approximate ever more closely the true 
qualities of the curve of a function—but any two points we plot on a 
graph, no matter how close together, have an inﬁnity of points between 
them; we approach but can never reach perfection. Since God is perfect 
and inﬁnite, we cannot comprehend Him—but our God-given reason is 
ample for understanding His creation. All speculation about the physi­
cal world becomes permissible because, in the opposed rhythm of specu­
lation and doubt, we progressively reﬁne our concepts toward the vivid, 
the clear, and the distinct. The more crystalline our ideas, the more 
closely we approach Divine Truth—although we can no more reach it 
than we can plot every point in a line. 
Blaise Pascal was a man in whom the multidimensional contradictions 
of the medieval mind lined up along the great divide that still marks our 

Discovering 
23 
way of thought: reason versus faith, rigor versus intuition, head versus 
heart. Young, startlingly intelligent, well off and well connected, 
sprightly in speech with a Wildean taste for paradox (“I have made this 
letter a rather long one, only because I didn’t have the leisure to make 
it shorter”), Pascal personiﬁed the cast of mind at which the French 
excel—and for which their word esprit remains the best description. 
But the spirit was also a source of torment to Pascal: “Fire, Fire, 
Fire . . . Jesus Christ . . . I have ﬂed Him, renounced Him, cruciﬁed 
Him . . .” This is part of Pascal’s record of an experience of ecstatic devo­
tion on the night of November 23, 1654, preserved on a slip of parch­
ment he wore thereafter, sewn inside his coat. Pascal’s religion was deep, 
personal, and overwhelming; so when he said that he desired certainty 
above all things, he was talking about more than the area within a 
curve—he also meant the salvation of his eternal soul. Not for him 
Descartes’ calm division between worldly doubt and divine faith; the 
abyss into which every believer must launch himself gaped painfully 
within his heart. 
Of the three intellectual feats that together make Pascal the “father 
of modern probability”—his Wager, De Méré’s problems, and the 
Triangle—none was, in fact, original with him. They were all well-
known puzzles and curiosities, dating back hundreds of years. Pascal’s 
real accomplishment was to transform each of these attractive mental ex­
ercises into the mathematical language of proof. 
The question in the Wager is whether to accept faith in God, despite 
our inability to comprehend Him: 
A game is being played at the far end of this inﬁnite distance; heads 
or tails will turn up. What will you bet? By reason, you can do 
neither one thing nor the other; using reason, you can defend 
neither . . .  but you must bet. It is not up to you. You are 
committed. What do you choose, then? 
At this point, most previous discussions of faith would become qual­
itative, explaining that it is not so hard to believe, and that Hell is very 
unpleasant, and eternity extremely long. Pascal remains judicious, ex­
pressing the problem as one of expectation, very much in Cardano’s 

24 
Chances Are . . . 
terms: “Let us see. Since there is an equal risk of gain and of loss, if you 
had only to gain two lives, instead of one, you might still wager.” 
A modern gambler might set up the problem like this: 
E  [p(X )  A]  [p(X )  S] 
where p X  is the probability that X will happen—in this case, that your 
faith will save your soul—and A is the amount promised to winners.* 
E is expectation, what you could hope to gain for your stakes; and in this 
case, you bet your life. 
Pascal says that, since we have no way of knowing God, we can as­
sume equal probabilities of winning and losing, so p X   1/2. At these 
odds, you need to be offered only two lives to make the game fair; if 
three were offered, you’d be a fool not to bet on God’s side. 
But if faith actually does save your soul, there is “an inﬁnity of an inﬁ­
nitely happy life to gain.” Since the payoff stands in relation to the stake as 
the inﬁnite to the ﬁnite, you should always bet on God, whatever the odds 
against you: “There is nothing to decide—you must give everything.” 
The popular summary of Pascal’s Wager is “Bet on God—if He ex­
ists, you win; if He doesn’t, you don’t lose anything.” Pascal was not so 
cynical; for him, the calculation genuinely expressed a belief that proba­
bility can offer a handle on the unknown, even if that unknown were as 
great as the question of our salvation. 
The Chevalier de Méré was not simply a high-living gamester but also a 
capable mathematician. The ﬁrst problem he brought to Pascal was this: 
he knew that there is a slightly better than even chance of throwing at 
least one six in four throws of a die; adding a second die to the throw 
should simply multiply the number of possible outcomes by six—so, 
throwing two dice, shouldn’t there be a better-than-even chance of get­
ting at least one double-six in 24 throws? But gamblers were noticing 
that double-six showed up slightly less than half the time in 24 throws. 
De Méré, Pascal wrote, “was so scandalized by this that he exclaimed 
that arithmetic contradicts itself.” 
*p( X ) is your chance of loss: damnation, reincarnation or no afterlife at all. 

Discovering 
25 
Pascal, of course, could not accept such an insult to mathematics; his 
solution followed the path we have already explored with Cardano. The 
chance of throwing at least one double-six in 24 throws is the inverse of 
the chance of not throwing a double-six (whose probability is 35/36) in 
any of 24 throws; we can swiftly calculate it as: 
35 24 
1.141913124  1037 
1( )1
1  0.508596123  0.491403877
36 
2.245225771  1037 
That is, a bit less than 1/2. Pascal, without mechanical help, had re­
deemed the accuracy of arithmetic: the shooter who bets on making a 
double-six will lose over time on 24 throws, and will win on 25—just as 
the gamblers had found. 
De Méré’s second problem, the “problem of points,” is deceptively 
simple. Let’s say you and a Venetian have put your stakes on the table; 
the ﬁrst to win a certain number of games will pocket the lot. Unfortu­
nately (and here it’s tempting to think of some Caravaggio painting of 
low-life suddenly interrupted by an angel), the game is stopped before 
either of you has reached the winning total. How should the pile of 
money on the table be divided? 
Fermat (of the Theorem), with whom Pascal discussed the problem, 
chose a method that adds the probabilities of mutually exclusive events. 
Let’s say the game is to throw a six in eight throws; you are about to roll 
the ﬁrst time when—behold!—radiance ﬁlls the darkened tavern and we 
are called to higher things. But the money; we can’t just leave it there. 
Well, you could have made the point on your ﬁrst roll; you had a 1/6 
chance of that, so take 1/6 of the pot. But, alternatively, you could have 
failed on the ﬁrst but made it on the second, so take 1/6 of the remain­
der, or 5/36 of the total. Then there’s the third throw—a further 25/216; 
and the fourth; add another 125/1296 . . . and so on eight times, adding 
probabilities and hoping at each stage that someone will have the correct 
change. 
Fermat was really interested in the problem only as a mathematical 

26 
Chances Are . . . 
construct, but adding up cases of possible success, as Fermat does, can 
rapidly become a matter of argument: for instance, if you had made your 
point on the ﬁrst throw, you would not have bothered with the others; 
why, therefore, should you get anything for them? For Pascal, though, 
the problem centered around expectation and justice, so his approach 
was different. He reasons from the money backwards. Let’s say the game 
is one of even chances, like ﬂipping a coin, and you’ve agreed that the 
ﬁrst player to win three games gets the stakes; when the angel appears, 
you have won two games, your shady opponent one. You could ﬁgure 
the division like this: “There are 64 pistoles on the table. If I had won this 
next game, they would all be mine; if I had lost, we would be tied and 
could divide the pot evenly, 32 each; these two likelihoods are equal, so 
fairness dictates that I split the difference between 64 and 32 and take 
48.” The Venetian pockets his 16 with a suppressed oath, but he cannot 
fault your logic. 
Now if you were instead ahead by 2 games to 0 when the game is in­
terrupted, you could extend this reasoning: “If I had won the next game, 
I would have gained all 64; if I had lost, we would be at 2 games to 1— 
which, as I remember, means I should get 48 pistoles. So the fair division 
is halfway between these possibilities: 56 for me, 8 for him.” Once again, 
you are being as just as Aristotle; and you are free to go out into the 
deepening evening, the serene city before you and gold jingling in your 
purse. 
So far, so good. But can we ﬁgure out a general law for interrupted 
games where you have, say, r points still to make and your opponent has 
s? Yes, but to do so we need to take an excursion . . . to  the beach, perhaps. 
Curlews ride the buffeting wind—celestial surfers. The clouds spread in 
regular ripples like a vast satin quilt. The waves curl, spread, and spring 
back, as if the ocean were shaking out her hair. Simile reveals pattern— 
one of the deepest human pleasures, a source of excitement and wonder. 
For Pascal, the mystical prevalence of pattern was evidence of design and 
spiritual meaning; for scientists, it is an invitation to explore the un­
known, promising that the seemingly random has hidden structure. 

Discovering 
27 
In art, we play with pattern to make our own signiﬁcant marks. We 
can start here, scratching the simplest ﬁgure, 1, in the sand. On either 
side, for symmetry, another 1, thus: 
1 
1
1 
Let’s spread these wings a little wider, using a rule (itself a kind of 
pattern) for ﬁlling the space between them: mark down the sum of the 
two numbers just above to the left and right: 
1 
 1
 1 
1 
2 
1 
 
1 
3 
3 
1 
1 
4 
6 
4 
1 
1 
5 
10 
10 
5 
1 
1 
6 
15 
20 
15 
6 
1  
and so on, ﬁlling the sand as we go with our own symmetrical but 
unexpected design. 
What do we have here? It seems, at ﬁrst glance, to be no more than the 
sort of doodle found in the margins of all schoolbooks. Look at it more 
closely, though—as Pascal did in his Traité du triangle arithmétique—and 
you will see wonders of pattern. Let’s start by skewing our triangle slightly, 
to make its rows, columns, and diagonals a little more clear. 
Pattern reveals itself ﬁrst as a lesson in counting. The left column 
counts as infants do: “This one and then this one and then this one”; the 

•  • 
•  •  • 
• 
•  • 
• 
28 
Chances Are . . . 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
3 
3 
1 
1 
4 
6 
4 
1 
1 
5 
10 
10 
5 
1 
1 
6 
15 
20 
15 
6 
1 
second as grownups do, adding up as we go. The third column lists what 
are called triangular numbers, that is, the numbers of dots needed to con­
struct equilateral triangles like these: 
• 
(or the number of ﬁgures, row by row, in Pascal’s own triangle: 1, 3, 6, 
10 . . .  see?). The next column lists pyramidal numbers, the number of 
equal-size stones needed to build a regular pyramid with a triangular 
base—and so on through Fibonacci series, fractal patterns, and further 
delights of complexity. 
The second trick of the triangle may have been discovered by the an­
cient Hindus and Chinese, and was certainly known to Omar Khayyám 
(an excellent mathematician as well as poet, tentmaker, and philosophi­
cal toper). You will probably remember from school how easy it is, when 
squaring a binomial (a  b), to forget to include all the relevant combi­
nations in your multiplication: (2  3)2 does not equal 22  32 and so 
2
(a  b)2 cannot equal a  b2; instead, it equals: 
(a  b)2  (a  b)  (a  b)  (a  a)  (a  b)  (b  a)  
(b  b)  a2  2ab  b2 
To calculate (a  b)3, and so on, you would need to include yet more 
combinations of terms: 

Discovering 
29 
(a  b)3  a3  3a2b  3ab2  b3; 
(a  b)4  a4  4a3b  6a2b2  4ab3  b4 
(a  b)5  a5  5a4b  10a3b2  10a2b3  5ab4  b5 
Does anything about the numbers in bold—the binomial coeffi-
cients—look familiar? Yes, indeed. If you want to know the coefficient 
of any term in the expanded form of (a  b)n, simply count down n 
rows in Pascal’s triangle (taking that ﬁrst 1 you drew as row 0) and count 
across. 
This is a pleasant discovery, but why does it work? Because, in multi­
plying out your binomial, you have to multiply each term by all the oth­
ers and then sort the results into groups. In the expansion of 
(a  b)5, how many groups with 5 a’s are there? One; but there are ﬁve 
groups with 4 a’s and 1 b and ten with 3 a’s and 2 b’s. So the coefficients 
tell you how many combinations of a and b you can make when you 
take them in groups of 1, 2, 3, or more. 
We are now nearly ready to return to the gaming table and claim our 
share of the winnings. Play has stopped at a point where you are r points 
short of victory and your opponent s points short. If you were to go on 
with neither player gaining an advantage, the longest that play could 
continue would be another r  s  1 plays, since those are all the points 
available before one of you must win. Let’s call this largest number of 
plays n. Now, on each one of these n attempts, you could win or your 
opponent could win; so the universe of all possible plays can be repre­
sented as (1  1)n: your potential point and your opponent’s potential 
point through your n remaining potential games. Given that your oppo­
nent had s points to make when the game is interrupted, how much of 
that universe of 2n potential points is rightfully yours? 
(1  1)n has a familiar form: it’s a binomial. So if we count n rows 
down Pascal’s triangle (again, taking the top row as zero), we should ﬁnd 
its expansion. And since a and b in this case both equal 1, the only sig­
niﬁcant terms in that expansion will be the binomial coefficients. 

    ||  etc.  ||  etc.  ||  etc.  ||  etc.  ||
30 
Chances Are . . . 
1
 1
 1 
1 
2 
1
 
1 
3 
3 
1
(1+1)1 
(1+1)2 
(1+1)3
 || etc. || etc. || etc. || etc. || 
1 
 . . .
1 
(1  1)n 
sth term 
 
ending with : 
Total points 
n  . . .  . . .  . . .  
  . . .  n  
You win 
He wins 
The ﬁrst term in the row is 1; this represents the single case in which 
you win all remaining points and the Venetian wins nothing; the second 
term represents the n cases in which you win all but one of the remain­
ing points and your opponent wins one. Add this term to your total and 
go on, counting across and adding the coefficients until you get to the 
sth term of the expansion. From here on to the end, the territory belongs 
to your opponent: the coefficients represent the number of different 
ways he can win starting with s points to go. This is your point of divi­
sion; by comparing the sum of the total number of ways you could have 
won with the total universe of points, 2n, you get the proportion for di­
viding the stakes. 
Returning to the Venetian, still waiting impatiently: you were within 
1 point of winning, but he needed 3. Therefore, s  3. The total number 
of points that could be played (n) is 1  3  1  3. The universe of 
points is therefore 23  8. If you count down to the third row of the tri­
angle, you ﬁnd four coefficients: 1, 3, 3, 1. Since s  3, you can add the 
ﬁrst three coefficients to your total: 1  3  3  7. Compare this with 
the total universe of points, 8, and you ﬁnd you have the right to 7/8 of 
the stakes, or 56 of the 64 pistoles—just as you found before. 

Discovering 
31 
In 1654, the same year that God approached him in the form of ﬁre, 
Pascal listed his accomplishments in a memorial to the Academy in Paris: 
. . . the uncertainty of fortune is so restrained by the equity of 
reason, that each of two players can always be assigned exactly 
what is rightly due. . . . By  thus uniting the demonstrations of mathe­
matics to the uncertainty of chance . . . it  can take its name from 
both sides, and rightly claim the astonishing title: the geometry of 
chance. 
The geometry of chance: the same geometry Descartes had made in­
terchangeable with equations. The spell of Pascal’s triangle is not just in 
its elegant array of numerals: each line, if plotted as values on a graph, 
describes a shape; and successive lines describe that shape with greater 
and greater precision. 
It is this shape that now governs our lives, that deﬁnes our normality: 
the normal, or standard, distribution—the bell curve. The bell curve? 
How does this come from dicing with Venetians? Because the game we 
were playing was much more important than it seemed. Winning and los­
ing is not simply a pastime; it is the model science uses to explore the uni­
verse. Flipping a coin or rolling a die is really asking a question: success or 
failure can be deﬁned as getting a yes or no. So the distribution of proba­
bilities in a game of chance is the same as that in any repeated test—even 

32 
Chances Are . . . 
though the result of any one test is unpredictable. The sum of all the num­
bers on the nth row of the triangle, 2n, is also the total of possible answers 
to a yes-or-no question asked n times. The binomial coefficients, read 
across the row, count the number of ways either answer can appear, from n 
yeses to n nos. If, as here, a perfect bell curve arises from your repeated 
questioning, you will know that the matter, like Pascal’s game, involves a 
50-50 chance. 
A game, though, must have rules. How can we try our skill or 
strength against each other if every trial is different? This is the secret 
weakness of the method Pascal revealed: we must show we were always 
playing the same game for the scores to count. That’s a straightforward 
task as long as we stay with dice and coins—but as questions become 
deeper, it grows ever harder to prove that test n is truly identical to test 1. 
Think, for instance, of asking the same person n times the most signiﬁ­
cant yes-or-no question of all: “Do you love me?” 
The medieval scholars had a clear path to understanding: every as­
pect of knowledge came with its own distinct rules of judgment. We, 
when we want to take advantage of the rigor of science, have to deﬁne 
our problem in a form that’s repeatedly testable, or abandon it. “Why is 
an apple sweet?”—that’s not a scientiﬁc question. 

3 | Elaborating 
The same arguments which explode the Notion of Luck may, on the other 
side, be useful in some Cases to establish a due comparison between 
Chance and Design. We may imagine Chance and Design to be as it were 
in Competition with each other for the production of some sorts of Events, 
and may calculate what Probability there is, that those Events should be 
rather owing to one than to the other. 
—Abraham de Moivre, Doctrine of Chances 
N
ewton, apparently, would fob off students who pestered him with 
mathematical questions by saying, “Go to Mr. de Moivre; he 
understands these things better than I do.” Abraham de Moivre was a 
Huguenot refugee who had arrived in London in 1688 with no other 
patrimony than a Sorbonne education in mechanics, perspective, and 
spherical trigonometry. It was both more than enough and not nearly 
enough; for 66 years he didn’t quite make ends meet—publishing this 
and that, tutoring the sons of earls, helping insurance agents calculate 
mortality, and selling advice to gamblers on the odds. 
De Moivre’s new technique for calculating odds was algebra: con­
sider how powerfully it deals with de Méré’s ﬁrst problem—how many 
throws of two dice you need to have an even chance of throwing a dou-
ble-six. This being algebra, he does not start with one trial and then 
scale up, he boldly puts an x where we expect to ﬁnd our answer and 
takes the most general form of the problem: if something happens a 
times or does not happen b times during x trials, then we can say, put­
ting the power law into general terms, that the chance of its not hap­
pening in every trial is: 
33 

 
34 
Chances Are . . . 
b x 
(a  b)x 
We want to ﬁnd the number of trials where the chance that a 
double-six will not happen is even, or 1/2: 
b x
1 
2  (a  b)x 
Using the splendid ability of algebra to re-jig equations in simpler 
forms, we multiply both sides by (a  b)x and by 2, then divide both 
sides by bx, and get: 
b
(a  b)x 
 2 
x 
For many years, mathematicians would have been stumped at this 
point. But de Moivre had the beneﬁt of logarithms, which allow us 
to manipulate equations to isolate exponents like x from the other 
elements: 
log 2
x 
log (a  b)log b 
Logarithms ease calculation by considering any large number as a base raised to some 
power (as a million is also 106). Instead of trying to multiply large numbers, we can 
simply add the powers of 10 that represent them, since 10a  10b  
10 a+b. So if x 10a , then a  log x. De Moivre was using “natural” logarithms, 
which have as their base not 10, but e, a mysteriously prevalent irrational number 
whose decimal expansion begins as 2.718281 . . . so 2 is a little less than e, roughly e0.7. 
Once you’ve found the logarithm tables in the back of your old high-
school textbook, you would have something good enough for most 
practical purposes. But de Moivre is not yet done. Instead of a and b, 
let’s talk about 1 and q, so that we can say the odds against success are q 
to 1; that makes our basic equation (expressed in odds rather than prob­
abilities): 

Elaborating 
35 
x
1
1
(1 q )  2 or x log (1 q ) log 2 
De Moivre had a general method for dealing with crabbed, knotty 
expressions like log(1  1/q), which involved inﬁnite series: that is, 
adding together an inﬁnite number of terms, thus: 
1
1
1
1
1
1 
1
1
1
1 . . .
log (1 q )  q  ( q2 ) ( q3)  ( q4) ( q5)
2
3 
4
5 
Er, yes . . .  and exactly how is algebra helping us here? The formula 
looks clear enough, but then so do the instructions “Move this mountain 
using these tweezers.” De Moivre, however, noticed that, assuming q is 
big enough, all the terms after the ﬁrst are so small as to make hardly any 
difference to the total—particularly since they alternately add and re­
move progressively tinier and tinier amounts. In fact, they are usually so 
small that we can dispense with them completely, allowing us to be rea­
sonably correct without being exact. So, having done this major surgery, 
we are left with: 
1  log 2 or x  qlog 2
x (q ) 
A quick glance above will remind you that log 2 is roughly 0.7. So, 
having started with a vague and general question, algebra offers us a star­
tlingly speciﬁc result: given big enough odds against something, you can 
gauge how many trials are needed to have an even chance of seeing it 
happen by multiplying the odds by 0.7. This will apply to anything: 
roulette, cards, eclipses of the moon. In the case of de Méré’s dice, the 
odds against rolling a double-six are 35 to 1 (as you know); 35 x 0.7 = 
24.5 trials: exactly the answer Pascal got by calculating cases. 
Inﬁnite series and logarithms also gave de Moivre the key to under­

36 
Chances Are . . . 
standing Pascal’s Triangle—and, with it, the bell curve. A few pages ago 
we blithely said that if you wanted to know, say, the chance that a heads 
will appear in n tosses of a coin, you need only count n rows down the 
triangle and a across to ﬁnd the coefficient. Easy enough for ﬁve or six 
trials, but imagine actually doing it for a series of 1,000 trials. Here are 
the tweezers—there is the mountain. There are clearly good reasons for 
asking de Moivre and his algebra to help us. 
His attack on the problem took advantage of the two most impor­
tant aspects of logarithms and inﬁnite series: that logarithms allow you 
to get the result you need by adding logs rather than multiplying big 
numbers; and that inﬁnite series can converge. That is (as we saw with 
the series for 1 1/q), although the summing goes on forever, each new 
term makes progressively less and less difference to the total, so you can 
see where the series is heading even if you never quite get there. De 
Moivre then made one of those shifts of viewpoint that deﬁne genius in 
mathematics. Having teased out his formula for the middle term of the 
nth row of the triangle into an inﬁnite series, he seemed to invite confu­
sion and disaster by expanding each term in that series as an inﬁnite se­
ries in itself—wheels within wheels, new worlds riding on ﬂeas’ backs. 
Then, spreading out this vast quilt of terms, of sums of sums, he sug­
gested that instead of adding across the rows, we should add down the 
columns, which reveal themselves as converging to neat and orderly for­
mulae. For large numbers of trials, this inﬁnite range of potential calcu­
lation collapses into two simple formulae for the approximate values 
(relative to the total, 2n) of the middle term and any other term t places 
away from the middle of row n of Pascal’s triangle: 
 2 
and  2 
e 
(2t2/n) 
2n 
2n 
You could, if you wish, use this formula to solve the problem of points; 
indeed, you would probably have to if you were playing more than, say, a 
hundred games. 
Even if your taste is not for formal mathematics, you have a glim­
mering here of its entrancing power. This shabby man, ensconced at the 
window end of a greasy table in Slaughter’s Tavern, had, through the 

Elaborating 
37 
clever manipulation of abstract terms, discovered—or created—a way to 
describe how things happen the way they “ought”: how Chance scatters 
itself around the central pillar of Design in the shape of a bell. “If the 
terms of the binomial are thought of as set upright, equally spaced and at 
right angles to a straight line, the extremities of the terms follow a 
curve.” He went on to say: “The curve so described has two inﬂection 
points, one on each side of the maximal term.” Let’s look at this curve, 
basing our example on the numbers from row 14 of Pascal’s Triangle. 
1 
14 
91 
364 
1001 
2002 
3432 
3003 
1
14 
91 
364 
1001 
2002 
3003 
It’s still pretty rough, since we have only 15 ﬁxed points, but the 
form is becoming clear, particularly the “inﬂection points” that de 
Moivre mentioned: the places where the convex curve down from the 
center changes into a concave curve out toward the sides. Those are the 
most interesting points on the curve; de Moivre calculated their distance 
from the midpoint of the curve as 1/23n, for n trials. This number is 
what statisticians now call the standard deviation, one of their most im­
portant terms—and its importance stems from what de Moivre did next. 
Since the newly invented calculus gave him the ability to measure 
the area under the curve, de Moivre decided to see what fraction of that 
area was taken up by the vertical slice of area between the midpoint and 
the inﬂection point. Again, the calculation involved an inﬁnite series 

38 
Chances Are . . . 
that converged to a single, disconcertingly precise ﬁgure: 0.341344 (as­
suming that the total area under the curve equals 1). So the area covered 
by the curve between its two inﬂection points is double that: 0.682688. 
Once again, the power of formal mathematics has handed us a 
golden key—but to what? To the orderly expectation of random behav­
ior. It reveals that, for an experiment with equal chances of success or 
failure, we can expect a bit more than two thirds of our results to be 
within 1/23n of our expected middle value. The more trials we make, 
the bigger n becomes and the closer the total results come to their inher­
ent probability. So, as de Moivre showed, if we toss a coin 3,600 times, 
the probability is 0.682688 that we will get between 1,770 and 1,830 
heads, and the probability is 0.99874—as close to certainty as most 
mortals know—that we will toss between 1,710 and 1,890 heads. Make 
yet more trials, and the window will tighten as the curve becomes ever 
taller and narrower: the behavior of the experiment is inherent in the na­
ture of the curve. 
De Moivre saw that his curve was not only the expression of the laws 
of probability, but the sign by which previously incoherent data revealed 
their subjugation to those laws. 
As it is thus demonstrable that there are in the constitution of things 
certain laws according to which events happen, it is no less evident 
from observation that those laws serve to wise and benevolent 
purposes. . . .  And hence, if we blind not ourselves with meta­
physical dust we shall be led by a short and obvious way, to the 
acknowledgement of the great MAKER and GOVERNOUR of all, 
Himself all-wise, all-powerful and good. 
De Moivre saw God revealed in the pattern of randomness. Having 
been banished from the deterministic physical world by Descartes, Di­
vinity returns in the unexpected mathematical perfection of chance 
events. The bell curve shows the trace of an almighty hand—though, of 
course, particular cases can lie well off the midpoint. De Moivre himself 
was just such an outlier. He gained little from his genius; even his curves 
are now named for Gauss and Poisson. He was always a bit too much or 
too little for the world he lived in, but his own series at last converged at 

Elaborating 
39 
the age of eighty-seven. According to the story, having noticed that he 
was sleeping a little longer every day, he predicted the day when he 
would never awake . . .  and on that day he died, as the bill of death put 
it, of “a somnolence.” 
The essence of calculus is its ability to conjure precision out of impreci­
sion. No genie could ever sum all the terms of your inﬁnite series, no 
guardian angel tell you the exact slope of your curve at a single point— 
but calculus can give you an answer within any desired degree of exacti­
tude. Nothing real in the eighteenth century, not even astronomy, 
actually demanded a measurement correct to four decimal places, yet de 
Moivre could provide answers far more accurate than that, simply by 
working out approximations with a thick carpenter’s pencil on the back 
of a discarded ballad-sheet. 
The power this technique offered to science obscured, at least for a 
time, the philosophical problems it brought with it, the deepest of 
which may have been troubling you since we ﬁnished with Pascal’s Tri­
angle. Its beautifully symmetrical rows give us a perfect, Platonic repre­
sentation of the fall of heads and tails, but we have not been talking 
about anything that actually happens in this world. Our constructs, 
beautiful as they may be, are descriptions of the behavior of chance in 
the abstract, as true (or, rather, as valid) at any point in space or time as 
here and now. To achieve this validity, they depend on the unique ability 
of mathematics to map the unobtainable and inaccessible: sums of series 
that go on forever, distances that collapse to zero. 
Thus, we get our results by pointing—albeit precisely—at places we 
can never reach. What has more recently been called “the unreasonable 
effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences” is bought at the 
price of making a mental leap into the abstract at the point of recording 
an observation: we assign it to a model universe, at once simpler and 
purer than the one we inhabit. Dice, after all, are not inherently random: 
they are a very complicated but determined physical system. Coins need 
not be ruled by chance; a competent amateur magician learns to ﬂip 
only heads, pinning us forever to one side of the normal distribution. So 
when we take up the tools of probability and use them on experience, 

40 
Chances Are . . . 
what are they actually telling us? Something about the real world and its 
hidden structure? Something about the nature of observation? Or some­
thing about our own judgment? These questions are not rhetorical; and 
if they worry you, you are in the best of company. 
Such worries, however, were far from anyone’s mind at the height of the 
Enlightenment, when the mutually supporting advances of mathemat­
ics and the natural sciences convinced most cultured observers that cal­
culus was not just the grammar but the content of Reason. Mathematics 
was the natural model for the self-evident truths which were such a dis­
tinguishing feature of Enlightenment belief, from Newtonian physics to 
revolutionary politics. 
The curve described by a simple molecule of air or vapor is 
regulated in a manner just as certain as the planetary orbits; the only 
difference between them is that which comes from our ignorance. 
The speaker was Pierre Simon, Marquis de Laplace, at once the most 
brilliant and the most fortunate scientist of his generation. Son of a Nor­
man smallholder, from his arrival in Paris in 1767 at the age of eighteen 
until his death in 1827—through all the years of discord, revolution, 
slaughter, empire, war, restoration, and again discord—Laplace never 
knew misfortune or danger. Ennobled by Napoleon, promoted to mar­
quis by Louis XVIII, he proceeded from honor to honor in an imper­
turbable orbit. 
Laplace’s abilities straddled the crystalline purity of ﬁrst principles and 
the messy particularity of actual phenomena. Beyond his virtual invention 
of the calculus of probability, he made signiﬁcant mathematical contribu­
tions to the sciences of gravitation, thermodynamics, electricity, and mag­
netism. His accomplishments in physical astronomy were legendary; in 
effect, the science had to wait for new data before it could have anything 
further to say. 
The fullest expression of Laplace’s contribution to the theory of 
probability is his Théorie analytique of 1812. Although he said that 
probability was simply common sense expressed in mathematical lan­
guage, his theory required the creation of an entirely new branch of cal­

Elaborating 
41 
culus, and is presented so densely that it still daunts professional mathe­
maticians. His assistant remembered the great man himself wrestling for 
an hour to retrace the mental steps he had dismissed with just one “il est 
aisé à voir.” Easy to see, he meant, in retrospect—blossoming from ﬁrst 
principles by agreed forms of reasoning. 
Laplace’s universe is entirely determined. He famously claimed that 
if it were possible for a single intelligence just to know the current position 
and velocity of all particles, every future event would be predictable—it 
is only we, with our puny senses, our inefficient instruments and our 
hasty judgments, who fail to anticipate its revolutions. 
Probability therefore is a kind of corrective lens, allowing us, through 
an understanding of the nature of Chance, to reﬁne our conclusions and 
approximate, if not achieve, the perfection of Design. The signiﬁcance of 
de Moivre’s bell curve is that it describes how what we observe scatters 
around the pole of immutable law—the “generating function” that repre­
sents the ideal behavior of a system. The curve is a tool that cancels out 
the inescapable error in our data and reveals the one, pure, truth—the se­
crets not just of the stars but of all physical processes. 
Showing the same conﬁdence with which the French Revolution de­
vised the metric system and the decimal calendar, Laplace thought it only 
logical to extend his principles from the science to morals and politics. Vot­
ing, forming assemblies, evaluating legal testimony—all, he felt, would pro­
ceed more reasonably if ﬁrst modeled as the dice-rollings, coin-tossings, 
lotteries, and urns full of pebbles in probability problems. Probability 
would damp the terrible ﬂuctuations that can blight the lives of genera­
tions, and lead us to the broad sunlit uplands of the Empire of Reason. 
Sadly, the fundamental unit of the metric system is not a perfect 
fraction of the Earth’s circumference, and the French Revolutionary cal­
endar is now remembered only in lobster Thermidor. As for Laplace’s in­
junction to “examine critically our own opinions and weigh with 
impartiality their respective probabilities”—how, exactly, should we do 
this? Well . . .  il est aisé à voir. 
Nevertheless, by redeﬁning probability from an inherent property of 
random events to a proportion derived from observations, Laplace 
helped shape the future of science by prescribing which phenomena it 

42 
Chances Are . . . 
would choose to observe: those that could be entered neatly into proba­
bility calculations. And because he put the mind of the observer, rather 
than the nature of creation, at the center of science, he broke forever Pas-
cal’s hope that faith and scientiﬁc inquiry could sit comfortably together. 
Not a religious man, Laplace seemed almost to resent the implica­
tion that a mere divinity could disturb the perfect regularity of celestial 
affairs. When Napoleon teasingly remarked that he had seen no men­
tion of the creator of the universe in the Méchanique céleste, Laplace bri­
dled: “Sire, I had no need of that hypothesis.” He seemed genuinely 
pained that as great a mind as Pascal’s should give credence to miracles. 
And so, since probability is a matter of what we can see in this world 
rather than what could happen anywhere, Laplace made quick use of it 
to bring Pascal’s Wager ﬂuttering down to earth. 
Here is his reasoning—and as always, the crux of the argument is in 
its initial setting out. Assuming that our choice is between belief in God 
or not, how did we know we had this choice? Because we had been told 
about it: witnesses, from evangelists to parish priests, affirmed to us 
God’s promise that belief leads to an inﬁnity of happy lives. That—not 
the promise itself—is the observation. Laplace chooses a lottery as his 
model, which ﬁts well enough with Pascal’s idea that even if the odds 
against the existence of God approach the inﬁnite, the size of the prize 
compared with our entry stake makes the game worth playing. Let’s say 
that Pascal’s lottery is represented by a series of numbered balls, each of 
which returns that number of happy lives for our stake of one life. We 
ourselves don’t see the draw, but a witness tells us that we have won the 
top prize. How credible is that testimony? 
Obviously, it’s very much in the interest of these particular witnesses 
to affirm that we have won, but let us simply assume that the likelihood 
of their being able to speak with absolute accuracy on such an important 
matter is, say, one-half. Let us assume moreover the fewest number of 
happy lives that Pascal claimed would make his wager a guaranteed win: 
three. There are three balls in the urn; the draw is made. The witness 
says: “Congratulations! It’s number 3!” Now he is either telling the truth 
or not. If he is telling the truth, we calculate the probability of observing 
this by multiplying the innate probability of drawing number 3 (1/3) by 

Elaborating 
43 
the probability that the witness is telling the truth (1/2), and we come 
up with 1/6. 
Now let’s assume the witness is mistaken: some other number came 
up and your life is wasted. This in itself has a probability of 2/3, which 
we multiply by the chance (1/2) that the witness is untruthful: our like­
lihood of discovering this as we trudge the path to Purgatory is therefore 
2/3  1/2 = 1/3. 
So we see that number 3 being drawn and hearing the truth about it 
is only half as likely as hearing that it was number 3 when it wasn’t. We 
win only one-third of the time—far from Pascal’s absolute certainty. 
We are back in the territory of the Blue Cab/Green Cab problem: 
when something is intrinsically rare or unlikely, it doesn’t matter how 
truthful or sincere a witness is—the essential unlikelihood prevails. Even 
if the witness were 90 percent accurate, the chance of being told accu­
rately that you have won 1,000 happy lives is only 9 in 10,000. As the 
prize for the celestial lottery goes up, the odds of hearing truthfully that 
you have won it go down—even without considering any multiplying 
factors for the self-interest of the witnesses. 
Laplace’s calculus of probabilities was intended to give us a mechanism 
by which we could conquer error and see as on shining tablets the essen­
tial laws of the universe. Yet nowadays, we see it as applicable only to a 
degree and only to a few selected problems. How did this powerful para­
digm come to grief? In part, it suffered from that which affects so many 
great and convincing ideas: its very success tempted people to apply it in 
realms for which it was ill adapted, sciences far removed from its native 
astronomy: chemistry, biology, the ever hoped-for social sciences. Here, 
phenomena did not necessarily fall neatly in a normal distribution 
around a “true” value. New patterns, new distributions appeared that re­
quired a new calculus. 
One early example of the new curves made necessary by wider obser­
vations was named for Laplace’s student, Poisson, a former law clerk 
who hoped to apply probability to evidence and testimony. Poisson 
identiﬁed a class of events that, like crime, could happen quite easily at 
any time, but in fact happen rarely. Almost anyone in the world, for in­

44 
Chances Are . . . 
stance, could call you on the telephone right now—but it’s highly un­
likely that a ring actually coincided with the moment your eye passed 
that dash. Quite a lot of human affairs turn out to be like this: the 
chance of being hit by a car in Rome on any one day is very small, al­
though passing a lifetime there makes the likelihood of at least a bump 
quite high. You might have a real interest in knowing the relative likeli­
hoods of being run into once, twice, or more times. 
Poisson’s distribution is most like real life in not supposing that we 
know the actual probability of an event in advance. We already “know” 
the probabilities attached to each side of a die; we “know” the laws that 
should govern our observation of a planet’s path. We can therefore mul­
tiply that known probability by the number of trials to give us our prob­
ability distribution. But in real life, we may not have that information; 
all we have is the product of the multiplication: the number of things 
that actually happened. 
Poisson’s curve, more a steeple than a bell, plots this product of prob­
ability times number of trials for things that happen rarely but have 
many opportunities to happen. The classical case of a Poisson distribu­
tion, studied and presented by the Russian-Polish statistician Ladislaus 
Bortkiewicz, is the number of cavalry troopers kicked to death by horses 
in 14 corps of the German army between 1875 and 1894. 
Here are the raw ﬁgures: 
Deaths 
Number of 
per year 
cases 
0 
144 
1 
91 
2 
32 
3 
11 
4 
2 
5 or more 
0 

Elaborating 
45 
The total of trials (20 years x 14 corps) is 280; the total of deaths is 
196; the ﬁgure for deaths per trial, therefore, is 0.7. 
The Poisson formula for this would be 
e0.7(0.7)m 
Wm  
m! 
where m is the number of deaths per year whose probability we want to 
gauge. If m = 1, the probability is 0.3476. If this is applied to 280 exper­
iments, the probable number of times one death would occur in any 
corps during one year is 97.3 (in fact, it was 91). The theoretical distri­
bution is remarkably close to the actual one (which is probably why this 
is cited as the classical case): 
Deaths 
per year 
Theoretical number 
of instances 
0 
139.0 
1 
97.3 
2 
34.1 
3 
8.0 
4 
1.4 
5 or more 
0.2 
If it happens you are not a cavalryman, what use could you make of 
this? Perhaps the best characterization of Poisson’s distribution is that, 
whereas the normal distribution covers anticipated events, Poisson’s cov­
ers events that are feared or hoped for (or both, as in the case of tele­
phone calls). Supermarkets use it to predict the likelihood of running 
out of a given item on a given day; power companies the likelihood of a 
surge in demand. It also governed the chance that any one part of south 
London would be hit by a V2 rocket in 1944. 
If you live in a large city, you might consider Poisson’s distribution as 
governing your hope of meeting the love of your life. This suggests some 
interesting conclusions. Woody Allen pointed out that being bisexual 

46 
Chances Are . . . 
doubles one’s chance of a date on Saturday night; but sadly Poisson’s 
curve shows very little change in response to even a doubling of innate 
probability, since that is still very small compared with the vast number 
of trials. Your chance of fulﬁllment remains dispiritingly low. Encourag­
ingly, however, the greatest proportion of probability remains packed in 
the middle of the curve, implying that your best chance comes from 
seeking out and sustaining friendships with the people you already like 
most, rather than devoting too much time to the sad, the mad, or the 
bad alternative. Like staying away from the back ends of horses, this is a 
way to make the curve work for you. 
Poisson’s distribution could be seen as a special case of the standard 
distribution—but as probability advanced into statistics it came upon 
many more curves to conquer, if the mathematics and the data were 
to continue their engagement. Curves spiky, curves discontinuous— 
scatters that could not be called curves at all, although they were still de­
ﬁned by functions (that is, rules for assigning a single output to any 
given input). Mathematics spent much of the nineteenth century seek­
ing methods to bind such boojums and snarks, snaring them in inﬁnite 
series, caging them with compound constructions of tame sine-curves, 
snipping them into discrete lengths of manageability—getting their 
measure. 
At the turn of the century, the French mathematician Henri 
Lebesgue brought these many techniques to their philosophical conclu­
sion: a way to assign a value—a measure—to even the most savage of 
functions. Measure theory, as his creation was called, made it possible to 
rein in the wilder curves, gauging the probabilities they represented. It 
offered its power, though, at the price of intuition: a “measure” is just 
that. It is simply a means whereby one mathematical concept may be ex­
pressed in terms of another. It does not pretend to be a tool for under­
standing life. 
By 1900 it was clear that if the counterintuitive need not be false, the 
intuitive need not be true. The classical approach to probability could 
no longer conceal its inherent problems. Laplace had founded his uni­
versal theory of probability on physical procedures like tossing a coin or 

Elaborating 
47 
rolling a die, because they had one particularly useful property: each 
outcome could be assumed to have equal probability. We know before­
hand that a die will show six 1/6 of the time, and we can use this knowl­
edge to build models of other, less well known, aspects of life. But think 
about this for a minute: how, actually, do we know these cases are equally 
probable? 
Well, we could say we have no reason to believe they aren’t; or that 
we must presuppose equal application of physical laws; or that this is an 
axiom of probability and we do not question it; or that if we didn’t have 
equally probable cases . . . we’d have to  start all over again, wouldn’t we? 
All are arguments reﬂecting the comfortable, rational assumptions of 
Enlightenment science—and all draw the same sardonic, dismissive 
smile from our prosecutor, Richard von Mises. 
Lemberg, alias Lwów, alias Lviv: a city that lies at the intersection of 
three sets in three dimensions: Polish, Austrian, Ukrainian; Catholic, 
Orthodox, Jewish; applied, abstract, artistic. It remains a symbol of in­
tellectual promise for the debatable lands between the Vistula and the 
Dniepr; a Baroque lighthouse in a politicogeographic tempest. Its 
prominent sons and daughters would be themselves enough to populate 
a culture: the writers Martin Buber and Stanislaw Lem; the pianists 
Moriz Rosenthal and Emanuel Ax; the Ulam brothers, Stanislaw (math­
ematician) and Adam (historian); Doppler of the eponymous effect; 
Redl the spy—not to mention Weegee, Paul Muni, Sacher-Masoch, and 
the Muslim theologian Muhammad Asad (one of the few imams to be 
the son of a rabbi). 
Lemberg’s Richard von Mises was a pioneer in aerodynamics, de­
signing and piloting in 1915 Austria-Hungary’s monster bomber, the 
600-horsepower Aviatik G. III. The plane was not a success, for many of 
the subtle local reasons that govern heavier-than-air ﬂight. Perhaps in re­
action, von Mises became increasingly interested in turbulence. Turbu­
lence (as we will see later) lacks the pleasant predictability of the solar 
system; the swirls of ﬂuid vortices may brieﬂy resemble stately galaxies, 
but their true dynamics remain infuriatingly difficult to grasp. Von 
Mises was not an easygoing man—he demanded of applied mathemat­

48 
Chances Are . . . 
ics all the rigor of its pure cousin—and the more he worked in the unsta­
ble, ﬂuttering world of ﬂow, the less he liked the ﬁxed but unexamined 
assumptions behind Laplace’s idea of probability; deﬁning it as “a num­
ber between 0 and 1, about which nothing else is known.” 
The problem, von Mises thought, was that in assuming equally 
probable cases for our dice, coins, and urns, we had created out of noth­
ing a parallel universe, in which things happened a certain way because 
they were supposed to. Instead of being messengers of the gods, the dice 
had become the gods. At best, the rules of probability were a tautology: 
the numbers 1 through 6 come up equally often in theory because we 
deﬁne them that way. At worst, the concept of equally probable cases 
prevented us from saying anything about what was before our eyes. 
What if the die has a few molecules missing from one corner, for in­
stance? We have evidence, but no theorem based on equally probable cases 
applies to it; our probability calculus is irrelevant; we have to fall silent. 
Von Mises’ view was that the true reason for our believing that six 
should come up 1/6 of the time is no different from our reason for be­
lieving that the Earth takes 365.25 days to orbit the sun. That reason is 
our having observed it. “The probability of a six is a physical property of 
a given die”—a quantity derived from repeated experience, not some in­
nate essence of creation or nature. Heads or tails, red or black, pass or no 
pass—these are no more phenomena in themselves than are grams, 
ohms, or pascals. Probability is a measure of certain aspects of consistent 
groups of events (“collectives,” in von Mises’ terminology) revealed 
when these events are repeatable indeﬁnitely. 
The nature of the “collective” has to be very particular: one must 
have a practically unlimited sequence of uniform but random observa­
tions. We can conclude that we have observed a given probability for a 
result if the relative frequency of that result approaches a limit, not just 
for the basic collective, but for randomly selected and mixed subgroups 
of the collective. The probabilities of combinations of results (like 
throwing two dice or taking two balls at a time out of an urn) can also be 
deﬁned by keeping careful track of the order and subgroups of observa­
tions. That means that, while rigorously banishing any preconceptions 

Elaborating 
49 
of probability from our mind, we can gradually rebuild many aspects of 
its calculus—as long as we insist on describing frequencies, and restrict 
our observations to true collectives. 
There was no doubt where science had to go to remain science: all 
facts were to be considered as mere probabilities, and all probabilities, 
frequencies of observations. As von Mises saw it, anything else was sim­
ply a kind of false consciousness. 
Given this view of pure science, it is certainly hard to see how proba­
bility could be legitimately applied to juries, deliberative assemblies, or 
voting systems. For von Mises, probability had only three areas of legiti­
macy: games of chance, certain mass social phenomena like genetics and 
insurance, and thermodynamics (where, as we will see in Chapter 11, it 
would take the leading role). 
“Dost thou think, because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more 
cakes and ale?” Like all puritans, within or without the sciences, von 
Mises was asking his audience to give up much of what they felt made 
life worthwhile. People go into science because they want to discover 
and explain all the things around us that seem so richly freighted with 
meaning. But how many of the interesting phenomena of life truly are 
“collectives”—what fascinating event can be said to repeat exactly and 
indeﬁnitely? While Laplace’s system glided over the crack between stat­
ing equally possible outcomes and assuming them in experiment, von 
Mises’ straddled a crevasse when it assumed that the relative frequencies 
of observed events could indeed approach a limiting value. All might be 
revealed in the long run—but, as Keynes pointed out, in the long run 
we are all dead. 
Trains of thought can sometimes seem exactly that; bright little worlds 
rattling through unknown and perhaps uninhabited darkness. It is the 
cliché tragedy of intellectual life to discover, far too late, that your own 
train got switched off the main line up a remote spur whose rusty rails 
and lumpy roadbed reveal all too clearly that it leads only to ghost 
towns. Sometimes, though, there is the excitement of approaching the 
metropolis on converging lines: other golden windows glide alongside 

50 
Chances Are . . . 
with other travelers folding their newspapers or reaching for their coats, 
other children waving in welcome. 
Lebesgue’s measure theory and von Mises’ idea of frequency were 
ideas that were already within view of one another. Between them, two 
further trains were advancing: one was the growing conviction among 
physicists that certain processes in thermodynamics and quantum me­
chanics had only a probabilistic meaning—that there was no mechani­
cal, deterministic model by which they could be described or even 
imagined. The other was the great contemporary movement, which 
promised that of all of mathematics—all the rigor and complexity that, 
magically, seem to ﬁnd so many parallels with the richness and beauty of 
life—could be founded on a few axioms linked by the rules of deductive 
logic. There was a palpable sense of approaching the terminus, where the 
many travelers could exchange stories—all in the same language. 
This shared language was the notion of the set, introduced by Georg 
Cantor as a means of keeping the inﬁnite in mind without having to 
think of inﬁnite things or inﬁnite processes. The deﬁnition of a set is in­
tentionally as loose as possible: it is deﬁned by its members. But mem­
bership can be generated by the most varied of rules: “numbers divisible 
by 5” determines a set; but so does “Dog; 17; Red.” It is possible to have 
an empty set: we can talk about the contents of the box even though 
there’s nothing in it. We can subdivide a set into subsets, which will also 
be sets. We can combine sets into a union, which is also a set. We can de­
ﬁne where two sets overlap; the overlap or intersection is also a set. We 
can have inﬁnite sets (such as all the counting numbers). And we can 
imagine the collection of all subsets of a set—which is also a set. 
What, you might feel yourself asking, are we actually talking about 
here? Nothing in particular—and that’s the point. This is pure form; its 
aim is to support a logical system that governs every instance of the way 
we consider some things as distinct from other things. A set is simply a 
pair of mental brackets, isolating “this” from “not this”; we can put into 
those brackets whatever interests us. Just as Cantor’s inﬁnity can be put 
in a set and considered here and now, rather than endlessly and forever, 
von Mises’ indeﬁnite sequences of observations can constitute a set: the 

Elaborating 
51 
set of events of observing something. We can use the axioms by which 
we manipulate sets to manipulate collections of events. Most important, 
Lebesgue’s concept of measure gives us a method for assigning a unique 
and complete value to a set, its subsets, and its elements—and these val­
ues behave the way we want probability values to behave. 
Lines of thought, all coming together, all converging—so who better 
to effect the ﬁnal union than a man who was born on a train? Andrei 
Nikolaevich Kolmogorov was a son any parent would be proud of, but 
neither parent ever saw him. His mother died in bearing him, on April 
25, 1903, journeying from the Crimea to her family estate, having left 
behind his father, an agronomist of clerical origin. The newborn Kol­
mogorov was swept up from the whistle-stop town of Tambov by his 
maiden aunt. She created a special school for her talented nephew and 
his little friends; it had its own magazine in which the young Andrei 
published his ﬁrst mathematical discovery at the age of ﬁve: that the sum 
of the ﬁrst n odd numbers is equal to n2, as we too discovered in 
Chapter 1. 
What immediately struck people who met Kolmogorov was his 
mental liveliness. He remained interested in everything, from metal­
lurgy to Pushkin, from the papacy to nude skiing. His dacha, an old 
manor house outside Moscow, re-created the estate school of his youth. 
Presided over by his old aunt and his old nanny, it had a large library and 
was always full of guests: students, colleagues, visiting scholars. 
It has been said that it would be simpler to list the areas of mathe­
matics to which Kolmogorov did not make a signiﬁcant contribution than 
to describe the vast range of topics he did explore—in depth—in his 
more than seventy years of productive work. His genius was to connect: 
he took mathematical ideas, clariﬁed their expression, and then used 
them to transform new ﬁelds. He worked on mathematical logic, link­
ing the classical and intuitionist traditions; he worked on function-space 
theory, extending it to the mechanics of turbulence; he invented the ﬁeld 
of algorithmic complexity, and, with characteristic verve, he hoicked up 
the tottery ediﬁce of probability and slipped new foundations underneath. 
The basic premise of his system was simple: the probability of an 


