
MODEL THEORY 

STUDIES IN LOGIC 
A N D  
THE FOUNDATIONS O F  MATHEMATICS 
VOLUME 73 
Editors 
J. BARWISE, Stanford 
H. J. KEISLER, Madison 
P. SUPPES, Stanford 
A. S. TROELSTRA, Amsterdam 
NORTH-HOLLAND 
AMSTERDAM . NEW YORK . OXFORD . TOKYO 

MODEL THEORY 
C. C .  CHANG 
Uuirersity of Colifortrio, Los Angeles 
and 
H. J. KEISLER 
Uniiwsity of Wisconsin, Modison 
Third edition 
NORTH-HOLLAND 
AMSTERDAM . NEW YORK . OXFORD . TOKYO 

ELSEVIER SCIENCE PUBLISHERS B.V. 
Sara Burgerhartstraat 25 
P.O. Box 21 1, 
lo00 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
SoleDistrihutors for the U.S.A. and Canada: 
ELSEVIER SCIENCE PUBLISHING COMPANY, INC. 
655, Avenue of the Americas 
New York, N.Y. 10010, U.S.A 
First edition 1973 
Secondedition 1977 
Second impression 1978 
Third edition 1990 
Second impression 1991 
Third impression 1992 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Keisler. H. Jerome. 
Model theory / H.J. Keisler. -3rd ed. 
p. cm. --(Studies in logic and the foundations of 
mathematics: v. 73) 
1977. 
Rev. ed. of: Model theory / C.C. Chang and H.J. Keisler. 2nd ed. 
Includes bibliographical references. 
1. Model theory. I. Chang. Chen Chung, 1927- Model theory. 
ISBN 0-444-88054-2 
11. Title. 111. Series. 
QA9.7.K45 1990 
5 1 1 ‘.8--dcZO 
89-71124 
CIP 
ISBN: 0 444 88054 2 
OELSEVIER SCIENCE PUBLISHERS B.V., 1990 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., 
P.O. Box 21 I ,  lo00 AE Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
Special regulations for readers in the U.S.A. - this publication has been registered with the Copy- 
right Clearance Center Inc. (CCC), Salem, Massachusetts. Information can be obtained from the 
CCC about conditions under which photocopies of parts of this publication may be made in the 
U.S.A. All other copyright questions, including photocopying outside of the U.S.A., should be re- 
ferred to the publisher. 
No responsibility is assumed by the Publisher for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as 
a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, 
products, instructions or ideas contained in the material herein. 
Printed in The Netherlands 

PREFACE 
Model theory is the branch of mathematical logic which deals with the 
connection between a formal language and its interpretations, or models. 
In this book we shall present the model theory of first order predicate logic, 
which is the simplest language that has applications to the main body of 
mathematics. Most of the techniques in model theory were originally de- 
veloped and are still best explained in terms of first order logic. 
The early pioneers in the development of model theory were Lowenheim 
(1915), Skolem (1920), Godel (1930), Tarski (1931), and Malcev (1936). 
The subject became a separate branch of mathematical logic with the work 
of Henkin, Robinson, and Tarski in the late 1940's and early 1950's. Since 
that time it has been an active area of research. 
Looking over the subject as it stands today, we feel that it can best be 
analyzed on the basis of a few general methods of constructing models. 
While the methods in their pure form are quite simple, they can be iterated 
and combined in a great variety of ways to yield practically all the deeper 
results of the theory. For this reason we have organized the book on the fol- 
lowing plan. As a rule, we introduce a method in the first section of a chapter 
and then give some applications of it in the remaining sections. The basic 
methods of constructing models are: Constants (Section 2.1 ), Elementary 
chains (Section 3,1), Skolem functions (Section 3.3), Indiscernibles (Section 
3.3), Ultraproducts (Section 4.1), and Special models (Section 5.1). In the 
last two chapters, 6 and 7, we present some more advanced topics which 
combine several of these methods. We believe that this book covers most of 
first-order model theory and many of its applications to algebra and set 
theory. 
Up to now no book of this sort has been written. This has made it dif- 
ficult for students and outsiders to learn about large areas of the subject. Jt 
V 

VI 
PREFACE 
has been necessary for them to chase down an almost unlimited number 
of widely scattered articles, some of which are hard to read. We do not claim 
to have compiled all the results in first-order model theory, but we have tried 
to include the important results which are indispensable for further work in 
this area. In addition we have included some of the more recent results 
which are stimulating present and probabIy future research. In this category 
are the Keisler-Shelah isomorphism theorem, the Morley categoricity theo- 
rem, the work of Ax-Kochen and Ershov in field theory, and the results of 
Rowbottom, Gaifman and Silver on large cardinals and the constructible 
universe. 
First-order model theory is a prerequisite for the other types of model 
theory and such applications as nonstandard analysis. Other logics whose 
model theories have been investigated are infinitary logic, logic with addi- 
tional quantifiers, many-valued logic, many sorted logic, intuitionistic 
logic, modal logic, second-order logic. In recent years model theory for 
infinitary logic has made rapid progress. Model theory for second-order 
logic is largely beyond present methods but has a great deal of potential 
importance. We hope that the availability of this book will contribute to 
future research in all kinds of model theory and to the discovery of more 
applications. 
This book grew out of a number of graduate courses in model theory that 
we have taught at UCLA and Wisconsin. The idea of writing a textbook of 
this sort arose in 1963 as we were completing our earlier monograph, Con- 
tinuous Model Theory. Some lecture notes by Keisler in 1963-64 were tried 
out from time to time and the present form of the book gradually evolved 
from them. The actual writing of the book began in early 1965. In the inter- 
vening period as the book took shape it was tested in classes, expanded in 
scope, and almost completely rewritten during the logic year 1967-68 at 
UCLA. Major changes were again made in 1971-72. 
We owe a debt to the many mathematicians whose work forms the sub- 
ject of this book. A tribute is due to Alfred Tarski who was the motivating 
and influencing force in the shaping of the theory. On a more personal level, 
we both received our Ph. D. degrees under his direction at the University 
of California, Berkeley. Space does not permit us to list the names of all the 
colleagues and students who at various times have read or used our manu- 
scripts and have made many constructive suggestions and criticisms. 
For the amusement of all those who gave us help, we dedicate our book to 
all model theorists who have never dedicated a book to themselves. 
We have been supported during the writing by the Departments of Math- 

PREFACE 
VII 
ematics at the University of California, Los Angeles, and the University 
of Wisconsin, Madison, by the National Science Foundation under several 
research grants, and by a Fullbright grant to Chang in 1966-67 and a Sloan 
Fellowship to Keisler in 1966-67, 1968-69. 
Invaluable assistance in the proof reading and preparation of the manu- 
script was rendered by Jerry Gold. Perry Smith has spent many h a m  helping 
us with the page proofs. We are grateful to Sister Kathleen Sullivan for pre- 
paring the index. We wish to thank Mrs. Gerry Formanack for her excellent 
typing of the manuscript. 
University of California, Los Angeles 
University of Wisconsin, Madison 
C. C. CHANG 
H. J. KEISLER 
April 1973 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
The field of model theory has developed rapidly since the publication of 
the first edition of this book in 1973. There is an up-to-date survey of the 
subject and extensive references to the literature in the Handbook of Marhe- 
matical Logic. 
Only minor changes have been made from the first edition of this book. 
We have added a few pages at the end of Appendix B discussing the current 
state of the list of open problems. A few of the problems have been com- 
pletely solved, and partial results have been obtained on several others. 
Throughout the book, errors, misprints, and ambiguities have been 
corrected. We are grateful to the many colleagues who have pointed out 
errors and offered suggestions. We especially wish to thank S. C. Kleene, 
who suggested over one hundred corrections after teaching a course from the 
book this spring. 
University of California, Los Angeles 
University of Wisconsin, Madison 
C. C. CHANG 
H. J. KEISLER 
September 1976 

VlIl 
PREFACE 
PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 
It has been thirteen years since the Second Edition of this book was 
written, and as one would expect, the subject of model theory has 
changed radically. Model theory is now dominated by new areas which 
were in their infancy in 1976 and have blossomed into thriving fields in 
their own right. Among these fields are classification (or stability) 
theory, nonstandard analysis, model-theoretic algebra, recursive model 
theory, abstract model theory, and model theories for a host of nonfirst 
order logics. Model-theoretic methods have also had a major impact on 
set theory, recursion theory, and proof theory. 
In spite of the changes in the field, this book still serves well as a 
beginning graduate textbook and reference work. Classical first order 
model theory as developed here remains a prerequisite for all of the 
newer branches of model theory, and many newer books have relied on 
this book for the necessary background. 
In preparing this Third Edition, we have been careful to preserve the 
usefulness of the book as a first textbook in model theory. We have 
made no attempt to cover the whole field, but have added new topics 
which now belong in a first graduate course. Four new sections have 
been added. These sections have been placed at the end of the original 
chapters to minimize changes in the numbering of results. Throughout 
the book, new exercises have been added, usually at the end of the 
original exercise lists. We made a number of updates, improvements, 
and corrections in the main text, have updated the appendix on the 
current status of the open problems, and have added a list of additional 
references. 
The new Section 2.4 introduces recursively saturated models, which 
have led to the simplification of many arguments in model theory by 
replacing large saturated or special models by countable models. As an 
illustration, we have replaced the proof of the Vaught two-cardinal 
theorem in Section 3.2 by a simpler proof using recursively saturated 
models. 
The new Section 2.5 presents Lindstrom’s celebrated characterization 
of first order logic. This result has gained importance as the launching 
point for the subject of abstract model theory. 

PREFACE 
IX 
Because of the growing importance of model-theoretic algebra, our 
treatment of model completeness which had been in Section 3.1 was 
greatly expanded and moved to the new Section 3.5. 
The new Section 4.4 on nonstandard universes was added to provide 
an interface which is needed to apply results from model theory to 
nonstandard analysis. 
We wish to thank our many colleagues and students who have given us 
invaluable help and encouragement on this textbook. We have been 
supported by several National Science Foundation grants and the Vilas 
Trust Fund at the University of Wisconsin. 
Madison, Wisconsin, 1989 
H.J. KEISLER 

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK AS A TEXT 
This book is written at a level appropriate to first year graduate students 
in mathematics. The only prerequisite is some exposure to elementary logic 
including the notion of a formal proof. It would be helpful if the student has 
had undergraduate-level courses in set theory and modern algebra. All the 
set theory needed for the book is presented in the Appendix which the stu- 
dent can use to fill in any gaps in his knowledge. The first four chapters pro- 
ceed at a leisurely pace. The last three chapters proceed more rapidly and 
require more sophistication on the part of the student. 
There is ample material for a full-year graduate course in Model Theory, 
and there is enough flexibility so that a variety of shorter courses can be 
made up. Chapter 1 contains introductory material and from Chapter 2 
on there is at least one interesting theorem in every section. 
The core of the subject which must be in any model theory course is com- 
posed of Sections 1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.1, 3.1, 4.1. The sections which are next in 
priority are 1.2, 2.2, 3.3, 4.3, 5.1, 6.1. 
To help the instructor to make up a course, we give below a table showing 
the dependence of the sections in the first five chapters. This table applies 
only to the text itself and not to the exercises, which may depend on any ear- 
lier section. 
X 

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK AS A TEXT 
XI 
1.4: 1.3 
1.5: 1.4 
2.1: 1.4 
2.2: 2.1 
2.3: 2.2 
2.4: 2.3 
2.5: 2.4 
3.1: 2.1 
3.2: 2.4,3.1 
3.3: 2.2,3.1 
3.4: 3.2,3.3 
3.5: 2.4,3.1 
4.1: 3.1 
4.2: 4.1 
4.3: 4.1 
4.4: 4.3 
5.1: 3.1 
5.2: 5.1 
5.3: 5.1 
5.4: 5.1 
5.5: 5.1 
6.1: 4.3,5.1 
6.2: 4.1 
6.3: 5.5,6.2 
6.4: 4.2,4.4 
6.5: 6.4 
7.1: 2.3,3.2,3.3,5.1 
7.3: 3.2,3.3,4.2 
7.4: 7.3 
Any hereditary set in the above partial ordering of sections can be 
used as a course. A very short course could consist of the core Sections 
1.1, 1.3, 1.4, 2.1, 3.1, and 4.1. A one quarter course might consist of the 
above core plus Sections 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.2, and 3.3 or 3.5; this would give 
a fairly complete picture of countable models. An alternative one 
quarter course which emphasizes ultraproducts and saturated models 
would add to the core the Sections 4.3, 5.1, and either 4.2, 4.4, or 6.1. 
All of Chapters 1 through 4 plus Sections 5.1, 6.1, and 7.1 would make 
an appropriate one semester course. 
The exercises range from extremely easy to impossibly difficult. Exercises 
of more than routine difficulty are indicated by a single star; a few of the more 
difficult ones have double stars. Quite often improvements of the basic 
theorems proved in the text are put in the exercises. Some exercises are major 
theorems in their own right and we have included them to broaden the cov- 
erage. In order to gain an understanding of the field the student should try 
to do at least a third of the exercises. 
At the end of the book we have included a list of unsolved problems in 
classical model theory. We feel that the solution of any of them would be 
a substantial contribution and worthy of publication. Not all of the problems 
originated with us. 
We have collected all the historical remarks on the results in the text, the 
exercises, and the open problems in a separate section entitled Historical 

XI1 
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK AS A TEXT 
Notes. In all probability there will be some omissions and errors for which 
we apologize in advance. In many cases students can find suggestions for 
further study in these notes. 
Two final remarks on typography. The word ‘iff’ is used in all definitions 
that require it and is to mean ‘if and only if’. The end of each proof is indi- 
cated by the symbol -I, which is meant to suggest the reverse of the common 
yield sign of first-order logic. 
A MAPPING FROM THE SECOND TO THE THIRD 
ED IT I 0  N 
Here is a table of results and exercises in the Second Edition which 
have new numbers in the Third Edition. Most of these changes are in the 
old part of Section 3.1 on model completeness, which has been replaced 
by the new Section 3.5, and in Section 3.2, which has been simplified 
using recursively saturated models. E stands for “Exercise”. 
OLD NUMBER 
3.1.7 
3.1.8 
3.1.9 
3.1.10 
3.1.11 
3.1.12 
3.1.13 
3.1.14 
3.1.15 
3.1.16 
NEW NUMBER 
3.5.1 
3.5.3 
3.5.11 
3.1.7 
3.1.8 
3.5.8 
3.1.9 
3.5.10 
3.1.10 
3.1.11 
3.2.7 
2.4.3 
3.2.8 
2.4.2 
3.2.9 
3.2.8 
3.2.10 
E3.2.11 
3.2.11 
3.2.7 
3.2.12 - 3.2.16 
3.2.9 - 3.2.13 

XI11 
A MAPPING FROM THE SECOND TO THE THIRD EDITION 
E2.1.25 
E3.1.2 
E3.1.11 
E3.1.12 
E3.1.14 
E3.1.16 
E3.1.17 
E3.1.18 
E3.2.5 
E3.2.6 
E3.2.7 
E3.2.11 
E2.1.16- E2.1.19 
E2.1.20 
E3.5.2 
E3.5.6 
3.5.9 
E3.5.7 
after 3.5.18 
3.5.18 
E3.5.9 
2.4.3 
E2.4.6 
E2.4.8 
E2.4.7 
E2.1.21 - E2.1.24 

This Page Intentionally Left Blank

CONTENTS 
Chapter 1. Introduction 
. 
1.1. What is model theory? . 
1.2. Model theory for sentential logic 
. 
1.3. Languages, models and satisfaction . 
1.4. Theories and examples of theories . 
1.5. Elimination of quantifiers 
. 
Chapter 2. Models constructed from constants 
2.1. Completeness and compactness 
. 
2.2. Refinements of the method. Omitting types and interpolation 
2.3. Countable models of complete theories 
2.4. Recursively saturated models 
. . . . . . . . . 
2.5. Lindstrom’s characterization of first order logic . . . 
. 
theorems 
. 
. 
Chapter 3. Further model-theoretic constructions . 
3.1. Elementary extensions and elementary chains 
3.2. Applications of elementary chains . 
3.3. Skolem functions and indiscernibles . 
3.4. Some examples 
. 
3.5. Model completeness 
. 
. 
Chapter 4. Ultraproducts . 
4.1. The fundamental theorem 
. 
4.2. Measurable cardinals 
. 
4.3. Regular ultrapowers 
. 
4.4. Nonstandard universes . 
xv 
1 
1 
4 
18 
36 
49 
61 
61 
77 
96 
109 
127 
136 
136 
147 
163 
178 
186 
21 1 
21 1 
227 
248 
262 

XVI 
CONTENTS 
Chapter 5. Saturated and special models 
5.1. Saturated and special models . 
5.2. Preservation theorems . 
5.3. Applications of special models to the theory of definability . 
5.4. Applications to field theory 
5.5. Application to Boolean algebras 
. 
. 
. 
Chapter 6. More about ultraproducts and generalizations 
. 
6.1. Ultraproducts which are saturated . 
6.2. Direct products, reduced products, and Horn sentences 
. 
6.3. Direct products, reduced products, and Horn sentences (con- 
6.4. Limit ultrapowers and complete extensions 
6.5. Iterated ultrapowers 
. 
tinued) 
. 
. 
Chapter 7. Selected topics . 
7.1. Categoricity in power . 
7.2. An extension of Ramsey’s theorem and applications; some 
two-cardinal theorems . 
7.3. Models of large cardinality 
7.4. Large cardinals and the constructible universe , 
. 
Appendix A. Set theory 
. 
Appendix B. Open problems in classical model theory . 
Historical notes 
Referen‘ces 
Additiohal references 
Index of definitions . 
292 
292 
306 
323 
342 
372 
384 
384 
405 
420 
447 
463 
482 
482 
509 
534 
558 
579 
597 
603 
623 
634 
641 
Index of symbols 
. 
. 649 

CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1. What is model theory? 
Model theory is the branch of mathematical logic which deals with the 
relation between a formal language and its interpretations, or models. We 
shall concentrate on the model theory of first-order predicate logic, which 
may be called ‘classical model theory’. 
Let us now take a short introductory tour of model theory. We begin 
with the models which are structures of the kind which arise in mathematics. 
For example, the cyclic group of order 5, the field of rational numbers, 
and the partially-ordered structure consisting of all sets of integers ordered 
by inclusion, are models of the kind we consider. At this point we could, 
if we wish, study our models at once without bringing the formal language 
into the picture. We then would be in the area known as universal algebra, 
which deals with homomorphisms, substructures, free structures, direct 
products, and the like. The line between universal algebra and model 
theory is sometimes fuzzy; our own usage is explained by the equation 
universal algebra+ logic = model theory. 
To arrive at model theory, we set up our formal language, the first-order 
logic with identity. We specify a list of symbols and then give precise rules 
by which sentences can be built up from the symbols. The reason for 
setting up a formal language is that we wish to use the sentences to say 
things about the models. This is accomplished by giving a basic truth 
definition, which specifies for each pair consisting of a sentence and a model 
one of the truth values true or false. The truth definition is the bridge 
connecting the formal language with its interpretation by means of models. 
If the truth value ‘true’ goes with the sentence rp and model !2l, we say that 
1 

2 
INTRODUCI‘ION 
[1.1 
cp is true in PI and also that 3 is a model of q. Otherwise we say that cp is 
false in ?I and that ’% is not a model of cp. Moreover, we say that ‘II 
is a model of u set C of sentences iff 11 is a model of each sentence in the 
set C. 
What kinds of theorems are proved in model theory? We can already 
give a few examples. Perhaps the earliest theorem in model theory is Lowen- 
heim’s theorem (Lowenheim, 1915): If a sentence has an infinite model, 
then it has a countable model. Another classical result is the compactness 
theorem, due to Godel (1930) and Malcev (1936): if each finite subset of 
a set C of sentences has a model, then the whole set C has a model. As 
a third example, we may state a more recent result, due to Morley (1965). 
Let us say that a set C of sentences is categorical in power a iff there is, 
up to isomorphism, exactly one model of C of power a. Morley’s theorem 
states that, if C is categorical in one uncountable power, then C is categorical 
in every uncountable power. 
These theorems are typical results of model theory. They say something 
negative about the ‘power of expression’ of first-order predicate logic. 
Thus Lowenheim’s theorem shows that no consistent sentence can imply 
that a model is uncountable. Morley’s theorem shows that first-order 
predicate logic cannot, as far as categoricity is concerned, tell the difference 
between one uncountable power and another. And the compactness theorem 
has been used to show that many interesting properties of models cannot 
be expressed by a set of first-order sentences - for instance, there is no set 
of sentences whose models are precisely all the finite models. 
The three theorems we have stated also say something positive about 
the existence of models having certain properties. Indeed, in almost all of 
the deeper theorems in model theory the key to the proof is to construct 
the right kind of a model. For instance, look again at Lowenheim’s theorem. 
To prove that theorem, we must begin with an uncountable model of a 
given sentence and construct from it a countable model of the sentence. 
Likewise, to prove the compactness theorem we must construct a single 
model in which each sentence of C is true. Even Morley’s theorem depends 
vitally on the construction of a model. To prove it we begin with the assump- 
tion that C has two different models of one uncountable power and construct 
two different models of every other uncountable power. 
There are a small number of extremely important ways in which models 
have been constructed. For example, for various purposes they can be 
constructed from individual constants, from functions, from Skoleni terms, 
or from unions of chains. These constructions give the subject of model 

1.11 
WHAT IS MODEL THEORY? 
3 
theory unity. To a large extent, we have organized this book according 
to these ways of constructing models. 
Another point which gives model theory unity is the distinction between 
sy/itax and seniantics. Syntax refers to the purely formal structure of the 
language - for instance, the length of a sentence and the collection of 
symbols occurring in a sentence, are syntactical properties. Semantics 
refers to the interpretation, or meaning, of the formal language - the truth 
or falsity of a sentence in a model is a semantical property. As we shall 
soon see, much of model theory deals with the interplay of syntactical and 
semantical ideas. 
We now turn to a brief historical sketch. The mathematical world was 
forced to observe that a theory may have more than one model in the 19th 
century, when Bolyai and Lobachevsky developed non-Euclidean geo- 
metry, and Riemann constructed a model in which the parallel postulate 
was false but all the other axioms were true. Later in the 19th century, Frege 
formally developed the predicate logic, and Cantor developed the intuitive 
set theory in which our models live. 
Model theory is a young subject. It was not clearly visible as a separate 
area of research in mathematics until the early 1950’s. However, its historical 
roots go back to the older subjects of logic, universal algebra, and set 
theory - and some of the early work, such as Lowenheim’s theorem, is now 
classified as model theory. Other important early developments which 
contributed to the theory are: the extension of Lowenheim’s theorem by 
Skolem (1920) and Tarski; the completeness theorem of Godel (1930) and 
its generalization by Malcev (1936); the characterization of definable sets 
of real numbers, the rigorous definition of the truth of a sentence in a model, 
and the study of relational systems by Tarski (1931, 1933, 1935a); the 
construction of a nonstandard model of number theory by Skolem (1934); 
and the study of equational classes initiated by Birkhoff (1935). Model 
theory owes a great deal to general methods which were originally developed 
for special purposes in older branches of mathematics. We shall come across 
many instances of this in our book; to mention just one, the important 
notion of a saturated model (Chapter 5) goes back to the q.-structures 
in the theory of simple order, due to Hausdorff (1914). The subject grew 
rapidly after 1950, stimulated by the papers of Henkin (1949), Tarski (1950), 
and Robinson (1950). The phrase ‘theory of models’ is due to Tarski (1954). 
Today the literature in the subject is quite extensive. There is a rather 
complete bibliography in Addison, Henkin and Tarski (1965). In recent 
years, the theory of models has been applied to obfain significant results 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.2 
in other fields, notably set theory, algebra and analysis. However, until 
now only a tiny part of the potential strength of model theory has been 
used in such applications. It will be interesting to see what happens when 
(and if) the full strength is used. 
1.2. Model theory for sentential logic 
In our introduction, Section 1.1, we gave a general idea of the flavor of 
model theory, but we were not yet ready to give many details. We shall 
now come down to earth and give a rigorous treatment of model theory 
for a very simple formal language, sentential logic (also known as proposi- 
tional calculus). We shall quickly develop this ‘toy’ model theory along 
lines parallel to the much deeper model theory for predicate logic. The basic 
ideas are the decision procedure via truth tables, due to Post (1921), and 
Lindenbaum’s theorem with the compactness theorem which follows. This 
section will give a preview of what lies ahead in our book. 
We are assuming (see Preface) that the reader is already thoroughly 
familiar with sentential, and even predicate, logic. Thus we shall feel free 
to proceed at a fairly rapid pace. Nevertheless, we shall start from scratch, 
in order to show what sentential logic looks like when it is developed in the 
spirit of model theory. 
Classical sentential logic is designed to study a set Y of simple Statements, 
and the compound statements built up from them. At the most intuitive 
level, an intended interpretation of these statements is a ‘possible world’, 
in which each statement is either true or false. We wish to replace these 
intuitive interpretations by a collection of precise mathematical objects 
which we may use as our models. The first thing which comes to mind is 
a function F which associates with each simple statement S one of the truth 
values ‘true’ or ‘false’. Stripping away the inessentials, we shall instead 
take a model to be a subset A of 9’; 
the idea is that S E A indicates that the 
simple statement S is true, and S #  A indicates that the simple statement S 
is false. 
1.2.1. By a model A for 9’ 
we simply mean a subset A of Y. 
Thus the set of all models has the power 2Iy’. Several relations and 
operations between models come to mind; for example, A c B, Y - A ,  
and the intersection O i c , A i  of a set { A i  : i EZ ] of models. ‘Two distinguished 
models are the empty set Q) and the set Y itself. 

1.21 
MODEL THEORY FOR SENTENTIAL LOGIC 
5 
We now set up the sentential logic as a formal language. The symbols of 
connectives A (and), i 
(not); 
parentheses ), (; 
a nonempty set Y 
of sentence symbols. 
our language are as follows: 
Intuitively, the sentence symbols stand for simple statements, and the 
connectives A ,  i 
stand for the words used to combine simple statements 
into compound statements. Formally, the sentences of Y are defined as 
follows: 
1.2.2. 
(i). Every sentence symbol S is a sentence. 
(ii). If cp is a sentence then (1 cp) is a sentence. 
(iii). If cp, I) are sentences, then (cp A I)) is a sentence. 
(iv). A finite sequence of symbols is a sentence only if it can be shown 
to be a sentence by a finite number of applications of (i)-(iii). 
Our definition of sentence of 9’ may be restated as a recursive definition 
A single symbol is a sentence iff it is a sentential symbol; a sequence cp 
of symbols of length n > 1 is a sentence iff there are sentences I) and 8 
of length less than n such that cp is either (-I I)) or (I) A 0). 
The set of all sentences of 9’ is the least set C of finite sequences of 
symbols of Y such that each sentence symbol S belongs to I: and, 
whenever I), 0 are in C, then (1 I)), (I) A 0) belong to Z. 
No matter how we may think of sentences, the important thing is that 
properties of sentences can only be established through an induction based 
on 1.2.2. More precisely, to show that every sentence cp has a given 
property P, we must establish three things: (1) Every sentence symbol S 
has the property P; (2) if cp is (1 I)) and I) has the property P, then cp has 
the property P; (3) if cp is ($A 0) and $, 8 have the property P, then cp 
has the property P. (The reader may check his understanding of this point 
by proving through induction that every sentence cp has the same number 
of right parentheses as it has left parentheses.) 
How many sentences of 9’ are there? This depends on the number of 
sentence symbols S E  9. 
Each sentence is a finite sequence of symbols. 
If the set 9’ is finite or countable, then there are countably many sentences 
of 9’. Of course, not every finite sequence of symbols is a sentence; for 
based on the length of a finite sequence of symbols: 
Alternatively, our definition may be restated in set-theoretical terms: 

6 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.2 
instance, (So A (1 S,)) 
is a sentence, but A A )S, and So ~i 
S, are not. 
If the set Y of sentence symbols has uncountable cardinal 3, then the set 
of sentences of Y also has power u. 
Let us pause briefly to explain the role of the Greek letters cp, $, Z, etc. 
In the above paragraphs we have used the lower case Greek letters cp, I/J, 0, . . . 
as names for arbitrary finite sequences of symbols of Y. These letters were 
needed in order to write down the definition of a sentence. From now on, 
we shall be much more interested in sentences than in arbitrary finite 
sequences of symbols. We shall hereafter use the lower case Greek letters 
cp, I/J, 8, ... as names for arbitrary sentences of Y. The situation is similar 
to elementary arithmetic, where we study natural numbers 0, 1,2, 3, ..., 
but much of the time we write down letters like m, n, x ,  y, . . . as names for 
arbitrary natural numbers. Just as in arithmetic where we write things like 
m = x+y, we shall now write, for example, cp = ($A 0) to express the fact 
that cp and ($ A 0) are the same sentence. In the above paragraphs we also 
used capital Greek letters C, r, ... as names for arbitrary sets of finite 
sequences of symbols of 9; 
hereafter we shall use the capital Greek 
letters as names for arbitrary sets of sentences of 9’. 
The symbols 
cp, I/J, 0, ..., Z, r, ... are not in our list of formal symbols of our language - 
they are merely informal symbols which we use to talk more easily about Y. 
We shall introduce abbreviations to our language in the usual way, 
in order to make sentences more readable. The symbols v (or), -+ (implies), 
and - (if and only if) are abbreviations defined as follows: 
(cp v $1 for (m 
cp)A (1 $))), 
(cp + +I for ((1 
cpp>v$), 
(cp - 
I/J) 
for 
((cp 
-+ $1 A (+ + cp)). 
Of course, v, -+ and t) could just as well have been included in our list 
of symbols as three more connectives. However, there are certain advantages 
to keeping our list of symbols short. For instance, 1.2.2 and proofs 
by induction based on it are shorter this way. At the other extreme, 
we could have managed with only a single connective, whose English transla- 
tion is ‘neither ... nor ...’. We did not do this because ‘neither ... nor ...’ 
is a rather unnatural connective. 
Another abbreviation which we shall adopt is to leave out unnecessary 
parentheses. For instance, we shall never bother to write outer parentheses 
in a sentence - thus i 
S is our abbreviation for the sentence (1 S). We shall 
follow the commonly accepted usage in dropping other parentheses. Thus 
-I is considered more binding than A and v , which in turn are more binding 

1.21 
MODEL THEORY FOR SENTENTIAL LOGIC 
7 
than --f and C I .  For instance, i 
cp v $ + 8 A 'p means ((1 'p) v+) --f (0 A 9). 
Hereafter we shall use the single symbol Y to denote both the set of 
sentence symbols and the language built on these symbols. There is no fear 
of confusion in this double usage since the language is determined uniquely, 
modulo the connectives, by the sentence symbols. 
We are now ready to build a bridge between the language Y and its 
models, with the definition of the truth of a sentence in a model. We shall 
express the fact that a sentence cp is true in a model A succinctly by the 
special notation 
A k p. 
The relation A k cp is defined as follows: 
1.2.3. 
(i). If cp is a sentence symbol S, then A k cp holds if and only if S E A .  
(ii). If cp is I) A 8, then A k cp if and only if both A k $ and A C 8. 
(iii). If cp is i 
$, then A k cp iff it is not the case that A k $. 
When A k cp, we say that cp is true in A, or that cp holds in A ,  or that A 
is a model of cp. When it is not the case that A k cp, we say that cp is false in A, 
or that cp fails in A .  The above definition of the relation A C cp is an example 
of a recursive definition based on 1.2.2. The proof that the definition 
is unambiguous for each sentence cp is, of course, a proof by induction 
based on 1.2.2. 
An especially important kind of sentence is a valid sentence. A sentence cp 
is called ualid, in symbols k cp, iff cp holds in all models for 9, that is, iff 
A k cp for all A .  Some notions closely related to validity are mentioned in 
the exercises. 
At first glance, it seems that for Yinfinite we have to examine uncountably 
many different infinite models A in order to find out whether a sentence cp is 
valid. This is'because validity is a semantical notion, defined in terms of 
models. However, as the reader surely knows, there is a simple and uniform 
test by which we can find out in only finitely many steps whether or not a 
given sentence p is valid. 
This decision procedure for validity is based on a syntactical notion, 
the notion of a tautology. Let cp be a sentence such that all the sentence 
symbols which occur in cp are among the n+ 1 symbols So, S , ,  ..., S,. Let 
0 0 ,  a,, ..., a,, be a sequence made up of the two letters t, f. We shall call 
such a sequence an assignment. 

8 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.2 
1.2.4. The value of a sentence cp for the assignment a, , . . . , a, is defined 
(i). If cp is the sentence symbol S,,,, m < n, then the value of cp is a,,,. 
(ii). If cp is i 
$, then the value of cp is the opposite of the value of $. 
(iii). If cp is $ ~ 8 ,  
then the value of cp is t if the values of I) 
and 8 are 
recursively as follows: 
both t, and otherwise the value of cp is f. 
Note how similar Definitions 1.2.3 and 1.2.4 are. The only essential 
difference is that 1.2.3 involves an infinite model A, while 1.2.4 involves 
only a finite assignment a, , . . ., a,, . 
1.2.5. Let cp be a sentence and let So, ..., S,, be all the sentence symbols 
occurring in cp. 
cp is said to be a tautology, in symbols I- cp, iff cp has 
the value t for every assignment a,, ..., a,,. 
We shall use both of the symbols C, t- in many ways throughout this book. 
To keep things straight, remember this: C is used for semantical ideas, 
and 1 is used for syntactical ideas. 
The value of a sentence cp for an assignment a,, . . . , a,, may be very easily 
computed. We first find the values of the sentence symbols occurring in cp 
and then work our way through the smaller sentences used in building up 
the sentence cp. A table showing the value of cp for each possible assignment 
a,, ..., a, is called a truth table of cp. We shall assume that truth tables are 
already quite familiar to the reader, and that he knows how to construct 
a truth table of a sentence. Truth tables provide a simple and purely mech- 
anical procedure to determine whether a sentence cp is a tautology - simply 
write down the truth table for cp and check to see whether cp has the value t 
for every assignment. 
PROPOSITION 
1.2.6. Suppose that aN the sentence symbols occurring in rp 
are among So, S, , ..., S,,. Then the value of cp for an assignment 
a,, a,; ..., a,,, ..., a,+, is the same as the value of cp for the assignment 
ao, 111, ..., an. 
We now prove the first of a series of theorems which state that a certain 
syntactical condition is equivalent to a semantical condition. 
THEOREM 1.2.7 (Completeness Theorem). I- cp if and only if C cp; in words, 
a sentence is a tautology if and only if it is valid. 

1.21 
MODEL THEORY FOR SENTENTIAL LOGIC 
9 
PROOF. Let cp be a sentence and let all the sentence symbols in cp be among 
So, ..., S,,. Consider an arbitrary model A. For m = 0, 1, ..., n, put a,,, = t 
if S,,, E A, and a,,, = f if S,,, 4 A .  This gives us an assignment a,, a, , . .., a,,. 
We claim: 
(1) A I. cp if and only if the value of cp for the assignment a, , a, , . . ., a,, is t. 
This can be readily proved by induction. It is immediate if cp is a sentence 
symbol S,,,. Assuming that (1) holds for cp = I) and for cp = 0, we see 
at once that (1) holds for cp = i $  
and cp = $ A 0 .  
Now let So, ..., S,, be all the sentence symbols ocdurring in cp. If rp is a 
tautology, then by (I), cp is valid. Since every assignment a,, a, , ..., a,, 
can be obtained from some model A, it follows from (1) that, if cp is valid, 
then cp is a tautology. 4 
Our decision procedure for t cp now can be used to decide whether rp 
is valid. Several times we shall have an occasion to use the fact that a 
particular sentence is a tautology, or is valid. We shall never take the trouble 
actually to give the proof that a sentence of Y 
is valid, because the proof 
is always the same - we simply look at the truth table. 
Let us now introduce the notion of a formal deduction in our logic 9. 
The Rule of Detachment (or Modus Ponens) states: 
From $ and I(/ --f cp infer cp. 
We say that cp is inferred from $, 0 by detachment iff 0 is the sentence $ + cp. 
Now consider a finite or infinite set C of 9’. 
A sentence cp is deducible from C, in symbols C t cp, iff there is a finite 
sequence $,, $,, ..., $,, of sentences such that cp = $,, and each sentence 
$,,, is either a tautology, belongs to C, or is inferred from two earlier sentences 
of the sequence by detachment. The sequence $,, $, , ..., $,, is called a 
deduction of cp from C. Note that cp is deducible from the empty set of 
sentences if and only if cp is a tautology. 
We shall say that C is inconsistent iff we have C t cp for all sentences cp. 
Otherwise, we say that ,Z is consistent. Finally, we say that C is maximal 
consistent iff C is consistent, but the only consistent set of sentences which 
includes C is C itself. The proposition below contains facts which can be 
found in most elementary logic texts. 
PROPOSITION 
1.2.8. 
then r is consistent. 
(i). If C is consistent and r is the set of all sentences deducible from 1, 

10 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.2 
(ii). VC is maximal consistent and C t- cp, then cp E C. 
(iii). C is inconsistent if and only ifC k SA i 
S (for any S E 9). 
(iv) (Deduction Theorem). r f C  u {$} t. cp, then C t $ --+ cp. 
LEMMA 1.2.9 (Lindenbaum’s Theorem). Any consistent set C of senterices 
can be enlarged to a maximal consistent set r of sentences. 
PROOF. Let us arrange all the sentences of Y in a list, q,,, q l ,  cpz, .. .) qa7 . . .. 
The order in which we list them is immaterial, as’ long as the list associates 
in a one-one fashion an ordinal number with each sentence. We shall form 
an increasing chain 
C =,To c C, c C, c ... c z, c ... 
of consistent sets of sentences. If C u (qo} is consistent, define 
C, = C u {qo}. Otherwise define Z, = C. At the ath stage, we define 
Ca+, = 1, u (q,} i€C, u (qZ} isconsistent, andotherwisedefineC,. 
= C,. 
At limit ordinals a take unions, C, = UB<mC’B. 
Now let r be the union of 
all the sets C,. 
We claim that r is consistent. Suppose not. Then there is a deduction 
$o, $,, ...,$,, of the sentence S
A
~
 
S from I‘ (see Proposition 1.2.8). Let 
8, , ..., 8, be all the sentences in r which are used in this deduction. We may 
choose a so that all of el, ..., 8, belong to C,. But this means that C, is 
inconsistent (again see Proposition 1.2.8), which is a contradiction. 
Having shown that r is consistent, we next claim that r is maximal 
consistent. For suppose A is consistent and r c A. Let c p , ~  
A. Then 
C, u {cp,} 
is consistent, and hence C,+, = C, u {cp,}. 
Thus cp, E r, and 
hence A = r. -I 
LEMMA 
1.2.10. Suppose r is a maximal consistent set of sentences in Y. Then: 
(i). For each sentence cp, exactly one of the sentences cp, i 
cp belongs to I-. 
(ii). For each pair of sentemes cp, $, cp A +  belongs to I’ if and only if 
both cp and + belong to r. 
We leave the proof as an exercise. 
Now consider a set C of sentences of 9’. We shall say that A is a model of 
C, A k Z, 
iff every sentence cp E B is true in A. C is said to be satisfiable iff 
it has at least one model. We now prove the most important theorem of 
sentential logic, which is a criterion for a set C to be satisfiable. 

1.21 
MODEL THEORY FOR SENTENTIAL LOGIC 
11 
THEOREM 
I .2.11 (Extended Completeness Theorem). A set C of sentences of 
9’ 
is consistent if and only ifZ is satisfiable. 
PROOF. Assume first that ,E is satisfiable, and let A k Z. We show that every 
sentence deducible from C holds in A .  Let I),, I), , ..., I),, be a deduction of 
i,bn from C. Let m < n. If I),,, 
E Z or if I),,, is a tautology, then $, 
holds in A .  
If $, 
is inferred from two sentences $,,, I), -+ I), which hold in A ,  then I)”, 
must clearly hold in A .  It follows by induction on m that each of the sentences 
I),, 
...,I),, holds in A .  Since S A T  S does not hold in A, it is not 
deducible from C, so C is consistent. 
Now assume that C is consistent. By Lindenbaum’s theorem we enlarge 
C to a maximal consistent set r. 
We now construct a model of C. Let A be the set of all sentence synibols 
S E 9’ 
such that S E r. We show by induction that, for each sentence cp, 
(1) 
cp E r if and only if A k cp. 
By definition, (1) holds when cp is a sentence symbol S,,. Lemma 1.2.10(i) 
guarantees that, if (1) holds when cp = I), then (1) holds when cp = i 
I). 
Lemma 1.2.10(ii) guarantees that, if (1) holds when cp = I) and when 
cp = 8, then (1) holds when cp = $ A  8. From (1) it follows that A I= r, and, 
since Z c r, A k Z. -I 
We can obtain a purely semantical corollary. C is said to be finitely 
satisfiable iff every finite subset of C is satisfiable. 
COROLLARY 
1.2.12 (Compactness Theorem). /f C is finitely satisfiable, then 
C is satisfiable. 
PROOF. Suppose C is not satisfiable. Then by the extended completeness 
theorem 1 is inconsistent. Hence, C t- S A T  S. In the deduction of the 
sentence SA i 
S from C only a finite set Z, of sentences of Z is used. It 
follows that C, t- S A  i 
S, so Zo is inconsistent. Then C, 
is not satisfiable, 
so C is not finitely satisfiable. -I 
Note that the converse of the compactness theorem is trivially true, i.e., 
every satisfiable set of sentences is finitely satisfiable. 
We say that cp is a consequence of Z, in symbols C k cp, iff every model of 
C is a model of cp. The reader is asked to prove Exercises 1.2.3-1.2.6 as well 
as the following: 

12 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.2 
COROLLARY 
1.2.13 
(i). C t cp ifand only i f C  k cp. 
(ii). If Z t cp, then there is afinite subset C, o f C  such that C, 
k cp. 
We shall conclude our model theory for sentential logic with a few 
applications of the compactness theorem. In these applications, the true 
spirit of model theory will appear, but at a very rudimentary level. Since 
we shall often wish to combine a finite set of sentences into a single sentence, 
we shall use expressions like 
and 
In these expressions the parentheses are assumed, for the sake of definiteness, 
to be associated to the right; for instance, 
~ 1 A c p 2 A ~ 3  
= ' P l A ( ' P Z A ' P 3 ) '  
First we introduce a bit more terminology. A set f of sentences is called 
a theory. A theory is said to be closed iff every consequence of r belongs 
to I'. A set A of sentences is said to be a set of axioms for a theory f iff f 
and A have the same consequences. A theory is calledfinitely axiomaiizable 
iff it has a finite set of axioms. Since we may form the conjunction of a 
finite set of axioms, a finitely axiomatizable theory actually always has a 
single axiom. The set F of all consequences o f f  is the unique closed theory 
which has r as a set of axioms. 
PROPOSITION 
1.2.14. A is a set of axioms for a theory f if and only if A has 
exactly the same models as f. 
COROLLARY 
1.2.15. Let f , and f , 
be two theories such that the set of all 
models of rz 
is the complement of the set of all models off , . Then f and f , 
are both finitely axiomatizable. 
PROOF. The set rl u r2 is not satisfiable, so it is not finitely satisfiable. 
Thus we may choose finite sets A ,  c r,, A 2  c f2 such that A ,  v A, is not 
satisfiable. If A b A , , then A is not a model of r,, and consequently A k f , . 
It follows by Pkposition 1.2.14 that A ,  is a finite set of axioms for rl. 
Similarly A, is a finite set of axioms for r2. -I 

1.21 
MODEL THEORY FOR SENTENTIAL LOGIC 
13 
The next group of theorems shows connections between mathematical 
operations on models and syntactical properties of sentences. The first 
result of this group concerns positive sentences. A sentence cp is said to be 
positive iff cp is built up from sentence symbols using only the two connectives 
A ,  v .  For example, (So A ( S ,  v S,)) v S , ,  is positive, while i 
S, and 
S, c) S, are not positive. A set Z of sentences is called increasing iff A k C 
and A c B implies B k C. 
THEOREM 
1.2.16. 
in B. 
(i). A c B if and only if every positive sentence which holds in A holds 
(ii). A consistent theory r is increasing if and only iff has a set of positive 
(iii). A sentence cp is increasing if and only if either cp is equivalent to a 
axioms. 
positive sentence, cp is valid, or 7 cp is valid. 
PROOF. (i). The fact that, if A c B, then every positive sentence which holds 
in A holds in B, is proved by induction. First, every sentence symbol 
which holds in A holds in B, because of 1.2.3(i) and A c B. Using 
1.2.3(ii) and Exercise 1.2.2, it can be checked that, if the condition 'if cp 
holds in A ,  then cp holds in B' is true when cp = $, and when cp = 8, then 
it is also true when cp = $ A 0 and when cp = $ v 8. Hence that condition 
is true for every positive sentence cp. 
Suppose that every positive sentence which holds in A holds in B. In 
particular, for each S E 9, 
if A k S, then B k S. Thus, if S E A ,  then S E B, 
so A c B. This proves (i). 
(ii). Now let r be a consistent increasing theory. Let A be the set of all 
positive consequences o f f .  Suppose B k A .  Let C be the set of all sentences 
i 
cp such that cp is positive and B k i 
cp. Let i cpl, ..., i 
cp, E C. Then the 
sentence cp, v ... v cp, 
is a positive sentence which fails in B. Hence 
'pl v . . . v cp, 
does not belong to A and is not a consequence of r. Thus 
the set r u {i 
cpl, ..., i 
cp,} 
is satisfiable, and the set r u C is finitely 
satisfiable. By the compactness theorem, f u 2: has a model, say A .  Now 
for every positive sentence cp which fails in B, i 
cp E C, so cp fails in A .  
Thus every positive sentence holding in A holds in B, and by (i), A c B. 
Since A k f and r is increasing, we have B k r. We conclude that every 
model of A is a model of r. But A c F ,  and therefore A i p  a set of positive 
axioms for r. 

14 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.2 
Conversely, if r has a set of positive axioms, then it follows from (i) that 
r is increasing. 
(iii). Let cp be an increasing sentence. We may assume further that cp is 
satisfiable. If r is the set of all consequences of cp, then by (ii) r has a 
positive set A of axioms. Now cp E r, so A k cp, and by Corollary 1.2.13 
there is a finite subset ($,, ...,I),,} 
of A such that 
..., $"} k cp. If 
/ I  = 0, then cp is valid. Let n > 0. Each $," is in A and thus in r, so each 
$ff, is a consequence of cp. lt follows that cp is equivalent to the positive 
sentence 
A ... A$,,. 
Conversely, it follows from (I) that every positive sentence is increasing. 
Obviously, cvery valid sentence and every refutable sentence are also 
increasing. -I 
A completely trivial fact which is analogous to part (i) of the above 
theorem is: A = B if and only if every sentence which holds in A holds in B. 
We shall see later on in this book that the situation is very different in 
predicate logic, where a maximal consistent theory ordinarily does not even 
come close to characterizing a single model. This is one thing which makes 
model theory for predicate logic so much niore interesting and difficult 
than model theory for sentential logic. 
We now turn to another kind of sentence. By a conditional sentence 
we mean a sentence cp, A ... A cp,,, 
where each cpi is of one of the following 
three kinds: 
(1) s, 
(2) l s l v l s , v  ... VlS,, 
(3) i 
S ,  v i 
S2 v ... v i 
S,v T. 
A set C of sentences is said to be preserved under finite intersections iff 
A I= C and B 1 C implies A n B I= C. C is said to be preserved under arbitrarjv 
intersections iff for every nonempty set ( A i  : i E I }  of models of 1 the 
intersection n i e r A i  is also a model of L. 
LEMMA 
1.2.17. A theory r is preserved underJiiiite intersectioizs if and only if 
r is preserved under arbitrary intersections. 
PROOF. Let r be preserved under finite intersections, let ( A i  : i E I }  be a 
nonempty set of models of r, and let B = ni., A i .  Let C be the set of all 
sentences of the form S or i 
S which hold in B. We show that r u C is 
satisfiable. Let C, 
be an arbitrary finite subset of C, and let the negative 
sentences in C, 
be i 
S , ,  ..., i 
S,. If p = 0, all the sentences in C, 
are 

1.21 
MODEL THEORY FOR SENTENTIAL LOGIC 
15 
positive, and each of the models A ,  is a model of C,, because B c A i .  
Let p > 0 and choose models A i l ,  ..., Aip from among the A i  such that 
S1 4 A i l ,  ..., S, $ A i p .  Then A = Ail n .. . n Aip is a model of Z,,; 
since r 
is preserved under finite intersections, A is also a model of r. We have 
shown that r u C is finitely satisfiable. By the compactness theorem, 
r u C has a model. But the only model of C is B, so B is a model of r. -I 
In view of the above lemma, we may as well simply say from now on that 
r is preserved under intersections, since it makes no difference whether we 
say finite or arbitrary intersections. 
THEOREM 
1.2.18. 
set of conditional axioms. 
alent to a conditional sentence. 
(i). A theory r is preserved under intersections if and only if r has a 
(ii). A sentence cp is preserved irnder intersections if and only ifcp is equic- 
PROOF. (i). We leave to the reader the proof that every conditional sentence 
(and hence every set of conditional sentences) is preserved under inter- 
sections. 
Conversely, let r be preserved under intersections. Consider the set A 
of all conditional consequences of r. It suffices to show that every model of 
A is a model of r. Let B be an arbitrary model of A .  For each T E  9’--B, 
let Cr be the set of all sentences of the form 
s 1 A  ... A S , , A T T  
which hold in B. We also let the sentence i 
T itself be in IT. We first note 
that the conjunction of finitely many sentences in Zr is again equivalent 
to a sentence in Z T .  Consider a sentence cp E Cr . Then i 
cp is clearly equiv- 
alent to a conditional sentence $ either of the form S or of the form 
-IS, v.. . v i 
S, v T. 
But i,b fails in B, so 1(1 does not belong to A .  This means that $, and hence 
i 
cp, is not a consequence of r, and it follows that r u {cp} is satisfiable. 
Since CT is, up to equivalence, closed under finite conjunction, we see that 
r u C, is finitely satisfiable. Applying the Compactness Theorem, we may 
choose a model AT of r u C r .  
For each T E 9- 
B, we have T $ AT and B c A , .  Thus, if 9’- 
B is not 
empty, then 

16 
INTRODUCI'ION 
[1.2 
B = n A T .  
T 9 B  
Since each AT is a model of r and r is closed under intersections, we have 
B = r. In the remaining case B = 9, 
we let ,Y be the set of all sentences of 
the form 
S l ~  
... AS,,. 
Arguing as before, we find that r u Z is finitely satisfiable and thus has 
a model. But B is the only model of Z, so again B is a model of f. 
We have now shown that every model of A is a model of r, and it follows 
that A is a set of conditional axioms for r. 
(ii). This follows from (i) by an argument similar to the last part of the 
proof of Theorem 1.2.16. i 
We conclude with a table which summarizes the semantical and syntactical 
notions that we have shown to be equivalent (some of these are done in the 
exercises). 
TABLE 
1.2.1 
Syntax 
Semantics 
rp is a tautology, k rp 
Z is consistent 
IJI 
is inconsistent 
rp is deducible from Z, Z 
p is equivalent to a 
positive sentence 
rp is equivalent to a 
conditional sentence 
intersections 
'p is valid, C rp 
Z is satisfiable 
p is not satisfiable 
rp is a consequence of Z, Z C q~ 
rp is increasing, 
and not valid or refutable 
rp is preserved under 
IP 
EXERCISES 
1.2.1. Let A be a model such that S, T E A  and U, V E  9 ' - A .  Which of 
the following sentences are true in A? 
U, 
S, T A  U, i i 
i 
U, S + V, S A ( S V  U c r  ( V +  T)). 
1.2.2. Show that, if cp = $ v8, then A k cp if and only if A C $ or A C 6' 
or both. Concoct similar rules for A i= $ + 8 and A 
$ - 
8. 
1.2.3. A sentence cp is satisjiable iff it has at least one model. Show that cp is 
satisfiable if and only if i 
cp is not valid. 

1.21 
MODEL THEORY FOR SENTENTIAL LOGIC 
17 
1.2.4. A sentence cp is a consequence of another sentence $, in symbols 
$ k- cp, iff every model of $ is a model of cp. Show that $ C cp if and only if 
c * + c p .  
1.2.5. Two sentences cp and $ are (semantically) equivalent iff they have 
exactly the same models. Show that cp and $ are equivalent if and only if 
each one is a consequence of the other, and also if and only if C cp -$. 
1.2.6. Prove that if cp is satisfiable and Y 
is countable, then the set of all 
models of cp has the cardinal number of the continuum. 
1.2.7* (Interpolation Theorem). Assume that cp C $. Show that either (i) cp 
is refutable, (ii) $ is valid, or (iii) there exists a sentence 8 such that cp C 8, 
8 C $, and every sentence symbol which occurs in 8 also occurs in both cp 
and $. 
1.2.8. Prove Proposition 1.2.6. 
1.2.9* 
that K is the set of all models of C. 
models of Z is countably infinite. 
represented as the set of all models of some set of sentences. 
(i). For every finite set K of models, there is a set Z of sentences such 
(ii). Give an example of a set C of sentences such that the set of all 
(iii). Give an example of a countable set of models which cannot be 
In (ii) and (iii), assume that Y 
is countable. 
1.2.10. If C !- cp for all cp E r and if C u I' t 8, then C t 8. 
1.2.1 1. Prove that the set of all non-models of C is empty or of power 2IyI. 
1.2.12. Show that no positive sentence is valid and no positive sentence is 
refutable. 
1.2.13. A theory r is said to be complete iff for every sentence cp, exactly 
one of r I= cp, r k- i 
cp holds. For any set C of sentences, the following are 
equivalent: 
(i). The set of consequences of C is maximal consistent. 
(ii). C is a complete theory. 
(iii). C has exactly one model. 
(iv). There is a model A such that for all cp, C C cp iff A C cp. 
1.2.14. Let r be a consistent theory and let B be a model for 9. Prove that 

18 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.3 
B is a model of the set of all positive consequences of 
if and only if there is 
a model A of r such that A c B. 
1.2.15. Show that every conditional sentence is preservedunder intersections. 
1.2.16. State and prove the analogue of Exercise 1.2.14 for intersections 
and conditional sentences. 
1.2.17‘k. Formulate and prove a result like Theorem 1.2.18 for unions of 
sets of models. 
1.2.18. A set C of sentences is said to be independent iff, for each 0 E C, 
CJ is not a consequence of C- [o]. Prove that if 9’ 
is countable, then every 
theory r in 9 
has an independent set of axioms. 
[Hint: Show that r has a set of axioms C = {c1, nz, g3, ...> such that, 
for each n, I- 
--* on but not !- b, -+ on+ 
I .  Then consider the set 
lo1, 61 -+ 6 Z , f J l  --i 6 3 ,  ...>.I 
1.2.19**. Prove without any restriction on the cardinality of Y that every 
theory in Y has an independent set of axioms. (The case where (9’1 
= o1 
is very much easier than the general case, but still a challenge.) 
1.3. Languages, models and satisfaction 
We begin here the development of first-order languages in a way parallel 
to the treatment of sentential logic in Section 1.2. First, we shall define 
the notions of a first-order predicate language Y and of a model for 2. 
We introduce some basic relations between models - reductions and expan- 
sions, isomorphisms, submodels and extensions. We shall then develop 
the syntax of the language 9, 
defining the sets of terms, formulas and 
sentences, and presenting the axioms and rules of inference. Finally, we give 
the key definition of a sentence being true in a model for the language 2’. 
The precise formulation of this definition is much more of a challenge in 
first-order logic than it was for sentential logic. At the end of this section, 
we state the completeness and compactness theorems (Theorems 
I .3.20-1.3.22), but the proofs of these theorems are deferred until the next 
chapter. 
We first establish a uniform notation and set of conventions for such 
languages and their models. A language 2’ 
is a collection of symbols. These 
symbols are separated into three groups, relation symbols, function symbols 
and (individual) constant symbols. The relation and function symbols of 9 

1.31 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACTION 
19 
will be denoted by capital Latin letters P, F, with subscripts. Lower case 
Latin letters c, with subscripts, range over the constant symbols of 9. 
If 
9 
is a finite set, we may display the symbols of 9 
as follows: 
2 
= {Po, ..., P,,, Fo, . .., F,, co, . . ., c,}. 
Each relation symbol P of 9 
is assumed to be an n-placed relation for some 
integer n 3 1, depending on P. Similarly, each function symbol F of 9 
is 
an in-placed function symbol, where m 2 1 and m depends on F. Note 
that we do not allow 0-placed relation or function symbols. When dealing 
with several languages at the same time, we use the letters 9, 
S', 9", 
etc. 
If the symbols of the language are quite standard, as for example + for 
addition, 6 for an order relation, etc., we shall simply write 
9 
= (<}, 9 
= {<, +;,O}, 9 
= (+;, 
- , O , Z } ,  
etc., 
for such languages. The number of places of the various kinds of symbols is 
understood to follow the standard usage. The power, or cardinal of the 
language 9, 
denoted by I 191 
1, is defined as 
11911 = 0 u 191. 
We say that a language 9 
is countable or uncountable depending on whether 
1191 I is countable or uncountable. 
We occasionally pass from a given language 9 
to another language 9' 
which has all the symbols of 9 
plus some additional symbols. In such 
cases we use the notation 9 
c 9' 
and say that the language 9' 
is an 
expansion of 9, 
and that 9 is a reduction of 9'. 
In the special case where 
all the symbols in 9' 
but not in 9 
are constant symbols, 9' 
is said to be 
a simple expansion of 9. 
Since 9 
and 9' are just sets of symbols, the 
expansion 9' 
may be written as 9' 
= 9 
u X ,  where X is the set of new 
symbols. 
Turning now to the models for a given language 9, 
we first point out that 
the situation here is more complicated than for the sentential logic 9 
in 
Section 1.2. There, each S E  9 
could take on at most two values, true or 
false. Thus the set of intended interpretations for 9 
has rather simple 
properties, as the reader discovered. This time, each n-placed relation 
symbol has as its intended interpretations all n-placed relations among 
the objects, each m-placed function symbol has as its intended interpreta- 
tions all m-placed functions from objects to objects, and, finally, each 
constant symbol has as intended interpretations fixed or constant objects. 
Therefore, a 'possible world', or model for 9 
consists, first of all, of a 

20 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.3 
universe A, a nonempty set. In this universe, each n-placed P corresponds 
to an n-placed relation R c A" on A, each m-placed F corresponds to an 
m-placed function G : A" --* A on A ,  and each constant symbol c corresponds 
to a constant x E A .  This correspondence is given by an interpretation 
function 9 
mapping the symbols of 9 
to appropriate relations, functions 
and constants in A .  A model for 9 
i s  a pair ( A ,  9). 
We use Gothic letters 
to range over models. Thus we write 2l = ( A ,  ,a), 23 = ( B ,  $), 
Q = (C, Y ) ,  
etc., with appropriate subscripts and superscripts. We shall 
try to be quite consistent in this respect, so that the universes of the models 
B', B", B,, Bj, etc., are precisely the sets B', B", B,, Bj, etc. The relations, 
functions and constants of 2l are, respectively, the images under 3 of the 
relation symbols, function symbols and constant symbols of 9. 
Note that in a given universe A there are many different permissible 
interpretations of the symbols of 9. 
Suppose 9€ = ( A ,  9), 
'LL' = (A', 9') 
are models for 9 
and R, R' are relations of 'LL, !U', respectively. We say that 
R' is the corresponding relation to R if they are the interpretations of the 
same relation symbol in 2, 
i.e. 
9 ( P )  = R and 9 ' ( P )  = R' for some P E 9. 
We introduce similar conventions as regards the functions and constants. 
When 
we write the models for 9 
in displayed form as 
9 
= {Po, . . . , P, , Fo , . . . , F, , c0 , . . . , c ~ } ,  
2l = ( A ,  Ro, ..., R,, Go, ..., G,, xO, ..., xq). 
When the symbols of 9 
are familiar, we shall agree to use, for instance, 
2l = ( A ,  <, +;) 
for models of the language 9 
= { 6 ,  +, .}. We may resort to 
23 = ( B ,  G B ,  +B, 
aB>, 
etc., 
2l = ( A ,  <%, +11, 
a d ,  
if the context of the discussion requires it. 
If we start with a model 91 for the language 9 
we can always expand it 
to a model for the language 2' 
= 9 
u X by giving appropriate inter- 
pretations for the symbols in X .  If 9' 
is any interpretation for the symbols 
of X in a, and Xis disjoint from 9, 
then 2l' = ( A ,  9 
u Y') is a model for 
2". 
In this case we say that a' is an expansion of 'LL to Y', and 'LL is the 
reduct of a' to 9. 
Sometimes we use the shorter notation (g, -@') for a'. 
Clearly, there are many ways a model 2l for 9 
can be expanded to a model 

1.31 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACTION 
21 
%’ for 9’. 
On the other hand, given a model 3’ for 9’, 
it has only one 
reduction % to 9. 
Namely, we form % by restricting the interpretation 
function 9’ 
on 9 
u X to 9. 
The processes of expansion and reduction 
do not change the universe of the model. 
The cardinal, or power, of the model fl is the cardinal IAl. % is said to be 
finite, countable or uncountable if IAl is finite, countable or uncountable. 
Note that on a finite universe A ,  while there can be only finitely many 
different relations, functions and constants, the number of different inter- 
pretation functions 9 
can be very large and depends on 191. 
We next introduce some simple but basic notions and operations on 
models. The reader should go through the exercises at the end of this section 
in order to be familiar with them. 
Two models fl and 3’ for 9 
are isomorphic iff there is a 1-1 function f 
mapping A onto A’ satisfying: 
(i). For each n-placed relation R of 
and the corresponding relation 
R’ of a‘, 
R(x, ... x,,) if and only if R ’ ( f ( x , )  ...f( 
x,,)) 
for all xl, ..., x,, in A .  
G‘ of M’, 
(ii). For each m-placed function G of M and the corresponding function 
f(G(x1 ... x m ) )  = G’(f(x1) ...f(xm)), 
for all x l ,  ..., x, in A .  
(iii). For each constant x of ?I 
and the corresponding constant x’ of a’, 
f ( x )  = x’. 
A function f that satisfies the above is called an isomorphism of % onto %’, 
or an isomorphism between fl and a‘. We use the notation f :  % g U’ to 
denote that f is an isomorphism of % onto %’, and we use % 
8’ for % is 
isomorphic to a’. For convenience we use 2 to denote the isomorphism 
relation between models for 9. 
It is quite clear that z is an equivalence 
relation. Furthermore, it preserves powers, that is, if fl 1 
23, then IAl = (BI. 
Indeed, unless we wish to consider the particular structure of each element 
of A or B, for all practical purposes fl and 23 are the same if they are 
isomorphic. 
A model fl‘ is called a submodel of % if A’ c A and: 
(i). Each n-placed relation R‘ of %’ is the restriction to A’ of the corre- 
sponding relation R of fl, i.e., R’ = R n (A’)”. 

22 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.3 
(ii). Each m-placed function G' of ?I' 
is the restriction to A' of the 
(iii). Each constant of '21' is the corresponding constant of PI. 
We use '21' c '21 to denote that '21' is a submodel of 'II, and the symbol c 
for the submodel relation between models for 2. 
The reader should show 
that c is a partial-order relation and that, if '21 c 23, then IAl < IBI. 
We say that 93 is an extension of '2l if '21 is a submodel of 23. 
Combining the above two notions, we say that 9l is isomorphically embedded 
in 93 if there is a model G and an isomorphism f such that f : '21 2 G and 
0: c B. In this case we call the function f an isomorphic embedding of '21 in 23. 
If Pi is isomorphically embedded in 23, then % is isomorphic to an extension 
of ?I. 
To formalize a language 9, 
we need the following logical symbols 
(see the corresponding development for Y in Section 1.2.): 
corresponding function G of '21, i.e., G' = GI(A')". 
parentheses 
), (; 
variables 
u g ,  u , ,  ...) u,, ...; 
connectives 
A (and), i 
(not); 
quantifier 
V (for all); 
and one binary relation symbol = (identity). 
We assume, of course, that no symbol in 9 
occurs in the above list. 
Certain strings of symbols from the above list and from 9 
are called terms. 
They are defined as follows: 
1.3.1. 
(i). A variable is a term. 
(ii). A constant symbol is a term. 
(iii). If F is an m-placed function symbol and t,, ..., t, are terms, then 
(iv). A string of symbols is a term only if it can be shown to be a term 
F(t, ... t,) is a term. 
by a finite number of applications of (i)-(iii). 
The atomic formulas of 9 
are strings of the form given below: 
1.3.2. 
(i). t ,  3 t ,  is an atomic formula, where t ,  and t, are terms of 9. 
(ii). If P is an n-placed relation symbol and t,, ..., t, are terms, then 
P(tl . . . t,) is an atomic formula. 
Finally, the formulas of 9 
are defined as follows: 

1.31 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACTION 
23 
1.3.3. 
(i). An atomic formula is a formula. 
(ii). If cp and $ are formulas, then (cp A $ )  and (i 
cp) are formulas. 
(iii). If u is a variable and cp is a formula, then (Vu)cp is a formula. 
(iv). A sequence of symbols is a formula only if it can be shown to 
be a formula by a finite number of applications of (i)-(iii), 
Just as in the case of Y ,  wc may put definitions 1.3.1 and 1.3.3 in a set- 
theoretical setting. Namely, the set of terms of 9 
is the least set T such that 
T contains all constant symbols and all variables u,, n = 0, I ,  2, ..., and, 
whenever F is an m-placed function symbol and t ,  , ..., t,, E T, then 
F(t , . .. t,,,) E T. 
every atomic formula belongs to Q, and, whenever cp, $ E Q, and u is a 
variable, then (cp A$), (i 
q), (Vu)cp all belong to @. 
Note that we hsve tacitly used the letters ? (with subscripts) to range over 
ternis, I )  to range over variables, and cp, $ to range over formulas. Again, 
we emphasize that properties of ternis and formulas of 2' can otily be 
established by an induction based on deJinition.7 1.3.1 and I .3.3. 
We can now introduce the abbreviations v , +, c* as in Section 1.2. 
Furthermore, we adopt all the conventions introduced earlier. The new 
symbol 3 (there exists) is introduced as an abbreviation defined as 
Similarly, the set of formulas of 2 
is the least set @ such that 
(3u)cp for i 
(Vu) i 
cp. 
Some new conventions are the following: 
'PI A ( ~ 2  
A * - * 
pn 
for ('P 1 A ( ( ~ 2  
A * * * 
q n ) ) ;  
'PI VCP, v . * *  vcpn 
( C P ~  
v ( ( ~ 2  v ... V V n ) ) ;  
for 
(Vx,x, ... x,)cp 
for (Vxl)(Vx2) ... (Vx,)cp; 
(3xlx2 ... xn)cp for (3x1)(3x2) ... (3x,)q. 
At this point we assume that the reader has enough experience in first-order 
predicate logic to continue the development on his own. In particular, 
we leave it to him to decide on the notions of subfortnrrlus, of .free and 
bound occurrences of a variable in a formula, and to give a proper definition 
(based on definitions 1.3.1 and 1.3.3) of substitution of a term for a variable 
in a formula. 
We now come to an extremely important convention of notation. To 
make sure that the reader does not miss it, we enclose it in a box: 

r 
We use t(u, ... u,) to denote a term t whose variables form a subset of 
{uo, ..., u,,). Similarly, we use cp(u, ... u,) to denote a formula cp whose 
free variables form a subset of {uo, ..., u,}. 
Note that we do not require that all of the variables cia, ..., u, be free 
variables of ~ ( u ,  ... u,). In fact, cp(u0 .. . r,) could even have no free variables. 
Also, we make no restriction on the bound variables. For example, each of 
the following formulas is of the form cp(u02i, u 2 ) :  
( v ~ ' 1 ) ( 3 ~ 3 ) ~ ( ~ 0 ~ 1  
u3). 
R(uou, u2), 
s('ou,), 
(vu4)s(u4u4). 
A sentence is a formula with no free variables. 
Note that even if 9 
has no symbols, there are still formulas of 2. These 
formulas are built up entirely from the identity symbol = and the other 
logical symbols listed. Such formulas are called identity formulas and they 
occur in every language. The following proposition is simple but important. 
PROPOSITION 
1.3.4. The cardinal of the set of all formulas of P 
is lILYl[. 
To make all the above syntactical notions into a formal system we need 
logical axioms and rules of inference. The logical axioms for 9 
are divided 
into three groups. 
1.3.5. Sentential Axioms: Every formula cp of 9 
which can be obtained 
from a tautology $ of 9' by (simultaneously and uniformly) substituting 
formulas of 9 for the sentence symbols of $ is a logical axiom for 2. 
From now on we call such a formula cp a tautology of 9. 
I .3.6. Quantifier Axioms: 
formula 
(i). If cp, * are formulas of 9 
and u is a variable not free in cp, then the 
(VU)(cp 
+ $1 + (cp + (VU)*) 
is a logical axiom. 
(ii). If cp, $ are formulas and $ is obtained from rp by freely substituting 
each free occurrence of u in cp by the term t (i.e., no variable x in t shall 
occur bound in + at the place where it is introduced), then the formula 
P ) r p  + * 
is a logical axiom. 

1.31 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACTION 
25 
1.3.7. Identity Axioms: Suppose x, y are variables, t(uo ... u,) is a term and 
cp(u0 ... u,) is an atomic formula. Then the formulas 
x 3 x, 
x = y + t(u, ... ui- 1 xui+ 1 ... 0,) 
x = y + (cp(0, ... ui- 1 xui+ 1 ... u,) + q(u0 ... ui- 1 yui+1 ... u,)), 
t(vo ... ui- ,yui+ 1 ... u,), 
are logical axioms. 
There are two rules of inference. 
1.3.8. Rule of Detachment (or Modus Ponens): From cp and cp + $ infer $. 
1.3.9. Rule of Generalization: From cp infer ( V X ) ~ .  
Given the axioms and the rules of inference, we assume that the resulting 
notions of proof, length of proof, theorem are already familiar to the reader. 
As we are dealing with the usual first-order logic with identity, we shall 
assume as known and make free use of all of the basic theorems and meta- 
theorems of such formal systems. 
Following standard usage, t cp means that cp is a theorem of 2'. If C is 
a set of sentences of 9, 
then C t cp means that there is a proof of cp from 
the logical axioms and C. If C = {a1, ..., a,} is finite, we write al ... a, t cp. 
As the logical axioms are always assumed, we say that there 
is a proof of cp ,from C, or cp is deducible from C, whenever C t cp. C is 
inconsistent iff every formula of 9 
can be deduced from C. Otherwise Z is 
consistent. A sentence a is consistent iff {a} is. C is maximal consistent (in 2') 
iff C is consistent and no set of sentences (of 9) 
properly containing C is 
consistent. We list in the proposition below some useful, though simple, 
properties of consistent and maximal consistent sets of sentences. (Many 
of these properties are found also in Proposition 1.2.8.) 
PROPOSITION 
1.3.10. 
(i). C is consistent if and only if every Jinite subset of C is consistent. 
(ii). Let u be a sentence. C u {u} is inconsistent if and only i f C  k 1 u. 
Whence C u (a} is consistent if and only if 7 u is not deducible .from C. 
(iii). If C is maximal consistent, then for any sentences a, 7 
C 1 u $and only ifa E C; 
u 6 C if and only if7 u E C; 
u A 7 E Z if and only if. and z belong to C. 
(iv) (Deduction Theorem). C u {a} k 2 if and only if C 1 u -+ 7. (Here 
u is a sentence, although 7 need not be one.) 

26 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.3 
The next proposition duplicates Lemma 1.2.9. There is no change in the 
proof. 
PROPOSITION 
1.3.1 1 (Lindenbaum’s Theorem). Any consistent set of sentences 
of 9’ 
can be extended to a maximal consistent set ofseritences of 9. 
We now come to the key definition of this section. In fact, the following 
definition of satisfaction is the cornerstone of model theory. We first give 
the motivation for the definition in a few remarks. If we compare the models 
of Section 1.2 and the models discussed here, we see that with the former 
we were only concerned with whether a statement is true or false in it, 
while here the situation is more complicated because the sentences of 9’ 
say something about the individual elements of the model. The whole 
question of the (first-order) truths or falsities of a possible world (i.e., 
model) is just not a simple problem. For instance, there is no way to decide 
whether a given sentence of 2 
= { +, ., S, 0) is true or false in the standard 
model (N, +, a ,  S, 0) of arithmetic (where S is the successor function). 
Whereas we have already seen in Section 1.2 that there is such a decision 
procedure for every model for 9 
and for every sentence of 9. 
To define 
the notion 
the sentence u is true in the model BI, 
we have first to break up u into smaller parts and to examine each part. 
If D is i 
cp or if o is cp A 1(1, then we see that the truth or falsity of u in ?( 
follows once we know the truth or falsity of cp and 1(1 in (LL. If, on the other 
hand, D is (Vx)cp, then the same method for deciding the truth of D breaks 
down as cp may not be a sentence and it would be meaningless to ask if cp 
is true or false in (LL. 
The free variable x in cp is supposed to range over the elements of A .  
For each particular a in A it is meaningful to ask whether 
the formula cp is true in (LL if cp is talking about a. 
If for each a in A the answer to this question is yes, then we can say that u 
is true in (LL. If there exists an a in A so that the answer is no, then we say 
that u is false in (LL. But in order to answer the above question, even for a 
fixed element of A ,  we shall run into the same difficulty if cp happens to be 
(Vy)1(1. Then we are led naturally to ask whether 
It takes but a very small step before we see that the crucial question is the 
following: 
Given a formula cp(v,, ... v,) and a sequence xo, ..., xp in A ,  what does 
1(1 is true in (LL if 
is talking about a pair of elements a and b in A .  

1.3) 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACTION 
27 
it mean to say that cp is true in 8 if the variables uo, ..., up are taken 
to be xo, . . ., x,? 
Our plan is to give an answer to this question first for every atomic formula 
$(uo ... up) and all elements xo, ..., x,. Then, by an inductive procedure 
based on our inductive definition of formula (1.3.1-1.3.3), we shall 
give an answer for all formulas q(u0 ... u p )  and elements x o ,  ..., x,. 
There is still one difficulty with our plan: if all the free variables of a 
formula cp are among uo, .. ., up, it does not follow that all the free variables 
of every subformula of cp are among uo, ..., u p .  For a quantifier makes a 
free variable bound. This will cause trouble in the induction part of our 
plan. To overcome this difficulty we observe that the following is true. 
If all the variables, free or bound, of a formula cp are among uo, ..., u,, 
then all the variables of every subformula of cp are also among v o ,  ..., u,. 
So we shall modify our plan thus: First, we answer the question for all 
atomic formulas $(uo ... cq) and all elements x o ,  ..., xq. Then by an induc- 
tive procedure we answer the question for all formulas cp such that all its 
free and bound variables are among uo, ..., uqr and all elements xo, ..., xq. 
Finally, we prove that the answer to the question for a formula cp(uo ... up) 
and elements x o ,  ..., xq, p < q, depends only on the elements x o ,  ..., x, 
corresponding to free variables of cp, so that the values of x , + ~ ,  ..., xq 
are irrelevant. 
We are now ready for the formal definition. The crucial notion to be 
defined is the following: Let cp be any formula of Y ,  all of whose free and 
bound variables are among uo, ..., u,, and let x o ,  ..., xq be any sequence of 
elements of A .  We define the predicate 
1.3.12. cp is satisfed by the sequence xo, . . ., xq in a, or xo, . . ., x, satisfies 
cp in a. 
The definition proceeds in three stages (compare with 1.3.1-1.3.3). 
Let 8 be a fixed model for Y. 
1.3.13. The ualue of a term t(uo ... u,) at x o ,  ..., x, is defined as follows 
(we let t[xo ... x,] denote this value): 
(i). If t = ui, then t[xo ... xq] = x i .  
(ii). If t is a constant symbol c, then r[xo ... x,] is the interpretation of 
(iii). If r = F f t ,  ... tm), where F is an m-placed function symbol, then 
c in 8. 
t [ x o  ... xq] = G(tI[xo ... x,] ... t , [ x O  ... x,]), 

28 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.3 
where G is the interpretation of F in %. 
1.3.14. 
and f2(u0 ... u,) are terms. Then x,, . .., xq satisfies cp if and only if 
(i). Suppose q(u, .. . u,) is the atomic formula 
-= i t ,  where tl (vo . . . 0,) 
f 1 [xo ... xq] = f,[x, .. . xq]. 
(ii). Suppose cp(uo ... 0,) 
is the atomic formula P(tl ... t,,), where P is an 
n-placed relation symbol and t,(u, ... u,), ..., f,(u, ... uq) are terms. Then 
xo , . . . , xq satisfies cp if and only if 
R(rl[x, ... x,] ... f,,[X, ... x,]), 
where R is the interpretation of P in a. 
For brevity, we write 
% t q[x, ... x,] for: x,, ..., x, satisfies cp in a. 
(i). ‘9l t (t, = r2)[x0 ... xq] if and only if tl[xo ... xql = t2[x0 ... xgl. 
(ii). % t P(tl ... r,,)[x, ... x,] if and only if R(tl [xo ... x,] ... t,[xo ... .,I). 
Thus 1.3.14 can also be formulated as: 
1.3.15. Suppose that cp is a formula of 9 
and all free and bound variables of 
cp are among uo , . . ., uq. 
% t cp[x, ... x,] if and only if both % t Bl[x0 ... xq] and % t 62[xo ... xql. 
l!l != cp[xo ... x,] if and only if not % k 0[x, ... x,]. 
l!l k cp[x, ... x,] if and only if for every x E A, % t $[x0 ... xi-lxxi+l ... x,]. 
(i). If cp is dl A 02, then 
(ii). If cp is -I 0, then 
(iii). If cp is (Voi)*, 
where i < q, then 
Our definition of 1.3.12 is now completed. As simple exercises, the reader 
should check that the abbreviations v , -+, -, 3 have their usual meanings. 
In particular, if cp is (3ui)$, where i < q, then 
l!l t cp[x, ... x,] if and only if there exists x E A such that 
More important, the reader should realize that we can formulate a precise 
definition of r [x, . . . x,] and % t q [x,, . . , x,] in set theory, based upon 
Having finished our definition, our first task is to prove the proposition 
% c *[xo ... xi-1xxi+1 ... x,]. 
1.3.13-1.3.15. 
that the relation 

1.31 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACTION 
29 
2l I= q(u0 ... up)[xo ... x,] 
depends only on x o ,  .. . , x p r  where p < q. This is the last part of the plan 
we have outlined. 
PROPOSITION 
1.3.16 
(i). Let t(v, ... up) be a term and let x o ,  ..., x, and y o ,  ..., y, be two 
sequences such that p < q, p < r, and xi = y ,  whenever v ,  is a variable oft. 
Then 
t[x, ... x,] = t[yo ... y,]. 
(ii). Let cp be a formula all of whose,free and bound variables are among 
u0, . .., up, and let xo, . . ., x, and yo, .. ., y, be two sequences such that 
p ,< q, p < r, and x i  = y ,  whenever ui is a free variable of cp. Then 
B t cp[xo ... x,] ifand only if% C cp[yo ... y,]. 
REMARK. 
Proposition 1.3.16 shows that the value of a term t at xo, ..., x, 
and whether a formula cp is satisfied or not by a sequence xo, ..., x, depend 
only on those values of xi for which ui is a free variable, and are independent 
of the other values of the sequence as well as the length of the sequence. 
The length q of the sequence must be high enough to cover all the free and 
bound variables of t and cp in order for the expressions t[xo ... x,], 
B t cp[xo ... x,] to be defined at all. We can now immediately infer that 
if 0 is a sentence, then B I= a[xo ... x,] is entirely independent of the sequence 
xo, ..., x,. The importance of the above proposition is that it allows us 
to make the following definition. 
1.3.17. Let cp(vo . . . up) be a formula all of whose free and bound variables 
are among uo, ..., u,, p < q. Let x o ,  ..., xp be a sequence of elements 
ofA. Wesay thatcpissatisfedin%byx,, ..., xp, 
2l I= c p b o  *.* xpl, 
if and only if cp is satisfied in % by xo, ..., xp, ..., x, for some (or, 
equivalently, every) x p + ,  , ..., x,. 
Let cp be a sentence all of whose bound variables are among uo, . .., 0,. 
We say that M satisfies cp, in symbols B C cp, iff cp is satisfied in B by some 
(or, equivalently, every) sequence xo, ..., x,. 
The proof of Proposition 1.3.16 is straightforward but tedious. We shall 
sketch it here as a first example of an inductive proof on the ‘complexity’ 

30 
INTRODUCI'ION 
(1.3 
of formulas. We shall often omit similar easy inductive proofs in the future. 
PROOF 
OF PROPOSITION 
I .3.16 
(i). If t(oo ... up) is a variable v i r  then 
t [ x ,  ... xq] = x ;  = J'; = t [ y o  ... y,]. 
If f(vo ... up) is a constant symbol c, and x is the interpretation of c in 91, 
then 
t [ x o  ... xu] = x = t[yo ... y,]. 
Suppose /(oo . . . u p )  is E(f . . . /m), where F is an rn-placed function symbol 
and the proposition holds for each of the terms t , ,  ..., I,. This means that 
li[X0 ... xq] = t i [ Y 0  ... y,], 
(i = 1, ..., m). 
Therefore, if G is the interpretation of F in ?I, 
/ [ x o  ... x,] = G(t,[xo ... x,] ... t,[xo ... x , ] )  
= G(t, [yo 
< .. y,] .. . /,[yo .. . y,]) = f [yo .. . y,]. 
This verifies (i) for all terms t .  
(ii). If cp is an atomic formula t ,  = t,, then using (i) we see that 
f I b 0  .'. -4 = 1, [Yo ... v r l 7  
12[x, ... x,] = t,[y, ... y,]. 
?I != cp [xo . . . x,], 
t ,  [x, ... x,] = t,[x, ... x,], 
tl [ Y O  ... ~
r
l
 
= ',[YO ... ~ r l ,  
')I k q [ y o  ... y,]. 
Therefore the following are equivalent: 
Let cp be an atomic formula P(tl ... f"), where P is an n-placed predicate 
symbol and t , ,  ..., t ,  are terms. Then, using (i). we see that the following 
are equivalent (where R is the interpretation of P in ?[): 
?I k p[x0 . . . x,], 
R ( f ,  [xo .. . x,] .. . t,[x, . f .  x,]), 
R(t1 [YO ... ~
r
l
 
... t n [ Y ~  ... Y~I), 
')I k  YO ... ~ r l .  
Suppose now that $, 0 are formulas, all of whose free and bound variables 
are among uo, ..., up, which satisfy part (ii) of the proposition. 

1.31 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACIION 
If cp is $ A 0, the following are equivalent: 
2l cplxo ... x,l, 
2l k $[xo ... xq] and 2l C B[xo ... x,I, 
2l k + [ y o  ... rrl and 2l O[yo ... yrl, 
!= cp[Yo * * *  Yrl. 
2l 1 cp[xo ... x,l, 
If cp is i 
+, then the following are equivalent. 
not 2l C 
[xo . . . x,], 
not 3 C $ [ Y O  ... yrl, 
u 
V [ Y O  
. * *  ~ r l .  
31 
Finally, let cp be (Vui)$, where i < p. Then the following are equivalent: 
2l cp[xo ... x,l, 
forall X E A ,  ~
~
$
[
X
~
.
.
.
X
~
-
~
X
X
~
+
~
 
... xql, 
for all Y E A, 2l != $ [ Y O  ... yi-.1~yi+l ... yrl, 
% C  YO - * *  ~ r l .  
In this last part of the proof we used the fact that the free variables of t+b 
are just the free variables of cp and, perhaps, u i .  Our proof is now complete. i 
We shall state one more elementary proposition which deals with the 
behavior of the satisfaction relation under the substitution of variables by 
terms. We omit the proof, which is another tedious but straightforward 
induction. 
PROPOSITION 
1.3.18. Let q(v0 ... up) be a formula and let to(vo . .. up), ..., 
t,(uo ... up) be terms. Suppose that no variable occurring in any of the terms 
to, ..., t, occurs bound in cp. Let xo, ..., x p  be a sequence of elements of A 
and let cp(to ... t p )  be the formula obtained from cp by substituting ti for vi 
(i = 0, ...,p). Then 
91 k p(to .. . tp)[xo ... xp] if and only if % k cp[to[xo ... xpl ... t,[xo ... ~ ~ 1 1 .  
This proposition is especially useful in the simple case that the terms 
to, . . . , tp are constant symbols cg, . . . , cp whose interpretations in 
are 
a,, . . . , up. In that case, cp(c, . . . c p )  is a sentence, and the proposition 
shows that 
‘.21 L cp(c,. . . c p )  if and only if 2l L cp[ao. . . up]. 

32 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.3 
Thus a sentence formed by replacing a tuple variables by constant 
symbols is true in a model if and only if the tuple of interpretations of 
the constant symbols satisfies the formula in the model. 
We have now completed the project started several paragraphs back. 
Namely, we say that a sentence 
iff 
a is true in ‘2l 
2l C a[xo ... xq] for some (or for every) sequence x,,, ..., xq of A. 
We use the special notation N C a to denote that u is true in 91. This last 
phrase is equivalent to each of the following phrases: 
a holds in N; 
N satisfies a; 
t~ is satisfed in a; 
91 is a model of 0. 
When it is not the case that a holds in 8, we say that a is false in a, or that 
a fails in N, or 9.l is a model of 1 u. Given a set C of sentences, we say that 
‘i?l is a model of C iff ‘i?l is a model of each a in 1; 
it is convenient to use the 
notation ‘i?l C C for this notion. A sentence a that holds in every model for 
9 is called valid. A sentence, or a set of sentences, is satisfiable iff it has at 
least one model. C a denotes that u is a valid sentence. 
A sentence cp is a consequence of another sentence a, in symbols a C cp, 
iff every model of a is a model of cp. A sentence cp is a consequence of a set 
of sentences C, in symbols C C cp, iff every model of Z is a model of cp. 
It follows that 
C u {a} C cp if and only i f C  C a + cp. 
Two models N and 23 for 9 
are elementarily equivalent iff every sentence 
that is true in 9l is true in 23, and vice versa. We express this relationship 
between models by =. It is easy to see that = is indeed an equivalence 
relation. The symbol we have chosen to denote elementary equivalence is 
exactly the same as the identity symbol for the language 2’. 
However, no 
confusion can ever arise because one is a relation between models for 2 
and the other is a relation between terms of 9. 
If the context is clear, 
equiualent shall mean elementarily equivalent. 
PROPOSITION 
1.3.19. If 9 
converse is also true. 
8, 
then 2i = 23. In case ’2I is finite, then the 
We conclude this section by stating a number of important results without 
proofs, but whose proofs will be given in the next chapter. 

1.31 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACTION 
33 
THEOREM 
1.3.20 (Godel's Completeness Theorem). Given any sentence 6, 
0 is a theorem o f 2  if and only if a is valid. 
THEOREM 
1.3.21 (Extended Completeness Theorem). Let C be any set of 
sentences. Then C is consistent if and only if C has a model. 
THEOREM 
1.3.22 (Compactness Theorem). A set of sentences C has a model 
if and only if eueryjinite subset of C has a model. 
As in Section 1.2, we conclude with a table of equivalent notions. 
TABLE 
1.3.1 
Syntax 
Semantics 
q is a theorem, t q 
q is valid, 
q 
2 is consistent 
Z has a model 
q is deducible from Z, Z t q 
q is a consequence of Z, Z ,k q 
EXERCISES 
1.3.1. Prove that the isomorphism relation 
is an equivalence relation. 
Let u be any cardinal. Show that there are at most 2" " l l a ' I  
nonisomorphic 
models for 2 
of power u. 
1.3.2. Let '3 '2 23 mean that % is isomorphically embedded in 8. Show 
that the relation Z is reflexive and transitive but not antisymmetric. Let N 
be the set of all natural numbers 0, 1,2, . ... Decide if the following are true 
or false: 
( N ,  <, +, 0) .2 ( N ,  <, *, I>, 
( N ,  6 ,  ., 1) .2 ( N ,  <, +, o>, 
( N -  (01, *, 1) "c ( N ,  +, o>, 
( N -  (01, * >  z ( N ,  +>. 
( N -  (O}, <, ., 1 )  F ( N ,  <, +,O), 
Take < , +, and - as the usual ordering and operations on N. 
1.3.3. Let rp(uo ... u,,) be a formula of 3, and '3 be a model for 2. 
Prove 
that: 
(i). The satisfaction relation '3 I= rp [xo . . . x,,] has a precise definition 
in Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. 
(ii). If %' is an expansion of % and xo, . .., x,, E A, then 
'3 k p[x, ... x,,] if and only if a' C ~ [ X O  
... X.1. 

34 
INTRODUCTION 
11.3 
1.3.4. Prove Proposition 
I .3.19. Also construct a counterexample if CU 
is not finite. 
I .3.5. A sentence cp is universal iff it is in prenex form and all ofits quantifiers 
are universal, i.e., V. Prove that if cp is universal and CU c '4 and % 1 cp, 
then CU 1 cp. A sentence is existential iff it is in prenex form and all of its 
quantifiers are existential, i.e., 3. Prove that if cp is existential and 91 c 23 
and CU 1 cp, then 8 
k cp. Thus universal sentences are preserved under 
submodels and existential sentences are preserved under extensions. 
1.3.6. There are at most 2114"11 
nonequivalent models for 9. 
1.3.7. Let CU and 23 be equivalent models for lu. Suppose that every element 
of A is a constant of A and the same is true for 23. Then show that ?I 
'4. 
If the hypothesis is assumed only for ?I, show that CU is isomorphically 
embedded in '4. 
1.3.8*. Find a necessary and sufficient condition on 9 s o  that there will 
be exactly 2liU1l nonequivalent models. Do the same for exactly 2" non- 
isomorphic models of power a, for each infinite cardinal a. 
1.3.9. Let CU be a model for 2' and let X be a nonempty subset of CU. Let 
B = n{c: 0 c 91 
and x c c}. 
Then there is a submodel 8 c 2l with universe B. % is called the submodel 
generated by X .  
1.3.10. Let 91, X be as above and let '4 be the submodel generated by A'. 
Then 
B = { t [ x ,  ... x,] : f is a term of Ip and 
x , ,  ..., x, E X } .  
Moreover, 
1x1 
IBI 6 1x1 u ll-ql. 
1.3.1 1. Suppose X c A and X generates the whole model 91. Let ,f be a 
one-one map on X into another model B. Then there is at most one iso- 
morphic embedding g on 2l into '4 such that f c g .  
1.3.12. Suppose 2' has no function or constant symbols. Then for every 
model 2l for 9 
and every nonempty subset X c A ,  9l has a submodel with 
universe X. 

1.31 
LANGUAGES, MODELS AND SATISFACTION 
35 
Suppose 9 
has no function symbols. Then for every model % for 9 
and 
has a 
every nonempty X c A which contains all the constants of H, 
submodel with universe X. 
1.3.13. Verify all the claims in Table 1.3.1, assuming the extended com- 
pleteness theorem. 
1.3.14*. An element a E A of a model % is said to be definable (in a) iff 
there is a formula cp(x) of 9 
such that a is the only element in A satisfying 
cp. For each n ~ w ,  
find a model a,, for 2 
and a language with only a 
finite number of symbols, which has exactly n undefinable elements. For 
n = 0 or n > 1, the examples are easy to find. For n = 1, it is much 
harder. 
1.3.15*. Let 2 
have only a finite number of relation and constant symbols, 
but no function symbols. Define the relations =,, on models for 9 
as 
follows by induction: 
91 = o  23 
iff the submodels of 
and % generated by the constant 
elements are isomorphic, or else 2 
has no constant symbols. 
91 =,,+ 23 iff for every a E A there exists b E B such that (a, a) =,, (‘23, b), 
and for every b E B there exists a E A such that (8, a) =,, (%, b). 
Note that the definition of 
depends on the fact that =,, has already 
been defined for all languages of the form 9 
u (cl, ..., c,}. Prove that 
% 
[Hint: Show that for each n, there are finitely many =,, classes, and 
each =,, class is the class of all models of a sentence of 2.1 
23 if and only if for all n, 9.l s,, 
23. 
1.3.16. Let 9 be as in the previous exercise. Prove that if 2i =,,% then 
for every sentence rp of 2’ 
in prenex form with at most n quantifiers, 
1 cp if and only if 23 t rp. 
1.3.17*. Let 2 
be as in Exercise 1.3.15. Let K be a class of models for 9. 
Prove that the following are equivalent: 
(i). There is a sentence cp of 9 
such that K is the class of all models for 
9 
satisfying cp. 
(ii). For some n E w, K is closed under E,, i.e., if 2l E K and 8 =,, 93, 
then 8 E K. 
[Hint: For each n there are only finitely many nonequivalent prenex 
sentences with at most n quantifiers.] 

36 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.4 
1.3.18. Show that Exercise 1.3.15 is false if either 9 has function symbols, 
or 9 
has infinitely many constant or relation symbols. However, it is still 
true that if for all n, % = ,, 8, then '% = %. 
1.3.19. Show that two models %, 8 for 9 
are equivalent if and only if 
for all finite Yo 
c 2' the reducts of PI and B to -Yo are equivalent. 
This exercise shows that a version of Exercise 1.3.15 can be given if 9 
has 
only relation and constant symbols. 
1.3.20*. As applications of Exercise 1.3.15, show that the following pairs 
of models 'iY, '23 are equivalent: 
(i). 
(ii). 2i = ( A ,  <), 93 = ( B ,  <), where A and B are densely ordered 
by 6 with no endpoints. 
(iii). 9l = (0, <), 8 = ( w + w * + w ,  <), where w + w * + w  is the order 
type of the natural numbers followed by a copy of the integers. 
(iv). 9l = (ww, < ), 8 = ( w , ,  < ), where w" is the ordinal exponentia- 
tion of w to the power w. 
(v). 2 = ( S J X ) ,  c), 8 = ( S , ( Y ) ,  c), where X and Y are infinite 
sets, S,(X), So(Y) are the sets of finite subsets of X and Y, respectively, 
and c is the inclusion relation. 
1.3.21. Let T be a set of universal sentences. Assume T kVx 3 y  P(x, y ) .  
Prove that there exist terms t , ( x ) ,  . . . ,t,(x) such that 
= ( A ) ,  8 = ( B ) ,  where A and B are infinite. 
n 
T kVx v P(x, t,(x)). 
m = l  
1.3.22*. Let 91 be a countable model for a countable language. Prove 
that if the simple expansion (91, b) has more than one automorphism for 
each finite sequence b of elements of A ,  then % has 2" automorphisms. 
1.4. Theories and examples of theories 
A (first-order) theory Tof 2' is a collection of sentences of 9. 
T is said 
to be closed i@ it is closed under the t= relation. In view of Table 1.3.1, this 
is the same as requiring that T be closed under I-. Since theories are sets of 
sentences of 9, 
we may apply the expressions 
a model of a theory, 
consistent theory, 
satisfiable theory, 
as introduced in Section 1.3. 

1.41 
THEORIES AND EXAMPLES OF THEORIES 
37 
A theory Tis called complete (in 2') 
iff its set of consequences is maximal 
consistent. If T is a theory of .Y and 2.3' c 2.3", 2 
# 9', 
then T is not a 
closed theory of 2". 
On the other hand, it is easy to see that if 2' 
c 9, 
then the restriction of a closed theory T to Y', in symbols T l g ' ,  is always 
a closed theory of 9'. 
Tis a subtheory of T' iff T c T'. If T is a subtheory of 
T', then T' is an extension of T. 
A set of axioms of a theory T is a set of sentences with the same conse- 
quences as T. Clearly, T is a set of axioms of T, and the empty set is a set of 
axioms of T if and only if T is a set of valid sentences of 9. 
Every set of 
sentences C is a set of axioms for the closed theory T = {'p : Z i= 9). A 
theory T isjnitely axiomatizable iff it has a finite set of axioms. 
The most convenient and standard way of giving a theory T is by listing 
a finite or infinite set of axioms for it. Another way to give a theory is as 
follows: Let % be a model for 9; 
then the theory of 91 is the set of all 
sentences which hold in 91. The theory of any model 9I is obviously a 
complete theory. 
Historically, the importance of theories stems from the following two 
facts. Once the axioms of a theory are given, then by using the relation t- 
we can find out, in a syntactical manner, all the consequences of T. On the 
other hand, by using the satisfaction relation, we can also study all the 
models of T. 
By the extended completeness theorem, these two approaches give 
basically the same results about consequences of T. However, owing to the 
fact that models of T also have non-first-order properties, such as isomor- 
phism, submodels, extensions, plus many others, the second approach leads 
to the field now known as model theory. 
We shall give in the rest of this section some examples of theories and 
their models to show the intimate connections that model theory has with 
other branches of mathematics. tn each example we describe a closed theory 
by a set of axioms. Some classical results will be stated without proof. 
I .4. I .  Let 2' consist of the single 2-placed relation symbol 6 . Using the 
iisual notation for <, we write x < y for < (xy). The theory ofpartial 
ordcr has three axioms: 
( I )  (VXyZ)(X 6 Y A Y  < Z 4 
X 6 Z), 
( 2 )  (vXy)(X < Y A Y  6 X + X E y), 
(3) (Vx)(x < x ) .  
They are, respectively, the transitive, antisymmetric, and reflexive properties 
of partial orders. Any model ( A ,  < ) of this theory consists of a nonempty 
set A and a partial order relation 6 on A. [f we add the comparability 

38 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.4 
axiom 
(4) (VXY)(. 
< y V Y  G x), 
we obtain the theory of simple order (also called linear order). A model 
( A ,  <) for this theory is a simply-ordered set. Adding two more axioms 
(writing .Y f J’ for i 
(x = y ) ) :  
( 5 )  (v.VJ))(X < > ’ A X  f ) ’ +  (3Z)(X < Z A Z  $ X A Z  < J’AZ $ y)), 
( 6 )  (j+YJ’) (x f J’h 
we then have the theory of dense (simple) order. The rationals with the usual 
< i s  an example of a model of this theory. The theory of dense order has 
no finite models. If we wish to consider only dense orders without endpoints, 
we add the axioms 
(7) (VX)(jY)(X < > . A X  f Y ) ,  
(8) ( V . Y ) ( j y ) ( J ’  < X A X  f J’). 
PROPOSITION 
1.4.2. Any tMlo countable models of the theory of dense order 
witliout elidpoints are isomorphic. 
EXAMPLE 
1.4.3. Let Y = [+, ., -, 0, I}, where +, . are 2-placed function 
symbols, - is a I-placed function symbol, and 0 and I are constant symbols. 
The theory of Boolean algebras has the following axioms (where we shall 
assume that the following formulas all have their free variables universally 
quantified in front). 
Associativity of + and . : 
Commutativity of + and . : 
x + y  = y+x, 
ldempotent laws: 
X + X  = x, 
Distributive laws: 
x+(y+z) = (x+y)+z, 
x + ( y . z )  = (x+y).(x+z), 
x + ( x . y )  = x, 
x+y = .u. j ,  
x+o = x, 
x + l =  I, 
0 f 1, 
x+x = 1. 
Absorption laws: 
De Morgan laws: 
Laws of zero and one: 
X ‘ X  = x. 
x . 0  2 0, 
X ’ I  f x, 
x * E  = 0. 

1.41 
THEORIES AND EXAMPLES OF THEORIES 
39 
Law of double negation: 
x' = x. 
A model ?L = ( A ,  +, ., -, 0, 1) of this theory is called a Boolean algebra. 
(Strictly speaking, wc should write +,, 
.%, 
-%, 
O,, 
I, in the above model. 
But following our convention we shall drop the subscripts.) A partial order 
6 can be defined on A by: x < y if and only if x +  y = y. It can be shown 
that < has a largest element, namely 1, a smallest element, namely 0, and, 
given any two elements x, y E A ,  the 1.u.b. (least upper bound) of x and j
p
 
is .r+ .I,, and the g.1.b. (greatest lower bound) of x and y is x y. 
Ajield of sets S is a collection of subsets of a nonernpty set X such that 
both the empty set c? and the set X are in S and S is closed under u, n and 
- with respect to X .  Lt is easy to see that if S is a field of sets, then 
( S ,  u, 
17, -, 0, X )  
is a Boolean algebra. Conversely, we have: 
PRoPoslTloN 1.4.4 (Representation Theorem for Boolean algebras). Every 
Booleuti algebra is isomorphic to afield of sets. 
An atom of a Boolean algebra is an element x # 0 such that there is 
no element y which lies properly between 0 and x, i.e., not 0 Q y < x, 
0 # .I., y # x. A Boolean algebra is atomic iff every nonzero element x 
includes an atom. A Boolean algebra is atomless iff it has no atoms. There 
are Boolean algebras which are neither atomic nor atomless. Adding the 
axiom (writing x < 1- for x + y  = y )  
gives us the theory of atomic Boolean algebras; while adding the axiom 
gives us the theory of atomless Boolean algebras. 
(VS) (0 f X + (3y) ( y  < X A O  f y A  ( V Z )  ( 2  < y + Z 
0 V Z 
y ) ) )  
1 (3y) (0 f y A  ( V Z )  ( Z  < y + Z = 0 
V Z 
y ) )  
PROPOSITION 
1.4.5. Any two countable atomless Boolean algebras are 
ison iorp h ic . 
Some other relevant facts about Boolean algebras can be found in the 
exercises. 
EXAMPLE 
1.4.6. Let 9 
= { +, O}, where + is a 2-placed function symbol 
and 0 is a constant symbol. The theory of groups has the following 
axioms: 
(I) x+(y+z) = ( x + y ) + z  (associativity), 
(2) x+O = x, O+x E x (identity), 
(3) (3y) ( x + y  = O A ~ + X  = 0) (existence of inverse). 

40 
INTRODUCHON 
[1.4 
A model ( G ,  + , O )  of this theory is a group. We obtain the theory of 
Abelian groups when we add the axiom 
(4) x +  y = y + x  (commutativity). 
The order of an element x of a group is the least n such that x + x + . . . + x 
(n times) = 0. If no such n exists, the order of x is infinity. For it fixed 
n 2 I ,  we can write down the abbreviation nx for the expression 
x+(x+( ... ( x + x )  ...)), n times. 
Suppose p is a prime. The theory of Abelian groups nith all elernoils oJ' 
order p has the extra axiom 
(5,) px = 0. 
PROPOSITION 
1.4.7. Any two models of the theory of Abelian groups ic.i/h all 
elements of order p of the same power are isomorphic. 
To obtain the theory of Abelian groups with all elements of order rx, 
(torsion-free) we need a n  infinite list of axioms: for each n 2 1, we add 
the axiom 
(6,) x f 0 + nx f 0. 
This theory is our first example of a nonfinitely axiomatizable theory. Lf 
we add a further infinite list of axioms, one for each n 2 I ,  
we have the theory of divisible torsion-free Abelian groups. 
(7") (3Y) ("Y = XI, 
PROPOSITION 
1.4.8. Any two uncountable divisible torsion-free Abelian groups 
of the same power are isomorphic. There are countably many such groups 
which are countable and not isomorphic. 
EXAMPLE 
1.4.9. Let 9 
= { +, ., 0, I}, where + and . are 2-placed function 
symbols and 0, I are constant symbols. The theory of commutative rings 
(with unit) has the axioms (1)-(4) listed above plus the axioms (8)-(11) 
given below: 
(8) I ex = X A X .  I = x (I is a unit), 
(9) x ( y  * z )  = (x . y )  . z (associativity of .), 
(10) x y = y * x (commutativity of a), 
(11) x .  ( y + z )  = ( x . y ) + ( x - z )  (distributivity of. over +). 
(12) x . y = 0 + x = 0 v y = 0 (no zero divisors), 
Adding one more axiom 

1.41 
THEORlES AND EXAMPLES OF THEORIES 
41 
give: us the theory o f  integral domains. Adding the two axioms 
(13) 0 f 1, 
(14) x $ 0 -+ (3y)(y x E I )  (existence o f  multiplicative inverse), 
gives the important theory offields. For a fixed prime p, if we add the axiom 
(15,) pl = 0, 
we have the theory offields of characteristicp. On the other hand, ifwe add 
for all primes p the negation of (1 5,,), namely, all the axioms 
we have the theory offields of characteristic zero, each field has a unique 
characteristic, either prime or zero. We now introduce the abbreviation x" 
x * ( x  * (x ... x )  . ..), n times. 
for the expression 
The infinite list o f  axioms, one for each n 2 1, 
when added to the theory o f  fields, gives us the theory o f  algebraically 
closed fields. 
(16) p l  f 0, withp a prime, 
(17,) (3y)(xn..f+xn-, * Y " - ' +  ... + X I  y + x ,  = 0 ) V X "  = 0, 
PROPOWION 
1.4.10. Any two uncountable algebraically closed fields of the 
same characteristic and power are isomorphic. 
Each axiom (17,) says that every polynomial of degree n has a root. 
The theory of real closedfields has as axioms all the axioms for fields plus 
the axiom 
and two infinite lists o f  axioms. One is the infinite list (17,) for all odd n, 
and the other is the infinite list that says that 0 is not a sum o f  nontrivial 
squares: 
(18) (Vx)(3y)(y2 = x v y 2 + x  = 0), 
(18,,)x;+x:+ ... +xg 3 0 -+ xo = O A X ~  = O A  ...  AX^ = 0. 
The theory o f  ordered fields is formulated in the language A? 
= { <, +, a, 0, I } .  It has all the field axioms, the linear order axioms, 
and the additional axioms 
x < y --r x + z  < y + z ,  
X < y A 0 <  Z + X ' Z < y ' Z .  
The ordered fields of rational numbers and of real numbers are examples. 
Of the examples of theories we have discussed so far, the following are 
complete: dense order without endpoints, atomless Boolean algebras, infinite 
Abelian groups with all elements of order p, torsion-free divisible Abelian 
groups, algebraically closed fields o f  a given characteristic, and real closed 

42 
INTRODUCTlON 
[1.4 
fields. The various propositions show that each of these complete theories, 
except the last one, enjoys the unusual property that in some (sometimes all) 
infinite powers all models of the given theory of that power are isomorphic. 
EXAMPLE 
1.4.11. Let 9 
= { +, ., S, 0}, where + , are 2-placed function 
symbols, S is a I-placed function symbol (called the successor function), 
and 0 is a constant symbol. Number /heory (or Peano arithmetic) has the 
following list of axioms: 
(1) 0 f Sx (0 has no predecessor), 
(2) Sx = Sy -+ x 5 y (S is one-one), 
(3) x+0 = x, 
(4) x+Sy = S(x+y), 
( 5 )  x - 0  = 0, 
( 6 )  x . Sy 
(X . y ) + x ,  
and, finally, for each formula q ( u 0  ... D,) of 9, 
where uo does not occur 
bound in cp, the axiom 
(7,) ' ~ ( 0 ~ 1  
... un)A(Vuo)((P(t~ou1 ... o n )  + ~ ( S u o u ,  ..' v,)) 
+ (Vuo)cp(uo ... U"). 
Axioms (3) and (4) are the usual recursive definition of + in terms of 0 
and S, and axioms ( 5 )  and (6) are the recursive definition of . in terms of 
0, S and +. The whole list of axioms (7,), one for each cp, is called the 
axiom schema of induction. 
The standard model of number theory is ( w ,  +, *, S, 0), where S is the 
successor function and +, ., 0 have their usual meaning. All other (non- 
isomorphic) models are called nonstandard. Complete number theory (or 
complete arithmetic) is the set of all sentences cp of 2' that hold in the 
standard model. 
There are several deep results about number theory: 
Godel's (193 1) incompleteness theorem states that number theory is 
not complete; therefore, complete number theory is a proper extension 
of number theory. 
No finite extension (that is, by adding a finite number of new axioms) 
of number theory is complete; therefore complete number theory is not 
finitely axiomatizable over number theory, whence it is certainly not finitely 
axiomatizable. 
Number theory itself is not finitely axiomatizable. This was proved 
by Ryll-Nardzewski (1952) by the use of nonstandard models. The exis- 
tence of nonstandard models of complete number theory was first shown 
by Skolem (1934). 

1.41 
THEORIES AND EXAMPLES OF THEORIES 
43 
We mention a number of interesting subtheories of number theory. For 
instance, if the induction schema (7,) is replaced by the single axiom 
we obtain a finitely axiomatizable subtheory of number theory (the theory Q 
of Tarski, Mostowski and Robinson, 1953) which is incomplete, and no 
finite extension of it is complete. 
In the language 2" = { S O }  obtained by leaving out the symbols + 
and *, the subtheory of number theory given by axioms (I), (2) and the 
schema (7,), 
restricted of course to formulas of 9', 
is complete. However, 
it is still not finitely axioniatizable, as can be shown by using the compactness 
theorem. 
In the language 3'' 
= { +, S, 0}, the axioms (1)-(4) and the schema 
(7q), again restricted to formulas of Z', give the additive number theory 
(or Pressburger arithmetic). This theory is not finitely axiomatizable, but 
it is complete (Presburger, 1929); the completeness of the theory 2" in 
the previous paragraph follows from the proof given by Presburger. 
(8) (VX)(X f 0 -+ (3Y)(X = SY)), 
EXAMPLE 1.4.12. We shall now discuss some examples of set theories. 
There are two quite different reasons to include a discussion of set theories 
in a book on model theory. The first reason is that, if we wish to be com- 
pletely precise, we should formulate our whole treatment of model theory 
within an appropriate system of axiomatic set theory. Actually, we are 
taking the more practical approach of formulating things in an informal 
set theory, but it is still important that, irz principle, we could do it all in an 
axiomatic set theory. We have left for the Appendix an outline oftheinformal 
set theory we are using. The other reason for discussing set theories is that 
they are among the most interesting and important examples of theories. 
The second reason is the one which concerns us at this time. The theory 
of models is particularly well suited to the study of models of set theory. 
In the Appendix we have listed the axioms for four of the most familiar 
set theories: Zermelo, Zermelo-Fraenkel, Bernays, and Bernays-Morse. 
The first two of them are formulated in the language 2 
= { c } ,  while the 
other two are formulated in the language 2' 
= { E ,  V } ,  where E is a binary 
relation symbol and V is a unary relation symbol. Zernielo set theory is a 
subtheory of Zermelo-Fraenkel, and Bernays set theory is a subtheory of 
Bernays-Morse. 
The deepest results in set theory use constructions of models. However, 
these constructions are often of a special nature, for models of set theory 
only, and are therefore outside the scope of this book. For instance, the 

44 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.4 
notion of constructible sets was used by Godel (1939) to show that if 
Bernays set theory is consistent, then it remains consistent if we add to it 
the axiom of choice and the generalized continuum hypothesis; in other 
words, if Bernays set theory has a model, then it has a model in which the 
axiom of choice and the generalized continuum hypothesis are true. The 
same proofs and results are also well known to hold for Zermelo-Fraenkel 
set theory. Cohen’s foicing construction has been used by Cohen and others 
to obtain a remarkable series of additional consistency results (see Cohen, 
1963). For example, if Bernays (or Zermelo-Fraenkel) set theory has a 
model, then it has a model in which the axiom of choice is false, and another 
model in which the axiom of choice is true but the generalized continuum 
hypothesis is false. 
In the rest of our discussion let us use the abbreviation ZF for ‘Zermelo- 
Fraenkel set theory’. Whether or not we can prove that ZF is consistent 
depends on just how much we are assuming in our intuitive set theory. 
If our intuitive set theory is just a replica of ZF, then we cannot prove the 
consistency of ZF, even if we allow the use of the axiom of choice. Similarly, 
for any of the other set theories T we have introduced in the Appendix, 
we cannot prove the consistency of T if our intuitive set theory is a replica 
of T. These assertions follow from the Godel incompleteness theorem. 
On the other hand, in Bernays-Morse set theory we can prove the consistency 
of Bernays set theory and of ZF. In ZF we can prove the consistency of 
Zermelo set theory. If we assume the existence of an inaccessible cardinal, 
then we can prove that Bernays-Morse set theory as well as ZF are con- 
sistent. Bernays set theory and ZF are very close to each other, and we can 
prove that one is consistent if and only if the other is. We shall leave the 
last three results above for exercises. 
Neither Zermelo set theory, nor ZF, nor Bernays-Morse set theory is 
finitely axiomatizable (assuming that they are consistent). But, surprisingly, 
Bernays set theory is finitely axiomatizable (Bernays, 1937). With its 
finite axiomatization it is sometimes called Bernays-Godel set theory. Each 
of the four set theories in our discussion, like number theory, has the 
following property: if the theory is consistent, then it is not complete, and 
no finite extension of it is complete. This is another consequence of the 
Godel incompleteness theorem. 
There is no completely satisfactory notion of a ‘standard’ model of set 
theory. The closest thing to it is the notion of a natural model. Natural 
madels, roughly, are models of the form (M, r), where M is a set of sets 
formed by starting with the empty set and repeating the operations of 

1.41 
THEORIES AND EXAMPLES OF THEORIES 
45 
union and power set, while E is the erelation restricted to M. More 
precisely, we define for each ordinal a the set R(a) by 
R(0) = 0, 
R(a+l) = S(R(a)), 
R(a) = u R(P) if a is a limit ordinal. 
and 
/?<a 
Then a natural model of ZF (or of Zermelo set theory) is a model of the 
form (R(a), c). A natural model of Bernays set theory is a model of the 
form (R(a+ l), E ,  R(a)). 
None of our set theories has any countable natural models. For this 
reason, a somewhat weaker notion of ‘standard’ model is also important. 
A model (M, E) is said to be a transitive model iff c is the erelation restricted 
to M and every element of an element of M is an element of M. For models 
of the language 9’ = {E, V }  we make a similar definition. The countable 
transitive models are the most important models for Cohen’s forcing 
construction. 
Since number theory has just one standard model and is not complete, 
it has consistent extensions which have no standard models. If ZF has any 
transitive model at all, then it has many nonequivalent transitive models. 
Nevertheless, if ZF is consistent, then it has consistent extensions which 
have no transitive models at all. Moreover, in ZF plus the axiom of choice, 
we cannot prove the following: if ZF has a model, then ZF has a transitive 
model. 
EXERCISES 
1.4.1. Is there a theory of well order in the first-order language (<}? 
1.4.2. Find two dense orders without endpoints of the same power which 
are not isomorphic. 
1.4.3. Every finite Boolean algebra is atomic. If it has n atoms, then it has 
exactly 2” elements. Any two finite Boolean algebras with the same number 
of elements are isomorphic. 
1.4.4. Every finite subset of a Boolean algebra generates a finite sub-Boolean 
algebra. 
1.4.5. Find two atomless nonisomorphic Boolean algebras of the same 
power. 

46 
INTRODUCIION 
11.4 
1.4.6. Prove the following weak form of the representation theorem: 
Every atomic Boolean algebra is isomorphic to a field of sets. 
1.4.7. Prove that the theory of infinite models whose axioms are the infinite 
list of sentences on, where each sentence on says that there are at least n 
distinct elements, is not finitely axiomatizable. 
1.4.8. Prove that there is no theory T such that ?I is a model of T if and 
only if ?I is finite. 
1.4.9. Let ?l = ( A ,  +, ., -, 0, I )  be a Boolean algebra. A (proper) ,filter 
on ()I is a subset D c A such that D # (1, D # A, and whenever x, y E D 
and x < z, then x * y E D and z E D. A subset E of A is said to have the.finite 
intersection properly iff for all x, , ..., x ,  E E and all n, x ,  . x 2  . ... . x ,  # 0. 
Prove that every subset E with the finite intersection property generates 
a filter D in the following sense: 
X E  D 
iff x 3 y, ... .y,, for some y , ,  ..., 
19, 
E E. 
A filter D on ?I is said to be principal iff for some element a # 0 in A, 
X E D  iff a < x .  
D is an ultrafilter on 4I iff no proper extension of D is a filter on ?l. Prove 
that the only principal ultrafilters on ?I are generated by the atoms of ?L 
i.e., D is a principal ultrafilter iff for some atom u E A ,  
X E D  iff a <  x .  
Thus, if ?I is atomless, then all ultrafilters on ?I are nonprincipal. Prove the 
following: 
(i). Every nonzero element of A belongs to an ultrafilter, and more 
generally, every filter on 4I can be extended to an ultrafilter. 
(ii). If D is an ultrafilter on 9, 
then 
x + y ~ D  iffeither X E D  or  ED, 
X E D  iff X $ D .  
(iii). Let X be the set of all ultrafilters on 41. For each a E A, define 
h, = { D E X : U E D } .  
Show that h is an isomorphism of (21 onto the field of sets 
( { A ,  : a E A } ,  u, n, -, 0, X > .  
This gives a proof of Proposition 1.4.4. 
1.4.10. Let 9 
be a first-order language and consider the equivalence 
relation k cp CI 1(1 on the formulas of 2. 
Let 

1.41 
THEORIES AND EXAMPLES OF THEORIES 
47 
(cp) = {@ : I- cp - 
4% 
0, = ( c p A l c p ) ,  1, 
= (CPVlCp). 
B, = {(cp) : cp a formula of -I"}, 
Define 
- 
(Cp)+(lc/) 
= (cpvlc/), 
(cp). (@) = (cp A@)- 
(cp) = (1 
cp). 
Then 'Bs = (B,, +, a, -, 0,, 
I,) 
is a Boolean algebra and it is known 
as the Lindenbaum algebra of 2'. We shall drop the subscript 2' if it is 
understood. 23 has several important subalgebras. For each n E w, we can 
define 
B,, = ((cp) : cp has at most the variables u 0 ,  u , ,  ..., u,-, free}. 
Then each B,, determines a sub-Boolean algebra 23" of 23. In particular, 
8, 
is the Lindenbaum algebra of allsentences of 9. 
Prove that the following 
are equivalent: 
(i). Lindenbaum's theorem for 2, 
Proposition 1.3.1 I .  
(ii). Every filter on the Lindenbaum algebra 23, can be extended to an 
ultrafilter. 
1.4.11. Let T be any theory of 9 
and define 
DT = {(V) : T' cp). 
Prove that: 
(i). T is consistent iff DT is a filter on 23,. 
(ii). T is consistent and finitely axiomatizable iff DT is a principal filter 
(iii). T is complete iff DT is an ultrafilter in 23,. 
(iv). T is complete and finitely axiomatizable iff DT is a principal ultra- 
The converse of the above four equivalences also holds in the following 
on B0. 
filter on 23,. 
sense. Let D be a subset of B, and define 
TD = {cp : cp is a sentence and (p) E D}. 
Then (i)-(iv) hold with T replaced by T O  and DT by D. If T is complete, 
then, of course, the quotient algebra 23o/DT is the two-element algebra. 
In general, there is a one-to-one correspondence between complete closed 
extensions of T and ultrafilters in @O/DT. Show, without using the com- 
pleteness theorem, that the above results still hold when the notions of 
closed theory, finitely axiomatizable and complete are replaced by their 
syntactical analogues. 

48 
INTRODUCTION 
11.4 
1.4.12. Let 9' be the language of Section 1.2. By considering the equivalence 
relation k cp tt I,!I 
on sentences of 9, 
we can define the exact analogue of 
g9, namely 
89 = ( B y ,  +, ., -, 09, 19). 
The following shows that there is a close relation between completeness 
theorems and representations of Boolean algebras. Prove that the following 
are equivalent: 
(i). The completeness theorem for 9, 
Theorem 1.2.7. 
(ii). The Lindenbaum algebra By is isomorphic to a field of sets. 
There is an analogue of this result for 9 
and 
which we shall discuss 
in the exercises for Section 2.1. 
1.4.13. Show that in the language { S ,  O} the theories given by the two sets 
of axioms (see Example 1.4.11) 
(A) axioms (1). (2), and schema (7q), 
(B) axioms ( I ) ,  (2), (8), and the schema 
(9,) so, f 01 v sv, f v t  v ... v so, f u g  
are equivalent. 
1.4.14. Show that if w < ct and ct is a limit ordinal, then (R(ct), E )  is a 
model of Zermelo set theory. Hence in ZF we can prove that Zermelo set 
theory is consistent. 
1.4.15. Let 0 be an (uncountable) inaccessible cardinal. Show that (R(O), E )  
is a model of ZF, and that ( R ( 0  + l), E, R(8)) is a model of Bernays-Morse 
set theory. 
1.4.16. Which axioms of ZF are true in the model ( R ( w ) , r ) ?  And in 
the model (R(w+o), E)? 
1.4.17* 
(i). Let ( A ,  E, U )  be an arbitrary model of Bernays set theory. Prove 
that ( U ,  E n  ( U  x U ) )  is a model of ZF. Hence if Bernays set theory is 
consistent, so is ZF. 
(ii). Let 9J = ( A ,  E )  be an arbitrary model of ZF. We may assume that 
no subset of A belongs to A .  Let us say that a subset X c A is definable in 'II 
iff there is a formula q ( u ,  ... u,) and elements xl, ..., x, E A such that 
x = { x  E A : 2l t 'p[xx, ... x,]}. 
Let B be the set of all definable subsets X of A such that there is no y E A 
with X = { X E  A : xEy}, and let E' be the set of all pairs x E A ,  X E  
B 
such that x E X .  Prove that ( A  LJ B, E u E', A )  is a model of Bernays set 
theory. Hence, if ZF is consistent, so is Bernays set theory. 

1.51 
ELIMINATION OF QUANTIFIERS 
49 
1.4.18* 
(i). Let ( A , € )  be any model of the axiom of extensionality, where E 
is theerelation restricted to A. Prove that ( A ,  E) is isomorphic to a transitive 
model, called a transitive realization of ( A ,  e ) .  
(ii). Show that any two transitive models of the axiom of extensionality 
which are isomorphic are equal. 
1.4.19. Prove that there exists a complete theory T which has arbitrarily 
large natural models. T may be taken to be an extension of Zermelo set 
theory. 
1.4.20. Let 3 and '13 be infinite simple orderings. Prove that 2I and % 
satisfy exactly the same universal sentences. 
1.5. Elimination of quantifiers 
Each model '2L of a theory T gives rise to a complete theory, namely the 
set of all sentences holding in 2, 
which is an extension of T. For this reason, 
it is important to know something about the complete extensions of a 
theory. In a few fortunate cases, it is possible to give a simple description 
of all the complete extensions of a theory by using the method of elimination 
of quantifiers. 
This method applies only to very special theories. Moreover, each time 
the method is applied to a new theory we must start from scratch in the 
proofs, because there are few opportunities to use general theorems about 
models. On the other hand, the method is extremely valuable when we want 
to beat a particular theory into the ground. When it can be carried out, 
the method of elimination of quantifiers gives a tremendous amount of 
information about a theory. For instance, it tells us about the behavior 
af all formulas, as well as all sentences, relative to the theory. Usually 
it also gives a uniform way of deciding whether or not a sentence belongs 
to the theory; in other words, it gives a proof that the theory is decidable. 
The question of the decidability of a theory lies outside the scope of this 
book, since it is not usually considered model theory. However, it is a very 
important question, and in fact the most striking applications of the 
elimination of quantifiers are to show that certain theories are decidable. 
The method is also valuable as a source of examples of thoroughly under- 
stood theories, which are useful for testing conjectures and for illustrating 
results. The method may be thought of as a direct attack on a theory. 
Later on, especially in 43.5, we shall learn of several more indirect 
attacks on theories, which work more often but give less information in 
particular cases. 

50 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.S 
Before describing the method, we need some more notation. In Section 
1.3, we introduced the notion of a sentence cp being a consequence of a set 
C of sentences, in symbols C k cp. What meaning shall we give to C k cp if cp 
is a formula? We shall say that a formula q ( v ,  ... ti") is a consequence of 
Z, symbolically Z k cp, iff for every model ?I of C and every sequence 
a,, ..., a, E A ,  a,, ..., a, satisfies cp. Tt follows that the forniula p(r0 ... I , " )  
is a consequence of C if and only if the sentence ('duo . . . Z ~ , ) ( P ( U ~  . . . I.") is a 
consequence of L. We say that two formulas cp, i,b are L-eqiiii.~Itwt iff 
In general, the method of elimination of quantifiers is as follows: First, 
depending on the theory T, we pick out an appropriate set of formulas, 
called basic formulas. By a Boolean combination of basic formulas we mean 
a formula obtained from basic formulas by repeated application of the 
connectives 1, A .  The main result to be proved is that evcrj~,fhrniiila is 
T-equivalent to a Boolean combination of basic formulas. The key step in the 
proof is the step where we 'eliminate quantifiers'. Ln fact, we map state 
at once a simple but general lemma which shows why the name 'elimination 
of quantifiers' is given to the method (the name is due to Tarski. 1935). 
, x k c p e r * .  
LEMMA 
1.5. I .  Let T be a theory and let Z be a set of formulas, callcd basic 
formulas. In order to show that every formula is T-equicalent to a Boolean 
combination of basic formulas, it is suficient to show the folloicing: 
(i). Every atomic formula is T-equivalent to a Boolean cornbination of 
basic formulas. 
(ii). If 0 is a Boolean combination of basic formulas, then (3r*,")0 is T- 
equivalent to a Boolean combination of basic formulas. 
PROOF. Let Y be the set of all formulas which are T-equivalent to a Boolean 
combination of basic formulas. We show by induction that every formula 
cp belongs to Y .  If cp is an atomic formula, then cp E Y by (i). If cp is i 
i,b 
and$€ Y,itisobviousthatcp~ Y .  Similarly,ifcpisi,b, ~ $ ? a n d $ , , i , b ?  
E Y ,  
then fp E Y .  If cp is (3v,)$ and $ E Y ,  then $ i s  T-equivalent to a Boolean 
combination 0 of basic formulas. Moreover, cp is T-equivalent to (3v,,,)O. 
By (ii), (3v,)O E Y ,  so cp E Y .  -I 
We shall illustrate the method with two simple examples. Our first 
example is the theory of dense simple order without endpoints (Example 
1.4.1). Let us temporarily (in this section only) call this theory A .  As we 
mentioned in Section 1.4, the theory A is complete. The method of elimina- 

1.51 
ELIMINATION OF OUANTIFIERS 
51 
tion of quantifiers is one of several ways which we shall come across for 
proving that theories are complete. The completeness of A will follow from 
our results below. The elimination of quantifiers was applied to the theory 
A very early, by Langford (1927). 
As basic formulas we shall take the atomic formulas 
0, = u,, 
v, < 11,. 
The Boolean combinations of atomic formulas are precisely the formulas 
which have no quantifiers. In any language, formulas which have no 
quantifiers are called open formulas. We wish to prove that every formula 
cp is A-equivalent to an open formula $. As we carry out our arguments, 
we shall also keep track of which variables occur in the open formula which 
is A-equivalent to a given formula. This will be useful for applications. 
Before we can eliminate any quantifiers, we must take a close look at the 
open formulas. For convenience, we use the abbreviation 
v, -= u, for 
v, < v, A i 
v, 5 0,. 
Let us consider n +  1 variables uo, ..., u,,, n > 0. By an arrangement of 
the variables uo, ..., t', we mean a finite conjunction of the form 
e o A e , A  ... A e  "-,, 
where uo, . . ., u, is a renumbering of vo , . . ., u, and each formula Bi is either 
ui < ui+ or else ui = ui+ , . The lemma below allows us to put every open 
formula into a 'normal form' built up from arrangements of the variables. 
LEMMA 1.5.2. Every open formula p(v0 ... 0,) 
is A-equivalent either to one 
of thtj formulas uo -= vo, vo E vo, or else to the disjunction offnitely many 
arrangements of the Variables vo, ..., v,;. 
PROOF. First, we consider the case n = 0. In this case, the open formula 
p(vo) is built up from the atomic formulas uo Q uo, vo = vo. Since 
A C vo < uo and A C vo = vo, we must haveeitherd C cp and A C cp - v o  
E uo, 
or else A C i cp and A C cp - 
vo < vo. 
Let us now make three observations about arrangements (we assume 
that n > 0): 
(1). There are only finitely many different arrangements of the variables 
v g ,  ..., u,. 
(2). For each simply-ordered structure a, each sequence ao, ..., a, 
satisfies some arrangement of vo, ..., q,. 

52 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.5 
(3). Let cp(u, ... u,) be an open formula and let + be an arrangement of 
u,, ..., u,. Then one or both of the formulas I(/ + cp, $ + i 
cp, is a con- 
sequence of the theory of simple order. 
(1) should be obvious, while (2) follows easily from the fact that in a 
simply-ordered structure, exactly one of the relations a < 6, a = b, b < a 
holds between two elements a, b. (3) is proved by induction on the length 
of the open formula 9, 
and is left to the reader. 
Now let q ( u 0  . . . u,) be an open formula. If A C i 
cp, then cp is A-equivalent 
to the formula u, c uo. Assume the other possibility, that it is not the case 
that A t= i 
cp. Consider any model 
of A and sequence a,, ..., a, which 
satisfies cp in %. By (2), a,, ..., a, also satisfies some arrangement II/ of 
u,, ..., u, in PI. Thus we cannot have A C $ + i 
cp, and, by (3), we must 
have A k $ + cp. Form the disjunction 8 of all arrangements $ of u,,, ..., u, 
for which A C $ + cp. 8 is the disjunction of at least one, but only finitely 
many formulas, in view of (1). It follows from our remarks above that 
A C cp -+ 0, and from the definition of 8 we see that A C 0 + cp. So cp and 0 
are A-equivalent, and our proof is complete. -1 
We observe that actually the above lemma is true for the theory of 
simple order as well as for the theory A .  The reader may check this by 
going carefully through the proof, noticing that the only axioms of A 
which we actually made use of are the axioms of simple order. In the next 
theorem, however, we need all of the axioms of A. 
THEOREM 
1.5.3. Euery formula cp is A-equiualent to an open formula +. 
Moreover, if all the free variables of cp are among u,, ..., u,, n 2  0, then + 
can be chosen so that all its variables are among uo , . . ., 0,. 
PROOF. We first prove that every formula cp is A-equivalent to an open 
formula $. By Lemma 1.5.1, it suffices to prove that for every open formula 
$(uo ... u,), the formula (3u,)i,b 
is A-equivalent to an open formula. If 
m > n, then u, does not occur at all in +, so (3u,)+ is A-equivalent to $. 
We may thus assume that rn ,< n. By renaming the variables we can even 
make m = n. 
Using Lemma 1.5.2, we may suppose that + is either u, < u,, u, = u,, 
or a disjunction of finitely many arrangements of uo, ..., u,. If $ is either 
u, < u, or u, 3 u,, then obviously (3u,)+ is A-equivalent to $. In the 
remaining case, let 
$ = e,v ... ve,, 

1.51 
ELIMINATION OF QUANTIFIERS 
where each Bi is an arrangement of uo, ..., u,. Then 
53 
A F (30,)$ +, (3u,,)eo v . .. v (3u,)o,. 
We may eliminate the quantifier (30,) in the following way: If n = I ,  
the only possibilities for the formulas (3u,)Oi are 
(3Ul)UO < 01, 
(3UI)UO = u1, 
( 3 U I ) U l  < 00. 
Each of these is a consequence of A, and it follows that (3ul)$ is a con- 
sequence of A and is A-equivalent to uo = uo. 
Let n > 1. Then, from each arrangement Bi of uo, ..., u,, we may form 
in a natural way an arrangement 8; of uo, . . ., u,- 
obtained by leaving out 
u,. It is easy to see that 
A k (~u,)Q+ e;, 
i = 0, . . . , p ,  
and hence 
A F (3u,)$ ++ 0: v . . . v 0;. 
We have shown in each case that (3u,)$ is A-equivalent to an open formula. 
We now prove the second clause of the theorem. Our proof given above 
actually shows that if $(u0 ... u,) is an open formula, n > 0, then (3u,)$ 
is A-equivalent to an open formula of the form 8(uo ... u,,- ,). Let q(u0 . .. u,) 
be an arbitrary formula, n 2 0. Then cp is A-equivalent to some open 
formula$(u ,... u, ... u,,,). 
But rp is also A-equivalent to (3u,+,) ...( 3u,+,)cp, 
and hence to (3u,+,) ... (3u,+,)$. 
The latter formula is A-equivalent to 
an open formula of the form 8(uo ... u,), and thus cp is A-equivalent to 8. 
Our proof is complete. -I 
The proof of the theorem also gives a decision procedure for the theory A. 
Very briefly, the decision procedure is as follows. We are given an arbitrary 
sentence cp and we wish to determine whether cp belongs to the theory A .  
Our first step is to put rp into prenex normal form, say (after renumbering 
variables), 
(Qouo)(Q, 
01) 
(Qnun)$7 
where Qo, ..., Q, are quantifier symbols 3 or V, and $ is open. We may 
assume further that Q, is 3, for otherwise we may work with i 
q. Next, 
we put $ into one of the forms uo < uo, uo = uo, or a disjunction of finitely 
many arrangements of uo, ..., u,. Then we eliminate the quantifier (3u,), 
that is, we replace (3u,,)$ by a A-equivalent open formula 8(uo ... u n - , )  
by the process explained in the proof. After that, we repeat the process 

54 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.5 
until all the variables except vo are eliminated. When we finish, we can tell 
at once whether the resulting sentence (Qovo)O(vo) belongs to A. Of course, 
the decision procedure can be streamlined very much if it is really going 
to be used. 
We now obtain another consequence of the theorem. 
COROLLARY 
1.5.4. The theory of dense simple order without endpoints is 
complete. 
PROOF. Let cp be an arbitrary sentence. By Theorem 1.5.3, cp is A-equivalent 
to an open formula $(vo). But for any open formula $(vo), we have either 
A t I) or A b i 
$. Hence either A I= cp or A t i 
cp, and A is complete. -1 
Note that Corollary 1.5.4 is only concerned with sentences, but to prove 
the corollary via Theorem 1.5.3 we had to use an induction concerned with 
arbitrary formulas. This happens time and again in model theory, because 
the notion of a sentence is defined using the recursive definition of a formula. 
Theorem 1.5.3 also tells us something about the theories formed by adding 
new constant symbols to the language and taking A as a set of axioms. We 
leave this application of the theorem as an exercise. 
Theorem 1.5.3 can be improved a little by taking for our basic formulas 
only the formulas v ,  < v,. 
COROLLARY 
1.5.5. Every formula p(uo ... v,) is A-equivalent to a Boolean 
combination of formulas of the form u, < up, where m = 0, ..., n and 
p = 0, ..., n. 
PROOF. 
In view of Theorem 1.5.3, it is enough to observe that 
A != v, = vp*-,v, < v p h u p  < v,. -1 
We now take up our second example of the elimination of quantifiers. 
We shall obtain a full description of all complete closed theories in the pure 
identity language (see Section 1.3), which has no predicate, function or 
constant symbols at all. In other words, we shall describe all complete 
closed extensions of the theory with the empty set of axioms in the pure 
identity language. 
As in the case of dense simple order, we begin with a lemma about 
arrangements. What should we mean by an arrangement this time? An 
arrangement of vo, ..., v, will be a formula which tells which variables are 

1.51 
ELIMINATION OF QUANTIFIERS 
55 
equal to each other and which are unequal. To be precise, we let e be an 
equivalence relation over the set (0, 1, ..., n} of indices of the variables 
uo, ..., v,. We define the arrangement of uo, ..., u, given by e to be the 
conjunction of all the formulas 
u i  = v j ,  iej; and i 
u ,  = vj, not iej. 
LEMMA 
1.5.6. Every open formula cp(vo .. . v,) is either inconsistent or is 
equivalent to a disjunction offinitely many arrangements o j v o ,  ..., u,. 
The proof is very similar to that of Lemma 1.5.2, so we leave it as an 
exercise. 
We now must decide on our set of basic formulas. It should be clear 
that the atomic formulas are not enough. For instance, the sentence 
( V ~ ~ v , ) ( t ~ ~  
E v l )  cannot be expressed by an open formula. 
For our basic formulas we take all atomic formulas 
u, z u,, 
together with the sentences cr, which state that ‘there are more than 17 
distinct elements’. Formally, on, n > 0, may be written 
(VU, ... V n ) ( 3 V o ) ( 1  UO 
01 A ... A 1  UO 
0,). 
For good measure, we shall define cro to be a valid sentence, say 
(3vo)(vo = 00). 
THEOREM 
1.5.7. Every formula cp in the pure identity language is equivalent 
to a Boolean combination @ of basic formulas. Moreocer, if all the free 
variables of cp are among vo, ..., v,, then $ may be chosen so that all its 
free variables are among v o ,  ..., v,. In particular, if 
cp is a sentence, then 
so is $. 
PROOF. We first show that every formula is equivalent to a Boolean 
combination of basic formulas. Let $(vo ... 0,) be an arbitrary Boolean 
combination of basic formulas. By Lemma 1.5.1, it suffices to prove that 
(3u,)@ is equivalent to a Boolean combination of basic formulas. First, 
we note that $ is equivalent to a formula of the form 
(*o A 0O)V ... v (*PA 0,) 
where each Il/i is an open formula and each Bi is a Boolean combination of 
the sentences u0, crl, cr2, .... Still better, using Lemma 1.5.6, we may make 

56 
INTRODUCIION 
[1.5 
each $i be either the inconsistent sentence 1 oo or else a disjunction of 
finitely many arrangements of vo, ..., it,,. 
As in the previous theorem, we may assume without loss of generality 
that m = n. In the case ti = 0, the only arrangement of uo is the valid formula 
r0 = u0, so each tki is either valid, in which case it may be replaced by go, 
or else it is the inconsistent formula i 
go. Thus $ is equivalent to a Boolean 
combination of the sentences go, ol, ..., and so is (3u,,)$. 
Assume that n > 0. For each arrangement i+hi, i ,< p ,  form @: 
by deleting 
all the equations and inequalities in which u, occurs. Then $: is an arrange- 
ment of the remaining variables u 0 ,  ..., u,-, . (If $i happens to be i 
oo, 
we simply let t+b: 
also be i 
no.) Note that (3u,,)4hi is not, in general, equivalent 
to t+b,?. 
(Why?) However, if ei is the equivalence relation from which the 
arrangement t+bi comes, and ri is the number of equivalence classes in ei, 
then we easily see that (3~,,)$~ 
is equivalent to ar,-l 
A$*. Also (3r,,)$ is 
equivalent to the formula 
(00 A ( 3 4 , M O )  v ... v (o,,~ (3~,,)$~). 
It follows that (3u,,)$ is equivalent to 
This is indeed a Boolean combination of basic formulas, and the first part 
of the theorem is proved. 
Now, using exactly the same trick as we used at the end of the proof of 
Theorem 1.5.3, we can obtain the full statement of the theorem - that each 
formula q ( u ,  ... u,) is equivalent to a Boolean combination $(uo ... v,,) of 
basic formulas, and, if cp is a sentence, then so is $. -I 
We are now ready to describe clearly all the closed theories in the pure 
identity language. It is easy to see that for every finite set N of positive 
natural numbers, there is a sentence o ( N )  whose models are precisely those 
?l 
such that IAl E N .  The reader should check that for each N, a ( N )  is a 
pure identity sentence, and, in fact, is a Boolean combination of a,, ul, .... 
We now can conclude that, up to equivalence, the sentences a ( N )  and their 
negations are the only pure identity sentences. 
COROLLARY 
1.5.8. For every pure identity sentence cp, there is a finite set N 
of positive natural numbers such thar cp is equivalent either to a(N) or to 
i a ( N ) .  

1.51 
ELIMINATION OF QUANTIFIERS 
57 
We now take up the theories. It is also easy to see that for each finite or 
infinite set N of positive natural numbers, there is a closed theory d ( N )  
whose models are precisely those % such that either IAl E N  or 'i?l 
is infinite. 
Again, the reader should check that each theory A ( N )  has a set of pure 
identity sentences for axioms. To make our notation more complete, we 
may as well write C ( N )  for the closed theory which has the single axiom 
o ( N ) ,  where N is finite. The next corollary shows that the A ( N )  and C ( N )  
are the only closed theories in the pure identity language. 
COROLLARY 
I .5.9. 
(i). The finitely axiomatizable closed theories in the pure identity language 
are precisely the theories Z(N), where N isfinite, and A(N), where w -  N is 
.finite. 
(ii). The nonjinitely axiomatizable closed theories in the pure identity 
Zanguage are precisely the theories A(N), where w -  N is infinite. 
PROOF. (i). The theories Z ( M ) ,  M finite, and d ( N ) ,  o - N  finite, are 
finitely axiomatizable. Indeed, Z ( M )  has the single axiom a(M), and 
d ( N )  the single axiom i 
o(w- N ) .  By Corollary 1.5.8, any finitely axiomatiz- 
able theory has a single axiom of the form a ( N ) ,  or else i 
a ( N ) ,  N finite. 
This proves (i). 
(ii). Now let T be an arbitrary closed theory in the pure identity language. 
Let N be the set of all positive natural numbers such that T has a model of 
power in N. Then for each finite model 21, (21 is a model of T if and only if 
IAl E N .  If one of the sentences a(M), M finite, belongs to T, then all 
models of Tare finite and N c M ,  and thus T = C(N). 
Assume now that Tis not of the form Z(N). It follows that every sentence 
<p E T is equivalent to a sentence of the form i 
o ( M ) .  Let N' be the union 
of all sets M such that TI= i 
a(M). Then clearly (21 is a model of T if and 
only if 
is infinite or IAl E O - N ' .  Therefore T = A(w-N'). Note also 
that o - N '  = N, so T is A(N). Finally, if T is not finitely axiomatizable, 
then by (i) the set w -  N is infinite. This proves (ii). -I 
Note that by our last corollary, there is no theory at all whose models 
consist precisely of all finite models. Likewise, if N is an arbitrary infinite set 
of positive natural numbers, there is no theory whose models consist of all 
'II such that IAl E N .  In other words, in the pure identity language, any 
theory which has arbitrarily large finite models has an infinite model. We 
shall see later that this is true in every other first-order language as well. 

58 
INTRODUCTION 
[1.5 
There are several very important theories which have been analyzed using 
the elimination of quantifiers. For example, additive number theory 
(Presburger, 1929), the theory of Abelian groups (Szmielew, 1955), the 
theory of Boolean algebras (Tarski, 1949), the theory of all well-ordered 
models (Mostowski and Tarski, 1949), and the theories of real closed 
fields and of algebraically closed fields (Tarski, 1948). As might be guessed 
from our two simple examples, the elimination of quantifiers becomes 
quite difficult in some of the more substantial cases mentioned above. 
In each of those cases, the method gives a decision procedure for the theory, 
as well as a useful classification of all formulas and all complete extensions 
of the theory. 
Most of the interesting theories which arise in mathematics are undecid- 
able (e.g., number theory, set theory, groups, fields, partial order), and the 
method of elimination of quantifiers does not work for these theories. 
EXERCISES 
1.5.1. Let 2 ( n )  be the language {<, co, ..., cn-,} obtained from the 
language { < } by adding n constant symbols. 
(i). Show that the set A of sentences is not complete in the language 
9 ( n ) ,  forn > 1. Show that all the complete extensions are finitely axiomatiz- 
able. 
(ii)*. Describe all the complete extensions of A in the language Y(u). 
1.5.2*. Let r be the theory of dense simple order. Prove that r has exactly 
four complete closed extensions, which come from one of the four additional 
axioms: 
there are no endpoints; 
there is a left endpoint but no right endpoint; 
there is a right endpoint but no left endpoint; 
there are a right and a left endpoint. 
Hint: As a set of basic formulas, take the set of all atomic formulas 
together with the formulas which state: 
urn is a left endpoint; 
urn is a right endpoint; 
there is a left endpoint; 
there is a right endpoint. 

1.51 
ELIMINATION OF QUANTIFIERS 
59 
Modify the proof of Theorem 1.5.3 to show that every formula is r- 
equivalent to a Boolean combination of basic formulas.] 
1.5.3'. Show by elimination of quantifiers that the theory of atomless 
Boolean algebras is complete. 
1.5.4. Which are the complete theories in the pure identity language? State 
a simple criterion for two models a, '23 of that language to be equivalent. 
1.5.5. Describe all the complete theories in the language which has n 
constant symbols but no relation or function symbols. Do the same for 
the language with w constant symbols. 
1.5.6. Outline a decision procedure for deciding whether a given pure 
identity sentence is valid. 
1.5.7*. Analyze the following theories using the method of elimination of 
quantifiers : 
(i). The theory with no axioms in the language with one I-placed 
relation symbol and no other symbols (Behmann, 1922). 
(ii). The theory of Abelian groups with all elements being of order 3. 
(iii). The theory of divisible Abelian groups. 
(iv). Monadic first-order logic. 
1.5.8*. This and the succeeding exercises are very long and tedious, if 
complete proofs are written out. The theory of one successor function has 
the axioms (I), 
(2) and (7), from Example 1.4.11 in the language 
9 
= { S ,  O}. Prove that this theory is complete by elimination of quantifiers. 
1.5.9*. Prove that additive number theory (from Example 1.4.11) in the 
language 9 
= { +, S, 0) is complete by elimination of quantifiers. 
1.5.10*. The theory of one equivalence relation in the language 9 
= ( E }  
has the following axioms: 
xEx; 
xEy A yEz -+ XEZ; 
xEy + yEx. 
Give a decision procedure for this theory by the method of elimination of 
quantifiers. 

60 
INTRODUCTION 
(1.5 
1.5.1 1 **. Give a decision procedure for the theory of Abelian groups 
(Example 1.4.6) by elimination of quantifiers. Use this to describe all 
complete extensions of this theory. 

CHAPTER 2 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
2.1. Completeness and compactness 
In this section, we prove the basic completeness theorem first proved by 
Godel (1930). The proof we give is due to Henkin (1949) and it applies 
to situations somewhat more general than Godel’s original proof. This 
extension was already noted by Malcev (1936). 
The result we prove is that every consistent set of sentences Tin a language 
9 
has a model or, in other words, is satisfiable. The proof proceeds in two 
stages. We shall first show that T can be extended to another consistent set 
of sentences Tin an expanded language p, 
having certain desirable features. 
Then we show that every T having these desirable features has a model. 
It will make no difference which of the two steps we prove first. 
DEFINITION. 
Let T be a set of sentences of 2’ and let C be a set of constant 
symbols of 2’. (C might be a proper subset of the set of all constant symbols 
of 9.) 
We say that C is a set of witnesses for Tin 2 iff for every formula cp 
of 9 
with at most one free variable, say x, there is a constant c E C such that 
TI- (Wcp --* 4 c ) .  
We say that T has witnesses in 9 
iff T has some set C of witnesses in 9. 
The meaning and usage of cp(c) should be quite clear here and in all 
succeeding places in this chapter: cp(c) is obtained from cp by replacing 
simultaneously all free occurrences of x in cp by the constant c. We shall be 
careful to use cp(c) only when it has been made clear from the context 
which variable x is to be replaced by c. Otherwise the notation ~ ( c )  
would 
be ambiguous. For example, if cp is a formula with the free variables x, y ,  
61 

62 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.1 
we have to indicate whether q(c) is obtained from cp by replacing x by c 
or by replacing y by c. An alternative notation which is completely un- 
ambiguous is to write cp(c/x) for the formula obtained by replacing all free 
occurrences of x in cp by c. However, we prefer to use q(c) and rely on the 
context for clarity rather than use the more cluttered notation cp(c/x). 
LEMMA 
2.1.1. Let T be a consistent set of sentences of 9. 
Let C be a set 
of new constant symbols of power ICl = 11911, 
and let 9 
= 9 
u C be the 
simple expansion of 9 formed by adding C. Then T can be extended to a 
consistent set of sentences T in 
which has C as a set of witnesses in y. 
PROOF. Let a = Il9ipII. For each p < a, let c,, be a constant symbol 
which does not occur in 9 
and such that c,, # cy if p < y < a. Let 
C = {ca : B < a}, 3’ = 2’ u C. Clearly 113’11 = a, so we may arrange 
all formulas of 
with at most one free variable in a sequence q,, 5 < a. 
We now define an increasing sequence of sets of sentences of 9: 
T = T o c T , c  ... c T , c  ..., 
( < a ,  
and a sequence d,, t < a, of constants from C such that: 
(i). each T, is consistent in p; 
(ii). if c = [ + l ,  then T, = T, u {(3x,)q, -, q,(d,)}; xc is the free 
(iii). if 5 is a limit ordinal different from 0, then T, = U,<,Te. 
Suppose that Tc has been defined. Note that the number of sentences in 
T, which are not sentences of 2’ is smaller than a, i.e., the cardinal of the 
set of such sentences is less than a. Furthermore, each such sentence contains 
at most a finite number of constants from C. Therefore, let d, be the first 
element of C which has not yet occurred in T,. For instance, do = co. 
We show that 
variable in qc if it has one, otherwise xc = u,; 
Tc+ I = Tc u {(3x,)coc 
+ cp,(d,)} 
is consistent. If this were not the case, then 
By propositional logic, 
T, 
( W P ,  * ’ 
cp,(d,). 
T, I- (VX,)((3Xc)cpc A 1 cpc(xc))9 
As dz does not occur in Tc, we have by predicate Icgic, 

2.11 
COMPLETENESS AND COMPACTNESS 
63 
which contradicts the consistency of Ti. If 5 is a nonzero limit ordinal, 
and each member of the increasing chain T,, < 5, is consistent, then 
obviously T ,  =-ui.sT, is consistent. This completes the induction. 
Now we let T = u c < z T s .  It is evident that Tis consistent in 
is an extension of T. Suppose that cp is a formula of 9 
with at most the 
variable x free. Then we may suppose that cp = cps and x = xf for some 
g < a. Whence the sentence 
and 
( 3 4 %  + cpr(d,) 
belongs to T s + ,  and so to F. -I 
and tedious. 
The idea of the next lemma is just as simple, but its proof is more involved 
LEMMA 
2.1.2. Let T be a consistent set of sentences and C be a set of witnesses 
for Tin 2. 
Then T has a model % such that every elemelit of '?i 
is an inter- 
pretation of a constant c E C. 
PROOF. First, note that if a set of sentences T has a set C of witnesses in 9, 
then C is also a set of witnesses for every extension of T. Second, if an 
extension of T has a model a, then % is also a model of T. So we may as 
well assume that T is maximal consistent in 9. 
f o r  two constants c, d E C, 
define 
C - d  iff c = d ~ T .  
Because T is maximal consistent, we see that for c, d, e E C, 
c - c; 
if c N d and d -  e, then 
c - e; 
if c - d then d - c. 
So - is an equivalence relation on C. For each c E C, let 
Z = { d ~ C : d - c }  
be the equivalence class of c. We propose to construct a model 91 whose 
set of elements A is the set of all these equivalence classes Z, for c E C; 
so we define 
We now define the relations, constants, and functions of a. 
(1) A = {Z : C E  C } .  

64 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.1 
(i). For each n-placed relation symbol P in 9, 
we define an n-placed 
relation R' on the set C by: 
for all c,, ..., c, E C, 
By our axioms of identity, we have 
(2) R'(c, ... c,) iff P(c, ... c,) E T. 
t. P(cl ... c,) A c1 = d, A ... A C, 3 d, + P(d, ... d,). 
So - is what is called a congruence relation for the relation R' on C. 
It follows that we may define a relation R on A by 
By (2), the definition (3) is independent of the representatives of the equiv- 
alence classes P, , ..., P,. This relation R is the interpretation of the symbol 
P in PI. 
(ii). Now consider a constant symbol d of 9. 
From predicate logic, 
we have 
(3) R(Z, ... Z,) 
iff P(c, ... c,) 
E T. 
I- (3uo)(d = uo). 
So (3uo)(d = uo) E T, and, because T has witnesses, there is a constant 
c E C such that 
(d E c )  E T. 
The constant c may not be unique, but its equivalence class is unique 
because, using our axioms of identity, 
( d E  C A d  
C'+ 
C 
C'). 
The constant d is interpreted in the model iY by the (uniquely determined) 
element i: of A .  In particular, if d E  C, then d is interpreted by its own 
equivalence class d in 8, because (d = d )  E T. 
(iii). We handle the function symbols in a similar way. Let F be any 
m-placed function symbol of 9, 
and let c,, ..., c, 
E C. As before, we have 
(3uo)(F(c, ... c,) = uo) E T, 
and because T has witnesses, there is a constant c E C such that 
(F(c, ... c,) = C)E T. 
Once more, we have a slight difficulty because c may not be unique, and 
we use our axioms of identity to obtain: 
k (F(c, . . . c,) = c A c1 = d, A . .. A c, = d, A c = d )  + F(dl .. . d,) = d. 
This shows that a function G can be defined on the set A of equivalence 
classes by the rule 

2.11 
COMPLETENESS AND COMPACTNESS 
65 
(4) G(E, ... Em) = F iff (F(c, ... c,) = c) E T. 
We leave the detailed steps of (4) to the reader. We interpret the function 
symbol F by the function G in the model ?1. 
We have now specified the universe set and the interpretation of each 
symbol of 9 
in '$I, so we have completed the definition of thc model ?I. 
We have pointed out that the interpretation of each constant C E  C in ?I 
is its equivalence class C, and it follows that every element C E  A is the 
interpretation of some constant c E C. 
We proceed to prove that '!I1 is a model of T. First of all, using (4) as the 
first step of an induction, we easily show that 
(5) for every term t of 2 
with no free variables and for every constant 
c E c, 
Using the fact that C is a set of witnesses for T, we obtain from (5): 
?I C t = c if and only if (t = c) E T. 
( 6 )  for any two terms t ,  , f 2  of 9 
with no free variables, 
if and only if 
(tl = t z )  E T, 
91 != t ,  5 t2 
(7) for any atomic formula P ( t ,  ... r,) of 9 
containing no free variables, 
?I != P ( t ,  ... ?,) 
if and only if P(tl ... tn) E T. 
Combining ( 6 )  and (7) will form a basis for proving: 
(8) for any sentence cp of 9, 
31 C cp if and only if 
cp E T. 
(8) has an unusual proof in that it is proved by induction on the length of 
the sentences of 9. 
The reader will see that the reason why this could be 
done is because T is maximal consistent and has witnesses in 2. 
Without 
a great deal of trouble, we have for sentences cp, $ of 9 
and 
24 C 1 cp 
if and only if 
(1 cp) E T, 
? l C c p ~ $  ifandonlyif ( ~ ~ A $ ) E T .  
Suppose cp = (3x)$. If 24 != cp, then for some 2. E A ,  91 k $[;I. 
This means 
that % k $(c), where$(c) is obtained from $ by replacing all free occurrences 
of x by c. So $(c) E T and because 
I- Il/(c) --* (3x)$, 
we have cp E T. On the other hand, if cp E T, then because T has witnesses, 
there exists a constant c E C such that 

66 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.1 
As T is maximal, $(c) E T, so (2( k $(c). This gives ?1 b $[?I and ‘% i= cp. 
This shows that 91 is a model of T. -i 
Note that a converse of Lemma 2.1.2 is very easily proved, and, in fact: 
LEMMA 
2.1.3. Let C be a set of constant symbols of 9, and let T be a set 
of sentences of 2. If T has a model 3 such that every element of 31 is at1 
ititerpretation of some constant c E C, then T can be extended to a consistent 
if; in 2 
for which C is a set of witnesses. 
For the proof of Lemma 2.1.3, simply let T b e  the set of all sentences of 
Y true in 91. 
The model BI constructed from the constants c E C of 2’ by taking 
suitable equivalence classes is said to be built up from the set C of constants 
of 2’. Since every a E A is the interpretation of some c E C, we see im- 
mediately that IAl < JCI. We now supply the proofs of three theorems from 
Chapter 1. 
THEOREM 
1.3.21 (Extended Completeness Theorem). Let I; be a set of‘ 
setitences of 2. Then Z is consistent if and only if Z has a model. 
PROOF. The consistency of Z if Z has a model is a straightforward argument. 
So assume I; is consistent. By Lemma 2.1.1, we consider extensions 
of I; 
and 
has witnesses in p. By Lemma 
2. I .2, let % be a model of 2. 3 is a model for the expanded language p, 
so let 23 be the model for 9 
which is the reduct of 91 to P. 
Because 
sentences in Z do not involve the constants of 9 not in 9, 
we see that ‘23 
is a model of Z. -I 
of 9 (11911 = 11911), so that 
COROLLARY 
2.1.4 (Downward Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem). E- 
very consistent theory T in 2 has a model of power at most Il3’ll. 
PROOF. In the proof above we may choose ?I so that every element is a 
constant, and we have JBI = IA) < 11911 = Il2lpII. i 
Corollary 2.1.4 gives the original theorem of Lowenheim (1915): If a 
sentence has a model, then it has a countable (finite or infinite) model. 

2.11 
COMPLETENESS AND COMPACTNESS 
67 
THEOREM 
1.3.20 (Godel’s Completeness Theorem). A sentence of 2 
is a 
theorem of 9 
if and only if it is valid. 
PROOF. We need only concern ourselves with one direction of the theorem. 
If a sentence o is not a theorem of 2, 
then {i 
o} is consistent in 9. 
By 
Theorem 1.3.21, (1 o} will have a model in which o cannot hold. Hence o 
is not valid. i 
THEOREM 
1.3.22 (Compactness Theorem). A set of sentences t; has a 
model if and only if everyjinite subset oft; has a model. 
PROOF. If every finite subset of t; has a model, then every finite subset 
of t; is consistent. So C is consistent and Theorem 1.3.21 shows that 1 has 
a model. i 
We conclude this section with a representative list of applications or 
consequences of the completeness and compactness theorems. Some 
additional exercises can be found at the end. 
COROLLARY 
2.1.5. If a theory T has arbitrarily large jiriite models, then it 
has an injinite model. 
PROOF. Let T be a theory in 2’ with arbitrarily large finite models. Consider 
the expansion 9’ 
= 2’ 
u {c, : n E w } ,  where c, is a list of distinct constant 
symbols not in 9. 
Consider the set ,T of 9’ 
defined by 
C = T u  {i 
(c. 3 c,) : n < m < w}. 
Any finite subset t;’ of C will involve at most the constants c,, ..., c,, 
say, 
for some m. Let 91 be a model of T with at least m+ 1 elements, and let 
a,, . . ., a, be a list of m + 1 distinct elements of a. We can verify easily that 
the model (a, a,, ..., a,) for the finite expansion 9’‘ = 9 
u {co, ..., c,} 
of 2’ is a model of Z’. So, by Theorem 1.3.22, C has a model. The reduction 
of this model to 9 
gives a model of T which is clearly infinite. i 
COROLLARY 
2.1.6 (Upward Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem). Zf T 
has infinite models, then it has infinite models of any given power 
PROOF. 
The proof is similar to that of Corollary 2.1.5. Let cc, < < a, be 
a list of distinct constant symbols not in 9, 
and consider the set of sentences 
a a  1 1 ~ 1 1  . 

68 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.1 
Z = T u {-I (cc = c,) : 5 < q < u}. Every finite subset C‘ of I; will involve 
at most a finite number of the constants cc. Hence any infinite model of T 
can be expanded to a model of C‘. By Theorem 1.3.22, Z has a model BI 
and by Corollary 2.1.4, this model is of power at most 
119 u {Ce : 5 < u}II = u. 
On the other hand, the interpretations of the constants c, in 3 must give 
distinct elements of A .  So a < IAl < u and IAJ = u. i 
A result first published by Skolem (1934) is the following: 
COROLLARY 
2. I .I. There exist nonstandard models of complete nwnber 
theory. 
PROOF. Recall from 1.4.11 that complete number theory is the set of all 
sentences holding in the standard model (0, +, a, S, 0) of number theory. 
Since this theory has an infinite model, it has models of all infinite powers. 
A noncountable model of complete number theory clearly cannot be 
standard. i 
A simple but powerful device in model theory is the method of d’ ragrams. 
Let 91 be a model for 2’. We expand the language 2’ to a new language 
9, 
= 2’ 
u {c, : a €  
A }  
by adding a new constant symbol c, for each element a E A .  tt is understood 
that if a # b, then c, and c,, are different symbols. We may then expand 91 
to the model 
MA = (91, a),sA 
for 9, 
by interpreting each new constant c, by the element a. The diagram 
of M, denoted by A,,,, is the set of all atomic sentences and negations of 
atomic sentences of ~Y, 
which hold in the model PI,. 
If X is a subset of A ,  then we let 9, 
be the language 2’ u {c, : a E x} 
and ?Ix 
= (a, a),,, be the obvious expansion of 94 to Sx. 
Iff is a mapping 
from X into the set of elements B of a model 93 for 9, 
then (8, 
fa),,x is 
the expansion of 23 to a model for gX 
formed by interpreting each c, byfu. 
The method of adding new constant symbols for elements of a model is 
used again and again in model theory. The following proposition illustrates 
the usefulness of diagrams. 
PROPOSITION 
2.1.8. Let 
the following are equivalent: 
and B be models for 9 a n d  let f : A+ B .  Then 

2.11 
COMPLETENESS AND COMPACTNESS 
69 
(a). f is an isomorphic embedding of '11 into B. 
(b). There is an extension E 3 '21 and an isomorphism g : E 
that g 3 f .  
(c). (B, 
fa),,, 
is a model of the diagram of 3. 
'$3 such 
PROOF. The implication from (b) to (a) is trivial. If (a) holds, one can 
extend the set A to a set C and extend the function f to a one to one 
function g from C onto B. Then define the relations of E by the rule 
K L R [ c , .  . . c,] iff BkR[gc, . . . gc,] , 
and similarly for functions. This will make (b) hold for 
tion 1.3.18, for each formula q(x, . . . x , )  and all a,, . . . ,a, in A ,  
and g. 
To prove the equivalence of (a) and (c), use the fact that by Proposi- 
'211 q [ a ,  . . . a,] if and only if '21, 
k q(a, . . . a,) 
'$3 k q [  f a ,  . . . fa,] if and only if (B, 
fa),,, L q(a, . . . a,). i 
and 
Proposition 2.1.8 shows that the following three conditions are equiv- 
alent: 
(a') '21 is isomorphically embeddable in '23. 
(b') B is isomorphic to an extension of 3. 
(c') B can be expanded to a model of the diagram of '11. 
In the special case that A C B and f is the identity mapping from A 
into B, Proposition 2.1.8 shows that '21 is a submodel of B if and only if 
23, is a model of the diagram of 3. 
COROLLARY 
2.1.9. Suppose that Y has no function or constant symbols. 
Let T be a theory in 9 
and 31 be a model for Y .  Then (ZT is isomorphically 
embedded in some model of T if and only if every Jinite submodel of 91 is 
isomorphically embedded in some model of T. 
PROOF. We skip the easy direction and suppose that every finite submodel 
of I[ is isomorphically embedded in some model of T. We show that the 
set Z = T u A ,  is consistent. Every finite subset C' of Z contains at most 
a finite number of the new constants, say c,, , . . . , cam. Because the language 
9 
has no function or constant symbols, the finite set A' = (a,, ..., a,,,} 
generates a finite submodel 3' of 91. Let 8' 
be a model of T in which '11' is 
isomorphically embedded. We see without difficulty that C' c T u A,, . 
So, by Proposition 2.1.8, 8' can be expanded to a model of I', and hence 
L' has a model. By compactness, C has a model 8. 
By Proposition 2.1.8 
again, the reduct of 8 
to 9 
gives a model of Tin which '21 is isomorphically 
embedded. -I 

70 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.1 
We next consider two applications from the theory of fields (see 1.4.9). 
COROLLARY 
2.1.10. Let T be a theory in the language 2 
= { +, ., 0, l}? 
which has as models fields with arbitrary high finite characteristics. Then T 
has a model which is afield of characteristic 0. 
PROOF. Let T’ be the theory of fields and consider the set 
C = T u T’ u { p l  f 0 : all primes p ] .  
Recall from Chapter 1 that p l  is our abbreviation for the term I +  ... + I ,  
p times, of the language 2. 
A finite subset C‘ of C will involve a highest 
prime, sayp. Let 2l be a model of T which is a field, so M is also a model 
of T’, and such that the characteristic of M is higher than p. Then M is a 
model of C’, whence by compactness, C has a model. This model is a 
model of T, is a field, and has characteristic 0. i 
COROLLARY 
2.1.1 1. There exist non-Archimedean ordered fields elementarily 
equivalent to the orderedfield of real numbers. 
PROOF. An ordered field ( F ,  +, -, 0, 1, < ) is Archimedean iff for any two 
positive elements a, b in F there is an n such that nu 2 6. This is not ex- 
pressible in first-order logic. 
Let T be the set of all sentences of 9 
= { +, *, 0, I ,  < }  holding in the 
ordered field of reals. Let c be a constant symbol different from 0 and 1. Let 
C = T v  (nl < c : n E w ) .  
For every finite subset C’ of C, there is an expansion of the reals to a model 
of C’. By compactness, C has a model in which c has an interpretation b. 
In this model, both 1 and b are positive; yet no finite multiple of 1 can 
exceed 6. -I 
Corollary 2.1.11 is the very beginning of a branch of model theory 
called nonstandard analysis. The model theory of nonstandard analysis 
will be developed in Section 4.4. 
Consider A,, the diagram of 9 
introduced earlier. We see that Proposition 
2.1.8 gives an intimate connection between models of A ,  and models in 
which 24 can be isomorphically embedded. By the positive diagram of \I1 
we mean the subset of A ,  which consists only of atomic sentences (no 
negations of atomic sentences). We shall see that positive diagrams are 
associated with the following notion of homomorphic embedding. 
Given models 9 and 8’ for 9, 
9 is homomorphic to 9’ 
iff there is a 
function f mapping A onto A‘ satisfying the following: 

2.11 
COMPLETENESS AND COMPACTNESS 
71 
(i). For each n-placed relation R of (21 and the corresponding relation 
R‘ of a’, and all elements x , ,  ..., x, of A ,  
if R(xl ... x,,), then R‘(f(x,) ...f( 
x,,)). 
(ii). For each m-placed function G of (21 and the corresponding G’ of 
%’, and for all x l ,  ..., x, of A ,  
f(G(x1 ... xm)) = G’(f(x1) ... f ( X m ) ) .  
(iii). For each constant x of (21, f ( x )  is the corresponding constant of 31’. 
A function f satisfying the above is called a homomorphism of (21 onto 31‘. 
We write (21 z j  (21’ to indicate that f is such a homomorphism; if it is not 
necessary to indicatef, we write (21 N (21‘ for (21 is homomorphic to a’. In 
this case we also say (21’ is a homomorphic image of (21. (21 is homomorphically 
embedded in 81’ iff (21 is homomorphic to some submodel of (21’. See Exercise 
2.1.3 for some elementary properties of these notions. The next proposition 
corresponds to Proposition 2.1.8. 
PROPOSITION 
2.1.12. Let 3, 8 be models for 9. 
Then (21 is homomorphically 
embedded in 8 if and only if some expansion o j 8  is a model of the positive 
diagram of PI. 
COROLLARY 
2. I .  13. Every partial order on a set X can be extended to a 
simple order on X .  
PROOF. Suppose that d partially orders X .  Let 31 = ( X ,  d ). Let (c, : X E  X }  
be distinct constants for x E X and let A be the positive diagram of PI. Let 
C = A u (c, f c, : x # y in X }  u {a}, 
where CT is the sentence which expresses that < is a simple order (see 1.4. I). 
Let Z’ be a finite subset of C involving, say, the elements x l  , ..., x,, and 
the corresponding constants. We need the following fact: 
(1) Every partial order < on { x l ,  ..., x,,} can be extended to a simple 
order d ’  on { x l ,  ..., x,,} so that < is preserved, i.e., if x i  d xi, then 
The proof of ( I )  is not difficult and proceeds by induction on n. Assuming 
(I), we see that ( { x ,  , ..., x,,], d ’) is a model of C’. By compactness, C has 
a simply ordered model ( Y ,  < ’), in which there is an element y ,  corre- 
sponding to each constant c,. Clearly the set { y, : x E X }  is simply ordered 
by 6 ’ .  If x < z, then y, < ‘ y z ,  and if x # z, then y,r # y,. Using the 
inverse of the 1-1 function y : x + y,, we can induce a simple order on X 
which extends <. -I 
xi < ’ X j .  

72 
MODELS CONSTRUCED FROM CONSTANTS 
12.1 
EXERCISES 
2.1.1. Show that there are also countable nonstandard models of complete 
number theory. 
2.1.2. Prove the representation theorem for Boolean algebras (Proposition 
1.4.4) by the method of diagrams. 
[Hint: (a). Every atomic Boolean algebra is isomorphic to a field of sets. 
(b). Every finite subset of a Boolean algebra generates a finite, therefore 
atomic, Boolean algebra, (c). If B is isomorphically embedded in a field of 
sets, then % is isomorphic to a field of sets.] 
2.1.3. Prove the following. The homomorphism relation N is reflexive and 
transitive. It is not symmetric nor antisymmetric. If 91 Y W ,  then IAl 3 (BI. 
A sentence 0 is called posirioc iff it is built up from atomic formulas using 
only A ,  v , 3, V. tf 91 = 8, 
0 is a positive sentence, and 91 k c, then ‘5 k 0. 
Compare this with Exercise 1.3.5. 
2.1 .J. Prove the assertion ( I )  in Corollary 2.1.13. 
2.1.5. Show that every ordered field is equivalent to a non-Archimedean 
ordered field. 
2.1.6. Show that every group which has elements of arbitrarily large finite 
order is equivalent to a group which has an element of infinite order. 
2.1.7. Show that every model of ZF is equivalent to a (countable) model 
( A ,  E )  which has an infinite sequence 
... E x ~ E x ~  
 EX^. 
Therefore every model of ZF is equivalent to a countable model which is 
not isomorphic to a transitive model. 
2.1.8. Let ‘u = ( A ,  <, ...) be an infinite model such that < well orders A .  
Show that there is a model a’ = ( A ’ ,  <’, ...) equivalent to ?I such that 
< ’ is not a well ordering. 
2.1.9. Show that every infinite model 91 for a language 9 
has an equivalent 
model 23 of power II-YlI such that not every element of B is a constant of 23. 
2.1.10. Let 9 
have no function or constant symbols. Let T be a theory in 9 
and 91 be a model for 9. 
Then ‘u is homomorphically embedded in some 
model of T if and only if every finite submodel of 
is homomorphically 

2.11 
COMPLETENESS AND COMPACTNESS 
73 
embedded in some model of T. (This is a homomorphism version of 
Corollary 2.1.9.) 
2.1.11. Let ?I be an arbitrary infinite model and let LY 2 )(-5?lI. Then there 
is a model 23 equivalent to 9 such that for every formula cp(x) with one free 
variable, if cp(x) is satisfied by infinitely many different elements of 23, 
then cp(x) is satisfied by LY different elements of 23. 
2.1.12. A model 2 is said to bejnitely generated iff there is a finite set 
X c B which generates 2 (see Exercise 1.3.9). Let T be a theory in 3' and 
let 9 be a model for 9. 
Then 9-l is isomorphically embedded in some model 
of T if and only if every finitely generated submodel of 
is isomorphically 
embedded in some model of T. (Compare with Corollary 2.1.9.) 
2.1.13 
(i). If T, and T2 are two theories such that T ,  u T2 has no models, 
then there is a sentence cp such that T, t= cp and T, b 1 
cp. 
(ii). If T, and T, are two theories such that for all a, ?l is a model of 
T, iff ?( is not a model of T,, then T, and T, are finitely axiomatizable. 
2.1.14. Let T, c T, c T3 c ... be a strictly increasing sequence of closed 
theories in 9. 
Show that their union T = un<wT,, is a consistent closed 
theory in 9 
and it is not finitely axiomatizable. 
2.1.15. Let T,, n E w ,  be a strictly increasing sequence of closed theories 
in a finite language 2. 
Prove that U , 
T, has an infinite model. 
2.1.16. Let T be a finitely axiomatizable theory with only a countable 
number of complete extensions in a language 2. 
Prove that T has a 
finitely axiomatizable complete extension in 2. 
2.1.17. Prove that every complete theory T in a countable language has 
a model 2l of power ~ 2 "  
such that for every 8 L T and every S 
B there 
is an R C A such that (8, S) is elementarily equivalent to (a, R). 
2.1.18*. Let A be the theory of dense linear order without endpoints. 
Prove the following lemma (a), and then use (a) and the Lowenheim- 
Skolem-Tarski Theorem to give a simpler proof of Theorem 1.5.3 on the 
elimination of quantifiers for the theory A. 
(a). Let 2l and !B be countable models of A , a l , .  . . , a ,  E A ,  and 
b,, . . . , b, E B. If a , ,  . . . , a, and b,, . . . , b, satisfy the same arrange- 
ment, then (%, a , .  . . a,) = (8, b, . . . b,). 

74 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.1 
2.1.19*. Let 2' = 0 be the language of pure identity theory. Prove the 
following lemmas (a) and (b), and then use (a), (b), and the 
Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski 
Theorem to give a simpler proof of 
Theorem 1.5.7 on the elimination of quantifiers for pure identity theory. 
(a). Let 'u and 23 be models for 9 o f  the same cardinality, a , ,  . . . , a, E 
A ,  and b,, . . . , b, E B. If a , ,  . . . , a, and b,, . . . , b, satisfy the same 
arrangement, then ('u, a ,  . . . a,) 
(b). Let q ( x ,  , . . x , )  be a formula of 9 a n d  B(x, . . . x,) be an arrange- 
ment. Let S be the set of all cardinals a such that cp A 0 is satisfiable in a 
model of cardinality a. Then either S or its complement is a finite set of 
finite cardinals. 
(23, b, . . . b"). 
2.1.20. This and some of the following exercises are designed to show an 
alternative method of proving the extended completeness theorem for 
countable languages. A generalization of this method to noncountable 
languages is also given later. 
Let 9 be a countable language, and let T be a consistent set of sentences 
closed under t-. We aim to prove that T has a model. The starting point of 
our discussion is the countable Lindenbaum algebra By. 
We have already 
seen in Exercise 1.4.1 1 that Tcorresponds to a filter in Bo, the Lindenbaum 
algebra of sentences of 9. 
It is also easy to show that the set 
@ = {cp : T I  cp and 
cp is a formula of 9} 
is a filter in B. For simplicity, we shall now operate in the quotient algebra 
B/@. In other words, the equivalence classes of this new algebra are given 
by sets of formulas 
(+) = {cp :TI- cp-+), 
{'p: Tt- l c p } .  
with its unit element given by the set @, and its zero element given by 
We denote this quotient algebra by BT 
and call it the Lindenbaum algebra of 
T. BT is obviously a countable Boolean algebra. 
2.1.21. Let 'u be any Boolean algebra and let Y be a subset of A .  The sum 
of Y, or the 1.u.b. of Y, is defined to be the unique y E A such that 
x < y for all x E Y (i.e. y is an upper bound for Y ) ,  and 
if z E A is any upper bound for Y, then y < z. 
We denote the sum of Y if it exists by VY, or if the elements of Y are 
indexed by I, vis, 
yi. In an entirely similar manner, we can define the 

2.11 
COMPLETENESS AND COMPACTNESS 
75 
product of Y. or the g.1.b. of Y, and denote it by AY or AiEI 
y i .  Sums and 
products of arbitrary Y c A do not necessarily exist. When they do exist, 
they satisfy the following identities (assume that viE, 
y i  exists): 
( V Yi)+x = V (Yi+x), 
i E  I 
i € I  
( V yi). x = V ( y i . ~ ) ,  
i E I  
i E 1  
These identities imply, of course, that the sums and products on the right- 
hand side also exist. We leave the duals involving A to the reader. 
Let cp be any formula of 9. 
Let cp(k/p) be the formula obtained from cp 
by first replacing all bound occurrences of up in cp by u j ,  the first variable 
in the sequence uo, u , ,  ..., not occurring in cp, and then replacing all free 
occurrences of r:, by up. Show that in the Boolean algebra &, 
v (cp(k/p)) = ( ( 3 u k ) ( P ) ?  
P E W  
A ( d k l ~ ) )  
= ((Vukb). 
Thus sums and products of certain sets of substitution instances of a single 
formula cp always exist and correspond to existential and universal quantifica- 
tion of cp. Note that the number of such sums (and products) in BT is 
countable. 
2.1.22. An ultrafilter D on % is said to preserve the sum Viel 
yi iff 
P E W  
v yi E D if and only if some y i  E D. 
Similarly, D preseroes the producr A i s ,  yi iff 
I C I  
A yi E D if and only if all yi E D. 
i C I  
Prove the following: Given a countable sequence of products A X o ,  A X , ,  
..., AX,, ... of B. Then there exists an ultrafilter D on B which preserves 
each product. 
[Hint: Pick a sequence x, E X, such that no finite product of elements 
of the form AX,+Z, is equal to zero. Now consider any ultrafilter D 
which has as elements all AX, + X, .] 
There is also a corresponding result about countable sequences of sums. 
2.1.23. Let D be any ultrafilter on '%IT which preserves all the products of 
Exercise 2.1.21. We shall now construct a model of T from the variables 

16 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.1 
uo, u, , ... of 9. 
Since the procedure is quite similar to that of Lemma 2.1.2, 
we ask the reader to fill in all the details. 
First define equivalence by 
ui * u j  iff 
(ui E u j ) €  D. 
The equivalence classes are denoted by iji. 
Let c be a constant symbol of 9’. 
Since k (3u0)(c = uo), and D preserves 
sums, we see that for some i, (c = ui) E D. Let the interpretation of c be 
the class i i i .  
Let t be any term of 9 
(this includes the cases of function symbols and 
constant symb,ols) and up be a variable not occurring in t. Then 
k (3up)(t = up). Since D preserves sums, for some j ,  ( t  = u j )  E D. Let the 
interpretation of the term t (defined on equivalence classes iji) be i i j .  
Finally, let P be a relation symbol of 9. 
We define the relation R by 
R(iji, ... ijiJ 
iff 
(P(u,, ... uin)) E D. 
In this way, we have defined in an unambiguous manner a model % for 
2 
with universe the set of equivalence classes iji. Now prove by induction 
on the formulas q(u, ... u,) of 2’ 
that 
PI t= cp[ijo ... fin] 
iff 
(cp(u, ... u,)) E D. 
To pass through the cases of V or 3, we again need the fact that Dpreserves 
sums. Since cp E T implies that (cp) E D, this shows that ?I is a model of T. 
2.1.24. If the language 9 
is uncountable, then the number of sums and 
products corresponding to 3 and V in Bj7 is also uncountable. Even though, 
in general, Exercise 2. I .  17 fails for uncountable sequences of products in 
an arbitrary Boolean algebra, there is, nevertheless, a version of it which 
holds for the algebra Bj7. This is because every formula cp contains only a 
finite number of symbols. The generalization of Exercise 2.1.17 is as follows 
(the proof is straightforward): 
Let 8 be a Boolean algebra, a be an infinite cardinal, and AX,, p < a, 
be a sequence of products of ?I. Suppose that for all fl < SI and all filters E 
on % generated by fewer than SI elements, 
whenever X, c E, then 
AXfl E E. 
Then there exists an ultrafilter D on % which preserves each product AX,. 
Using this result, a generalization of the proof in Exercise 2.1.18 can be 
given for noncountable languages 9. 
(A technical detail should be 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
77 
mentioned: Before proceeding with the proof we must first expand 9 
to 
a language 9 with 11911 new constant symbols. This is apparently necessary, 
see the proof of Lemma 2.1. I .) 
2.2. Refinements of the method. Omitting types and interpolation theorems 
In this section, we shall give two refinements of the method used in 
Section 2.1 to construct countable models with additional properties. The 
first refinement will lead us to the omitting types theorem. At the moment, 
the possible ramifications of this technique to noncountable languages and 
models are not yet fully understood. We shall mention only a couple of 
results for noncountable languages. 
The starting point of our discussion is the notion of a set C of formulas 
of 9 
in the (free) variables x , ,  ..., x,. Here we are using x , ,  x 2 .  ... as 
names for arbitrary free variables of 9. 
We could just as well use v m l ,  v , , ~ ,  . . ., 
but we abhor double subscripts. The following is a precise definition: 
C is a set of formulas of 9 
in the (free) variables xl, ..., x, (symbolically, 
C = Z(x, ... x,)) iff x , ,  ..., x,, are distinct individual variables and every 
formula Q in Z contains at most the variables x i ,  ..., x, free. We now 
introduce the convention Q = o(xI ... x,), as we did for cp = q(u, ... v,). 
If u = u(xl ... x,), then the notation 
(21 k a[a, ... a,] 
means that the sequence a,, ..., a, of A satisfies Q in (21 (see the section on 
satisfaction). It is useful also to introduce the notation 
i?I k C[a, ... a,] 
to mean that for every u E I;, a , ,  . .., a, satisfies Q in 8; in this case we say 
that a , ,  ..., a, satisJies, or realizes, C in i?I. If c,, ..., c, is a sequence of con- 
stant symbols, then u(cl ... c,) denotes the sentence formed’by simultaneous- 
ly replacing each free Occurrence of xi, 1 < i < n, in Q by the corresponding 
ci. Sometimes we shall replace just lome of the variables by constants. If 
m < n, the notation u(cl ... c,,,x,,,+, ... x,) is self-explanatory. 
For reasons explained in Section 2.1 {before Lemma 2.1.1), we must be 
careful to use the above notation only in a context where the list of variables 
x ,  , . . ., x, is given, A completely unambiguous notation can be introduced, 
but at great cost in readability. For example, we could use the notation 
i?I C a[al/xl ... a,/x,] 
for 
i?I k o[al ... a,], 

78 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
o(cl/xl ... C,/X,,,X,+~ 
... x,,) for 
o(cl ... C,X,+~ 
... x,). 
Let C be a set of formulas in the variables xl, ..., x,, and let 
be a model 
for 9. 
We say that '% realizes C iff some n-tuple of elements of A satisfies 
C in a. We say that 
omits C iff '% does not realize C. The phrase C is 
satisfiable in 
has exactly the same meaning as 91 realizes C. C is consistent 
iff I: is satisfiable in some model. 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.1. Let T be Peano arithmetic and let C(x) be the set 
(0 f x, so f x, sso f x, ...}. 
An element is said to be nonstandard iff it realizes C(x). The standard model 
of T omits C(x), while all the nonstandard models realize C(x). 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.2. Let T be the theory of ordered fields and let C(x) be the set 
{Z < x,z+z < x, z+z+z < x, ...}. 
An element is said to be positioe infinite iff it realizes C(x). An ordered 
field omits C(x) if and only if it is Archimedean. The ordered fields of 
rationals and reals omit C(x). Non-Archimedean ordered fields were 
constructed in the last section using the compactness theorem. 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.3. Let T be the theory of Abelian groups and let C(x) be the set 
{x f 0,2x f o,3x $ 0, ...}. 
Elements which realize C(x) are said to be of infinite order. An Abelian 
group which omits C(x) is said to be a torsion group. Thus in a torsion 
group, every element has a finite multiple which is zero. 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.4. Here is an example of a set of formulas with infinitely 
many variables. Let T be the theory of partial order and let C be the set 
{XI < xo, x2 < xi, XJ < x2, ...}. 
A model % of T omits C iff 8 is a well founded partial ordering. A linear 
ordering 
omits C iff it is a well ordering. 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.5. By a type T(xl ... x,,) in the variables x,, ..., x,, we mean 
a maximal consistent set of formulas of 9 
in these variables. Given any 
model !?I 
and n-tuple a,, ..., a,, E A ,  the set T(xl ... x,) of all formulas 
y(xl ... x,,) satisfied by a,, ..., a,, is a type, and, in fact, is the unique type 
realized by a,, . . .) a,, . It is called the type ofal, . . .) a, in '%. 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
79 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.6. Let 21 be the ordered field of real numbers. Then any two 
distinct elements a, b E A have different types. For if a < b, there is a rational 
number r with a < r < b; hence a satisfies x < r, while b does not. Thus 
% realizes 2" different types in one variable. 
The next proposition answers the question: When is a set of formulas 
realized by some model of a theory T? Its proof is a simple application of 
the compactness theorem. 
PROPOSITION 
2.2.7. Let T be a theory and let C = Z(x, ... x,,). The following 
are equivalent: 
(i). T has a model which realizes C. 
(ii). Everyfinite subset of C is realized in some model of T. 
(iii). T u  {(3x, ... x,)(al A ... A a,) : m < w, a,, ..., a, E C} is consistent. 
We shall say that a formula a(xL ... x,) is consistent with a theory T iff 
there is a model 21 of T which realizes {a}, and we say that C(xl ... x,) is 
consistent with T iff T has a model which realizes C. Thus (i)-(iii) above 
are all equivalent to the statement that C is consistent with T. 
We now take up the question: When is a set 1 of formulas in x,, ..., x,, 
omitted in some model of a theory T? This is a more difficult question, 
and we need more than the compactness theorem to answer it. The key 
theorem of this section, Theorem 2.2.9, gives a necessary and sufficient 
condition for T to have a model which omits C. The w-completeness 
theorem 2.2.13 is one of a long list of consequences of it. We shall use 
Theorem 2.2.9 in the next section, and again later on. If ,Z is a finite set of 
formulas, then there is no problem in determining whether C can be omitted, 
because the sentence 
Cp = (1x1 ... X,)(Ol A ... A a,), 
where C = {a1, ..., a,}, and its negation i 
cp express, respectively, that C 
is realized or omitted. Thus the interesting case is where C is infinite. 
Let us first take another look at Lemma 2.1.2. So far, we have only used 
the property that every element of 21 is the interpretation of a constant 
C E  C in a simple way, to show that \A( < IC(. In this section, we shall 
make much more use of that property of 21. 
The central idea in dealing with our problem is the notion of a theory 
locally realizing a set of formulas. 
Let C = C(x, ... x,) be a set of formulas of 9. 
A theory T i n  DEP is said 
to locally realize C iff there is a formula ~ ( x ,  
. . . x,,) in Ysuch that: 

80 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
(i). cp is consistent with T. 
(ii). For all cr E C, T C cp -+ 
cr. 
That is, every n-tuple in a model of T which satisfies cp realizes C. 
We say that T locally omits C iff T does not locally realize Z. Thus T 
locally omits C if and only if for every formula cp(x, . .. x,) which is consistent 
with T, there exists 0 E C such that cp A i 
cr is consistent with T. 
For complete theories we have a simple proposition: 
PROPOSITION 
2.2.8. Let T be a complete theory in 2, 
and let C = C(x, . . . x,) 
be a set of formulas of 2. 
If T has a model which omits C, then T locally 
omits C. 
PROOF. The proposition may be restated as follows: If T locally realizes Z, 
then every model of T realizes C. Suppose T locally realizes C and let 
cp(x, .. . x,) be a formula consistent with T such that T 1 cp + 6, 
cr E C. 
Let 9l be a model of T. Since T is complete, TI= (3x, ... x,)cp. So some 
n-tuple a , ,  ..., a, satisfies cp in 91. Then a , ,  ..., a, satisfies each cr E C, and 
hence realizes C in 91. -I 
The omitting types theorem is a converse of the above proposition. 
It holds, in fact, for arbitrary consistent theories in a countable language. 
THEOREM 
2.2.9 (Omitting Types Theorem). Let T be a consistent theory 
in a countable language 9, 
and let C(x, ... x,) be a set of formulas. If T 
locally omits C, then T has a countable model which omits C. 
PROOF. 
To simplify notation, let Z(x) be a set of formulas in one variable x. 
Suppose T locally omits Z(x). Let C = {c,,, c, , ...} be a countable set of 
new constant symbols not already in 2 
and let 2'' = 2' u C. Then 2'' 
is countable. Arrange all the sentences of 9' in a list cpo, q n l ,  cp2, .... We 
shall construct an increasing sequence of consistent theories 
such that: 
T = To c T, c ... c T, c ... 
(1). Each T,,, is a consistent theory of 2' 
which is a finite extension of T. 
(2). Either (P, 
E T,, 
or (1 cp,) 
E T,, , . 
(3). If (P, 
= (3x)J/(x) and qnm E T,, ,, then J/(c,) E T,, ,, where cp is the 
(4). There is a formula ~ ( x )  
E Z(x) such that (1 ~ ( c , ) )  
E T,, 
first constant not occurring in T, or qm. 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
81 
Assuming we already have the theory T,, we construct T,, 
as follows: 
Let T, = T u  {O,, ..., O r } ,  r > 0, and let 0 = 0, A ... ~
0
~
.
 
Let cO, ..., r, 
contain all the constants from C occurring in 0. Form the formula O(x,) of 
2 
by replacing each constant ci by x i  (renaming bound variables if neces- 
sary), and prefixing by ] x i ,  i f m. Then O(xm) is consistent with T. There- 
fore, for some ~ ( x )  
E Z(x), O(x,,) A i 
a(x,) 
is consistent with T. Put the 
sentence i 
a(c,) 
into T,+,. This makes (4) hold. 
If cpm is consistent with T, u {i 
a(c,)}, 
put cp, 
into T,,, ,. Otherwise 
put (1 cp,) 
into T,, , . This takes care of (2). Lf cp, 
= (3x)$(x) is consistent 
with T, u (1 ~ ( c , ) } ,  put $(c,) into T,, , . This takes care of (3). The 
theory T,,, 
is a consistent finite extension of: T,. Thus (1)-(4) hold for 
Let T, = U,,,wT,,. From ( I )  and ( 2 )  we see that T, is a maximal con- 
sistent theory in 9‘. 
Let 23’ = (23, bo, b, , ...) be a countable model of T,,, 
and let a’ = (a, bo, b, , . . .) be the submodel of 8’ 
generated by the constants 
b,, b,, .... We then see from (3) that 
Tm.+ 1 * 
A = {bo, b,, ...}. 
Moreover, using (3) and the completeness of T,,, we can show by induction 
on the complexity of a sentence cp in 2” that 
9l‘k cp, 
%’k cp, 
T, t= cp 
are all equivalent. Thus &I’ is a model of T, and hence 2l is a model of T. 
Finally, condition (4) ensures that 2l omits Z. -I 
When T is a complete theory, we see that locally omitting C(xl ... x,) is 
a necessary and sufficient condition for T to have a model omitting Z. Here 
is a necessary and sufficient condition which works in general. 
COROLLARY 
2.2.10. Let 2’ be countable. A theory T has a (countable) 
model omitting C(x, ... x,) if and only if some complete extension of T 
locally omits Z(x, . , . x,,). 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.11. Consider the language X = { +, ., S, O}. We abbreviate 
I = SO, 2 = SSO, 3 = SSSO, .... By an w-model we mean a model 2l in 
which 
A ={0,1,2,3 ,... } , 
that is, 2l omits the set {x f 0, x f I ,  x f 2, ...}. A theory Tin 2’ is said 
to be w-consistent iff there is no formula q ( x )  of 9 
such that 

82 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
T + cp(O), 
T b cp(I), 
T k ~ ( 2 ) ~  
. . . 
and 
T b (3x) i 
cp(x). 
T is said to be w-complete iff for every formula cp(x) of 2 
we have 
T k cp(O), T k cp(l), T k cp(2), ... 
It follows from the omitting types theorem that: 
implies T 1 (Vx)cp(x). 
PROPOSITION 
2.2.12. Let T be a consistent theory in 9. 
(1). If T is w-compfere, then T has an w-model. 
(ii). I f  T has an w-model, then T is w-consistent. 
PROOF. (i). Weshowthat TlocallyomitsthesetC(x) = {x f 0, x f I ,  ...}. 
Suppose O(x) is consistent with T. Then TI= (Vx) 1 O(x) fails. By o- 
completeness, there is an n such that not T 1 i 
O(n). Hence O(n) is consistent 
with T, so O(X)A i x f n is consistent with T. Thus T locally omits C(x). 
(ii). Trivial. i 
The w-rule is the following infinite rule of proof: From cp(0), cp(l), cp(2), ..., 
infer (Vx)cp(x), where cp(x) is any formula of 9. 
o-logic is formed by 
adding the w-rule to the axioms and rules of inference of the first-order logic 
9 
and allowing infinitely long proofs. We have the following completeness 
theorem for w-logic. 
PROPOSITION 
2.2.13 (o-Completeness Theorem). A theory T in 9 
is con- 
sistent in w-logic if and only if T has an w-mode!. 
PROOF. Let T' be the set of all sentences of 2 
provable from Tin o-logic. 
Then Tis consistent in w-logic if and only if T' is consistent in 9. 
Moreover, 
T' is o-complete. Therefore T' has an w-model if and only if T' is con- 
sistent. i 
The formulation of w-logic above is aimed at studying the standard 
model of arithmetic. A useful generalization, which we shall call general- 
ized o-logic, is aimed at studying ordinary models for first order logic 
enriched by a symbol for the set of natural numbers. 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.11'. Let 2' be a countable language which has among its 
symbols a special unary relation symbol N and special constant symbols 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
83 
0,1,2,. . . . By an w-model for 2' 
we mean a model '2.l for 2' 
in which 
N is interpreted by the set w of natural numbers, and 0, 1,2, . . . are 
interpreted by themselves. In an w-model, w is a subset of the universe 
A ,  but we allow A to contain elements outside of w or even to be 
uncountable. 
Let T, be the special set of sentences 
TN = { N ( m )  : m < w }  U { i m  = n : m < n < w }  
which state that the natural numbers are distinct and belong to N .  TN 
holds in every w-model for 2'. 
A theory T in 2' 
is said to be 
w-consistent iff there is no formula ~ ( x )  
of 2' 
such that 
TN U T k cp(O), T ,  U T k cp(l), T, U T k p(2), . . . 
and 
T N  U T k (3x)(N(x) A icp(x)). 
T is said to be w-complete iff for every formula ~ ( x )  
of 2" we have 
T, U T != cp(O), T, U T L cp(l), T, U T k p(2), . . . 
implies 
T N  u T ( V x ) ( N x ) - ,  cp(x)). 
The w-rule for 2' is the infinite rule: From cp(O), cp(l), cp(2), . . . , 
infer (Vx)(N(x)+ &)). 
By generalized w-logic we mean first order 
logic for the language 2' 
with T, added as an additional set of logical 
axioms and the w-rule added as an additional rule of proof. 
Propositions 2.2.12 and 2.2.13 take the following form for generalized 
w -logic. 
PROPOSITION 
2.2.12'. Let T be a theory in 2' 
such that T, U T is 
consistent. 
(i). If T is w-complete, then T has an w-model. 
(ii). If T has an w-model, then T is w-consistent. 
PROPOSITION 
2.2.13'. A theory T in 9' 
is consistent in generalized w-logic 
if and only if T has an w-model. 
The following example shows that the omitting types theorem fails for 
sets of formulas with infinitely many free variables. 

84 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.14. Let T be the theory of dense linear order without 
endpoints. Thus T is complete. Let Z(xox,xz ...) be the set 
{XI < x0,xz < x1,x3 < x2, ...}. 
As we observed before, a model 9l omits C if and only if 
is a well ordering. 
But T has no well ordered models, so no model of T omits C. However, 
T does locally omit Z, because if cp(xoxl ... x,,) is consistent with T, then 
cp A i 
x , , + ~  
< x , , + ~  
is consistent with T. 
The omitting types theorem can be generalized to the case of countably 
many sets of formulas. 
THEOREM 
2.2. I5 (Extended Omitting Types Theorem). Let T be a consistent 
theory in a countable language 9, 
and for each r < o let .Y,(x, ... xn,) 
be a set of formulas in n, variables. If T locally omits each Z,, then T has a 
countable model which omits each C,. 
PROOF. Similar to the proof of the omitting types theorem. The only 
difference is that for each r the n,-tuples of new constants are arranged in 
a list: 
The theories T, are built up so that for each r = 0, 1, ..., m, there is a 
formula 0 E Z, such that (i 
~(s:)) 
E T,, 
s:, s:t1,s:tz, .... 
-1 
Here is a first application of the extended omitting types theorem. 
It uses the notion of an elementary extension which plays an important role 
in the rest of this book. 
2.2.16. 8 is said to be an elementary exfension of 91, 91 < 9, 
iff 
(i). 23 is an extension of 'II, 9I c 23. 
(ii). For any formula cp(x, ... x,,) of 9 
and any a , ,  ..., a,, E A ,  a l ,  ..., a,, 
satisfies cp in 'II if and only if it satisfies cp in 8. 
When 23 is an elementary extension of PI we also say that BI is an 
elementary submodel of 8. 
A mapping f :  A 
B is said to be an elementary embedding of '21 into 
93, in symbols f: ?I < 93, iff for all formulas p(x, . . . x , )  of 2 and 
n-tuples a , ,  . . . , a, E A, we have 
%kp[a, . . .a,] if and only if % k p [ f a , .  . . fa,,]. 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
85 
An elementary embedding of 'u into 23 is thus the same thing as an 
isomorphism of 8 onto an elementary submodel of 23. 
The following analogue of Proposition 2.1.8 is often useful. 
PROPOSITION 
2.2.17. Let 'u and 23 be models for 3 and let f :  A+ B. 
Then the following are equivalent: 
(a). f is an elementary embedding of 8 into 23. 
(b). There is an elementary extension G > 8 and an isomorphism g: 
(c). ('8, fa),,A is a model of the elementary diagram of 9. 
GG% such that g >  f .  
Proposition 2.2.17 shows that the following three conditions are 
(a') 2l is elementarily embeddable in 23. 
(b') 23 is isomorphic to an elementary extension of 8. 
(c') '8 can be expanded to a model of the elementary diagram of 'u. 
In the special case that A C B and f is the indentity mapping from A 
into B, Proposition 2.2.17 shows that 'u is an elementary submodel of 23 
if and only if BA is a model of the elementary diagram of 'u. 
Let us now consider the theory ZF, Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. A 
model 23 = ( B ,  F )  of ZF is said to be an end extension of a model 
9.l = ( A ,  E )  of ZF iff !8 is a proper extension of H and no member of A 
gets a new element, that is, 
equivalent: 
if a e  A and b E B ,  then hFa implies b e  A. 
THEOREM 
2.2.18. Every countable model ?1 = ( A ,  E )  of ZF has an end 
elementary extension. 
PROOF. 
Let 9 
be the language with the symbol e, a constant symbol ij 
for each a E A ,  and a new constant symbol c. Let T be the theory with the 
axioms 
W W ,  
c # ii, where a E A .  
T is consistent because every finite subset of T has a model of the form 
(91, a, c),,~. For each a E A ,  let Zo(x) be the set of formulas 
Z,(x) = { x  E a} u {x f b : bEa}. 

86 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
It suffices to show that T locally omits each Fet C,(x). For then T has a 
model (23, a, c),,, 
which omits each C,(x). We may also assume that A c B. 
8 is an elementary extension of 2l because Th((U, a),,,) t T, whence 
(a, a),,, = (23, a),,,. 23 is a proper extension because c E B\A. 
Finally, 
9 is an end extension because it omits each C,(x). 
To see that T locally omits each Z,(x), we note that a formula q(x, c) 
of 2' is consistent with T if and only if 
Suppose q ( x ,  c )  is consistent with T, but q(x, C)A i 
x z 
is not. Then 
q(x, c) A xzZ is consistent with T. Using the axiom of replacement in ZF, 
we see in turn that the following sentences hold in (%, a),,,: 
Then for some bE A, q(6, c ) ~ 6 a B  is consistent with T, whence 
q ( x ,  c) A x 5 6 is consistent with T. Thus T locally omits C,(x). -I 
The omitting types theorem as it stands is false for uncountable languages. 
For example, let T be the theory with the axioms 
in the language 2%' with constants 
{c. : u c a,} 
u {d,, : n < w}. 
Let T(x) be the set of formulas 
T(x) = { X  f d, : n c o}. 
Then T locally omits T(x). However no model of T omits T(x) because 
every model of T is uncountable but each model which omits T ( x )  is 
countable. 
A more complicated counterexample where the theory T is complete 
has been given by Fuhrken (1962). 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
81 
However, the omitting types theorem can be generalized to uncountable 
languages if we define the notion of ‘locally omits’ in the proper way. Let 
T be a theory and Z(x, . . . x,) a set of formulas in a language 3 of power a. 
We say that T a-realizes Z iff there is a set @ ( x 1  ... x,) of fewer than a 
formulas of 9 
such that: 
(i). Q is consistent with T, 
(ii). T u @(x1 ... x,) t C(x, ... x,), 
that is, in any model 2i of T, any n-tuple which realizes 95 realizes C. T is 
said to a-omit C(x, ... x,) iff T does not a-realize Z(xl ... x,,). Note that 
if Z has power less than a, then T a-realizes C trivially. Thus only sets of 
formulas of power a can ever be a-omitted. 
THEOREM 
2.2.19 (a-Omitting Types Theorem). Let T be a consistent theory 
in a language 9 
of power a and let Z(xl . . . x,) be a set of formulas of 2. 
If T a-omits Z, then T has a model of power < u which omits C. 
The proof is like the proof of the omitting types theorem. An important 
problem is to find a useful sufficient condition for a theory in an uncountable 
language to have a model which omits a countable set of formulas. The 
a-omitting types theorem is of no help here since a countable set of formulas 
is never a-omitted when a > o. 
We now turn to the interpolation theorems of Craig and Lyndon. 
THEOREM 
2.2.20 (Craig Interpolation Theorem). Let cp, t,b be sentences such 
that cp t $. Then there exists a sentence 8 such that: 
(i). cpkBandBC$. 
(ii). Every relation, function or constant symbol (excluding identity) 
which occurs in 8 also occurs in both cp and I). 
The sentence 8 will be called a Craig interpolant of cp, $. The identity 
symbol is allowed to occur in 8. The following example shows why this is 
necessary. 
EXAMPLE 
2.2.21. In each of the following, cp and $ are sentences such that 
the identity symbol occurs in at most one of them, and cp i= $; however, 
cp, II/ have no Craig interpolant in which the identity symbol does not occur: 
(i). cp is (3x)(P(x) A i 
P(x)), 
(ii). cp is (3x)Q(x), 
(iii). cp is ( ~ x y ) ( x  = y ) ,  
II/ is (3x)Q(x); 
$ is (3x)(P(x) v 1 P(x)); 
$ is (Vxy)(P(x) 
c-f P ( y ) ) .  

88 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
We shall see in an exercise, however, that in the Craig interpolation 
theorem, if the identity symbol occurs in neither cp nor $, and if not k i 
cp 
and not k I,+, then cp and I) have a Craig interpolant in which the identity 
symbol does not occur. 
PROOF OF THEOREM 
2.2.20. We assume that there is no Craig interpolant 
0 of cp and $, and prove that it is not the case that cp != $. To do this we 
construct a model of cp A i 
$. We may assume without loss of generality 
that 9 
is the language of all symbols which occur in either cp or Ic/ or both. 
Let 9, 
be the language of all symbols of cp, Y 2  
the language of all symbols 
of $, and 9, 
the language of all symbols occurring in both cp and $. Thus 
Zl n P2 
= Yo, 2, 
u 9, 
= 9. 
Form an expansion 9' 
of 9 
by adding a countable set C of new constant 
symbols and let 
9; 
= 9, 
u c, 
9; 
= 2Yl v c, 9; 
= ?Y2 u c. 
The proof will resemble the proofs of the completeness and omitting types 
theorems, but the notion of a consistent theory will be replaced by the more 
general notion of an inseparable pair of theories. 
Consider a pair of theories T in Plio; and U in 9;. 
A sentence 8 of 2; 
is said to separate T and U iff 
T ! = 8  and 
U b 8 .  
T and U are said to be inseparable iff no sentence 8 of 2; 
separates them. 
To begin with, we see that 
For, if O(c, ... c,,) separates {cp} and {i 
$} and u1 ..., u,, are variables not 
occurring in e(cl ... c"), then (Vu, ... u,,)O(u, ... u,) is a Craig interpolant 
of cp and $, contrary to our assumption. 
(1) {cp} and {I$} areinseparable. 
Now let 
'Po9 c p I , c p Z ,  . . 9 $ 0 , $ 1 9 * 2 r . . .  
be enumerations of all sentences of 9; 
and of 9;, 
respectively. We shall 
construct two increasing sequences of theories, 
{ c p }  = To c T, c T2 c ..., 
{l*} = u, c u, c u, c ... 
in -2'; and 9;, 
respectively, such that: 
(2). T,,, and U,,, are inseparable finite sets of sentences. 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
89 
(3). If T, u {cp,} 
and U, are inseparable, then q, E T,, 1 .  
If T,+ , and U, u {JI,} are inseparable, then JI, E U,, 1 .  
(4). If cp, 
= (3x)a(x) and q+,, E T,, 1 ,  then o(c) E T,, 
for some c E C. 
If JI, = (3x)6(x) and $, 
E Urn+ 
1, then 6(d) E Urn+ for some d E C. 
Given T, and U,, the theories T, + and then U,, are constructed in the 
obvious way. For (4), use constants c and d which do not occur in T,, 
U,,,, 
q, or $,. 
Then inseparability will be preserved. Let 
Tcu = ()m<,Tm, 
u w  = U m < w U m *  
Then T, and U, are inseparable. It follows that T, and U, are each con- 
sistent. We must show that T, v U, is consistent. We show first that: 
(5). T, is a maximal consistent theory in 9; 
, and U, is a maximal 
To show this, suppose q m $  T, and (-I cp,)$T,. Since T, u {cp,} 
is 
separable from U,, there exists 8 E 9; 
such that 
consistent theory in 9;. 
We see by the same argument that there exists 8' E 9; 
such that 
T, t 7 pm --* e', 
u, t 18'. 
But then 
T, t e v e', 
u, 1 (e v 09, 
contradicting the inseparability of T, and U,. This shows that T, is maximal 
consistent in 9;. 
The maximality of U, is similar. 
Our next observation is: 
(6). T, n U, is a maximal consistent theory in 9;. 
To prove (6), let a be a sentence of 9;. 
By (9, either a E T, or (1 u) E T,, 
and either a E U, or (1 a) E U,. By inseparability, we cannot have CT E T, 
and (1 a) E U,, or vice versa. Therefore either T, n U, k a or T, n U,, k i 
a. 
We are now ready to construct a m'odel. Let 23; = (Bl, bo, b,, ...) 
be a model of T,. Using (4) and ( 5 ) ,  we see that the submodel 
2l; = (a,, b,, b,, ...) with universe A ,  = {b,,, b,, ...) is also a model of 
T<,,. Similarly, U ,  has a model 9ii = (912, do, d , ,  ...) with universe 
A ,  = {do, d , ,  ...}. By (6), the 9; 
reducts of 81; and 91; are isomorphic, 
with b, corresponding to d,. We may therefore take b,, = d,, for each 11, 
whence '21, and '$I2 have the same z0 
reduct. Let 91 be the model for 9 
with 2, 
reduct 81, and P2 reduct 9i2. Since cp E T,,, and (1 $) E U,,, 
Yisamodel ofcpA71(1. -1 

90 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
We give two applications of the Craig interpolation theorem. The first 
application deals with ways of defining a relation. Let P and P’ be two new 
n-placed relation symbols, not in the language 9. 
Let Z(P) be a set of 
sentences of the language 9 
u { P } ,  and let Z(P’) be the corresponding set 
of sentences of Y u { P ‘ }  formed by replacing P everywhere by I“. We say 
that Z(P) defines P implicitly iff 
Z(P) u Z(P’) k ( V X ,  ... x,)[P(x, ... x,) tf P’(x, ... x,)]. 
Equivalently, if (91, R )  and (a, R’) are models of Z(P), then R = R‘. 
Z(P) is said to define P explicitly iff there exists a formula q ( x ,  ... x,) of 
Y such that 
Z(P) k (VX, ... x,)[P(x, ... x,) ++ q(x1 ... XJl. 
It is obvious that, if Z(P) defines P explicitly, then Z(P) defines P implicitly. 
Thus, to show that Z(P) does not define P explicitly, it suffices to find two 
models (a, R )  and (9lY R’) of Z(P), with the same reduct (If to 9, 
such that 
R # R‘. This is a useful classical method known as Padoa’s method. 
We now prove the converse of Padoa’s method. 
THEOREM 
2.2.22 (Beth‘s Theorem). Z(P) defines P implicitly if and only if 
Z(P) defines P explicitly. 
PROOF. We prove only the ‘hard’ direction. Suppose that Z(P) defines P 
implicitly. Add new constants c, , ..., c,, to 2. 
Then 
Z(P) u Z(P’) k P(c, ... c,) 
+ P’(C1 . * *  c,). 
By the compactness theorem, there exist finite subsets A c Z(P), A‘ = Z(P’) 
such that 
A u A’ k P(cl ... c,) 4 
P‘(c, ... c,). 
Let $(P) be the conjunction of all a(P) E Z(P) such that either a(P) E A 
or a(P’) E A‘. Then 
$(P) A lf!/(P’) k P(C1 . . . C,) + P’(C1 . . . C,,). 
Rearranging to get all symbols P on one side and all symbols P’on the other, 
$(P) 
A P ( C 1  . . . C,) k $ ( P ’ )  + P’(C, . . . C,). 
Then, by the Craig interpolation theorem, there is a sentence U(c, ... c,) 
of 9 
u {cI ... c,} 
such that 
(1) 
I/!’(P)AP(C, ... C,) k o(C1 ... C,,), 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
91 
(2) 
q c ,  ... c,) c +(pi) -, P’(c, ... c,). 
But any model (H, R’) for Y u {P’, 
c , ,  ..., c,,} is also a model for 
9 
u {P, c, , ..., c,} when we interpret P by R’. Thus (2) implies 
(3) 
qC1 
... c,) c +(P) -, P(C, ... c,). 
(4) 
+(P) c 
... c,) +, q c ,  ... c,). 
Now (1) and (3) yield 
Since cl, ..., c, do not occur in +(P) (which is built from Z(P)), we have 
$(P) vxl ... X,[P(~, ... x,) +, e(x, ... XJI, 
where x , ,  ..., x, are variables not occurring in 8(cl ... c,). Therefore 
THEOREM 
2.2.23 (Robinson Consistency Theorem). Let 9, 
and 2, 
be 
two languages and let 9 
= Yl n 9,. 
Suppose T is a complete theory in 
9, 
und T, 3 T, T, 3 T are consistent theories in 9,, 
Y,, respectively. 
Then TI u T2 is consistent in the language 9, 
u 9,. 
PROOF. Suppose T, u T, is inconsistent. Then there exist finite subsets 
Z, c T,, C, c T2 such that C, u C, is inconsistent. Let 6, be the conjunc- 
tion of C, and t~, the conjunction of C,. It follows that t~, != i 
t~,. 
By the 
Craig interpolation theorem, there is a sentence 8 such that t ~ ,  t 8,8 C i 
02, 
and every relation, function or constant symbol occurring in 8 occurs in 
both 0, and 6,. Consequently, 8 is a sentence of Yl n Y 2  = 2’. Now 
returning to T, and T,, we find that T, 18. Since T, is consistent, T, J i 
8, 
so T J  i 
8. Moreover, T2 C i 
8, and, by the consistency of T,, T2 J 8; 
so T ,F 8. But this contradicts the hypothesis that T is a complete theory in 
2. 
-1 
The Lyndon interpolation theorem is an improvement of the Craig 
interpolation theorem, but it holds only for languages which have no 
function or constant symbols. In order to state it, we need the notions of 
a positive and a negative occurrence of a symbol in a formula. 
In the following discussion we shall consider only formulas which are 
built up using the connectives A ,  v , 1, 
and the quantifiers V, 3. We do not 
allow the connectives 4, 
+,. 
[Strictly speaking, the language 9 
was defined in Section 1.2 so that the 
only connectives are A and 1, 
and the only quantifier is V. The other con- 

92 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
nectives and 3 were introduced as abbreviations. Thus we now wish to avoid 
using the abbreviations +, -.I 
We now shall consider more closely the ways in which a symbol can occur 
in a sentence. Let s be a symbol of 9, and let cp be a sentence of 9. 
Then s 
is said to occur positively in cp iff s has an occurrence in cp which is within 
the scope of an even number of negation symbols. The symbol s occurs 
negatively in cp iff s has an occurrence in cp which is within the scope of an 
odd number of negation symbols. Remembering that s may have several 
different occurrences in cp, we see that there are four possibilities: 
s does not occur in cp; 
s occurs positively in cp; 
s occurs negatively in cp; 
s occurs both positively and negatively in cp. 
The reason we do not want to use the abbreviations -+ and - is that they 
contain ‘hidden’ negation symbols. For example, the sentence P(c) + Q ( c )  
is an abbreviation of i 
(P(c) A i 
Q(c)), so P occurs negatively but not 
positively in it, and the constant c occurs both positively and negatively 
in it. 
On the other hand, the abbreviations 
cp V $ = 1 (1 cp A 1 $), 
( 3 X ) c p  = 1 
( V X )  1 
cp 
will not cause any trouble in deciding whether a symbol s occurs positively 
or negatively, because they introduce exactly two ‘hidden’ negation symbols 
about cp, II/, and two is an even number. 
THEOREM 
2.2.24 (Lyndon Interpolation Theorem). Let cp, + be sentences 
of 2 such that cp k +. Then there is a sentence 8 of 2 s u c h  that: 
(i). cp k 8 and 0 k +. 
(ii). Every relation symbol (excluding equality) which occurs positive- 
(iii). Same as (ii) for ‘negatively’. 
ly in 0 occurs positively in both cp and +. 
The following simple example shows that we cannot find an interpol- 
ant 0 which satisfies (ii) and (iii) for constant symbols: 
(3X)(X 
C A 1 
R ( X ) )  k 1 R(C). 
Note that c is positive on the left, negative on the right, but must occur 
in any interpolant. 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
93 
PROOF 
OF THEOREM 
2.2.24. The proof is obtained by making only a very 
few changes in the proof of the Craig interpolation theorem. We begin by 
assuming that there is no sentence 8 such that (i)-(iii) hold, and prove that 
cp A i 
I(/ has a model. Form the expansion 2” = 9 
u C as before. 
A formula is said to be in negation normal form (nnf) iff it is built up from 
atomic formulas and their negations using A ,  v , 3, V. Every formula is 
equivalent to an nnf formula. We assume that cp and + are nnf formulas. 
Let a* denote the nnf of i 
Q. 
This time, the notion of an inseparable pair of theories is defined as 
follows. Let @ be the set of all nnf sentences a of 3‘ such that every relation 
symbol which occurs positively (or negatively) in a also occurs positively 
(negatively) in cp. The set Y is defined similarly with respect to I(/. Let 
Y *  = { u * :  u E Y } .  Two theories T c @ and U c Y *  are said to be 
inseparable iff there is no sentence 8 E @ n Y such that T b 0 and U k i 
8. 
Using this notion we can apply the construction given in the proof of the 
Craig interpolation theorem to obtain a model of cp A $ * .  
This time we enumerate the sets of sentences 0 and T instead of the 
languages 2’; and Y;, and then construct T,, and U, as before. Some 
changes are needed in the rest of the proof because the sets @ and !P are 
not necessarily closed under negation. Instead of proving that T, is 
maximal consistent, show that if u v 8 E T, then either u E T, or 8 E T,, 
and similarly for U, . Then show that T, and U, have the same equations 
and inequalities, and that the set A for all atomic and negated atomic 
sentences in T, U U, is consistent. Finally, let % be a model of A whose 
universe is the set of all constants, and prove by induction on complexity 
of formulas that 
is a model of both T, and U, and therefore a model 
Of Cp A $*. -1 
A suggestion for further reading: The book “Building Models by 
Games” by Hodges [1985] gives an interesting treatment of a wide 
variety of applications of the Henkin construction in model theory. 
EXERCISES 
2.2.1. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language, and let 
f ](XI), f2(x2), r3(x3), ... be a countable set of sets of formulas such that 
each f,(x,) is consistent with T. Prove that T has a countable model which 
realizes each set f,(x,). 
2.2.2. Let T be a complete theory. Show that T has a model 
such that 

94 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.2 
every set of formulas f ( x I ,  x 2 ,  ...) which is consistent with T is realized 
in %. 
2.2.3. Let ?A = ( A ,  < , +, ., 0, 1) be an ordered field. An element a E A 
is said to be finite iff there is an ti < w such that -n < a < n. Suppose that 
for any formula cp(x). if ?l C (3x)cp(x), then there is a finite a E A such that 
?l k cp[a]. Show that ?[ is elementarily equivalent to an Archimedean- 
ordered field. 
2.2.4. Let T be a theory in a countable 2' and let Z(x) and d(y) 
be two sets of formulas of 9 
which are consistent with T. Suppose that 
for every formula cp(x, y )  of 9 
there exists O ( X )  E Z(x) such that for all 
S,(y), ..., S , ( ~ ) E  d(y): if 
{cp, a,, ..., S,} is consistent with T, then 
{cp, S,, ..., S,, i 
O }  is consistent with T. Prove that T has a model realizing 
A ( ) ? )  and omitting Z(x). 
2.2.5. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language 9. 
Suppose that 
for each n < o, T has a model Yl,, omitting the set of formulas Z,(x). 
Prove that T has a model 91 which omits each Z,,(x). 
2.2.6. Let 2' be a countable language and let 2'' = 9 
u { P o ,  P , ,  ...} 
be a countable expansion of 9. 
Let T' be a maximal consistent theory 
in 2" and f ( x )  a set of formulas of 9. 
Suppose that for each n, the 
restriction of T' to 9 
u { P o ,  P I ,  ..., P,,} has a model which omits f ( x ) .  
Prove that T' has a model omitting T(x). 
2.2.7. Prove that there is an ordinal CL < o1 such that every formula q of 
w-logic which has a proof has a proof of length less than a. 
2.2.8. Show that the compactness theorem fails for o-logic. 
2.2.9. Show that the Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem fails for models 
of T which omit Z. 
2.2.10*. A model 8 of Peano arithmetic is said to be an end extension of 2l 
iff 8 is a proper extension of 91 and, for all b E B and a E A, if b < a, then 
b E A. Prove that every countable model of Peano arithmetic has an end 
elementary extension. 
2.2.11*. Prove the following Restricted Omitting Types Theorem. Let 3' 
be a countable language and let T be a consistent V3 theory in 9, 
that is, 
a theory whose axioms are sentences of the form 

2.21 
REFINEMENTS OF THE METHOD 
95 
where cp has no quantifiers. For each n < w ,  let C, ( x ,  . . . x k )  be a set of 
universal formulas of 2. Suppose that for each n and each existential 
formula 8(x, . . . x k )  consistent with T, there is a formula ~ ( x ,  
. . . x k )  E 
C,(x, . . . x k )  such that 8 A i f f  is consistent with T. Prove that T has a 
countable model which omits each C,(x, . . . x k ) .  
[Hint: 
The proof is similar to that of the Extended Omitting Types 
Theorem.] 
2.2.12”. Deduce the Craig interpolation theorem from the Robinson 
consistency theorem. 
2.2.13. Let 1, r be sets of sentences of Y 
such that Z u r is inconsistent. 
Then there exists a sentence 0 of Ysuch that: 
(i). Z 1 8 and r k i 
8. 
(ii). Every relation, function or constant symbol which occurs in 8 
occurs in some member of 1 and in some member of r. 
2.2.14 
(i). Show that the Robinson consistency theorem fails if T is not 
assumed to be complete. 
(ii). Show that the Robinson consistency theorem holds if the hypoth- 
esis that T is complete is replaced by the hypothesis that T is consistent, 
and for i = 1,2, T contains every consequence of Ti in 2’. 
2.2.15. Prove the Craig interpolation theorem for formulas ~ ( x ,  
. . . x,,), 
$(xl ... x,,). It can be deduced easily from the Craig interpolation theorem 
for sentences. 
2.2.16. Assume Y has no function or constant symbols. Suppose that a 
set of sentences 1(P) of 2 
u {P} defines P implicitly. Then there is a 
formula cp(x, ... x,) of 9 s u c h  that: 
(i). C(P) t- P(x, ... x,) - 
cp(x, ... x,). 
(ii). Any symbol of Y which occurs in cp occurs both positively and 
negatively in Z(P). 
2.2.17. Let 2” be an expansion of the language 2’ 
and let P be an n-placed 
relation symbol in 2’\9. 
Let T be a theory in 9’. 
Suppose that for any 
model 2l for 9 
and any two expansions a’, 2l” of % to models of T, the 
relations of 3’ and %” corresponding to P are the same. Prove that there 
exists a formula 8(x, ... x,) of 9 
such that 

96 
MODELS CONSTRUnED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.3 
T F ~ ( x ,  
... x,,) ++ e(x, ... XJ. 
2.2.18. Let 9' 
be an expansion of 9 
and let T' be a theory in 9'. 
Suppose 
that each model 
for 9 
has at most one expansion to a model T'. Prove 
that there is a theory Tin 9 
such that the models of T are exactly the reducts 
of the models of T' to 9. 
2.2.19*. Show that the Lyndon interpolation theorem remains true when 
we add the conclusion: 
Alternatively, it holds when we add: 
However, the theorem becomes false if we add both the extra conclusions 
(iv), (iv') at the same time. 
2.2.20. Show that the Craig and Lyndon interpolation theorems hold with 
the following additional conclusion: 
(iv). Cf not I= i 
cp, not I= cc/, and the identity symbol occurs in neither 
cp nor I(/, then the identity symbol does not occur in 8. 
2.2.21*. Show that there is a model 'u of Peano arithmetic which has an 
infinite element x such that no y < x realizes the same complete type as x 
in 'u. 
2.2.22*. Show that Peano arithmetic has two models 91 and 8 such that 
(A, +) 
2.2.23*. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language and let T(x) 
be a type over T which is consistent with T and locally omitted by T. 
Prove that T has a model in which infinitely many elements realize Qx). 
2.2.24*. Let S be a set of fewer than 2" types T(x) which are maximal 
consistent with T and locally omitted by T. Prove that T has a countable 
model which simultaneously omits each T(x) E S. [Hint: Represent the 
Henkin construction by a binary tree.] 
(iv). If cp is a universal sentence, then so is 8. 
(iv'). If I(/ is an existential sentence, then so is 8. 
(B, +) but not 'u 
B. [Hint: Use Beth's Theorem.] 
2.3. Countable models of complete theories 
In this section, we assume that 2 is a countable language. We shall 
embark on a thorough study of countable models of a complete theory. 
This study will give insight into what can be expected in general. Our study 
will center on two kinds of countable models, the atomic models, which are 
'small', and the countably saturated models, which are 'large'. We begin 
with the atomic models. 

2.31 
COUNTABLE MODELS OF COMPLETE THEORIES 
97 
Consider a complete theory Tin 9. 
A formula cp(x, ... x,) is said to be 
coniplete (in T) iff for every formula @ ( x I  ... x,) exactly one of 
Tkcp+@, 
T C c p + i @  
holds. A formula B(x, . . . x,) is said to be completable (in T) iff there is a com- 
plete formula ~ ( x ,  
... x,) with T b cp + 8. If O(x, ... x,) is not completable 
it is said to be incompletable. 
A theory T is said to be atomic iff every formula of 9 
which is consistent 
with T is completable in T. A model 9l is said to be an atomic model iff 
every n-tuple a , ,  ..., a, E A satisfies a complete formula in Th(9l). 
In this and the next chapter we shall frequently pause to illustrate our 
definitions with examples. We shall sometimes make assertions about the 
examples without proofs. These proofs usually involve a combination of 
standard algebraic results and the theorems in the first three chapters of 
this book. In Section 3.4, we return to the examples and supply proofs. 
2.3.1. EXAMPLES 
(I). Let T be a complete theory and let co, cI , c2, ... be constant symbols 
of 9. 
Then any formula of 9 of the form 
Xo E C O A X !  
CIA ... A X , ,  
C, 
is complete in T. If 31 is a model of T such that every element of A is a 
constant, then 8i is an atomic model. 
(2). The standard model of number theory is an atomic model. 
(3). Let T be the theory of real closed ordered fields. The ordered field 
of real algebraic numbers is the unique atomic model of T. For example, 
the ordered field of real numbers is not atomic. 
(4). Every finite model is atomic. 
(5). Every model of pure identity theory is atomic. This gives an example 
(6). Every dense linear ordering without endpoints is atomic. 
(7). The following theory Tis a complete theory which has no conipletable 
formulas and no atomic models. The language Y has unary relation symbols 
Po(x), P ,  (x), .... The axioms of T are all sentences of the form 
of uncountable atomic models. 
( 3 X ) ( f i , ( X ) A  ... A f i m ( X ) A l  P j , ( X ) A  ... A 1  f j n ( X ) ) ,  
where the i ,  , ..., i,,,,.jl, ..., J, are all distinct. 
Our first theorem about atomic models is an application of the extended 
onii tting types theorem. 

98 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.3 
THEOREM 
2.3.2 (Existence Theorem for Atomic Models). Let T be a coiiipletc 
theory. Then T has a countable atomic model if and only if T is atoniic. 
PROOF. First assume that T has an atomic model '3. Let cp(x, ... xln) be 
consistent with T. Then, since T is complete, 
T 1 (3x, ... x,)cp(x, ... x,~). 
Let a,, ..., a,€ A satisfy cp, and let $(xI ... x,) be a complete formula 
satisfied by a,, ..., a,. Then we cannot have T t $ + i 
cp. so we must have 
T t $ -+ cp. Hence cp is completable and T is atomic. 
Now assume T is atomic. For each n < w, let f , , ( x I  ... xIt) be the set of 
all negations of complete formulas $(x, ... x,) in T. Then every formula 
cp(x, ... x,) which is consistent with T is completable, and hence cp A 7 
;I is 
consistent with T for some y E f,. Therefore T locally omits each set 
f,(xl ... x,). By the extended omitting types theorem, T has a countable 
model % which omits each f,. Then each a12 ..., a, E A satisfies a complete 
formula, whence 9I is an atomic model. -I 
Returning to our examples, we see that complete number theory and 
the theory of real closed ordered fields are atomic, because they have atomic 
models. 
THEOREM 
2.3.3 (Uniqueness Theorem for Atomic Models). IfN and 8 are 
countable atornic ntodels and ?I = 8, 
then N 2 8. 
PROOF. If BI or % is finite, then 91 g 23 is trivial. Let N and 8 be infinite 
and well-order the sets A and B with order type o. 
The proof will be our 
first example of a back and forth construction. We shall see many other 
proofs of this type later. 
Let a, be the first element of A and let cpo(xo) be a complete formula 
satisfied by a, in 91. Since $1 t (3Xo)Cpo(Xo), % k (3xo)'po(xo). Thus we may 
choose bo E B, which satisfies 'p,(xo). Now let 6 ,  be the first element of 
B\(b,), and let 'p,(x,x,) be a complete formula satisfied by b,,b, in 8. 
Then both % and 23 satisfy 
Vxo(cpo(xo) + (3x1)c~i(xo~i 
))* 
because 'po is complete. Therefore there exists lzl E A such that a,, a, 
satisfy 'p,(xox,). Next, let a, be the first element of A\(a,, a,}, and so on. 
Going back and forth o times, we obtain sequences 
aO,alra2, .*.,bo,bi,b2,.... 

2.31 
COUNTABLE MODELS OF COMPLETE THEORIES 
99 
By going back and forth we used up all of A and B, so 
Moreover, for each n the n-tuples a,, ..., a,,-, and b,, ..., b,-, satisfy the 
same complete formula. It follows that the mapping u, -, b, is an isomor- 
phism of 'i!l onto 8. 
-I 
Our third result on atomic models shows that they should be thought 
of as 'small' models of T. First, we need to define the notion of a prime 
model. 
'i!l is said to be a prime model iff ?I is elementarily embedded in every 
model of Th(M). ?I is said to be countably prime iff ?I is elementarily embed- 
ded in every countable model of Th(?i). 
THEOREM 
2.3.4. The following are equicalent : 
(i). ?X is a countable atomic model. 
(ii). 91 is a prime model. 
(iii). 'u is a countably prime model. 
PROOF. First assume that 'u is a countable atomic model and let T = Th(%). 
The proof that M is prime is one-half of the 'back and forth' construction. 
Let A = { a , , a , , a z ,  ...I and let % be any model of T .  Let cpo(xo) be a 
complete formula satisfied by a,. Then T b (3x,)cp,, so we may choose 
b,E B which satisfies cpo(xo). Now let cp,(x,x,) be a complete formula 
satisfied by a,, a , .  Then T 1 cpo(xo) -, (3x,)cp,(x,x,). Choose 6 ,  E B so 
that b,, 6 ,  satisfies cp, , and so forth. The function a,, -P 6, is an elementary 
embedding of 9l into 23. 
Now assume 'II is prime. Then 'u is elementarily embedded in every 
countable model of T, so 91 is countably prime. 
'4ssume 2l is countably prime. Let a , ,  ..., a, E: A and let f (x, ... x,,) 
be the set of all formulas y(x, ... x,) of 9 
satisfied by a , ,  ..., a,. For any 
countable model '23 of T, we have some elementary embedding f :  ?I < W, 
whence f a , ,  ...,fa , satisfies T(xl ... x,) in B. Thus r is realized in every 
countable model of T. By the omitting types theorem, r is locally realized 
by T .  Thus there is a formula q(x, ... x,) consistent with T such that 
T 1 cp -P y for all y E r. But, for each formula $(xl ... x,,), either $ E r or 
(1 $) E r. Thus cp is complete in T. We cannot have T k cp -, 1 cp, so cp E f. 
Therefore ~ ( x ,  
... x,) is a complete formula satisfied by a , ,  ..., a,, in 91, 
and 91 is atomic. i 

100 
MODELS CONSTRUCED FROM CONSTANTS 
12.3 
We now turn to the study of 'large' countable models. Given a model '% 
and a subset Y c A ,  the expanded model (?I, a)oEy will be denoted by 
'illy, and its language by Y Y .  
A model ?I is said to be w-saturated iff for every finite set Y c A ,  every 
set of forrnulas f ( x )  of PY 
consistent with Th('Uy) is realized in ?ly. A 
model is said to be countably saturated iff it is countable and o-saturated. 
To gain some intuition, we shall list some examples of countably saturated 
models. Note that if ?l is o-saturated, then so is ?Iy for every finite subset 
Y c  A .  
2.3.5. EXAMPLES 
( I ) .  Every countable infinite model of pure identity theory is countably 
(2). The ordering of the rational numbers is countably saturated. 
(3). Let T be a theory in the language with only the constant symbols 
c,,, cl, ..., and axioms ci f c j ,  i < j  < w. There are countably many 
countable models of T up to isomorphism; for each a < w, there is a model 
with exactly tl elements which are not constants. The model with zero 
nonconstants is the atomic model. The model with w nonconstants is the 
countably saturated model. 
(4). Let T be the theory of algebraically closed fields of characteristic 
zero. Again there are countably many countable models; for each a < o, 
there is a model of transcendence degree a over the rationals. The model 
of degree zero, i.e. the field of algebraic numbers, is the atomic model of T. 
The model of transcendence degree o is the countably saturated model. 
(5). Every finite model is countably saturated. 
We need some additional notation for sets of formulas. Remember that 
a type in the variables x , ,  ..., x, is a maximal consistent set f ( x ,  ... xn) 
of formulas. The set T'of sentences which belong to r is a maximal con- 
sistent theory; we call T' the theory o f f .  If T E f, f is called a type of T. 
Given a model 3 of T and an n-tuple a,, ..., a, E A ,  the set of all formulas 
y(x, ... x,) of 2 satisfied by a , ,  ..., a, is a type of T, called the type of 
a,, ..., a,. By a type of'ill we mean a type of Th(c2l). 
Consider a set of formulas C(x, ... x,) of 9. 
A formula cp(x, ... x,) is 
said to be a consequence of C, in symbols Z I. cp, iff for every model ?l 
and 
every n-tuple a,, ..., a,eA, if a , ,  ..., a, satisfies Z, then it satisfies 40. 
That is, 
3 k C[a, ... a,] implies 3 k q[a, ... a,]. 
saturated. 

2.31 
COUNTABLE MODELS OF COMPLETE THEORIES 
101 
We let C(cl ... c,) denote the set of all consequences in 9 
u {cl, ..., Cn} 
of the set 
{fJ(cl ... c,) : b ( X ,  ... x,) E C } .  
The notation C(c, ... c,x,+ 
I ... x,) is defined in a similar way. 
Let 9‘ 
= 9 
u {cl, ..., c,} 
be a finite simple expansion of 9. 
There 
is a natural one-to-one correspondence between the types Z ( x ,  ... X,) of 
9 
and the types F(x,+, ... x,) of 2’. 
If Z(xl ... x,) is a type of 9, 
then 
Z’ = C ( c ,  ... c,x,+, 
... x,) 
is a type of 9’. 
On the other hand, if f(x,+ , ... x,) is a type of 9’, 
then 
Z(x, ... x,) = { ~ ( x ,  
... x,) : C ( C ,  ... c,x,+ 
... x,) E F }  
is the unique type of 9 
such that Z‘ = F .  (We leave the verification of this 
as an exercise.) 
One might wonder why we used only sets of formulas in one free variable 
in the definition of an o-saturated model. At first sight, it may appear 
that we would obtain a stronger notion by considering sets of formulas 
with finitely many free variables. The next proposition shows that we do not 
obtain a stronger notion in this way. 
PROPOSITION 
2.3.6. Let ?I be an o-saturated model. Then for each finite 
Y c A, each set of formulas F ( x l  ... x,) of ZY consistent with Th(aY) 
is realized in Vly. 
PROOF. We argue by induction on n. The result holds for n = 1 by 
definition. Assume the result for n -  1 and let f ( x l  ... x,) be consistent 
with Th(?ly). We may assume that F is closed under finite conjunctions. Let 
f ’ ( x l  ... x,- 
= {(3x,)y(x, ... x,) : E F } .  
Then f’ is consistent with Th(91r). By inductive hypothesis, there is an 
( n -  I)-tupIe a , ,  ..., a,- 
realizing f’ in Yy. 
Let Y’ = Y u { a l ,  ..., Q,- 
I}. 
Then Y’ is still finite. Moreover, the set T(cI ... C , - ~ X , )  is consistent with 
Th(91y,) because for each yl, ..., ym E F ,  (3x,)(y, A ... A 7,) 
E F ’ .  Since 
is w-saturated, there exists a, E A realizing f ( c I  ... C , - ~ X , )  in 91yt. Then 
a , ,  ..., a, realizes F in ?Iy. -I 
Our three theorems below on countably saturated models will closely 
parallel our three theorems for atomic models. We shall prove an existence 

102 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
(2.3 
theorem, a uniqueness theorem, and a theorem showing that countably sa- 
turated models are 'large'. 
THEOREM 
2.3.7 (Existence Theorem for Countably Saturated Models). Let 
T be a complete theory. Then T has a countably saturated model if and only if 
for each n < o, 
T has only countably many types in n oariables. 
PROOF. Suppose first that T has a countably saturated model 81. By Proposi- 
tion 2.3.6, every type of Tin n variables is realized in %. But no n-tuple can 
realize two different types in n variables. Therefore T has only countably 
many types. 
Now suppose that for each n, T has only countably many types in n 
variables. Add a countable set C = {cl, c,, ...} of new constant symbols 
to Y ,  forming Ip'. For each finite subset 
Y = { d , ,  ..., d,} c C, 
the types T ( x )  of Tin 9, 
are in one-to-one correspondence with the types 
C(x, . . . x,x) of T in 9. 
Therefore T has only countably many types f ( x )  
in 9,. 
Also, there are only countably many finite subsets Y c C. Let 
be an enumeration of all types of T in all expansions Y
y
,
 Y a finite 
subset of C. Let 
v19 v2, .'. 
be an enumeration of all sentences of 9'. 
We form an increasing sequence 
T =  TO c TI c T2 c ... 
of theories of 2'' such that for each m < o: 
from C. 
(1). T,,, is a consistent theory which contains only finitely many constants 
(2). Either (P,,, E T,,,, , or (1 9,) E T,,,, , . 
(3). If q,,, = (3x)@(x) is in T,,,+l, then @ ( c ) E  T,,,,, for some C E  C. 
(4). If T,(x) is consistent with T,, , , then T,,,(d) c T,,,, for some d~ C. 
The construction of T,,, is straightforward. The union T, = u,,,T, is 
a maximal consistent theory in 3'. 
Using (3) we see that T, has a model 
%' = (a, a,, a,, ...) such that A = { a l ,  a,, ...}. Thus % is a countable 
model of T. 
It remains to prove that % is o-saturated. Let Y c A be finite and let 
Z ( x )  be consistent with Th(%,). Extend C ( x )  to a type f ( x )  in Th(a,,). 

2.31 
COUNTABLE MODELS OF COMPLETE THEORIES 
103 
For some m, T ( x )  = T,(x). T,(x) is consistent with T, and hence with 
T,, , . Then by (4), T,(ci) c T,, , for some c, E C, and it follows that a, 
realizes T ( x )  in $?Iy. i 
COROLLARY 
2.3.8. If T is a complete theory with only countably many 
nonisomorphic countable models, then T has a countably saturated model. 
PROOF. Each type of T is realized in some countable model of T, and each 
countable model realizes only countably many types. Therefore T has 
countably many types. -1 
THEOREM 
2.3.9 (Uniqueness Theorem for Countably Saturated Models). 
If % and 23 are countably saturated models and ?1 = 23, then % is isomorphic 
to 23. 
PROOF. The proof uses a back and forth construction which closely parallels 
the proof of the uniqueness theorem for atomic models. The only difference 
is that instead of working with complete formulas we work with types. 
Using countable saturation of (2I and 23, we obtain two sequences 
a , , a , ,  ..., 
b,, b , ,  ..., 
such that 
and, for each n, a, realizes the same type in (?I, a,, ..., a,,- ,) as b, realizes 
in ('23, b,, ..., b,-,). Then 
(9, 
a,, a , ,  ... ) = ('23, b,, b , ,  ... ), 
A = {a,, a , ,  ...}, 
B = {b,, b , ,  ...}, 
whence % 2 23 by the mapping a,, -+ b,. -I 
The 'dual' of a prime model is a countably universal model. A model '8 
is said to be countably universal iff M is countable and every countable model 
8 3 '21 is elementarily embedded in M. The next theorem shows that 
countably saturated models are 'large'. 
THEOREM 
2.3.10. Every countably saturated model is countably universal. 
PROOF. Let 23 be a countable model and (21 a countably saturated model, 
'% = 8. 
Let B = {b,, b, , ...}. Using one half of the back and forth con- 
struction and the saturation of ?I, we obtain a sequence a,, a , ,  a2, ... 
in A such that 
(8, 
b,, b , ,  ...) = (%,a,, a , ,  ...). 
Then the mapping b, -+ a, is an elementary embedding of 23 into %. -I 

104 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.3 
For a related necessary and sufficient condition for countable saturation 
see Exercise 2.3.12. Example 2.3.12 shows that the converse of Theorem 
2.3.10 fails. 
EXAMPLE 
2.3. I 1. Let T be the theory with infinitely many unary relations 
Po(x), Pl(x), ..., and a double sequence of constants c i j ,  i, j < w. The 
axioms are 
(Vx) i 
( P i ( x ) ~ P j ( x ) ) ,  i < j < w, 
Pdcij), 
i < w, 
c i j  f cik* 
j < k < w .  
It turns out that T is a complete theory. T has 2" nonisomorphic countable 
models, because for each n the relation P,(x) may or may not contain any 
nonconstants. However, T has a countably saturated model %. % is the 
model in which each P,(x) contains w nonconstants and the complement 
of all the P,(x) also has power w. 
EXAMPLE 
2.3.12. Let T be the theory of linear orderings in which every 
element has an immediate predecessor and successor. It can be shown that 
T is a complete theory, and the models of Tare exactly the orderings obtained 
by taking a linear ordering ( A ,  < ) and replacing each element a E A by a 
copy of the ordering of the integers (Z, 6). T has 2" nonisomorphic 
countable models. The model (Z, < ) is the atomic model of T. The model 
(B, 6 ) formed by replacing each rational number by a copy of (Z, < ) 
is the countably saturated model of T. By adding one more copy of (Z, < ) 
to the end of (B, < ), we obtain a model of T which is countably universal 
but not countably saturated. 
We conclude this section with three applications of our basic results 
on atomic and saturated models. We recall that a theory T is said to be 
w-categorical iff all models of T of power w are isomorphic. 
THEOREM 
2.3.13 (Characterization of w-Categorical Theories). Let T he a 
complete theory. Then the following are equivalent: 
(a). T is w-categorical. 
(d). For each n < w, T has onlyjnitely many types in x ,  , ..., x,. 
PROOF. The reader is advised to sit down before beginning this proof. We 
shall prove the equivalence of (a) and (d) by proving a chain of implications 
(a) -+ (b) -+ (c) -+ (d) + (el -+ (f) + (a). 
Each of the six equivalent conditions is interesting in its own right. 

2.31 
COUNTABLE MODELS OF COMPLETE THEORIES 
105 
Assuming (a), T is w-categorical, we prove: 
(b). T has a model 9t which is both countably saturated and atomic. 
Let 91 be the unique countable model of T. Then "21 is countably prime, 
so 91 is atomic. Since T has only one (hence countably many) countable 
models, it has a countably saturated model. Hence 'u is countably saturated. 
Now, assuming (b), we prove: 
(c). For each n < w, each type T(xl ... x,) of T contains a complete 
Since 2l is w-saturated, the type r is realized in 9l by some n-tuple a , ,  ..., a,. 
Since 'il is atomic, a , ,  ..., a, satisfies a complete formula y(x, ... x,,). 
We cannot have (i 
y) E r, so y belongs to r. 
formula. 
Assuming (c), we next prove: 
(d). For each n c w, T has onlyfinitely many types in x, , . . ., x,. 
To prove (d), let Z(x, ... x,) be the set of all negations of complete formulas 
'p(x, ... x,) in T. Then Z cannot be extended to a type in x, , ..., x,,, so Z is 
inconsistent with T. Therefore some finite subset 
(1 401 9 ..., 7 v m }  c Z 
is inconsistent with T .  Hence 
T k 1 (1 cpl A . . . A 1 cp,), 
T k  cp,v...vcp,. 
For each i < in, the set T i ( x ,  ... x,) of all consequences of T u f q i )  is a 
type of T. But in every model of T, every n-tuple satisfies one of the c p i ,  
hence realizes one of the T i .  Therefore rl, r2, 
..., rm are the only types 
ofTinx,, ..., x,. 
whence 
Now we assume (d), and prove: 
(e). For each n < w, there are onlyfinitely inany formulas ~ ( x ,  
... x,) 
Given a formula cp(x, ... x,), let cp* be the set of all types T(xl ... x,) of T 
which contain cp. Then cp* = @ *  implies Tk cp CI @. But there are only 
finitely many types of Tin x, , ..., x,, say m. Hence there are only 2" sets 
of types and therefore at most 2" formulas up to equivalence in T. 
up to equioalence with respect to T. 
From (e) we prove: 
(f). All models of T are atomic. 
To see this, let 2l be a model of Tand let a , ,  ..., a, E A .  Let cpl(x, ... x,), ..., 
'pr(x, ... x,) be a finite list of all the formdas satisfied by a , ,  ..., a,, up to 
equivalence in T. Then cp, A ... A cpr is a complete formula in T which is 
satisfied by a , ,  ..., a, in '$1. Hence % is atomic. 

106 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.3 
Finally, assuming (f), we see that any two countable models of T are 
atomic and elementarily equivalent, hence isomorphic. Therefore T is 
o-categorical. i 
The next theorem can often be used to show that a theory has an atomic 
model. 
THEOREM 
2.3.14. Any complete theory T which has a countably saturated 
model has a countable atomic model. 
PROOF. Assume that T has no countable atomic model. Then T is not 
atomic. Therefore T has a consistent incompletable formula 'p(x, ... x"). 
For each consistent incompletable formula $(xl . . . x,) of T, we may choose 
two formulas $o(x, ... x,) and Jll(x, ... x,) each consistent with T such that 
(1) 
T k $ O + $ ?  
T k $ , + $ ,  
T k l ( $ o A $ , ) .  
$o and $ I  are again incompletable. In this way we obtain a tree of incom- 
pletable formulas 
/ 'Po0 ..* 
' P O I  ..' 
/ ' P o \  
/ 
\ / ' P I 0  ... 
\ 
'P\ 
' P I 1  ..* 
Each infinite sequence so, sI, 
s2, ... of zeros and ones gives a branch 
Ts = (cp, cp,,, 
(psosl, (psos1s2, ...} of the tree. There are 2" branches. By ( I ) ,  
each branch Ts(x, ... x,) is a set of formulas which is consistent with T, 
and any two branches are inconsistent with each other. Extending each 
branch Ts to a type of T, we obtain 2" different types. Therefore T does not 
have a countably saturated model. i 
The converse of the above theorem is false. For example, we have already 
seen that the theory of real closed ordered fields has a countable atomic 
model. But this theory has 2" types and therefore has no countably saturated 
model. Another example of a theory with a countable atomic but no 
countably saturated model is complete number theory. 
It is worth repeating here some of our examples of o-categorical theories: 
atomless Boolean algebras; the four complete theories of dense simple 
order; the theory of infinite pure identity models; the theory of infinite 

2.31 
COUNTABLE MODELS OF COMPLETE THEORIES 
107 
Abelian groups with all elements of order p (p prime); the theory of an 
equivalence relation with infinitely many equivalence classes and each class 
infinite. 
We conclude this section with a surprising result of Vaught. 
THEDREM 
2.3.15. No complete theory T has exactly two nonisoniorpliic 
countable models. 
PROOF. Assume T has exactly two nonisomorphic countable models. 
Our previous results show that T has a countably saturated model a and 
a countable atomic model 9I and that these two models cannot be isomorphic. 
Since '$3 is not atomic, it has an n-tuple b,, ..., b, which does not satisfy 
a complete formula. Our plan is to obtain a countable atomic model 
(6, cI ... c,) of the complete theory T' = Th((23, b, ... b,)) and show that 
the reduct Q is neither w-saturated nor atomic. Thus T will have at least 
three nonisomorphic countable models 91, '$3, 6. 
Since '$3 is countably saturated, ('$3, b, ... b,) is countably saturated. 
The theory T' thus has a countably saturated model, and therefore has a 
countable atomic model (a, cl ... c,). The reduct Q is a model of T. 6 is 
not atomic because the n-tuple c l ,  ..., c, does not satisfy a complete formula. 
It remains to be shown that B is not w-saturated. Because T is not w- 
categorical, it has infinitely many nonequivalent formulas. Therefore T' 
has infinitely many nonequivalent formulas. Hence no model of T' is both 
atomic and w-saturated. In particular, since (6, cl ... c,) is atomic, it 
cannot be w-saturated. It follows that 6 is not w-saturated. -I 
EXERCISES 
2.3.1. Show that if q ( x l  ... x,) is a complete formula in T with respect to 
x,, ..., x,, then (3x,)q(xl ... x,-,x,) 
is a complete formula in T with 
respect to x l ,  ..., x,-,. 
2.3.2. Show that for any model 2l the simple expansion (3, 
atomic model. 
is an 
2.3.3. Let c,, ..., c, be new constant symbols. Prove that for each n 2 m 
the map 
q x ,  ... X") + q c l  ... C,X,+l 
... x,) 
is a one-to-one mapping from the types in 9 in n variables onto the types 
in 2'u {cl, ..., c,} 
in n-m variables. 

108 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.3 
2.3.4. Suppose % -= 8. Show that an n-tuple a , ,  .,., a,, 
E A and an n-tuple 
b, , ..., b, E B realize the same type if and only if (%, a, ... a,,) = (% b, ... b,). 
2.3.5*. Prove that a model BI is atomic if and only if for every finite subset 
Y of A, every element U E  A satisfies a complete formula q ( x )  in Th(BI,). 
Use this to show that if % is atomic and Y c A is finite, then "& is atomic. 
2.3.6. Prove that if % is elementarily embedded in 8, then every type 
T(xl . . . x,) which is realized in % is realized in '23. 
2.3.7. Let Z(x, ... x,) be a type of a complete theory T. Prove that Z is 
realized in every model of T if and only if ,Z contains a complete formula. 
2.3.8. Prove that if a complete theory T has fewer than 2" types, then T 
has an atomic model. 
2.3.9*. Prove that complete number theory has no countably saturated 
model. 
2.3.10*. Prove that no ordered field is countably saturated. 
2.3.1 1 .  Prove that every complete theory which has a countably universal 
model has a countably saturated model. 
2.3.12. Let 
be a countable model. Prove that PI is countably saturated 
if and only if for every finite subset Y of ?I, aIY 
is countably universal. 
2.3.13. Show that every reduct of a countably saturated model to a sub- 
language of 9 
is countably saturated. 
2.3.14*. Let T be a complete theory and let BT be the Lindenbaum algebra 
of T as defined in Exercises 1.4.10 and 2. I .  15. For n < o, 
let B,,, be the 
Boolean subalgebra of BT determined by the formulas q(u, ... 0,- 
I). 
Prove that: 
(a). q(o, ... o n - ] )  is consistent with T if and only if (q) # 0 in 
(b). q(u, ... u , - ] )  is a complete formula in T if and only if (q) is an 
atom of 'B,,r. 
(c). T is an atomic theory if and only if each Bn,r is an atomic Boolean 
algebra. 
(d). T is o-categorical if and only if B,, 
is a finite Boolean algebra for 
each n < w. 
(e). T has a countably saturated model if and only if each 'Bn,T has 
only countably many ultrafilters. [Hint: 
Show that types Z(uo ... u,- I )  of 
T correspond to ultrafilters in B,,T.] 

2.41 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
109 
2.3.15* (Ehrenfeucht). Let 9 
= {<, co, c,, ...} and let T be the theory 
of 9 
which states that < is a dense simple order without endpoints and 
that c, < c,+, , n < o. T is easily seen to be complete. There are three 
kinds of countable models of T. If we identify the elements of the count- 
able model with the set of all rationals, then one of the following three 
cases occurs: 
lim c,, = 03; 
lim c, < 03 and is a rational; 
lim cn < 00 and is an irrational. 
Determine which of these three models is countably saturated? Countable 
atomic? And neither? 
2.3.16* (Ehrenfeucht). Modify the above example to obtain an example of 
a complete theory T with exactly n nonisomorphic countable models, 
n 
2.3.17**. Let T be a theory in a countable language 9. 
Prove that if T 
has more than w1 nonisomorphic countable models, then T has continuum 
many nonisomorphic countable models. This result disappears if the con- 
tinuum hypothesis holds. It is an open problem whether the hypothesis 
of the result can be weakened to: T has uncountably many nonisomorphic 
countable models (assuming that the continuum hypothesis fails). 
2.3.18*. Let ?I be a countably saturated model for an uncountable 
language 2'. Prove that there is a countable sublanguage Zf C Z 
such 
that for each formula cp of 2' there is a formula I) 
of Tf such that 
n+m 
n+m 
n-rm 
3. [Hinr: Add n-2 I-placed relation symbols to 9 . 1  
w P + + * .  
2.3.19*. Let 9I and 58 be w-saturated models for a countable language. 
Show that the direct product '2I x 58 is w-saturated. 
2.3.20*. In a countable language, let T be a complete theory which is 
not w-categorical. Let r,, . . . , r, be consistent types over T. Show that 
T has a countable model 2l which realizes r,, ; . . , r, but is not w -  
saturated. 
2.4. Recursively saturated models 
A recursively saturated model is, roughly speaking, a model which is 
saturated for recursive sets of formulas. The proofs of a number of early 

110 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.4 
results in model theory were simplified by using the method of recursive- 
ly saturated models. In this section we shall introduce the recursively 
saturated models, develop their basic properties, and give some illustra- 
tions of how they are used. 
There are a number of results in model theory which would be quite 
easy if every complete theory had a countably saturated model. But 
countably saturated models do not exist for complete theories with 
uncountably many types. However, countable recursively saturated mod- 
els are often good enough, and they always exist for a complete theory in 
a countable language. 
To prepare for the definition we must first explain what is meant by a 
recursive set of formulas, or more generally a recursive set of expressions 
(where an expression is a finite sequence of symbols of 2’). Intuitively, a 
set of expressions is recursive if there is an algorithm which, given any 
expression cp, will produce the answer “yes” if cp belongs to the set and 
the answer “no” if cp does not belong to the set. A set of expressions is 
recursively enumerable if there is an algorithm which, given any expres- 
sion cp, will produce the answer “yes” if cp belongs to the set and will 
never end if cp does not belong to the set. At the beginning of a course in 
Recursion Theory several equivalent mathematical definitions of recur- 
sive set are presented. The principle that these mathematical definitions 
are equivalent to the above intuitive notion of a recursive set is called 
Church’s Thesis. 
In this course we will only need to know two things about recursive 
sets: (1) There are only countably many recursive sets of formulas. (2) In 
a recursive language, the set of all formulas described by a “finite 
scheme” is recursive. The intuitive description of recursive sets above 
will be enough to understand our treatment of recursively saturated 
models. However, for the sake of completeness we shall also give a 
precise definition of recursive set here. We shall choose a form of the 
definition which is particularly easy to apply to sets of formulas. We 
restrict our attention in this section to the case where the language 2 is 
countable. We may then take each symbol of 2’ to be an element of the 
set R(w) of sets of finite rank. Then each finite sequence of symbols of 2’ 
also belongs to R(w). We begin with the notion of a recursive subset of 
R(w). 
DEFINITION. 
By a A,, formula, or bounded quantifier formula, we mean a 
formula in the language with only the E symbol and equality which is 
built from atomic formulas using only logical connectives and the 

2.41 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
111 
relativized quantifiers (Vx E y )  and ( 3 x  E y ) .  By a Z1 formula we mean a 
formula which is built from A,, formulas using the positive connectives 
A ,  v , bounded quantifiers (Vx E y ) ,  ( 3 x  E y ) ,  and existential quantifiers 
( 3 x ) .  A subset S of R(w) is recursively enumerable, or r.e., if it is 
definable in the model ( R ( w ) ,  e )  by a XI formula &), 
that is, 
S = { a  E R(w) : (R(w), E )  k p [ a ] } .  
A subset S of R(w) is recursive if both S and R(w)\S are r.e. 
The language 2 is said to be recursive if the sets of symbols of 2 and 
functions giving the number of places of symbols of 2 are recursive 
subsets of R(w). That is, each of the sets 
{ ( n ,  u,,) : 
E w } ,  
{c : c is a constant symbol of 9}, 
{ P : P is a relation symbol of 2} , 
{ f : f is a function symbol of 2}, 
{ ( P ,  n )  : P is a relation symbol of 2 with n places}, 
{ ( f ,  n )  : f is a function symbol of 9 
with n places} 
is a recursive subset of R(w). For convenience we shall also include as 
part of the definition of a recursive language that each symbol of 2 is a 
natural number and that there are infinitely many natural numbers which 
are not symbols of 2. 
We shall restrict our attention in this section to recursive languages 9. 
Since R(w) is countable, every recursive language is countable and has 
countably many recursive sets of formulas. We can freely expand recur- 
sive languages by adding new symbols. Since any finite set is recursive, 
any expansion of a recursive language by finitely many new symbols is 
again a recursive language. Moreover, any expansion of a recursive 
language by a recursive set of new constants is again a recursive 
language, provided that there are still infinitely many natural numbers 
which are not used as symbols. 
If 9 
is recursive, then the set of all formulas of 2 is recursive, because 
there is an algorithm which decides whether an element of R(w) is a 
formula of 9. 
The set of all formulas cp(x,, . . . , x,,) of 2 with at most 
x ,  , . . . , x, free, and the set of all sentences of 2, are also recursive. We 
shall come across various other examples of recursive sets of formulas in 
this section. As a by-product of the Godel completeness theorem, the set I 
of all proofs in 2 is recursive and the set of all valid sentences in 3 
is r.e. 
We now give the key definition in this section. 
DEFINITION. 
Let 2 be a recursive language. A model ‘2l for 2’ is 
recursively saturated if for every finite set {cl, . . . , c,,} 
of new constant 

112 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
(2.4 
symbols, every recursive set T(x) of formulas of 2 ( c l , .  . . , c,), and 
every n-tuple a , ,  . . . , a, of elements of A, if T(x) is finitely satisfiable in 
(a, a , ,  . . . , a , )  then T(x) is realized in (91, a , ,  . . . , a , ) .  
EXAMPLES 
1 .  Every o-saturated model is recursively saturated. 
infinite element, since the recursive set of formulas 
2. Every recursively saturated model of complete arithmetic has an 
{ n  < x : n E o) 
is finitely satisfiable. 
infinitesimal element, since the recursive set of formulas 
3. Every recursively saturated real closed ordered field has a positive 
{ O < x r \ x < l l n :  n e w }  
is finitely satisfiable. 
It is immediate that any reduct of a recursively saturated model is 
recursively saturated, because any recursive set of formulas in the 
smaller language is also a recursive set of formulas in the larger 
language. Also, every expansion of a recursively saturated model formed 
by adding finitely many new constants is again recursively saturated. 
Our first theorem is that countable recursively saturated models exist. 
THEOREM 
2.4.1 (Existence Theorem for Recursively Saturated Models). 
Let 2 be a recursive language and let T be a complete theory in 2' whose 
models are infinite. Then T has a countable recursively saturated model. 
PROOF. Before starting, let us emphasize that the theory T is not 
necessarily a recursive set of sentences. The proof is similar to the proof 
of Theorem 2.3.7, the Existence Theorem for Countably Saturated 
Models. However, instead of working with complete types we work with 
recursive sets of formulas which need not be complete. 
Add a recursive set C = {c, , c2, . . .} of new constant symbols to 2' so 
as to form a recursive language 2". Notice that if xi are distinct varibles 
and di are distinct constants in C for i = 1, . . . , n, then a set of formulas 
r(x,, . . . , x,-,, x n )  of 9 
is recursive if and only if T(d,, . . . , d,-, , x,) 
is recursive. Let 
be an enumeration of all recursive sets of formulas of 2' with only x free 

2.41 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
113 
in which only finitely many constants from C occur, and let 
(91, ( 9 2 , .  . * 
be an enumeration of all sentences of 2‘. By carrying out the construc- 
tion given in the proof of Theorem 2.3.7, we now obtain a countable 
recursively saturated model of T. -1 
COROLLARY 
2.4.2. Let 2 be a recursive language. Then every countable 
model i?l for 2’ has a countable recursively saturated elementary extension. 
PROOF. Let 2‘ be a recursive expansion of 2’ with a countable set C of 
new constant symbols. Then l?l has an expansion ‘L” to 2’ in which every 
element of A is an interpretation of a constant. By Theorem 2.4.1, the 
elementary diagram T’ of 9’ 
has a countable recursively saturated model 
23’. The reduct 23 of 8’ 
to 2 is a countable recursively saturated 
elementary extension of 8. i 
We shall see in a later chapter that the above corollary has an 
analogue for uncountable models. In general, countable recursively 
saturated models are not unique in a complete theory. Some counterex- 
amples are indicated in the exercises. The back and forth method is not 
able to prove uniqueness for recursively saturated models, but it is still 
quite powerful, as the next few results show. 
DEFINITION. 
A model i?l is said to be w-homogeneous if for any pair of 
tuples a , ,  . . . , a, and b , ,  . . . , 6 ,  of elements of A such that 
(a, a , ,  . . . , a,) = (3. b,, . . . , b,) 
and any c E A there exists d E A such that 
(a, a,, . . . , a,, c) = (a, b , ,  . . . , b,, d ) .  
A countable w-homogeneous model is said to be countably homoge- 
neous. 
The methods of the preceding section can be used to show that every 
w-saturated model and every atomic model is o-homogeneous. We leave 
the result for atomic models as an exercise. Our next proposition is that 
recursively saturated models are also w -homogeneous. This is somewhat 
surprising because the type of an n-tuple of elements of a model “2l is in 
general not a recursive set of formulas. The trick is that the property that 

114 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.4 
two n-tuples have the same type can be expressed by a recursive set of 
formulas, even though the type of each n-tuple is not recursive. 
PROPOSITION 
2.4.3. Let 2’ be a recursive language. Then every recursively 
saturated model for 2’ is w-homogeneous. 
PROOF. Let 9 be a recursively saturated model for 2’ and let a , ,  . . . , a, 
and b,, . . . , b, be two n-tuples in A such that 
(a, a , ,  . . . , a,) = (8, 
b,, . . . , b,). 
Let c E A. Choose distinct new constant symbols corresponding to 
a , ,  . . . , a,, b,, . . . , b,, and c, and form the finite expansion 2” of 2’. 
Let T(x) be the set of all formulas of 2” of the form 
q(a,, . 
* > 
c)* 
q ( b 1 7 .  . . 7 b,, x)‘ 
Then r ( x )  is a recursive set of formulas of 2” which is finitely satisfiable 
in the model 
8’ = (a, a , ,  . . . , a,, b,, . . . , b,, c). 
By recursive saturation, T(x) is realized in a’, and this shows that % is 
w - homogeneous. -I 
If % is a countably homogeneous model, then a back and forth 
construction shows that whenever (91, a , ,  . . . , a,) = (a, b,, . . . , b,), 
we have (a, a , ,  . . . , a,) ZE (a, b , ,  . . . , b,). (This will follow from Ex- 
ercise 2.4.5 and Proposition 2.4.4 below.) The back and forth construc- 
tion can be captured in a more general context with the notion of a 
partial isomorphism. 
DEFINITION. 
Let 
and B be models for a language 2’. A partial 
isomorphism I : 71 
B between 8 and B is a relation I on the set of 
pairs of finite sequences ( a , ,  . . . , a , ) ,  ( b , ,  . . . , b,) of elements of A 
and B of the same length such that: 
(i). 0 I O ;  
(ii). If ( a , , .  . . , a , )  I ( b , , .  . . , b,) 
then ( 2 I , a , , . .  . , a , )  and 
(iii). If ( a , ,  . . . , a,) I ( b , ,  . . . , b,) then for all c E A there exists 
(8, 
b,, . . . , b,) satisfy the same atomic sentences of .=Y(c,, . . . , c,); 
d E B such that ( a , ,  . . . , a,, c) I (b,, . . . , b,, d ) ,  and vice versa. 
Condition (iii) is called the back and forth condition. Thus \u is 
w-homogeneous if and only if the relation 
(a, a , ,  . . . , a,) = (a, b,, . . . , b,) 

2.41 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
115 
is a partial isomorphism from 
isomorphisms between two different structures. 
to a. We shall now consider partial 
PROPOSITION 
2.4.4. (i) Any two finite or countable partially isomorphic 
models are isomorphic. 
(ii) Any two partially isomorphic models are elementarily equivalent. 
PROOF. 
(i) By a routine back and forth construction. 
cp(x,, . . . , x,) that if ( a , ,  . . . , a,) I ( b , ,  . . . , b,) then 
91 k cp[a,, . . . , a,] iff B k cp[b,, . . . , b,]. 
(ii) Let I :  % 
B. Show by induction on the complexity of formulas 
Then taking n = 0 we obtain 3 = 23. -I 
We shall next prove a partial isomorphism theorem for recursively 
saturated models which is analogous to the uniqueness theorem for 
countably saturated models. In order to obtain a partial isomorphism 
between two different recursively saturated models, the models must be 
recursively saturated “together”. To make this precise we introduce the 
notion of a model pair. To avoid complications we consider only 
languages which have no function symbols. In applications, the function 
symbols can be replaced by relations in the usual way. 
DEFINITION. 
Let 
and ‘23 be two models for the recursive language 2’ 
which has no function symbols. The model pair @ , B )  is the model for 
the language 2 ” U  2’’ defined as follows. 2’’ is a recursive language 
obtained by replacing each relation symbol R of 2’ by a new symbol R’ 
with the same number of places, replacing each constant symbol c of 2’ 
by a new symbol c’, 
and adding one new unary relation symbol A .  
Identify each constant c’ and relation R’ 
with its interpretation in the 
model a. 2’ is formed in a similar way. Then (a,@) 
is the model 
(a, B) = ( A  U B, A ,  B, R’, R’, 
c’, c ’ ) ~ , ~ ~ ~ .  
It is easy to see that if (a, B) is a recursively saturated model pair, 
then both 8 and 23 are recursively saturated models for 2’. However, it 
frequently happens that each of !?I 
and B is recursively saturated but the 
model pair (91, B) is not recursively saturated. For an example see 
Exercise 2.4.17. 
In order to extend the notion of a model pair to languages with 
function symbols in the natural way, a function symbol of 2’ should be 
interpreted by a pair of partial functions in (a, B), which are relations 

116 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.4 
but not functions in our treatment. For example, if F is a unary function 
symbol of 2, then F" should be interpreted by a partial function with 
domain A .  For this reason we may as well replace function symbols by 
relation symbols in the original language 2. 
THEOREM 
2.4.5. Let 2 be a recursive language, and let % and B be 
elementarily equivalent models for 2 such that the model pair (?I, B) is 
recursively saturated. Then &I is partially isomorphic to 23. In fact, the 
relation 
(a, a,, . . . , a,,)= (23, b,, . - . , b,) 
is a partial isomorphism. 
PROOF. Let I be the elementary equivalence relation between n-tuples 
from 3 and B. We wish to show that I is a partial isomorphism. Since 
% = B ,  the empty sequences are in the relation I. It is immediate that 
any pair related by I satisfies the same atomic formulas. We must verify 
the back and forth condition for the relation I .  
For each formula cp(x,, . . . , x,) of 2, define the formula 
cp (x,, . . . , x,) of 2" inductively as follows. For an atomic formula cp of 
2, cp' is obtained by replacing each relation or constant symbol s of 2 by 
s . The logical connectives are passed over with no change, and the 
quantifiers are relativized with the rules. 
'21 
91 
[(W# = (Vx)[A(x)-+ $7, 
[(3x)q]" = (gx)[A(x) A cp"]. 
The formula q
'
 
is defined analogously. 
n-tuple a,, . . . , a, in A ,  
We see by induction that for any formula cp(x,, . . . , x,) of 2 and any 
91 L qo[a,, . . . , a,] iff (&I, B) L q"[a,, . . . , a,], 
and similarly for E3. It follows that whenever a , ,  . . , , a, in A and 
b, , . . . , b, in B are such that 
( 3 ,  a,, . . . , a,) = (23, b , ,  . . . , b,) 
and d E A ,  the set r ( x )  consisting of B(x) and all formulas of 
2" U 2 ' ( a , , .  . . , a,, d, b , ,  . . . , 6,) 

2.41 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
of the form 
117 
is finitely satisfiable in the model pair (a,B). Moreover, the set T(x) of 
formulas is recursive. It follows by recursive saturation of the model pair 
that there is an element e E B which realizes T(x) in (a, B). Then 
(a, u,, . . . , a,, d ) =  (23, b,, . . . , b,, e). 
Thus I satisfies the back and forth condition, and the proof is 
complete. i 
As a corollary we obtain a useful criterion for a theory to be complete. 
COROLLARY 
2.4.6. Let 2 be a recursive language. A theory T in 9 
is 
complete if and only if for any recursively saturated model pair (a, B) of 
models of T, 
is partially isomorphic to 23. 
PROOF. If T is complete, then the models in the pair are partially 
isomorphic by Theorem 2.4.5. Suppose that T is not complete. Let a 
and ‘23 be models of T which are not elementarily equivalent. Form the 
model pair (a, ‘$3). 
By Theorem 2.4.1 there is a countable recursively 
saturated model 6 elementarily equivalent to (%, 23). Using the relativ- 
ized formulas (pa and q B  from the preceding proof, we see that 
is a 
model pair (a’,B’) where %’=“I 
and B’=B. Then a’ and B’ are 
models of T but are not elementarily equivalent and hence not partially 
isomorphic. -1 
There are several methods in model theory for showing that particular 
theories are complete. The method based on recursively saturated 
models and parital isomorphisms is quite powerful and easy to use. As 
an illustration of the method we obtain a complete set of axioms for the 
theory of the ordered group of integers under addition. 
EXAMPLE 
2.4.7. The following theory T is the complete theory of the 
ordered group of integers under addition, (2, + , -, 0 , 1 ,  S )  . The con- 
stant 1 is not necessary but is included for convenience. 
The Abelian group axioms with + , -, 0. 
The axioms for linear order. 

118 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.4 
x s y - , x  + z s y  + z .  
1 is the least element greater than 0. 
For each integer k > 1, the axiom that each x has a remainder modulo 
k ,  
( V ~ ) [ k J x v k J x - l v  
. . .  v k J x - ( k - l ) ]  
where k l x  means ( 3 y ) [ k y  = X I .  
PROOF. Let (3,B) be a recursively saturated pair of models of T. Let Z 
be the relation such that 
(a1,. . . ,a,) I ( 4 , .  
* 
f , b,) 
if and only if for each linear term P(x,, . . . , x , )  with integer coefficients, 
and each integer k > 1, 
(a) 
3 k P(al, . . . , a,) > 0 iff B k P(bl, . . . , b,) > 0 
and 
(b) 
3 k k I P(a,, . . . , a,) iff B k k I P(bl, . . . , b,) . 
We shall show that Z is a partial isomorphism from '21 to B. It is trivial 
that 0 I 0. Since each term in 2' is equal to a linear term with integer 
coefficients, (a,, . . . , a,) I (b,, . . . , b,) implies that ( a,, . . . , a,) and 
(b,, . . . , b,) satisfy the same atomic formulas. 
It remains to prove that I has the back and forth property. Let 
(al,. . . ,a,) Z ( b l , .  . . , b,) and let C E  A .  We must show that the 
recursive set T(x) of all formulas of the form 
[P(Ul, . . . , a,, c) > 01% - 
[P(b,, . . . , b,, x )  > 0IB, 
[k I P(al, . . . , a,, c)]' ++ [ k  1 P(b,, . . . , b,, x)lm, 
B(x) 
is finitely satisfiable in (3,B). Using the axioms of T to simplify terms 
we see that it suffices to show that for all linear terms P(xl, . . , , x , )  and 
Q(xl, . . . , x,) and natural numbers k > 1,1, rn such that 
3 k P(a,, . . . , a,) < mc < Q(a,, . . . , a,) and c = 1 (mod k )  
there exists x E B such that 
23 k P(bl, . . . , b,) < mx < Q(b,, . . . , b,) and x = 1 (mod k). 

2.41 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
119 
If there are only finitely many elements between P(a,, . . . , a,) and 
Q(a,, . . . , a,) in '21 then mc is equal to a linear term in ( a , , .  . . , a,) 
and mx may be taken to be the same linear term in ( b , ,  . . . , b,). 
Otherwise, since ( a , ,  . . . , a , )  Z ( b , ,  . . . , b,), there are infinitely many 
elements between P(b,,. . . , b,) and Q(b,,. . . , b,) in B. By the 
axioms of T, any infinite interval contains elements mx such that x = 1 
(mod k). Therefore r ( x )  is finitely satisfiable in (a, '23). By recursive 
saturation, T(x) is realized in ('21, B), and thus the relation 1 is a partial 
isomorphism from '21 to '23. -I 
As another application of recursive saturation we give an easy direct 
proof of the Robinson Consistency Theorem (Theorem 2.2.23). We saw 
in an exercise in Section 2.2 that the Craig Interpolation Theorem 
follows quickly from the Robinson Consistency Theorem, and in fact the 
Robinson Consistency Theorem is only needed for finite languages. On 
the other hand, in Section 2.2 it was shown that the full Robinson 
Consistency Theorem is a corollary of the Craig Interpolation Theorem. 
Thus we only need a direct proof of the Robinson Consistency Theorem 
for finite languages. In this section it is more natural to prove it for 
recursive languages. 
2.4.8 ROBINSON 
CONSISTENCY 
THEOREM 
(restated). Let 2, 
and 2, be two 
recursive languages and let 2' = 2, f l  2,. Suppose T is a complete theory 
in 2' and T ,  3 T, T, 3 T are consistent theories in 2Zl, 2, respectively. 
Then T, U T, is consistent in the language 9, 
U 9,. 
PROOF. By replacing constant and function symbols by relation symbols 
in the usual way, we may assume that 2Zl and 2Z2 have only relation 
symbols. Let %?I be a model of T, and '23 be a model of T,. Form the 
model pair (in the natural extended sense for models of two languages) 
('21, B) = ( A  u B, A ,  B, R%, s" : R E  9,, 
S E  3,). 
The language of ('21, '23) is the recursive language 2': U 2':. Let (%', '23') 
be a countable recursively saturated model which is elementarily equival- 
ent to ('21, @), whence '21' is a model of T, and '23' is a model on T,. Let 
(%?Io,B0) 
be the reduct of (a',@') to the smaller language 2Z"U2ZB. 
Then a,, and B,, are models of T and hence are elementarily equivalent 
models for 9, 
and ($?lo, 
@,,) 
is a recursively saturated model pair in the 
original sense. Therefore '21, and @, are partially isomorphic, and since 

120 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.4 
they are countable they are isomorphic by some isomorphism f .  We may 
now expand 58' to a model '23'' for 2* U Z2 by interpreting each relation 
symbol  RE^^ by the f-image of its interpretation in '21'. Then 58" is a 
model of T ,  U T2 as required. -1 
Recursively saturated 'models have a number of other applications, 
some of which are given in the exercises. We conclude this section with a 
general result about recursively saturated models, which shows that 
every countable recursively saturated model is "recursively saturated 
with respect to relations" as well as with respect to variables. We first 
need a useful lemma concerning the set of consequences of a recursive 
set of formulas. 
LEMMA 2.4.9. Let 2 and 2' be recursive languages with 2 C 2' and let 
T ( x )  be a recursive set of formulas of 2". Then there is a recursive set 
Z(x) of formulas of 3'such that Z(x) and r ( x )  have exactly the same set 
of consequences with at most x free in the smaller language 2. 
PROOF. Let d , ,  d,, . . . be a recursive list of all deductions from T(x) of 
formulas of 2 i n  x ,  and let cp,(x) be the conjunction of n copies of the 
formula proved by d,. Let S(x) be the set 
Z(x) = {'p,(x) : n E w } .  
Z(x) is clearly a set of formulas of 2 which has the same consequences in 
2 as T(x). Moreover, Z(x) is recursive because one can decide whether a 
formula $(x) belongs to 2 ( x )  by looking only at the deductions d ,  where 
m is at most the number of A symbols in $(x) plus 2. -I 
THEOREM 
2.4.10. Let 22 and 2" be recursive languages with 2 C 2' and 
let 9 be a countable recursively saturated model for 2. Then any recursive 
set rof sentences of 3" which is consistent with the complete theory of '21 
is satisfied in some expansion of '21. 
We remark that if 2' consists of 2 plus a recursive set of constant 
symbols, then the above theorem holds even for uncountable recursively 
saturated models a. To see this, let 9" 
be 2' plus the first n constant 
symbols and by Lemma 2.4.9 let 
be a recursive theory in 2" with the 
same consequences in 9, 
as r. Because 2l is recursively saturated there is 
an expansion of 3 by adding one constant which is a model of r,. Since 

2.41 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
121 
any expansion of ‘21 by finitely many constants is again recursively 
saturated, the process may be repeated to obtain an expansion of ‘21 by 
countably many constants which is a model of r. 
The proof of the general case of Theorem 2.4.10 is more difficult and 
requires the hypothesis that ‘21 is countable. 
PROOF 
OF THEOREM 
2.4.10. Let 9; 
be an expansion of 9’ 
which has a 
new constant symbol for each element of A ,  and let $, O,, . . . be a list of 
all sentences of 9;. 
Let T be the elementary diagram of ‘21. Then r U T 
is consistent. Form a sequence of sentences 
. . of 9; 
such that 
for each 11: 
(1). k +,,+I+ 
+,,* 
(2). +,, is consistent with r U T. 
(3). If 0, is consistent with r U T U {qn} then k +,,+,+ 6,. 
(4). If 0, is of the form ( 3 x ) O ( x )  and is consistent with r U T U { +n} 
Recursive saturation is needed to show that the sequence +,, can be 
chosen to satisfy property (4). Suppose 
. . . , +,, have been chosen to 
satisfy (1)-(4) and that 0, satisfies the hypothesis of (4). Let Y be the 
finite set of constants from A which occur in +n, and 0,. Then 
then there is an a E A such that k 
O(a). 
r’(x> = r u {+,,I u {e(x)> 
is a recursive set of formulas of 9; 
which is consistent with T. By 
Lemma 2.4.9 there is a recursive set Z(x) of formulas of zy 
which has 
exactly the same set of consequences as T ’ ( x )  in the language XY. 
It 
follows that Z(x) is consistent with T, and thus is finitely satisfiable in 
?Iy. By recursive saturation there exists a E A which realizes Z(x) in STY. 
We claim that r’(a) 
is consistent with T. To prove this claim, suppose 
that r’(a) 
k p(a) where p(x) is a formula of 9*. 
Existentially quantifying 
the elements of A - (Y U { a } ) ,  we may take p(a) to be a sentence of 
2 y ( a )  and p(x) to be a formula of TY. 
Then r’(x) k p(x), and hence 
C(x) F p(x). Since a realizes 2 ( x )  in ?Iy, we have ?Iy k p[a]. Therefore 
p(a) belongs to T and the claim is proved. 
to be +,, A O(a) in case (4), 
whence (1)-(4) will hold for n + 1 as required. The sequence of sent- 
ences +,,, II < w, may then be defined by recursion. It follows from 
(1)-(4) that % has an expansion ‘21’ to 2‘ such that ‘21; 
is a model of 
r U T U { +,, : II < w } ,  and in particular such that ‘21’ is a model of r. -I 
In view of the claim, we may take 

122 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.4 
As an example of the preceding theorem, let T be the theory of the 
ordered group of integers under addition from Example 2.4.7 and let r 
be the set of sentences with an additional function symbol for multiplica- 
tion consisting of the commutative ring axioms and Peano’s axioms for 
the nonnegative elements. Then every countable recursively saturated 
model of T can be expanded to a model of T U r. 
The results in this section can be readily extended to the case of an 
arbitrary countable language 2 by modifying the notion of a recursively 
saturated model. A set S is said to be recursive relative to 2 i f  there is an 
algorithm which decides whether or not an arbitrary input belongs to S 
but makes use of an “oracle” which will always correctly answer 
questions of the form “is cp a formula of 2?”. 
Everything goes through 
with only minor changes when the notion of recursive saturation is 
replaced by recursive saturation relative to 2. 
EXERCISES 
2.4.1. Prove that a complete theory in a recursive language which has 
continuum many complete types has continuum many nonisomorphic 
countable recursively saturated models. 
2.4.2. Let T be the complete theory of models with countably many 
distinct constants and no functions or relations. Prove that all recursively 
saturated countable models of T are isomorphic. 
2.4.3. Let T be the theory of divisible torsion free Abelian groups. Prove 
that all recursively saturated countable models of T are isomorphic. 
2.4.4. Let ‘u be a countable model for a recursive language such that for 
each finite sequence ( a , ,  . . . , a,) in A, every element of A realizes a 
recursive type in (a, a , ,  . . . , an). Prove that 2I is elementarily embedd- 
able in every recursively saturated model of Th(’u). 
2.4.5. Let T be the complete theory of the model ( w ,  s ) .  
Prove that a 
model of T is countably homogeneous if and only if it is isomorphic to 
one of the following three models: the atomic model ( w ,  S ) ,  the 
countably saturated model formed by adding a countable dense set of 
copies of (2, S )  to the end of ( w ,  S ) ,  and the model formed by adding 
one copy of (2, S )  to the end of ( w ,  s ) .  

2.4) 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
123 
2.4.6. Show that every atomic model is w-homogeneous. 
2.4.7. If T is not w-categorical, then T has at least two nonisomorphic 
countably homogeneous models. 
2.4.8. Show that if '21 is countably homogeneous and every type in 
finitely many variables in Th('21) is realized in '21, then '21 is countably 
saturated. 
2.4.9. Let '21 and '23 be w-homogeneous models which realize exactly the 
same types in finitely many variables. Prove that '21 and '23 are partially 
isomorphic. 
2.4.10*. Let '21 = ( A ,  s, . . .) be an o-homogeneous model for a count- 
able language such that s well orders A .  Prove that A has cardinality at 
most 2". 
2.4.11. A model '21 is called almost w-homogeneous if there is a finite 
sequence a,, . . . ,a, of elements of A such that ('21,ul,. . . , u n )  is 
w-homogeneous. Prove that if every countable model of theory T is 
almost o-homogeneous then every model of T is almost w-homoge- 
neous . 
2.4.12*. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language and let r ( x )  
be a type such that: 
(i). T has a model which omits r, 
(ii). for every complete type 2( yl, . . . , y,) over T, either 
Z ( Y * , .  * . 9 Y,> 3 r(Y;) 
for some i, or T has a model which realizes 2 and omits r. 
Prove that T has an w-homogeneous model which omits r. 
2.4.13. Let '21 be a countably infinite recursively saturated model for a 
recursive language. Prove that '21 has an automorphism which is not the 
identity function. 
2.4.14. Let 
and let 
be a recursively saturated model for a recursive language, 
( P m ( X 1 , . . .  , X , , Y l t . . . ? Y , ) : m < w )  

124 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.4 
be an r.e. set of formulas. Suppose that for each m < o, 
” 
CP,+,+ 
p m  
and 
a k v x , 3 y , v x 2 3 y 2  . . . vx,3ynCp,. 
a ~ V x , 3 y , V x 2 3 y 2 .  
. . v x , 3 y ,  A cp,. 
Prove that 
m<w 
2.4.15. In an ordered field F, two elements x ,  y are said to realize the 
same cut over the rationals if for every rational number q we have q < x 
iff q < y .  Let F and G be two ordered fields such that F C G and the 
model (G, F, 0,1, +, 0
,
 s )  is recursively saturated. Prove that every 
element of G realizes the same cut as some element of F over the 
rationals. 
2.4.16. Let (a, B) be a recursively saturated model pair. Prove that ‘u 
and B are recursively saturated. 
2.4.17. Let T be a complete theory which has uncountably many com- 
plete types in one variable. Prove that T has countable recursively 
saturated models 91 and B such that the model pair (a, B) is not 
recursively saturated. [Hint: 
Use Theorem 2.4.5.1 
2.4.18. In a recursive language, let 3 and B be models such that B C l?l 
and the expanded model (a, B) is recursively saturated. Prove that the 
model pair (%,a) 
is recursively saturated. 
2.4.19*. Let T be the theory in a language with countably many unary 
relations such that each nontrivial finite Boolean combination of rela- 
tions is consistent. Show that every model of T is o-homogeneous, and 
that T has countably homogeneous models which are not recursively 
saturated. 
2.4.20. Let I be a partial isomorphism from 9 to 8. Show that whenever 
( a , ,  . . . , a, ) I ( b, , . . . , b,), the expanded models (a, a, ,  . . . , a,) and 
(B, b , ,  . . . , b,*) are partially isomorphic. 

2.41 
RECURSIVELY SATURATED MODELS 
125 
2.4.21. Let Y b e  a recursive language with only relation symbols and let 
(8,23) 
be a countable recursively saturated model pair for 2. Prove that 
every existential sentence which holds in 8 holds in 23 if and only if '% is 
isomorphically embeddable in 23. 
2.4.22. Let Y 
be a recursive language with only relation symbols and let 
(91, 23) be a countable recursively saturated model pair for 2. Prove that 
every positive sentence which holds in 8 holds in 23 if and only if there is 
a homomorphism of 8 onto 23. 
2.4.23. Let Y be a recursive language with only relation symbols, let 
(a, 23) be a countable recursively saturated model pair for 2, and let U 
be a unary relation symbol of 2. The relatiuization cp" of a formula cp of 
Y to U is defined recursively as follows. 
If cp is atomic, then (pu = cp, 
(VXcp)" = (VX)(u(X)+ cp"), 
( 2 X c p ) "  = (3X)(u(X) 
A 0"). 
Prove that 91 is isomorphic to the submodel of '23 with universe U' 
if and 
only if for every sentence cp of Y, 
'Ix F cp iff 23 L cpu. 
2.4.24. Let 2' be a recursive language with only relation symbols, let 
(8, 23) be a countable recursively saturated model pair for 2, and let E 
be a binary relation symbol of 2. A formula of 2 is said to be essentially 
existential if it is built up from atomic and negated atomic formulas using 
conjunctions, disjunctions, bounded quantifiers 
(VX)(XEY + cp), (34(XEY A cp), 
and existential quantifiers. 23 is said to be an outer extension of K, and (5 
is said to be a transitive submodel of 23, if '23 is an extension of CS and for 
every x E C and y E B ,  if 23 L y E x  then y E C. 
Prove that '23 is isomorphic to an outer extension of 8 if and only if 
every essentially existential sentence which holds in '% holds in '23. 
2.4.25. By an arithmetical set we mean a subset of R(w) which is 
definable by a formula of first order logic in the model ( R ( w ) ,  E ) .  A 
model 8 for a recursive language 2 is said to be arithmetically saturated 

126 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.4 
if for every finite sequence ( al, . . . , a,) in A ,  every arithmetical set of 
formulas r(x) in Y(a,, . . . , a,) 
which is finitely satisfiable in 
(a, a,, . . . , a , )  is realized in (3, a,, . . . ,a,). Prove that every count- 
able model for Y has a countable arithmetically saturated elementary 
extension. 
2.4.26. Use the method of recursively saturated models to obtain a 
complete set of axioms for the set of natural numbers with the order 
relation. 
2.4.27. Use the method of recursively saturated models to obtain a 
complete set of axioms for the rational numbers with the order relation 
and addition (the theory of divisible ordered Abelian groups). 
2.4.28. Let T be the theory with the binary relation s and unary 
function F and axioms stating that: 
(i). s is a dense simple ordering with no greatest or least element. 
(ii). F is an automorphism of the ordering S .  
(iii). For all x ,  x is strictly less than F(x). 
Prove using the method of recursively saturated models that T is 
complete. 
2.4.29*. Use the method of recursively saturated models to show that 
the set of axioms for additive number theory described in Example 
1.4.11 is a complete set of axioms for the set of natural numbers with 
zero, successor, and addition. 
2.4.30*. Let 2 have one binary function symbol F and let T be the 
theory whose axioms state that F is a one to one function, every element 
belongs to the range of F, and 
1 Y  = 4x1, . * * 
7 x,, y )  
where y occurs in the term ~ ( x , ,  . . . , x,, y )  and the term is not a single 
variable. Use the method of recursively saturated models to show that T 
is complete. 
2.4.31*. Let T be a complete theory in a recursive language L, and 
suppose that T has a complete extension T' in the language L U 
{c, : n < o} such that T' has no atomic model. Then T has a model 
which is not recursively saturated. 

2.51 
LINDSTROM’S CHARACTERIZATION OF FIRST ORDER LOGIC 
127 
2.4.32*. Let 2 be the language with only the binary relation E and let 2” 
be the language with the binary relations E ,  S. Let ( R ( w ) ,  E ,  Sat) be the 
model for 2” where Sat(x, y )  holds iff x is a formula of 2’ and y is a tuple 
which satisfies x in (R(w), E ) .  Show that there is a recursive set r of 
sentences of 9’ 
such that ( R ( w ) ,  E ,  Sat) k r, and for each countable 
nonstandard model % = ( R ( w ) ,  E ) ,  % is recursively saturated if and only 
if % can be expanded to a model of r. 
2.4.33*. Prove that a countable nonstandard model of complete arith- 
metic is recursively saturated if and only if it is the arithmetic part of 
some model of Zermelo set theory. 
2.4.34*. Show that a countable nonstandard model of additive number 
theory can be expanded to a model of Peano arithmetic if and only if it is 
recursively saturated. 
2.5. Lindstrom’s Characterization of First Order Logic 
In this section we shall prove a result of Lindstrom which shows that 
first order logic is the only logic for which the Compactness Theorem and 
Downward Lowenheim Skolem Theorem hold. In order to state such a 
result we need a general notion of an abstract logic. This is the beginning 
of a subject called abstract model theory, which studies the relationship 
between various model theoretic results in arbitrary logics. There are 
many interesting logics which are richer than first order logic, such as 
logics with infinitely long formulas and logics with extra quantifiers. The 
theorem of Lindstrom shows that, even though there are richer logics, 
first order logic is of fundamental importance. No matter how we enrich 
first order logic, we must either give up one of the basic results which 
underlies our whole treatment of model theory, the Compactness 
Theorem or the Downward Lowenheim Skolem Theorem, or else go 
outside the notion of an abstract logic which is assumed in Lindstrom’s 
theorem. 
We shall not discuss logics other than first order logic here, and shall 
instead concentrate on results which characterize first order logic. To 
avoid long detours into side issues, we shall give a definition of abstract 
logic which is less general than is usually found in the literature, but is 
adequate for our present purposes. 

128 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.5 
Recall that a language 2 is a set of relation, constant, and function 
symbols. In order so avoid some complications which would obscure the 
main ideas, we shall restrict our consideration in this section to languages 
2 which have only relation and constant symbols, and no function 
symbols. 
DEFINITION 
2.5.1. An abstract logic is a pair of classes (1, k,) with the 
following properties, I is the class of sentences and k, is the satisfaction 
relation of the logic (1, k l ) .  
(i) Occurrence Property. For each cp E 1 there is associated a finite 
language 2p, 
called the set of symbols occurring in cp. The relation % k, cp 
is a relation between sentences cp of 1 and models % for languages 2 
which contain Lfp. That is, if cp E 1 and % is a model for 2, then the 
statement '21 i=, cp is either true or false if 2 contains Tq, 
and is undefined 
if 2 does not contain 2+. 
(ii) Expansion Property. The relation '21Llcp depends only on the 
reduct of '21 to T9. That is, if '21 Ll cp and 23 is an expansion of '21 to a 
larger language, then B kl cp. 
(iii) Isomorphism Property. The relation % k l  cp is preserved under 
isomorphism, That is, if '21 
(iv) Renaming Property. The relation '21k,cp is preserved under re- 
naming. Formally, let p be a bijection (one to: one mapping) from a 
language 2 to a language p2which preserves the number of places of all 
symbols, and for each model 'ill for 2 let p'21 be the model for $3' induced 
in the obvious way by p. Then for each sentence cp E 1 with Zp C 2 there 
is a sentence pcp E 1 with ZPp 
= pZp such that for each model '21 for 
2, '21 k l  cp iff p% i=, pcp. 
(v) Closure Property. 1 contains all atomic sentences, I is closed under 
the usual first order connectives A ,  v, i, 
k, satisfies the usual rules for 
satisfaction for atomic formulas and first order connectives, and the set 
of symbols 2p behaves as expected for atomic sentences and first order 
connectives. 
(vi) QuantiJier Property. 1 is closed under universal and existential 
quantifiers. That is, for each cp E I and each constant symbol c E T9 there 
are sentences (Vx,)cp and (3x,)p in I with the set of symbols 2p - { c }  
such that: 
'21 k l  (Vx,)cp iff for all a E A ,  ('21, a) k, cp; 
'21 L, (3x,)cp iff for some a E A ,  (a, a) k, cp. 
23 and '21k,cp then 23 k , q .  

2.51 
LINDSTROM’S CHARACTERIZATION OF FIRST ORDER LOGIC 
129 
(vii) Refutivization Property. For each sentence cp E f and relation 
R(x, b,, . . . ,b,) with R ,  b,, . . . , b, not in 2+,, 
there is a new sentence 
cplR(x, b,, . . . , b,), read cp refutivized to R(x, b,, . . . , b,), which has 
the set of symbols 2+, 
U { R ,  b,, . . . , b,} and is such that whenever 23 is 
the submodel of a model % for 2+, 
with universe 
B = { a  E A : R(u, b,, . . . , b,)}, 
we have 
(g, 
R ,  b,, . . . , b,) kl cp I R(x, b,, . . . , b,) iff 23 k, cp. 
Two abstract logics are said to be equivalent if for each sentence of one 
of the logics there is a sentence of the other logic which has the same set 
of symbols and the same models. Two logics which are equivalent are 
alike except that the sentences are “renamed”, and may be considered as 
the same. We shall be interested in characterizing first order logic up to 
equivalence. 
Our notion of an abstract logic has no provision for free variables, and 
f should be thought of as a set of sentences rather than formulas. Notice 
that in the Quantifier Property (vi), a sentence in an expanded language 
with a new constant symbol takes the place of a formula with a free 
variable. 
To shorten our notation, we shall use the symbol 1 both for the logic 
and for the class of sentences of the logic. We use k for the satisfaction 
relation for ordinary first order logic, and k l  for the satisfaction relation 
for an arbitrary abstract logic 1. The most familiar example of an abstract 
logic is the ordinary first order logic, usually denoted by f+,,+, = (f+,,+,, k). 
The Relativization Property (vii) for first order logic holds where cp 
relativized to R(x, b,, . . . , b,) is the sentence formed by replacing each 
quantifier (Vx)+ in cp by 
(Vx)[R(x, b,, * * * , b,)+ $1 
and (3x)$ in q by 
The class of sentences of first order logic, fm,+,, is a proper class because it 
contains sentences for all languages 2. However, for each language 2, 
the class of sentences cp E f w , , ,  with 2p C 2 is a set. By the closure and 
quantifier properties, every sentence of first order logic belongs to every 
abstract logic I, and for each model % and each first order sentence cp, 

130 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.5 
‘21L)cp iff ‘21k cp. Many other examples of abstract logics have been 
studied extensively in the literature, but are outside the scope of this 
book. The book “Model-Theoretical Logics”, Barwise and Feferman 
(1985), has a large collection of articles surveying abstract model theory 
and the model theory for a variety of logics beyond first order logic. 
It should be emphasized that logics in the sense of Definition 2.5.1 
deal with the same class of models as first order logic, and only the 
sentences and satisfaction relation may be different. This is a significant 
restriction which leaves a large loophole in Lindstrom’s theorem. There 
are many examples of logics in a generalized sense which study models 
with additional structure and thus do not fit within our framework. These 
include modal logics, programming logics, and logics for models with 
topologies and measures. Sentential logic and o-logic as described in this 
book are not examples of abstract logics in the sense of 2.5.1, because 
they also deal with different classes of models than first order logic. 
However, the notion of an abstract logic in Definition 2.5.1 is broad 
enough to explain what abstract model theory has to say about first order 
model theory. 
By a model of a set T of sentences of an abstract logic 1 we mean a 
model ‘21 such that 3 Ll cp for each cp E T. Two models 3 and B for the 
same language are said to be 1-elementarily equivalent if for each 
sentence cp E 1, 3 kI cp if and only if B kl cp. 
We shall now define two properties of abstract logics which correspond 
to the Compactness Theorem and the Downward Lowenheim Skolem 
Theorem. 
DEFINITION. 
An abstract logic 1 is countably compact if for every count- 
able set T C 1, if every finite subset of T has a model then T has a model. 
The Lowenheim number of 1 is the least cardinal a such that every 
sentence of 1 which has a model has a model of power at most a. 
By the Compactness Theorem, first order logic is countably compact. 
In fact, first order logic is fully compact, that is, every finitely satisfiable 
set of sentences has a model. The Downward Lowenheim Skolem 
Theorem shows that first order logic has Lowenheim number w. 
If the Lowenheim number of an abstract logic 1 exists, it must be at 
least w ,  because 1 contains every sentence of first order logic. For an 
arbitrary abstract logic, the Lowenheim number may not exist. However, 
the following simple result shows that it does exist if the logic does not 

2.51 
LINDSTROMS CHARACTERIZATION OF FIRST ORDER LOGIC 
131 
have too many sentences. This simple result is of particular interest 
because it is one of the few natural results outside of set theory which 
uses the full power of the axiom scheme of replacement. 
PROPOSITION 
2.5.2. Let 1 be an abstract logic such that for each finite 
language 2, the class {cp E 1 : Tq 2} 
is a set. Then the Lowenheim 
number of 1 exists. 
PROOF. Because of the Renaming Property, we may restrict our atten- 
tion to the class I’ of sentences cp E I such that Zq 
belongs to R(w). By 
hypothesis, I’ is a set. For each cp E 1’, let a(cp) be w if cp has no models, 
and the least cardinal of a model of cp if cp has at least one model. By the 
axiom of replacement, there exists a cardinal 
a = sup{a(cp) : cp E l ’ } .  
a is the Lowenheim number of 1. -I 
We now prove a preliminary result which is an abstract version of 
Proposition 2.4.4. 
PROPOSITION 
2.5.3. Let I be an abstract logic which has Lowenheim 
number o. Then any two models which are partially isomorphic are 
1-elementarily equivalent. 
PROOF. Suppose 3 and 8 are models for a language 2 which are 
partially isomorphic by a relation I, but there is a sentence cp E 1 such that 
3 !=[ cp but 8 
k r i c p .  By taking reducts we may assume that 2 = Zq. 
We 
may also assume that I is preserved under subsequences, that is, 
whenever 
(a,, . . . , a,) 
Z ( b , ,  . . . , b , ) ,  any 
subsequence of 
(a,, . . . , a,) is in the relation I to the corresponding subsequence of 
( b , ,  . . . , b,,). Let A’ be the set of finite sequences of elements of A and 
let F : A’ X A+ A’ and F’ : A’ X A’+ A’ be the functions 
F((a,, . . . , a,,), b )  = (a,, . . . , a,,, b ) ,  
F’((a,, . . . ,a,,,), ( b , , .  . . , b , , ) ) =  ( a , , .  . . , a,, b , ,  . . . , b,,). 
Form the expanded model 3” = (A U A’, 3 ,  F, F’) where F and F‘ are 
ternary relations rather than binary functions. Define B‘, G, G’, and 8” 
analogously. By the Isomorphism Property, we may take 3 and 8 so 

132 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.5 
that the sets A ,  A’, B, and B‘ are all disjoint from each other (with a 
different “empty sequence” in each of A’, B’). Since % is partially 
isomorphic to B, we may expand the model pair (%”,B”) 
to a model 
(3 = (a”, ’@’, I). By the closure, quantifier, and relativization properties, 
there is a sentence I(, E 1 in the language of the model (5 which holds in & 
and implies that 
In particular, there is a first order sentence which holds in Q and implies 
that % z p  B. (This sentence uses the symbols for F and F’. The atomic 
formula condition depends on the fact that 9 
is finite and Z is closed 
under subsequences). Since 1 has Lowenheim number w ,  JI has a count- 
able model &,,, from which we obtain models U,, and 8, 
for 2. %,, and 
B,, 
are countable models, and are partially isomorphic because Q, is a 
model of 4. By Proposition 2.4.4, a,, and B,, 
are isomorphic. But since & 
is a model of 4, U,, k, cp and B,, 
Fl i c p ,  contradicting the Isomorphism 
Property. This completes the proof. -I 
THEOREM 
2.5.4 (Lindstrom’s Characterization of First Order Logic). 
First order logic is, up to equivalence, the only abstract logic which is 
countably compact and has Lowenheim number w .  
PROOF. Let 1 be a countably compact abstract logic with Lowenheim 
number w. We must show that every sentence cp E 1 is 1-equivalent to 
some first order sentence 4, that is, for all a, % L, cp iff 
!= JI. It is 
sufficient to consider models for a finite language 2. Let % and 58 be two 
models for 2. We shall define a “back and forth sequence” of relations 
I,, k E w ,  between U and ‘93. Let (al,. . . ,a,) and ( b l , .  . . , b,) be 
n-tuples from A and B respectively. (al, . . . , a,) Z, ( b l , .  . . , b,) 
means that ( a l ,  . . . , a,) and ( b l , .  . . , b,) satisfy the same atomic 
formulas of first order logic. By induction on k we define (al,. . . , a,) 
Zk+l (b,, . . . , b,) if and only if (1) For all c E A there exists d E B with 
( a l , .  . . , a,, c) Zk ( b l , .  . . , b,, d )  and (2) vice versa. We shall let 
% = k  B mean that 0 Z, 0 where 0 is the empty sequence. Since 2 is finite 
and has no function symbols, for each k there is a finite set rk of 
sentences of first order logic in 9 
such that for all models % and B for 2, 
% = k  ‘23 if and only if % and B satisfy the same sentences of I‘,. 
Let cp E 1 be a sentence such that 9q 
C 9. 
It suffices to show that there 
is a k E w such that for all models % and B for 9, 
(3) ‘u = k  B and % kl cp 

2.51 
LINDSTROM’S CHARACTERIZATION OF FIRST ORDER LOGIC 
133 
implies B k, cp. When (3) is proved, it will follow that cp is equivalent to a 
boolean combination of sentences in r,, and the proof will be complete. 
Suppose (3) fails for all k E w .  Choose models a,, B, such that (4) 
‘21, 
= k  B,, ‘21, klcp, and Bk k/icp. We next adjust the models 91, so that 
there is a model ‘21 for 2 which has each 3, as a submodel. By taking a 
subsequence we may assume that all the ‘21, 
satisfy the same atomic 
sentences of 2. By the Isomorphism Property, we may also assume that 
all the 
have the same interpretations of the constants of 2. Then the 
union of the models ‘21, is a model ‘21 for 2 which has each a, as a 
submodel. We may also take the ‘21, so that each set A ,  is disjoint from 
w. As in the preceding proof, let ‘21” be an expansion of ‘21 with universe 
A U A‘ and extra relations A’, F, F’ where A’ is the set of finite 
sequences of elements of A ,  and the functions are given by F(a, b )  = ab, 
F’(a, b )  = ab. We make similar assumptions for the B, and form the 
union B and expansion B”. We may now form an expanded model Q 
from the sequences of ’21, and 8, of the form 
0 = (a”, B‘’, R, S, o, 
G ,  I), 
where R and S are relations such that for each k E w, 
A ,  = { a  E A : R(a, k ) } ,  B, = { b  E B : S(b, k ) } ,  
A; = { u  E A’ : R(a, k ) } ,  B; = { b  E B’ : S(b, k ) } ,  
and for each kE w ,  Z(k,a, b )  holds if and only if aZ,b. As in the 
preceding proof, by the Closure, Quantifier, and Relativization Prop- 
erties there is a sentence 8 E 1 which holds in 6 and implies that ( w ,  s )  
is a simple order with immediate successors and predecessors except for 
the first element, and (4) holds for all k E w. By countable compactness, 
8 has a model 
0- 
= (‘21-, Be, 
R-, Se, 
w ” ,  ce, 
I-), 
such that { w - ,  s”) 
has a nonstandard element H .  Then in terms of I ^ ,  
(5) 91”- kl cp, BHe L/ i c p ,  and ‘21”- ~
~
2
3
~
~
.
 
It follows that the relation J 
between rn-tuples given by 
( a , ,  . . . ,u,)J(b,, . . . ,b,) iff ( a l , .  . . , ~ ~ ) l ~ ~ - ~ ( b , ,  
. . . , b,) 
is a partial isomorphism between 
and BH-. But then by Proposition 
2.5.3 and the hypothesis that 1 has Lowenheim number w, ‘?IH- and BH* 
are I-elementarily equivalent, contrary to (5). Therefore (3) holds and 
the proof is complete. -I 

134 
MODELS CONSTRUCTED FROM CONSTANTS 
[2.5 
Theorem 2.5.4 shows that if we go beyond first order logic, we must 
give up one of three things: countable compactness, the Downward 
Lowenheim Skolem Theorem, or the properties of an abstract logic. 
There are good examples of each possibility. The logic 1( Q,) obtained 
from first order logic by adding the quantifier “there exist infinitely 
many” is an abstract logic which has Lowenheim number w but is not 
countably compact. Another such logic is the logic f,,,,,, which is like first 
order logic except that it allows countable conjunctions and disjunctions. 
The logic f( Q,) obtained from first order logic by adding the quantifier 
“there exist uncountably many” is an abstract logic which is countably 
compact but has Lowenheim number w,. There is a logic ltop (e.g. see 
Flum and Ziegler (1980)) which is not an abstract logic in the above 
sense because it deals with models with topologies, but is countably 
compact (in fact fully compact) and has Lowenheim number w .  
There are several other results which characterize first order logic in 
the style of Lindstrom’s Characterization Theorem, and use similar ideas 
in their proofs. Some of these results are stated as exercises. 
EXERCISES 
2.5.1. The Hunfnurnber of an abstract logic 1 is the least cardinal a such 
that every sentence of f which has a model of power at least a has models 
of arbitrarily large power. (Thus the Upward Lowenheim Skolem 
Theorem shows that first order logic has Hanf number w ) .  Show that 
every abstract logic 1, such that for every finite 9 
the class { cp E f : LfV C 
9} 
is a set, has a Hanf number. This is the upward analogue of 
Proposition 2.5.2. 
2.5.2. Prove that first order logic is the only abstract logic which has 
Lowenheim number w and Hanf number w. 
2.5.3. An abstract logic 1 is said to pin down the ordinal a if there is a 
sentence cp E 1 and unary and binary relation symbols U and R in 9q such 
that cp has a model, and every model of 
cp is such that ( U ,  R )  is 
isomorphic to ( a ,  S ) .  Show that if 1 is either countably compact or has 
Hanf number w ,  then f does not pin down w. 
2.5.4. Prove that first order logic is the only abstract logic 1 such that any 

2.51 
LINDSTROM’S CHARACTERIZATION OF FIRST ORDER LOGIC 
135 
pair of partially isomorphic models is I-elementarily equivalent, and 1 
does not pin down w. 
2.5.5. A sentence cp in an abstract logic I is said to be 1-valid if 9l L I  cp for 
every model 3 whose language contains zV. 
Prove that if an abstract 
logic 1 pins down o, then there is a finite 9 
such that the set of 1-valid 
sentences cp with Yq 
C 2’ is not r.e., and in fact is not even arithmetical. 
Hint: You may use the fact that the set of first order sentences which 
hold in the standard model of arithmetic is not arithmetical. 
2.5.6 (Lindstrom’s Second Theorem). Prove that first order logic is the 
only abstract logic with Lowenheim number w such that for each finite 
language 2, the set of 1-valid sentences cp with zV C 2’ is r.e. (or even 
arithmetical). 
2.5.7*. Prove that first order logic is the only abstract logic 1 such that 1 
has Lowenheim number w and the Robinson Consistency theory holds 
for 1. 

CHAPTER 3 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
3.1. Elementary extensions and elementary chains 
Given two models %, B for 9, 
we have already defined the two notions 
of % = B ((21, '$3 are elementarily equivalent) and 91 c '8 (BI is a submodel 
of 8). 
Thus the natural combination of these two notions will lead to models 
which are submodels or extensions of an elementarily equivalent model. 
For example, the model (w\(O}, < ) is a submodel of ( w ,  < ), and, since 
they are isomorphic, they are also equivalent. However, the element I is 
the first element of w\{O}, while it is the second element of w. An elementary 
submodel is a far stronger notion, namely a submodel of a given model 
in which the elements in common shall have exactly the same first-order 
properties with respect to both models. Let us repeat the definition. 
and for all formulas (7 of 2 
in the variables xI, ..., x,, and all elements a l ,  ..., a, in A, we have 
% is an elementary submodel of '$3 iff '21 c 
I1 t q[a, ... a,] 
iff % k q [ a ,  ... a,]. 
If BI is an elementary submodel of %, then c8 is an elementary extension 
of %. Apart from some simple properties of elementary submodels and 
extensions, we shall answer in this section the following questions: 
(1). How can we tell if a model 2l is (isomorphic to) an elementary 
submodel of another model B? 
(2). Are there any restrictions on the cardinalities of elementary sub- 
models and extensions of a given model %? 
(3). When can two or more models have a common elementary extension? 
(4). Can the notion of elementary extensions be iterated into the trans- 
finite? 
We use the notation % < B to denote % is an elementary submodel 
of '$3. For convenience, the notation B > % is also used to mean 'II < 23. 
136 

3. I] 
ELEMENTARY EXTENSIONS AND ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
137 
Let X C A .  We let (a, a)aeX, or ?Ix, denote the obvious expansion of 2i 
to the language Lfx = Lf U {c, : a E X }  with new constants c,. 
PROPOSITION 
3.1. I .  
(i). Zf?i < %, then PI E %. 
(ii). 91 < ?l. 
(iii). If?[ < 23 and 'H < Q, then 91 < &. 
(iv). If?[ < Q, 
93 < 0. and 91 c 8, then '21 < 93, 
The proof is a simple exercise. 
PROPOSITION 
3.1.2. ?I < 9 if and onlji if 91 c 123 and for all forndas 
(3x)cp(xx, ... x,,) in xI , ..., x,, and all a , ,  ..., a,, in A, 
if% 
k 3xcp[a, . . . a,,], then there is an a E A such that % k cp[aa, . . . a,,]. 
PROOF. We prove the nontrivial direction by the following induction on 
formulas cp: Whenever cp is in the variables x l ,  ..., x,, and a,, ..., a,, in A, 
then 
PI k cp[a, ... a,,] iff 'H k q[a, ... a,,]. 
The induction is easy to carry out for atomic formulas, and for going 
through sentential connectives. In the crucial step of going from ~ ( x ,  
. .. x,,) 
to (3x1)cp(x2 ... x,,), we note the following: Given u 2 ,  ..., a,,EA, if 
BL k (3x,)cp[a2 ... a,,], then there is an a, E A such that 91 t q[a, ... a,,]. 
By induction, 23 k q [ a ,  ... a,,], whence '23 k (3x,)cp[a2 ... a,,]. On the other 
hand, i f 8  k (3x,)cp[a2 ... a,,], then by hypothesis, there is anal E A such that 
23 t q[a, ... a,,]. So by induction, M k q[a, ... a,,], and BI k (3x1)cp[a2 ... a,,]. -I 
We recall that an elementary embedding of M into 'H is an isomorphism 
f of % onto an elementary submodel of %, in symbols f :  
% < '8. Recalling 
the use of the notation % '2 23 for 3 embedded in %, we shall use the 
notation % ? 23 for 91 elementarily embedded in '8. 
Let 2A 
= 2 
u {c. : a E A}. The elementary diagram of M is the theory 
Th(%,) of all sentences of L?A which hold in the model a,, = (a, a)aeA. 
(Recall that the diagram of PI is the set of all atomic and negated atomic 
sentences of Y A  
which hold in MA.) 
PROPOSITION 
3.1.3. Let rA be the elementary diagram of M. Then M 7 8 
if and only if some expansion '8' of % is a model of f A .  
If 91 c %, then 
% < 'H if and only if (B, a).eA k rA. 

138 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.1 
PROPOSITION 
3.1.4. Let 8 be any nonempty set of elementarily equiva- 
lent models. Then there exists a model % such that every model % E 8 is 
elementarily embedded in 8. 
PROOF. For each '91 E 8, 
let rA be its elementary diagram. We first make 
sure that if '$1 # 81', then the sets of constants (c, : a E A }  n (c, : a E A'} = 0. 
Let A = Uat5rA. 
We claim that A is a consistent set of sentences of 
Ucu&PA. Suppose {cpl, ..., cp,} 
is a finite subset of A .  We may suppose 
that for i +,j, 'pi and 'pi come from different '9"s. Then there are formulas 
cp',, ..., cp; 
in the variables xl, ..., x ,  and elements aij E: A i ,  1 < i < n, 
I ,< .j 6 m, such that '91i E 5 and 
'pi = qi(ca,, ... ca,J, 
I < i < n. 
Then the sentence (3x, ... x,,,)cp; A (3x, ... x,,,)cp; A ... A (3x, ... x,)cpl will 
hold in %,, since 91i E 91j, 1 < i,j < n. This shows that {cpl, ..., cp,} 
is consistent. By the compactness theorem, A has a model B'. Let '$3 
be 
the reduct of %' to the original language 2. 
Then Proposition 3.1.3 shows 
that each '$l E '3: is elementarily embedded in %. i 
THEOREM 
3.1.5. Every injinite model % has arbitrarily large elementary 
extensions. 
PROOF. Let r be the elementary diagram of 9l. By the Lowenheim-Skolem- 
Tarski theorem, r has arbitrarily large models, and the result follows 
from Proposition 3.1.3. i 
Theorem 3.1.5 may be regarded as a strengthening of the Lowen- 
heim-Skolem-Tarski theorem. Curiously, the following very special case of 
Theorem 3.1.5 is not easy to answer: Does every infinite model '$l have a 
proper elementary extension of the same power? The answer is simple if 
II-YpII ,< (A1 (see Exercise 3.1.6). We shall give some more complete answers 
later in the book. 
Our next theorem is a strengthening of the downward Lowenheim- 
Skolem-tar ski theorem. 
THEOREM 
3.1.6. Let 9l be a model of power a and let 11LZ'Il < j? < a. Then 
% has an elementary submodel of power fl. Furthermore, given any set X c A 
of power < j?, 9l has an elementary submodel of power j? which contains X. 

3.11 
ELEMENTARY EXTENSIONS AND ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
139 
PROOF. We may assume that X has power p. For each formula 
cp(xx, ... x,) and each n-tuple a,, ..., a, E X such that 9l k (3x)cp[a, ... a,,], 
choose an element b E A such that B k cp[ha, ... a,,]. Let XI be the set X 
plus all the b’s so chosen. Since 1x1 = /I and 1194pII < B, XI has power p. 
Now repeat the process countably many times, forming a chain 
X c x, c x, c .... 
Let B = Un<wX,,. B is closed under the functions of 8. Each X, has power 
8, so B has power p. Let B be the submodel of ‘II with universe B. Con- 
sider a formula cp(xx, ... x,) and an n-tuple b,, ..., b,, E B such that 
?i k (3x)cp[b, ... b,]. 
For some m < w, we have b , ,  ... , b , € X , .  Then there exists b€X,,,+, 
such that 9l C q[bb, ... b,]. Thus b E B, and by Proposition 3.1.2 we have 
B 4 9 l . i  
As an immediate consequence of the above theorem, we see that if T 
has a model 91 of power a which omits a set of formulas Z(x), and if 
lldplI 6 8 < a, then T has a model B of power p which omits Z(x). Any 
B < B of power 
will do. 
PROPOSITION 
3.1.7 (Loi-Vaught Test). Suppose that a consistent theory T 
has only infinite models and T is a-categorical for some infinite cardinal 
a 5 11311. Then T is complete. 
PROOF. It is sufficient to show that any two models 9( and ‘23 of T are 
equivalent. Since T has only infinite models, both ‘3 and 8 are infinite. 
Whence by the Lowenheim-Skoleni-Tarski theorem (both downward and 
upward) there are models %’, @’ 
of power a such that ‘!I = ?I’ and 23 = 8’. 
Since T is a-categorical, 91’ 2 8’, 
so 91’ E 8’ 
and ?I = 8. i 
For example, the following theories are categorical in some infinite 
(I). The theory of dense simply ordered sets without endpoints; w- 
(2). The theory of atomless Boolean algebras; o-categorical. 
(3). The theory of algebraically closed fields of characteristic zero (or p ) ;  
power and have no finite models, so they are complete. 
categorical. 
a, 
-categorical. 

FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
(3.1 
(4). The theory of infinite Abelian groups with all elements of order p ;  
a-categorical for all u. 
( 5 ) .  The theory of countably many unequal constant symbols; wl- 
categorical. 
(6). The theory of a one-to-one function of A onto A with no finite cycles; 
w1 -categorical. 
We now turn to the second main topic of this section, the elementary 
chain construction. A chain of models is an increasing sequence of 
models 
140 
a, c 211 c ... c a, c ...) 
B < a, 
whose length is an ordinal a. The union of 
the chain is the model 
2l = u,<ol(zIB 
which is defined as follows: The universe of (II is the set 
A = U B < a A , .  Each relation R of ?I is the union of the corresponding 
relations of N,, R = U,<.R,. Similarly, each function G of 
is the union 
of the corresponding functions of Up, G = Ua<BGP. 
The models '11, and (II 
all have the same constants. 
Here is a simple lemma: 
LEMMA 3.1.8. Given a chain 21p, /3 <a, of models, Up<m(up 
is the 
unique model with universe U p<aAp which contains each (zip as a 
submodel. 
When we iterate the notion of an elementary extension we arrive at the 
notion of an elementary chain. An elementary chain is a chain of models 
210 4 ?Il 4 ... < 91, 4 ..., 
/? < a, 
such that 217 4 9, whenever y < /3 < a. 
For example, if for each n < w, a,, is the algebraically closed field of 
characteristic zero and transcendence degree n over the rationals, then 
2llJ 4 
81 4 ... 
is an elementary chain. The union a, of this chain is an algebraically closed 
field of characteristic zero and transcendence degree w. In fact, we have 
%,, < 'u, for each n. 
The following theorem is the analogue of 3.1.8 for elementary chains. 
In spite of its simple character, it is a very important construction. 
THEOREM 
3.1.9 (Elementary Chain Theorem). Let 216, 5 < a, be an 
elementary chain of models. Then (21, < u 
for all 6 < a. 

3.11 
ELEMENTARY EXTENSIONS AND ELEMENTARY CHAlNS 
141 
PROOF. Let 91 = ur<or%t. 
We prove the following assertion by induction on 
formulas cp: for all formulas cp in xl, . . ., x,, all t < a, and all elements 
a , ,  . . ., a, E A ,  9 
a, C cp [a, . . . a,] iff a t cp [a, . . . a,]. 
The proof is routine for atomic formulas. The induction steps involving 
sentential connectives are also quite easy. Assume that cp = 3x,$ is a for- 
mula in x,, . . ., x,, < < a, and a,, . . ., a, E A,. If %, t= q[a2 . . . a,], then 
there is an al E A ,  such that 9lr t. $[al . . . a,,]. So, by induction, Yl C $[al 
. . .a,] and 8 C q[a, . . . a,]. On the other hand, if 91 C cp[a2 . . . a,], then 
for some q < a and a, E A we have a,, . . ., a, E A,, and 
C $[al . . . a,]. 
Since ?Ir, t < u, is a chain, we may assume that t 5 q. As a , ,  . . ., a, all 
belong to A,,, by induction, a,, C $[a, . . . a,], so 91,, C q[a2 . . . a,]. Since 
k cp[a2 . . . a,]. i 
< ?Ir, we have, finally 
Here is an example which shows that we cannot replace < by = in the 
elementary chain theorem. Let a0 = (0, <) be the natural numbers 
with the usual ordering. For each n, form an by adding n new elements 
to the beginning of the ordering (w, < ). Then 
a0 c a, c a, c ..., 
and for each n we have a,, E go and, in fact, a,, z Ylo. However, the 
union flu = un<u’21,, 
is an ordering which has no first element. Therefore 
To illustrate the value of elementary chains we shall use them to give a 
third proof of the Robinson consistency theorem, which was stated as 
follows: 
Let 9, 
and 9, 
be two languages and let 22’ = Y1 n 9,. Suppose 
Tis a complete theory in 9 
and T, =I T, T, 2 Tare consistent theories 
in Y1, Y 2 ,  
respectively. Then TI u T, is consistent in the language 
In Section 2.2 we proved the Craig interpolation theorem and then 
used it to obtain the Robinson consistency theorem, and in Section 2.4 
we gave a second proof of the Robinson consistency theorem using 
recursively saturated models. We now give a third proof of the Robinson 
consistency theorem, which is essentially Robinson’s original argument. 
For the proof, let go and B0 be models of T, and T,. To simplify notation 
in the proof, let 
am f ao* 
9, 
u 9 2 ,  
2l=gB, 
f : % < y B  

142 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.1 
mean that the 2-reducts of II and B are elementarily equivalent, and that 
fis an elementarily embedding of 819 into 819. 
Since 91015? and Bo19 are models of the complete theory T, we have 
go = 980. It follows that the elementary diagram of %,,15? 
is consistent 
with the elementary diagram of Bo. Therefore there are an elementary exten- 
sion Bl > Bo and an embedding f l  :ao< Bl . Passing to the expanded 
language YAor 
we have 
(a0 
9 a ) a ~ A o  
YAo 
9 f a ) a e A o *  
Repeating the construction in the other direction, we obtain an elementary 
extension 911 > a0 and an embedding 
Then g;' is an extension offl. Iterating the construction we obtain a tower 
a0 <a1 <a, < ... 
Y 1s 
tPt 
8 0  < 8, < 8, < 
f m C g i ' C f m + l ,  
Jrn:?4m-l 
< y @ m r  
gm:Brn<9arn* 
such that for each m 
Let I( = 
M = 
Then 
is a model of TI and 8 is a 
model of T,. Moreover, Urnc,fn is an isomorphism of 9412 onto B ( 9 .  
Then 23 is isomorphic to a model B' such that ?(IL?' 
= 8'19. 
Piecing ?I 
and '21' together, we obtain a model 6 for Yl u 9, 
with Q I 9 ,  = a, 
61Y2 = 9'. 
Then Q is a model of T, u T,. -I 
A construction which is very similar to the construction of elementary 
chains is that of a partial elementary chain. This notion lies between the 
notions of a chain of models and of an elementary chain of models. It is 
useful in obtaining some results in model theory (see Theorem 3.1.11 and 
some of the exercises for this section). In order to describe the construction 
precisely, let us now formally introduce the notions of Z: and Ilt formulas. 
Let 9' 
be fixed for the following discussion. A formula cp of 3 is a 
?2: = Il: formula iff cp contains no quantifiers. Proceeding inductively, 
a formula cp of Y is a E:+~ (resp. 11,0+~)formu/a 
iff cp = (3x1 ... x,,,)$ 
(resp. (Vx, ... xrn)$), where $ is a n: (resp. Zc,") formula. Obviously, every 
prenex formula is eitherax: or II: formula for some n. A Ec," (resp. II:) 

3.11 
ELEMENTARY EXTENSIONS AND ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
143 
formula that is a sentence is called a 72: (resp. II:) 
senfence. Existential 
sentences are Ey sentences; universal sentences are n(: sentences; universal- 
existential sentences are IIg sentences, and so forth. 
23 is said to be a I;: exlension of ?I iff for all E: formulas cp(x, . . . x,) and 
all a,, ..., a, E A ,  
if 
2l 1 ~ [ a ,  
... a,], 
then 23 b q [ a ,  ... a,]. 
A E:-chain of models is a chain of models 
c 91, t ... c 91, c ...) 
p < a, 
such that for each p < y < a, ?ly is a E: extension of ?I, . Every extension 
of a model is a E: extension, whence every chain of models is a Ey-chain. 
The next lemma is the analogue of the elementary chain theorem. 
LEMMA 3.1.10 Let !?,Ip, p < CY, be a X:-chain of models and let '21 = 
u 
p<o (21,. 
Then 
(i). ?i 
is a C,O extension of each go. 
(ii). Every II;, , sentence which is true in all 2l, is true in 2l. 
PROOF. We argue by induction on n. The result already holds for n = 0. 
Assuming the result for n -  1, we prove it for n. Let 
(I/ = (3x, ... x,)q(x, ... x,y, ... y,) 
be a Z: formula, where cp is II: - , . Suppose 6 ,  , . . ., 6, E A, satisfies IC/ in 91,. 
Then for some a , ,  ..., a, E A,, we have 
a, b cp[a, ... ambl ... bp]. 
Let Y = {a,, ..., om, b , ,  ..., b,} andconsider theC:-chain %,,,, 
c ?I,+ , ,, c ... 
with union !?Iy. The ng-, sentence q(a, ... u,bl ... 6,) holds in every model 
of this chain and by inductive hypothesis also holds in 81,. 
Therefore 
'$1 b (3x1 ... x,)q[6, ... b,]. 
This proves that 91 is a I;: extension of H,. 
To prove (ii), consider a II:,, 
sentence (Vx, ... x,)O 
which holds in all 
a,,, where 0 is a E: formula. Let a,, ..., a,€ A .  Then for some p < c1, 
a,, ..., a, E A , .  These elements satisfy 0 in a,, and therefore they satisfy 
0 in 2l. Therefore (Vx, ... x,)e holds in ?I. -1 
The last theorem of this section is a model theoretic proof of a theorem 
about predicate logic. 

144 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.1 
THEOREM 
3.1.11. The following are equivalent (n S O ) :  
(i). cp is equivalent both to a Z: + sentence and to a II: + sentence. 
(ii). cp is equivalent to a Boolean combination of C: sentences. 
PROOF. We leave the simple proof that a Boolean combination of 72: senten- 
ces is equivalent to a Z:+ and a II:+ 
sentence to the reader. The point is 
that vacuous quantifiers may always be added to a sentence without dis- 
turbing its meaning. 
In the other direction, assume (i). We shall first prove that given two 
models '21 and 23, 
(1) if every Z: sentence holds in '21 if and only if 
So let a, 23 be models for which the hypothesis of (1) holds. We shall construct 
a Z:-chain of models 
such that 
(2) ak = '21 and 
%k = 23 for all k EO. 
Suppose we have constructed the finite Z:-chain 
it holds in 23, then '21 'F cp if and only if 23 I= cp. 
= ?lo c 8 0  t 81 c 231 ... c ak 
%k 
... 
'210 c 230 c ... c '21, 
c B,, 
so that (2) holds for all k < m. Let T be the collection of all Z: sentences 
of 9 
u {c, : b E B,} which hold in 23,. We can show that given any finite 
subset of T, we may take its conjunction, then existentially quantify out the 
new constants, and in this way obtain a 72: sentence I) of 3' which holds 
in 23,. 
Using the hypothesis of (l), this sentence I) holds in a. So 
T u Th('21) is consistent and has a model 
Tt is easy to verify that 
'210 ,= 231 c ... 23, c am+ 
1 
is still a Z:-chain. Exactly the same argument applied to am+ will give us 
the next model 23m+l in the Z:-chain. 
Suppose that cp holds in '21, then cp 
holds in '11, for all k. Since cp is IIf+I, by Lemma 3.1.10, cp holds in 
Uk.o'21& = U k E o B k .  If cp does not hold in 23, then its negation i 
cp is 
(equivalent to) a 11:+1 sentence holding in 23. So again by Lemma 3.1.10, 
i 
cp holds in U k s o B k ,  which is a contradiction. So (1) is proved. 
From (1) we now argue as follows: If (ii) is false, then for any finite 
collection of Z: sentences, say ol, ..., om, 
we can find two models '21 and 23 
such that 
(3) 
'211 cp, B'Ficp, and %Ca, iff 
23'F ni, 
1 < i < m. 

3.11 
ELEMENTARY EXTENSIONS AND ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
145 
This is seen as follows: Consider the 2" conjunctions CJ = o; 
A ... AD;, 
where each a; is either oi or i 
oi. Some such conjunction o must be con- 
sistent with both rp and i 
rp. For otherwise we have k o + rp or k o + i 
rp 
for all such CJ, and propositional logic will show that rp is (equivalent to) 
a finite disjunction of such o's, so (ii) would be true. Now from (3), a simple 
application of the compactness theorem will yield two models 91 and B 
such that 9i, % are equivalent with respect to 72: sentences, but not equivalent 
with respect to rp, contradicting (1). i 
Theorem 3.1.11 is true even when n = 0, provided that 2 has constant 
symbols. 
EXERCISES 
3.1.1. Let '2 t 23. Suppose that for all elements a,, ..., a, E A and b E B, 
there is an automorphism of B onto B which leaves fixed a, ,  ..., a, but 
maps b onto some element in A .  Then B < 23. 
3.1.2. Let a and p be infinite cardinals such that a S p and a is regular. 
Show that there is a model 
of complete arithmetic which has cardinali- 
ty p and cofinality a. 
3.1.3. Let Y( be a ring (see Example 1.4.9), and let ?Ix, 91, be polynomial 
rings over 'II with indeterminates x E X and y E Y. Show that if X c Y and 
X is infinite, then ax < a,. 
3.1.4. Let (0, 1) denote the set of all rationals between 0 and 1, and let 
[0, 1) = (0. 1) u (0). Let M = ((0, l), 6 ) and B = ([0, l), 6 >. Let 91' 
be the union of N, disjoint copies of 'II and N, disjoint copies of 23, and 
let B' be the union of No disjoint copies of ?l 
and N, disjoint copies of 23. 
(The union of models ( A i ,  Ri), i E I ,  with binary relations Ri, is defined as 
the model ( U i s , A i ,  UiErRi).) 
Then 
(i). 9i' and B' are isomorphically embedded in each other. 
(ii). Neither of the models BI', 8' is elementarily embedded in the 
(iii). a' = B', and hence (from Proposition 3.1.4) %' and B' are both 
other. 
elementarily embedded in some fixed model &. 
3.1.5. Let a, B be models for 9. 
The following are equivalent: 

146 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.1 
(i). There are a model B and two elementary embeddingsf of 91 into 6 
and g of 8 into B such that 
f r A n B = g r A n B .  
(ii). (% a).eA n B 
(
8
9
 a)oeA n B e  
3.1.6. If 119’11 < ( A J ,  then 
has a proper elementary extension of the 
same power. 
3.1.7*. Assume the GCH. Regardless of ll9ll, show that every infinite 
model 
has an elementary extension in each power 
> IAl. 
3.1.8. A prenex sentence is a universal-existential sentence, or simply a 
Wsentence, iff all of its universal quantifiers (if any) precede all of its 
existential quantifiers (if any). Clearly every universal or existential sentence 
(see Exercise 1.3.5) is a V3-sentence. Prove that if cp is a V3-sentence and 
a, k cp for each member of the chain BI,, 5 < ci, then us<391c k cp. (This 
is a special case of Lemma 3.1.10.) 
3.1.9. A binary relation D on a set I is said to be directed iff for all i ,  , i, E I, 
there is an i, E I such that i, Di, and i2 Di,. A collection of models Ui, i E I, 
is directed iff there is a directed relation D on I such that for all i, j E  I, 
if 
iDj, then ai c 91,. 
Show that a meaningful definition can be given to Uie,9li. Furthermore, 
each ‘?Ii c Uie,9li. 
Extend both Exercise 3.1.8 and the elementary chain theorem to directed 
families of models. 
3.1.10”. A class K of models is said to be closed under unions of well ordered 
chains iff every union of a well ordered chain of members of K is again a 
member of K. Similarly, we can define the notion K is closed under directed 
unions (see Exercise 3.1.9). Prove that a class K of models is closed under 
1inior.s of well ordered chains iff it is closed under directed unions. 
[Hint: Use induction on the cardinality of the directed set.] 
3.1.11. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language, let (B, <) 
be the full binary tree, and let ?Is, s E B be a set of models of T such 
that: 
(i). A complete type is realized in both 
and ‘21, if and only if it is 
realized in 2lxn,; 
(ii). If s < t then there is a complete type which is realized in 3, 
but 
not in !?Is; 

3.21 
APPLICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
147 
(iii). If s < t then ?Is <at. 
Prove that T has 2" pairwise nonisomorphic countable models. 
3.1.12. Show that if T has a model of power a which omits a type 
2(xlx,x3 . . .) and 11211 G p < a, then T has a model of power p which 
omits 2(x,x,x3 . . .). 
3.1.13. Suppose that T has a model which omits a type 2(xl . . . x,,), and 
every such model has a proper elementary extension omitting 
2(xl . . . x,,). Prove that T has models of arbitrarily large cardinality 
which omit 2(xl . . . x,,). 
3.1.14. Suppose 2 has the binary relation S .  A model ?I = ( A ,  S ,  ...) 
for 2 is said to be well ordered iff G well orders A .  Show that if T has a 
well ordered model of power a, and 112ll G p < a, then T has a well 
ordered model of power p. 
3.1.15. Suppose that T is finitely axiomatizable and in some infinite 
power a, T has at most a finite number of nonisomorphic models of 
power a. Prove that for some n E w, every formula cp is equivalent under 
T to a X: formula $. 
3.1.16* (The reflection principle). Let cp be a sentence in the language of 
ZFC. Prove within ZFC: If cp then for every ordinal a there is an ordinal 
p > a such that ( R ( P ) ,  E ) kcp. [Hint: See the appendix on set theory 
for notation. The sentence cp has only finitely many subformulas. Take p 
to be a limit of a countable increasing sequence of ordinals p,, such that 
for every subformula $(x, . . . x,, y )  of cp and all a,, . . . , a, in R( p,,), if 
(3y)$(al ... a,, y )  then ( 3 y  ~ R ( p , + ~ ) ) @ ( a ~  
... a,, 
y). The proof that 
( R ( @ ) ,  
E ) Lcp is like the proof of Proposition 3.1.2.1 
3.2. Applications of elementary chains 
In this section we shall give several applications of elementary chains 
which illustrate their power in model theory. 
We start with some examples of 'preservation theorems'. We say that 
a theory T is preserved under submodels iff any submodel of a model of T 
is a model of T. T is said to be preserved under unions of chains iff the union 
of any chain of models of T is a model of T. T is preserved under homo- 
iviorphisms iff any homomorphic image of a model of T is a model of T. 

148 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTKUCTIONS 
[3.2 
TABLE 
3.2. I 
Preserved under 
_ _  -~ 
---- 
- 
Theory 
Submodels 
u 
chains 
Homomorphisms 
Partial order 
yes 
Boolean algebras 
yes 
Dense simple order 
no 
Atomic Boolean algebras 
no 
Groups 
no 
Groups with symbol for --x 
yes 
Commutative rings 
no 
Integral domains 
no 
Fields 
no 
Fields and one-element rings 
no 
Algebraically closed fields 
no 
(3x)(vy)R(w, Y )  
no 
Peano arithmetic 
no 
ZF 
no 
The preservation theorems are results which characterize those theories 
which are preserved under submodels, union of chains, etc. There are 
several results of this type. We shall give three here and a few more in 
Chapters 5 and 6. 
The status of some familiar theories with respect to preservation is shown 
in Table 3.2. I .  It is a rather remarkable fact that these preservation phenom- 
ena can be explained just by the syntactical form of the axioms. 
We shall use the following general lemma. 
LEMMA 3.2. I .  Let T hc a consistent theor), in 9 and let A he a sct of sentences 
of’ 5 O  which is closed rinder finite disjiinctions. Tlicn the following are 
eqiiiralent : 
(i). T has a set of axionis 
(ii). If ?I is a rnodel of T and erler), sentence 6 E A n31iicli liokds in ?I holdr 
in %, then ‘H is a niodd of T. 
siich that 
c A .  
PROOF. It is obvious that (i) implies (ii). Assume (ii). Let r be the set of all 
sentences cp of 9’ 
such that T 1 cp and cp E A .  Then T k r. We show that 
r k T, whence r is a set of axioms of T. Let ‘H be a model of r. Let Z be 
the set of sentences 
X = { 1 6 : % 1 ~ 6 , 6 ~ A } .  
We show that Z u T is consistent. T is assumed to be consistent. Suppose 
T u Z is inconsistent. Then there exist i 
6 , ,  ..., i 
6, E Z, n 3 I ,  such that 

3.21 
APPLICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
T 1 i 
(1 6, A ... A i 
6,). Hence 
T 1 6 , v  ... v6,. 
149 
Since A is closed under v , we have 6, v ... v 6, E A, whence 6, v . .. v S, E r 
and 
!8 k 6, v ... v6,. 
But this contradicts 8 k i 
6, , ..., 9 
I= i 
6,. Hence t; u T is consistent, and 
has a model ?I. Then every sentence 6 E A which holds in !?I holds in ‘H, 
because otherwise (1 6) E 1. -I 
Our first and simplest preservation theorem below uses only the 
compactness theorem, not elementary chains. 
THEOREM 
3.2.2. A theory T is preserved under submodels if and only if T 
has a set of universal (i.e., lly) axioms. 
PROOF. It is easy to check that if T has a set of universal axioms, then T 
is preserved under submodels. Assume T is preserved under submodels. 
We apply Lemma 3.2.1, with A the set of all sentences equivalent to IIy 
sentences. Consider two models U != T and 8 such that every universal 
sentence which holds in U holds in 8. Then every existential sentence true 
in 113 is true in U. Consider the theory T‘ = T u As, in the language p,, 
where A, is the diagram of 23. The theory T‘ is consistent, because, for any 
finite set 
{O,(b, ... b,,), ..., O,(b, ... b,)} c A,, 
the existential sentence 
( ] X I  ... X , ) ( O , ( X ,  ... X,)A ... AO,(X, 
... X , ) )  
holds in %, hence in a, and hence is consistent with T. Let 6’ = Q, be 
a model of T’. Then 8 is a submodel of B, and 65 is a model of T. Hence 
9 is a model of T. By Lemma 3.2.1, T has a set of universal axioms. i 
The next preservation theorem does use elementary chains. 
THEOREM 
3.2.3. A theory T is preserved under unions of chains if and only 
i f T  has a set of universal-existenfiat (i.e., II;) axioms. 
PROOF. (e), 
For the easy direction, let r be a set of I-I; axioms for T 
and let ?lp, p c a, be a chain of models of T with union fl = us<z’!I,. 
Con- 
sider a sentence 
y = (VX, ... x,3y, ...y,)$( x, ... x,y, ... y,) 

150 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCnONS 
[3.2 
in r, where $ has no quantifiers. Each PI, is a model of y. Let a,, . .., a, E A. 
For some 
< LY, we have a,, ..., a, E A,. Then there exist b , ,  ..., 6, E A, 
such that 
a, k $[a, ... ambl ... b,]. 
a k $[a1 ... ambl ... b,], 
It follows that 
whence ?l satisfies y. Hence ?l is a model of r, and thus of T. 
(a). 
Now assume T is preserved under unions of chains. Let A be the 
set of all sentences which are logically equivalent to IT: sentences. Then A 
is closed under finite disjunctions. Suppose ?l and ‘23 are models such that 
?l k T and every IT: sentence true in ?l is true in 8. 
Then every E: sentence 
true in B is true in 8. We shall prove the following: 
(1) There are models ?l’ 
and B’ such that ‘23 c a’, PV c B’, 
% < %’ and 
To prove ( I ) ,  we add a new constant cb for each b E B, forming the model %@ 
and language 2ZB. Let T ,  be the complete theory of PI in 9, 
and T, the set 
of all universal sentences of 2ZB which hold in BE. Then TI u T, is con- 
sistent, because up to equivalence T, is closed under conjunction, and for 
any $(cb, ... cbn) in T,, the E! sentence (3y, ... y,)$ holds in ‘23, and hence 
in a. Let 
91 E a’. 
flb = (a’, b)bcB 
be a model of T, u T2. Then ?l = a‘ and B c 8’. Moreover, every 
universal sentence of 9, 
true in BB is true in fl;, whence every existential 
sentence true in 9lh is true in BE. Now expand the language further by adding 
a new constant c,, for each a E A‘ \ B. Then the theory 
D(ah) u Th(BB), 
the diagram of 
has a model (B’, 
u),,~,,,. Then ?l’ c 8’ and ‘23 < B’, 
so (1) is proved. 
plus the elementary diagram of Brr, 
is consistent. It thus 
Iterating (1) we obtain a chain 
‘B = 8 0  c PI, c B1 
c ?l, c ... 
such that for each n, 
a,, = PI and B, < B,,, . 
Let 9I, be the union of this chain. Since each fln is a model of T, ?lo, 
is 
a model of T. However, a, is also the union of the elementary chain 
Therefore by the elementary chain theorem, B,, < PI,, 
so B = 
is 
8 0  4 B, < 232 < .... 

3.21 
APPLICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
151 
also a model of T. By Lemma 3.2.1, we conclude that T has a IIg set of 
axioms. -I 
A formula cp is said to be positive iff it is built up from atomic formulas 
using only the connectives A ,  v and the quantifiers V, 3. 
THEOREM 
3.2.4. A consistent theory T is preserved under homomorphisms 
if and only if T has a set of positive axioms. 
PROOF. ( ). Let us first check the easy direction. A formula q ( x ,  . . . x,,) 
is preserved under homomorphisms iff for any homomorphism fof a model 
2l onto a model ‘23 and all a,, ..., a,,€ A ,  if 91 k cp[a, ... a,], then 
% != cp[fa, ...fa ,,I. It suffices to prove that all positive formulas cp are 
preserved under homomorphisms. This is done by induction on the com- 
plexity of cp. It obviously holds when cp is atomic and passes over v and A .  
Assume cp(xx, ... x,,) is preserved under homomorphisms. First, suppose 
2l C (3x)cp[a, ... a,,]. Then for some a E A ,  we have 2l k cp[aa, ... a,,], 
!I3 k cp [fa fa, ...fa ,,I, 
and hence % k (3x)cp [fa, ...fa ,,I. 
Now assume 
3 k (Vx)cp [a, . . . a,,]. Let b be any element of B. Then for some a E A we have 
b = fa.ThusBCcp[aa, ... a,,],%bcp[bfa, ....fa ,,],and% k (Vx)cp”fa, ....fanI- 
Therefore (3x)q and (Vx)cp are preserved under homomorphisms. 
(-). We now prove the hard direction. Let ‘2lposB mean that every 
positive sentence true in 2l is true in B. We show first that: 
(1) If 91 pos 2, 
then there exist an elementary extension %’ > 23 and an 
embeddingf: ?I -+ 9’ 
such that (a, a)seA pos (B’,~u),~~. 
To prove (I), we add new constants c,, a E A ,  and db, b E B. Let T, be the 
set of all positive sentences of 9 
u {c, : a E A )  true in 91”. Let T2 be the 
set of all sentences of 2’ u {db : b E B )  true in 8,. Then T, u T2 is con- 
sistent because 91 pos B. Let (B’, a’, b)osA, 
be a model of TI u T2; 
T2 shows that 9’ 
> 8. Let f be the embeddingf(u) = a‘; T, shows that 
A similar argument can be used to prove the following dual of (1): 
(2) If 91 pos B, then there exist an elementary extension 2l’ > ‘2l and a 
mapping g : B -+ A’ such that (a’, gb),,, pos (8, b)bE,. 
Now let 910, Bo be models such that ?lo k T and ?lo pos Bo. Iterating (1) 
and (2), we obtain a tower 
(K Q)osA POS (B’Lb),&4 * 
a0 < 2l, < %2 < ... 
YtX f B 2  
23, < 23, < 232 < ... 

152 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.2 
Let a, 
= U,<,%,,, 8, = un<,Bn be the unions of the elementary 
chains and f, = Un<,fn. Then f, is a homomorphism of go, into %?,. 
f, maps A ,  onto E, because g;’ c f, for each n. By the elementary 
chain theorem, a, > go, B, > Bo, whence $!Io, 
is a model of T. But T 
is preserved under homomorphisms, so Bw 
C T and hence B0 k T. Then, 
by Lemma 3.2.1, T has a set of positive axioms. i 
These three preservation theorems explain the phenomena in Table 3.2.1. 
The usual formulation of the axioms happens to be universal for those 
examples which are preserved under submodels, 
for those which are 
closed under unions of chains, and positive for those which are closed 
under homomorphisms. Try writing down the axioms and see. 
Each preservation theorem also has a version for single sentences. 
COROLLARY 
3.2.5. A sentence is presrraed under (a) subniodels, (b) uriioris 
of chains, (c) homomorphisms, if and only if it is logically equicalent lo a 
sentence which is (a) unioersal, (b) universal existential, (c) positirie or logi- 
cally false, respectively. 
PROOF. We prove (a) as an illustration. Every universal sentence is 
preserved under submodels. Suppose a sentence cp is preserved under 
submodels. Then the theory T = {q) has a set r of universal axioms. We 
have f != cp, so by the compactness theorem, there are sentences y I  , . . ., y,, E r 
such that y1 A ... A yn C cp. There is a universal sentence y equivalent to 
y1 A ... A yn. Then y C cp. But since r k y, we have cp k 1’. whence cp is logically 
equivalent to y. i 
We shall now strike out in a different direction, working towards a 
generalization of the Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem which involves two 
cardinals. For the remainder of this section we shall work with countable 
languages. 
Recall from Chapter 2 that a countably saturated model \2( is a countable 

3.21 
APPLICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
153 
model which is o-saturated, or, in other words, for all finite X c A ,  the 
model (PI, a),Gx realizes all types C(x) in its theory. We also proved the 
important Theorem 2.3.7, one direction of which states that if a complete 
theory T (which is countable) has at most a countable number of types, 
then T has a countably saturated model. We shall give below another proof 
of this result using elementary chains. 
PROPOSITION 
3.2.6. Let T be a complete theory in a countable languagc 2'. 
Suppose that for each n, T has only countably many types in ti cariables. 
Then T has a countably saturated model. 
PROOF. Let '21 be any countable model. An elementary extension Y > 91 
is said to be countably saturated oiw i!l iff '23 is Countable and for every 
finite subset Y c A ,  every type T ( x )  in Th(i!lUy) 
is realized in SY. 
Now let 91,, be a countable model of T. We shall find an elementary 
extension Pll > M, which is countably saturated over ?lo. 
Let X c A, be a finite subset of A ,  and let C(x) be any type in x of the 
theory of (a,, a),,,. Since there are only a countable number of types of T, 
there are only a countable number of types C(x) of the theory of (a,, a)oEx. 
Since there are only a countable number of finite subsets X of A, altogether, 
the number of such types C(x) is at most countable. Let czx be a new constant 
symbol for each such X c A and Z. Let 
To = (elementary diagram of 91, 
in 9 
u {cn : a E A , } )  u {Z(czx) : X a 
A standard argument will show that every finite subset of To is consistent. 
So To is consistent in the countable language 9 
u {c, : a E A,} u (czx}. 
Let Bl be any countable model of To, and let '?Il be the reduct of '$3, to 2'. 
We may suppose that 911 is an elementary extension of a,. Then 
is coun- 
tably saturated over 2,. We now repeat the procedure on the model 81,, to 
obtain a countable elementary extension PIz of M, which is countably satu- 
rated over MI, etc. 
finite subset of A,, and Z(x) a type of (?lo, a)&,}. 
Consider the elementary chain 
'21, .< a, < PI, ... 
) 
and let '21 -- Une,,,M,. M is still a countable model of T. We claim that 81 
is w-saturated. Let X be a finite subset of A = U n c w A n .  There exists an n 
such that X c A,. Let Z(x) be any type of the theory of (a, a),,,. Then 
because 
(M,,+, a),,, < (91, a)oeX, C(x) is a type of the theory of 
(Pi,,, ,, a)oex. Whence some b E A,, , realizes Z in (a,+ ,, a),,, . It follows 
that b realizes C in (PI, a),eX. i 

154 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.2 
Note that the above construction will yield a countably saturated 
elementary extension of any countable model of T provided T has only a 
countable number of types. The construction breaks down in the case where 
T has a noncountable number of types. It turns out that practically the same 
construction will always yield a countable elementary extension which 
satisfies a somewhat weaker, but nevertheless useful, property. 
Our next application is concerned with an analogue of the Lowenheim- 
Skolem-Tarski theorem. Recall that (foracountable Y), 
if a theory Thas an 
infinite model, then T has an infinite model in each power. Thus every 
theory Twill fail to distinguish between infinite cardinals. We can now ask 
the question whether a theory T will distinguish between pairs of infinite 
cardinals, in the following sense: Let the language 2 have a I-placed 
relation symbol U. Let ?( be a model for 9, 
and let V be the interpretation 
of U in ?I. Thus we may display ?I = ( A ,  V ...). ?I is said to be an (3, 8)- 
model iff IAl = a, IVI = p. We say that a theory T admits the pair of 
cardinals (a, /I) iff T has an (a, /I)-model. The question is: 
If Tadmits ( r ,  p), then what other pairs (a', p') must Tadmit? 
The following proposition sums up all the simple properties that we can 
prove with the machinery available to us at present. First some notation: 
Let N,,(a) be defined by induction on n as follows: No(a) = a, K,,+l(a)= 
[N,,(a)]'. Similarly, let >,,(a) be defined by ao(a) = a, and a,,+ l ( a )  = 2'"("). 
PROPOSITION 
3.2.7. Let T be a theory in a countable language 9, 
and let 
a, p, y range over infinite cardinals. Then: 
(i). If T admits (a, p), then T admits (y. b)for all y such that a 2 y 2 /I. 
(ii). I f T  admits (a, p), then T admits all (y, y). 
(iii). For each n E w, there is a theory Tsuch that T admits every (>,,(a), a) 
and T does not admit any (>,,(a)+, a). 
(iv). For each n E w, there is a theory T such that T admits every (Nn( a), a )  
and T does not admit any (N,,+ ,(a), a). 
PROOF. (i). Suppose that 2l = ( A ,  V . . . )  is a model of T with IAl = a 
and I VI = p. Let y be such that a 2 y 2 p. Let X be any subset of A of 
cardinality y and such that V c X .  2l has an elementary submodel 
'23 = ( B ,  W . . . )  such that B 3 X and IEI = y. Since W = V n B = V, 
we have 1 WI = /I. 
(ii). By (i) we already know that T admits (p, p). Say 2l = ( A ,  V . . . )  
is a model of T with IAl = IVI = p. Let 9' = 9 
u { F } ,  where F is a 
new 1-placed function symbol. Let T' be the theory in 9' consisting of all 

3.21 
APPLICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
155 
the sentences of T together with a single sentence which says: Fis a one-to-one 
mapping of the universe A onto V .  Then T' is consistent and has an 
infinite model, namely the expansion 9' = (a, G), where G is any one-to-one 
function of A onto V. By the Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem, T' has a 
model in every infinite power y. Obviously, the 9-reducts of these models 
of T' are (y, 7)-models of T. 
(iii). We shall illustrate the proof with the case n = 1. Suppose 9 has 
a 2-placed relation symbol E, as well as the I-placed relation symbol U. 
Consider the following sentences of 9: 
( V X Y ) ( X  = Y * (\Jz)(E(zx) * E(ZY))), 
( V X ) ( l  W X )  --* @Y)(E(YX) 
-+ U(Y>)). 
Intuitively, these two sentences say that every element x not in U determines 
a subset U, of U by the set of ally such that E(yx), and, if x # y, then 
U ,  # U,. A moment's thought will show that if the interpretation of U 
in a model has cardinal a, then the cardinal of the model is at most 2". 
Whence the theory Tgiven by the above two sentences will admit (aI(a), u )  
for all a, but will not admit any (>,(a)+, a). An iteration of this idea will 
prove (iii). 
(iv). We leave (iv) as an exercise for the reader. Its proof is slightly more 
subtle than the proof of (iii). -I 
We shall need the following simple result about elementary chains of 
countably homogeneous models. 
PROPOSITION 
3.2.8. 
(i). The union of any countable elementary chain of countably 
homogeneous models is countably homogeneous. 
(ii). A type in finitely many variables is realized in the union of an 
elementary chain if and only if it is realized in some element of the chain. 
(iii). The union of any countable elementary chain of pairwise iso- 
morphic countably homogeneous models is isomorphic to each member of 
the chain. 
PROOF. (i) and (ii) are straightforward and are left as an exercise. To 
prove (iii), let 
a < p be such a chain and let '21 be the union. Then 
by (i), '21 is countably homogeneous. By (ii), since all the %?la are 
isomorphic, they realize exactly the same types as '21. Then by Exercise 
2.4.8, %=aa. 
-I 

156 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.2 
THEOREM 
3.2.9. If a countable theory T admits (a, p )  with a > p 2 w ,  
then T admits (wl, w ) .  
PROOF. We shall use the notion of a recursively saturated model intro- 
duced in Section 2.4. For simplicity we give the proof only for recursive 
languages 2'. However, the proof can be readily extended to arbitrary 
countable languages by using the notion of a recursively saturated model 
relative to 2, 
as explained at the end of Section 2.4. 
Let % = ( A , V , . . . )  be a model of T with IAl=a, (Vl=p. By 
Theorem 3.1.6, we find an elementary submodel B of '21 such that B 3 V 
and IBI = p. Let T' be the theory of the model ('21, B). By Theorem 
2.4.1, T' has a countable recursively saturated model (a,, Bo). Let Bo 
be the submodel of a,, with universe B,. Then Bo is a proper elementary 
submodel of a,,, and in both a, and B, the interpretation of the unary 
predicate symbol U is the same. By Exercise 2.4.16, the model pair 
(ao, 
Bo) is recursively saturated. Then by Theorem 2.4.5, 
and B, are 
partially isomorphic, and since they are countable they are isomorphic. 
Let us call a proper elementary extension CS > C' neat if CS is isomorphic 
to Q' and the interpretation of U is the same in CS as in CS'. Then 
is a 
neat extension of B,,. Hence any model isomorphic to Bo has a neat 
extension, and in particular any neat extension of B0 has a neat 
extension. Since the model pair is recursively saturated, 23, is recursively 
saturated, and by Proposition 2.4.3, Bo is countably homogeneous. By 
Proposition 3.2.8 (ii), the union of any countable chain of neat exten- 
sions of Bo is again a neat extension. Therefore there is an uncountable 
chain B,, 5 < w1 of neat elementary extensions of 23". The union 6 of 
this chain has power w1 but still has the same interpretation of U than '23, 
has, and is thus a model of T of type (wl, w )  as required. -1 
The proof above gives an extra fact which we state as a corollary. 
COROLLARY 
3.2.10. Let T be a countable theory which has a pair of 
models 
= ( A ,  V, ...), 
93 = ( B ,  V ,  ...) 
such that 93 is a proper elementary submodel of a, but V is infinite and is 
the same set in % as in a. Then T admits (wl, w). 
The analogue of the downward Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem for 
two cardinals is the following statement, known as Chang's conjecture: 

3.21 
APPLICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
157 
Every model of type (a, p), o < p < a, has an elementary submodel 
We shall see in Chapter 7 that this statement cannot be proved in ZFC, 
and can be disproved if we assume the axiom of constructibility. The 
next theorem lies between Theorem 3.2.9 and Chang’s conjecture. Its 
proof depends on the omitting-types theorem. 
of type (q, 
0). 
THEOREM 
3.2.11. Let % = ( A ,  V ...) be a model such that w G IV( < IA(. 
Then there are two models 8 = ( B ,  W ...) and 0 = (C, W ...) such that 
23 <%, IBI = w , B  < EaHdICI =ol. 
(Note that the set W remains the same in !I3 and E.) 
PROOF. By the downward Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem we may al- 
waysassumethat (A1 =IVI+,soIAIisaregularinfinitecardinal. Let Q beany 
well ordering of the set A of type IAI, and we may assume that the set V t A 
under the well ordering i 
is aninitial segment oftype I VI. Let a , ,  ..., a,, E A. 
We note that in the model (‘21, < ), if there are arbitrarily large a E A such 
that for some b E V, ‘21 t $[baa, ... a,,] holds, then there is a fixed b E V 
such that there are arbitrarily large a~ A such that ‘21 t $[baa, ... a,,]. 
This is because IAl is regular. In other words, the following sentence holds 
in (a, 6 ) (where $(xyu, ... u,,) is an arbitrary formula of 9): 
(1) 
(VUt ... U , , ) [ ( v Z j y X ) ( Z  < .YA u ( X ) A $ ( X J ’ U ,  ... 0,)) 
+ ( j X v Z 3 y ) ( Z  < y A  u ( X )  A $(XJW, . . . U,,))]. 
We now prove the main step of the theorem: 
(2) 
every countable model (B,, < ,) = (‘21, < ) has a countable proper 
elementary extension (Bl, < ,) such that the interpretations of U 
in 8, and in B, are the same. 
So let B0 = (B,, W . . . )  be a model such that (B,, G o )  3 (‘21, Q ) .  Note 
that 6 , 
need not be a well ordering relation on B,. Let 2.2” be the expansion 
of 9 
by adding { 6 ,  c} and {c, : b E Bo}. Let T consist of the elementary 
diagram of (B,, 6 ,) plus the collection of all sentences {cb < c : b E Bo}. 
Let C ( X )  be the set of formulas { V(x)} u { x  f cb : b E W } .  We now look 
for a model of T which omits C. First, note that T is a consistent theory 
in a countable language, because, given any finite subset of T, it is possible 
to find an interpretation of c in the model (B,, < ,) which lies beyond all 
elementsb E B, such that c, occurs in this finite set. We next verify that 
T locally omits C. 

158 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.2 
Let Bz be the expanded model (@o,<o,b)baBo. 
We first observe that a 
formula $ ( c )  of 9‘ 
is consistent with T if and only if $(y) is satisfied by 
arbitrarily large elements of %!I:, that is, 
8; 
k (VX jy)(X < J’A $(.Y)). 
Suppose (3x)O(xr) is consistent with T. Then either 
(3) 
or 
(4 1 
(3x)(O(xc) A U ( x ) )  is consistent with T. 
tf (3) holds, then we have found a formula O(X) in ,Z such that O(xc) A i 
O(X) 
is consistent with T. So let us assume that (4) holds. Then 
(3x)(O(xc)~ 
i U(x)) is consistent with T 
8; 
k ( V Z  3yX)(Z < y A u(X) A o(Xy)). 
Using the equivalence of (V,, < o) and (91, < ) and ( I ) ,  we see that 
%; 
k (3X VZ 3Y)(Z < y A u(X) A o(Xy)). 
Then, for some b E W ,  
whencc 
9; k (vz 3y)(Z < y A u(cb) A o(cby)), 
B: k ( V Z  3y)(Z < Y A  (3x)(O(xy) A x 
cb)). 
This shows that (3x)(O(xc)~x 3 cb) is consistent with T. But x $ cb 
belongs to I;, so we have proved that T locally omits 1. 
By the omitting types theorem, T has a countable model 23’ omitting Z. 
The reduct of 23’ to the language of (B0, < ,) is a model 
(%I, Gb) > (Bo, $0) 
such that there is an element b E BA \ B,, and the interpretation of U in 
both Bo and 23; is the set W .  So ( 2 )  is proved. We now construct an 
w,-termed elementary chain of countable models (%<, <<), 5 < w ,  , such 
that each (8<, 
< <) = (a, < ), B,, , \ B, # 0, and the interpretation of U 
in each Bt is W .  The model 8 = u,<o,8~ 
is a model of T with IBI = o, 
and IWl = o. i 
Here is an example which shows that 8 cannot be an arbitrary 
countable elementary submodel of 3 in Theorem 3.2.11; that is, it 
cannot be strengthened to: 
If 3 = ( A ,  V, ...) is a model of type (a, fl), where o < fl < a, then 
every countable elementary submodel 8 = ( B ,  W ,  ...) of 91 has an 
elementary extension 0. = (C, W, .. .) of power w ,  with the same set W. 

3.21 
APPLICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
159 
n 
Let 91 = ( A ,  V, V ,  , V 2 ,  E, F )  be constructed as follows: We first draw 
a picture and then explain the details. Let Z be the set of all integers, I a set 
of power w, and J a set of power w ,  , which is disjoint from I. Let 
A = ( I x Z )  u ( J x Z ) .  
E is the equivalence relation over A whose classes are 
I x  {n}, 
J x  {n}, 
n E Z .  
Thus E has w countable classes and w uncountable classes. V ,  is the 
equivalence class Z x  {O}. Fix an element i, E I and j, E J. V2 is the set 
v2 = ( { i O } X Z )  u ('301 X Z ) ,  
which contains exactly one element from each class of E. V is the countable 
set V = V ,  u V z .  Finally, F is the function given by 
F ( ( i , n ) )  = ( i , n + l ) ,  
i E I u J ,  
~ E Z .  
F maps A one-to-one onto A ,  and is an automorphism of the model 
( A ,  V.2, E ) .  
Let 23 be the submodel of 3 with universe B = I x Z .  Then 23 is countable. 
Using the compactness and elementary chain theorems we can see that both 
aB and aB have elementary extensions 3; and 8; 
with o1 equivalence clas- 
ses each of power w , ,  and 2lk E' %;. 
It follows that 8 < 2l. 
The set corresponding to V in 23 is 
W = V, u (V2 n B). 

160 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.2 
If Q = ( C ,  W, ...) is an elementary extension of 23, then we must have 
0. = 23, because for each c E C there is a b E V ,  n B with cEb, and there is 
an n E Z such that in '$3, F" maps V ,  onto the equivalence class ofb. Therefore 
'$3 has no proper elementary extension with the same set W. 
We conclude with an application of Theorem 3.2.11 to omitting types. 
COROLLARY 
3.2.12. Let T be a theory in a countable language and 2(x) 
a set of formulas. Suppose T has a model ?I of type (a, fi), w < fi < a, 
which omits C(x). Then T has a model of type ( w ,  , o) which omits C(x). 
PROOF. Let C ( x )  = {a,(x), a , ( x ) ,  ...}. We may assume that w is a subset 
of V .  Let R be the binary relation on A such that R(n, x )  holds if and only if 
n E w and 
t a,[x]. Expand the model '21 to 
a* = (W, R, W ,  0, I ,  2, ...). 
Then since % omits C ( x ) ,  
(1) 
But for each n, 
(2 ) 
%* t (Vx)(R(rz, x )  4-i a,(x)). 
Now let B* < %* and Q* > B* with B* countable, Q* of type ( w , ,  o)), 
and U having the same interpretation in B* as in Q*. Then in '$3* and a*, 
%* t i 
(3xVu)(w(u) + R(u, x)). 
w = (0, 1, 2, ...}. 
Moreover, Q* E a*. It then follows from (1) and (2) that Q* omits 
C(x). Thus the reduct Q of Q* to 2' is a model of T of type (a,, 
w )  which 
omits Z(x). i 
Finally, we give an example to show that the following stronger form 
of Corollary 3.2.12 is false. 
If 
has a proper ele- 
mentary extension omitting C(x), then % has an uncountable elementary 
extension omitting C(x). 
is a countable model which omits C(x) and 
EXAMPLE 
3.2.13. Let 
a = ( A ,  v, F, a)o.v, 
where V is a countable set and F is a binary function mapping V x  V 

3.21 
APPLICATIONS OF ELEMENTARY CHAINS 
161 
one-to-one onto A \ V. We represent F by a ternary relation because it is 
undefined outside V x  V. Th(8) is o,-categorical. Let 'x3 be the extension 
93 = ( B ,  w, 
G, a),,, 
of 9, 
where W = V u {bo} has one extra element and G maps W x  W 
one-to-one onto B\, 
W. 
Then 23 is a proper elementary extension of 8 
because they have isomorphic elementary extensions of power ol. 
Both 
8 and 23 omit the set of formulas Z(x) which says that x is outside U and 
x is the image of a pair of distinct elements which are not constants a E V. 
Formally, 
Z(X) = (1 (3y)(F(ya) = x) : a €  V >  u (1 (3z)(F(az) = x) : U E  V }  
u (1 V(x)} u {(3y3z)(y f Z A  F(yz) = x)}. 
However, any uncountable elementary extension of '% realizes Z(x). 
This example was suggested independently by Gregory, MacKenzie and 
M orley. 
EXERCISES 
3.2.1. Prove that a theory T is preserved under extensions if and only if T 
has a set of existential axioms. 
3.2.2. Prove that a consistent theory T is preserved under both homo- 
morphisms and submodels if and only if T has a set of axioms which are 
both universal and positive. 
3.2.3. Use the preservation theorems to prove that every theory which is 
preserved under submodels is preserved under unions of chains. 
3.2.4*. Let To be any theory. A theory T is said to be preserved under 
submodels relative to To iff for any two models 91, '23 of To, if '% i= T and 
23 c 8, then % 1 T. Prove that T is preserved under submodels relative 
to To iff T u To has a set of axioms of the form r u To, where r is a set of 
universal sentences. Prove similar relativized preservation theorems for 
unions of chains, homomorphisms and extensions. 
3.2.5. Use Exercise 2.4.19 on recursively saturated models to give 
another proof of the preservation theorem for submodels, Theorem 
3.2.2. 

162 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.2 
3.2.6. Use Exercise 2.4.20 on recursively saturated models to give 
another proof of the preservation theorem for homomorphic images, 
Theorem 3.2.4. 
3.2.7. Let 2I0 be a countable model and let Bo be an elementary 
submodel of a0. Then the model (ao, 
B,) has an elementary extension 
(a, B )  such that 
B where '23 is the 
submodel of % with universe B. 
is countably homogeneous and 
3.2.8. Prove Proposition 3.2.8 (i) and (ii) on countably homogeneous 
models. 
3.2.9. Prove that every w-homogeneous model has acountably homogeneous 
elementary submodel. 
3.2.10. If 91 is countably homogeneous, % g a, B is countable, and every 
type T(xl ... x,) realized in '$3 is realized in 21, then '$3 is elementarily 
embedded in a. 
3.2.11. Give the proof of Theorem 3.2.9 for arbitrary, not necessarily 
recursive, countable languages 3. 
3.2.12*. Let 91 = (wl, <, R,, 
R 2 ,  ...) be a model in a countable language. 
Prove that 
is the union of an elementary chain a,, a -= ol, of countable 
models such that each A, is an initial segment of w l ,  i.e., a countable 
ordinal. 
3.2.13*. Let T be a theory in a countable language. Prove that if every 
finite subset of T admits (wl, w), then T admits (wl, w). 
3.2.14. Prove that every countable model of ZF has an uncountable 
elementary end extension. Similarly for Peano arithmetic. (See pp. 82, 91). 
3.2.15. Let T be the theory with axioms stating that: 
6 is a linear ordering, 
that is, F(x, z) maps U onto the set { y  : y < x}. Prove that Tadmits (a, p), 
where w < /3 < a, if and only if either a = p or a = B'. 
3.2.16*. Suppose that 2' has at least the I-placed relation symbols 
U,, 
U2 ,..., U, ,.... LetTbeatheoryofL?withamodel% = ( A ,  V I V  ,...) 

3.31 
SKOLEM FUNCTIONS AND INDISCERNIBLES 
163 
suchthatod 1V.l < ~A~foralln.ProvethatThasamodeIB 
= ( B ,  W ,  W , . . . )  
such that lBI = w1 and I W,,l = o for all n. 
3.2.17*. Show that the corresponding generalization of Theorem 3.2.11 
to the situation described in Exercise 3.2.16 does not hold. That is, there is 
no countable elementary submodel !I3 of 
having an elementary extension 
6 of power w1 such that the interpretation of each U,, is the same in ‘8 
and in 6. 
3.2.18*. Find a countable model PI = ( A ,  V ...), V c A, which has a 
countable proper elementary extension 23 = ( B ,  V . . . )  with the same V, 
but the extension !I3 has no such extension. Compare this with Example 
3.2.16. 
3.2.19*. Let ( A ,  R ...) c ( B ,  S ...) and R, S be binary relations. ( B ,  S ...) 
is said to be an end extension of ( A ,  R ...) iff B # A and for all u E A, 
b E B \ A ,  we have aSb and not bSa. Prove that every countable model 
( A ,  R ...) having an elementary end extension has an elementary end 
extension of power ol. 
(Assume that 2 
is countable. This is not the same 
notion as for models of ZF or Peano arithmetic.) 
3.2.20*. In a recursive language, let T be a complete theory whose 
models are infinite. Show that T has a recursively saturated model of 
power w1 which has only countably many complete types in finitely many 
variables. [Hint: Use the method of proof of the two-cardinal Theorem 
3.2.9.1 
3.3. Skolem functions and indiscernibles 
In this section there is less emphasis on countable languages. We 
shall combine the method of constructing models by Skolem functions 
together with another important notion, namely, that of indiscernible 
elements of a model. We shall first study Skolem functions. Next we prove 
a combinatorial result known as Ramsey’s theorem. Then we apply it 
to obtain models generated from indiscernible elements, and finally give 
several applications of this notion. We shall meet this particular type of 
construction again later on in the book. 
Given a language 9, 
we expand 2’ to a new language 2’* by adding new 
function symbols. Let F be a mapping from the set of all formulas of the 

164 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCnONS 
[3.3 
form $ = (3x)cp of 2 
to a list of new function symbols F#. We assume that 
F is one-to-one and that if $ has exactly n free variables, then F, is ann-placed 
(Skolem) function symbol. We call the expansion 2 
u {F+ : $ = (3x)cp 
a formula of 2} 
a Skolem expansion of 9, 
and we denote it by 2*. 
Evidently 112*11 
= 11211. 
The Skolem theory C, 
of the language 2' in 
the language 2* 
has the following sentences of 2* 
as axioms: 
Let $ = (3x)cp be any formula of 9 
and suppose that $ has exactly the 
free variables x l ,  ..., x,,. Let y , ,  ..., y ,  be variables not occurring in $. 
Then the sentence 
is an axiom of Z,. 
(Note that cp(F,(y, ... y , , ) ~ ,  ... y,) is obtained from 
cp(xx, ... x,) by replacing all free occurrences of x in cp by the term 
F#(yl ... y,,), and all free occurrences of xi by y i . )  
Let 91 be a model for 2. An expansion 'II* of 'II to the language 9* 
is a 
Skolem expansion of 'II iff 'II* C C,. 
If T is a theory in 9, 
then the Skolem 
expansion of T, denoted by T*, is the theory T* with the set of axioms 
TvC,. 
PROPOSITION 
3.3.1. 
(i). Every model 'II for 2 
has a Skolem expansion %*. 
(ii). If T is a consistent theory in 2, 
then its Skolem expansion T* is a 
(iii). Let 91, It? be models for 2, 
let %* be a Skolem expansion of 8, 
and 
consistent theory in Y*. 
let 'II* be an expansion of % to 2*. 
If W* c %*, then 'II < 8. 
PROOF. (i). Let 'II be a model for 2. Let $ = (3x)rp and suppose that $ 
has exactly the free variables x ,  , . .., x,. We shall define the interpretation 
G, of F# in 'II as follows. First well-order A .  For any elements a , ,  ..., a, E A ,  
if 'II C $[a, ... a,], then let G#(a, ... a,) be the first element a of A 
such that 'II I= cp [aal . . . a,,]; 
if not W C $[a, ... a,], then let GS(al ... a,) be arbitrary. 
and 
It is a simple matter to check that the expansion 'II* = (W, {G, : $ = (3x)cp 
a formula of 2}) 
is a Skolem expansion of W. 
The proof of (ii) follows immediately from (i), and the proof of (iii) 
follows from Proposition 3.1.2. i 

3.31 
SKOLEM FUNCTIONS AND INDISCERNIBLES 
165 
Let %* be a Skolem expansion of %, and let X c A. The Skolem hull of 
X in %* is the smallest set Y such that X c Y c A ,  Y contains all the 
constants in %, and Y is closed under all functions in %*. We let H ( X )  
denote the Skolem hull of X ,  and @ ( X )  the corresponding submodel of % 
determined by the set H(X). 
PROPOSITION 
3.3.2. Let %* be a Skolem expansion of %, and let X c A. 
Then the Skolem hull @ ( X )  is an elementary submodel of 8. Furthermore, 
I W ) l  G 1x1 u I I a I .  
PROOF. If we lct @(X)* denote the model determined by H ( X )  in the 
model %*, then it is evident that $(A/)* t %*. Since @(X)* is an expansion 
of $(X) to 9*, 
the result follows from Proposition 3.3.l(iii). i 
A theory T in 9 
has built-in Skolem functions iff for every formula 
$ '= (3x)q with exactly the variables xl, ..., x, free, there is an n-placed 
term t+ of 9 such that 
T I- (Vyl ... .Y,)("(Y~ ... Yn) + V(t+(Y, ... Yn)YI ... J'n)). 
(The variables y , ,  ..., y, do not occur in II/ or in f9, and $(y, ... y,), 
q(t+(y, ... y,)yl ... y,) are the obvious formulas obtained from $(xl .... x,) 
and ~ ( x x ,  
. . . x,).) 
PROPOSITION 
3.3.3. If a theory T has built-in Skolem .functions, then T is 
model complete, i.e., whenever 9l, 23 are two models of T and % c 'H, then 
'3 <B. 
PROOF. Since 9l is a submodel of 23, 9l is closed under all terms t9 of 9. 
Thus the result follows from Proposition 3.1.2. i 
PROPOSITION 
3.3.4. Let T be a theory in 9. Then there are an expansion 2 
of 2' and an extension T of T (T a theory in 9) 
such that T has built-in 
Skolem functions. Furthermore, every model of T has an expansion which 
is a model of T. 
PROOF. Starting from the language 9 
= -Yo, we define an increasing 
sequence of expansions Y, by letting Y,+ 
= (9,)*. 
Note that for each n, 
the Skolem theory .ZYn is a set of sentences of 9,+ 
1 .  Let 2 
= U, 9, 
and 
let T have the set of axioms T u UnZ9.. Because every formula of 3 

166 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.3 
involves at most a finite number of symbols, we see that T has built-in 
Skolem functions. An induction based on Proposition 3.3.1 will prove that 
every model of Thas an expansion which is a model of 73. -I 
In order to simplify the argument for Ramsey’s theorem, we shall first 
give a small glimpse into Section 4.1 by introducing the notion of an 
ultrafilter on a countable set. This notion is not strictly necessary for the 
argument, but it will make the ideas much clearer. The student may, if he 
wishes, go on. ahead and read about filters and ultrafilters in Section 4.1; 
however, the next few paragraphs are sufficient for an understanding of 
the material in this section alone. 
Let Z be a nonempty set. A collection D of subsets of Z is called an 
ultrafilter over I iff for all A’, Y c I: 
(a) 
X E D  and X c  Y implies 
Y E D ;  
(b) 
X, Y E  D implies X n Y ED; 
(c) 
X E  D 
if and only if I\ 
X $  D. 
D is called a nonprincipal ultrafilter iff, in addition to (a)-(c): 
(d) 
For all i E  I, { i }  4 D. 
From (a)-(d), 
we can draw the following immediate simple properties of 
nonprincipal ultrafilters D over I .  From (a)-(c), it follows that D # 0, 
and Z E D  and 0 4 D. From (b), it follows that I must be infinite, for if 
I = {i,. ..., i,#}, then by (d) and (c) we have 
I\ 
{ i i }  E D for 
1 < j < n. 
If we now use (b) a finite number of times, we see that 0 E D, which is a 
contradiction. 
A collection E of subsets of I has the$nite intersection property iff no 
finite intersection of elements of E is empty. Clearly, an ultrafilter D over Z 
has the finite intersection property. The following proposition characterizes 
those families with the finite intersection property which are ultrafilters 
over I. 
PROPOSITION 
3.3.5. Let I be a nonempty set. Then the following are equivalent: 
(i). D is an ultrafilter over I .  
(ii). D has the finite intersection property, and is maximal with respect 
to this property, i.e. if E is any collection of subsets of I having the finite 
intersection property, then D is not a proper subset of E. 

3.31 
SKOLEM FUNCTIONS AND INDISCERNIBLES 
167 
(iii). D is nonernpfy, 0 $ D, D satisfies ( a )  and (6) above, and whenever 
X v  Y ~ D , t h e n e i t h e r X ~ D o r Y ~ D .  
PROOF. (i) => (ii). If D is a proper subset of E, then some X c Z will be 
such that X E  E and X $  D .  It follows that I\ 
X E  D, so I\, 
X E  E, and 
(I\ 
X) n X = 0. This is a contradiction of the fact that E has the finite 
intersection property. 
(iii). Clearly 0 4 D .  Also D # 0, for the set {I} has the finite 
intersection property. Let 
(ii) 
E = { Y  c I: for some X E D ,  X c Y } .  
E evidently includes D and has the finite intersection property. So D = E, 
whence D satisfies (a). Similarly, if we let 
E = { Z  c I: for some X, Y E  D, Z = X n  Y } ,  
then again D = E. So D satisfies (b). 
Finally, suppose that X u  Y E  D. We claim that one of the two sets 
D u { X } ,  D u { Y )  has the finite intersection property. This will show that 
either X E D or Y E  D. Suppose, on the contrary, that there are X ’ ,  Y’ E D 
such that X’ n X = 0 and Y’ n Y = 0. Then 
0 = (X’n X )  u (Y’n Y )  = (X’ u Y ’ )  n ( X ’  u Y ) n ( X u  Y ’ )  n ( X u  Y ) .  
Each of the terms on the right belongs to D, and hence their intersection 
(= 0) belongs to D, which is a contradiction. 
(iii) 3 (i). Since I E D, one and exactly one of X, I ‘\ 
X belongs to D. 
So (c) holds. i 
PROPOSITION 
3.3.6. There is a nonprincipal ultrafilter owr anq’ infjrritc set I .  
PROOF. We shall use Proposition 3.3.5 (ii). Let 
E = {I,\ 
X : X is a finite subset of I > .  
Then because I is infinite, E has the finite intersection property. Given any 
chain of families of subsets of I ,  E j ,  j E J ,  such that E c E j  and each Ej 
has the finite intersection property, we see that u j c J E j  is again a family 
of subsets of I with the finite intersection property. Therefore, by Zorn’s 
Lemma, there is a maximal extension D of E. By Proposition 3.3.5 (ii), 
D is already an ultrafilter over I. Since E c D, no finite subset of Z can 
belong to D, so D is nonprincipal. i 

168 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.3 
Given a set A', we let [XI" 
denote the set of all subsets of X with exactly n 
elements. S,(X) denotes the set of all finite subsets of X. Clearly 
S,(X) = une,[X]". Suppose that X is simply ordered (strictly) by the 
relation < . Then there is a one-to-one correspondence between elements 
of [XI" and strictly increasing n-termed sequences x1 < ... < x, from X. 
THEOREM 
3.3.7 (Ramsey's Theorem). Let I be an injinite set and let n E o. 
Suppose that [I]" = A, u A,. Then there is an injinite subset J c I such that 
either [J]" c A, or [J]" c A , .  
PROOF. We first assume that I is countably infinite, because any countably 
infinite subset of I will satisfy the hypothesis. Let the members of I be 
arranged in an increasing sequence, ordered by <, 
i, c i, c ... < i, c .... 
We may assume that n > 1. Let D be any nonprincipal ultrafilter over I. 
Note that for all m, ( i  E I : i,,, < i }  E D. For each r c n, we shall define 
two subsets A,"-' and A:-' of [I]"-' by induction on r as follows: 
A: = A, 
and A: = A , .  
Suppose that A,"-' and A;-' have beendefined so that [I]"-' c A:-' u A:-'. 
We let 
= { y ,  < ... c yn-r-l : { i E l  : y,,.-'-, 
c i and 
A!-'- 
= { y ,  < ... < y,,-'-, : { ~ E Z  : yn-r-l c i and 
A n - r - 1  
0 
{ y ,  ... y,,-'-, i }  €A",-'} E D } ,  
{ y ,  ... yn-r-l i }  €A:-'} ED}. 
Using the properties of D, we see that 
[I]" -' - 1 
An-'-1 
An-'-1 
0 
I
'
 
Proceeding in this way, we finally have I c A: u A : .  The argument now 
splits into two symmetrical cases depending on whether A: E D or A :  E D. 
Assume that A: E D. Let us define an infinite sequence 
j ,  < j ,  < ... <j, c ... 
of elements of I by induction as follows. Let j, E A ; .  Suppose that 
j, < ... < j ,  have been defined such that 
(1) 
for all r. 1 < r < n, and all y, < ... c yr from {j, ... jm}, the set 
{ Y ,  ... Y,> E 4. 

3.31 
SKOLEM FUNCTIONS AND INDISCERNIBLES 
169 
We define j,,,+, as follows. By (l), given y ,  < ... c yr from { j ,  ...j,}, 
with r < n, the set 
X, ,... ,, = { i E I  : y ,  < i and {yl ...y , ~ } E A ~ + ' ) E D .  
Since there are at most a finite number of increasing sequences of length at 
most n- 1 from the set {j,, ... j,,,}, the number of sets Xyl..,,, 
is finite, and 
so their intersection Y belongs to D. Since D is nonprincipal, we may pick an 
element j,,,,, E Y such that j,,, < jm+l. 
Now it is clear that (1) will hold 
with m replaced by m + 1. Proceeding in this way we see that the infinite set 
J = (j, ... j, ...} can be constructed. Now it is clear that any y, c ... c y,, 
from J will be such that { y ,  ... y,,} E A: = A , ,  so [J]" c A,,. 
The other case when A :  E D will give [J]" c A , .  -1 
Let Yl be a model for 9, 
and let X c A be a subset of A which carries 
a relation < that strictly simply orders X .  Note that < may or may not be 
a relation in Yl. We say that X is a set of elements indiscernible in 
(with 
respect to c) 
iff for all n and all finite sequences x ,  < ... c x, and 
y, < ... < y,, from X ,  (91, xI ... x,) = (N, y ,  ... y,,). 
If the relation c is understood, then we shall not mention it explicitly. 
We also refer to X simply as a set of indiscernibles in a. We see that the term 
indiscernible means that the sequences x ,  < ... < x,, and y, < ... c y,, 
cannot be distinguished by any first-order formula q ( u ,  ... u,,) of 2. 
By an 
ordermorphic embedding we shall mean an isomorphic embedding of one 
simply ordered structure into another. An ordermorphism of ( X ,  <) is an 
automorphism of ( X ,  <). This notation will help emphasize the distinction 
between an isomorphism of models for 9 
and an ordermorphism of sets of 
indiscernibles in the models. 
Here is a sufficient condition which can be used to obtain examples of 
sets of indiscernibles: 
PROPOSITION 
3.3.8. Let ( X ,  <) be a linearly ordered subset of a model %. 
Suppose that for any two increasing n-tuples xl < . . . c x, and y, c . . . < y,, 
from X ,  there is an automorphism f of 8 onto 
such that f (x,) = y ,  , . . ., f 
(x,,) 
= y,. Then X is a set of indiscernibles in '21. 
whence X is a set of indiscernibles. i 

170 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.3 
It follows, for example, that in any algebraically closed field of character- 
istic zero, if X is a set of algebraically independent elements, then for any 
linear ordering < of X, X is a set of indiscernibles. Other examples are 
given in Exercise 3.3.13. 
LEMMA 3.3.9. Let 2" = 9 
u {c,, : n E w}, where the c, are new constants. 
Let T be a theory in 9 
with infinite models. Then the following set T' of 
sentences of 9' 
is consistent: 
T' = T u (q(c,, ... cim) 
++ 
q ( c j ,  ... cjn) : q ( u ,  ... 0,) 
is a formula of 9, 
n E w, and i, < ... < i,,, j ,  < ... < j,} 
u {xi, = cil : i ,  # i2} 
PROOF. Let 58 be any infinite model of T, and let I be a countable infinite 
subset of A. Suppose that < well orders I, so that 
io < i ,  < ... < in < ... 
is a list of all the elements of I .  We claim that: 
(1) 
given any finite subset A of T', there is an infinite subset .IA of I 
such that for each infinite subset 
j ,  < j ,  < ... < j ,  < ... 
of J,, the expansion (91, jn)nEW 
satisfies A .  
This is proved by induction on the number of sentences in A .  So suppose 
(1) holds for some finite subset A c T' and let q ( u ,  ... u,) be a formula 
of 9. 
We now divide [J,]'" into two pieces: Let 
A, = {x, < ... < x, : x , E J ,  and % k q [ x ,  ... x,]} 
A ,  = {xl < ... < x, : X , E J , ,  and '2l t= i q [ x ,  ... x,]]. 
and 
Clearly [ J A p  c A ,  u A , .  By Theorem 3.3.7, there is an infinite subset 
K c J ,  such that either [K]" c A, or [K]" c A l .  Let k ,  < k ,  < ... < k, < ... 
be an infinite subset of K. It is easy to verify that in either case the 
expansion ('ill, 
k,),,, 
satisfies 
(P(C,, 
* ' * cs,) - 
(P(ct, * .  . CJr 
with sI < ... < s, 
and t ,  < ... < t,. tn addition, of course ('If, k,I),ELU 
still satisfies all sentences of A .  So this proves that (1) holds whenever A is 
increased by the addition of one sentence, and the induction is complete. 
The consistency of T' follows immediately from (1). -I 

3.31 
SKOLEM FUNCTIONS AND INDISCERNIBLES 
171 
THEOREM 
3.3.10. Let T be a theory in 2 
with infinite models, and let (X, < ) 
be any simply ordered set. Then there is a model 
of T with X c A and 
such that X i s  a set of indiscernibles in 8. 
PROOF. Let 9' 
= 9 
u {c, : x E X } ,  and let 
T' = T u {q(c,, ... c,") * cp(c,, ... cYn) : p(u, ... 0,) a formula of 2, 
n E w, 
and x, < ... < xn, y ,  < ... < y,, from X >  
u {-I c,, = cx2 : x, # x2 in X } .  
Since every finite subset of Xcan be ordermorphically embedded in ( w ,  <), 
we see that by Lemma 3.3.9, T' is a consistent set of sentences of 9'. 
Let a' be any model of T', and let 2€ be the reduct of 2€' to 2. Then 'i?i 
is a 
model of T. We may, without loss of generality, identify the interpretations 
of c,, x E X ,  in a'with the elements x themselves. Now, by the form of T', 
we see that given q ( u ,  ... 0,) of 9 
and x1 < ... < x, and y ,  < ... < y ,  
of X ,  we have 
31 t; q [ x ,  ... x,] 
if and only if 21 k q [ y I  ... y,]. 
So (91, x, ... x,) = (%, y ,  ... y,) and X is a set of indiscernibles in 8. i 
The fact that T has models with indiscernibles of any order type is already 
quite remarkable. We sce below that if Talso has built-in Skolem functions, 
then this construction gives us models with even more interesting properties. 
In the paragraph below, let us assume that T has built-in Skolem functions. 
We make the following simple observations about the models of T: 
We first note by Proposition 3.3.4 that every theory can be extended to a 
theory with built-in Skolem functions. If ?l is a model of T, then a Skolem 
expansion 21* of ?1 can be obtained from 2€ by simply adding some functions 
which are already definable in a, i.e., functions which are interpretations 
of terms of Y in 91. Thus there is no essential difference between ?I* and 91, 
and in all future discussions we shall consider them as practically the same 
model. Indeed, %*and (21 are exactly the same model if the Skolem functions 
of 3 are interpretations of function symbols of 9, 
as we know could be done. 
Recall also that if X c A, thcn the Skolem hull generated by Xis the model 
. g ( X )  = ( H ( X ) ,  ...), where H ( X )  is the closure of Xunder all terms of a. 
Also, Q ( X )  < a. We say that a model (21 is generated from a set of indis- 
cernibles iff for some set X c A of indiscernibles in Yf, 8 = Q ( X ) .  
The following theorem contains most of the basic and important proper- 
ties of models generated from indiscernibles. 

172 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.3 
THEOREM 
3.3.1 1. Let X be a set of indiscernibles in a model 21 of a theory T 
with built-in Skolem functions. Then : 
(a) (Subset Thcorem). If Y c X, then Y is a set of indiscernibles in XI( Y )  
with respect to the order inherited,froni X ,  and (>( Y )  < $ ( X ) .  
(b) (Stretching Theorem). Suppose that X and Y are infinite sinip/v 
ordered sets. Then there exists a model B, in which Y is a set of indiscernibles 
and the sets of formulas satisfied by increasing sequences of elements froin 
.Y in % arid froni Y in 23 are the satne. 
(c) (Automorphism Theorem). Let f he atiy ordermorpliistn of X onto X .  
Then f can be extended iiniqiielv to an aiitomorphisni of x ) ( X )  onto $ ( X ) .  
(d) (Elementary Embedding Theorem). Let Y be a set qfindiscernibles 
in 23 andsuch that the sets of formulas of 9 
satisjied by increasing seqiiences 
of elements from X and Y are the satne. Let f he a one-to-one ordermorphic 
embedding of X into Y ;  then f can be extended itniquelj~ to an clementary 
embedding3 of Q ( X )  into XI( Y ) .  The range off is H(range off). 
(e) (Realizing and Omitting-Types Theorem). Let Y, % satisfy the first 
sentence of (d). Suppose also that X and Yare infinite. Then given any type 
Z ( P ,  ... v,) of 2, @ ( X )  realizes 1 ifand only i f K ~ (  k’) realizes 1. 
PROOF. (a). We first note that $)( Y) is an elementary submodel of S ( X ) .  
It is quite clear that increasing sequences from Y satisfy the same formulas 
satisfied by increasing sequences from X. So (a) is proved. 
(b). Let C be the set of all formulas ~ ( u ,  
. . . ~ 1 , )  of 9 
satisfied by increasing 
sequences x1 < ... c x, froin X .  In an expansion -V’ 
= 9 u {c, : v E Y }  
of 9, let I’ be the set of all sentences cp(c,,, ... c,,), 
where cp E C and 
y ,  < ... < y, in Y. Then because Xis infinite, the sct C’ is consistent. From 
this we can find the model ‘$3 with the set of indiscernibles Y. 
(c) follows from (d), so we prove (d) next. 
(d). Every element J* E H ( X )  is generated from some term r(o, ... u,) 
and some elements xI, ..., x, of X .  We can assume that the term t and the 
elerncnts xi from Xcan be chosen so that t has exactly the variables u l ,  ..., u, 
free, x ,  < x2 < ... < x,, andy = t ( x ,  ... x,). (Strictly speaking, we should 
use t [ x ,  ... x,] for the value of the term t on x , ,  ..., x,. We shall dispense 
with the square brackets and pretend that t is a function.) We shall refer 
to this as a standard representation of y in .$j(X). 
Let y = t(x, ... x,) be a standard representation of y. We define 
We first show thatfis well-defined. Suppose t’(z, ... z,.,) is another standard 
representation of y. Then in Q ( X )  we have t(x, ... x,) = f(z1 ... z,,,). Let 

3.31 
SKOLEM FUNCTIONS AND INDISCERNIBLES 
173 
u, < ... < u, be a listing of the set { x I  ... x,z, ... z,} in increasing order. 
Then we may express the equality t(x, ... x,) = t'(z, ... z,) by a formula 
cp in terms of u, ... u,, SO @(X) 
C cp [ul ... u,]. By hypothesis, @ ( Y )  I= 
cp[f(u,) ...f( 
u,)]. Fromthisfollowsthat t ( f ( x , )  ...f( x,)) = t'(f(z,) ... f(z,,,)) 
in @( Y). 
Let rp(u, ... ul) be any formula of 9, 
and let y,, ..., y, be such that 
@ ( X )  C p [ y l  ... y,]. Let us take standard representations of y, , ..., y, given 
by, say, t ,  , ..., I , ,  together with a finite sequence of generators x ,  < ... < x, 
from X. We assume that each t i  when applied to an appropriate subsequence 
of x, < ... < x, gives y i .  We can now find a formula I) containing the 
terms t , ,  ..., t, and the variables u , ,  ..., u, such that 
@ ( X )  l= ~ [ y ,  
... y,] if and only if @(X) 
C $[xl ... x,]. 
Again, we have $ ( Y )  C JIIf(x,) ...f( 
x,)]. Whence by examining the form 
of JI, we see that Q ( Y )  l= cpLf(yl) . . . f ( y , ) ] .  Sofis an isomorphism. 
Ifz E H(range off), then there is a standardrepresentationz = t(yl ... y,) 
with y,, ..., y, in the range off. Let x ,  < ... < x, be in X such that 
f ( x i )  = y i .  Then f maps the element t(x, . .. x,) in H ( X )  onto z. So f is 
onto H(range off) and the result (d) follows from (a). We leave it to the 
reader to verify that f is unique. 
(e). Let X, Y, @(X), 
@ ( Y )  satisfy the hypothesis of (e). Siippose that 
zl, .. ., z, in H ( X )  realizes C in Q ( X ) .  Let zl , . . ., z, have standard representa- 
tions in @(X) and let us assume that in these representations at most the 
generators x ,  < . . . < x, from X are involved. Let f be any order-preserving 
map of x ,  < ... < x, ontoy, < ... < y,,, in Y. Then, by (d), $({X, ... x,}) r 
@({yl ... y,}), by the mappingf. So the n-tuple of elementsf(z,), ...,f( 
z,) 
of Q({yl ... y,}) 
realizes C. Since @( { y ,  ... y,}) < @(Y), we see that 
f(z,), ...,f( 
z,) realizes C also in Q(Y). The other direction is proved 
analogously. i 
Some applications of this construction are given below and in the exercises. 
COROLLARY 
3.3.12. Let 9 
be a countable language and let T be a theory 
in L? with infinite models. Then there is a countable collection A of types of 
9 
such that T has arbitrarily large models which realize exactly those types in 
A .  
PROOF. 
We first expand 9 
to 3 
and extend T to a theory Tin 
with 
built-in Skolem functions. T still has infinite models. Let X be a set of 
indiscernibles in @(A'), where @(X) is a model of Tand the ordering < on 
X is of type o. Then since 
is still countable, @(A') 
is again countable. 

114 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.3 
So @ ( X )  realizes at most a countable number of types (of 3). 
If Y is an 
infinite set of indiscernibles in @(Y) such that increasing sequences from Y 
satisfy the same formulas as increasing sequences from X, then B(Y) 
realizes exactly those types (of r) 
realized in Q(X). Such an $( Y) exists by 
the stretching theorem. The reducts of Q(X) and Q(Y) to 9 are both 
models of T and realize exactly the same types (of 9). 
-1 
COROLLARY 
3.3.13. Every infinite model has elementary extensions with 
arbitrarily large groups of automorphisms. 
PROOF. Let U be an infinite model for 9, and let U* be an expansion of 
91 whose theory has built-in Skolem functions. Let T be the elementary 
diagram of U* in the language 9* u {c,, : a E A } .  T is a theory with built-in 
Skolem functions, and T has an infinite model (a*, a),,,, . Let X be a set of 
indiscernibles in $)(X), which is a model of T. Then the reduct of <$X) to the 
language Y is an elementary extension of % with at least as many auto- 
morphisms as there are ordermorphisms on X. (See Exercise 3.3.7.) -I 
COROLLARY 
3.3.14. Let Y be a countable language and let T be a theory 
in 9 
with infinite models. Then for every infinite cardinal u, T has a model U 
of power u such that for every subset 61 c A the expanded model (a, b)b,B 
realizes at most IBI v o types in the expanded language Y v {c,, : b E B}. 
PROOF. Extend T to a theory T which has built-in Skolem functions in an 
expanded language 3. 
Let (X, <) be a well ordered set of order type u, 
and let 
= ,(?(X) be a model of T in which X is a set of indiscernibles. 
Then ‘8 has power u, because 9 is still countable. Let B c A. Choose a 
standard representation for each b E B, and let Y be the set of all y E X 
which appear in one of these standard representations. Then IYI < IBI v a. 
Let us call two sequences x1 < ... < x,,, y ,  < ... < y,, equivalent over Y 
iff for all k < n and all z E Y, we have xk # z, yk # z, and 
x k  < z iff yk < z. 
Form the expanded language 9’ 
= 9 u (c, : ZE Y}. Whenever x1 < . . . < x, 
and y ,  < ... < y, are equivalent over Y, they satisfy the same formulas 
in the expanded model (%, z),,~. It follows that for any term f(v, ... 0,) 
of Y’, the two elements f(x, ... x,,) and t(y, ... yn) realize the same type 
in the model (a, z ) , , ~ ,  whence also in the model (a, b)kB. Let U be the 
reduct of B to 9. 
Then, whenever x ,  < ... < x, and y ,  < ... < y. are 

3.31 
SKOLEM FUNCTIONS AND INDISCERNIBLES 
175 
equivalent over Y, the elements t(x, ... x,) and t(y, ... y,) realize the same 
type in the model (a, b)bs8. However, there are at most lYl u w non- 
equivalent n-tuples over Y, because if we write 
or 
x’ = least z E Y such that x < z, 
x’ = co if Y c x, 
then we see that x, c ... c x, and y ,  < ... < y, are equivalent over Y 
iff .Y; = y; , ..., x; = 1):. 
Moreover, every element of A is equal to some 
term t(xl ... x,) in the model (a, 
with x1 4 Y, ..., x, $ Y. Also there 
are at most (YI u w terms in the language 64’ of that model. It follows 
that the model (a, b)beB realizes at most IYI u o < IBI u w types. i 
EXERCISES 
3.3.1. Prove that if a theory T has built-in Skolem functions and ’% is a 
model of T, then the elementary diagram Th(%,,) also has built-in Skolem 
functions. 
3.3.2 (Skolem Normal Form Theorem). For every formula cp of 64 there 
is a universal formula + of 9” 
such that I- I) + cp and C, I- cp + +. 
3.3.3. Let a = (w, <). Show that 9.l has two Skolem expansions which 
are not elementarily equivalent in 9*. 
Thus the Skolem expansion of the 
complete theory Th(%) is no longer complete. 
3.3.4. Show that if Zis infinite and [I]” c A, u ... u A,, then there is an 
infinite J c Zand a k, 0 < k < r, such that [JJ” c A,. 
3.3.5. Show that if [I]” c A, u A, and D is a nonprincipal ultrafilter 
over Z, then we cannot necessarily draw the conclusion that there is a 
J E  D such that [J]” c A, or [J]” c A,. (n > 1.) 
3.3.6. Show that if I x  I c A ,  u A,, then there may be no infinite J c Z 
such that J x  J c A ,  or J x  J c A , .  
3.3.7. Let X be a set of indiscernibles in $j(X). Show that there is an iso- 
morphic embedding of the group of ordermorphisms of (X, 
<) into the 
group of automorphisms of @ ( X ) .  Furthermore, if the ordering c on X is 
itself definable in Q(X), 
then this isomorphic embedding is onto. (Assume 
that $ ( X )  is a model for a theory with built-in Skolem functions.) 
3.3.8. Generalize Corollary 3.3.12 to noncountable languages. 

176 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.3 
3.3.9*. Every infinite model 8 has a proper elementary extension Bo which 
has a descending chain of isomorphic elementary submodels 
Bo > 23, > ... > CA, > ... 
such that % = n,,,23,,. 
3.3.10*. Two elements x ,  y are said to have the same automorphism type 
in a model 21 iff there exists an automorphism f of '21 such that f(x) = y .  
If x ,  y have the same automorphism type in '21, then they realize the 
same types in the language of 21. Show that if 2 is countable and a 
theory T in 2 has infinite models, then T has models H of every infinite 
power (Y such that BI has at most w automorphism types, and also that 52 
has 2" distinct automorphisms. 
[Hint: Use the Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem to show that for 
each infinite cardinal (Y there is a dense linear ordering X of power (Y 
such that any two strictly increasing n-tuples in X are automorphic. Then 
take 21 to be a Skolem hull of X.] 
3.3.1 I *. In the above exercise, show that, for every infinite cardinal a, T 
has a model % of power a such that for every B c A, the model (a, b),,, 
has at most JBJ u o automorphism types. 
[Hint: Use a set of indiscernibles ( X ,  S )  where X is the set of all finite 
sequences of elements of a* + (Y and s is the lexicographic order.] 
3.3.12. Show that if (X, 
<) is indiscernible in 91 and 23 is an elementary 
submodel of 8 which contains X, then ( X ,  <) is indiscernible in '23. 
3.3.13. Use Proposition 3.3.8 and Exercise 3.3.12 to show that for each of 
the following examples, X is a set of indiscernibles in the model a: 
(1). 8 is a pure transcendental extension of a field '23, and X is a set of 
algebraically independent elements over 9. 
(ii). % is an algebraically closed field and X is a set of algebraically 
independent elements over the prime field. 
(iii). B is a free group and X is its set of free generators. 
(iv). 8 is the ring of polynomials over a ring 23 in the set of variables X. 
(v). B is the ordered set of rationals and ( X ,  <) = '21. 
(vi). B is a Boolean algebra and X is the set of all atoms of a. 
(vii). B = ( A ,  E ) ,  where E is an equivalence relation and X is one of 
(viii). 
is as above, Xis a set of nonequivalent elements, and if x, y E X, 
the equivalence classes. 
then their equivalence classes are of the same power. 

3.31 
SKOLEM FUNCTIONS AND INDISCERNIBLES 
111 
3.3.14*. Let 9.l = (A, < ...) bs an infinite model for a countable language 
in which < is P well ordering of A. Show that for every regular cardinal a > o, 
there is a model 8 E % such that 8 has an increhsing sequence of length a 
but no decreasing sequences of length a with respect to < . 
3.3.15**. Let 8 = <A, < . . .) be an infinite model for a countable language 
in which < is a simple ordering of A. Show that for every infinite successor 
cardinal a', there is a model 8 = 2l of power a+ which has no increasing 
sequences or decreasing sequences of length a+. 
[Hint: Use a set of indiscernibles whose order type has the desired 
property.] 
3.3.16*. Show that every model 2l has a proper elementary extension 8 
such that there is an elementary embeddingfof '23 into 23 with 
[Hint: 
Use a set of indiscernibles of order type a.] 
3.3.17*. Give examples of countable decreasing elementary chains 210 > 8, 
> '$I2 > ... such that: 
(i). (-),A,, is empty. 
(ii). 8 = nn21n 
is not empty, but 2l is not an elementary submodel of 
any 8,. 
3.3.18*. Give an example, for each n, of a model 2l and an infinite ordered 
set (X, <) such that X c A, any two increasing n-tuples of X realize the 
same types in 8, but there exist two increasing (n+ I)-tuples in X realizing 
different types in %. 
3.3.19*. Let % be a model for 2'. G(2l) shall denote the group of auto- 
morphisms of %. Let Z be any consistent set of sentences of 9 and let 
K(C) be the class of all groups H which are isomorphic to a subgroup of 
G(2l) for some model 2l of Z. Prove that K(Z) is the class of all models of 
a set Q, of universal sentences in the language of group theory. Further- 
more, show that if Z is recursive, then Q, may be picked to be recursive. 
3.3.20*. Let K be the intersection of all the classes K(Z), where C has at 
least one infinite model (for notation see Exercise 3.3.19). Prove that 
K = K(Co) when Zo is the theory of simple order. 
3.3.21. Let T be a complete theory with infinite models in a countable 
language and let K be an infinite cardinal. Prove that T has models 3 and 
'23 of power K where '23 is a proper submodel of 3 and there is an 

[3.4 
3.3.22. In a countable language, let T be a complete theory whose 
models are infinite. Prove that T has a family of countable models as, 
Sew, such that if R is a proper subset of S then 21R is a proper 
elementary submodel of as. 
3.4. Some examples 
During the last two chapters we have mentioned a large number of 
examples and made several assertions without giving proofs. In this section 
we shall re-examine five of these examples in some detail, in the light of the 
theorems we have proved. Most of the other examples can be analyzed by 
methods similar to these five. One exception is the theory of real closed 
fields, which we shall return to in Chapter 5. 
EXAMPLE 
3.4.1. The theory of dense linear order without endpoints. Two 
classical models of this theory are the ordering of the reals and the ordering 
of the rationals. All models of Tare infinite. 
To prove that T is o-categorical, we use a back and forth argument of 
Cantor. Let (A, < ) and (B, f ) be two countable dense linear orderings 
without endpoints. A mapping f from a finite subset A, c A onto a finite 
subset B,, c B is said to be a partial isomorphism iff f is one-one and 
whenever a, < a, in A,, f(a,) < f(a,). It is easy to see that for any partial 
isomorphism f and any elements U E A  and b E  B, there is a partial iso- 
morphism g ~ f ,  
and a ~ d o m a i n  (9) and b E  range (9). We can then 
construct a union of partial isomorphisms which is an isomorphism of 
(A, f ) onto ( B ,  < ). 
T is w-categorical, T is complete and its countable model is both 
countably saturated and atomic. T is obviously preserved under unions 
of chains. T is not preserved under submodels: For example, the model 
( 0 ,  -() is a submodel of a model of T but is not dense. T is also not 
preserved under homomorphisms, because the one-element model is a 
homomorphic image of any model but is not a model of T. 

3.41 
SOME EXAMPLES 
179 
Cantor's back and forth argument shows the following: if % = ( A ,  < ) 
is the countable model of T and x1 < ... < x,, y, < ... < y, in A ,  then 
'2l has an automorphism f with f ( x , )  = y,, ..., f(x,) = y,. It follows that 
<A, C )  itself is a set of indiscernibles in %. Moreover, every increasing 
n-tuple satisfies the same type r(xl ... x,) in (21. Since % is o-saturated, 
every type of T is realized in %. Therefore in any other model B of T (possibly 
uncountable), every increasing n-tuple also realizes r(xl .. . x,). This shows 
that in any model 
= ( B ,  6 )  of T, (B, C ) itself is a set of indis- 
cerni bles. 
The theory T has 2" nonisomorphic models in any uncountable power 
u. We can build up 2" such models as follows. Let w: +a, be the ordering 
consisting of a copy of o1 
with the reverse order followed by a copy of o1 
with the natural order, that is, 
... r' ... 3'2'1'0'0123 ... 5 ..., 
5 < w t .  
Let q(w:+wl) be the ordering formed by replacing each point in the 
ordering w:+w, by a copy of the rationals. Let q(o:+w,+l) 
be the 
ordering formed by adding one more copy of the rationals to the end of 
q(w: +a1). 
Now for each subset S c a, form the ordering as from (a, C ) 
by replacing each B E S by a copy of q(w: +wl) and each p E a \ S by 
a copy of q(w: +a, + 1). If a is an uncountable cardinal, then the models 
9Is, S c a, are 2" nonisomorphic models of T of power u. 
EXAMPLE 
3.4.2. The theory of countably many independent unary relations. 
This theory is in a language with countably many unary relation symbols 
Po(x), P,(x), P2(x), ... and the axioms 
(h)(Pi,(X)A ... A Pi,"(X)Al Pj,(X)A ... A 1 pj,(X)) 
where i, , . . ., i,, 
j ,  , . . .,jn are all distinct. 
Let us first show that T is complete. All models of T are infinite. Let 
be any countable model of T. Using the compactness theorem, we can 
readily show that 'u has an elementary extension % of power 2" such that 
for each set S c o there are 2'" elements b E B, with 
% k P,(b) 
if nE S, 
B k iP,(b) if n$S. 
However, up to isomorphism there is only one such model %. Thus any two 
countable models of T have isomorphic elementary extensions and hence 
are elementarily equivalent. We conclude that T is complete. 

180 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.4 
Let % be a model of T, let n < o, 
and consider two elements a, b of A. 
Suppose a and b satisfy exactly the same atomic formulas among 
Po(x), ..., P,,(x). Then the mapping which interchanges a and b is an 
automorphism of the reduct of % to the sublanguage (Po , . . ., P,,}. It follows 
that for any formula p(x) in which at most the symbols Po, ..., P,, occur, 
we have 
'u k p[a] if and only if % k p[b]. 
Using the above, we see that every consistent formula p(x) is incomplet- 
able in T, because if all the symbols occurring in p(x) are among Po, . .., P,,, 
then any model % has elements a, b with 
91 C c~[aI~Pn+,(a), 
I= c ~ [ b I ~ l P n + , ( b ) .  
Hence p(x) does not imply either P,,+l(x) or i 
Pn+,(x) with respect to T. 
Therefore T is not an atomic theory, and T has no atomic models. Con- 
sequently T has no countably saturated models. 
Another consequence of the above discussion is that every formula p(x) 
is equivalent with respect to T to a finite disjunction of conjunctions of 
formulas Pi(.) and i 
Pj(x). We can readily extend this result to formulas 
q ( x ,  ... xn) if we also allow equations and inequalities. 
Two elements a, b realize the same type if and only if they satisfy exactly 
the same relations P,(x). So T has 2'" types T(x). Given any subset X c o, 
let X(%) be the set of all elements b in a model 'u such that 
fl k P,,(b) 
if n € X ,  
% k i ~ , , ( b )  if n ~ o \ X .  
Then for any linear ordering d of X(fl) whatsoever, X(%) is a set of 
indiscernibles in 91. 
A model fl for 9 is determined up to isomorphism by the cardinalities of 
the sets X(fl), X c o. 
% is a model of T if and only if the family of sets 
s = { X  c w : X(fl) # 0) 
is dense in the sense that for any two disjoint finite subsets s, t c w, there 
exists X E  
S such that s c X and t c o \ X. From this we can see that 
there are 2'" nonisomorphic countable models of T. Moreover, for each 
infinite cardinal c1 < 2" there are 2" nonisomorphic models of T of power a. 
And for each cardinal K g  > 2'" there are IPI'" nonisomorphic models of 
T of power Xg. 
It is easy to find two dense sets S , ,  S ,  of subsets of o such that 

3.41 
SOME EXAMPLES 
181 
S ,  n S2 = 9. From these we obtain two countable models ?l,, '21, of T 
such that no type T ( x )  is realized in both '21, and g2. 91, is formed by 
putting one element into X(91,) for each X E S ,  , and 'LL, similarly. In fact, 
it is easily seen that there are 2" disjoint countable dense sets of subsets 
of o, whence there is a family of 2" countable models of T such that no 
type T ( x )  is realized by more than one of them. 
Two n-tuples a , ,  ..., a, and b,, ..., b, realize the same type in ?I if and 
only if each ai realizes the same type as bi and the same equations hold 
between the a's as between the b's. From this we can readily see that every 
model of T is o-homogeneous. Given an infinite cardinal a, we can obtain 
a model % of T of power a which realizes only countably many types of 
n-tuples by taking a countable dense set S and putting a elements into 
X(2l) for each X E S. 
The theory T is preserved under extensions and hence under unions of 
chains. Note that all the axioms are existential. T is not preserved under 
submodels or homomorphisms. 
EXAMPLE 
3.4.3. The theory of algebraically closedjelds of characteristic zero. 
A transcendence basis in a model '21 of T is a maximal set X c A with the 
property that no distinct n-tuple from X is a root of a nonzero polynomial 
in n variables over the rationals. It is a classical result of field theory that 
every model has a transcendence basis, all transcendence bases of % have 
the same cardinal a(the transcendence rank of %), for each a there is a unique 
model of transcendence rank a, and this model has power a u o. 
It follows 
that T is a-categorical for each uncountable cardinal a. Since all models of T 
are infinite, T is complete. T is also closed under unions of chains. 
Moreover, T has just countably many countable models, one for each 
rank < o. 
Therefore T has a countably saturated model and an atomic 
model. Since the model of rank o cannot be embedded in any model of 
finite rank, none of the models of finite rank is countably universal. But the 
countably saturated model is countably universal, so it must be the model 
of rank w. The model of rank zero, the field of algebraic numbers, is a prime 
model of T and is thus the atomic model. 
Another classical result is that if two n-tuples a , ,  ..., a, and b , ,  ..., b, 
in 8 are roots of exactly the same polynomials over the rationals, then there 
is an automorphism f of % withf(a,) = b , ,  ...,f( 
a,) = 6,. It follows that, 
if X is a transcendence basis of a, then Xis a set of indiscernibles in '21 with 
respect to any simple ordering of X. It also follows that every model of T 
is w-homogeneous. 

182 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.4 
EXAMPLE 
3.4.4. The theory of discrete simple orderings with an initial element. 
This is the theory in the language 2 
= { < ] with the axioms: 
The axioms of simple order. 
(3xVy)(x < y )  (there is a first element). 
Every element has an immediate successor. 
Every element except the first has an immediate predecessor. 
The model (a, 
Q ) is a model of T. Every other model of T can be obtained 
in the following way: Let !J = (A, Q )  be any simple ordering. Form the 
model N* = (B, <) of T by adding one copy of the ordering (2, <) 
to the end of (a, 
Q ) for each element a E A. More precisely, 
(1) 
B = o u ( A x Z ) ,  
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
<a,m) < ( b , n )  iff a c b or a = b and m Q n. 
Then every model of T is isomorphic either to (w, Q )  or to some a*. 
For example, if Q is the ordering of the rationals, then Q* is formed by 
adding to the end of <a, 
Q ) one copy of (Z, Q ) for each rational. Thus 
T has 2" nonisomorphic models in every infinite cardinal dl. 
It is convenient to work first with a new theory in the language formed 
by adding a symbol 0 for the first element and S for the successor function. 
The expanded theory T(0, S) has the additional axioms 
< is the natural ordering on o, 
n < (a, m )  
for all n E to, (a, m) E A x 2, 
x = 0 4-+ (Vy)(x < y), 
y = sX4-+X < y A l  ( 3 Z ) ( X  < Z A Z  < y). 
Every model (B, Q ) of T can clearly be expanded in a unique way to a 
model <B, <,O, S) of T(0, S). We can show that the theory T(O, S) is 
model complete by proving that if 123 and Q are models of T(0, S) and 
Q c 123, then every existential sentence true in 123, is true in Qc. Consider 
an existential sentence 
true in BC, 
where c, , . .., cn are elements of C. By the compactness theorem, 
Q has an elementary extension Q' such that before, after, and between any 
two copies of (Z, < ) in Q there are infinitely many copies of (Z, < ) in 
Q'. Let b , ,  ..., 6, satisfy 4p in BC. 
We may then choose d,, ..., d, in &' 
such that the sets 
(3x, ... x,)rp(x, ... x,c1 ... c,) 
{b,, *-*,bm,cl, 
**.,cn,o}, 
{ d l ,  . . . , d m , c l ,  * * * , ~ n i O >  
are ordered in the same way, and the distance between two corresponding 

3.41 
SOME EXAMPLES 
183 
elements is either the same finite number or infinite. It follows that d, , . .., d,,, 
satisfies cp in ah, so (3xl ... x,)cp 
holds in 6; and in 6,. We conclude that 
T(0, S) is model complete. 
Since (0, < , O ,  S) is isomorphically embedded in every model of 
T(0, S), T(0, S) is a complete theory. Every countable model of T(O, S) 
is isomorphically embedded, and hence elementarily embedded, in the 
model (Q*, <, 0, S). Therefore (Q*, 
< , 0, S) is a countably universal 
model. Since T(0, S) has a countably universal model, it has a countably 
saturated model. We now have enough information about T(O, S) to resume 
our study of the original theory T. 
of T, the expansions (8, 
0, S) and (6,0, 
S) to 
T(0, S) are elementarily equivalent. Therefore B and 6 are elementarily 
equivalent, so T is a complete theory. In fact, T = Th( ( w ,  s)). 
Given 
any two simple orderings a0 C a,, the associated models of T are such 
that %: < Sy, because the operations 0 and S are the same in 91; as in 
Since the reduct of a countably saturated model is countably saturated, 
T has a countably saturated model. We can identify this model by a process 
of elimination. The model (o, 
<) is not o-saturated because it omits 
the set of all 'infinite' elements. Let '21 = (A, < ) be any countable simple 
ordering. If '$I has a last element a, then (a*, (a, 0)) omits the set of all 
elements infinitely greater than (a, 0), so '21* is not o-saturated. Similarly, 
if '21 has a least element, or if '$I is not dense, we can see that a* is not 
o-saturated. The only remaining possibility is that '21 is the ordering Q of 
the rationals. Therefore Q* is the countably saturated model of T. If '21 is a 
countable simple ordering which has Q as a submodel, but is not isomorphic 
to Q, then Q* <'$I*, and therefore '21* is countably universal but not 
countably saturated. 
T also has an atomic model. Since no other model is embedded in 
(0, 
< ), the prime and hence atomic model of T must be (a, < ). 
T has exactly three countably homogeneous models, namely (0, d ), 
Q*, and the model 1* formed by adding just one copy of (2, 
< ) to the end 
of (o, 
<), To see that I *  is countably homogeneous, we note that each 
function f which is the identity on (a, 
<) and translates the copy of 
(Z, <) finitely many positions to the right or left, is an automorphism 
of l*. Suppose a,, ..., a, and b , ,  ..., b, realize the same type in l*. Then 
if ai is in (a, 
<), we must have a, = bi. If aj is in the copy of (Z, < ), 
then so is b,, say bj = aj+m. Moreover, for any other ak in ( Z ,  <), 
the distances aj-ak and bj-bk must be the same, so bk = q + m .  Therefore 
Given two models 8, 
a;. 

184 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.4 
there is an automorphism of I* mapping each uj onto b j .  This shows that 
1* is countably homogeneous. The proof that no other model of T is 
countably homogeneous is similar to the proof that no model except Q* 
is countably saturated, but uses the description of types on the next page. 
.In any model %* of T, the set (X, <), where X = {(a, 0) : u E A}, 
is a set of indiscernibles in %*. To see this, we may suppose that 91 is a 
submodel of Q, so that 91* < Q*. Given any two increasing n-tuples 
x I  < ... < x, and y, < ... < y, from X, there is an automorphism of Q* 
in which each xi goes to y i .  Therefore 
(Q*, 
* * a  xn) 
(Q*, ~1 * * *  Yn). 
(a*, X I  ... x,) = (%*, y, ... yn), 
Since %* < Q*, we have 
whence (X, < ) is indiscernible in %*. 
Since T has a countably saturated model, it has only countably many 
types of n-tuples. These types can be described explicitly. Consider the 
following sets of formulas: 
x I  -xo = n says xo < x1 and x l  is the nth successor of x o ,  
x I  - x o  = 00 says x0 < xI and i 
( x ,  - x o  = n), n = 0, 1,2, .... 
Then two n-tuples xI, . .., x, and y ,  , ..., y, have the same type if and only if 
for each i andj, xi, xi and y i ,  y j  realize exactly the same sets of formulas 
of the forms 
xi-0 = n, 
.xi-0 = co, 
x i - x i  = n, 
x i - x ,  = 00. 
To prove this, show that in the countably saturated model there is an 
automorphism mapping each x i  into y i .  
EXAMPLE 
3.4.5. Peano arithmetic. The Godcl incompleteness theorem 
shows that this theory T is not complete. Ln fact, no finite extension 
T u {ql , ..., q,} is complete. Then, using a binary tree argument, we can 
see that T has 2" complete extensions. By a classical result of Ryll- 
Nardzewski, T does not have a set of II; axioms, for any n. In particular, 
T does not have a set of ll;axioms. Therefore, by the preservation theorem, 
T is not preserved under unions of chains. It follows that T is not preserved 
under submodels, and also that T is not model complete. T is not preserved 
under homomorphisms. because the one-element model does not satisfy T. 
The standard model ( q 0 ,  
S, +, .) of T is isomorphically embedded 
in every model of T. Using this and the fact that T is not complete, we obtain 
a second proof that T is not model complete. 

3.41 
SOME EXAMPLES 
185 
The theory T almost has built-in Skolem functions. That is, T has an 
( I ) .  T has built-in Skolem functions. 
(2). Every model ?l of T has a unique expansion @ to a model of ?'. 
(3). If cp is a sentence of 9, 
then T C cp if and only if 
(4). For every formula @ ( x ,  ... x,) of 3 there is a formula ~ ( x ,  
... x,) 
The expansion Tis formed by adding, for each formula (3x)cp(xxl ... x,) 
(3x)cp(xx, ... x,) -+ F(3x)cp(x, ... x,) = the least x such that cp(xx, ... x,), 
i 
3xcp(xxl ... x,,) + F(3x)q(x1 ... x,) = 0. So (2) will be right. 
By the induction scheme in Peano arithmetic, T has the properties (1)-(4). 
T is what is called a definitional extension of T. It follows from (1)-(4) 
that if a, B are models of T, then 9i < B if and only if 
c s. From this 
we see that the intersection of any set of elementary submodels of 8 is an 
elementary submodel of B. In particular, each model 8 of T has a smallest 
elementary submodel, and for each X c B there is a least elementary 
submodel of Is containing X.. 
Every complete extension T' of T is an atomic theory and thus has an 
atomic model. This is because if cp(x, ... x,) is consistent with T', then 
the formula which states that 
( 5 )  
q ( x I  ... x,,)A(VY, ... y,)[cp(yl ... y,,)42p'3)' . ... .A''> 2"'3"'. ... .p,""] 
is a complete formula in T' which implies cp. The standard model 
(0.0, S, +, *) is the atomic niodel for its complete theory. For any model B 
of Peano arithmetic, the model 91 < B which is the intersection of all 
elementary submodels of 8 must be the countable atomic model of Th(B). 
This is because PI has no proper elementary submodels, so no other model 
of Th(B) could be prime. 
The countable atomic model % < 23 can also be characterized in another 
way. An element b E B is definable in 23 iff there is a formula cp(x) such 
that b is the unique element of B which satisfies p ( x )  in B, i.e., 
B k (Vx)(cp(x) ++ x 3 b). 
Then 9i is the submodel of % where A is the set of all definable elements 
in 23. For every definable element in 8 must belong to Y, and if U E A  
satisfies the complete formula cp(x), then a is definable in U, and hence in 
expansion T such that: 
cp. 
of 9 
such that T C cp er +. 
of Y ,  a function symbol F(3x)cp(xI 
... x,) and the axioms 
Since there are only countably many formulas and every element of an 

186 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
atomic model of T is definable as above, we see that T has no uncountable 
atomic models. 
Finally, we show that Peano arithmetic has no countably saturated 
models. For, let T' be any complete extension of T. Let P c w be the 
set of all prime numbers. For each set X c P of primes, let 
Thus x satisfies T,(x) if and only if X is the set of all primes p E P which 
divide x. For each finite subset {cpl(x), ..., cp,(x)} c f,(x), we can prove 
in Peano arithmetic that 
Therefore for each complete extension T' of T, each set T,(x) is consistent 
with T'. But if XI # X,, then T,,(x) u T,,(x) is inconsistent. It follows 
that T' has 2" distinct types in x (at least one containing each rx(x)). 
Therefore T' has no countably saturated model. 
f , ( x )  = { p l x : p E X }  u { l p l x : p E P \ X } .  
( 3 X ) ( ( P l ( X )  A * .' * cp"(X)). 
3.5. Model completeness 
In this section we present the beginnings of a branch of model theory 
called model theoretic algebra. In many cases, a phenomenon from 
abstract algebra, especially field theory, can be generalized to a fruitful 
notion in model theory. The model theoretic notion may in turn lead to 
new ideas in other areas of algebra. This approach to model theory was 
strongly influenced by the work of Abraham Robinson. For example, 
Robinson introduced the notion of the model completion of a theory, 
starting with the example of the theory of algebraically closed fields as 
the model completion of the theory of fields. He then introduced the 
new theory of differentially closed fields as the model completion of the 
theory of differential fields. In abstract algebra, existential and quantifier 
free formulas play a greater role than arbitrary formulas. Model 
theoretic algebra, in turn, has provided a collection of results in pure 
model theory which concentrate on existential and open formulas. The 
starting point is the notion of a model complete theory. 
DEFINITION. 
A consistent theory T is said to be model complete if for all 
models '?I, 
23 of T, if \u C 23 then 3 < 23. 
Obviously, if T is model complete then any consistent theory U 3 Tin 
the same language is model complete. 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
187 
Neither one of completeness and model completeness implies the 
other. The theory of dense linear order with first and last elements is 
complete but not model complete. So are the complete theories of the 
models ( w ,  S) and ( w ,  S ) .  For each of these theories, the natural 
model has an isomorphic extension which has new elements at the 
beginning and thus is not an elementary extension, so the theory is not 
model complete. 
From the results on elimination of quantifiers in Section 1.4, we see 
that the theory of dense linear order without endpoints is model com- 
plete. This theory is also complete. In a language with two or more 
additional constant symbols, the theory of dense linear order is still 
model complete but is no longer complete. Before giving more exam- 
ples, we shall give some characterizations of model completeness. 
THEOREM 
3.5.1. Given a consistent theory T of 2, the following are 
equivalent: 
(i). T is model complete. 
(ii). For every model 8 of T, the theory T U A, is complete in 2,, 
(iii). (Robinson's Test). Zf 91, '23 are models of T and Y1 C '23, then 
(iv). For every existential formula cp(y,, . . . , y , )  there is a universal 
(v). For every formula cp(y,, ... , y , )  there is a universal formula 
where A, is the diagram of a. 
every existential sentence which holds in BA holds in a*. 
formula +( y , ,  . . . , y , )  such that T Fcp * 9. 
$ ( y , ,  . . . , y , )  such that TFcp*$. 
PROOF. (i) implies (ii). Assume (i), T is model complete. Let l?l be a 
model of T. Since every extension of 2l is an elementary extension, 
T U A, has exactly the same models as the elementary diagram Th(8,), 
and hence is complete. 
C B, 
then '21, 
and '23, 
are both models of the complete theory T U A,, 
so 
every existential sentence true in %, 
holds in 3,. Thus (iii) follows. 
(iii) implies (iv). Assume (iii). Let q ( y , ,  . . . , y , )  be an existential 
formula. It is convenient to add new constants and form the existential 
sentence cp(c,, . . . , c,) of 2' = 2 U { e l ,  . . . , c,}. Let r be the set of all 
universal sentences y of 2' such that T !i 
cp - 
y. Let (a, b,, . . . , b,) 
be a model of T U r, and let A, be the diagram of 3. Each finite con- 
junction 8(a,, ... , a,, b , ,  ... , b,) of sentences of A, is consistent with 
(ii) implies (iii). Assume (ii). If 91 and '23 are models of T with 

188 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
T U { cp}, 
because 
the 
universal 
sentence 
(Vx,, . . . , x , )  
iO(x,, . . . , x,, b,, . . . , b,) is false in 3, thus does not belong to r and is 
not a consequence of T U { cp}. Therefore T U { cp} U A, has a model 
BA. Then '$1 C B and B is a model of T. By (iii), every existential 
sentence true in BA is true in HA. In particular, the existential sentence 
cp holds in (a, b,, . . . , b,). We conclude that every model of T U r is a 
model of cp, i.e. T U r k c p .  By the compactness theorem, there are 
'y,, . . . , y, E r such that T k 'y, A . . . A 'y, -+ cp. It follows that T L 'yl A 
. . . A y, tf cp. Moving quantifiers to the front and replacing c,, . . . , c, by 
y,, ... , y , ,  
we 
obtain 
a 
universal 
formula 
$ 
such 
that 
T L cp( y,, . . . , y,) - $( y,, . . . , y n ) .  This proves (iv). 
(iv) implies (v) by induction on the complexity of formulas. 
(v) implies (i). Finally we assume (v). Let %, 23 be models of T with 
%CB. Let a,, ... ,a, E A and suppose BLcp[a,, ... ,a,]. Let I) be 
universal 
and 
T k cp - $. 
Then 
we 
have 
B!= $[a,, ... , a,], 
H L $[a,, . . . , a,], and % k cp[a,, . .. , a,]. The same argument holds for 
i c p .  Therefore % < B and T is model complete. -I 
Robinson's Test, condition (iii) in the above proposition, is often used 
to show that particular theories are model complete. One of the original 
examples which served to motivate the notion of model completeness is 
the theory ACF of algebraically closed fields. The model completeness of 
ACF is closely related to a classical algebraic result, the Hilbert null- 
stellensatz. One form of the nullstellensatz is as follows. Let F and G be 
algebraically closed fields with F C G and let 2(xl, . . . , x,) be a finite set 
of polynomial equations with coefficients in F; if 2(xl, . . . , x,) has a 
solution in G then 2 ( x , ,  ... , x , )  has a solution in F. In field theory, any 
term is equal to a polynomial, and any inequality -I( p = q) can be 
replaced by an equation with one extra existentially quantified variable, 
( 3 x ) [ x .  ( p  - q) = 11. Thus the nullstellensatz implies that for any pair of 
algebraically closed fields F C G, any existential sentence with constants 
from F which holds in G holds in F. By Robinson's Test (iii), the theory 
ACF is model complete. Notice that ACF is not a complete theory, 
because fields of different characteristic are not elementarily equivalent. 
Here is a list of examples of model complete theories. 
EXAMPLES 
3.5.2. 
(1). The complete theory of the model ( q 0 ,  
S). 
(2). The complete theory of the ordered group of integers under 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
189 
addition with a constant for 1, (2, +, -, 0, 1, S )  , which was considered 
in Example 2.4.7. (Without a constant for 1 the theory would not be 
model complete, because the even integers would be an isomorphic 
submodel which would fail to satisfy the formula stating that there is an 
element between 0 and 2). 
(3). The theory of countably many independent unary relations. 
(4). The theory of divisible torsion free Abelian groups. 
(5). The theory of divisible ordered Abelian groups. 
(6). The theory of algebraically closed fields. 
(7). The theory of real closed fields. 
(8). The theory of real closed ordered fields. 
Each of these theories can be proved to be model complete by 
Robinson’s Test. However, the methods we shall develop in this section 
will lead to other, easier proofs of model completeness. Some of the 
examples of model completeness will be left as exercises. The model 
completeness of the theories of real closed fields and real closed ordered 
fields depend on results from algebra which will be explained in detail in 
Section 5.4. 
Sometimes a theory which is not model complete can be made model 
complete by adding a symbol for a constant, function, or relation which 
is already definable by a formula in the original theory. For example, the 
theory of ( w ,  S )  is not model complete but the theory of ( w ,  0, S )  is 
model complete. The constant 0 is definable in Th( ( w ,  S)) as the unique 
element which is not in the range of S. 
As another example of model completeness, we recall that by Proposi- 
tion 3.3.3, every theory with built-in Skolem functions is model com- 
plete. 
We have seen in Section 3.4 that condition (v) of Theorem 3.5.1 is 
false for Peano arithmetic. Therefore Peano arithmetic is not model 
complete. However, the definitional extension of Peano arithmetic with 
built in Skolem functions is model complete. For the same reasons, 
complete number theory, that is, the complete theory of the standard 
model ( w ,  + , , S, O), is not model complete but has a model complete 
definitional extension with built in Skolem functions. 
By examining the proof of Theorem 3.5.1 we obtain two useful 
corollaries. 
COROLLARY 
3.5.3. Suppose T is a consistent theory in a language 3 with 
a 2 1 1.91 
1. Then T is model complete if and only if for all models 21 and B 

190 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
of T such that % C B and 2l and B are either finite or of power a, every 
existential sentence true in BA is true in f l A .  
PROOF. Same as the proof of Theorem 3.5.1, but using models of power 
a in the step from (iii) to (iv). -1 
COROLLARY 
3.5.4. Suppose T is a consistent theory in a recursive language 
9. 
Then for T to be model complete it is necessary and sufficient that T 
have the following property: 
(* ) For all models 2l and B of T such that 'II C B and the expanded 
model (23, A) is recursively saturated, and every tuple c l ,  . . . , c, in A ,  the 
models (a, c l ,  . . . , c,) and (23, c l ,  . . . , c,,) are partially isomorphic. 
PROOF. Suppose first that T is model complete. Then for any pair of 
models 21 and B as in ( *), B is an elementary extension of 'II, and thus 
for all c l ,  ... , c, in A, (3, c , ,  ... , c,)=(%, cl, ... , c,). Since (8, A) is 
recursively saturated, it follows from the proof of Theorem 2.4.5 that 
('II, 
cl, ... , c,,) and (23, c,, ... , c,) are partially isomorphic. 
Now assume that T has property (*). Since 9 
is recursive, it is 
countable. We show that T satisfies the criterion in Corollary 3.5.3. Let 
'II and B be finite or countable models of T such that 91 C B. Then the 
expanded model (B, A) has a recursively saturated countable elemen- 
tary extension (B', A'). It follows from (*) that every existential sent- 
ence (in fact every sentence) true in B; is true in %;, 
and therefore 
every existential sentence true in B,4 is true in 21A, as required in 3.5.3. 
Therefore T is model complete. -1 
This corollary can be used to show that theories are model complete 
by a method which is parallel to the method of showing that theories are 
complete with recursively saturated model pairs. It can be applied to all 
of the theories listed in Example 3.5.2. 
EXAMPLE 
3.5.5. We prove that the complete theory T of the model 
(2, +, -, 0,1, S )  is model complete. We shall make use of the com- 
plete set of axioms for T given in Example 2.4.7. Let a, B be models of 
T such that 2l C B and the pair ('2.3, A) is recursively saturated, and let 
c l ,  . . . , c, be a tuple of elements of A. Let I be the relation on pairs of 
tuples from A and B given in Example 2.4.7, that is, 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
191 
if and only if for each linear term P ( x , ,  . . . , x , )  with integer coefficients 
and each integer k > 1, 
(a) 
and 
(b) 
Let J be the relation on pairs of tuples from A and B such that 
?I k P(a,, . . . , a,) > 0 iff B L P(b,, . . , , b,) > 0 
21 k klP(a,, .. . , a,) iff B L klP(b,, . . . , b,). 
( a , ,  ... 9 a,)J(b,, ... 7 6,) 
if and only if 
(c,, ... , c,, a,, ... , a n ) l ( c l r  ... , c,,, b , ,  ... , b,). 
We shall show that J is a partial isomorphism from (?I, c,, . . . , c,) to 
(93, c , ,  ... , cm). It will then follow from Corollary 3.5.4 that T is model 
complete. By the argument of Example 2.4.7, I is a partial isomorphism 
from ?I to 23. Therefore J preserves atomic sentences and satisfies the 
back and forth condition. It remains to show that 0 J 0, that is, 
(c,, ..* 
9 C , ) l ( C , ,  ... 9 c,,). 
Let P ( x , ,  . . . , x m )  be a linear term with integer coefficients and let k be 
an integer greater than 1. Since ?I C 'P, we have 
21 k P(c,, . . . , c,) iff B k P(c,, . . . , c m )  
and 
?I k klP(c,, . .. , c m )  implies B L klP(c,, . . . , c,). 
Suppose that 
not fl F klP(c,, . . . , c,). 
From the axioms of T, there is a positive integer h < k such that 
?I k k l P ( ~ , ,  
. . . , c,) - h. 
Since ?( C %, 
B L k l P ( ~ , ,  
. . . , c,,~) - h. 
It now follows from the axioms of T that 
not 'P L k(P(c,, . .. , c,,). 
Therefore 0 J 0, and J is a partial isomorphism as required. -1 

192 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
We now introduce the important notion of an existentially closed 
model, which is suggested by the notion of an algebraically closed field 
and is related to Robinson's test for model completeness in Theorem 
3.5.1 (iii). 
DEFINITION. 
A model 3 is said to be existentially closed in a model 23 if 
3 C 23 and every existential sentence which holds in BA holds in 3,. '11 
is said to be existentially closed for T if 91 is existentially closed in every 
model 8 of T such that 3 C 23. 
By Theorem 3.5.1, a consistent theory T is model complete if and only 
if every model of T is existentially closed for T. Corollary 3.5.3 states 
that if 11311 S a, then T is model complete if and only if every model of 
T which is finite or of power a is existentially closed for T. 
DEFINITION. 
Given a theory T, Tv denotes the set of all universal 
consequences of T, and Tv3 denotes the set of all universal existential 
consequences of T. Two theories T and U are cotheories if Tv = U,. 
REMARK 
3.5.6. Here is a list of easy facts about existentially closed 
models and cotheories whose proofs are left as exercises. 
(1). 5?l is a model of Tv if and only if 8 is a submodel of some model 
of T. 
(2). T and U are cotheories if and only if every model of T can be 
extended to a model of U and every model of U can be extended to a 
model of T. 
(3). Tv is a cotheory of T, and is the unique cotheory of T which has a 
set of universal axioms. 
(4). If '3 C23 C Q  and 'u is existentially closed in Q, then 3 is 
existentially closed in 23. 
(5). If T and U are cotheories then a model 5?l is existentially closed 
for T if and only if it is existentially closed for U. 
(6). The union of a chain of models which are existentially closed for 
T is existentially closed for T. 
(7). If 5?l is existentially closed in 23, then every V3 sentence true in 23 
is true in 5?l. 
(8). Every model of Tv which is existentially closed for T is a model of 
T V 3 .  
Let us consider again the theory ACF of algebraically closed fields. 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
193 
Let F denote the theory of fields and ID the theory of integral domains 
with unit. It is known that every integral domain with unit can be 
extended to a field and every field can be extended to an algebraically 
closed field. Thus by (2), the theories, ACF, F, and ID are cotheories of 
each other. The theory ID has a universal set of axioms, and therefore 
ID is equivalent to ACF, and to Fv. The theory ACF is model complete, 
so every model of ACF is extentially closed for ACF. By (5), every 
model of ACF is existentially closed for F and ID as well. 
Similarly, the theories of real closed ordered fields and ordered fields 
are cotheories of each other, and each real closed ordered field is 
existentially closed for the theory of ordered fields. 
The next lemma is an existence result for existentially closed models. 
LEMMA 
3.5.7. Suppose T is a theory which is preserved under unions of 
chains. Then for each cardinal a 3 IILfl 1, every model of T of power a can 
be extended to a model of T of power a which is existentially closed for T. 
PROOF. Let 2 be a model of T of power a 2 ))211. 
Let { 'pp : /3 < a }  be 
an enumeration of all existential sentences of LfA. We form a chain of 
models of T of power a, 
%=2l0C%,C ... c2,c ...) 
such that if 4op holds in some extension of 
which is a model of T, 
then q, holds in 
We can continue through the limit ordinals 
because T is preserved under unions of chains. Let %' be the union of 
the chain of models ?I,, 
/3 < a. Then every existential sentence which 
holds in some extension of 9; which is a model of T holds in 91;. 
Repeating the construction w times we obtain a chain of models 
% = B o c B , c  ... 
of T such that any existential sentence with constants from B, which 
holds in some extension of B,+, which is a model of T holds in B,+l. It 
follows that the union of the chain of models Bn, n < w, is existentially 
closed for T and is a model of T of power a which is an extension of 
a. -I 
The following result sometimes gives a very easy proof that a theory is 
model complete. 
THEOREM 
3.5.8 (Lindstrom). Let T be a theory in a countable language 

194 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
such that: 
(i). All models of T are infinite. 
(ii). T is preserved under unions of chains. 
(iii). T is a-categorical for some infinite cardinal a. 
Then T is model complete. 
PROOF. By (iii), T has infinite models. By Lemma 3.5.7, T has a model 
of power a which is existentially closed for T. Since T is a-categorical, 
every model of T of power a is existentially closed for T. Then by 
Corollary 3.5.3 and (i), T is model complete. -I 
EXAMPLES 
3.5.9. We have seen in Section 3.1 that each of the following 
theories (1)-(6) is categorical in some infinite power and has no finite 
models, and is therefore complete by the Los-Vaught Test. Each of these 
theories is also preserved under unions of chains. Therefore by Theorem 
3.5.8, each of these theories is model complete. 
(1). The theory of dense simply ordered sets without endpoints (which 
is a cotheory of the theory of simple order). 
(2). The theory of atomless Boolean algebras (which is a cotheory of 
the theory of Boolean algebras). 
(3). The theory of algebraically closed fields of characteristic zero 
(which is a cotheory of the theory of fields of characteristic zero). 
Similarly for characteristic p .  
(4). The theory of infinite Abelian groups with all elements of order 
P .  
(5). The theory of countably many unequal constant symbols. 
(6). The theory of a one-to-one function of A onto A with no finite 
(7). The theory of divisible torsion free Abelian groups. 
Theorem 3.5.8 can also be used to give a very simple proof that the 
theory of algebraically closed fields is model complete. If 5Y and 93 are 
algebraically closed fields and $?I 
C 93, then 5Y and 93 have the same 
characteristic. Since the theory of algebraically closed fields of a given 
characteristic is model complete by 3.5.8, '21 < B. Therefore the theory 
of algebraically closed fields is model complete. 
An example of an o,-categorical complete theory which is not model 
complete is the theory of the model ( w ,  S). An example of an o- 
categorical complete theory which is not model complete is the theory of 
equivalence relations with infinitely many infinite classes and one finite 
class which has just one element. 
cycles. 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
195 
Let us record a useful property of model complete theories which 
follows at once from the Elementary Chain Theorem and the preserva- 
tion theorem for unions of chains. 
PROPOSITION 
3.5.10. If T is model complete then T is preserved under 
unions of chains and T has a set of V3 axioms. 
Recall from Section 2.3 that a model '21 of a theory T is prime iff 
is 
elementarily embeddable in every model of T. We now introduce the 
analogous notion for isomorphic embeddings. 
DEFINITION. 
A model '21 of a theory T is said to be algebraically prime iff 
2l is isomorphically embeddable in every model of T. 
Since every elementary embedding is an isomorphic embedding, every 
prime model of a theory T is algebraically prime. If T is model complete, 
then every isomorphic embedding is an elementary embedding, so every 
algebraically prime model is prime. See Exercise 4.4.20 for an example 
of a complete theory which has algebraically prime models (in fact 
infinitely many) but no prime model. A theory which is not complete 
cannot have a prime model, but may have an algebraically prime model. 
Here are some examples: 
EXAMPLES. 
The field of rational numbers is an algebraically prime model 
of the theory of fields of characteristic zero. 
The field of integers modulo p is an algebraically prime model of the 
theory of fields of characteristic p .  
The two-element Boolean algebra is an algebraically prime model of 
the theory of Boolean algebras. 
The one-element group is an algebraically prime model of the theory 
of groups. 
Every countable model of the theory of dense simple orders (with or 
without endpoints) is algebraically prime. 
We shall now introduce two properties of a theory which say that 
models can be fitted together. 
DEFINITION. 
A theory T has the joint embedding property if for any two 
models 3, 23 of T there is a model 0 of T such that both '21 and 23 are 
isomorphically embeddable in Q. 
T has the amalgamation property if for any three models, '21, 93, and Q 

196 
F'URTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
of T and isomorphic embeddings 
f : a+'%, 
g : (5+B 
f' : 3- Q', g' : B+ Q' 
there is a model (5' of T and isomorphic embeddings 
such that the diagram commutes. The model Q' is said to amalgamate '% 
and B over G. 
Notice that T has the amalgamation property if and only if for every 
model CS of T, the theory T UA, has the joint embedding property 
where A, is the diagram of Q. By the compactness theorem, every 
complete theory satisfies the analogues of the joint embedding property 
and the amalgamation property for elementary embeddings. Therefore 
every complete theory has the joint embedding property. 
As a special case, it follows that every model complete theory has the 
amalgamation property. For if T is model complete, then for each model 
CS of T, T U A, is complete and thus has the joint embedding property. 
EXAMPLES. 
Some well known theories from algebra which have the 
amalgamation property are the theories of fields, ordered fields, groups, 
Abelian groups, and Boolean algebras. 
The theory of fields does not have the joint embedding property 
because fields of different characteristics cannot be embedded in a 
common field. The theory of algebraically closed fields is an example of a 
model complete theory which does not have the joint embedding proper- 
ty. The theories of fields of characteristic p, ordered fields, groups, 
Abelian groups, and Boolean algebras do have the joint embedding 
property. An example of a theory which has the joint embedding 
property but does not have the amalgamation property is the theory of 
equivalence relations such that at most one equivalence class has more 
than one element. 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
197 
The next proposition gives two simple conditions under which a model 
complete theory must be complete. 
PROPOSITION 
3.5.11. Let T be a model complete theory. 
is complete. 
(i) (Prime Model Test). Zf T has an algebraically prime model then T 
(ii) T is complete if and only if T has the joint embedding property. 
PROOF. Both parts follow at once from the fact that any isomorphic 
embedding between models of T is an elementary embedding. -I 
EXAMPLES. 
The ordered field of real algebraic numbers is an algebraical- 
ly prime model of the theory of real closed ordered fields. Since the 
theory of real closed ordered fields is model complete, it is complete by 
the Prime Model Test. Two possible converses of Proposition 3.5.1 fail. 
The theory of countably many unary relations is complete but has no 
algebraically prime model. The complete theories of each of the models 
( w ,  S), ( w ,  s ) ,  
and ( w ,  +, a ,  S, 0) have algebraically prime models and 
the joint embedding property, but are not model complete. The theory 
of algebraically closed fields is model complete but does not have an 
algebraically prime model. All of the other model complete theories 
listed in Example 3.5.2, and all the model complete theories listed in 
Example 3.5.9, have algebraically prime models and hence are complete. 
The theories of algebraically closed fields and real closed ordered 
fields were the original examples which led Robinson to introduce the 
notion of a model complete theory. We now take up the notions which 
generalize the relationship between the theory of algebraically closed 
fields and the theory of fields, and the parallel relationship between the 
theory of real closed ordered fields and the theory of ordered fields. 
Robinson first introduced the notion of a model completion for this 
purpose. More recently, it was found that the more general but simpler 
notion of a model companion is better. 
DEFINITION. 
A theory T* is a model companion of T if T* is a cotheory 
of T and T* is model complete. 
EXAMPLES 
3.5.12. Here are some examples of model companions from 
algebra. 
(1). The theory of atomless Boolean algebras is a model companion of 
the theory of Boolean algebras. 

198 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
( 2 ) .  The theory of dense simple order without endpoints is a model 
companion of the theory of simple order. 
(3). The theory of divisible torsion free Abelian groups is a model 
companion of the theory of torsion free Abelian groups. 
(4). The theory of divisible ordered Abelian groups is a model 
companion of the theory of ordered Abelian groups. 
( 5 ) .  The theory of algebraically closed fields is a model companion of 
the theory of fields. 
(6). The theory of real closed ordered fields is a model companion of 
the theory of ordered fields. 
(7). The theory of real closed fields is a model companion of the 
theory of formally real fields. (A field is formally real if no finite sum of 
squares of nonzero elements is equal to zero. It can be shown that a field 
can be expanded to an ordered field if and only if it is formally real.) 
We now develop some properties of the model companion. 
PROPOSITION 
3.5.13. Every theory has at most one model companion up 
to logical equivalence. 
PROOF. Let T* and T** be model companions of T. Then T* and T** 
are model complete cotheories of each other. Let 91, be a model of T * .  
By repeated extension, there is a chain of models 
9IIC5?l2 ca, c ... 
such that 
is a model of T* for odd n and of T** for even n. Let 3 be 
the union of this chain. The an for odd n form an elementary chain, and 
by the Elementary Chain Theorem 8 is an elementary extension of a,. 
Similarly, '% is an elementary extension of a*. Therefore 2l1 is a model 
of T**. In a similar way, every model of T** is a model of T * ,  so T* 
and T** are logically equivalent. -1 
REMARK 
3.5.14. If T* is a model companion of T then every model of 
T* is existentially closed for T and is a model of Tv3. 
PROOF. By 3.5.6 (4) and (7). -1 
PROPOSITION 
3.5.15. Let T be a theory which is preserved under unions of 
chains and let K be the class of all models of T which are existentially 
closed for T. Then 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
199 
(i). Zf T has a model companion T*, then K is the class of all models 
of T*. 
(ii). T has a model companion if and only if K is an elementary class 
(the class of all models of some theory T'). 
PROOF. (i) Let T* be the model companion of T. By 3.5.14, every model 
of T* belongs to K. Now let 3 be any model in the class K. Since 
is a 
model of T and T* is a cotheory of T, 3 can be extended to a model 23 
of T*. 8 is existentially closed for T and hence for T*. Then 3 is 
existentially closed in 23 and hence every V3 sentence true in 23 is true in 
3. By proposition 3.5.10, T* has an V3 set of axioms, so 
is a model of 
T*. 
(ii) If T has a model companion then (i) shows that K is an elemen- 
tary class. Suppose K is an elementary class, say the class of all models of 
a theory T'. Then every model of T' is a model of T. By Lemma 3.5.7, 
every model of T can be extended to a model of T'. Thus T and T' are 
cotheories. Therefore every model of T' is existentially closed for T'. By 
Robinson's Test , Theorem 3.5.1 (iii) , T ' is model complete and hence a 
model companion of T. i 
Proposition 3.5.15 can be used to show that several familiar theories 
from algebra which are preserved under unions of chains do not have 
model companions. These include the theories of groups, commutative 
rings, and division rings. For each of these theories, the class of all 
existentially closed models of the theory is not elementary. As an 
illustration we sketch the argument for the theory of groups. 
EXAMPLE 
3.5.16. The theory of groups has no model companion. 
PROOF. It is known that for each group G and any two elements a, b E G 
of the same order, there is a group H 3 G in which a and b are 
conjugate, that is, b = c-lac for some c E H. The proof uses methods 
from group theory and will not be given here. Since each group can be 
extended to an existentially closed group, there is an existentially closed 
group G which contains elements of arbitrarily large finite order. Two 
elements in a group which are conjugate have the same order. There- 
fore, for each finite n there is a pair of elements in G of order greater 
than n which are not conjugate in G. By compactness, G has an 
elementary extension G' which has a pair of elements of infinite order 
which are not conjugate in G'. Thus G' is not existentially closed, and 

200 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
the class of existentially closed groups is not elementary. By 3.5.15, the 
theory of groups has no model companion. i 
Here is a syntactical characterization of V3 theories which have model 
companions. Its proof uses the Restricted Omitting Types Theorem 
stated in Exercise 2.2.11. 
THEOREM 
3.5.17. Let T be a consistent V3 theory in a countable language 
2. Then T has a model companion if and only if condition (i) below 
holds. 
(i) For every existential formula O(xl ... x,) there is a universal for- 
mula t)’(~, 
... x,) such that: 
(a) 
(b) 
TtO(x, ... x,)+ 
8’(x, .. . x,). 
For every universal formula q ( x ,  . . . x , ) ,  
if T, 8’+8kcp, 
then Tkcp. 
Moreover, if (i) holds, then the theory 
T’ = T U {(Vx, . . . x,)(8’+ 
8) : 8 is existential} 
is a model companion of T .  
PROOF. First suppose that T’ is a model companion of T. Let 8(x, . . . x,) 
be an existential formula. T‘ is model complete, so there is a universal 
formula 8’ such that T’M * 8’. We prove (a) and (b). Let l?I be a model 
of T and let 8 k 8[a, . . . a,]. Since T‘ is a cotheory of T, there is an 
extension 233% such that 23k T’. 8 is existential, so BkB[a, ... a,]. 
Using the fact that 8 k T’, we have 23 k 8’[a, . . . a,]. Since 8’ is universal, 
8 k 8’[a, . . . a,]. This proves (a). 
Now let cp be a universal formula which is not a consequence of T. 
Suppose 3 is a model of T and l?I k i 
~ [ a ,  
. . . a,]. Extend l?I to a model B 
of T’. Then Bkicp[a, ... a,]. Since B is a model of T’, we have 
B k 8’+ O[a, . . . a,]. T‘ is a cotheory of T, so B can be extended to a 
model 0 of T. Both i c p  and (8’- 8) are equivalent to existential 
formulas, so Q k i c p [ a ,  . . . a,] and 
k (8’+ 8)[a, . . . a,]. This shows that 
cp is not a consequence of T and (8’- O ) ,  and (b) follows. 
T’ = T U {(Vx, ... x , ) ( 8 ’ + 8 )  : 8 is existential}. 
For the converse, assume (i). Let 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
201 
We must prove that T’ is a model companion of T. Using (a), we see that 
for each existential formula 8, T’ L 8 * 8’ and 8’ is universal, so .T’ is 
model complete by Theorem 3.5.1 (iv). For each existential formula 
8(x, . . . x n ) ,  let Zo be the single universal formula 
zo = {l[eyx, . .. xn)+ e(x, ... x , ) ] > .  
Let 9 be a countable model of T and let TVl be the union of T and the 
diagram of ‘21. Using (b) and the Restricted Omitting Types Theorem, 
we see that T, has a countable model BA omitting each set Zo. Let 23 be 
the reduct of BA to the original language 2’. B3’21 and by (a), 23 is a 
model of T’. Therefore T‘ is a cotheory of T, and thus a model 
companion of T. -I 
We shall now introduce the notion of a model completion of a theory. 
DEFINITION. 
A theory T* is a model completion of a theory T if T* is a 
model companion of T and for every model 8 of T with diagram A,,, 
T* U A, is complete. 
The notion of model completion may be regarded as a uniqueness 
condition. It adds to the notion of model companion the condition that 
whenever 
is a model of T and 23, Q are two extensions of ‘21 which are 
models of T*, BA and Q A  satisfy the same sentences. The following 
result gives a relationship between model completions and the amalga- 
mation property. 
PROPOSITION 
3.5.18. Let T* be a model companion of T. The following 
are equivalent: 
(i). T* is a model completion of T. 
(ii). T has the amalgamation property. 
PROOF. 
Assume (i), that T* is a model completion of T. Let 8, 
23, and 
CI be models of T with isomorphic embeddings f : Q+ a, g : Q+ 23. 
Since T* is a cotheory of T, there are models a’, 23’ of T* with ‘u C ‘u’ 
and B CB’. Then (a’, fc)cEc and (B’, gc)c,c are both models of the 
complete theory T* U A,. Any complete theory has the joint embedding 
property, so these models have a common extension (Q’, hc),,c which is 
also a model of T* U A,. Because T and T* are cotheorjes, CS’ has an 
extension 6‘’ which is a model of T. Then Q” amalgamates ‘u and 23 over 
CI. This shows that T has the amalgamation property, so (ii) holds. 

202 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
I3.5 
Now assume (ii), that T has the amalgamation property. Let Q be a 
model of T and let (a, fc)ceC, (23, gc)c,c be models of T* U A,. We 
must show that these models are elementarily equivalent. Since T and 
T* are cotheories, 8 and 8 can be extended to models “2’ and 23’ of T. 
By the amalgamation property of T, there is a model Q’ of T and 
isomorphic embeddings f ’  : a‘ +. CS’, g’ : 8’ 4 
K’ which amalgamate a’ 
and 8’ over K. Again using the fact that T and T* are cotheories, C5’ can 
be extended to a model E“ of T*. We have the following commutative 
diagram. 
. % C % ’  
23 CB’ 
Q‘ C 0“ 
T 
T *  T 
T 
T* 
Since T* is model complete, the embeddings of 
and 23 into Q” are 
elementary. It follows that (a, fc)cEc = (8, gc),Ec as required. There- 
fore T* is a model completion of T, and (i) holds. -! 
We now introduce a condition on a theory which is stronger than 
model completeness. 
DEFINITION. 
A theory T is said to admit elimination of quantifiers if for 
every formula ~ ( x , ,  
. . . , x,) of 2 there is an open formula $(xl, . . . , x,) 
of 2 such that 
TFcp(x,,... ,x, )“W,,... 
We see from Theorem 3.5.1 (iv) that every theory which admits 
elimination of quantifiers is model complete. 
PROPOSITION 
3.5.19. Let T be model complete. Then the following are 
equivalent. 
(i). T is a model completion of Tv. 
(ii). Tv has the amalgamation property. 
(iii). T admits elimination of quantifiers. 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
203 
PROOF. T is always a cotheory of T,,, so a model complete T is a model 
companion of T,,. Thus the equivalence of (i) and (ii) follows from 
3.5.18. We shall prove that (i) is equivalent to (iii). The proof is similar 
to the proof in Theorem 3.5.1 that a theory T is model complete if and 
only if every formula is equivalent to an existential formula with respect 
to T. 
Assume (i), that T is a model completion of T,,. Let cp(x,, . . . , x,) be 
any formula of 2. Let Z(x,, . . . , x,) be the set of all open consequences 
of T U cp(xl, ... , x,) in the variables x,, ... , x,. Add new constant 
symbols c , ,  ... , c,. Let (a, a,, ... ,a,) 
be any model of 
TU 
Z(c,, .. . , c,,). Let D be the diagram of the submodel of '.21 generated by 
a,, . . . , a,. Then T U D must be consistent with cp(c,, . . . , c,,), because it 
is consistent with T U Z(cl, ... , c,). By (i), T U D is complete, and 
therefore T U D k cp(c,, . . . , c,,). Therefore (%?I, 
a,, . . . , a,) is a model of 
cp(c,, ... , c,,). This shows that 
T U Z(x,, . . . , x,) k cp(xl, . . . , x,,). 
Since Z is closed under finite conjunctions, there is a sentence I/J E 2 such 
that 
T u w-, 
, . . . 7 x, 1 k 
9 . . . 7 x ,  ). 
Then Jl(x,, ... , x,,) is an open formula which is equivalent to 
cp(x,, ... , x,,) with respect to T, and (iii) holds. 
Now assume (iii), that T admits elimination of quantifiers. Let C5 be a 
model of T,, and let (a, f ~ ) ~ , ~ ,  
(23, gc),,= be models of T U A, where 
A, is the diagram of Q. The models (?I, fc)cEc and (8, gc)c,c satisfy the 
same open sentences. By elimination of quantifiers, each sentence of YC 
is equivalent to an open sentence of ZC with respect to T. Therefore 
(a, fc)cEc = (23, gc)c,c, and the theory T U A, is complete. This proves 
that T is a model completion of T,,. -I 
Condition (i) of the above proposition is sometimes called submodel 
completeness. It states that for every model 
of T and every submodel 
G C 
the theory T U A, is complete. By comparison, criterion (ii) for 
model completeness in Theorem 3.5.1 states that for every model ?X of 
T, T U A,, is complete. 
In each of the theories T in Examples 3.5.2 and 3.5.9 except the 
theory of real closed fields and the theory of ( o, + , - , 0,1, S )  , it can be 
shown that T admits elimination of quantifiers by showing that T,, has 

204 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
the amalgamation property. For example, if T is the theory of atomless 
Boolean algebras, then Tv is the theory of Boolean algebras, which has 
the amalgamation property. By Proposition 3.5.17, the theory of atom- 
less Boolean algebras admits elimination of quantifiers and is a model 
completion of the theory of Boolean algebras. 
The theory RCF of real closed fields does not admit elimination of 
quantifiers. In fact, the formula ( 3 x )  x - x  = y ,  which says that y is 
nonnegative, is not equivalent to an open formula. This is because any 
open formula $ ( y )  in one variable is equivalent to a finite Boolean 
combination of equations of the form p( y )  = 0 where p is a polynomial 
with rational coefficients, and therefore in each model a, one of the sets 
{ a E A : ( 2 1 k + [ a ] } , { a E A : ? l k i $ [ a ] }  
must be finite. Thus by Proposition 3.5.19, RCF is not a model comple- 
tion of RCF,, and RCF, does not have the amalgamation property. On 
the other hand, RCF does have the amalgamation property because it is 
model complete. 
Similarly, in the theory of the model ( w ,  +, -, 0,1, S ) ,  the formula 
( 3 x )  x + x = y ,  which says that y is divisible by 2, is not equivalent to an 
open formula. 
The elimination of quantifiers for the theories of algebraically closed 
fields and for real closed ordered fields are important classical results of 
Tarski and Robinson. Macintyre, McKenna, and van den Dries (1983) 
obtained converses of these results. They showed that the theory of 
algebraically closed fields of characteristic 0 or p are the only complete 
extensions of the theory of infinite fields which admit elimination of 
quantifiers, and the theory of real closed ordered fields is the only 
complete extension of the theory of ordered fields which admits elimina- 
tion of quantifiers. More recently, analogous questions for other areas of 
algebra have been studied by several authors. 
The following theorem gives a syntactical characterization of universal 
theories which have model completions. It is a consequence of Theorem 
3.5.17. 
THEOREM 
3.5.20. Let T be a consistent universal theory in a countable 
language 2. 
Then T has a model completion if and only if condition (i) 
below holds. 
(i) For every existential formula 8(x, . . . x,,) there is an open formula 
8’(x, ... x n )  such that: 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
205 
( 4  
(b) 
TW(x, ... x,)+ 
8'(x, .. . x,). 
For every universal formula cp(x, . . . x,), 
if T, 8'+8I-cp, then TI-cp. 
Moreover, if (i) holds, then the theory 
T' = T U {(Vx, . . . x,)(8'+ 8 )  : 8 is existential} 
is a model completion of T. 
PROOF. First suppose T has a model completion T'. T' admits elimina- 
tion of quantifiers by 3.5.19. Therefore for each existential formula 
8(x, . . . x,) there is an open formula 8'(xl . . . x,) such that T' k 8 - 
8'. 
As in the proof of 3.5.17, (a) and (b) hold for T'. 
For the converse, assume (i) and let 
T' = T U {(Vx, . . . x,,)(8'+ 8 )  : 8 is existential}. 
By Theorem 3.5.17, T' is a model companion of T. Since T 'k  T, it 
follows from (a) that 
for each existential formula 8, so T' admits elimination of quantifiers. 
Since T is universal, T =  T;. By Proposition 3.5.19, T' is a model 
completion of T. -1 
As we have seen, many theories, including some familiar theories from 
algebra, do not have model companions. Several constructions have 
been discovered which share many of the properties of the model 
companion but exist for every theory T. 
DEFINITION. 
A mapping T+ T* from theories to theories in 2 is said to 
be a companion operator if: 
(1). For each theory T, T* is a cotheory of T; 
(2). if T and U are cotheories then T* = U*; 
(3). every model of T* is a model of Tv3. 
PROPOSITION 
3.5.21. Suppose * is a companion operator. Then for every 
theory T which has a model companion, T* is the model companion of T. 

206 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
PROOF. Let T' be the model companion of T. Then 
T* = (TI)* 2 (T')v3 = T', 
so every model of T* is a model of T'. Since T' is model complete, it 
follows that T* is model complete, and since T* is a cotheory of T it 
must be the model companion of T. -1 
Two examples of companion operators are the finite forcing compan- 
ion and the infinite forcing companion introduced by A. Robinson. The 
definition and properties of these and other companion operators is left 
to the exercises. 
EXERCISES 
3.5.1. Show that the following theories are not model complete: 
(a) The theory of divisible torsion free Abelian groups. 
(b) The theory of divisible ordered Abelian groups. 
3.5.2. Show that the following theories are model complete: 
(a) The theory of divisible torsion free Abelian groups. 
(b) The theory of divisible ordered Abelian groups. 
(c) Any complete theory in a language with only unary relation 
symbols and constant symbols. 
(d) The complete theory of ([0,1], s, 0, l), that is, the theory of 
dense simple order with constant symbols for the first and last element. 
(e) The complete theory of any set with a bijection (one to one onto 
function). 
3.5.3. Which equivalence relations have model complete theories? 
3.5.4. Which reducts of 
( w ,  +, S, s ,  0,l) have model complete 
theories? 
3.5.5. Prove the results stated in Remark 3.5.6. 
3.5.6. Let T be a theory in a countable language Y. Suppose that for 
every finite or countable model 9 of T, T U A ,  is complete. Prove that T 
is model complete. 
3.5.7. Show that each theory in Exercise 3.5.2 admits elimination of 
quantifiers. 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
207 
3.5.8. Which reducts of ( 0 ,  +, S, <, 0, 1) have theories which admit 
elimination of quantifiers? 
3.5.9. Let T be the theory in a language with three unary relations 
U ,  V, W and two binary relations R ,  S and axioms which state that: 
The union of U ,  W, and W is the whole model; 
U, V, and W are pairwise disjoint; 
R is a one to one function of U onto V; 
S is a one to one function of the union of U and V onto W, 
the model is infinite. 
Prove that T is complete and in fact a-categorical for each infinite a, and 
T is model complete, but T does not admit elimination of quantifiers. 
3.5.10. Prove that the theory of equivalence relations with infinitely 
many infinite classes is the model completion of the theory of equival- 
ence relations. 
3.5.11. Prove that the theory of models ( A ,  f )  where f i s  a bijection of 
A has a model completion, namely the theory of models ( A ,  f) where f 
is a bijection with infinitely many cycles of each finite size. 
3.5.12. Show that the theory of groups in the language with symbols for 
the unit element, product, and inverse, is universal and has the amalga- 
mation property but does not have a model companion. 
3.5.13. Let T be the universal theory with the axioms 
Vx V y [ R ( x ,  y ) +  P,(x)], n = 0,1,2, ... . 
Show that T has the amalgamation property but does not have a model 
companion. 
3.5.14*. Prove that the theory of graphs (symmetric binary relations) has 
a model completion. 
3.5.15*. Prove that the theory of Abelian groups has a model com- 
pletion. 
3.5.16*. Prove that each of the following theories has no model com- 
panion: 
(a) Commutative rings. 

208 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCnONS 
[3.5 
(b) Division algebras. 
(c) Peano arithmetic. 
(d) Complete number theory. 
(e) ZFC. 
3.5.17*. Let T be a consistent theory in a countable recursive language 
2'. Prove that T admits elimination of quantifiers if and only if for all 
models ?I, B of T such that the model pair ('21,B) 
is recursively 
saturated, and every subset C C A n B, the simple expansions 
('21, c1 .. . c,) and (B, 
c1 ... c n )  are partially isomorphic for all c, .. . c, E 
c. 
3.5.18*. Let T be preserved under unions of chains, and let K be the 
class of all models which are existentially closed for T. Prove that K is 
the largest class L of models such that: 
(i). Every model of T can be extended to a model in L ;  
(ii). if '21 and 8 
belong to L and '21 C B then '21 is existentially closed in 
f!3. 
3.5.19*. Let 3 and 23 be models of T and let C5 be a model which is 
existentially closed for T, and let f : a+ '21, g : a+ 8 be isomorphic 
embeddings. Then there is a model K' of T and isomorphic embeddings 
f '  : ?I+ Cr', g' : B-;. 6' such that the diagram commutes. That is, models 
of T can always be amalgamated if the amalgam is existentially closed for 
T. 
3.5.20*. Suppose S?! and B are models of T which are existentially closed 
for T, and 3 C B .  Then every V3V sentence true in B is true in '21. 
[Hint: Extend B to an elementary extension of '21.1 
3.5.21*. If T is complete and w-categorical and has a model companion 
T*, then T* is w-categorical. [Hint: Use the characterization of w -  
categoricity from Section 2.3.1 
3.5.22*. Let 2' be the language with countably many unary function 
symbols, and let T be the theory in 2 whose axioms state that each 
function is one to one, has no finite loops, and that the ranges of the 
functions are pairwise disjoint. Prove that T is a complete universal 
theory which has countably many algebraically prime models and no 
prime model. 

3.51 
MODEL COMPLETENESS 
209 
3.5.23*. For each theory T, let T #  be the set of all V3 sentences cp such 
that T,, U { cp} is a cotheory of T. Prove that # is a companion operator. 
3.5.24*. Let T be a theory in 2, '$1 a model of T,, and cp a sentence of 
2*. The infinite forcing relation 2l It cp is defined inductively by: 
If cp is atomic then 2l It cp iff 2l k cp; 
'$1 It- cp v I(/ iff 3 It- cp or 3 It- I/J; 
'$1 It (3x)cp(x) iff there exists a E A such that 'u It- cp(a); 
\21 It i c p  iff there is no model 23 3 2l of T,, such that 23 It cp. 
(a) If a, B are models of T,,, '$1 C B, and 23 It cp then 3 It cp. 
(b) Every model 2l of T,, can be extended to a model 23 of T,, such 
that for every sentence cp of TB, 
23 It- cp or 23 It i c p .  Such a model is said 
to be infinitely generic. 
(c) A model 23 of T,, is infinitely generic for T if and only if for every 
sentence cp of ZB, 23 It cp iff 23 k cp. 
(d) Every infinitely generic model for T is existentially closed for T. 
(e) If T has a model companion T*, then the class of models of T* is 
equal to the class of all infinitely generic models for T. 
(f) The infinite forcing companion of T is the theory of the class of 
infinitely generic models for T. The infinite forcing companion is a 
companion operator. 
(8) The infinite forcing companion of T is complete if and only if T 
has the joint embedding property. 
Prove the following results. 
3.5.25*. Let T be a theory in 2 and let C be a countable set of new 
constant symbols outside of 2. A condition for T is a finite set of atomic 
and negated atomic sentences of 2c which is consistent with T. Thefinite 
forcing relation p It cp between conditions for T and sentences cp of 2c 
is 
defined as follows. 
If cp is atomic then p It- cp iff cp E p ;  
p It- rp v I(/ iff p It- cp or p It I(/; 
p It- (3x)cp(x) iff p It cp(c) for some c E C ;  
p It- i c p  iff there is no condition q 1 
p with q I t  cp. 
We say that p weakly forces cp, p IFw cp, if p IF i i c p .  Prove the following 
results. 
(a) If p IF cp and q 2 p then q It cp. 
(b) A finitely generic set is a set G of sentences of TC 
such that each 
finite subset of G is a condition, and for each sentence cp of TC, 
there is a 
finite p C G which forces either cp or i c p .  Write G It cp if p It- cp for some 

210 
FURTHER MODEL-THEORETIC CONSTRUCTIONS 
[3.5 
p C G .  Each condition is contained in a finitely generic set. p 11'" cp iff 
G It cp for each finitely generic G 3 p .  
(c) For each finitely generic set G ,  there is a model S ( G )  for Lf<, such 
that { cp : G It cp} is the elementary diagram of VI(G). The reduct of VI(G) 
to Lf is called a finitely generic model for T. 
(d) Every finitely generic model for T is a countable model of Tv3 
which is existentially closed for T. 
(e) If T has a model companion T*, then the class of all finitely 
generic models for T is equal to the class of all countable models of T*. 
(f) The finite forcing companion of T is the theory of the class of 
finitely generic models for T. The finite forcing companion is a compan- 
ion operator. 
(g) The finite forcing companion of T is complete if and only if T has 
the joint embedding property. 
3.5.26*. This is a refinement of Exercise 2.2.11 (the Restricted Omitting 
Types Theorem). Let T be an V3 theory and 2 ( x )  a set of universal 
formulas such that every existential formula O(x) consistent with T, there 
is a u ( x )  E 2 ( x )  such that 8 A i u  
is consistent with T. Show that there is 
a finitely generic model for T which omits ,Z(x). 

CHAPTER 4 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
4.1. The fundamental theorem 
In the preceding two chapters we have developed three basic methods of 
constructing models: from constants, from Skolem functions, and from 
elementary chains. This chapter contains a treatment of another basic 
method of constructing models, the ultraproduct construction. This method 
originated with Skolem in. the 1930’s, and has been used extensively since 
the work of to6 in 1955. In this section we shall define the notions of an 
ultrafilter and ultraproduct and prove the important results which establish 
the connection between ultraproducts and the first-order properties of 
models. At the same time, we shall introduce the more general reduced 
product construction, which we shall meet again in Chapter 6. 
We begin with the notion of an ultrafilter over a set Z, and the proof of 
the ultrafilter theorem which concerns their existence. 
Let I be a nonempty set. We recall that S(I) is the set of all subsets of I. 
Afilter D over I is defined to be a set D c S(I) such that: 
Z E D ;  
if X , Y E D ,  then X n  Y E D ;  
if X E D  and X c  Z c  I, then Z E D .  
We observe that every filter D is a nonempty set since I E  D. Examples of 
filters are: 
The trivialfilter D = { I } .  
The improperfilter D = S(I). 
For each Y c I, the filter D = {X c I :  Y c X } ;  this filter is called the 
The FrPcheffilfer D = {X 
E S(Z) : I \ X is finite}. 
principal filter generated by Y. 
211 

212 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.1 
D is said to be aproperfilter iff it is not the improper filter S(I). The proposi- 
tion below shows how we can make a filter beginning with an arbitrary 
subset of S(I). First we give a definition: 
Let E be a subset of S(I). By thefilter generated by E we mean the inter- 
section D of all filters over I which include E: 
D = n { F  : E c F and F is a filter over I}. 
E is said to have the finite intersection property iff the intersection of any 
finite number of elements of E is nonempty. 
PROPOSITION 
4.1.1. Let E be any subset of S(I) and let D be thefilter generated 
by E. Then: 
(i). D is afilter over I. 
(ii). D is the set of all X E S ( I )  such that either X = I or for some 
Y , ,  ..., Y,, E E, 
Y ,  n ... n Y,, c X .  
(iii). D is a proper filter if E has the finite intersection property. 
PROOF. (i) is almost immediate. 
To prove (ii), let D' be the set of all X E S(I) such that X = I or for some 
Y , ,  ..., Y,, E E, Y ,  n ... n Y,, c X .  We show that D = D'. We have put 
I E  
D'. Let X,X' E D', and let Yi,Yj' E E be such that 
Y, n ... n Y,, c X ,  
Y;n ... n YA c A". 
If X c Z c I, then 
so Z E D'. Moreover, 
Y ,  n ... n Y,, c Z, 
Y, n ... n Y,, n Y,' n ... n YL c X n X', 
so X n X' E D'. Therefore D' is a filter over I. Obviously E c D'. It follows 
that D c D'. 
Now consider any filter F over I which includes E. Then I E F. For any 
Yl , ..., Y,, E E, we have Y ,  n ... n Y,, 
E F, and hence any X E  
S(I) which 
includes Y, n ... n Y, belongs to F. Thus D' c F. This shows that D' c D, 
whence D = D'. 
(iii) follows easily from (ii). i 
We pause to give one more example of a filter which will be particularly 

4.11 
THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 
213 
important in our study. Let J be an infinite set, and let I = S,(J) be the 
set of all finite subsets of J. For eachj E J, let 
j = { i E I : j E i }  
be the set of all finite subsets of J which containj. Now let 
E = ( j  : ~ E J } .  
Then E is a subset of S ( I ) ,  and we may form the filter D generated by E. 
From Proposition 4.1.1, D is just the set of all subsets X of I such that 
for some i E I, every i' E I which includes i belongs to X. Moreover, E has 
the finite intersection property, whence D is a proper filter. 
We now turn to ultrafilters. D is said to be an ultrafilter over I iff D is a 
filter over I such that for all X E S(I), 
X E D if and only if 
( I  \ X )  $ D. 
If we simply say that D is an ultrafilter, we shall tacitly assume that D is an 
ultrafilter over the set I = UD. 
PROPOSITION 
4. I .2. Tlre following arc equiralent: 
(i). D is an ultrafilter over I. 
(ii). D is a maximal proper filter over I. That is, D is a properjilter over I, 
and the only properjilter over I which itrclirdes D is D itself. 
PROOF. (i) + (ii). Assume (i). Then 0 4 D, because I E  D and 0 = I\ 
I. 
Hence D is a proper fiiter. Let F be any proper filter over I which includes D. 
IfXE Fand X #  D, 
then I\ 
X E  D, whence I\ 
X E  F, and 
0 = xn (f'\X)EF. 
This contradicts the assumption that F is proper. Thus F c D, so F = D, 
and (ii) holds. 
(ii) + (i). Assume (ii). Consider any set X E S(I). We cannot have both 
X E D and I \ X E D, because then 0 E D, whence every Y E  S ( I )  is in D, 
and D is not proper. It suffices now to prove that, if I \ X 4 D, then X E D. 
Suppose I\ 
X $  D. Let E = D u { X I ,  and let F be the filter generated 
by E. Consider any Y,, ..., Y, E E, and let 
Z = Y, n ... n Y,. 
Since D is closed under finite intersections, we either have Z E D or Z = Y n X 
for some Y E  D. In the first case Z # 0, because 0 # D. In the second case, 

214 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.1 
we also have Z # 0, for otherwise we would have Y n X = 0, Y c I \ A', 
whence I\ 
X E  
D. Thus in any case, Z # 0. By Proposition 4.1.1, we see 
that 0 # F. This means that F is a proper filter including D, so by (ii), 
F = D. Therefore E c D and X E D. This proves (i). -I 
We now prove an important theorem about the existence of ultrafilters. 
PROPOSITION 
4.1.3 (Ultrafilter Theorem). If E c S ( I )  and E has the finite 
intersection property, then there exists an ultrafilter D over I such that E c D. 
PRCOF. By Proposition 4.1.1, the filter F generated by E does not contain 
the empty set, whence F is proper. Moreover, if C is any nonempty chain 
of proper filters over I, then U C  is a proper filter over I. This follows very 
easily from the definition of proper filter, and is left as an exercise. Further- 
more, if each D E C includes E, then U C  includes E. It follows by Zorn's 
lemma that the class 8 of all proper filters over I including E has a maximal 
element, say D. Thus E c D. D is a maximal proper filter over I, because 
if D' is a proper filter including D, then E c D', and so D' belongs to d 
and D' = D. Thus, by Proposition 4.1.2, D is an ultrafilter over I. i 
COROLLARY 
4.1.4. Any proper filter over I can he extended to an ultrafilter 
over I. 
PROOF. Every proper filter has the finite intersection property (see 
Exercise 4.1.1). -I 
We are now ready to introduce the reduced product and ultraproduct 
constructions. The latter is merely a special case of the former. We first 
apply the construction to sets, and then to models. 
Suppose I is a nonempty set, D is a proper filter over I, and for each 
i E I, Ai is a nonempty set. Let 
c = n A i  
i e  I 
be the Cartesian product of these sets. Thus C is the set of all functions f 
with domain I such that for each i E I,f(i) E Ai. For two functionsf, g E C, 
we say that f and g are D-equivalent, in symbols f = D  g, iff 
{
i
~
 
I : f ( i )  = g ( i ) }  E D. 
To continue, we need the following: 

4.11 
THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 
215 
PROPOSITION 
4.1.5. The relation = D  is an equivalence relation over thc set C. 
The proof is left as an exercise. Now let f D  be the equivalence class off: 
f D  = {g E C  :f 
= D g } .  
We then define the reduced product of A ,  modulo D to be the set of all 
equivalence classes of = D .  It is denoted by n D A i .  Thus 
We shall call the set I the index set for n D A i .  In the special case wherc D 
is an ultrafilter over I, the reduced product n D A i  is called an ultraproduct. 
In the case when all the sets A i  are the same, say A i  = A, the reduced 
product may be written nD 
A, and it is called the reducedpower of A modulo 
D. In particular, if D is an ultrafilter, then n D A  is called the ultrapower 
of A modulo D. 
Strictly speaking, our notation n D A i  is not completely precise. From 
the filter D we can recover the index set I = U D ,  so there is no need to 
write an I in our notation. However, there may be some ambiguity if the 
sets depend on more than one variable, for example n D A i j .  The reduced 
product really depends on both the filter D and the function ( A i  : i E I). 
So in the few cases where the need arises we shall use the more complete 
notation 
n ( A i :  i E I )  
for the reduced product n D A i .  For example, &,Aij 
is ambiguous, and 
could mean any one of 
n 
(Aij : i E I ) ,  
in our more complete notation. 
There are a number of interesting and difficult problems of a purely 
set-theoretical nature concerning the existence of various kinds of ultra- 
filters and the cardinality of ultraproducts. We shall postpone a discussion 
of these problems to the next two sections and proceed immediately to the 
fundamental model-theoretic results on ultraproducts. For these are the 
results which make ultraproducts important. 
We now give the definition of reduced product of models. Let Z be a 
nonempty set, let D be a proper filter over Z, and for each i E Z let Bli be a 
model for 2. 
We have our usual convention that in Hi relation symbols P 
are interpreted by R i ,  functions F by Gi, and constants c by a,. 
D 
n ( A i j  : j E I ) ,  n 
( A i j  : ( i ,  j )  E I > ,  
D 
D 
D 

216 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.1 
4.1.6. The reducedproduct nDai 
is the model for 9 described as follows: 
(i). The universe set of 
is n D A i .  
(ii). Let P be an n-placed relation symbol of 9. 
The interpretation of 
P in n D % i  is the relation S such that 
S(fd ... f:) 
if and only if 
{ i  E I : R,(f'(i) ... f"(i))} E D .  
(iii). Let F be an n-placed function symbol of 9. 
Then F is interpreted 
in nD91i 
by the function H given by 
H ( f d  ... f') 
= (G,(f'(i) ... f"(i)) : i E I ) D .  
(iv). Let c be a constant of 9. 
Then c is interpreted by the element 
b E n D A i ,  where 
b = (ai : i e  I ) D .  
To show that the above definition is consistent, we must check that 
S(fd ...fi) and H(fA ... f') 
depend only on the equivalence classes 
fd, ..., f', 
and not on the representatives f ', ...,f" of these equivalence 
classes. We state this fact as a proposition and leave the proof as an exercise. 
PROPOSITION 4.1.7. Let I, D, 91i be as in definition 4.1.6. Suppose that 
f 
= D  gl, ...,f" = D  9". Then 
{ i  E I : Ri(f'(i) ... /"(i))} E D  if and only if 
( i E I  : Ri(g'(i) ... g"(i))} E D ,  
(G,(f'(i) ... f"(i)) : i E I )  = D  (G,(g*(i) ... gn(i)) : i E I ) .  
and 
We now prove two important theorems about ultraproducts. The first 
of these, which we have labeled the expansion theorem, has to do with 
the passage from the language Y to an expansion 9' of 9. 
It is a very 
simple result, but is an extremely powerful tool when combined with other 
facts about ultraproducts. Actually, the expansion theorem concerns 
arbitrary reduced products. 
THEOREM 
4.1.8 (Expansion Theorem). Let 9' 
be an expansion of 9. 
Let 
I be a nonempty set and for each i E I let 91i be a model for Y and Bi an 
expansion of gi to 9'. 
Let D be a filter over I. Then the reduced product 
n D 8 i  is an expansion of the reducedproduct nD%, 
to 2". 

4.11 
THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 
217 
PROOF. For each i, the models 21i and '23, have the same universe set, 
A, = B,. Therefore the reduced products have the same universe sets, 
n , A ,  = n D B i .  Since 8, 
is an expansion of 21i, each symbol of 2' has the 
same interpretation in Bi as in 21i. From definition 4.1.6, we see that the 
interpretation of a symbol of 64 in nD9ii 
depends only on its interpretations 
in the models a,, and on the universe sets and the filter D. It follows that 
each symbol of 9 
has the same interpretation in n D B i  as in nD3Ii, 
so 
the former is an expansion of the latter. -I 
Our next result is the 'fundamental theorem' of ultraproducts. It holds 
only for ultraproducts, and not for arbitrary reduced products. From 
now on, we shall concentrate exclusively on ultraproducts, and shall not 
discuss reduced products again until Chapter 6. 
THEOREM 
4.1.9 (The Fundamental Theorem of Ultraproducts). Let '23 be 
the ultraproduct n D ( u i ,  and let I be the index set. Then: 
(i). For any term f(x, ... x,) of 2' and elements fd, ..., fi E B, we have 
tg[fd ... f;d] = < t U i [ j ' ( i )  ... f"(i)] : i E I ) ~ .  
(ii). Given any formula cp(x, ... x,) of 9 
and f j ,  ..., fl E B, we have 
Bl=(p[fd ...f;l] ifandonly if { i e l  : ' l r i k c p [ f ' ( i )  ...f"( i ) l } ~ D .  
(iii). For any sentence cp of 64, 
B 1 cp 
ifand only if 
{i E I : Yli k cp} E D. 
PROOF. (iii) is an immediate consequence of (i) and (ii). The proofs of 
(i) and (ii) are by induction on the terms and formulas, respectively. 
(i). From the definition of reduced product we see that (i) holds whenever 
t(x, ... x,) is a term of the form F(x, ... x,) and also whenever t(x, ... x,) 
is a constant symbol or variable. Suppose that 
t(x, ... x,) = F ( ~ , ( x ,  ... x,) ... t,(x, ... xJ), 
where F is a function symbol of 3 and the terms t , ,  ..., t, all satisfy (i). 
Then by the definition of interpretation of terms, 
ts[fr: * * ' f;ll = H(flPI[fi: . . . f;dI * * * f,B[fd 
. . . f;dl), 
where H is the interpretation of F in B. By (i), for t ,  , ..., t,, we have for 

218 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.1 
k = 1, ..., m, 
where 
traCfi ... fil = 
g k  = (tra,[f'(i) ... f"(i)] : i E I ) .  
By 4.1.6 (iii), 
H(gL ... g;) = (Gi(gl(i) ... gm(i)) : i E I ) D .  
Again using the definition of interpretation of terms, 
f p l r [ f I ( i )  ... f"(i)] = Gi(gl(i) ... g"(i)). 
Combining, we obtain 
t,[,fA ... f;] = H ( g h  ... g:) 
= (tpl,[fl(i) 
... f"(i)] : i E I ) ~ .  
Thus r(x, ... x,) satisfies (i). 
(ii). The proof that (ii) holds for all atomic formulas is similar to the 
above proof of (i), and we shall leave the details to the reader. We only 
point out that (i) is used in the proof of (ii) for atomic formulas. 
Suppose that cp = i 
$(xl ... x,) and (ii) holds for $(xi ... x,). Then the 
following are equivalent: 
B b V[fd ..' 61; 
not 8 k $[fd ... J;]; 
{i E I : ?Ii k $ [ f ' ( i )  ... f " ( i ) ] }  # D ;  
{ i  E I : not '!Ii b $ [ f ' ( i )  ... f"(i)]} E D ;  
{ i  E I : 91i k q[fl(i) ... f"(i)]} E D .  
The fact that D is an ultrafilter is used to show that the third and fourth lines 
in the above list are equivalent. Indeed, this is the only point in the entire 
proof of the theorem where we need the fact that D is an ultrafilter, and 
not merely a proper filter. 
The next step is to prove that if $ and 0 satisfy (ii), then so does $ A O .  
This is done by writing a string of equivalences like the one we used for 
i $. This time the crucial fact about D which we need is that 
X n Y E D  ifandonlyif X E D  and Y E D .  
Every filter has this property. The details of this step in the proof are straight- 
forward. They are left to the reader. 

4.11 
THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 
219 
For the last part of our induction, suppose that 
q(x1 *.* xn) = (3xO)ll/(xox1 
- 1 .  xn), 
m t dfd ... GI; 
and that (ii) holds for I). Then the following statements are equivalent: 
there exists f: E B such that '23 C I)[fi ... f;]; 
(1) 
there exists f: 
E B such that { i E I  : iXi t $ [ f 0 ( i )  ... f"(i)]} ED. 
Since 9ti C $uo(i) 
...f"( i ) ]  implies that 911 t cppl(i) ...f"( 
i)], thestatement 
(1) above implies 
(2) 
On the other hand, if (2) holds, then we may pick a function f E n i e , A l  
such that (1) holds. Hence ( I )  is equivalent to (2), and 
{ i  E I : 9ti t c p [ f ' ( i )  ... f " ( i ) ] }  E D .  
9 cpCfA - * .  fjl 
is also equivalent to (2). This shows that the formula cp has the property (ii). 
Our induction is now completed. -I 
COROLLARY 
4.1.10. Let nD9t be an ultrapower of N. Then n D N  = 2. 
Let us now give a few applications of the fundamental theorem. Further 
applications can be found in the exercises. Our first application is another 
proof of the compactness theorem (Theorem 1.3.22). 
COROLLARY 
4.1.11 (An ultraproduct version of the compactness theorem). 
Let Z be a set of sentences of 9, let I = SJZ) be the set of allfinite subsets 
of 8, and for each i E I, let 21i be a model of i. Then there exists an ultrafilter 
D over I such that the ultraproduct HDBi is a model of C. 
PROOF. 
For each 0 E Z, let 8 be the set of all i E I such that a E i. The set 
E = { ~ : u E Z }  
has the finite intersection property because 
{a1, ..., a,,} 
n ... n a,,. 
It follows by the ultrafilter theorem that E can be extended to an ultrafilter 
D over I. Any ultrafilter D over I which includes E will do. If i E a ,  then 

220 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.1 
a E i, whence Bi != a. Thus for each a E Z, 
{ i E Z : B i k a }  3 8  and  ED. 
{ i  E Z : Bi t a} E D. 
Therefore 
By the fundamental theorem, nDui 
k a for all a E Z. Hence nD9li is 
a model of Z. -I 
Our next application gives characterizations of the notions of ‘elementary 
class’ and ‘basic elementary class’ in terms of ultraproducts and elementary 
equivalence. This theorem is best stated in terms of classes of models. 
These classes will be so large that they cannot be sets (see the Appendix 
on set theory). A class K of models for 3 is said to be an elementary class 
iff there exists a theory Tin 3 such that K is exactly the class of all models 
of T. K is a basic elementary class iff there is a sentence cp of 2’ such that K 
is the class of all models of cp. A class K of models for 9 
is said to be 
closed under elementary equivalence iff B E K, B = ‘$3 implies ‘$3 E K. K is 
said to be closed under ultraproducts iff every ultraproduct nDBli 
of a family 
of models Bi E K belongs to K. 
THEOREM 
4.1.12. Let K be an arbitrary class of models. Then: 
and elementary equivalence. 
of K are closed under ultraproducts and elementary equicalencc. 
(i). K is an elementary class if and only if K is closed under ultraproducts 
(ii). K is a basic elementary class if and only if both K and the complement 
PROOF. (i). Every elementary class is obviously closed under elementary 
equivalence. The fundamental theorem shows that if Bi != cp for all i E I, 
then nDB, 
t cp. Thus every elementary class is also closed under ultra- 
products. 
Let K be any class of models which is closed under ultraproducts and 
elementary equivalence. Let T be the set of all sentences of 9 
which hold 
in all B E K. Then T is a theory in 2’ and every B E K is a model of T. 
Let 23 be any model of T. Let C be the set of all sentences true in 23, and let 
I = So,(Z). For each i = {a1, ..., a,} E 1, there exists a model !Xi E K which 
is a model of i, for otherwise the sentence i 
(al A ... A a,) would belong 
to T and yet be false in 23. Choose a model Hi E K of i for each i E l. By 
Corollary 4.1.1 1, there exists an ultraproduct 
which is a model of Z. 
Since K is closed under ultraproducts, n D B i  
E K. But every model of Z 

4.1) 
THE FUNDAMENTAL TIlEOREM 
22 1 
is elementarily equivalent to 8, so n D U i  = 8. Therefore 8 E K. Hence K 
is the class of all models of T, and so K is an elementary class. 
(ii). This follows easily from (i) and the compactness theorem (see 
Exercise 2.1.13). We leave the details for an exercise. -I 
Our third application shows that each model 2l is elementarily embeddable 
in every ultrapower of 
in a natural way. We now define the natural 
embedding of 91 into nD9L This embedding is extremely important and will 
be used many times in our treatment of ultraproducts. 
Let I be a nonempty set, D a proper filter over I, and % a model. The 
natural embedding d of 2l into HD91 is the function d such that d(a) is the 
equivalence class of the constant function with value a, 
d(a) = ( a  : ~ E I ) ~ .  
The range of d is denoted by d(A), and the restriction of nD91 to d(A) is 
denoted by d(2l). 
COROLLARY 
4.1.13. Let 2l be a model and D an ultrafilter. Then the natural 
embedding of 
into the ultrapower HD2l is an elementary embedding. 
PROOF. Let q ( x ,  ... x,,) be a formula of 2 
and a,, ..., a,, E A. Then, 
by the fundamental theorem, the following are equivalent: 
{ i  E I : 
C q[a, ... a,,]} E D ;  
2l I= q[a, ... a,,]. i 
Corollary 
1.13 shows that d is an isomorphism c 2l onto d(2l) ant, that 
d(%) is an elementary submodel of the ultrapower nD91. 
One of the topics 
of the next section will be to determine when d is a proper embedding. 
Our iast application is a very simple one which depends on both the 
expansion theorem and the fundamental theorem. It shows that certain 
second-order formulas are ‘preserved under ultraproducts’. This application 
will be useful in the next section. We wish to consider quantifiers over 
relation and function symbols, as well as over individual variables. 
By a Xi formula over 2 we mean a formula I) 
of the following form: 
(*I 
(3P1 ... P,F, ... F,)c~, 

222 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.1 
where the Pi and Fj are new relation and function symbols not occurring 
in 9, 
and where cp is a formula in the expanded first-order language 
2" = 3 v {P, ... P,,, 
F, ... F"}. 
Thus a Ei formula is a second-order formula all of whose relation and 
function quantifiers occur at the beginning and are existential. Satisfaction 
for Ci formulas is defined in the obvious way. If cp is a sentence, then $ 
holds in a model (II for 9 
if and only if there exists an expansion 
%' = (a, R ,  ... R,G, ... G,) 
of (II to 9' such that cp holds in 8'. 
Tf cp has a free variable x, then (II C $[a] 
if and only if there exists an expansion a' of % to 9' 
such that (II' t rp[a]. 
COROLLARY 
4.1.14 (Xi formulas are preserved under ultraproducts). Suppose 
23 is the ultraproduct nD(III, 
fd , . . .,fL E B, and $(x, ... x,) is a E: formula. 
{ i  E I : (IIi t $ [ f ' ( i )  ... f'(i)]} 
E D ,  
?f 
then 
23 k 
. * *  f a  
PROOF. 
Let $ be as in (*) and let 
x = { i  E I : (IIi k $ [ f l ( i )  ... f'(i)]}. 
For each i E X, let Hi be an expansion of (IIi to 9' 
such that 
(II; k q [ f ' ( i )  ... f'(i)]. 
Since X E  
D, we we by the fundamental theorem, 
n 
Hi dfd ... GI. 
D 
By the expansion theorem, nDH; 
is an expansion of 23 = nD(II, 
to 9'. 
Therefore 
23 c $[f; ... f;]. -I 
The reader may wonder why the notation 72: is used. It is just one instance 
of the currently popular way of classifying formulas. In general, a E: 
formula is a formula of (m + 1)th-order logic which is of the form 
(3x11 . * *  XI,,VXZI * . *  XZrz *.* OX., * * .  XnrJVs 

4.11 
THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 
223 
where cp is in mth-order logic. The subscript n stands for the number of 
blocks of quantifiers. Q is either 3 or V depending on whether n is odd or 
even. If the formula has n blocks of (m+ 1)th-order quantifiers beginning 
with a universal quantifier, it is called a II: formula. As we have explained 
in our introduction to this book, we shall almost always deal only with 
first-order logic. The Zf and IIf formulas are first-order, and we have 
already introduced them in Section 3.1. 
EXERCISES 
4.1.1. Let D be a filter over I. Show that the following are equivalent: 
(i). D is a proper filter. 
(ii). 0 4 D. 
(iii). D has the finite intersection property. 
4.1.2. 
(i). The intersection of any set of filters over I is a filter over I. 
(ii). The union of any chain of proper filters over Zis a proper filter over I. 
4.1.3. Let D be an ultrafilter over I and let X E  D. Then D n S ( X )  is an 
ultrafilter over X. Similarly for proper filters. 
4.1.4. D is a principal ultrafilter over I if and only if D = { X E  S(I) : i E X }  
for some i E I. 
4.1.5. If X is infinite, then there exist nonprincipal ultrafilters over X. 
4.1.6. A filter D is principal if and only if n D  E D. Every filter over a 
finite set is principal. 
4.1.7. Let D be a proper filter over I. D is an ultrafilter if and only if for all 
X, Y E S ( I ) ,  X u  Y E  D implies X E D  or Y E  D. 
4.1.8. Let E be a countable subset of S(o). Then the filter generated by E 
cannot be a nonprincipal ultrafilter. 
4.1.9. Prove Propositions 4.1.5 and 4.1.7. 
4.1.10. Suppose D is the principal ultrafilter where { j }  E D .  Prove that 
nDMi is isomorphic to M,. 
4.1.1 1. Let D be a proper filter over I, let XE D, and let E = D n S(X). 

224 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.1 
Prove that 
(Cf. Exercise 4.1.3.) 
4.1.12. The direct product of the models BIi, i E I is defined as follows. 
The universe set is the Cartesian product nlE,Ai. A relation S(f' ...f") 
holds in the direct product if and only if the corresponding relation 
R,(f'(i) ...f"( i ) )  holds in Mi for all ieZ. The functions H are defined by 
H ( f '  ... f") = (Gi(j'(i) ... f"(i)) : i E I ) ,  
and the constants b are defined by 
b = ( a , : i E I ) .  
Prove that the direct product is isomorphic to the trivial reduced product 
4.1.13. If D, E are proper filters over Z and D c E, then nEMi is a homo- 
morphic image of nD%i. 
Hence every reduced product is a homomorphic 
image of the direct product of the models Mi. (See Section 2.1 for the 
definitions of homomorphism and homomorphic image.) 
4.1.14. Show that there exists an ultraproduct n D A i  of finite sets Ai which 
is infinite. 
4.1.15. Let D be a proper filter over I. If each 2& is isomorphically em- 
bedded in B,, then nDMi is isomorphically embedded in nDBi. If each Mi 
is isomorphic to Bi, then nDMi is isomorphic to n D B i .  If each Mi is a 
homomorphic image of Bi, then nD%, 
is a homomorphic image of nDBi. 
4.1.16. Let D be an ultrafilter over I. If M, = Bi for all i c  I, then 
nDMi = nDBi. If Mi is elementarily embedded in Bi for all i E Z, then 
nDMi is elementarily embedded in nDBi. 
4.1.17. A class K of models for 9 is said to be a pseudo-elementary class 
iff for some expansion 9' of 9 and some elementary class K' for 9', 
K is the class of all reducts of models in K' to 9. Prove that every pseudo- 
elementary class is closed under ultraproducts. Prove that if r is a set of 
C: sentences, then the class of all models of r is a pseudo-elementary class. 
4.1.18. Let K be a class of models for 9. Let M be the class of all models 
M such that M is elementarily equivalent to an ultraproduct of members 

4.11 
THE FUNDAMENTAL THEOREM 
225 
of K. Prove that M is an elementary class, and is the least elementary class 
which includes K. 
4.1.19. Give the proof of Theorem 4.1.12 (ii). 
4.1.20. The following are equivalent: 
(i). K is a basic elementary class. 
(ii). There exists a finitely axiomatizable theory T in 2 
such that K 
(iii). Both K and its complement are elementary classes. 
is the class of all models of T. 
4.1.21. Let D be a principal ultrafilter. Prove that d(%) = nD%, 
whence 
d is an isomorphism of Yl onto nDYl. 
4.1.22. Let D be a proper filter. Prove that d is an isomorphic embedding 
of 9l into nD%. 
4.1.23. Let K and M be two classes of models. Let T, be the theory of K 
(the set of all sentences which hold in every model in K), and let T2 be 
the theory of M. Prove that TI u T2 is consistent if and only if some ultra- 
product of members of K is elementarily equivalent to some ultraproduct 
of members of M .  
4.1.24. Let 21a, a < 8, be an elementary chain of length B > 0. Let D be 
an ultrafilter over p such that for each a < p, the set { y  : a < y < p} 
belongs to D. Prove that Ua<BYla 
is elementarily embedded in the ultra- 
product n D 2 1 a .  
4.1.25. In the above exercise suppose that 2ia, a < p, is only a chain of 
models, and D is only a proper filter. Prove that Ua<P911a 
is isomorphically 
embedded in the reduced product nD%,. 
4.1.26. Using Theorem 4.1.12, prove that none of the following theories is 
finitely axiomatizable: 
(i) infinite models of pure identity theory; 
(ii) fields of characteristic zero; 
(iii) real closed fields; 
(iv) algebraically closed fields; 
(v) divisible Abelian groups; 
(vi) torsion-free Abelian groups; 
(vii) the theory of the model (w, S), where S is the successor function. 
4.1.27. Show that none of the following classes of models is closed under 

226 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.1 
elementary equivalence (use Corollary 4. I. 10): 
(i) the class of free groups; 
(ii) the class of torsion groups; 
(iii) the class of simple groups; 
(iv) the class of all rings isomorphic to polynomial rings over the field 
of rational numbers. 
4.1.28. Prove that every model a can be isomorphically embedded in some 
ultraproduct of finite submodels of 91. (For this problem, assume that Y 
has no function or constant symbols, so we can be sure that finite submodels 
exist.) This gives a stronger form of Corollary 2.1.9. 
4.1.29. Give an example of a IIi formula which is not preserved under 
ultraproducts. 
4.1.30*. Let F', i E I be a family of fields. From the direct product 
R = n i , , F i .  Thus R is a ring. For each ultrafilter D over I, let 
M D  = { f ~  
R : {i E I :f(i) = 0) E D}. 
Prove the following: 
(i). For each D, M ,  is a maximal ideal in R. 
(ii). For every maximal ideal M in R, there is an ultrafilter D over I 
(iii). The ultraproduct n D F i  is isomorphic to the quotient field RIM. 
Thus ultraproducts of fields are essentially the same thing as quotient 
fields of direct products of fields. Show that the same results hold for 
division rings (which have all the field axioms except for commutativity of 
multiplication). 
such that M = M D .  
4.1.31. Let D be an ultrafilter and let 3 X 93 be the direct product of ?I 
and 93. Prove that n (a X 93) 
4.1.32. Let D be a nonprincipal ultrafilter over w. Prove that for every 
infinite set A ,  the natural embedding D : A- H D A  is a proper embed- 
ding. Prove the same result under the weaker hypothesis that the index 
set I of D can be partitioned into countably many sets none of which 
belongs to D. (Such ultrafilters are called countably incomplete in Section 
fl 2l X flDB. 
u 
D 
4.3.) 
4.1.33. Let D be a nonprincipal ultrafilter over o. Prove that the 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
227 
ultrapower n ( w ,  S )  is isomorphic to a proper initial segment of 
n (n 
( w ,  S ) ) .  [Hint: Use the fact that ( w ,  s )  is isomorphic to an 
initial segment of flD ( w ,  S )  .I 
4.1.34*. Let 9 be a model with the property that each subset U of A is a 
relation of 9 and each function f : A+ A is a function of 9. 
Suppose 
9 < B and there is an element b E B such that B has no proper 
submodels containing b. Prove that there is an ultrafilter D over A such 
that B n A. 
D 
D
D
 
D 
4.1.35*. Let D be an ultrafilter over a set I and let f : I+ I. Prove that 
there is a set X E D such that either f(i) = i for all i E X ,  or f(i) q! X for 
all i E X .  [Hint: Let J = {i E I : f(i) # i}. Show that J can be partitioned 
into 3 sets X I ,  X,, X ,  such that for each n E {1,2,3}, f(i) q! X,, for all 
i E X,,.] 
4.2. Measurable cardinals 
In this section we shall study ultraproducts of a special kind. These are 
ultraproducts where the ultrafilter is a-complete. We shall apply these 
ultraproducts to the problem of the existence of a-complete ultrafilters. 
This problem has had a profound influence on the recent development of 
set theory. 
Let a be an infinite cardinal. A filter D over I is said to be a-complete 
iff the intersection of any non-empty set of fewer than a elements of D be- 
longs to D, that is, 
E c D and IEI < a implies n E E  D. 
We see at once that: 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.1. 
(i). Every filter is w-complete. 
(ii). A filter D is a-complete for all a if and only if D is principal. 
(iii). If a < fl, then every B-completefilter is a-complete. 
A slightly less trivial proposition is the following: 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.2. Let D be a filter over a set I of power a. If D is a+- 
complete, then D is principal. 

228 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.2 
PROOF. Let E be the set of all complements of singletons which belong 
to D, 
E = {I\ 
{ i }  : I\ 
{ i }  E D } .  
Since 111 = a, IE( < a c a'. D is a+-complete and E c D, so n E E  D. 
On the other hand, if X E D, then n E  c X .  For if i # X, then X c I \ { i } ,  
whence I\ 
{ i } E  D, I\ 
{ i }  E E, and i #  n E .  Thus D is the principal 
filter generated by n E .  -I 
We shall be mainly interested in nonprincipal a-complete ultrafilters. 
The above proposition shows that a must be at most the power of I. 
If a is a regular cardinal, then the set D of all sets X c a for which 
la \ XI < a is an a-complete nonprincipal filter over a. We shall see below 
that a-complete nonprincipal ultrafilters are much harder to come by. 
The following is a useful lemma. 
LEMMA 
4.2.3. Let D be an ultrafilter over a set I. Then D is a-complete if 
and only if for every partition of I into fewer than a parts, one of the parts 
belongs to D. 
PROOF. Suppose D is a-complete and let I = U,,<@X,, be a partition of 
Zinto B parts, where /l 
c a. Then 
n(I\x,,) = O # D .  
s < b  
Hence for some q c p, I \ X,, 
# D, whence X,, 
E D. 
Now suppose that for every partition of I into fewer than a parts, one 
part is in D. Let E be a subset of D of power less than a. Let E = {e,, : q < B} 
be an enumeration of E, where 
< a. We define a function f on Z into 
B+ 1 as follows. If i E R E ,  then f ( i )  = 0. If i E Z \  n E ,  then f ( i )  is the 
least q < /3 such that i # e,,. By our assumption, there exists q < B+ 1 
such that f - ' ( q ) ~  
D. For each q < /3, f ( i )  = q implies i#e,,, so 
f -'(q) n e,, = 0. Since e,, E D, f -'(q) 4 D. Therefore we must have 
f-'(p) E D. But f 
= r)E, so n E  E D. Hence D is a-complete. -I 
We now prove a result which tells when the natural embedding maps N 
onto nD%. 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.4. Let N be a model of power a and let D be an ultrafilter. 
Then the natural embedding d maps N onto nD% 
if andonly if D is a+- 
complete. 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
229 
PROOF. Suppose D is u+-complete. Let f D  E n D A .  Then f maps I into A. 
Since IAl = u, the partition I = U{f - ' ( a)  : a E A }  partitions I into fewer 
than a+ parts. By Lemma 4.2.3, there exists a E A  such that f - ' ( a ) E  D. 
Then f = D(a : i E I ) ,  so f D  = d(a). This shows that d(A) = n D A .  
Now suppose d maps 8 onto nD8. 
Let Z = us<BX,, be a partition of 
I into /I < u+ parts. Since I/II < u = IAI, we may renumber the sets X,, 
with indices from A, say 
I = U x a ,  
a d  
where B c A. Let f be the function on Z into A given by: f ( i )  = a if and 
only if i E X,. Then f D  E n D A  = d(A), so f D  = d(a) for some a E A. This 
means that f -'(a) E D. But f -'(a) = X,, so Xa E D. By Lemma 4.2.3, 
D is a+-complete. -I 
COROLLARY 
4.2.5. If either 2l is finite or D is a principal ultrafilter, then d 
maps 8 onto nD8. 
The interesting ultrapowers are those in which d maps M properly into 
A cardinal u is said to be measurable iff there exists a nonprincipal 
u-complete ultrafilter over u. Obviously, o is measurable. We shall learn 
from the results below that the first uncountable measurable cardinal, 
if it exists at all, must be very large. We observe that if one set of power a 
has an a-complete nonprincipal ultrafilter, then so does every other set of 
power u. 
JJDY1. 
LEMMA 
4.2.6. Suppose D is an or-complete ultrafilter over Z and f : Z -+ J. 
Then the set E = { Y c J : f - ' ( Y )  E D} is an a-complete ultrafilter over J. 
The proof is left as an exercise. 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.7. Let D be a nonprincipal ultrafilter. Then there is a 
greatest cardinal u such that D is a-complete. Moreover, a is a measurable 
cardinal. 
PROOF. Since D is not principal, there exists a least cardinal /? such that 
D is not /I-complete. /I cannot be a limit cardinal, because if D is y+-complete 
for all y < /I, then D is closed under all intersections of fewer than /3 sets, 
and hence is /?-complete. Therefore, /? is a successor cardinal, /I = a + ;  
and a is the greatest cardinal such that D is u-complete. 

230 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.2 
D is not a+-complete, so by Lemma 4.2.3 there is a partition I = u,,<oX,, 
of Z into a parts such that none of the sets X,, belongs to D. Let f be the 
function on Z onto a given byf(i) = q if and only if i E X,,. 
By Lemma 4.2.6. 
the set 
E = {Y c a : f - ' ( Y )  E D} 
is an a-complete ultrafilter over a. Mcreover, E is nonprincipal. For if E 
is principal, then { q }  E E for some q < a, whence X,, 
= f -'( { q } )  E D. 
Therefore a is measurable. -I 
COROLLARY 
4.2.8. If 1 A1 is less than thefirst uncountable measurable cardinal 
(or if there is none), and if D is an w,-complete ultrajilter, then d maps 3 
onto &a. 
PROOF. If there is no measurable cardinal > w, then by Proposition 4.2.7, 
D is principal. If there is a least measurable cardinal a > w, then by 
Proposition 4.2.7, D is a-complete. Since IAJ < a, D is IAl+-complete. The 
result now follows from Proposition 4.2.4. -I 
We now wish to prove a stronger form of the fundamental theorem 
for a-complete ultrafilters. To do this, we need to introduce the infinitary 
language Pa. 
The language Po has a individual variables instead of only 
countably many. The set of formulas of 9, is obtained by adding to the 
rules of formation for 9' the following two additional rules, which permit 
infinite conjunctions and quantifiers: 
4.2.9. If O is a set of formulas of Po of power 101 < a, then A @  is a 
formula of Po. 
4.2.10. If cp is a formula of 
then (VV)cp is a formula of Yo. 
and V is a set of variables of power I VI < a, 
Thus 2Zu is just the usual logic 9. 
The models for Po are exactly the same as the models fbr 2. If a is a 
regular cardinal, then each formula of 
has fewer than a symbols. It 
should be noted that if a > w, then a formula may have infinitely many 
free variables. The notion of truth of a formula of 
in a model can be 
defined in a precise way by adding to the definition of truth for formulas 
of 9. 
Infinite disjunctions, VO, and existential quantifiers, (3V)cp, are 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
23 1 
introduced as abbreviations in the obvious way. We shall leave the details 
as an exercise. 
The most interesting example of a property which can be expressed in 
PU, 
is that of a well founded relation. The following sentence states that 
the relation P(x, y )  is well founded: 
( V X ~  
~ 1 x 2  
.**) 7 A. p(xn+ 1 xn)* 
n<w 
When added to the sentence of 9 stating that P(xy) is a simple ordering, 
we obtain the statement that P(xy) is a well ordering. 
The sentence 
1 (3x)A (Q(x) : Q E Z} 
of 2’u, 
expresses the fact that the type Z(x) is omitted, and the negation 
of that sentence says that Z(x) is realized. The sentence 
(Vx)(x = o v x  = 1 v ...) 
is true in 8 if and only if 2I is an o-model. This is also a sentence of gal. 
THEOREM 
4.2.1 1. Let b be an ultraproduct nD8,, 
where I is the index set 
and D is an a-complete ultrafilter. Then: 
(i). Given any formula cp(x,x, ...) of 
andfi, f i ,  ... E B, we have 
b C cpvi fi ...I ifand only if {iE I :  911 C cpp1(i)f2(i) ...I} E D .  
(The list xl, xz, ... of variables may be infinite.) 
(ii). For any sentence cp of Pa, 
b C cp 
ifandonly if 
{ i E Z :  aII 
C cp} E D. 
PROOF. (ii) is a special case of (i). By the fundamental theorem, we 
already know that (i) holds for formulas of 9, 
and, in particular, for atomic 
formulas. The proof that for any formula $ of 9=, 
if (i) holds for $, then 
(i) holds for i 
$, is exactly the same as before. 
Suppose @ is a set of formulas of 9=, 
1@1 < a, and (i) holds for all 
cp E @. Then for any fd , f,”, 
... in B, the following are equivalent: 
8 (A @)[fdfD’ ... 1; 
for all 
cp E @, 
8 t; cp[fdfj ...I; 
for all cp E @, 
{i E I : for all cp E @, 91i k cplf’(i)f’(i) 
...I} E D ;  
{ i E I : 9 i i t =  ( A @ ) [ f ’ ( i ) f ’ ( i )  ...I} E D .  
(i E I : 9ii k cp[f’(i)f2(i) 
...I} E D ;  

232 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.2 
The equivalence of the third and fourth lines uses the a-completeness of D. 
Hence A @ has the property (i). 
Now suppose a formula $ ( x , x ,  ... y , y 2  ...) of =!Za has the property (i), 
{ y , y , ,  ...} is a set of fewer than a variables, and 
cp = ( 3 Y 0 2  . . a ) $ .  
We shall prove that cp has the property (i). This is done by observing that 
the following are equivalent: 
23 I= cp[fdfi ...I ; 
there exist g;, g i ,  ... E B such that 
there exist gb , g i  , . . . E B such that 
{ i E I :  91t b $[f1(i)f2(i) 
... g1(i)g2(i) ...I} E D ;  
{iE I :  91i k cp[f’(i)f’(i) 
...I} E D .  
From this, it follows that (i) holds for all formulas of DLpa because the 
infinite universal quantifier can be expressed in the usual way in terms of 
the infinite existential quantifier and negation. -I 
As an example of Theorem 4.2.11, if D is an o,-complete ultrafilter, 
then any ultraproduct of well ordered structures modulo D is well ordered, 
and any ultraproduct of well founded structures modulo D is well founded. 
We shall indicate some applications of this theorem in the exercises. One 
particularly important application is the following weak compactness 
theorem for infinite languages: 
THEOREM 
4.2.12 (Weak Compaztness Theorem). Let a be a measurable 
cardinal. If I; is a set of sentences of Pa 
such that II;I = a and every subset 
C, of C of power lZo1 < a has a model, then Z has a model. 
PROOF. 
Since a is measurable, there exists an a-complete nonprincipal 
ultrafilter D over a. Since D contains no singletons and is a-complete, 
D contains no sets of power less than a. Hence for each y < a, 
{ P : y  < < a } E D .  
Let us enumerate ,Z as ,Z = {op : p < a}. For each -= a, there is a model 
91B of the set (0, : y < a}. Let 23 be the ultraproduct nD91,. 
Then for each 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
233 
oy E C, we have 
{ p  < a :9 € Up l= o y }  
=I { P : y  < p < a } E D .  
By Theorem 4.2.1 1, 23 is a model of C. i 
A cardinal a which satisfies the conclusion of Theorem 4.2.12 above 
is said to be weakly compact. Thus every measurable cardinal is weakly 
compact. We shall see later that the converse does not hold, and in fact 
every uncountable measurable cardinal a has many weakly compact 
cardinals /3 < a. 
LEMMA 
4.2.13. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal and let D be 
a nonprincipal a-complete ultrafilter ooer 
a. Form the ultrapower 
23 = n,,(a, <). Then: 
(i). '8 is a well-ordered structure of order type greater than a. 
(ii). For every y < a, d(y) is the 7th element of 23. 
PROOF. '23 is well-ordered by Theorem 4.2.11. d is an isomorphic 
embedding, so '8 has order type at least a. For each y < a, let 7 be the yth 
element of 8. 
Let y < a and suppose (ii) holds for all 6 < y. This means 
that d(6) = 8 for all 6 < y. Add a constant c, for each 6 < a. Thus c, is 
interpreted by 6 in the model ( a ,  <, S),<., 
and by d(6) in (23, d(S)),<.. 
In the model ( a ,  <, ~5),,<~, the sentence 
(1) 
(Vx)(x < cy c* v { x  = c, : 6 < 7)) 
of -Ya holds. Hence, by Theorem 4.2.1 1, ( I )  holds in (23, d(6))d<a. Thus 
d(y) is the yth element of '23, for the set of elements < d(y) is exactly 
{6 : 6 < y}. (ii) now follows by induction. 
To prove (i) we note that D is not principal, so D is not a+-complete, 
whence by Proposition 4.2.4 the natural embedding d maps a properly 
into B. But, by (ii), d(a) is an initial segment of 23. Thus d(a) is a proper 
initial segment, and (i) follows. -I 
THEOREM 
4.2.14. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal. Then: 
(i). a is inaccessible. 
(ii). a is the ath inaccessible cardinal. 
PROOF. Let D be a nonprincipal a-complete ultrafilter over a. Consider 
the model 9l = (a, <, b)bea and form the ultrapower 23 = nD%. 
Let 23 
have order type p, and for y < fl let 7 be the yth element of '8. By Lemma 

234 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.2 
4.2.13, we have p > a, and d(y) = 7 for all y < a. Thus each constant 
c,, y c a, is interpreted by y in 9l and by d(y) = 7 in 23. We are now ready 
to prove (i). 
(i). First, we show that a is regular. Suppose a is singular. Then for some 
y < a, there is a function F on y into a such that the range of F is cofinal 
in (a, <). Define F(6) = 0 for a > 6 2 y, and form the model (9l, F) 
and the ultrapower 
n (a, F )  = (9, 
G). 
D 
For each 6 < a, we have 
C(8) = G(d(6)) = d(F(6)) = F(6) < 8. 
Hence in (9, C), 
(1) 
( W ( V Y ) ( Y  < cy + F(Y) < x) 
holds, with 8 for x. However, since the range of F is cofinal in ( a ,  <), 
the sentence 
(2) 
(VX)(3Y)(Y < cy A x  < F(Y)) 
holds in (a, F), thus also in (9, G). But (1) and (2) contradict each other. 
Therefore a is regular. 
Now we show that a is a strong limit cardinal, that is, y c a implies 
2y < a. Suppose instead that for some y, 
y c a Q 27. 
Then there exists a one-one function F on a into S(y). Let R c a x y  be 
the binary relation ‘representing’ F, namely 
R(q, 6) if and only if 6 E F(q). 
Form the ultrapower 
(9, 
S) = n (2, R). 
F(q) = (6 c /3 : S(f, 6)). 
D 
Let F be the function on B defined by 
The function F is a one-one function on 
sentences below hold in (2, R) and hence in (a, S): 
into S(y), because the two 
(vxY)(R(xY) + Y c CJ’ 
PxY” 
9 Y + (32) 1 
* R(YZ))l. 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
235 
Moreover, F(q) = F ( q )  for all q < a, because d maps (N, F )  isomorphically 
into (‘23, G). It follows that the set X = F(a) does not belong to the range 
of F, while X E  
S(y). Thus the sentence 
(3x)(VJ’)(R(x)’) * V { y  
cd : 6 E X } )  
is false in (a, R), but true in (‘23, S )  with E for x. This contradiction shows 
that a is a strong limit cardinal, and (i) is proved. 
(ii). This part of the proof can best be understood by using the fact that 
Ei formulas are preserved under ultraproducts (Corollary 4.1.14). Let X 
be the class of all inaccessible cardinals, Y the class of all ordinals which 
are not regular cardinals, and 2 the class of all ordinals which are not 
strong limit cardinals. Thus y E X if and only if y # Y u 2. We wish to show 
that X n  a is cofinal in a. Then, since a is regular, it will follow that 
IX n a1 = a, whence a is the ath inaccessible cardinal and (ii) holds. Since 
a c X u  Y v 2, 
it suffices to prove that for each y < a, 
(3) 
there exists 6 such that y < 6 < a and 6 # Y u 2. 
Suppose that (3) fails for some y < a. Then for all 6 < a, 
(4) 
6 < y  or ~
E
Y
 
or ~ E Z .  
There is a Xi formula $,(u) such that for any model (a’, <) with a’ 
an ordinal, and any 6 < a’, 
(5) 
6 E Y if and only if 
(a’, <) k $,[6]. 
+,(u) is just a formalization of the statement: 
‘There exists y < u and a function F : y + u such that the range of F 
is cofinal in u’. 
There is also aE! formula$,(u) such that for any ordinal a’, and any 6 < a‘, 
(6) 
6 E 2 if and only if 
(a‘, <> 1 tjz[61. 
$Z(u) is obtained by formalizing the statement: 
‘There exists y < u and a relation R c u x y such that R represents 
a one-one function on u into S(y)’. 
We have already explained how a function F : u + S ( y )  can be represented 
by a relation R c u x y, and how to say that F is one-one using R. From 
(4)-(6), we see that the formula 
(7) 
x < c, v 
“ $z(x) 

236 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.2 
is satisfied in ( a ,  <) by all X E  a. Moving the second-order quantifiers 
to the front, we see that (7) is equivalent to a C: formula. Therefore, 
by Corollary 4.1.14, for any fD E B the formula (7) is satisfied in (B, < ) 
by fD. Since (B, c) is isomorphic to (p, <), the formula (7) is satisfied 
in (j, <) by all x E j. Putting x = u, we have 
< Y Of 
(
B
y
 <> 1 4 + y [ a l  or (P, <> I= $z[Ul. 
Using ( 5 )  and (6), with j = a’, we see that 
u < y  or a E Y  or 
a E Z .  
But this contradicts our assumption that y < a and a is inaccessible. 
Therefore (3) holds, and our proof is complete. i 
Part (ii) of the above proof also works when a is an inaccessible weakly 
compact cardinal (see Exercise 4.2.9). The argument can be extended 
to show that even larger cardinals are less than u. 
Our next application of measurable cardinals concerns axiomatic set 
theory. We prove that if there exists an uncountable measurable cardinal, 
then the axiom of constructibility fails. Equivalently, the axiom of 
constructibility implies that w is the only measurable cardinal. The axiom 
of constructibility was introduced by Godel in 1938 to prove that the 
generalized continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice are consistent 
with ZF (or BG) provided that ZF is consistent. Godel proved first that if 
ZF is consistent, then so is ZF plus the axiom of constructibility. Secondly, 
the axiom of constructibility implies the axiom of choice and the 
generalized continuum hypothesis. These classical results belong to set 
theory rather than model theory, and are thus outside the scope of this book. 
We shall present the result in such a way that a minimum knowledge of 
set theory is needed. 
To begin with, let us review the rank function R(u). For each ordinal u, 
the set R(a) is defined as follows (see the Appendix): 
R(0) = 0, 
R ( a + l )  = S(R(a)), 
and for a a limit ordinal, 
The sets R(a) are important because they provide natural models of set 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
237 
theory. In Exercise 1.4.15 it was shown that when 8 is an uncountable 
inaccessible cardinal, (R(8), E) is a model of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory 
and (R(8+ l), E, R(8)) is a model of Bernays-Morse set theory. 
We list some elementary facts which will be needed for R(a) in the 
following proposition. 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.15. 
R(a) is an element of R(a) (see Section 1.4). 
(i). The set R(a) is transitive, that is, every element of an element of 
(ii). If a < p. then R(a) c R(P). 
(iii). R(w + a) has power am. 
(iv). Zfa is an ordinal, then a c R(a), but a @ R(a). 
We shall also use another set-theoretic function, H(a), the set of all sets 
which are hereditarily of power less than a. For each cardinal a, we define 
H(a) by the condition: 
x E H(a) iff there is a transitive set y such that x c y and IyI < a. 
Here are some basic facts about H(a). The theory ZF-P, described in the 
Appendix, is Zerrnelo-Fraenkel set theory minus the power set axiom. 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.16. 
(i). H(a) is a transitive subset of R(a). 
(ii). Ifa < p, then H(a) c H(p). 
(iii). a c H(a). 
(iv). If a is an uncountable regular cardinal, then (H(a), E) is a model 
of ZF - P. 
It is not obvious from the definition that H(a) is even a set, but this 
follows from part (i) above. To prove (i), we show by induction on the 
rank of y that if y is transitive and Iyl < a, then y E R(a). The other parts 
are also not hard to prove. It turns out that H(w) = R(w), and, more 
generally, H(a) = 8 ( a )  when a is inaccessible. However, H(w,) is a rather 
small subset of R(w,), in fact H(q) 
has power 2", while R(w,) has power 
We now have a few things to say about well-founded models. Recall 
that a binary relation E is said to be well.founded iff there are no infinite 
sequences decreasing with respect to E, that is, no infinite sequences 
xo, xI , . . . such that 
For example, the erelation is well founded. Let (B, E )  be a well founded 
a", 
X I  ExO, x Z E X ~ ,  
.... 

238 
ULTRAPRODUCIX 
[4.2 
model. We shall say that an element b E B is an ordinal of (B, E )  iff 
( B ,  E )  L(vYZ)[(y E b A 2 E b + y  E Z V 2 E y  V Y ' Z )  
A ( y E b  A Z E y + Z E b ) ] .  
It is easy to see that x is an ordinal of (H(a), E) if and only if x E a. We need 
one more preliminary result. 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.17. Suppose (B, E )  is a well-founded model of ZF-P. 
Then the set of ordinals of (B, E )  is well ordered by E. 
PROOF. Let x be any ordinal of (B, E). Over the set X = { y E B : yEx}, 
the relation E must be transitive. For if uEyEz, but not UEZ, 
then either 
u = z or zEu, and in either case we have an infinite sequence decreasing 
with respect to E (either y ,  u, y ,  u, ..., or z, y ,  u, z, y ,  u, ...). Therefore E 
simply orders X. Since E is well founded, it well orders X. We may now 
simply imitate the proof in ZF that the ordinals are well ordered by the E 
relation (see the Appendix) to show that the ordinals of (B, E) are well 
ordered by E. i 
Let (B, E) be a well-founded model of ZF-P. By the order type of 
(B, E ) ,  we mean the order type of the set of ordinals of (B, E) under 
the relation E. We may now state the axiom of constructibility. We state 
it in an unusual way so that we can get by with a minimum knowledge of 
set theory. However, in ZF with the axiom of choice, our formulation here 
can be shown to be equivalent to the more familiar statements of the axiom 
of constructibility. 
Axiom of Constructibility. For every regular cardinal a > w, every 
well-founded model ( B ,  E )  of ZF-P of order type a is isomorphic to 
(H(a), E). 
This axiom states that H(a) is very narrow. We can see this more clearly 
in the following equivalent statement of the axiom of constructibility 
(which is less convenient for our intended use): 
For eoery regular cardinal a > o, there is no proper subset M c H(a) 
such that M is transitive, a c M, and ( M ,  E) is a model of ZF - P. 
THEOREM 
4.2.18 (Scott's Theorem). 
constructibility fails. 
(i). If there exists an uncountable measurable cardinal, then the axiom of 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
239 
(ii). The axiom of constructibility implies that w is the only measurable 
cardinal. 
PROOF. Let a be the first uncountable measurable cardinal. Let 
/I = 12""1+. Then R(a+3) is a transitive set of power less than p, and B 
is a regular cardinal. It follows that R(u+3) E H(p) and (If@), E) is a 
model of ZF-P. 
Let D be a nonprincipal a-complete ultrafilter over a, and form the 
ultrapower 
Then (B, E) is a well founded model of ZF-P. We claim that (B, E) has 
order type p. The natural embedding d maps p isomorphically into the 
ordinals of (B, E), so (B, E) has order type at least B. Let x be any ordinal 
of (B, E). Then x = fD for some function f on a into 8. Since cf(p) > a, 
f is not cofinal in B. Thus there exists y -= p such that f 
E 'y. It follows that, 
if yEx, then y = gD for some g E 'y. Therefore the set { y : yEx} has power 
< ya, and since y < 2' , ya < 8. This shows that every ordinal of (B, E) 
has fewer than B predecessors, and it follows that (B, E )  has order type 
at most 8. Our claim is established. 
Let q(x) be the formula of set theory stating that ' x  is the first 
uncountable measurable cardinal'. When q ( x )  is written out in detail, 
we see that the quantifiers in q(x) can be restricted to, say, S(S(S(x))). 
Thus in the model (H(P), E), an element b satisfies q ( x )  if and only if 
b really is the first uncountable measurable cardinal, b = a. In the ultra- 
power (B, E), the unique element satisfying q ( x )  is thus d(a). The ordinal 
d(a) is greater than the ath ordinal of (B, E). For we see from Lemma 
4.2.13 that there is a function f 
E ' a  such that fD has u predecessors, and 
clearly fDEd(a). This shows that (B, E) is not isomorphic to ( H ( p ) ,  E). 
For any isomorphism would have to map a to the uth ordinal E of (B, E), 
and d does not satisfy q(x). So the axiom of constructibility fails. -I 
2- 
We shall now prove another theorem about ultraproducts modulo an 
a-complete ultrafilter. This result will not hold for weakly compact cardinals. 
First, we need to study normal ultrafilters. Normal ultrafilters are a-complete 
nonprincipal ultrafilters over a which have a valuable extra property. 
We only define normal ultrafilters over a set u which is an uncountable 
measurable cardinal. We shall not attempt to give any notion of a normal 
ultrafilter over an arbitrary set I. 
An ultrafilter D over a is said to be normal iff a > w and 
(1). D is nonprincipal; 

240 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.2 
(2). D is a-complete; 
(3). In the ultrapower nD( 
a, <), the ath element is fD, where f is the 
An alternative form of (3) is: 
identity function on a, i.e.,f(y) = y for all y < a. 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.19. Let D be a nonprincipal a-complete ultrafilter over a. 
Then D is normal if and only if for every function gEaa such that 
{p : q(p) < p} E D, there exists y < a with 
{ i E  a : g(i) = y }  ED. 
Briefly, every decreasing function on a is equivalent to a constant function 
modulo D. 
We leave the proof as an exercise. 
PROPOSITION 
4.2.20. If a is a measurable cardinal and a > w, then there 
exists a normal ultrajlter over a. 
PROOF. Let E be an arbitrary a-complete nonprincipal ultrafilter over a. 
Form the ultrapower nE( 
a, < ) = '23, and let f E  be the ath element of 8. 
Define 
D = {A' c a : f -'(A') 
E E } .  
D is an a-complete ultrafilter over a because 0 6 D. and. for all X E  S(a) 
and C c S(a), (see Lemma 4.2.6) 
,f-l(a\X) 
= a\f-'(X), 
f-l(Uc) 
= Uf-'(c)? 
n n c )  = n f - w  
D is nonprincipal because for each y < a, 
fE = 6 # s = d(y), 
f-'({r>) = { i E  a : f ( i )  = r} $ E, 
and so ( y }  4 D. (As before, j is the 7th element of %.) 
whence 
Finally, we show that D is normal. Let g E ' a  be such that 
x = {a : s(P) < PI E D. 
h(B) = s(f'(P)) < f ( P ) .  
We shall use Proposition 4.2.19. Let h = gof- Then for all /3 E f - ' ( X ) ,  

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
241 
f-'(X) 
E E, so h, c YE = E. Thus for some y = u, h, = j .  By Theorem 
4.2.14,u = d(7). SO 
{ i E  u : h(i) = y} E E. 
But 
{i : h(i) = y }  = {i : g ( f ( i ) )  = y }  = f - ' ( { j :  g ( j )  = y)), 
whence 
f-w s(j> = Y}) E E. 
Thus, by Proposition 4.2.19, D is normal. i 
So now we know that normal ultrafilters exist. There does not seem to be 
any useful counterpart of normal ultrafilters for the measurable cardinal w 
because the definition depended strongly on the well ordering of the 
ultraproduct. Our next theorem will give an iddication of how valuable 
normal ultrafilters are. 
We now prove a result concerning ultraproducts of R(a)'s. 
THEOREM 4.2.21. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal and let D 
be a normal ultrafilter over a. Then 
(R(a+ I), E) E n <R(P+ l), E). 
Moreover, an isomorphism n is defined as follows: For each x E R(u+ l), 
n(x) = ( x  n R(P) : /I < a)D. 
D 
PROOF. 
Let the ultraproduct be denoted by 
n (R(B+ 11, E) = (B, E ) .  
D 
We must show that n is one-one, onto, and for all x, y E R(a+ l), 
(1) 
x E y 
if and only if nxEny. 
To see that n is one-one, suppose x, y E &(a+ 1) and x # y .  Then there 
is an element z which belongs to one and not the other, say Z E X \ ~ .  
Since x E R(a+ 1) = S(R(a)), z E R(a). a is a limit ordinal, so z E R(y) 
for some y < a. Then, whenever y < B < a, we have 
z = z n R(B) and z E (x n It(/?)) \ ( y  n R(B)). 
But the set of all B, where y < j? < a, belongs to D, since D is nonprincipal 
and a-complete. Hence 

242 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.2 
rtzEnx and not nzEny. 
This shows that K X  # ny, so K is one-one. 
y < a. Whenever y Q B < a, we have 
Next we verify (1). Suppose x E y .  Then x E R(a), so x E R(y) for some 
x = x n R(B) and x E y n R(B). 
It follows that n x E ~ y .  
We next prove that R is onto. LetfD E B. First suppose that 
x = {B E SL :f@) E R@)} E D. 
For each 8, let 
g(B) = least y such thatf(p) E R(y + 1). 
Then, whenever B E X, we have g(B) < B. For if B is a limit ordinal, then 
f ( p ) ~ R ( y )  
c R(y+l)forsomey < B.AndifS = y+l,theng(B) < y < B. 
D is normal, so by Proposition 4.2.19, there exists y < a, for which 
Y = {B : g(B) = 7) ED. 
The set R(y + 1) has power D7+ But, by Theorem 4.2.14, a is inaccessible, so 
a = 3, > D y + i .  
Let us consider the partition of a such that one of the partition classes is 
a \ Y, and for each set u E R(y + I), the set 
{P : f ( P )  = .> 
is a partition class. There are only a,,+, partition classes, and D is a-complete, 
so one class belongs to D. We cannot have a \ Y E  D, so there is a 
u E R(y + 1) such that 
{B :f(B) = .> 
E D. 
{P : f ( P )  = 24 n WJ E D. 
But when y < P we have u n R(P) = u, so 
It follows thatf, = n(u); hencef, is in the range of 71. 
(2) 
For we have 
Our argument thus far shows a little bit more: 
If there exists 91, E B such that h,Eg,, then there exists u E R(a) 
with hD = nu. 
{ P  h(B) E dP)J E D, 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
243 
and our argument gives a u. This shows the other direction of (1). 
It remains to consider an arbitraryf, E B. Let 
x = { y  E R(a) : XyEfD}. 
Then x E R(a+ I). We claim that AX = fD. Since the axiom of extensionality 
holds in (R(a+ I), E )  and in (B, E ) ,  it suffices to prove that 
(3) 
hDEfD if and Only if hDEnx. 
If hDEf,, then by (2) we have hD = nu for some u E R(a). Then u EX, 
so by (l), hD = RUEITX. 
If hD Enx, then we use (2) again to get a u E R(a) 
with hD = nu. But then nuEnx, so by (l), u E x. By the definition of x, 
hD = nuEf,. This proves (3), so nx = f D ,  and A maps R(a+ 1) onto B. -I 
COROLLARY 
4.2.22. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal and D 
a normal ultrafilter over a. Then for any formula q(x, ... x,) and any 
S , ,  ..., S, E R(a+ I), we have 
<R(a+ I), E) c dS1 * * *  4 1  
if and on& if 
{BE (x : ( R ( P +  I), E) k v[S, n R(/?) ... S, n R(/?)I: E D. 
( R ( r +  I ) ,  E) b cp 
If cp is a sentence, 
if and onlv if' 
{/I 
E z : (R(/I+ I ) ,  E) b cp) E D. 
We conclude this section with another application howing that t i n -  
countable measurable cardinals are very large. 
THEOREM 
4.2.23. Let z be uii uticoutituhk ineusrrrublc. (urditid, und ICI D 
be a normal ultrafilter owr z. Tlieti: 
(i). The set oj'ull iiiucccssible curditiuls /I < r hrlottgs I O  D. 
(ii). The set of all ~rleuklv compact curdiiruls 
(iii). z is the ztlt wcuklv LYJI)I~UL'I inuccessiblc curdiirul. 
< z helotigs t o  11. 
PROOF. (iii) follows froin ( i )  and ( i i )  bccause every set in D has po\vur 2. 
(i). When we formaliLe the Jcfinition of an inaccessible cardinal in the 
natural way, we obtain a sentence cp such that for all ordinals 0, 

244 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
14.2 
(R(P+ l), E) 1 cp if and only if /I is an inaccessible cardinal. Since 2 is 
inaccessible by Theorem 4.2.14. cp holds in (R( z + I ), E); hence b!i 
Corollar! 
4.2.22, (i) holds. 
(ii). Since weak compactness is defined in ternis of the model theor!. of 
the infinitary logic 
it is not very easy to formalize its delinition in 
terms of the E relation in set theory. We shall instead use a sct-tlieoretic 
property which, for inaccessible cardinals, is equivalent to weak compactnebs. 
This equivalence will be left as one of the exercises. A binary relation .U?I. 
is said to be a tree over X iff: 
( I )  T is transitive, i.e. xTy and JJTZ implies XTZ; 
(2) T is well-founded; 
(3) if ~ T x  
and ZTX, then either yTz, Z T ~ J  
or y = z; 
(4) T has a least eletircnt t such that 1T.u for all x E T \ { I ; .  
It follows from (2) that we never have xT.K, and never have .KTI,T.Y. 
Let T be a tree over X. For each x E X ,  the set of predecessors of s is well 
ordered by T, because it is linearly ordered and well founded. Let o(x.), 
the order of x, be the order type of the set of predecessors of x. The order 
of T, o(T), is defined to be the supremum of the orders of x E X :  
O(T) = u 
O(X). 
The reader should convince himself that the graph of a tree looks like 
a tree. A branch of T is a subset B c X such that: 
( 5 )  if x E B and yTx, then y E B; 
(6) if x, y E B, then either xTy, yTx or x = y. 
X€X 
Thus any branch of T is simply ordered, and hence well ordered, by T. 
The order of a branch B is just the order type of B under T. We say that a 
cardinal a has the free property (or ramification property) iff 
for every tree T on a of order a such that, for each P < a, fewer than 
a elements have order B, T has a branch of order a. 
We leave as an exercise the fact that an inaccessible cardinal a has the tree 
property if and only if a is weakly compact. When we formalize the above 
definition of a tree and of the tree property, we obtain a sentence 1/1 such that, 
for all cardinals B, ( R ( j +  I), E) t= + if and only if p has the tree property. 
Since a is weakly compact (Theorem 4.2.12), and inaccessible, we have 
(R(a+ I), E) I= +. Therefore the set 
U = {B < a : (R(B+ I), E) I= @} E D .  
By (i), the set of all B E  U such that B is an inaccessible cardinal belongs 
to D, and (ii) follows. -I 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
245 
EXERCISES 
4.2.1. Let a be measurable. Prove that if 111 3 a, there exists an a-complete 
nonprincipal ultrafilter over I. 
4.2.2. Let !4 be a model of power IAl < a and suppose Il9II < a. Show 
that there is a sentence cp of 9,. 
such that for all 8, '23 C cp if and only if 
'23 z 2. 
4.2.3*. Let '$I 
be a model of power IAl < a. Prove that for any 8, '2l = '$3 
in the language 2,+ 
if and only if 2l z 23 (even when 9 has more than a 
symbols). 
4.2.4. Let !4 = (a, S)scu and let 8 = (B, Ts)scu be an elementary exten- 
sion of !4 in the sense of the language 9,. For any b E B, let 
Db = {s C a : Ts(b)}. 
Prove that each Db is an a-complete ultrafilter over a. Moreover, Db is 
principal if and only if b E a. 
4.2.5. A cardinal a is said to be strongly compact iff the following 
compactness theorem holds in the language 9,: 
if Z is a set of sentences 
of 9, 
and every set Co c C of power lZ,l < a has a model, then C has 
a model. Prove that every strongly compact cardinal is measurable. 
[Hint: Use the preceding exercise.] 
4.2.6*. Model-theoretic characterizations of measurability: Prove that each 
of the following conditions on a are equivalent: 
(i). a is a measurable cardinal. 
(ii). Suppose, for each /? < a, C5 is a set of sentences of the language 
Y,, 
and for each y < a the set (JB<yC5 has a model. Then U5<,CB has 
a model ('medium compactness'). 
(iii). Every model 
of power IAl = a has a proper elementary extension 
in the sense of the language 2,. 
(iv). The model (R(a), 
E, S)ScR(u) has a proper elementary extension 
'23 = (B, E, Ts)s,R(u) 
such that for all b E B and a E R(z), b E a implies 
b E R(a). 
4.2.7. Show that for any X: formula &(x, . . . xn), the formula (Vxl)t,5(xl . .. x,) 
is equivalent to a 
formula. 

246 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.2 
[Hint: Replace quantified relation and function symbols by symbols 
with one more argument place.] 
4.2.8. Suppose a is an uncountable weakly compact cardinal, and let 
2l = (a, <, R ,  ... R,,). Prove that there exists an ordinal 
> r and a 
model 23 = (p, c, 
S ,  ... S,,) such that 81 4 
23 and every 
sentence 
which holds in 2l holds in 23. 
4.2.9*. Prove that if a > w is an inaccessible weakly compact cardinal, 
then a is the ath inaccessible cardinal. 
[Hint: Adapt the proof of Theorem 4.2.14 (ii), using the preceding two 
exercises.] 
4.2.10. A set C c a is said to be unbounded iff UC = a, and is said to be 
closed iff, for all nonempty subsets X c C, either U X E  C or U X  = a. 
Prove that if a is regular, then the intersection of fewer than a closed and 
unbounded subsets of a is again a closed and unbounded subset of a. 
4.2.1 1. Suppose cf(a) > w, and C is a closed and unbounded subset of a. 
Prove that the set 
C' = {a E a : /.I = U(C n a)} 
of all limit points of C is again a closed and unbounded subset of a. 
4.2.12. a is said to be a Mahlo number iff every closed and unbounded 
subset of a contains an inaccessible cardinal. Prove that if a is a Mahlo 
number, then a is the ath inaccessible cardinal. 
4.2.13*. Let a > w be an inaccessible weakly compact cardinal. 
(i). Prove that a is a Mahlo number. 
(ii). Prove that a is the ath Mahlo number. 
4.2.14*. Let X,, p < a, be a sequence of subsets of a. By the diagonal 
intersection of the sets X, we mean the set 
dn,<=X, = { y  E a : Y E  n,<,x,i. 
Prove that D is a normal ultrafilter over a if and only if D is a nonprincipal 
a-complete ultrafilter and D is closed under diagonal intersections, that is, 
if X , E D  for all 
< a, then d n p c a X B ~ D .  
4.2.15*. Let D be a normal ultrafilter over a. Prove that every closed and 
unbounded subset of a belongs to D. 
[Hint: Use Theorem 4.2.19.1 

4.21 
MEASURABLE CARDINALS 
247 
4.2.16* (Mahlo's operation). Let X c a. Define M ( X )  to be the set of all 
fi < a such that every closed and unbounded subset of fi contains an 
element of X. (Thus, if X is the set of all inaccessible cardinals fi < a, then 
M ( X )  is the set of all Mahlo numbers fi < a.) Prove that every normal 
ultrafilter D over a is closed under the Mahlo operation, that is, X E  
D 
implies M ( X )  E D. 
4.2.17. Let D be a normal ultrafilter over a, let g E 'a, and let E be the set 
E = { X c  a : g - ' ( X ) E D } .  
Prove that if E is a normal ultrafilter over a, then E = D. 
4.2.18. Let cp be a C: sentence in the language of the model (R(a), E, S ) .  
Suppose that a is a measurable cardinal and D is a normal ultrafilter over a. 
Prove that if 
then 
{B E a : (R(fi), EY s n R(B)) c cp} E D, 
(R(a), E, S) cp. 
4.2.19. A cardinal a is said to be IIY-indescribable iff for every set S c R(a) 
and every II; sentence cp, if 
(R(a), E, s> c cp, 
then there exists p < r such that 
(W), 
€9 s n N P ) )  
cp. 
Zr-indescribability is defined analogously. 
(i). Prove that every measurable cardinal a > w is IIf-indescribable. 
(ii). Prove that the first measurable cardinal r > w is not Zf-indescribable. 
4.2.20*. A cardinal p is said to be indescribable iff it is IIr-indescribable 
for all m, n -= w. Prove that if 2 is the first uncountable measurable cardinal, 
then there exists an indescribable cardinal p < r. 
[Hint: Let D be a normal ultrafilter over a. Show that in the ultrapower 
fl,(R(a). E) the formal statement 'x is indescribable' is satisfied by the 
element 6.1 
4.2.21*. Equivalent formulations of weak compactness. Prove that for any 
inaccessible cardinal a, the following are equivalent: 
(i). a is weakly compact. 

248 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.3 
(ii). Every model of power a, which has at most a relations and functions, 
has a proper elementary extension in the sense of the language YU. 
(iii). Every model of the form 
= (R(a), E, S, ... S,,) has a proper 
elementary extension E3 = (B, E, TI ... T,,) such that for all b E B and 
a E R( a), bEa implies b E R( a). 
(iv). Either a = w or a is ll:-indescribable. 
(v). a has the tree property (see the proof of Theorem 4.2.23). 
(vi). (Lindenbaum’s Theorem for Ya.) 
Let 191 6 a. Every set C of 
sentences of 2Yu of power IZI < a, with the property that every subset of 
Z of power < a has a model, can be extended to a maximal set with that 
property. 
[Hint: The easiest order to prove the equivalences is 
(i) + (ii) + (iv) + (v) + (vi) + (i), and (ii) 3 (iii) + (v).] 
4.3. Regular ultrapowers 
In the previous section, we investigated ultraproducts taken modulo an 
a-complete ultrafilter. We shall now study the opposite case - ultraproducts 
modulo an ultrafilter which is not o,-complete. This section may be read 
independently of Section 4.2. 
We shall begin by investigating ultrafilters of various kinds, namely 
countably incomplete, uniform, and regular. 
4.3.1. A filter D is said to be countably incomplete iff there exists a count- 
able set E c D such that n E  $ D. (This is the same as not w,-complete, 
in the terminology of Section 4.2.) 
4.3.2. Let a be a cardinal. A proper filter D over Z is said to be a-regular 
iff there exists a set E c D of power IEJ = a such that each i E Z belongs 
to only finitely many e E E. 
PROPOSITION 
4.3.3. A filter D over Z is w-regular if and only if there exists 
a countable decreasing chain 
z = z, 
3 I ,  3 zz 3 ... 
of elements Zn E D such that n n Z n  = 0. 
The above proposition is often useful in dealing with ultraproducts. The 
proof is left as an exercise. It is obvious that the notion of a-regular becomes 

4.31 
REGULAR ULTRAPOWERS 
249 
stronger as a increases. In view of the next proposition, we may think of 
a-regularity as a stronger and stronger kind of countable incompleteness 
as a increases. 
PROPOSITION 
4.3.4. An ultrafilter D is o-regular if and only if0 is countably 
incomplete. Any o-regular filter is countably incomplete. 
PROOF. Suppose D is o-regular. Let E c D, IEl = o, 
be such that each 
i E I belongs to only finitely many e E E. Then n E  = 0, and, since D is 
a proper filter, n E  # D, whence D is countably incomplete. 
Let D be a countably incomplete ultrafilter. Take a set E = {e,,, e l ,  ...} 
c D such that n E  # D. Let 
eb = eo \ n E ,  
e:+l = e: n en+, . 
Then E' = {eb,e;, ...} c D, and n E '  = 0. Therefore D is o-regular. -I 
Our next task is to establish the existence of a-regular ultrafilters. 
PROPOSITION 
4.3.5. For any set I of in$nitepower a, there exists an a-regular 
ultrafilter D over I. 
PROOF. It suffices to show that some set J of power a has an a-regular 
ultrafilter over it. We consider the set J = So(.) 
of all finite subsets of a. 
For each fi E a, let 
j? = { j E J : B E j } ,  
E = {B : B E  a}. 
Then E has power a. Moreover, each j E J belongs to only finitely many 
1 
E E, because j is finite, and j E B means fi ~
j
.
 
It follows that any proper 
filter over J which includes E is a-regular. E has the finite intersection 
property, because 
and let 
{fil, - . a ,  P A  4
1
 ... n B.. 
Hence by the ultrafilter theorem, E can be extended to an ultrafilter D 
over J, whence D is an a-regular ultrafilter. -I 
We turn now to the cardinality problem for ultraproducts. Given an 

250 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.3 
ultrafilter D over I and nonempty sets A i ,  i E I, what is the cardinality of 
the ultraproduct InD 
A J? It is a special case of Exercise 4.1.15 that the 
cardinality of the ultraproduct n D A i  depends only on the cardinality of 
the sets A j .  Thus the cardinality problem is really a problem in the arith- 
metic of cardinals. Some cases of the problem are still unsolved and appear 
quite difficult. However, we shall prove some partial answers here which 
shed much light on the question, and we can later apply these results 
to model theory. We begin with a list of elementary facts. 
PROPOSITION 
4.3.6. Let D be a proper filter over I. Then: 
(i). ZflAil = lBil for all ieZ, then InDAfI = InDBfI. 
(ii). If lAil < IBilfor all i E I, then lnI,Ail < InDBil. 
(iv). I A ~  
< ~
~
D
A
I
 
< ~AI"'. 
(iii)* l n D A i l  
lnidAil* 
The next two propositions give some more substantial information about 
cardinalities of ultrapowers. The first result shows that when D is regular, 
then n D A  has the largest possible power. 
PROPOSITION 4.3.7. Suppose D is an a-regularfilter over a set Z of power a. 
If A is injinite, then 
PROOF. Proposition 4.3.6 (iv) gives the upper bound 
I l - p l  
IAI". 
14" I n 4. 
D 
We now show that for any a-regular filter D, 
regardless of the power of A, 
D 
(1) 
Since D is a-regular, there exists E c D of power [El = a such that each 
i E Z belongs to only finitely many e E E. Let B be the set of all finite sequences 
of elements of A. Since A is infinite, we have IAl = IBI. Thus to prove (l), 
it suffices to find a one-one function 
n : EA -+ n B. 
D 
For each g : E -+ A, we shall define a function g' : I -+ B. We intend 
to define n by putting ng = g6. First, we choose a simple ordering < of 

4.31 
REGULAR ULTRAPOWERS 
25 1 
the set E. For each i E I, define the element g'(i) E B as follows. Let 
(2) 
(el ..* en> 
be the finite set of all e E E such that i E e, arranged in increasing order 
with respect to < . Then 
g'(i) = ( g ( e , )  
g(en)>. 
Thus g' maps I into B. Now define ng = g b .  Then IL maps ' A  into n D B .  
It remains to show that n is one-one. Suppose g ,  h E ' A  and g # h. Then 
for some e E E, g(e) # h(e). Now, for any i E e, e will occur in the finite 
sequence (2) of sets containing i, say e = eL. Then 
g'(i) = (... g(ek) ...) # (... h(e,) ...) = h'(i). 
Thus e E D and g'(i) # h'(i) for all i E e, whence 
ng = gb # hb = nh. 
Therefore IL is one-one, and (1) follows. -I 
In the case when A is finite, n D A  always has the same power as A, 
for the fact that A has n elements is expressible by a single sentence of 3. 
COROLLARY 
4.3.8. If 9l is infinite, then 'i?l 
has ultrapowers of arbitrarily 
large power. 
The above corollary gives another proof of the Lowenheim-Skolem- 
Tarski theorem, 3.1.5 (because 91 is elementarily embedded in its ultra- 
power - Corollary 4.1.13). Next we show that certain cardinals cannot be 
cardinals of ultrapowers, at least when D is countably incomplete. 
PROPOSITION 
4.3.9. Let D be an o-regularfilter. If A is infinite, then 
PROOF. Let B be the set of all finite sequences in A. Then IBI = IAl 
because A is infinite. So it suffices to prove that 
I n 
Al" G I n BI. 
D 
D 
(9 
It suffices to find a mapping 'I on a subset of n D B  onto o ( n D A ) .  To do 
this, it suffices to find a mapping 0 on "('A) into ' B  such that: 

252 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.3 
(2) 
if 
g, h E "('A) 
and 
o g  = D  a h ,  then, for all 11, 
g(n) = D  h(n). 
For then we may define the mapping T by: 
if 
Ug = f, then ?(f~) 
= (g(o)Dg(l)D ..*>. 
Since D is w-regular, there is a sequence I = I, =I I, XI ... of sets I,, E D 
such that n,,I,, = 0 (Proposition 4.3.3). Then for each i E I, there is a 
unique integer n(i) such that 
i E In(i) \ 
I n ( , )  + 1 * 
= <g(l)(i) s(n(i>>(i)>. 
For each function g E "('A), 
define ag E 'B by setting 
It remains to verify (2). Suppose g, h are in "('A), 
and og =Doh. Then 
the set 
X = {i E I : (ay)(i) = (oh)(i)} E D. 
For each n < w, we have X n Z, E D. Whenever i E X n I,,, n < n(i), 
and thus g(n)(i) = h(n)(i). It follows that g(n) = D  h(n) for all n. Thus (2) 
holds and hence (1) holds. i 
It follows, for example, that no ultrapower of a set modulo a countably 
incomplete ultrafilter can have power w, a", or even any power of cofinality 
o. Other similar cardinality theorems are known, and we shall include them 
in our list of exercises. Before moving on to our next topic, we wish to say 
a few words about unsolved problems. The following questions remain 
completely open: 
Does there exist a countably inconiplete ultrafilter D such that 
1 n 
01 is singular? 
I n 
01 
is inaccessible? 
D 
D 
We can state a more sophisticated problem along this line if we introduce 
another notion. A filter D over I is said to be unifornz iff every member of D 
has the same cardinality 111. We then ask: 
Does there exist a countably incomplete uniform ultrafilter over a which 
is not a-regular? 

4.31 
REGULAR ULTRAPOWERS 
253 
Does there exist a countably incomplete uniform ultrafilter D over a 
such that lflDol < 2”? 
We have already answered the above two questions negatively for 
a = w. By Proposition 4.3.6, the second question implies the first. 
Although these questions originated from model theory, they really 
belong more to set theory, and consistency results have been found 
which involve large cardinals in one direction and the constructible sets 
or the core model of Dodd and Jensen (1981) in the other direction. 
Some negative results on the first question: Prikry (1971) showed that 
the axiom of constructibility implies that every uniform ultrafilter over w1 
is regular. Jensen (unpublished) improved this result to 0,. Using the 
core model, Donder (1988) proved that if ZFC is consistent, then so is 
ZFC+ ‘every uniform ultrafilter on an infinite set is regular’. 
Some positive results on the second question: From Exercise 6.5.9 it 
follows that both questions have affirmative answers if a is a measurable 
cardinal. Magidor (1979) has shown that if 
ZFC + [there is a huge cardinal] 
is consistent, then so are each of the following: 
ZFC + [there is a uniform ultrafilter D over w3 with ln,w,l 
4
,
 
ZFC + [there is a uniform ultrafilter D over w2 with In,wol 6 w2]. 
In each case, D cannot be regular because of Proposition 4.3.7. 
Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah have obtained an analogous result for 
w l .  Huge cardinals are defined in Kanamori, Reinhart, and Solovay 
(1978). 
Some additional results in ZFC about cardinalities of ultraproducts can 
be found in Exercise 4.3.13-4.3.18 and in Shelah (1978), Chapter VI. 
For some relationships between cardinalities of ultrapowers and descend- 
ingly complete ultrafilters (defined in Exercise 4.3.10), see Adler and 
Jorgensen (1972). 
Let us now study the model-theoretic properties of regular ultrapowers. 
We first give an application of the cardinality result, Proposition 4.3.7, 
to the Lowenheim-Skolem problem for two cardinals considered in Section 
3.2. Let 9 
have among its symbols a 1-placed relation symbol U. Let us use 
the term (a, p)-modd for a model 9l for 2’ such that the universe A has 
power a and the interpretation of U has power p. Thus a theory T in 9 
admits (a, p) iff T has an (a, 
P)-model. 

254 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.3 
THEOREM 
4.3.10. If a theory T admits (u, /?) and /? 2 w, then for all cardinals 
y, T admits (ay, p’). In fact, every (a, /?)-model has an elementary extension, 
which is an (ay, jY)-model. 
PROOF. Let 2l be an (01, /?)-model of 7, 
and let V be the interpretation of 
U in PI. We may assume that y is infinite. Let D be a y-regular ultrafilter over 
a set of power y. Now form the ultrapower nD%. 
By Proposition 4.3.7, 
1 n A )  = ay, 
1 n Vl = By. 
D 
D 
(1) 
Let V’ be the interpretation of U in nDa. 
We shall show that V’ has the 
same power as nD 
V. For each f E V, we are considering two different 
equivalence classes off, both ordinarily denoted by fD. We now need to 
distinguish them, so we shall write 
ft = {g E I A  : f = D g }  = fD 
in the sense of n A, 
in the sense of 
D 
f: 
= (g E I v : f = D  g} = fD 
n V. 
D 
For any f, g E I V, we have 
(2) 
f i = g g  iff f = D g  iff f,’=gL. 
Moreover, for any f 
E ‘A such that fi E V’, we have 
{ i E Z : f ( i ) E  V I E D .  
Thus if we definef’ E ‘A by 
f’(i) = f ( i )  
if f ( i )  E V, 
f’(i) = any element of V otherwise, 
we have 
(3) 
f ‘ E r V  and fi = fiA. 
From (2) and (3), it follows that the mapping n such that n(fD) = f,” 
is a one-one map of n D V  onto V’. Therefore, by (l), nD% 
is an 
(ay, PY)-model. -I 
COROLLARY 
4.3.11 (Narrowing a Gap). Assume the G.C.H. Suppose 
a 2 a’ 2 fl’ 2 p 2 o and IILZ’pI1 < a’. Then every theory T in 9 
which 
admits (a, p) admits (a’, 
p’). 
PROOF. By Proposition 3.2.7 (i) (generalized to the case 1l21l 
a’), 

4.31 
REGULAR ULTRAPOWERS 
255 
we may assume that p < p‘. First take the case that p’ is a successor cardinal, 
8’ = y+. Then p < y, so by the G.C.H., p‘ = p’. By Theorem 4.3.10, 
T admits (aY, p’). Then, using Proposition 3.2.7 (i), we see that T 
admits (a’, p’). 
The case where 8’ is a limit cardinal requires an iteration of Theorem 
4.3.10. We form an elementary chain a?, p < y < fl’, such that each 217 
is an (a, y)-model of T. Let 9lP be any (a, b)-model of T. Suppose y < fl‘ 
and we have constructed a,,, p < q < y. If y is a limit ordinal, let 
gy = U{aq :/I 
< q < y } .  Then UY is an (u, y)-model of T. If y = q’, 
then y = $, so by Theorem 4.3.10 there is an (uq, y)-model 23 >. a,,. By 
Proposition 3.2.7 (i), there is an ( a ,  y)-model !?ly such that !?lq < ?Iy < B. 
By induction, we have the desired elementary chain. Now let H’ = 
u 
{!X7 : p < y < p‘}. Then 8’ is an (a, P‘)-model of T. Thus T admits 
(u, fl’); hence T admits (u’, p’). 4 
In Section 6.5 we shall eliminate the G.C.H. from Corollary 4.3.11 by 
using iterated ultrapowers. 
A model 
is said to be u-universal iff every model 23 of power less than 
u which is elementarily equivalent to 8 is elementarily embedded in 8, i.e., 
% = 8 and IBI < u implies 23q 2. 
THEOREM 
4.3.12. Suppose 11.1411 < u and D is an u-regular ultrafilter. Then 
for every model a, the ultrapower nD8 
is a+-universal. 
PROOF. Let E c D, where IEI = u and each i E Z belongs to only finitely 
many e E E. Also, let ‘23 be a model such that 23 = 
and IBI < CC. 
We are 
to show that 23 is elementarily embedded in nD%. 
Form the elementary 
diagram r B  of !??I in the expanded language T E  
which contains a new 
constant for each b E B. It suffices to find an expansion (nDS!I, 
ab)beB of 
the ultrapower nD8 
which is a model of rE. 
Since 112’11 < a and 1B1 < u, 
we have I r B l  < u. Thus there is a one-one function H on r B  into E. Now 
consider an element i E I. Since there are only finitely many e E E such that 
i E e, there are only finitely many sentences cp E T s  such that i E H(p). Let 
{PI 9 
cpn} = {p E r B  : i E  H(p))* 
The sentence ‘pl A ... A cpn holds in (By 
b)beB, and therefore is consistent 
with the theory of 8. It follows that there exists an expansion 

256 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.3 
of '% to 9, which is a model of p, A ... A qn. When we choose such an 
expansion for each i E I, we obtain functionsf, E 'A, b E B, such that for all 
i e l  and V E r B ,  
i E H(p) implies ('%,fb(i))&, t rp. 
Moreover, for each rp E f 
B I  H(rp) E D, whence by the fundamental theorem, 
For each 6, let ab = ( f b ) D .  Then, by the definition of ultraproduct, 
n 
(Yl, fb(i))beB = ( n a, ab)beB * 
D 
D 
COROLLARY 
4.3.13 (Frayne's Theorem). 2l E 23 if and only if BI is elemen- 
tarily embedded in some ultrapower nD8 
of 23. 
PROOF. 
If % 2 n D B ,  then 2l = nD8 
3 '23, For the converse, suppose 
'2l E 23. Let tl be the maximum of 11 911 and IAI, and let D be an r-regular 
ultrafilter over a. Then, by Theorem 4.3.12, nD23 is a+-universal, whence 
2l 7 nDB. -I 
Our next corollary will be used in Chapter 5 to prove the existence of 
saturated models. Let 23 be an elementary extension of '91 and let j? be a 
cardinal. For each set Y c A, let 2'r be the expansion of 9 
obtained by 
adding a new constant symbol for each y E Y. We shall say that '8 is 
@-saturated over 2l iff it has the following property: 
For every set Y c A of power IY( < 8, every set Z(x) of formulas of 
Lfy which is consistent with the theory of (%,y),,€r is satisfiable in 
(B, Y)yEr. 
A model 8 is said to be p-saturated iff E3 is p-saturated over E3. In the 
case p = w, this agrees with the definition of an w-saturated model given 
in Section 2.3. 
COROLLARY 
4.3.14. Let 2l be a model for a language 3 of power s a .  
Then the ultrapower of 2l modulo an a-regular ultrafilter is isomorphic to 
an elementary extension of % which is a+-saturated over a. 

4.31 
REGULAR ULTRAPOWERS 
257 
PROOF. Let D be an u-regular ultrafilter and form the ultrapower nD%. 
Let '13 be an elementary extension of 91 such that the natural embedding 
d :  ?I -+ flD% can be extended to an isomorphism f :  3 z nD%. 
Let 
Y c A, IYI < u+. Then l19yll < u. Therefore, by Theorem 4.3.12, the 
ultrapower nD(%, 
y),,, is u+-universal. But 
so ( ' 1 3 , ~ ) ~ ~ ~  
is a+-universal. Any set C ( x )  of formulas of Zy 
consistent 
with the theory of (8, 
Y),,,~ is satisfiable in some model (6, 
c , , ) ~ ~ ~  
= (a, y ) , , ~  
of power < ci. Then (G, 
c,,),,~ 
is elementarily embedded in ('13, Y ) ~ , ~ ,  
and it follows that C(x) is satisfiable in (3, Y),,~. -1 
Theorem 4.3.12 is not true for arbitrary ultraproducts (instead of ultra- 
powers). In Section 6.1 we shall investigate ultrafilters D for which Theorem 
4.3.12 does hold for ultraproducts. (We shall call them u+-good ultrafilters.) 
There are two interesting questions which remain open in connection 
with Theorem 4.3.12. 
Is flD% 
u++-universal for every a-regular ultrafilter D and every model a? 
Does 9 = '23, IAI, IBI 6 2", D an a-regular ultrafilter over u, and a+ = 2" 
imply that flD91 nD'13? 
For both questions, we must assume that 11911 < a, otherwise counter- 
examples are known. In Chapter 6 we shall see that the answer to 
both questions is yes when D has the stronger property of being u+-good. 
Note that the first question is a strengthening of Theorem 4.3.12 where 
a+-universal is improved to u++-universal. Exercise 4.3.36 states a result 
which lends some plausibility to the second question. It shows that nD% 
and flD8 are very much alike, and, in fact, share properties expressible in 
the infinitary language =Ya. 
EXERCISES 
4.3.1. Prove Proposition 4.3.3. 
4.3.2. 
(i). Every uniform ultrafilter over an infinite set is nonprincipal. 
(ii). An ultrafilter D over Z is uniform if and only if D contains every set 
X c Z such that IZ\ XI < (ZI. 
4.3.3. If D is an arbitrary ultrafilter and J is an element of D of smallest 
cardinality, then D n S ( J )  is a uniform ultrafilter over J. Similarly for 

258 
' 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.3 
proper filters. Since 
(Exercise 4.1.11), this shows that in the study of ultraproducts we need 
only consider uniform ultrafilters. 
4.3.4. Let I be an infinite set of power a. Then every a-regular filter over I 
is uniform. 
4.3.5. Let I be an infinite set of power a. Then there does not exist an a+- 
regular filter over I. 
4.3.6. If D is an a-regular ultrafilter over I and J E  D, then D n S ( J )  is 
an z-regular ultrafilter over J. A similar result holds for filters. 
4.3.7. Let D be an ultrafilter over I and letf : I + J. Let E be the set 
E = ( X  c J : ~ - ' ( X ) E  
D}. 
Show that E is an ultrafilter over J, and, furthermore, if E is r-regular, 
then D is a-regular. (Cf. Lemma 4.2.6.) 
4.3.8. A proper filter D over I is a-regular if and only if there exists a 
function f : I --* S,( z) such that for each /3 E a, 
{ i E I :  / 3 ~ f ( i ) }  
ED. 
4.3.9*. Let I be an infinite set of power a. If E c S(I), JEJ < a, and the 
filter generated by E is uniform, then E can be extended to an z-regular 
ultrafilter D over 1. 
4.3.10. An ultrafilter D is said to be descendingly a-contplete iff for every 
descending chain X,, y < z of sets X ,  E D, of length a, the intersection 
n,.J; ED. Prove the following: 
(1). D is descendingly w-complete iff D is countably complete. 
(ii). D is descendingly a-complete iff D is descendingly cf(a)-complete. 
(iii). D is a-complete iff for all /? < a, D is descendingly /?-complete. 
(iv). If D is a uniform ultrafilter over a set of power a, then D is not 
descendingly a-complete. However, D is descendingly /3-complete whenever 
cf(/?) > 2. 
4.3.1 I *. If D is a descendingly a-complete ultrafilter, then D is not a-regular. 
4.3.12**. If a is regular, then every descendingly a-complete ultrafilter is 

4.31 
REGULAR ULTRAPOWERS 
259 
descendingly a+-complete. Thus, if m ,< n < w, then no uniform ultrafilter 
over w, is descendingly om-complete. 
4.3.13*. Suppose D is a uniform ultrafilter over a set of power a, and 
IAl = a. Then lnDAl > a. 
4.3.14*. If D is a countably incomplete ultrafilter, then either 
I n A,\ < o or 
1 n A,\ > 2". 
D 
D 
Thus, in all cases, JnDAil # a. 
4.3.15*. If D is any ultrafilter and IAI = \AT, then l n D A l  = lnDAI". 
4.3.16*. Suppose D is an ultrafilter which is not descendingly a-complete. 
If JAl = \Alp whenever 0 < p < a, then lnDAl = InDAla. (Proposition 
4.3.9 is the special case where a = w.) 
4.3.17*. The notion of a tree of order a was introduced during the proof 
of Theorem 4.2.23. A tree T of order a is said to be a Kurepa tree iff T has 
more than c( branches of order a, while for each /I < a, T has fewer than a 
elements of order p. Suppose that there exists a Kurepa tree of order a'. 
Then for every uniform ultrafilter D over a+, 
4.3.18*. For any ultrafilter D, 
and any cardinal a, 
If D is a uniform ultrafilter over a+, or over 2", then InD.! > a. 
4.3.19. Let D be a proper filter, let % c B, and form the expanded model 
(8, 
A )  and its reduced power nD(B, A). Let A' be the (1-placed) relation 
in nD(B, A) corresponding to A, and let %' be the reduct to 9 
of the 
submodel of nD(B, A) with universe A'. Prove that a' Z nD%. 
4.3.20. If a theory T admits (a, p, y), then T admits (a', p, y') (provided 
y 2 w). (Where 'T admits (a, p, y)' is defined in the obvious way.) 
4.3.21. A subset X c B is said to be definable in the model B iff there is a 
formula (p(xoxl ... x,) and elements b , ,  ..., b, E B such that 
X = (b, E B : % t q[b,b, ... b,]}. 

260 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.3 
Suppose D is a countably incomplete ultrafilter. Let 9l be any model and 
form the ultrapower nD%. 
Show that any definable subset of nD% 
is 
either finite or has power 2 2"'. 
4.3.22. A class K of models for 9 is said to be relatively compact iff for 
every set I; of sentences of 9, 
if every finite subset of 2 has a model in K, 
then 1 has a model in K. Let 119';411 
Q a and suppose D is an a-regular 
ultrafilter. Then any class K of models for 9 
which is closed under ultra- 
products modulo D is relatively compact. 
4.3.23. Every finite model is a-universal. 
4.3.24. Suppose IlYll < a. Let 9' 
be a simple expansion of 9 
formed by 
adding a new constants. Then a model ?I for 3 
is 2'-universal if and only 
if every set I; of sentences of 2" which is consistent with the theory of '![ 
has a model 91' which is an expansion of '9. 
4.3.25. Let II2'1I < a; then every reduct of an a+-universal model is 
a + -universal. 
4.3.26. Let D be an a-regular ultrafilter. Then for any model %, every 
reduct of the ultrapower n,?I to a language of power < a is z'-universal. 
4.3.27. Suppose D is a countably incomplete ultrafilter and Y is countable. 
Let % be a model for 9. 
Then every type Z(x, ... x,) which is realized in 
some model 23 = ?I is realized in n,?L 
4.3.28*. Let D be an a-regular ultrafilter. Then the model ( z ' ,  <) is 
isomorphically embedded in the ultrapower nD(o. 
< ). 
4.3.29*. Call 23 an ultrapower extension of YI iff 'I[ c % and for some 
ultrafilter D, the natural embedding d : ?I -, n,Yl can be extended to an 
isomorphismf : 23 2 nD'![. 
By an ultrapower chain over ?[ we mean a chain 
'II = ?lo c ?l, 
c 91, ... of length w such that each Yin+l is an ultrapower 
extension of B[,. Show that every ultrapower extension of '!I is an elementary 
extension, and every ultrapower chain is an elementary chain. Prove that 
91 E 23 if and only if there exist ultrapower chains 
'II = 910 c a, c ..., 
3 = s o  c g1 c ... 
over BI and 93 such that 
u Y" z u !Bn. 
n<w 
n < w  
This gives an algebraic characterization of elementary equivalence. 

4.31 
REGULAR ULTRAPOWERS 
261 
4.3.30. Prove that K is an elementary class iff K is closed under ultraproducts, 
and both K and its complement are closed under isomorphisms and under 
unions of ultrapower chains. Give a similar characterization of basic 
elementary classes. 
4.3.31. In Exercise 4.3.29, suppose IIYrpI1 < 
IAl < am, and IBI < a=. 
Show that the ultrapower chains may be chosen so that the unions have 
power a=+*, (or else are finite). 
4.3.32*. Prove that an ultrafilter D is a-rcgular if and only if for every 
language Y of power 114pll < a and every model I?L for 9, 
n,‘i?l is 2’- 
universal. 
4.3.33*. Give an example showing that Theorem 4.3.12 fails if the hypothesis 
Il-EpII Q a is weakened to 11911 < a’. 
4.3.34. An ultrafilter D is descendingly a-complete iff the set d(a) is cofinal 
in the ultrapower n,(a, <). 
4.3.35*. Let 11911 Q a and let D be an a-regular ultrafilter. Let 8, B be 
infinite models such that M = B and form the ultrapowers nD8, nDB. 
Suppose 8’ < nD8, B’ < nDB, and I l l ,  lB’l Q a.. Then there exist 
models a”, 23’’ of power a such that 
8’ < 8” < n 
%, 
23’ 4 B” 4 n 23, 
8“ = 8’’. 
D 
D 
4.3.36**. Suppose D is an a-regular ultrafilter, and 8 = 2.3. Then the 
ultrapowers nD8 and flDB are elementarily equivalent in the sense of 
the infinitary language Ya. 
(The language 
is described in Section 4.2.) 
4.3.37. Let D be a uniform ultrafilter over w, and let T be a theory in a 
language of power wl. For each class K of models let K* be the class of 
models of the form n 21a where each ‘%a E K. Suppose that each finite 
subset of T has a model in K. Prove that T has a model in the class 
D 
(K*)*. 
4.3.38*. Let 2l= ( A ,  S ,  ...) be an infinite model for a countable lan- 
guage such that =s simply orders A. Let D be a nonprincipal ultrafilter 
over w. Prove without using the continuum hypothesis that nDI?L 
has a 
set X of indiscernibles of power 2”. 
[Hint: Find an X which is an infinite ultraproduct of finite subsets of A 
and use Exercise 4.3.13.1 

262 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
4.3.39. Let ‘2x = ( A ,  E, ...) be a model such that E is an equivalence 
relation and each equivalence class of E is countable. Prove that ?J has 
an elementary extension % = ( B ,  F , .  . .) such that every equivalence 
class of F has cardinality 2”. 
4.3.40. Let D and E be ultrafilters over sets Z and J .  We say that E S D 
if there is a function f : Z+ J such that E = f - ’ [ D ]  in the sense of 
Exercise 4.3.7. (The relation E S D is clearly transitive. It is called the 
Keisler-Rudin ordering in the literature.) Show that D G E and E S D if 
and only if there is a one to one function h of Z onto J such that 
E = { X C  J : h-’(X) E D}. 
[Hint: Use Exercise 4.1.35.1 
4.3.41*. Prove that E S D if and only if for every model %, n ?J is 
elementarily embeddable in nD8. 
4.3.42. An nonprincipal ultrafilter D over w is said to be selective, if for 
every partition w = u,,<,X,, of w into countably many disjoint sets, 
either some X ,  belongs to D or there is a choice set Y E  D such that 
I Y n X,, I = 1 for each n. Prove that D is selective if and only if for every 
nonprincipal ultrafilter E ,  E S D implies D s E. 
4.3.43*. Assuming the continuum hypothesis, prove that selective ultra- 
filters exist. 
E 
4.4. Nonstandard universes 
The purpose of this section is to provide a bridge between classical 
model theory and Abraham Robinson’s nonstandard analysis, which was 
first introduced in Robinson (1961). We believe that Robinson’s choice 
of the name “nonstandard analysis” is unfortunate, and instead use the 
name “Robinsonian analysis” here. Robinsonian analysis has been used 
extensively as a method of applying model theory to other areas of 
mathematics and the natural sciences. There are several good books on 
the subject (see the Historical Notes), and we shall not go into Robin- 
sonian analysis itself here. 
Our emphasis will be on model-theoretic questions, usually involving 
the satisfaction relation, which arise in the foundations of Robinsonian 
analysis. We shall deal with the existence of models with certain prop- 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
263 
erties, and semantic relationships between two models. The ultrapower 
is the key method of constructing models in Robinsonian analysis. 
Several approaches to Robinsonian analyis have been proposed in the 
literature, but in practice most research in the subject uses one of two 
approaches: superstructures and internal set theory. The intuitive idea 
underlying all approaches is to start with the set-theoretic universe 
(V, E ) and form an elementary extension ( W, E )  in which all infinite 
sets are enlarged. This turns out to be awkward because V is not a set, 
and worse yet, E is not well founded and thus cannot be represented as 
the E relation on some collection of sets. Superstructures and internal 
set theory deal with this problem in different ways. In this section we 
shall first treat the superstructure approach and then internal set theory. 
The superstructure approach works with models in a language which 
has a symbol E for set membership, and concentrates on formulas which 
have bounded quantifiers (Vx E y )  and ( 3 x  E y )  instead of the ordinary 
quantifiers Vx and 3x. Many model theoretic constructions have analog- 
ues for bounded quantifier formulas. 
Given a set X ,  the superstructure over X ,  denoted by V ( X ) ,  is 
obtained from X by taking the power set countably many times. The 
precise definition is as follows. For each natural number n, we define the 
set Vn ( X )  recursively by 
% ( X )  = X ,  V, + 1 (XI = Vn (XI U '(Vn (X)). 
The superstructure V ( X )  is the union 
We shall often work with the model ( V ( X ) ,  E ) where E is the set 
membership relation. The elements of X will play the role of individuals 
rather than sets. To avoid irrelevant side issues, we shall confine our 
attention to the case where there are no extra membership relationships 
in ( V ( X ) ,  E ) involving elements of X .  The set X is said to be a base set 
if 0 g X and for all x E X ,  x r l  V ( X )  = 0. It is easy to replace any set X by 
a base set of the same size; see Exercise 4.4.1 for one method. Notice 
that any subset of a base set is also a base set. From now on, it will 
always be understood that X is a base set. 
In a superstructure V ( X )  over a base set X ,  the elements of X will be 
called individuals relative to V ( X )  and the elements of V ( X )  \ X will be 
called sets relative to V(X). The individuals can be characterized as those 
elements x E V ( X )  such that x # 0 but x fl V ( X )  = 0. 

264 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
It is clear from the definition that 
V,(X) c V 1 ( X )  c ... c V,(X) c .. . )  V,(X) c V ( X )  
V,(X) E V 1 ( X )  
E ... E V,(X) E ..., V,(X) E V ( X ) .  
and 
Moreover, if X is infinite, the cardinalities of V,(X) and V ( X )  are given 
by 
IVAX)l = L ( I X l ) ?  IV(X)I = L ( l X I ) *  
Our first lemma shows that the collection of all sets relative to V ( X )  at 
level n + 1 is equal to the field of all subsets of V,(X). 
PROOF. We prove the first equation by induction on n. We see at once 
from the definitions that the lemma holds for n = 0. Assume that the 
lemma holds for n - 1, so that V,(X) = XU S(V,-,(X)). Using the 
definition of V,+,(X) and the fact that V,_,(X) C V,(X), we have 
v, + 1 (XI = V,(X) u S ( K ( X ) )  
= x u S(V,-l(X)) u S(V,(X)) 
c x u S(V,(X)) u S(V,(X)) 
= xu S(V,(X)) 
c V,+I(X). 
This completes the induction. 
The second equation follows because X is a base set. -I 
COROLLARY 
4.4.2. Let X be a base set. Suppose a E V ( X ) ,  and a E b E 
V,,(X). Then n > O  and a E V,-,(X). 
PROOF. Since X is a base set and a E b n V ( X ) ,  we cannot have b E X ,  so 
n > 0. By Lemma 4.4.1, b E X U  S(V,,-l(X)). Therefore b E S(VflPl(X)), 
and hence a E Vfl-l(X), as required. -I 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
265 
Our next lemma shows that the collection of sets of a superstructure is 
closed under simple set-theoretic operations. The proof is routine and is 
left as an exercise. 
LEMMA 4.4.3. Let V ( X )  be a superstructure with base set X .  
(i). Zf xl, ..., x, 
E V,(X) then {xl, ..., x,} 
E V,+,(X)\X. 
(ii). Zf xl, ..., x, E V,(X) then (xl, .. ., x,) 
E Vn+2(m-1)(X). 
(iii). Zf u E V,(X)\X 
and u C u, then u E V,(X)\X. 
(iv). Zf u, u E V,(X)\X 
then u x u E V,+,(X)\X. 
(v). Zf u E V,(X)\X 
then S(u) E V,+,(X)\X. 
It is sometimes useful to consider models 
for some language 2Z such 
that the universe A is a set relative to V ( X ) .  By Lemma 4.4.3, each 
relation or function over A will be an element of the superstructure 
Throughout this section, 2ZE will be the language { E} with the single 
binary relation symbol E, so that the superstructure ( V ( X ) ,  E )  is a 
model for TE. 
We shall use the following abbreviations in YE, called bounded 
quantifiers. 
V(A). 
(Vx E y) cp means (Vx)(x E y +  cp), 
(3x E y) cp means (3x)(x E y A cp). 
A bounded quantifier formula is a formula obtained from atomic for- 
mulas using connectives and bounded quantifiers. 
Formulas in the language 2ZE become more readable when abbrevia- 
tions such as the subset symbol C or the ordered pair symbol (x, y) are 
used instead of expressing everything directly in terms of E and =. The 
following lemma shows that we can introduce these abbreviations as 
bounded quantifier formulas. In the abbreviations, some of the variables 
must be interpreted as sets relative to V ( X )  rather than arbitrary 
elements of V ( X ) .  We can see the reason for this by considering the 
empty set. In a superstructure V(X),O is the only set relative to V ( X )  
which has no elements in V ( X ) ,  but each individual relative to V ( X )  also 
has no elements in V ( X ) .  
LEMMA 4.4.4. Let n E o. There are bounded quantifier formulas 
cpo, . . . , cp6 of 2?e such that for every superstructure V ( X )  with base set X ,  

266 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
PROOF. We give the proof for a few cases to illustrate the method. In the 
case n = 2, the required abbreviation 'p, for u = {x, y }  is the bounded 
quantifier formula 
x E u A y E u A (VZ E U ) ( Z = X  v z = y ) .  
Using cp,, we obtain an abbreviation (p2 for u = (x, y ) :  
The proof of (6) is by induction on n. -I 
In Lemma 4.4.4 above, it is important that the same abbreviation 
formula works for every superstructure. We now consider mappings from 
one superstructure into another. 
Let 3 and 8 be models for 2'E. 
A mapping f : A+ B is said to be a 
bounded elementary embedding of 2I into 8, in symbols f : 8 < b8, 
iff f 
is an isomorphic embedding of 3 into 8 and for every bounded 
quantifier formula cp(x,, ..., x,) and a,, ... , a, in A ,  
k cp[a,, . .. , a,] if and only if 8 != cp[ fa,, . . . , fa,J. 
Thus a bounded elementary embedding is the analogue of an elementary 
embedding for bounded quantifier formulas. 
We say that 8 is a bounded elementary extension of 3, and 3 is a 
bounded elementary submodel of 8, in symbols 3 <,, 23, if 3 is a 
submodel of 8 and the identity mapping is a bounded elementary 
embedding. 
DEFINITION. 
By a nonstandard universe we mean a triple 
(V(X>, V ( Y ) ,  *> 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
267 
such that: 
(a) X and Y are infinite base sets; 
(b) (Transfer Principle) 
is a bounded elementary embedding: 
( 4  
*x= 
Y ;  
and 
(d) for every infinite subset A of X, 
{ * a  : a E A }  is a proper subset of 
The set * A  is called the star of A .  
* A .  
X 
Y 
A nonstandard universe 
Condition (d) in the definition of a nonstandard universe can be 
considerably weakened; see Exercise 4.4.28. 
We shall give two proofs of the existence of nonstandard universes, 
first a direct construction using ultrapowers, and then an indirect con- 
struction using the compactness theorem. 

268 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
THEOREM 
4.4.5 (Existence of Nonstandard Universes). Let V ( X )  be a 
superstructure with an infinite base set X .  Then there exists a nonstandard 
universe ( V ( X ) ,  V ( Y ) ,  *). 
PROOF VIA ULTRAPOWERS. 
For this proof we shall introduce a higher 
order extension of the ultrapower construction which we call a bounded 
ultrapower. We shall use the ordinary ultrapower of the base set X to 
form the base set Y ,  with * being the natural embedding d of X into Y ,  
and then define the restriction of * to V,(X) by recursion on n. 
Let D be any countably incomplete ultrafilter over an index set I. Let 
Y be the ordinary ultrapower n , X  of the set X. We shall assume 
hereafter that the index set I has been chosen so that Y is a base set; see 
Exercise 4.4.2. For each natural number n, let 
W, = {
f
~
 
'v(x) : {i : f(i) E v,(x)} 
E D}, 
the set of all functions f such that f(i) E V,(X) for all i in an element of 
D. Thus W,, is equal to the set of all f : I+ V ( X )  such that f is 
D-equivalent to some g : I+ V,(X). Then 
w,,c w, c ... c w, c . . 
Let W = U , 
W,,. For each x E V ( X ) ,  let c(x) = (x : i E I) be the constant 
function at x .  For each n, c maps V,(X) into W,,, and thus c maps V ( X )  
into W. 
We claim that there is a unique function / D : W-, V( Y )  such that: 
f/D = { g E 'X : f =, 
g }  
if f~ W,, and 
flD = {g/D : g E W and {i : g(i) ~ f ( i ) }  
E D} 
iff E W\W,. 
Here is a proof sketch of the claim. For f e  W,, f/D belongs to the 
ultrapower Y .  One can readily show by induction that for each n E w 
there is a unique function h, : W, + V,( Y )  such that 
h , ( f )  = f/D 
for f~ W,, and 
h,(f)={h,(g):gEWand 
{i:g(i)Ef(i)}ED) 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
269 
for f E W, \ W,,. Moreover, the functions h, form an increasing chain. 
The union of the functions h, is the required function lD. This estab- 
lishes the claim. 
Now define the embedding * : V(X)--, V ( Y )  by * A  = c(A) lD. Then 
for each individual a E X, *a = d(a). And for each set A relative to 
V(X) 
9 
* A  = { f / D  : f E W and { i  : f(i) E A }  E D } .  
We call the triple (V(X), V(Y), *) defined in this way the bounded 
ultrapower of V(X) modulo D. 
We now show that any bounded ultrapower is a nonstandard universe. 
It is clear from the definition that *X = Y. Let A be an infinite subset of 
X .  Since D is countably incomplete, it follows from Proposition 4.2.4 (or 
Exercise 4.1.32) that the natural embedding d : A - - t n D A  is a proper 
embedding, and therefore { * a  : a E A} is a proper subset of * A .  
We need the following analogue of -Log’ Theorem. 
SUBLEMMA 
4.4.6. For every bounded quantifier formula ~ ( x ,  
. . . x,) and 
every tuple f l  . . . f ,  E W, 
(V(Y), E ) i = q [ f , l D  ... f,lD] ifand only if 
{ i :  (V(X), E ) i = c p [ f l ( i )  ... f , ( i ) ] } ~  
D. 
The proof of this sublemma is by induction on the complexity of 
bounded quantifier formulas, and is left to the reader. The definition of 
lD takes care of the case where cp is an atomic formula. 
Takingf,, . . ,, f, to be constant functions c(a,), . . . , c(a,), we conclude 
that 
(V(Y), E ) k q [ * a  l...*an] if and only if (V(X), E ) L ~ [ a ,  
... a,], 
that is, * is a bounded elementary embedding. This completes the proof 
that (V(X), V(Y), *) is a nonstandard universe. -1 
The bounded ultrapower construction can still be defined in the same 
way even if D is a countably complete ultrafilter. If D is a principal 
ultrafilter, the bounded ultrapower modulo D is trivial in the sense that * 
is an isomorphism of (V(X), E ) onto ( V ( Y ) ,  E ). If D is a countably 

270 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
complete nonprincipal ultrafilter, so that Z must be at least as large as the 
first uncountable measurable cardinal p, and 1x1 2 p, then the bounded 
ultrapower is not trivial. It fails to be a nonstandard universe and instead 
has the property that for any infinite subset A of X of power less 
p, A = * A .  In the case of a countably complete ultrafilter D, the 
bounded ultrapower of V ( X )  modulo D is the same as the full ultra- 
power of the model ( V ( X ) ,  E ) modulo D. 
The second proof of the existence of nonstandard universes, via the 
compactness theorem, is more like Robinson’s original proof. We shall 
break this proof into a series of lemmas which are useful in their own 
right. 
DEFINITION. 
Let 8 = ( B ,  E )  be a model for .=YE. A submodel ‘21 of B is 
said to be a transitive submodel if whenever a E A ,  b E B, and bEa, we 
have b E A .  
For example, Lemma 4.4.2 shows that for each n, (V,,(X), E ) is a 
transitive submodel of ( V ( X ) ,  E ) . 
LEMMA 
4.4.7. Let B be a model for .=YE. Every transitive submodel ‘21 of 
B is a bounded elementary submodel. 
PROOF. By a straightforward induction on the complexity of bounded 
quantifier formulas q, we see that for all a,, . . . , a,, in A ,  B k q [ a ,  . . . a,,] 
if and only if 
k q[a, . . . a,]. i 
A generalization of Lemma 4.4.7 to languages with extra symbols, and 
a much deeper converse result, are stated in Exercise 2.4.22. 
We now wish to truncate a model 8 of .=YE by chopping off all elements 
which are not at a finite “level” over the base set. To do this, we need a 
formal analogue of the relation y E V,(X) in the language .=YE. Define by 
recursion on n the bounded quantifier formulas v,,( y ,  x )  as follows: 
.o(Y, 
x )  is Y E x ;  
V,,+I(Y, x )  is V “ ( Y ,  x )  v ( V 2  EY)%(Z, XI. 
1 ( 3 y  E x)(32 E y ) z  = 2 ,  
Let BASE(x) be the bounded quantifier formula 
which states that each element of x is “disjoint from the universe”. 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
271 
Comparing the definitions, we see that for any superstructure V ( X )  
over a base set X ,  
and 
(V(X), E ) k BASE[X]. 
Given a model '21 for LEE and an element X E A ,  define the truncation 
of '21 over X to be the submodel B of 
with universe 
B = { a  E A : for some n < w ,  % F .,[a, 
XI}. 
LEMMA 4.4.8. Let X be a base set, let B be a bounded elementary 
extension of (V(X), E ) , and let '21 be the truncation of 53 over X .  Then 'II 
is its own truncation over X ,  and 
( v(x), ) <b a <b 
PROOF: By the argument for Corollary 4.4.2, we see that '21 is a transitive 
submodel of B. By Lemma 4.4.7, '21 <b B, and the result follows. -I 
We shall call a model '21 for LEE truncated over Y if '21 is its own 
truncation over Y. For example, the model (V(X), E ) is truncated over 
X .  
THEOREM 
4.4.9 (Mostowski Collapsing Theorem). Let '21 = ( A ,  E )  be a 
model for LEE and X be an element of A such that 
(a) 'II is truncated over X ;  
(b) '21 kBASE[X]; 
(c) (Extensionality over X )  
'II L (Vu)(Vu)(u E x v u E x v (u = u * (Vz)(z E u * z E u)))[X]. 
(d) Y = { a  E A : aEX} is a base set. 
Then there is a unique bounded elementary embedding 
h : '21+ (V(Y), E ) 
such that h(a)=a for all a E  Y ,  h ( X ) =  Y ,  and the range of h is a 
transitive submodel of (V( Y ) ,  E ) . 
PROOF. We define the restriction of h to the set 
A ,  = { a  E A : '21 !F .,[a, XI} 

272 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
by recursion on n. We have A ,  = Y. For a E A ,  we define h(a) = a as 
required by the theorem. Suppose h(a) is defined for a E A,. Let 
a E A ,  + \ A,. Then whenever bEa we have b E A,. We may therefore 
define 
h(a) = {h(b) : bEa}. 
Since % is truncated over X ,  A = U ,<mA,, so we have defined the 
function h with domain A .  By induction on n, h maps each set A ,  into 
V,( Y ) ,  and thus h maps A into V(Y). From the definition, the mapping h 
from %!l 
into (V(Y), E ) preserves atomic formulas of the form u E u ,  
that is, aEb implies h(a) E h(b). Using the Extensionality property (c), 
one can show by induction on n that for each n, h restrictied to A ,  is one 
to one, and hence h is one to one. 
For a, b E A ,  h(a) E h(b) implies aEb. This is because if h(a) E h(b) 
then h(a)= h(c) for some cEb, and since h is one to one, c =  a. It 
follows that h is an isomorphic embedding of '2I into (V(Y), E ). Let C 
be the range of h, so that h is an isomorphism of % onto a submodel Q of 
(V(Y), E ). We see from the definition of h that h(X) = Y and Q is a 
transitive submodel of (V(Y), E ). By Lemma 4.4.7, Q is a bounded 
elementary submodel of (V(Y), E ), and thus h is a bounded elementary 
embedding of % into (V( Y ) ,  E ) . 
To prove uniqueness, let h' be any other mapping with the required 
properties. Since h' is a bounded elementary embedding, for each n, 
a E A ,  if and only if h'(a) E V,(Y). Using this and the other properties of 
h', one shows by induction on n that h'(a) = h(a) for all a E A,. i 
In Theorem 4.4.9, the mapping h :  %+ (V(Y), E ) is called the 
Mostowski collapse of %. 
PROOF 
OF THEOREM 
4.4.5 VIA COMPACTNESS 
THEOREM. 
By the compact- 
ness theorem, (V(X), E ) has an elementary extension B = ( B, E )  such 
that every infinite subset U C X  is enlarged, that is, there exists 
U E  B\V(X) such that aEU. We may choose B so that the set Y =  
{ b  E B : bEX} is a base set. Let % be the truncation of 23 over X .  By 
Lemma 4.4.8, % is a bounded elementary submodel of B and a bounded 
elementary extension of (V(X), E ) . 
Since X is a base set, ?I kBASE[X]. We shall leave the proof that % 
has the Extensionality 
property 4.4.9(c) as an exercise. 
Let 
h : %+ (V(Y), E ) be the unique bounded elementary embedding from 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
273 
Theorem 4.4.9, and let * : V(X)-, V(Y) be the restriction of h to V(X). 
Then * is a composition of two bounded elementary embeddings, and 
therefore * is a bounded elementary embedding of (V(X), E ) into 
(V(Y), E ). Moreover, * X  = Y ,  and { * x  : x E U }  is a proper subset of 
*U for each infinite subset U of X .  Thus ( V ( X ) , V ( Y ) , * )  is a non- 
standard universe. -1 
Now that we have shown that nonstandard universes exist, we shall 
study their properties. Assume hereafter that (V(X), V(Y), *) is a 
nonstandard universe. 
The condition * X =  Y guarantees that x E X iff * x  E Y .  Thus if x is an 
individual relative to V(X) then * x  is an individual relative to V(Y), and 
if u is a set relative to V(X) then * u  is a set relative to V(Y). 
All of the bounded quantifier formulas in Lemma 4.4.4 are preserved 
under *. For example, by 4.4.4 (3), if A and B are sets relative to V(X) 
and A C B, then *A C *B. By 4.4.4 ( S ) ,  i f f :  A+ B then *f : *A+ *B. 
Let A be a set relative to V(X), that is, A E V(X)\X. 
A is both an 
element of V(X) and a subset of V(X). It is important to distinguish 
between the element *A of V ( Y )  and the subset { * a  : a E A} of V(Y). 
We sometimes use the notation 
“A = { * a  : a E A } .  
Since x = y is a bounded quantifier formula, * is a one to one map of A 
onto “A, and thus “A has the same size as A. Since x E y is a bounded 
quantifier formula, a E A implies * a  E *A, and therefore “A C *A. With 
this notation, condition (d) in the definition of a nonstandard universe 
states that for every infinite A C X ,  “A is a proper subset of *A. In 
particular, “X is a proper subset of Y = * X .  
One can think of the mapping * as an expander which blows up each 
infinite set A relative to V(X) to a larger set *A relative to V(Y). 
By renaming the elements of Y ,  we can assume without loss of 
generality that X is a subset of Y and * x =  x for each  EX. This 
simplifies notation in Robinsonian analysis by reducing the number of 
*’s. Under this simplifying assumption, “ X =  X ,  and in fact “A = A for 
every subset A C X .  At higher levels, “A will usually be different from A. 
More precisely, given a nonstandard universe (V(X), V(Y), *), we 
may form the new nonstandard universe (V(X), V(Z), p )  where Z = 
X U  (Y\“X), 
and p(a) = f ( * a )  where f is the isomorphism f : (V(Y), 
E ) 
(V(Z), E ) such that f( y) = y if y E Y\”X 
and f( * x )  = x if x E X .  

274 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
As usual, when we do this it is understood that (V(X), V(Y), *) is such 
that Z is a base set. By Exercises 4.4.2 and 4.4.3, in the case of a 
bounded ultrapower the base set X and ultrafilter index set I can always 
be chosen so that X U n X is a base set, whence 2 = X U  (n,X\"X) 
is also a base set. 
The following lemma is used to compute the star of a set which is 
definable by a bounded quantifier formula from constants in V(X). 
D 
LEMMA 4.4.10. Let 'p(x,. . . x,, y )  be a bounded quantifier formula. Then 
for all b, , . . . , b, E V ( X )  and all sets A relative to V ( X ) ,  
* { Y E  A : ( V ( X ) ,  E ) k d b , . . .  b,, Y l )  
= { y E * A  : (V( Y ) ,  E ) k cp[* b, . . . * b,, y ] } ,  
PROOF. Let 
B =  { Y E  A : ( V ( X ) ,  E )  kcp[b, ... b,, y ] )  . 
Then B E V ( X ) ,  and 
This is a bounded quantifier formula, so 
(V(Y), ~ ) i = ( V y ~ * A ) ( y ~ * B e c p [ * b  
,...*b,, y ] ) .  
Also, * B  C * A ,  and the result follows. i 
Combining Lemmas 4.4.4 and 4.4.10, we see that the simplest set- 
theoretic operations are preserved by the bounded elementary embed- 
ding *. 
COROLLARY 
4.4.11. Let A, B and f be sets of a superstructure V ( X ) .  
(1). * maps (S(A), U ,  n, \) isomorphically, into (S(*A), u, n, \). 
(2). If A is finite then * A  = "A. 
(3). * ( A  x , B )  = * A  x *B. 
(4). If S(A) C B ,  then *(S(A)) = S(*A) n *B. 
(5). Zf Vflil(X) C B ,  then *(V,(X)) = V,(Y) n *B. 
We now consider models whose universe sets are sets relative to V(X). 
The next proposition shows that for such models, the bounded elemen- 
tary embedding * gives rise to an elementary embedding in the original 
sense. 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
275 
Let 2 be a first order language and let '21 be a model for 2 whose 
universe set A is a set relative to V(X). By Lemma 4.4.3, each finitary 
relation over A belongs to V(X), and thus the interpretation of each 
symbol of 2 belongs to V(X). Abusing notation, we denote by *'21 the 
model for 2 with universe *A such that for each symbol P of 2 with 
interpretation Z(P) in '21, P has interpretation *Z(P) in *%. (There is an 
abuse of notation because the interpretation function for *'21 has the 
original language 2 instead of *2 
as its domain.) 
PROPOSITION 
4.4.12. If '21 is a model whose universe set A is a set relative 
to V ( X ) ,  then the restriction of * to A is an elementary embedding of '2.I 
into *%. 
PROOF. Since each formula contains only finitely many symbols of 2, 
it 
suffices to prove the result in the case that 2 is finite, say 2= 
{ P,, . . . , Pk}. 
Let Ri be the interpretation of Pi in a, and identify % with 
the tuple (A, R,, ..., Rk). Then '21 is a set relative to V(X), and 
'21 E Vm(X) for some m. By Lemma 4.4.10, 
*'21 = ( * A ,  *R1, ..., *Rk). 
One can show by induction on the complexity of formulas that for each 
formula q ( x , .  . . x,) of 2, there is a bounded quantifier formula 
q ' ( x ,  ... x,, a, u )  of 2E such that for all b,, ... , b, E A ,  
(1) 
'21kq[b ,... b,]iff (V(X), ~ ) k c p ' [ b  
,...b,,%,V,(X)], 
and for all b,, ..., b, E * A ,  
(2) 
*'21i= q[b,, ... , b,] iff (V(Y), E ) k q'[b ,... b,, *a, V,(Y)]. 
Since * is a bounded elementary embedding, it follows from (1) and 
(2) that the restriction of * to A is an ordinary elementary embedding 
from 'u into *a. i 
Proposition 4.4.12 is often applied in the simplified case where X is a 
subset of Y and * x  = x for all x E X. In this case, if the universe A of 3 is 
an infinite subset of X, then *'21 is a proper elementary extension of '21. 
EXAMPLES. 
In these eqamples, suppose * x  = x for all x E X. 
*% is a nonstandard model of complete arithmetic. 
Let '21 be a standard model of arithmetic with universe A C X. Then 

276 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
Let 23 be isomorphic to the ordered field of real numbers with universe 
B C X and a symbol for the set N of positive integers of B. Then *B is a 
proper elementary extension of B and * N  is a proper extension of N .  
The elements of B are called standard real numbers, and the elements of 
* B hyperreal numbers. Abraham Robinson showed that the hyperreal 
number field could be used to develop the calculus in a rigorous manner 
which mirrors the intuitive use of infinitesimals by Leibniz and his 
contemporaries. Infinitesimals arise as follows. A hyperreal number is 
infinitesimal iff its absolute value is less than any positive standard real, 
finite iff its absolute value is less than some positive standard real, and 
infinite iff it is not finite. 
0 is the only standard infinitesimal. Here is a proof that positive 
infinite elements and positive infinitesimals exist. Each element of N has 
finitely many predecessors in N ,  and hence cannot have any new 
predecessors in * N .  Thus the new elements of * N  must be greater than 
all elements of N in *B, and hence positive infinite. This shows that the 
ordered field *B is nonarchimedean, that is, it has positive infinite 
elements. Using the ordered fields properties, it follows that the re- 
ciprocal of a positive infinite hyperreal number is positive infinitesimal. 
Thus positive infinitesimals exist in *B. 
Now consider an expansion of the standard real model B in the 
preceding paragraph which has symbols for additional real functions f of 
finitely many variables. Then * f is an extension off to *B which satisfies 
the same first order formulas. Robinson’s approach to calculus starts 
with the fact that the notion of a limit in calculus can be expressed very 
elegantly in terms of infinitesimals. But that is another story. 
We now turn to the important notion of an internal set. An element 
A E V( Y )  is said to be internal iff A is an element of *V,(X) for some n, 
or equivalently, A is an element of * B  for some set B relative to V ( X ) .  
The set of all internal elements of V(Y) is denoted by *V(X). Sets 
relative to V ( Y )  which are not internal are called external. 
By 4.4.11 (5), *(V,(X)) is the set of all internal elements of V,(Y), 
An element B E V(Y) is called standard if B = * A  for some A E V ( X ) .  
We denote by “V(X) the set of all standard sets. Notice that the mapping 
* is an isomorphism of ( V ( X ) ,  E ) onto (“V(X), E ), and that 
(“V(X), E ) is a bounded elementary submodel of (V( Y ) ,  E ) . 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
277 
In practice, the next two propositions are the usual means of showing 
that sets are internal. 
PROPOSITION 
4.4.13. For each A E V(X), * A  is internal. That is, “V(X) C 
*V(X). 
PROOF. We have A E V,,(X) for some n, and therefore * A  E *V,(X). -1 
PROPOSITION 
4.4.14 (Internal Definition Principle). Let ‘p(xl. . . x,, y )  be 
a bounded quantifier formula. If A , ,  . . . , A,, B are internal, then the set 
{ Y E B :  (V(Y), E ) ~ c p [ A l . . . A , , Y l )  
is internal. 
PROOF. Take k such that A l ,  ..., Am, Be*Vk(X). Let $(u) be the 
bounded quantifier formula 
(VX, ... X,, b E U ) ( 3 U  E U)(vy E U)(y E U @ ( y  E b A ‘p(X ,... X,, y))). 
Then 
(V(X>, E ) $[Vk(X)I. 
(V(Y), E ) $[*Vk(Wl. 
{ Y E B :  (V(Y), E )  k ~ [ A l * * . A m ,  
Y I )  
Therefore 
Taking Ai for xi and B for b, it follows that the set 
belongs to *Vk(X) and hence is internal. -I 
EXAMPLES. 
Since Y = *X and X E V(X), every element of Y is internal. 
It follows from 4.4.14 that for each internal set A, the set of all internal 
subsets of A is closed under unions, intersections, and complements. 
Moreover, if 9 is a model for 2’whose universe is a set relative to V(X), 
then each relation on * A  which is definable in *% by a formula of 9with 
constants from * A  is internal. 
Notice that by Lemma 4.4.10, Proposition 4.4.14 also holds when 
“internal” is everywhere replaced by “standard”. 

278 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
COROLLARY 
4.4.15. The model (*V(X), E ) of internal sets is a transitive 
submodel of (V( Y ) ,  E ). Moreover, 
* : ( V ( X ) ,  E ) < b  (*V(X), E >, 
(*V(X), E ) < b  (V(Y), E >. 
and 
PROOF. Let A E V(Y), A E B, and B E *V(X). For some n, B E  
*V,+,(X), so by Lemma 4.1.2 and the Transfer Principle, A E *V,(X). 
Therefore A E *V(X). This shows that (*V(X), E ) is a transitive sub- 
model of (V( Y ) ,  E ). The remaining two statements follow by Proposi- 
tion 4.4.13 and Lemma 4.4.7. i 
We remark that (“V(X), E ) is not a transitive submodel of ( V ( Y ) ,  E ), 
because * X  E “V(X) but * X  has elements which do not belong to “X and 
hence do not belong to “V(X). 
EXAMPLE. 
We can now give an example of an external set. Suppose % is 
a standard model of arithmetic whose universe A is a subset of X .  Then 
every set in V,(X) which meets A has a least element in %. By the 
Transfer Principle, every set in *V,(X) which meets * A  has a least 
element in *%. By 4.4.11 (5), every internal set in V,(Y) belongs to 
*V,(X). The set *A\A 
of infinite elements of *% belongs to V,(Y), 
meets * A ,  and has no least element in *%. Therefore *A\A 
does not 
belong to *V,(X) and must be external. It follows that A is external. By 
a similar argument, any nonempty subset of * A  which has no least 
element in *% is external. See the exercises for other examples. 
Instead of the model ( V ( X ) ,  E ), one might wish to work with an 
expansion ( V ( X ) ,  E , R i ) i E I .  
Given an expansion 2 3 ZE, the notions of 
a bounded quantifier formula and a bounded elementary embedding are 
defined exactly as before, except that we start with the set of atomic 
formulas of 2’ instead of ZE 
. The next theorem shows that our results on 
nonstandard universes can be extended “for free” to such expansions. 
We first extend the star notation to subsets of the superstructure V ( X )  
in the following way. Given any subset U C V ( X ) ,  define * U to be the 
union of the chain 
*u= Un<u*(Unvn(X))* 
For each n, U n V,(X) belongs to V,+,(X) and hence to V ( X ) ,  so 
*(U fl 
V,(X)) is an element of V(Y). In the case that U is already a set 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
219 
relative to V(X), we have U C V,(X) for some n, and the new and old 
definitions of *U agree. Since any relation R over V ( X )  is a subset of 
V(X), the star notation also applies to relations over V(X). 
THEOREM 
4.4.16 (Expansion Theorem). Let '11= (V(X), E , R i )  be an 
expansion of (V(X), E ) .  Then '$3= (*V(X), E , * R ~ ) ~ ~ ,  
is the unique 
expansion of ( *V(X), E ) such that * is a bounded elementary embedding 
from '11 into '$3. 
PROOF. Let 2 be the expanded language 
U { P I  : i E I } .  For con- 
venience suppose that 2 has only relation symbols. We first prove that 
*:a K h  '$3. Let a,, be the submodel of '11 with universe V,(X), and '$3, be 
the submodel of 5F3 with universe *V,(V). The proof of Lemma 4.4.7 
goes through for the expanded language 2, so that 
and 
@,, 
<b '$3. By Lemma 4.4.3 and the definition of *R,, we see that 
'$3, = *%, for each n. By Proposition 4.4.12, *:a,, < '$3, for each n. 
Consider a bounded quantifier formula cp(x, . . .x,) and a,, . . . , a, in 
V(X). For sufficiently large n, a,, . . . , a, all belong to V,(X). Thus the 
following are equivalent: 
'11 I= cp[a,. . . a,] 
'11, i= cp[a,. . . a,] 
B, L cp[*a, ...* a,] 
5F3 k cp[*a,.. . * a m ] ,  
proving that * : '11 <b '$3. 
It remains to prove uniqueness. Let 6 = (*V(X), E , T l ) l p ,  be an 
expansion of (*V(X), E ) such that * : '11 <b CS. Let i E Z and for each n let 
S, = R, n V,(X). Then V,(X), S, E V(X), and the equation S, = R, fl 
V,(X) is expressible by a bounded quantifier formula q ( s ,  u )  in 2. Since * 
is a bounded elementary embedding, we have 
0 
k cp[*S,, *V,(X)l 
T, n *v,(x) 
= *s, = *R, n *v,(x) 
for each n. It follows that 
for each n, and hence TI = *R, and 6 = B as required. -I 
EXAMPLES. 
If FIN is the set of all finite sets relative to V(X), then *FIN, 

280 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
the set of all *-finite sets, is the union 
*FIN= U,<,*(UEV,(X)\X: 
u is finite}. 
The expansion theorem 4.4.16 shows that *FIN is the collection of all 
sets u relative to V ( Y )  such that for some H E *N, there is an internal 
function f mapping { K E * N  : K < H }  onto u. 
If we let S denote the power set function on V(X)\X, 
then S 
regarded as a set of ordered pairs is a subset of V(X), and *S is a 
function mapping *V(X)\*X 
into itself. Theorem 4.4.16 shows that *S 
extends S in the sense that for every set A relative to V(X), (*S)(*A) = 
*(S(A)). 
The next proposition characterizes *S in another way. 
PROPOSITION 
4.4.17. For each internal set B relative to V(Y), (*S)(B) is 
the set of all internal subsets of B. 
PROOF. Let B be internal, so that B E  *V,(X) for some n. Since 
*V,(X) = *V(X) n V,(Y), every internal subset of B belongs to *V,(X). 
We have 
(V(X), E 7 S) (VU E V,(X))(VY E V,(X))(Y E S(u) f ) Y  c u). 
By 4.4.16, this formula is also satisfied by *V,(X) in (*V(X), E , *S). 
Taking B for u, we have 
(VY E *V,(X))(Y E (*S)(B)@Y c B). 
Since every internal subset of B belongs to *V,(X), (*S)(B) is the set of 
all internal subsets of B. -I 
We now prove two results which establish relationships between 
internal sets and ultrapowers. 
PROPOSITION 
4.4.18. Suppose that (V(X), V ( Y ) , * )  is a bounded ul- 
trapower of V(X) modulo D, and let h be the Mostowski collapse of the 
truncation of the ordinary ultrapower of (V(X), E ) modulo D. Then 
*V(X) = range(/D) = range(h). 
PROOF. We prove the first equation. As in our construction of the 
bounded ultrapower, 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
28 1 
For each n, we have 
*V,(X) = c(V,(X))/D 
= { g / D  : g E W and { i  : g(i) E V,(X)} E D} 
= { g / D :  gE W,}. 
Taking unions of each side over n we have 
*V(X) = { g / D  : g E W } .  -1 
THEOREM 
4.4.19 (Local Ultrapower Theorem). Let ( V ( X ) ,  V(Y), *) be 
a nonstandard universe. For every internal set B E *V(X) there is a 
bounded ultrapower ( V ( X ) ,  V(Z), p )  and a bounded elementary em- 
bedding 
h : ("V(X), E ) + (*V(X), E ) 
such that B belongs to the range of h, and * A  = h('A) for all A E V(X). 
PROOF. Let I be a set relative to V ( X )  such that B E *I. Let J be a 
countably infinite subset of X ,  choose an element b E *J\J 
and put 
/3 = (B, b )  (this is done to make that we end up with a countably 
incomplete ultrafilter). Let 
D =  
{ C C Z X  J :  p E *C}. 
Then D is an ultrafilter over I X J .  D is countably incomplete because for 
each j E J ,  I x { j }  e D. Let (V(X), V(Z), p )  be the bounded ultrapower 
of V(X) modulo D, 
and let 'V(X) be its collection of internal sets. By 
Proposition 4.4.18. 
"V(X) = { f / D  : f E W }  . 
Since I x J E V(X)\X, W C V ( X )  and thus * f is defined and is a function 
with 
domain 
* ( I X  J ) = * Z X  * J  
for 
each 
f E  W. 
Define 
h : 'V(X)+ *V(X) by 
h ( f / D )  = (*f>(P) 
h is a well-defined function because if f / D  = e / D  then 
{ k  E I X J : f(k) = e(k)} E D, 

282 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
so 
p E * { k  E I x J : f(k) = e(k)} 
and hence (*f)(p) = ( * e ) ( P ) .  
We have h ( g / D )  = B where g is the function g(i, j )  = i, and hence B 
is in the range of h. It remains to show that h is a bounded elementary 
embedding. UsingEoS' theorem (Sublemma 4.4.6) and Lemma 4.4.10, we 
see that for all fl, ..., f, E W and all bounded quantifier formulas 
cp(xl. . . x , ) ,  the following are equivalent. 
( " V ( x ) ,  E ) kcO[f1/D...fn/Dl, 
{ k  E I x J : ( V ( X ) ,  E ) cp[fl(k). . . f,(k>l> E D, 
P E * { k E I X  J :  ( V ( X ) ,  E ) ~ c p [ f l ( k > . . . f , ( k > l > ?  
P E { k E * ( I X  4 :  (*V(X), E )  ~cp[*fl(k)...*f,(k)l}, 
(*V(X), E ) k cp[(*f,)(P)...(*f,>(p)1' 
(*V(X)7 E ) ~ c o [ h ( f l / D ) . . . h ( f , / D ) I .  
This completes the proof. -1 
This theorem gives us some information about cardinalities of internal 
sets. 
PROPOSITION 
4.4.20. Each infinite internal set relative to V( Y )  has car- 
dinality at least 2". Every countably infinite set relative to V( Y )  is external. 
PROOF. Let B be an infinite internal set relative to V ( Y ) .  Let 
( V ( X ) ,  V ( Z ) ,  p )  and h : 'V(X)+ *V(X) be the bounded ultrapower 
and bounded elementary embedding from theorem 4.4.19, so that B is in 
the range of h. The bounded ultrapower is taken modulo a countably 
incomplete ultrafilter D over a set I .  We have B = h(C) for some 
C E 'V(X). Since B is infinite, C is infinite. Moreover, C = f / D  for some 
n and some f : I +  V,,+l(X). To prove that ICI 32", one must find 2" 
functions g : I +  V,,(X) which are unequal modulo D and such that 
{ i  : g(i) Ef(i)} E D. This follows from Exercise 4.3.14, which states that 
any ultraproduct modulo a countably incomplete ultrafilter which is 
infinite has cardinality at least 2". -1 
We now turn to saturated nonstandard universes. We shall start out by 
stating a bounded quantifier analogue of our previous definition of 
saturation. We shall see that in the case of nonstandard universes, this 
definition can be considerably simplified. Let 2v(x) 
and 2,e,,, 
be the 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
283 
extensions of ZE formed by adding constants for all elements of V ( X )  or 
*V(X), respectively. A constant symbol c E V ( X )  will be interpreted by c 
in (V(X), E ) and by *c in (V(Y), E ). In the definitions which follow, a 
is an uncountable cardinal. 
We shall say that the superstructure (V(X), V(Y), *) is a-saturated 
over V(X), or is an a-enlargement, iff for every n < w ,  every set Z(x) 
of fewer than a bounded quantifier formulas of 
"fLpv(x) 
which is 
finitely satisfiable in (V(X), E ) by elements of V,(X) is satisfiable in 
(V( Y ) ,  E ) by an element of *V, ( X ) .  
(V(X), V(Y), E ) is saturated over V(X), or is an enlargement, iff for 
every n < w ,  every set Z(x) of bounded quantifier formulas of "fLpv(x) 
which is finitely satisfiable in (V(X), E ) by elements of V,(X) is 
satisfiable in (V(Y), E ) by an element of *V,(X). 
Thus (V(X), V(Y), *) is an enlargement if and only if it is a-saturated 
over V ( X )  for all cardinals a, and also if and only if it is lV(X)l+- 
saturated over V(X). 
We shall say that the superstructure (V(X), V(Y), *) is a-saturated iff 
for every n < w ,  every set 2 ( x )  of fewer than a bounded quantifier 
formulas of ZINT 
which is finitely satisfiable in (V(Y), E ) by elements of 
*V,(X) is satisfiable in (V(Y), E )  by an element of *V,(X). 
COROLLARY 
4.4.21. Every a-saturated nonstandard universe is an a - 
enlargement. 
PROOF. By Proposition 4.4.13. -I 
Several characterizations of enlargements and a -saturated nonstandard 
universes are given in the problem set. The following theorem shows that 
enlargements exist. 
THEOREM 
4.4.22. Let D be an a-regular ultrafilter. Then the bounded 
ultrapower of V(X) modulo D is an a+-enlargement. 
PROOF. Comparing the definitions of ultrapower and bounded ul- 
trapower, one can check by induction on n that there is an isomorphism 
such that for each A EV,(X), * A  = h(d(A)). The result now follows 
from Corollary 4.3.14. -I 

284 
ULTRAPRODUCCS 
[4.4 
In many applications of Robinsonian analysis, an a,-saturated non- 
standard universe is needed. The next theorem will be used to show that 
@,-saturated nonstandard universes exist. 
THEOREM 
4.4.23 (Comprehensiveness Theorem). Let ( V ( X ) ,  V(Y), *) be 
a bounded ultrapower. Let A and B be sets relative to V ( X )  and let 
F : A -+ * B. Then there exists an internal function G : * A  + * B such that 
G(*a) = F(a) for all a E A .  
PROOF. Let the bounded ultrapower be modulo the ultrafilter D over I. 
For each a E A ,  choose a representative f ( a )  : I+ B such that F(a) = 
f(a)/D. Let g : I +  *B be the function defined by g(i)(a) = f(a)(i), and let 
G = g/D. G is internal. For each i E I we have g(i) : A+ B, so 
G : *A+ *B. Finally, for each a E A ,  we have 
G(*a) = (g(i)(a))iEJD 
= (.f(a)(i))iEJD 
= f ( a ) / D  = F(a), 
as required. -I 
COROLLARY 
4.4.24. Every bounded ultrapower is an w,-saturated non- 
standard universe. 
PROOF. Let {p,(x) : n E N }  be a countable set of bounded quantifier 
formulas of 2ZINT which is finitely satisfiable in (V( Y ) ,  E ) by elements of 
*V,(X). Let B, be the set of elements of *V,(X) which satisfy p,. We 
must show that n , B ,  # 0. By 4.4.14, each B, is internal. We may 
assume without loss of generality that N C X .  By 4.4.23, there is an 
internal function G : *N+ *C such that G(n) = B, for all n E N .  The 
internal set 
{ H E  * N  : n 
K
<
H
~
(
~
)
 
z 01 
contains N and therefore contains an infinite H .  It follows that 
Exercise 4.4.29 shows that there are nonstandard universes, and even 
enlargements, which are not w,-saturated. 
The analogue of Corollary 4.4.24 for ordinary ultrapowers, that any 
countably incomplete ultrapower is a, 
-saturated, will be proved in 
Section 6.1 by a different argument. 
For arbitrary cardinals a, the existence of a -saturated nonstandard 
universes will follow from the results in the next section, 5.1. 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
285 
We now take up the topic of internal set theory, which was introduced 
by Nelson (1977). It works within an expansion of ZFC which has a new 
unary predicate St(x) for "standard" and additional axioms which reflect 
the intuitive idea of a "rich" elementary extension of the original 
universe. 
DEFINITION. 
The language of internal set theory has the binary relation 
symbol E and the unary relation symbol St. A formula is called internal iff 
the symbol St does not occur in it. We use the abbreviations 
(~"x)cp for (Vx)St(x)+ cp, (gs'x)cp for (gx)(~t(x) 
A cp), 
( V ~ ' ~ ' " X ) ( P  
for (Vx)(St(x) A x is finite)+ cp. 
Internal set theory, IST, has the following axiom schemes. 
The axioms of ZFC; 
Idealization: (VS""'"y)(3x)(Vz 
E y)cp+ (3x)(Vs'z)cp, where cp is an 
Standardization: ( ~ s " x ) ( ~ s ' y ) ( ~ s ' z ) ( z  
E y - z E x A a), where @ is an 
Transfer: (Vs'x,). . . (Vs'x,)((Vs'y)cp -+ (Vy)cp), where cp is an internal 
internal formula in which y does not occur; 
arbitrary formula in which y does not occur; 
formula which has at most the free variables x,. ..., x,, y .  
Here is an example of a model of IST. 
THEOREM 
4.4.25. Let 91 = ( R (  0, E ) where 6 is a limit ordinal >w, and 
let % = ( B ,  E )  be an (21,)'-saturated elementary extension of ?I. Then 
'$3' = ( B ,  E ,  R( 6)) satisfies the Idealization, Standardization, and Trans- 
fer schemes. If 91 is a model of ZFC, then % is a model of IST. 
PROOF. The interpretation of St in 8' is R( 6 ) .  Since ?I < a,%' satisfies 
the Transfer scheme. The model 91 has power 21,. Finiteness can be 
expressed in %' because 6 is a limit ordinal >w. Since 3 is (216)+- 
saturated, the idealization scheme holds in a'. Standardization holds in 8' 
because, for any x E R( 8 ) .  the set 
y =  { Z E X :  %'k@[z, ...I} 
belongs to R( 6 ) .  -I 
In the above theorem, if % is only assumed to be (l,)'-saturated over 
?I, then 8' will still satisfy the Standardization and Transfer schemes. 

286 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
and the restricted Idealization scheme where only x and z occur free in 
CP. 
We shall now use Theorem 4.4.25 to show that IST is a conservative 
extension of ZFC, and thus the consistency of IST follows from the 
consistency of ZFC. The proof will depend on the existence of a- 
saturated elementary extensions, which will be proved in Section 5.1. 
THEOREM 
4.4.26. IST is a conservative extension of ZFC. That is, any 
sentence of the language of ZFC which is provable from IST is already 
provable from ZFC. 
PROOF: Let 8 be a sentence of the language of ZFC which is provable 
from IST. Then 8 is provable from a finite subset ZFC, C ZFC and the 
Idealization, Standardization, and Transfer schemes. To show that 8 is 
provable from ZFC, we formalize the argument in the next paragraph 
within ZFC. 
We assume the negation of 8 and get a contradiction. By the reflection 
principle (Exercise 3.1.16), there is a limit ordinal 6 > w such that ZFC, 
and 1 0  hold in '11 = (R( 0, E ). By the existence theorem for saturated 
models, Theorem 5.1.4, '11 has a (lf)+-saturated elementary extension 
B. By Theorem 4.4.25, 8' = (B, R ( 5 ) )  is a model of ZFC, and the 
Idealization, Standardization, and Transfer schemes. Therefore B' k 8, 
contradicting '11 L 18. -1 
We conclude with a comparison of the superstructure and internal set 
theory approaches. The superstructure approach works within ordinary 
ZFC set theory, at the price of restricting the universe to the finite 
E -levels. It uses the interplay between the three structures ( V ( X ) ,  E ), 
(*V(X), E ), and ( V ( Y ) ,  E ), that is, the collections of standard, inter- 
nal, and external sets. The external sets often play an essential part; for 
example, in many applications one uses the cr-algebra generated by the 
algebra of internal subsets of a set. 
The internal set theory approach is syntactic in character, and works 
within a conservative extension of ZFC. It has the expository advantage 
of avoiding any mention of models. There are no stars, and the new 
predicate St(x) appears instead. All the E levels of the original set- 
theoretic universe are kept, but the price is the loss of the external sets. 
Seen from the outside, it uses the interplay between the two structures 
(St, E ) and ( V ,  E ) of standard and internal sets, where (St, E ) is the 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
287 
usual set-theoretic universe and (V, 
E ) is a non well-founded elementary 
extension. Particular external sets whose elements are internal can be 
treated as formulas involving St(x). A disadvantage is that the language 
cannot talk about sets of external sets, such as the a-algebra generated 
by an algebra of internal sets. In practice, internal set theory has been 
adequate for certain areas of Robinsonian analysis (e.g. singular pertur- 
bations), but inadequate for others (e.g. probability theory, Banach 
spaces). 
EXERCISES 
In the exercises which follow, it is understood that (V(X), 
V( Y), 
*) is a 
nonstandard universe and * x  = x for all x E X. 
4.4.1. Let a be an infinite ordinal and let X be a set such that every 
element of an element of X has rank a. (Ranks of sets are defined in the 
Appendix.) Prove that Xis a base set. [Hint: Prove by induction on n that 
each element of V,(X) has rank p where either p < n  or a < p <  
a + n + 1.1 
4.4.2. Let X be a set of rank p and let D be an ultrafilter over a set I of 
rank y such that y 3 p + w .  Prove that the ultrapower n D X  is a base 
set. [Hint: 
Prove that each function f : I +  X has the same rank, y if y is 
a limit ordinal, and y + 2 if y is a successor ordinal. Then use Exercise 
4.4.1 .] 
4.4.3. Let a and p be ordinals such that w S a and a + w 6 p. Let X 
and Y be sets such that every element of an element of X has rank a and 
every element of an element of Y has rank p. Prove that X U Y is a base 
set. [Hint: 
No element of V(X U Y) has rank a or p.] 
4.4.4. Prove that the composition of two bounded elementary embed- 
dings is a bounded elementary embedding. 
4.4.5 (Bounded elementary chain theorem). Let '$Im, a < y, be a chain of 
models for .YE 
such that '$Ia <,,'lip whenever a < p < y. Prove that 
%O<h 
u m < v " a .  

288 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
4.4.6. Give the proof of Lemma 4.4.3, and complete the proof of 
Lemma 4.4.4. 
4.4.7. Let 
cp(x ,... x,) 
be 
a 
formula 
of 
2ZE of 
the 
form 
( 3 y , . .  . yn)(Vz, . . . z p ) @  where @ is a bounded quantifier formula. Then 
for all a, , ..., a, in A, if (V(X), E ) k cp[a,.. . a,] 
then (*V(X), E ) 
k cp[a,. . .a,]. 
4.4.8. Prove that for every infinite set A relative to V ( X )  (not necessari- 
ly a subset of X), 
“A is a proper subset of *A. 
4.4.9. Prove that for each A E V ( X )  there is a subset A, C X such that 
for all U C X ,  A E V(U) if and only if A, C U. 
4.4.10. Show that for each set A relative to V(X), the following are 
equivalent: 
*A = A; 
“A = A; 
*A E V(X); 
A E V ( 2 )  for some finite subset 2 C X. 
[Hint: Use the preceding exercise.] 
4.4.11. Let F be an internal function which is a set relative to V(Y). 
Prove that the domain and range of F are internal sets. 
4.4.12. Given sets A and B, let EXP(A, B) be the set ”A of all functions 
from B into A. Prove that for any two sets A, B relative to V ( X ) ,  
*( EXP(A, B ) )  is the set of all internal functions f : * B --., *A. 
4.4.13. Let F be a function F : V(X)+ V(X), and suppose that for each 
n there exists k such that F restricted to Vn(X) maps V,,(X) into V,(X). 
Show that 
is a total function from *V(X) into itself. 
4.4.14. The binary function EXP from pairs of sets into sets may be 
regarded as a subset of V(X)\X, 
so that *EXP is a subset of 
*V(X)\Y. 
Prove that for any two internal sets A, B relative to V(Y), 
(*EXP)(A, B) is the set of all internal functions f : *B-, * A .  

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
289 
4.4.15. In the definition of a nonstandard universe, prove that the 
Transfer Principle (b) may be replaced by the statement that * is a 
bounded elementary embedding of (V(X), E ) into ( U ,  E ) for some 
transitive submodel ( U, E ) of (V( Y ) ,  E ) . 
4.4.16 (Overspill Principle). Let 91 be a model isomorphic to the ordered 
field of real numbers with universe A C X. Prove that any internal subset 
of *A which contains arbitrarily large infinitesimals contains arbitrarily 
small positive noninfinitesimals, and that any internal subset of *A which 
contains arbitrarily large finite elements contains arbitrarily small posi- 
tive infinite elements. 
4.4.17. Let 2l be as in the preceding exercise. Prove that any internal 
subset of *A which contains all sufficiently large infinitesimals contains 
all sufficiently small positive noninfinitesimals, and that any internal 
subset of *A which contains all sufficiently large finite elements contains 
all sufficiently small positive infinite elements. 
4.4.18. Let 2l be as in the preceding exercises, and suppose that the 
nonstandard universe is w,-saturated. Prove that every countable set of 
infinitesimals has an infinitesimal upper bound. 
4.4.19. Suppose that the nonstandard universe is o,-saturated. Prove 
that the union of a countable strictly increasing chain of internal subsets 
of V,,(Y) is external. 
4.4.20. Suppose that the nonstandard universe is w,-saturated. Let B be 
a subset of V,(Y) such +that both B and V,,(Y)\B 
are unions of 
countable sets of internal sets. Prove that B is internal. 
4.4.21. Suppose that the set N of natural numbers is a subset of X .  
Prove that (V(X), V(Y), *) is w,-saturated if and only if every countable 
sequence (A,, : n E N) of internal sets can be extended to an internal 
sequence ( B, : n E * N ) .  
4.4.22. Suppose the nonstandard universe is an a-enlargement, where 
a > w. Prove that for every model '2i for a language 2 whose universe set 
A is a subset of X, *a is a-saturated over 8. 
4.4.23. Suppose the nonstandard universe is a-saturted, where a > w. 

290 
ULTRAPRODUCTS 
[4.4 
Let ‘21 be a model for a language 9 
such that the universe A and each 
relation and function of 8 is internal. Prove that ‘21 is an a-saturated 
model. 
4.4.24. (i). A nonstandard universe (V(X), V(Y), *) is an a-enlarge- 
ment if and only if each collection U of fewer than a standard sets 
relative to V(Y), if U has the finite intersection property then U has 
nonempty intersection. 
(ii). (V(X), V(Y), *) is a-saturated if and only if for each set U of 
fewer than a internal sets relative to V(Y), if U has the finite intersection 
property, then U has nonempty intersection. 
4.4.25. A binary relation R with domain B is said to be concurrent if for 
every finite subset C of B there exists y such that for all x E C ,  
( x ,  y )  E R. Prove that the nonstandard universe is an enlargement if and 
only if for every concurrent relation R with domain B such that R is a set 
relative to V(X) there exists y such that for all x E B, ( * x ,  y )  E *R. 
4.4.26. Prove that a nonstandard universe is an enlargement if and only 
if it is a IV(X)I-enIargement. 
4.4.27. Prove that a nonstandard universe is an enlargement if and only 
if for each set A relative to V(X) there is a *-finite set B such that 
“A C B. 
4.4.28*. Prove that in the definition of a nonstandard universe, the 
condition (d) can be replaced by the weaker condition that “A is a proper 
subset of * A  for some infinite A C X of cardinality less than the first 
measurable cardinal. 
4.4.29*. Prove that for each infinite base set A ,  there is a nonstandard 
universe (V(X), V(Y), *) which is an enlargement but is not w,-satu- 
rated. [Hint: Form the union of a countable elementary chain beginning 
with (V(X), E ) , then truncate and take the Mostowski collapse.] 
4.4.30*. Let (V(X), V(Y), *) be an enlargement and let ‘21 and B be 
models for a language 2 whose universe sets A and B are sets relative to 
V(X). Prove that if ‘21 = 23, then 8 is elementarily embeddable in *B. 
4.4.31*. Let D be an a-regular ultrafilter and let (V(X), V(Y), *) be 

4.41 
NONSTANDARD UNIVERSES 
291 
the bounded ultrapower of V ( X )  modulo D. Prove that ( V ( X ) ,  V(Y), *) 
is cyf-universal in the sense that for any nonstandard universe 
( V ( X ) ,  V ( Z ) ,  p )  with at most a internal sets there is a bounded 
elementary embedding 
h :  (”V(X), E ) + ( * V ( X ) ,  E )  
such that h(”A) = * A  for all A E V ( X ) .  
4.4.32*. Let U be a set of internal sets, U C *V(X). By the Skolem hull 
of U we mean the set 
H ( U )  = {(*F)(u) 
: F E FUNC and u E U n Domain(*F)} 
where FUNC is the set of all functions which are sets relative to V(X). 
Prove that for any U, 
and that H ( U )  is the intersection of all sets W such that 
“V(X) U U C W and (W, E ) <, (*V(X), E ). 
4.4.33. Let ( V ( X ) ,  V(Y), *) be a bounded ultrapower modulo an ul- 
trafilter D over a set I relative to V(X). Prove that *V(Y) is the Skolem 
hull of the singleton {idlD} where id is the identity function on I .  
4.4.34. Show that for each base set X there exists a bounded ultrapower 
of V ( X )  such that *V(X) is not the Skolem hull of a singleton. 
[Hint: Get an upper bound for the cardinality of the Skolem hull H(U).] 
4.4.35*. Prove that *V(Y) is the Skolem hull of a singleton if and only if 
( V ( X ) ,  V(Y), *) is a bounded ultrapower of V ( X )  modulo an ultrafilter 
D over a set I relative to V ( X )  (renaming the elements of Y if 
necessary). [Hint: Use the proof of the Local Ultrapower Theorem.] 
4.4.36*. Call a nonstandard universe minimal iff *V(X) and “V(X) are 
the only sets W such that (“V(X), E ) <, (W, E ) <, (*V(X), E ). 
Prove that a nonstandard universe is minimal if and only if it is a 
bounded ultrapower with respect to a selective ultrafilter over w (renam- 
ing the elements of Y if necessary). Selective ultrafilters are defined in 
Exercise 4.3.42. 

CHAPTER 5 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
5.1. Saturated and special models 
We have already defined in Section 2.3 the notion of an w-saturated 
model. To repeat the definition, a model PI is w-saturated iff for every finite 
subset X c A, the expansion (a, a)IIEX 
realizes every type C(v) that is con- 
sistent with its theory. So an w-saturated model is rich in the number of 
types that it realizes; essentially, it realizes the maximum number of types. 
We also proved in Section 2.3 that any two equivalent countable w-saturated 
models are isomorphic; furthermore, if a theory T has only a countable 
number of finite types, then T has countably saturated models. We shall 
develop in this section some simple properties of generalizations of w- 
saturated models. The generalizations we have in mind are the notions of an 
a-saturated model, a saturated model, and a special model. 
Let a be a cardinal. A model a is a-saturated iff for every subset X c A 
with fewer than a elements, the expansion (Y, 
a),,x realizes every type Z(v) 
of the language 9 u {c, : a E X} which is consistent with the theory of 
(8, a)aEx. In working with a-saturated models, we frequently want to 
enumerate the elements of X in the expansion (Y, 
a),,x.Thus if ( is an 
ordinal less than a and X = {a, : q < t}, then we write (Y, a,),,C. There 
is then no ambiguity when we write (Y, a,,),,<C = (23, !J,),,<~. 
PROPOSITION 5.1.1. 
(i). If a is a limit cardinal, then M is a-saturutrd if and only if ?l 
is 8- 
saturated for all cardinals /3 < a. 
(ii). M is a-saturated if and only if for every ordinal t < a and every 
a E {A, the model (?l, a,),<{ realizes all types Z(x, ... x.) consistent with its 
theory. 
292 
A model Y is saturated iff it is Idl-saturated. 

5.11 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
293 
(iii). % is a-saturated ifand only iffor every ordinal { < a and every a E {A, 
(iv). If % is a-saturated, then every rcduct of % is a-saturated. 
Parts (ii) and (iii) require that a be infinite. 
the model (8, a,,),, 
is a-saturated. 
The proof of Proposition 5.1.1 is left to the reader. 
PROPOSITION 
5.1.2. 
(i). If% is a-saturated and infinite, then IAI 2 a. 
(ii). % is finite if and only if% 
is a-saturated for all a. 
PROOF. (i). Suppose IAl < a. Let U E ' ~ ' A  
be an enumeration of all the 
elements of A, and let C(u) be a type such that 
C(v) 3 {u f c, : a €  A } .  
C is a type of (a, a)&,, and C cannot be realized in (%, a),EA. 
(ii). If % is infinite, then by (i), % is not IAl+-saturated. On the other hand, 
suppose that % is finite. Let X c A, and let C(v) be a type of ((11, a),Ex. 
If C(u) is not realized in %, then for every b E A, there is a formula tsb E C 
such that (%, a),Ex t i 
ub[b]. This shows that the finite subset {a, : b E A }  
of C is not consistent in (a, 
i 
We next restate an earlier result from Chapter 4. 
LEMMA 
5.1.3. Suppose IIYII < a and w < IAI < 2". Then there exists an 
elementary extension '$3 of 2l of power 2" such that for euery X c A of power a, 
(23, a),,, realizes every type C(u) of (%, a).,,. 
PROOF. This lemma already follows from Corollary 4.3.14. The proof there 
requires the ultrapower construction modulo a regular ultrafilter. While 
the proof given there is not difficult, the student should realize that the 
compactness theorem is already adequate for this construction. For this 
reason, we sketch an alternate proof. 
Since IAl < 2", the number of subsets X c A of power a is at most 2". 
The language 2Zx = 3 u {ca : a E X }  still has at most a symbols. Whence 
the total number of types Z(u) of 2Zx is at most 2". For each X c A of 
power a and each type C(u) of (a, a)orX, we introduce a new constant cxz. 
Let 
T = the elementary diagram of % in 2ZA plus all the sentences C(cxz) 
for every X c A of power a and every type C(v) of (a, a)..~. 

294 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
15.1 
We can show that T is consistent and has an infinite model. Since T has 
at most 2" symbols, T has a model of power 2". The reduct of this model 
to 9 
is the desired model 8. -I 
LEMMA 
5.1.4 (Existence of a+-saturated Models of Power 2"). Suppose 
112'11 6 a and w 6 [ A (  6 2". Then there is an a +-saturated elementary 
extension of 'II of power 2". 
PROOF. We construct an elementary chain B<, 5 c 2" of length 2" such that 
(1) each 8< is an elementary extension of % of power 2"; 
(2) for every X c B, of power a, (Bc+ 
1, a).Ex realizes every type Z(v) 
We take B,, to be the model constructed in Lemma 5.1.3. If q is a limit 
ordinal, 0 c q c 2", we let a,, = u,,,'$323,. 
If q = 5 +  I ,  we let B23,+l 
be 
the elementary extension of B< given by Lemma 5.1.3 with % replaced by 
8,. Let 8 = U,,2.'$3,,. Clearly '$3 is an elementary extension of % of power 
2". Let X c B be of power OL, and let Z(u) be a type of ('$3, a)aex. Since 2" 
has cofinality greater than a, there is some 5 < 2" such that X c Bt. Now 
9, is an elementary submodel of 8. 
So C(v) is also a type of (Be, a)crEx. 
By our construction, some b E Bc+ realizes Z, i.e., 
of (8, 9 a).Ex. 
PROPOSITION 
5.1.5. 
models has a saturated model in each regular power /3 > a. 
a saturated model in each inaccessible power y > a. 
(i). (GCH.) Let II9pII < a. Then every theory T in 9 
having infinite 
(ii). Let l(9pll < a. Then every theory T in 9 
having infinite niodels has 
PROOF. 
(i). The case /3 = y +  is immediate. In the case where /3 is a regular 
limit cardinal, the proof follows from the argument given below for (ii) 
and the GCH. 
(ii). Let 
be a model of T of power a. By Lemma 5.1.4, we construct an 
elementary chain afl, where /3 runs over all cardinals between a and y, 
such that 
for limit cardinals /?, 21P = ud<fl?la; 
%,,+ 
is a /?+-saturated model of power 26. 

5.11 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
295 
Then the union 917 = up<v9€p 
is a y-saturated model of T of power y, 
because 
and each subset X c A, of power 1x1 < y is included in some A,, , where 
1x1 6 8. -1 
In one of the exercises, the student is asked to prove that the GCH cannot 
be eliminated from Proposition 5.1.5(i). Thus the existence of infinite 
saturated models is, in general, limited to cases where we assume either the 
GCH or the existence of inaccessible cardinals. Of course, as we have 
already noted at the beginning of this section, very special theories T may 
have infinite (countably) saturated models. It turns out that for many 
purposes the notion of a saturated model can be replaced by that of a special 
model. For example, every saturated model is special, but not all special 
models are saturated. More importantly, the existence of special models 
does not require the GCH or inaccessible cardinals. We next take up the 
study of special models. 
A model 8 is said to be special iff 8 is the union of an elementary chain 
Np, p < IAI, where /I is a cardinal and each '21p is P+-saturated. The chain 
of models 'ill8, /3 < IAI, is called a specializing chain of 8. Note that /3 is 
always a cardinal smaller than IAI, and nothing is said about the cardinal 
of 218. Of course, it follows from Proposition 5.1.2 that either 
is finite or 
lAsl 2 P'. 
PROPOSITION 
5.1.6. 
(i). Every saturated model is special. 
(ii). Every finite model is special. 
(iii). A model of power a+ is saturated if and only if it is special. 
(iv). If u is a regular limit cardinal, then a model of power u is saturated 
(v). Zf8 is special, then every reduct of % is special. 
(vi). (GCH.) If Thas an infinite model, it has a special model in eachpower 
if and only if it is special. 
a > 1 1 ~ 1 1 .  
PROOF. 
(i). For each cardinal j? < IAI, define '21p = 8. Then, since B is 
IAl-saturated, Np is /I'-saturated and 
= 8. 
(ii). This follows from (i) and Proposition 5.1.2. 
(iii). Let 8 be a model of power u'. If % is saturated, then, by (i), % is 

296 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
p . 1  
special. Suppose '2l is special and let %,, 
B < a+, be a specializing chain 
of '?I. This chain has a last member '?Ia, which must be N. But Na is a+- 
saturated, so '?I is. 
(iv). Let '?I,, p < a, be a specializing chain of N. If X c A and 1x1 c a, 
then X c A, and 1x1 6 fi for some fi < a, and every type L(c) of (91, a)uFx 
is realized in '91,. 
(v). This follows from Proposition 5.1.1 (iv). 
(vi). Apply Proposition 5. I .5 ( i )  to get a specializing chain. i 
Let a be an infinite cardinal. a* is defined to be the cardinal sum Ua<a 
2", 
where p ranges over cardinals less than a and 2p is cardinal exponentiation 
of 2 to the power /I. 
We shall prove that special models exist in each power 
a = a". But first we shall state some simple properties of the *-operation. 
PROPOSITION 
5.1.7. 
(i). a = a* ifand only i f 2 ,  Q a for all j? < a. 
(ii). There are arbitrarily large cardinals a such that a = a*. 
(iii). (a') = (z+)* ifand only $2" = a+. 
(iv). The GCH is equivalent to a = a* for all infinite cardinals a. 
PROPOSITION 
5.1.8 (Existence of Special Models). Suppose that a = a*, 
11 9 
11 < a, and 6.1 I A I < a. Then there is a special elementary extension 23 
of 8 of power a. 
PROOF. If a = y', then by Proposition 5.1.7 (iii), 2y = y+. So, by Lemma 
5.1.4, 
has a saturated elementary extension of power y+ = a. So let us 
assume that a is a limit cardinal. This means that if 
< a, then /?' < CI 
and 2, Q a. Let y = IIYII u IAl. We construct an elementary chain of 
models B,, p a cardinal less than a, as follows (we use Lemma 5.1.4 re- 
peatedly): Let By 
be any y+-saturated elementary extension of N of power 
2y. For any cardinal 6 < y, let B6 = By. Let y Q p < a. Given B, of 
power at most 2,, let B,+ be any j?++-saturated elementary extension of 
power 2(,+). Given B,,, 6 < p, where 
is a limit cardinal less than a, 
we first take the union 8' = ud<,B6, which is an infinite model of power 
at most 28; then we let 8, be any /?+-saturated elementary extension of 
9' of power 2'. 
Now the chain B,,/3 < a, is a specializing chain of the 
model up<oB,, 
with power a. i 
We ask the reader to show as an exercise that with a little more work 
we can extend the inequalities w 6 lAl < a in Proposition 5.1.8 to 
w d IAl 6 a. 

5.11 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
297 
Now that we have established the existence of special models, we shall 
next consider them from the point of view of the notions of a-homogeneous 
models and a-universal models. Recall that we have already defined a- 
universal models in Section 4.3 and o-homogeneous models in Section 3.2. 
We now introduce the corresponding notion of an a-homogeneous model 
for an infinite cardinal a. A model B is a-homogeneous iff for all < a, 
a E {A, b E { A  and c E A, if (B, 
a,,),,,, = (a, b,,),,,,, then there is a d E A 
such that (2, 
a,,, c),,<, E (a, b,, d),,,,. Let us also recall that a model B 
is a-universal iff for every model % = B of power smaller than a, 8 is 
elementarily embedded in ‘$I. 
Given a class K of models, we say that 2l 
is a-universal with respect to K iff every model % E K of power smaller than 
a is elementarily embedded in 2l. Finally, we say that 2l is homogeneous 
(or universal) iff B is IAl-homogeneous (or IAI-universal). 
The next proposition is an analogue of Proposition 5.1.1. 
PROPOSITION 
5. I .9. Let a be injnite. 
(i). B is a-homogeneous (a-universal) if and only if 2l is 8-homogeneous 
(8-universal) for all 8 Q a. 
(ii). If a is a limit cardinal, then B is a-homogeneous (a-universal) if and 
only if8 is /?-homogeneous (8-universal) for all 8 < a. 
(iii). If ?I is a-saturated, then 2l is a-homogeneous. 
(iv). B is a-homogeneous if and only if for all c < a and all a E ,A, 
(a, a,,),,, is a-homogeneous. 
The proofs are left as an exercise. 
LEMMA 
5.1.10. Suppose that 2l is a-saturated, 2l = % and b E “B. Then there 
exists an a E “A such that (N, a,),<. = (8, 
b,),,”. 
PROOF. We find the sequence a,, t < a, bj, transfinite recursion on ( < a. 
Suppose that for allq < we have a,, E A such that 
(8, a,,),,, = (% b,),<t. 
Let Z(v) be the type of the element b, in (%, b,,),,,c. Clearly, C is a type of 
(B, 
a,,),,,,; whence Z is realized by an element, say a{ E A. It follows that 
We have found the element a, and our recursion is complete. The conclusion 
follows. -I 

298 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.1 
The two-sided version of Lemma 5.1.10 is as follows: 
LEMMA 5.1.11 (Back and Forth Lemma). Suppose that a is infinite, '21 
and 8 are both a-saturated, and 'II = 8. Let a E "A and b E "B. Then 
there are ti E "A and 6 E "B such that 
range (a) c range (a), 
range (b) c range (6), 
(a, 3,)<<a 3 ( 8 , 6 t ) , < a *  
PROOF. We represent each ordinal t < u uniquely as a sum t = I + n ,  
where L is a limit ordinal and n E w. 5 is said to be even if n is even; otherwise 
5 is odd. We wish to find two sequences 5 E "A, 6 E "B such that for all 
t < a  
(a). For all q < 5, if q = 1+2n is even, then ii, = a,,,. 
(b). For all q < 5, if q =L+(2n+1) is odd, then6, = b,,,. 
(4. (a, Q , C <  3 (8, 6,),<<. 
Suppose that t < u and a,,, 6,, q < 5, have been found so that (a), (b) 
and (c) hold for t. We now find a, and 6,. if 5 = 1+2n is even, first 
let ti, = a,,,. Next let C(v) be the type of 
By (c), Z is 
a type of ('23,6s)rcC. So Z is realized by some element 6, E E. Clearly, 
in (a, 
The case when 5 = o 
* L+ (2n+ 1) is odd is treated similarly; we let 
bt = b,.*+, and find a,. This defines i and 6 by transfinite recursion. The 
sequences ti E "A and 6 E "B will satisfy the conclusions of the lemma. i 
The above two lemmas will now be our tools for the rest of this section. 
THEOREM 
5.1.12. u-saturated models are a+-universal. 
PROOF. Let 'II be u-saturated and let '23 be any equivalent model of power < u. 
Let b E "B be an enumeration of all the elements of B. By Lemma 5.1.10, 
there is an a E "A such that 
(% a<)(<. (B, b,),<a* 
From this and Proposition 3.1.3, 8 2 a. -1 
THEOREM 
5.1.13 (Uniqueness of Saturated Models). Let 3 and 23 be 
equivalent saturated models of the same power. Then '21 
23. 

5.11 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
299 
PROOF. Let IA1 = lBl = a and let UE’A, b E ” B  be enumerations of A and 
B, respectively. By Lemma 5.1.11, there are “extensions” C E “A, b E “B of 
a and b such that 
( 8 3  z<)<<a E (B, b<)<<a* 
Since a and 6 still enumerate A and B, the isomorphism of % and B follows. -I 
THEOREM 
5.1.14 (a-saturated models are exactly the a-homogeneous and 
a-universal models). Suppose that I 191 
I < a. The following three conditions 
on 8 are equivalent: 
(i). 8 is a-saturated. 
(ii). 8 is a-homogeneous and a+-universal. 
(iii). 8 is a-homogeneous and a-universal. 
PROOF. The implication (i) 
Theorem 5.1.12. 
(ii) follows from Proposition 5.1.9 (iii) and 
(iii) trivially follows from (ii). 
We now prove (iii) => (i). Assume 8 is a-homogeneous and a-universal. 
Let ( < a, a E <A, and let Z(u) be a type of (fl, a,),,c. Let T be the set of 
sentences consisting of the theory of (8, a,,),,<c in 9 
u {c, : q < t} plus 
all sentences Z(c). Then T is clearly consistent in a language of power 
smaller than a. Let 9’ 
be a model of T. We may consider B’ = (8, b,, d),,<<, 
where B is the 64-reduct of 8’. Then 
(1) 
(a, a,),<{ = (9, 
br),<{. 
Since 8 is a-universal and IBJ < a, the model 9 can be elementarily 
embedded into 8. To avoid the introduction of new letters, let us assume 
that 8 itself is an elementary submodel of 8. So we can replace (1) by 
(8, 
= (8, bJr<{ * 
Since 8 is a-homogeneous, there is a c E A such that 
So c realizes the type X in (8, u,),,~. -I 
(a 
a,, c),<{ 
(8, b,, d),<< = (9, 
b,, d),<<. 
Note that the equivalence of Theorem 5.1.14 (i) and (ii) still holds if 
1 1 ~ 1 1  = a* 
COROLLARY 
5.1.15 (Saturated models are homogeneous and universal). 
If II64pII < /Al, then 8 is saturated if and only if it is homogeneous and 
universal. 

300 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.1 
This follows immediately from Theorem 5.1.14. 
We now turn to special models. 
THEOREM 
5.1.16. If M is special, then M is I A( +-unioersal. 
PROOF. Let a = IAl. If a is not a limit cardinal, then M is saturated, so M 
is a+-universal. So assume a is a limit cardinal. Let M,, /3 < a, be a 
specializing chain of a. Let B be any equivalent model of power < a, and 
let b E "B be an enumeration of B. We now find an a E "A such that for all 
/3 < a, a I / ~ E ~ A ,  
and 
(1) 
6%' 
&B 
= ( 8 9  b,),<,. 
(M, 9 4 C < r  = (
8
3
 bc)c<v a 
Suppose we found a I 6 for all S < /3. If /3 = y+, then from (1) we have 
Applying Lemma 5.1.10 to (a,, u < ) ~ . = ~ ,  
we can find elements at, y < t 
< /3, in A, such that (1) holds. If /3 is a limit cardinal, then obviously 
each a,, t < /I, 
is in A, and again (1) holds. Once U E ' A  is found, then 
(M, 
= (23, be),<.. Since b enumerates B, this proves the theorem. -I 
THEOREM 
5.1.17 (Uniqueness of Special Models). Zf % and !-3 are equiva- 
lent special models of the same power, then % 
!-3. 
PROOF. The proof uses the back and forth technique applied to the special- 
izing chains %,, 
/3 < a, and B,, /3 < a. We replace the element by element 
construction of Lemma 5.1.11 by a block by block construction, using 
Lemma 5.1.10. We leave the details to the reader. -I 
We conclude this section with a study of homogeneous models. 
LEMMA 
5.1.18. Let /3 < a, let M be a-homogeneous, and for each 5 < p, 
let ac E {A. Suppose that for all t < q < /3, 
(a, a:),<, = (M, aX)A<t. 
(a* a,),<< 3 (a, &<,. 
Then there is an a E ,A such that for all t < /3, 
PROOF. Suppose that for all 1 -= t < 8, we have constructed a, E A such 
that 

5.11 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
301 
(1) 
for all 
rl < t, 
(a, a,),<,, = (8, 
a:)Ac,,. 
We wish to extend the sequence a,, A -= 4, by one more element. If ( = c+ 1, 
then 
(2) 
a,>,<[ = (a9 an,<(. 
(4 
(a, a%<< = (a9 1 )lac. 
By hypothesis, 
,t+ 1 
Putting (2) and (3) together and using the a-homogeneity of a, we see that 
there is an at E A such that 
.t+ 1 
(4) 
(a, a A ) l < C + l  = (a, 1 
) A < C + 1 -  
Suppose 5 is a limit ordinal. Let d+' be given. We claim that 
(5) 
(a, a:+'),<< 
(a, a,),<<. 
This is the usual situation when formulas have finite lengths. Of course, 
we make heavy use of the fact that ( is a limit ordinal; whence, if (1) holds 
for all (' < 5, then (1) holds also for t. So (a, a,),,C E (a, a:),,t and 
from this ( 5 )  follows. By ( 5 )  and a-homogeneity, we again can find at E A 
such that (4) holds. -I 
LEMMA 
5.1.19. Suppose that 
is a-homogeneous and every type realized in 
23 is realized in H, i.e., for all b, , ..., b,, E B (n E o), 
there are a,, ..., a,, E A 
such that (%, a1 ... a,,) = (B, b, ... b,,). Then for each b E "B, there is an 
a E "A such that (H, a&. 
= (23, bJt,.. 
PROOF. We prove the following by induction on infinite cardinals /3 Q a: 
(1) for every b E ,B, there is an a E ,A such that (23, b,),,, = (a, u..)~,,. 
(1) is true for B = w. This can be seen as follows: Let b E "B. For each 
n E  w, let b" be the restriction of b to n. By our hypothesis, there are 
a" E "A such that 
(23, b,,,),,,,, = (H, a:),,,,,, 
for all n. 
Now the sequences a", n E o, satisfy the hypothesis of Lemma 5.1.18. 
Whence there is an a E "A such that 
(8, a,,,),<,, = (8, a:),,,+ 
for all n. 
This gives (%, a,,,),,,,, E (23, 
b,,,),,,. 
The other two cases of /3 = y +  or /l 

302 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.1 
a limit cardinal are entirely analogous to the case /? = w. We only need 
to note that if (1) holds for an infinite cardinal 8, then by rearranging the 
terms of the sequences, we have the necessary hypothesis for Lemma 5.1.18. 
Namely, 
for every ordinal < < /?' and every b E 'B, there is an a E 'A such that 
(23, br)r<' = 
ar)r<'. -I 
LEMMA 
5.1.20. 
Suppose that a is infinite; both 2l and 23 are a-homogeneous 
and 2l and '23 realize the same types. Then for all a E "A and b E "B, there are 
Li E "A and 6 E "B such that 
range (a) c range (Z), 
range (6) c range (4, 
(% aJ'<" 
( ' 2 3 9  64)'<". 
PROOF. This is proved in exactly the same manner as the proof of Lemma 
5.1.11. We add, however, the new twist introduced in Lemma 5.1.19. The 
proper form of induction is the following: For all infinite cardinals /3 Q a, 
we have 
for all a E BA, b E #B, there are li E P A ,  6 E @B such that 
range (a) c range(li), range(b) c range(6) and (a, iit)c<p = (8,6,),,,. 
There are no special difficulties involved, so we leave the proof as an 
exercise. -I 
PROPOSITION 
5.1.2 1. Every a-homogeneous model is a+-universal with respect 
to the class K of models defined by 
'23 E K iff every type realized in 23 is realized in a. 
PROOF. Let B E  K, lBl < a, and let bE'B be an enumeration of B. By 
Lemma 5.1.19, there is an u E "A such that 
Whence '23 2 2l. i 
(8, b')(<" - 
= pa, a')'<". 
THEOREM 
5.1.22. Suppose that 2l and 23 are two homogeneous models of 
the same power a realizing exactly the same types. Then 2l 
23. 
PROOF. Let a be infinite and let a E "A, b E "B be enumerations of A and B, 
respectively. By Lemma 5.1.20, there are ii E "A, 6 E "B such that 

5.11 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
303 
and 5 and 6 are again enumerations of A and B. It follows that % E 23. 
If a is finite, then, since % and 23 realize the same types, they are elementarily 
equivalent and therefore isomorphic. 4 
EXERCISES 
5. I. 1. The union of an elementary chain a,,, q < a, of a-saturated models 
is again a-saturated, if a is regular. 
5.1.2. Find a union of a countable elementary chain of w,-saturated models 
which is not a,-saturated. 
5.1.3. Let Y be P+-saturated, and let X c A be such that IIL?ll < IXI < P. 
Then there exists an IXI+-saturated elementary submodel of Y of power 
at most 2lX1 containing the set X. Do the same exercise with /3+-saturated 
and 1x1 +-saturated replaced by /3+-homogeneous and (XI +-homogeneous. 
5.1.4. Let (1911 
= a. Find a theory T of 3 having infinite models such that 
T has a saturated model of power a+ if and only if a+ = 2". 
5.1.5. If a is weakly inaccessible, then every special model of power a is 
saturated. 
5.1.6. Suppose % is special of power a. Then show that 2l has a specializing 
chain %@, 
/3 < a, such that lA81 < 28 whenever lldell < /3 < a. 
5.1.7. Suppose Il-EpII < a, o( = a* = IAI = IA'I, % has a specializing chain 
Up, P < a, and % 4 a'. Prove that there are a special elementary extension 
23 of 8' of power a and a specializing chain 238, B < a, of 23 such that 
+ 23# for all jl < a. 
5.1.8. Show that if % is a-universal and II-EpEpll < a, then every reduct of 
2l is again a-universal. 
5.1.9*. Our definition of a-homogeneous models is such that in the case 
where a is a singular cardinal it is difficult to show that there are 
a-homogeneous models of power a. Suppose a is an infinite cardinal. We 
say that a model % of power a is weakly homogeneous iff fl is the union of an 
elementary chain, 8 = up<@%#, such that each %# is /3+-homogeneous. 
Every special model % is weakly homogeneous. If a is regular, then for 
models of power a weak homogeneity is equivalent to homogeneity. Prove 
analogues of Proposition 5.1.21 and Theorem 5.1.22 (and the associated 

304 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.1 
necessary lemmas) for weakly homogeneous models of power a with 
1 1 ~ 1 1  < a. 
5.1.10*. Let 9 
be a countable language. Prove that if a theory T in 9 
has 
at most a countable number of countably homogeneous models, then it 
has in each power a at most a countable number of (weakly) homogeneous 
models of power a. 
[Hint: Show that every homogeneous model of T of power a realizes at 
most a countable number of types.] 
5.1.1 I * (GCH). Let 11 91 
I = o and let 
be a weakly homogeneous model 
of power p. Prove that for every cardinal y, w ,  < y < /?, there exists an 
elementary submodel 23 of 2l such that 23 is weakly homogeneous and '23 
has power y. 
5.1.12 (GCH). Suppose ll9ll = w and w < a < p. Let T be a theory in 
9. 
Then the number of (nonisomorphic) weakly homogeneous models of 
T of power a is greater than or equal to the number of weakly homogeneous 
models of T of power 8. 
5.1.13* (GCH). Give an example of a complete theory which has three 
homogeneous models of power w,, , two homogeneous models of power o, , 
and one homogeneous model of power 02. 
5.1.14. Let ll911 = o. Show that in each power a there are at most 2'* 
nonisomorphic homogeneous models of power a. Find a theory which has 
exactly 2'" 
nonisomorphic homogeneous models of each power a 3 2". 
5.1.15*. Find an example of a complete theory T in a countable language 
such that 
(i) all models of T of power > 2" are homogeneous; 
(ii) T has a model of power 2" which is not homogeneous. 
5.1.16* (GCH). Give an example of a complete theory which has exactly 
w nonisomorphic (weakly) homogeneous models in each infinite power. 
Do the same for 2", for 2 and for 3. 
For which finite n can such an example be found? (This is an open 
question.) 
Added in Third Edition: Kudaibergenov (1986) has announced a 
solution to this problem, that for each n < w there is a theory which has 
n homogeneous models in each power. Earlier partial results are in Lo 
(1980). 

5.11 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
305 
5.1.17. Let 2 
be countable with at least a 2-place relation symbol and a 
be an infinite cardinal. Show that there is an infinite a+-saturated model 'Z 
for 2 
such that for no B c A ,  o Q IBI f a, is the model (a, B) wl- 
saturated. 
[Hint: Consider an a'-saturated model equivalent to (R(o), 
E).] 
5.1.18. Prove that every infinite saturated model in a countable language 
is isomorphic to a proper elementary submodel of itself. 
5.1.19. Let 2l be a saturated model for a countable language where IAJ 
is a regular cardinal a. Prove that 
is the union of an elementary chain 
2IP, /3 < a, of models isomorphic to '21. 
5.1.20. Show that for each regular cardinal a, complete arithmetic has 
models of arbitrarily large cardinality which are a -saturated, but have 
cofinality a and thus are not a +-saturated. 
5.1.21. Let V ( X )  be a superstructure (as defined in Section 4.4) such 
that X is infinite and IV(X)I S 2 * .  Prove that there is an a+-saturated 
nonstandard universe (V(X), V(Y), * ) which has 2" internal sets. (Note 
that if in addition a+ = 2*, then the nonstandard universe is saturated.) 
5.1.22. Let a be an inaccessible cardinal and let V ( X )  be a superstruc- 
ture such that w S 1x1 < a. Prove that there is a saturated superstructure 
(V(X), V(Y), * ) which has a internal sets. 
5.1.23. Let (V(X), V(Y), * ) and (V(X), V(Z), p )  be saturated non- 
standard universes with IYI = IZI. Prove that the superstructures are 
isomorphic, that is, there is an isomorphism 
h : (V(Y), E ) 
(V (Z ) ,  E ) 
such that for all A E V(X), h( * A) = 'A. 
5.1.24*. A superstructure ( V(X), V( Y )  , * ) is said to have the a -isornor- 
phism property if for any two models a, ?I3 for a language 2" with fewer 
than a symbols, if 2l = B  and the universes and all relations and 
functions of 
and ?I3 are internal, then '21 8. 
Prove that for each cardinal a and each infinite base set X ,  there exists 
a nonstandard universe (V(X), V( Y ) ,  * ) with the a -isomorphism prop- 
erty. [Hint: Use Exercise 4.4.28 and form a bounded elementary chain.] 

306 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
5.1.25*. Suppose that ( V ( X ) ,  V ( Y ) ,  * ) is a nonstandard universe which 
is an enlargement and has the a-isomorphism property. Prove that it is 
an a-saturated nonstandard universe. 
5.1.26*. Prove that every saturated nonstandard universe with a internal 
sets has the a-isomorphism property. 
5.2. Preservation theorems 
In Section 3.2 we used elementary chains to prove a group of results 
called preservation theorems. In Exercises 3.2.5 and 3.2.6, the student 
was asked to give different proofs using recursively saturated models. A 
more uniform method for proving preservation theorems is the use of 
saturated or special models. We shall give alternate proofs of the 
preservation theorems from Chapter 3 (submodels, unions of chains, and 
homomorphisms) by this method and then go on to some additional 
preservation theorems. 
We shall frequently use the first general lemma of Section 3.2, so we 
repeat it here for convenience. 
LEMMA 
3.2.1 (repeated). Let T be a consistent theory of 9 and let A be a set 
of sentences of T closed under Jinite disjunctions. Then the following are 
equivalent: 
(i). T has a set of axioms r such that r c A .  
(ii). If '21 is a model of T and every sentence 6 E A which holds in '21 holds 
in 23, then 23 is a model of T. 
Our first lemma is an analogue of the result that a-saturated models are 
a+-universal. 
LEMMA 
5.2.1. Suppose that 8 is a-saturated, a 2 IAI, and every existential 
sentence holding in '21 holds in 23. Then '21 is isomorphically embeddable in 23. 
PROOF. For the purposes of this (and later) proofs we introduce the 
temporary notation 231 (E)B3, to mean that every existential sentence 
holding on 23, holds on B2. 
Let a E " A  be an enumeration of A .  We find 
the sequence b,, < < a, by induction on < < u. Suppose that for all q < {, 
we have b, E B such that 
(%, aW)W&)(B9 
b,),,c 
* 

5.21 
PRESERVATION THEOREMS 
301 
Let C(u) be the set of all existential formulas O ( U )  satisfied by aC in (a, a,,),,<,. 
By taking finite conjunctions (p of formulas in C and quantifying by (3u), 
we obtain sentences which are equivalent to existential sentences. Whence 
all such sentences (3v)cp hold in (23, b,JqCC. Thus C is consistent with the 
theory of (23, b,,),,<,. We can now extend C to some (complete) type z ( v )  
of (23, b,,),,<,. Since (23, b,,),,<, is still a-saturated, c, and hence C, is realized 
by some element b, E B. So we have 
(a, af/),sc(E)(% b,,),,, * 
So our induction is complete. Since a is a limit ordinal, we also have 
(a, aS)C<a(E)(23, 
bC),<.. Since existential sentences contain all atomic and 
negations of atomic sentences, the mapping aC -+ b, is an isomorphic 
embedding of 
into 23. -I 
Recall that a sentence (p is preserved under extensions iff for all models 
c 8, 'II C cp implies B C cp. 
PROPOSITION 
5.2.2. The following two conditions on models 
equivalent : 
(i). Every existential sentence holding in 91 holds in 8. 
(ii). 
and 23 are 
is isomorphically embeddable in some elementary extension of 23, 
PROOF. (ii) = (i). Since existential sentences are preserved under extensions, 
this is trivial. 
(ii). Let /3 be a cardinal such that IAJ 6 P and Il-EpII < 8. By the 
existence theorem for saturated models, 23 has a /3+-saturated elementary 
extension B', which is either finite or of power 2@. By Lemma 5.2.1, 
is 
elementarily embeddable in %. i 
(i) 
THEOREM 
5.2.3. A theory T is preserved under extensions if arid only if 
T has a set of existential axioms. 
PROOF. We prove only the hard direction. Assume T is preserved under 
extensions. The disjunction of finitely many existential sentences is equivalent 
to an existential sentence, so we may use Lemma 3.2.1. Let 
be a model 
of T and suppose every existential sentence true in 91 is true in 23. Then 
is isomorphically embeddable in some 23' t 8. 
Hence B', and therefore '$3, 
is a model of T. By Lemma 3.2.1, T has a set of existential axioms. i 
THEOREM 
5.2.4. A theory is preserved under submodels if and only if T has 
a set of universal axioms. 

308 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
PROOF. This is similar to that of the preceding theorem. -I 
We now turn our attention to the universal-existential sentences, namely 
the I'I; sentences. 
PROPOSITION 
5.2.5. The,following are equivalent: 
(i). Every universal-existential sentence holding in 8 also holds in 23. 
(ii). There are two models 23' and a' such that 23 c 8' c B', 23 < 23' 
and < 8'. 
PROOF. (ii) 
(i). Let rp be a universal-existential sentence holding in 8. 
For simplicity, assume that cp = (Vx3y)a, where CJ is quantifier-free. We 
show that 23 C rp. So let b e  B. Thus (23, b) = (B', b). Since b E A' and 
8' C rp, we have 21' C (3y)o[b]. As existential sentences are preserved under 
extensions, B' C (3y)a[b]. This means 23 C (3y)a[b]. Whence B C (Vx3y)a. 
So (i) holds. 
(i) =t. (ii). From (i) it easily follows that 
every existential-universal (72:) sentence holding in 23 also holds in 8. 
Let 8' be a IBI-saturated elementary extension of 8 such that IBI < IA'I 
and let b E "B be an enumeration of B. Using exactly the same induction 
as in Lemma 5.2.1 (we leave the simple details as an exercise), we can find 
a E "A' such that 
every existential-universal sentence holding on (23, bC)t<pl also holds 
This implies that every existential sentence holding in (a', ac)c<u holds in 
(23, b&<". Now apply Proposition 5.2.2 and obtain in a straightforward 
manner an elementary extension (B', b,),,, of (23, be)<<. in which (a', aC){<. 
is isomorphically embeddable. We can assume without loss of generality that 
on (a', a<){<". 
B c 8' c B', 
2l< 8', 
93 < 23'. -I 
We say that three models 2l, B, 0: form a 1-sandwich iff 9l c 23 c Q 
and 2l < Q. We say that the model 9 is sandwiched by B iff there are 
elementary extensions 8' >- 8, 23' > 23 such that 23, a', 23' form a 
1-sandwich. 
THEOREM 
5.2.6. The following are equivalent: 
(i). T has a set of universal-existential axioms. 
(ii). T is preserved under unions of chains of models. 
(iii). T is preserved under 1-sandwiches, i.e., ifq C T and 8 is sandwiched 
by B, then 23 k T. 

5.21 
PRESERVATION THEOREMS 
309 
PROOF. We proceed in the direction (i) = (ii) 
(iii) 
(i). 
(i) 
(ii). This is easy. 
( i i )  => (iii). Suppose that '?I is sandwiched by 23. We shall construct a 
chain of models, 
such that 9" = 23, each triple S,,. ?l,,, 9,,+, 
forms a ]-sandwich, and 
?io > X, 
and each 
I is equivalent to ?I. In order to define the models 
'I[,,. Y,, inductively. we see that we only need the following: 
(2) If 
!)I,,, 
%,,+, form a I-sandwich, then there are an elementarily 
and an elementary extension %,,+2 of B,,+l 
To prove (2), let .Y' = Y' u {cb : h E B,,+ I 1 u { U : ,  where U is a I-placed 
relation symbol, and consider the theory T' in 2'' 
given by 
(1) 
230 c '?I0 c 2 3 1  c a, c ... c B,, 
c N" c ... 
equivalent ?I,,+ 
I E 
such that 
, ?in+ I ,  Yn+2 
form a 1-sandwich. 
[the elementary diagram of 3,1T, 
1 u {(P'~'' : %,, k p} u ',U(C,, : b E Bn+,}. 
Here p'"' is the relativizatio:i of the sentence cp (see Exercise 5.2.20). So 
any model of T' will be an elementary extension ?3n+Z of 
which 
contains a subset U that includes at least all the elements of 23,,+, , and 
such that the submodel determined by the interpretation of U in 
is 
a model equivalent to ?(,,. The consistency of T' is shown as follows: Any 
linite subset of T' consists of three parts: 
a sentence u(cbl ... cbm) such that 
a sentence &')such that 91, != p, 
the sentence U ( c b l ) ~  
... A U(cbm). 
k a[bl ... b,l, 
Since 9,, 
< %,,+ I ,  there will be cl,, ..., d,,, E B,, such that 
%,, k a[d, ... d,], 
%,,+, != a[d, ... dm]. 
Now the model (%,,+, , A,,, d, ... d,,,) clearly will be a model of this finite 
subset of T'. So T' has a model, and ( 2 )  is proved. 
Now consider the sequence of models in the chain (I). Since T holds 
in VLo, we have Vi,, t T for all n. Whence UneW(21, 
t T. On the other hand, 
the chain of models %,,, n E w, is an elementary chain, so ?3 < u,,,w%. 
= Uno~uB[,,. 
Whence '23 t T. 
(iii) - (i). Assume (iii). Then (i) follows by Proposition 5.2.5 using 
Lemma 3.2. I .  -I 
There are natural generalizations of Theorem 5.2.6 to Cg sentences and 
to II; and Cf sentences with n 2 3. For the sake of completeness, we shall 
give below a generalization of Theorem 5.2.6 for I I q n  sentences. The reader 
is asked in an exercise to provide analogous generalizations for lli sentences 

310 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
when m is odd and for 22: sentences for n 2 2. The chain of 2n+ 1 models 
is an n-sandwich iff 
230 < 2 3 1  < ... <Bn, 
a0 <a, < ... <%,,.-I. 
We say that the model 
elementary chains 
is n-sandwiched by the model Bo iff there are 
9i -< Blo < 2l1 < ... < 2 1 n - 1 ,  
230 < ... < B,, 
such that the chain 
8 0  c a0 t ... c 2 l n - 1  c B,, 
is an n-sandwich. The next proposition generalizes Proposition 5.2.5. 
PROPOSITION 
5.2.7. Let n 2 1. The following are equivalent: 
(i). Every ng,, sentence holding in 'iU holds in 9. 
(ii). There is an n-sandwich 
such that Bo = B and 2l < go. 
PROOF. The reader is asked first to review briefly the proof of Proposition 
5.2.5. 
(ii) 
(i). This is based on the following assertion proved by induction 
on k, 1 < k < n: 
for every IIQ formula rp(x, ... x,) and all b , ,  ..., b, E B,, with 
0 < m < ti-k, if 91m k p[b, ... b,], then %,,, I= q[b1 ... b,]. 
Note that when k = 1, the first stage of the induction for all m, 
0 Q m i 
n- 1, is essentially given by one direction of Proposition 5.2.5. 
There is no special difficulty in carrying the induction from k to k + l .  
So we shall assume that the assertion is proved. When k = n, we see that 
every n;,, sentence holding on a0 holds on B0, 
as was to be proved. 
and Bo = B. Let go be any 
lBoI-saturated elementary extension of 91 and let 6' E 
be an enumera- 
tion of Bo. So 
(i) =. (ii). Let us start with the models 
every II& sentence holding on 2l also holds on Bo, 

5.21 
PRESERVATION THEOREMS 
311 
and hence 
(1) 
By examining the proof of Proposition 5.2.5, ( I )  leads to 
(2) there is an a0 E sOAo such that every E:,, sentence holding in (Bo, 6i)c<B0 
Deleting the outermost existential quantifiers and stating the result in the 
contrapositive form we find that (2) yields 
(3) every X:,,- sentence holding in exo, ai)c<Bo 
also holds in (go, bi 
Now let Bl be any IA,I-saturated elementary extension of Bo and let 
Go E "AO be an extension of a. which enumerates go. Then (3) gives 
(4) there is a b' E 'OB, such that every X: - sentence holding in (ao, 
c$)~<,,,, 
every Xi,, sentence holding on Bo also holds on a. 
also holds in (ao, ai)t<Bo. 
holds in (Bl, bi)t<ao. 
From (4) we have 
( 5 )  every E:(n-l) sentence holding in 23, holds in ?lo. 
Furthermore, we already have the I-sandwich 
230 c a0 c 81, 
a 4 910, 
8 0  4 23'. 
Clearly, using ( 5 )  in the same way we used (l), we can extend the I-sandwich 
to a 2-sandwich 
B o c a o C B 1 C a 1 c B 2 ,  
a<aIJ4911, B 0 4 B ' 4 B 2 ,  
and 
every C~,,,-,, sentence holding in B2 also holds in !XI. 
It is now clear how an inductive proof can be given, so that we can construct 
the n-sandwich as required in (ii). i 
The next theorem generalizes Theorem 5.2.6. 
THEOREM 
5.2.8 (Keisler Sandwich Theorem). Let T be a theory of 2' and 
let n 2 1. The following are equivalent: 
(i). T has a set of @,, axioms. 
(ii). T is preserved under unions of E:,, - ,-chains. 
(iii). T is preserved under n-sandwiches, i.e., if 2l k T and 2l is n-sandwiched 
by 23, then B t T. 

312 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
PROOF. (i)+(ii). This follows by Lemma 3.1.10. 
(ii) * (iii). Suppose that 8 is n-sandwiched by 9 = 9, and % t T. 
Then by an induction very much similar to the one in Proposition 5.2.7, we 
have 
(1) for every g,,-, 
formula q(x, ... x,) and all a,, ..., a, E A,, if 
Consider the three models 9, c No c 9, such that 9, i 
9, 
and (1) 
holds for the pair a,, 9, 
. We shall extend this chain by adding two more 
models, 
such that 
(2) 9, < 9, < 9,, a, = a,, and (1) holds for the pairs a,, a, and 
To prove (2), extending the corresponding idea in Theorem 5.2.6, let 
9, 
k q[al ... a,], then go I= q[al ... all. 
9, c a, c 8, 
c a, c 9 2 ,  
a,, 9,. 
9 ' = 9 u { C * : b E B 1 } U { U }  
and consider the theory T given by the following sentences of 2": 
the elementary diagram of 8, 
, 
{@") : a, C 8 and 8 a sentence of 9}, 
{$(')(c,,, ... cJ: a,, ..., a1 
E A,; $(x, ... x,) a II:,,-, formula such that 
{(vx, ... xl)($rz U(X,)A ... A ~ ( x , )  + $(')):$(x, ... x,)isaZ:,,-, 
formula 
{u(cb) : b E Bl}, 
a0 I= $[a1 
all}, 
of 9}. 
A typical finite subset of the sentences of T will consist of five parts: 
(3) a sentence g(Cbr ... cb,) such that 9, 
I= a[bl ... b,], 
a sentence @"), where a, k 8, 
a sentence u(cb,) A . .. A U(cbm), 
a sentence $y)(ca1 ... caI) such that a,, ..., a, is among b,, ..., 6, and 
a sentence (VX, ... x,)($, A U(x,)/r ... A ~ ( x , )  -, $:"I), 
$, is a II:,,- , formula and aI0 
C $, [al ... ull, 
where $, is a 2:"- , formula. 
By (1) we have B, C $, [a, ... a,]. Since 9, i 
8,, 
we can find elements 
d,, ..., d,,, E B, such that the model (B,, A,, d, ... d,) satisfies all the 
sentences in (3). Whence T is consistent. Now let 9, be a model of T 
and let A, be the interpretation of U in 9,. Then we see easily that (2) 
holds. Repeating this procedure, we obtain by induction a chain of models 
9, c a, c 9, 
c a, c ... c Bn c a,, c Bn+, ... 

5.21 
PRESERVATION THEOREMS 
313 
such that 
Bo < 81 < < 23, < ..*, 
the models Z,, n E w, form a Z;,-,-chain, 
and 
B o < U B , =  ua,. 
nEm 
nEu 
Since each a,, = a, cp holds in the union. So cp holds in Bo . This proves (iii). 
(iii) +- (i). This follows from Proposition 5.2.7. -1 
The sandwich theorem has an application to Peano arithmetic. It has 
been shown by other methods that Peano arithmetic does not have a 
set of axioms, for any n. It follows that for each n, Peano arithmetic is not 
preserved under n-sandwiches. That is, there is a chain of models 
such that 
and a,, is a model of Peano arithmetic but %o is not. 
It is also known that ZF has no IIf set of axioms, so ZF is also not 
preserved under n-sandwiches. 
The next few results are concerned with positive sentences and homo- 
morphisms. Recall that positive formulas are built up from atomic formulas 
and A ,  v, 3, V. We say that a formula is negative iff it is built up from 
negations of atomic formulas and A ,  v, 3, V. Obviously cp is equivalent 
to a positive sentence if and only if i 
cp is equivalent to a negative sentence. 
Recall also that a homomorphism of ‘8 onto 23 is a mapping f of A onto B 
which preserves all atbmic formulas, i.e., if c(xl ... x,) is an atomic formula 
and ‘2l k a[al ... a,], then B t cu(al) ...f( 
a,)]. 
The next two lemmas are generalizations of Lemmas 5. I .  10 and 5.1.11. 
We adopt the temporary convention that Bl(P)Bz(Bl(N)B2) shall mean 
that every positive (negative) sentence holding on Bl holds on Bz. 
More 
generally, if Q is an arbitrary set of formulas, we write Bl(@)Bz for ‘every 
sentence of Q holding in B1 holds in Bz’. 
B() c a0 c ... c %,-I 
c 23, 
a0 < ... < an-lr rso < ... 4 B”, 
LEMMA 
5.2.9. Let Q be the set of formulas of 2 
which are equiualent to 
positive (negative) formulas. Suppose that B is a-saturated, ?.I(@)@
and 
a E “A. Then there is b E “B such that 
PROOF. We first mention that the proof only requires that @ be a set of 
formulas which is closed under conjunction and existential quantification. 

314 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
Whence our proof for @ = P will work equally well for @ = N, or even 
@ = the set of all formulas of 2 
(Lemma 5.1.10). 
We find the sequence b,, 5 c u, by induction. Suppose t c u, and for all 
q c 5, we have b, such that 
(3, a,),<t(W%3 bs)fI<, 
* 
Let Z(u) be the set of all formulas Q of @ (with respect to the language of 
(a, a,),,c) in the variable u such that 
( ( 2 1 3  Q,),<t I= QCael. 
By using the basic properties of @, we see that 
(23, b,),,<, C (3v)c 
for all c E @. 
Whence C can be extended to a complete type of (23, b,),,,. 
As (8, b,),,, is 
a-saturated, some element 6, E B realizes C, so that 
(a? 
a,),<t(@)@9 b,),Ct. 
Our induction is complete and the lemma is proved. i 
LEMMA 
5.2.10. Suppose that u is injinite, a, 8 are u-saturated, a €"A, 
b E "B, and %(P)23. Then there are ii E "A, 6 E "B such that 
range (a) c range (a), 
range (b) c range (6), 
(X 
& d P W  
6,),<"' 
PROOF. (Please first briefly review the proof of Lemma 5.1.1 1.) We shall find 
the sequences ii, 6 such that 
if 5 =o.1+2niseven,theniig 
if 5 = o 
* A+2(n+ 1) is odd, then 6, = b,. 
(a, %),&>(R h l ) r l < C .  
If 4 is even, we fix a, as above, and find 6, E B as in Lemma 5.2.9. If 5 is odd, 
we fix 6, as above and note that 
(% ~
,
)
q
<
m
(
~
~
 
a,),,, 
* 
Whence again we find iit E A as in Lemma 5.2.9. -I 
PROPOSITION 
5.2.11. Suppose that 
and 'B are special models such that 
every positive sentence holding in '2l also holds in %. Assume that either 8 
is$nite or IBI = IAI. Then % N- %. 

5.21 
PRESERVATION THEOREMS 
315 
PROOF. We sketch below a proof in the case where Bis infinite and IAl = IBI. 
However, if B is finite, then regardless of whether A is infinite or not, the 
same proof will work. The point to remember is that finite models are 
a-saturated for all cardinals a. So Lemma 5.2.10 applies. 
If a = y’, then % and ‘23 are both a-saturated, of power a. Let a E “A, 
b E “B enumerate A and B, respectively. Then there are 6 E “A, 6 E “B which 
satisfy Lemma 5.2.10. Whence ij, 6 must still both enumerate A, B, and the 
mapping iit + ti,, for < < a, gives a homomorphism of % onto 8. 
If a is a limit cardinal, let gP, /? < a, and Bfl, /? -= a, be specializing chains 
of ‘21 and 113, respectively. We use a back and forth argument as in the 
uniqueness theorem, and leave the details to the reader. -I 
PROPOSITION 
5.2.12. The following are equivalent: 
(i). Every positive sentence holding on (2I also holds on 8. 
(ii). There are elementary extensions CZT < W, ‘8 < 8’ such that 8’ 
is 
a homomorphic image of a’. 
PROOF. (ii) =S (i). This follows since positive sentences are preserved under 
homomorphisms. 
(i)* (ii). Note that if % or 113 is finite, then IAl 3 IBI. We find special 
elementary extensions %’ of % and 113’ of 8 such that ]A‘] 3 IB’], with 
equality holding if % is infinite and ‘21’(P)113’. 
By Proposition 5.2.11, 113’ 
is a homomorphic image of a’. -I 
Lyndon’s homomorphism theorem now follows at once using Lemma 
3.2.1. We repeat the statement here: 
THEOREM 
5.2.13. A consistent theory T is preserved under homomorphisms 
if and only if T has a positive set of axioms. 
The next three results are not, strictly speaking, preservation theorems, 
nor do their proofs require the use of a-saturated or special models. 
Nevertheless, they give us a better insight into the general problem of 
elementary classes closed under certain operations and they lead to some 
interesting (and difficult) exercises at the end of this section. We shall state 
the results for single sentences and leave the corresponding results for 
classes to the exercises. 
PROPOSITION 
5.2.14. Let cp be a sentence of 9’. 
Suppose that whenever % 
is a model of cp and 
and B2 are submodels of ‘21, which are themselves 
models of cp, then BL 
n B2 is a model of cp. Then, given any nonempty collec- 
tion X of models of cp which are submodels of a model of cp, their intersection 
O X  is again a model of cp. 

316 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
PROOF. (The definitions ofBl n 'B2 and OXare taken in the natural sense.) 
Let 2l be a model of cp and let X be a nonempty collection of models of cp 
which are submodels of 2l. Let 9' 
= 2' u {c, : a E A }  u { V } ,  where U 
is a new I-placed relation symbol. Let T be the theory in 9' 
given by the 
following sentences: 
the diagram of 2l in 9 
u {c, : a E A}, 
the relativized sentence cp("), 
the sentences U(c,) for all elements a in the intersection nX, 
the sentences i 
V(c,) for all elements a E A not belonging to n X .  
Given any finite subset T' of T, it involves at most a finite number of 
sentences i 
U(c,,), ..., i 
U(c,,). Suppose that for 1 < i < n, 
a i $ B i ,  BieX. 
Let !l3 = n l s i s , , B l .  By hypothesis, 23 is a model of cp. Whence the model 
BY a1.d 
is a model of T', with U being interpreted by the set B. So Tis consistent. 
Let 58 be a model of T. Clearly 2l is isomorphically embeddable in 23 onto 
a model 211, and also the interpretation of U in 23 gives rise to another 
submodel 21z of B. Both 211 and 2lz are models of cp, whence 211 n aZ 
is a model of cp. But it is clear that 211 n 21z z OX. Hence O X  is a model 
of cp. -I 
PROPOSITION 
5.2.15. Let cp be a sentence of 9 
satisfying the hypothesisof 
Proposition 5.2.14. Then cp is equivalent to a universal-existential sentence. 
PROOF. We prove that cp is closed under unions of chains. The result then 
follows from Theorem 5.2.6. There is no loss of generality if we prove that 
cp is closed under unions of chains of type w. (In any case, see Exercises 
5.2.13 and 5.2.14.) So suppose that 
a() c a1 c ... c a,, c ... 
is a chain of models of cp. Let 2l = UnEo211,. 
By using the diagram of 2l 
and the compactness theorem, we can easily prove that 2l is a submodel 
of some model '23 of cp. Our argument now parallels that of Proposition 
5.2.12. Let T be a theory in 27 u {c, : b E B} u { U }  given by the following 
sentences: 
the diagram of 23 in 2' u {c, : b E B}, 
U(c,) for all a E A ,  
-I Ll(c,)foralla~B\A. 
cp,cu, 
3 

5.21 
PRESERVATION THEOREMS 
317 
Again Tis consistent. So it has a model B' of cp. Now both B and the model 
with the interpretation of U in B' as universe are models of cp. Hence their 
intersection is a model of cp. But this intersection is isomorphic to ?I. i 
PROPOSITION 
5.2.16. Suppose that cp is preserved under nonempty descending 
intersections, i.e., whenever 
210 =) 211 3 ... 3 2l, 3 ... 
is a sequence of model of'cp, and their intersection is nonernpty, then their 
intersection is again a model of cp. Then cp is equivalent to a universal- 
existential sentence. 
PROOF. As in the proof of Proposition 5.2.15, we shall use Theorem 5.2.6 
and show that cp is preserved under unions of chains. So let 
910 c ... c 8, c ... 
be a chain of models of cp. We may assume that the union 8 = UnEo21,, 
is a submodel of some model Bo of cp. Let U ,  , U,, ..., U,, ... be a sequence 
of new I-placed relation symbols, and we shall construct an increasing chain 
of models 
where each model 8, 
is a model for 3, 
= 2 
u { Ui : 1 < i < n} and such 
that the 9, 
reduct of the chain 
B0C8] 
c ... c B , c  ...) 
8, 
c %,+I = ... 
is an elementary chain in the sense of 2'". 
Furthermore, we require that 
the interpretation of U,+, in B,,+l, say V : : : ,  satisfies the following: 
V::; c V," 
(the interpretation of U, in 8,,+ 
A c V',::, 
V."+'; n (B, \A) 
= 0, 
8 c ( p + l )  
n +  1 
Suppose we have the sequence B0 c ... c 23, satisfying the above. Then 
we see that in the model %,, 
A c V,," c V,"_, c ... c V:, 
8, t cp("0 
for 
1 < i Q n. 
We wish to find a model Bn+l for 2,,+1 
such that 
8, < the 3,-reduct of B,+ 1, 
and, in B,,+ we have 

318 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
A c v;!l' c v;+, c ... c v;+', 
vi::' 
n (B,, \ A )  = 0, 
1 < i < n + l .  
'B,,+l c q+"~), 
To obtain B,,+ , let T be given by the 9,, 
elementary diagram of Bn plus 
the sentences which express (using the full strength of 9,,+ 
, plus constants 
for the elements of B,,) 
A c u n + ,  c u n ,  
p" 
+ 1)) 
U,,,, n (&\A) 
= 0. 
The consistency of any finite portion of T can be shown in the model B,, 
by an appropriate choice of A,,, for U,,+ 
1. So T is consistent, and we may 
assume that it has a model B,,+ , which extends the chain to 
230 c 23, c ... c 'B,,+,. 
Let B = UnE,,,23,, 
and let V , ,  V,, ... be the interpretations of U1, 
Uz, ... 
in B. Then we see that 
A c  ... c vnc ... c V , ,  
Vn+, n (Bn\A) 
= 0, 
23 c cp("n'. 
So the submodels of 'B with universe V,, -.vith respect to the original language 
9 
is a descending chain of models of cp, whose intersection is 8. Hence 
9 l c c p . i  
The techniques involved in the above proofs can be extended to give 
other results; see the exercises. 
EXERCISES 
5.2.1*. Suppose that 9 
has only a finite number of relation symbols and 
no function or constant symbols. Prove that K is the class of models of 
a set of universal sentences iff for all models a, 9l E K iff every finite submodel 
of '2l is isomorphically embeddable in some model in K. Prove a version of 
this if 9 
has infinitely many relation symbols. Prove another version of 
this for arbitrary 2. 
5.2.2*. Assume 9 
is as in Exercise 5.2.1. Prove that K is the class of 
models of a single universal sentence iff there is a number n such that for all 
models 9, 
9 l ~ K  
iff every n-element submodel of 91 is isomorphically 
embeddable in some model of K. Is there an analogue when 9 
is arbitrary? 

5.21 
PRESERVATION THEOREMS 
319 
5.2.3. Let K be an elementary class. Show that the class R of all submodels 
of models of K is the class of models of some set of universal sentences. 
[Hint: Use Exercise 5.2. I ,  the version for arbitrary 9 . 1  
5.2.4*. Show by a counterexample that if K is a basic elementary class, 
then the class R as in Exercise 5.2.3 need not be the class of models of a 
single universal sentence. 
5.2.5*. Find counterexamples for the analogues of Exercise 5.2.3, where 
R is the class of all extensions of models of K, all homomorphic images of 
models of K, and all unions of chains of models of K. 
5.2.6. A sentence is existential-positioe iff it is both existential and positive. 
Prove that a sentence cp is preserved under both homomorphisms and 
extensions iff either it is equivalent to an existential-positive sentence, 
or else I- i 
cp. Do the same for universal-positive and homomorphism and 
submodels. Are there analogues for universal-existential-positive sentences? 
5.2.7. Give model-theoretic characterizations, in the manner of Theorem 
5.2.8, of theories with Xi,, axioms. By using sandwiches of even lengths, e.g., 
start with Bo and end with an, characterize theories in lli and Xi for m 
odd. Extend all these results to elementary classes. 
5.2.8. The notion of n-sandwiches can be given the following purely algebraic 
formulation. Prove that the model L!l is n-sandwiched by !B0 iff there is a 
(2n+ 1)-chain of models 
such that each B,,, is isomorphic to an ultrapower of bk, 
0 Q k < n, 
and similarly for the models 91k, 0 < k < n. Then all references to syntactical 
notions or the notion of satisfaction are deleted. 
5.2.9. By appealing to the proof of Theorem 5.2.6, show the following for 
an elementary class K: K is closed under unions of infinite chains of length 
w iff K is closed under arbitrary directed unions. (For the definition of 
directed unions, see Exercise 3.1.9. Exercise 3.1.10 is also relevant.) 
5.2.10. Change the hypothesis of Proposition 5.2.14 to the following: 
Whenever B l ,  Bz c 
are three models of cp and Bl n Bz # 0, then 
B1 n Bz is a model of cp. Then prove that the conclusion can be similarly 
changed to: Whenever the intersection of a nonempty family of submodels 
of cp is nonempty, then it is a model of cp. 
5.2.11. Show that there are sentences cp which are preserved under nonempty 
descending intersections but which are not preserved under nonempty 
intersections of two submodels. 
Bo c a. c Bl c ... c an-l 
c B,, 

320 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
5.2.12**. Characterize the sentences cp, or sets of sentences C, which are 
preserved under nonempty intersections of two submodels. (As a starting 
point, see Exercise 5.2.18.) 
5.2.13**. Prove that a sentence cp is preserved under nonempty descending 
intersections if and only if it is preserved under unions of chains and 
nonempty intersections of two elementary submodels. 
5.2.14*. Prove that cp is preserved under (nonempty) simple infinite de- 
scending intersections if and only if cp is preserved under (nonempty) 
directed descending intersections. 
5.2.15. Prove the following more general version of Proposition 5.2.16. 
Suppose that cp is closed under nonempty descending intersections. Let B 
be a model such that 
(i) some extension of B is a model of cp, 
(ii) for every extension 23 of B which is a model of cp and for all finite 
subsets A' c A and B' c B \  A, there is a model G of 
cp such that 
A' c C c Band C n B' = 0. 
Then M is a model of rp. 
5.2.16*. Find a sentence cp which is preserved under unions of chains but 
not preserved under nonempty descending intersections. 
5.2.17*. Let U be a 1-placed relation symbol of 9 and T be a complete 
theory of 9. Prove that the following are equivalent: 
(i). There is a model B = (A, V ...) of T such that V is a descending 
intersection of submodels of M and of T. 
(ii). There is a model M = (A, V...) of T such that for every finite 
subset X c A \ V, there is a submodel 23 = (B, V ...) of T such that 
B = I  V a n d B n X = O .  
5.2.18. Suppose that a sentence cp has the following form (II/ open): 
~p = (VX, 
x,3y1 * * *  ~ m ) [ + ( x l  
x n ~ l  
*.* 
Y m )  
A(vZ1 ... Z,,,>($(XI 
... Xnz1 ... Z,,,)'+ 
A y ,  
Zi)]. 
1 < i s m  
Show that cp is preserved under intersections of submodels. 
5.2.19*. A model M is said to be simple iff every homomorphism mapping 
9l onto 23 is an isomorphism of B onto 23. Let T be a theory of 2. 
Then 
every model of T is simple if and only if every formula cp of 3 is equivalent 
under T to a positive formula. 

5.21 
PRESERVATION THEOREMS 
32 1 
5.2.20*. Let U be a I-placed relation in 9. 
Given a model 2l = (A, U ...) 
for 3, let MI U be the least submodel of % which includes U. The relatioiza- 
tion cp" of a formula cp of 2 to U is defined in the following recursive way: 
If cp is atomic, then 9" = cp; 
(cp A I,//)" = cp" A I,//', 
(cp V $)' = 'p' V $', 
(1 Cp)' 
= 1 cp'; 
((Vx)d" = (VX)(U(X) 
-b 
cp"); 
((WcpP)" 
= ( W J ( x )  A cp"). 
Prove that cp' 
is logically equivalent to (cp")". 
Prove that for every theory T 
and sentence cp of 9, 
the following conditions are equivalent: 
(i). There is a sentence @ of 9 
such that 
(ii). For any two models M = (A, U ...) and 123 = (B, V...) of T, 
if MIU z 123lVand M C cp, then 8 C. cp. 
5.2.21*. We say that M is the union of u set K of models iff each 8 E K 
is a submodel of M and A = U { B  : 23 E K}. Prove that a sentence cp is 
preserved under unions if and only if it is logically equivalent to a sentence 
of the form (Vx3y, ... y&, 
where $ is quantifier-free. 
5.2.22*. By a strong homomorphism of M onto 123 we mean a homomorphism 
f of M onto 8 such that for every n-placed relation R of 2l and the corre- 
sponding relation S of 8, we have 
S = {(fa, ...fa .) : (a, ... a,) E R}. 
Assume 3 contains only binary relation symbols. Prove that a sentence cp is 
preserved under strong homomorphisms iff cp is equivalent to a sentence 
I- 1 cp c-, (I,//"). 
of the form 
r
s
 
(3x1 VY, zi 3
~ 2
v ~ 2
 
z2 ... ~ x , V Y ~ Z ~ )  
A V e i j ,  
i = 1  
j - 1  
where each Oij is either atomic or of the form 
' 
p(Yk zk). 
Generalize the result to arbitrary 3. Give a sentence which is closed under 
homomorphisms but not closed under strong homomorphisms. 
5.2.23**. The direct product M x 123 of two models M, 123 is defined in Exercise 
4.1.12. We say that '11 is a direct factor of 0. iff there exists a model 23 such 
that either '11 x 23 = B or 8 x M = B. Give a syntactical characterization 
of sentences preserved under direct factors. Give an example of a sentence 
closed under strong homomorphisms but not under direct factors. 

322 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.2 
5.2.24*. By a direct system of type o, we mean a sequence of models 
a,, 212, ... and a sequence of mappings f o , f i  f i  ... such that each 
f,, is a homomorphism on a,, into %,+ 
1 .  A model 8 will be said to be a 
direct limit of the direct system iff for each n, there is a homomorphism g,, 
on %,, into % such that: 
(i) for all n < o and a E A,, g,(a) = gn+l f,,(a); 
(ii) A is the union of the ranges of the functions g o ,  g l ,  g 2 ,  . . . ; 
(iii) for any other model %’ and homomorphisms g,‘, satisfying (i) and 
(ii) above, there is a homomorphism h on % onto %’ such that for each 
n , g , o h  =g,’,. 
Prove that the direct limit exists and is unique up to isomorphism. Prove 
that a sentence q is preserved under direct limits iff cp is equivalent to a 
sentence of the form 
m 
A (VX, ... xs)($r + (3~1 ... yt)ei), 
i =  1 
where the $i and Bi are quantifier-free positive formulas. 
5.2.2S. By an inverse system of type a, we mean a sequence of models 
So, a,, a2, ... and mappings f o ,  f i ,  f i ,  ... such that each f. is a homo- 
morphism of a submodel of %,,+ 
onto %,, . 8 is said to be an inverse limit 
of the sequences iff for each n, there is a homomorphism g,, on a submodel 
B,, c % onto %,, such that 
(i) for all n and all b E B,, f,g,,+ ,(b) = g,,(b); 
(ii) a = Un<uBn; 
(iii) if %’, g: also satisfy (i) and (ii) above, then there is a homomorphism 
h of 8’ onto 3 such that for each n, h o g,, = g i .  
Show that the inverse limit of any inverse system exists and is unique. 
Prove that a sentence cp is preserved under inverse limits iff q is equivalent 
to a sentence of the form 
(vxi ... X s ) ( ( v Y ,  * . *  Y,)$i + oil, 
i = l  
where $ i  and fli are quantifier-free positive formulas. 
5.2.26*. Let 9 
= { E } ,  where E is a binary relation symbol. Given two models 
% = ( A ,  E ) ,  8’ = (A’, E’) for 9, we say that 8’ is an outer extension 
of 8 iff 8 c 8’ and for all a E A and b E A’, if bE‘a, then b E A .  A formula 
q of Y is called essentially existential iff it is obtained from atomic and 
negations of atomic formulas by means of 

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEFINABILITY 
323 
conjunction: O1 A 02; 
disjunction: 8, v 02; 
restricted quantifications: ( V x ) ( x ~ y  
--f O), ( 3 x ) ( x ~ y  
A 8); 
existential quantifications: (3y)p. 
Prove that a sentence cp of 9 
is preserved under outer extensions iff p is 
equivalent to an essentially existential sentence. Generalize this result to 
cases when 9 
may contain symbols (relations and functions) other than E. 
5.3. Applications of special models to the theory of interpolation and defina- 
bility 
This section contains applications of special models to prove some more 
general results in interpolation and definability. We have already encountered 
in Section 2.2 the two interpolation theorems of Craig and Lyndon 
and the definability theorem of Beth. The kind of proof employed in 
Section 2.2 is, of course, quite elementary when compared with proofs 
requiring the use of special or saturated models. We shall see, however, 
that there are several generalizations whose proofs use special models. 
At the moment, the use of special models in these results (Theorem 5.3.6 
and some of the exercises) appears to be essential. 
By way of introducing the use of special models in interpolation and 
definability results, and as a refresher to the reader, we first give a new 
proof of the Robinson consistency theorem, from which the reader should 
be able to deduce the Craig interpolation theorem. 
THEOREM 
2.2.23 (Robinson Consistency Theorem). Let 9, 
and Z2 
be two 
languages and let 9 
= gLPl 
n s2. 
Suppose T is a complete theory in 9, 
and T, =) T, T2 
=) T are consistent theories in g1 
and 9,, 
respectively. 
Then T, u T2 
is consistent in the language g1 
v P2. 
PROOF. Suppose that 
k Tl and iY2 k T2. 
Let B, be the 9 
reduct of iYl , 
and similarly let B2 be the 9 
reduct of U2. Since B, k T, B2 k T and T is 
complete, we have Bl 3 B2. 
Now let ql, B2 be special elementary exten- 
sions of 911 and U2 of the same (finite or infinite) power. Let %, and g2 be 
the reducts of '%, 
and g2, respectively, to 9. 
Then we see that 
B, < g l , a n d B 2  <B2, 
B1 
and B2 are equivalent special models of the same power. 
Hence 
2 B2. 
Using this, we can find an expansion %!I 
of a, by adding 

324 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.3 
interpretations of the symbols in 9, 
\, 9, 
which are images of the corre- 
sponding interpretations in ’$i2 under the isomorphism mapping @, onto %, . 
B then will be a model for 9, 
u 9, 
such that its zl-reduct is a, and its 
z9,-reduct is isomorphic to a2. So every sentence of Tl u T, holds in a, 
whence T, u T2 is consistent. -1 
Let P and P’ be two new n-placed relation symbols not in 9. 
Let C(P) 
be a set of sentences of 9 
u {P}, 
and let C(P’) be the corresponding set of 
sentences of 9 
u {P’} 
formed by replacing P everywhere by P’. Recall 
from Chapter 2 that C(P) defines P implicitly iff 
C(P), C(P’) k (VX, ... x,)(P(x, ... x,) c* P y x ,  ... x,)). 
Phrased slightly differently, this notion is equivalent to the following: 
Given any model ’% for 9, 
there is at most one n-placed relation R over A 
such that 
(9, 
R) != w. 
If C(P) were a finite set of sentences (any argument involving the com- 
pactness theorem will reduce Z(P) to this case), then the condition that 
there be at most one relation R can be written thus: 
(*I 
The sentence appearing to the right of k is a second-order sentence, in fact, 
a 
sentence (see the discussion in Chapter 4). The interpretation of k is, 
of course, the usual (standard) satisfaction predicate with respect to second- 
order sentences. By Beth’s theorem 2.2.22, (*) is true for every model 
for 9 
iff C(P) defines P explicitly, i.e., there is a formula ~ ( x ,  
... x,) of Y 
such that 
k (vPP’)(Z(P) A Z(P’) 
-+ P = P’). 
Z(P) k (VX, ... X,)(P(X, ... x,) 4 - i  q(x, ... x,)). 
From the form of Beth’s theorem, it would follow that an important 
model-theoretic question to ask is the following: 
Given C(P) and given ?I (a model for 9), 
exactly how many (or how few) 
relations R are there on A such that (a(, R) k C(P)? 
This question for an arbitrary model 81 is extremely difficult to answer, 
as it would already imply a certain knowledge of second-order logic, 
which we do not as yet have. If the question were posed for the class of all 
models 91 for 9, 
as, for example, in Beth’s theorem and in some of our 
later theorems in this section, very elegant answers can be found. It turns 
out that for special models, we can answer quite satisfactorily the question 

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEFINABILITY 
whet her 
PI I= (3P)A qP), 
325 
as the following proposition shows. 
PROPOSITION 5.3.1. Let C(P; x,  . .. x,) be a set of formulas of 2' u { P }  in the 
free variables x,, ..., x,. Then there exists a set @ of formulas of 2' in the 
variables x ,  , . .., x, satisfying: 
(i). every formula q ( x ,  ... x,) in @ contains only those symbols of 9 
occurring in the set C ;  
(ii). t (Vx, ... xn)((3P)AZ + A@); 
(iii). for every special model '2l for 9, 
which is eitherfinite or is of power 
0 < IAl = IAl*, II9lI < I 4  
u k ( V X ,  ... x,)((3P)AC -A 
@). 
PROOF. 
We first define the set (9 as follows: @ consists of all those formulas 
~ ( x ,  
... x,) of 2' containing only symbols occurring in Z such that 
I= (Vx, ... x,)((P)AZ + cp). 
To prove (iii), let '2I satisfy the hypothesis of (iii) and let a,, ..., a, E A 
Then it is clear that (i) and (ii) hold. 
be such that 
(1) 
A k A@[a, ... a,]. 
We first show that 
(2) the theory of (8, a, ... a,) u Z(P; 
c, ... cn) is consistent in the language 
If (2) were false, then for some a(x, ... x,) of 9, 
we have 
9' = 2 
u {P, 
c,, ..., C"}. 
'u I= a[a, ... a,], 
Z(P; 
c, ... C") k 1 V ( C ,  ... c,). 
By the interpolation theorem, we may assume that -I b(xl ... x,) contains 
only symbols occurring in Z. This shows that i 
b(xl ... x,) E @, contra- 
dicting (1). Now let (23, R, bl ... 6,) be a special model for 2' 
which 
satisfies the set of sentences in (2) and which has power IS1 = IAJ. Then 
since 
(8, a, ... a,) = (23, 
b, ... b,,), 

326 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.3 
and both are special models of the same power, we have 
(a, a ,  ... a,) 2 (%, b, ... b,). 
The isomorphism naturally carries the relation R on B onto a relation S 
on A such that 
(a, s, a ,  ... a,) I= C(P; 
c, ... c,). -1 
Some remarks on this simple-looking proposition are in order here. If 
9 
is countable and some sort of meaningful Godel numbers are assigned 
to the formulas of 2, then it is easily seen that the set @ will be recursively 
enumerable in C. If Z is a single formula or sentence, then @ is recursively 
enumerable. Proposition 5.3.1 can be improved in two directions. First of 
all, if C is a single sentence or formula, then @ can be taken to be primitive 
recursive, i.e., we can give an explicit description of the set @, so that the 
conclusion still holds. Secondly, we can dispense with the condition that 
the power of 
must be a cardinal a = a*, and, in the case where Z is a 
single sentence the restriction that IAI > 11211 is also not necessary. Finally, 
the use of the Craig interpolation theorem in the proof is not essential, 
as we can restrict ourselves to those symbols of 9 
which do occur in some 
formula in C. 
We next prove a generalization of the Craig interpolation theorem. 
At its simplest level, the Craig interpolation theorem for formulas can be 
stated in the following fashion: Let q ( P ;  x1 ... x,) be a formula of 9 u {P) 
and let +(Q; x, ... x,) be a formula of dip u {Q}. We assume that P and Q 
are relation symbols not already in 9. 
Then the following are equivalent: 
(i). t (Vxl ..* x n ) ( ( 3 P ) ~  
+ (vQ>+); 
(ii). there is a formula B(x, ... x,) of 2' such that 
I: (Vxi ... XAt((3P)cp 
-+ 0) A (6 4 
(VQ)JI)l. 
The generalization which follows is stated in a similar way. 
THEOREM 
5.3.2. Let cp and $ be as in the above, and let Q,, ..., Q, be any 
string of quantijers, V or 3. Then the following are equioalent: 
(i). 
(QIXI ... QnXn>((3P)q 
+ (vQ)$). 
(ii). There is a formula B(x, ... x,) of 9 
such that 
1 (QIx, *.. Qnxn)[(W)q + 0 ) ~  
(0 + (Ye)$)]. 
PROOF. (ii) 
(i). This is trivial and follows from logic. 

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEFINABILITY 
327 
(i) => (ii). By Proposition 5.3.1, let 
G I ,  uz, ...) om, ... 
be a list of all formulas of 9 
in @ (from Proposition 5.3.1) with respect 
to the formula (3P)cp, and let 
TI, 72, ..., T,, ... 
be a list of all negations of formulas of 9 
in @ (from Proposition 5.3.1) 
with respect to the formula ( 3 Q ) i $ .  
We may assume by taking finite 
conjunctions that 
C g m + 1  + urn, 
and by taking finite disjunctions that 
! = = r n + ~ m + l .  
We already know that 
V Tm + (VQN- 
m 
(2) 
We claim that 
(3) 
First of all, (3) is certainly sufficient to prove the theorem, as by taking 
8 = u,,, or 8 = z,, 
and by using (l), (2), (3) and some predicate logic, 
we have the conclusion (ii). (This is a good time to brush up on some of 
the rules of predicate logic.) So it is sufficient to prove (3). Suppose that (3) 
is false. Then 
there exists an m such that I= (Qlx, ... Q,,x,,)(u, + T,,,). 
for each m, there exists a model 3, such that 
- 
(4) 
%n 
(61.1 
Q n X n ) ( u , ~ l  Tm), 
where ai = 3 if Qi = V a n d a ,  = V if Qi = 3. The sentences in (4) become 
logically stronger as m becomes larger. Therefore, by the compactness 
theorem, the set of sentences 
( 5 )  
(alxl ... a,,x,,)(u,,,Ai T,,,), 
m = 1,2, ..., 
is consistent and has a model. Since urn and T, contain only symbols occurring 
in cp or I), we may assume that Y 
is countable. Let i?l 
be a special model 
of the sentences in ( 5 )  of power a0,. It is a simple fact to verify that not 

328 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.3 
only is 'ill special, but also 
(6) 
'il 
is a,-saturated. 
Schematically, we have 
- 
8 C A (GI 
m 
* * Qn xn)(um A 7 
Zm). 
We show that, by using (6), 
a c (GI 
Q, xn)[ A (om 
~ m ) ] .  
m 
(7) 
This is proved by pushing the infinite conjunction A ,,, through the quantifiers 
a one by one. If 6, 
= V, then clearly Ama, = ai/lm. 
If 
= 3, then 
we first show: 
(8) let a,, ..., a,-, be any sequence of elements in A, and let 
(3xi)qm(x, .. . xi- xi), m = 1, 2, .. ,, be any sequence of formulas of 2 
such that C qm+, + qm. Then 
c A (hi)qm[a, ... U , - ~ X , ]  iff '2l C @xi) A qm[a, ... ai-lx,]. 
m 
m 
The proof of (8) is immediate, since, by (6), (g, 
a, ... 
saturated, and we simply find an a, E A such that 
2 C qm[ul ... a,] 
is stdl 0,- 
for all m = 1,2, .... 
Now we see that 
- 
- 
- 
a ( Q I x ~  
. * *  Q i - , X i - , )  
A ( Q i x i  
Q n X n ) ( C m A l T m )  
m 
- 
- 
iff 
a k (GI.~, 
..* Q i X i )  A ( c Z i + l  x i + l  
a * *  Q n X n ) ( b m A l T m ) *  
m 
Whence, by induction, (7) holds. Since (ao,) = (Do,)*, the conclusions of 
Proposition 5.3.1 with respect to cp and I,!3 both hold for 'II. So (by predicate 
logic again) 
- 
,U k (GI X 1  
Qnxn)( A Um A T  V ~ m ) ,  
a (61 
a * *  GnXn)((jp)VAq (VQN), 
a 
m 
m 
1 (QI X I  * * *  Qnxn)((3p)V 4 (vQ)I,!3)* 
This contradicts (i). So (3) must hold and the theorem is proved. -I 

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEF’INABILITY 
329 
Further refinements of Theorem 5.3.2 can be found in the exercises. 
Our next few results are generalizations of Beth‘s theorem in various 
directions. No essential use of special models is needed again until Theorem 
5.3.6, although the proofs of Theorems 5.3.3 and 5.3.4, and Proposition 
5.3.5 are simpler with special models. 
Let Z(P) be a set of sentences of 9 
u {P}, 
P a new n-placed relation 
symbol. Z(P) is said to define P explicitly up to disjunction iff there are a 
finite number of formulas cpl(xl ... x,), ..., qm(x1 ... x,) of 9 
such that 
C(P) is said to define P explicitly up to parameters iff there is a formula 
cp(x, ... x,y, ... y,) of 2’ such that 
Z(P) C (3y1 ... y,VX, ... X,)(P(Xl ... X,,) 
q(X1 ... X,y, ... y,)). 
Finally, Z(P) is said to define P explicitly up to parameters and disjunction 
iff there are formulas cpl(xl ... x,yl ... ym), ..., ‘pk(xl ... x,yl ... y,) of 9 
such that 
Z(P) c v (3y1 ... y,Vx1 ... xn)(P(xl ... x,) * 
cpi(X ... x,y1 ... y,)). 
1 6 i b k  
By the compactness theorem, every result that we prove in what follows 
extends obviously to sets of sentences of 2‘ u {P}, once we can prove it 
for single sentences of 9 
u {P}. 
It will be equally clear that instead of an 
n-placed relation symbol P, we can, in order to save on notation, use a 
I-placed relation symbol U. The reader is asked to verify these claims as 
exercises. If q ( U )  is a sentence of 2 u {U}, we sometimes shall simply 
write cp for cp(U). 
The next theorem slightly extends the range of Beth’s theorem. 
THEOREM 
5.3.3 (Svenonius’ Theorem). Let cp be a sentence of 2’ u { U } ,  
U a new I-placed predicate. The following are equivalent: 
for 9, 
if any two expansions (a, XI) and (a, X 2 )  
of (II to models of cp are isomorphic, then X, = X2. 
(i). For every model 
(ii). cp defines U explicitly up to disjunction. 
PROOF. (ii) =- (i). Suppose that O,(x), ..., ek(x) are formulas of 9 s u c h  that 
Let (a, X) be an expansion of a which is a model of cp. This means that for 

330 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.3 
some O,(x), 
x = {a E A : ‘u c e,[a]}. 
So X remains fixed under any automorphism of a, and, in particular, under 
any isomorphism of (a, X) onto an (3, X’). 
(i) + (ii). Suppose that (ii) does not hold, i.e., for no formulas 
O,(x), ..., O,(x) of 9 does ( I )  hold. Then the set 
C = {cp} u {i 
(Vx)(V(x) - 
O(x)) : O(x) a formula of 9} 
of sentences of 9’ 
u { U} is consistent. Let T be any complete extension 
of 1 in 9 
u { U}. 
Note that T does not define U explicitly, as there is no 
formula O(x) of 9 
such that 
T c (vx)(u(~) 
++ e(x)). 
Whence, by Beth’s theorem, there is a model 2l for 9 which has two 
different expansions into models of T: 
(a, Xi) t T, 
(a, Xz) C T, 
XI P Xz. 
Since T is complete, we also have 
(a9 Xl) = (a, X2). 
Consider the model (3, X ,  X,). Let (%, Y, Y2) be a special elementary 
extension of it with respect to the language Y u { U, V’}. Clearly, (23, Y,) 
and (8, Y,) are special, of the same power, and equivalent. So, because 
(a, X, X , )  t i 
(Vx)(U(x) C)I U’(x)), we see that 
(23, Y,) 
(8, 
YZ)> 
(%, y, Y,) 1 (Vx)( V ( x )  - 
V ‘ ( X ) > ?  
Y, # Y,. 
This contradicts (i). i 
The following finite analogue of Beth’s theorem is more difficult to prove. 
It gives one answer to the question we posed just before Proposition 5.3.1. 
THEOREM 
5.3.4 (Kueker Finite Definability Theorem). Let cp be a sentence 
of 9 
u {U}, 
and let n 2 1. Then the following are equiualent: 
(i),,. For every model 
for 2, 
there are ar most n subsets X c A such 
that (a, X )  t cp. 
(ii),,. There are formulas ~ ( u ,  
... uk), Oi(xul ... uk), 1 < i < n, of 9 such 

5.31 
that 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEFINABILITY 
331 
PROOF. (ii),, * (i),,. This is easy to verify. 
(i),, =+ (ii),,. We shall first prove an easy consequence of Proposition 5.3.1. 
Let 0(P; y )  be a formula of 2’ 
v { P } .  Then the following are equivalent: 
(1) 
c (3yvp)e. 
(2) There is a formula o(y) of 9’ such that i= (3y)a and C (Vy)(o + 0). 
The proof of (1) from (2) is easy and we leave it to the reader. 
Assume (1). Then, by Proposition 5.3.1, there is a set C(y) of formulas 
of 9 
such that 
2 C ( V Y ) ( ( W 0  * vq, 
for every special model B for 9’ such that IAl = IAl* and JIPEoII < IAl if 9I 
is infinite. By (l), we have 
B C (3y)a for some a E 1. 
Since every model for Y is equivalent to some such special model %, 
we see that 
c v ((3y)u : O E C } .  
I= (3y)a1 v . . . v (3y)a,,,, 
Hence it follows from compactness that there are a,, ..., a, E C such that 
So, defining a = ol v ... v om, we find that (2) holds. 
Returning now to the proof of the theorem, assume (i),,. We first show 
that there are formulas $i(U; u1 ... u k )  of 2’ 
u { V } ,  1 < i < n, such that 
(3) 
k (3v1 
* a *  ukvuu‘vx)[(q(u) 
+ v $i(u; 01 ... v k ) )  
1 Q i S n  
A A (q(u)A$i(v)ACp(~‘)A$i(u’) + (u(x) 
+ v’(x)))I. 
1 Q i G n  
Condition (3) simply says that given any model ‘3 for 9, 
we can find 
elements a , ,  ..., a, E A such that at most one subset X c A satisfies 
(a, x, q A $i[.l 
... a,]* 

332 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.3 
We now describe a procedure by which each ei can be written down. Given 
3, we first assume that 
has exactly n sets X ,  , ..., X,, such that 
(a,X,)tcp, 
i = l ,  ..., n. 
We may assume that one of the X i ,  say X,,, is such that 
X,, + X i  for i = 1, ..., n-I. 
$*(u; 
u1 . .. u,- 1) = U(U1) A U(U2) A ... A U(O,,- I), 
and let ai E X,, \ Xi for i = 1, ..., n- 1. Then X, is the only subset of A 
such that 
(Ql,X,,)kcp~+i[ai 
...an-,]. 
Let 
Next we may assume that 
X,,-l + X i ,  for 
i = 1, ..., n-2. 
We write 
$2(u; u1 ... 02,,-3) = (1$1)A U(U,,)A . a .  A U(u2n-3), 
and find U , , - ~ + ~ I E X ~ - ~  
\Xi, 
i = 1, ..., n-2, so that 
subset of A satisfying 
is the only 
(a, xn-1) ‘?A$2[al 
a ~ n - 3 1 .  
Proceeding in this fashion, we obtain I(li, i = 1, ..., n. The integer k is simply 
the total number of distinct variables required to write down en. 
Certainly 
our choice of the elements a , ,  ..., a, E A is such that (3) holds for a. In the 
case where PI has fewer than n subsets X such that (a, X) C cp, we can still 
prove that (3) holds by suitably identifying some of the ai. So (3) is proved. 
Let 8 be the subformula in (3) immediately following the set quantifiers. 
We now apply the implication (1) => (2) to 8. (It is clear that in this applica- 
tion we can replace (3y) by (3vl ... uk) and (VP) by (VUU’).) 
So we obtain 
a formula o(u, ... uk) of 9 such that 
k (301 ... uk)o, 
t ( ~ 0 1  ... o k ) ( c  + (40(u) 
+ V $i(u)))q 
1 < i Q n  
(4) 
( 5 )  
(yo1 
ukX)[bhcp(U)Aei(u)Acp(u’)AIl/i(u’) 
(u(x) -+ u’(-x))]9 
i = 1, ..., n. 
Using propositional logic, we can rewrite each part of ( 5 )  as an implication 

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEFINABILITY 
333 
of two formulas, one containing U and the other containing U'. We now 
apply the Craig interpolation theorem to each part of ( 5 )  and obtain 
formulas ei(o, ... ukx) of 2, i = 1, ..., n, such that 
C ( V O ,  *. * vk .)[(a A Cp( U )  A $'i( 
U )  A U ( X )  + ei) A (Oi --* (V( U') 
A $'i( 
U') 
+ U'(x)))], 
i = 1, ..., n. 
After identifying U and U', and lifting out 9, 
we obtain 
cp t (Vv, ... v k X ) [ C T A $ i ( U )  + (U(x) + Oi(x))], 
cp 
i = 1, ..., n, 
i = 1, ..., m. 
( v v l  ..* v k x ) [ $ ' i ( U )  
+ (ei 
+ u(x))l, 
From the latter two statements and (4) we obtain the desired conclusion 
cp t ( V O ,  
v k ) [ a  * v vx(U(x) t* &)I. 4 
1 S i S n  
The finite analogue of Theorem 5.3.3 is the following: 
PROPOSITION 
5.3.5. Let rp be a sentence of 9 v {U} and let n 2 1. Then 
the following are equivalent: 
(i). For every model (a, X )  of rp, there are at most n sets Y suck that 
(ii). Thereureformulasaj(vl ... uk), Olj(xv1 ... Uk), 1 < j 6 m, 1 6 i < n, 
( 3 , X )  = (3, Y ) .  
of Y s u c h  that 
The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 5.3.3 and we leave it as 
an exercise. 
We next consider an infinite analogue of Beth's theorem and Theorem 
5.3.3. Note that condition (v) of Theorem 5.3.6 states that rp defines I/ 
explicitly up to disjunction and with parameters. Theorem 5.3.6 provides 
another answer to our earlier question. 
THEOREM 
5.3.6 (Chang-Makkai Theorem). Let cp beasentenceof 3' u { U}. 
The following five conditions are equivalent: 
(i). For every infinite model %for 9, 
I { X :  X c A and (a, X) t cp}[ < IA[+. 

334 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
(ii). For every infinite model (2, X )  t cp, 
I ( Y :  (a, X )  = (rn, Y)}j < IAl+. 
(iii). For eoery infinite model 
for 9, 
I{X : X c A and (a, X) t cp}l < 2IA1. 
(iv). For euery infinire model (8, X )  cp, 
I{ Y : (a, X )  r (a, Y)}l < 2 ’ 4 .  
[5.3 
(v). There are afinite number of formulas e1(xul ... urn), ..., e,,(xol ... urn) 
of 9 such rhat 
~p c V (3~, 
... V~VX)(U(X) ++ e,). 
1 S i b n  
PROOF. The set of rn-tuples of an infinite set A has cardinal IAI. So it 
follows that (v) implies all the other conditions (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv). 
Among the four conditions (i)-(iv), (iv) is the weakest, since if it fails, 
then so will (i)-(iii). So it is sufficient to prove that (iv) implies (v). We shall 
show that if (v) fails, then (iv) also fails. This will then prove the theorem. 
In order to simplify the proof somewhat, we shall assume that 9 is a 
countable language; in fact, we may assume that 9 contains only the 
symbols occurring in q. Suppose (v) does not hold. Then the set 
{cp) u {(vo, ut ...) 1 (v~)(u(x) ++ e(xul uz ...)I : qxu, uz ...I 
is a formula of P’} 
is consistent, whence it has a model (a, X). In the model 9, 
the set X can 
never be defined by any formula of 2’ with any finite number of parameters 
from A. So A must be infinite. We can assume that the model (a, X) is 
special and is of power am. This means that (91, X) is the union of a 
specializing elementary chain 
(a09 Xo) < (a13 X I )  < * * *  < (c2xn, Xn) < * * a  
(we have only taken a subchain determined by the cardinals a,,, and we are 
using n as an index instead of a,,), where each (a,,, X,,) is a >:-saturated 
model of power a,,+, . We may also suppose that the set A is well-ordered 
in such a way that 
A = {aC : t < am}, 
A,, = {aI: : ( < a,,+,) for all n < o. 

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEF'INABILITY 
The model ('11, X) will be shown to violate (iv), i.e. 
I{ Y : (a, X )  z ('11, Y)}l = 2'4. 
335 
This means that we have to create 2IA1 automorphisms of '11 such that 
distinct automorphisms will give rise to distinct subsets of A when applied 
to the set X. 
Let <IA12 denote the set of all functions whose domain is some ordinal 
5 < IAI, and whose range has at most two values 0, 1. That is, 
<I42 = {f : f ~~2 and 5 < IAI}. 
We shall define two functions G and H such that the following hold: 
(1) Domain (G) = domain (H) = <IA12. 
(3) IffEC2 and 5 < a", then 
(2) Iff = g, then G ( f )  = G(g) and H ( f )  = Hb). 
W, ~ ( f )  
E 'An 9 
(g, 
W q ) q < <  
(a- ~ ( f ) q ) q < < .  
(4) Iff€ <2 and ( = I+3m with I a limit ordinal, then 
G(fu {<to>>) = G ( f u  ((51))) 
= G(f) u ( ( 5 ,  ar+,)>. 
( 5 )  Iff€ <2 and 5 = I+3m+ I with I a limit ordinal, then 
H(fu {<CO>>) = H(fu {<51>>> = Nf) u {<<a,+,)>. 
(6) Iff€ 52, 5 < a,,, and 5 = I+3m+2 with I a limit ordinal, then there 
are two elements bo EX, 
and 6, 4 X,, such that 
G ( f u  {(50)}) = G ( f )  u {(tW, 
C(fU {<rl>l) = C(f) u {(tw, 
H(fu {(YO))) 
= H(fU {<5l>>>. 
The existence of the functions G and H is proved by induction on t, the 
domain off. There are precisely three cases of the induction corresponding 
to cases (J), (5) and (6). So suppose that G and H have been defined on all 
functionsf€ <''I2 such that domain fis less than 5. If t is a limit ordinal, 
then the extension of G, H to g E <2 is obvious. So let us deal only with the 
cases when ( = q + l .  
Case 1. 5 < a,, 5 = I+3m, I a limit ordinal. Let g E :2. Then for 
some f e q 2 ,  g = f u ((50)) 
or g = f u ((51)). 
In either case, define 

336 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.3 
G(g) = G ( f )  u ( ( ~ a , + , ) } .  
We now have to find an element a E A,, such that 
(7) 
(a, G(.f),, %+m)<<q = (a? 
H(S)C, 
But by inductive hypothesis we have 
(a, G(f)C)C<?l = (a? 
H(f)C)C<q. 
(a" 
3 G(f),)C<q = (8" 
7 H(f)C)C<q. 
Whence 
Since uL+, E A,, and a,, is >:-saturated, 
we find by the usual technique 
an element a E A,, which satisfies (7). Then we define 
= H(f) u {(Ya>>. 
Case 2. 5 < a,, 
= A+3m+ 1, L a limit ordinal. Here the argument is 
entirely analogous to Case 1, except that we extend the definition of H 
first by (5), and then extend G. 
Case 3. t < an, t = 1+3m+2, I a limit ordinal. Let f ~
~
2
.
 
Consider 
the two possible extensions off, 
go =f u {(YO)} 
and 91 = f  u ((51)). 
In order to satisfy (6), we shall have to find three elements bo, 6 ,  , a E A, 
such that 
b o ~ x m ,  
b 1 4 x n ,  

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEFINABILITY 
337 
Fix 60 E X,,. 
Let Zbo = {pbob, : 61 # x,,}. Then by (9), 
(10) 
la 
A n  : (sn 
> G(f){),<q ZboCal} 
x n  * 
We now see that some finite subset Z' c Zbo also has the property that 
(11) 
{a E An (an 
9 G(f)&<q 
GoCaI} c Xn * 
For otherwise, by the a:-saturatedness 
of (?In, Xn), 
we can find an element 
b, # X,, 
such that 
which contradicts (10). Let Db0 be the conjunction of this finite subset Z' 
from (1 1). Clearly, 
So, letting 60 range over X,,, 
and letting Z = {bbo : 6, EX.}, we see that, 
by (11), 
(%n 
9 c(.f)()C<q 
zbo[bl]r 
(%n 
9 G(.f)&<q 
Dbo[bOl* 
Xn = ( a E A n  : (an G(f)J)<<q !=  call. 
By the same reasoning which established (ll), using again the 3;- 
saturatedness of (a,,, 
Xn), 
we see that some finite conjunction D of formulas 
from Z satisfies 
Xn = {a E An : (gn 
9 G(f),)c<q 
4 a I ) .  
This means that X,, is definable in '21, from a formula D of 9 with some 
parameters in A,,. Since (a,,, X,,) < (a, X), this is a contradiction. So (8) 
is proved. 
by inductive hypothesis, we use 
the 2;-saturatedness of 91" once more to find an element a E An such that 
Since (gin, G(f)e)e<,, = (g,,, 
H(f)[)<< 
(an, G(f),, bo)(<q 
( a n 3  H(f)cya)c<q. 
By (S), we also have 
(24, G(f)c, bl)<<q (an* H(f)c,a)<<q* 
We have now finished the proof of Case 3. 
Once G, H are defined on <lA12 
satisfying (1)-(6), we can easily extend 
them in the natural way to functions defined on IA12, so that, given any 
f E 142, 
( ' 2 1 9  G ( m <  
IAl = (a, H(f)<)C< IAl . 
Since 
range ( G ( f ) )  = A = range ( H ( f ) ) ,  

338 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.3 
this defines an automorphism G(f)< + H ( f ) <  of 3 onto 8. If two functions 
f, g E IA12 differ at the first place on an ordinal 5 = I + 3 m + 2  with I a 
limit ordinal, then the two automorphisms 
G(f)c -P 
H(f),, 
w
e
 
+ H(g)c 
will map the set X onto distinct subsets of A. This is because by (6), 
a = H(f)r: = H(& 
G ( f  )c E x and w
e
 
& X* 
and, say ft = 0 and ge = 1, 
So the image of X under G(f)c -, H ( f ) ,  contains a and the image of X 
under G(g),: 4 H(g)< excludes a. Obviously, there are 2IA1 such functions, 
whence there are 2IAI distinct automorphic images of X. So (iv) fails. 
Hence the theorem is proved. i 
EXERCISES 
5.3.1*. Assume that the set C(P; 
x1 ... x;) of Proposition 5.3.1 is a single 
formula of Y u {P}. Improve Proposition 5.3.1 to the following: There 
is a primitive recursive set @J of formulas of 9 
(containing only those 
symbols in C) such that for all special models 2l for 9, 
2l c (Vx, ... xn)((3P)C 4+ /\ @). 
[Hint: Assume without loss of generality that P is a 1-placed function 
symbol and that Z = (3PVx)cp(P(x)x), where cp(yx) is a formula of Y 
and cp(P(x)x) is obtained from cp(yx) by replacing y by P(x). Then intuitively 
C implies each of the sentences: 
(VX, 3Yl)cp(Y, XI), 
( V S , ~ Y ~ V X ~ ~ Y ~ ) ( ( X ~  
= x2 + Y ,  3 y , ) ~ c p ( y 1 x l ) ~ c p ( y z ~ 2 ) ) ~  
Show that if 2l is a special model for 9, 
then 2l C (3P)C iff 
sentence of the list.] 
satisfies each 

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEFINABILITY 
339 
5.3.2*. Prove the following generalization of Theorem 5.3.2. Let 
cp(P; s, ... s,; x, ... x,) 
be a formula of Y v {P, 
S,, ..., S,}, 
$(Q; S, ... S,; x, ... x,) 
be a formula of 9 
u {Q, 
S,, ..., S,}, where P, Q, S,, ..., S, are new 
relation (or function) symbols. Let 2 be a sequence of quantifiers on the 
(second-order) variables S, , ..., S, and the (first-order) variables xl, .. ., x,, 
such that any second-order quantifier in 2 occurs universally. We make 
no stipulation on the order in which these quantifiers in 9 are to occur. 
Then the following are equivalent: 
(i). != ~ ( ( W V  
-+ (VQM). 
(ii). There is a formula O(S, ... S,; x, ... x,) of 2 
u { S , ,  ..., S;} such 
that 
b 9 [ ( ( 3 P ) ~  
-+ 0) ,-, 
(0 -+ (vQ)$)l. 
[Hint: Try to ‘code’ the relations and functions on a model 2l by using 
elements of A and relations with one more place. This is where the assump- 
tion that second-order variables must be quantified universally is crucial.] 
5.3.3. Deduce Beth’s theorem 2.2.22 from Theorem 5.3.3 directly. 
5.3.4. Verify that the proofs of Theorems 5.3.3 and 5.3.4, Proposition 5.3.5, 
and Theorem 5.3.6 go through using a set Z(P) of sentences of 9 
v {P}, 
where P is not necessarily I-placed. 
5.3.5. Give a proof of Proposition 5.3.1 without the cardinality restriction 
IAI = IAl* in Proposition 5.3.1 (iii). 
[Note: This is easier than Exercise 5.3.1 above.] 
5.3.6. Show by a counterexample that Theorem 5.3.4 cannot be simplified 
to: for n 2 1, Theorem 5.3.4 (i), is equivalent to 
(ii’). There are n formulas O,(x), ..., O,(x) of 2’such that 
v 
V (VX)(~(X) - ei(x)). 
1 S i S n  
5.3.7. Prove Proposition 5.3.5. 
5.3.8*. The following is a countable common generalization of Theorem 
5.3.4 and Proposition 5.3.5 (compare with Theorem 5.3.6). Let cp be a 
sentence of 9 
u { V } .  Then the following are equivalent: 

340 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.3 
(i). For every model Yf for 9, 
there are at most a finite number of 
(ii). For every model (Yf, X) of cp, there are at most a finite number of 
(iii). There are a number n and formulas o(uI ... uk). oi(xuI ... uk), 
subsets X of A such that (91, X) k cp. 
Y c A such that (a, A‘) 
2 (H, Y). 
I < i < n, of 9 
such that 
cp k (30, ... vk)a, 
cp k (vu, ... U k ) [ 6  
v ( v x ) ( u ( x )  c, el)]. 
I C i d n  
5.3.9. Let cp be a sentence of 9 
u { U l ,  ..., U,,}. Then the following are 
equivalent: 
(i). For every model 3 for 9 
there is at most one n-tuple of subsets 
XI, ..., X,, of A such that 
(3, XI ... X,,) != cp. 
(ii). There are formulas U,(x), ..., O,,(x) of 3’ such that 
CP t A 
( V x ) ( u i ( x )  * 
o i ( x ) ) *  
1 d i d n  
5.3.10. Let cp be a sentence of 9 
u {(I}. 
The following are equivalent: 
(i). For every model &I for Y, the set 
{A’: X c A 
and (2l,X)t cp} 
is a chain of subsets of A. 
(ii). There is a formula cp(xy) of 2 such that 
cp != ( V X Y ) [ ( W  -+ (cp(XY) -+ U(Y” 
(1 U(x> + (U(Y) 
-+ 4 X Y ) ) ) l .  
5.3.11*. Let K be an elementary class of partially ordered structures 
II = (A, < ). A subset X c A is called hereditary iff u E X and b < u 
imply b E X. Suppose that every automorphism of every model 91 in K 
maps every hereditary subset X of A onto another set Y c A which is 
comparable with X, i.e., X c Y or Y c X. Then there exists an n such that 
in every model in K every set of pairwise incomparable (under < ) elements 
has at most n elements. 
5.3.12. The equivalence of conditions (1) and (2) in the proof of Theorem 
5.3.4 can be generalized as follows: Let O(S, ... S,; x I  ... x k )  be a formula 
of 9 
u {S, , ..., S,}. Then the following are equivalent: 

5.31 
THEORY OF INTERPOLATION AND DEFINABILITY 
341 
(i). k (3x,VS, 3x,VS2 . . . hktJ&)O. 
(ii). There are formulas o i ( S ,  ... S i - , ;  x, ... x i )  of 3' u {S,, ..., Si- 
,}, 
i = 1, ..., k, such that: 
(a) k (3Yl )GI ; 
(b) k (Vx, ... xi)(oi --* ( 3 x i + , ) a i + , ) ,  i = 1, ..., k -  I; 
(c) k (vx1 ... xk)(bk --* 6). 
The interpolation theorem in Exercise 5.3.2 (as well as Theorem 5.3.2) can 
now be improved as follows: Let us suppose (without loss of generality) 
that (in Exercise 5.3.2) m = n = k and 9 is the sequence of quantifiers 
(3x,VS1 ... 3xkVSk). Then the following is equivalent to both Exercise 
5.3.2 (i) and Exercise 5.3.2 (ii): 
(iii). There are formulas oi(S, ... S i - ,  ; x1 ... x i )  of 2 
u { S ,  ... S i - l } ,  
i = 1, ..., k, and a formula e(s, ... 
x ,  ... xk) of 2 
u {S, ... S,} such 
that (a), (b), and 
(VXI ..* x k ) [ ( ' k A ( 3 p ) ( P  
--* e ) A ( e  --* (vQ)$)I. 
5.3.13. Prove Beth's theorem directly from Theorem 5.3.6. 
5.3.14. Show that Theorem 5.3.6 is still true if conditions (i)-(iv) are 
modified in the following manner: delete the word 'infinite' throughout 
and replace IAl+ by IAl+ u w and 2'"' by 2'"' u w. 
5.3.15. Use Theorem 5.3.6 to prove that every special model of 9 of power 
a greater than 11LZ'l( has 2" automorphisms. It follows that every saturated 
model of power a > ll-Lpll has 2" automorphisms. 
5.3.16'. Prove, by techniques similar to those employed in Theorem 5.3.6, 
that every countable model for a countable language has a continuum 
number of automorphisms if it has more than a countable number of 
automorphisms. 
5.3.17*. Let % be a countable model for a countable 9, and let X c A. If 
I{ Y :  Y c A 
and (91, Y) z (a, X)}l > w, 
I(Y : Y c A and (a, Y) z (a, X)}l = 2". 
then 
5.3.18. Using Exercise 5.3.17, show by means of a simple argument that 
Theorem 5.3.6 holds when 'infinite' is replaced everywhere by 'countably 
infinite', assuming 9 is countable. 
[Hint: Code the subsets by elements of a model and then use the downward 
two-cardinal theorem 3.2.12.1 

342 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
p.4 
5.3.19*. Let cp(P, Q) be a sentence of 9 u {P, 
Q}. Show that the following 
two conditions are equivalent: 
(i). For every sentence T ( P )  of 9 u {P}, 
if t cp + 7, then t T .  
(ii). For every sentence 7(P) of 9 u {P}, 
if T(P) has a model, then 
7 ( P )  A q(P, Q) has a model. 
On the other hand, show by an example that the following definability 
result is not true: (i) is equivalent to 
(i’). Every model 91 for 9 u {P} has an expansion %* which is a model 
of cp(P, Q). 
5.3.20. Give a proof of Theorem 5.3.2 using countable recursively 
saturated models instead of special models. 
5.3.21. Prove Svenonius’ Theorem 5.3.3 using countable recursively 
saturated models instead of special models. 
5.3.22. Prove Kueker’s Finite Definability Theorem 5.3.4 using count- 
able recursively saturated models instead of special models. 
5.3.23. Prove the Chang-Makkai Theorem 5.3.6 but modified by replac- 
ing “infinite model” everywhere by “countably infinite model”, using 
countable recursively saturated models instead of special models. 
5.4. Applications to field theory 
Saturated or special models give us a very powerful method of proving 
that certain theories are complete. In this section we shall apply this method 
to some extensions of the theory of fields. The method depends upon the 
following simple consequence of the results of Section 5.1. 
PROPOSITION 
5.4.1. Let 9 be a countable language and let T be a consistent 
theory in 9, all of whose models are infinite. 
(i). Assume the continuum hypothesis. Then T is complete if and only if’ 
any two saturated models of T of power w1 are isomorphic. 
(ii). T is complete if and only if any two special models of T of poner a(,, 
are isomorphic. 
PROOF. (i). If T is complete then any two saturated models of T of the 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
343 
same power are elementarily equivalent, and hence isomorphic. lf T is not 
complete, then T has two different complete extensions, say TI and T z .  
Since all models of T are infinite, TI and T, have wl-saturated niodels 
gll, 9(, of power 2" = w , .  Then ?Il, \)Iz are both models of T. But they 
are not elementarily equivalent, and hence not isomorphic. 
The proof of (ii) is similar. i 
We shall use Proposition 5.4.1 (i) to show that theories are complete under 
the assumption of the continuum hypothesis. In each case there will be 
a very similar proof using Proposition 5.4.1 (ii) which shows that the 
theory is complete without assuming the continuum hypothesis. However, 
special models are more complicated to deal with, and these extra coniplica- 
tions would tend to obscure the main ideas of the proofs. So we shall be 
using the continuum hypothesis only to simplify the proof, and it will 
always be possible to eliminate it by using special models instead of saturated 
models. 
Saturated models are in fact generalizations of the 'q. sets' of Hausdorff. 
The '1, sets, which are very special kinds of densely ordered sets, still provide 
us with an instructive example of saturated models. Let (A, < ) be a densely 
ordered set without endpoints. If X, Y are subsets of A, then we write 
X <  Y i f f x c y f o r a l l x E X , y E Y ( w h e r e x c y m e a n s x ~ y a n d x  
Z y ) .  
If z E A and X c A, then X c z means X c {z}, and z < Xmeaiis { z >  -= X .  
Let a be an ordinal. We say that ( A ,  < ) is an '1, set iff (A, < ) is a densely 
ordered set without endpoints and, for all X, Y c A of power less than w,, 
if X c Y, then there exists z E A such that X < z c Y. Note, in particular, 
that in an '1. set, every subset of power less than o, has an upper bound 
and a lower bound, for we always have X c 0 and 0 < Y, where 0 is the 
empty set. 
PROPOSITION 
5.4.2. Let (A, < ) be a densely ordered set without endpoints 
and let a be an ordinal. Then ( A ,  < ) is o,-saturated if and only if it is an 
q, set. 
PROOF. Suppose (A, 6 )  = % is a,-saturated. Let X, Y be subsets of A 
of power less than w, such that X < Y, and form the expanded model 
(%, x, y)xsx,yEy 
= 8'. Let c,, cy be the corresponding constant symbols. 
Then the set of formulas 
(1) 
C(0) = {c, c D : x E x} u { D  < cy : y E Y} 

344 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
is consistent with the theory of 21’. Since 1x1 < w, and IYI < w,, Z(u) is 
satisfied in 8’ by some element z E A. Then X < z < Y. 
(2) If %, B are densely ordered sets without endpoints, q ( x ,  ... x,) is a 
formula of 9, and the expansions (a, a, ... a,), (8, 
b, ... b,) satisfy 
exactly the same atomic sentences, then 
‘u t cp[a, ... a,] iff B t cp[b, ... b,]. 
The converse depends on the following fact: 
The proof of (2) is a straightforward induction on the complexity of the 
formula cp. 
Assume that % is an q. set. Let A, be a subset of A of power lAol < w,, 
and let T(u) be a type in the expanded model %’ = (PI, u),~,,,,. We must 
show that r(u) is realized in 8’. If the formula c, = u belongs to r(u) 
for some a E A,, then f (u) is just the type determined by the formula c, = u, 
and a satisfies r(u) in a’. 
Suppose now that for all a E A,, the formula c, f u belongs to T(u). Let 
x = {a E A ,  : (c, < u )  E r(u)}, Y = {a E A ,  : (u < c,) E r(u)>. 
Then X u  Y = A,, X < Y, and 1x1, IYI < a,. Hence there exists a* E A 
such that X < a* < Y. Let c* be a new individual constant. Then T(c*) is 
consistent and therefore has a model 
(8, 
ba > b*)atzAO = (B‘, b*), 
where b* is the interpretation of c*. Hence we have 
b, < b* 
for 
U E  X, 
b* < b, 
for 
U E  Y. 
It follows that the models (W, 
a*) and (B’, b*) satisfy exactly the same 
atomic sentences, and i!3 is a densely ordered set without endpoints. There- 
fore, by (21, 
(%’, a*) = (B’, b*). 
Since (B‘, b*) is a model of T(c*), we conclude that (%’, a*) is a model of 
T(c*), whence a* satisfies T(u). 4 
As a first illustration of our method of proving completeness, we shall 
prove that the theory of real closed fields is complete. We wish to indicate 
where the methods of model theory are used in the proof. First, we shall 
state a purely algebraic lemma. While this lemma is a deep result, its proof 
uses standard algebraic methods which are quite outside the subject matter 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
345 
of this book. Accordingly, we shall omit the proof of the lemma and ask 
the reader either to take it for granted or to read about it elsewhere. 
We recall from Section 1.4 that the theory of real closed fields has 
as a set of axioms the field axioms plus axioms stating that every 
polynomial of odd degree has a root, 0 is not a sum of nontrivial 
squares, and for all x, either x or -x has a square root. It follows at 
once that every real closed field has characteristic zero, and hence is infinite. 
The best known real closed field is the field of real numbers. In the 
theory of real closed fields, let x < y be the abbreviation of 
(32)(22 E y - x). 
Then < is a dense ordering of any real closed field, and Q has no greatest or 
least element. Thus each real closed field F can be expanded in a unique way 
to an ordered real closed field (F, < ). It will be sometimes more convenient 
to work with ordered real closed fields. 
It is easily seen from the field axioms that the intersection of any family 
of subfields of a field is a field. If F is a field, F, is a subfield of F, and 
x E F, let us denote by F,(x) the least subfield F, of F such that Fo c F, 
and x E F, . By the Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem, 
IFo(x)l < IF01 u 0. 
This can also be shown using the fact that F,(x) is the set of all values of 
rational functions of x with coefficients in F,. 
An element x E F is said to be algebraic over F, iff x is a root of a nonzero 
polynomial with coefficients in F,. We shall denote by F, the set of all 
elements x E F which are algebraic over F,. Thus Fo c Fo. F, is called 
the relative algebraic closure of Fo in F. F, is said to be a real closure of F, 
iff Fl is a real closed field and Fo is a subfield of F, and every x E F, is 
algebraic over F,, i.e. F, c F,. In our discussion of fields, it will be easiest 
to use the same symbol F for a field and for its universe set; thus 
F = (F, +, *. 0, I). 
If there is an ordering < on F, then (F, < ) will denote the expansion of F 
to the language { +, ., 0, 1, Q }, while (F, < ) will be the corresponding 
reduct which is a model for the language { Q }. 
LEMMA 
5.4.3 
(i). Let F be a real closed field with ordering < , and let Fo be the smallest 

346 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
subfield of F. Then (F,, <) is isomorphic to the field of rational numbers 
with the usual order. 
(ii). Let F be an arbitraryfield and let Fo be a subfield of F. Then the 
relative algebraic closure F ,  is a subfield of F, and 
Moreover, if F is a real closed field, then F ,  is a real closure of Fo. 
(iii). Let F be a real closedfield and let Fo be a real closed subfield of F. 
Then for all x, y E F,, we have x < y in the sense of Fo iff x < y in the 
sense of F. Also, F, = F,. 
(iv). Let (F, < ) and (G, < ) be orderedreal closedjelds, let F,, Go be real 
closed subfelds, and let f : Fo z Go be an isomorphism between them. Suppose 
x E F\ 
F,, y E G \ Go, and for all a E F,, 
a < x iff f ( a )  < y. 
Then we can extend f to an isomorphism g : (F,(x), < ) S' (Go(y), <) such 
that g(x) = y. 
(v). (Uniqueness of the real closure.) Let F,, Go be,fields, let F, , G, be 
real closures of Fo and Go, and form the ordered real closedfields (F, , < ), 
(GI, Q ). I f f  : (F,, < ) S' (Go, < ), then f can be extended to an isomorphism 
9 :  (F1, Q )  
S' (GI, <). 
The first three parts of the above lemma are elementary facts which are 
easy to prove, while the last two parts are substantial results in field theory. 
Part (v) states that every ordered field has at most one real closure. In 
general, it is not true that every field has at most one real closure. That is, 
in (v) we cannot weaken the hypothesis f :  (F,, Q ) S' (Go, < ) to f: 
F, E Go. 
THEOREM 
5.4.4 (Tarski's Theorem). The theory of real closed fields is 
complete. 
PROOF. We shall assume the continuum hypothesis and use Proposition 
5.4.1 (i). As we have explained above, the continuum hypothesis can be 
avoided by using Proposition 5.4.1 (ii) and with a similar but more com- 
plicated proof. 
Let F, G be any two saturated real closed fields of power 0,. 
By 
Proposition 5.4. I it suffices to prove that F and G are isomorphic. Since the 
order relation Q is definable, the ordered real closed fields (F, Q )  and 
(G, < ) are still saturated. Then all their reducts are saturated. In particular, 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
347 
the ordered sets (F, < ) and (G, < ) are q I  sets. We may enumerate the 
sets F, G with order type ol: 
F = {a, : a < ul}, 
C = (6, : a < wl}. 
We shall form two ascending chains F,, G,, and an ascending chain of 
mappingsf,, such that for all a < ol, 
(1) F, and G, are countable real dosed subfields of F and G; 
(2) f, : F a  g G,; 
(3) {a, : y -= a} c Fa and 
Consider the minimal subfields FA, GG. By Lemma 5.4.3 (i), (FG, < )  and 
(GG, Q ) are isomorphic. Let Fo = FA, Go = (7;. Then by Lemma 5.4.3 (v), 
there exists an isomorphism fo : F, z Go. If a is a limit ordinal, we let 
(6, : y < a} c G,. 
F u = U F d ,  
G a = U G d ,  
f a = U f * *  
d<U 
d < a  
d<U 
Assuming (1)-(3) 
for all p < a, it easily follows that (1)-(3) 
hold for a. 
In particular, a union of a chain of real closed fields is a real closed field, 
because the axioms are IIp. 
Now assume that (I )-(3) 
hold for a. We use a back and forth argument. 
Since (G, 6 ) is an q 1  set and Fa is countable, there exists y E G such that 
for all c E Fa, 
c < a, iff f,(c) Q y, 
c = a, iff f , ( c )  = y. 
Then by Lemma 5.4.3 (iv),f, can be extended to an isomorphism 
f : (Fu(aa), Q ) g ( G ~ ( Y ) ,  
Q )* 
By Lemma 5.4.3 (.),fin 
turn can be extended to an isomorphism 
- -  
: Fa(au) 
Gu(y)* 
- - 
Moreover, F,(a,) and G,(y) are still countable. Now using the fact that 
(F, Q ) is an q l  set, we can find an x E F such that for all d E G C ) ,  
d < 6. 
iff 
g - ' ( d )  < x, 
d = 6, iff 
g - ' ( d )  = x .  
Then g can be extended to 
: ( F E m ( x ) *  Q (m)@,), 
Q ). 
Let 
- 
Fa+ I = F,(a,)(x), 
Ga+ 1 = Ga(y)(ba)* 

348 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
Then h can be extended to a mapping 
Nowf, c f c g c h c fa+ I ,  and a, E F,, ,, b, E G,+ ,, so (1)-(3) hold for 
a+ 1. 
Finally, let f,, = ua<o,S.. 
Then from (1)-(3) we see that f,, : F 2 G. -1 
Note that in the above proof we did not use the full assumption that F 
and G are a,-saturated models, but only that (F, 6 )  and (G, <) are qI 
sets. Moreover, the argument remains valid for any successor cardinal a,+ , 
instead of 0 , .  Thus the proof of Theorem 5.4.4 gives the following extra 
information, for each ordinal a: 
Any two real closed fields whose order structures are q,+ sets of power 
a,+ are isomorphic (Erdos, Gillman and Henrickson, 1955). 
A similar argument can also be used to prove: 
Every real closed field whose order structure is w,+ ,-saturated (Lee, 
an qa+ , set), is w,+ ,-saturated. 
Tarski’s original proof of Theorem 5.4.4 also showed that the theory 
of real closed ordered fields admits elimination of quantifiers. This can 
also be proved using Lemma 5.4.3 and the results of Section 3.5. See 
exercise 5.4.4. 
Macintyre, McKenna, and van den Dries (1983) proved the following 
converse result: The theory of real closed ordered fields is the only 
complete extension of the theory of ordered fields which admits elimina- 
tion of quantifiers. 
A similar proof shows that the theory of algebraically closed fields of 
characteristic p is complete. However, this already follows from wl- 
categoricity. A more interesting case is the theory of all models (F, U), 
where F is an algebraically closed field and U is a subfield. Given such a 
model (F, U ) ,  an element x of F is said to be of degree n over U iff n is the 
least positive integer such that x is a root of a polynomial of degree n with 
coefficients in U. Thus x has degree 1 over U iff X E  U, and x has degree 
n over U for some n -= w iff x is algebraic over U. We say that x is transcen- 
dental over U, or has infinite degree over U, iff for all n, x does not have 
degree n over U. A subset X of F is said to be transcendental (or algebraically 
independent) over U iff for any xl, ..., x, E X, the only polynomial with n 
variables and coefficients in U having x , ,  ..., x,, as a root is the zero poly- 
nomial. Thus {XI is transcendental over U iff x is. 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
349 
LEMMA 
5.4.5. 
(i). Let F, G be algebraically closed fields, let U, V be subfields, and let 
f: U r V. Suppose X c F is a maximal transcendental set over U, Y c G 
is a maximal transcendental set over V, and I X I = I Y I. Then f can be extended 
to an isomorphism g : F 2 G. 
(ii). If F is an algebraically closed field and U is a subjeld of F, then any 
two maximal transcendental sets over U have the same cardinality. 
(iii). Let F be an algebraically closed jield and let U be a subjield of F. 
Then exactly one of the following statements holds: 
(a) F = U .  
(b) U is a real closedfieid and F is the algebraic closure of U. 
(c) For each n < w, there is an x in F of degree > n (perhaps injinite) 
ouer U .  
THEOREM 
5.4.6. Suppose F, G are algebraically closed fields, U and V are 
subfields, and U = V. Assume that neither (F, U )  nor (C, V )  is of the type 
(a) or (b) in Lemma 5.4.5. Then 
(F, 17) 
-= (G, V ) .  
PROOF. 
We may assume that the models (F, U )  and (G, V) are saturated 
of power wI , and prove that they are isomorphic. The union of a chain of 
transcendental sets over U is obviously transcendental over U, whence by 
Zorn's lemma there exists a maximal transcendental set X over U. There is 
a set Z(u) of formulas which is satisfied by x if and only if x is transcendental 
over U. Just take C(v) = {i a,(u) : n < a}, where a,(u) says that u is of 
degree n over U .  By Lemma 5.4.5 (iii), every finite subset of C(u) is satis- 
fiable in (F, U), so C(u) is satisfiable. This shows that X is nonempty. 
Now form a set C(u, ... v,) of formulas saying that u , ,  ..., on are transcen- 
dental over U. If x E X, then for each m < w, the n-tuple 
x, xm, xm', ..., xmn 
cannot be a root of any nonzero polynomial of degree less than m with 
coefficients in U. For if it were, then we would obtain a nonzero polynomial 
with coefficients in U and x as a root. It follows that C(u, ... 27,) 
is finitely 
satisfiable in (F, U ) ,  so there exist transcendental sets of power n over U. 
By Lemma 5.4.5 (ii), the maximal set X must be infinite. We may form 
the expanded model (F, U, x),..~, and in this model there is a set of formulas 
T(u) saying that X u  { v }  is transcendental over U. Since X is infinite, 

350 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
p . 4  
every finite subset of r(v) is satisfied in (F, U, 
x ) , , ~  by an element of X 
not mentioned in the finite subset of r(v). If X is countable, then by 
saturatedness, f ( v )  is satisfiable in (F, U, 
x ) , , ~ .  But X is a maximal 
transcendental set over U, so T(v) is not satisfiable. Therefore X is un- 
countable, and 1x1 = q. 
Exactly the same argument shows that there is a maximal transcendental 
set Y over V of power w , .  Since (F, U )  and (G, V )  are w,-saturated, the 
subfields U and V are w,-saturated. Hence either both are finite or both 
have power 0 , .  In either case, since U -= V, there is an isomorphism 
f :  U z V. By Lemma 5.4.5 (i), f may be extended to an isomorphism 
g : F z G. Since f c 9, g maps U onto V; hence g : (F, V )  z (G, V ) .  -I 
As a third example, we shall show that if two fields of characteristic 
zero are elementarily equivalent, then their fields of formal power series 
are elementarily equivalent. We shall actually prove a much more general 
result about valued fields, but first we describe the classical case. 
Consider a field H, and let H(t) be a pure transcendental extension of H. 
We shall define a valuation on H(t) in the following way. We set val (0) = 0. 
For each element a # 0 in H, define val (a) = 1. For each nonzero 
polynomial 
b = ao+a,t+ ... +ant" 
with coefficients in H, let Val (b) = t"', where a, is the first nonzero coeffi- 
cient, i.e. 
In particular, Val (t") = t". Finally, if b and c are two polynomials with 
coefficients in H, 
and with c # 0, define 
a0 = o  ,..., a"-l =o, 
a,#O. 
Let Z be the set of integers and let 
V = {t" : m E Z}. 
Then (V, ., 1) is a subgroup of (H(t) \ (01, 
a, 1) and Val maps H(t) onto 
V u (0). We introduce a simple ordering < on the set V u (0) by making 
0 the greatest element and putting 
t" < I" if and only if m < n. 
Thus the structure (V, -, 1, < ) is isomorphic to (h, +, 0, < ). 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
35 1 
The structure 
(H(t), + , 
- 9  0, 1, V, G 9 Val) 
is an example of a valued field. We now list the axioms for the theory of 
valued fields. All of these axioms are easily seen to hold in H(t). 
5.4.1. A valuedfield (with cross section) is a model 
where 
F = < F ,  +,-,O,l,V, <,Val), 
(a) (F, +, ., 0, 1) is a field; 
(b) (V, ., 1) is a group with unit 1 (the value group); 
(c) < is a simple ordering of the set V u  (0) with greatest element 0; 
(d) for all x, y, z E V, x < y implies x * z < y * z ;  
(e) Val is a function from F onto V u (0); 
(f) for all x, y E F, 
val (x * y )  = Val (x) * val (y), 
val (x+y) 2 min {Val (x), val (y)}, 
Val (x) = 0 iff x = 0; 
(g) for all x E V, Val (x) = x (‘cross section’ axiom). 
We shall now extend the valued field H ( t )  to a valued field H((t)) which 
is the completion of H(t). It is constructed by a process analogous to the 
construction of the real numbers from the rational numbers. One of the 
standard definitions of a real number is as an equivalence class of Cauchy 
sequences of rationals. A Cauchy sequence of rationals is a sequence 
(x, : n < o) such that limm,n+m~xm-xn~ 
= 0; two sequences (x,), (y,) 
are equivalent iff limn+,, Ix.-y,l 
= 0. The sums and products are defined 
pointwise, e.g., (x,) + (y,) = (x,+ y,). 
In a similar way, a Cuuchy sequence in the valued field H(t) is a sequence 
(x, : n < o) of elements of H(t) such that for all y E V, there exists an 
N < o such that 
val (xm-xn) > y for all m, n 2 N. 
Two Cauchy sequences (x,), (y,) are equivalent iff, for all z E V, there 
exists an N < o such that 
Val (x,-y,) > z for all n 2 N. 
Define H((t)) as the set of all equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences in 

352 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
H(t). It turns out that when we define sums and products of Cauchy 
sequences pointwise, H((t)) is a field. When we identify each element 
x E H(t) with the equivalence class of the constant sequence ( x ,  x, ...), 
then H(t) becomes a subfield of H((t)). Moreover, if (x,,) is any Cauchy 
sequence not equivalent to the zero sequence, then the function Val (xn) 
of n is eventually constant, i.e., there exists N < o and y E V such that 
Val (x,,) = y 
for all n 2 N. 
Therefore the valuation function on H ( t )  may be extended to a function 
val on H((t)) into V u (0) by defining Val ((x.)) to be the eventual value 
of val (x,,). It is easy to check that the structure 
(H((t)), +, -3 0, 1, K 
9 Val) 
is a valued field. H((t)) is called the field of formal power series over H, 
and it is also called the completion of H(t). 
The valued field H((t)) also has another, much deeper property, known 
as Hensel's lemma. To state Hensel's lemma we need more notation. 
Consider a valued field F. By the valuation ring, we mean the subring R(F) 
of the field (F, +, a, 0, I), whose elements are all x E F with val ( x )  2 1. 
It follows from axiom (f) that R(F) is a ring with zero 0 and unit 1. Further- 
more, the set 
M(F) = { x  E F :  val ( x )  > I} 
is a maximal ideal in R(F), because if an ideal Z in R(F) contains an element 
x with Val ( x )  = 1, then x-l E R(F), whence 1 = x * x-' E I. Therefore 
the quotient ring 
F* = R(F)/M(F) 
is a field. F* is called the residue class .field of F. For each x E R(F), let 
x* = x/M(F) 
be the residue class of x in F*. Thus * is a homomorphism of R(F) onto 
F*. It follows that if F has prime characteristicp, then so does F*. Moreover, 
if F* has characteristic 0, so does F. 
H(t)*. In fact, we have 
the following lemma: 
In the special case F = H((t)), we have H((t))* 
LEMMA 
5.4.8. H is a subfield of R(H((t))) and the restriction of * to H maps 
H isomorphically onto H((t))*. Thus we may identifv H with the residue 
classfield of H((t)). 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
353 
We denote by R(F)[t] and F*[t] the rings of all polynomials in the 
variable t with coefficients in R(F) and F*, respectively. For each 
p(t) E R(F)[t], let p*(t) E F*[t] be formed by replacing each coefficient 
a of p(t) by a*. Then Hensel’s lemma is the following: 
5.4.9 (Hensel’s Lemma). If p(t) E R(F)[t], p(r) has leading coeficient 
1, and in F*[t] we havep*(t) = q’(t)r’(t), where q‘(t) and r’(t) are relatively 
prime, then there is a factorization p(t) = q(t)r(t) in R(F)[t] such that 
q*(r) = q’(t), r*(t) = r’(t). 
By a HenselJield we mean a valued field in which Hensel’s lemma holds. 
A classical result is: 
LEMMA 
5.4.10. For any field H, the valued field H((t)) of formal power 
series is a Henseljield. 
To return to model theory, we have: 
LEMMA 
5.4.1 1 .  The class of all HenselJields is an elementary class. 
We leave the details of the proof of Lemma 5.4.11 as an exercise. The only 
difficulty is to express Hensel’s lemma in 9. 
For each degree n, Hensel’s 
lemma for p(t) of degree n can be expressed by a single sentence of 9. 
val ( F )  = ( V ,  ., 1, < ). 
Given a valued field F, the value group is denoted by 
We shall prove the following theorem: 
THEOREM 
5.4.12. Suppose F and G are Hensel fields such that F* has 
characteristic zero, F* E G*, and val ( F )  = val (G). Then F = G. 
A helpful reference on valued fields is the monograph of Ribenboim 
(1967), hereafter referred to as [R]. We shall give the proof of the above 
theorem modulo some results in [R] of a purely algebraic nature. All the 
uses of model-theoretic methods in the proof will be given here. A few more 
definitions are needed. 
Consider a valued field F. If (G, +, *, 0, 1) is a subfield of (F, + , ., 0, l), 
we let 
Val, (G) = {Val (x) : x E G and x # 01, 

354 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
and 
GOF = {x* : x E G and val (x) 2 l}. 
G is said to be a valued subfield of F iff G is a subfield of F and Val, (G) c G. 
It is easy to check that every valued subfield of F is a valued field. If G 
is a valued subfield of F, then Val, (G) = Val (G), and G'F becomes G* 
when we identify x/M(F) with x/M(G). For any X c F, there is a least- 
valued subfield of F which includes X. Let us recall that if G is a subfield of 
F, then the relative algebraic closure G of G in F is the set of all x E Falgebraic 
over G. We know from Lemma 5.4.3 (ii) that G is a subfield of F. We say 
that G is relatively algebraically closed in F iff G = G. 
If G is a valued subfield of F, the value group val (G) is said to be closed 
under roots iff for any J! E val (F) and any positive integer n, if y" E val (G), 
then )I E val (G). That is, any nth root of an element of val (G) in val (F) 
belongs to val (G). Clearly, if G is a relatively algebraically closed valued 
subfield of F, then val (G) is closed under roots. 
We shall now introduce the analogue of the real closure of a field. Let F 
be a valued field and G a valued subfield of F. We say that F is a henselization 
of G i f f  F is an algebraic extension of G, F is a Hensel field, and for any 
other algebraic extension H of G which is a Hensel field, there is an 
isomorphic embedding of F into H which is the identity on G. 
The following lemma contains the purely algebraic facts needed to prove 
Theorem 5.4.12. 
LEMMA 
5.4.13. 
(i). Let F be a valuedfield. If x, y E F and Val ( x )  -= val (y), then 
val ( x f y )  = Val (x), 
val (-x) = val (x). 
Moreover, i f x  E val ( F )  and 0 < n < o, 
then there is at most one y E val (F) 
such that y" = x. 
(ii). Let F be a Henselfield whose residue class field F* has characteristic 
zero. Then there is a valued subfield Fo c F such that Fo c R(F) and * 
maps F,, isomorphically onto F*. 
(iii). Let F, and G, be valued fields with Hensel subjields Fo and Go, 
respectively, and suppose f : Fo z Go and F, , G, are algebraic extensions of 
Fo, Go, respectively. I f f  can be extended to afield isomorphism g : Fl s G1, 
then f can be extended to a valuedfield isomorphism g : F, E GI. 
Moreover, 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
355 
if a is a field automorphism of F, which is the identity on F,, and x E F, , 
then Val ( x )  = val (ax). 
(iv). Every valuedfield has a henselization. If Fo and Go are valuedfields, 
F, and G, are henselizations of them, and f : F, 2 Go, 
then f can be extended 
to an isomorphism g : F, 2 GI (i.e., the henselization is unique). 
(v). If F, is a henselization of a valued subfierd F,, then F,* = F: and 
Val (F,) = Val (F,). 
(vi). If F is a valuedfield, and Fo is a valued subfield, then val (Fo) 
is the 
closure of Val (F,) under roots in Val (F). If F is a Henselfield, Fo a valued 
subfield, F* = F t ,  F* has characteristic zero, and val (F,) is closed under 
roots in Val (F), then Fo is a henselization of F, . 
(vii). Suppose F, and G, are Hensel fields, F and G are Hensel subfields of 
F, and G, , respectively, x E F, and y E G, are transcendental over F and G, 
f is an isomorphism f : F 
G, 
Val (F(x)) = val (F), 
F(x)* = F*, 
andfor all a €  F, f(val (x-a)) = val (y-f(a)). 
Then 
val (G(y)) = val (G), 
and f cun be extended to an isomorphism 
G(y)* = G*, 
g : F(x) 2 G(y). 
(viii). Suppose F, is a Hemelfield, F is a Hensel subfield, x E F, is tran- 
scendentalover F, andF(x)* = F*. If val ( F )  has more than one element, then 
lval (F(x))l = lval (F)I. 
PROOF. 
(i). This is elementary. 
(ii). We have 
val (1) = val (1 . 1) = val (1). val (I), 
and Val (1) # 0; hence Val (1) = 1. If n is any positive integer, then 
val (n) = val (1+ ... + 1) 2 val(1) = 1, 
so n E R(F). Since F* has characteristic 0, n* = n # 0; hence val (n) = 1. 
For any positive rational number m/n, val (m/n) = Val (m)/val (n) = 1. 
By (i), the value of any negative rational number is 1. Thus the field Q of 
rational numbers is a subfield of the ring R(F). The union of a chain of 
fields is a field, so by Zorn’s lemma there is a maximal subfield Fo c R(F). 

356 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
For any nonzero element x E F,, Val ( x )  = Val (l/x) = 1. The mapping * 
embeds F, isomorphically onto a subfield Go of F*. We shall show that 
Go = F*. 
First suppose a E F* \ Go is algebraic over Go. 
Then there is an irreducible 
polynomial p l ( t )  E G[t] which has leading coefficient 1 and pl(u) = 0. 
Taking inverse images of the coefficients under * r F,, we obtain a poly- 
nomial p(t) E F,[t] with leading coefficient 1 such that p*(t) = pl(t). 
Since Go has characteristic 0, p*(t) has no multiple roots, and therefore 
in F* we may write 
P*(t) = 41(t)(t-a), 
and q l ( t )  and t-a are relatively prime. Now by Hensel’s lemma, there 
exist polynomials q(t), r(t) E R(F)[t] such that 
p(t)= q(t)r(t), 
q*(t) = ql(t), 
r*(t) = t-u. 
Since the leading coefficients of q(t), r(t) have product 1 and values 2 1, 
they have value 1. Therefore q(t) has the same degree as q*(t), and r ( t )  
has degree 1. Say r ( t )  = b,+b, t. Then the element y = -b,/b, is a root 
of r(t) and therefore a root of p(t). Since p*(t) is irreducible over Go, p(r) 
is irreducible over F,, whence y 4 F,. But Val (b,) = 1 and val (b,) 2 1, 
so Val (y) 2 1. We have y* = - b,*/b: = a. For any polynomial s(t) E Fo [t] 
withdeg(s(t)) < deg(p(t)), wehaves(y)* = s*(u) # 0, whenceVal(+)) = 1. 
But Fo(y) is the set of all such s(y). Therefore F,(y) c R(F), contradicting 
the maximality of Fo. 
Now suppose a E F* \ Go is transcendental over Go. Choose any 
y E R(F) such that y* = a. Then for any nonzero polynomial p(t) E F,[t], 
P(Y)* = P * W  # 0, 
so Val ( p ( y ) )  = 1 .  Hence if p(t), q(t) E F,[t] are two nonzero polynomials, 
then val (p(y)/q(y)) = 1. It follows that F,(y) c R(F), again contradicting 
the maximality of Fo. Therefore Go = F* and (ii) is proved. 
(iii). This is proved in [R] Chapter F, Theorem 4. The equivalence of 
the definition of henselization given here with the one in [R] is proved in 
Chapter F, Corollary 2 of Theorem 2, and Theorem 4. 
(iv). This is proved in [R] Chapter F, Theorem 2. 
(v). This is proved in [R] Chapter F, Corollary I of Theorem 3. 
(vi). Let i7 be the closure of val (F,) under roots. If x E F o ,  then by 
[R] Chapter F, Theorem 1, val (x) E V. Thus val (F,) c V c F,. But 
val (F,) is closed under roots, so val (F,) = V. Now suppose F is a Hensel 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
357 
field, val (F,) = V, and F* = F: has characteristic zero. Let p ( t )  E R(F,)[t] 
have leading coefficient 1. Suppose that in F * [ t ]  we have p * ( f )  = q'(f)r'(t), 
where q'(t) and r'(t) are relatively prime. Since F is a Hensel field, there 
exist q(r), r(t) E R(F)[t] such that p ( t )  = q(t)r(t), q*(t) = q'(t), and 
r*(t) = r'(t). We may assume that q(r) and r(t) have leading coefficients 1. 
Because F ,  is relatively algebraically closed in F, we already have 
q(t), r(t) E F,[t]. This shows that F ,  is a Hensel field. By the definition of 
henselization and by (iv), there is a henselization Fl of Fo such that 
Fo c Fl c F,. Then F ,  is an algebraic extension of F, such that 
- 
Val (F,) = Val (F,), 
F,* = F:. 
It is shown in [ R ]  Chapter G, Theorem 2, that if F, is a Hensel field and 
F: has characteristic zero, then F, has no proper algebraic valued extension 
with the same value group and residue class field. It follows that F ,  = Fl . 
(vii). Let F; be an algebraic closure of F,, and choose G; similarly. It 
is proved in [R] Chapter B, Theorem 5, that F; can be made into a valued 
field with the valued subfield F l ,  and similarly for G; . Let F', G' be the 
algebraic closures of F, G in F; , G; . By [ R ]  Chapter F, Theorem 1, Val (F') 
is the closure of Val ( F )  under roots in val (Fi), and similarly for G'. 
Therefore F', G' are valued subfields of F;, G;. Then by (iii), f can be 
extended to a valued field isomorphism 
f' : F' r G'. 
We shall show that for every b E F(x) and a E F' \ F, 
(1) 
there exists U E  F such that Val (b-a) # Val (a-a). 
Suppose (1) fails for some b and a. Let p(t) E F[t] be an irreducible poly- 
nomial with leading coefficient 1 such that p(a) = 0. Let a = a l ,  ..., a,, 
be all the roots of p(t). Thus 
p ( t )  = (t-a,) ... (?-an) = c,+c,t+ 
... +c,,-,t"-'+t". 
Let 
e = val (b-cn-ln-l). 
Since (1) fails, and by (iii), we have 
Now let 
e = val (a,-c,,-ln-l), 
i = 1, ..., n. 
a; 
(ai-cn-,n-'), 
i = I, ..., n. 

358 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
p . 4  
Thus val (a;) = 1 for each i. Consider the polynomial 
pl(t) = (t-a;) ... (t-a:) = do+dl r +  ... +d,,-, t"-'+t". 
Each coefficient di is a symmetric function of al , ..., a,, and hence belongs 
to F, whence p ( t ) E F [ t ] .  Moreover, pl(r) is irreducible over F, for 
F(a) = F(a'), whence a and a' have the same degree n over F. We have 
(2) 
val(d,) = vd(a; ... a:) = val(a;) = ... = val(a3 = 1, 
and 
(3) 
and for each i < n, Val (d,) 2 1. Let 
c~,,.-~ = a;+ ... +a: = e-'(a,+ ... +a,,--c,,-l) = 0, 
6' = e-l(b-c,,-ln-l). 
Then Val (6') = 1. Hence b' E R(F(x)), and because F(x)* = F*, there 
exists U E  F such that Val (b'-a) > 1. Then since (1) fails, Val (a'--) > 1. 
By (iii), 
whence 
Therefore 
and hence p*(t) has the linear factor (1-a*). By Hensel's lemma, in F, 
p*(f) cannot be the product of two relatively prime factors, because p ( t )  
is irreducible over F. Therefore we must have 
(4) 
p*(t) = (t-a*)". 
It follows from (2), (3), and (4) that 
However, 
val(a;-a) = val(a'-a), 
i = 1, ..., n, 
Val (p(a)) = Val (a'--)" > 1. 
p*(u*) = 0. 
(a*)" = d,* # 0. 
n - 1  
* 
n(u ) 
= dn-l = 0, 
but this is impossible because F* has characteristic zero. We conclude that 
(1) does hold for all b E F(x) and a E F' \ F. 
a o + a l x +  ... +a,x" 
Let us now define the function 9 on F(x) into G(y) by 
f a o + f a l y +  ... +fa,ym 
' 
( b o + b , x +  ... +b,,xn) = f b o + f b l y +  ... +fb,,y" ' 
Then g is an extension off and g is a field isomorphism of F(x) onto G(y). 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
It suffices to show that for all b E F(x), 
Val (g(b)) = f(Vd (6)). 
359 
Since f is an isomorphism and the value function preserves products, 
we need only show that for every iri 
ucible polynomial p ( t )  E F[t] with 
leading coefficient 1, 
(5) 
Val (g(P(4)’ - f (Val (P(X1)). 
By hypothesis, ( 5 )  holds if p ( t )  has degree < 1. Suppose p has degree 
> 1 and let a be a root of p ( t )  in F‘. Then a E F‘ \ F, so (1) holds for x 
and a. Let a E F be as in (1). We have 
f(va1 ( x - a ) )  = val ( ~ - f ( a ) ) ,  
f’(va1 (a-a)) = Val (f’(a)-.f(a)). 
Val ( x - a )  < Val (a-a), 
Val ( x -  a) = Val (x-a), 
In the case that 
we see that 
Val ( Y - f ’ W )  = Val ( Y - f ( 4 ) ,  
whence 
f(va1 (~(x))) =f(val (x-a)”) =f(val (x-a)”) 
= val (y-f(a))” = val (y-f’(a))” = val (g(p(x))), 
so ( 5 )  holds. In the other case 
we have 
val (x-a) < val (x-a), 
val ( x -  a) = Val (a- a), 
Val (Y-f’(a)) = Val (f(a)--f’(a)), 
and a similar computation shows that ( 5 )  again holds. 
(viii). As in (vii), we may let F; be an algebraic closure of F, and make 
F; into a valued field extension of F,. Let F’ be the algebraic closure of 
F in F;. Again, val (F’) is the closure under roots of Val (F) in val (F;). 
Since Val (F) has more than one element, it follows from the axioms that 
Val (F) is infinite. Therefore, in view of (i), we have 
lval (F’)I = lval ( F ) ( .  

360 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
We shall show that 
(6) 
from which it will follow that 
lval (F’)I = lval (F’(x))l, 
lval (F)I Q lval (F(x))l Q lval (F’(x))l = lvai (F)l. 
Each element of F’(x) is a quotient of products of elements of the form 
x -  a, a E F‘. We observe that if a, /3 E F’ and val (x- a )  < Val (x-/I), 
then by (i), 
Val ( x - a )  = val ( ( x - a ) - ( x - p ) )  
= val @-a), 
whence Val (x- a) E val (F’). Therefore the set 
{Val (x- a )  : a E F‘} \ Val (F’) 
contains at most one element. It follows that 
lval (F’(x))l Q a+ lval (F‘)I; 
thus (6) holds. -I 
PROOF 
OF THEOREM 
5.4.12. The proof parallels the completeness proof for 
the theory of real closed fields, using Proposition 5.4.1 (i). Let l? and 6 be 
saturated models of power a, such that i’ = F and e = G. By Lemma 
5.4.11, i; and G are Hensel fields. It is easy to check that E* 3 F* 3 G* =e * 
and val (l?) = val (F) = val (G) = val (e) (see Exercise 5.4.16). Thus, 
given the continuum hypothesis, we may assume that F and G are saturated 
models of power o, , and we shall prove that F S G. We note first that the 
residue class fields F* and G* and the value groups val (F) and val (G) 
are a,-saturated models (Exercise 5.4.16). Except in the trivial case where 
val (F) = {l}, and F*, G*, val (F) and val (G) have power w , .  
By Lemma 5.4.13 (ii) we may identify F* and G* with subfields of F 
and G in such a way that the * mapping is the identity on F* and G*. 
Since F* = G*, there is an isomorphismf, : F* s G*. In the trivial case 
where val (F) = {I}, we have val (G) = {I}, and F = F*, G = G*, so 
f , : F z G .  
Suppose now that val (F) is not trivial. If F,, G ,  are valued subfields of 
F, G, we shall writef, : F, H G ,  ifffi : Fl E G ,  and 
(Val (0 
x)xGvd(F,) = (Val (G)Lf, x)xEval(F,, 
’ 
We shall prove the following: 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
361 
(i). F* and G* are relatively algebraically closed valued subfields of 
F and G, respectively. 
(ii). Let F, and G ,  be relatively algebraically closed valued subfields of 
F and G, respectively, such that F* c F, and G* c G,, and val (F,) is 
countable. Suppose that fo c f, and 1; : F, 
c-) G,. Then for every x E F, 
there exist relatively algebraically closed valued subfields F2 and G2 and 
a mapping f2 : F2 c-) G2 such that Val (F2) is countable and 
X E F Z ,  
F1 c F2, 
Gi c G2, 
fi ~ f i .  
(iii). Property (ii) above holds with the roles of F and G interchanged. 
By the usual back and forth argument, (i)-(iii) imply that F z G. We 
note that f o  : F* ++ G* because Val (F*) = (1) = val (G*), so (i) allows 
us to start the induction. 
Proof of (i). Let p ( t )  E F*[t]. Then since F* c R(F), p ( t )  E R(F)[t]. If 
x E F and Val (x) < 1, then all the nonzero terms a,x" ofp(x) have different 
values, val (x)" c 1. Hence val (p(x)) c 1, and x is not a root of p(x). 
Suppose x E F is a root ofp(t). Then val (x) > 1, whence x* is defined and 
p(x*) = 0. Thusp(t) already has the root x* in F*, whence F* = F*. The 
same proof shows that G* = G*. 
- 
Proof of (ii). We shall first prove a special case: 
(iia). If Val (F,(x)) = Val (F,), 
then (ii) holds. 
We wish to use Lemma 5.4.13 (vii). We have 
F,(x)* = F* = F:. 
If x E F, , then (ii) is trivial, so let x #F, . Then F,(x) is a simple transcenden- 
tal extension of F, . By Lemma 5.4.13 (vi), 
= Fl is a Hensel field, and 
similarly GI is a Hensel field. We must find y E G such that for all a E F,, 
(1) 
f , W  @ - a ) )  = Val bJ-f,(a)). 
We claim that: 
(2) For every finite A c F, there exists y E G such that for all a E A, 
(1) holds. 
Let us prove (2). Let A c F1 be finite, and let ~
E
A
 
be such that 
c = Val (x-b) is a maximum. Since Val (F,) = Val (Fl(x)), 
c E val (F,). 
For each positive n < w, Val (n) = 1 because F* has characteristic zero, 
whence Val (nc) = c. It follows that for all n and all a E A, 
val (b-nc-a) z min (Val (b-x), val (nc), val (x-a)) = val (x-a). 

362 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
Moreover, for each a E A, there is at most one n such that 
val(6-nc-a) 
> Val (x-a). 
For if m < n, a E A, and 
min (vd (b-mc-a), 
val (b-nc-a)) 
> val (x-a), 
val (x-a) < val ((n-m)c) = c, 
then 
whence, by Lemma 5.4.13 (i), 
val (b - nc - a) = Val ( x  - a). 
But A is finite, so there is a positive n < w, where 
val (b-nc-a) 
= val (x-a) for all a E A. 
Let y =f(b-nc). Then for all a E A, 
f(va1 (x-a)) =f(val (b-nc-a)) 
= val (y-f(a)), 
and our claim (2) is proved. 
that: 
(3) 
For all b E F,, there exists a E A, with val (x-a) = Val (x-b). 
Using (2) and the fact that G is o,-saturated, we can choose an element 
y E G such that (1) holds for all a E A,. Let b E F, . Using the equation 
F,(x)* = F:, we see that there exists 6' E F, such that, with c = Val (x-b), 
val ((x-b)c-'-b') > 1, 
val (x-(b+cb')) > val (x-b). 
Because val (F,(x)) is countable, there is a countable set A, c Fl such 
whence 
Hence there exists a E A, such that 
val (x-b) < val (x-a). 
val (x-b) = val (a-b) -= val (x-a), 
Val (fa -fb) = f(va1 (a - b)) < f(va1 (x - a)) = val (y -fa). 
Therefore 
and applyingf, 
It follows that 
val (y -fb) = Val ( y -fa +fa -fb) = Val (fa -fb) 
= f(va1 (a - 6)) = f(va1 (x- b)). 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
363 
So (1) holds for b. 
We have verified all the hypothesis of Lemma 5.4.13 (vii). Hence 
Val ( G , ( Y ) )  = Val (GI), 
and f can be extended to an isomorphism 
91 : m.4 
G d Y ) .  
Since F, = F ,  and GI = G I ,  the value groups 
(4) 
val ( F , ( x ) )  = val ( F , ) ,  
are closed under roots in val ( F )  and val (G). Hence, by Lemma 5.4.13 (vi), 
F,(x) and G,(y) are henselizations of F , ( x )  and C,(y), respectively. Whence 
by Lemma 5.4.13 (iv), g ,  can be extended to an isomorphism 
Val (G,(y)) = val (GI) 
- -  
9 2  : F , @ )  2 G,(v). 
By Lemma 5.4. I3 (v) and (4) 
It follows that condition (ii) is satisfied by 
- - 
F 2  = F I ( ~ ) ,  G2 = GI(u), 
f 2  = 9 2 .  
Thus we have proved the special case (iia). 
We now shall prove (ii) in another special case: 
(iib). If x E Val ( F ) ,  then (ii) holds. 
Again, we may assume x #  F, . Sincef, : F, CI G,, and val ( F , )  is countable, 
we may choose y E Val (G) with 
( 5 )  
(Val (F), x, u)aEval(F1) 
(val (GI, ~ , f i  
u)aeval(FI) * 
k t  V be the subgroup of val ( F )  generated by Val ( F , )  u {x} and W the 
subgroup of Val (G) generated by Val (C,) u { y } .  Then V and W are 
countable. Consider any polynomial 
p ( t )  = e,+e, t +  ... +e,t" E F , [ t ] .  
If r c s < n and e,, e, # 0, then we must have 
val (e, xr) # Val (e, x'). 
For otherwise 
Val (e, x') = Val (e,)xr = Val (es)xE, 

364 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
and thus 
xS-' = val (e,)/val (e,) E val (F,), 
and, since Val (F,) is closed under roots, x E val (Fl), contradicting x#Fl. 
This means that there is a term e,Y of p ( x )  with smallest value, and, by 
Lemma 5.4.13 (i), 
(6) 
Val (p(x)) = val (e,)x' 
E V. 
Similarly, if we let q(t) E G, 
[t] be the image polynomial 
q(t) = fi(eo)+fi(e,)t+ ... +fl(en)t", 
then it follows from ( 5 )  that for the same r 6 n as before, 
(7) 
val ( d y ) )  = val (f,(er))y' E w. 
It follows that Val (F,(x)) = V, val (G,(y)) = W. Thus F l ( x )  and G,(y) 
are valued subfields of F and G, respectively. 
Let us define the mapping g1 from Fl(x) onto C,(y) by 
d , + d , x +  
... +d,x"j - 
- fl(do)+ ... +f,(d,)y" 
Then g1 maps the field Fl(x) isomorphically onto G,(y) and fl c gl. 
By (6) and (7), g1 is an isomorphism between the valued fields F,(x) and 
W Y ) .  From (519 
( 8 )  
(Val (0 
C),," 
= (Val (9 
9 1 C),,W. 
By Lemma 5.4.13 (iv), Fl(x) and Gl(y) have henselizations F2 and G 2 ,  
respectively. It follows from Lemma 5.4.13 (vi) that F,(x) and G,(y) are 
Hensel fields. Therefore, by the definition of henselization, we may choose 
F2 and G2 so that 
- - 
Fl(x) 
c F2 c mo, 
GI(Y) c G 2  = G',(y). 
Using the uniqueness part of Lemma 5.4.13 (iv), we may extend g1 to an 
isomorphism 
g2 : F2 
G2. 
By Lemma 5.4.13 (v), 
val ( F 2 )  = V, 
val (G2) = W. 
Let V, W be the closures of V, W under roots in Val ( F ) ,  val (G). In view 
of Lemma 5.4.13 (i), V and W are countable. Using (8), g2 1 V can be 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
extended in a unique way to an isomorphism h : V z W. Indeed, 
365 
(9) 
(Val (F), c),,~ = (Val (G), h c ) , , ~ ,  
and for each C E  V, c is a root of some irreducible polynomial over F2 
and hc is the root of the image polynomial over G 2 .  Let F3 = FZ(V) and 
G3 = G2(W) be the subfields generated by F2 u Vand G 2  u W, 
respectively. 
Then F3 and G3 are algebraic extensions of F2 and G2, respectively. It 
follows from Lemma 5.4.13 (vi) that Val ( F 3 )  = V, Val ( G 3 )  = V, so F' 
and G' are valued subfields. In view of (9), we may extend g2 to a field 
isomorphism on F3 onto G'. Then it follows from Lemma 5.4.13 (iii) that 
g2 can be extended to a valued field isomorphism, g3 : F3 E G 3 .  Since h 
is unique, h = g3 r V. 
We recall that 
F* c F, c F3, 
G* c G ,  c G', 
whence 
F* = F3*, 
G* = G3*. 
Therefore, by Lemma 5.4.13 (vi), 
and @ are henselizations of F3 and 
G3, respectively. Hence, by Lemma 5.4.13 (iv), we may extend g3 to an 
isomorphism g4 : F3 z G 3 .  By Lemma 5.4.13 (vi) or (v), 
- -  
val (F) = Val (F3) = V, 
val ( F )  = Val (G') = V. 
Thus by (9), g4 : 
c, p. 
Also, we have seen that V is countable. Hence 
(ii) holds with F2 = F, 
G2 = p, 
fz = g4. This proves (iib). 
We now prove (ii) in the general case. Since F, = E ,  x is transcendental 
over F,. By Lemma 5.4.13 (viii), the value group Val (F,(x)) is countable. 
Hence, applying (iib) countably many times and taking the union, we can 
find valued subfields F2, G2 and a mapping g2 such that val (F') is countable, 
and 
- 
- 
F, c F2 = F2, 
G ,  c G2 = G2, 
fl c g2 : F2 t+ 
G2, 
val (F,(x)) c val (F2). 
We may then iterate this process and obtain for 2 < n < o, 
valued subfields 
F"", G"" and a mapping g"" 
such that val(F"+') is countable and 
- 
JP c p+' = 
G" c G"+1 = Gn+1 
gn 
g n f l  : F"+1 c, G"+1, 
Val (F"(x)) c val (F""). 

366 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
Let 
F" = u F", 
G" = u G", 
9" = u g" 
2 Q n < o  
2qnCrn 
2 S n C o  
Then all the hypotheses of (ii) hold with F", G", go instead of F, , G I ,  f,. 
Moreover, 
Val (F"(x)) = u Val (F"(x)) = val (F"). 
2 < n < o  
Thus we may apply the special case (iia), and we conclude that (ii) holds 
in general. 
Proof of (iii). This is exactly the same as the proof of (ii), with F and G 
interchanged, and the desired conclusion follows. i 
COROLLARY 
5.4.14. If F and G are fields of characteristic zero and F = G 
then F((t)) = G((t)). 
PROOF. 
By Lemmas 5.4.8 and 5.4.10, Theorem 5.4.12, and the remark that 
val (F((t))) z (Z, +, *, 0, Q ) E val (G((t))). i 
Another classical example of a valued field is the field of p-adic numbers, 
where p is a prime. We first describe the p-adic valuation on the field Q of 
rational numbers. Every rational number r # 0 can be written uniquely 
in the form r = p"s, where n E Z is an integer and s is a quotient of two 
integers not divisible by p. We then define Val (r) = p". In particular, 
Val (p") = p". Let 
V = {p" : n E Z}, 
and put p" Q p" iff m < n. Setting val(0) = 0 and r < 0 for all r E V, 
we make Q into a valued field 
(Q, +, ., 0, 1, V, Q , Val), 
called the field of rational numbers with the p-adic valuation. Its valuation 
group is isomorphic to (H, +, 0, < ). Its residue class field is the prime 
field Z, of characteristic p ,  which has the elements Z, = (0, 1, ...,p- l}. 
Indeed, if m = qp+k E Z and 0 < k < p ,  then m* = k, and if n* # 0, 
then (m/n)* = m*/n* in the sense of Z,. 
The field of p-adic numbers, denoted by Q,, is defined as the completion 
of the field Q of rational numbers with thep-adic valuation. Its construction 
is the precise analogue of the construction of H((t)) from H(r) described 
above. 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
367 
LEMMA 
5.4.15. 02, is a Henselfield and Q; = Z,, 
val (Q,) r (Z, +, 0, < ). 
The following lemma is known from the literature. 
LEMMA 
5.4.16. 
(i). (Chevalley.) Suppose f ( t l  ... tn) is a polynomial with coeflcients in 
Z,, 
zero constant term, and degree d < n. Then f has a nontrivial root in Z, 
(the trivial root is (0, 0, ..., 0)). 
(ii). (Lang.) Let f(tl ... t,) be apolynomial over Z,((t)) with zero constant 
term and degree d such that d 2  < n. Then f has a nontrivial zero in Zp((t)). 
COROLLARY 
5.4.17. Let f ( t ,  ... t,) be a polynomial with coefficients in Z, 
zero constant term, and degree d < n. Then there is ajinite set Y of primes 
such that whenever p$Y, f has a nontrivial zero in thejield Q, 
of p-adic 
numbers. 
PROOF. Suppose there is an infinite sequence of primes p o  < p I  < p2 < ... 
such that for each n c o, 
f has only the trivial root in Q P n .  Let D be a 
nonprincipal ultrafilter over o, 
and form the ultraproduct 
F = n Q,,. 
D 
Then f has only the trivial root in F. Since each QPn is a Hensel field, F is 
a Hensel field. Also, 
F* E n 
ZPn, 
whence F* has characteristic zero. Thus by Lemma 5.4.13 (ii), F* is iso- 
morphic to a subfield of F. By Lemma 5.4.16 (i), f has a nontrivial root in 
each field ZPn, and hence f has a nontrivial root in F* and thus in F. This 
contradiction completes the proof. -I 
D 
The following corollary is an application of Theorem 5.4.12. It is a precise 
statement of the intuitive principle that the Hensel fields Q, and Z,((t)) are 
very much alike, even though Q, has characteristic zero and Z,((t)) has 
characteristic p. 
COROLLARY 
5.4.18. Let cp be any sentence in the language of valuedfields. 
Then for all but finitely many primes p, we have 
Q, 
I= cp $and only if Z,((t)) I= cp. 

368 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
PROOF. By Lemma 5.4.10, each E,((t)) is a Hensel field. By definition, 
each Qp is a Hensel field. Furthermore, 
E,((t))* = z, = as;, 
Val (Z,((t))) iz <Z, +, 0, <) z val (as,). 
Let D be any nonprincipal ultrafilter over the set of all primes, and form 
ul traproducts 
F = n 
z,((t)), 
G = n 
Q,. 
D 
D 
Then F and G are Hensel fields. We have 
val ( F )  z 
(E, +, 0, 6 ) s' val (G), 
D 
and F* has characteristic 0. Thus by Theorem 5.4.12, F and G are elemen- 
tarily equivalent. Whence, for each sentence q, 
S, = { p  : Qp k cp iff E p ( ( t ) )  k cp} E D. 
Since this holds for any nonprincipal D, all but finitely many primes must 
belong to the set S,. i 
The next corollary looks very similar to Corollary 5.4.17 above, but it 
depends on Theorem 5.4.12 and hence is much deeper. 
COROLLARY 
5.4.19 (Artin's Conjecture). For each positive integer d there 
exists a finite set Y of primes sucli that for every prime p# Y, every polynomial 
f(tl ... tn) of degree d over Q, 
with zero constant term and n > d2 has a 
nontrivial zero in Q,. 
PROOF. For each pair of positive integers d, n, let 
the language of field theory which says: 
I 
be the sentence in 
Every polynomial of degree d with n variables and zero constant term 
has a nontrivial zero. 
We note that if n > d2, then the sentence 
holds in all fields, because the extra n- ( d 2  + 1) variables can be set equal 
to zero. By Lemma 5.4.16 (ii), the sentence (Pd,dZ+, holds in every field 
( P d . d 2 + l  * q d . n  

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
369 
Zp((t)). Then by Corollary 5.4.18, ( p d , d 2 + 1  holds in Q, for all but finitely 
many primes p. -I 
We shall see in the exercises that Theorem 5.4.12 also holds when the 
hypothesis that F* has characteristic zero is replaced by the hypothesis 
F = 02,. This result gives a set of axioms for the complete theory of Q,, 
just as Theorem 5.4.4 provided a set of axioms for the complete theory of 
the field of real numbers. 
Instead of valued fields with cross section, one sometimes considers the 
slightly more general notion of a valued field (F, V, Val), where F is a field, 
V an ordered Abelian group (disjoint from F), and Val a function on F 
onto V u  (01, such that the obvious analogues of the axioms 5.4.7(a)-(f) 
above hold. With some extra complications, it is possible to generalize 
Theorem 5.4.12 to Hensel fields without cross section. 
EXERCISES 
5.4.1. Every q1 set has power at least 2". 
5.4.2. A real closed field F is said to be an qu field iff (F, < ) is an qu set. 
Prove that any two q. fields of power mu are isomorphic. 
5.4.3. Assume the continuum hypothesis. Prove that a theory T for a 
countable language 9 is model complete iff for every countable model M 
of T and any two saturated models 8, 6 of T of power either m1 or finite, 
if M c 23 and N c 6, then (23, u),,~,, z (6, 
5.4.4. (i). Prove that the theory of real closed fields is model complete. 
(ii). Prove that the theory of real closed ordered fields admits elimina- 
tion of quantifiers. 
5.4.5. Prove that a real closed field F is an qu field iff it is a,-saturated. 
5.4.6*. Prove that the theory of infinite atomic Boolean algebras is complete, 
but is not model complete. 
5.4.7. Prove that the theory of infinite atomic Boolean algebras with an 
extra predicate At(x) for ' x  is an atom' is model complete. 
5.4.8. Show that for each complete extension T of the theory of fields, 
there is a complete theory T' in a language with an extra 1-placed relation 
symbol U such that (F, U )  
is a model of T' iff F is an algebraically closed 

370 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.4 
field, U is a subfield of F, which is a model of T, and F is not an algebraic 
extension of U of degree < 2. 
5.4.9. Suppose that F, G are algebraically closed fields, U, V are subfields, 
X c F and Y c G are nonempty transcendental sets over U and V, and f 
is a one-one function from X into Y. Prove that if U = V, then 
(F, u, x),,* 
= (G, 
K f X ) , . X .  
5.4.10*. Prove that the theory of divisible ordered Abelian groups is 
complete and model complete. It has the following axioms, in the language 
{+,o, <}: 
(i). the axioms for divisible Abelian groups; 
(ii). (Vxyz)(x < y + x + z  < y + z ) ;  
(iii). the axioms for simple order. 
5.4.1 1. The theory of Z-groups has the following axioms in the language 
( + , O ,  1, <}: 
(i). the axioms for Abelian groups with identity element 0; 
(ii). the axioms for simple order; 
(iii). (Vxyz)(x < y -+ 
x + z  < y+z); 
(iv). 1 is the least element greater than 0; 
(v). (Vx3y)(ii.y = xvFi*y = x + l v  ... vFi-y = x+(Fi-l)), 
for each 
positive integer n, where Fi is the term 1 + ... + 1, n times. Show that 
(a, +, 0, 1, < ) is a 2-group. 
5.4.12* (Pressburger). Show that the theory of Z-groups is complete 
(using the method of this section). 
5.4.13. Use Exercise 5.4.12 to obtain a set of axioms for the complete theory 
of the model (0, +, 0, 1, < ). 
5.4.14. Let T be the theory of 2-groups with extra relations P,(x), 
n = 1, 2, ..., and axioms 
(tfx)(Pn(x) 
(3y)(n Y = XI). 
Prove that T is model complete. 
5.4.15. Supply the proofs of Lemmas 5.4.8 and 5.4.1 1. 
5.4.16. Let F and G be valued fields such that F 3 G. Show that F* = G* 
and val (F) = Val (G). Also, if F is @-saturated, then F* and Val (F) are 
a-saturated. 

5.41 
APPLICATIONS TO FIELD THEORY 
371 
5.4.17. Give direct proofs of Theorems 5.4.4, 5.4.6 and 5.4.12 which do not 
use the continuum hypothesis. 
5.4.18. Let TI be a theory in the language { +, ., 0, I} and T2 
a theory in the 
language {*, 1, <}. Show that the class of all valued fields F such that 
F* != TI , Val ( F )  k T2 is an elementary class, and show how to construct 
a set of axioms for this class from sets of axioms for TI and T2. 
5.4.19*. A Z-valued jidd is a valued field F such that for some c E F, 
(Val (F), c) is a 2-group. Thus for each field H, H((c)) is a Z-valued Hensel 
field, and for each prime p, the field Q, of p-adic numbers is a Z-valued 
Hensel field. Show that if TI is a complete extension of the theory of fields 
of characteristic zero, then the theory of Z-valued Hensel fields whose 
residue class fields are models of TI is complete. 
5.4.20*. Let F be a Hensel field such that F* has characteristic zero. Let G 
be a Hensel subfield of F such that val (G) i 
val ( F )  and G* = F:: . P rove 
that G < F. 
[Hint: Reduce the problem to the case where F is saturated, of power w I ,  
and val (G) is countable. Then use the proof of Theorem 5.4.12 to show 
that any elementary embedding of G into F which is the identity on F* 
can be extended to an automorphism of F.] 
5.4.21*. Prove the result in the above exercise with the hypothesis G'k = F* 
weakened to G* 4 F*. 
5.4.22. Let C be the field of complex numbers. Using partial fractions, the 
nonzero elements of C((t)) can be identified in a natural way with formal 
power series of the form 
(1) 
a,tm+a,+, P+'+ ..., 
where m E Z, a, E C for all n 2 m, and a, # 0. A series (1) is called a 
germ of a meromorphic function iff there is a nonempty neighborhood U 
of 0 such that for all z E U \ {0}, the series (I) converges at t = z. The set 
M of all germs of meromorphic functions, together with 0, forms a relatively 
algebraically closed valued subfield of C((t)). Use this fact and Exercise 
5.4.20 to show that M < C((t)). 
5.4.23. A valued field F is said to have rank 1 iff for all x, y E val ( F )  such 
that y > 1, there is a positive integer n such that x < y". The completion 
of a valued field F of rank 1 is defined as the set of all equivalence classes 

372 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.5 
of Cauchy sequences in F, just as in the special cases H ( ( t ) )  and Q,. It is 
known that the completion of F is a Hensel field which has F as a valued 
subfield and has the same value group and residue class field as F. Use this 
to show that if F and G are valued groups of rank I ,  F* has characteristic 
zero, and F = G, then the completions of F and G are elementarily 
equivalent. 
5.4.24. Suppose F is a Hensel field such that for every Hensel field G, 
F* = G* and Val (F) E val (G) implies F = G. Prove that F has no proper 
algebraic valued extension with the same value group and residue class field. 
Note: In [R] Chapter G, there are examples of Hensel fields F, with F* 
of prime characteristic, which do have proper algebraic valued extensions 
with the same value group and residue class field. 
5.4.25*. Let p be a prime. Let F be a Z-valued Hensel field of characteristic 
zero such that F* = Z, and p is the least element of Val (F) such that 
p > 1. Show that F = Q,, 
the field ofp-adic numbers. This gives a set of 
axioms for the complete theory of Q,. 
[Hint: Similar to Theorem 5.4.12, but Lemma 5.4.13 must be modified.] 
5.4.26*. Let p be a prime and F = Q,. If G is a Hensel subfield of F and 
Val (G) is closed under roots in val (F), then G < F. Thus the complete 
theory of the model 
(Qp,P2,P3,P4, ...) 
is model complete, where 
Pn = { x  E val (a,) : x has an nth root}. 
5.4.27. Prove Tarski’s Theorem 5.4.4 using countable recursively satu- 
rated model pairs instead of saturated models. 
5.4.28. Prove Theorem 5.4.6 using countable recursively saturated 
model pairs instead of saturated models. 
5.5. Application to Boolean algebras 
All of our applications in Section 5.4 were to complete theories. The 
method of saturated models in some cases can also be applied to incomplete 
theories, where the aim is to give a useful characterization of all the complete 
extensions of the given theory. As an illustration, we now give a classification 

5.51 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
373 
of the complete extensions of the theory of Boolean algebras. The axioms 
of this theory are given in Example 1.4.3, and some simple definitions and 
results are found in Example 1.4.3 and the exercises of Section 1.4. Apart 
from these facts in Section 1.4, we shall assume that the reader has some 
previous, although not necessarily extensive, experience with Boolean 
algebras. The classification given here will be used in Section 6.3 in the study 
of reduced products. 
We begin with a list of simple properties of Boolean algebras. Let 
2T = { +, *, -, 0, I }  be the language of Boolean algebras. In our axioms 
we have assumed that 0 f 1. It will be convenient to discard this axiom in 
this section, and we say that the Boolean algebra 
8 = (B, +, *, -, 0, 1) 
is trivial iff 0 = 1; otherwise, we say that B is nontrivial. Observe that 
according to our definitions, the trivial Boolean algebra is both atomic and 
atomless. Let a be an element of a Boolean algebra B. We let 
Bla = {x E B : x G a}, 
(x)-" = a * 3 
for all x E Bla. 
and we define 
Then 
%la = @la, +, ., 
0, a )  
is a Boolean algebra with the operations .+, inherited from B, -', and 
constants 0, a. Bla is a subalgebra of B iff a = 1, and %la is the trivial 
algebra iff a = 0. Every element x E B can be written uniquely as the sum 
of two elements y and z, where y < a and z < Z; in fact, y = x . a and 
z = x * 5. This decomposition of x into two parts gives rise to a one-to-one 
mapping of B onto the direct product Bla x BIG, which can be shown to be 
an isomorphism 
(5.5.1) 
B z BlaxBlZ. 
An element a is said to be atomic iff Bla is atomic, and, similarly, a is said 
to be atomless iff %la is atomless. Note that the zero element 0 is both 
atomic and atomless. By (5.5.1), we see that for arbitrary a E B, 
(5.5.2) 
B is atomic iff Bla and BIG are atomic, 
B is atomless iff Bla and BIZ are atomless. 
An ideal on B is a subset Z c 23 such that for all x, y, z E B, 
if x , y ~ Z ,  then x + y ~ Z  and X - Z E Z .  

374 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.5 
If an ideal I # 0, then 0 E I. The set of all complements of elements in an 
ideal is a filter on 8. If I is an ideal on 8, then the relation (I) defined by 
x(Z)y ifandonlyif X . J + X . ~ E Z  
is a congruence relation on 8. For x E B, let x/I denote the congruence class 
of x under (I), and let 
B/I = {x/Z : x E B}. 
The quotient algebra 
8 / I  = (BIZ, +, -, -, 0, 1) 
carries the natural extensions of +, ., - to B/I, and has as zero element the 
set I and unit element the filter corresponding to I. % is homomorphic to 
the quotient algebra %/I under the homomorphism x -+ x/Z. The kernel of 
this homomorphism is exactly the set I. The quotient algebra 8 / Z  is trivial 
iff I = B. An ideal I is principal iff I = Bla for some a E B. If I = Bla, 
then the quotient 8 / I  is isomorphic to 81~7, and hence by (5.5.1), we have 
b r b/Ixb[a. 
A very special ideal I(%) 
on 8 is defined as follows: 
Z(8) = {x E B : x can be written as a sum x = y +z, where y is atomic 
If x, = y ,  + z , ,  x2 = y2+z2, y, and y2 are atomic, and z1 and z2 are 
atomless, then x1 +x2 = ( y ,  +y2)+ (z, +z2), where y, +y2 is atomic and 
z, +z2 is atomless. If u E B, then x1 u = y ,  u+z, * u, where y, u is 
atomic and z, - u is atomless. So I(%) 
is an ideal on 8. Note that if 8 has 
at most a finite number of atoms, then I ( 8 )  = B. If 8 is atomic, then also 
I(%) = B. It is easy to check that for an arbitrary element a E B, we have 
and z is atomless}. 
Z(8la) = I(@) n Bla, 
Z(8lii) = I ( 8 )  n Bin, 
I ( 8 )  = {x E B : x can be written uniquely as a sum'x = y+z, where 
y E I(%la) and z E I(8la)). 
From this we easily obtain 
(5.5.3) 
SlI(8) z (bla)/I(%la) x (ela)/I(%la). 
We define by induction a sequence 
( % ( k ) ) k < o ,  
of quotient algebras, a sequence 
({(x, 
X c k ) )  : x E B, x ( k )  E % ( k ) } ) k < a  

375 
It follows trivially from the definition that for each k < o, 
(i) the mapping x -, x ( ~ )  
is a homomorphism of B onto B(k); 
(ii) the set 
(iii) 'iIYk) g B/z(~). 
is an ideal on B; 
Note that each 
can also be described as the set of all x E B such that 
x ( ~ )  
is a sum x ( ~ )  
= y(k) + z ( ~ ) ,  
where y(k) is atomic in B(k) and z ( ~ )  
is atomless 
in %Yk). 
PROPOSITION 
5.5.5. For each k, I < w, there are formulas ( P k ,  &, p k ,  r l k , l ,  
b k . 1  of 2' 
in the free variable x such that for every Boolean algebra B and every 
a E B: 
(i). B t ( P k [ a ]  if a E ~ ( ~ ) ( a ( ~ )  
= 0). 
(ii). B t t,bk[a] iff a(k) is atomic in 2Yk). 
(iii). 8 t pk [a J if a(k) is atomless in Wk). 
(iv). B t ~ ~ , ~ [ a ]  
iff a(k) contains at most I atoms in %Yk). 
(v). B t bk,l [a J if a(k) contains at least I atoms in 2Yk). 
The proof, which is not difficult, is left as an exercise. 
Let B be a nontrivial Boolean algebra. Consider the sequence 
g y 0 )  B(1) 
s
p
,
 .., 
9 *.., 
of quotient algebras defined in (5.5.4). Either some B(k) is trivial, in which 
case all 
I > k, are trivial, or else no W k )  is trivial. In the first case, 
we can find the least k such that B(k+l) is trivial. This means that %?3(k) is 
nontrivial and each element of 'B(k) is in the ideal Z(Wk)). We now can ask 
whether B(k) is atomless or atomic and whether B(k) has a finite or infinite 
number of atoms. The main result of this section states that the answers 
to these questions determine the elementary type (the theory) of B. We 
assign a pair of inoariants (m(%), n(B)) to each nontrivial Boolean algebra 

376 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
p . 5  
B as follows: 
(5.5.6a) 
m(8) = 
the least k < w such that B(k+l) 
is trivial, if such a k 
co, otherwise; 
co if m(B) = k and B(k) has infinitely many atoms, 
exists, 
if m(B) = k and B(k) has I c w atoms; 
(5.5.6~) 
n(B) = no(@) if m(B) = k and B3'k) 
is atomic, 
i" 
-no(B) if m(B) = k and B3'k' 
is not atomic. 
Thus m(B) indicates when @ ( k + l )  becomes trivial, the sign of n(B) indicates 
whether or not %(m(e)) is atomic, and no(%) = In(23)l indicates the number 
of atoms in 23('"(')). 
m(B) is either a natural number or CO, and n(%) is either 
an integer or f03. 
When m(%) = k < w and n(%) = 0, then %(k) is a 
nontrivial atomless Boolean algebra. The following proposition follows 
easily from Proposition 5.5.5. 
I 
(5.5.6bj 
no@) = 
if m(B) = 00, 
PROPOSITION 
5.5.7. 
(i). For each k, I < w, the following can be expressed by single sentences 
of 9: 
m(B) = k, 
m(B) = k 
and n(B) = 1, 
m(8) = k 
and n(B) = -1. 
(ii). For each k < w, the following are expressible by sets of sentences 
of 9: 
m(B) = co, 
m(%) = k and n(%) = 03, 
m(%) = k and n(%) = - 
00. 
The proof is left as an exercise. 
An iteration of (5.5.3) shows that for k < w and a E B, 
B(k) 
ZJ 
x (BIG)'". 
The observation (5.5.2) enables us to prove: 
PROPOSITION 
5.5.8. Let 8 be a nontrioial Boolean algebra and let a E B. Then: 
(i). m(B) = max (m(%la), m()Blii)). 

5.51 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
377 
(ii). Ifm(B1a) < m(Blii), then m(%) = m(B1G) and n ( 9 )  = n(B1ii). 
(iii). Ifm(B1a) = m(BlG) < 00, then 
n(B) = 0 zfln(B1a) = n(B1ii) = 0, 
n(B) > 0 ifn(B1a) > 0 and n(BI5) > 0, 
n(B) c 0 iff either n(B1a) < 0 or n(B1G) < 0, and not both n(23la) = 0, 
n(B1ii) = 0. 
(iv). Ifm(B1a) = m(B1G) c co, then no(B) = no(Bla)+no(Blii). 
0 The lemma below provides the key step to the proof of Theorem 5.5.10. 
LEMMA 
5.5.9. Let 24, B be nontrivial Boolean algebras such that 
(
d
W
9
 .(a)) = (m(B), 48)). 
Assume that a E A, 0 # a # 1, and 'B is o-saturated. Then there exists 
b E B such that 0 # b # 1 and 
(m(Wa), n(gIa)) = (4W), 
n(@lb)), 
(m((Uli), n(alii)) = (m(B16), n(Bl6)). 
PROOF. First suppose that 
m(2tla) = m(9Ilii) = 03. 
We have m(%) = 03, so m(B) = co. This means that for each k < w, 
there exists an element b E B such that b('' # 0 in W k )  and b(') # 1 in WkJ. 
By Proposition 5.5.5 and the o-saturatedness of B, there exists b E B such 
that b(k) # 0 in B(') and b(k) # 1 in 'B('), for all k. Clearly, for such b E B 
we have 
m('B1b) = m(Bl6) = 00. 
Next suppose that 
m(%la) c m(24li.i) = m(24). 
We claim that we only need to find b E B such that 
(1) 
m(B1b) = rn(9Ila) and n(BIb) = n(24la). 
This is because by Proposition 5.5.8 (i) and (ii), 
m(24lii) = m(24) = m(8) = max (m(BIb), m(816)) = m('Bl6), 
n(24li.i) = n(%) = n ( 8 )  = n(%16). 
and similarly, 

378 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.5 
Let k = m(%la). We verify (1) for all possible values of n(%la). Since 
k < rn(B), we know that 
Wk) has more than a finite number of atoms, 
2Yk) is not atomic. 
(2) 
For otherwise 2Yk+1) is trivial, contradicting the definition of m(8). By 
(2), Proposition 5.5.5, and the w-saturatedness of 23, it is easy to find 
an element b E B such that 
rn(9lb) = k and n(8lb) = n(%la). 
The only two slightly nontrivial cases are when n(2lla) = +a. 
This is 
where we need that '23 is w-saturated. 
The case 
rn(2llii) < m(%la) = m(%) 
is handled in exactly the same way as the previous case. 
Suppose that 
rn((llla) = m(r2llii) < m. 
Then let k = m(%) = m(%la) = m((ll1E). If n(%) = 0, then, by Proposition 
5.5.8 (iii), n(B) = n(2Ila) = n(2llii) = 0. In this case, let b E B be any 
element such that 6") # 0 and bg) # 1 in 'B(k). Then clearly, 
and 
If .(a) > 0, then by Proposition 5.5.8 (iii) and (iv), we have n('X3) > 0 and 
n(YI1u) > 0, 
n(BllE) > 0, 
no(B) = no(%) = n,(YIla>+n,(2llii). 
In this case, by Proposition 5.5.5 and the w-saturatedness of 93, we find 
b E B such that 
b(k) is atomic and contains exactly no(Blla) atoms in 'B(k), 
P4) is atomic and contains exactly n,(Bl~E) atoms in Wk). 
m(B1b) = m(B16) = k, 
Then 
and 
n('X31b) = n(Blla), 
~(816) = n(%lii). 

5.51 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
319 
Finally, if n(%) < 0, then by Proposition 5.5.8 (iii) and (iv), we have 
n(%) < 0 and 
not both n(%la) = 0, 
n(%la) = 0, 
either n(%la) < 0 or n(%lZ) < 0, 
n o ( 8 )  = no(%) = no(%la)+no(%la). 
The method should be clear enough by now, so that we can leave the latter 
case as an exercise. In all cases, we only need the o-saturatedness of % 
in the case where one of the invariants is k 
00. -I 
Let a,, ..., a, be elements of a Boolean algebra 3. 
By a bit of a,, ..., a, 
we mean any one of the 2" products 
s = s, ' S 2 .  ... .s,, 
where each s, = a, or s, = c',. If s and t are two bits of a,, ..., a, and 
s # I ,  then s . t = 0. The set of all sums from 
I 
{s : s is a bit of a,, ..., a,, 
is precisely the finite subalgebra of 3 generated by a, , . . ., a,, . If b, , . . ., 6, E B 
and s is a bit of a , ,  ..., a,, then by the corresponding bit t of h , ,  ..., 6, 
we mean the product 
t = t ,  ' 1 ,  . ... . t,, 
where ti = bi if si = ai and ti = 6, if s, = iii. Let ?l and % be Boolean 
algebras and let a , ,  ..., a,, E A ,  b, , ..., b,, E B. We say that (%, a ,  ... a,) 
issimilarto('X3, b, ... b,)iffforevery bitsofa,, ..., a,,and thecorresponding 
bit t of b , ,  ..., b,, the two Boolean algebras ?Ils and BIt either are both 
trivial or have the same pair of invariants. We me the symbols 
(%,a, ... a,,) 2 (93, b, ... b,) 
to denote that they are similar. 'ZI z 2 means simply that either they are 
both trivial or they have the same invariants. If aE'"A, b E"'B, we write 
(91, 
= (3, h>,<,, 
(a, am)rn<n 
(B, b m ) m < n *  
if and only if for all n -= w, 
THEOREM 
5.5.10. A necessary andsuficient condition for two Boolean algrbras 
% and '23 to be elementarily equivalent is that either they are both triuial or 

380 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
[5.5 
they have the same invariants, 
(m(9Q 4%)) 
= (m(%), 4%)). 
PROOF. The necessity follows from Proposition 5.5.7. 
The sufficiency can be proved in any one of several ways. For example, 
it could be done by the method of elimination of quantifiers (cf. Section 1.5), 
or using either part of Proposition 5.4.1. We shall use here a simpler method 
than Proposition 5.4.1. The proof will be a familiar back and forth con- 
struction which has only countably many steps, rather than w ,  steps. The 
reason we can do this here is because finitely generated Boolean algebras 
are finite and easily described. The proof uses o-saturated models and does 
not depend on the continuum hypothesis. 
If % and '$3 are both nontrivial and finite, then since 91 z 23, we have 
(21 E %, and so % and 23 are elementarily equivalent. We may assume that 
% and 58 are both infinite and w-saturated; in particular, we may assume 
that 91 and 23 are of power 2", although the continuum hypothesis will in 
no way be involved in what follows. Let us first prove the following: 
(1) For all a , ,  ..., a,, , E A and b, , ..., b, E B, if 
((21, a, 1 . 1  a,) x (%, b, ... b,), 
(9, a, ... a,+,) x (% b1 ... b n + 1 ) *  
then there exists b,+ , E B such that 
To prove (I), we first prove: 
(2) Assume that (3, a, ... a,) x (23, b, ... b,) and a,+, E A. Then, for each 
bit s of a , ,  ..., a, and corresponding bit t of b , ,  ..., b,, there exists 
c < t such that 
(%IS, an+ 1 * 3) x (BIZ, c). 
By the assumption of (2), (211s x Bit. If they are both trivial, then let c = 0. 
If they are nontrivial, then they have the same invariants. If a,+l . s = 0, 
then let c = 0. If a,, , . s = s, then let c = r. So assume that 0 # a,+ , . s # s. 
Clearly, %It is w-saturated, because all of the operations on %It are definable 
in 23 using t as a parameter. Whence, by Lemma 5.5.9, there exists c E Blt 
such that the conclusion of (2) holds. So (2) is proved. 
Now let b,+, be the sum of all c's obtained in (2), one for each bit of 
a , ,  ..., a,. It follows that the conclusion of (1) holds. 
We arrange all of the terms from the Skolem expansion 2* of 2' in a 
simple infinite sequence 
f,, 
f,, ...) t,, ... 

5.51 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
381 
(possibly with repetitions) in such a way that the following hold: 
(3) Each Skolem term tn has at most the free variables u,, ..., 0,- 
(4) If a E "A, b E "B are such that for each n < w, 
a2n = fnu*[ao 
an-llr 
b * n + l  = f n d b o  
b n - 1 1 9  
then the ranges of a and b determine elementary submodels of 8 and 8, 
respectively. 
Here tna. and tnS* are the interpretations of t, in the Skolem expansions 
%* and %*, respectively. Such an arrangement of the terms t,, can easily 
be made. Combining (1) with its dual, i.e., 8 and % are interchanged, 
we can find by the familiar back and forth argument, a E "A and b E "B 
such that 
(5) 
(X an),<" x (123, bn)n<a, 
and the hypothesis of (4) holds. Using (9, a simple argument in Boolean 
algebras will show that the mapping 
h : a, --* b, 
is an isomorphism between the two Boolean algebras 
and 
8 0  = ( { a ,  : n E w}, +, ., -, 0, l), 
230 = ({b, : n E a}, +, a, -, 0, 1). 
Here we use the fact that a bit of a,, ..., a, i s  0 if and only if the corre- 
sponding bit of bo, ..., b, is 0. The conclusion of (4) says that 
8, < 8  and B0 <%. 
so 8 = %. -I 
EXERCISES 
5.5.1. Supply the proofs of (5.5.1 b(5.5.3). 
5.5.2. Prove Proposition 5.5.5. 
5.5.3. Determine the invariants of the following particular Boolean algebras: 
(i). a finite Boolean algebra with n atoms; 
(ii). a nontrivial atomless Boolean algebra; 
(iii). an infinite atomic Boolean algebra. 

382 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
p . 5  
5.5.4*. Prove that for each possible pair of invariants (m,, 
n,) among 
(o0,O) and (rn, n), m < w, -GO < n < +GO, there exists a Boolean 
algebra B with invariants (m,, 
n,). 
5.5.5. Prove Proposition 5.5.7. 
5.5.6. Prove Proposition 5.5.8. More generally, try to compute the invariants 
of B x 23 from the invariants of B and 9. 
5.5.7. Give a detailed proof of Lemma 5.5.9. 
5.5.8. Using the technique of Theorem 5.5.10, prove that any two saturated 
Boolean algebras of power w1 with the same invariants are isomorphic. 
5.5.9. The theory of Boolean algebras has only countably many complete 
extensions, and each complete extension has only countably many finite 
types. Thus every Boolean algebra $!I is elementarily equivalent to a countably 
saturated Boolean algebra B. 
5.5.10*. (a). By the theory of inductive order we mean the'theory in the 
language 9 
= { <, 0} whose axioms are the axioms for the theory of 
simple order, an axiom stating that 0 is the least element, and the induction 
scheme 
(3X)dX) -b (3XtlY)(Cp(X)A M Y )  
-+ x 
Y)), 
where ~ ( x )  
is a formula which may possibly have additional free variables 
z1 ... z,. For example, for each ordinal a > 0, the model (a, <, 0) is a 
model of the theory of inductive order. Let $!I be a model for the theory of 
inductive order. An element x E A is said to be a 1-limit point iff there does 
not exist a greatest element y < x. x is said to be an (n+ 1)-limit point iff 
there is no greatest n-limit point y < x. Every point is a 0-limit point. 
Thus 0 is an n-limit point for all n. Show that the notion of an n-limit point 
can be expressed by a single formula of 9. 
of the theory of inductive order, assign invariants 
rn(a), 
n(%) andp,(B), k = 0, 1, 2, ..., as follows: 
(b). For each model 
k if k is the least natural number such that 8 has a greatest 
m(%) = 
k-limit point, 
I 
if for all k < w, 9.l has arbitrarily large k-limit points. 
k if k is the greatest natural number such that B has a 
00 if for all k < a, B has a k-limit point greater than 0. 
k-limit point greater than 0, 

5.51 
SATURATED AND SPECIAL MODELS 
383 
00 if k < m(B), 
00 if k 2 m(%) and there are infinitely many k-limit points 
greater than the greatest (k+ 1)-limit point, 
I if k 2 m(%) and there are exactly I < o k-limit points 
greater than the greatest (k + 1)-limit point. 
Prove that if %,9 
are models of the theory of inductive order, then 9l = 9.3 
if and only if B and 9 
have the same invariants. 
[Hint: Use the method of Theorem 5.5.10.1 
5.5.1 1. Determine exactly which invariants are the invariants of some model 
of inductive order. Also, determine which invariants correspond to well 
ordered models. Use your answer to show that the theory of inductive 
order has 2" complete extensions. 
[Hint: Consider the normal form of ordinals in descending powers of 0.1 
5.5.12*. Which complete extensions of the theory of inductive order have 
uncountably many types of elements? 
5.5.13*. Prove that every sentence which holds in every model (a, <, 0), 
where 0 < a < o"' 
(ordinal exponentiation), is a consequence of the theory 
of inductive order. Thus the theory of inductive order is the theory of the 
class of all well ordered models, and is also the theory of the set of models 
{(a, <,O) :O < a < w"}. 
5.5.14*. Prove that every well-ordered model (a, <, 0) is elementarily 
equivalent to a unique model (p, < , 0), where 0 < p < w" + om. 
5.5.15*. Let Or denote the class of all ordinals. For the purposes of this 
exercise, we may consider (Or, < ), (Or, < , +), (Or, < , +, .) as models 
where <, +, * are the usual ordering, addition and multiplication of 
ordinals. Prove the following: 
(i). (o", <) < (Or, <); 
(ii). (wow, <, i-) i 
(Or, <, +); 
(iii). (wow"', <, +, * >  < (or, <, +, .>. 
Prove also that in each case every element in the left-hand model is definable 
in that model by a single formula. 
[Hint: The proofs of (ii) and (iii) depend on the technique introduced in 
Exercise 1.3.15 and on the normal form theorem for ordinals.] 

CHAPTER 6 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS 
AND GENERALIZATIONS 
In this chapter we shall continue the study of ultraproducts begun in Chap- 
ter 4, but we may now make use of saturated models. Section 6.1 ties to- 
gether the notions of an ultraproduct and of a saturated model, and con- 
tains a very neat characterization of elementary classes. The remaining 
sections deal with various generalizations of the ultraproduct construction. 
6.1. Ultraproducts which are saturated 
We shall show that certain ultraproducts of models are saturated models. 
The main theorem in this section is the ‘isomorphism theorem’ for ultra- 
products: Two models are elementarily equivalent if and only if they have 
isomorphic ultrapowers (Theorem 6.1.15). Some of the theorems in this 
section and Section 6.3 depend on the continuum hypothesis, or the gener- 
alized continuum hypothesis. We begin with a theorem about countably 
incomplete ultraproducts. Recall that an ultrafilter D is said to be countably 
incomplete iff D is not closed under countable intersections. 
THEOREM 
6.1.1. Let 9 
be countable, arid let D be a countably incomplete 
ultrafilter over a set I. Then for every family 21i, i E I, of models for 2, 
the 
ultraproduct nD21i 
is w,-saturated. 
PROOF. 
We must show that for every countable sequence a,,, , m < w, of ele- 
ments of n D A l ,  and every set Z(x) of formulas of 9 
u {co, cl, ...}, if each 
finite subset of Z(x) is satisfiable in ( n D % [ ,  a,,,),,,,,, then Z(x) is satisfiable 
in ( n D u i ,  a,,,),,,,,. Note that if a,,, = <a,,,(i) : i E 
then 
( n 81 am)m <a = n ((at 
3 am(i))m<,)* 
D 
D 
Since Y is an arbitrary countable language and 9 u {co, cl, ...} is also 
countable, it suffices to prove the following: 
384 

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
385 
(1) For every set Z(x) of formulas of 9, if each finite subset of Z(x) is 
Suppose every finite subset of C(x) is satisfiable in nD%,. 
Since 9 is 
satisfiable in nD%,, 
then Z(x) is satisfiable in nD%,. 
countable, C(x) is countable, and we may write 
C(x) = {Cl(X), a&), 
...}. 
I = I, 3 I ,  3 12 I3 ... 
As D is countably incomplete, we find a descending chain 
such that each I,, E D and n,,<J,, 
= 0. Let X, = I and for each positive 
n < o, 
let 
X,, = I,, n { ~ E I :  
%, t (3x)(a,(x)~ ... AO,,(X))}. 
Then by the fundamental Theorem 4.1.19, each X,, 
E D. Moreover, n,,+,J,, 
= 0, and X,, 
3 X,, , . It follows that for each i E I there is a greatest n(i) < o 
such that i E Xnc0. 
We choose a function f E n,., 
Al in the following way: If n(i) = 0, choose 
f ( i )  to be an arbitrary element of Ai. If n(i) > 0, choosef(i) E A, so that 
%It 
C ~1 A ..* ~on(i)[-f(i)l* 
Then whenever 0 < n and i E A',,, we have n 6 n(i), whence %, k a,,Lf(i)]. 
It follows from the fundamental theorem that nD%, 
I= anlfD] for all n > 0, 
and therefore the element fD satisfies C(x) in nD%,. 
This proves (1). i 
COROLLARY 
6.1.2. Assume the continuum hypothesis. Suppose %, 8 are two 
models for a countable language 2' and IAI, IBI 6 wl. Then the following 
are equivalent: 
(i). % = 8. 
(ii). For all nonprincipal ultrafilters D, E over o, nD% 
2 n,8 (and 
_ _  
n D %  
n D @ ) *  
(iii). There exist ultrafilters D and E such that nD% 
z n68. 
PROOF. 
(i) 
(ii). Assume (i). By Theorem 6.1.1, nD% 
and nEB are 
a,-saturated models. Since IAI, IBI 6 o1 and 2" = ol, the ultrapowers 
nD% 
and n,S have power at most wl. By (i) and the fundamental 
theorem, they are elementarily equivalent. Hence by the uniqueness theorem 
for saturated models, they are isomorphic. 
It is obvious that (ii) implies (iii), and (iii) implies (i) because by the fun- 
damental theorem, every model is elementarily equivalent to its ultrapower. i 

386 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
Roitman (1982) showed that the continuum hypothesis is needed in 
Corollary 6.1.2. In an extension of a model of ZFC with a Cohen reals, 
she proved that for each uncountable regular p S a there is an ul- 
trapower D over w such that 
( w ,  G )  has cofinality p. See also Canjar 
(1988). 
The rest of this section is devoted to the generalization of Theorem 6.1.1 
to arbitrary cardinals. We can see from cardinality considerations that the 
condition that D is countably incomplete is not sufficient for nD% 
to be 
an w,-saturated model. In fact, for a > w the assumption that D is a-regu- 
lar, or even a+-regular, is not sufficient for 
to be a+-saturated (see 
Exercise 6.1.6). We shall need a totally new kind of ultrafilter, the ‘good 
ultrafilters’, in order to get a generalization of Theorem 6.1.1. 
We first need some notation about functions. Let Z be a nonempty set, 
and p a cardinal. We consider functionsf, g on the set S,(p) of all finite 
subsets of /3 into the set S(Z) of all subsets of Z. We say that g < f iff for all 
u E S,(p), g(u) c f(u). Thus g < f means that each value of g is included 
in the corresponding value off. We shall say that f is monotonic iff 
u, w E S&?) and u c w imply f (u) 3 f ( w ) .  
Notice that the direction of the inclusion reverses. Thus the larger u is, 
the smaller f (u) is. Strictly speaking, ‘antimonotonic’ would be a better 
name, but it is also longer. The function g is said to be additive iff 
u, w E s,(p) 
implies g(u u w )  = g(u) n g(w). 
Again, notice that there is a union on the left and an intersection on the 
right. A better but longer name would be ‘antiadditive’. It is obvious that: 
LEMMA 
6.1.3. Every additive function on S,(p) into S(Z) is monotonic. 
Since an ultrafilter D over Z is a subset of S(Z), any function f on S&?) into 
Now for the main definition. Let a be an infinite cardinal. An ultrafilter 
For every cardinal fl < a and every monotonic function f on S&?) 
into D, there exists an additive function g on S&?) into D such that 
Note that if D is a-good, then D is p-good for all infinite cardinals p < a. 
Let us give one example of a monotonic functionfon S,@) into D. Sup- 
pose D is a countably incomplete ultrafilter over I, and let I = I, 3 I ,  
=) Z, 3 ... be a decreasing chain of sets Z, E D such that nnZ. = 0. Then 
D is a function on So(p) into S(Z). We are interested in that case. 
D over I is said to be a-good iff it has the following property: 
S G f .  

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
387 
the function f : S&?) + D such that for each u E SW(/3), f ( u )  = IIuI 
is 
monotonic. However, f is not additive, because 
f(u n w )  = 11. u W I  3 
f(4 n f(4 = ~ m n x ( l u l .  I W l ) ’  
The power of the a-good ultrafilters lies in the fact that monotonic functions 
f like the one above, which are very nonadditive, can be ‘refined’ to additive 
functions g < f on SJP) into D. 
In Exercise 6.1.2, we shall see that every countably incomplete ultrafilter 
is w,-good. In order to generalize Theorem 6.1.1 to larger cardinals, we must 
first prove the existence of countably incomplete ultrafilters which are a-good 
for a given a. We shall first state the existence theorem, and then prove a 
series of lemmas which will be used to prove the existence of a-good ultra- 
filters. 
THEOREM 
6.1.4. Let Z be a set of power a. Then there exists an a+-good count- 
ably incomplete ultrafilter D over I. 
LEMMA 
6.1.5. For an ultraflter D to be a+-good it is necessary and suficient 
that for every monotonic function f on &(a) into D there is an additive function 
g on S,(a) into D with g < f. 
PROOF. The necessity is obvious. 
Define a function f ‘  : SJa) + D by 
To prove the sufficiency, let p < a, and let f :  SW(p) + D be monotonic. 
f’(u) = f ( u  n p), for all 
u E SJa). 
Thenf’ is monotonic. By hypothesis there exists an additive function g’ < f’ 
on SO(.) into D. Now let g be the restriction of g’ to S,(p). Then g maps 
SJp) into D, 
and it is easy to check that g is additive and g < f. This proves 
that the condition in the lemma is sufficient for D to be a+-good. -I 
LEMMA 
6.1.6. Let a be an infinite cardinal. Suppose that X is a set of power 
a and let Y,, x E X, be a family of sets each of which has power a. Then there 
exists a family of sets 2, , x E X ,  such that for all x, y E X :  
(i). 2, c Y,; 
(ii). Z, has power a; 
(iii). i f x  # y ,  then 2, n Z, = 0. 
That is, any family of a sets of power a can be refined to a family of a diQoint 
sets of power a. 

388 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
PROOF. 
We may assume without loss of generality that X = a. For each or- 
dinal /3 < a, let X, be the set 
X, = ((7, 6 )  : y < 6 and 6 < 81. 
Thus X, is a subset of 8 x 8. (If a x a is drawn on a graph with two axes, 
Xa will be a right triangle with sides of length p.) Since a is a limit ordinal, 
X ,  = u B < , X a .  We shall find a function f with domain X, such that f is one- 
one and 
(1) 
whenever y < 6 < a, f ( y ,  6) E Y,,. 
Once the function f is found, we may define 
z, = ( f ( 7 ,  6 )  : y G 6 < a>, 
and the family Z,, y < a, clearly has the desired properties (i)-(iii). 
The function f is defined by transfinite induction. Let /? < a and suppose 
that we already have a one-one function fa with domain X, such that (1) 
holds for 8. Since IX,( < a, and I Yyl = a for all y < a, we may extend4 to a 
one-one function f,+, with domain Xa+, such that ( I )  holds for B+1. 
Simply choose, for each y < 8, a value fa+ ,(y, /?) E Y, which is different 
from all the previously chosen values of fa+ 
By taking unions at the limit 
ordinals, we obtain a chain of functions f, with domain Xa such that each 
f a  is one-one and has the property (I). Then the union f = us.ufa 
is 
a one-one function with domain X, satisfying (1). 4 
The next definition is the key to the proofs of Lemma 6.1.7 and Theorem 
6.1.4. 
Let ll be a nonempty collection of partitions of a such that each partition 
has exactly a equivalence classes, and let F be a nontrivial filter over a. We 
say that the pair (ll, F) is consistent iff given any X E F and any X ,  , ..., X,, 
n < o, 
each X i  belonging to a distinct partition Pi E I7, X n 
ismxi 
# 0. 
The next lemma contains all the important information about this notion of 
consistency. If F is a filter and F u E has the finite intersection property, then 
we let (F, E) denote the filter generated by F u E. 
LEMMA 
6.1.7. Let a be an infinite cardinal. 
(i). Let F be a unijbrm filter over a generated by a subset E c F of power 
at most a. There exists a collection ll of partitions of a such that Ill1 = 2" 
and (IZ, F) is consistent. 

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
389 
(ii). Suppose that (ZI, F) is consistent. Let J c a. Then either (ZI, (F, { J } ) )  
is consisfenf, or else (IZ', (F, (a\J})) 
is consistent for some cofiniten' c If. 
(iii). Suppose that (ZI, F) is consistent. Let p be any monotonic mapping 
of S,(a) into F and let P E l7. Then there exist an extension F' of F and an 
additive function q : &(a) + F' such that q < p and (n\{P}, F') is con- 
sistent. 
PROOF. (i). Let J,, p < a, be a list of all finite intersections of members 
of E. Each lJ,l = a. By Lemma 6.1.6, there are I,, p < a, such that lI,l = a, 
Z, c J,, and la n I,. = 0 if 
# p'. Consider the set 
B = {(s, r )  : s E &(a) and r : S(s) + a}. 
Clearly, IB( = a. Let (s,, r,), < < a, be an enumeration of B (with possible 
repetitions) in such a way that 
B = {(st, rc) : ( E I,} for each p < a. 
For each J c a define the functionf, : a + a as follows: 
fJ(5) = r<(J n sc) 
if 
5 E u 
I,, 
8 < 4  
fJ(r) = 
otherwise. 
We first establish that there are 2" such functions f , ,  Suppose that J ,  # J 2 .  
We may suppose, by symmetry that there is an X E  J ,  and x # J 2 .  Let 
s = { x }  and r = {( {x}, 0), (0, l)}. Then (s, r )  E B, so (s, r )  = (sc, rc) for 
some t. Now f,,(5) = r(J, n s) = 0 and fJ,(5) = r(J2 n s) = 1. So 
f,, # f J , .  Next, let p, y,, ..., y,, be ordinals in a, and let J , ,  ..., J,, be dis- 
tinct subsets of a. Then we claim that there is a ( E I, such that 
fJ,(<) = yi for 1 < i < n. 
To see this, lets be any finite subset of a such that 
s n Ji # s n J j  for 1 < i < j < n. 
Now let r : S(s) + a be defined in such a way that 
r(J, n 8) = y i ,  
1 < i < n .  
E la such that (sc, rc) = (s, r ) .  Whence 
There is a 
f,,(t) = Q(Ji 
S<> = 4 J i  n s )  = Yi. 

390 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
We have, incidentally, shown that the range of eachf, is a. 
Finally, let 
= {{jy'(y) : y < a} : J c a}. 
Clearly n is a collection of 2" partitions of a. It is obvious that (n, 
F) is 
consistent. 
(ii). Suppose that (n, 
(F, ( J } ) )  is not consistent. Then there are X E  F, 
Xi E Pi E n, 
1 < i < n, the PI)s distinct, such that 
Let n' = n\{P, 
... P,}. Let Q j ,  1 < j < rn, be distinct elements of l7' 
and Y j  E Q j .  Then by hypothesis, 
x n  n xin 
Y j z O .  
l S i S n  
1 Q j S n  
(2) 
It is immediate from (1) and (2) that 
( a \ J ) n x n  n Y j z O .  
l S j < m  
So (n', 
(F, {a\J))) 
is consistent. 
(iii). Let X,, 6 < a, be an enumeration ofP without repetition. Let So(.) 
= {r, : 6 < a}. For each 6 < a, we define the function q, : S,(a) -+ S(a) 
as follows: 
qd($) = P(?b) fl Xd 
if 
?d7 
%(S) = 0 
if s + r,. 
Note that q&) c p(td), q,(s) # 0 if s c r,, and q&, u s2) = qd(sl) n 
qd(s2). This last is because 
s1 u s2 c t, iff both s1 c t, and s2 c t,. 
Define the function q : &(a) + S(a) as follows: 
44 = u 
q a ( 4  
s E S,(Q). 
,<a 
As p is monotone, we see easily that q(s) c p(s), so q < p. Since q&) n 
q&) = 0 if 6 # 6', we have that q(s) is a disjoint union of subsets of X,. 
Using the fact that each q, is additive and that 
Xb n X,, # 0 
iff 6 = 6', 
we check easily that q is additive. Now let I;' = (F, Rng q). We claim that 
(n\{P}, F') is consistent. Let X E  
F, s E &(a), XI 
E Pi E n, 1 < i < n, 

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
391 
the P, distinct and different from P. Since s = fa for some 6 < a, we have 
4 s )  = 4*(4 = P ( 4 )  n 
& Y  
and 
x np(ta) n xd n n xi z 0. 
l d i d n  
Whence 
x n q ( s ) n  n xi z 0. -1 
1 < i < n  
PROOF 
OF THEOREM 
6.1.4. We may assume that Z = a. Let I,,, n < w, be a 
sequence of subsets of a of power a such that I,,+1 c Z,, and n,,<Jn 
= 0. 
Let F, be the uniform filter generated by the set (I,, : n E w}. By Lemma 
6.1.7 (i), let no be any collection of partitions of a such that lnol = 2" and 
(no, 
F,) is consistent. We shall define by transfinite induction two sequences 
n,, ( < 2", Fs, 5 < 2" such that 
Il, c n,, F, 3 F, if 
q < 5 < 2", 
(n,, F,) is consistent for ( < 2". 
The construction is as follows: Let p,, 5 < 2", be an enumeration of all 
monotone functions mapping &(a) into S(a), and let J,, t c 2", be an enu- 
meration of S(a). Suppose that n,,, F,, for q < ( < 2" have been defined 
satisfying all the inductive hypotheses. If ( is a limit ordinal, then simply let 
It is clear that (n,=, 
F,) is consistent and In,l = 2". If 
= A+2n+ 1, A a 
limit ordinal and n < o, 
then let J be the first element of S(a) not already in 
F,-l. By Lemma 6.1.7 (ii), we can find n,, F; such that 
IU,-l \n,l < a, 
IU,l = 2", 
J E Fc or (a\J) 
E F,, 
(n,, F,) is consistent. 
If { = 1+2n+2,1 a limit ordinal and n < o, 
then let p : &,(a) + F,- 
be 
the first function in the listp,, q < 2", which we have not already dealt with. 
By Lemma 6.1.7 (iii), we can find n,, F,, q : &(a) -+ F, such that 
\n,1 
= 1, 
ln,l = 2", 
q < p, q is additive, 
F, = (Fc-1, Rng q), 
(n,, F,) is consistent. 

392 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
Let F = uc< 
2= Fc. Because of our construction and cf (2") > u, we see that 
F is a countably incomplete a+-good ultrafilter over a. -1 
Notice that the full strength of Lemmas 6.1.6 and 6.1.7 allows us to 
prove that any uniform filter F over a generated from a set of at most u ele- 
ments can be extended to an a+-good ultrafilter over a (Exercise 6. I .4). 
We now prove the generalization of Theorem 6.1.1. 
THEOREM 
6.1.8. Let ct be an injinite cardinal and let D be a countably incom- 
plete u-good ultrajilter over a set I. Suppose 11911 < u. Then for any family 
al, i E Z, of models for 9, the ultraproduct nD21i 
is u-saturated. 
PROOF. In exactly the same way as in the proof of Theorem 6.1.1, we see 
that it is sufficient to prove: 
(1) For every set Z(x) of formulas of 9, if every finite subset of Z(x) is 
satisfiable in nD21i, 
then Z(x) is satisfiable in nD211. 
Suppose every finite subset of Z(x) is satisfiable in nDai. 
Since D is count- 
ably incomplete, we may choose a descending chain 
z = I0 3 I ,  3 z2 3 ... 
such that each Z, E D and nn<oZn 
= 0. We have ICI c u because II9lI < u. 
Let us define a function 
f: 
S,(C) + D 
as follows. For each finite subset u of Z, let 
(2) 
with the understanding that f ( 0 )  = I. Each u E S$) is finite and is satis- 
fiable in nDai, whence nDai 
C (3x)Au. By the fundamental theorem, 
f(u) E D. Whenever u c z E Sa(Z), we have 
1111 c I l e l  
I- (3x1 A 7 
(3x1 A 6, 
sof(z) cf(u) and f is monotonic. Now we use the fact that D is a-good. 
Since D is a-good, there is an additive function g ,< f on &(C) into D. For 
each i E Z, let 
(3) 
If la(i)l 2- n, then i E I,. Because if b(i) has at least n distinct elements el , . . ., 
On, then for s < n we have 
f(u) = IlOl 
n {i E I : 
C (3x) A u}, 
u(i) = U {e E Z : i E g({e})}. 
i E SP,), 

6.11 
ULTRAPROD1 JCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
393 
whence using the additivity of g, 
iEg((81)) n**.n 
g({en}) = g({e,, - * * ?  e n > )  c f ( ( e 1 ,  - . * , e n > )  c I n .  
We recall that n n c o Z n  = 0, and therefore 
for each i E I, 
a(i) is finite. 
We now choose an element h, which satisfies C ( x )  in nDmi. 
For each i E Z, 
we have by (2), (3), and additivity, 
i E n { g w i )  : 0 E o(i)) = g ( m )  =f(m, 
and therefore i ~ f ( a ( i ) ) .  
Then by (2) we may choose an element h(i) E Ai 
such that 
(4) 
91i b A c(i)[h(i)l. 
Now, whenever 8 E C and i E g({O>), we have 8 E a(i) and by (4), 9li I= 
0 [h(i)]. But g( (8)) E D, so by the fundamental theorem 
C 8 [hD] for all 
4 E C. This shows that hD satisfies 2 in &,ai. -I 
Using Theorems 6.1.4 and 6.1.8, and an instance of the GCH, let us quickly 
draw a conclusion which is stronger than the isomorphism theorem 6.1.15, 
proved later in this section. 
THEOREM6.1.9. LetIILi?II < a and8,B be models for 9 
with IAI, 
d a+. 
Assume that 2" = a+. Let D be an a+-good countably incomplete ultra- 
filter over a set Z of power a. Then the following are equivalent: 
(i). B = 8. 
(ii). n D %  s n D 8 .  
PROOF. 
(i) =- (ii). Assume (i). By Theorem 6.1.8, the ultrapowers nD% 
and nD8 
are both a+-saturated. Moreover, they both have cardinality at 
most (a+>" = 2" = a+. Using the equivalences nD% 
= 8 3 'B E n~'% 
and the uniqueness theorem for saturated models, we have the isomorphism 
n D %  
n D 8 .  
(ii) 
(i). This is obvious. i 
It follows from Theorem 6.1.9 that if we assume the GCH, then for any 
two models %, '% for an arbitrary 9, 8 and B are elementarily equivalent 
if and only if they have isomorphic ultrapowers. This isomorphism theorem 
gives us a purely algebraic characterization of the notion of elementary equiv- 
alence. It turns out that while it is not known whether Theorem 6.1.9 is true 

394 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
without the assumption 2" = a', the above consequence of Theorem 6.1.9 
is always true without the GCH. 
The next sequence of lemmas is designed to 
prove the isomorphism theorem without the GCH. 
We first give a crucial definition. Let 1, K be infinite cardinals and let ,u 
be the least cardinal a such that Ia > 1. It is easily seen that p < I and ,u 
is a regular cardinal. Let F be a set of functionsf : I -, p and let G be a set of 
functions g : 1 + /3(g), where /?(g) is a cardinal less than p, Let D be a filter 
over 1. We say that the triple (F, G, D )  is rc-consistent iff the following hold: 
(i). D is generated by a subset E c D of power at most K. This means 
that E c D, [El Q K, E is closed under finite intersections, and every ele- 
ment of D is a superset of some element in E. 
(ii). Whenever we are given a cardinal /3 < 11, a P-termed sequence f , ,  
p < /I, 
of distinct functions in F, a B-termed sequence of ordinals o,, p < p, 
less than p, and two functions f E F and g E G, then the set 
{t < 1 :fp(t) 
= up for all p .c B andf(5) = s(0) 
together with D generate a nontrivial filter over 1. 
A consequence of this definition is that D is a nontrivial filter over 3,. 
The next lemma is a straightforward generalization of Lemma 6.1.7(i). 
Indeed, the definition of the triple (F, G, D) being rc-consistent is a general- 
ization of the notion of the pair (n, F )  being consistent. 
LEMMA 6.1.10. There is a family F of 2'functions from 1 to p such that the 
triple (F, 0, { I > )  is p-consistent. 
PROOF. 
Let 
H = {(A, S, h) : A c I ,  IAl < p, S c S(A), IS1 .c p, and h : S + p}. 
By thedefinitionof p, IHI = 1. Whence we may enumerate H = {(A,, S,, 
h,) : t < A}. For B c I, and 5 < I, define 
h,(B n A,) 
if B n A, E S,, 
if B n  A , $ S , .  
fdt) = (() 
Finally, let F = { fe : B c I > .  It is easy to see that ifB # C, then f B  # f c .  Let 
jl < p and let Bp, p .c p, be distinct subsets of I and let up, p < p, be a se- 
quence of ordinals less than p. We show that the set 
{t < 1 :fB,(t) = a, 
for all p < p} 
is not empty. Let A be a set of power less than p such that Bp n A # B,, n A 

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
395 
for all p, p' < 0, 
p # p'. Let S = {B, n A : p < /3) and let h(A n B,) = 0,. 
Then ( A ,  S, h ) E H ,  and whence ( A ,  S, h )  = ( A z ,  S,, h,) for some 5 < A. 
Hence 
fBp(t;) = h,(B, n At) = h(B, n A )  = Q, 
for all 
p < 0. i 
LEMMA 
6.1.11. 
(i). If(F, G, D )  is K-consistent and ti < y ,  then (F, G, D )  is y-consistent. 
(ii). Suppose that (F,, G,, D,) is ti,-consistent for every 5 < 6. Suppose 
< 6, and ti, < K 
F,, U T < a G t ,  us<aD,) is K-con- 
(iii). If (F, G, 0) 
is K-consistent and F' c F, G' c G, then (F', G', 0) is 
further that F, 2 F,, G, c G,, Dt c D, whenever 5 < 
for each t; < 6 ,  andcf ( 6 )  6 K. Then 
sistent. 
K-consistent. 
PROOF. The proofs of all parts of this lemma consist of simply checking 
the definitions. We leave it as an exercise for the reader. i 
The next lemma contains the heart o f  the matter. 
LEMMA 
6.1.12. Let G be a set of functions from ;1 to cardinals less than p such 
that @+[GI < IC. Suppose that (F, 0, D )  is K-consistent. Then there is an 
F' c Fsuch that IF\F'I 
< K and the triple (F', G, D )  is K-consistent. 
PROOF. Since IG( < K ,  it is clearly sufficient to prove that: 
(1) For every element g E G, there is a subset F, c F such that IF,I < K 
and (F-F,, {g}, D )  is K-consistent. 
This is because from (1) it follows that the set F' = F- ugEG{Fg} 
is the re- 
quired set. To prove (l), let g E G. Suppose that (1) fails to hold for g. Then 
(2) For every subset F c F of power at most K ,  (F\F, 
{g}, 0) is not K- 
consistent. 
We now define by induction sets F,, F,, ( < K', such that (making use of 
F, = F; 
F, is a subset of F, of power at most IC such that (F,\F,, 
{g}, D) is 
not K-consistent; 
F,+ = F,\F,; 
F,, = n,<,,F, if q is a limit ordinal, q < K'. 
(2)) 

396 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
Furthermore, since 11 < K ,  if weexamine what it really meansfor ( F c ,  {g}, 0) 
to be not K-consistent, we can make sure that for each < < K', there are a 
cardinal /Ie < p, a sequence of ordinals af, p < p,, less than p, a sequence 
of distinct functionsf: 
E F , ,  p < p,, and a function f e  E F, such that the set 
A ,  = ( v  < A :fj(v) = a: 
for all 
p < p, 
and f r ( v )  = g(v)} 
is inconsistent with D. Remember now that D is generated by a set E of 
power at most K. Since each A ,  is inconsistent with D, we have that, 
for each f < K', 
there is an X ,  E E such that A ,  n X ,  = 0. 
Since JEJ < JC, this means that there is a set X E E and there are K' 
ordinals 
X = 0. Since p < K, we may assume without loss of 
generality that for all 5 E K', 
such that A, 
P, = p < p and 
A ,  n X =O. 
Let y < p be a cardinal such that g : A -, y. 
It is clear that y < K'. 
Consider now the functions f j ,  5 < y, p < /?, 
and the functions f S ,  5 < y. Consider also the ordinals af, 5 < y ; p  < p, 
and the ordinals 5 < y. Clearly, we may well-order all the functions and the 
ordinals by the cardinal P + y  < p. Since the triple (F, 0, D) is K-consistent, 
the set 
A = ( v  < 1. : f j ( v )  = a:, 
for all 5 < y 
and 
p < j?, 
and 
f C ( v )  = 5, for all < c y }  
is consistent with D. So, in particular, A n X # 0. Now let v E A n X. We 
have that v 4 A ,  for all 5 < K', 
because A ,  n X = 0. But now, for some 
5 < y, g(v) = 5. Whence v E A , .  This is a contradiction. So (1) is proved. -I 
LEMMA 
6.1.13 
(i). Suppose that (F, 0, D )  is K-consistent and A c A. Then there is an 
F' c F, (F\F'I 
< p, such that either ( F ,  0, 0') 
is K-consistent, where D' 
is thejitter generated by D and { A } ,  or else (F', 0, D") is K-consistent, where 
D" is thefilter generated by D and {A\A}. 
(ii). Suppose that (F, 0, D )  is K-consistent, p < K ,  and A ,  c I ,  for 4 < K .  
Then there are F' c F and ajilter D' 3 D such that I F\F 
I < K ,  (F', 0, D') is 
K-consistent, and for all 5 < K ,  either A ,  E D' or (A\Ac) 
E D'. 
PROOF. (i). The proof of (i) is an analogue of the proof of Lemma 6.1.7 (ii). 
First of all, it is clear that both D' and D" are generated by a subset of power 

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
397 
at most K. Suppose that (F, 0, D') is not K-consistent. Then there are a cardi- 
nal /A? < p, distinct functionsf,, 9 c p, and ordinals a,, p c P, such that the 
set 
B = ( 5  < 1 : f,(t) = a, 
for all p c P }  
is inconsistent with D'. Whence there is a set X E E such that B r\ X n A 
= 0. Let F' = F\{f, : p < p}. We show that (F', 0, D") is K-consistent. 
Let P' < p and let the sequences fd, p < p' and c$, p < P', be given. Con- 
sider the set 
Since (F, 0, D) is K-consistent, the set B n B' is consistent with D. Let Y be 
any set in E. We have that B n B' n Y n X # 0. Since B n X n A = c). it 
follows that B' n Y n (1\A) 
# 0. So B' is consistent with D". 
(ii). The proof of (ii) is a simple iteration of (i). i 
The following lemma is a key step in constructing the isomorphism. 
LEMMA 
6.1.14. Suppose that BI is a model with IAl < p, and (F, 0, C) is 
K-consistent. Let ( p e ,  5 < K ,  be formulas of 2'. 
We assume that the set 
{qt : < c K} is closed under conjunction. We write each 'pc = (ps(x, J J ) .  For 
each 5 < K, let ac : 1 + A be a function mapping 1 into A .  Suppose that for 
each 4 < K, 
{v c A : '11 I= (3x)cp~(x, ac(v))} E D .  
Then therearea : 1 + A ,  F' c F, D' =I D, such that IF\F'I 
6 K, (F', 0 ,  D') 
is K-consistent, and, for every < c K, 
{ v  < A : '1[ k (p;(a(v), d ( V ) ) }  ED'. 
PROOF. Let IAl = c1 and let {ac : 5 < a} be an enumeration of A .  We define 
functions gc : A + ci for 5 c K as follows: for each v < A, 
the first ordinal 
0 otherwise. 
such that 91 1 (pc(a,,ac(v)) if such an a,, exists, 
Let G = {gc : 5 < K>. Note that p+IGI < K. So, by Lemma 6.1.12, there 
i s F  c Fsuch that IF\FI 
6 Kand (F, G, D)is K-consistent. Now letfbe any 

398 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
function in F. Define a : 1 + A as follows: 
For each 5 < K, define 
B, = {v < il : c q,(a(v), a'(v))}. 
Let D' be the filter generated by D and {B, : [ < K}. Note that D' is gene- 
rated by a subset of power at most K. Let F' = F\{f}. 
We now show that 
the conclusion of the theorem holds for F', D' and a. We simply have to 
show that (F', 0, 0') is K-consistent. 
Let p < p, and suppose we are given the sequences f p ,  p < p, and up, 
p < p. Let 
B = {v < 1 : f,(v) 
= up for every p < /I}. 
If B were inconsistent with D', then there are X E  
D and some Bs, t < K, 
such that 
B n X n  B, = 0. 
Now consider the function f E F together with the sequence f,, p < 8, 
and the function gc E G. Since (F, G, D) is K-consistent, the set 
B = {v < A :fp(v) = up for all p < fl andf(v) = g,(v)} 
is consistent with D. If we look at the definition of gc and of B,, we see that 
B c B n  B,. 
Since B n X # 0, it follows that B n B, n X # 0. This contradicts the as- 
sumption that B is inconsistent with D'. -I 
We observe that only notational difficulties prevented us from proving 
the above lemma with the set of formulas q,(x, y1 , . . ., y,,), [ c K ,  nC < o. 
Then we would have to deal with the functions af , . . ., a:, , and the sets 
{v < I. : c (3x)cp,(x, af(v), ..., a:,(v))}. 
However, nothing will be gained in the proof. So we shall assume that Lem- 
ma 6.1.14 holds in this more general form. 
THEOREM 
6.1.15 (Isomorphism Theorem). Let % and '23 be models for 9. Then 
% and 23 are elementarily equivalent if and only if they have isomorphic ul- 
trapowers. 

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
399 
PROOF. One direction of the theorem is trivial, so let us concentrate on the 
hard direction. 
Let 9.l and '23 be equivalent models for 9. 
We may assume that p and 1 
are cardinals such that p is the least cardinal such that Rp > R and both 
IAl c p and IBI c p. Since 2'"I < 
= 1, we may further assume without 
loss of generality that Il.rtPII < 1. We shall now construct by transfinite in- 
duction on ordinals p < 2' an ultrafilter D over R and an isomorphism be- 
tween the ultrapowers nD% 
and nD8. 
We start out with 
IFo! = 2A and Do = {A}, and (Fo, 0, Do) is 1-consistent. 
This is clearly possible by Lemmas 6.1.10 and 6.1.11(i) (as p < A). We 
now look for a decreasing sequence of the F,, p < 2', and an increasing 
sequence of the D,, p c 2', satisfying, among other conditions: 
(1) 
IFo-F,I < R+IpI, 
SO lFpl = 2'; 
(F,, 
0, D,) is R + Jpl-consistent; 
F, = n F,, D, = u D,, for r] a limit ordinal; 
P < 9  
P < ,  
eventually, every subset of A either belongs to some D, or its complement 
belongs to some D,, p < 2', so D = upc2ADp 
is the required ultrafilter. 
We also want to construct two sequences of elements of up : 1 + A and b, : 
1 B so that the sequences up, p -= 2" and b,, p < 2' exhaust all the 
elements of A' and B', respectively, and for each < < 2' the following con- 
ditions hold: 
(2) for any formula cp(xl,. . ., x,) of 9 
and any elements u p , , .  . ., uPn, 
each pi c t, either 
{v < 1 : ,a!= 
( P b P l ( V ) ,  
* a * ,  a,,(v)]} ED< 
{v < 1 : 
C 1 rp[a,,(v), .**, a,,(v)I} EDc; 
or 
(3) for any formula cp(xi, . . ., xn) of 9 
and any elements up,, . . ., up" and 
b p i , .  . ., bPn, each pi c 5, we have 
{v c R : 2 != cp[u,,(v) ... upn(v)]} ED, if and only if 
{v c 1 : 23 C cp[b,,(v) ... bp,(v)]} ED,. 
Using Lemmas 6.1.13(i) and 6.1.1 1, it is easy to satisfy all the requirements 
of (1). Also, if conditions (2) and (3) hold for all ( < r] < 2' for some 

400 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
limit ordinal q, then they hold automatically for q. Whence, using the by now 
familiar back and forth technique, we only need to satisfy (1)-(3) when 
5 = a+ 1, in which case we either pick a, arbitrarily (in order to exhaust 
A') and find b,, or vice versa. Since the situation is symmetrical, let us 
pick a, to be the first element of Ad which has not yet been put in the list 
a,, p c 0. We now seek to find F,, ,, D,+ and b, so that (1)-(3) hold. 
For each formula cp(xy, . . . y,,) of 9 
and ordinals p1 , . . ., pn < a, con- 
sider the set A', 
depending on cp, p l ,  . . ., p,,, 
X ( 9 ,  
7 
S e . 9  P n )  = { V  < A : (21 
( ~ [ a u ( v ) a p , ( v )  apn(v>l>* 
There are altogether I+lal such sets X. Since (F,, 0, D,) is I+la(-consis- 
tent, by Lemma 6.1.13(ii) we can find F' c Fa, D' 3 D, such that 
IF,\F'I 
G A+(UI, 
(F', 0, D') is I +  101-consistent, 
each X(cp, p , ,  . . ., p,,) is in D' or its complement is in D'. 
Let r be the set of all formulas cp(xa,, . . . upn) such that the corresponding 
set 
X(V, 
9 
.) P.) E D'. 
Note that if cp(xa,, . . . a,") $ I', then icp(xa,, . . . uPn) 
E I'. Furthermore, 
for each '~(xu,, . . . a,") E r, the set Y defined below (Y depending again 
on cp, p I ,  . . ., p,,) belongs to D': 
Y(V, P1 3 
...7 P,,) = { V  < A : B != ( ~ X ) ( P ( X U ~ , ( V )  
... u,~(v))} ED'. 
Note that there are at most 1 + la( such sets Y. We now claim that the set 
Z ( q ,  p l ,  . . ., p,,) depending on cp(xa,, . . . aPn) E I' defined below is in D': 
Z(cpp, p1, ..., p,,) = { V  c 1 : 23 k (3x)cp(xb,,(v) ... b,,(v))} ED'. 
The reason for this is that if Z(cp, pl,. . ., p,,) 4 D', then Z(q, p i ,  . . ., p,,) 
4 D,. Using (3), we see that this implies Y(cp, p , ,  . . ., p,,) # D,. Now, 
by (2), [A\Y(cp, 
pI , . . ., p,,)] E D, c D'. This contradicts that D' is a non- 
trivial filter. We can now apply Lemma 6.1.14 to get a 6, : 1 + B, F,+, c 
F', D,+l =, D' such that IF'\F,+,l 
6 1+lal, (F,,,, 0, D a + l ) i s  1+lal- 
consistent, and for each ~ ( x u , ,  , . . . upn) E r, 
' 
( V  < A : 23 l= (PCbwJp,(v) 
0 . .  b,,(VIl> ED,+I 
We now have our F,+l, Da+l and b,. First of all, by our choicc of D', 

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
40 1 
it is clear that 
satisfies (2). To show that (3) holds, we only note that 
if p ( x a p l r .  . . a,") E r, then (3) will hold for cp and a,, a,,, . . .,up,. If 
p(xa,, . . . a,")$ r, then icp(xa,, . . . a,,)€r. Then (3) holds for i 
cp, 
a,, apI , . . ., a,,, and hence also for cp, a,, a,,, . . ., a,,. 
So the induction is 
complete. 
Let D = up<2L 
D,. Then D is an ultrafilter over A. Furthermore, the map- 
ping apD + b,, is the required isomorphism of nD% 
onto nDB. i 
We shall see in some of the exercises that Theorem 6.1.15 can be improved 
in various ways. However, no new ideas are involved in these improvements. 
As a corollary we give an algebraic characterization of the notion of an 
elementary class. 
COROLLARY 
6.1.16. Let K be any class of models for 9'. 
and isomorphisms, and the complement of K is closed under ultrapowers. 
are closed under ultraproducts and isomorphisms. 
(i). K is an elementary class if and only if K is closed under ultraproducts 
(ii). K is a basic elementary class if and only if both K and its complement 
PROOF. By Theorems 6.1.15 and 4.1.12. -I 
The next corollary is a strong form of the Craig interpolation theorem. 
COROLLARY 
6.1.17 (Separation Theorem). Let K, L be two classes of models 
for 9 
such that K n L = 0 and both K and L are closed under isomorphisms 
and ultraproducts. Then there exists a basic elementary class M such that 
K c  M a n d L n M = O .  
PROOF. Let K' be the class of all models 2l for 9' such that some '$3 E K is 
elementarily equivalent to %. Define L' similarly. Then K c K', L c L' and 
K', L' are closed under elementary equivalence. It follows from the funda- 
mental theorem 4.1.9 that the ultraproduct construction preserves ele- 
mentary equivalence, that is, if D is an ultrafilter over Z and UI = B1 
for all 
i E Z, then n D U i  = n D B i .  Therefore the classes K', L' are also closed un- 
der ultraproducts. By Theorem 4.1.12, K' and L' are elementary classes. 
We claim that K n L' = 0. For if U E K'nL', then there exist B E K, Q E L  
such that B = % E Q, and by the isomorphism theorem there is an ultrafilter 
D such that nDB z nDQ; 
since K, L are closed under isomorphisms and 
ultrapowers, this implies that n D B  E K n L ,  contradicting K n L = 0. 

402 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
Now, since K' n L' = 0 and K', L' are elementary classes, it follows from 
the compactness theorem that there is a basic elementary class M with 
K' c M ,  L' n M = 0. Since K c K', L c L', we have K c M, L n M 
= 0. i 
EXERCISES 
6.1.1*. Give examples for the following: 
(i). Theorem 6.1.1 is false when 2' is uncountable. 
(ii). A countable model % for a language 2' of power 2" and nonprin- 
cipal ultrafilters D, E over w such that nD'% 
* nE'%. 
(iii). Like (ii), but with n D ' %  * n D ( n ~ a ) .  
(iv). For every nonprincipal ultrafilter D over w, there are countable 
models a, '23 with 2" symbols such that 
6.1.2. Prove that every ultrafilter is w,-good. (Thus Theorem 6.1.8 implies 
Theorem 6.1.1 .) 
6.1.3*. Every countably incomplete a+-good ultrafilter is a-regular. Hence 
the index set has power at least a. 
6.1.4. Let IZ( = a. Every set E c S(Z) such that IEl < a, every element of 
E has power a, and E is closed under finite intersections can be extended to 
an u+-good ultrafilter over I. 
6.1.5*. There are 22u different a+-good ultrafilters over a. 
6.1.6*. There exists an a-regular ultrafilter over a which is not w2-good. If 
w1 < p < a, then there exists an a-regular ultrafilter over x uhich is p'- 
good but not p++-good. 
6.1.7. If D is an a-complete ultrafilter, and if '11 is a model for a language of 
cardinal 11Y\1 < a, then nn21 
is a-saturated if and only if ?f is a-saturated. 
(Note that a > w because IlYll 2 0.) 
6.1.8. Let D be an a-good countably incomplete ultrafilter over a set I. Then 
for any family of nonempty finite sets A,, i~ Z, the ultraproduct n D A l  is 
either finite or has cardinality 3 a. 
6.1.9. Every model !?l 
of power 6 2" has an elementary extension '23 of power 
< 2" such that every reduct of '23 to a language with at most a symbols is 
a+ -saturated. 
6.1.10*. Assume a+ = 2" and let 8, B be models of power < a+ such that 
= '23 but nD'll + nD%. 

6.11 
ULTRAPRODUCTS WHICH ARE SATURATED 
403 
'% 3 23. Let I)Li?l) = 0. Prove that if D, 
Eare a+-good countably incomplete 
ultrafilters over a and F is any P-regular ultrafilter, then 
[Hint: All reducts of nD%, 
nEB to finite sublanguages of 2 
are isomor- 
phic.] 
6.1.1 I*. Let p be the least cardinal a such that I" > 1, Then there exists an 
ultrafilter D over 1 such that for any two models ?l, 
B of power less than p, 
'Ix = 23 if and only if nD21 2 nDB. 
6.1.12. Let p and 1 be as in Exercise 6.1.1 I. Then there exists an ultrafilter 
D over I (in fact the same one as in Exercise 6. I. 11) such that for every model 
'% for 3 with IAl < p and 11911 6 1, the ultrapower nD% 
is I+-saturated. 
6.1.13*. Again let p, I be as in Exercise 6.1.11. Then one can find an ultra- 
filter D over I with the additional property that whenever we are given two 
sequences of models !If<, t < I ,  and ?Bc, 5 < 1 for the same 2 
such that 
JA,J 6 p < p, lB,l < p < p for all < < I ,  and nD'u, 
3 nDB,, then 
6.1.14 (Consistency Theorem). Let K, L be two classes of models and let 
T,, T, be the theories of K, L. Prove that T ,  u T, is consistent if and only 
if some ultraproduct of members of K is isomorphic to some ultraproduct of 
members of L (cf. Exercise 4.1.23). 
6.1.15*. Let 91 be an infinite simply ordered set, and D a nonprincipal ultra- 
filter over w. Prove that nD!Il 
is not (2,)+-saturated. Also prove that 
n D ( w l ,  <) is not w,-saturated. 
6.1.16**. Let D be an a-regular ultrafilter. Prove that if 'u = (0, +, *, 0, 1) 
is the standard model for number theory, and nD?i 
is a+-saturated, then 
D is a+-good. A similar result holds for other models, e.g., 2l = ( S ,  (w), c ). 
6.1.17*. Prove that for each ultrafilter D and each cardinal a > 0, (i)-(iv) 
below are equivalent: 
nDw< 2 nDB{. 
(1). D is countably incomplete and a-good. 
(ii). For every model 2l for a countable language, nD21 is a-saturated. 
(iii). For each family 2fi, i E I, of models for a language with fewer than 
(iv). Same as (iii) with a-saturated. 
a symbols, 
is a-universal. 
6.1.18. Let D be an a-regular ultrafilter and let Y, B be models for a language 

404 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.1 
of power ,< a with (II = 23. Then nD21 
is a+-saturated if, and only if, nDB 
is af-saturated. 
[Hint: See Exercise 4.3.36.1 
6.1.19. Let D be an w,-good countably incomplete ultrafilter over ol, and 
let E be a countably incomplete ultrafilter over w. Let 91 be the standard niodel 
for number theory, ?I = ( w ,  +, ., 0, 1). Prove that 
6.1.20*. Let w ,< a < P, let D be an a+-good ultrafilter over a, let E 
be a P+-good ultrafilter over P, and let D, E be countably incomplete. Let 
91 be an infinite simply ordered set, and form the double ultrapower 23 = 
flD(nE91). 
Prove that: 
(i). '8 is a+-saturated; 
(ii). 23 is not a++-homogeneous (hence not a +  +-saturated); 
(iii). 93 is P+-universal. 
6.1.21". Let S,,(a) denote the set of all subsets of a of power < n. An ul- 
trafilter D is &(a)-good iff for every monotonic function f :  &(a) -+ D 
there is an additive function g : &(a) + D such that g 6 f. Every ultrafilter 
is trivially &(a), S,(a), and S,(a)-good. Show that if 3 < n < w, then 
D is S,,(a)-good if and only if D is S,(a)-good. 
6.1.22**. Let D be a countably incomplete ultrafilter. Then D is S,(a)-good 
if and only if D is a+-good. 
6.1.23. Let ?I be a model and cp(uvl . . . D,,) 
a formula. A set S c A is said to 
be cp-definable iff there are a,, . . ., an in A such that 
S = {b E A : % k cp[bal . . . u,,]}. 
By a (cp, nt)-cover of ?I we mean a collection of m pdefinable sets S, , . . ., 
S, c A such that 
S ,  u . . . v S, = A ,  
but no proper subfamily of S,, . . ., S,,, covers A .  A model % has thefinite 
couer property iff there is a formula ~ ( u u ,  
. . . v,,) such that for arbitrarily 
large m < o, 
2l has a (cp, m)-cover. Show that if (II E B and (II has the finite 
cover property, then so does 23. 
6.1.24**. Show that the following are equivalent: 

6.21 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
405 
(i). 2l does not have the finite cover property. 
(ii). There is a cardinal a 2 2" such that for every a-regular ultrafilter 
(iii). For all a and a-regular D, nD% 
is a+-saturated. 
D, nD21 is a+-saturated. 
6.1.25*. If 11211 = o, 
91 is a-saturated, D is an ultrafilter over a set of power 
fi, and no% 
is (28)+-saturated, then nD91 
is r-saturated. 
6.1.26. Prove that for every countably incomplete ultrafilter D, every 
bounded ultrapower of a superstructure V ( X )  modulo D is w,-saturated. 
6.1.27. Prove that a countably incomplete ultrafilter D is a-good if and 
only if for every superstructure V ( X ) ,  the bounded ultrapower of V ( X )  
modulo D is a-saturated. 
6.2. Direct products, reduced products, and Horn sentences 
This and the next section contain a thorough study of the notions listed 
in the above title. One of the results is a preservation theorem of the type 
encountered in Section 5.2, namely: A sentence q is preserved under re- 
duced products if and only if it is equivalent to a Horn sentence. There are a 
number of equally interesting results concerning direct products, for exani- 
ple: (i) a sentence cp is preserved under direct products of two models if and 
only if it is preserved under arbitrary direct products; (ii) every sentence is 
equivalent to a Boolean combination of sentences preserved under reduced 
products. 
Recall from Chapter 4 that if D is a proper filter over a nonenipty in- 
dex set I, then the reduced product of the models 21i, i E I, modulo D is de- 
noted by nD21i. 
The reduced power of 2l modulo D is denoted by nD.. In 
the case where the filter D consists only of the set { I } ,  then we call n,,, 91i the 
direct product of the models ai, i E I. (See Exercise 4.1.12 for a more ex- 
plicit definition of the direct product.) We henceforth agree to drop the 
subscript { I }  on n 
and write ni.,Ni for the direct product. Our understand- 
ing in this section is that I shall always be nonempty, and D shall always be 
a proper filtcr over I. If the index set I has exactly two members, I = {l, 2}, 
then the reduced product 
degenerates into a model which is either 
isomorphic to 
or to a,, or is the direct product of the two models '21, 
and M,, 
which we shall denote by 
x a2. Considered as a binary operation 
on models, the operation x is (up to isomorphism) commutative and asso- 

406 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.2 
ciative. There is a unique (up to isomorphism) one-element model (II for 9 
which acts like an identity for x , namely the one-element model in which 
all relations are nonempty. For this model 9l, we have obviously 23 
23 x % z % x 23 for all %. We refer to 911 x 912 x . . . x (II,, as a finite direct 
product of 'illl , . . ., an, and to nlsr 
91i as an arbitrary direct product of models 
91i. It will be clear from the context whether we have the finite or arbitrary 
direct product in mind. We keep a similar convention as regards finite or 
arbitrary direct powers. 
Since D is a filter over Z, it is a filter in the complete Booiean algebra 
S(I), the set of all subsets of Z, under the usual Boolean operations. Thus we 
may define the quotient Boolean algebra S(Z)/D in the usual way. If we let 
1 denote the two-element Boolean algebra (1 here denotes the fact that this 
Boolean algebra has exactly one atom), then there is a natural isomorphism 
of S(Z)/D onto the reduced product nD 
1 (see Exercise 6.2.1). Much o f  the 
study of reduced products nD21i 
depends on a knowledge of the theory 
of the Boolean algebra nD 
1. 
At this point we need some general combinatorial lemmas on direct 
and reduced products. The student already knows that the operation x on 
models is commutative and associative (up to isomorphism). Furthermore, 
it is easy to verify that a direct product niE,21i 
of direct products 91i = 
njsJ, 
Bj is again (isomorphic to) a direct product of models with a suitably 
chosen index set. Also a direct product nier91i 
can always be regrouped, 
depending on a partition Z = ujEJ 
I j  of Z, so that it is a direct product 
njs,(sj 
of direct products Bj = niEr,'illi. These same facts for reduced 
products (and also for ultraproducts) are slightly less trivial and we shall 
state them carefully below, leaving most of the proofs to the exercises. (This 
topic is treated in a more thorough manner again at the beginning of Sec- 
tion 6.4.) Let D and E be filters over the sets Z and J, respectively. We de- 
fine D x E to be the collection of all subsets Y of Zx J such that 
{ j  E J : {i E I : ( i j )  E Y }  E D} E E. 
The reader is asked to verify that D x E is a filter over Zx J. In particular, 
if D and E are proper filters, then so is D x E. Let D be a filter oier Z, and let 
I = I ,  u . . . u I,, be a partition of Z into disjoint sets Zj. Suppose that, 
forallj,I < j <  n,forallXED,XnZj#O. 
Then the sets 
D j = { X n I j : X ~ D } f o r l  
< j < n  

6.21 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
407 
are proper filters over I j .  The following proposition contains essentially 
all that we need to know about combinations of reduced products. 
PROPOSITION 
6.2.1. 
qii, (0) E I x  J, 
(i). Suppose that D and E are filters over I and J. Then for all models 
(ii). Suppose I = I ,  v . . . v I,, D is a .filter over I, and Dj arefilters over 
Ij defined as above. Then for all modeIs 21i, i E I, 
PROOF. We give a precise definition of the isomorphisms and leave the rest as 
an exercise. Let a €  n ( i j > E r x J A i j .  
F o r j E J ,  let ai be the restriction of a 
to the set I x  { j } ;  ai is essentially a member of n i e r A i j ,  whence a i  is in 
nD 
A i j .  Let f be the function defined by 
.f(aD X €1 = ( n j  J ( a i ) ) E  
Then f is the desired isomorphism. The required isomorphism for (ii) is 
constructed in very much the same manner. For 1 6 j < n, let aj be the 
restriction of a E n i c r A i  to the set I j .  Then the mapping 
g(aD) = 
..* a”,,> 
will work. -I 
A formula cp of 9 
is said to be a basic Horn formula i f f  cp is a disjunction 
of formulas O i ,  
cp = e , V  ..A,,,, 
where at most one of the formulas Bi is an atomic formula, the rest being 
negations of atomic formulas. If m = 1, then cp is either an atomic or the 
negation of an atomic formula. If m > 1 and Om is an atomic formula, say, 
then cp is equivalent to a formula 
( $ l A $ z A *  
* * A $ m - t  
+ e m ) ,  
where each $ i ,  1 < i -= m, is also an atomic formula. A Horn formula is 
built up from basic Horn formulas with the connectives A ,  3 and V. A Horn 
sentence is a Horn formula with no free variables. 

408 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.2 
PROPOSITION 
6.2.2. 
Let D be a (proper)jilter over I, and let a', . . ., a" E ni., 
A i .  If 
(i). Let cp(x, . . . x,) be a Horn formula and let a[, i E I, be models for 9. 
{ i  E I : 91i C p[a'(i) ... an(i)]} ED, 
then 
n 
%i C p[ah ... a",. 
D 
(ii). Every Horn sentence is preserved under reduced products. 
(iii). Every Horn sentence is preserved under direct (jinite or arbitrary) 
products. 
PROOF. 
We shall sketch a proof of (i). Then (ii) and (iii) follow easily. Sup- 
pose cp = 8, v . . . v 8, is a basic Horn formula. Assume first that all Oj are 
negations of atomic formulas I)j, and 
x = { i  E z : 
c (1 $, v ... v i 
I),)[a'(i) ... a"(i)]} ED. 
This means that for some j, 1 < j < m, the set 
X j  = {i E I : 
I= Jlj[u'(i) ... a"(i)]} 4 D. 
For otherwise X n XI n . . .nX, = 0 e D, which is a contradiction. So, by 
the definition of reduced products, for some j, 
n 
%i C -l 
n 
i!ii C cp[a:, ... a;]. 
... a;], 
D 
and hence 
D 
Next suppose that Bi = i 
tjj, 1 Q j < m, and $ j  and 8, are atomic formulas. 
Let us disregard the trivial case m = 1, and assume that for 1 ,< j < m 
J-J 
%i C $,[a:, ... a",. 
D 
Then each 
X j  = { i  E Z : 21i I= $ j [ a l ( i )  ... a"(i)]} ED. 
So X = X,n.. .nX,-, ED. 
Now if 
i E x n { i  EZ : Hi C p[a'(i) ... ~ " ( i ) ] } ,  
then illi C O,[a'(i). . . S(i)]. 
So 
{ i  E z : ai c e,[al(i) ... an(i>l> ED, 

6.21 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
and 
nDai 
c em[.:, 
... a;;]. 
409 
Now (i) is proved for basic Horn formulas. We leave the induction steps for 
cpl A cp2, (3x)cp, and (Vx)cp to the reader. -I 
We turn next to the converse of the above proposition. There are two nat- 
ural preservation problems: Which sentences are preserved under reduced 
products, and which sentences are preserved under direct products? The 
following example shows that the two questions have different answers. 
EXAMPLE 
6.2.3. There is a Z: sentence cp which is preserved under arbitrary 
direct products but not under reduced products. Hence the sentence cp is 
not logically equivalent to a Horn sentence. 
Let cp be the conjunction of the axioms for Boolean algebras plus the sen- 
tence 'there is at least one atom', i.e. 
(3XVY)tX f 0 A ( X  ' J' = y -b y = X V y 3 o)]. 
Since the axioms for Boolean algebras are universal, cp is E:, To see that 
cp is preserved under direct products, we note that if an element f E ni,,9li 
is an atom at one coordinate i and zero everywhere else, then f is an atom in 
nie191i. 
However, cp is not preserved under reduced products because if 
D is the FrechCt filter of all cofinite subsets of o, 
then any reduced product 
nDan 
of Boolean algebras is atomless. 
Let us take up the preservation problem for reduced products. 
Let I be a set of infinite power a. The phrase 'for almost all i E Z', shall 
mean 'for all but fewer than a elements i E Z'. 
LEMMA 
6.2.4. Suppose that 112'11 6 IZI = a, 2" = a', and that 91i, i E I, are 
models for 27 with lAil 6 a'. Let % be either afinite model or a saturated 
model of power a'. Zf every Horn sentence holding on almost all 'illi holds on 
B, then B is isomorphic to a reduced product nD91i 
of the models 'illi modulo 
a.filter D over I. 
PROOF. Let A = n i e r A i .  Since 2" = a+, IAl < a'. 
We first find a 
mapping h of A onto B such that 
(1) for all Horn formulas q ( x ,  . . . x,) and all y', . . ., y" E A, if for almost 
all i E Z, $!Ii 
C cpb'(i) . . . y"(i)], then '8 C cp[hy' . . . hy"]. 
Let a E "'A and b E "'B enumerate A and B, respectively. We shall con- 

410 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.2 
struct by transfinite induction two sequences ii E "'A and 5 E "'B such that 
for each v < a', 
(2) every Horn sentence (in 9 u {cc : 5 < v}) holding in almost all mod- 
and 
(3) range (u) c range (ii), 
range (b) c range (5). 
Inductions of this form are by now so familiar that we shall skip the formal- 
ities and settle down on the hard parts. Suppose that (2) holds for v. We 
shall take the two possibilities of v = q+2k and v = q+2k+ 1 (q limit or- 
dinal, k < o) separately. 
els ('% cc(i))c<v holds in (B, 6,),,,, 
Case 1. v = q+2k. Define ii, = a,,+k. Let 
C = {cp(x) : cp(x) is a Horn formula of 2' u {c, : C: < v} and for almost 
all i E 1, (ai, 
iic(i))s<v t cp[ii,(i)]). 
It is immediate that C is closed under con.iunction. By inductive hypothesis, 
because (3x)cp is a Horn sentence of Y u {cc : < < v ) ,  
for every cp E 1, (23, b,),<, 1 (3x)cp(x). 
This shows that ,Z can be extended to a type of (??, 
6,),,,. 
Since the latter 
model is a'-saturated, some element, say 6, E B is such that 
( 8 9  &" 
t mvl. 
Clearly (2) now holds for v + 1. 
Case2. v = r]+2k+l. Let 6, = b,,,,. 
Let 
C = {cp(x) : cp is a Horn formula of 2 
u {c: : C: < I,} and 
(8, 
&,),<v 
i= ' 
cpvil}. 
Let cp E C. Then (3, 
6,)<<, 1 (3x) i 
cp, so by predicate logic (99,6,)s<v does 
not satisfy the Horn sentence (Vx)cp. By our inductive hypothesis (2), we 
see that the set I, defined by 
I, = {i E Z : (ai, 
iiC(i)),<,, does not satisfy (Vx)cp} 
is a subset of Z of power a. Since 11911 < a, the set C also has power at most 
a. Applying Lemma 6.1.6, we have that 
(4) for each cp E C, there is a subset J, c Z,,,, of power a such that J,,,, n J* 
= 0 if cp, $ E C  and cp # 9. 

6.21 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
411 
Now define a, E n i . , A ,  as follows: 
if i E J,, pick a,(i) so that (ai, 
iic(i))s<v k i 
cp[a,(i)], 
if i # UVEIJ,, pick a,(i) arbitrarily. 
The definition of a, is such that, given any Horn sentence cp such that cp 
holds for almost all (?Ii, 
iiC(i))t4v, 
then cp must hold on (23, 6C)tcv, for other- 
wise cp would have already failed to hold on at least a models (ai, 
CC(i))tcv. 
So again (2) holds for v +  1. After the induction is complete, clearly (3) will 
hold. The mapping h is defined by h(ii,) = 6,, v -= 3
'
.
 
It is well-defined be- 
cause if ii, = a,,, then for all i E I, Z&i) = C,,(i) whence, using the fact that 
cc = c,, is a Horn sentence, we have 6, = 6q. So (1) is proved. 
For each atomic formula q(xl . . . x n )  of 9 . a n d  each sequence y = 
(y' . . . y") of elements of A ,  define 
K,,y = {i E I : 2ii C cp[y'(i) ... y"(i)]). 
If 23 C q[hy' . . . hy"], then \K,,yl = a; if otherwise, then, since i 
cp is a Horn 
formula, '3 1 i 
cp[hyl . . . hy"]. Let E be the collection of all K,,y such that 
93 1 cp[hyl . . . hy"]. Since the disjunction of negations of atomic formulas is 
a Horn formula, the same reasoning as above will show that 
( 5 )  every finite intersection of elements of E has power 3. 
From ( 5 )  we see easily that E can be extended to the (proper) filter D over 
I such that for X c I, 
X E D iff X contains a finite intersection of members of E. 
The final step ofthe proof consists in showing that 23 is isomorphic to nDBIi. 
Let us first show that 
for all y ' ,  y2 E A, yb = y i  iff 
hjj' = hy2. 
2 
If y; = y,, then K = {i E I :  y'(i) = y2(i)> 
E D. So 
Consider now the Horn formula (roughly speaking) 
I(/ = (cp, A .  . . A cp,, + y' 
.V2). 
By (6), I(/ holds in all models 9ii under the obvious interpretations of zl, . . ., 
z,,, y ' ,  y 2 .  So $ holds in 23 under the interpretation hz,, . . ., hz,, hyl, hy2. 
By the definition of E, we have % C cpl[hzl], . . ., 23 != cp,[hz,]. So B != hy' 
= hy2 and hy' = hy2. On the other hand, if hy' = hy2, then for the formula 
(roughly speaking) cp(y'y2) = (y' = y') there will be a K E E, thus K E D, 
such that 

412 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.2 
K = {
i
~
 
z : 'lli I= y'(i) = y'(i)}. 
Whence -v; = &. We leave the remaining analogous arguments showing 
that h preserves all atomic and negations of atomic formulas to the reader. 
So h induces an isomorphism of nD%i 
onto B and the proposition is proved. i 
The preceding lemma is similar to a result from Section 6.1 on ultraprod- 
ucts: Under ?he hypotheses of the lemma, if every sentence holding in al- 
most all \rri holds in 3, then 3 is isomorphic to an ultraproduct nDai 
of the models ?Ii modulo an ultrafilter D over I. Recall that in Section 6.1 
we proved that an ultrafilter D has the property that every ultrapower 
nDYl is a-saturated if and only if D is a-good. We mention in passing that 
there is an analogous theorem for reduced products. Benda and Shelah (1972) 
proved the following. 
Let c( > w .  A filter D has the property that every reduced power flD'll 
is a-saturated if and only if D is countably incomplete, a-good, and the 
Boolean algebra nD 
1 is a-saturated. 
We say that cp is a reduced product sentence iff it is preserved under re- 
duced products. We similarly define reduced power sentences, finite direct 
power sentences, and so forth. We now prove a preservation theorem for 
reduced products. Our first proof uses the continuum hypothesis, 2" = w l .  
We shall then show how to eliminate the continuum hypothesis using one 
result which will be proved in the next section. 
THEOREM 
6.2.5. Assume the continuum hypothesis, 2" = w'. Then cp is a 
reducedproduct sentence if and only ifcp is equivalent to a Horn sentence. 
PROOF. The fact that Horn sentences are reduced product sentences was 
shown in Proposition 6.2.2, and its proof does not require the continuum 
hypothesis. Assume that cp is a reduced product sentence. If cp is inconsistent 
then it is equivalent to the Horn sentence (Vx)(x f x). So assume cp is con- 
sistent. Since we are dealing with a single sentence cp, we may assume that 9 
is countable. Let 
C = {$ : $ is a Horn sentence and I- cp + $}. 
C is not empty and is closed under conjunctions. We prove that 
(1) 
for some $ E C, t 1,9 + cp. 
By the compactness theorem, it is sufficient to prove Z k cp. Let 23 be a mod- 
el of Z, and we may assume that either 23 is finite or 23 is saturated of power 

6.21 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
413 
ol. 
Let 
Y = {$ : $ is a Horn sentence and P A  i 
$ is consistent}. 
If Y = 0, then every Horn sentence is in C, and again cp is inconsistent. So 
Y # 0. For each $ E Y ,  pick a model 'ill$ of cp A i 
$. Each 
is countable. 
Let Z = o x  Y .  For each i = ( n , $ )  EZ, let !Xi = 8,. Now let $ be an ar- 
bitrary Horn sentence and assume that $ holds in almost all Hi. Then 
$ # Y ,  so $ E C and B C $. By Lemma 6.2.4, 8 is isomorphic to a reduced 
product l$,'illi. 
Since 'illi k cp and cp is a reduced product sentence, we have 
B k cp. So (I) is true. i 
We ask the reader to prove in an exercise that it is sufficient in the hypoth- 
esis of Theorem 6.2.5 to assume that 2" = a+ holds for some infinite car- 
dinal a. 
PROPOSITION 
6.2.6. Assume 2" = wl. Then we have: 
junction of Horn sentences. 
if it is equivalent to a Horn sentence. 
(i). cp is a reduced power sentence if and only if it is equivalent to a dis- 
(ii). cp is aJinite direct product and a ceducedpower sentence if and only 
PROOF. 
(i). Let cp be a reduced power sentence. Let 
C = 
v .  . . v$,: 
. ., +,,,are 
C is closed under disjunctions. Suppose 
(1) 
for no $ E C is kcp + $. 
Then by compactness, {cp} u {i 
$ : $ E C} is consistent. Let 8 be any count- 
able model of {cp} u {i 
$: $ E C}. Note that any Horn sentence $ which 
holds on 'ill must also have a model which does not satisfy q. Since Horn 
sentences are closed under conjunctions, by compactness once more, we 
can find a model B such that 8 C 1 
cp and 
Horn sentences and t- 
v . . . v$,,, + cp}. 
every Horn sentence holding in 'ill holds in 8. 
We may assume that 8 is either finite or saturated of power ol. Let 
= aj, 
i E w. Then clearly every Horn sentence holding on almost all ai will hold 
in 8. 
By Lemma 6.2.4, B is isomorphic to some reduced power nD% 
of 8. 
This contradicts the fact that cp is a reduced power sentence and that 8 C i 
cp. 
So (1) is false. 

414 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.2 
(ii). Here we argue in a similar manner. Suppose that cp is a finite direct 
product sentence and a reduced power sentence. Then by (i), we already 
know that cp is a disjunction of Horn sentences. For simplicity, let cp = 
C = {$ : * a Horn sentence and 1 rp + *}. 
$1 v$z* Let 
We prove that 
(2) 
for some $ E Z, 
k $ + cp. 
By a similar argument as in Theorem 6.2.5, for every8 k Z there are models 
ai, i E I, of cp such that '$3 = nD!Xi. 
We now break up the index set Iinto two 
pieces I, and I, such that 
if i E Il , then ail $ I ,  
if i e  12, then !Xi k $,. 
We also assume without loss of generality that 
X n I ,  # O a n d X n I ,  #OforallXED. 
Then, by Proposition 6.2.1, nD!Xi nD,aix nDZai. 
Clearly nD,aikt,b1, 
nDZai 
C $,, 
and because cp is a direct product sentence, nD%, 
C cp and 
hence 8 t cp. So (2) holds. Notice that the proof does not claim that either 
cp = 
The latter two results, Theorem 6.2.5 and Proposition 6.2.6, were first 
proved by Keisler (1965d) using the continuum hypothesis. Galvin (1965) 
found an indirect way to eliminate the continuum hypothesis from these re- 
sults. Then Shelah (1972a) obtained a direct proof without the continuum 
hypothesis along the lines of his proof of the isomorphism theorem for ul- 
trapowers. We shall present Galvin's indirect method of eliminating the 
continuum hypothesis. It takes a circuitous journey through recursive 
functions, Boolean algebras and the constructible universe, but offers an 
example of a method which has proved useful in other circumstances. 
Let us assume that the language 9 
is countable. We may assign suitable 
Godel numbers to the symbols and expressions of 9 
so that all of the usual 
syntactical properties and transformations will become, under the correspon- 
dence given by the Godel numbers, recursive predicates and functions. Thus, 
for example, the predicates 
or cp = $,. i 
cp is a sentence of 9; 
cp is a Horn sentence of 9; 
cp is an axiom of 9; 
n is a proof of rp from the axioms of 9; 

6.21 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
415 
are all recursive predicates. As is well known, the predicate 
cp is a theorem of 2' 
is not recursive if 2 has at least one binary relation symbol; however, it 
is also well known that this predicate is a recursively enumerable predicate, 
i.e., a predicate obtained from a recursive predicate by prefixing a single 
existential (number) quantifier. A predicate P(x) is said to be arithmetical 
iff it is obtained from some recursive predicate R(xy, . . . y,,) by prefixing 
a sequence of quantifiers ( Q , y ,  . . . Q,,y,,)(Qi existential or universal) such 
that for all x ,  
P(x) iff (QIYI 
* - * QnYn)R(xYl- * - ~ n ) *  
An arithmetical statement is a zero-placed arithmetical predicate. Let ZF 
denote Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory (see Appendix), and let ZFL denote 
ZF plus the axiom of constructibility (for an esoteric form of this axiom 
see Chapter4; for the more usual form see Section 7.4). The following are im- 
plicit in Godel (1940): 
(1) Let r be an arithmetical statement. Then r is provable in ZF if and 
only if 
is provable in ZFL; or, in symbols, kzFr 
iff kZFLI'. 
(2) In ZFL we can prove the axiom of choice and the generalized con- 
tinuum hypothesis (GCH). 
From (1) and (2), it is immediate that: 
(3) Let I' be an arithmetical statement; if r is provable in ZF with the axiom 
of choice and the GCH, then r is provable in ZF. 
Let us now consider the statement: 
(4) For all sentences cp, cp is a reduced product sentence iff cp is equivalent 
to a Horn sentence. 
There is no question that a part of (4), namely, the predicate 
cp is equivalent to a Horn sentence, 
is an arithmetical predicate. 
arithmetical predicate. That is, we have the following: 
We shall prove in the next section that the other part of (4) is also an 
LEMMA 
6.2.7. The predicate 
cp is a reduced product sentence 
is an arithmetical predicate. 

416 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.2 
Using this lemma we .see that (4) is an arithmetical statement. Theorem 
6.2.5 r,!ates that (4) can be proved in ZFC with the GCH. We conclude by (3) 
that the theorem can be proved in ZFC alone. So the one fact needed to 
eliminate the continuum hypothesis is Lemma 6.2.7 above. 
We now consider the preservation problem for direct products. A syn- 
tactical characterization of direct product sentences was given by Wein- 
stein (1965). Since his characterization is very complicated, we shall not 
give it here. Instead we concentrate on the simple cases of universal and 
existential direct product sentences. 
PROPOSITION 
6.2.8. Let cp be a universal sentence. Then cp is a (finite) direct 
product sentence if and only if cp is equivalent to a universal Horn sentence. 
PROOF. We shall illustrate the method of proof by an example. Suppose that 
cp is a direct product sentence of the following form: 
CP = (Vx)[(l Pi (XI 
v P ~ ( x )  
vP3 (XI) 
A (7 
Q i  (x) v Qz(x) v Q ~ ( X ) ) L  
We have assumed for simplicity that x is the only free variable occurring 
in the atomic formulas P, , Pz, 
P3, Q ,  , Q 2 ,  Q3. We assert that cp is equiv- 
alent to one of the four universal Horn sentences below: 
'PI = (Vx)((Pi + Pz)h(Qi + Qz)), 
(PZ = (tfx)((Pi + P 3 1 ~ ( Q i  
+ Qz)), 
~3 = (Vx)((Pi + P z ) A ( Q I  + Q 3 ) h  
C P ~  = (Vx)((Pi + P ~ ) A ( Q I  
+ Q 3 ) ) -  
Clearly C 'pi + q for 1 < i < 4. Suppose that not C cp + cpi for 1 < i < 4. 
Then there are four models !Xi, 1 < i < 4, of cp, and four elements a,, 
1 < i < 4, a, E A,, such that 
Mi C (Pi(ai)~lPz(ai))v 
( Q i ( a i ) ~  
1 Q~(ai)), etc. 
A simple combinatorial argument will show that some direct product M, x !XI 
of these four models will contain an element (a,a,) which will not satisfy 
the matrix of cp. This contradicts !Xi x M, C cp. i 
PROPOSITION 
6.2.9. Let cp be an existential sentence. Then cp is a (finite) direct 
product sentence if cp is equivalent to an existential Horn sentence. 
PROOF. We here give a proof assuming 2" = wl. This assumption can be 

6.21 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
417 
eliminated using 6.3.7. Assume cp is an existential sentence preserved under 
B x 113. Note that the natural embedding maps % isomorphically into 
n,B. Since <p is preserved under extensions, this remark shows that q is a 
reduced power sentence. Hence, by 6.2.6, cp is a reduced product sentence. 
Let 
X = {I) : $ is an existential Horn sentence and I- cp -, I)}. 
C is closed under conjunctions. If 
(1) 
for no J/ E Z, is I- JI -, cp, 
then by compactness find a model 23 of {i 
cp} u C. For each existential Horn 
sentence I) such that cp A i 
$ is consistent, find a countable model 
of 
cp A i 
J/. By the technique of Theorem 6.2.5, we have a system of models 
Bi, i E I, with Z countable and such that 
every existential Horn sentence holding on almost all Bi holds on 23. 
Assume now 23 is at least 2°D-saturated. This is always possible, regardless 
of whether 23 is finite or infinite, and it does not use any form of the con- 
tinuum hypothesis. Inspecting the argument of Lemma 6.2.4, we see 
that a reduced product nDBi of the models Bi is isomorphically embedda- 
ble into 23. Since each ai t cp, we have n D B i  C cp. Since cp is existential, 
23 k cp. This contradicts 23 t i 
cp. So (1) fails. -1 
Weinstein (1965) has shown that a universal-existential sentence is a 
(finite) direct product sentence if and only if it is logically equivalent to a 
universal-existential .Horn sentence. Example 6.2.3 shows that we cannot go 
further, since it gives an existential-universal direct product sentence which 
is not equivalent to a Horn sentence. 
EXERCISES 
6.2.1. Let D be a filter over Z. Show that the relation 
X E D Y i f f X n Z =  Y n Z a n d X n Z =  Y n Z f o r s o m e Z E D  
is a congruence relation on the field of sets S(Z). Thus we can define in the 
natural way the quotient Boolean algebra S(Z)/D, with the elements of the 
Boolean algebra being equivalence classes X/D for X c I. If we identify a 
subset X c Z with its characteristic functionf, 
(fx(i) = 1 if i E X,f'(i) = 0 
if i 4 X), then there is a natural isomorphism of S(Z)/D onto the reduced 
power nD1, 
where 1 is the 2-element Boolean algebra. 

418 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.2 
6.2.2. Show that any reduced product nDai 
over a finite index set Z is iso- 
morphic to a direct product ni,,91i over a subset JofZ. Thisis true more gen- 
erally whenever D is a principal filter over I. 
6.2.3. Let D, be filters over the sets Z j ,  and let D be a filter over J. Then there 
is a filter E over the set 
K = u 
( l j x  {jl), 
j d  
so that 
6.2.4*. Using Section 6.1, prove Theorem 6.2.5 directly without the CH. 
6.2.5. Prove an analogue of Theorem 6.2.5 for elementary classes: that is, 
an elementary class K is closed under reduced products if and only if K is 
the class of all models of some set of Horn sentences. 
6.2.6*. Use Lemma 6.2.4 to prove the following separation theorem. Let 
K ,  and K, be arbitrary classes of models, each closed under reduced prod- 
ucts and isomorphisms. Suppose that K ,  n K2 = 0. Then there are two 
elementary classes L , and L , 
each determined by a set of Horn sentences 
such that 
K ,  c L , ,  
K2 c L , ,  
L1 nL, = 0. 
6.2.7. Let T be a theory in 9. Then the following are equivalent, using 2" = 
0 1 :  
(i). Every formula is equivalent under T to a Horn formula. 
(ii). Every reduced product n D g i  of models ai, i E Z, of T which is itself 
a model of T is an ultraproduct of models of T; in fact, D will be an ultra- 
filter over I. 
Examples of theories T which satisfy (ii) are: theory of simple order, theory 
of fields, theory of division rings. (See Exercise 4.1.30.) 
6.2.8. We say that a basic Horn formula cp = 8, v . . . v 8, is a strict basic 
Horn formuls iff some Oi is an atomic formula. A strict Horn formula is 
built up from strict basic Horn formulas by using A ,  3 and V. Prove the fol- 
lowing using 2" = wl. A sentence cp is preserved under reduced products 
n D H t ,  whether or not D is an improper filter over I, iff cp is equivalent to a 
strict Horn sentence. 
6.2.9. A disjunction of atomic and negations of atomic formulas 8, v . . . 
v 8, is said to be weakly Horn iff at most two of the terms 8,, 8, are atomic 
formulas, the rest being negations of atomic formulas. The closure of these 

6.21 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
419 
formulas under A ,  3, V is called the set of weak Horn sentences. Show by the 
technique of Lemma 6.2.4 (2" = ol), that if every weak Horn sentence 
holding on all models of a theory T holds on B, then B is a model of T. 
Whence every sentence is equivalent to a weak Horn sentence, a result which 
also has a proof without the continuum hypothesis. 
[Hint: Show that the filter D constructed in Lemma 6.2.4 so that ?8 z 
n D Z  is actually an ultrafilter.] 
6.2.10*. cp is said to be a special Horn sentence iff cp is a conjunction of sen- 
tences of the form 
(VX, 
* * * &)($ -+ O), 
where 8 is an atomic formula, and JI is a positive formula. Prove that cp 
is preserved under subdirect products if and only if cp is equivalent to a spe- 
cial Horn sentence. [A submodel '23 of a direct product n i e r Z i  of models of 
cp is a subdirect product of models Zi 
iff for all i E I, {b(i) : b E B} = A,.] 
Also, an example of a special Horn sentence is the sentence that expresses 
the condition: a group has a trivial center, i.e., 
(Vx)[(Vy)x+y = y + x  -+ x E 01. 
Find an example of a Horn sentence which is not equivalent to any special 
Horn sentence. 
6.2.11. A sentence cp is preserved by reduced factors iff whenever nDHj 
C cp, 
then { i  : Zi C cp} E D. Prove that every positive sentence is preserved by re- 
duced factors. Also prove directly without using Lyndon's theorem that every 
sentence preserved under homomorphic images is preserved by reduced fac- 
tors. Find a reduced factor sentence which is not equivalent to any positive 
sentence. 
6.2.12. Prove that reduced products lead to an easy proof of the followingcom- 
pactness theorem for Horn sentences. Let Z be a set of Horn sentences. If 
every finite subset of Z has a model, then Z has a model. 
6.2.13*. An early result in the subject of universal algebras is the following 
theorem of Birkhoff. Let K be an arbitrary class of algebras. Then for K 
to be an equational class, i.e., a class of models of some set of equations, it 
is necessary and sufficient that K be closed under subalgebras, homomor- 
phisms and arbitrary direct products. Using the results of Sections 6.1 and 
6.2, give a proof of this theorem. 
[Hint: First show that K is closed under ultraproducts and the comple- 

420 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
ment of K is closed under ultrapowers. Thus K is an elementary class. Since 
K is closed under homomorphisms, K is determined by a set of positive sen- 
tences. Since K is closed under subalgebras, K is determined by a set of uni- 
versal positive sentences. Since K is closed under direct products, K is deter- 
mined by a set of universal positive Horn sentences. Such sentences are equa- 
tions.] 
6.2.14. By examining the proofs of Lemma 6.2.4 and Theorem 6.2.5, de- 
duce that a sentence cp is preserved under countably indexed reduced prod- 
ucts iff it is preserved under arbitrary reduced products. Do the same for 
reduced powers. 
6.2.15*. The definition of a-good makes sense for filters as well as ultra- 
filters. Suppose D is a filter over a and D contains an a+-good countable 
incomplete filter. Assume the GCH. Show that, if lldpll < a, 9l and 8 are 
models of power at most a+, and 9l E 8, then nD91 z nD8. 
6.3. Direct products, reduced products, and Horn sentences (continued) 
This section is a continuation of Section 6.2. Consider an arbitrary reduced 
product nDai. 
We ask the following question: given the models 91i, i E I, 
and the filter D, 
how can we determine which sentences are true in the reduced 
product nDai? 
We shall see that the truth value of a formula cp in n D % i  is 
in a sense determined by the truth values of certain other formulas in the 
models 91i and in the Boolean algebra S(I)/D. This fact will be developed to 
give a great deal of information about direct and reduced product sentences. 
We begin with a key definition. 
6.3.1. A formula cp(x, . . . x,) of 9 
is determined by the sequence of 
formulas (a; 
t,bl, . . ., $,,,) iff 
(i). Each Jlj is a formula of 9 
with at most the variables x l ,  . . ., x, free. 
(ii). a(y, . . . y,) is a formula in the language of Boolean algebras which 
is monotonic, i.e. 
T,, 
( v Z 1  ... Z,JJl ... JJm)(O(yl ... )',)A 
A 
1 Q j 4 m  
Y j  < Z j  + O(Z1 
. a -  Z,)). 
(Here, and hereafter, T,, shall denote the theory of Boolean algebras.) 
models of 9. 
Let a', . . ., a" E n i o , A i ,  and for eachj, 1 < j < m, let 
(iii). Let I be an arbitrary index set, D a filter over I, and ai, i E I, be 
X' = { i  E I : 21i c $j[a'(i) ... ~ " ( i ) ] } .  

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
421 
Then 
n 91i != p[aA ... a;] 
iff S(Z)/D C a[X1/D ... X"/D]. 
D 
We say that cp is determined iff it is determined by some sequence. 
PROPOSITION 
6.3.2. Every formula cp is determined. 
PROOF. This is proved by induction on the formula cp. Suppose that cp(x, . . . 
x,,) is an atomic formula. We show that cp is determined by (o : cp), where 
a(y) is the formula y = 1 (in the language of TBA). 
Clearly 6.3.1 (i) and (ii) 
hold. Assume the hypothesis of 6.3.l(iii). Then by the definition of reduced 
products, the following are equivalent: 
JJ 
%i k cp[a:, ... a",, 
D 
X = { i  E I : ai I: cp[a'(i) ... a"(i)]} E D, 
X/D = 1 in S(I)/D, 
S(I)/D I: o[X/D 
1. 
Suppose that cp is determined by the sequence (a; 
. . . t,b,). 
Say o = o(yl 
. . . y,), with at most y , ,  . . ., y ,  free. Let 7 = I o(-y, . . . -y,). 
(- is 
the Boolean complement.) Then i 
cp is determined by (T; 1 . . . 1 $,). 
Clearly, 6.3.1 (i) and (ii) hold. For 1 d j < m, let 
X ,  = {i E I : ai I: -I $j[ul(i) ... ~"(i)]}. 
Then the following are equivalent: 
n 
%i != 1 cp[a:, ... a;], 
D 
not 
not S(I)/D != a[(Z\\Xi)/D. . . (Z\X,,,)/D], 
n 
%i != cp[a:, ... u;], 
D 
S(Z)/D c 1 o[-(XIID) * * * -(xm/D)I* 
s(z)/o != T[X,/D. . . X,/D]. 
Suppose that cp is determined by the sequence (a; $1 . . . +,), 
and x is deter- 
mined by the sequence (7; 
. . . 6,). Let y l ,  . . ., y, and zl, . , ., z1 be distinct 
vaiiables and let 
p(y1 . . . y,Zl . . . Zl) = "(yi . . y,) A T(Z1 . . -21)- 

422 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
We may assume that {xl, . . ., x,,} contains all the free variables in cp or x. 
Then cp A is determined by the sequence (p; 
. .$,,,el.. .Of). Again 6.3.1 (i) 
and (ii) hold trivially. Assume the hypothesis of 6.3.l(iii), with the sets 
X j ,  1 < j Q m, and Y k ,  1 < k < 1. Then the following are equivalent: 
nai != VAXX[ak . . a  a",, 
D n 
'iUi C cp[ak ... a;] 
and n !Xi C x[ak ... a;], 
S(I)/D C a[X'/D ... X"/D] and S(I)/D k r [ Y ' / D  ... Y'/D], 
S(I)/D t p [ X ' / D  ... Xm/DY1/D ... Y'/D]. 
D 
D 
Finally, suppose that cp(xx, . . . x,,) is determined by the sequence (0; 
#1 . . . $,,,). Let 1 = 2" and let sl, . . ., s, be a listing of all subsets of { 1, . . ., m} 
with sk = {k} for 1 Q k < m. For 1 Q k < I, let 8' = 3x A jesk$j. (The 
empty conjunction shall be some true formula.) We see that 0' = 3xt,bk 
for 1 < k Q m. Let 
'()'I 
... )'I) = (321 ... Z I ) [  A ( Z L  < yk)h 
r\ 
(zi. zj 
zk)Ab(z1 -.. Z,,,)]. 
1 S k S l  
S l  u SJ'Sk 
We show that (3x)cp is determined by (T; O1 . . . el). 6.3.1(i) holds trivially, 
and 6.3.1(ii) follows simply because of the syntactical form of T. Let us 
first suppose that nD 
ai t (3x)q [a; . . . S, 1. Then there exists an a E nierAi 
such that IID'iUi 1 cp[a,a;. . . a",]. For 1 < k Q I, let 
Y' = { i  E I : Bi t e,[a'(i) ... a"(i)]} 
Z' = { i  E I : ai t A $,[a(i)u'(i) ... an(i)]}. 
and let 
j€Sk 
It is clear that Zk 
c Y k  
A (zi n Zj = z'), 
S 
[ s J = S k  
and 
S(I)/D C a[Z'/D ... Zm/D]. 
Whence S(I)/D C z [ Y ' / D .  . . Y f / D ] .  On the other hand, let Y', 1 4 k GI, 
be defined as above, and suppose that there are sets Z', 1 < k Q I, such that 
for all k, 1 < k Q I, 
S(I)/D C Z'/D Q Y'/D, 
S(I)/D C A 
(Zi/D - Z'/D = Zk/D), 
S(Z)/D C a[Z'/D ... Z"/D]. 
S1 u SJ=Sk 
(1) 

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
423 
Since the number of conditions in (1) is finite, we can find a set X E D such 
that 
~ ' n  
x c Y' 
for 1 < k < I ,  
Z ' n  Z'n x = Z' n x 
for si v sj = sk. 
(2) 
For each i E X, let s = { j : i E Zj, 1 d j < m}. Then because of (2) and the 
definition of Yk, 
we see that 
21i C (3x) A i,hj[ul(i) ... ~"(i)]. 
jos 
So pick an a(i) E Ai such that 
gi k A $j[u(i)ul(i) ... ~ " ( i ) ] .  
jor 
Define a(i) E A' arbitrarily if i $ X. For 1 < j < m, let 
W' = { i  E I : 21, k ijj[u(i)u'(i) ... ~ " ( i ) ] } .  
Note that by our choice of a, 
~ ' n  
x c w', 
1 < j < m. 
Whence Z'/D < Wi/D. Since a satisfies 6.3. I (ii), we have from (l), 
S(I)/D != a [ W ' / D  ... Wrn/D]. 
But, since cp is determined by (a; @ I  . . . $,,,), this implies 
SO 
Ha, k (3x)cp[u:, ... u q .  -I 
D 
Inspecting the proof of Proposition 6.3.2, we see that the following addi- 
tional remarks can be made. If a sentence or formula cp is given explicitly, 
then by the procedure described in Proposition 6.3.2, we can find explicit 
formulas a, @ I ,  . . ., @,,, 
such that cp is determined by (a; . . . i,h,,,). In 
other words, if we knew the precise shape of cp as a concatenation of 
symbols of 9, then we can exhibit specific formulas a, , . . ., @,,, 
which 
determine cp. We call such a process effective. Another way of putting it 
is that a process is effective if and only if a machine can be programmed so 
that when we feed in the expression for cp, it will automatically and mechani- 
cally give us the sequence (6; 
1,9~ . . . @,,,) of formulas with each symbol print- 
ed on a piece of paper. Such processes are also called recursive; however, 

424 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
since this is a book on model theory, we shall not go into recursion theory 
here. So whatever we shall need later about recursion theory, we shall as- 
sume it outright and ask the interested students to look up the matter in 
some references. There should, however, be no question about what we 
mean when we say that something is effective. The following proposition 
summarizes these remarks. 
PROPOSITION 
6.3.3. 
(i). Given a formula cp, there is an eflective way ofjinding a sequence 
(a; $1 . . . I,$,,,) 
which determines cp. 
(ii). If cp is a Z: (resp. II:) formula then there is an eflective way ofjinding 
a sequence (a; $1 . . . $,,,) which determines cp and such that each Jlj is a X: 
(resp. II:) formula. 
(iii). If cp is a X: (resp. II:) 
sentence, then each of the t,bj in the determining 
sequence is a x,O (resp. II:) sentence. 
The proof of this proposition is straightforward. We notice that the notion 
of determining sequences is closed under logical equivalence. That is, if cp 
is determined by (a; 
. . . $,,,) and if the formulas cp', a', $;, . . ., $; 
are term-by-term equivalent to the formulas cp, 6, 
$1, . . ., $,,,, then cp' is 
determined by the sequence (a'; $; , . . ., $6). This remark is predicated on 
the assumption that the formulas cp', a', I&, . . ., 
have the correct number 
of free variables as required in 6.3.1. 
An immediate application is the following: 
THEOREM 
6.3.4. Reduced products, reduced powers, direct products and direct 
powers all preserve elementary equivalence. 
PROOF. Suppose that 2Ii = 'Bi for ieZ. Consider the reduced products 
% = nD91i 
and B = n D B i .  Let cp be any sentence of 9' and let (a; $1 . . . 
$,,,) be a determining sequence of cp. Each $' is a sentence of 9'. 
By our as- 
sumption, for 1 < j < m, 
{ i  E I : ai c $'} = X' = { i  E I : Bi c $'}. 
From this it follows that 
% tr cp iff 
S(I)/D c O[X'/D ... x'"/D] iff B C cp. 
Since reduced powers, direct products and direct powers are all special cases 
of reduced products, the proposition is proved. -I 

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
425 
Let S be a finite set of formulas, and let 
i s  be the set of negations of formulas in S; 
A S be the set of all finite conjunctions of formulas in S; 
(3x)S be the set of all formulas (3x)cp with cp E S; 
B(S) be the set of all Boolean combinations of formulas in S. 
Since in what follows we are only interested in formulas up to logical equiv- 
alence, we may assume that the sets /'\ S and B(S) are also finite. In fact, in 
our discussions hereafter we shall frequently identify a formula cp with the 
equivalence class of all formulas I) logically equivalent to cp. We shall try 
to be careful in checking that a representative cp can always be chosen so 
that it has the required (small) number of free variables, or that it is a for- 
mula of a particular form Z: or I$'. Some words about the notion of ef- 
fectiveness when applied to sets of the form A S or B(S). In the first case, 
wecantakefor A S  all finite conjuncts of members of S up to )SI of such 
members. Then we can effectively find, given cp, $ in AS, an element 
0 in A S such that 6 is equivalent to cp A $. In the second case, we let B(S) be 
the set of all disjunctions (of length <2IsI) of conjunctions of the form 
A 
CiVi, 
1 <i<<lSI 
where S = {cpt : 1 < i < ISl}, and each ei is either the empty sequence or 
the symbol 1. Clearly, S c B(S), because V A cp is the same as cp. Further- 
more, given cp, JI in B(S), we can effectively find 6, p, X E B ( S )  such that 
k 8 t, i 
cp, I- p t, cp v J/, I- x - 
cp A JI. Also, we can effectively find an in- 
consistent formula and a valid formula in B(S). In passing from S to B(S), 
we see that we do not increase the number of free variables in the formulas, 
and also if each cp E S is equivalent to a Boolean combination of Z: for- 
mulas, then each JI E B(S) is equivalent to a E:+ 
and also to a n:+ for- 
mula, When we write the expression S = B(S), we shall mean that S is 
closed under all Boolean operations, and that, given cp, JI in S, we can ef- 
fectively find formulas in S equivalent to an inconsistent formula, a valid 
formula, -I cp, cpvll, and rp A$. 
A set S of formulas is said to be self-determining iff S is finite and for each 
cp E S, there is a sequence (b; . . . JI,,,) which determines cp with all JIj E S. 
Since the property of being a determining sequence for cp cannot be decided 
effectively, we say that we can effectivelyfind a self-determining set S iff S 
is explicitly given, and for each cp E S, the determining sequence (0; JI1 . . . ll,,,,) 
is also explicitly given. 

426 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
PROPOSITION 
6.3.5. Let S and T be self-determining sets. Then each of the fol- 
lowing sets is self-determining: 
S u T, -I S, AS, @)AS, 
B(S). 
PROOF. The fact that S u T is self-determining follows from the definition. 
The sets i 
S, A S, 3 x A  S are self-determining by examining the proof of 
Proposition 6.3.2 and the remarks preceding this proposition. By combining 
the argument for i s  and for A S, and by examining the specific formulas in 
B(S), we see that B(S) is self-determining. i 
REMARK. 
In Proposition 6.3.5, if S and T are explicitly given, as well as 
the correspondence between cp and its determining sequence (a; . . .$,,,), 
then we can effectively find the sets in the conclusion. 
A set S of formulas is autonomous iff S is self-determining and S = B(S), 
i.e., the Boolean operations on S are closed and effective. The following is 
the fundamental theorem of autonomous sets. We state it in several parts 
for emphasis. 
THEOREM 
6.3.6. 
(i). Given a formula cp of 9, 
we can effectively find an autonotrious set 
S, to which cp belongs. 
(ii). Given ufinite set @ of formulas of 9, we can eflectivelyjnd an auto- 
nomous set S, which extends @. 
(iii). If cp is equivalent to a Boolean combination of E: forrnulas (resp. 
E: sentences), then each member of S, is equivalent to a Boolean combination 
of E: formulas (resp. 
sentenres) which has at most the free variables that 
are in cp. 
(iv). This part extends (ii) in the same way that (iii) extends (i). 
PROOF. The proof depends heavily on the preceding results. We sketch a 
proof of part (i) and the rest will follow by a careful inspection. It is suffi- 
cient to prove that every formula cp belongs to a self-determining set S, for 
then B(S) is autonomous and cp E B(S). Clearly, if cp is an atomic formula, 
the set {cp} is self-determining. If cp belongs to a self-determining set S, then 
-I cp belongs to the self-determining set i 
S. If cp and II/ belong, respectively, 
to self-determining sets S and T, then cp A II/ belongs to the self-determining 
set A (S u T). If cp belongs to a self-determining set S, then (3x)cp belongs 
to the self-determining set (3x)A S. i 

6.31 
PRODUmS AND HORN SENTENCES 
427 
We point out here a fact which we shall need later: If cp belongs to an 
autonomous set S, then (3x)cp belongs to the autonomous set B((3x)S). 
Theorem 6.3.4 motivates the following series of definitions. Let S be an 
autonomous set of sentences. S clearly gives rise to a finite Boolean algebra 
under the logical operations of 1, A ,  v , 0, 1, where 0 and 1 are identified, 
respectively, with an inconsistent sentence in S and a valid sentence ins. 
We shall use the symbol S to denote also the Boolean algebra. Since S is 
finite, S is a Boolean algebra with exactly n atoms cp, , . . ., cp,, 
n 2 1. We 
refer to the set {cp, . . . cp,} 
as the set of atoms of S, and we write 
4s) = {cpl * . . cpA. 
Note that for 1 6 i, j 6 n, we have: 
6.3.7. 
(i). ' P I  v .  . .vcp, = 1. 
(ii). 'pi # 0, c p i ~ c p j  = 0. 
(iii). If cp E S and cp 6 'pi, then cp = 0 or cp = pi. 
(iv). If cp E S, then cp is a disjunction (possibly empty) of elements o~'at(S). 
(v). Every model satisfies some cpi. 
(vi). cpi is consistent and so has a mode!. 
(vii). Zf9I is a model of 'pi and 8 is a model of c p j ,  then 
i = j i f  for all cp E S, 81 C cp iff 8 k cp. 
Let Z be an index set and let D be a filter over I. Suppose that 'pi E at(S) 
for i E I. We shall show that there is a a E at(S) such that 
whenever 
91i C 'pi, then n 
!Xi C Q. 
D 
(*I 
It is sufficient for this purpose to show that if we have also mi 
C (pi, then 
So let CF E S and let it be determined by a sequence (a; 
. . ,, $ m )  with the 
t+bj E S. Since 91i and Bi are equivalent under all sentences of S, we see that 
for I Q j Q m, 
{i E I : '2Il C $ j }  = X' = {i E z : Bj C $ j } .  
Whence 
n 
91i k cp iff S(z)/D k U[X'/D ... x"'/D] iff n 
mi c cp. 
D 
D 

428 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
So we can now define, without ambiguity, 
n'Pi=a 
D 
in precisely the sense of (*) above. We agree to call nDqi 
the reducedprod- 
uct of the atoms cpi, i E I, modulo thefilter D. Our notation extends imme- 
diately to 
reduced powers: fl cp, 
direct products: n 
' p i ,  
finite direct products: (pix 'pi. 
Ordinarily, D is taken to be a proper filter over I. In the case where D is 
improper, then nD'21i 
degenerates into the trivial 1-element model with re- 
lations and functions defined everywhere. This trivial I-element model is, of 
course, a model of some 'pi E at(S). Let us denote this particular element of 
at(S) by 1;, or, more precisely, rs. From our definitions, we see that all of 
the combinatorial properties of reduced and direct products of models 
carry over to the analogous operations on at(S). In particular, to mention 
just a few examples, x is commutative and associative, and 
D 
i d  
cpixl; = ' p i  = 1;xcp,for 1 < i < n. 
Thus we shall not bother to put parentheses in expressions like 'pi, x .  . . 
Let Jli, i E I, now be arbitrary elements of S; we define the reducedprod- 
X 'Pi,. 
uct of Jli modulo D as 
n 
Jli = v {a E at(S) : there are 
cpi E at(S), 
'pi < Jli and D = n 
qi}. 
D 
D 
Note that if some $i = 0, then nD$, 
= 0. Also, the same property expressed 
in (*) still holds, namely 
whenever '91i != $, , then n 
21i C n 
Jli. 
D 
D 
Analogously, we have 
the reduced power: n 
t+h, 
D 
the direct product: n 
Jl,, 
is1 
the finite direct product: Jli x J l j ,  

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
429 
of elements of S. Needless to say, all combinatorial properties of reduced 
products for models carry over to S. 
Some interesting consequences can now be deduced from the fact that 
nD 
can be defined on at(S) and on S. Many of the consequences depend 
on the fact that S is finite, and others depend on the fact that S can be ef- 
fectively formed. First, the following remarks are practically obvious and 
are left as an exercise: 
6.3.8. Let cp E S. Then: 
(1). cp is a reducedproduct sentence iff nDcp < cp for all I, D. 
(ii). cp is a reduced power sentence iff for all atoms $ < cp and all I, D, 
(iii). cp is a direct product sentence iff niEI 
cp < cp for all I, D. 
(iv). cp is a direct power sentence iff for all atoms $ < cp and all I, ni,,t,b 
(v). cp is afinite direct product sentence i f f  cp x cp < cp. 
n D $  < cp* 
< cp. 
(vi). cp is a finite direct power sentence iff for all atoms I(/ < cp and all n, 
$ x  ... x$(nrimes) Q cp. 
Secondly, we should make some remarks concerning the effectiveness 
of the operations x and nD 
on S. We have already shown that given a for- 
mula cp, we can effectively find an autonomous set S such that cp E S. By the 
definition of autonomous sets we know that given cp, t,b E S, we can effectively 
find p, x and 0 in S such that 
kpMlCp, 
k X w r p V $ ' ,  
kO+'cpA$'. 
Furthermore, we can effectively find sentences in S that are inconsistent and 
valid. All this will not guarantee that we can effectively tell which sentences 
in S give rise to elements of at(S). This is because to say that cp # 0 re- 
quires essentially that cp be consistent, and we have no effective way of de- 
termining that. Thus it is impossible to make the operations x and nD 
ef- 
fective on S. On the other hand, even though we cannot distinguish effective- 
ly the atoms of S from the nonatoms, we can, by looking at the definition 
of B(S), always find effectively a subset S' of S such that at(S) c S' and 
every sentence in S' is either an atom of S or is inconsistent. A similar con- 
sideration tells us that given cp E S, we can always find effectively a subset S' 
of S such that every atom of S included in cp belongs to S' and every sen- 
tence of S' is either an atom included in cp or is inconsistent. 

430 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
THEOREM 
6.3.9. 
jinite direct product sentences. 
rect product sentences. 
reduced product sentences. 
and a reduced power sentence. 
(i). cp is ufinite direct power sentenceiflcp is equivalent to a disjunction of 
(ii). cp is a direct power sentence if cp is equivalent to a disjunction ofdi- 
(iii). cp is a reduced power sentence i f  cp is equivalent to adisjunction of 
(iv). cp is a reduced product sentence if cp is ajinite direct product sentence 
PROOF. (i). Let cp be finite direct power sentence. Find autonomous S so 
that cp E S. Consider all J/ E S such that 
J/ < cp and J/ is a finite direct product sentence. 
We claim that cp is (equivalent to) a disjunction of such sentences J/. Let 
T E at(S) and T < cp. Then the set of all finite direct powers of T is a finite 
set of atoms each of which is included in cp. Let $ be the disjunction of all 
such atoms. Clearly, T < J/ 6 cp and I) is a finite direct product sentence. So 
cp is a disjunction of such sentences. 
(ii). This proof is similar to that of (i). 
(iii). Let cp be a reduced power sentence, and let S be an autonomous 
set containing cp. Again consider all $ E S such that 
J/ Q cp and II/ is a reduced product sentence. 
Let 7 E at(S) and T < ip. Then the set of all reduced products of 7 is a finite 
set of atoms included in cp. Let $ be the disjunction of such atoms; then, 
because a reduced product of reduced products of ‘5 is again a reduced prod- 
uct of 7 (see Exercise 6.2.3), $ is a reduced product sentence and 7 < $. So 
cp is a disjunction of such sentences. 
(iv). Suppose that cp is a finite direct product sentence and a reduced 
power sentence. Let cp E S and S be autonomous. Let $1, i E I, be atoms of S 
such that Jlr Q ip, and we wish to show that the reduced product nD$,is 
an atom included in cp. We may assume without loss of generality that 
and that for each j and each X E D, 
and 
I, = { i E z : $ l  = cp,} 
X n I, # 0. 

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
43 1 
Defining the filters Dj on Zj as in Proposition 6.2.1, we see that 
Since cp is a reduced power sentence, each nD,cp, 
is an atom included in cp, 
and since cp is a finite direct product sentence nDJ/i 
is included in cp. i 
The technique used above also leads to an interpolation lemma (see Exer- 
cise 6.3.2). A further refinement of the technique will lead to the next main 
result, namely, that a finite direct product sentence is always a direct prod- 
uct sentence. 
Let S be an autonomous set. The (arbitrary) direct power operation cp' 
= n,.,cp on S is said to be essentially finite, with index m, iff for all cp E S 
and all (nonempty) index sets I with at least m elements, there is a subset 
J of I with exactly m elements such that 
cp' = cpK = cp' 
for all K such that J c K c I. 
If m is understood, then we say that (arbitrary) direct power is essentially 
finite on S. 
A refinement of the argument of Theorem 6.3.6 leads to the following: 
PROPOSITION 
6.3.10. Given a sentence cp of 9, 
then we can effectively jind 
an autonomous set of sentences S such that cp E S. Furthermore, the direct 
power on S is essentially finite with an index m which can also be effectively 
determined from cp. 
We should mention here that while the operations x and f l D  on S are 
not effective, we can, nevertheless, determine the bound m effectively. The 
proof of the proposition depends on the following lemma. First a convention: 
Suppose S is an autonomous set of formulas in the free variables xI , . . ., 
x,. We can find a corresponding autonomous set of sentences S' simply by 
replacing all free occurrences of x ,  , . . ., x, in cp E S by new constants cI , . . ., 
c,. In this way, our definitions of reduced products, etc., on S' carry over in 
a natural way to S. Also, we may, of course, speak of S having an essentially 
finite direct power, etc. 
LEMMA 
6.3.1 1. Every finite set @ of Boolean combinations of l2: formulas can 
be effectively extended to an autonomous set S of Boolean combinations of 
C: formulas (every free variable occurring in a formula of S occurs in some 

432 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
formula in @) having an essentiallyjinite direct power and such that the index 
m is efectively calculable. 
PROOF 
(in outline). We prove this by induction on n. For n = 0, let S = B(S) 
be the set of all Boolean combinations of atomic formulas occurring in @. 
The number m is simply the total number of different atomic formulas (not 
predicate symbols) occurring in @. This can be seen as follows: Let (ai, 
al(i), 
. . ., a,,(i)), i E I, be models for 9 
u {c, . . . c,,}, and suppose that 111 2 m. 
For each atomic formula cp(xl . . . x,) in @, pick an index i E I such that 
ai t i 
cp[a,(i). . . a,(i)] 
if there is such an i. Collecting all these indices together in a set J with at 
most m elements, we see that for all K, J c K c I, and all cp E S, 
iff n (ai, al(i), ..., a,(i)) i= cp. 
This proves the assertion for n = 0. Assume the lemma is true for n. Let 
@ be a finite subset of Boolean combinations ofI;;, , formulas. We may with- 
out loss of generality assume that there is a finite set Y of Boolean combi- 
nations of 72; formulas and a sequence u = ( y ,  . . . y,) of variables such 
that each cp E 9 is a Boolean combination of formulas in (3u)Y. By induc- 
tion hypothesis, Y can be extended to an autonomous set T of Boolean com- 
binations of 72; formulas such that the direct power on T is essentially finite 
with index m. Let S be the autonomous set S = B((3u)T). (Here we use the 
remark following Theorem 6.3.6, and the observation that in the proof of 
Proposition 6.3.2 it is inessential whether we quantify on a single variable 
or a finite sequence of variables simultaneously.) Thus every formula in S 
is a Boolean combination of I;."+ formulas and S extends a. We now show 
that the direct power on S is essentially finite. Let 8,, . . ., O1 be an effective 
listing of formulas of T which contains all atoms of T and such that each 
is an atom of Tor is inconsistent. We now claim that the set S' of all con- 
junctions 
id 
cp = A ei(3u)8,, 
ei is empty or is -I, 
contains all atoms of S and that each such conjunction is either an atom of 
S or is inconsistent. This is evident because, for each 8 E T, (3u)O is equiva- 
lent to a disjunction of formulas of the form (3u)Oi, and i 
(3u)O is equiv- 
1 Q i 4 1  
(1) 

6.3) 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
433 
alent to a conjunction of formulas of the form i 
(3u)8,. By the disjunctive 
normal form theorem, every atom of S has a representative in S‘, and clearly 
every conjunct in S‘ is either an atom or is inconsistent. We shall show that 
m - IS’I is the required index. We now argue informally. For each atom cp 
of S’, let g(cp) be the disjunction of all atoms Oi of T which appears in the rep- 
resentation of cp in ( I )  as (3u)8,, without the i symbol. Then we can es- 
tablish the following: 
(2) 
and 
(3) 
We leave the verification of (2) and (3) as an exercise. Since direct power 
on T is essentially finite with index m, (2) and ( 3 )  show that direct power 
on at(S) is essentially finite with index m. Remember that the total number 
of atoms of S is at most IS’I; we see that the product of any k 2 m IS’I 
number of atoms of S can always be regrouped into a subproduct of exactly 
m - IS’I terms. (Here we use strongly the fact that m is an index for direct 
powers on at(S).) Furthermore, in any direct product of m - IS’l atoms of S, 
some atom must repeat at least m times. So we can add this atom any num- 
ber of times to the product without changing the result of the product. Since 
direct product on S is a natural extension of the product of atoms of S, 
the above remarks show that direct power on S has index m * IS’l. -I 
g is a one-to-one mapping of at(S) into T, 
g preserves direct products, i.e. g ( n r e I q r )  
= nierg(cpi). 
Let S be an autonomous set of sentences. We define the relation d 
on 
at(S) as follows: for cp, $ E at(S), 
cp d 
J/ iff for some eEat(S), cpx8 = J/. 
Since there is an identity Is in at(S), d 
and I// = x x T, then cp = (8 x x )  x T. So Q 
is a reflexive relation. If cp = 0 x $ 
is transitive. 
PROPOSITION 
6.3.12. Let S be an autonomous set. If the direct power on S is 
essentiallyfinite, then d 
on at(S) is a partial ordering of at(S). 
PROOF. 
Suppose that q, J/, 8, x E at(S), and cp = 8 x J /  and J/ = x x cp. 
Then 
cp = Ox+ = (8xx)xcp = (8xx)”xcp forall n < o. 
Let m be the index of direct power on S, then by commutative and associa- 

434 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[ 6 . 3  
tive properties of x ,  we have 
cp = e m x X m x c p  = e m + l x X m x c p  = e x ( e * x X m x c p )  = ~
X
(
P
 
= 9. 
So Q 
is antisymmetric. -I 
Let cp E at(S), and consider the set 
(*) 
@ = {I) E at(S) : cp Q $}. 
It is immediate that if 
x $2 E @. Thus the sentence V @ 
is a finite direct product sentence. Similar considerations show that the sen- 
tence 
$2 E @, then 
(**I 
V {$ E 4s) : $ Q 
cp} 
is preserved under direct factors. It is known that if < is a (finite) partial 
ordering relation, then every cp E at(S) is a Boolean combination of sen- 
tences of the form (*), as well as sentences of the form (**). Thus we have: 
PROPOSITION 
6.3.13. 
product sentences. 
preserved under direct factors. 
(i). Every sentence is equivalent to a Boolean combination offinite direct 
(ii). Every sentence is equivalent to a Boolean combination of sentences 
PROOF. Given cp, find by Theorem 6.3.9 and Proposition 6.3.10 an auton- 
omous set S such that cp E S and such that < 
is a partial ordering of 
at(S). The proof now follows from the remarks above. i 
We shall see later that part (i) can be improved. 
THEOREM 
6.3.14. 
(i). Every finite direct product sentence is an (arbitrary) direct product 
sentence. 
(ii). Every finite direct power sentence is an (arbitrary) direct power sen- 
tence. 
(iii). More generally, given a sentence cp we can effectively find a number 
n such that for all index sets I and all models HI, i E I, there is a subset J of I 
with at most n elements such that for all K, J c K c I ,  

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
435 
PROOF. 
Both (i) and (ii) are consequences of (iii) (in fact, by Theorem 6.3.9, 
part (ii) already follows from part (i)), so we shall only prove (iii). 
(iii). Given cp, find effectively an autonomous set S o n  which direct power 
is essentially finite with index m. Let n = rn. ISJ. (This is really a waste, since 
we can find a much better upper bound to the number of atoms of S 
than ISl.) Suppose that ?Ii, i E I, are given. Suppose that 91i t t,hi, whereibiare 
atoms of S. If an atom $ of S occurs in the list J,i, i E I, less than m times, 
then we put into J all indices i E I such that $ = J,i. If an atom J, of S occurs 
in the list $i, i E I, m or more times, we simply select any m indices i such that 
II/ = $ i  and put them in J. At the end, J will have at most n elements. 
To prove the conclusion of (iii), it is sufficient to do it for all atoms 
J, < cp. Let K be such that J c K c I, and let J, E at(S), JI < cp. Then 
using the fact that direct power on S has index m, we see that, by a suitable 
regrouping of the atoms $ i ,  i E I, 
Pursuing our line of investigation even further, we shall next use this same 
sort of method to show that every sentence of 9 is equivalent to a Boolean 
combination of reduced product sentences. Notice that by Theorem 6.3.9 
(iii), it is clearly sufficient to show that every sentence is equivalent to a Boo- 
lean combination of reduced power sentences. 
Let us now return to the definition of the reduced power nDcp defined on 
the atoms of an autonomous set. We recall that nDcp = J, iff whenever 
?Ii, i E I, are models for 9' and each ?ii k cp. then nD91i 
k J,. Since S is auton- 
omous, there is a sequence (a; . . . $,) 
with J,j E S which determines 
$. This means that, letting 
X ] = { ~ E I : ! ? & ~ $ ~ } ,  1 6  j c m ,  
we have 
n ai t $ iff S ( I ) / D  t a[x'jD ... x"/D]. 
Notice that since ?ii 
k cp, the sets X j  do not depend on 'ui, i E I, but only 
depend on $ j ,  and hence on $. Furthermore, depending on whether the atom 
cp is included in $ j  or excluded from $ j ,  the sets XI are, respectively, I or 
0. Whence, whether or not nDcp = $ depends only on whether or not S(Z)/D 
D 

436 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
k o', where o' is a sentence in the language of Boolean algebras depending 
only on II/. From this we draw the following simple but important conclu- 
sion: 
If S(Z)/D and S(J)/E are elementarily equivalent Boolean algebras, 
then nD 
cp= $ iff nEcp = $. 
This implies that the reduced power nDcp on at(S) depends only on the 
(Boolean) elementary type of S(I)/D. Let the letters a, b, c, . . . range over 
elementary types of Booleans algebras of the form S(Z)/D, i.e., those Boolean 
algebras which are (proper) homomorphic images of a complete atomic Boo- 
lean algebra. We define, for cp E at(S) and a the type of S(I)/D, 
a cp = the unique $ E at(S) such that nDcp = $, 
Let Q denote the set of elementary types of quotient Boolean algebras of the 
form S(I)/D. We see from Theorem 6.3.4 that the direct product of two such 
algebras S(I)/D and S(J)/E is determined, up to equivalence, by the types of 
S(I)/D and S(J)/E. Also, it follows from the above discussion that a reduced 
power n E S ( Z ) / D  of such an algebra modulo a filter E over J is determined, 
up to equivalence, by the types of S(I)/D and S(J)/E. From these remarks we 
can introduce meaningful definitions of a x  b and a b for a, b E Q. We now 
introduce certain specific types of Boolean algebras, namely, 
ii = the type of the Boolean algebra with exactly n atoms, n 2 1 ; 
00 = the type of the (complete) theory of atomless Boolean algebras. 
The next two lemmas tell us all we need to know about the three operations 
- 
a x b , a . b  and a.cp. 
LEMMA 
6.3.15. Let a, b range in Q. Then: 
(i). a x b ~  
Q, a . b  E Q, 
fi E Q, 00 E Q. 
(ii). a * ai = Ej * a = z. 
(iii). Either a = ix, or a = c x 7 for some c E Q. 
PROOF. 
We briefly sketch proofs of parts of the lemma, leaving the detailed 
verification to the reader. Let a be the type of S(I)/D and b be the typeof 
S(J)/E. We may assume that I n J = 0. Then a x  b is the type of 
S ( I u J ) / { X u  Y : X e D ,  Y E E ) ,  
and a . b is the type of 
( 1 )  
S(Zx J)/D x E. 

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
437 
Clearly ii E Q for each n c o. To obtain 00 E Q, consider the type of 
s(w)/{x c w : (wU) 
is finite}. 
We point out that in general, a b # b a, however, it is easy to verify that 
a * G5 = OC, * a = 00, either in a straightforward manner, or using the def- 
inition of a * b given in (1). For the last statement, if a is not atomless nor 
trivial, then a has an atom. It is then easy to ‘factor’ this atom out. -I 
LEMMA 
6.3.16. Let S be an autonomous set and let cp, $ range in at(S) and 
a, b range in Q. Then: 
(i). (a b )  cp = a . (b * cp). 
(ii). (axb)*cp =a.cpxb*cp. 
(iii). a.(cpx$) = a . c p x a . $ .  
(iv). Ts = a - Cs. 
(v). i ‘cp = cp. 
We leave the easy proof of Lemma 6.3.16 as an exercise. For cp, $ E at(S), 
we introduce another ordering relation G Q  defined by 
cp <,$iffa.cp = $ f o r s o m e a ~ Q .  
The next two results are analogues of Propositions 6.3.12 and 6.3.13. 
PROPOSITION 6.3.17. Let S be an autonomous set of sentences. r f  the relation 
G on at(S) is a partial ordering of at(S), then so is the relation 6 Q. 
PROOF. 
By Lemma 6.3.16 (i) and (v), G Q  is reflexive and transitive. So we 
must show that < , 
is antisymmetric. So let cp = a * II/ and II/ = b - cp with 
a, b E Q, cp, I) 
E at(S). If one of a or b is Z, say a = 00, then by Lemma 
6.3.15 (ii), 
cp = Z * J I  
= ( b - m ) . ~  
= 6 . p  = ~ .  
If a i’ Ej, then by Lemma 6.3.15 (iii), a = c x i  for some c E Q. Then, 
by Lemma 6.3.16 (ii) and (v), 
- 
cp = ( c x i ) - $  = c . $ x i . $  = c . $ x $ .  
So JI < cp. Similarly, if b # Z, then cp < JI. Whence, by hypothesis, 
p = * .  -I 
THEOREM 
6.3.18. Every sentence cp is equivalent to a Boolean combination of 
reduced product sentences. 

438 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
PROOF. 
We find an autonomous set S containing rp such that direct power 
is essentially finite on S. By Proposition 6.3.12, Q 
is a partial ordering of 
at(S). By Proposition 6.3.17 G Q  is also a partial ordering of at(S). This 
means that every sentence in S is a Boolean combination of sentences of the 
form 
rpe = V {+ E at(S) : 8 Q +} with 8 ranging in at(S). 
Clearly, if 8 Q Q+, then 8 < nD$ 
for all reduced powers nD+. 
So each 
rpe is a reduced power sentence. The result now follows from Theorem 
6.3.9 (iii). -I 
In order to be quite specific in what follows, let us assume that Sis an auton- 
omous set. Let 
T = { A (E,))(P : E,,, is either the empty sequence or is i}, 
and, as before, let B(S) be the set of disjunctions of sentences in T up to 
I = IT1 terms. As we noted earlier, B(S) is autonomous. But the more im- 
portant thing is that Tconsists of all atoms of B(S) plus, possibly, a few other 
inconsistent sentences. Every rp E S, of course, is equivalent to the disjunc- 
tion of the subset T, of T defined by 
T, = (8 E T : rp occurs positively in O}. 
From this, since each rp E S is determined by a sequence ( a ;  
... $,,,) 
with + j  E S, we see that, with a sufficient amount of writing, we can show 
that, letting T = {el ... O,}, 
for each k, 1 f k d I, we can find effectively a formula b k  in the 
variables y 1  , . . . , y, , so that the sequence ( b k ;  
Let J c I and let 1 Q k Q 1. Define the sentence P J , k ,  in the language of 
Boolean algebras, as follows: 
(PES 
. . . 8,) determines 0,. 
A A (yi 7 Y j  = 0 ) ~  
/'\ 
( Y j  = 0)). 
i, jcJ 
ICJ 
i # j  
For J c I, let @(J) be the following statement: 
for every k such that k 4 J and 1 < k G 1, the Boolean sentence P J , k  
holds in no Boolean algebra S(Z)/D. 
For cp E S, let J, = (k : 8, E T,}. 

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
439 
PROPOSITION 
6.3.19. cp is a reduced product sentence if and only if for some 
J c Jq , @(J) and cp is equivalent to V ke f 8,. 
PROOF. (i). Assume first that cp is a reduced product sentence. Let 
J = {k E Jq : 8, is an atom in B(S)}. 
Clearly, J c .Iq and cp is equivalent to \/ ksJ 8,. We now prove @(.I). 
If cp is 
inconsistent, then J = 0 and P J k  can never hold in any Boolean algebra. So 
@(J). Now assume that cp is consistent. Suppose, on the contrary, that 
P J , k  holds in some Boolean algebra S(I)/D for some k $ J. 
Thus there are sets X'JD, ..., X'JD such that 
s ( l ) / D  k Ok[x'/D ... X'/D] A 
X'ID = 1 A 
A 
(X'/D * X'/D = 0). 
jeJ 
1 S i <  j 6 1  
Let X E D be such that 
u x' 3 x, 
jeJ 
and 
~
'
n
 
~
'
n
 
x = o 
for I <  i < j < 1. 
Notice that each X'JD for j 4 J is forced to be equal to 0. For j E J and 
i E Xi n X ,  let l!Ii be a model of B j .  For i E r\X, pick 91i to be any model of 
cp (we have assumed that cp is consistent). It should be clear that ifj J, then 
either B j  is inconsistent, or 8' 
is an atom not included in cp. Define for 
I < j < l ,  
(1) 
y j =  { i ~ z : ! & k e ~ ) .  
It is clear that 
and 
Y ' =  o if j $ J ,  
Y'/D = X'ID, 
l < j < l ,  
C Y'/D = 1, 
j e f  

440 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
This is a contradiction to the fact that cp is preserved under reduced prod- 
ucts, as & is an atom not included in cp. 
(ii). In the other direction, suppose that for some J c J,,,, @ ( J )  and cp 
is equivalent to V k = J O k .  Let I, D, and 91i, i E I, be given such that each 
91i k cp. Define the sets Y', 1 < j < 1, as in (I). Then it is clear that (2) holds. 
There is some atom 0, such that (3) holds. Whence 
(4) 
s ( l ) / D  k o k [ Y ' / D  ... Y'/D]. 
Putting (2) and (4) together, we see that 
P J , k  holds in the Boolean algebra S(I)/D. 
This implies by @(J) that k E J. So n,91i k cp. i 
Let us now examine the statement C ( q )  about the sentence cp: for some 
J c J,,,, @(J) and cp is equivalent to vkeJt&. 
Given an arbitrary sentence 
cp, we see that the sentences O,, ..., 0, can be found effectively; similarly, 
the formulas ol, ..., o1 can also be found effectively. The same remark ap- 
plies to the sets T,,, and J,,,. Since J,,, is finite, we can examine in turn all J 
such that J c J,,,. Given a J c J,,,, the sentence V k E J O k  can be constructed 
explicitly. Whence we can ask if t cp c, V k e J d k ;  this involves finding a 
proof of the sentence cp CI V k E J O k .  This then turns out to be a recursively 
enumerable condition. Turning now to the statement @(J), we see first of 
all that the construction of p J , k  for each J c J,,, and k + J is quite explicit. 
However, the statement 
P J , k  holds in no Boolean algebra S(1)/D 
can in no way be interpreted as an effective statement. We shall see later 
that C(cp) is an arithmetical statement. 
Finally, the last result in this section uses the analysis of Boolean alge- 
bras in Section 5.5. 
THEOREM 
6.3.20 (Ershov's Theorem). Let o be a sentence in the language 
of Boolean algebras, and let T,, be the axionis of' the theory of Boolean 
algebras. Then the following are equivalent: 
(i). T,, u {o} is consistent. 
(ii). o holds in some quotient Boolean algebra S(o)/D. 
PROOF. 
We first observe that (i) follows immediately from (ii). 
(i) --f (ii). In the other direction, we shall need several intermediate steps. 

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
44 1 
First observe that (i) is equivalent to the assertion that 
~7 holds in some Boolean algebra 23. 
Using the notation from Section 5.5, let m ( B )  and n(23) be the pair of inva- 
riants assigned to 23. If we could find a quotient algebra S(o)/D such that 
(1) 
m(S(w)/D) = m ( B )  and n(S(o)/D) = n(B), 
then we could conclude from 5.5.10 that ~7 holds in S(w)/D, whence (ii) 
would be proved. To prove (l), we shall show that 
(2) for every pair of possible invariants (m, n) for Boolean algebras, there 
exists a quotient algebra S(w)/D such that m(S(w)/D) = m and 
n(S(o)/D) = n. 
We divide the proof of (2) into two cases: m is finite, or m = co. 
Let us first deal with the case when m is finite. Recall from Section 5.5 
that n is either an integer or is = f 
co, depending on the number of atoms 
%("') has and on whether a("') is or is not atomic. We shall first prove the 
following lemma by induction on the finite values of m. 
LEMMA 
6.3.21. Let n be either an integer or 
gebra S(o)/D such that: 
(i). D contains all cojinite subsets of w ;  
(ii). m(S(w)/D) = m and n(S(w)/D) = n. 
00. Then there is a quotient al- 
PROOF. 
First consider the case m = 0 and n = 1. Let D be any nonprin- 
cipal ultrafilter over o. 
Then S ( o ) / D  has exactly one atom, and D satisfies 
(i). For any positive value of n, with m remaining 0, we use the construction 
in Lemma 6.3.15 to find a D over o satisfying (i) and (ii). If n is negative, we 
again appeal to the construction in Lemma 6.3.15, piecing together an atom- 
ic part with an atomless part. Thus the case m = 0 is proved. 
Consider now any pair of invariants (m+ 1, n), n either an integer or 
k co. By induction hypothesis, we already have a quotient algebra S(w)/D 
satisfying (i) and (ii). We shall now construct another quotient algebra 
B = S(w x w)/F such that 
(3) 
(i) holds for F, and B(l) z S(w)/D. 
(B(l) is defined in Section 5.5.) From this it follows readily that m ( B )  = 
m+ 1 and n(B) = n. To construct F, first let E be any nonprincipal ultra- 
filter on w. Let F be the following collection of subsets of w x w :  for 

442 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
X c w x w, let Xi = X n { i }  x w. Then (in what follows we shall frequently 
identify Xi with the set {n : (in) E X i } )  
(4) 
XE 
Fiff X , E  E for all i e  w, and { i E  w : Xi is cofinite} E D. 
It is quite clear that F is a filter over w x 0; 
furthermore, Fcontains every co- 
finite subset of w x w. Let '$3 = S(w x w ) / F  and we assert that '$3 is the de- 
sired quotient algebra satisfying (3). 
Let Z be any subset of w. In view of the definition (4) of F, we see that the 
following pair of equivalences are true: 
( 5 )  I/D = 0 iff there is an X E  F such that I n  { i ~ w  
: Xi is cofinite} = 0; 
Z/D # 0 iff for all X E F, I n { i E w : Xi is cofinite} # 0. 
Since, by assumption, D contains all cofinite subsets of w, we see that 
{ i } / D  = 0 for al i E w, and whence, by (5), 
(6) for all i E w, there is an X E F such that X i  E E but is not cofinite. 
One more definition: for each X c w x w ,  let 
( X )  = { i E w : X i E E } .  
The atoms of '$3 are characterized by the following: Let X c w x w. Then 
(7) X/F is an atom of '$3 if and only if (X) is a singleton {i} and X/F = 
To prove (7), suppose first that (X) is a singleton {i}, and that X/F = XJF. 
It is sufficient to prove that Xi/F is an atom of %. Notice that o\Xi 4 E; 
therefore w x o\Xi 
$ F, so Xi/F # 0. Suppose that Y c X i .  Then either 
Y E  E or Xi\Y 
E E ;  so either 
Xi/F. 
Y / F  = X/F, or YIF = 0. 
On the other hand, suppose that X/F is an atom of B. We first show that 
(8) 
( X )  # 0. 
Suppose that (8) fails. Let 
J = {i E w : Xi is infinite}. 
Since (8) fails to hold, we see that each X i  $ E for i E J. From this it follows 
that (w\J) 
$ D, for otherwise X/F = 0. Now for each i E J, let Y i  and Zi be 
disjoint infinite subsets of Xi, 
and let 
W = u yi and U = U Zi. 
i d  
i d  

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
443 
It follows from ( 5 )  that 
0 # WIF 6 X/F, 
0 # U/F ,< XIF, 
W / F  # U/F. 
This contradicts X / F  is an atom. So (8) holds. If i , j  E ( X )  and i # j ,  then it 
is evident that 
0 # Xi/F < X/F, 
0 # Xj/F < X/F, 
X J F  # XJF. 
So it follows that ( X )  = {i} for some i E o. 
By the direction of (7) that we 
have already proved, we have that Xi/F is an atom of 9 and XJF < X/F. It 
follows that X i / F  = X/F. So ( 7 )  is proved. 
It follows easily from (7) and the arguments leading to it that atomless 
elements of 23 are characterized as follows: Let X c w x w .  Then 
(9) 
X / F  is atomless in 9 
if and only if X i  $ E for each i E ( X ) .  
We leave the easy proof of (9) to the reader. The next two assertions char- 
acterize those elements of % which belong to Z(23), i.e., those elements of 
23 which can be decomposed into an atomic part and an atomless part (see 
Section 5.5). Let X < o x  w. 
(10) If ( X ) / D  = 0, then in 9 the sum of all atoms covered by X/F exists 
and is equal to (uis(x) 
Xi)/F. So in this case X/FE I @ ) .  
exist. So in this case X / F @  Z(%). 
(1 1 )  If ( X ) / D  # 0, then in 23 the sum of all atoms covered by X/F does not 
Let us first prove (10). We have already seen by ( 7 )  that each Xi/F is an 
atom covered by XIF. Let Y = U i e ( X ) X i .  
It is immediate that Xi/F < Y / F  
< X/F for i E ( X ) .  Furthermore, it is easy to show that 
every atom covered by X/F is one of Xi/F with i E ( X ) .  
Thus Y / F  covers all atoms covered by X/F. Suppose that Z / F  is an atomless 
element such that Z / F  < Y / F .  We may suppose that Z c Y, and, by (9), 
Z i  $ E for all i E ( X ) .  Since ( X ) / D  = 0, it follows that Z / F  = 0. So (10) is 
proved. 
Assume now ( X ) / D  # 0. By previous considerations we know that Xi/F 
with i E ( X )  is the set of all atoms covered by X/F. Also, these atoms are cov- 
ered by Y / F ,  where Y = Uie(X) 
X i .  Suppose the sum of these atoms exists in 
8; let it be denoted by Z/F. We may suppose that Z c Y. Since X J F  < Z/F, 
we see that for each i E (X), 
Z i  E E, for otherwise X J F .  Z / F  = 0. Since 
E is nonprincipal, Z i  is infinite. Whence we pick a subset W i  
c Z i  such that 
Wi is infinite and Wi @ E. Let W = Uictx) 
Wi. By (9), W is an atomless ele- 

444 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
ment of !8 such that 0 # W / F  < Z/F. This contradicts the definition of 
Z/F. So ( 1 1 )  is proved. 
By (10) and ( I  I), we see that 
( X ) / D  = 0 if, and only if, (X/F‘)/f(B) 
= 0. 
Furthermore, the mapping X+ ( X )  is a homomorphism of S ( w x o )  onto 
S(w). Whence we have 
S(w)/D z (S(w x m)/F)/I(B), 
which proves (3) and completes the induction. (We may, of course, iden- 
tify w x w with w and redefine F, so that 23 is isomorphic to a quotient alge- 
bra S(o)/F.) The lemma is proved. i 
Finally, to construct a quotient algebra S(w)/D such that m(S(w)/D) = 
00, we proceed as follows: Let I,,, n < w, be a partition of w into disjoint 
infinite sets. On each I,,, let D,, be a filter over I,, such that m(.S(f,,)/D,,) = n. 
This is possible by the lemma. Now let 
D = { X c o : X n I , , ~ D , , f o r a l l n < w } .  
We leave it to the reader to verify that m(S(w)/D) = 03. This concludes the 
proof of Ershov’s theorem. -I 
Using Proposition 6.3.19 and Ershov’s theorem we can at last fill the gap 
needed to eliminate the continuum hypothesis in the preceding section. We 
must prove: 
LEMMA 
6.2.7. The predicate 
cp is a reduced product sentence 
is an arithmetical predicate. 
PROOF. Using Ershov’s theorem, we see that the following three statements 
are equivalent: 
p J , k  holds in no Boolean algebra S(I)/D; 
p J , k  holds in no Boolean algebra S(w)/D; 
p J , k  is inconsistent with the theory of Boolean algebras. 
Notice that this last statement is quite obviously an arithmetical statement 
about 
Whence we have, by Proposition 6.3.19 and the discussion follow- 

6.31 
PRODUCTS AND HORN SENTENCES 
445 
ing it: the predicate 
cp is a reduced product sentence 
is an arithmetical predicate. i 
Now, we can restate Theorem 6.2.5 as follows: 
THEOREM 
6.2.5'. cp is a reduced product sentence if and only if cp is equivalent 
to a Horn sentence. 
We can, of course, apply the same technique to eliminate the continuum 
hypothesis from Proposition 6.2.6. 
EXERCISES 
6.3.1. Let 9 be a countable language, and let there be a suitable 
Godel numbering of the formulas of 9. 
Show that the set of direct product 
sentences of 9 
is a recursively enumerable set. 
[Hint: Show that in 2 
u {U, V } ,  where I/ and V are I-placed relation 
symbols, one can express that cp is a direct product sentence by considering 
Will the same method work for direct power, reduced power or reduced 
product sentences?] 
6.3.2*. Prove by the technique of Theorem 6.3.9 the following interpolation 
lemma. Suppose cp and $ are sentences, with $ true in every finite direct prod- 
uct (with one or more factors) of models of cp. Then there exists a finite di- 
rect product sentence 8 such that cp 1 8 and 8 1 $. 
6.3.3*. Prove by the methods of Theorem 6.3.6 the following result: Every 
n,", reduced (direct) product sentence cp is equivalent to a sentence of the 
form 
the validity of a suitable sentence which expresses (cp") 
A p(") + cp" ' 
") ). 
(vx, ... xk)$, 
where $ is a C: reduced (direct) product formula. (cp is a reduced product 
formula if cp(c, ... ck), obtained from cp by replacing x i  by constants cir is a 
reduced product sentence.) 
[Hint: Let S be any self-determining set of E: formulas such that S is 
closed, up to equivalence, under both A and v .  Suppose, for simplicity, 
that x is the only free variable occurring in S. For each $ E S, let $' be a for- 
mula of S equivalent to the disjunction of all formulas qU,. E S, where 
cpu,. 
= A {c E S : 9l k ~ [ a ] ,  
a E A, and 9l k (Vx)$}. 

446 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.3 
The mapping $ -P I)' of S into S satisfies the following: 
(i). t- (Vx)$ c-) (Vx)$'; 
(ii). for every set I and filter D over I, and all formulas $, @i, 
i E I, of S, if 
every reduced product nDai 
of models ai b (VX)$~ is a model of (Vx)#, 
then 
every reduced product nDai 
of models gi 
t= $i(c) is a model of @'(c).] 
6.3.4. Combining Exercise 6.3.3 and Proposition 6.2.9, show that every I$ 
sentence that is preserved under direct products is equivalent to a llg Horn 
sentence. 
6.3.5. Prove that every sentence 40 containing only the identity symbol and 
which is closed under direct products is equivalent to a Horn sentence con- 
taining only the identity symbol. 
[Hint: Use the results of Section 1.5 to show that every sentence rp contain- 
ing only the identity symbol is equivalent to a II(l sentence. Then apply 
Exercise 6.3.4.1 
In an entirely analogous manner, every direct product sentence containing 
only s and 1-placed relation symbols is equivalent to a Horn sentence. 
6.3.6. If 9 
is countable, then for every I and models 91i, i E I, there is a 
countable subset K c I such that for all J, K c J c I, niEJ91i 
=_ niErgi. 
6.3.7*. Use Theorem 6.3.14 to show the following Cantor-Bernstein type 
result: Let 9I, 23, B be three models for 9. 
If % 3 % x B  xQ, then 9I = 
9I x 23. (In general, we cannot replace E by z .) 
6.3.8. Use Theorem 6.3.18 to show that: If two model (11. and 23 are equiva- 
lent under all Horn sentences of 2, 
then they are equivalent. 
6.3.9. cp is said to be closed under reduced roots iff (11. k cp whenever nD(ll. 
t= rp. 
Prove the following consequence of Theorem 6.3.18: Every sentence is equiv- 
alent to a Boolean combination of reduced root sentences. 
6.3.10*. A class K of models is said to be compact iff for all sets of sentences 
Z, C has a model in K iff every finite subset if Z has a model in K. Evidently, 
K is compact iff the closure of K under elementary equivalence is an elemen- 
tary class. Prove that if K is compact, then the class of all arbitrary direct 
products of members of K is again compact. 

6.41 
LIMIT ULTRAPOWERS AND COMPLETE EXTENSIONS 
447 
6.3.11. Use the results of Section 5.5 to prove that the condition 
{CT} u TBA is consistent (or is inconsistent) 
is a recursive predicate. 
6.3.12. Show the following sharper form of Proposition 6.3.19: Let cp be an 
arbitrary sentence of 2. Then we can effectively find reduced product sen- 
tences 
..., $,,, such that 
(i). t- $ j  -, cp for 1 < j < rn; 
(ii). for every reduced product sentence $, if t $ .+ cp, then t- $ .+ +hj for 
some j, 1 < j < m. 
6.3.13. Let cp be the sentence which says that there are not exactly three 
elements in the universe. Then cp is equivalent both to a Cg sentence and to 
a I I g  Horn sentence. However, cp is not equivalent to any Cg Horn sentence. 
6.3.14*. Prove that every Horn sentence cp which holds in the two-element 
Boolean algebra holds in every Boolean algebra. 
[Hint: First eliminate the existential quantifiers in cp by using the fact that 
every Boolean function on (0, l} can be built up from +, 1, and - . Then use 
the fact that universal Horn sentences are preserved under subdirect prod- 
ucts.] 
6.3.15*. Assuming the continuum hypothesis, give a shorter proof of Er- 
shov's theorem. 
[Hint: Use Lemma 6.2.4 and the preceding exercise.] 
6.4. Limit ultrapowers and complete extensions 
The limit ultrapower construction is a generalization of the ultrapower 
construction. It shares many of the desirable properties of ultrapower; in 
particular, the fundamental theorem, the expansion theorem, and the 
existence of a natural embedding. In a number of problems in model theory, 
the ultrapower construction is not broad enough, and the limit ultrapower 
construction gives us the model we want. While the definition of an ultra- 
power is simpler, we shall see that the class of limit ultrapowers of a model 2l 
is in some ways a much more natural class than the class of ultrapowers of 9l 
(cf. Corollary 6.4.1 1). Before we come to the definition of limit ultrapower 
we shall study in some detail complete extensions of models. They are a very 
strong kind of elementary extension, and are intimately connected with 
limit ultrapowers. 

448 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
(6.4 
Consider a model % for 9 
of infinite power a. There are exactly 2" dif- 
ferent (finitary) relations and functions on the set A. Let us expand the lan- 
guage 9 by adding a new symbol for each relation and function over A, 
and a constant symbol for each element of A. The new language 5?# will 
have 2" new relation and function symbols, and a new constant symbols. 
Let '$l# be the expansion of % to 5?#, whereeach new symbol is given its 
natural interpretation. We shall call 9(# the completion of%. 
Let %, 23 be two models for 9 
and let %# be the completion of %. 
We shall say that a mapping f is a complete embedding of % into 23 iff there 
exists an expansion Q of 23 to L?# such that f: 
%# < Q. In other words, f 
is an elementary embedding, and we can simultaneously extend all relations 
and functions on A to relations and functions on B such thatfis still an ele- 
mentary embedding from the expansion of % into the expansion of 23. Thus 
a complete embedding is an elementary embedding of a very special kind. 
The natural embedding for ultrapowers gives us one example of a com- 
plete embedding. 
PROPOSITION 
6.4.1. Let D be an ultrafilter and % a model. Then the natural 
embedding d is a complete embedding of 2l into the ultrapower nD%. 
PROOF. Let %# be the completion of %. By the fundamental theorem, 
d : %# < nD%#. 
But by the expansion theorem, nD%" 
is an expansion 
of n D %  to L?#. 4 
We shall see more examples of complete embeddings later on. However, 
it may be instructive to mention one such example now. 
EXAMPLE 
6.4.2. Let % be a model, let D be an ultrafilter, and let /3 be an in- 
finite cardinal. Let 
B = {gD : g E 'A 
and [range (g)l < /I}, 
and let 23 be the submodel of nD% 
with universe B. Then, by repeating the 
proof of the fundamental theorem, we can show that d is a complete em- 
bedding of % into 8. We leave the details as an exercise. 
It is often easier to talk about extensions instead of embeddings. We shall 
say that 23 is a complete extension of 2l iff 2l c 8 and the identity function 
is a complete embedding of 2l into 23. Let us call 23 an ultrapower extension of 

6.41 
LIMIT ULTRAPOWERS AND COMPLETE EXTENSIONS 
449 
% iff 2l c 'B and there is an ultrapower nD% 
of % such that 
(8, 4 . A  
( n %d(a))o., 
- 
D 
Thus, by Proposition 6.4.1, we have the following: 
COROLLARY 
6.4.3. Every ultrapower extension of a model % is a complete ex- 
tension of %. 
The converse of the above corollary is false (cf. Exercise 6.4.6). However, 
the following is a weak converse. 
THEOREM 
6.4.4. Let 'B be a complete extension of %. Then for each b E B, 
there exists art ultrapower extension 6 of % such that Q i 
'B and b E C. 
PROOF. Let b E B. Let %# be the completion of 8, let 9# 
be the language 
of %#, and let 'B# be an expansion of 'B to dp# such that %# < 'B#. For 
each relation R on A, let R' be the corresponding relation in 'B#, and use a 
similar notation for functions. Consider the set 
D = ( R E  S(A) : b E R'}. 
Since %# < B#, it is easily seen that D is an ultrafilter over the set A. Con- 
sider the ultrapower nD%#. 
To prove the theorem, it suffices to find an 
elementary embeddingg : nD%# 
i ' B #  such that b E range (9). It suffices be- 
cause each element a E A is a constant of %#, whence g(d(a)) = a, and thus 
the range Q of g is an ultrapower extension of % containing 6, and 6 i 
'B. 
Let i be the identity function on A. Consider any formula ~ ( x )  
of Y#, and 
let 
Then R, is a relation of a#, and 
R, = {a E A : 
c ( ~ [ a ] } .  
(1) 
I= (Vx)(Cp(x) - 
R&)). 
Because of the definition of D, the following are equivalent: 
n 
%# C Cp[i,l; 
D 
R, E D ;  
b E  Rb; 
'B# C cp[b]. 

450 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.4 
The last two lines are equivalent because %# < B#, whence (1) holds for 
‘B#. Then 
(n 
a#, i D )  = (%#, 6). 
Now consider an arbitrary elementf, of nD%#.fis a function of %#; let 
f ”  be the corresponding function of nD%#. 
Then 
D 
(2) 
f “(iD) = (f(i(a)) : a E A)D = fD. 
Let us add a new constant symbol cf to S# for each f E AA. Expand the 
models n,M#, 
by interpreting cf by f D  in the former and byf’(b) in the 
latter. Then for each sentence cp(c,, .. . cfm) of the new language, the follow- 
ing are equivalent: 
11 
J
G
)
~
~
A
~
 
c cp(cr, ... cfn); 
D 
n a# p[f;’(iD) ... f.”(iD)]; 
D 
n a# cp(fl(x) 
.fn(x))[iD]; 
D 
23# != rP(fl(X) 
* a .  fXx))C61; 
‘B# 
rPCfXb) . 
* * f,(b)l; 
(@, f’(b)),€AA c dc,, 
CfJ. 
( n 
%#, fD)fEAA 
Thus 
(%#, ff(b))f€AA 
* 
D 
Therefore the map f D  + f‘(b) is an elementary embedding on nD%” 
into 
%# which maps i, to 6. -I 
THEOREM 
6.4.5 (Keisler-Rabin Theorem). Let a be an infinite cardinal, and 
suppose that w is the only measurable cardinal < a. (That is, either a is less 
than thejirst measurable cardinal > w, or else w is the only measurable car- 
dinal.) Then the following are equivalent: 
(i). a = am. 
(ii). Every model% of power a (with any number of relations) has aproper 
(iii). Every model % of power a has aproper complete extension of power a. 
elementary extension of power a. 
PROOF. (i) 
(ii). Let D be a nonprincipal ultrafilter over w. Then, for 
any model % of power a, d is an elementary embedding of % into n D % .  

6.4) 
LIMIT ULTRAPOWERS AND COMPLETE EXTENSIONS 
45 1 
Since A is infinite and D is not a,-complete, d is a proper embedding (Prop- 
osition 4.2.4). Moreover, 
a < I n A I  < a" = a. 
Thus nD% 
is isomorphic to a proper elcmentary extension of '$4 of power 
a, and (ii) holds. 
(ii) 3 (iii). Let % be a model of power a. Form the completion lY# of 
%. Applying (ii) to '$I#, there is a proper elementary extension B# of 
power a. Then the reduct B of B# to 9 
is a proper complete extension 
of %, so (iii) holds. 
(i). Let % be a model of power a and let 8 be a proper complete 
extension of power a. Then there exists b E B'\A. 
By Theorem 6.4.4, there 
is an ultrapower extension Q of '$1 with b E C, B < B. Thus B is isomorphic 
to some ultrapower nD%, 
say f: 
B z nD%, 
and for all a E A,f(a) = d(a). 
Since b E C\A,f(b) 
4 d(A), whence d maps A properly into n D A .  Then, by 
Proposition 4.2.4, D is not an a+-complete ultrafilter. But since there is no 
measurable cardinal /3 such that o, < p < a, it follows from Proposition 
4.2.7 that D is not o,-complete, i.e. D is countably incomplete. Therefore 
D is o-regular; so by Proposition 4.3.9, l n D A l  = InDAI". But a < lnDAI, 
D 
(iii) 
SO 
whence (i) holds. i 
Other applications of Theorem 6.4.4 are given as exercises. 
We now come to the definition of the limit ultrapower. Roughly, a limit 
ultrapower of % is a submodel of an ultrapower nD% 
made up of elements 
f D ,  wherefis 'almost constant', that is, the set of pairs (i, j )  such thatf(i) = 
f ( j )  belongs to a given filter over I x I. 
Here is the formal definition: For each g E ' A ,  the equivalence relation 
determined by g, denoted by eq (9) 
is defined as 
4 s )  = {<W 
E 1 x 1  : g(i) = g(i)}. 
Now let D be an ultrafilter over I and let Y be a filter over I x I. For a set 
A, the limit ultrapower 
A is the set 
n A = {gD : g E 'A 
and eq(g) E V}. 
D I V  

452 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.4 
Before defining the limit ultrapower of a model we need the proposition 
below. 
PROPOSITION 
6.4.6. Let $!I be a model, D an ultrafilter over I, and V afilter 
over I x I. Then nDlv 
A is a nonempty subset of nD 
A which is closed under 
the functions and constants of the model nDa. 
PROOF. Iff is a constant function in ‘A, then eq( f) = I x  I, so es( f) E V 
and fD E n D l v A .  This shows that, for all a E A, d(a) E n D l v A .  Therefore 
n D l v A  is nonempty and contains all the constants of nD$!I. 
Let G be an 
n-placed function of 3, and H the corresponding function of nD%. 
We 
show that if 
Assume (1). Then we may suppose that 
eq(f’) E V, ..., eq(f”) E V. 
eq(f ’) n . . . n eq(f”) E ‘v. 
Hence 
But for all ( i , j )  E I x  I, 
f ’ ( i ) =  f’(j), ...,f”( 
i) = f”(j) implies G(f’(i) ...f”( 
i ) )  = G(f’(j) ...f’(j)). 
Thus 
eq(f’) n ... n eq(f”) c eq((G(f’(i) ... fn(i)) : i E I ) ) E  V. 
Since 
H(fd ... fi) = ( G ( f ’ ( i )  ... f”(i)) : i E I > D ,  
the formula (2) follows. i 
We may now define the limit ultrapower nDlv 
2€ of the model 2l to be the 
submodel of nD% 
whose universe is the set n D l v A .  
The model 8 of Example 6.4.2 is just the limit ultrapower ‘B = nDlv$!I, 
where V is the filter over I x  I generated by the set of all equivalence rela- 
tions on I having c fl equivalence classes. 
There is also such a thing as a limit ultraproduct which has been studied in 
the literature. We shall not take it up here. We shall next concern ourselves 
with a study of some model-theoretic properties of the limit ultrapower. 

6.41 
LIMIT ULTRAPOWERS AND COMPLETE EXTENSIONS 
453 
PROPOSITION 
6.4.7 (Expansion Theorem). If 31' is an expansion of ?I to a 
language 21, 
then a limit ultrapower nDl&?l') 
is an expansion of nD,y?i 
to 
9'. 
PROPOSITION 
6.4.8 (Fundamental Theorem). Let nDlv 
'u be a limit ultrapower 
of ?I. Then nDlv'21 
is an elementary submodel of the ultrapower nD%. 
We leave the proofs of the two propositions above as exercises. Proposi- 
tion 6.4.8, combined with the fundamental theorem for ultraproducts, 
shows that we have available the same criterion for truth in nDlv21 
as we 
have in n,%. 
COROLLARY 
6.4.9. Let nDlv'u 
be a limit ultrapower of 9. 
Then the natural 
embedding d of 'u into nD'u 
is also a complete embedding of ?I into nDlv%. 
Moreover, there is a complete extension 23 of 2l such that 
(B, a).€" = ( n W).€" 
DIV 
This time it turns out that the converse is also true. 
THEOREM 
6.4.10. For all models 'u, B, the following are equivalent: 
(i). 23 is u complete extension of 3. 
(ii). There exists a limit ultrapower nDlv'u 
of 'u such that 
PROOF. 
(ii) 
(ii). Let 'u# be the completion of 'u in a language 9#, 
and let B# 
be an expansion of B to L?# 
such that 'u# < B#. Then 'u# = B#, 
whence by Corollary 4.3.13, B# is elementarily embeddable in some ul- 
trapower nD'u#. 
Let n : 23# < nD'u# 
be such an elementary embedding. 
Since each U E  A is a constant of 'u# and its interpretation in nD%# 
is 
d(a), we have 
(1) 
.(a) = d(a) for all a E A. 
Let C be the range of K. We shall find a filter V over I x I, where I = u 
D, 
such that C = nDlvA. 
(i). This is immediate from Corollary 6.4.9. 
(i) 
Define V to be the filter over I x  I generated by the sets 
{eq(f) : f E'A 
and 
fD E C}. 

454 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.4 
Then obviously 
(2) 
Let go E n D l v A .  Then there exists f = D  g such that eq(f) E V. This means 
that there exist h;, .. ., h: E C such that 
eq(h') n ... n eq(h") c eq(f). 
It follows that there is an n-placed function G over A such that for all i E I ,  
G(h'(i) ... h"(i)) = f ( i ) .  
Since 2l# is the completion of 2l, G is a function of 2l#. Let G" be the corre- 
sponding function of no'%#. 
Then 
G"(hA ... hk) = fD. 
Since Cis the image of x, C must be closed under all the functions of nD%". 
Thus fD E C. We have shown that 
(3) 
From (2) and (3) we see that 
(4) 
The desired conclusion (ii) now follows from (1) and (4), taking reducts to 
9. 
-I 
COROLLARY 
6.4.11. 23 is isomorphic to a complete extension of 2l i f  9 
is 
isomorphic to a limit ultrapower of 8. 
The following corollary is an application of limit ultrapowers to give a 
result involving complete embeddings only. 
COROLLARY 
6.4.12. Suppose f is a complete embedding of 8 into 9. 
Then for 
any extension 2l' 3 %, there exists an extension 23' 3 23 such that f can be 
extended to a complete embeddingf' of (W, 
A )  into (B', B). 
PROOF. By Theorem 6.4.10, there is a limit ultrapower nDlv21 
and an iso- 
morphism 
: (B9 f(al1.4 
( n 8, W ) . E A  * 
DIV 

6.41 
LIMIT ULTRAPOWERS AND COMPLETE EXTENSIONS 
4.5.5 
Form the limit ultrapower nDIV(%’, 
A ) .  Let US identify, for f E ‘A, theequiv- 
alence class f D  in the sense of nDIV 
A with the equivalence class f D  in the sense 
of RDlVA’. With this identification, nDIV’2I 
is a submodel of nDIV’21‘, 
and 
nDIV(%’, 
A )  = (nIDIY’21’, 
n D I V A ) .  It follows that there is an extension 
23’ 3 23 and an isomorphism 
n’ : (B’, B) S! n (a’, A) 
DIV 
such that n c n’. Define the mapf’ : A’ + B”by 
f’(a) = n’-’d(a). 
Since d is a complete embedding of (%’, A )  into its limit ultrapower, f’ 
is a complete embedding of (a’, A )  into (@’, B). Finally,f’ is an extension of 
A for, whenever a E A, 
f’(a) = n‘-’d(a) = n-’d(a) = f(a). i 
Notice that in the above corollary there is no limit on the size of the model 
M’. For example, we have the following: 
COROLLARY 
6.4.13. Suppose a is an ordinal and f : (R(u), E) i 
93. If there 
exist extensions 23’ 3 23 and f’ 3 f such that f‘ : (R(u+ l), E) < B’, then 
for all ordinals B > a there exist extensions 23” I> 23 andf” 3 f such that 
f” : (R(P), E) i 
8”. 
PROOF. Every relation, function and constant of R(a) is an element of 
R(a+ 1). Therefore f is a complete embedding of (R(a), E) into By 
and the 
result follows. i 
COROLLARY 
6.4.14. Suppose f is a complete embedding of (a, < ) into a model 
B. Then there exist an extension 23’ 3 23 andf’ 3 f such that: 
(i). f’ is a complete embedding of (R(a), E) into ’$3’; 
(ii). B is the set of all ordinals of the model 23’. 
PROOF. 
By Corollary 6.4.12, there is a complete embedding f‘ =I f of 
((R(a), E), a) into (B’, a) for some 23’ 3 B. Thenf’ is a complete embedding 
of (R(a), E) into B‘. Since a is the set of ordinals of ((R(a), E), a), B is the 
set of ordinals of (B’, B), whence (ii) holds. -I 

456 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.4 
We conclude this section with some applications of the limit ultra- 
power construction to the nonstandard universes studied in Section 4.4. 
We begin with an improvement of Proposition 4.4.10. 
PROPOSITION 
6.4.15. Let ( V ( X ) ,  V( Y ) ,  * ) be a nonstandard universe and 
let % be a model whose universe A is a set relative to V(X). Then the 
restriction of * to A is a complete embedding of % into *%. 
PROOF. The completion 23 = ?I# of % also has the universe A which is a 
set relative to V(X). By Proposition 4.4.10, the restriction of * to A is 
an elementary embedding of 23 into *B, and *B is an expansion of *%. -I 
If we define a complete bounded elementary embedding in a manner 
analogous to our definition of a complete elementary embedding, then 
Theorem 
4.4.16 
shows 
that 
for 
any 
nonstandard 
universe 
( V ( X ) ,  V(Y), * ), * is a complete bounded elementary embedding of 
( V ( X ) ,  E ) into (*V(X), E ). 
It follows from 6.4.11 and 6.4.15 and *% is isomorphic to a limit 
ultrapower of 8. We now wish to obtain an analogous result for the 
whole superstructure ( V ( X ) ,  E ). Our plan is to introduce a notion of a 
bounded limit ultrapower and show that every nonstandard universe can 
be “represented” as a bounded limit ultrapower. 
Let D be an ultrafilter over an index set I and let U be a filter over 
I X I. Assume that D and U have the property that for every infinite set 
A ,  the natural embedding d : A + n A is a proper embedding. We 
imitate the definition of a bounded ultrapower in Section 4.4 but restrict 
ourselves to functions f : I-+ V ( X )  such that eq( f )  E U when appropri- 
ate. Let Y be the ordinary limit ultrapower n X of X .  For each 
natural number n, let 
DlU 
DIU 
W, = { f E ‘V(X) : { i  : f ( i )  E V,(X)} E D and eq( f )  E U }  
Let W = U 
For each x E V ( X ) ,  let c(x) be the constant function 
at x. As in Section 4.4, there is a unique function l D  : W+ V(Y) such 
that 
fl D = { g E ‘X : eq( g )  E U and f = g ) 
iff E W,, and 

6.41 
LIMIT ULTRAPOWERS AND COMPLETE EXTENSIONS 
457 
f l D  = { g / D  : g E W and { i  : g(i) E f ( i ) }  E D )  
iff E W\W,. 
Now define the embedding * : V(X)-+ V ( Y )  by * A  = c(A) / D .  We call 
the triple (V(X), V(Y), * ) the bounded limit ultrapower of V ( X )  mod- 
ulo D I U. 
THEOREM 
6.4.16. Each bounded limit ultrapower of V(X) is a non- 
standard universe. 
The proof of Theorem 6.4.16 follows the same pattern as the proof in 
Section 4.4 that a bounded ultrapower is a nonstandard universe, and 
requires an analogue of LoS' theorem for bounded limit ultrapowers. We 
now state a converse result. 
THEOREM 
6.4.17 (Representation Theorem for Nonstandard Universes). 
Every nonstandard universe (V(X), V( Y ) ,  * ) is a bounded limit ultra- 
power of V(X). 
PROOF. By Exercise 4.4.29, there is an ultrafilter D with bounded 
ultrapower (V(X), V(Y), p )  and a bounded elementary embedding 
h : (*V(X), E ) + ("(X), 
E ) such that h(*A) = 'A for all A E V(X). 
By the argument used to prove Theorem 6.4.10, one can find a filter U 
over Z X I such that (V(X), V ( Y ) ,  * ) is the bounded limit ultrapower of 
V(X) modulo DIU. i 
COROLLARY 
6.4.18. For every nonstandard universe (V(X), V(Y), * ) 
there is a model '21 for 2 = { E } such that ( *V(X), E ) is the truncafion of 
(21 and * is an ordinary elementary embedding of (V(X), E ) into (21. 
PROOF. By Theorem 6.4.17, there exist D 
and 
U such that 
(V(X), V(Y), * )  is a bounded limit ultrapower of V ( X )  modulo DIU. 
Let h be the Mostowski collapse of the ordinary limit ultrapower 
n (V(X), E ). Proposition 4.4.18 on bounded ultrapowers can readi- 
ly be extended to the case of bounded limit ultrapowers, so that *V(X) is 
the range of h and for all f E W, h( f D )  = f / D .  For each x E V ( X ) ,  
* x  = h(d(x)). By Corollary 6.4.8, d is an elementary embedding of 
(V(X), E ) into n ( V ( X ) ,  E ). By renaming elements and replacing 
d(x) by * x  for each x E V ( X ) ,  we may replace n (V(X), E ) by an 
isomorphic model (21 such that (*V(X), E ) is the truncation of 91 and * 
is an elementary embedding of (V(X), E ) into (21. i 
DlU 
DI u 
Dlu 

458 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
(6.4 
EXERCISES 
6.4.1. If 9I# is the completion of 8, then the theory of 
Skolem functions. 
6.4.2. '23 belongs to every pseudoelementary class which contains 8 iff '23 is 
isomorphic to a complete extension of 8. (See Exercise 4.1.17.) 
6.4.3. Letfbe a complete embedding of 8 into 8. Then: 
(i). If 9' 
c 9, 
then f is a complete embedding from the reduct of 8 
to 9' 
into the reduct of '23 to 9'. 
(ii). If 9 
c 9' 
and 8' is an expansion of 8 to 9', 
then there exists an 
expansion 8' of 8 to 9' 
such thatfis a complete embedding of W into 8'. 
6.4.4. (i). If 6 is a complete extension of 8 and 23 is a complete extension of 
a, then Q is a complete extension of 8. 
(ii). If 8,,+ is a complete extension of an for all n < w, then Urn+,,8,,,is a 
complete extension of each a,,. Generalize to well ordered chains of arbitrary 
length. 
6.4.5*. Let 9I = (A, L, ...) be a model such that L is a simple ordering of 
cofinality > w. Then M has complete extensions '23 = (B, M, ...) of ar- 
bitrarily large cardinality such that A is cofinal in (B, M). 
6.4.6. Let w < a, 2" < p. Then every model M of power a has a complete 
extension 8 of power p. If w is the only measurable cardinal < a and if 
cf (p) = w, then the complete extension '23 is not an ultrapower extension of 
a. 
6.4.7* (i). No proper ultrapower extension of <a, 
<) has cofinality w. 
has built-in 
(ii). (w, <) has a proper complete extension of cofinality a. 
6.4.8. Prove the assertion in Example 6.4.2. 
6.4.9. Let D be an ultrafilter over a set Z and let T be a topology on I. Let M 
be a model and give A the discrete topology. Let 
B = {fD : f: I + A andfis continuous}. 
Let 23 be the submodel of nD8 
with universe B. Prove that '23 < nD8 
and 
d is a complete embedding of B into '23. 
6.4.10. Suppose w is the only measurable cardinal <.a and let M be an (a, a)- 
model. Show that there is a pseudoelementary class K such that ~ E K ,  
and every (a, w)-model 8 E K is isomorphic to M. 

6.41 
LIMIT ULTRAPOWERS AND COMPLETE EXTENSIONS 
459 
6.4.1 1. Suppose w is the only measurable cardinal < a, and let ?I be a model 
of power a. Let C ( x )  be a countable set of formulas such that 8 omits C 
and C is consistent with the theory of 'u. Find a pseudoelementary class K 
such that CU E K and every model 23 E K which omits C is isomorphic to 'u. 
6.4.12*. Suppose there exists an uncountable measurable cardinal p 6 a. 
Assume the GCH. Prove that every model of power a has a proper complete 
extension of power a. 
[Hint: Show that if /? < a < a* and D is a countably complete ultrafilter 
over /?, then InDal = a.] 
6.4.13. Let a be an ordinal, and suppose w is the only measurable cardinal 
< a. Assume that (R(a), E) 4 ( B ,  E )  and w is 'fixed' in the sense that 
{b E B : bEo) = w .  Then: 
(i). If a is a successor ordinal a = y +  1, then ( B ,  E )  = (R(a), E). 
(ii). In general, (B, E )  is an 'end extension' of (R(a), E) in the sense that 
{b E B : for some u E R(a), bEu} = R(a). 
6.4.14. Let c1 be a cardinal and suppose ( B ,  L )  is a complete extension of 
(a, <) such that a is not cofinal in (B, L ) .  Then there exists an ultrafilter 
D which is not descendingly a-complete (see Exercise 4.3.10), such that the 
model ( n D ( a ,  <), d(/?))psa is elementarily embeddable in ((B, L ) ,  
6.4.15. Let (B', B, L )  be a complete extension of the model (a', a, <). 
If a is cofinal in ( B ,  L ) ,  then a' 
is cofinal in (B', L ) .  
[Hint: Use Exercise 4.3.34.1 
[Hint: Use Exercise 4.3.12.1 
6.4.16. If V is the improper filter V = S ( I X  I), then nDlv% 
= nD%. 
Thus 
every ultrapower is a limit ultrapower. 
6.4.17. If V is the trivial filter V = { I x Z } ,  then nDlV21 
= d(M), where d 
is the natural embedding. 
6.4.18. The limit ultrapower nDlV\2I 
depends only on the equivalence rela- 
tions in V. That is, if d is the set of all equivalence relations on I, and V n 8 
= W n E, then 
6.4.19. Prove the results Proposition 6.4.7, Proposition 6.4.8, and Corollary 
6.4.9. 
6.4.20. Suppose V, W are filters over I x Z  and V c W. Then nDlvCU i 
= ~DIw'i?L 
n D , w  a. 

460 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.4 
6.4.21. In Exercise 6.4.9, '23 is a limit ultrapower of 2. 
6.4.22. When D is a proper filter over Z and V is a filter over Zx Z, define the 
limit reducedpower nDlv91, 
and verify Proposition 6.4.6 for it. 
6.4.23*. For any two models ?I, '23 such that 9l 3 '23, there exists a model 
6 such that both 2l and B are completely embeddable in 6. 
[Hint: Use Exercise 4.3.29.1 
Furthermore, Q may be chosen of power 2IA' u 2IB1. 
6.4.24. ?I = '23 iff there exist limit ultrapowers nDIv2 
r nElwB3. 
Further, 
we may take the limit ultrapowers to be of power 2IA1 u 2IB1. 
6.4.25. If V is a principal filter over I X  
I, then nDlv?I 
is isomorphic to an 
ultrapower of '21. 
6.4.26. Suppose 23 is a complete extension of PI. Then there exists a set M 
of models such that: 
(i). For each 0. E M ,  Q is an ultrapower extension of 91 and B < B, 
and ICl < 2IA1. 
(ii). For all GI, 
Q 2  E M ,  there exists 6 E M such that 
< 6, Q2 < 6 
(i.e., M is directed). 
(iii). 23 = uhf. 
This justifies the term 'limit ultrapower'. 
[Hint: Use Theorem 6.4.10 and Exercises 6.4.20 and 6.4.25.1 
6.4.27. K is an elementary class iff K is closed under ultraproducts and both 
K and its complement are closed under limit ultrapowers and isomorphism. 
6.4.28*. Let a be a regular cardinal. Let ?I be a model 2l = (a, <, ...) 
and suppose 23 = ( B ,  L ,  ...) is a complete extension of ?I. Let 
B, = (6 E B : bLa for some a E a], 
and let B,, be the submodel of 23 with universe B,. Prove that B, is also a 
complete extension of %. 
nDl,2, where Wis the filter 
such that eq(f) E W iff eq(f) E V and lrangefl < a.] 
6.4.29*. Suppose a is an inaccessible cardinal, (R(a), E) < (B, E ) ,  and for 
all b E B there exists a E R(a) such that bEa. Then ( B ,  E )  is a complete ex- 
tension of (R(a), E). 
[Hint: Every relation and function on R(a) of power < a belongs to 
R(a). Use this fact and the method proof of Theorem 6.4.10 to show that 
[Hint: Show that if B s nDI,21, 
then 23, 

6.41 
LIMIT ULTRAPOWERS AND COMPLETE EXTENSIONS 
46 1 
for some limit ultrapower n D j v ( R ( a ) ,  
E), we have 
6.4.30*. Let % be a model with built-in Skolem functions. A functionfe A A  
is said to be definable iff there exist a formula cp(xyz, ... 2,) and elements 
a , ,  ..., a, E A such that for all a, b E A ,  
'91 != cp [ a h ,  . . . a,] iff f ( a )  = 6. 
Let D be any ultrafilter over A, and let 
B = { f D e n A  : f is definable}. 
D 
Let 23 be the submodel 'B c nD% 
with universe B. Show that: 
(i). d(B) < 23 < n D ' B .  
(ii). If D is nonprincipal, then d(%) # 8. 
(iii). If %, 2 
are countable, so is %. In general, IBI < IAI u 115?Il. 
(iv). If 8 is the completion of model G, then '$3 = nD8. 
6.4.3 1. Generalize the construction of the preceding exercise by considering 
a definable subset U c A ,  taking an ultrafilter D over Uand 
B = {jD : f E "A and f is definable in a}. 
6.4.32. Let B = ( A ,  U, ...) be a model for a countable language which has 
built-in Skolem functions. Let D be an ultrafilter over A such that for every 
definable functionfe AA, either 
( U E A : ~ ( U ) # U } E D ,  
or there exists U E  U such that 
{ a  E A : f ( a )  = u }  E D. 
If 23 = (B, V, ...) is the model constructed in Exercise 4.3.30, show that 
v = d( U). 
6.4.33. Use the preceding exercises to give a new proof of Theorem 3.2.14. 
6.4.34*. Let % be a (not necessarily countable) model of ZF, let x be a reg- 
ular cardinal of 8, 
and suppose the set 
{y E A : B k y E 22") 
is countable. Then 9l has an elementary extension 23 such that x is fixed and 

462 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.4 
2" is enlarged, i.e. 
{,VEB:Bk,VEXX) C A ,  
{ , V € B : 8 k J ' E 2 X } \ A  #o, 
and, furthermore, 
{ v  E B : 8 k y E 22x} 
is still countable. Iterating this, show that there is an elementary extension 
0. of 91 such that 
{ ~ E C : ~ . ~ ~ V E X }  
c A ,  I { J E C : % ~ . Y E ~ " } I  
= m i .  
6.4.35 (GCH). Let 2l be a saturated model of power a+ for a language Zy 
where 11911 < a. Then every model 23 E 2l of power < a+ has a complete 
embedding into Yl. If 23 4 ?I and IBI < a, then ?X is a complete extension of 
%. 
6.4.36*. Give an example of a set ,T of sentences in an uncountable language 
9 
such that: 
(i). C has a countable model. 
(ii). Every countable subset ,To of C has a countable model (II, for the 
language 2, 
having just the symbols occurring in C o y  such that (II cannot 
be expanded to a model of Z. 
[Hint: Use Theorem 6.4.5 with ci = w, and pick C so that the successor 
function symbol occurs in every member of C.] 
6.4.37*. In the above exercise, find a C which also has the property: 
many CT E C such that both S and T occur in 6. 
6.4.35*. Let Z be a set of sentences in 9 
such that each symbol of 2' occurs 
in only countably many members of C. Then there is a countable subset Co 
of 2 such that every model 2l of C,, for the language Y o  having just the 
symbols occurring in C,, 
can be expanded to a model of C. 
6.4.39*. Let V ( X )  be a superstructure with infinite base set X .  Prove 
that for each uncountable cardinal cy G 1x1 there are nonstandard uni- 
verses ( V ( X ) ,  V ( Y ) ,  * ) and ( V ( X ) ,  V(Z), p )  such that * A  C 'A for all 
A C X ,  and * A  = 'A if and only if IAl< a. [Hint: Use an appropriate 
bounded ultrapower and bounded limit ultrapower.] 
6.4.40*. Let V ( X )  be a superstructure with infinite base set X .  Prove 
that for each n > 1 there are nonstandard universes ( V ( X ) ,  V( Y ) ,  * ) 
and ( V ( X ) ,  V ( Y ) ,  p )  such that * A  = 'A for all A E V,(X), and *V,(X) is 
a proper subset of "V,(X). 
(iii). For each pair S, T of symbols of Yy there are only countably 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
463 
6.5. Iterated ultrapowers 
We now take up the following question: Can we construct additional 
models by iterating the ultrapower construction? The answer is yes, and 
the models so constructed are useful. The iterated ultrapowers will always 
be limit ultrapowers, but the particular way in which they are constructed can 
give them desirable properties which are not shared by arbitrary limit ul- 
trapowers. Our starting point is a result showing that finite iterations of 
ultrapowers give nothing new. 
Consider a pair of ultrafilters D, E over sets I, J. We define D x E to be the 
set of all Y E  S(I x J )  such that 
{ j  E J : {i E I : ( i , j )  E Y }  E D }  E E. 
Suppose now that D , ,  ..., Dn+l are ultrafilters over sets I , ,  ..., I,,,,; then we 
define inductively 
D 1 ~ . . . ~ D n + l  
= ( D , x  ... X D , ) X D , , + , .  
PROPOSITION 
6.5.1. In the above notation, D x E is an ultrafilter over I x J, and 
D ,  x ... x D,, is an ultrafilter over I ,  x ... x I,,. 
PROPOSITION 
6.5.2 (Finite Iteration Theorem). Let D and E be ultrafilters. 
Then for any model 'ZI, 
If D , ,  ..., D,, are ultrafilters, n > 0, then 
PROOF. The second statement follows from the first by induction, SO we 
need only prove the first statement. Let f E IX 
'A. For each j E J, let fi E ' A  
be the function 
fj = (f(u) 
: i E  I ) .  
We shall show that the relation associating f D x  with f * = <fjD : j E J ) E  
is an isomorphism of nDxE% 
onto nE(nD'ZI). 
Consider any formula 
q ( x ,  ... xn)of9andanyf', ...,f" €'''A. 
It sufficestoprove 
iff 

464 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCI’S AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.5 
By the fundamental theorem, (1) is equivalent to 
(3) 
But (3) in turn is equivalent to (4) and (5): 
(4) 
{(i,j) : ‘II C p[f ‘(ij) ...f”(ij)]} E D x E. 
{ j  : {i : U C cplf’(ij) ...f”(ij)]} ED} E E, 
{ j : n a P (~[fi’, ... jja]} E E. 
D 
( 5 )  
If the fundamental theorem is involved a third time, (5) is equivalent 
to (2). -I. 
Examples show that in general, nD, 
E% and nEx 
DU are not isomorphic. 
Thus the order in which we iterate the ultrapower is important. For the gen- 
eral case, suppose we are given a simply ordered (nonempty) set ( Y ,  <) 
and for each y E Y an ultrafilter D, over a set I,. When the ordering < 
is understood, we shall also let Y denote the ordered set (Y, <). We shall 
define an iterated ultrapower of 8 modulo D,,. Roughly speaking, it is 
y ,  < . . . < y ,  in Y, can be embedded in a natural way. When Y is a finite 
set, say Y = {y, , ..., y,} in increasing order, then the iterated ultrapower 
of 8 modulo Dy will coincide with the ultrapower nDyI 
x . .  . ,,a. 
Let K = nyEyZy 
be the Cartesian product of the index sets I,. Let Z c Y. 
We say that a function f with domain K lives on Z iff f ( i )  depends only on 
i r 2, that is, for all i, j E K, 
the smallest model 23 in which all the finite iterations nDyIX...XDy
‘II, 
ir z=j r Z implies f ( i )  = f ( j ) .  
A subset s c K is said to live on Z iff the characteristic function of s lives on 
2. Thus s lives on Z iff for all i, j E K, 
i rz = j r  z implies iE s i f f j E s .  
By the trace of s on { y , ,  ..., y,}, denoted by s,~...,~, we mean the set 
~
y
1
 
...yn = { < i ( ~ l )  
- * *  i(Yn)> : i E s}. 
Thus s,,~...,~ is a subset of I,, x ... x Zyn. We now define a product x y D y  of 
the ultrafilters D, as follows: 
x ,,D, is the set of all s c K such that, for some y ,  < ... <y, in Y 
(1) 
slives on (y,, ...,y,}; 
(2) 
Sy, . . . y . E D , , X  
. * *  XD,,. 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
465 
Thus x, Dy is a set of subsets of K, and each of its elements lives on a finite 
subset of K. Before we can go any further, we need a lemma which is harder 
to prove than we would expect. For this reason we are giving the proof in 
some detail, even though it makes terrible reading. 
LEMMA 6.5.3. Suppose s c K, and s lives on both the sets Yo = {yl, ..., y,} 
and 2, = { z , ,  ..., z,}, where y, < ... < y,, z1 < ... <z, in Y. Then 
iff 
PROOF. If t E S(K) and j E I,, x ... x IUD, let tlj = { i  E t : (i(u,) ... i(uD)) 
= j } .  Note that s also lives on Yo u 2,. Therefore it suffices to prove the 
lemma for the case Yo c 2,. In this case, the statement i E s depends only 
on i(y,), ..., i(y,) and is independent of i(z) for z E Zo\Y0. 
We may assume 
further that n = m + 1, for we can get from the set Yo to the set 2, by adding 
one element at a time. Thus there is a unique element z E Zo\Y,, 
. It follows 
by induction on m that for each r, 1 < r < m, and each set t c Zyl 
x . . . x Iym, 
we have 
iff 
t E D,, x ... x D y m  
{ j E I , , + , x  ... XI,,,, :(Wy 
,... y , E ~ y , X  ... X D , ~ ) E D , ~ + , ~  
... XD,,,,. 
Therefore 
Sy, ... ym E Dy, x ..* x Dym iff 
( j E I Y p + l X  .-. X I y r n  : ( S ~ ~ ) ~ , . . . ~ , E D ~ , X  
... x D ~ , } E D ~ ~ + ~ x  
... x D y m .  
Case 1. z is the last element of Z,, i.e., ym < z. Then the following are 
(1) 
A corresponding statement also holds for 2,. We have three cases. 
equivalent, since s lives on Yo: 
Sy ,...ymEDyrX 
1.. xDym; 
{i(z) : syl ... y, 
ED,, x ... xDYm} = I,; 
{i(z) : Sy, ... ym E Dy, x 
xDym} ED,; 
Sy, ... y , r E ~ y , X  
xDy,xDz. 
Case 2. z is the first element of Z,, i.e., z < y, . Then the following are 
equivalent, since s lives on Yo: 
Sy, ... y,EDylX 
. * *  xDym; 
{ j  E I,, x ... x Iym : ( ~ l j ) ~  
= I z }  ED,, x ... x DYm; 

466 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATTONS 
[6.5 
{ j E I,, x ... x I,, : (sI j ) ,  E D,} E D,, x ... x Dym; 
E D , x D , , x  ... x D Y m .  
S Z Y ~  
... Ym 
The last step used the statement (1) for Z,. 
Case 3. Otherwise. There is a greatest element y, E Yo such that y, < z, 
and r < m. Then again using the assumption that s lives on Yo, and using 
(1) for both Yo and 2, , we see that the following are equivalent, where 
Do = D,, x ... x D,,, 
D ,  = DY,+, x ... x D,,, 
and I,, I ,  are defined analogously: 
PROPOSITION 
6.5.4. Let S be the set of all subsets s of K which live on ajinite 
subset of Y. Then S is closed under$nite unions, finite intersections, arid com- 
plementation relative to K. Moreover, there exists an ultrajilter D over K 
such that 
D n S = XyD,. 
PROOF. The first statement is easy. To prove the second statement, it suffices 
to prove: 
(1) For all s E S, either s E x, D, or (K\ 
s) E x, D,. 
(2) The set x , Dy has the finite intersection property. 
First we prove (1). Let s E S. Then s lives on some finite set Yo = 
{ y ,  ,..., y,,,}, where y ,  < ... < ym. Since D,, x ... x D,, is an ultrafilter over 
I,, x . . . x IYm , we have either 
(3) 
or 
(4) 
I,, x ... x I,,,, \ syl ... Ym ED,, x ... x DYm. 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
But since s lives on Yo, 
467 
(K \ 
sly, ... y, = I,, x * * .  x l Y m  \ SYl ... y, 
- 
Hence, in the case (3), s E X y  Dy, 
while in the case (4), K\s 
E )(yoy. 
We need Lemma 6.5.3 to prove (2). It suffices to prove thatXy Dy is closed 
under finite intersection and does not contain the empty set. The latter is true 
because for any y l  < ... < y, in Y, 
Suppose that s,t E X y  Dy. Say s lives on Yo and t lives on Z,, where Yo, 2, 
are finite. Then s n t lives on the finite set Yo u Z,. Let 
Yo u Zo = ( ~ 1 ,  * * * , ~ m } ,  
A = Sy, ... ym 1 
yt 
< * . a <  
ym. 
Then, by Lemma 6.5.3, both of the sets 
B = t y ,  ... y, 
belong to the ultrafilter D,, x ... x Dy,. Hence the intersection A n B be- 
longs to the ultrafilter. But since s and t live on { y ,  , ..., y,,,}, we have 
i E s iff 
(i(y,) ... i(y,)) E A ,  
i E  t 
iff 
(i(y,) ... i(y,)) E B, 
whence 
It follows that 
i E s n t 
iff 
(i(y,) ... i(y,,,)) E A n B. 
(s n t)y, ... Ym = A n B E Dyl x . .. x DYm 
and therefore s n t E X y D y .  i 
We are now over the hump. We continue to assume that (Y, <) is a 
simply-ordered set, D, is an ultrafilter over 1, for each y E Y, K is the Car- 
tesian product K = nyeyZy, 
and S is the set of all s c K which live on a finite 
subset of Y. Now let B be a model for 3. Let C be the set of all functions 
f: 
K -+ A such that f lives on a finite subset of Y. Let us also write E = 
x D,, for brevity. We shall say that two functions J g  E C are equivalent 
modulo E, in symbols f =€ g, iff 
{ i  E K :f(i) = g(i)} E E. 
As usual, the equivalence class off is written 
fE.= b C : f  
= E d .  
The iterated ultrapower nE. 
A of the set A is defined as the set of all equiva- 

468 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.5 
lence classes: 
JJA = {fE :fd}. 
E 
Finally, the iterated ultrapower nE'21 
of the model '21 is described in the fol- 
lowing way. The universe of nE% 
is the set &A. 
For each n-placed 
relation R of '21, the corresponding relation R' of nE?l 
is determi- 
ned by 
For each n-placed function G of el, the corresponding function G' of H E Y  
is given by 
R'(fL ... f:) 
iff 
{ i  E K : K ( f ' ( i )  ... /"(i))} E E. 
G'(fi ... f:) = ( G ( f ' ( i )  ... f"(i)) 
: i E K)E. 
For each constant a of '21, the corresponding constant a' of n,% is the ele- 
ment 
a' = ( a  : i E K)E. 
The similarity between this definition and the definition of the ultrapower 
is obvious. The difference is that we are now dealing with subsets S c S(K), 
C c K A ,  E c D, 
rather than the whole sets. As in defining the ultraproduct, 
there are certain details which must be verified before we can be sure that the 
definition is meaningful. We list these details in a proposition. 
PROPOSITION 
6.5.5. 
(i). I f f '  . . . f" E C, then 
(i E K : f ' ( i )  = f z ( i ) }  E S ;  
{i E K : R ( f ' ( i )  ... f"(i))} E S ;  
(G(f'(i) ... f"(i)) : i E K )  E C. 
(ii). The relation = E  is an equivalence relation over C. 
(iii). Iff' = E  g', ..., f" = E  g", then 
{ i  E K : R(f'(i) ... f"(i))} E E 
if 
{ i  E K : R(g'(i) .,. g"(i))} E E, 
(C(f'(i) ... f " ( i ) )  : i E K )  = E  (G(g'(i) ... gn(i)) : i E K ) .  
and 
The basic results for iterated ultrapowers are similar to the corresponding 
results for ultraproducts and limit ultrapowers, and have essentially the 
same proofs. 
PROPOSITION 
6.5.6 (Expansion Theorem). Let E = x u D , .  If %' is an ex- 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
469 
pansion of ‘u to a language LZ”, then an iterated ultrapower n,(‘u’) 
is an ex- 
pansion of the iterated ultrapower &‘u to 9’. 
PROPOSITION 
6.5.7 (Fundamental Theorem). Let E = x ,, D,, and form the 
iterated ultrapower n,W. Then for each formula q(x, ... x,) of 9 and all 
f ’, ...,p 
E K A  which live onjinite subsets of Y, 
we have 
n ‘u I= PCfE’ ... fE”1 
E 
iff 
{ i  E K : ‘u t c p [ f ’ ( i )  ... J”(i)]> E E. 
The corresponding statement for terms also holds, and as before, the 
fundamental theorem must first be proved for terms. The natural embedding 
d : A -+ n E A  is defined as before by putting d(a) equal to the equivalence 
class of the constant function with value a. Then, we have the following: 
COROLLARY 
6.5.8. Let E = x ,, D, and form the iterated ultrapower n,’u. 
Then the natural embedding d is a complete embedding of % into &‘u. 
The iterated ultrapower abounds with natural embeddings, in addition 
to the original natural embedding of ‘u into its limit ultrapower. Let us con- 
sider a finite subset Z c Y, and let 2 = {zl, ..., z,> be arranged in increas- 
ing order. It is then natural to associate the functions 
g : I,, x ... X I z n  + A 
with the functions f :  K 4 
A which live on Z. With E = X,,D,,, EZ = 
D,, x ... x D,,, we may define the natural embedding 
nZ(g€z) = < g ( i ( z l )  ... i(zn)) : 
K ) E .  
For 2 = 0, we adopt the convention do = d, the natural embedding of ‘u 
into n,N. The embedding dz depends on Y, D,, and the set A, as well as on 
Z. 
PROPOSITION 
6.5.9. Let Z be aJinite subset of Y. Then: 
(i). dz is a one-one function on nEz 
A into nE 
A. 
(ii). range(d,) = { f E  E nE 
A : f lives on Z}. 
(iii). n E A  = U {range(d,) : W E S J Y ) } .  
(iv). If y # z in Y, then 
range (d(,)) n range (d(=)) = range (4,). 

470 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.5 
PROOF. (i). The following string of equivalent statements, for all g,h : Z,, 
x ... x Iz, ---t A ,  show both that d, is a function and that it is one-one: 
9 = E z h ;  
( j E I Z , x  ... x Z Z , : g ( j ) = h ( j ) } ~ E Z ;  
( i  E K : g(i(z,) ... i(z,)) = h(i(zl) ... i(z,,))} E E ;  
( g ( i ( z , )  ... i(zn)) : i E K )  = E  (h(i(z,) ... i(zn)) : i E K ) .  
(ii). This follows at once from the fact that a function f :  K + A lives 
on Z iff there is a g : Iz, x ... x Zz, -+ A such that 
f = (g(i(zl) ... i(z,)) : i E  K ) .  
(iii). This follows from (ii). 
(iv). Obviously, range(do) c range(d{,)) and similarly for z. Let 
b E range (d{,,]) n range (d,zl). 
1 hen by (iii) there existf, g E “ A  such that b = fE = gE andf lives on {y}, 
g lives on {z}. Suppose, for example, y < z. Letf’(i(y)) =f(i), g’(i(z)) = 
g(i). Then 
{i E K :f’(i(y)) = g’(i(z))} = {i E K : f ( i )  = g(i)} E E, 
{ j  E lz : { i  E I, : j ’ ( i )  = g ’ ( j ) }  E D,} E D z .  
whence 
Thus there existsj, E Iz such that 
{ i E I, : f’( i) = g’(jo)} E D, 
Let a = g’(jo). Then a E A ,  and 
{ i E f y  : f ‘ ( i )  = u } E D , ,  
{i E K : f ( i )  = a} E E, 
whence 
soyE = d,(a) E range (do). i 
PROPOSITION 
6.5.10. Whenever W c Z E S,(Y), we have 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
471 
PROOF. 
Let cp(x, ... x,) be a formula of 9, 
and letf', ...,f" 
be functions on 
I=, x ... x Zz, into A which live on a finite subset of Z. Using the funda- 
mental theorem we see that the following are equivalent: 
n 
2l cp[ftz ..* JEmzl; 
E Z  
s = ( i  E I,, x ... x I," : B t cp[f'(i) ... f"(i)]} E E,; 
( i  E K : 2I k cp[f'(i(z,) ... i(zn)) ... fm(i(z,) ... i(zn))]> E E ;  
{i E K : % t cp[f'(i) ... f"(i)]} E E. 
3' = (Jr(i(zl) ... i(z,,)) : i E K ) ;  
Here 
I-Ia t= d3E' ... 3E"I; 
rI 9.l t cpCnz(fE',) ... dZ(fE",)l. 
E 
E 
This shows that dz : nEz% 
< ITE%. The second assertion follows from the 
first and the fact that range(&) c range (d,). -I 
The most useful case of the iterated ultrapowcr is the case where all the 
ultrafilters D,, y E Y, are the same, say D, = D. In this case we shall write 
X y D  = X u D , .  The next two results are applications of iterated ultra- 
powers to the Lowenheim-Skolem problem (cf. Section 4.3). 
THEOREM 
6.5.1 1 (Narrowing a Gap). Let 9 
have a I-placed relation symbol 
U. 
(i). If ao 2 p' 2 /I" 
and a 2 p 2 w, then every (a, /?)-model has a com- 
plete extension which is an (ao, /?')-model. 
(ii). Suppose a 2 a' 2 p' 2 p", fl 2 w and a' 2 I1.S" I. Then every theory 
which admits (a, p) admits (a', p'). 
PROOF. (ii) follows easily from (i) and the downward Lowenheim-Skolem 
theorem. 
(i). Choose a countably incomplete ultrafilter D over o. Let (Y, <) 
be any linearly ordered set of power p'. Let 2I = ( A ,  V, ...) be an 
(a, p)-model, where IAI = a, I V J  = p. Form the iterated ultrapower 
%' = (A', V', ...) = n%, E = X y D .  
E 
Since d is a complete embedding of % into a', W is isomorphic to a complete 
extension of %. For each finite Z c Y, let nEz% 
= (A,, V,, ...). Then, 

472 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.5 
by Proposition 6.5.10, d, is an elementary embedding of nEz21 
into %'. By 
Proposition 6.5.9, 
A' = (J {range (d,) : Z E S,( Y)}. 
When 2 is finite, Ez is just an ultrafilter over a finite number of copies of 
w. If 2 # 0, then Ez is also countably incomplete, since D is. It follows that 
when Z is a nonempty finite set, In,,Al = a"(by Proposition 4.3.7). Then 
a m <  IA'I<a".IYI=a".p'=a", 
so IA'I = a". We also have 
(1) 
v' = u {&(Vz) : Z E S"(Y)}, 
whence j? = IV) < InEz 
Vl < P", and IY,l = InEz 
V ( .  Thus 
(2) 
IVZl < P". 
Since Y is infinite and D is countably incomplete, d maps V properly into 
nD 
V. It follows that for each y E Y, 
(3) 
do( V )  is a proper subset of dry)( V(,,,). 
But by Proposition 6.5.9(iv), for y # z in Y we have 
(4) 
drydl/(yJ n 4 * ) V ( Z J  = d O ( 0  
p' = IYI < Ivy. 
IV'I < 1rl.p" = /3'.pm = p'. 
It follows from (l), (3) and (4) that 
Also, from (2), 
Therefore (V'I = P'. This shows that U' is an (a", P')-model, and (i) is 
proved. -I 
The above theorem eliminates the continuum hypothesis from the ear- 
Ths next result complements Theorem 6.4.5. It is of interest when a < 
lier result, Corollary 4.3.1 l. 
am < 2". 
COROLLARY 
6.5.12. Let a, p be cardinals, a > P 2 w, and suppose w is the 
only measurable cardinal < p. Then the following are equivalent: 
(i). a 2 j?". 
(ii). Every model 
(iii). Every model U of power fi has a complete extension of power a. 
of power 
has an elementary extension of power a. 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
473 
PROOF. 
Assume (i). Let D be a countably incomplete ultrafilter over w, let 
Y be a simply ordered set of power a, and form the iterated ultrapower 
N' = nx 
+'u. The proof of Theorem 6.5.1 1 shows that 'u' has power a and 
is isomorphic to a complete extension of (21. Thus (ii) and (iii) follow from 
(i). 
By applying (ii) to the completion of 'u, we see that (ii) implies (iii). 
So far we have not used the assumption that o is the only measurable 
cardinal 6 a. It is used only to go from (iii) to (i). 
Assume (iii), and let 'u have power B' and % be a complete extension 
of 'u of power a. Since a > /?, there exists b E B\A. 
By Theorem 6.4.4, 
there is an ultrapower extension 6 of 91 such that b E C and 6 < 23. Then 
(6, a),,EA is isomorphic to an ultrapower (nD 
N,d(u))aEA. 
Since b $ A, there 
must be an element of n D A  not in d(A). Thus D is not /?+-complete, whence 
by our measurability assumption D is countably incomplete. Then, by Prop- 
osition 4.3.7, lJ$,Al 
= B", so /?" = ICI < IBI = a, and (i) holds. i 
What happens if we form an iterated ultrapower where all the ultrafilters 
D, are a-complete? We would like such iterated ultrapowers to preserve 
sentences of the infinitary language LYa, but unfortunately this is not the case 
(see Exercise 6.5.20). However, in one special situation, they do preserve 
the property of well foundedness. We shall exploit that fact to get more 
information about measurable cardinals. The rest of this section depends 
heavily on Section 4.2. 
LEMMA 
6.5.13. Suppose ( Y ,  <') is an inversely well ordered set, and, for 
each y E Y, Dy is an a-complete ultrafilter. Then the intersection of any sub- 
set of x ,  D, of power less than a is nonempty. 
PROOF. Let E c X y D y ,  IEl < a. We may assume that <Y, <') = (B, >>, 
where /3 is an ordinal. We assume that p is a limit ordinal and leave the other 
case for the reader. For each s E E, choose a finite set L(s) c Yon which s 
lives. Suppose S E E ,  0 < y (8, and L(s) = {al, ..., a,}, 
where 6 ,  > ... > 
6, = 0. We shall define a set F,(s). There are two cases, depending on the 
position of y. 
Case 1: 6, 2 y > ag+ 1. Let F,(s) be the set of all j E la,+ I x ... x l a ,  
such that (slj)a, ...a, 
E Da, x ... x Da,. 
Case 2 : y > 6 , .  Let F,,(s) = sa ,... 6". 
Putting p = 0 in Case 2, we always have F,(s) E Da,+, x ... x Dan. Let US 

474 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.5 
say that a function j passes through Fy(s) iff 
Now for each y E 8, 0 < y, we may define 
F,, = { j E n Id : for all s E E, j passes through Fy(s)}. 
dEY 
Let Fo = (0). We claim that: 
(I) If j ,  E Fd for all 6 < y and if 6 c q impliesj, c j,,, then Uacyja 
E Fy. 
(2) I f j  E Fy, 
thenj can be extended to a function k E Fy+ 
1 .  
(1) follows because each set L(s) is finite. To see (2), we first note that for 
each s E E, the set 
X, = { i  E I,, : j n i  passes through Fy+ 
l(s)} E D,. 
Since IEJ < a and D, is a-complete, the set nSJS belongs to D,, hence 
is nonempty. Choosing i E: n s E E X s ,  we find that j"i = k belongs to Fy+ 1 ,  
and (2) is proved. Using Zorn's lemma, (1) and (2) imply that there exists 
a function i E K such that for all s E E, 
<i(4 : 6 E qs)) E Sd, ... 6" 9 
that is, i E s. Therefore i E 
E, and n E # 0. -I 
THEOREM 
6.5.14. Let u be an uncountable measurable cardinal. Then: 
trarily large power. 
(i). For all 
2 a, (p, <) has well ordered complete extensions of arbi- 
(ii). For each cardinal y > 2", ( y ,  <) is a complete extension of (a, <). 
PROOF. (i). Let D be a nonprincipal a-complete ultrafilter over a. Given a 
cardinal y, we wish to find a well ordered complete extension of (p, <) of 
power at least y. Let (Y, < ') be an inversely well ordered set of order type 
(y, >), and form the iterated ultrapower (B, L) = n,(p, <), where 
E = X y D .  Since D is nonprincipal, it is not a+-complete, and therefore 
d(p) is a proper subset of nDp. 
It follows that for each y E y, range (do) 
is a proper subset of range(d[,,). Then by Proposition 6.5.9(iv), it follows 
that B has power at least y. Suppose (B, L) is not well ordered. Then there 
is a countable sequence f,", 
fl, ... of elements of B such that 
fi+*Lfi, n = 0, 1,2, .... 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
475 
Then for each n, 
X ,  = { i  E K : f""(i) < f"(i)} E E. 
Since a > w, we may apply Lemma 6.5.13, and n,,<J,, is nonempty. Let 
i E n,<, X ,  . Then in (p, <) we have the decreasing sequence 
f " ( i )  > f'(i) > .... 
But this contradicts the fact that (/3, <) is well-ordered, whence (B, L )  
must be well-ordered. Finally, by Corollary 6.5.8, (B, L) is isomorphic 
to a complete extension of (p, <). 
(ii). Let D and E be as in the proof of (i), where y is the given cardinal, 
y > a. Form the iterated ultrapower (A, L )  = nE(a, <>. Then (A, L) 
is well-ordered and IAI 2 y. We claim that 
( 1 )  
d(a) is an initial segment of (A, L). 
For letf, E A andfEld(6) for some 6 < a. Letflive on { y , ,  ..., y,,}, where 
y ,  > ... > y,. Then (with D,, = D for all y), 
{ i E ' a  : j(i) < S},, ... ,. E D,, x . .. x D , ~ .  
Since D is a-complete, Dyl x ... x DYn is a-complete, whence there exists 
q < 6 such that 
{ i E ' a  : f(i) = v } , ~  
... Yn E D,, x ... x D,". 
Sof, = d(q). This proves (1). Let y' be the order type of (A, L). Then 
(y', <) is a complete extension of (a, <). By (i), IAI 2 y, whence we have 
y' 2 y. 
It remains to prove y r  6 y. Letf, E A, and suppose that f lives on y ,  , ...,y, 
where y > y1 > ... > y,,. Let Z = { y ~ y  
: y ,  2 y}, and let 
C = (9, E A : gELfE and g lives on a finite subset of Z}. 
Since there are at most lZl - a' 
functions which live on a finite subset of 
Z, and a', IZI < y, we have ICI < y. Consider an arbitrary hE E A such that 
hELfE. There is a finite number of elements z1 > ... > z,,, such that h lives 
on {z,, ..., z,,,}, and { y l ,  ..., y,,} c {zl, ..., z,,,}. Suppose z1 > y,. Then 
f lives on {z2, . . ., z,,,}. Since hELfE, the set 
s = { i  E 'Y : h(i) < f ( i ) }  E E. 
ForjEI,,x ... xIZm, define h'(j) = h(i) andf'(j) =f(i), where (i(zl) ... 
i(z,)) = j .  Then 
{jEI,,x ... x I Z m  : h r ( j )  < f'(j)}ED,,x ... xDZm. 

476 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.5 
Hence the set 
U = { j ,  EI,,x 
... XI,, 
: { j O ~ I , ,  
: h'(jo"jl) < f'(j,"'j,)} ED,,} 
belongs to D,, x ... x D,,. But f'(jo"j,) depends only on j ,  and not on 
j o ,  sinceflives on {z2, ..., z,}. Thus, since D is r-complete andf'(j,"j,) 
< a, there is for eachj, E U an element l'(jf) < f'(jonjl) 
such that 
{ j o  E I,, : h'(jo"j,) = W,)} ED,. 
It follows that if we define I :  ' Y  -+ a by I(i) = I'(i(z2) ... i(zm)), then 
1 lives on {zt, ..., z,} 
and hE = lE. For some r < m, y ,  = z,. Continuing 
'the above process, we obtain a function k living on {zr, ..., z,} such that 
kE = hE. But then k lives on a finite subset of Z, so kE E C, whence h, E C. 
This means that f E  has ICI < y predecessors in ( A ,  L ) .  We conclude that 
y' < y. -I 
The theorem can also be stated in terms of models of the form (R(r), E) 
instead of (a, < ). 
COROLLARY 
6.5.1 5. Let c1 be an uncountable measurable cardinal. Then: 
tensions of arbitrarily large power. 
tension (B, E) such that y c B c R(./) and B is a transitive set. 
(i). For all p 3 c(, the model (R(/?), E) has well founded complete ox- 
(ii). For each cardinal y > 2", the rnodel (R(z), E )  has a complete ex- 
PROOF. (i). Let y be a cardinal and let (Bo, <) be a complete well ordered 
extension of (p, <) of power 3 y. By Corollary 6.4.14, (Bo, <) can be 
extended to a complete extension <B, E )  of (R(P), E) which has the same 
ordinals as (Bo, <). It follows that (B, E )  is well founded. 
We leave the proof of (ii) as an exercise. 4 
EXERCISES 
6.5.1. Prove that if D, E are ultrafilters, then so is D x E. Moreover, if D, E 
are proper filters, so is D x E. Prove a similar result for D, x ... x D,. 
6.5.2. Let D, E be proper filters over sets I, J. For each (i, j )  E Zx J let 
21ij be a model. Prove that 
Thus an ultraproduct of ultraproducts is isomorphic to an ultraproduct. 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
477 
6.5.3. Let E be a proper filter over J and for eachj E J let Dj be a proper filter 
over I j .  Let K = UjEJZj. 
Prove that the set 
F = { X E S ( K )  : { j  E J : X n f j  E D j }  E E }  
is a proper filter over K. Moreover, if E and every Dj is an ultrafilter, then F 
is an ultrafilter. 
6.5.4. In the above exercise assume that the sets I j  are pairwise disjoint. 
Prove that 
6.5.5. Let D, E be ultrafilters over I, J and let I/, W be filters over Z x Z, J x J. 
Give an appropriate definition of V x  W and show that for any model a, 
6.5.6. Suppose D is an a-regular filter and E is a proper filter. Show that 
D x E and E x  D are a-regular filters. 
6.5.7. Suppose D is a uniform filter over I, E is a proper filter over J, and 
IJ( 6 111. Then D x E and E x  D are uniform filters. 
6.5.8. If D and E are a-complete filters, then D x E is a-complete. The same 
holds for descendingly a-complete. 
6.5.9. Suppose D is a uniform a,-complete ultrafilter, and E is a countably 
incomplete ultrafilter over w. Then D x E and E x  D are uniform countably 
incomplete ultrafilters which are not w,-regular. 
6.5.10. Supply the proofs of the results Propositions 6.5.5-6.5.7 and Corol- 
lary 6.5.8. 
6.5.1 1. Let (Y, <) be a finite ordered set, where Y = {y,, ..., y.} in increas- 
ing order. Given ultrafilters Dy,, ..., D,", let E = x , D y .  Show that for any 
model ?I, 
6.5.12. Given (Y, <) and ultrafilters D,, y E Y, let E = X y D y  and K = 
nyEyZy. 
Find a filter V over K x  K such that for all filters D 3 E over K ,  
Thus iterated ultrapowers are limit ultrapowers. 

478 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.5 
6.5.13. Show that if E = X y D , ,  then for any nonempty set A 
I n A1 < (YI u sup { I A p Y l  : y E Y } .  
E 
If each D, is Il,l-regular and the set A is infinite, then equality holds. 
6.5.14. Let 'Ilo < i?fl < ... be an elementary chain of length w such that 
each 
is an ultrapower extension of an; specifically, 
(% + 1 9 a h ,  ( n 
a n  > d(a)).EA,, . 
D" 
Let (Y, <) = ( w ,  <) and E = X y D n .  Prove that 
u 8, E rpn. 
n < o  
E 
6.5.15. Show that the result of the above exercise does not hold for elemen- 
tary chains of length w +  1. 
6.5.16. %=B iff they have isomorphic iterated ultrapowers oftype (Y, <) = 
[Hint: 
Consider the cardinalities.] 
(0, >. 
6.5.17. Show that reduced powers and limit ultrapowers can also be iterated. 
That is, given (Y, <) and filters D,, define 
and, given ultrafilters D, and filters Vy over Zy x I,, define 
X@,lV,) 
and n 9l. 
X P(DYIVY) 
6.5.18. Let (2, <) be a finite initial segment of the simply ordered set 
(Y, <), and let W = Y\Z. 
Let D,, y E Y, be ultrafilters. Show that 
n a g  n (nw 
X Y D ~  
X w D w  X Z D .  
Give an example showing that the result is not always true for infinite ini- 
tial segments 2 of Y. 
6.5.19*. Given an iterated ultrapower n E A ,  where E = X y D y ,  let 
W, 2 E S,(Y). Show that 
range(d,) n range(dw) = range (dZ "). 
6.5.20. Show that Lemma 6.5.13 is not true for the ordered set (Y, <) = 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
479 
(w, <). Also show that if a is measurable and D is a nonprincipal r-com- 
plete ultrafilter over a, then nx,o(r, 
<) is not well ordered. 
6.5.21. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal and let '2 be a model of 
power 2 a. Prove that % has complete extensions 8 of arbitrarily large 
power such that every sentence of the infinitary language 9'= 
of the form 
(VU)V @ which holds in ?1 holds in 23 (where @ is a set of finite formulas). 
This is a more general form of Theorem 6.5.14. 
6.5.22. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal. Then for each cardi- 
nal y > 2", the model (R(a), E) has a complete extension ( B ,  E) such that 
y c B c R(y) and B is a transitive set. (Use Exercise 1.4.18 on the existence 
of the transitive realization of a well founded model.) 
The next few exercises show how iterated ultrapowers can be used to give 
another proof of the results on indiscernible elements in Section 3.3. 
6.5.23. Let (Y, <) and (Y', <') be simply ordered sets and let d be an or- 
dermorphism of Y into Y'. Let E = x y D, E' = x yc D, where D is an ultra- 
filter over I. Define the map o* : "'I -+ "I by ~"((i) 
=jo 8. Then define a 
natural embedding d, : n D A  -+ n E A  by du(gE) = (go c ' : : ) ~ . .  
Prove that 
for any model 2f, d, is an elementary embedding of nE?l 
into nE,?i. 
Moreover, if 8 maps Y onto Y', then d, maps n,?l isomorphically onto 
I&?!. 
6.5.24. Let Y, 2 be simply ordered sets and let D,, E, be ultrafilters for each 
y E Y, z E Z .  Let d : Y -+ 2 be an ordermorphic embedding such that for 
all y E Y, Dy = Eu(y). Find a natural elementary embedding 
d, : n 
?1 < n 
?I. 
6.5.25. Let D be an ultrafilter, let Y, Z be simply ordered sets, and let 0 be 
an ordermorphic embedding of Y into 2. Let ?X be a model. Show that 
X r D y  
X z E z  
range(d,) = { f x z D  : f lives on range (.)I. 
6.5.26. Let D be an ultrafilter, Y an ordered set, and E = X y D .  For each 
b E n D A ,  define eb : Y -+ 
n E A  by eb(y) = d,,,(b) for eachy E Y. Show that: 
(i). If b E nDA\d(A), then eb is a one-one function. 
(ii). For all b E n D A  and all ordermorphisms d : Y -+ Y, d, o 6% = e b  0 0. 
6.5.27. Let ?l be a model, let D be an ultrafilter such that n,A\d(A) 
# 0, 
and let (Y, <) be a simply ordered set. Let 8 be the iterated ultrapower 

480 
MORE ABOUT ULTRAPRODUCTS AND GENERALIZATIONS 
[6.5 
= nxyD%. 
Prove that there exists a set C c B and an ordering <‘ of C 
such that: 
(i). (C, <’) z (Y, <); 
(ii). every automorphism of (C, < ’) can be extended to an automorphism 
(iii). C is a set of indiscernibles in 23. 
of 58; 
6.5.28. Let Y, Y’, Y” be simply ordered sets and let D : Y + Y’, z : Y’ --+ Y” 
be ordermorphic embeddings. Then for any model ‘9l and ultrafilter D, the 
natural embeddings satisfy 
4 0 ,  = d , o d , .  
6.5.29. Let Y be a simply ordered set, D an ultrafilter, E = x D, 
a model. 
Then the mapping D + d, is an isomorphic embedding of the group of auto- 
morphisms of Y into the group of automorphisms of nEa. 
It also maps the 
semigroup of ordermorphic embeddings of Y into Y into the semigroup of 
elementary embeddings of nE% 
into itself. 
6.5.30*. Let E = x D, and form the iterated ultrapower 
<B, M) = n 
(A, L), 
where L is a well ordering of A. Suppose thatfEMgE in (B, M ) ,  and f lives 
on W and g lives on 2, where W,Z E &(Y). Suppose further that, in Y, 
W \ Z  is an initial segment of W u 2. Then there exists hE in B such that 
fEMhE, hEMgE, and h lives on W n Z. 
6.5.31*. Let a be a regular cardinal, a > 2”. Let (Y, <) be ordermorphic 
to (a, >). For each y E Y, let D, be an ultrafilter over w. Let M = (A, L) 
be a model such that L well orders A. Then the iterated ultrapower nx 
uD,% 
has no strictly descending sequences of length a. 
6.5.32. Let D, E be ultrafilters, and let E be countably incomplete. Then 
D x E is a-good if and only if E is a-good. 
6.5.33. Use the above exercise to do Exercise 6.1.6. 
6.5.34 (GCH). Let D be an a+-good countably incomplete ultrafilter over 
a, and E a /3+-good countably incomplete ultrafilter over /3. Form the ul- 
trafilter D x E over the set Z = a x  /3. Find two families of finite nonempty 
sets A , ,  B,, i E I, such that 
E 

6.51 
ITERATED ULTRAPOWERS 
48 1 
6.5.35. Reformulate Exercise 6.1.19 to show that if 2O' = w2, then there 
exist ultrafilters D, E and a countable model % such that 
6.5.36. A filter D over a set I or power a is said to be selective iff for 
every partition I = uB<. 
X, of I into a nonempty sets X, such that Us<r X, 
D for all y < a, there exists Y E  D such that for all p < a, I Y n X,l = 1. 
(That is, Y is a choice function for the partition.) Let D be a selective 
ultrafilter over a. Show that there cannot exist nonprincipal ultrafilters 
E, F over sets J ,  K such that F is uniform, IKI = a, and there is a 
one-one mapping of J X K onto a which maps E X F onto D. 
6.5.37. Let D be a countably incomplete, selective, a+-good ultra- 
filter over a. Show that there cannot exist countably incomplete ultrafilters 
E, F over sets J, K such that some one-one function f of J x  K onto c( maps 
E x F  onto D. 
6.5.38* (GCH). Show that there exists an ultrafilter D over a which is count- 
ably incomplete, selective, and a +-good. 
6.5.39. Let D be a countably incomplete ultrafilter and E an a-complete 
ultrafilter. Show that D x E is a-good if and only if D is a-good. (Cf. Exer- 
cise 6.5.32.) 

CHAPTER 7 
SELECTED TOPICS 
7.1. Categoricity in power 
Let us recall that a theory Tin 2’ 
is said to be categorical in power a, or 
a-categorical, iff T has a model of power a and every two models of T of 
power a are isomorphic. (In other words, T has exactly one model of power 
a, up to isomorphism.) In Section 2.3 we obtained a necessary and sufficient 
condition for a theory to be categorical in power o. 
In this section we shall 
study theories which are categorical in uncountable powers. 
We shall assume throughout this section that the language 9 
is countable, 
IlLFll = o. 
We shall be interested only in complete theories, since every a- 
categorical theory having no finite models is complete. 
In Section 1.4 we have seen examples of theories of each of the following 
kinds: 
categorical in every infinite power; 
categorical in power w but not in any uncountable power; 
categorical in every uncountable power but not in power w; 
not categorical in any infinite power. 
It was conjectured by Eoi that these are the only possibilities. Log’s con- 
jecture may be stated as follows: If a theory T i n  9 
is categorical in some 
uncountable power, then T is categorical in every uncountable power. This 
conjecture was proved by Morley (1965a), and our chief aim in this section 
is to prove Morley’s theorem (Theorem 7.1.14). First, we give a list of 
examples of theories which are categorical in every uncountable power. Only 
a few natural examples of such theories are known: 
(i). Pure identity theory. 
(ii). Infinite Abelian groups in which all elements have orderp (p prime). 
(iii). Divisible torsion-free Abelian groups. 
482 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
483 
(iv). Algebraically closed fields of characteristic p (zero or prime). 
(v). The theory of all models (A, G), where A is an infinite set and G 
is a permutation of A with no finite cycles. 
(vi). The theory of all models (A, U, G), where G is one-one function 
with n places mapping U” onto A\U. 
(vii). The theory in the language 3 = {c, : n < w }  with the axioms 
i 
c, = c,, where n < m < a. 
(viii). The complete theory of the model (w, S), where S is the successor 
function. 
Our proof of Morley’s theorem will put together several of the methods 
developed earlier in this book, including indiscernible sets, saturated 
models, and one of the Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorems for two 
cardinals, namely Theorem 3.2.11. 
LEMMA 
7.1.1. Let T be a complete theory in 2’ 
such that every model of T 
of power w1 is saturated. Then every uncountable model of T is saturated. 
Hence if T has infinite models, T is categorical in every uncountable power. 
PROOF. We shall use Theorem 3.2.11. Suppose that a > o, and T has a 
model % of power a which is not saturated. Then there exists a set X c A 
of power 1x1 c a and a set C(o) of formulas in the expanded language 
-Yx = 9 
u {ex : x E X )  such that every finite subset of C is satisfiable in 
the model (8, x)xox, but C is not satisfiable in (8, x ) , , ~ .  Since II-YII = o, 
we have Il-Yxll = 1x1 u w < a; hence ICI c a. We may therefore choose a 
subset U c A of power lUl = ICI and a one-one function cp of U onto 
Z. We shall now expand the model % so that we can say that an element 
satisfies the formula corresponding to some U E  U. Besides the new one- 
placed relation U, we shall introduce two two-placed relations R and S. 
The mapping cp associates with each element aE U a formula cp4 in C, 
whence cp4 is a formula in the language -Yx in the variable v. Let R be the 
set of all pairs (a, x) in A x A such that a E U, 
x E X, and the constant c, 
occurs in the formula cp4. Thus for each a E A there are only finitely many, 
and possibly zero, x E A such that R(a, x). Let S be the set of all pairs 
(a, 6 )  E A x A such that a E U and (a, x ) ~ , ~  
k cp4 [b]. We form the expanded 
model 
8* = (a, U, R, S). 
For each a E U, the following formula $(u) is satisfied by a in (a*, x),,~ : 
(1) 
( W ( S ( U V )  - 
cp4(u)). 
Furthermore, for each n < o, 
the following sentence, which says ‘every n 

484 
SELECTED TOPICS 
(7.1 
elements of C are simultaneously satisfied', holds in %*: 
( 2 )  
Finally, the sentence below, which says 'C is not satisfied', holds in '21": 
(VJU, ... u,,)[u(Ul)A ... A (I(U,,) 9 ( 3 U ) ( s ( U l U ) A  ... A s ( U , , U ) ) ] .  
( 3 )  
1 (3UVU)(U(U) + S ( U 2 ~ ) ) .  
By Theorem 3.2.14, since IUI < IAl, there exist two models 8* and &* 
such that %* < ?l*, 
B* < &*, IBI = o, 
ICI = w l r  and the interpretation 
of U is the same in %* as in Q". Thus we may write 
%* = (23, U', R', S'), 
&* = (&, U', R", S"), 
and U', being a subset of B, is countable. It follows that, with X '  = X n B, 
id) 
(5) 
(B*, x),,x, < (%*, X).v,X* 
9 
(B*, X),,x. < (&*, x),,x, 
* 
and 
For each a E U', the set { x  E A : R(ax)} is finite, and therefore 
{X E A : R(~x)} = {X E B : R'(ux)} c X'. 
It follows that for each a E U', 40. 
is a formula in the language Zx. of the 
model (B*, x),,~. . Therefore, by (4) and (9, for each a E U' the formula 
(1) is satisfied by a in both of the models (%*, x),,~, and (&*, x),,~. . Also, 
the sentence (2) for each n < w and the sentence (3) hold in B* and in &*. 
We conclude that in the model (6, 
x),,~. the set of formulas 
C'(v) = {cpa(u) : a E V'} 
has the property that every finite subset of C'(u) is satisfied but Z'(u) is not 
satisfied. Since X' c B, X' is countable. Thus the model & is not wl- 
saturated. But & does have power wl, and by (4) and (5), & is a model of 
T. This shows that T has a model 0. of power w1 which is not saturated, 
contrary to our hypothesis. So every uncountable model of T is saturated. 
Finally, if T is complete and has infinite models, then any two models of 
T of the same infinite power are elementarily equivalent and saturated, 
whence by the uniqueness theorem for saturated models they are isomorphic 
and T is categorical in every uncountable power. -1 
In the above lemma, the countability of the language 9 
was used very 
strongly, because it was needed in the proof of Theorem 3.2.11. 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
485 
We need yet another application of Theorem 3.2.11. This application 
concerns the notion of a theory being stable in a power, which is of con- 
siderable interest in its own right as well as an important tool in the proof 
of Morley's theorem. Let us recall that a type Z(u) is a maximal consistent 
set of formulas in the single variable u. Thus each element of a model realizes 
a unique type. 
7.1.2. A theory T is stable in power a iff for every model 2l of T and every 
set X c A of power a, the simple expansion ($[, x),,,~ realizes exactly a 
types in a single variable u. 
Here is our second application of Theorem 3.2.11. 
LEMMA 
7.1.3. Suppose T is a theory in 2 
which is stable in power o. Then 
T is stable in every infinite power. 
PROOF. Suppose a 2 w and T is not stable in power a. Then T has a model 
B with a set X c A of power a such that (B, x ) , , ~  realizes at least a+ types 
in u. By the Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem, we may assume without 
loss of generality that 2l has power exactly a+ and (a, x ) , , ~  realizes exactly 
a+ types in u. As in Lemma 7.1.1, we form an appropriate expansion of the 
model 3. 
Since 9 
is countable, the language YLP, 
= 2' u {cx : x E X >  has power 
a. Therefore the set Z of all formulas q ( u )  of 2, 
in the variable u has power 
a. Choose a subset U c A of power a with a one-one function cp on U 
onto C. As in Lemma 7.1.1, let R and S be binary relations on A such that 
R(ax) iff a E U and 
c, occurs in cp.; 
S(ab) iff 
U E  U and (Z,X),,~ != cp,[b]. 
Let V c A be a set of power I VI = a+ such that any two distinct elements 
of V realize different types in (a, x ) , ~ ~ ,  
and let G be a one-one function 
of A into V. Now form the expanded model 
a* = (a, U, V, R, S, G). 
For each a E U, 
in the model (a*, x ) , , ~  a satisfies the formula 
(1) 
(Vu)(S(uu) - 
%(U)). 
Furthermore, in the model a* the following sentences hold: 
(2) 
(vUW)[V f W A  V(U)A v ( W )  3 ( j U ) ( U ( U ) A  1 ( S ( U U )  *-, s ( U W ) ) ) ] ,  
(3) 
(Vow)(u f w + V(GW A G(u) + G(w)). 

486 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
The first one says ‘two distinct elements of V realize different types’, and the 
second one says ‘G maps A one-one into V ’ .  Now, using Theorem 
3.2.11 and the fact that 1U1 < IAI, we obtain models 
%* = (8, U‘, V’, R’, S‘, 
GI), 
%* = (6, U’, Y”, R“, S“, G”), 
such that %* < U*, IBI = w, %* < &*, and ICl = 0,. Since (3) holds in 
%*, it follows that 
(4) 
IV”l = w,. 
As before, for all a E U‘, every x E X such that R(ax) belongs to X ’  = X nB, 
whence cp,(u) is a formula in gX,. 
Thus for each a E U’, 
the formula (1) 
is satisfied in (%*, x),,~. and in (&*, x),,~. by the element a. Since (2) holds 
in %*, and U is interpreted by U‘ in %*, any two distinct elements of Y” 
realize different types in the model (&, x),,~. . Also X ’  c B, so X‘ is count- 
able. Thus, by (4), the model (%, x),,~. realizes uncountably many types, 
whence T is not stable in power w. i 
The next lemma ties the notion of stability in with the notion of cate- 
goricity. 
LEMMA 
7.1.4. If a theory T is categorical in some uncountable power a, then 
T is stable in power w. 
PROOF. 
Suppose T is not stable in power w. Then T has a model 91 of power 
w1 with a countable set X c A such that the model (8, x),,~ realizes w ,  
types. Now we shall use a result in Section 3.3 on indiscernible sets. By 
Corollary 3.3.14, T has a model % of power tl with the property that for all 
Y c B, the expanded model (%, Y ) , , ~ ~  
realizes at most IYI u w types. But 
since T is a-categorical, every model % of T of power a has the above 
property. By the Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem, the model U has an 
elementary extension ‘$3 of power a. But then the model (8, x),,~ realizes 
only 1x1 u w = w types, while the model (U, x),,~ realizes w 1  types. This 
is a contradiction, because every element of A realizes the same type in 
(a, x),,~ as it realizes in (8, x),,~. i 
In view of Lemma 7.1.4, we wish to make a further study of theories 
which are stable in power o. There are complete theories which are stable 
in power w but are not categorical in power wl. The simplest example is 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
487 
the theory of all models ( A ,  U ) ,  where U and A\U 
are infinite. Another 
example is the theory of all equivalence relations ( A ,  E ) ,  where E has in- 
finitely many equivalence classes and each class is infinite. Both of these 
examples are o-categorical. 
Here is an example of a complete theory which is w-stable but not 
categorical in any power. Tis the theory of all models ( A ,  U,, U ,  , U,, . . .), 
where each U,, is a unary relation such that the U,, are infinite disjoint sub- 
sets of A .  This theory has countably many countable models. If we add to 
T constant symbols c,, 
and axioms stating that the constants are distinct 
and V,,(c,,,,), we obtain a complete o-stable theory with 2" countable models. 
The corollary below gives a whole class of non-w-stable theories. 
COROLLARY 
7.1.5. Let 
= ( A ,  <, R,, ...) be an injinite model such that 
,< is a simple ordering. Then Th(g) is not w-stable and is not w,-categorical. 
PROOF. By the compactness theorem, there is a model 23 = 
which has 
a subset X c E such that ( X ,  ,<) is isomorphic to the rationals. For each 
initial segment Y c X ,  the set of formulas 
{cy < 0 :  y €  Y }  u (0 < c, : XEX\Y} 
is consistent with Th(BX). But X has 2" initial segments, so Th(%,) has 2" 
types. -1 
LEMMA 7.1.6. Suppose T is a theory which has infinite models and is stable 
in power o. Then, for every regular cardinal u > o, 
T has an u-saturated 
model of every power p 2 u. 
PROOF. Consider an arbitrary model 
of T of power p. Form the expanded 
model (3, a).EA, and let T, be the complete theory of this model. By the 
compactness theorem, there is a model (23, a),,€,, in which every type 
consistent with T, is realized. By Lemma 7.1.3, T is stable in power p. 
Hence (23, a).EA realizes only ( A ]  = b different types. Therefore by the 
LCiwenheim-Skolem-Tarski 
theorem there is an elementary submodel 
(Q, 
a),,,,, < (8, 
a),,,,, of power 
in which every type consistent with Tw 
is realized. From Propositions 3.1.1 and 3.1.3 on elementary extensions, 
Q is an elementary extension of a. We have shown: 
(1) 
Every model H of T of power b has an elementary extension a' of 
power /3 such that every type which is consistent with the theory of 
(H, a)aeA is realized in (a', a),,€,, . 

488 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
Now we use (1) a times, and form an elementary chain PI,, y < a, such that 
eadh 21Y is a model of T of power p, 
‘illY = Ud<,9& when 
y is a limit ordinal, 
and for all y < a, the condition ( I )  holds for 91 = aY, 
91’ = NY+ Let B 
be the union 8 = up<II\)ly. 
Then B is a model of T, and since a 6 8, 9 
has power p. 
We show that 23 is a-saturated. Consider any set X c B of power 1x1 < a. 
Since a is regular, 1x1 < cf(a), and it follows that there exists y c a such 
that X c a,. Then every type C(v) consistent with the complete theory of 
the model (N,, x),,~ is realized in (a,,,, 
x),,~, and hence in (8, x),,~. 
But since ‘ill, -< 8, the models (a7, 
x),,~ and (8, 
x),,~ have the same 
complete theories. This shows that 23 is a-saturated. i 
At this point we can already prove the ‘upward’ half of Morley’s cate- 
goricity theorem. 
LEMMA 
7.1.7 (Upward Morley Theorem). Ecery complete theory T which 
is categorical in power w1 is categorical in every uncountable power. 
PROOF. Let T be categorical in power w , .  Then T is stable in power w. 
Since w1 is regular, T has a saturated model of power wI . Therefore every 
model of T of power w1 is saturated. By Lemma 7.1.1, all uncountable 
models of T are saturated. Since T is complete, any two saturated models 
of T of the same power are isomorphic. Hence T is categorical in every un- 
countable power. i 
Before continuing towards Morley’s theorem, we can at this point derive 
two corollaries about categoricity in power which are of interest. 
COROLLARY 
7.1.8. Let a be an uncountable cardinal and let T be a complete 
theory which has infinite models. Then a necessary and suficient condition 
for T to be categorical in power a is that every model of T of power a is 
saturated. 
PROOF. The sufficiency follows at once from the uniqueness theorem for 
saturated models. To prove the necessity, we assume that T is a-categorical. 
Let 2l be a model of T of power a. By Lemma 7.1.4, T is stable in power w. 
Thus, by Lemma 7.1.6, for every regular cardinal o c a’ < a, T has an 

7.1) 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
489 
a'-saturated model of power a. But since % is the only model of T of power 
a (up to isomorphism), % is a'-saturated for all regular a', w < a' < a. If 
a is a successor cardinal, then a is itself regular, so % is saturated. On the 
other hand, if u is singular, then % is y+-saturated for all infinite y < a, 
and so 
is saturated by Proposition 5.1.1. i 
COROLLARY 
7. I .9. Suppose T is categorical in an uncountable cardinal a. 
Then for every model 91 of T and every countable set X c A ,  the complete 
theory of the expandedmodel (2f, x ) , , ~  is a-categorical. 
PROOF. Let (23, yx)x.x = (a, x),,~ and let 58 have power a. Then the models 
'23 and (B, 
yJxGx are both saturated models of power a.i 
The next two lemmas concern atomic models of o-stable theories. Let 
us recall that a complete formula, or atom, of T is a formula q ( x ,  ... x,) 
which is consistent with T and is such that for every formula $(x, ... xn), 
either T k cp + $ or TC cp + i 
$. If q ( x ,  ... x,) 
is complete and 
T C q(xl ... x,) + $(x, ... x,), we call cp an atom of $. If $ ( X I  ... x,) has an 
atom in T, it is said to be completable in T. The theory T is said to be atomic 
iff every formula consistent with T is completable in T. 
In Section 2.3, we only considered atomic theories in countable languages. 
Now we shall need to study atomic theories in uncountable languages formed 
by adding constants to 3. 
LEMMA 
7.1.10. Suppose T is a theory in a countable language 9 and T is 
stable in power o. Then for every model % of T and every subset X c A ,  the 
complete theory of the expanded model (%, x ) , , ~  
is atomic. 
PROOF. Let 21x = (a, x ) ~ ~ ~ ,  
let Tx be the complete theory of HX, and let 
5?x = 2'u {cx : x E X }  be the language of ax. Assume that for some X c A ,  
Tx is not atomic. We shall obtain a contradiction. There is a smallest positive 
integer n such that there exists an X c A and a formula $(u, ... v,) which 
is consistent with Tx and is incompletable. We shall first reduce the lemma 
to the case n = 1. 
Suppose for the moment that n > 1. Then the formula (3u,)$(u, ... u,) 
has an atom p(ol ... u , , - ~ ) .  Add new constants cl, ..., c , , - ~  to 3,. 
Then 
the set of sentences 
Tx u {p(cl ... c,,-])} = Ti 

490 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
determines a complete theory in 9, 
u (c, ... cn-,}. We claim that the 
formula$(cl ... c,,-,u,)hasnoatomsinT~. For assumethatO(c, ... c,,-,v,,) 
is an atom of $(c, .. . c,,- , 
u,,). Then 
T; F e(cl ... c,,- 
u,,) -, +(c, ... c,- 
un), 
Tx t q ( u ,  ... O,-,)A8(UI ... u,) --t +(ul ... u,,). 
whence 
However, it is easily seen that the formula ~ ( u ,  
... u n L 1 ) ~ f I ( u l  ... u,) is 
an atom of T,, contradicting the assumption that $(ul ... v,) has no atoms. 
This proves the claim that $(cl . .. c,,- 
0,) 
has no atoms in T i .  Now let 
a,, ..., a,,-, be elements of A such that ax b q[al ... a,,-1]. Then (a,, 
a, ... a,-,) is a model of Ti, so the formula +(c1 ... C , , - ~ U , )  has no atoms in 
the complete theory of (ax, a, ... a,,-,). 
We may assume hereafter that n = 1, so $(u) is consistent with T, and 
has no atoms. 
We shall use a binary tree argument. For every formula O(u) which is 
consistent with and incompletable in T,, we may choose two consistent 
formulas O,(U) and B,(u) such that 
T, b 8, + 8, 
T, t= 8, + 8, 
T, != 1 (BOA8,). 
The formulas 8,(u) and 8,(u) are then still incompletable in T,. Repeating 
the process with $(u) as a starting point, we obtain a tree of consistent in- 
completable formulas, 
/$oo 
... 
,%$ol 
... 
+\ $,1<;;; . . . 
... 
Let Y be the set of all constants x E X which occur in some formula of this 
tree. Then Y is a countable subset of X. Let Tr be the complete theory of 
(a, x),,~. The tree has 2" branches, and each branch is a set of formulas 
consistent with Tr . It follows that T, has 2" types in u. By the compactness 
theorem, T, has a model which realizes 2" types. Therefore T is not stable 
in power w, contrary to the hypothesis. i 
Let us recall that a model 9 is said to be atomic iff every n-tuple of 
elements of A satisfies a complete formula in Th(2l). Also, 2l is said to be 
prime iff 
is elementarily embeddable in every model of Th(rlI). In Section 
2.3, we proved that every atomic theory in a countable language has a model 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
49 1 
which is atomic and prime. We now generalize this result to uncountable 
languages. Later on we shall discuss the question of uniqueness of prime 
models. 
LEMMA 
7.1.1 1. Let T be a theory such that for every model 
of T and erery 
subset X c A ,  the complete theory of the expanded model a, 
= (a, x),,, is 
atomic. Then for every model 
of T and every subset X c A ,  the complete 
theory of a, has an atomic prime model. 
PROOF. We shall construct an elementary submodel of 91x which is atomic 
and prime. Let 2ZX be the language of ax and let II=YXlI = a. We shall find 
a sequence a,, fi < u . w, of elements of A such that: 
(1) For all B < a w,ap realizes an atom in the complete theory of 
(ax 9 a,),<a. 
( 2 )  For all n c w and every atom cp(v) in the complete theory of 
(a,, 
a,),<..,,, there exists 6 < a .  (n+ 1) such that a, realizes cp(v). 
This is done inductively. Suppose m < o and we have a sequence a p ,  
/3 c a .  m such that (1) holds for all /I c a . m and ( 2 )  holds for all n < m. 
Let cpd(v), 6 < a, be a list of all the atoms in the variable v for the complete 
theory of the model (ax, 
a?),<=.,. Choose for a,., an element of A which 
satisfies q o ( v )  in (a,, ay)Y<u.m. 
For the next step, we use the fact that the 
complete theory of (a,, ay)y<a.,+l is atomic. Therefore the formula cpl(v) 
has an atom cp;(u) in the complete theory of (ax, ay)y<a.m+l. 
(Note that 
cpl(v) itself is an atom for the complete theory of ("-Ix, ay)ycu.m, 
but perhaps 
not for ((lIX,ay)y<a.m+l.) 
Now choose a,.,,, satisfying qP;(u). We may 
continue in this manner to obtain a..,+,, 6 c a, such that (1) holds for 
/3 < u (m+ 1) and ( 2 )  holds for n = m. This completes the induction. 
Now let Bx be the submodel of a, such that B = {aa : p < u .  w } .  For 
any formula q ( v )  which is consistent with the complete theory of 
( ( l I X ,  aB)a<u.o, 
there is an n < o such that all the constants ca occurring in 
atomic, cp(v) contains an atom cp'(v) in that theory. Then by (2) there is a 
6 c u such that ao.,,+, satisfies cp'(v), and hence satisfies q ( v ) .  But aU."+, is 
an element of B. This shows that 
q ( v )  appear before u n, fi < u n. Since the theory of (?lx, 
ap)a 
< z . n  is 
(3) 
Bx 4 
% x .  
We first show that Bx is prime. Let Bx = Bx. Since each aa realizes an 

492 
SELECTED TOPICS 
(7.1 
atom in the complete theory of (Bx, 
are elements d,, E C, y < a * w, such that 
we see by induction that there 
It follows that the mapping a,, -+ d, is an elementary embedding of BX 
into O x ,  whence BX is prime. 
It remains to be proved that Bx is an atomic model. To do this, we prove 
by induction that for all p < a - w, 
(4) for all 6 , ,  ..., 6, < p, then-tuple ad,, ..., adn satisfies an atom in ax. 
Suppose (4) holds for all p < y. If y is a limit ordinal, (4) obviously holds 
for p = y. Suppose y is a successor ordinal, y = q +  1. Consider 
a,, ..., 5, < q, and look at the (n+l)-tuple a,,, ...,a,,, a,,. By (l), a, 
satisfies an atom q ( u )  in the complete theory of (ax, 
u ~ ) ~ < , , .  
Let c~,,. .., cA, 
be all the constants appearing in cp(u). Then by our inductive hypothesis, 
the (n+m)-tuplea,, , ..., a,,, a,,, ..., uA, satisfies an atom 8(u, ... u,ul ... urn) 
in the theory of ax. Moreover, the formula q ( u )  may be written in the form 
~ ( u c , ,  ... cAm), where ~ ( u u ,  ... urn) is a formula in the theory of ax. 
For any formula $(u) of (ax, 
u ~ ) ~ < , , ,  
one of the formulas 
(WCp(4 + $ ( v ) ) ,  (VO)(rp(U) 
+ -I $(u)) 
holds in that model. Hence for any formula $(w, ... unul ... urn) of 2,, 
either 
or else 
ax c e(0, ... UnuI ... 
ax 1 e(0, ... unul ... 
-+ 
-+ (vU)(q(uu, ... urn) + l$). 
... urn) -+ $), 
It follows that the formula 
e(ul ... u,ul ... urn) 
A q(Uu, ... urn) 
is an atom in the theory of ax, for the variables u, u,, ..., u,,, u,, ..., urn. 
Hence the formula 
(3U, ... urn)[e(o, ... u,ul ... urn) A ~ ( u u ,  ... urn)] 
is an atom in the theory of ax, and this atom is satisfied by the elements 
ad,, .. ., a,,, a,. This completes the proof of (4) by induction. i 
Combining the last two lemmas, we have the following: 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
493 
COROLLARY 
7.1.12. Let T be a theory in a countable language such that T 
is stable in power w .  Then for every model % of T and every subset X c A, 
the complete theory of 21, has an atomic prime model. 
LEMMA 
7.1.13. Suppose T is a complete w-stable theory and '21 is an uncouiit- 
able model of T. Then there is a proper elementary extension '23 > ?I such 
that every countable set T(o) of formulas of 2'" which is realized in %A is 
realized in a,,. 
PROOF. We first find a formula $ ( v )  of Y A  
such that: 
(1 ) { b E A : a,, k $ [b]} is uncountable. 
( 2 )  For any formula q ( v )  of g,,, 
at least one of the sets 
{bEA:9l,,k$~cp[b]}, { b E A : % , , C $ h  icp[b]} 
is countable. 
Suppose there is no such formula $(u). That is, for any formula q ( u )  satis- 
fied by uncountably many elements in %,,, 
there are two formulas ( p 0 ( v )  
and q l ( o )  such that 
a,, k 'Po -+ 'P, 
gIA 
'P1 + 'P, 
%" 1 1  ('POA'Pl)? 
and (po(v), q l ( u )  are each satisfied by uncountably many elements in 91A. 
Using a binary tree argument, we could then find 2" types consistent with 
Th(%,) for some countable X c  A. But this contradicts the hypothesis 
that T is o-stable. Therefore there is a formula $ ( v )  of 9,, 
satisfying ( 1 )  
and (2). 
Now let c be a new constant symbol and let A be the set of all sentences 
p(c) in 9, 
u {c} such that all but countably many elements which satisfy 
$ ( v )  satisfy q ( u )  in a,,. Then by (1) and (2), A is a complete theory in 
9, u {c}. Also, Th(%,,) c A. By the preceding corollary, A has an a!omic 
model 
(
8
9
 a9 C).." 
9 
and % 4 B. 23 is a proper extension of % because for each a E A, 
A k i c E a .  
We show that every countable set T(u) of formulas of 2',, 
which is realized 
in B,, is realized in a,,. Suppose b E B  realizes T(u). Then b satisfies a 
complete formula ~ ( c o )  
in the atomic model 23AU(c). It follows by the 

494 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
completeness of A that 
A k (3v)cp(cu), 
A 
cp(ci~) 
-+ y(u), 
for all y(v) E f ( v ) .  Since f ( v )  is countable, there is a countable subset 
A ,  c A such that 
A 0  k (30)cp(co), 
A 0  k cp(cu) + r(v) 
for all y(v) E f ( v ) .  Since each 6(v), where 6(c) E A , ,  is satisfied by all but 
countably many elements which satisfy $(v) in 91A, there is an element 
c, E A such that (aA, 
c,) is a model of A , .  But then there is an element 
d, E A such that 21A k q[c,do], and hence do realizes f ( v )  in 21A. This 
completes the proof. -1 
THEOREM 
7.1.14 (Morley Categoricity Theorem). Suppose T is a complete 
theory in a countable language. If T is categorical in some uncountable power, 
then T is categorical in every uncountable power. 
PROOF. Let T be categorical in the uncountable power u. By Lemma 7. I. 1, 
it suffices to prove that every model of T of power w ,  is saturated. Let 9l be 
a model of T of power w1 . Since T is u-categorical, T is w-stable. Using the 
preceding lemma u times and taking unions at limit ordinals, we obtain an 
elementary extension B > 2l of power u such that every countable set f (v) 
of formulas of 9” 
which is realized in 23” is realized in aA. Since the w- 
stable theory T has an w,-saturated model of power u and is a-categorical, 
?h’ must be w,-saturated. Consider any countable set Y c A and any set 
r(r) of formulas of =YY 
consistent with Th(%,). Since B is a,-saturated, 
T ( c )  is realized in By 
and therefore is realized in 21y. It follows that 
is 
o,-saturated. -1 
The above proof of Morley’s theorem actually shows a bit more, namely: 
COROLLARY 
7.1.15. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language and 
let 2 > w. If every model of T of power u is w,-saturated, then every un- 
countable model of T is saturated. 
The proof we have given for Morley’s theorem is considerably simpler 
than Morley’s original proof and is due to Baldwin and Lachlan. The two 
key lemmas which were not available to Morley were the Lowenheim- 
Skolem-Tarski Theorem for two cardinals and Lemma 7.1.13. On the other 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
495 
hand, Morley's original proof gave a great deal of additional information 
on w-stable theories which is of independent interest. One of Morley's ob- 
servations is not hard to prove and concerns indiscernibles in stable theories. 
A subset X of a model 91 is said to be totally indiscernible iff for any two 
n-tuples x I ,  ..., x, and yl, ..., y ,  in X such that xi # xi and y i  # .vi. 
whenever i # j ,  we have 
Note that if X is totally indiscernible in 9, 
then any simple ordering ( X ,  < ) 
is indiscernible in a. 
For example, in an algebraically closed field any transcendental basis 
is a set of total indiscernibles. 
THEOREM 
7.1.16. Suppose 91 is a model of an w-stable theory. Then any in- 
finite set ( X ,  < ) of indiscernibles in ?I is totally indiscernible. 
PROOF. Suppose ( X ,  <) is indiscernible but not totally indiscernible. Then 
for some formula q ( u ,  ... D,) and some permutation 71 of { I ,  ..., n } ,  we have 
91 k q [ x ,  ... x,], 
i?i k 1 q [ x , ,  ... XJ, 
for all increasing n-tuples x1 < ... < x, in X .  Since any permutation is 
a product of transpositions of the form (i, i +  I), we may assume that r 
is such a transposition. By the stretching theorem we may assume that 
( X ,  <) is a countable dense ordering. Fix elements 
XI < ... < X i - ]  < xi+z < ... < x, 
in X ,  and let Y be the interval of ( X ,  <) between x i -  I and x i + z .  Let 
q(yz) = q ( x ,  ... x i -  I yzxi+z ... X"). 
T,(u) = {q(yu) : I' E S }  u (1 q(yu) : y E Y '\ S }  
For each initial segment S of Y, the set of formulas 
is consistent with Th(91x). Therefore 91x has 2'" types in u, contradicting ( 1 ) -  
stability. i 
In his original proof of the categoricity theorem, Morley developed a 
way to classify formulas q ( v )  in %A by giving each formula an ordinal called 
its transcendence rank. The higher the transcendence rank, the greater the 
'complexity' of the formula. The notion of transcendence rank has proved 

496 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
useful for other purposes. We present here the basic results of Morley and 
then discuss some later applications. 
We begin with the transcendence rank zero. Consider a model 2L A 
formula q ( x )  in Y, is said to be algebraic, or of transcendence rank zero, 
in '3 iff q ( x )  is satisfied by at least one but only finitely many elements in 
'?[. The degree n of q(c) is the number of elements of A which satisfy cp(x). 
Notice that each algebraic formula cp(x) of degree n is equivalent in 
Th('!(,) to a finite disjunction 
x = a , v  ... v x  = a, 
In particular, the algebraic formulas of degree I are equivalent to equa- 
tions .Y = a. 
Now let us consider a subset X c A. An algebraic formula cp(x) in Y x  
is said to be irreducible oaer X iff the set of consequences of cp(x) in Th(!?lx) 
is a type in Y x ,  
i.e., is maximal consistent in ZX. 
A type Z(x) in Th(lYx) 
is said to be algebraic over X iff it is the set of all consequences of some ir- 
reducible algebraic formula over X. Similarly, an element a E A is algebraic 
o w  X iff a satisfies some irreducible algebraic formula over X .  
LEMMA 
7.1.17. Let X c A and let cp(x) be an algebraic formula in Y x .  
The11 q ( x )  is equivalent in Th(9tx) to a Jinite disjunction of algebraic ir- 
reducible formulas oiier X .  
PROOF. Let a,, ..., a, be the elements of A which satisfy cp(x). Choose a 
maximal subset { b , ,  ..., b,} c { a , ,  ..., a,} such that the b, all realize dif- 
ferent types in YX. For each i, choose a formula $,(x) in Y x  
which is satis- 
fied by b, but not by any b,,j # i. Then for each i, cpi(x) = cp(x)h$,(x) 
is algebraic and irreducible over X, and 
c cp * cp,v ... vcp,. -I 
For example, let 91 be an algebraically closed field and let X be a subfield 
of 9L If p(x) is a polynomial over X r;ith degree n and no multiple roots, 
then the equationp(x) = 0 is an algebraic formula of degree n. The equation 
p ( x )  = 0 is irreducible over X if and only if the polynomial p(x) is irre- 
ducible over X. An element a E A is algebraic over X if and only if a belongs 
to the algebraic closure of X. Because any two elements not in the algebraic 
closure of X realize the same type in g x ,  and if there is one such element, 
then there are infinitely many. 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
497 
As a second example, let 9l be a dense ordering without endpoints and 
let X c A. Then, using the analysis of dense ordering by elimination of 
quantifiers in Section 1.5, we see that an element a is algebraic over X if 
and only if a E X .  
We now introduce the higher transcendence ranks. The idea is to ‘throw 
out’ the algebraic formulas and look at what is left. It is convenient to work 
with o,-saturated modcls. 
Let 8 be an w,-saturated model. The transcendence rank, or Morley 
rank, of a formula q ( x )  of ZA is defined recursively as follows: q ( x )  has 
rank a in 8, where LY is an ordinal, if and only if the set of formulas 
(1) 
{ q ( x ) }  u {cr(x) : ia(x) has rank < a] 
of 9, is consistent and has finitely many maximal consistent extensions 
in Th(%,). The number of maximal consistent extensions of the set of 
formulas (1) is called the degree of a formula q ( x )  of rank a. 
The degree is thus always a positive integer. Algebraic is the same as 
of rank zero, because a consistent formula q ( x )  is satisfied by finitely many 
elements a , ,  ..., a, in 9l if and only if it has finitely many maximal consistent 
extensions determined by the formulas x E a, , . . ., x E a,. 
If q ( x )  is inconsistent with Th(g,) we give it rank - I .  If q ( x )  is con- 
sistent withTh(%”) but has no ordinal as a rank we give it rank 00. Thus each 
formula q ( x )  has a unique rank. 
If we let 
S,(x) = ( ~ ( x )  
: ia(x) has rank < a }  
for each ordinal a, then the transcendence rank may be described as fol- 
lows: S,(x) is the set of all consequences of Th(%,). A formula q ( x )  is 
algebraic if it is consistent with & ( x )  and has only finitely many maximal 
consistent extensions. S,(x) is equivalent to the set { x  f a : a E A } .  q ( x )  
has rank 1 if q ( x )  u S,(x) is consistent and has only finitely many maximal 
consistent extensions. In general, we see that: 
(i). If q ( x )  u S,(x) is inconsistent, q ( x )  has rank < a. 
(ii). If q ( x )  u SJx) is consistent and has finitely many maximal consistent 
(iii). If q ( x )  u S,(x) has infinitely many maximal consistent extensions, 
(iv). If q ( x )  u S,(x) is consistent for all a, then q ( x )  has rank 00. 
(v). S, (x) is closed under consequences, and increases with a. 
From the definition and intervening discussion, we see that: 
extensions, q ( x )  has rank a. 
q ( x )  has rank > a. 
LEMMA 
7.1.18. Ler q ( x )  and $ ( x )  be formulas of 9,. 

498 
SELECI'ED TOPICS 
[7.1 
(i). The rank of q ( x )  v $(x) is the maximum of the rank of q ( x )  and the 
rank of $(x). 
(ii). If q ( x )  and $ ( x )  have rank a and 91A 1 1 (~(x)A$(x)), then the 
degree of q ( x ) v $ ( x )  is the sum of the degree of q ( x )  and the degree of 
(iii). Euery formula of rank Q is equiualent in Th(?[,) to ajnite disjunction 
(iv). If there is a formula of rank Q, IX an ordinal, then there are formulas 
* ( X h  
of formulas of rank a and degree I .  
of every rank p < a. 
Lt follows that the valid formula x = x has the largest rank. We call the 
rank of x = x in ?I the rank of the model Yi. 
To complete our series of definitions, we let X be a subset of A. A formula 
q ( x )  in Y X  of rank Q is said to be irreducible over X iff the set of conse- 
is a type in Y x .  
(Thus irreducible over A is the same thing as degree I . )  
A type Z(x) in Th(?Ix) is of rank a over X iff it is the set of consequences of 
{cp(x)l u (&(XI n 9 x 1  
9 
where q ( x )  is irreducible over X and of rank a. An element a E A has rank 
IX ouer X iff its type in 21x does. 
LEMMA 
7. I .  19. Let X c A and let q ( x )  be a formula in Y X  
of rank a. Then 
q ( x )  is equioalent in Th(91x) to a jinite disjunction of irreducible formulas 
of rank IX over X .  Moreover, q ( x )  is irreducible ouer X if and only if q ( x )  
is irreducible over eueryjinite X,, c X ,  where q ( x )  is in Yx0. 
PROOF. Like Lemma 7. I .  17. i 
Let us return to our examples. First let BI be an algebraically closed field 
and X a subfield of 91. The model 2l has transcendence rank I ,  because the 
set of formulas 
{ x +  a : a E A }  
determines a type in Th(BIA). The formula x = x is irreducible of rank I 
over X .  An element a E A has rank 1 over X if and only if a is not in the 
algebraic closure of X .  
The example where 
is a dense linear order without endpoints is quite 
different. In this model there are no formulas of rank 1, because if q ( x )  

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
499 
is satisfied by infinitely many elements, then 
has infinitely many maximal consistent extensions in Th(aA). Therefore 
cp has rank 00 and every element of A \  X has rank co over X .  
Here is an example of a model with rank 2. Let 94 = (A, E), where E 
is an equivalence relation with w ,  equivalence classes, each of power wl. 
The formula E(au) has rank 1 for each a E A, because the set 
{E(au)} u { b  f u : b e  A )  
determines a type C(u) in Th(91A). The formula u = u has rank 2 because 
{ u  = u> u {i 
E(au) : a €  A }  
determines a type in Th(94,), but 
{ u  = u} u {b f u : b e  A }  
does not. Thus 94 has transcendence rank 2. 
For each u < q, 
there are examples of theories whose models have 
transcendence rank u. 
We now prove that in two elementarily equivalent w,-saturated models, 
the same formula has the same transcendence rank. This is thz reason that 
o,-saturated models are more convenient than arbitrary models. 
LEMMA 
7.1.20. Let 94, 23 be w,-saturated models, let X be a subset of A n B, 
and suppose BIx = BX . Then: 
(i). For any formula q ( x )  in 9x, 
q ( x )  has the same rank in 94 as in 8. 
Thus 94 and 23 have the same rank. 
(ii). If the rank of q ( x )  is an ordinal, then q ( x )  has the same degree in 
2l as in 23, and q ( x )  is irreducible ouer X in 94 if and only git is irreducible 
ouer X in 23. 
PROOF. It suffices to prove the result in the case that Xis finite. 
(i). We prove by induction on tl that for all w,-saturated models 'u 
and 23 and finite sets X, if UX = ax and q ( x )  in 9, 
has rank u in 94, then 
it has rank a in 8. 
We temporarily write Sa(a, x) for Sa(x) in 94. 
< a. Suppose q ( x )  has rank u in 94. Then 
q ( x )  cannot have rank -= u in 58. We assume q ( x )  has rank > u in 8 and 
obtain a contradiction. The set of formulas 
Assume the result for all 
{cp(x)) " S,(%?, x >  

500 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
has infinitely many maximal consistent extensions. Therefore for some 
countable set C with X c C c B, the set 
Cq(x,) u (S,(%, x) "9,) 
has infinitely many maximal consistent extensions in yc. 
Since 9l is wI- 
saturated, there is a mapping f :  C -+ A such that f'(b) = b for b E X and 
PK fb)*,c = 
b)beC. 
To simplify the notation, we may assume that C c A n B and 91c = !&. 
By inductive hypothesis, the set of formulas S,(x) n YC 
is the same with 
respect to ?I as with respect to B. Since S,(x) is closed under consequence, 
it follows that 
{ d x ) )  u S,(% x> 
has infinitely many maximal consistent extensions. This contradicts the as- 
sumption that q ( x )  has rank a in %. Therefore q ( x )  also has rank a in %. 
(ii). The proof is similar to (i). -I 
COROLLARY 
7.1.21. I f  the rank of q ( x )  in ?l 
is an ordinal a, then r < (2")'. 
PROOF. There are only 2'" theories of saturated models 91x, X countable. 
Therefore there are only 2" different ranks of formulas. -I 
Lachlan (1971) has improved the above result to a < wl. 
We now characterize o-stable theories in terms of transcendence rank. 
By the above lemma, any two w,-saturated models of a complete theory T 
have the same rank. We call this rank the rank of T. T is called totally 
transcendental iff its rank is an ordinal, rather than co. 
THEOREM 
7.1.22. Let T be a complete theory. 
(i). T is o-stable i f  and only if T is totally transcendental. 
(ii). If T is totally transcendental, then its rank is a countable ordinal. 
PROOF. (i). First assume T has rank 00. Let 9l be an o,-saturated model 
of T and let S(x) = ~ z S a ( x ) .  
Then S(x) is consistent and S(x) = SB(x) 
for some p. For every formula cp(x) consistent with S(x), the set 
{co(x)l " S(x) 
has infinitely many maximal consistent extensions. Using a tree argument, 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
501 
we can then find a countable set C c A such that Th(%,-) has 2" types. 
Therefore T is not w-stable. 
Now assume T has rank -= 00, and let % be a model of T and Xacount- 
able subset of A .  We may assume % is w,-saturated. 
Let Z(x) be a type in Th('21x). Each formula u(x) in C(x) has an ordinal 
rank. Let u(x) be a formula in Z(x) of minimal rank a. Since u(x) is a finite 
disjunction of irreducible formulas over X, we may assume that u(x) is 
irreducible over X .  Then C ( x )  is the set of all consequences of 
4 x )  u (SAX) 
9 x 1  
Since there are only countably many formulas in =!Tx and each type is de- 
termined by a formula as above, there are only countably many types in 
Th(2lX). Hence Tis w-stable. 
(ii). Let T be w-stable. Then for each n, T has only countably many 
complete extensions in the language 2' u { c l ,  ..., c,,}. The rank of a 
formula q(xa, . . . a,,) in an w,-saturated model 2l of Tis completely determined 
by the theory of (a, a ,  ... a,,). Therefore there are only countably many 
ranks of formulas in '2l. Thus T has rank less than w ,  . -I 
As an application of transcendence rank, we show that every uncountable 
model of an w-stable theory has indiscernibles. 
THEOREM 
7.1.23. Let T be a complete w-stable theory. Then every model 
3 of'T of regular power a > w has a set of total indiscernibles ofpower a. In 
fact, if Y ,  Z t A and IYI < IZI = a, then 21y has a totally indiscernible set 
X c Z ofpower a. 
PROOF. We may assume that BI is w,-saturated, since &[ has an w,-saturated 
elementary extension of power a. Let p be the least ordinal such that there 
is a formula q ( x )  in =!TA of rank p which is satisfied by a elements of Z .  
Thus 0 < p < 0 , .  There is a formula q ( x )  of rank p and degree 1 which is 
satisfied by a elements of Z .  For any set Y' c A of power JY'I < a, there 
are fewer than a formulas in YY. 
of rank < b, and each one is satisfied by 
fewer than x elements of Z. Therefore the set 
SY,(X) = { d x ) }  u (Sp(x) n Y Y , )  
is satisfied by a elements of Z .  We may assume that all the constants of 
q ( x )  belong to Y. Then for each Y' 3 Y, the set Sy.(x) determines a type 

SELECTED TOPICS 
502 
(7.1 
of Th(9iy.). We may choose elements 
a09 01, ..., a,. .*., 
Y < a, 
such that each a, belongs to Z and realizes the set 
SYy(X), 
Y, = Y u (aa : b < y } .  
Let X be the set {a, : y < a}. We shall prove that X is a set of indiscernibles 
in %,,. 
It suffices to show that (A', <) is indiscernible, where ud c a? iff 
b < ;'. We show by induction on n that for dl y ,  < ... < yn < a and 
b ,  < ... < S, < a, we have 
(&ay1 ... ayn) = pJya& ... ad,). 
Y' = Y u { a , ] ,  
I . . ,  a,"}, 
Y" = Y u :aa,, ...) a,,j. 
1 
U(a;,, ... a,,,x) E Sy*(X) 
qua, . . . ad, x) E Sy-(X). 
dly != O(a,, ... aYnaYn+,); 
S,.(X) 
!= O(UY, ... aynx); 
Sy..(x) != qu,, ... aanx); 
% != @a, '.. a d , Q d . + l ) .  
( d 1 y  a,, ... a,") = (UY aal ... a,"). -I 
Assume this holds for n and let 
Then 
if and only if 
Thus, for each y n + ,  > yn and S,, , > S,, the following are equivalent: 
This shows that for all n < w, 
In the years since the writing of the second edition of this book, the 
methods used by Morley to prove his categoricity theorem have de- 
veloped into a major new branch of model theory, which goes by the 
names of Classification Theory, Stability Theory, or Forking. Several 
books on the subject are now available, including Baldwin (1988), 
Lascar (1986), Pillay (1983), Poizat (1985), and Shelah (1978), (19??). 
An excellent survey of the subject is given by Baldwin (1987a). 
The aim of the theory is to isolate classes of models which can be 
classified up to isomorphism using invariants like the Morley rank. The 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
503 
theory has been most successful in the case of stable theories, that is, 
theories which are a-stable for some a. Instead of the original Morley 
rank, the theory stresses an analogue of the Morley rank with respect to 
a finite set of formulas, and a powerful generalization of the notion of 
algebraic dependence called forking. There has been progress both in the 
general study of stable theories and in the application of the method to 
particular classes of algebras. 
We shall not go further into the subject in detail here. However, to 
give a feeling for the progress which has been made, we shall state a 
selection of results about categoricity and stability. 
Shelah used transcendence degrees to study prime and atomic models 
of a-stable theories with extra constants. We proved in Corollary 7.1.12 
that if T is w-stable, then for every model 91 of T and every set X c A ,  
Th(91x) has a prime atomic model. Shelah proved the following, which 
answered a question of Sacks. 
7.1.24. Suppose T is w-stable, 
is a model of T, and X c A. 
(i). Th(91,) has a unique prime model up to isomorphism. 
(ii). A model BX of Th(Qlx) is prime if and only if it is atomic andhasno 
uncountable set of indiscernibles. 
The rough idea of the proof is to build an isomorphism between two 
prime models by a back and forth construction using an induction on the 
ranks of elements over X .  
Shelah (1978) proved the following extension of 7.1.24 to stable 
theories. 
7.1.24'. If T is a stable theory in a countable language and Th(2(,) has a 
prime model for every model 2( of T and countable subset X C A, then the 
prime model of Th(2(,) is unique for every such 91 and X .  
Morley's theorem was extended to uncountable languages by Shelah 
(1978), extending various partial results of Rowbottom, Ressayre, and 
Keisler. Shelah proved that: 
7.1.25. If a complete theory T is categorical in one cardinal greater than 
ll3/l, then T is categorical in every cardinal greater than 1/31). 
If 
11311 > w and T is categorical in cardinal ((Y((, 
then T has fewer than 
I(3ll 
nonequivalent formulas and T is categorical in every cardinal greater 
than )l31). 

504 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
Returning to countable languages, Baldwin improved Morley's result 
that every o,-categorical theory has countable rank. 
7.1.26. Every o,-categorical theory T has finite Morley rank. 
Baldwin and Lachlan obtained the following result concerning count- 
able models of w1 -categorical theories. 
7.1.27. Suppose T is an w,-categorical theory in a countable language. Then 
T is either o-categorical or T has exactly countably many countable models 
up to isomorphism. Moreover, all countable models of T are w-homogeneous. 
As a by-product of the above theorem, Baldwin and Lachlan gave a 
characterization of w,-categorical theories in terms of countable models. 
To state the result, we introduce some notation. Given a model 
and a 
formula q ( x )  in the language Y A ,  
let q(%) be the set 
q(%) = {a E A :  a satisfies q ( x )  in 91,). 
7.1.28. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language. Then T is wl- 
categorical if and only if the following two conditions hold: 
(i). T is stable in power w .  
(ii). For every pair of countable models BI, 8 of T with '91 $ 23, if q(x) 
is a formula of Y A  
and q(%) is infinite, then q(%) 5 q(8). 
The necessity of (i) and (ii) for w,-categoricity was already known, and 
the sufficiency was proved by Baldwin and Lachlan. The necessity of (i) 
is given in Lemma 7.1.4 (due to Morley), while the necessity of (ii) follows 
from Vaught's two-cardinal theorem in Section 3.2. 
The notion of a stable theory in powers other than w has also proved to 
be fruitful. Shelah and Harnik (see Shelah, 1971d) showed that: 
7.1.29. If a complete theory T is stable in power a, then T has a saturated 
model of power a. 
Shelah has classified theories by the cardinals in which they are stable. 
7. I .30. For every complete theory T in a countable language, exactly one of 
the following happens: 
(i). T is stable in every cardinal a 2 2". 
(ii). T is stable in power a ifand only ifa = a@. 
(iii). T i s  not stable in any infinite cardinal. 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
505 
T is called superstable if (i) holds, stable if (i) or (ii) holds (i.e., T is stable 
in some a), and unstable if (iii) holds. Note that o-stable implies super- 
stable. 
EXAMPLE 7.1.31. The theory of countably many independent unary 
relations is stable in power a if and only if a 2 2". So this theory is super- 
stable but not w-stable. 
EXAMPLE 7.1.32 (Shelah). Here is a complete theory which is stable but 
not superstable, i.e. has property (ii): The language has countably many 
binary relations E,, E l ,  E,, ..., and the axioms state that: 
(i). Each En is an equivalence relation with infinitely many classes, 
(ii). Each class of En is the union of infinitely many classes of En+, 
. 
En + 1 (x, Y )  -+ En(x, Y). 
The following theorem of Shelah gives a characterization of unstable 
theories which does not involve cardinals. 
7.1.33. A complete theory T is unstable if and only if there is a formula 
Cp(x1 ... Xnyl ... y,) = (p(X'y'), a model 
of T, and an infinite set X c A" 
such that the relation 
((2, y') : x',j E X and BI t q[X', 31) 
simply orders X .  
For example, we see that the theory of dense order without end-points 
is unstable, and so is the theory of atomless Boolean algebras. 
One of the test problems which has been a driving force for classifica- 
tion theory is known as the spectrum problem. For a theory T, let 
Z(T, a) be the number of models of T of power a up to isomorphism. 
The spectrum problem is: 
Which functions f(a) = Z(T, a), a an infinite cardinal, are possible 
where T is a complete theory for a countable language? 
To give the reader an idea of the progress in classification theory 
without giving any more definitions, we shall state a sampling of newer 
results on categoricity and the spectrum problem. 
It is clear that Z(T, a) is at most 2". Morley's theorem shows that if 
Z( T, a) = 1 for some uncountable a, then I( T, a) = 1 for all uncountable 
a. Theorem 2.3.15 of Vaught shows that Z(T, 0 )  2 2 .  Theorem 7.1.26 of 
Baldwin and Lachlan shows that if I( T, q )  
= 1 then either I( T, w )  = 1 or 

506 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
I( T ,  w )  = w .  At the opposite extreme from Morley's theorem, Shelah 
(1978) has proved 
7.1.34. Every complete theory in a countable language which is not 
superstable has 2" models in each cardinal a > w. 
There are a number of open questions involving stability and the 
spectrum for small cardinals. A problem which has attracted particular 
interest is Vaught's conjecture that if I( T ,  w )  > w then I( T ,  w )  = 2". 
Several special cases of Vaught's conjecture have been proved. Steel 
(1978) proved Vaught's conjecture for theories of trees (extending earlier 
work of M. Rubin, L. Marcus, and A. Miller). Shelah, Harrington and 
Makkai (1984) proved Vaught's conjecture for w-stable theories. Lo 
(1985) proved Vaught's conjecture for homogeneous models. 
Extending earlier work of Lachlan and of Buechler (1984), Hrushov- 
sky (19??) proved Kueker's conjecture for stable theories, that every 
complete stable theory such that all uncountable models are w-saturated 
is either w,-categorical or w ,  -categorical. 
Another problem concerns finite axiomatizability of categorical 
theories. Peretyatkin (1980) gave an example of a finitely axiomatizable 
complete w1 -categorical theory. Zilber (1980,1984) and Cherlin, Harring- 
ton and Lachlan (1985) proved that there is no finitely axiomatizable 
complete theory which is categorical in all infinite powers, and the latter 
paper improved this to show that there is no complete finitely axiomatiz- 
able w-categorical w -stable theory. 
Lachlan (1973) improved Theorem 7.1.27 by proving that a super- 
stable theory has either one or infinitely many countable models. The 
corresponding problem for stable theories is open. 
Classification theory has yielded a nearly complete solution of the 
spectrum problem for sufficiently large cardinals a. Shelah (1989, 
(19??) has proved the following results. The first result was a conjecture 
of Morley, and the second result is the solution of the spectrum problem. 
7.1.35. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language and suppose 
that T is not w,-categorical. Then for all infinite cardinals a S p we have 
I(T, a) I(T, P ) .  
7.1.36. Let T be a complete theory in a countable language. Then either 
(a) 
I( T, a) = 2" for all uncountable cardinals a, or for all ordinals 6, 

7.11 
CATEGORICITY IN POWER 
(b) 
I(T, "1 < Ll(l 
61). 
Moreover, case (b) splits into three subcases: 
(bl) There is an ordinal 5 < w, such that for all ordinals 6 > 0, 
507 
(b2) There exist n < w and a cardinal 1 s p s 2" such that for all ordinals 
6 22", 
(b3) There exist k, m < w and a cardinal p s (2")+ such that for all 
ordinals 6 
2", 
Z(T, 
= ~k(~y<p~m(161y)). 
The dichotomy between (a) and (b) is called the main gap. It shows 
that I( T, a) for a > w is either the largest possible function 2* or is much 
smaller than 2*. 
EXERCISES 
Unless we specify otherwise, assume the language 64 is countable. 
7.1.1. Prove the following directly from Lemmas 7.1. I, Corollary 7.1.5, and 
Lemma 7.1.6: Any complete theory T which is w,-categorical is categorical 
in every uncountable power. 
7. I .2. A class K of models for 64 is said to be a-categorical iff K has a model 
9l E K of power a, and any two models of power ct in K are isomorphic. 
Prove that if T' is categorical in power a in an expansion 2" of the language 
64, then the class K of all reducts to 9 
of models of T' is a-categorical. 
7.1.3*. Give an example of a PCA class of models of 9 
(see Chapter 4) 
which is categorical in power 3" but not in power 0,. (2 
is countable.) 
7.1.4*. Prove that every PC, class (in a countable language) which is w I -  
categorical is categorical in every uncountable power. 
[Hint: First try assuming 2" = 0, 
and use the proof of Lemma 7.1.1. 
In general, also use the proofs of Corollary 7.1.5 and Lemma 7.1.6.1 
7.1.5. Prove the following stronger form of Lemma 7.1.1. Let T be a 
complete theory of 9 
and let C,(u), C,(u), ... be sets of formulas in u. If 

508 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.1 
every model of T of power w1 which omits Co(u), C,(o), ... is homogeneous, 
then every uncountable model of T which omits C,(u), Cl(u), ... is homo- 
geneous. (Compare with Exercise 5.1.15.) 
7.1.6. Let T be a complete theory and let K be the class of all models of 
T which omit C,(u), C,(u), .... Prove that if K is wl-categorical and every 
91 E K of power w ,  is homogeneous, then K is categorical in every uncount- 
able power. 
7.1.7*. Give an example of a complete theory in a language with N u + ,  
symbols which is categorical in power K, but not in any larger power. 
7.1.8. Give an example of a complete theory in a language with a symbols 
which is categorical in every power p > a but is not categorical in power 
ct (for each infinite cardinal a). 
7.1.9. Suppose that a theory T in 2' is stable in power w and 91 is a model 
of T. Prove that for every countable set X c A, the complete theory of 
(a, x ) , , ~  is stable in power w. 
7.1.10. Prove that Example 7.1.31 gives a complete theory which is stable in 
every power a 2 2'" but is not stable in power w. Thus the converse of Lem- 
ma 7.1.4 fails. 
7.1.1 1. Show that a theory T is stable for types in one variable iff it is stable 
for types in finitely many variables. That is, if T is stable in power a, then 
for every model 
of T, every X c A of power a, and every n <  w ,  ax 
realizes exactly a types in v l ,  ..., v,. 
7.1.12. For each of the examples of w,-categorical theories given in the 
text, find an infinite set of indiscernibles in a model of power w, . 
7.1.13*. Let q ( u l  ... u,) be a formula, 8 a model, and X an infinite subset 
of a. Suppose that for every sequence x,, ..., x, of distinct elements of X 
there is a permutation n of { 1, ..., n} such that exactly one of 
t q[x, 
1 . .  xn]r 
a I= r~[x,, * . *  xzn] 
holds. Then the complete theory T of 
T is not a,-categorical. 
is not stable in power o, 
whence 
[Hint: Use Ramsey's theorem.] 
7.1.14*. Let T be a complete theory and let K be the class of all models of 
T which omit Zo(u), Z,(u), ... . Assume that a > w and: 
(i). K is a-categorical; 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEYS THEOREM 
509 
(ii). every countable model in K has arbitrarily large elementary exten- 
(iii). every model of K of power a is o,-homogeneous. 
sions; 
Prove that K is categorical in every uncountable power, and every uncount- 
able model of K is homogeneous. 
7.1.15*. Let T be a complete theory and let cp(u, u )  be a formula. Let 2l 
be a model of T. Suppose that for all n < o there exist elements u l ,  ..., U,EA 
such that 
[Hint: Use the methods of this section and Section 7.2.1 
9 != (Vu)(qO(u,u)v ... vcp(u,u)), 
but for all m < n, 
2l != '1 (VU) v 'p(upu). 
1 QpCn 
p # m  
Prove that T is not a,-categorical. 
[Hint: Use Ramsey's theorem.] 
7. I .  16*. Let T be a complete theory in 2 
and a an uncountable cardinal. 
Suppose that for every model ?I of T of power o! and every finite set X c 91, 
the model (?I, x),,~ is a+-universal. Prove that T is categorical in every 
uncountable power. 
7. I .  17*. Suppose T is categorical in power w, . Then every countable model 
?I of T has a proper elementary extension !I3 such that: 
(i). 
is prime over ?l, i.e., for every proper elementary extension 0 of 
a, (23, 
(ii). 8 is minimal over ?I, i.e., if \>I < Q < 23, then 91 = 6 or 3 = a. 
is elementarily embeddable in (6, 
7.1.18*. If T is o,-categorical, then T has at most w nonisomorphic count- 
able models. 
7.1.19**. If T is a complete theory which has uncountably many types, 
then T has 2"' nonisomorphic models of power o, 
. 
7.2. An extension of Ramsey's theorem and applications; some two-cardinal 
theorems 
We introduced the notion of indiscernibles in Section 3.3, and have made 
use of this notion in Section 7.1. The main results on indiscernibles were sta- 
ted and proved in Section3.3,andtheydepend,atleast for the existence 
of models with indiscernibles, on Ramsey's theorem (Theorem 3.3.7). 

510 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
The omitting types theorem (Theorem 2.2.3) gives a sufficient condition 
for a (countable) theory to have a (countable) model omitting a type C. 
This theorem is definitely false if the language 9 
is not countable or if we 
require that T has a noncountable model omitting C. It was first discovered 
by Morley (1965b) that the method of indiscernibles allows us to construct 
arbitrarily large models of T which have indiscernibles and omit a type C, 
provided that T has sufficiently large models omitting C to start with. He 
observed that the simple Ramsey theorem for countable sets no longer suf- 
fices, and what is needed is an extension of Ramsey's theorem first proved 
by Erdos and Rado (1956). This new method also enabled him to deduce 
rather easily a two-cardinal theorem of Vaught. This new line of approach 
of constructing models using the result of Erdos and Rado will form the 
substance of this section. We have decided to include in this section a two- 
cardinal theorem of Chang, which does not use indiscernibles, but does re- 
quire the notion of saturated models introduced in Section 5.1. 
Our first task is to state and prove the partition theorem of Erdos and 
Rado. Recall from Section 3.3 that [XI" is the set of all n-element subsets of 
X .  If u is an infinite cardinal, then, as has been introduced elsewhere in the 
book, 
>,,(a) = a, 
act ,(a) = 2'~(@, 
' 1 W  = UC<14(4? 
if 7 is a limit ordinal different from 0. 
When a = o, we simply write 
hypothesis is, of course, equivalent to the assertion 
r. 
for ae(w). The generalized continuum 
= XC for all ordinals 
THEOREM 
7.2.1 (Erdos and Rado). Let a be an injinite cardinal and let n E w. 
Suppose that 
1x1 > a,,(a), 
[XI"+' c UiEIci, 111 < u. 
Then there are a subset Y c X and an i E I such that 
IYI > a 
and 
[Y]"" c C i .  
PROOF. The theorem is proved by induction on n. The case that n = 0 follows 
from the pigeonhole principle: If more than a elements are divided into a 
classes, then some class must contain more than a elements. Let n =- 0 and 
assume the theorem is true for n - 1. We may suppose that I c X and that 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY'S THEOREM 
511 
Ci 
n Cj = 0 if i # j .  Let R be the (n+2)-placed relation on X defined by 
R(xo ... x,i) iff i E I and {xo ... x,,) E Ci. 
Form the model 
'% = ( X ,  R, i)i,l. 
Let us say that an elementary submodel '23 < 91 is P-saturated relative to 'II 
iff for every Z c B of power IZI < P, every type Z(u) which is realized in 
(a, b)bsZ is realized in (8, 
b)bez. 
We claim that M has an elementary submodel 23 of power >,,(a) such that 
I c B and 23 is 3,,- ,(a)+-saturated relative to M. The proof is like the proof 
of the existence of P+-saturated models of power 28. We need only form an 
elementary chain 
%../ < \u, 
y < >,,-,(a)+ 
such that I c B,, each '23, has power >,,(x), and for all Z c By of power 
>,,-l(a), every type Z(u) realized in (at, b)b,z is realized in ('23,+,, 
b)bsz. 
such sets Z and types Z(u) at stage y. 
ment c E A\,B. 
We then form a sequence 
This is possible because there are at most 3,,(a)"'-'(a) . 2'n-'f4) = ',(a) 
Since 'II has power > >,,(a), IH is a proper submodel of 2l. Choose an ele- 
by, 
Y < ' n - l ( a ) +  
of elements of B such that for all y, b, realizes the same type as c in (PI, b,),,,. 
All the b, are distinct because c $I B. Let U be the set of all by. Then U has 
power 3n-I(a)+. Partition [U]" into disjoint sets Di, 
i E  I, as follows: for 
YO < ... < y n -  1 < an- t(a)+, 
By the induction hypothesis for n- 1, there is a subset Y c U of power IYI 
> a such that for some i E I, 
[ Y]" c Di 
. 
< y,,; 
Then for any yo c ... < 
{by,, ..., ~ , , n - , , ~ } ~ C i .  
Since by" realizes the same type as c in (a, bd)d<,, we have 
This shows that 
{b,,, ..., by,) E Ci. 
[Y]"+' c ci. i 

512 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
We next state and prove Morley's theorem on omitting types of elements 
in its simplest form, leaving various ramifications of the result to the exer- 
cises. Let 9 
be a countable language, T be a theory in 9, 
and C(u) be a set 
of formulas of T in the single free variable u. Recall that a model '?I 
of T 
omits C iff for all a E A it is not the case that B t C[a]. Or, equivalently, for 
all a E A ,  there is a o(v) E C such that % 1 i 
.[a]. 
THEOREM 
7.2.2 (Morley's Theorem on Omitting Types). Let 9, 
T, C be as 
in the above. If for each cardinal a,, 5 < o ~ ,  
T has a model of power greater 
than 3, omitting 1, 
then T has a model omitting C in each injnite power. 
PROOF. For 5 < wl, 
let %{ = (A,, ...) be a model of T of power greater 
than 3< omitting C. Let 2'* be an expansion o f 9  with built-in Skolem func- 
tions and let T* be the extension of T to Y* by adding all axioms for the 
Skolem theory. Clearly, by results of Chapter 3, each 91, has a corresponding 
expansion to B;. Then for all t < o,, 
( I )  
for all a E A,, there is a a(v) E C, such that 2i: l= 
-I a[a]. 
Since 2' is countable, 2* is still countable. Thus, let 
to, t , ,  t2, ..., r,, ..., n E O, 
be an enumeration of all the terms of P*. 
We may assume that t,, has p,, 
places, and that each term t ,  is in the variables ul, ..., up,. Let c,. c2, ... be 
new constant symbols, and let 
= P* 
u {c,, c2, ...}. We wish to prove 
the following: There is a sequence 
(2) 
oo(v), ..., a,,(u), ..., n E w 
of formulas of C such that the following set Tof sentences o f 9  is consistent: 
(3) the set T*, 
and the sentences 
i 
o,,(tn(ci, ... q,)), 
1 
( C i  = C j ) ,  
whenever i, < i2 < ... < iPn < w, 
whenever i < j c w. 
The proof of the existence of the sequence (2) and the consistency of (3) 
is by induction on n, and follows from an auxiliary induction given below. 
We assume that each set A, is simply ordered in some manner by <. (The 
context willmake it clear whether we are referring to <, or to <,,.) We 
prove by induction on n: 
(4) There are formulas uo(u), ..., 0,- ,(u) E C, and a cofinal subset F,, of 
o,, and a sequence of subsets X, c A,, 5 E F,,, 
such that, for each 
t E F,,, we have 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY'S THEOREM 
513 
(i). IX,l > aA, where < is the Ath-element of F,, and 
(ii). for each m < n, a, t i 
a,,,[t,,,(x, ... xp,)] whenever 
x1 < ... < xpm are in X,. 
The statement (4) is obviously true if we taken = 0, F, = wlr and X: = A,. 
Then (4) (i) holds, and (4) (ii) holds vacuously. Assume therefore that 
(4) holds for n, namely, we have found cro, ..., cr,,- 
1, F,,, and Xc, ( E F,, that 
satisfy the conclusions (4) (i) and (ii). Consider the term t,(ul ... up,). As- 
sume first that p,, 2 1. We first form a subset G, of F,, by omitting all elements 
of Fn which cannot be written as q + (pn- l)(in the sense of the natural order- 
ing on F,,). Thus 
G, = ( 5  E F, : there is an q E F, such that ((\q) 
n F, has exactly' p,- 1 
members). 
G, is still cofinal in wl, and, furthermore, for 5 E G,, 
(5) 
Since H: omits C, we see that whenever x1 < ... < xpn are from X,, 
IX,l > 
if 5 is the Ith element of G,,. 
it is not the case that 8: t Z(t,,(xl ... xp,)). 
So there is a a(u) E C such that 
(6) 
a,. t 1 a[t,(x, ... xp,)]. 
Remember that C is countable, so (6) represents a partition of [Xc]pn into 
a countable number of pieces. Since ( 5 )  holds, we may use Theorem 7.2.1 
to find a subset Y, t X ,  such that 
(7) 
I Y,l > 
if 
is the Ith element of G,,, 
and 
(8) there is a a E C, call it a,, such that 
8: t i 
ac[t,,(xl ... xp,)] whenever x1 < ... < xp, are from Y,. 
(7) and (8), of course, hold for each ( E G,,. Since 1G.l 
= w1 and 
l{oc : 5 E G,}I = w, we see that by (S), 
(9) there is a formula cr E C, call it on, and a cofinal subset F,, 
of G, 
such that for each 5 E F,, 1, 
C i 
crn[t,,(xl ... xp,)], where x1 < ... < xp, are from Ye. 
Since F,,, c G,, it follows easily from (7) that 

514 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
('0) 
iY,l =- a1 if 5 is the Ith element of F,,,, . 
Since each Y, c X,, we see that (9) and (10) show that the formulas ao, ..., 
a,, the set F,,, 1, and the sequence Y,, < E F,,, 1, satisfy the conclusions of 
(4). If pn = 0, then t, is the interpretation of a constant element in each 
a:, 
5 E F,,. From this we can easily find a cofinal subset F,, 
c F, such that 
(9) holds. So (4) is proved. 
We now take the sequence of formulas in (2) simply as the sequence of 
formulas given to us by (4). The consistency of the set (3) now follows 
easily by compactness. For suppose A is any finite subset of the set (3). 
It will contain some term t,, for a highest n. Now take any 5 E F,, 
Since 
X, is an infinite subset of A,, the model 
is more than adequate to show 
the consistency of A. 
Finally, let a be any infinite cardinal, and let 2" be the language 
9* 
u {c, : ( < a} with new constant symbols c,, ( < a. Let T' be the set 
of sentences of 9' given by: 
the set T*; 
all sentences i 
a,,(t,,(c,l ... c,,.)) with t, < ... < tp, < a; 
all sentences i 
(cc = c,) with t < q < a. 
Then a simple argument using the consistency of (3) shows that T' is 
consistent. Let 23' = (B', ...) be any model of T', and let C be the set of 
all interpretations of c,, 5 < a, in 23'. Let 23 be the model for 9 
(the 
original language) obtained from the Skolem hull @(C) of the set C in 23'. 
Several facts are evident. Since ICl = a and 9* 
is countable, the model 23 
has power exactly a. 23 is an elementary submodel of 23' (in the sense of Y), 
whence 23 is a model of T. We now prove that %3 omits Z. Each element 
b E B is obtained from the set C by applying a (Skolem) term t,, to a sequence 
xl, ..., xpm from C. We may suppose that b = t,,(xl ... x,.) and x,, ..., xPm 
are interpretations of ccl, ..., ctpn, with tl < ... < tPn < a. From the 
definition of T', we see that 
The idea behind the proof of Theorem 7.2.2, once understood, is quite 
simple. We shall now amplify the basic idea in a number of remarks. The 
reader is asked to check these remarks in the exercises. 
The first remark is that Theorem 7.2.2 remains true if the set of formulas 
Z(u) is replaced by a set of formulas Z(v, ... u,) in the variables v l ,  ..., v,. 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY'S THEOREM 
515 
The required changes in the proof are minimal. We simply replace the 
sequence 
t,,t,, ..., t,, ..., 
n e w  
of all terms of 9* 
by a sequence enumerating all m-tuples of terms of 9*. 
Thevariables occurring in an m-tuple of terms may be ordered in an 
arbitrary fashion. From this point on, the proof may be repeated almost 
word for word. 
Secondly, we could have easily required that the constants c,, occurring 
in (3) be indiscernible in the sense of Section 3.3. To do this would only 
require one or two additional steps and will not complicate the proof very 
much. Thus the conclusion of Theorem 7.2.2 can be strengthened by saying 
that in each infinite power a, T has a model of power a which omits C and 
has a set of o! indiscernibles. 
The third remark is that in Theorem 7.2.2, we may replace the single set 
of formulas Z by any countable set S of sets of formulas of 9. 
If we specify 
that 2l omits S is to mean that 2l omits C for each C E S, then Theorem 7.2.2 
can be reworded, with S replacing C. The sets of formulas in S may be in 
different numbers of free variables. The truth of this remark depends on the 
fact that S is countable and that the proof of condition (4) in Theorem 
7.2.2 involves only a finite induction. 
What happens to Theorem 7.2.2 when 9 
is no longer countable, or when 
9 
is replaced by languages broader than the ordinary first-order language, 
will be touched upon in the exercises. There is, however, one case of the 
nonclassical languages which deserves to be pointed out here. Suppose that 
Y is a countable language which has among its symbols a unary relation _w 
and constants 0, A, ..., tj, ..., n E w. An w-model is a model '3 for 3, in 
which g is interpreted by w and each _n by n. 
COROLLARY 
7.2.3. Let T be a theory of 9. 
Suppose that for each cardinal 
a<, 5 < wl, T has an w-model of power greater than 3<. Then T has an 
o-model in each infinite power. 
The proof of Corollary 7.2.3 is immediate when we consider the set of 
formulas 
C = { g ( u ) ,  u f 0, ..., u f n, ...}. 
If we introduce the ordering relation < on w into an o-model and require 
that < be standard, then we obtain the notion of an w-standard model. 
For w-standard models, Corollary 7.2.3 can be improved if T is a single 
sentence. (See Exercise 7.2.7.) 

516 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
Before we go on to exploit the idea of Theorem 7.2.2 in an application 
on two-cardinal theorems, we give two counterexamples in the next two 
propositions. The first example shows that Theorem 7.2.2 cannot be im- 
proved, and the second example shows that the exact analogue of Theorem 
7.2.2 for languages with a symbols, where a 2 o and cf ( a )  > o, 
will fail. 
Thus Theorem 7.2.2 is false if we replace o, 
w1 by o,, 
w2 everywhere. 
PROPOSITION 
7.2.4. Let 5 be an infinite ordinal. Then there are a language 9 
with 151 symbols, and Z and T of 9 
such that T has a model of power at 
omitting Z but has no model of power exceeding 
omitting Z. 
PROOF. This proof is a generalization of the idea behind Proposition 
3.2.1 1 (iii). Let 9 
contain the following symbols: 
constant symbols c, for I < 5 ;  
two binary relation symbols < and P, and a unary symbol LI; 
a 3-placed relation symbol Q. 
Let Z(u) be the following set of formulas: 
C = V(U) u {u f CA : A < C}. 
Let T be a set of sentences of 9 
which expresses the following: 
(i). C, < c,, if I < p < 5 ;  U(CJ if I < 5; 
(ii). < is a simple ordering relation on U 
(for convenience, let P, denote the set { y  : P(xy)}); 
(iii). P, c Py if x < y ;  
(iv). Pco is the set { x  : x < c,}; 
(v). PCc is the universe of the model; 
(vi). if x E S and x has no immediate predecessor, then P, = uY<,Py; 
(vii). if x E S and x has an immediate predecessor y ,  then 
W ) [ P ( x u )  
A P(xu) A u f 
--t ( ~ ~ ) ( P ( Y w )  
A 1 (Q(Y.U) - 
Q(ywo)))I. 
Note that except for the infinite number of sentences of condition (i), 
the rest of the sentences of T, namely (ii)-(vii), can be put in a single sentence. 
Let '2l now be any model of T omitting C. This means that the interpretation 
of < on 91 is isomorphic to the natural < relation on the ordinal 5+ 1. 
Using conditions (iv)-(vii), we can prove by induction on 1 < p that 
Ithe interpretation of Pc, in 
< 3,. 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY’S THEOREM 
517 
From this and (v) we see that 1.41 6 at. By interpreting cg. by 5 and fg.+, 
by S(Ps), we can obtain a model 9I of T such that ‘!I has cardinal exactly 
3: and \)I omits z(11). 
-I 
The ideas of Proposition 7.2.4 can be sharpened and refined to obtain 
the following: 
PROPOSITION 
7.2.5. Let r be an infinite cardinal sirch that cf(r) > w. Then 
there is a language 9 
with r sjwibols. and 1, 
T of Y such that T has a niodel 
of power am+ oniitting 1, 
birt has no niodd of power greater than ZZ+ oniitting 
z. 
PROOF (in outline). Let Y’ contain at least the symbols ci, 1. < r, U, 
and a binary <. As before, let 
z = U ( r )  u ( I ‘  f cj. : E. < 2). 
Before describing T in detail, we let T have at least the sentences 
(i). cA < cr if‘ i. < p < a ; U(c,) if i. < or; 
(ii). < is a simple ordering relation on U .  
Thus any model \2I of T which omits Z will contain the standard ordering 
c on u. To complete the description of T, we first assert that the following 
ideas are expressible i n 9  (with the addition of a number of finitary relation 
symbols): 
q l ( r )  : r is a simple ordering relation on a; 
cp,(r) : r is a well ordering relation on a. 
Let R denote the collection of those r such that (p2(r), 
R is well ordered by the initial segment relation; 
to each r E R there corresponds a subset P,; 
the sets P,, r E R, satisfy conditions (vi) and (vii) of Proposition 7.2.4. 
All of these, except for cp,(r), aie routine, and we ask the reader to provide 
a proof of Proposition 7.2.5 in [Exercise 7.2.9. To show that (p2(r) is 
expressible in 9, 
we need to know the following special fact depending 
very much on cf(u) > w and a being a cardinal: 
r is a well ordering of a iff r restricted to any I c a is order isomorphic 
to some ordinal p c u. 
This should be enough of a hint. 4 

518 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
We now turn our attention to some more results for the two-cardinal 
problem, first introduced in Section 3.2. Recall that if a 2 j 2 w, then 
a theory Tis said to admit the pair (a, p) iff T has a model % = (A, V, ...), 
where IAl = a and IVI = p. We remind the reader that, apart from the 
collection of results in Section 3.2 (in particular, Proposition 3.2. I I ,  Theorem 
3.2.12, Theorem 3.2.14, and some exercises), we have also dealt with the 
two-cardinal problem in Section 4.3 (in particular, Theorem 4.3.10 and 
Corollary 4.3.11) and in Section 6.5 (Theorem 6.5.11). The idea behind 
Theorem 7.2.2 is used to prove the following theorem of Vaught; the proof 
is essentially due to Morley. 
THEOREM 
7.2.6. Suppose 9' is a countable language, T is a theory of 9, 
and for each n E w, T admits some pair (>,,(y,), 
y,,) of infinite cardinals. Then 
T admits every pair of irlfinite cardinals (a, j). 
PROOF. 
For each n, let Y, = (A,,, V,,, <,,, ...) be a model of T such that 
1A.I > 3,,(lV,,l); we may assume that <, is an ordering of A,,. As in the 
proof of Theorem 7.2.2, we first consider the expansion Y* 
of 9 
with 
built-in Skolem functions, and the corresponding expansions 
of a,,. 
2* is still countable, so it has only a countable number of terms. For later 
purposes, we shall consider all terms t(x, ... x,,; y I  ... y,) of 9* 
with the 
(distinct) variables x l r  ..., x,, and y , ,  ..., ym. Each term t(u, ... u,) of 9'* 
can, of course, be considered as many terms when we separate v,, ..., v, 
into two sets of variables. Nevertheless, 9'* will only have a countable 
number of such terms, and we shall arrange them in the sequence 
to, I , ,  ..., t,, ..., 
n E w. 
We assume that t,, is in terms of the variables x , ,  ..., xq, and y , ,  ..., ypn. 
Consider the language 2* 
u {el, c2, ...}, and the set 
of sentences 
consisting of 
ci f cj if i < j; 
the sentences of the Skolem expansion T* of T; 
the sentences which express that U is infinite; 
all sentences of the following form: 
n,,(Ci, ... Cipn; C j r  ... C j p )  = ( V X ,  ... X q n ) [ u ( X I ) A  ... A u(X,,) 
A X 1  < ... < Xq,A u(t,,(X, ... X q n ;  Ci, ... Ci,)) 
-+ f , ( X I  ... xq"; Cil ... ci ) = f , , ( X 1  ... xq,; c j ,  ... CjPJ 
Pn 
where n E o, 
and i, < ... < i,, < w, jl < ... < jp, < o. 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY'S THEOREM 
519 
We wish to show first that 
( 1 )  
T is consistent. 
This is shown by an induction on the following (we have assumed that each 
A, is ordered by <,): 
(2) There are an infinite subset F, c w, and a sequence X ,  c A,,,, m E F,,, 
such that for each m E F, we have: 
(i). IX,l > af(l V,I) if m is the Ith element of F,; 
(ii). for all k -= n and all u, < ... < upk and w ,  < ... < wPk from X,, 
3; k CTk[UI ... U p k ;  w ,  ... W P k ] .  
For n = 0, (2) holds trivially, with F, = w, and X, = A, for all m E F,. 
Assume (2) holds for n. Consider the term t,(x, ... xqn; y,, ... y,"); for 
simplicity, and without loss of generality, let us only consider the case 
where q, and p,, are both nonzero. Let 
F,, , = F,, \ the first p ,  elements of F,. 
Clearly, F,, , is an infinite subset of w, and 
(3) 
IX,l > ~l+pn(lVml) 
if m is the Ith element of F,,, . 
We now partition [X,]"", for m E F,+ ,, into 2'"'"l classes as follows: We say 
that 11, < ... < up, and w ,  < ... < w,, from X ,  are equivalent iff 
a: 
k CTn[UI ... up,,; w ,  ... w,,]. 
It is clear that this is indeed an equivalence relation. Furthermore, the 
equivalence class of any sequence u, < ... < up. is determined by a mapping 
f of the q,-tuples of V, into V, u {a,,,}, where a, is some arbitrary but 
fixed element of A ,  \ V,; i.e., the mapping is given by 
... xq,; I / ,  ... up,,] if this element is in V,; 
otherwise. 
f ( u ,  ... up,) = ($1 
From this, we see that the total number of equivalence classes on X ,  is 
at most 2Iym1. 
Whence, by (3) and Theorem 7.2.1, if m is the Ith element of 
(4) there is a subset Y, c X ,  such that I Y,l > af(l ?',,,I) 
and all members 
The set F,,, and the sequence Y,,, m E F,,, , satisfy the conclusions of 
(2) for n+l. So (2) holds for all n. Since each V, is infinite, we see that, 
by (2), a simple compactness argument proves (1). 
Fn+ 1 9 
of [ YmIPn are equivalent. 

520 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
Let now a > p be infinite cardinals. Considerthelanguage -Y*u 
{cs :< < a }  
and a set T’ of this language by imitating the definition of T, replacing, 
of course, i, < ... < i,, < w by 4 ,  < ... < <,, 
< a, etc. T’ is clearly 
consistent. Hence it has an (a, a)-model. Call this model % = ( B ,  V, ...). 
Let X be any subset of V of power p, and let Y be X union the set of inter- 
pretations of all cs, < < a, in ‘23. Y has power u. We claim that 
(5) the Skolem hull of Y in 23 with respect to the language2’* is an 
(a, p)-model of T. 
Let A be the Skolem hull of Y in 9. 
It is clear that A determines a model 
for 2’ which is a model of T of power a. It only remains to show that 
IA n VI = p. Suppose that a €  A n V. Then either (i) a €  X, or else (ii) 
for some n E w ,  5 ,  < ... < 5, < a, and x, < ... < xq, from X, we have 
a = t,[x, ... xqn; dt ,... d J .  
By our choice of T‘ and 58 we can never get more than a countable number 
of elements a €  A n V by (ii). Whence fi = 1x1 < IA n VI 6 p. Thus 
2l = ( A ,  A n V, ...) is an (a, P)-model of T and the theorem is proved. i 
For our next and last theorem of this section we shall not use the method 
originating with Theorem 7.2.1, but shall return to the method of saturated 
models introduced in Section 5.1. 
THEOREM 
7.2.7 (Chang’s Two-Cardinal Theorem). Let 2’ be a countable 
language and let T be a theory of 9. 
Assume the generalized continuum 
hypothesis. Suppose that T admits a pair (a, /I), 
with a > 
2 w. Then T 
admits every pair (S+ , S), where 6 is a regular infinite cardinal. 
PROOF. First note that the theorem for the case 6 = w is already known, 
namely Theorem 3.2.12, and, in fact, its proof does not require the GCH. 
Henceforth, let us assume that 6 is a regular cardinal greater than w .  Let 
3 = ( A ,  V, ...) be a model of T such that IAl = a and IVI = p. Let R 
be a new binary relation over V and such that R indexes all the finite subsets 
of V ;  this is possible because V is an infinite set. Thus we have: 
(1) for any u l ,  ..., u, E V, there exists u E V such that 
(3, R )  C (Vt)(U(t) -, (P(ut) C, t = u1 v ... v t = u,)). 
(P is a new binary relation symbol whose interpretation is R.) By the 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY’S THEOREM 
52 1 
downward Lowenheim-Skolem theorem applied to the language 9 
u {P}, 
and the model (8, R), there exists an elementary submodel (B, V, R, ...) 
of (8, R )  such that V c B and JBI = p. Let Q be a new 1-placed relation 
symbol, and consider the model 
(8, B, R )  = ( A ,  B, V, R, ...) 
for 9’ 
u {P, Q } .  Let T‘ be the theory of the model (8, B, R). Note that T‘ 
contains all closures of formulas of the form (by (1)) 
(2) u(Zl)A ... A u ( Z n ) A  ‘p(Z,X, ... X,) 
A ... A Cp(ZnXl ... X,) -+ 
+ ( ~ Y ) ( ~ ( Y z , )  
A ... AP(Yz~) 
A (Vt)(P(yt) 
-+ c~(tx, 
* - *  xm))), 
where rp is an arbitrary formula of 9 
u {P, 
Q}. By Proposition 5.1.5 (i), 
T’ has a saturated model 
0 0 ,  
B,, V,, R,, ... ) 
of power 6. Since both B and V are infinite, it follows easily that 
]Ao( = lBol = IV,l = 6. Furthermore, there are enough sentences in the 
theory T‘ to ensure that the model generated by the set B, in the model 
( A , ,  B, , V, , R, , .. .) has universe B,; in fact, let it be denoted by 
80 
= (Bo, 
V07 Ro, 
. a * > *  
B, is a proper elementary submodel (in the language 9 
u {P}) of the model 
80 = ( A , ,  Vo, Ro, .-.>. 
It is obvious that both B, and 8, are saturated models of power 6. Since 
they are also equivalent, by the uniqueness of saturated models, Theorem 
5.1.13, they are isomorphic. Because B, is a proper subset of A,, and 
because the interpretations of U and P in B, and 8, are identical, we see 
that the following is true: 
(3) If ‘ZI’ = (A’, V‘, R‘, ...) is any model for 9 u  
{P}, which is elementarily 
embeddable into 910 by an isomorphism which maps the set V’ onto the 
set V,, then 8’ has a proper elementaryextension9l” = (A”, V”, R”, ... ) 
such that 
V” = V’, 
R“ = R‘, a” 
8,. 
The point of (3) is that in going from 8’ to 8”, we do not increase the set 
V‘ nor the relation R‘, but we do add at least one element that is in A” \A’. 
We shall now define by transfinite induction an elementary chain of models 
’& = ( A , ,  Vo, Ro, ...) 4 ... < aV = ( A v ,  V,, Ro, ...) < ..., 
v < 6+, 

522 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
satisfying the following: for every v < 6+, 
(4) if 5 < q < v, then '21, z '21, and 91, is a proper elementary submodel 
of '21,; 
furthermore, the interpretations of P and U on '21< and 91, are 
the same. 
Let p be an ordinal such that 0 < p < 6'. Assume that the models ?Iv, 
v < p, have been found such that (4) holds for all v < p. If p = v f l ,  
then by (3), we can easily extend the elementary chain by finding a model 
'21, = (A,,, Yo, R,, ...) such that 
N,, r a, and 9I,, is a proper elementary extension of 2lV. 
Hence (4) holds with v replaced by p. So far, as the reader can see, the proof 
follows the idea of Theorem 3.2.12. It is in the limit case that the difficulty 
occurs. 
Suppose that p is a limit ordinal. Let a' = ut;<,'21?l,. 
Thus '21' = 
( A ' ,  V,, R,, ...), where A' = U S < , , A t .  Sincep < 6', we see that IA'I = 6, 
and that A' is a proper elementary extension of each '21<, 5 < p. Thus 
a' = PI,, We shall show in the next few paragraphs that 
(5) a' is elementarily embeddable into a, in such a way that the set V, 
is mapped onto itself. 
The proof of (5) is by a back and forth argument, which should be quite 
familiar to the student by now. Since the model !210 is saturated, there will 
never be any difficulty in finding the value of the correspondence in the set 
A,. Observe that the model '21' is not necessarily saturated. Thus in order 
to prove (5), we need to show that: 
(6) the model '21' is V,-saturated, i.e., for all A < 6 and all u E 'A', the 
model (a', u) realizes every type C(u) over it which contains the 
formula U(u). 
To prove (6), let A, a, C be as in the above. Since C is a type of (gl', u) 
containing the formula U(u), 
(7) Z is finitely satisfiable in (a', a) by elements of Yo. 
We simply have to prove that Z is simultaneously satisfiable in (W, 
u). 
Let s be a finite subset of Z, and let 
adv) = ( A .(u))* 
U(0). 
O E S  

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY'S THEOREM 
523 
By (7), we know that for every s E S,(C), 
(a', a)  (3v)a,(v). 
The formula 6, will contain a finite number of constants cC1, ..., cSn, for 
the elements a,,, ..., ucn of a, with ti < A. Hence we may write (the 
ael, ..., at,. of course, depend on s) 
%' k (3u)a,(uat, ... Us."). 
Now the formula o,(uu1u2 ... v,) is a formula of 9 
u'{P]. The elements 
as.,, ..., atn all occur in the set A', whence, for some ordinal, say Y, < ,u, 
we have 
Since 91v, < a', we have 
.-.) as.,, E Avs. 
UVs 
t (3u)a,(uac, ... acn). 
UV, 
%(Us as., . . * as.,). 
Let us E V, be an element such that 
Suppose s' is another finite subset of C such that s c s'. Then we see easily 
that us. E V, and us, E A , ,  and 
av, 
I. b , ( U S .  at1 ... at,). 
r,(U) = { ~ ( u u , . )  : s c s r  E s,(~)j 
Now for a fixed s E S,(C), consider the set of conditions 
" {(Vt)(P(Ut> + as(% 
1 . .  at,))}. 
Since 111 < 6, we see easily that this set of conditions involves less than S 
elements from 91vs. Furthermore, by the observation of (2), this set of 
conditions is finitely satisfiable in 91vs. Since 21v, is saturated, the set of 
conditions rs(u) 
is simultaneously satisfiable in 9lVs by an element, say, 
w, E Vo. So, in particular, we may select for each s E SJC) 
an element 
w, E Vo such that 
(8) 
94vs I= ( W p ( w s t )  -+ 4 t a t 1  .*. a<.)>, 
and 
(9) 
Consider now the set of conditions 
$?Ivs 
t P(wsus.), for all s' such that s c s' E S,(C). 
p ( u )  = (P(wsv) : s E S,(C)}. 

524 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
Notice that Id1 < 6 and all elements w, E V,; hence they all belong to A,. 
Given w,,, ..., w,,, and letting s = s1 u ... u s,, we see that, from (9), 
%, k p(Wslus)A ...Ap(ws,us), 
and thus 
80 
k P ( W s l U S ) " . . . A P ( W , , U s ) .  
So the set of conditions d(u) is finitely satisfiable in go. Since a, is saturated, 
d(u) is satisfiable in '$lo 
by an element, say, u. By (8), we see that 
k as(uac, ... at,) for all 
s E S,(Z). 
This implies immediately that 
(a', a) k C(u). 
So (6) is proved. We leave the straightforward proof of ( 5 )  from (6) to 
the reader as an exercise. Once we have (5), then it is trivial to find a model 
fl,, = (A,,, V,, R,, ...) such that (4) holds with v replaced by p. The 
induction is now complete. The model uv<d+!21v 
is now a (a+, 6) model 
of T (ignoring the superfluous relation R,). -I 
As the reader can see, this proof leans heavily on the existence of saturated 
models, and hence on the GCH. If 6 happens to be inaccessible, then, of 
course, we may apply Proposition 5.1.5 (ii) and avoid the GCH. 
At this point we would like to discuss the current status of two-cardinal 
problems and other associated problems. The reader will see that two- 
cardinal problems in model theory are intimately tied to various problems 
in set theory. 
The so-called gap n conjecture can be stated as follows (assuming the 
language 9 is countable): every theory T of 2' which admits some pair 
(K,(a), a), a > o, 
admits every pair (K,(B), S), fi 2 o. 
The gap n conjecture 
for n 2 2 easily implies a weak form of the GCH which is known to be 
unprovable in ZFC (see Exercise 7.2.32). 
Jensen has proved the following (unpublished) theorem. 
7.2.8. The axiom of constructibility implies the gap n conjecture for all 
n < o. 
This result shows that the gap n conjecture is consistent and improves 
some earlier consistency results of Silver (1971). 
Before proving the above Theorem 7.2.8, Jensen obtained the weaker 
result that the gap 1 conjecture follows from the axiom of constructibility. 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEYS THEOREM 
525 
Theorem 7.2.7 above shows that the gap 1 conjecture, where /3 is a regular 
cardinal, follows from the GCH. It is still an open question whether the 
gap 1 conjecture, where /3 is singular, can be proved from the GCH. 
The gap 1 conjecture is related to the problem of the existence of 
special Aronsajn trees in set theory. The notion of a tree over a set X 
was defined in the proof of Theorem 4.2.23. 
DEFINITION 
7.2.9. Let a be an infinite cardinal. An a-Aronszajn tree is a 
tree over the set a which has order a, fewer than a elements of each 
order, and no branch of order a. a has the tree property if there is no 
a -Aronszajn tree. 
A special a+-Aronszajn tree is an a'-Aronszajn tree T which has a 
function f :a++ a such that whenever x T y and x # y ,  f ( x )  # f ( y ) .  
Exercise 4.2.21 showed that an inaccessible cardinal has the tree 
property if and only if it is weakly compact. The following result on 
successors of regular cardinals is due to Aronszajn and Specker. 
7.2.10. (i). There is a special w,-Aronszajn tree. 
(ii). (GCH) For every regular a, there is a special a'-Aronszajn tree. 
It follows that o, does not have the tree property, and under the 
GCH, no successor of a regular cardinal has the tree property. The 
connection between special Aronszajn trees and the gap 1 conjecture is 
given by the following fact which was observed independently by Row- 
bottom and Silver. 
7.2.11. There is a sentence u in a finite language 9 
such that for all 
infinite cardinals a, u admits (a +, a )  if and only if there exists a special 
a '-Aronszajn tree. 
PROOF. Let 2'= { U, T ,  <, r, f ,  g, h }  where U is a unary relation, T and 
s are binary relations, r and f are unary functions, and g and h are 
binary functions. Let u be a sentence of 3 which says the following: 
T is a strict tree, that is, a strict partial order which is a strict linear 
order below each element. 
< is a strict linear order. 
U is an initial segment for <: (3x)(Vy)[ U( y )  - 
y < x]. 

526 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
r acts like the tree order function: 
x 2- Y + 4x1 < r ( y ) ;  
(Vz)(3x)r(x) = z; 
z < r ( y ) + ( 3 x ) [ x T y r \  r(x)=z]. 
f acts like the function for a special Aronszajn tree: 
(VX) U( fW; 
x T Y +fG) 
+ f ( Y ) .  
For each x ,  { y : y < x }  has power at most I UI (using g ) .  
For each x ,  { y : r( y )  = x }  has power at most I UI (using h). 
Each special a +-Aronszajn tree T with the function fcan be made into 
a model of u of type ( a  +, a )  where U is a, < is the usual order on a +, 
and r(x) is the order of x .  On the other hand, given a model of u of type 
(a+, a ) ,  we can build a special a+-Aronszajn tree by choosing a subset S 
of the universe which has order type a+ with respect to <, and 
restricting T to r-'(S). The sentence u guarantees that the tree has order 
a + and at most a elements of each order. There is no branch of order a + 
because f maps each branch one to one into the set U of power a. -1 
By 7.2.10, the sentence uof 7.2.11 admits ( w , ,  0). By 7.2.11, if every 
sentence which admits (w,, w )  admits (a+, 
a), then there exists a special 
a+-Aronszajn tree. Thus the full gap 1 conjecture implies that there 
exists a special a+-Aronszajn tree for every a, and hence no successor 
cardinal has the tree property. By 7.2.8, the axiom of constructibility 
implies that a cardinal has the tree property if and only if it is weakly 
compact. 
On the other hand, Mitchell, Silver, and Shelah respectively have 
proved the following consistency results relative to large cardinals. 
Mahlo numbers are defined in Exercise 4.2.12, where it is stated that 
every uncountable weakly compact cardinal is Mahlo, and every Mahlo 
number is inaccessible. The notion of a supercompact cardinal is stronger 
than a strongly compact cardinal, and can be found in Kanamori, 
Reinhardt, and Solovay (1978). 
7.2.12. (i). ZFC + [There is a Mahlo number] is consistent if and only if 
ZFC + [There are no special w,-Aronszajn trees] is consistent. 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEYS THEOREM 
527 
(ii). ZFC + [There is a weakly compact cardinal > w] is consistent if 
(iii). If ZFC + [There is a supercompact cardinal] is consistent, then so 
and only if ZFC + [ w2 has the tree property] is consistent. 
is ZFC + GCH + [There are no special w, + -Aronszajn trees]. 
By (i), if ZFC + [There is a Mahlo number] is consistent, then there is 
a model of ZFC in which the sentence CT admits ( w l ,  w )  but does not 
admit (w2, w , ) .  This shows that the assumption GCH is necessary in 
Theorem 7.2.7. 
By (iii), if ZFC + [There is a supercompact cardinal] is consistent, 
then there is a model of ZFC + GCH in which the sentence (+ admits 
(a +, a )  for all regular a but does not admit ( w , + ~ ,  w,). Thus the full gap 
1 conjecture cannot even be proved from the GCH. 
Turning now to the gap 2 conjecture, the related set-theoretical problem 
turns out to involve the existence of Kurepa families or trees. We say that 
a 2 w has the property K ,  , K,(c1), iff there is a (Kurepa) family F of 
subsets of r +  such that IF1 = a++ and for every 4 < c1+, 
I { X n < : X E F } J  < a. 
We say that c1 2 w has the property K 2 ,  K,(a), 
iff there is a (Kurepa) tree 
T o n  a+ of height a+ having at most a elements at each level and at least 
a++ branches of length r'. (See also Exercise 4.3.17.) It is again easy to 
see that: 
7.2.13. There is a sentence B in a suitable language sirch that for all infinite 
cardinals a, u adinits (a+ +, u )  if and only if K ,  ( a )  and also if and only if 
K2(a). 
Thus the gap 2 conjecture would imply a transfer principle for Kurepa 
families or trees. The property K,(w) (or K,(w)) is known as the Kurepa 
hypothesis. It was known that (a result of LCvy and Rowbottom, later 
improved by Stewart): 
If ZFC is consistent, then so is ZFC + GCH + K 2 ( o ) .  
This result has been further improved by Solovay as follows, where 
V =  L denotes the axiom of constructibility. 
7.2.14. ZFC + V =  L 1 [&(a) for every infinite cardinal a]. 

528 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
Concerning the negation of the Kurepa hypothesis, Silver and Solovay 
proved that 
ZFC + i K , ( w )  is consistent 
if and only if 
ZFC + [there exists an uncountable inaccessible cardinal] 
is consistent. 
in ZFC + GCH. He has shown the following: 
By a result of Silver, we can never hope to prove the gap 2 conjecture 
7.2.15. If 
ZFC + [there are two uncountable inaccessible cardinals] 
is consistent, then so is each of the following: 
(a). ZFC+ GCH + K 2 ( 0 1 ) +  i K , ( w ) ;  
(b). ZFC + GCH + K2(w) + i K 2 ( 0 1 ) ;  
(c). ZFC + GCH + K2(01) 
+ iKz(ws); 
(d). ZFC + GCH + K2(w5) + iKz(wl). 
These results together with 7.2.13 show that we can never hope to prove 
certain instances of the gap 2 conjecture. For example, from 7.2. I5(a) and 
7.2.13 we can never prove that whenever a theory T has an (w3, wl) model, 
then it has an (w2, w )  model. 
A conjecture related to the gap 1 conjecture, known as Chang’s conjec- 
ture, will be discussed in the next Section 7.3, where again we see that set 
theory plays a dominant role. 
EXERCISES 
7.2.1. Prove that Theorem 7.2.2 remains true if the type Z(u) is replaced 
by a type 2:(0, ... v,) in the variables vl, ..., L’ ,,,. 
7.2.2. Strengthen the conclusion of Theorem 7.2.2 by requiring that the 
models of T of arbitrary infinite powers omitting 2: be generated from 
indiscerni bles. 
7.2.3. Prove that Theorem 7.2.2 remains true if the type Z is replaced by a 
countable set S of types. 
7.2.4*. Let 2’ 
have cc 2 w symbols and let C be a type of 9. 
Prove, by 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY'S THEOREM 
529 
using the ideas of Theorem 7.2.2, that if for each 5 < (2")+, T has a model 
of power exceeding at omitting C, then T has models in arbitrarily large 
infinite powers omitting C. Also, T has a model which omits C and has an 
infinite set of indiscernibles. 
7.2.5*. Show that Exercise 7.2.4 remains true if C is replaced by an arbitrary 
set S of types of 9. 
Thus S may have as many as 2' types of 2'. Show 
also by means of counterexamples, like Proposition 7.2.4, that a(2.,+ is 
the least cardinal enjoying this property. 
[Hint: Let 9 
contain the 2-placed relation symbols < and E, and 
constants ct, 5 < a. Let p be an ordinal less than (2')+, and let W be a 
well ordering of S(a) of type p. For X, Y c a, let 
Z ~ y ( u o u I )  
= { C ; E U o  : 5 EX} u {1 C e E U ,  : < 4 X }  
u {csEtlI : 5 E Y }  u {i 
ccEv, : 5 r$ Y }  u {i 
(u0 < ul)}. 
Let S = {Cxu : W ( X Y ) }  u {(u,, < u1 A c0 f uI A U ,  < u,,)}.] 
7.2.6*. Let 9 have a 2 w symbols and suppose that cf ( a )  = o. Let Z be 
a type of 9. 
Assume the GCH. Prove that if for each 5 < a+, T has a 
model of power exceeding flC omitting C, then T has models in arbitrarily 
large infinite powers omitting C. (Again, C may be replaced by a set S of 
types, with IS1 < a.) 
7.2.7**. Let 9 have a 2 o symbols. Suppose that 9 has at least the 
symbols cl, I < a, and the binary predicate symbol <. A model 9l for 9 
is said to be a-standard iff the interpretation of -= in Pl is precisely the 
natural ordering of 5 < a. Clearly o-standard models are also w-models. 
Let m, be the least ordinal A such that for every sentence rp of 9, 
if rp has 
an a-standard model of power Z1, then rp has arbitrarily large a-standard 
models. Prove the following: 
(i). a < m, < a+ if cf (a) = o (GCH if a > w). 
(ii). a+ < m, < a + +  if cf (a) > o. 
(iii). m, is the first nonrecursive ordinal, i.e., the Church-Kleene wI . 
There are results in the literature relating in, and the notion of a+- 
recursiveness, for a > o. 
7.2.8**. Let T be a complete theory of 2 
and let I: be a type of 2'. We say 
that T and Z characterize an infinite cardinal a iff 
(i). T and Z have at most a symbols; 
(ii). there are models of T omitting C in just those infinite powers fi c a. 
A formula ~ ( u )  
of 2 
is said to be algebraic in Tiff in every model 2l of T 

530 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
there are only a finite number of elements of % satisfying cp. An element 
u of a model 3 of T is said to be algebraic iff u satisfies some algebraic 
formula cp(u) in T. Disprove the following conjecture of Morley: If T is 
complete and T and Z characterize a > o, 
then every model of T contains 
an infinite number of algebraic elements. 
7.2.9. Give a complete proof of Proposition 7.2.5. Make sure that other 
than the sentences of (i), all other requirements on the theory T can be 
expressed by a single sentence of 9. 
7.2.10. Let Z be a set of formulas of a countable language Y 
in the variable 
1). We say that (T, Z) admits the pair (a, p) iff T has a model % such that 
IA( = a and 
I{aEA:9ilrC[a]}l = p .  
Use the technique of Theorems 7.2.2 and 7.2.6 to establish the following: 
If for each 5 < ol, (T, Z) admits some pair (ac(yc), y e )  of infinite cardinals, 
then (T, C) admits all pairs (a, p) of infinite cardinals. 
7.2.11. Find a version of Theorem 7.2.6 for noncountable languages. Do 
the same for Exercise 7.2.10. (See Exercise 7.2.4.) 
7.2.12. Prove that the following property of a set C of sentences is compact: 
Z admits all pairs (a, p) of infinite cardinals a 2 p. That is, prove that C 
admits all pairs (a, p) if and only if every finite subset of Z admits all pairs 
( 4  P). 
7.2.13*. Recall from Section 4.2 (in particular. 4.2.9 and 4.2.10) that 
we have already defined the infinitary language L?,, where a is an infinite 
cardinal. We shall now describe a much more restricted sublanguage of 
Y,, but one which is nevertheless richer than the classical language YU. 
The language Yaw 
is obtained by adding to the rules of formation of 2' 
the following two new rules: the first new rule is already given in 4.2.9, 
namely: 
< a, then A@ is a formula 
If @ is a set of formulas of suU 
of power 
of dPuw. 
The second new rule is: 
If cp is a formula of YUU 
and V is a finite set of variables, then (VV)cp 
is a formula of YUu. 
Notice that L?,, still only has a countable number of individual variables, 
and that any sentence of 9,,, 
will only contain subformulas each having 
only a finite number of free variables. (Why?) 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEY'S THEOREM 
531 
Let a be an infinite cardinal and let 9 
have at most a symbols. Consider 
the language 9u+, 
built up from the symbols of 9. 
We define the Hanf 
number of 9,+, 
to be the least cardinal /3 such that every sentence cp of 
dpu+, having a model of power /3 also has models of arbitrarily high powers. 
We define the Morley number of 9 
to be the least cardinal y such that for 
any type Z (lZl < a) and theory T of 2, if T has a model of power y 
omitting Z, then T has models of arbitrarily high powers omitting C. Prove 
the following: 
(i). The Hanf number of dpu+, exists. 
(ii). For some language 9', 
with II9'II = a, the Hanf number of 
9u+, 
is exactly the Morley number of 9'. 
Hence, by Exercise 7.2.4 and 
Proposition 7.2.4, the Hanf number of 2.+, 
is trapped between au+ and 
(iii). If cf(a) = o and we assume GCH, then the Hanf number of YU+, 
(iv). The Hanf number of dp,,, is a,,. 
(v). If cf(a) > o, 
then the Hanf number of LZu+, is greater than aU+. 
This exercise shows that for these suitably restricted sublanguages of 
zu, 
we can find Had' numbers of these languages of reasonable size. As 
soon as we consider the full language 9=, 
say, even for dp,,, the Hanf 
number of dpm, exists, but is incredibly large. 
7.2.14. Complete the proof of Theorem 7.2.7 by proving statement (5). 
7.2.15. Suppose that 9 
has y 2 o symbols. Show that Theorem 7.2.7 
remains true, without any essential changes in the proof, if we require that 
6 be a regular cardinal greater than y. 
7.2.16*. Suppose that 9 
has y > w symbols, and suppose that y is regular. 
Prove that Exercise 7.2.15 can be strengthened by letting 6 2 y. 
[Hint: Replace all n-placed relations (or functions) in a model for 9 
by an (n+l)-placed relation (or function) which indexes, by means of 
elements of the model, all the n-placed relations (or functions) of the model. 
Thus given any model for 2 
of power at least y ,  we may pass to an 
'equivalent' model of the same power which has only a countable number of 
relations and functions. Next observe that the tower constructed in Theorem 
7.2.7 can be made so that 23 < a,, , where 58 is any model of T' of power 6.1 
7.2.17. Suppose that 9 
has y > w symbols. Assume the GCH. Prove that 
if a theory T admits the pair (a', a), then it admits the pair ( a + + + ,  a++). 
Notice that no assumption is made on the relative sizes of z and y. It is an 
open problem whether T admits the pair (r++, 
a'). 
is exactly aU+. 

532 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.2 
7.2.18". Combine Theorems 7.2.6 and 7.2.7 to obtain the following three- 
cardinal theorem: We say that T admits (a, 
p, y), with LY 2 /? > y, iff T 
has a model 
9f = ( A ,  v,, 
v2, ...) 
such that IAl = a, I V ,  I = 8, I V21 = y. Let 9 
be a countable language and 
let T be a theory of 9. Assume the GCH. Suppose that for each n E o, 
Tadmits a triple (x,+ ,(y), y+, y), y > w. Then Tadmits all triples (a, p+, p), 
with a > p+, p 2 o, 
and p regular. 
7.2.19. Prove that the symmetric version of Exercise 7.2.18 does not hold. 
Namely, there is a theory T which admits (a:, 
am, a0), but does not admit 
(a:, 
z,,, a0) for any 0 -= n < w. 
7.2.20. Prove that the gap 2 conjecture is equivalent to the following 
three-cardinal problem: If T admits (a++, ct', 
a), then T admits all 
(B", 
B+, B), a, B 2 a. 
7.2.21. Suppose that w 6 y, 
< P, 
f a, and T is a theory in a 
countable language which admits (a, p, y). Prove that T admits every triple 
of infinite cardinals (a', 
P', y'), where a' 2 B' 2 y'. (This is a generalization 
of Theorem 7.2.6.) 
7.2.22". Let T be a theory in a countable language. If w ,< y c fl and 
>,(/l) < a and Tadmits (a, p, y), then for any a' 2 p, Tadmits (a', /3", y"). 
7.2.23. Let Tbe a theory in a countable language and Z(u) a set of formulas. 
We say that T admits a pair (a, /?) omitting Z iff T has a model ( A ,  V, ...) 
which omits ,T and where IAl = a, IVI = /?. Prove that if a,, 
< p and 
ZU,(/l) < a and if T admits (a, p) omitting Z, then T admits every pair of 
infinite cardinals (a', p') omitting Z. (Compare with Theorem 7.2.6 and 
Exercise 7.2.21 .) 
7.2.24*. Let T, C be as above. If w 6 y < p and 
< ci and T admits 
( L Y ,  8, y) omitting Z, then for any cardinal a' 2 w I ,  T admits the triple 
(a', w , ,  w )  omitting C. (Compare with Exercise 7.2.18.) 
7.2.25*. State and prove the analogues of Exercises 7.2.21 and 7.2.23 for 
countable sequences of cardinals. 
7.2.26. Show that in each of the exercises 7.2.21-7.2.24 the hypothesis 
can be weakened in a way analogous to Theorem 7.2.6. 
7.2.27'. Prove the assertion 7.2.10. 

7.21 
EXTENSION OF RAMSEYS THEOREM 
533 
7.2.28**. Prove that w ,  does not have the tree property by finding a tree 
as described in 7.2.8 and 7.2.9. Next use Theorem 7.2.7 to cstablish 7.2.9. 
7.2.29*. Prove the assertion 7.2.13. 
7.2.30". Recall that in Section 4.2 we introduced the notion of a weakly 
compact cardinal and the infinitary logic Ta. 
Prove the following theorem: 
Let ct be a weakly compact cardinal and let 91 be a model of the form 
'11 = (R(a), E, R,, R , ,  ...). Then there exist elementary extensions %? = 
( B ,  E, So, S , ,  ...) of 94 of arbitrarily large power such that for all b E B 
and a E R(a), bEa implies b E R(a). (This improves Exercise 4.2.21 (iii).) 
[Ifint: We may assume that '11 has built-in Skolem functions. Let T be 
a theory in the language .A?", with constants c, for each a E R(a) and new 
constants do, d , ,  ..., with the axioms: 
( 1 )  the elementary diagram of a; 
(2) cp(d,,, ... d",) ++ cp(d,, ... d,,,), where no < ... < n,, mo < ... < m,, 
(3) (Vx)(x E c, - 
V b s , , X  = cb) for each a E R(a); 
(4) d,, d,, are ordinals and d,,, < d,, where in < n. 
and cp(u, ... u r )  is a formula in 3' u {ca : a E R(a)}; 
Use Exercise 7.2.4 to show that every subset of T of power < a has a model, 
whence by weak compactness, T has a model. Then form the desired model 
b by replacing do, d , ,  ... by a generating set of indiscernibles of any power.] 
The following related problem is open: Does every model of ZFC which 
has an end elementary extension have arbitrarily large end elementary 
extensions? Far a partial solution, see the next exercise. 
7.2.31**. Prove that every model of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory whose 
ordinals have cofinality w has arbitrarily large elementary extensions in 
which all new ordinals occur after all the old ordinals. 
[Hint: Try it first for models of the axiom of choice, using the Erdos-Rado 
theorem within the model. For the general case, prove a version of the 
Erdos-Rado theorem without the axiom of choice.] 
7.2.32. Show that the gap n conjecture implies the following weak form of 
the GCH: If m < n and there exists an infinite cardinal a such that 
2" = K,,,(a), then 28 = N,,,(/?) for all infinite cardinals 8. In particular, 
the gap 2 conjecture implies that if 2" = a+ for some infinite cardinal a, 
then the GCH holds. 
7.2.33*. Let 9 
be a countable language and let P be a 1-placed relation 
symbol of 9. 
A model 2l = ( A ,  R, ...) for 9 
is a two-cardinal model iff 
IAI > IRI 2 w. A set Z of sentences of 9 
is a set of axioms for two-cardinal 

534 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
models iff B != 1 if and only if B is elementarily equivalent to a two-cardinal 
model. Prove that the following is a set of axioms for two-cardinal models: 
for each n and each finite sequence of formulas qo, ..., qm of 9 in the 
variables xo, . . . , xn, 
(300 VxO 3
~
0
 
zo . * *  Vxn 3
~
n
 
zn)[ A 
~0 # Yi 
A 
A 
( P ( x j )  A xi = zj + Yi = x j )  A A 
( q j ( X 0  
x n )  + ‘P,(YO 
~ n ) ) l -  
OSiSn 
O C i .  jSn 
O S j S m  
7.3. Models of large cardinality 
In this section we shall investigate three closely related problems involving 
models and cardinal numbers. To state the first problem, recall that a model 
of type (a, P )  is a model B = ( A ,  U, ...) such that IAl = a, IUI = P. 
7.3.1. Which pairs of cardinals (a, P )  and (y, 6 )  have the property that every 
model ‘2.l of type (a, 8) for a countable language has an elementary submodel 
We say that Chang’s conjecture holds for the pairs (a, P), (y, 6) iff they 
have the above property. 
Chang’s conjecture is a stronger form of the Lowenheim-Skolem problem 
for pairs of cardinals; if Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, p), (y, 6), then 
every theory which admits (a, a) admits ( y ,  6). Chang’s conjecture is 
interesting only when a > p > 6 and a > y > 6; the other cases are trivial. 
When a > y > fl = 6, Chang’s conjecture is an easy corollary of the 
Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem. The ‘dual’ case, a = y > p > 6, is 
a difficult problem which leads to consistency results in set theory. 
23 of type (7, a)? 
Here is the second problem. 
7.3.2. Which cardinals a have the property that eriery model of power a for 
a countable language has a proper elementary submodel of power x? 
A model 91 for a countable language which does not have any proper 
elementary submodel of power JAl is called a Jdnsson model. Thus the 
problem may be restated: For which cardinals a does there exist no Jbnsson 
model of power a? 
It is not hard to see that if a > fi > S and Chang’s conjecture holds for 
the pairs (a, p), (a, S), then there is no Jbnsson model of power a (Proposi- 
tion 7.3.4). Thus an affirmative answer to problem 7.3.1, with z = y > p >  6, 
implies an affirmative answer to problem 7.3.2. 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
535 
For the third problem, we need the notion of a well ordered model. 
A model '21 = ( A ,  <, ...) is said to be well ordered of type a iff < is a 
well ordering of the set A of order type a. 
7.3.3. Which cardinals a, /?, with /? < a, have the property that every well 
ordered model of type a (for a countable language) has an elementary sub- 
model which is well ordered of type /?? 
This is a Lowenheim-Skolem problem for well ordered models. There 
is a natural similar question for /? > a, which will be dealt with in the 
exercises (cf. Exercise 7.3.34). 
We shall begin with a few elementary negative results concerning these 
three problems. Then we shall proceed to some deeper positive results 
which concern large cardinals, the so-called Ramsey cardinals. In Section 
4.2, we studied large cardinals, the measurable cardinals, with the aid of 
the ultraproduct construction. We now resume the study begun there, but 
this time we shall apply other model-theoretic constructions, especially 
Skolem functions and indiscernible elements. We shall first show that the 
class of Ramsey cardinals lies between the classes of weakly compact 
cardinals and measurable cardinals. Then it will be shown that the three 
questions above have affirmative answers for Ramsey cardinals. In the next 
section, 7.4, the results concerning Ramsey cardinals and the three questions 
7.3.1-7.3.3 will be applied to the notion of a constructible set, and Scott's 
Theorem 4.2.18 (that the axiom of constructibility and the axiom of 
measurability contradict each other) will be vastly improved. The standard 
facts about constructible sets which we shall need will be stated there 
without proofs. 
The following result gives relationships between problems 7.3.1-7.3.3. 
PROPOSITION 
7.3.4. 
(i). If a > /? > y and Chang's conjecture holds for the pairs (a, /?), (a, y), 
then there is no Jbnsson model of pouer a. 
(ii). Chang's conjecture holds for the pairs (z', 
a), (p', p) if and only if 
every well ordered model of type a' 
has an elementary submodel of type /?' 
(for a countable language). 
PROOF. (i). Let 91 be a model of power a (with dp countable). Let U c A 
have power fl, whence (?I, U )  is a model of type (a, p). By Chang's 
conjecture, there is a model (8, 
V )  < (2l, U )  of type (a, y). But then 
V = U n B and V is a proper subset of U, so B is a proper subset of A .  

536 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
Thus B is a proper elementary submodel of W of power a. 
(ii). Assume Chang's conjecture for (a', a), (p', p). Let W = (A, <, ... > 
be well ordered of type a'. Let U be an initial segment of (A, <> of type a. 
Each a E A has at most a predecessors, so there is a binary function 
F : A x A + A such that for each a E A, 
{F(a, 6 )  : b E U }  = { C  E A : c < a}. 
The model (W, U, F) of type (a', a) has an elementary submodel (% V, G )  
of type (p', p). In each of these models the sentence 
(1) 
( V X V Y ) ~  < x + (3z)(U(z) A F(x, z) r)I 
holds. It follows that every element of B has at most I VI = p predecessors. 
Moreover, IBl = p' 
and B < W, so (B, <) is well ordered of type 2 p'. 
Therefore (B, <) has exactly type p'. 
Now assume every well ordered model of type a' 
has an elementary 
submodel of type p'. Let W = (A, U, ...) be of type (a', a). Choose a 
well ordering < of A of type a' 
such that U is an initial segment of type a. 
As before, choose F: A x  A -+ A such that (1) holds in (%, <, F). Let 
('23, <, G )  < (24, <, F) be of type p'. Since U is a proper initial segment of 
(A, <), V is a proper initial segment of (B, <>. But (B, <) has order 
type exactly /If, so I VI < /I. 
However, by ( I )  each element of B has at most 
I VI predecessors, whence I VI = /I. 
Thus 23 is of type (/I+, /I). -I 
From Proposition 3.2.11 (iv) and (v), we see that Chang's conjecture 
fails for all pairs (a,,(a), a), (/?, 6) when p > a,,(6), and (N,,(a), a), (p, 6) 
when /3 > X,,(6), because the corresponding two-cardinal problems fail. 
That is, finite gaps cannot be stretched. Chang's conjecture leads once 
more to the problem of the existence of Kurepa families, which we en- 
countered in the precedingsection. We introduced in Section7.2 the notation 
K,(a) for 'there exists a Kurepa family of subsets of (w". 
It is not hard 
to see that: 
7.3.5. Jf K,(ct), then Cltany's conjectiire fails for (a", 
Y ~ ) ,  
((w', 
Y). 
Thus it follows from 7.2.14 that the axiom of constructibility implies 
that Chang's conjecture fails for all (ct", 
a'), (IX', 2). On the other hand, 
Silver has shown the following: 
7.3.6. IfZFC+'there is a Rarnsey cardinal' is consistent, tlien so is 
ZFCf'Chang's conjecture holds for (w", Q'), (w', w)' 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
537 
Ramsey cardinals are defined just before Proposition 7.3.9. Actually, 
Silver proved the conclusion of 7.3.6 assuming the weaker hypothesis 
that the existence of the cardinal K ( w , )  defined in Exercise 7.3.23 is 
consistent. 
Chang's conjecture for (w3, wr), (w2, w , )  is related to stronger large 
cardinal notions, such as the huge cardinals in Kanamori, Reinhart, and 
Solovay (1978). Laver proved that: 
7.3.6'. For each n < w ,  if ZFC + 'there is a huge cardinal' is consistent, 
then so is ZFC + 'Chang's conjecture holds for ( w , + ~ ,  wntl), 
( % + I ,  
%)'. 
Relative consistency results involving three-cardinal forms of Chang's 
conjecture were obtained by Foreman (1982). 
Results in the other direction can be stated using the notion of an 
inner model of set theory, which is a model of the form ( A ,  E ) where A 
is a transitive proper class. Examples of inner models of ZFC are the 
model ( L ,  E ) of constructible sets (defined in Section 7.3) and the core 
model of Jensen and Dodd (1981). Koepke (1988) used the core model 
to prove: 
7.3.6': Chang's conjecture for (w3, w z ) ,  (w2, w , )  implies that for each 
ordinal a there is an inner model of ZFC whose set of uncountable 
measurable cardinals has order type a. 
Let us now look for cases in which the answer to questions 7.3.2 and 
7.3.3 are negative. To give a negative answer to 7.3.2, we must give an 
example of a Jonsson model of power cx. There are obvious examples of 
J6nsson models of power w :  e.g., the standard model of arithmetic, 
( w ,  +, ., 0), i s  a J6nsson model. The next result gives further examples. 
PROPOSITION 
7.3.7. Assutne tile getieralized contitiuuni hypothesis. Then for 
eiwrji successor corrlinal cx ' , thwc exists a Jhsson model of power a'. 
PROOF. Let the universe sct be A = 2'. 
By the GCH, (cxt)a = 2" = a', 
so the set A has exactly at subsets of power a. Let X,, /I < a', be an 
enumeration of all subsets X c A of power 1x1 = a. Consider any y < u', 
with Q 6 7. Then 171 = r. From Lemma 6.1.6, any collection of a sets of 
power ci can be refined to a collection of Q disjoint sets of power a. That is, 
there are subsets Y, c X,, 
< y ,  such that each lY,l = a and the sets Yp 

538 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
are pairwise disjoint. For each p < y, we may choose a one-one function 
far on Y, onto y. The sets Y,, /3 < y ,  are pairwise disjoint, so the f,,, 
may be 'extended' to a functionfon A x A into A such that 
if p < y < a+ and y E Y,, 
then .f(yy) =fBr(y). 
Let 23 be any submodel of BI of power a+, and let t E A. We wish to prove 
that 5 E B. Take any subset of B of power a, say A',. 
Then there exists 
y E B such that 4 < y and X ,  c y. Since fpy maps Y, onto y, and Y, c X,, 
there exists 9 E A', 
c B such thatf(r]y) =faY(q) = 4. But r] E B and y E B, 
whence 4 E B. -1 
In Exercise 7.3.15 we see that without the GCH it can be proved that 
there exist Jonsson models of power w,, that is, w, is not a Jonsson 
cardinal, for each finite n. Tryba (1984) proved without the GCH that 
for each regular cardinal a there exist J6nsson models of power a+, that 
is, no successor of a regular cardinal is Jonsson. Recently, Shelah proved 
without the GCH that there exists a Jonsson model of power w, + 
His 
proof works for certain other small successors of singular cardinals, but it 
is open whether one can prove in ZFC that no successor cardinal is 
Jonsson. 
Using the core model, Koepke (1988) proved that if there exists a 
Jonsson cardinal wc such that 6 < wc, then for each a there is an inner 
model of ZFC whose set of uncountable measurable cardinals has order 
type a. He also showed that if there exists a singular Jonsson cardinal of 
uncountable cofinality a, then there is an inner model of ZFC with a 
measurable cardinals. 
In the other direction, Prikry (1970) proved that a singular cardinal 
which is the union of a strictly increasing sequence of measurable 
cardinals is a Jonsson cardinal. Devlin (1973) showed that if 
ZFC + [there exists a measurable cardinal > w ]  
is consistent, then so is 
ZFC + [there is no Jonsson model of power 2"]. 
Combining the results of Koepke and Prikry, it follows that for each 
ZFC + 'There is a Jonsson cardinal of cofinality w,' 
n>O. 
is consistent if and only if 
ZFC + 'There are w, measurable cardinals' 
is consistent. 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
539 
The above proposition shows that, assuming the GCH, the Chang 
conjecture fails for (a', p), (u', y )  whenever a+ > p > y. Here are some 
examples for problem 7.3.3. 
PROPOSITION 
7.3.8. Suppose that every theory T for a countable language 
which has a well ordered model of type a has a well ordered model of type p. 
Then: 
(i). Zfa > w, then fi > o. 
(ii). I f  a is singular, then p is singular. 
(iii). If a is a successor cardinal, then so is p. 
(iv). I f  there exists y such that y < a < 2y, then there exists 6 such that 
6 < p < 26. 
PROOF. (i). If a > o, 
then (a, <) is not elementarily equivalent to (w, <>. 
(ii). The theory of all models ( A ,  <, a, F ) ,  where F is a function, with 
(VX3Y)(Y < a A X  < F(Y)), 
has well ordered models of singular types only. 
(iii). The theory of all models ( A ,  <, a, F ) ,  where 
(VxVy)[y < x 3 (3z)(z < a A  F(x, z )  = y)], 
has well ordered models of successor types only. 
(iv). Consider the theory of all models(A, <, a, E )  satisfying 
(VxVy)[x f y + (3z)(z < ar\ i 
(ZEX ++ zEy))]. i 
Let us now define Ramsey cardinals. Recall that the set of all finite 
subsets of X is denoted by S,,,(X), and the set of all subsets of X of power n 
is denoted by [XI". Thus S,(X) = U,,<,[X]". 
An infinite cardinal a is said to be a Ranisey cardinal iff for every set X 
of power a, if 
S,(X) c U Ci and 111 < a, 
is1 
then there are a subset Y c X of power u and elements i, , i2, ... E Zsuch that 
[ Y ] "  c Ci,, 
n = 1,2, ... 
Ramsey cardinals are so named because the partition property defining 
them is suggested by Ranisey's theorem. 

540 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
PROPOSITION 
7.3.9. If u is a Ramsey cardinal, then u > o and u is 
inaccessible. 
PROOF. First let u = o and take X = u. Let C, be the set of all x E S,(X) 
such that 1x1 E x. Let C, = S,(X) \ C,. Consider any infinite subset 
Y t X ,  and write Y = { y o ,  y ,  , ...} in increasing order. Let n = yo. Then 
the sets { jj0, ..., y,- 
and { y , ,  ..., y,} do not both belong to the same 
Ci. 
Thus w is not a Ramsey cardinal. 
Now let u be singular and let /3 = cf(u) < u. Take X = u, and let Z 
be a cofinal subset of u of power B. Then put x E Ci 
iff i is the least element 
of I which is an upper bound of x. Clearly, for any Y c X of power u, 
we cannot even have an i E I such that [Y]' c Ci. 
Finally, let u be a cardinal such that for some y < u, u < 2'. Take 
I = y and let X be a subset of S(y) of power u. For each {a, b} E [XI', 
put {a, b )  E Ci, 
where i is the least element of I which belongs to exactly 
one of a, b. Define Ci 
arbitrarily outside [XI'. Then for any Y c X of 
power IYI 2 3 and any i E I, we cannot have [Y]' c Ci. 
Therefore u is not 
Ramsey. -I 
Ramsey cardinals can also be defined model-theoretically : 
PROPOSITION 
7.3.10. z is a Raiirscji cardi/ial if atid oii!~, if etvrj' niock.1 ?I 
of power u for a countable language has a set o j  indisccririhlcs of poiccr z. 
PROOF. Suppose ct is a Ramsey cardinal. Let I be the set of all sets of 
formulas of 9. 
Since 11Yll = w, 111 = 2", and because Ramsey cardinals 
are inaccessible and > w, 111 < z. Choose any simple ordering < of A .  
Partition S,,,(A) by putting { a I ,  ..., a,) E Ci iff a, < ... < a, and 
i = {cp(t~, ... v,,) : ?( k q [ a ,  ... a,]}. 
Since z is Ramsey, there is a set X c A of power z such that for each 11, 
all increasing n-tuples in (X, <) belong to thc same Ci. 
This means that 
(X, 
<) is a set of indiscernibles in '?(. 
For the converse, let S,,,(z) c UierCi and 111 < a. We may assume 
without loss of generality that Zis a proper initial segment of ( r ,  <). Form 
the model 
?1 = (z, <, I, F , ,  F,, ...), 
where for each n < w, F, is a function on A" into I such that if x, < . . . < x,, 
F,(X, ... x,) = i implies 
{ x l  , ..., x,) E C i .  

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
541 
Then PI has a set ( X ,  <‘) of indiscernibles of power a. Since < is already 
a relation of PI, <‘ must be either < or >, and we may assume that <’ is 
< (restricted to X ) .  Since a is a cardinal, ( X ,  <) has order type x .  
Consider two n-tuples x1 < ... < x, and yl < ... < y, in X. Suppose 
(1) 
F,(x, ... x,) # F,(Yl ... y,). 
Then choose z1 < ... < z, in X such that x, < z1 and y, < z I .  We cannot 
have 
F,(Xl ... x,) = F,(z, ... z,) = F,(yl ... y,), 
F,(x, ... x,) # F,(z, ... z,). 
u‘; < ... -= uf, 
< < a, 
so we may assume 
(2) 
There exists a sequence of n-tuples 
of elements of X such that 
5 < [ < a implies 
11: < u:. 
But by (2) and indiscernibility, 
F,(u$ ... uf), 
t < a, 
are all different elements of I, contradicting 111 < a. This shows that ( I )  
is never the case, and it follows that any two elements of [XI” 
belong to 
the same Ci 
(with i = F,(x, ... x,)). Thus a is a Ramsey cardinal. -I 
We shall now show that Ramsey cardinals are weakly compact. Recall 
that in Section 4.2 we defined a cardinal a to bz weakly compact iff a is 
inaccessible, and in the infinitary language LZa the following weak com- 
pactness theorem holds: If C is a set of sentences of dpa of power ICI = a, 
and if every subset of C of power < a has a model, then C has a model. 
Furthermore, we proved in 4.2 that an inaccessible cardinal u is weakly 
compact iff u has the tree property: For every tree T o n  a of order CL such 
that for all p < u, fewer than a elements have order p, T has a branch of 
order r. We show that Ramsey cardinals have the tree property and hence 
are weakly compact. 
LEMMA 7.3.1 1. Every Ramsey cardinal a has the following property: Every 
simply ordered set ( A ,  L )  of power a has a subset of power a, which is either 
well ordered or inversely well ordered by L. 

542 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
PROOF. We choose any well ordering < of A of type a. We then partition 
[A]’ into two parts as follows: 
{a, b} E C ,  iff 
(a < b iff aLb), 
{a, b} E C, otherwise. 
That is, C ,  contains the pairs on which the two orderings L ,  < coincide. 
We have assumed that a is a Ramsey cardinal, so there is a set X c A 
such that 1x1 = a and either [XI’ c C ,  or [XI’ c C s .  In the former case, 
X is well ordered by L, and in the latter case it is inversely well ordered by 
L. -I 
PROPOSITION 
7.3.12. Every Ramsey cardinal is weakly compact. 
PROOF. Let a be a Ramsey cardinal. We show that a has the tree property. 
Let T be a tree on a of order a such that for all p < a, fewer than a elements 
have order 8. We define a linear ordering xLy on SI which extends the 
ordering T as follows: Let x, y be distinct elements of a. 
Case 1. If xTy, then xLy. 
Case 2. If yTx, then yLx. 
Case 3. Otherwise: both the sets 
{ x ]  u { z  : ZTX and not zTy} = X ,  
{ y }  u { z  : zTy and not ZTX} = Y 
are nonempty sets well ordered by T. Let x‘ E X ,  y’ E Y be the least elements 
of these two sets. Then xLy iff x’ < y’ (as elements of a). 
It is easy to check that L linearly orders a. By Lemma 7.3.1 1, there is a 
set Z c a of power a which is either well ordered or inversely well ordered 
by L. Suppose Z is well ordered by L. We may assume the order type is a 
(otherwise take a subset of Z of order type a). Let 
B = { x  E a : for some y E Z and all z E Z, yLz implies xTz), 
that is, the elements of Z are eventually above x in the tree T. If x E B and 
uTx, then obviously u E B. For each p < a, there is at most one x E B of 
order p, because no element is above two elements of order p in T. On 
the other hand, for each p < a there exists x E B of order p. To see this, 
note that a is inaccessible by Proposition 7.3.9 and there are < a elements 
of order < p, whence Z contains a elements of order > p, so there is an 
xo of order /? such that Z contains a elements above xo in T. Since (2, L )  
has order type a, the elements of Z above xo in T are cofinal in (Z, L ) .  

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
543 
However, if xoTy, xoTz, and yLu, uLz, then from the definition of L it 
follows that xoTu. Therefore the elements of 2 are eventually above xo 
in T, i.e. x, E B. It follows that B is a branch of T of order a. i 
Let us recall from Section 4.2 that a cardinal a is said to be measurable 
iff there exists a nonprincipal a-complete ultrafilter over a. Moreover, 
an ultrafilter D over a is said to be normal iff a > w, D is a-complete and 
nonprincipal, and in the ultrapower n D ( a ,  <), the ath element is the 
equivalence class fD of the identity function$ It was shown in Proposition 
4.2.20 that every measurable cardinal a > o has a normal ultrafilter over a. 
THEOREM 
7.3.13. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal and let D 
be a normal ultrajlter over a. Zf Z is a set of power 111 c a and if 
&(a) c u 
isl C I ,  then there exists a set Y E  D and elements il , i2, i3, . . . E Z 
such that 
[ Y l n c C 1 , ,  n = l , 2 , 3  ,.... 
PROOF. 
Since D is countably complete, it suffices to prove that for each 
positive integer n there is an i E Z and Y E  D such that [Y I" c Ci. For 
then the intersection of these Y's will have the required property. Fix n. 
Well order I and letfbe the function on [a-J" into I such that f ( x )  is the least 
i E Z with x E Ci. We extendfto a function on Um<,,[a]"' into Z as follows. 
Assuming that m < n and f is already defined on [a]'"'', we define f on 
[a]"' by the condition 
(1) 
There is a unique i E I satisfying (1) because D is an a-complete ultrafilter. 
Ultimately, we obtain by induction a value f ( 0 )  = i, when m = 0. 
By transfinite induction define elements /?, 
E a and sets X,, Y, c a as 
follows, for < < a: 
f ( x )  = i iff {p E a : p $ x and f ( x  u { p } )  = i }  E D .  
(2) 
x, = {Pc : r < (1, 
X E  w, " {Yll'", f ( x )  = io}, 
(3) 
(4) 
6, is the least y E Y,. 
From the definition off and the a-completeness of D, we see that for all 
5 E a, 
( 5 )  
for all m < n and x E [Xc]'", f ( x )  = io, 
(6) 
Y ,  = { y  E a : y 2 5 and for ail m < n and 
Y, E D, whence p, exists. 

544 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
Now for each y E a, let g(y) be the least < E a such that y 4 Y,, , . From (3) 
we see that y 4 Y , + , ,  whence g(y) ,< y. Since each Y,,, E D ,  
we have 
for all 5, 
(7 E a : g(y) = < I 4  D. 
Now we use the fact that D is normal. By Proposition 4.2.19, 
Y = { y  E a : g(y) = y }  E D. 
We claim that 
(7) 
for all y E Y, y E Y,. 
If y = q +  1, then g(y) > q, whence y E Y,,, I = Y,. If y is a limit ordinal, 
then y E nc<,Yt, and it follows from (3) that y E Y,. We conclude from 
(7), (3) and (4) that for all y E Y, y = p,. Therefore, by (2) and (5), we have 
[Yl” c ci,. i 
Observe the similarity between the above proof and the proof of Ramsey’s 
Theorem 3.3.7. 
COROLLARY 
7.3.14. Every uncountable measurable cardinal is a Ramsey 
cardinal. 
PROOF. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal and let D be a normal 
ultrafilter over a. Let 111 < a and let S,(a) = UiE,Ci. By Theorem 7.3.13, 
there is a set Y E  D and elements i, , i,, i,, ... E I such that 
[U]” c C,,, 
n = 1,2, 3, ... . 
Since D is normal, every elemcnt of D has power a; in particular, I Y I = r. i 
Actually, the property of being a measurable cardinal is much stronger 
than that of being a Ramsey cardinal. 
PROPOSITION 
7.3.15. Let a be an uncountable measurable cardinal, and let D 
be a normal ultrafilter over a. Then the set of all Ramsey cardinals p < a 
belongs to D. Hence a is the ath Ramsey cardinal. 
PROOF. The proof is like Theorem 4.2.23. From the definition of Ramsey 
cardinals, we see that there is a sentence cp such that for all ordinals p, 
( R @ +  l), E) k cp iff p is a Ramsey cardinal. By Corollary 7.3.14, cp holds in 
( R ( a +  l ) , ~ ) ,  and then, by Corollary 4.2.22, (BE% : <R(P+ I), E )  b cp} E D. 
-1 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
545 
The following theorem applies Ramsey cardinals to the problems of 
Chang and J6nsson described in 7.3.1 and 7.3.2. 
THEOREM 
7.3.16 (Rowbottom’s Theorem). Let a be a Ramsey cardinal. Then: 
(i). If w 6 y < p < a, then Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, p), (a, 7). 
(ii). There are no Jbnsson models of power a. 
PROOF. From Proposition 7.3.4, (ii) follows from (i). We prove only (1). 
Let 9l = ( A ,  U, ...) be a model with IAl = a, IUI = p. We may assume 
without loss of generality that 9l has built-in Skolem functions. Choose a 
linear ordering c of A ,  an element a E A \ U, and a subset W c U of 
power y. Form a simple expansion 91* of 9l in the language 2’* 
by adding 
a constant c, for each W E  W. Let T be the set of all Skolem terms of the 
language 9*. 
We shall let I be the set I = ‘(U u { a } )  of all functions on T 
into U u {u}. Since T has power y and U has power fl, I has power By. 
But LY is inaccessible by Proposition 7.3.9, so II) < a. 
We make a partition S,,(A) = UiGrCi as follows: Call a term t E T an 
n-term iff all the variables occurring in t are among u ,  , . .., v, (whence we can 
write t in the form t(u, ... 0,)). 
Let x = { a , ,  ..., a,} E S,,(A), where 
a, < ... < a,. Then we put x E C i ,  where iE I is given by: 
i(t) = a if 
t is not an n-term; 
i(t) = a if t is an n-term and t(a, ... a,) E A \ U ;  
i ( t )  = u if 
t is an n-term and t(a, ... a,) = u E U. 
Since a is a Ramsey cardinal, there exists a set Y c A of power a and 
elements i, , i,, i3, . . . E I such that 
[Y]” c Gin, 
n = 1 , 2 , 3 ,  ... . 
Let 8* 
be the Skolem hull $ ( Y )  in the model ?I*, and let 
= ( B ,  V, ...) 
be the reduct of %* to the language 9. 
Then 8 is an elementary submodel 
of 9l of power a. Since each element of W is a constant of %* and belongs 
to U, we have W c V, whence 
(WI = y 6 IVI. 
On the other hand, each element b E V is of the form b = t ( y ,  ... y,) for 
some Skolem term t E T and some y ,  < ... < y, in Y. Since { y ,  , ..., y,} E 
[Y]” c Cim, 
we have i,,(t) = 6. Therefore 
b E u range (in) n U, 
n < o  

546 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
hence 
V' t U range(i,) n U, 
I V l <  w.ITI = w . y  = y .  
n c w  
and it follows that 
Thus IVI = 7. -I 
A cardinal a is said to be a Rowbottom cardinal iff it has the property: 
For all p < a, Chang's conjecture holds for (a, p), (a, w). 
Thus the above theorem shows that all Ramsey cardinals are Rowbottom 
cardinals. Exercise 7.3.7 shows that all Rowbottom cardinals are either 
weakly inaccessible or have cofinality w. Prikry has obtained the following 
consistency results: 
7.3.17a. If . 
ZFC + 'there exists a measurable cardinal > w' 
is consistent, then so ure 
ZFC+GCH+'there exists a Rowbottom cardinal a > w of cofinality a', 
and 
ZFC + 'there exists a Rowbottom cardinal a of cofinality 
w such that w < a < 2"'. 
Analogous consistency results for weakly inaccessible cardinals were 
obtained by Solovay: 
7.3.17b. If 
ZFC + 'there is a measurable cardinal > w' 
is consistent, then so are 
ZFC + '2" is a Rowbottom cardinal', 
and 
ZFC+ 'there exists a weakly inaccessible Rowbottom cardinal a with 
w < a < 2"'. 
We shall see in Section 7.4 that the axiom of constructibility implies 
that there are no Rowbottom cardinals > w. Kunen has shown that: 
7.3.17~. If 
ZFC+'there is a measurable cardinal > w' 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
547 
is consistent, then so is 
ZFC+ ‘there is a measurable cardinal > o’ 
+‘for all a > o, 
u is Rowbottom iff u is Ramsey, and also iff 
there is no Jbnsson model of power a’. 
Kleinburg (1972) has announced the following result: 
ZFC + ‘there exists a Rowbottom cardinal’ 
is consistent if and only if 
ZFC+‘there is a cardinal a in which there is no Jonsson model’ 
is consistent. 
It is not known whether or not the following are consistent: 
ZFC+‘N, is a Rowbottom cardinal’, 
ZFC f ‘the first inaccessible cardinal exists and is Rowbottom’, 
ZFC + ‘every cardinal which is of cofinality o or weakly inaccessible is 
Rowbottom’. 
Apter (1983) has obtained a partial solution of the first of these 
problems, showing that if ZFC + ‘there are infinitely many measurable 
cardinals’ is consistent, so is ZF + [@,-dependent choice] + [ww is a 
Rowbottom cardinal]. 
We next apply Ramsey cardinals to problem 7.3.3. We shall here use the 
notion of a set of indiscernibles which was introduced in Section 3.3 and 
used heavily in the preceding sections. 
THEOREM 
7.3.18 (Silver’s Theorem). Let a be a Ramsey cardinal, and let 
be countable. 
type a has an elementary submodel which is well ordered of type p. 
chain 
(i). i f p  is a cardinal with o < p < a, then every well ordered model of 
(ii). Let 
be a well ordered model of type a. Then there is an elementary 
91c = ( A c ,  <, ...), t an ordinal > 0, 
with the following properties: 
(a) %a 4 
(b) each 91c is a well ordered model of type oc; 
(c) whenever 5 < q, A, is an initial segment of (A,,, <); 
(d) if uc is defined as the wcth element with respect to <, then for each 
(note that u = ma); 
q the set (ut : ( < q }  is indiscernible in a,,. 

548 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
Note that (ii) obviously implies (i). 
Before proving the theorem we shall prove two lemmas. At the outset, 
observe that if %* is a Skolem expansion of %, then % is well ordered of type 
/I iff %* is. Therefore, when we prove Theorem 7.3.18, we may assume 
without loss of generality that (II has built-in Skolem functions. 
LEMMA 7.3.19. Let a be an infinite cardinal, let I?I = ( A ,  <, ...) be a well 
ordered model of type a with built-in Skolem functions, and suppose that 
( X ,  <) is a set of indiscernibles in 2I of power a. Then euery increasing 
sequence x1 < x2 < ... of elements of X satisjes the following formulas 
in 3: 
(i). vi < v j ,  where i < j < w ;  
(ii). t(o, ... 0,) 
< v,, where t is a term and m < n < w ;  
(iii). t(ul ... u,u,, ... ujm) < v, -, t(o, ... u,vj, ... uj,) = t(ul ... v,uk, ... uk,), 
where t is a term and 
m < j ,  <... < j n < w ,  
m < k ,  <... ( k , < w .  
PROOF. Increasing sequences from X obviously satisfy (i). 
For (ii), note that (A, <) has type u and 1x1 = a, so X is cofinal in 
(A, <). Therefore, given x ,  < ... < x, in X ,  the element t(x, ... x,) 
must be less than some y E X ,  with x, < y. But then, by the indiscernibility 
of X ,  we always have t(x, ... x,) < x, when x, < x, E X .  Thus (ii) holds. 
Theproofof(iii)depends onthefactthat each element of (A, <) has fewer 
than u predecessors. Let x l  < ... < x, < y ,  < ... y, and x, < z ,  < ... < z, 
in ( X ,  <>, and suppose t(xl ... x,yl ... y,) < x,, but 
(1) 
t ( X 1  ... x,y1 ... y,) # t ( X 1  ... x,z1 ... z,). 
Choose w1 < ... < w, in X such that y, < w l ,  z, < w l .  Since we cannot 
have 
and 
t(xl ... x,y1 ... y,) = t ( X 1  ... x,w1 ... w,), 
t(xl ... x,z1 ... z,) = t(x, ... x,w1 ... w.), 
in view of (I), we must have 
t(x, ... x,y1 ... y.) # t(xl 1 . .  x,w1 
. . I  w,), 
t(xl ... x,z1 ... z,) # t(x, ... x,w, ... w,). 
t(x, ... x,w1 ... w,) < x,. 
(2) 
Moreover, by indiscernibility, 
(3) 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
549 
Now choose u different n-tuples 
wf < ... < W E ,  
p < u, 
in X, such that y < p < a implies 
X I  < ... < x, < w; < ... < w; < w{ < ... < w,8. 
Then by (2), (3) and indiscernibility, the elements t(x, ... x,w{ ... WE), 
< u, are all different and all less than x,. This is impossible since x,,, has 
fewer than a predecessors. We conclude that (iii) holds for increasing 
sequences from X. -i 
LEMMA 
7.3.20. Suppose 23 = (B, <, .,.) is a well-ordered model for a 
countable language, B has built-in Skolem functions, ( X ,  < ) is an uncount- 
able set of indiscernibles in 23, and every increasing sequence of elements 
of X satisfies the formulas (i)-(iii) 
of Lemma 1.3.19 in 23. Then there is an 
elementary chain 
91, = ( A , ,  <, ...), 5 an ordinal > 0, 
of models 91, = !B such that conditions (b)-(d) of Theorem 7.3.18 hold and, 
moreover, 
(e) each a, is generated by a set X ,  of indiscernibles such that increasing 
sequences of X ,  and X satisfy the same formulas. 
PROOF. For each 4 > 0, let ( X , ,  c) = (ac, <). By the stretching 
theorem 3.3.11(b), there is a model M, which is generated by the set X, 
of indiscernib!es, and the sets of formulas satisfied by increasing sequences 
from X in 8 and from X ,  in M, are the same. By the elementary embedding 
theorem 3.3.1 1 (d), whenever 4 < I], there is a unique elementary embedding 
of ‘21, into a,,, whose restriction to X ,  is the identity mapping. We may 
therefore identify the elements of 91, with their images in ?1,,, and we obtain 
an elementary chain at, 5 > 0. By our construction, the condition (e) holds. 
Since each q true in 23 is satisfied by increasing sequences of X in 23, and 
hence, by increasing sequences of X ,  in %,, 
cp is true in a,. Thus (21, = 8. 
In particular, the relation < simply orders each a,. 
Moreover, each 
countable subset of M, is included in the Skolem hull Q ( Z )  of a countable 
subset 2 c X,. But X is uncountable, and therefore there is a one-one 
ordermorphic mappingfof ( Z ,  <) into ( X ,  <) (recall that both ( X ,  <) 
and (2, <) are well ordered). By the elementary embedding theorem 
3.3.11(d), fcan be extended to an elementary embedding of 9 ( Z )  into B. 

550 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
Since 23 is well ordered, Q(2) 
is well ordered. Thus every countable subset 
of %, is well ordered; hence %, contains no infinite decreasing sequence, 
and %, is well ordered. 
The order type of each (A,, <) is at least o, because X, c A, and 
IX,l = w,. All formulas of the form (ii) in Lemma 7.3.19 are satisfied by 
increasing sequences in X,, and X ,  generates a,. This guarantees that Xc 
is a cofinal subset of (A,, <). The formulas (iii) of Lemma 7.3.19 guarantee 
that, for each x E X c ,  every element y E A, which precedes x in the ordering 
< is determined uniquely by a term t(vi, ... ui,uj, ... ujn) and an m-tuple 
x, < ... < x, of elements of X,, with x, = x. (The variable vim does not 
necessarily occur in t.) We have assumed that 9 
is a countable language, 
so there are only w terms. Since (X,, <) = (o,, 
<), the element x has 
fewer than w, predecessors in the ordering (X,, <). Therefore there are 
fewer than o, finite sequences x ,  < ... < x, = x in X,. Also, < > 0, so 
o < 0,. It follows that the element x has fewer than w, predecessors in the 
ordering (A,, c). We have shown that X ,  is cofinal in ( A c ,  <), and it 
follows that every element of A, has fewer than we predecessors. Therefore 
( A c ,  c) has order type exactly a,, whence a, is a well ordered model of 
type 0,. This verifies condition (b). 
Now let 0 < 5 < 11. We prove (c). Let a E A,,, b E A,, a < b. We must 
show that a E A,. The element a may be written 
a = t(x, ... xi- ,yl ... y,,), 
where x1 < ... < x,-, < y, < ... -= y,,, the x's are in Xc, 
and the y's are 
in X,, \ X,. For some x,,, E X,, we have x,- , c x, and b < x,. 
Adding 
an inessential variable u,, we may write 
and we also have 
a = t(x, ... x,y, ... y,,), 
t ( x ,  ... xmyl ... y,,) -= x,. 
We maj choose w, , ..., w,, 
E X, such that 
x ,  < ... < x, < w, < ... c w,,. 
We also have x, < y ,  because x, E X, and y ,  E X,,-X,. Using Lemma 
7.3.19 (iii), we have 
a = t(x, ... x,yl ... y,,) = t(x, ... x,wl ... w,,). 
This shows that a E A,, and (c) holds. 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
551 
It remains to prove (d). We let u, be the octh element in the ordering c. 
Let 0 < [ C q. We have already established that A ,  is a proper initial 
segment of A,, of order type oc, 
and it follows that uc is the least element of 
A,\ 
A ,  in the ordering c. 
Moreover, if ( < q < [, then the w$h elements of 
%, and 
are the same, as u, is defined independently of q. Our plan is 
to show that all the uc ‘come from the same term’. 
= 1 c q. Recall from our construction that 
(X, <) = (a,, 
<), <X,,, <) = <on, c). Therefore o, is the first 
element of X, which does not belong to a,. For all x E X ,  , we have 
x c ut and u, < 0 , .  
Consider first the case 
The element u1 is expressible as a term in %,: 
U, = t(xl ... x,,,o,y, ... y.) 
where the x’s are in X ,  , the y’s are in X ,  \. XI, and 
x, < ... < x, < 0 ,  < y ,  < ... < Y”. 
It follows from Lemma 7.3.19 (iii) that 
ut = t ( X l  ... X , W I W 1 + 1  ... o,+n). 
x < t(xt ... X,OI 
0
1
 + 1 ... w1 +n) < 0 1 .  
Thus for all x E X , ,  
(1) 
Now consider an arbitrary 5, 1 ,< 5 < q. As before, oc 
is the first element 
of X ,  which is not in A , ,  and for all x E X ,  , we have 
x c u, and u, < 0,. 
Express u, as a term in a,, 
u, = s(wl ... w,o<z, ... z,) 
where the w’s are in X,, the z’s are in X,-X,, 
and 
H’, < ... < wp < 0, < I, < ... c z,. 
Again, using Lemma 7.3.19 (iii), 
uc = s(wl ... w,wcw,+l ... w,+q). 
W’ < s(wl ... w,w50,+1 ... wt+q) < 0 5 .  
Then whenever wp < w E X,, 
(2) 

552 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
Choose w; < ... < w; in X, such that for all i 6 m a n d j  6 p ,  
(3) 
xi < w j  iff 
xi < wJ, 
xi > w j  iff xi > ws. 
By indiscernibility and (2), whenever w; < x E X ,  , we have 
x < s(w; ... w;w,w,+1 ... w,+q) < 0 1 .  
s(w; ... w;w, w, + 1 ... 0, 
+q) E A, \A,, 
Since X ,  is cofinal in { A , ,  <), it follows that 
whence 
(4) 
u ,  = t(x, ... x,wIol+l ... w,+n) < s(w; ... w;olo,+l ... wl+q). 
Using indiscernibility and (3), (4), 
(5) 
t(x, ... x,wtwt+l ... q + n )  < S(WI 
..* w,wcwc+l ... wc+q) = uc. 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
Moreover, using indiscernibility and (l), 
we see that for all w E X , ,  
w < t(x, ... x,w,:w,:+l 
... w,:+.). 
ut = t(x, ... X,Otwt+l 
... o,:+n). 
x, < ... < x, 
< wc < ... < o<+, 
< wc < ... < wl;+n. 
Since X ,  is cofinal in ( A c ,  <), ( 5 )  and (6) imply that 
Note that whenever 1 < 5 < C < q, 
From (7), (8), and the indiscernibility of (X,,, <) in a,,, it follows that the 
set ( { u c  : 5 < q}, <) is indiscernible in %,, 
and this is the required con- 
dition (d). i 
PROOF 
OF THEOREM 
7.3.18. As we observed already, we need only prove (ii) 
and we may assume that '21 has built-in Skolem functions. By Proposition 
7.3.10, '21 has a set ( X ,  <) of indiscernibles of power a. Thus the hypotheses 
of Lemma 7.3.19 hold. Xis uncountable, so by Lemma 7.3.19, the hypotheses 
of the next lemra, 7.3.20, are satisfied by '21 = '23. Then by Lemma 7.3.20, 
there is an elementary chain 
%<, 5 is an ordinal > 0, 
which satisfies conditions (b)-(d) of the Theorem and condition (e) of 
Lemma 7.3.20. Finally, by (e) the model 91, is generated by a set ( X a ,  C )  
of indiscernibles whose increasing sequences satisfy the same formulas as 
the increasing sequences from X. Furthermore, a is inaccessible, so w, = a 
and '21= has order type w, = a, whence (X,, <) has order type 6 a. 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
553 
Therefore (Xu, 
< ) can be ordermorphically embedded one-one into 
( X ,  <). Then by the elementary embedding theorem, l?lu is elementarily 
embeddable in 91, so (a) can also be satisfied. i 
EXERCISES 
7.3.1. Investigate what happens to Chang’s conjecture in the ‘trivial’ 
cases where a > p > 6 and a 2 y > 6 are not both true. 
7.3.2. If Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, p), (7, 6) and a’ 2 a 2 p, then 
Chang’s conjecture holds for (a‘, p), (y, 6). 
7.3.3. If Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, p), (y, 6) and also for (y, a), (p, v), 
then Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, a), ( p ,  v). 
7.3.4. Let us say that Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, p), (y, < 6) iff every 
model of type (a, p) for a countable language has an elementary submodel 
of some type (y,p), with p < 6. Prove that if every well ordered model 
of type a for a countable language has an elementary submodel which is 
well ordered of type y, then for all p < a, Chang’s conjecture holds for 
(a, P), (7, < Y ) .  
7.3.5. If Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, p), (y, < 6) and if a 2 /? 2 p’, 
then Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, p’), (y, < 6). If Chang’s conjecture 
holds for (a, /I), 
(y, o) 
and a 2 /3 2 p’, then it holds for (a, p’), (y, w). 
7.3.6. If6 < cf ( a )  < /3 < a, then Chang’s conjecture fails for (51, p), ( 2 ,  6). 
7.3.7. If a is a Rowbottom cardinal, then either a is weakly inaccessible or 
cf (a) = o. 
7.3.8. Prove the assertion 7.3.5. 
7.3.9*. Assume a > p 2 6 and a 2 y 2 6. Then Chang’s conjecture for 
(a, p), (y, < 6) is equivalent to the following partition property: 
For every set X of power 1x1 = a and I of power 11) = p, and every 
partition S J X )  c UiE,Ci, there exist subsets Y c X of power I Y I = y 
and J c I of power IJI c 6 such that S,( Y )  c ujEJ 
C j .  
7.3.10’. Let a > 
6, a > y 2 6. Assume that for all p c 6, p” = p. 
If Chang’s conjecture holds for (a, p), (7, < 6), then it still holds for 
languages with fewer than 6 symbols. If p’ d p < y and p = p” and Chang’s 
conjecture holds for (a, p), (y, p ’ ) ,  then it holds for (a, p), (7, p). 
[Hint: Use Exercise 7.3.9.1 

554 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
7.3.1 1. CU is said to be a Jbnsson algebra of power a iff IAl = a and 3 has 
no proper submodel of power a (and Yl is a model for a countable language 
having only function symbols). Every J6nsson algebra is obviously a 
J6nsson model. Prove that if there exists a J6nsson model of power a, 
then there exists a J6nsson algebra of power a. 
7.3.12*. Prove that if there exists a J6nsson algebra of power a, then there 
exists one which has a single binary commutative function. 
7.3.13*. Prove that for every cardinal a there is a J6nsson algebra ( A ,  F )  
of power a, where F is an infinitary function with w places. 
7.3.14. Let fl < a. Prove that there exists a J6nsson model of power a 
with fl relations iff there exists a model M of power a with countably many 
relations and a set X c A of power fl such that Yl has no proper elementary 
submodel of power a which includes X. 
7.3.15*. Prove without the GCH that for each n < o, 
there is a J6nsson 
model of power X,. More generally, for all cardinals a, if there is a J6nsson 
model of power a, then there is a J6nsson model of power a+. 
7.3.16. Prove that a is a Ramsey cardinal iff a > w and every model M, 
for a language 2’ 
of power Il-YI I < a, has a set of indiscernibles of power a. 
(Cf. Proposition 7.3.10.) 
7.3.17. The ‘Erdos notation’. Let a, fl, y be cardinals and n be a natural 
number. The notation 
is defined to mean that: 
a + (8); 
For every partition [a]” = UiEYCi 
of [a]” into y parts, there exists 
X t a of power (XI = fl and i E y such that [XI’’ c C i .  
Similarly, 
means that: 
For every partition SJa) = UierCi of &(a) into y parts, there exist 
X c a of power a and elements i , ,  i,, ... E y such that [XI“ c Gin, 
n = I ,  2, ... . 
a + (fl):u 
Check the following: 
(i). Ramsey’s theorem (Theorem 3.3.7) says that for all iz < o, 
a 2 o, 
a -,(a);. 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
555 
(ii). Erdos and Rado's theorem 7.2.1 says that for all n < o and a 2 o, 
zn(a)+ + (a+):+ '. 
(iii), a is a Ramsey cardinal iff for all /3 < a, 
a + (a);". 
(iv). The relations a + (p)! and a + (a):" remain true when the 
cardinal a is made larger and when the cardinals on the right of the arrow 
are made smaller. 
7.3.18. Show that if a + (y);", 
then Chang's conjecture holds for (a, S), 
( Y ,  0). 
7.3.19*. Show that a is a Ramsey cardinal iff 
a -+ (a);". 
[Hint: Use Proposition 7.3.10.1 
7.3.20. sl -i (p),'" 
if and only if every model of power a for a countable 
language has a set of indiscernibles of power p. 
7.3.21*. If sl + (a):, then a is weakly compact. 
[Hint: Show that a -, (a): implies the condition in Lemma 7.3.11 and 
then use the proof of Proposition 7.3.12. Also it must be shown that a + (a): 
implies that a is inaccessible.] 
7.3.22*. If sl is weakly compact, then for all p < a and n < w, a 3 (a);. 
[Hint: Use an argument like the proof of Ramsey's theorem and Theorem 
7.3.13, but where D is an a-complete ultrafilter in an a-complete field of 
sets of power a , ]  
7.3.23*. For each infinite cardinal p, let ti(p) be the least cardinal a such 
that 
-+ (P);" 
(if such an a exists). Thus sl is Rarnsey iff a = .(a). Prove that if ti( a) 
exists, then 
for all 
y < ti@), ti@) --+ (p):". 
7.3.24. If ~ ( p )  
exists, then it is inaccessible. 
[Hint: Use above exercise.] 
(K( p )  is called the Erdos cardinal for p). 

556 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.3 
7.3.25*. If p < r and .(a) 
exists, then K ( P )  c .(a) 
(a, p are infinite 
cardinals). 
7.3.26**. tf K(W) exists, there is a cardinal w < fl < K(W) such that j? 
is lI,"-indescribable for all m, n < w. 
[Hint: Let a be a limit ordinal > K(w), and consider a model 
(R(a), E, R, ...) with built-in Skolem functions. This model has a set 
(X, <) of indiscernibles of order type w, with X c K(w). The mapping 
x, -, x,+, determines an elementary embeddingf : Q ( X )  < Q ( X ) .  Take for 
p the first ordinal moved byf.] 
This exercise shows that there are weakly compact cardinals w < p < ~ ( w ) ;  
hence the first uncountable weakly compact cardinal is not Ramsey. 
7.3.27*. If a < K ( a ) ,  then .(a) is not weakly compact. 
[Hint: Show that .(a) is n:-describable, using the equation K(a>" = K ( a )  
from Exercise 7.3.24.1 
7.3.28*. Let D be an a-complete nonprincipal ultrafilter over a. Then D 
has the partition property in Theorem 7.3.13 iff there is a permutation a 
of a such that a(D) = {cr(X) : X E  
D} is a normal ultrafilter over a. 
7.3.29. State and prove a version of Rowbottom's theorem for models of 
languages 9 
of power II-YII < a. 
7.3.30*. Suppose that a is a limit of measurable cardinals and cf ( x )  < y < 
fl c a. Then Chang's conjecture holds for (a, p), (a, 
7). Thus every limit a 
of measurable cardinals such that cf(a) = w is a Rowbottom cardinal. 
7.3.31. State and prove a generalization of Silver's theorem for languages 
of power less than a. 
7.3.32. A model !U = ( A ,  U, <, ...) is said to be well ordered on U of type 
a iff < is a well ordering of the set U of order type a. Generalize Silver's 
theorem for well ordered models on U. 
7.3.33**. Show that Silver's theorem is still true when the hypothesis 
' a  is a Ramsey cardinal' is weakened to 'for some y 2 wl, 
a = ~(7)'. 
[Hint: Verify the hypothesis of Lemma 7.3.20.1 
7.3.34*. Suppose a is a Ramsey cardinal and 'II is a well ordered mode! of 
type a for a language of power < a. Then for every cardinal j? > a, 'II 
has an elementary extension which is well ordered of type p. In fact, there 
is an elementary chain afl, 
fl a cardinal 2 a, such that 21, = 'ZI and conditions 
(b)-(d) of Silver's theorem hold. 
[Hint: Use the fact that tl is weakly compact.] 

7.31 
MODELS IN LARGE CARDINALITY 
557 
7.3.35*. A model 'u = (A, <, ...) is said to be o,-weN ordered iff < is 
a simple ordering of A and there is no decreasing sequence of length wl. 
If T is a theory in a countable language and T has an o,-well ordered model 
of power am, then T has ol-well ordered models of all infinite powers. 
[Hint: Use the Erdos-Rado theorem.] 
7.3.36. Let h, be the Hanf number for well ordered models, i.e., the least 
cardinal u 2 o such that for every theory T in a countable language, if 
T has a well ordered model of power u, then T has well ordered models 
of all infinite powers. Prove that h,, 
exists. 
7.3.37*. Prove that if ~ ( 0 ~ )  
exists, then h,, 
< ~ ( 0 ~ ) .  
7.3.38*. Show that w1 < cf (h,,) < 2". 
[Hint: Prove that if a theory T has well ordered models of every power 
/3 < u, but does not have well ordered models of every infinite power, then 
there exists another theory T' which has a well ordered model of power u 
but does not have well ordered models of all infinite powers.] 
7.3.39*. Show that h,, 
= ahwo. Thus w1 < h,,, aOl < h,,, &", < h,,, 
etc. 
7.3.40*. If the first inaccessible cardinal a > w exists, then u < h,,. 
7.3.41*. If K ( W )  exists, then K(W) < h,,. 
7.3.42. 9 = (A, <, ...) is said to be an d i k e  model iff < simply orders 
A, A has power u, and every element of A has fewer than u predecessors. 
(Thus a well ordered model is u-like iff it is of type a.) Give examples of 
the following: 
(i). A theory which has an d i k e  model for all u > w, but not for a = o. 
(ii). A theory which has a-like models iff a is a successor cardinal. 
(iii). A theory which has a-like models iff u is singular. 
For the following exercises assume that 2' is countable. 
7.3.43 (GCH). If T has an u+-like model, then for all regular /3, T has a 
P+-like model. The GCH is not needed when /3' 
= w,. 
7.3.44*. If T has an d i k e  model, then for all u, T has an d i k e  model. 
[Hint: Use the two-cardinal theorems.] 
[Hint: Use indiscernible elements.] 
7.3.45* (GCH). If a is inaccessible and T has a-like models, then for all - 
regular /3, T has fi+-like models. 
[Hint: Without using the GCH, show that T has an w,-like model, and 
then use Exercise 7.3.43. I 

558 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
7.3.46**. Let a be a strong limit cardinal. If T has an a-like model, then 
for all singular cardinals 8, T has a 8-like model. 
[Hint : Use ‘doubly-indexed’ indiscernibles. ] 
7.3.47. In Exercise 4.2.12, we defined a to be a Mahlo number iff every 
closed unbounded subset of a contains an inaccessible cardinal. Mahlo 
numbers are also called po cardinals. We now define a to be a pn+ cardinal 
iff every closed unbounded subset of a contains a p, cardinal. Show that if 
a is a P,,+~ cardinal, then a is the ath p, cardinal. Also, if a > w and a is 
weakly compact, then a is a pn cardinal. 
7.3.48**. Suppose that for each n < w, there is a p. cardinal a, such that T 
has an a,-like model. Then for every cardinal 8 > w, T has a 8-like model. 
7.3.49*. For each n < w, there is a sentence 0, such that for all a, 6, has 
an d i k e  model iff a is not a p, cardinal. 
7.3.50**. A semigroup (G, a )  is a set G together with an associative binary 
operation *. A semigroup is a group if. is both left and right solvable, i.e., 
Let 0: be an infinite cardinal. Prove that if a semigroup (G, -) of power SL 
is a Jonsson semigroup, i.e., it has no proper sub-semigroups of the same 
power, then either (G, -) is a group or else 
cf(a) = w and (3p)(p < S I A ~  
< 2p). 
Hence, if cf(cr) > w or if (p < a + 28 6 a), then every Jonsson semigroup 
of power a is a Jonsson group. 
7.4. Large cardinals and the constructible universe 
In Section 4.2, Scott’s theorem states that the existence of a measurable 
cardinal > w implies that the axiom of constructibility is false. We were 
able to give a proof there with a minimum knowledge of constructible sets. 
Using the results of the preceding section, Scott’s theorem can be vastly 
improved. From the weaker hypothesis of the existence of a Ramsey car- 
dinal, it will be shown that the axiom of constructibility becomes false at 
the earliest possible stage, i.e., there are nonconstructible sets of natural 
numbers (Theorem 7.4.7). The even weaker hypothesis that at least one ‘non- 
trivial’ case of one of the three questions 7.3.1-7.3.3 has an affirmative 
answer, still implies that the axiom of constructibility fails (Theorem 
7.4.10). It also implies that there are nonconstructible subsets of w (cf. 
Theorem 7.4.1 I), but we shall not give the (long) proof here. 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
559 
This section will depend heavily on the basic properties of constructible 
sets. They are available in several books, for example, Cohen (1966), Godel 
(1940), or Shoenfield (1967). We shall not attempt here to give a complete 
introduction to constructible sets. Instead we give only a brief outline which 
will serve to fix notation and point out what is needed for the theorems that 
follow. We advise the reader to learn the basic properties of constructible 
sets elsewhere before attempting to read this material. 
In Section 4.2 we gave the following ‘model-theoretic’ statement of the 
axiom of constructibility: 
For every regular cardinal a > w, there is no proper subset M c H(a) 
such that a c M and (M, E) is a model of ZF-P. 
This definition is not convenient for our present purposes, and we shall 
have to turn to the usual statement of the axiom of constructibility which 
is familiar from the literature. 
Given a set M of sets, a subset X c M is said to be dejinable in M (with 
parameters) iff there exists a formula cp(uv, ... v,) of the language 9 = {E} 
and elements y, , ..., y ,  E M such that 
x = {x E M : ( M ,  E) != cp[xy, ... y,]}. 
Note that each formula ~ ( U V ,  ... v,) and n-tuple y l ,  ..., y, E M defines a 
unique subset X c M. We now define by induction the chain of sets L(a), 
a an ordinal. 
7.4.1. If a = 0, then L(a) = 0. If a > 0 is a limit ordinal, then 
L(a) = u w. 
B<a 
If a = p+1, then 
L(a) = {X c L(@) : Xis definable in L(p)}. 
It follows that in all cases L(a) = uB<.L(p+ 1). 
A set x is said to be constructible iff there exists an a such that x E L(a). 
The class of all constructible sets is called the constructible universe and is 
denoted by L. Thus 
L = U L(a). 
a 
PROPOSITION 
7.4.2. The axiom of constructibility holds r f f  every set is 
constructible. 
The usual statement of the axiom of constructibility is that every set is 

560 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
constructible, and the above proposition states that this usual statement is 
equivalent to the one given in Section 4.2. 
PROPOSITION 
7.4.3. 
(i). If a < j3, then L(a) c L(j3) and L(a) EL@). 
(ii). a c L(a) c R(a) and a E L(a+ 1) \ L(a). 
(iii). L( a) is a transitive set, i.e. x E y E L(a) implies x E L( a). Consequently, 
(iv). Ifaisan injiniteordinal, then IL(a)l = Ial. 
(v). If a is a cardinal, (B, E )  = (L(a), E ) ,  and (B, E )  is well-founded, 
then there are a unique q and function f such that 
L is a transitive class. 
f: 
( B ,  E )  
(L(q), E). 
(vi). If x E L and x t L ( 0 ,  then x E L(ltJ+). More generally, if x E L 
(vii). If u = 3=, then L(a) = R(u) n L. 
and x is afinirary relation over L([), then x E L(1(1+). 
One important result is that the constructible universe is a ‘model’ of 
ZF+axiom of constructibility. 
Before we can state this and further results clearly, we must be more 
specific about the nature of the intuitive underlying set theory (UST) which 
we are operating in. Up to this point we have been able to get by without 
making any definite commitment to whether the UST is like ZFC, Bernays- 
Godel set theory, or Bernays-Morse set theory. But results such as the one 
above about the constructible universe must be stated one way when the 
UST is ZFC and another way when it is Bernays-Morse. So from now on 
we shall work under the definite understanding that our UST is Bernays- 
Morse set theory. This makes it possible for us to study models whose 
universes are classes rather than sets. 
The usual ordered pair construction 
( X 9 Y )  = { { X I ,  { X , Y > I  
does not work for proper classes. However, it is easy to find a substitute, 
for instance 
( X  Y )  = ( X X  (0)) u (YX (1)). 
Consider a class A and a binary relation E over A. We may then form the 
model (A, E) for the language LYE = {E). The notion of satisfaction of a 
formula cp of 2YE in the model (A, E) may then be defined recursively in 
the usual way. Since A might be a proper class, the Bernays-Morse 
axioms are needed to make such a definition. We shall extend the usual 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
561 
model-theoretic notation to such models, e.g., 
( A ,  E )  I= ~ [ a l  an19 
( A ,  E )  * (B, F), 
and so on. 
all sets. If cp(x, ... x,) is a formula of Ze and a l ,  ..., a,, are sets, then 
In particular, we may consider the model (V, E), where V is the class of 
p(a, ... a,,) is true 
if, and only if, 
If cp is a formula of Y E  
and y is a new variable, then 
relativization of cp to y ;  it is formed by replacing 
( V ,  E) 1 ~ [ a ,  
... an]. 
denotes the 
(3x)a by (3x)(x E y A u) and (Vx)u by (Vx)(x E y + u )  
everywhere. With this notation we see that for every class A and all 
qP)(a, ... a,,) is true 
a , ,  ..., U , , E A ,  
if and only if 
<A, E) 
cp[a, 
an]. 
It is convenient to use ZFL to denote the theory 
ZF+ axiom of constructibility. 
With this understanding we can now state the following theorem: 
THEOREM 
7.4.4 (Godel). 
(i). (L, E) 'F ZFL. 
(ii). (axiom of choice)'". 
(iii). (GCH)? 
Combining Proposition 7.4.3(vii) with Theorem 7.4.4(i), we obtain the 
following useful fact: 
The formal proof of Theorem 7.4.4 can be carried out in ZF and yields the 
following: 
(a = 
implies R(a) = L(a))(L). 
THEOREM 
7.4.4'. 
(i). ZF t- (ZFL)'L'. 
(ii). ZFL t- axiom of choice. 
(iii). ZFL I- GCH. 

562 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
Hereafter, by ‘formula’ we shall mean a formula of the language LYE = {E}. 
Let A be a transitive class. We say that the formula ~ ( x ,  
... x,) is absolute 
for A iff for all a,, ..., a, E A, 
q(a, ... a,) 4+ cp(”)(a, ... a,). 
(Note: We can replace the latter line by 
(Vy E) C q[a1 *.* an] 4+ ( A ,  E) 
q[a, ... an]*) 
Whence a formula cp(x, ... xn) is absolute for L iff for all a, , ..., a, E L ,  
cp(a, ... a,) c+ q ~ ( ~ ) ( a ,  
... a,). 
It is obvious that every atomic formula is absolute for L as well as for 
every transitive class B. We shall be particularly interested in absoluteness 
for the sets L(u). A convenient sufficient condition for absoluteness is given 
by the notion of a limited formula. 
By a limited (or bounded) quantiJier we mean a quantifier of the form 
( V U E U )  or ( ~ u E u ) ,  where u and u are set variables. ( V U E  v)$ means 
Vu(u E v + $), and (3u E v)$ means (3u)(u E v A$). A formula cp(v, ... v,) 
is said to be a limitedformula iff all its quantifiers are limited. 
LEMMA 
7.4.5. Let cp(v, ... u,) be a limited formula. Then cp is absolute for 
L and also for every transitive class B (hence for each set L(u)). 
The proof is an easy induction on the length of cp. 
Our flexible use of abbreviations (introduced into set-theoretical formulas 
in the standard way) can lead to trouble when we are dealing with the 
notion of absoluteness. The difficulty is that an abbreviation might stand for 
either of two or more formulas which are logically equivalent with respect 
to ZFC but not logically equivalent; thus if ( B ,  E) is not a model of ZFC, 
it may well happen that one of these formulas is absolute for B, while the 
other is not. For example, consider the abbreviation ‘x = ( y ,  z>’ and the 
two formulas (1) and (2) below: 
(1) 
(Vu)[u E x- 
( V U ) ( U  E u f+ U = Y )  
v ( V U ) ( U  E u ++ u = y v u = z ) ] ,  
or 
(2) 
( 3 U U ) [ U E X A U E X A ( v ~ ’ ) ( W E X ~  
W = U V W  = U )  
~y E u A (Vw)(w E u .+ w = y )  
A ~ E U A Z E U A ( ~ W ) ( W E U - +  
w = y v w  = z)]. 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
563 
The formulas are not logically equivalent, but they are logically equivalent 
with respect to ZFC. Thus ' x  = (11, 
z)' can stand for either (1) or (2). 
The formula (2) is a limited formula, so by Lemma 7.4.5, it is absolute for 
every transitive class B. However, formula ( 1 )  is not absolute for the tran- 
sitive set B = (0). 
To get around this difficulty, let us say that an abbreviation cp for a formula 
can be expressed by a formula t+b iff t+b is one of the formulas which 47 ab- 
breviates. Then we shall tacitly agree that whenever an abbreviation for a 
formula can be expressed by a limited formula, it really does stand for a 
limited formula. The following are examples of abbreviations which can be 
expressed by limited formulas: 
'x c y'; 
'x = ( y ,  z)'; 
'x is a function'; 
' x  is an ordinal'. 
We shall also need the following very special absoluteness results: 
LEMMA 7.4.6. Suppose q 2 151'. Then for allx E L(q) (andfor an appropriate 
joriniila dejning L(5)): 
(i). x = L(<) iJs(x = L(5))(L(q)), 
and 
(ii). (x, E) i= a[al ... a,] ijtr((x, E) 
a[al ... a " ~ ) ( ~ ( q ) )  
for aIIforrnulas a 
and a ,  , ..., a,, E x. 
The reader should be warned that some very simple and familiar formulas 
are not absolute for L or for L(cc), for example, 
x is a cardinal; 
x is countable; 
x = S ( y ) ;  
x = R(p). 
We now come to the first of the main results of this section. 
THEOREM 
7.4.7. Suppose there exists a Ramsey cardinal u. Then: 
(i). There are only countably many constructible subsets of o. 
( i i ) .  For any two cardinals p, y with o < p < y, we have (L(p), E) < 
(iii). If y is a cardinal, then 
(L(?)? E). 

564 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
( { p  : p is a cardinal and w < p < y } ,  < ) 
is a set of indiscernibles in (L(y), E). 
PROOF. It is not hard to prove that (ii) implies (i). However, we shall prove 
(i) directly from Rowbottom’s theorem, and then prove (ii) and (iii) from 
Silver’s theorem. 
(i). Let U be the set L n S(w) of all constructible subsets of w ;  then 
U c L(a). Consider the model (L(a), E, U). Thus IL(a)I = a and lUl < 
2” < a. By Rowbottom’s theorem, there is an elementary submodel 
(B, E, V )  -< (L(a), E, U )  such that IBI = a, I VI = w. There is a unique 
q and f such that f: 
(B, E) z (L(q), E). Since IBI = a, lql = lL(v)l 2 z, 
so q 2 a. But every ordinal of (B, E) is an ordinal of (L(u), E), so the 
ordinals of ( B , E )  and hence of ( L ( ~ ) , E )  
have order type < 2. Then 
q < u, whence 
f: 
( B ,  E) E (L(a), E). 
The statement ‘y is a finite ordinal’ can be expressed by a limited formula, 
and therefore the model (L(a), E, U) satisfies the sentence 
( V x ) ( U ( x )  c, (Vy)(y E x + y is a finite ordinal)). 
Hence the above sentence also holds in ( B ,  E, V ) ,  and it follows that the 
isomorphism f maps V onto U, 
whence I UI = I VI = w. 
(ii). We may choose a well ordering <* of the set L(a) such that for all 
C < u, the set L(5) is an initial segment of (L(a), <*). This is done by first 
well-ordering L(1), then L(2)\L(1), 
etc. SinceL(a) has power a, and for 
all C < a,L(() has power I l l  < a, the well ordering <* has order type 
exactly a. This gives us a well ordered model 
(1) 
of type a. From our choice of < * we see that 9l satisfies 
9l = (L(a), <*, E) 
(VX, Y ) ( X  E Y + x <* Y). 
This is because x E y E L  (0 
implies that x E L ( q )  for some q < <, and each 
L ( q )  is an initial segment of (L(a), < *). 
Using Silver’s theorem, there is an elementary chain 
%< = ( A < ,  <€,E<>, 
5 > 0, 
with the properties (a)-(d). 
By (a) we have 
( A < , E < )  = (L(cr),E), 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
565 
and by (b), 9.1c is a well ordered model of type me. Using (a) again, (1) holds 
in 9.1c, and therefore E< is a well founded relation. So by 7.4.3, there is a 
unique ordinal qc and isomorphism 
f< : <Ac, Ec> = (L(‘t<), 
E). 
2 IV<I = lwl<)l 
= IA<l = w<, 
Since (L(c)l = 
for all infinite i, 
so qt 2 q. 
On the other hand, by (I), the ordinals of 9.l< have order type 
< we, whence the ordinals of (L(qt), E) have order type < me. But the 
formula ‘y is an ordinal’ is absolute for L(qc). It follows that q5 < cot, and 
thus qc = q .  
Hence 
(2) 
f< : ( A t ,  E,> 
( L ( o ~ ) ,  
E), 
t 
0. 
We claim that 
(3) 
To prove (3), we note first that 
if 0 c 5 c t, then fc 1 A, =&. 
b E A,, 
a E A,, 
b E< a implies b q a, 
because by (1) we have b << a and by (c) the set A, is an initial segment in 
(At, <<>. 
Since L(oc) is transitive, we have 
Moreover, 
fc(a) = {f<(b) : b ~ g .  
a}, 
a E A,. 
fi(4 = {&(b) : b E( 4 = {j;(b) : b EC a}, 
a E A,. 
Then by induction on c5, 
we see that &(a) = fc(a) for all a E A,, and (3) 
follows. 
form an elementary 
chain, we conclude that 
Combining (2), (3), and the fact that the models 
(Jqq), 
E) 
<L(q), E). 
This proves (ii). 
(iii). Given 
< (, let uc be the olth element under <c. 
In our proof of (ii), the well ordering <* could have been chosen so that 
for each ordinal B < a, /3 is the first element of L(a)\L(fi). 
Since the 
formulas ‘y is an ordinal’ and ‘ x  E L (y)’ are absolute for L (a), the model 
% satisfies 
> 0 and 0 c 
(4) 
(Vy)[y is an ordinal + (Vx)(x c * y t, x E L(y))]. 

566 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
Then (4) also holds in a,. Moreover, for each 0 < < c, a E A,, we have 
a E A, iff fc(a) E L(w,) iff 
C a E L(f;’(q)). 
a e A I  iff a <c f;’(wC). 
Thus by (4), 
This means thatf;’(wJ 
is the w,th element in the ordering <<, that is, 
fc(UJ = WI;. 
<{us 0 < r < 8, <,> 
({q 
: 0 < t- .< r}, E) 
Condition (d) of Silver’s theorem says that the set 
is indiscernible in a,. By (I), we have ut; <, ug iff r < q. It follows that 
is indiscernible in the model (L(w,), E). This proves (iii). -I 
Theorem 7.4.7 is remarkable, for it shows that the assumption that a 
large cardinal exists (a Ramsey cardinal) implies something new about sets 
of natural numbers. Of course, even the existence of an inaccessible cardinal 
c1 > w implies number-theoretic facts like ‘ZF is consistent’. However, 
Theorem 7.4.7 is more exciting because it is a case where an axiom of in- 
finity implies something about sets of real numbers, which is mathematically 
interesting and unexpected. 
Motivated by Theorem 7.4.7 and the next corollary, we introduce the 
set 0’ and the set-theoretic sentence “0‘ exists”. Intuitively, 0’ is the 
set of all formulas of LZE which are satisfied in (L, E ) by any increasing 
tuple of uncountable cardinal numbers. In ordinary ZFC, this definition 
of 0’ cannot be formalized because it involves satisfaction in the proper 
class (L, E ) and assumes that the uncountable cardinals are a class of 
indiscernibles. The sentence “0’ exists” is defined as the conjunction of 
parts (ii) and (iii) of Theorem 7.4.7. We shall see in the next corollary 
that when 0’ exists, the intuitive definition of 0’ can be formalized in 
the language LZe of set theory. We first given an official definition of Ox 
within ZFC. 
DEFINITION. 
We say that O x  exists iff 
(i). For any two cardinals p, y with w < p < y, we have ( L ( P ) ,  
(ii). If y is a cardinal, then the set of uncountable cardinals p < y with 
E ) < ( U Y ) ,  E >, 
the usual ordering is a set of indiscernibles in (L(y), 
E ). 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
561 
If Ox exists, then we define 0' 
to be the set of all formulas 
q ( x ,  . . . x , )  of 
such that 
( L ( w u ) ,  E ) 
' P [ w I  . . . wnI. 
Here w, is the mth infinite cardinal in the ordinary sense, not in the 
sense of L. 
Theorem 7.4.7 may be restated as follows: 
THEOREM 
7.4.7'. If there is a Ramsey cardinal, then 0' exists. 
We now show that if Ox exists then we can formulate satisfaction in 
the 'model' ( L ,  E ). 
PROPOSITION 
7.4.8. Assume that 0' exists, Then: 
(i). For all cardinals p =- w, (L(p), E )  < (L, E). 
(ii). There is a formula @(u, u )  of -YE such that for all u and u, 
*(MU) ifl ' u  is a formula of =YE, 
u E L ,  and ( L ,  E )  k u[v]'. 
(iii). If cp(u) is a formula of =YE and ( L ,  E )  k (3v)(p, then there is a 
countable x E L(w,) such that ( L ,  E )  t cp [XI. 
(iv). Let C be the class of all uncountable cardinals. Then (C, <) is a 
class of indiscernibles in (L, E). 
Moreover, 0' is the set of all formulas q ( x ,  . . . x , )  which are satisfied by 
increasing tuples from C in ( L ,  E ) . 
(v). V # L, and in fact S ( W ) ~  
is countable and belongs to L(w,). 
PROOF. (i). By Theorem 7.4.7(ii), the models (L(p), E), p a cardinal > w, 
form an elementary chain. The union of this chain is ( L ,  E). The proof of 
the theorem on unions of elementary chains still goes through in this case, so 
(ii). Let +(uu) be the formula which says: 
' u  is a formula of gE, 
and there exists a cardinal p > w such that 
u E L(p) and u satisfies u in (L(p), E)'. 
Then it follows from (i) that Il/(uu) has the required property. 
(iii). If ( L ,  E) k (3v)cp, then by (i), (L(w,), E )  k (3u)cp, whence there 
exists x E L(w,), such that ( L ( o , ) ,  E )  k qo[x]. Again using (i), ( L ,  E) t 

568 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
cp[x]. Sincex E L(w,), x c L(5) for some w < 5 < wl. Thus 1x1 6 IL(t)I = 
151 = w, whence x is countable. 
(iv). Let a1 < ... < a,, and p1 < ... < p,, be increasing n-tuples of un- 
countable cardinals, and let y be a cardinal with a,, < y, p,, < y. By Theorem 
7.4.7(iii), we have 
<L(Y), 
€ 3  a1 ... an> 3 (L(Y), 
€ 3  Pi ... P n > *  
Then by (i), 
( L , E ,  a1 ... a,,) = ( L , E , ~ ,  
... P,,). -I 
The next Theorem 7.4.10 completely solves the problems 7.3.1-7.3.3 
under the assumption of the axiom of constructibility. Lemma 7.4.9 below 
allows us to handle all three problems at once. 
LEMMA 
7.4.9. Let a be a cardinal and assume: 
(i). For all cardinals p 6 a, if ( B ,  E) 4 (L(a), E) and IBI = p, then 
L(P) = B. 
Then each of the following hold 
(ii). (L(a), E )  is a Jbnsson model of power a. 
(iii). For all cardinals 6 < < a and fi < y 6 a, Chang’s conjecture 
fails for the pairs (a, p), (y, 6). 
(iv). For all cardinals fl < a, there exists a well ordered model of type a 
which has no elementary submodel of type p. 
PROOF. (ii) follows by taking 
For (iii), consider the model % = (L(a), L(p), E) of type (a, p) and 
suppose there is a % < U, 8 = ( B ,  V, E), of type (y,6). Then V = BnL(/l). 
By (i), L(y) c B. If y < p, then also L(y) 5 L(p), whence L(y) c V, and 
this contradicts IVI = 6 < y. Similarly, if p < y, then L(p) c B, whence 
L(p) c V and this contradicts I VI = 6 < p. Thus there is no 23 4 ?I of 
To prove (iv), choose a well ordering <* of L(a) of order type a, such 
that L(fl) is an initial segment. Then (L(a), <*, E, p) is a well ordered 
model of type a. Here p is a constant of the model. Suppose ( B ,  < *, E, p) 4 
(L(a), <*, E, p )  is an elementary submodel of type 8. Then IBI = p, so (i) 
implies that L(p) c B. But then the element p $ L(p) has p predecessors, so 
(B, < *, E, /I) 
cannot have type /3. Thus (L(a), <*, E, B )  has no elementary 
submodels of type B. -I 
= a. 
type (Y, 6). 
THEOREM 
7.4.10. Assume the axiom of constructibility. Then conditions 
(i)-(iv) of Lemma 7.4.9 hold for all cardinals a. 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
569 
PROOF. 
By Lemma 7.4.9, it suffices to prove (i). To do this, we assume that 
(i) is false and get a contradiction. Thus we assume that there are cardinals 
a > B and a model (B, E) < (L(a), E) of power lBl = B such that not 
L(B) c B. Since (B, E) is well-founded, there is a unique ordinal q and 
isomorphism 
f: (Jqrt), 
E) 
(B, E). 
f: 
(L(rt)7 E) 
(L(a), E). 
lrtl = IL(rt)l = B 7  so rt 2 B. 
Thenfis also an elementary embedding 
We have 
For any limited formula q ( u l  ... u,) and any x1 , ..., x, E L(q), we have 
because limited formulas are absolute for L(q) and L(a). Also, by Lemma 
7.4.6, for all p < j? we have 
(2) 
f(L(P)) = L(f(P)). 
f(x) = L(f(P)). 
This is because x = L(p) iff ( x  = L(p))'L'v" iff ( f ( x )  = L ( ~ ( P ) ) ) ( ~ ( ' ) )  
iff 
Since L(B) is not a subset of B, there exists x EL(@) 
such that f ( x )  # x. 
Let 5 be the least ordinal such that 
(3) 
B is a limit ordinal, so 5 < @. In fact, B is a cardinal, so 
for some x E L(5 + I), 
f ( x )  # x. 
(4) 
151' 
B 
rt. 
It follows from the equation L(5) = U,.CL(v+ 1) that 
( 5 )  
for all x E L(t), f ( x )  = x. 
Thus 5 is the greatest ordinal with the property (5). We claim that 
(6) 
f(0 ' 
5. 
To prove (6), assume thatf(t) < t. By ( 5 )  and the fact thatfis one-one, 
we have f(r) 2 5, so f(5) = 5. From (4) we see that L(()  EL(^). Let 
x E L(5 + 1). Then there are a formula '~(uu, ... u,) and y , ,  ..., y, E L(5) 
such that 
(7) 
x = (2 E L ( ( )  : q'L""(ry, ... y.)}. 

570 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
The statement 
x = {z E u : Cp'")(zyl ... y,)} 
is limited, so by (l), 
But by (2),f(L(t)) = L(f(5)) = L(t), and by ( 5 ) 9 f ( Y i )  = Y I  
9 . . . , f ( Y n )  = 
yn. It follows from (7) and (8) thatf(x) = x. But x was an arbitrary element 
of L ( ( +  I ) ,  so we have contradicted (3). We conclude that f ( 5 )  > (, i.e., 
( 6 )  holds. 
We have < > o, 
because for each p < o there is a limited formula q ( u )  
such that p is the unique set satisfying cp(u), whence f(p) = p. Also, it 
follows from (4) that 
(9) 
q r )  n L 
q v ) .  
Up to this point in the proof, we have not used the axiom of construc- 
tibility. Using it now, (9) implies that S ( < )  c L(v). Define 
D = {X E S ( ( )  : 5 E ~ ( x ) } .  
We claim that D is a nonprincipal (-complete ultrafilter over 5. This is es- 
sentially the result of Exercise 4.2.4, but we shall give a direct proof here. 
Note that the formulas x = 0, z = x n y, z = 5\x 
are limited. Thus 
f ( 0 )  = 0, so ( ~ f ( 0 )  
and 0 4 D. Also, for all x, y :  x E D and y E D implies 
t E ~ ( x )  
and 5 ~ f ( y ) .  
So 5 E ~ ( x )  n f ( y )  =f(x n y ) ,  and x n y E D. And, 
for all x c 5, x 4 D implies ( # f ( x ) .  So 5 ~ f ( S ) \ f ( x )  =f(t\x), 
and 
5' 
x E D. This makes D a n  ultrafilter. D is nonprincipal, because for all 
i E 5 ,  
5 4 {il = {f(i)) =f({i}h 
so {c} 4 D. To prove D that is <-complete, let c E 5 and {x, : n E c} c D. 
We have a slight difficulty because it is not clear whether {x, : n E c} E L(q). 
However, we get around this by letting 
r = {(n, p )  E c x 5 : p E x,). 
Then r E L( q). Each x, belongs to L( q), and 
{ p  E ( : (n, p )  E r }  = x, E D. 
The formula u = { p  E 5 : (n, p )  E r }  is limited. Therefore for all n < 4', 
i 
E f ( 4  = { P  E f ( 0  : <f(n), 
CC) E f ( r ) }  
= { P  E f ( 5 )  : (T 
P )  E f ( r ) } ?  

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
571 
Hence n n + x ,  E D. 
theorem 4.2.18, this contradicts the axiom of constructibility. -I 
We have shown that 5 is a measurable cardinal > o. But by Scott's 
By 7.4.8, if V =  L then Ox does not exist. By Theorem 7.4.10, if 
V =  L then 7.4.9 (i) holds. Kunen has obtained the following improve- 
ment of Theorem 7.4.10. 
7.4.11. If 0' does not exist then 7.4.9 (i) holds. 
The proof combines the methods of the preceding and present sections 
with a generalization of the iterated ultrapower construction of Section 
6.5. Although many of the tools required for the proof have already 
been introduced in this book, we shall not give the proof here because it 
is quite long. We shall prove one last result connecting the problems 
7.3.1-7.3.3 with the constructible universe. 
THEOREM 
7.4.12. Assume that there is no ordinal 5 > o such that 
(5 is a weakly compact cardinal)'L'. 
Then conditions (i)-(iv) of Lemma 7.4.9 hold. 
PROOF. Assume (i) is false. Let r, 17, 
f :  (L(9), E) 
<L(U)> 
E), 
and 5 be as in the previous proof. We show first that (t is inaccessible)'". 
It is easy to check that 5 is accessible if and only if 
( I )  there exist [ < 5 and y c and r c [ x y  such that y is cofinal in 
( 5 ,  <) and for all p ,  n ~
y
,
 
# n implies { v  : r(v, p ) }  # { v  : r(v, T)}. 
Let q(i, 5, y, r )  be an abbreviation for the part of (1) inside the quantifiers; 
formally, 
( V Z  E 5)(3UEy)[Z€ U ] A  ( v p ,  7T € J ' ) [ p  f 71 -+ 
i 
(Vv E [)[(3s E r)(s = ( v ,  p)) e* (3s E r)(s = ( v ,  n))]]. 

572 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
Note that all the quantifiers in cp are limited. It follows that cp is absolute 
for L. Suppose (t; is accessible)'". Then there exist i 
E 4 and y E S(5) A L 
and r E S(i x y )  n L such that 
cp'L'(i, t, J', r). 
cp(L t;, Y ,  r). 
Using absoluteness we have 
Since 151 + < q, we have y E L ( q )  and r E L(q). Then as we observed in the 
previous proof, it follows that 
rp (.f(i 
1 9  .f(t 
1 3  f( Y ) ,  f ( Y  1 1. 
Butf([) = C, SO 
( 2 )  
cp(i7f(t),f(.Y)7f(r)). 
The statement ( 2 )  implies that ,f(y) is cofinal in f(<), 
whence there exists 
/ I  <f'(t) with < ,< p and 11 ~ f ( y ) .  
Let 
(3) 
z = { v E [ : ( v , ~ ) E ~ ( ~ ) ] .  
We note that for all n E 5, we have f(n) = n, and n E y iff f ( n )  ~ f ( y ) ;  
therefore 
(4) 
Y =f(v) n 4. 
For all n ~ f ( y )  
n <, n # p, whence by (2) and (3), 
We have 
z = f ( z ) ,  
S(z) = /lo = L 
(C - z )  = f(i - z )  = f(i) -f(z) = i 
-f(z), 
and therefore z =f(z). Thus from (3) and (5), respectively, we obtain, 
using (4), 
(3P E Y ) ( Z  = { v  E i : ( v ,  P )  E r ) ) .  
( V n ~ y ) ( z  
# { v ~ i : ( v , n ) ~ r } ) .  
This is a contradiction. Hence (t is an inaccessible cardinal)'". 
To show that (t; is weakly compact)''' we shall use the characterization 
of weakly compact given in Exercise 4.2.2(iii). It says that a cardinal /I 
is weakly compact iff p is inaccessible and every model of the form 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
573 
has a proper elementary extension 
(C, E, TI '.. Tn> 
such that 
C E  C, 
b g  R@), 
cEb imply 
C E  R(P). 
Note that since (t is inaccessible)'", we have ( 5  = 
hence 
( R ( 0  = q5))'L'. 
f(L(t)) = L(f(5)). 
Furthermore, using Lemma 7.4.6, we have 
Consider a model '$3 E L  of the form 
'$3 = (L(5), E, s, 1 . .  S,). 
Then S1, ..., $,EL. Since S1, ..., S, are finite-placed relations over L ( 0 ,  
they all belong to L(It1'). Hence B ~L(151'), and B  EL(^). Now form the 
model 
Recalling that f is an elementary embedding of (L(q), E) into (L(a), E), 
we have for each YE 
formula q ( u l  . .. u,) and x, , ..., x, E L(t), 
(B t q[xl ... x,])(') 
iff (L(a), E) != (f(%) t= ~ L f ( x 1 )  f ( x n ) l )  
iff (f(B) ~ [ f ( x , )  
. * *  f(xn)I)(")* 
iff (L(q), E )  C (8 I.  xi 
xnl) 
This is because the statement 'B I= q [ x l  ... x,]' is absolute by Lemma 
7.4.6(ii). But f ( x , )  = x I ,  ...,f( 
x") = x,. Therefore (B < f ( @ ) ) ( L ) .  On the 
other hand, 5 c L(5), whence t ~ f ( 5 )  
c f(L(5)), so 5 ~ f ( L ( 5 ) ) .  
But 
5 4 I,((). Hence 
( f ( ~ )  
is a proper elementary extension of B)''), 
If y ~ f ( L ( t ) ) ,  
z E L(t), and y E z, then y E L(5) because L(5) is transitive. 
Thusf('$3) has the required property. -I 
COROLLARY 
7.4.13. If there exists a Ramsey cardinal, then there is a countable 

574 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
ordinal B > o such that 
(/I is a weakly compact cardinal)“’. 
PROOF. By Rowbottom’s theorem, there is no J6nsson model of power a. 
Then by Theorem 7.4.11, there is an ordinal 5 > o such that 
(r is a weakly compact cardinal)‘”. 
The desired conclusion now follows from Corollary 7.4.8(ii). -1 
The core model of Jensen and Dodd (1981) has many of the structure 
properties of L but allows measurable cardinals. The methods and 
results described in this section have been considerably extended using 
the core model and other inner models instead of L. These methods 
have led to results on regular ultrafilters, Chang’s conjecture and Jon- 
sson models which have been stated without proof in Sections 4.3 and 
7.3. See, for example, Devlin (1973), Kanamori and Magidor (1978), 
Donder, Jensen and Koppelberg (1981), Donder and Koepke (1983), 
Levinski (1984), Koepke (1988), and Donder (1988). 
EXERCISES 
7.4.1. Show that Corollary 7.4.8(i) can be reformulated as the following 
theorem of ZFC: Let % = ( A ,  E )  be a model of ZFC+ ‘there exists a 
Ramsey cardinal’. Let 
L’ 
= {a E A : % F ‘a E E}, 
% k ‘B is a cardinal > o’, 
~ ( f i ) ’  = {a E A : % I= ‘a E ~ ( f i ) ’ } .  
(L(P)’, E )  < (La, E). 
and 
Then 
Give similar formulations for parts (iii) and (iv) of the corollary. 
7.4.2*. Assuming that K ( w ~ )  
exists (cf. Exercise 7.3.23), prove the conclusions 
of Theorem 7.4.7. 
[Hint: Use Lemma 7.3.20 or Exercise 7.3.33 instead of Silver’s theorem.] 
7.4.3. Assume that there exists a cardinal a and a well ordering <* of 
L(a) such that the model (L(a), 
<*, E) satisfies the sentences (l), (4) of 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
515 
the proof of Theorem 7.4.7 and also has an uncountable set of indis- 
cernibles. Show that the conclusions of Theorem 7.4.7 hold. 
7.4.4*. Assume that the class of cardinals > w is indiscernible in the model 
( L ,  E) (i.e., condition 7.4.8(iv)). Let O# be the set of all formulas cp(v, ... u,) 
of gE 
such that ( L ,  E) t cp[w, ... a,]. Here wl, ..., 0, are in the ordinary 
sense, not in the sense of L. Prove that O# $ L. 
[Hint: Let ci be a cardinal > No. Then O# is also the set of all =.YE 
formulas 
q ( u ,  ... v,) such that ( L ( a ) , E )  k q [ w l  ... w,]. Use the fact that there 
exists a well ordering < * of L(a) which is definable in (L(ci), E) and such 
that (,!,(a), E) satisfies sentences (l), (4) of the proof of Theorem 7.4.7.1 
7.4.5. Condition (iv) of Corollary 7.4.8 implies conclusions (i)-(iii) of 
Corollary 7.4.8. 
7.4.6. Suppose that a is a Rowbottom cardinal. Then for every formula 
q ( u )  of SE such that (L(a), E) k (3!u)q(u), there exists a countable 
x E L(w,) such that (L(ci), E) t cp[x]. In particular, if 01 > w, then there 
are only countably many constructible subsets of w. 
7.4.7. Suppose a > w1 and Chang's conjecture holds for (ci, wl), (a1, w ) .  
Then there are only countably many constructible subsets of w. [Remark: 
From exercises in Section 7.3, if Chang's conjecture holds for some pair 
(a,P), (7, w )  with a 2 > w, ci 2 y > w ,  then it holds for (ci,wl), 
7.4.8*. Assume that a is a cardinal and every countable subset of a is con- 
structible. Then conditions (;)-(iv) of Lemma 7.4.9 hold. 
[Hint: Like the proof of Theorem 7.4.10, but prove that 5 is a Ramsey 
cardinal instead of proving that t is measurable.] 
7.4.9. If y is an inaccessible cardinal, then (y is an inaccessible cardina1)'l). 
7.4.10*. If y is a weakly compact cardinal, then (y is a weakly compact 
cardinal)'". 
[Hint: By the preceding exercise, (y is an inaccessible cardinal)'". Thus 
(R(y) = L(Y))(~). 
Let y > a. Consider a constructible model '23 = 
(L(y), E, S1 ... S,). Take a cardinal a > y and choose an elementary sub- 
model (5 4 (L(a), E) of power y such that y c C, y E C, 
'23 E C. Then 
(5 E (L(q), E) for some q. By weak compactness, there is a 6 2 q and an 
elementary embedding f : (L(q), E) < (L(6), E) such that y is the least 
ordinal withf(y) # y. Now use the method of Theorem 7.4.11 to show that 
[Hint: Use Exercise 7.4.3.1 
( 0 1  9 w1.1 

576 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
in the constructible universef(B3) is an elementary extension of 23 of the 
required kind. ] 
7.4.1 l*. Suppose f: (L(r]), E) < (L(a), E), a is a cardinal, 5 is the least 
ordinal such thatf(5) # t, and 151' < r] (cf. the proof of Theorem 7.4.1 1). 
Then 
(( is II:-indescribable)'L). 
(The notion of a llr-indescribable cardinal is defined in Exercise 4.2.19.) 
If in addition a is a limit cardinal, then 
(5 is indescribab1e)'l'. 
The same conclusion holds iff: ( L ,  E) < ( L ,  E) and 5 is the least ordinal 
such thatf(5) # C. 
7.4.12*. Assume that the class C of all uncountable cardinals is indiscernible 
in (L, E). Then for each cardinal a > w, there exists an elementary em- 
bedding f :  ( L ,  E) < (L, E) such that a is the least ordinal such that 
f ( a )  # a. Hence 
(a is weakly compact)'l', 
and 
(a is indescribable)'". 
[Hint: 
Use the fact that there is a function F definable in (L, E) such 
that the sentences (l)-(4) 
of the proof of Theorem 7.4.7 hold in (L, E). 
Thus ( L ,  E) has definable Skolem functions, and the Skolem hull of C is 
isomorphic to ( L ,  E). Next use the elementary embedding theorem for 
indiscernibles, i.e., any ordermorphism of the class of indiscernibles into 
itself generates an elementary embeddingf: ( L ,  E) < ( L ,  E).] 
7.4.13**. Assume that f: 
(L(r]), E) < (L(a), E), a is a cardinal, 5 is the 
least ordinal such thatf(5) # 5, and 151'' < r]. (Same hypotheses as Exercise 
7.4.1 1.) Then there exists an elementary embedding 
f: 
( L ,  E) < ( L ,  E) 
such that t is the least ordinal with f(5) # 5. 
[Hint: 
Form an 'ultrapower' n,(L, E). Let 
D = { X E L  
n S(5) : 5 E ~ ( x ) } .  
Note that D 4 L. Let the elements of n , ( L ,  E) be the equivalence classes 
of constructible functions g E~ L. Show that the ultrapower is well-founded 
and therefore isomorphic to (L, 
E). Letfbe the composition of the natural 
embedding and this isomorphism. This exercise is the first step in the proof 
of the result 7.4.11 of Kunen.] 

7.41 
LARGE CARDINALS AND THE CONSTRUCTION UNIVERSE 
577 
7.4.14. Using Exercises 7.4.12 and 13, show that if 
(there is no indescribable cardinal)'", 
then conditions (i)-(iv) of Lemma 7.4.9 hold. 
such that the following are theorems of ZFL: 
Elaborating on the hint for Exercise 7.4.12, there is a formula x <* y 
( V X Y ) ( X  E y --t x < * v), 
(Va)(L(a) is well ordered by <*), 
(Va)(L(a) is an initial segment of <*). 
Using <*, we can define Skolem functions in ZFL. For the following 
problem we shall use formulas containing < * and Skolem terms as abbrevia- 
tions for the formulas which define them in ZFL. 
7.4.15*. Assume that the class of all uncountable cardinals is indiscernible 
in (L, E), and let O# be the set of 9, 
formulas defined in Exercise 7.4.4. 
Show that O# is the unique set Z such that: 
(1). Z is a maximal consistent set of formulas of YE. 
(2). All axioms of ZFL belong to Z. 
(3). All the 9, 
formulas (i)-(iii) of Lemma 7.3.19 belong to C. 
(4). All 9'€ formulas of the form 
u, < t(u, ... 0,- 1 u,+ 1 ... 0,) + u,+ 1 Q t(0, ... u,- 1 u,,. 1 ... v,) 
belong to C. 
(5). All 9'€ formulas of the form 
'p(u,, ... uin) c) ~ ( v , ,  ... uJ, 
belong to Z. 
(6). For any well ordering <' of w, the model generated by the set 
(0, < ') of indiscernibles whose increasing sequences satisfy Z is well ordered 
by <*. 
formulas, the conditions (1)-(6) can be expressed as a ll: formula over 
(R(w), 
E) (that is, second-order universal-existential). It then follows that 
the statement cp E O# is A:, i.e., can be defined both by a II: formula and 
by a 
formula in ( R ( o ) ,  E). This is known to be the simplest possible 
kind of nonconstructible set, in the C and ll hierarchy. Solovay has shown 
that if ZF is consistent, so is ZF+ 'there is a nonconstructible A: set'. 
7.4.16*. Assume the class of cardinals > o is indiscernible in (L, E) and 
define O# as before. Let M be a transitive set or class, (M, E) 1 ZFC, 
i ,  < ... < in < w, j ,  < ... < j ,  < w, 
Note: It turns out that, with an appropriate Godel numbering of 

578 
SELECTED TOPICS 
[7.4 
CM = {a E M : ( M ,  E) k u is a cardinal > w}, and 
L M  = { X E M  : ( M , E )  t X E L } .  
Prove that if O# E M ,  then (CM, 
<) is a set of indiscernibles in (LM, 
E). 
Hence all the conclusions of Corollary 7.4.8 hold in ( M ,  E) (by Exercise 
7.4.5). This means that simply by putting the set O# of natural numbers 
into the model, we can make every definable element of ( L ,  E) countable! 
7.4.17*. Gaifrnan’s construction. Let u > w be a measurable cardinal and 
let D be an a-complete nonprincipal ultrafilter over a. Recall the iterated 
ultrapower construction of Section 6.5. For each ordinal p, let 
% = X<B,>>D 
be the ultrafilter formed by iterating D, p times with the inverse well order. 
Prove that: 
(i). The iterated ultrapower n,,(L, E) is well founded and isomorphic 
(ii). For each y E B, let d(y, : n,(L, E) 4 n E , ( L ,  E) be the natural 
embedding. Let b E n,(L, E) be the equivalence class of the identity 
function on a. Then {d{yl(b) : y E p} is indiscernible in nIE,(L, 
E) (with the 
obvious ordering). Hence ( L ,  E) has indiscernibles. 
7.4.18*. Generalize Theorem 7.4.7(ii) to the following. Suppose there exists 
a Rarnsey cardinal a. Then for any three infinite cardinals a < j < y, p and 
y regular, we have 
to ( L ,  E). 
(L(B), E) <a (L(Y), E)* 
denotes elementary submodel in the sense of the infinitary language 
=Ya introduced in Chapter 4.) In particular, we have 
( L ( 4 ,  E) -L, (L e. 
This result can be improved in the style of Exercise 7.4.2. 

APPENDIX A 
SET THEORY 
In the first part of this appendix, we shall develop the intuitive set theory 
which is needed for the theory of models. Our purpose is both to fix notation, 
and to present some basic results about ordinals, transfinite induction and 
cardinals. The treatment below will fill the gap between the amount of set 
theory used in most other branches of mathematics and the slightly larger 
amount used in model theory. 
The last part of this appendix contains the formal lists of axioms for 
four axiomatic set theories, those of Zermelo, Zermelo-Fraenkel, Bernays, 
and Bernays-Morse. 
The empty set will be denoted by 0. The set of all x such that the condition 
q ( x )  holds, if such a set exists, is denoted by (x : cp(x)}. The set of all 
elements of X which are not elements of Y is denoted by X\ 
Y. We write 
Y c X if Y is a subset of X, including the possibility Y = X .  We use the 
usual notation for unions and intersections. The ordered pair of x and y 
is defined by 
( X , Y >  = {{xl, (X,YIl. 
We define ordered n-tuples inductively by 
(x) = X, 
(XI 
9 *.., xn, xn+ 1) = ((XI 9 ...) Xn), Xn+ 1). 
The Cartesian product X x Y is the set of all ordered pairs (x, y )  with x E X ,  
y E Y ,  and we write 
X'X ... x x , x x , + 1  = ( X , X  ... X X " ) X X n + l ,  
x' = x, 
X"+' = X " X X .  
An n-ary relation over Xis a subset of X", and a function is a binary many-one 
relation. If ( x ,  y )  EL where f is a function, we may write y = f ( x )  or 
y = f,. If R is an n-ary relation we sometimes write R(x,, ..., x,,) for 
579 

580 
APPENDIX A 
( x l ,  ..., x,) E R. If R is binary, we may write xRy for ( x ,  y )  E R. We shall 
say thatf is a function on X onto Y if X = domain (f) 
and Y = range (f), 
f is a function on X into Y if X = domain (f) and range (f) c Y. The 
restriction of a functionf to a set Y c domain (f) is writtenfly. An n-ary 
operation over X is a function on X" into X. We shall denote the set of all 
functions on X into Y by 'Y. In particular, note that OX = (0). The Carte- 
sian product of a collection { X i  : i E I} of sets is denoted by n i s r X i  and is 
defined to be the set of all functions f with domain Isuch thatf(i)EXi 
for all i E I. 
An equivalence relation over a set X is a binary relation R over X which 
is reflexive (i.e., xRx for all X E  X ) ,  symmetric (i.e., xRy implies yRx), 
and transitive (i.e., xRy and yRz implies xRz). A partial ordering of a set X 
is a binary relation R over X which is reflexive, transitive and antisymmetric 
(i.e., xRy and yRx implies x = y ) .  A simple ordering of a set X is a partial 
ordering R of X which is connected (i.e., for all x, y E X, either xRy or yRx). 
A well ordering of a set X is a simple ordering R of X with the property 
that every nonempty subset Y of X has a least element (i.e., an element 
y E Y such that yRz for all z E Y). A strict well ordering of X is a relation 
R over X which is irreflexive ( x  E X implies not xRx) and such that the 
reflexive relation R u { ( x ,  x )  : x E X }  is a well ordering of X. It is easily 
seen that if X is (strictly) well ordered by R and Y c X ,  then Y is (strictly) 
well ordered by R n Y x Y. 
Any set X of sets is partially ordered by the inclusion relation c. 
X is said to be a chain iff X is simply ordered by c , and a well ordered chain 
iff X is well ordered by c. Two chains X, Y are said to be isomorphic iff 
there is a one-one functionf, called an isomorphism on X onto Y, such that 
for all x ,  y E X ,  x c y if and only iff(.) 
c f ( y ) .  
We now turn to ordinal numbers or ordinals. An ordinal is a set a such 
that u a  c u and a is strictly well ordered by the E relation. As a rule, 
we shall use lower case Greek letters for ordinals. This definition of ordinals 
is, of course, quite artificial, although it has by now become fairly standard 
in the literature. The intuitive idea of an ordinal is not a set at all, but a 
type of well ordering. Our definition of an ordinal as a certain kind of set is 
just a trick. However, it has the advantage of making our notation much 
simpler. We did the same sort of thing in our artificial definitions of ordered 
pairs and of functions. (If we wanted to do things in the most natural 
way, we would start with several different kinds of basic objects instead of 
starting only with sets.) We shall develop the elementary facts about ordinals 
carefully, so we can see that they really behave the way we want them to. 

SET THEORY 
581 
A. 1. Every element of an ordinal is an ordinal. 
PROOF. Let a be an ordinal and x E a. Ify E x, then y E u a ,  s o y  E a. Hence 
x c a, and it follows that x is strictly well ordered by E. 
We now show that u x  c x, or in other words, z E y ,  y E x imply z E x. 
Let z E y ,  y E x. Since u a  c a, we have y E a, and hence z E a. E is transitive 
over a, so z E x. i 
A.2. If a, fl are ordinals, then ci c p if and only if ci E fl or a = /?. 
PROOF. If a E /I, then a c u p  and u p  c p, so ci c p. 
Assume a c p and a # p. Let y be the least element of the nonempty set 
fl \ a. To show that a E fl, we shall prove that a = y. If 6 E y, then 6 E p, 
and since y is the least element of fl\ 
a, 6 E a. Therefore y c a. Now let 
6 E a. Since a c p, 6 E 8. /3 is strictly well ordered by E, so we have either 
y E 6, y = 6, or 6 E y. Since y 4 a and 6 E a, we conclude that y # 6 and 
y 4 6. Therefore 6 E y. This shows that a c y, and completes the proof. -1 
By combining the two previous results, we see the following: 
A.3. Every ordinal a is a well ordered chain. 
The next result is a considerable improvement over A.3. 
A.4. 
(i). Every set of ordinals is strictly well ordered by E .  
(ii). Every set of ordinals is a well ordered chain. 
PROOF. Since (i) obviously follows from (ii) and A.2, we prove only (ii). 
Let X be a set of ordinals. Then c partially orders X. Suppose a, p E X. 
If not p c a, then there is a least ordinal y E p \ a. Since 6 E y implies 
6 E /3 n a, we have y c a. But y 4 a, so by A.2, y = a. Therefore a E p 
and hence a c p. This shows that c is connected over X, and thus c 
simply orders X. 
Now let Y be a nonempty subset of X. Choose a E Y. 
Case 1: a n Y = 0. Let /3 E Y; then /3# a. Moreover, a c /3 or /3 c a. 
If fi c a, then fl = a. Hence a is the least element of Y. 
Case 2: a n  Y # 0. Then a n  Y has a least element y. We have 
y n Y = 0, because 6 E y n Y implies that 6 E a n Y and 6 E y, contradicting 

582 
APPENDIX A 
our choice of y as the least element of a n Y. Since y n Y = 0, we see from 
Case I that y is the least element of Y. Therefore t well orders X. -1 
Now that we have shown that the ordinals are strictly well ordered by E, 
we shall usually write a < p for a e p ,  and a 6 p for a e p  or a = p. 
We repeat for emphasis that 
a < /3 means the same as a E p. 
Notice that A.l says that each ordinal a is equal to the set of all ordinals 
p < a. Moreover, A.2 says that a c p if and only if ci < 8. 
The first three ordinals are: 0, 1 = {0}, 2 = (0, (0)). The successor of a 
is the ordinal a+ 1 = a u {a}, which is the least ordinal greater than a. 
a is said to be a limit ordinal iff it is the successor of no ordinal. The smallest 
limit ordinal other than 0 is denoted by w. The elements of o are called 
finite ordinals, or natural numbers; we use the letters m, n, p, q, r, s for 
arbitrary natural numbers. 
The infimum of a nonempty set X of ordinals is the least element of X, 
and the supremum of X is the least ordinal which is greater than or equal 
to every element of X. The exercise A.5 below provides a very convenient 
notation for the infimum, nX, and the supremum, U X ,  of a set X of 
ordinals. 
A.5. Let X be a nonempty set of ordinals. Then OX and UX are ordinals. In- 
deed, O X  is the infimum of X and U X  is the supremum of X .  
We now come to the very useful principle of transfinite induction. 
A.6 (Transfinite Induction). Let P(a) be aproperty of ordinals. Assume that 
for all ordinals /I, if P(y) holds for all y < p, then P(p) holds. Then we 
have P( a )  for all ordinals a. 
PROOF. We suppose that P(a) fails for some a, and arrive at a contradiction. 
Let 
X = {y < a : P(y) fails}. 
Xis not empty, because a E X. Thus X has a least element 8. But P(y) holds 
for all y < p, so by hypothesis P(p) holds. This contradicts 8 E X. -1 
We shall see many examples of proofs which use transfinite induction in 
this book. Here is a first example. 

SET THEORY 
583 
A.7. If a, j? are ordinals which are isomorphic well ordered chains, then 
a = 8. Furthermore, the only isomorphism from the chain a to itself is the 
identity function. 
PROOF. Let P(a) be the property: 
‘the only ordinal which is isomorphic to a is a, and theonly isomorphism 
from CL to a is the identity function’. 
Assume that P(y) holds for all y c p. Let f be an arbitrary isomorphism 
from fl to an ordinal 6. For each y c b, the restriction off to y is an iso- 
morphism from y to the ordinal f ( y ) .  But P(y) holds, so y = f ( y )  and f 
is the identity function on p. Therefore 6 = p, and P(p) holds. -I 
The whole point in studying ordinals is that every well ordering ‘looks 
like’ some ordinal. To make this precise we shall say that a well ordering R 
over a set X has order type a iff there is a one-one function f on X onto a 
such that xRy implies f (x) < f ( y ) .  The function f is called an isomorphism 
from R to a. We see from A.7 that a well ordering R has at most one order 
type, because any two order types of R must be isomorphic and hence equal. 
Moreover, there is at most one isomorphism f between R and its order 
type a, because iff, g are two such isomorphisms, then f -‘g is an isomor- 
phism from a to a. The next result shows that the order type always exists. 
A.8. Every well ordering has exactly one order type. 
PROOF. The proof of this proposition depends on another version of the 
principle of transfinite induction which applies to well orderings rather than 
ordinals. Let R be a well ordering of a set X ,  and let x E X .  By the initial 
segment of R determined by x we mean the restriction R n Y x Y of R 
to the set 
Y = { y ~ X : y R x  
and y # x}. 
We use the following principle of transfinite induction - the easy proof is 
left for the reader. 
(1) Let P(R) be a property of well orderings. Assume that for every well 
ordering S, i f P ( T )  holds for every initial segment T of S, then P(S). 
Then P(R) holds for all R. 
We now apply the principle (l), where P(R) is the property: ‘R has an 

584 
APPENDIX A 
order type'. Suppose every initial segment of a well ordering S over X has 
an order type. It suffices to prove that S has an order type. For each x E X 
let f, be the unique isomorphism from the initial segment of S determined 
by x to its order type. 
Case 1: S has a greatest element x. Then, if P is the order type of the 
initial segment of S determined by x, the function 
f = L "  { < x , P ) }  
is an isomorphism from S to P+ 1, so P ( S )  holds. 
tion g off, to the set 
Case 2: S has no greatest element. We note that if ySx, then the restric- 
( z  : zSy and z # y }  
is an isomorphism from the initial segment of S determined by y to an 
ordinal. Therefore g = S, and S, c S,. Now form the union f of the chain 
(fx : x E X } .  f is an isomorphism from S to the supremum of the order 
types of the initial segments of S. Thus again P ( S )  holds and our proof is 
complete. -1 
A function f whose domain is an ordinal a is called an (a-termed) sequence. 
An enumeration of a set Xis a sequence whose range is X. We sometimes use 
the notation (fo, 
fi, 
..., fs, 
...), P < a, or fa, 
P -= u, or even (so, 
f i ,  ...), 
for an a-termed sequence$ 
The sum a+P of two ordinals is the ordinal y 2 a with the property 
that the chain y \ a is isomorphic to the chain 8. It takes transfinite induc- 
tion to show that a+B exists and is unique. Intuitively we think of a+P 
as the list of ordinals in a followed by tlie list of ordinals in /3. Let f be an 
a-termed sequence and g a P-termed sequence. The concatenation f n g  of 
f and g is the ( a  + P)-termed sequence which is, intuitively, obtained by first 
listing fr, 
Cl < a, and then listing gc, 5 c P. More formally, f n g  may be 
defined by 
f " s ( 5 )  =f(t) 
for 5 < a, 
fng(a+5) = g(5) 
for 5 < P. 
We shall always assume the axiom of choice, which states that: 
If Xi is a nonempty set for each i E I, then the Cartesian product ni., Xi 
is nonempty. 
The axiom of choice has a number of equivalent formulations which 
can be found in almost any advanced textbook in mathematics. For con- 

SET THEORY 
585 
venience, we shall state a few of them here. The proofs of their equivalence 
to the axiom of choice can be found, for example, in KELLEY 
(1955). 
A.9 (Well Ordering Principle). Every set can be well ordered. 
A. 10 (Enumeration Principle). Euery set can be enumerated. 
A. 1 1 (Hausdorff Maximal Principle). Every set X of sets includes a maximal 
chain Y, i.e., a chain Y c X such that if Y c Z c X and Z is a chain, then 
Y = z. 
A.12 (Zorn’s Lemma). Let X be a nonempty set of sets which is closed 
under unions of nonempty chains (i.e., if0 # Y c X and Y is a chain, then 
u 
Y E X ) ;  then X has a maximal element, i.e. an element x E X such that 
x c y E X implies x = y. 
We shall often wish to introduce a definition by transfinite recursion. 
This type of definition is made possible by the following important result 
in set theory. 
A.13. Let G be a function on up<. 
p X  into X. Then there exists a unique 
a-termed sequence f such that f (p) = C( f Ip) for all p < a. 
PROOF. We argue by transfinite induction, A.6. Assume the proposition 
is true for all a < a,. We shall prove the proposition for a = a,. Let G 
be a function on U B < a t X  into X .  For each y < a, there is a unique y-termed 
sequence f y  such that &(j) = C(&lp) for all B < y. If a, is not a limit 
ordinal, say a. = y + 1, we let f be the a-termed sequence such that f Iy = f,, 
and f ( y )  = G(fy). Then f ( B )  = G(flP) for all /I < a,. 
Suppose now that a, is a limit ordinal. We note that if 6 < y < a,, then 
fylb is a b-termed sequence with the property that for all /l < 6, 
By uniqueness of fa, we have fylb =fa. In other words, fa c f,. Now it 
follows that the union f = Uy<. 
f ,  is an a-termed sequence with the property 
that f ( p )  =fs+,(p) = C(fp+,I/?) = C(fIp). In both cases we have found 
the desired function$ 
To show uniqueness, let f ‘  be another a,-termed sequence such that 
f ’(p) = G(f’l/l) for all /? < a, . Then by the uniqueness of f s ,  
f’@ = f a  = f I p  for all 
B < ao. 

586 
APPENDIX A 
By the power, or cardinality, of a set X ,  denoted by 1x1, we mean the least 
ordinal a such that Xis enumerated by an a-termed sequence. (The existence 
of 1x1 requires the axiom of choice.) An ordinal x is said to be a cardinal, 
or initial ordinal, if r = JaI. We shall use lower case Greek letters for 
cardinals as well as ordinals. The (th infinite cardinal is denoted by Nt, 
or alternatively by mt. 
The successor of a cardinal x ,  denoted by x ' ,  is the least cardinal greater 
than a; thus (Nr)+ = NC+, . A cardinal a is said to be a limit cardinal iff 
it is not the successor of a cardinal. The cardinaIpower of a with exponent /? 
is defined by c? 
= IPrl. The 'beths' 3< are defined recursively by 
and when < is a limit ordinal, 
3< = u a[. 
c<c 
The 'beths' are closely tied in with the notion of a strong limit cardinal. 
A cardinal a is called a strong limit cardinal iff, for all cardinals p < a, 
28 < a. We shall let the reader prove the following. 
A.14. 
such that a = NC. 
ordinal 5 such that a = 3{. 
(i). a is an infinite litnit cardinal if and only if there is a limit ordinal 5 
(ii). a is an infinite strong limit cardinal if and only if there is a limit 
A. 15. 
(i). 5 6 NC < at. 
(ii). There are arbitrarily large cardinals a such that 
a = N, = 3,. 
The continuum hypothesis (CH) states that a1 = K, , and the generalized 
continuirm hypothesis (GCH) states that, for all 5, 2', = N 
Thus the 
GCH implies that for all r, at = Xt. The GCH also implies that every 
limit cardinal is a strong limit cardinal. 

SET THEORY 
581 
We do not assume the CH or GCH as part of our intuitive set theory. 
The GCH is interesting because it dramatically simplifies the arithmetic 
of cardinals, and we shall sometimes prove theorems which need the GCH 
as an additional hypothesis. 
Some of the basic results in the arithmetic of cardinals are collected in 
the next three propositions. They are included mainly for reference, so the 
proofs are not given. Most of them are proved in Kamke (1950). 
A. 16. The following three conditions are equivalent: 
(i). 1x1 6 IYI (as ordinals). 
(ii). There is a one-one function on X into Y. 
(iii). There is a function on Y onto X. 
A.17. Let a, 0, 
y be arbitrary cardinals. 
(i). u < 2'. 
(ii). If a 6 p, then uy < py and (if0 c y )  ya 6 yB. 
(iii). uo = I ;  I" = I ;  i f a  > 0, 0" = 0. 
(iv). Let p be infjnite and y > 0. Then 
(ab)Y = (aY)B = ab u = &'Y. 
Special case: (298 = 28. 
(v). If a is infinite and n > 0, then u" = a. 
(vi). Z f X  is a nonernpty set of cardinals, then U X  and n X  are cardinals. 
A. 18. 
(i). If X v Y is infinite, then 
]Xu 
YI = 1x1 u IYI. 
IXX Y (  = 1x1 u IYI. 
IU XI < 1x1 u U(I4 : x E XI, 
(ii). If X v Y is infinite and X and Y are nonempty, then 
(iii). Z f X  is an infinite set of sets, then 
that is, the cardinal of U X  is at most the supremum of the cardinal of X and 
the cardinals of the elements of X. 
The inequality in (iii) above may be replaced by an equality in the following 
two important cases: 

588 
APPENDIX A 
(a) X i s  well ordered by inclusion; 
(b) any two sets in X are disjoint. 
The set of all subsets of X, also called the power set of X ,  is written S(X). 
If a is a cardinal, we shall write 
&(X) = { x  c X :  1x1 < a}, 
S'(X) = {x c X :  
IX\xl 
< a}. 
For example, S J X )  is the set of all finite subsets of X and Sm(X) 
the set of 
all cofinite subsets of X .  
A.19. 
(i). I S ( X ) ~  
= 21'1. 
(ii). Zf X is infinite, then 
I s m l  = 1x1. 
Part (i) is obvious, and (ii) follows from A.17 (v). 
The rank function R(5) is obtained by iterating the operation of forming 
power sets. We define inductively 
R(0) = 0; 
R(5 + 1) = S(R(5)); 
if 5 > 0 is a limit ordinal, R(5) = UqicR(q). 
The rank function has the following obvious properties: 
A.20. 
(i). If v < 5, then R(v) c R(5). 
(ii). For each ordinal 5, (R(o+5)1 = at. 
(iii). R(5) = UqicS(R(q)), for all 5 > 0. 
The axiom of regularity is the following statement: 
A.21. For every set x there is an ordinal 5 such that x E R(6). 
A.22. The axiom of regularity is equivalent to each of the following: 
(i). For every nonempty set x there exists y E x such that x n y = 0. 
(ii). There is no infinite sequence xo, x l ,  x2, ... of sets such that x1 E xo, 
x2 E X I ,  x3 E x2, ... . 

SET THEORY 
589 
The equivalence of (i) with the axiom of regularity does not require 
the axiom of choice, but the axiom of choice is needed to prove that (ii) 
implies the axiom of regularity. The statement (ii) has the consequence 
that for every set x, x 4 x, and more generally there cannot be any finite 
cycle xo E x I  E ... EX, E xo. 
The axiom of regularity is not used at all in this book. It is, however, 
usually included among the axioms of set theory, because only the ‘regular’ 
sets x E R ( 5 )  are considered to be mathematically interesting. For this 
reason we may as well include the axiom of regularity as part of the 
intuitive set theory. 
One consequence of the axiom of regularity which may be useful in 
model theory is the following principle of induction (compare A.6): 
A.23. Let P(x) be a propzrty of sets. Assume that for all sets y, if P(z) holds 
for all z E y ,  then P(.v) holds. Then we haoe P ( x )  for all sets x. 
In the next few pages we shall develop in some detail the important notion 
of cofinality. Let t be a limit ordinal. A set X is said to be cofinal in 5 iff 
X c ( and 5 = U X .  The cofinality o f t ,  written cf(<), is the least cardinal CI 
such that a set of power a is cofinal in 5. 
Notice in particular that cf(0) = 0. We define the cofinality of a successor 
ordinal by simply writing 
cf(<+l) = I .  
How does the cofinality function behave? One thing which we can see at 
once from the definition is 
0 < cf(5) < 5, 
0 = cf(o). 
whenever is an infinite limit ordinal. Putting 5 = w, we obtain the equation 
A cardinal a is said to be regular iff cf(a) = a, and to be singular iff 
cf(a) < a. So we have the following: 
A.24. w is regular. 
By a quirk of fate, 0 and 1 are regular, but all finite cardinals n > 1 are 
singular. However, the notions of regular and singular cardinals are irnpor- 
tant only for infinite cardinals. Are there any other regular cardinals? 
The next proposition gives us some others. 

590 
APPENDIX A 
A.25. Any infinite successor cardinal a+ is regular. 
PROOF. Let X be cofinal in a'. By A.18 (iii), 
a+ < IXI u u{IPI : P E  XI. 
U{lPl : B E  A') < a+* 
But 181 < a for all P E A', so 
This means that 1x1 = a+, and cf(a+) = a'. -1 
When we begin looking at limit cardinals other than w, we usually find 
that they are singular. For example, it is easy to see that 
Thus N, and 3, are singular. More generally, we may prove another result. 
A.26. For any limit ordinal < > 0, we have 
Cf(K,) = Cf(3,) = cf(<). 
PROOF. If X is cofinal in 5, then the set Y = (NY : y E X} is cofinal in N,, 
and IYI = 1x1. Hence cf(X,) < cf(<). 
If A" is cofinal in Xc, then the set 
Y' = {y : for some /3 E X', IjI = N Y )  
is cofinal in 5, and lY'l < IX'I. So we have cf(<) < cf(N,). This proves 
cf(r) = cf(X,). The proof of the equation cf(C) = cf(3,) is similar. i 
We now, naturally, ask the question: Are any limit cardinals greater than 
o regular? From the usual axioms of set theory it is impossible to prove that 
the answer is yes, and it is probably also impossible to prove that the answer 
is no. A strong limit cardinal which is regular is called an inaccessible 
cardinal. Thus w is an inaccessible cardinal. Other inaccessible cardinals, 
if they exist, have many nice properties in common with o. The hypothesis 
of inaccessibility states that there are inaccessible cardinals greater than w. 
We shall not assume the hypothesis of inaccessibility as a part of our 
intuitive set theory - like the GCH, it is a plausible extra assumption about 
set theory which can usually be avoided. 
Let us turn again to the cofinality function. 

SET THEORY 
591 
A.21. Let 5 be an infinite limit ordinal. Then there is a cofinal set Y in 5 
which is isomorphic as a chain to cf(5). If 5 is a limit cardinal, we may 
choose Y to be a set of cardinals. 
PROOF. Let a = cf(5) and let X be a cofinal set in t of power a. Let 
xp, P < a, be an enumeration of X. We define a function f on a into 5 by 
transfinite recursion. Let f(0) = 0. Now let 0 < /3 < a, and suppose we have 
already chosen f(y) E t for each y < /I. 
Then the set 
z = {x, : y  < P> u {f(r) :Y < PI 
is a subset of 5 of power less than a, so we cannot have 5 = UZ. The only 
other possibility is U Z  < 5. We may therefore define f ( P )  to be the least 
( < 5 such that U Z  < [. The function f on a into 5 has the following 
properties: 
(1) i f y  < B < a, thenfb) <f(P); 
(2) 5 = U,<f(P). 
It follows that the set Y = rqnge (f) is cofinal in 5, and Y has the isomor- 
phismfwith a. i 
A.28. For every ordinal 5, cf(5) is a regular cardinal. 
PROOF. We must show that 
cf(cf(5)) = Cf(5). 
This equation is obvious if cf(5) = 0 or cf(5) = 1, so let us assume that 
cf(5) is infinite, and let a = cf(5). By A.27, there is a set Y cofinal in 5 
which is isomorphic to a, and let f be the isomorphism from a to Y. Let Z 
be cofinal in a. Then the set 
w = {f(P) 
: B E  Z )  
is cofinal in 5. Then a < IWI. But IWI < 121, so a < IZI and cf(a) = a. -I 
A.29. If a is an infinite cardinal, then a < acf(a), 
PROOF. 
Let Y be a set cofinal in a and f an isomorphism from cf (a) to Y. 
Now let g be any function on a into the set cf(a)a. We wish to show that 
g cannot be onto 
To show this we define a function h E cf(a)a in the 
following way. For each j? < cf (a), h(P) is the least 5 < a which does not 

592 
APPENDIX A 
belong to the set 
(1) 
{SAP) : Y -=.f(B)l. 
We know that there is such a 
< a because the set ( I )  must have power 
at most If(/?)!, 
and If(P)I < a. Now the function h cannot lie anywhere 
in the list g y ,  y < a, because when f ( P )  > y we have h(P) # g@). 
It 
follows that g does not map a onto cf(u)a, 
and so 
a < lcf(dai = clcf(a) .-I 
Incidentally, the result which we have just proved is a form of what is 
known as Konig's theorem. It is an improvement of Cantor's theorem 
that a < 2" (A.17 (i)), because we know that 
2ff(") < 
= 2". 
Indeed, the proof of A.29 is a form of Cantor's famous 'diagonal method' 
which is used to prove that a < 2". 
In this part of the appendix, we shall give a brief description of three 
of the main systems of axiomatic set theory, namely the set theories of 
Zermelo-Fraenkel, Bernays, and Bernays-Morse. 
A.30. Zermelo-Fraenkel Set Theory, ZF. This theory is formulated in 
first-order logic with identity and the binary relation symbol E. The axioms 
are the following, 1-9: 
I .  Extensionality: (Vxy)(x 3 y c* (Vz)(z E x t) z EY)). 
Intuitively, x E y iff x and y have the same elements. 
2. Null set: (3xVy)(i y E x). 
3. Pairs: (Vxy3zVu)(u E z * u E x v u = y). 
Intuitively, if x, y are sets, so is { x ,  y } .  
4. Unions: (Vx3yVz)(z E y - 
(3w)(z E w A w E x)). 
Intuitively, if x is a set, so is u x .  
5. Power set: (Vx3yVz)(z E y c, (Vw)(w E z -+ w E x)). 
',Intuitively, if x is a set, so is S(x). 
6. Infinity: ( 3 ~ ) ( ( 3 y ) ( y ~ x ) ~ ( V y ) ( y ~ x  
+ ( ~ z ) ( ~ E z A z E x ) ) ) .  
Intuitively, there exist infinite sets. 
7. Regularity: (Vx)((3y)(y E x )  -+ (3y)(y E x A i 
(3z)(z E y A z E x))). 
Intuitively, every nonempty set is disjoint from one of its elements. 
8. Subsets: (Vx3yVz)(z E y c, z E x A ~ ( z u ,  
, . . urn)), where 
is any 
formula in which y does not occur. 
Intuitively, y = (z E x : cp(zu, ... urn)} is a set. 

SET THEORY 
593 
9. Collection: (Vx)[x E u + ( 3 z ) c p ( x z i r u ,  ... u,)] + (3yV.r)(x E u + 
(3z)(z E
~
A
 
cp(xzuu, ... u,,))], where cp is a formula in which y does 
not occur. 
Intuitively, if each of the classes C, = { z  : cp(xz ...)I, x E u, is non- 
empty, then there exists a set y which meets each of these classes. 
Note that both 8 and 9 are infinite schemes of axioms rather than a single 
axiom. The subset scheme and the collection scheme are often combined 
into a single scheme of axioms called the replacement scheme. 
Replacement : 
where cp is a formula in which y does not occur and 3!z means 'there 
exists a unique z'. 
Intuitively, if F ( x )  is the unique z such that ~ ( X Z  
...), then {F(x) : x E u} 
is a set. 
(vX3!Z)Cp(XZUU, ... Un) + ( 3 j ' v Z ) [ Z E y t *  ( 3 X ) ( X E U A c p ( X Z U U ,  ... U,,))] 
The scheme of' replacement can be proved from the axioms of ZF. On the 
other hand, the subset and collection schemes can he proved from the 
remainingaxioms 1-7 of ZF plus the scheme of replacement. Thus axioms 
1-7 plus replacement is an alternative set of axioms for ZF. The advantage of 
our list of axioms 1-9 is that it is easy to describe the subtheories of ZF 
below. 
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with choice, ZFC, has the axioms of ZF 
plus the following: 
10. Choice: (Vx3y)[y is a function with domain 
X A ( v Z ) ( Z  E X A ( 3 U ) ( U  E 2) + y(Z) E Z)]. 
Intuitively, every set has a choice function. 
All of the results in this book, except for a very small number of results 
which involve proper classes, can be formulated and proved in ZFC. 
A.31. Subtheories of ZF. Two important subtheories of ZF are Zermelo 
set theory and ZF minus the power set axiom. 
(i). Zermelo set theory, Z, has all the axioms of ZF except the scheme of 
collection, that is, axioms 1-8. For each limit ordinal a > o, 
( R ( a ) , E )  
is a model of Zermelo set theory. The importance of this theory is mainly 
historical, for it came before ZF. Zermelo set theory with the axiom of 
choice is adequate for much of classical mathematics and most of the 

594 
APPENDIX A 
results of this book. However, it is not adequate for defining the sequences 
X ,  or R(cc), or proving that every well ordering has the order type of some 
ordinal. Thus one has to treat cardinals and well orderings differently in 
Zermelo set theory. 
(ii). Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory minus the power set axiom, or ZF-P, 
has all the axioms of ZF except the power set axiom, namely axioms 1-4 
and 6-9. This theory (and some of its subtheories) is important in the recent 
literature because of its relation to generalized recursion theory and infinitary 
logic. It is not adequate for classical mathematics because the set of real 
numbers cannot be shown to exist. On the other hand, much of modern set 
theory can be done in ZF-P. We use ZF-P in Section 4.2 to give a quick 
statement of the axiom of constructibility. 
(iii). Set-theoretic arithmetic. This theory has all the axioms of ZF except 
that the axiom of infinity is replaced by its negation. Thus the axioms are 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ,  i 
6, 7, 8, 9. The standard model for this theory is ( R ( o ) ,  E). 
Set-theoretic arithmetic is equivalent to Peano arithmetic in the sense that 
every formula of one language has a simple translation into a formula of 
the other language such that a sentence is provable in one theory if and 
only if its translation is provable in the other theory. 
In ZF, one can prove the consistency of Zermelo set theory, ZF-P, and 
set-theoretic arithmetic. The consistency of set-theoretic arithmetic can also 
be proved in Zermelo set theory and in ZF-P. 
A.32. Bernays Set Theory. This theory is formulated in first-order logic with 
identity and with a binary relation symbol E and a I-placed relation symbol 
V. V(x) is read 'x is a set', and i 
V ( x )  is read ' x  is a proper class'. In order 
to make the axioms readable, we need to introduce some abbreviations. 
Given a formula cp, we define the relutioizution of cp to V, in symbols cp", 
inductively as follows: 
If cp is an atomic formula, cp" = cp; 
(cpl Acpl)" = c p h  v2Y; 
(1 ' P I ) "  = 1 
( c p 3  
((Wcp)" = (VX)(V(X) -b d). 
((3X)qO)" = (3X)( V(X) A q"); . 
Thus cp" is interpreted as cp with all the quantified variables restricted to V. 
The axioms of Bernays set theory are given by the list of axioms 1*-10* 
below: 

SET THEORY 
595 
l*. Extensionality: Same as axiom 1. 
2*-6*. The relativizations to V of the axioms 2-6, i.e. the null set axiom, 
axiom of pairs, axiom of unions, power set axiom and axiom of 
infinity. 
7*. Regularity: Same as axiom 7. 
8*. Replacement: 
(VW)(W is a function 3 [ ( V U E I Z V ~ ) ( ~  
E z c-) (3x)(x E u A Y  = ~(x)))]"), 
where the notion of a function and the notion x(z) are used in the usual 
way. Note that this time the axiom of replacement is a single formula 
rather than an infinite scheme, because the class w takes the place of 
the formula q(x, y). 
Intuitively, x is a set iff x is an element of some class. 
9*. Universe class: (Vx)( V ( x )  c) (3y)(x E y)). 
lo*. Comprehension: 
( ~ X V Y ) ( Y  
E x 
V(Y)^ 'P"(YU~ ... 
where q( yul . . . u,) is any formula in which x does not occur. 
Intuitively, the class x = {y : V ( ~ ) A  
q"(yu, ... u,)} exists. This axiom 
states that there are lots of classes. Note that V ( y )  is needed here 
to avoid Russell's paradox. 
There are two natural axioms of choice for Bernays set theory, one of 
which is stronger than the other. The weaker axiom of choice, the 'axiom 
of choice for sets', is just the relativization of Axiom 10 to Y. The stronger 
axiom of choice, the 'axiom of choice for classes', is Axiom 10 as it stands. 
Intuitively, the former says that every set has a choice function and the latter 
says that every class has a choice function. 
A.33. Bernays-Morse Set Theory. This theory has the same axioms as 
Bernays set theory except that the comprehension scheme lo* is replaced 
by the stronger scheme 
lo**. (3XVy)(yEX++ V(y)ACp(yU1 ... Urn)) 
where rp is any formula in which x does not occur. 
The difference is that Bernays set theory has the comprehension scheme 
only for formulas whose quantifiers range over sets, while in Bernays-Morse 
set theory the quantifiers in the comprehension scheme are allowed to range 
over arbitrary classes. Thus Bernays-Morse set theory is an extension of 
Bernays set theory. The relation between the models of the three set theories 

APPENDIX A 
596 
described here is discussed in Section 1.4. Bernays-Morse set theory will be 
especially convenient in the last section of the book, Section 7.4, where 
the results are most easily expressed in terms of classes. The axiom of 
choice for sets, or the stronger axiom of choice for classes, may also be 
added to Bernays-Morse set theory. 

APPENDlX B 
OPEN PROBLEMS IN CLASSICAL MODEL THEORY 
Here is a list of selected open problems. Generally, a problem is selected 
either because it has historical interest, or because it has intrinsic interest, 
or because its solution promises interesting or important new methods. 
The problems are arranged roughly into three groups: old problems (1-7) 
specific problems (8-21), and general problems (22-24). When a problem 
can be stated most strikingly as a conjecture, we shall state it that way, 
even where we believe that the conjecture is not true. Unless otherwise stated, 
assume that the language 9 
is countable. Whenever the proposer of a 
problem is known to us, his name appears in parentheses after the problem. 
I. The finite spectrum problem: Given a sentence cp, the finite spectrum of 
cp is the set of all n < w such that cp has a model of power n. 
Conjecture: If S c w is the finite spectrum of some sentence of 9, 
then 
w \ S is also the finite spectrum of some sentence of 9 
(Scholz). 
2. Conjecture: There is a Jonsson group of power w1 (Kurosh). 
3. For each n < w, let 8" be the free group with n generators x,,,, m < n. 
Conjecture: If 2 < p < n, then 9lp = 91n, and in fact 91p 4 a,, (Tarski). 
4. Conjecture: If D is an uniform countably incomplete ultrafilter over fl 
and A is any infinite set, then l n D A l  = IAJB. (Known to be true if /3 = w,,, 
n < w, and V = L holds.) 
5. Conjecture: If T is a complete finitely axiomatizable theory in 9, 
then 
T is not a,-categorical, and T is unstable. 
6. Conjecture: Without the continuum hypothesis, it can be shown that 
any theory T with more than w non-isomorphic models of power w has 
2" non-isomorphic models of power w (Vaught). 
591 

598 
APPENDIX B 
7. A model 3 is said to be rigid iff the only automorphism of 91 is the 
identity function. Given a theory Tin 9, 
define R(T) to be the class of all 
infinite cardinals a such that T has a rigid model of power a. 
Conjecture (GCH): For every theory Tin Y, 
either 
R(T) = { a :  t( 2 w } .  
R ( T )  = {a : a > o}, 
R ( T )  = {a : w < a < ma} for some ordinal p < a,, 
R(T) = { a  : o < a < up} for some ordinal p < o, 
or 
(Ehrenfeucht). 
8. Conjecture: There is a Jonsson model of power X , ;  of power 3cu (Jonsson). 
9. For a theory Tin 9, 
letfr(t() be the number of non-isomorphic models 
of T of power a. 
Conjecture: If o < a < p, thenf,(a) < fr(p) (Morley). 
10. Conjecture (GCH): If a, p 2 o and p is singular, then every theory 
which admits (z', a) admits (p', p). This has been proved by Jensen 
assuming V = L (Vaught). 
1 1 .  Find a simple set of axioms for the theory of all models 9 = ( A ,  U, ...) 
such that IAl 2 3,(lUl) (Vaught). 
12. Conjecture: Every theory T which admits (No, No) admits (2'O, 
No). 
This is trivial with the CH (Shelah). 
13. 3-cardinal problem: For which triples of cardinals (z, p, y), (a', p', y') 
does every theory which admits (a, p, y )  admit (a', p', y')? (Vaught). 
14. Conjecture (GCH or V = L ) :  If a is less than the first measurable 
cardinal > o, then every uniform ultrafilter over a is regular (Keisler). 
15. Conjecture: Let 0 < n < o. 
Every uniform ultrafilter over on is regular 
(Keisler). This was proved by Prikry and Jensen assuming V = L .  
16. Conjecture (GCH): If there is a uniform o,-descendingly complete 
ultrafilter over a, then a is no smaller than the first uncountable measurable 
cardinal (Keisler). 
17. Conjecture (GCH): Let D be an ultrafilter over a such that every 
ultraproduct H D A a  which is infinite has power 2 a+. Then D is a+-good 
(Keisler). 

OPEN PROBLEMS IN CLASICAL MODEL THEORY 
599 
18. Conjecture: Let IAI, ISl, II9II d a and let D be a regular ultrafilter 
over a. If '91 = 23, then nD% 
z nD%. 
(Chang and Keisler) 
19. Conjecture: If D is a regular ultrafilter over a, then for all infinite 
3, nD'91 
is a++-universal. (Chang and Keisler) 
20. Conjecture: Let T be a complete theory having infinite models. Then 
exactly one of the following will hold: 
(i). T is categorical in every power Ha, a 2 al. 
(ii). T has exactly z2 non-isomorphic models in every power X u ,  r 2 a1. 
(iii). T has at least la1 non-isomorphic models in every power X u ,  Q 2 zl. 
(Shelah) 
21. Let 9' 
c 9 
and let T be a complete theory in 9. 
T is said to be 
y-saturated ouer 9' 
iff every model of T of power y with a y-saturated reduct 
to 9' 
is y-saturated. 
Conjecture (GCH): Let a,B > o. If T is a+-saturated over 9, 
then 
T is B+-saturated over 3'. (Chang) 
22. Investigate set theory based on the axioms of ZFC plus the gap n 
conjecture, with or without the GCH. 
23. Develop a theory of models which stresses the order type of the model 
BI = (A. <, ...) rather than the cardinality of the set A. 
24. Develop the model theory of second- and higher-order logic. 
The following discussion surveys the progress which has been made on 
the above problems between the publication of the first edition of this 
book in 1973, and the writing of the current edition in 1989. 
Conjecture 1 remains open. It is equivalent to the conjecture that 
exponential time is equal to nondeterministic exponential time in com- 
plexity theory . 
Conjecture 2 was proved by Shelah (1980). In fact, Shelah constructed 
a group G of power o1 such that for every X C  G of power w l ,  every 
g E G is a product of fewer than lo6 elements of X. Thus G has no 
proper subgroups of power w l ,  and even no proper subsemigroups of 
power 0,. 

600 
APPENDIX B 
Conjecture 3 remains open. The following partial results was proved 
by Sacerdote (1973). If 2 s p < n G w, then for every 2 ;  formula 
q ( x ,  ... x,) 
and 
a,, ..., a, E A,, 
if 
% , k q [ a ,  ... a,], 
then 
Conjecture 4 should have been stated with the additional hypothesis 
that p is less than the first uncountable measurable cardinal, for other- 
wise there is an easy counterexample. Let E be a countably complete 
uniform ultrafilter over p, let F be a uniform ultrafilter over o, and let 
D = E x F. Then In 
0 1  = 2". 
Magidor (1976), (1979) obtained counterexamples to Conjecture 4 for 
p = wj and p = o2 assuming the consistency of ZFC + [There is a huge 
cardinal]. Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah have announced an analogus 
result for p = wl. See the discussion in Section 4.3 following Proposition 
4.3.9. 
Donder (1988) proved that if ZFC is consistent, then so is ZFC+ 
[Every uniform ultrafilter over an infinite set is regular], and it follows 
that ZFC + [Conjecture 41 is also consistent. 
Conjecture 5: Makowski (1974) disproved half of Conjecture 5, giving 
an example of a complete finitely axiomatizable superstable theory. 
Peretyatkin (1980) gave a full counterexample by giving an example of a 
complete finitely axoimatizable w,-categorical theory. The corresponding 
problem for theories categorical in all infinite powers turned out to have 
the opposite answer. Zilber (1980, 1984) and Cherlin, Harrington and 
Lachlan (1985) proved that there is no finitely axiomatizable complete 
theory which is categorical in all infinite powers, and the latter paper 
improved this to show that there is no complete finitely axiomatizable 
w -categorical w -stable theory. 
Conjecture 6, known as Vaught's Conjecture, remains open. It has 
been proved in several special cases, which are discussed at the end of 
Section 7.1. 
Conjecture 7 was disproved by Shelah (1976). He showed, assuming 
the GCH, that a class C of cardinals has the form R( 7') for some finitely 
axiomatizable T if and only if there is a 2; sentence q such that C is the 
class of all infinite cardinals of models of q. Even without the GCH, the 
classes R( 7') are much richer than Conjecture 7 suggests. 
an k q[a, . . . a,]. 
d 
Conjecture 8 is open. 
Conjecture 9 was proved by Shelah (1985), (19??). See the discussion 
at the end of Section 7.1. 
Conjecture 10: It was announced in an abstract by Litman and Shelah 

OPEN PROBLEMS IN CLASICAL MODEL THEORY 
601 
(1976), and proved in Shelah (1978) (as explained by Ben-David 1988), 
that the negation of Conjecture 10 is consistent relative to a strong axiom 
of infinity. The result is that if ZFC + [There is a supercompact cardinal] 
is consistent, then so is ZFC + GCH + [There is a theory which admits 
(wI, 
w )  but does not admit ( w , + ~ ,  w O ) ] .  See Section 7.2 for further 
discussion on this problem. 
Conjecture 11 was partially solved by Barwise (1975) and Schmerl 
(1977). They independently gave sets of axioms for the theory in 
question. However, neither set of axioms is simple enough to be easily 
read. 
Conjecture 12 was proved by Shelah (1977) without the CH. 
Conjecture 13 remains open in general. It was solved under the 
assumption of the axiom of constructibility by Jensen (see Devlin 1984). 
Foreman (1982) obtained consistency results concerning Chang's conjec- 
ture for three cardinals. Partial results in ZFC are indicated in problems 
Conjectures 14 and 15 are closely related to Conjecture 4 on car- 
dinalities of ultrapowers. Donder (1988) proved that the axiom of 
constructibility implies Conjecture 14 (and 15), that every uniform 
ultrafilter is regular. Donder used a weaker hypothesis than V =  L, and 
his result improves several earlier theorems, including the result of 
Ketonen (1976) that if Ox does not exist then every uniform ultrafilter 
over w, is regular. Magidor (1976), (1979) showed that the negation of 
Conjecture 15 is consistent relative to a large cardinal axiom. He proved 
that if ZFC + [There exists a huge cardinal] is consistent, then so are 
ZFC + [There is a uniform ultrafilter over w, which is not regular] where 
n is either 3 or 2. Foreman, Magidor, and Shelah announced an analogus 
result for n = 1. 
Conjecture 16: Jensen, Prikry, and Silver (see Prikry (1973)) prove as- 
suming V = L that for every a > w which is regular but not weakly com- 
pact, and every P < a, every uniform D over a is P-descendingly incomplete. 
D.V. and G. V. Choodnovsky (1974) extend the result to certain weakly 
compact cardinals. Silver (1974) proves assuming 0" does not exist that 
for every inaccessible a > w and every uniform D over a, there exists 
w < p < a such that D is not P-descendingly complete. 
Conjecture 17 was disproved by Shelah (1976~). Without the GCH he 
constructed, over each a > w, a regular non-good ultrafilter D such that 
every ultraproduct n D A s  is finite or of power 3 2". 
The negation of Conjecture 18 was shown to be consistent by Shelah 
7.2.18-7.2.22. 

602 
APPENDIX B 
(1988a, 19??a). He proved that if ZFC is consistent, then so is ZFC + 
2” = w2 + [There are countable graphs a, 8 such that 91 = 8 but there 
are no ultrafilters D, 
E over w with n \21 nE8]. 
D 
Conjecture 19 is still open. 
A modified form of Conjecture 20 was proved by Shelah (1985,19??). 
Conjecture 21 was solved negatively by Pabion (1982). 
See the discussion at the end of Section 7.1. 

HISTORICAL NOTES 
Notes for Chapter 1 
1.1 For an account of the early development of sentential and predicate 
logic, see Church (1956). Universal algebra as a separate subject appeared 
in the works of Whitehead and Russell (1913, 1925, 1927); in more recent 
years, the books of Birkhoff (1961), Cohn (1965), and Gratzer (1968) are 
representative of the field. The books of Cohn and Gratzer contain further 
discussions of the relation between universal algebra and model theory. 
1.2 Many results in this section (as well as the exercises) are special cases 
of more general theorems about the model theory of first-order languages. 
All of these more general results will appear in later sections of the book. 
Exercise 1.2.19: The case 19’1 = o, is due to Kreisel and Specker (see 
Kreisel, 1962); the general case is due to Reznikoff (1965). 
1.3 The basic notions of satisfaction and truth are due to Tarski (1935a). 
Also due to him are some of the other notions such as: elementary equiv- 
alence between models, the semantical notion of consequence, submodels, 
extensions. We again refer the reader to Church (1956) for a complete 
account of the history of first-order languages. 
Lindenbaum (see Tarski, 1930a). 
1.3.1 1 : 
I .3.20: 
Godel (1930). 
1.3.21-22: Godel (1930) for 9 
countable, Malcev (1936) for uncountable 
Exercise 1.3.14: 
Fuhrken (1968). 
Exercises I .3.I5-20: These exercises give a general method for proving 
that two models are equivalent. The method was 
introduced by FraissC (1954) and, independently, by 
Ehrenfeucht (1961 ). 
languages. 
603 

604 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
1.4 The definition of a theory is due to Tarski. Most of the examples in 
this section are well-known mathematical facts. Some references on number 
theory and set theory can be found in the text. For more information on 
the early development of set theory, see Fraenkel and Bar-Hillel (1958). 
Sikorski (1964) is a good reference for Boolean algebras. 
1.4.2: Cantor (1895). 
1.4.4: Stone (1936). 
1.4.10: Steinitz (1910). 
Exercise 1.4.9: Stone (1936). 
Exercise 1.4.10: Lindenbaum (see Tarski, 1935b). 
Exercise 1.4.15: Tarski (1938). 
Exercise 1.4.18: Mostowski (1949). 
1.5 Elimination of quantifiers is an important method in proving positive 
results in questions involving decidability. This section only contains two 
simple examples. 
1.5.3,4: Langford (1927). 
1.5.7-9: Tarski (1936). 
Exercise 1.5.7: 
Exercises 1.5.8-9: Pressburger (1930). 
Exercise 1.5.11 : Szmielew (1955). 
(i) Behmann (1922); (ii) Szmielew (1955); (iii) Tarski 
(1931); (iv) Behmann (1922). 
Notes for Chapter 2 
2.1 The Godel completeness theorem was first proved for countable 
languages by Godel (1930) and in general by Malcev (1936). The proof 
given here is due to Henkin (1949). Henkin’s proof is of particular impor- 
tance in model theory because it introduces the method of constructing 
models from individual constants. The Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski theorem 
was first proved even before the completeness theorem; the case a = w 
was proved by Lowenheim (1915) and Skolem (1920), and the general case 
is due to Tarski. The subject of model theory received a great impetus from 
the early applications of the completeness theorem by Henkin, Malcev, 
Robinson, and Tarski. The method of diagrams originated in the works of 
Henkin and Robinson and leads naturally to uncountable languages. 
Nonstandard analysis was introduced by Robinson (1961a, 1966), and has 
been developed by several researchers in recent years as a new approach 
to analysis. 
2.2.1-5: 
Henkin (1949). 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 2 
605 
2.1.6: 
Skolem (1920). 
2.1.7: 
Skolem (1934). 
2.1.9: 
Henkin (1953). 
2.1.10-1 1: Robinson (1951). 
2.1.13: 
Marczewski-Szpilrajn (1930). 
Exercise 2.1.1 : 
Skolem (1934). 
Exercise 2.1.2: 
Exercise 2.1.5: 
Robinson (1951). 
Exercise 2.1.12: 
Henkin (1953). 
Exercises 2.1.13-14: Tarski (1952). 
Exercises 2.1.15-19: Rasiowa and Sikorski (1950). 
Stone (1936), Henkin (1954a). 
2.2 The w-completeness theorem is due to Henkin and Orey. Various im- 
provements were later obtained by different authors. One of these improve- 
ments is the omitting-types theorem 2.2.3, which is from Grzegorczyk, 
Mostowski, Ryll-Nardzewski. 
Padoa (1901) observed that if a sentence q(P) has two models which are 
alike except for the interpretation of P, then the relation P is not explicitly 
definable from q(P). Beth’s theorem is the converse of Padoa’s method and 
was proved by Beth (1953). Later, the Craig interpolation theorem and the 
Robinson consistency theorem were proved independently by different 
methods, but each one easily implies the other. They form one of the 
fundamental properties of first-order predicate logic. Craig and Robinson 
both gave a proof of Beth‘s theorem. A number of different proofs of these 
results have appeared in the literature. The proof given here is due to 
Henkin (1963). Another proof, using special models, will be given in 
Chapter 5. 
The material in this section is covered from a somewhat different viewpoint 
in Kreisel and Krivine (1967). 
2.2.9, 10, 15: Grzegorczyk, Mostowski, Ryll-Nardzewski (1961). 
2.2.19: 
Chang (1964a), Kreisel and Krivine (1967). 
2.2.13: 
Henkin (1 954b), Orey (1956). 
2.2.18: 
Keisler and Morley (1968). 
2.2.20: 
Craig (1957). 
2.2.22: 
Beth (1953). 
2.2.23: 
Robinson (1956a). 
2.2.24: 
Lyndon (1959a). 
Exercise 2.2.10: MacDoWell and Specker (1961). 
Exercise 2.2.19: Henkin (1963). 

606 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
2.3 This section closely parallels the paper of Vaught (1961), “Denumerable 
models of complete theories”. The notions of countably saturated and 
atomic models were introduced in that paper. Theorem 2.3.13, the char- 
acterization of w-categorical theories, was proved independently by Engeler 
(1959), Ryll-Nardzewski (1959), and Svenonius (1959a). 
2.3.2-4,7,9: Vaught (1961). 
2.3.13: 
Engeler (1959) Ryll-Nardzewski (1959), Svenonius (1959a), 
Vaught (1961). 
2.3.15: 
Vaught ( 1 96 1 ). 
Exercises 2.3.15, 16: Ehrenfeucht (see Vaught, 1961). 
Exercise 2.3.17: 
Morley (1970). 
2.4 Recursively saturated models were introduced by Barwise and 
Schlipf (1975), (1976), Ressayre (1973), (1977), and Schlipf (1975). The 
basic results presented in this section are due to Barwise and Schlipf. 
They made extensive use of recursively saturated models in generalized 
recursion theory over admissible sets. For more about this subject see 
the book Barwise (1975). Partial isomorphisms were introduced by Karp 
(1965), and are important in the model theory of infinitary logics; see, 
for example, Barwise (1973). They are related to the earlier characteri- 
zation of elementary equivalence of Fraisse and Ehrenfeucht outlined in 
Exercises 1.3.15-1.3.20. Many applications of recursively saturated mod- 
els in model theory of the type described in this section, and a history of 
the subject, can be found in Barwise and Schlipf (1976) and in Schlipf 
(1978). 
2.4.1-2.4.3 and 2.4.5: Barwise and Schlipf (1976). 
2.44: 
Karp (1965). 
2.4.6: 
Schlipf (1978). 
2.4.7: 
Pressburger (1930), by elimination of quan- 
tifiers. 
2.4.8: 
Barwise and Schlipf (1976). 
2.4.9: 
Craig and Vaught (1958). 
2.4.10: 
Barwise and Schlipf (1976). 
This is a form of the result that countable 
recursively saturated models are resplendent. 
Kunen. The set of axioms is from Clark 
(1978). 
Exercises 2.4.21-2.4.22: Schlipf (1978). 
Exercise 2.4.30: 
Exercise 2.4.31: 
Millar (1981). 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 3 
607 
Exercises 2.4.32-2.4.33: Barwise and Schlipf (1975). 
Exercise 2.4.34: 
Lipschitz and Nadel (1978). 
2.5 Lindstrom’s Characterization Theorem was proved in Lindstrom 
(1966). It did not attract attention until it was rediscovered and publi- 
cized by Friedman (1970). Many variants of the definition of an abstract 
logic have been proposed, for example Lindstrom (1969), Friedman 
(1970), Barwise (1974), and Ebbinghaus (1985). The definition given 
here is similar to the notion of a regular logic in Ebbinghaus (1985), 
except that the Finite Occurrence Property is included here as part of the 
definition, and the substitution property from Ebbinghaus is replaced by 
a stronger form of the Relativization Property. 
2.5.2: Hanf (1964). 
2.5.3: Barwise (1974). 
Exercise 2.5.1 : Hanf ( 1964). 
Exercise 2.5.2: Lindstrom (1966). 
Exercise 2.5.4: Barwise (1974). 
Exercise 2.5.6: Lindstrom (1969). 
Exercise 2.5.7: Lindstrom (1973), (1974), Flum (1985). 
Notes for Chapter 3 
3.1 The basic notions of elementary chains (Tarski and Vaught, 1957) is 
of fundamental importance. The notions and basic results on elementary 
extensions and elementary chains were introduced by Tarski and Vaught 
(1957). The closely related notion of model completeness is due to Robinson, 
who proved the basic results and gave several examples of model complete 
theories in 1956. The last theorem in this section is a nontrivial application 
of the method of elementary chains due to Shoenfield. 
3.3.3-6,9: Tarski and Vaught (1957). 
3.1.7: 
Lo6 (1954), Vaught (1954a). 
3.1.11: 
Shoenfield (unpublished). 
Exercises 3.1.1,3.1.3: Tarski and Vaught (1957). 
Exercise 3.1.10: 
Exercise 3.1.15: 
Chang (1967a). 
Exercise 3.1.16: 
Cohn (1968, p. 33, Proposition 5.9). 
Levy (1960) and Montague (1961). 
3.2 Preservation theorems formed the backbone of model theory until 1962. 
More recently, they were prominent in the early development of model 

608 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
theory for infinitary logic. The various preservation theorems were originally 
proved by several different methods. The more uniform method presented 
here was developed in Keisler (1960). Another approach to preservation 
theorems using saturated models is discussed in Section 5.2. 
We have already encountered the notion of countably saturated models 
in Chapter 2. The notion of countably homogeneous models originates 
with Craig, 36nsson, Morley, and Vaught; for a detailed discussion, see 
Morley and Vaught (1962). The notions of T admitting a pair (a, B) of 
cardinals and the general problem of L6wenheim-Skolem theorems for 
two (or more) cardinals are due to Vaught; see Morley and Vaught (1962), 
Vaught (1965a, b). 
3.2.2: to9 (1955b), Tarski (1954). 
3.2.3: Lo4 and Suszko (1957), Chang (1959). 
3.2.4: Lyndon (1959~). 
3.2.7: (iii) is due to R.M. Robinson, and (iv) is due to Morley (both 
unpublished). 
3.2.8: 
(i) and (iii) are due to Vaught, and (ii) is due to Craig. 
3.2.9: 
Vaught (see Morley and Vaught, 1962). 
3.2.11: Keisler (1966b). 
Exercise 3.2.1 : Robinson (1956~). 
Exercise 3.2.2: Keisler (1960). 
Exercise 3.2.4: Robinson (1956~). 
Exercise 3.2.10: Craig (1961). 
Exercise 3.2.13: Morley and Vaught (1962). 
Exercise 3.2.14: Keisler and Morley (1968). 
Exercise 3.2.18: Kueker (unpublished). 
Exercise 3.2.19: Keisler (1970). 
3.3 Skolem functions date back to Skolem (1920). The important notion 
of indiscernibles is due to Ehrenfeucht and Mostowski (1956). The ultra- 
filter theorem, Proposition 3.3.6, was first proved by Tarski; for more 
discussion on this, see notes for Section 4.1. The remarkable theorem of 
Ramsey (1930) was discovered by him to settle the following: It is decidable 
whether a universal sentence has an infinite model. The consequences of 
his combinatorial theorem far transcend the original purpose for which 
it was intended. 
3.3.6: 
Tarski (1930b). 
3.3.7: 
Ramsey (1930). 
3.3.8-13: Ehrenfeucht and Mostowski (1956). 
3.3.14: 
Morley (1965a). 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 3 
609 
Exercises 3.3.7, 3.3.10-1 1: Ehrenfeucht and Mostowski (1956). 
Exercise 3.3.14: 
Keisler (unpublished). 
Exercise 3.3.1 5 : 
Hodges (1969). 
Exercise 3.3.16: 
Park (M.I.T. 
thesis). 
Exercise 3.3.18: 
Keisler (unpublished). 
Exercises 3.3.19-20: 
Rabin (1965). 
3.5 The notions of model completeness and model completion are due 
to A. Robinson (1956b). Most of the examples and basic results in this 
section are also due to him. The work was motivated to a large extent by 
applications to algebraically closed and real closed fields, particularly the 
nullstellensatz and Hilbert’s seventeenth problem. Algebraically prime 
models were introduced by Robinson (1956b), and are studied, for 
example, in Baldwin and Kueker (1981). Model companions were 
introduced by Barwise, Eklof, Robinson, and Sabbagh in 1969. Addi- 
tional material on model completeness can be found in the expositions of 
Cherlin (1976), Hirschfeld and Wheeler (1979, Macintyre (1977), 
Robinson (1973), and Simmons ( 1975). 
3.5.1-3.5.2: 
Robinson (1956b). 
3.5.4: 
Schlipf (1978). 
3 .5 .7-3.5.8: 
Lindstrom (1964). 
3.5.11: 
Robinson (1956b). 
3.5.13-3.5.14: Robinson (1963), Barwise, Eklof, Robinson, Sabbagh. 
3.5.15-3.5.16: Eklof and Sabbagh (1971). 
3.5.17: 
Millar (19??). 
3.5.18: 
Eklof and Sabbagh (1971). 
3.5.19: 
Shoenfield (1971). 
3.5.20: 
Millar (19??); see also Hodges (1981), Problem 13, p. 
57. 
3.5.21: 
Simmons (1975). 
Exercise 3.5.12: 
Millar. 
Exercise 3.5.14: 
Exercise 3.5.15: 
(a) Cherlin (1973). 
Eklof and Sabbagh (1971). 
(b) Wheeler 
(Hirschfeld 
and 
Wheeler 
( 1975)). 
(c) Robinson (1971). 
Exercise 3.5.16-3.5.18: 
Hirschfeld and Wheeler (1975). 
Exercise 3.5.19: 
Saracino (1973). 
Exercise 3.5.20: 
Baldwin and Kueker (1981). 
Exercise 3.5.21: 
Kaiser (1969). 

610 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
Exercise 3.5.22: 
Robinson (1971). 
Exercise 3.5.23: 
Robinson (1971a), Barwise and Robinson 
Exercise 3.5.24: 
(1970). 
Keisler (1973), Simmons (1973). 
Notes for Chapter 4 
4.1 The ultraproduct construction goes back to the work of Skolem (1934). 
He invented a ‘restricted’ ultrapower to construct a nonstandard model of 
complete arithmetic. More recently, Hewitt (1948) studied what we would 
now call the ultraproduct of real closed fields. The general reduced product 
construction was introduced by Loi (1955a), and the fundamental theorem 
was stated in that paper. Frayne, Morel, Scott, and Tarski discovered the 
ultraproduct version of the compactness theorem, the natural embedding, 
and other basic facts which make the ultraproduct an important construction 
in model theory; see Frayne, Morel and Scott (1962). A review of the role 
of ultraproducts in model theory can be found in the survey articles of 
Chang (1967b) and Keisler (1965a). The book by Bell and Slomson (1969) 
is an exposition of that part of model theory which can be reached using 
only the ultraproduct construction. Ultraproducts have proved to be useful 
in other branches of mathematics, particularly algebra (Amitsur, Ax, 
Kochen) and nonstandard analysis (Luxemburg, Robinson). 
4.1.14: 
Tarski (1930b), Stone (1936). 
4.1.9: 
LOB (1955a). 
4.1.12-13: Frayne, Morel, and Scott (1962), Kochen (1961). 
Exercise 4.1.30: Daigneault (see Kochen, 1961). 
4.2 Ulam (1930) proposed the problem of whether measurable cardinals 
exist, and proved that every measurable cardinal is inaccessible. Sub- 
sequently, many other mathematical conditions were found to be equivalent 
to measurability; see Keisler and Tarski (1964). Recent work on measurable 
cardinals began with the discovery of Hanf (1964) and Tarski (1962) that 
the fist inaccessible cardinal is not weakly compact and hence not measur- 
able. Keisler (1962) applied the ultraproduct construction to give another 
proof of the fact that the first inaccessible cardinal is not measurable, and 
then Scott (1961) used ultraproducts to show that the existence of a measur- 
able cardinal contradicts the axiom of constructibility. The work of 
Hanf and Scott (1961) and Keisler and Tarski (1964) showed that weakly 
compact cardinals are very large and measurable cardinals are larger still. 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 4 
61 1 
Since then measurable cardinals and ultraproducts have been one of the 
major themes of research in set theory, particularly in the works of Gaifman, 
Kunen, Rowbottom, Silver, and Solovay. Some of this work is expounded 
in Section 7.4 of this book. 
4.2.4: 
4.2.11 : 
Keisler (1962). 
4.2.12: 
Tarski (1962). 
4.2.14: 
First proof Hanf (1964) and Tarski (1962); this proof: 
Keisler (1962). 
4.2.18: 
Scott (1961). 
4.2.19-23: Scott (1961), Keisler and Tarski (1964). 
Exercise 4.2.6: 
Keisler (1 962). 
Exercise 4.2.9: 
Hanf ( 1  964). 
Exercises 4.2.1&12: LCvy (1960). 
Exercise 4.2.13: 
Hanf (1964). 
Exercises 4.2.14-16: Keisler and Tarski (1964). 
Exercise 4.2.19: 
Exercise 4.2.20: 
Vaught (1963a). 
Exercise 4.2.21 : 
Frayne, Morel, and Scott (1962). 
Hanf and Scott (1961). 
Keisler( 1962) Monk and Scott (1964), Tarski (1962), 
Hanf and Scott (1961), Erdos and Tarski (1961). 
4.3 Certain regular ultrafilters were used by Frayne, Morel, Scott, and 
Tarski to prove the compactness theorem and Frayne's theorem. They 
also proposed the cardinality problem and essentially proved Proposition 
4.3.7 on cardinalities of ultrapowers. The notion of an a-regular ultrafilter 
in general was introduced by Keisler (1964~). The two-cardinal theorem 
4.3.10 and its corollary were proved by Chang and Keisler. It is an example 
of a theorem whose statement does not mention ultraproducts, but whose 
proof requires ultrapowers in an essential way. 
Frayne, Morel, and Scott (1962), Keisler (1964~). 
4.3.7: 
4.3.9: 
Keisler (1964~). 
4.3.10-1 1 : Chang and Keisler (1962). 
4.3.12: 
4.3.14: 
Morley and Vaught (1962). 
Exercise 4.3.1 1: 
Keisler (unpublished). 
Exercise 4.3.12: 
Exercises 4.3.13, 14: Frayne, Morel, and Scott (1962). 
Exercises 4.3.15, 16: Keisler (1964~). 
Frayne, Morel, and Scott (l962), Keisler (1967a). 
Chang (1967~) with GCH, Kunen and Prikry (1970) 
without GCH. 

612 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
Exercise 4.3.28: 
Hodges (unpublished) 
Exercises 4.3.29, 30: Keisler (1963), Kochen (1961). 
Exercise 4.3.32: 
Keisler (I 967a). 
Exercise 4.3.34: 
Exercise 4.3.35: 
Exercise 4.3.36: 
Keisler (see Chang, 1967~). 
Walkoe (see Keisler, 1968b). 
Benda (1969), Keisler (1968b). 
4.4 Robinson introduced nonstandard analysis in (1961a) and in the 
book (1966). His original approach used the theory of types. The 
superstructure approach is a variant of the theory of types which fits 
better into ordinary set theory, and is due to Robinson and Zakon 
(1969). Internal set theory was introduced by Nelson (1977). Expositions 
of the superstructure approach to Robinsonian analysis can be found in 
the books of Albeverio et al. (1986), Cutland (1988), Davis (1976), 
Hurd and Loeb (1985), and Stroyan and Bayod (1986). Expositions of 
the internal set theory approach can be found in the books of Lutz and 
Goze (1971), Robert (1988) and van den Berg (1987). The article 
Diener and Stroyan (1988) discusses the relationship between the two 
approaches. The existence of nonstandard universes and enlargements 
are proved using the compactness theorem in Robinson (1966) and using 
ultraproducts in Robinson (1967). Bounded ultrapowers appear in 
Zakon (1972) and in Cherlin and Hirschfeld (1972). The importance of 
saturation in nonstandard analysis was emphasized by Luxenburg 
(1969a). w,-saturation is essential in much of current nonstandard analy- 
sis. The treatment of superstructures in Robinson and Zakon (1969) is 
reworked with particular attention to the requirements for a base set in 
Schmid and Schmidt (1987). 
4.4.1-4.4.4: 
Robinson and Zakon (1969). 
4.4.5: 
Robinson (1966). 
4.4.9: 
Mostowski (1949). 
4.4.10-4.4.11: Robinson and Zakon (1969). 
,,4.4.12: 
Henson (1974). 
4.4.16: 
Crisma and Holzer (1983). 
4.4.17: 
Zakon (1972). 
4.4.19-4.4.20: Keisler (1963). Another proof of 4.4.20 is in Zakon 
4.4.23: 
Robinson (1967). 
4.4.25-4.4.26: Nelson (1972). 
Exercise 4.4.36: Puritz (1971). 
(1972). 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 5 
613 
Notes for Chapter 5 
5.1 The notions of maturated and saturated models go back to the ?,-sets 
of Hausdorff (1914). Their importance for model theory was not realized 
and exploited until the late 1950's. J6nsson (1956, 1960) studied the notions 
of universal (r-universal) and homogeneous (a-homogeneous) models. 
In the present setting for model theory, these notions are also given in 
Morley and Vaught (1962). Many results relating saturated and special 
models to universal and homogeneous models were first proved in that 
paper. The notion of special models is due to Morley and Vaught (1962). 
The definition of special models given here is due to Chang and Keisler 
(1966) and is simpler than the original definition. 
5.1.4,5: 
Vaught (see Morley and Vaught, 1962). 
5.1.8,9: 
Morley and Vaught (1962). 
5.1.12-14: Vaught (see Morley and Vaught, 1962). 
5.1.16, 17: Morley and Vaught (1962). 
5.1.19-22: Keisler and Morley (1967). 
Most of the easier exercises in this section are either from Morley and 
Exercises 5.1.9-13, 15, 16: Keisler and Morley (1967). 
Exercises 5.1.24-5.1.26: 
Henson (1974). 
Vaught (1962) or from Chang and Keisler (1966). 
5.2 Most of the preservation theorems were proved before saturated models 
were invented. However, saturated models, let to a uniform approach to 
the subject. 
5.2.3,4: 
5.2.6: 
5.2.7, 8. 
Keisler (1960). 
5.2.1 1: 
5.2.13: 
Lyndon (1959~). 
5.2.14, 15: Chang (1959), improving earlier results of Robinson (1951). 
5.2.16: 
Vaught (1963b). 
Exercise 5.2.1 : 
Tarski (1955). 
Exercise 5.2.2: 
Vaught (1954b). 
Exercise 5.2.3: 
Exercise 5.2.4: 
Exercises 5.2.6, 7: 
Keisler (1960). 
Exercise 5.2.8: 
Kochen (1961). 
Exercise 5.2.10: 
Chang (1959). 
Exercise 5.2.12: 
Rabin (1960, 1962). 
LoS (1955b), Robinson (1956c), Tarski (1954). 
Equivalence of (i) and (ii) is due to Lo6 and Suszko (1957) 
and Chang (1959); (iii) is due to Keisler (1960). 
Morley and Vaught (1962). 
Tarski (1954), LoS (1955b). 
An example was first found by Frai'ssC (unpublished). 

614 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
Exercise 5.2.13: 
Park, M.I.T. thesis. 
Exercises 5.2.15, 17: Chang (unpublished). 
Exercises 5.2.19-25: Keisler (1965~). 
Exercise 5.2.26: 
Feferman (1968). 
5.3 The starting point of Section 5.3 is Beth’s theorem and Craig’s theorem, 
both of which were proved in Section 2.2. Definability and interpolation 
theorems give interesting connections between model-theoretical statements 
in 9 
and syntactical statements in expansions of 9. 
This is a very much simplified version of a result of Chang and 
Moschovakis (1968). The proof here is given in Kuekcr (1970). 
5.3.1: 
5.3.2: 
Chang (1968~). 
5.3.3: 
Svenonius (1959a). 
5.3.4, 5 :  Kueker (1970). 
5.3.6: 
Chang (1964b), Makkai (1964). Vaught first pointed out that 
GCH is not necessary for the proof; the proof here is due to 
Chang. 
Exercise 5.3.2: 
Chang (unpublished). 
Exercises 5.3.5, 6, 8: 
Kueker (1970). 
Exercise 5.3.9: 
Robinson (1965). 
Exercises 5.3.10, 1 1  : 
Chang (1964b). 
Exercise 5.3.12: 
Kueker (1970). 
Exercise 5.3.15: 
Chang (1964b). 
Exercises 5.3.16, 17: 
Kueker (1970). 
Exercise 5.3.18: 
Exercise 5.3.19: 
Exercises 5.3.20-5.3.23: Schlipf (1978). 
Reyes (1970); this proof is due to Chang. 
This is a negative solution, by Chang, to a 
problem posed by Mostowski. 
5.4 The q,-sets of Hansdorff are forerunners of o,-saturated models. 
Tarski’s original proof of the completeness of the theory of real closed 
fields used the method of elimination of quantifiers and gave a decision 
procedure for the theory. Later Erdos, Gillman and Henrickson (1955) 
proved that any two real closed fields of power w1 whose orders are q,-sets 
are isomorphic. Kochen observed that this result plus the existence of 
o,-saturated models of power w1 gives a new proof of Tarski’s theorem. 
The present proof is adapted from Kochen’s proof. 
Theorem 5.4.6 was first proved in the special cases where U is either real 
closed, algebraically closed, or equivalent to the field of rational numbers 
by Robinson (1959, 1961b). Robinson asked whether the theorem was 
true in general. This was settled affirmatively by Keisler (1964a). 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 6 
615 
Theorem 5.4.12 was proved independently by Ax and Kochen (1965a, b, 
1966) and Ershov (1965). The present treatment is largelydue to Rowbottom. 
The applications, including Artin's conjecture, are also given in those 
papers. Artin's conjecture is a striking example of a problem in algebra 
which was intractible to purely algebraic methods but which was solved 
elegantly using methods from model theory. Another treatment based 
on the elimination of quantifiers has been worked out by P. Cohen 
(unpublished). 
5.4.4: 
5.4.6: 
Keisler (1964a). 
5.4.12-19: Ax and Kochen (1965a, b, 1966), Ershov (1965). 
Exercise 5.4.1 : 
Hausdorff ( I9 14). 
Exercise 5.4.2: 
Erdos, Gillman and Henrickson (1955). 
Exercise 5.4.4: 
Robinson (1956b). 
Exercises 5.4.8, 9: 
Keisler (1964a). 
Exercise 5.4.10: 
Robinson (1956b). 
Exercise 5.4.12: 
Presburger (1930). 
Exercises 5.4.19-26: Ax and Kochen (1965a, b, 1966) and Ershov (1965). 
5.5 The main theorem, Theorem 5.5.10, as well as the definition of invariants 
are due to Tarski. The result was later rediscovered by Ershov (1964). The 
present proof is due to Keisler. 
Tarski and McKinsey (1948), Kochen (1961). 
5.5.10: Tarski ( 1  949). 
Exercises 5.5.8, 10-14: Keisler (unpublished). 
Exercise 5.5.15: 
Mostowski and Tarski (1949). Parts (ii) and (iii) 
require a key observation of Ehrenfeucht. 
Notes for Chapter 6 
6.1 The notion of a good ultrafilter, the result that good ultrafilters exist 
(assuming the GCH) and good ultraproducts are saturated, and the iso- 
morphism theorem for ultrapowers (assuming the GCH) are due to Keisler. 
The existence of good ultrafilters without the GCH, namely Theorem 6.1.4, 
is due to Kunen. The isomorphism theorem was proved without the GCH 
by Shelah (1972b). 
6. I. 1 : 
6.1.4: 
6. I .6: 
Keisler (1964). 
6.1.7: 
Keisler (1960, 1964d). 
Keisler (1964b) with GCH; Kunen (1972) without GCH. 
(i) is due to Ketonen (unpublished); (ii), (iii) are due to 
Kunen ( 1972). 

616 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
6.1.9: 
Keisler (1961, 1964d). 
6.1.10-15: Shelah (1972b). 
6.1.16, 17: Keisler (1961); GCH eliminated by Shelah (1972b). 
Exercise 6.1.1 : 
Keisler (1964d). 
Exercise 6.1.3 : 
Keisler (1967a). 
Exercises 6.1.4, 5: 
Keisler (1964b) with GCH; Kunen (1973) 
without GCH. 
Exercise 6.1.6: 
Keisler (1965b). 
Exercise 6.1.10: 
Chang (1960). 
Exercises 6.1.1 1-13: Shelah (1972b). 
Exercise 6.1.14: 
Keisler (1961). 
Exercises 6.1.15-18: Keisler (1967a). 
Exercise 6.1.20: 
Keisler (1967b). 
Exercise 6.1.21 : 
Exercise 6.1.22: 
Benda (1970). 
Exercise 6.1.23: 
Keisler (1967b). 
Exercises 6.1.24, 25: Shelah (unpublished). 
Keisler (see Benda, 1970). 
6.2 Direct products, reduced products and ultra products all play important 
roles in model theory. Reduced products were studied in Frayne, Morel, 
and Scott (1962); some of the underlying ideas also go back to Chang, Lo6 
(1955a), and Tarski. The characterization of universal direct product 
sentences given by Proposition 6.2.8 is a very early result of McKinsey 
(1943). The fact that Horn sentences are preserved under direct products 
was proved by Horn (1951), and preservation under reduced products by 
Chang. The converse result, that reduced product sentences are Horn 
sentences, was proved by Keisler (1965d), assuming the continuum hypoth- 
esis. The continuum hypothesis was eliminated by Galvin (1965). 
6.2.1: 
6.2.2: 
6.2.3: 
Chang and Morel (1958). 
6.2.4-6: 
Keisler (1965b). 
6.2.7: 
Galvin (1965). 
6.2.8: 
McKinsey (1943). 
6.2.9: 
Lyndon (1959b). 
Exercises 6.2.7, 8: Keisler (1965b). 
Exercise 6.2.10: 
Lyndon (1959d). 
Exercise 6.2.1 1 : 
Exercise 6.2.12: 
Frayne, Morel, and Scott (1962). 
Chang (see the above paper). 
Galvin (1965). 
Tarski (see Frayne, Morel, and Scott, 1962). 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 6 
617 
Exercise 6.2.13: 
Exercise 6.2.14: 
Keisler (1965d). 
Exercise 6.2.15: 
Benda (1 970). 
Birkhoff (1935). Proof here due to Chang. 
6.3 The notion of a determining sequence is due to Feferman and Vaught 
(1959), and is descended from earlier ideas of Vaught (1954~) and 
Mostowski (1952). The definition given here contains refinements added 
by Weinstein (1965). The general exposition in this section owes much to 
Weinstein (1965) and Galvin (1965). ‘The results of Galvin and Weinstein 
were both obtained in 1965 doctoral theses, about the same time as Ershov’s 
(1964) theorem. 
6.3.2: 
Feferman and Vaught (1959). 
6.3.3: 
Weinstein (1965). 
6.3.4: 
Feferman and Vaught (1959). 
6.3.6, 8: 
Weinstein (1965). 
6.3.9: 
Weinstein (1965), Galvin (1965). 
6.3.13: 
Galvin (1965). 
6.3.14: 
Vaught (1954~). 
6.3.18, 19: Galvin (1965). 
6.3.20: 
Ershov (1964). 
Exercise 6.3.1 : 
Oberschelp (1958). 
Exercises 6.3.24: Weinstein (1965). 
Exercise 6.3.5: 
Appel (1959). The simple proof here is due to 
Exercise 6.3.10: 
Makkai (1965). 
Exercise 6.3.1 1: 
Galvin (unpublished). 
Exercise 6.3.12: 
Galvin (1965). 
Exercise 6.3.13: 
Chang, Galvin. 
Exercise 6.3.14: 
Galvin (1965). 
6.4 The completion %# of a model 
was introduced by Rabin (1959). 
In that paper Rabin proved Theorem 6.4.5 in the special case where a is 
accessible and the GCH holds. In Keisler (1963), the concept of a limit 
altrapower was introduced and the three theorems is this section were proved, 
Theorem 6.4.5 in the present general form. The presentation here is based 
upon simpler proofs of Theorem 6.4.4 by Lindstrom and of Theorem 6.4.5 
by Chang. Blass (unpublished) has given another proof of Theorem 6.4.10. 
For a more general construction, the limit ultraproduct, see Keisler (1965a) 
and Kopperman (1972). The construction outlined in Exercise 6.4.30 is 
similar to Skolem’s original ‘restricted’ ultrapower construction. 
Weinstein. 

618 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
6.4.4: 
Keisler (1963), Lindstrom (1968). 
6.4.5: 
6.4.6-1 1: 
Keisler (1963). 
6.4.12-14: Keisler (1965a). 
Exercise 6.4.12: 
Keisler (1963). 
Exercise 6.4.1 3: 
Keisler (1965a). 
Exercises 6.4.16-26: Keisler (1963). 
Rabin (1959), Keisler (1963), Chang (1965b). 
6.5 Finite iterations of ultrapowers were developed by Frayne, Morel, and 
Scott (1962). The infinite iterations were introduced by Gaifman (1967). 
Our presentation is a simplification of Gaifman’s work. Gaifman used a 
category-theoretic approach instead of the notion of a function which lives 
on a finite set. Independently, Kunen (1970) developed iterated ultrapowers 
in essentially the same way as in this section, and generalized the construction 
even further in order to study models of set theory and measurable cardinals. 
6.5.1, 2: 
6.5.6-10: 
Gaifman (1967). 
6.5.1 1, 12: Keisler (unpublished). 
6.5.14: 
Gaifman (1967). 
Exercises 6.5.1-4: 
Exercise 6.5.16: 
Exercises 6.5.22-29: Gaifman (1967). 
Exercise 6.5.32: 
Keisler (1965a). 
Exercise 6.5.34: 
Keisler (1967a). 
Frayne, Morel, and Scott (1962). 
Frayne, Morel, and Scott (1962). 
Keisler (1963), Kochen (1961). 
Notes for Chapter 7 
7.1 Lo6 made his conjecture in Lo6 (1954). Before Morley proved the 
conjecture in general, Vaught had shown the special case that if a > w is 
a limit cardinal and T is categorical in all powers less than a, then T is 
categorical in power a. The original proof of Morleq’s theorem used the 
notion of transcendence rank. This notion provides a powerful way of 
classifying types of elements. The present simpler proof was devised by 
Baldwin and Lachlan, using methods of Keisler and Marsh. The notion of a 
stable theory was introduced by Morley, who used the term totally trans- 
cendental theory. The two most exciting recent results in categoricity are 
7.1.27, due to Baldwin and Lachlan, and 7.1.25, due to Shelah. 
7.1.1: 
7.1.3: 
Morley (1965a). (This proof due to Keisler.) 
Morley (1965a). (This proof due to Silver (unpublished).) 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 7 
619 
7.1.4-12: 
Morley (1 965a). 
7.1.13: 
Baldwin and Lachlan (1971). 
7.1.1423: 
Morley (1 965a). 
7.1.24: 
Shelah (1972a). 
7.1.24': 
Shelah (1978). 
7.1.25: 
Shelah (1970d), (1978). 
7.1.26: 
Baldwin (1973). 
7.1.27-7.1.28: Baldwin and Lachlan (1971). 
7.1.29-7.1.33: Shelah (1971d). 
7.1.34: 
Shelah (1978). 
7.1.35-7.1.36: Shelah (1985), (19??). 
Exercise 7.1 .3 : 
Silver (unpublished). 
Exercises 7. I .4-6: 
Keisler (197 la). 
Exercise 7.1.13 : 
Ehrenfeucht (1 957), Morley (I 965a). 
Exercises 7.1.14, 15: Keisler (1971a), (1967b). 
Exercise 7.1.16: 
Silver (unpublished), Ressayre (1969), Rowbottom 
(unpublished). 
Exercises 7.1.17, 18: Morley (196%). 
Exercise 7.1.19: 
Keisler (1970). 
7.2 The main topics covered in this section are the Morley theorem on 
omitting types and some theorems of Chang and Vaught on the two-cardinal 
problem. Apart from the methods of indiscernibles and saturated models, 
we introduce an idea due to Morley which uses the partition theorem of 
Erdos and Rado to construct models with special properties. The section 
ends with a discussion of the gap n conjecture and related problems, which 
leads naturally to the topics covered in the next section. 
Erdos and Rado. The elegant model-theoretic proof given here 
is due to S. Simpson. 
Morley and Morley (1967) (with V = L); Silver (unpublished, 
without V = L); the present proof is due to Chang (1968b). 
Vaught (1965b); the present proof is essentially due to Morley 
(1965b). 
7.2.1 : 
7.2.2-4: Morley (1965b). 
7.2.5: 
7.2.6: 
7.2.7: 
Chang (1965a). 
7.2.8: 
Jensen, see Devlin (1984). 
7.2.10: 
Specker (1949). 
7.2.11: 
7.2.12: 
Rowbottom and Silver, independently (unpublished). 
Mitchell (1972), Silver (in Mitchell 1972), Shelah (1979) (see 
also Ben-David and Shelah 1986). 

620 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
7.2.13: 
Vaught (1965a). 
7.2.14: 
Solovay; see Devlin (1984). 
Results preceding 7.2.15: Silver (1971) and Solovay, cf. Kanamori and 
7.2.15: 
Silver (1971). 
Exercises 7.2.1-4: 
Morley (1965b). 
Exercise 7.2.5: 
Magidor (1978). 
Chang (1968b); the counterexample was discovered 
independently by Shelah (1971a) and Schmerl 
(unpublished). 
Exercise 7.2.6: 
Helling (1964). 
Exercise 7.2.7: 
Morley (1965b), Morley and Morley (1967); see 
note on 7.2.5. 
Exercise 7.2.8: 
Howard 
(unpublished), Morley (unpublished), 
Shelah (1971a). 
Exercises 7.2.10, 12: Vaught (1965b). 
Exercise 7.2.13: 
Due to a large number of people; among them, 
Morley (1965b), Lopez-Escobar (1965b), Helling 
(1964), Chang (1968b). 
Exercise 7.2.15: 
Chang (1965a). 
Exercise 7.2.16: 
Vaught (1965b). 
Exercise 7.2.17: 
Chang. 
Exercise 7.2.18: 
Vaught (1965a). 
Exercise 7.2.19: 
Chang. 
Exercises 7.2.20, 21 : Vaught (1965b). 
Exercise 7.2.25: 
Keisler (1971a). 
Exercise 7.2.28: 
Specker (1949). 
Exercise 7.2.30: 
Kunen (unpublished). 
Exercise 7.2.3 1 : 
Exercise 7.2.33: 
Keisler (1966a). 
Morley (see Keisler and Morley, 1968). 
7.3 Ramsey cardinals were introduced by Erdos and his school, and several 
of the combinatorial results are due to them; for example, see Erdos, 
Hajnal, and Rado (1965). The main model-theoretic results in this section 
are Rowbottom’s theorem and Silver’s theorem. 
7.3.5: 
Vaught (1965b). 
7.3.6: 
Silver (unpublished). 
7.3.7: 
Erdos and Hajnal (1966). 
7.3.8: 
Fuhrken (1964). 
7.3.9: 
Erdos (1942). 

NOTES FOR CHAPTER 7 
621 
7.3.10: 
Silver, Shoenfield (both unpublished). 
7.3.11: 
Erdos and Tarski (1961). 
7.3.12: 
Hanf ( 1964). 
7.3.13: 
Rowbottom (1964). 
7.3.14: 
7.3.15, 16: 
Rowbottom (1964). 
7.3.16 (ii): 
7.3.17(a), (b): Prikry (1968); (c) Kunen (1970). 
7.3.18: 
Silver (1966). 
Exercises 7.3.9, 10: Rowbottom (1964). 
Exercises 7.3.12, 13: Erdos and Hajnal. 
Exercise 7.3.15. 
For 
iz = I ,  Galvin (unpublished); in general, 
Rowbottom (unpublished), Erdos and Hajnal(1966), 
Chang (unpublished). 
Erdos and Hajnal (1958, 1962). 
Also Erdos and Hajnal (1966). 
Exercise 7.3.16: 
Shoenfield (unpublished). 
Exercise 7.3.18: 
Rowbottom (1964). 
Exercise 7.3.19: 
Silver (1966). 
Exercise 7.3.21 : 
Hanf (1964). 
Exercise 7.3.22: 
Exercises 7.3.23-26: Silver (1966). 
Exercise 7.3.27: 
Rowbottom (1964). 
Exercise 7.3.28: 
Exercise 7.3.29: 
Rowbottom (1964). 
Exercise 7.3.30: 
Prikry (1968). 
Exercises 7.3.31-35: Silver (1966). 
Exercise 7.3.37: 
Silver (1966). 
Exercise 7.3.40: 
Hanf (1964). 
Exercise 7.3.41 : 
Silver (1966). 
Exercises 7.3.42-43: Fuhrken (1964). 
Exercise 7.3.44: 
Exercise 7.3.45: 
Fuhrken (1964). 
Exercise 7.3.46: 
Keisler (1968a). 
Exercise 7.3.48: 
Exercise 7.3.49: 
Schmerl (1969). 
Exercise 7.3.50: 
McKenzie (1971). 
Helling (1965); proof indicated due to Keisler. 
Keisler and Scott (unpublished). 
MacDowell and Specker (1961). 
Schmerl and Shelah (1969). 
7.4 The axiom of constructibility and the basic properties of constructible 
sets were introduced by Godel (1939, 1940) in order to prove that if ZF 
is consistent, then so is ZFC+GCH. This section is based mainly on the 

622 
HISTORICAL NOTES 
work of Gaifman and Rowbottom, and later Silver. Using iterated ultra- 
powers, Gaifman proved that if there is a measurable cardinal a > o, 
then 
all the conclusions of Theorem 7.4.7 hold. Independently, Rowbottom 
proved that if there exists a Ramsey cardinal, then part (i) of Theorem 
7.4.7 holds. Using th: methods explained in the last section, Silver proved 
Theorem 7.4.7 in its present form. It is a common improvement of both 
Gaifman and Rowbottom’s result. The other two main results of this section, 
Theorems 7.4.10 and 7.4.12, are due to Keisler and Rowbottom. Rowbottom 
first proved that any nontrivial case of Chang’s conjecture contradicts the 
axiom of constructibility 
7.4.1-6: Godel (1939, 1940). 
7.4.7,8: Silver (1966). 
7.4.10: Keisler and Rowbottom (1965). 
7.4.1 1 : Kunen (1970). 
7.4.12: Keisler and Rowbottom (1965). 
Exercises 7.4.2, 3: 
Silver (1966). 
Exercise 7.4.4: 
Solovay (1 967). 
Exercise 7.4.5: 
Silver (1966). 
Exercises 7.4.6-7: 
Rowbottom (1964). 
Exercises 7.4.8, 10-12: Silver (1966). 
Exercise 7.4.13: 
Kunen (1 970). 
Exercises 7.4.15-16: 
Solovay (1967). 
Exercise 7.4.17: 
Gaifman (1974). 
Exercise 7.4.18 : 
Chang (1968a). 

REFERENCES 
J. W. 
ADDISON, L. HENKIN 
and A. TARSKI, 
eds. 
(1965) 
K. 1. APPEL 
(1959) 
J. Ax and S. KOCHEN 
(1965a) Diophantine problems over local fields 1, Am. J. Math. 87, 605-630. 
(1965b) Diophantine problems over local fields 11: A complete set of axioms forp-adic 
number theory, Ant. J. Marh. 87, 631-648. 
(1966) Diophantine problems over local fields 111: Decidable fields, Ann. Marh. 83, 
437456. 
The Theory of Models (North-Holland, Amsterdam). 
Horn sentences in identity theory, J. Symb. Logic 24, 306-310. 
J. T. BALDWIN 
and A. H. LACHLAN 
(1971) 
J. BARWISE 
(1975) 
H. BEHMANN 
On strongly minimal sets, J. Symb. Logic 36, 79-96. 
Some Eastern two-cardinal theorems. In:. Cong. of Logic, Merhodology, and 
Phil. of Scr. a: London. On:. 1975. 
Beitrage zur Algebra der Logik, insbesondere zur Entscheidungsproblem, Marh. 
.4nn. 86, 163-229. 
Models and Ulrraproditcts (North-Holland, Amsterdam) i x f 3 2 2  pp. 
Reduced products and nonstandard logics, J. Symb. Logic 34,424-436. 
Reduced producrs, filters and Boolean ulrrapowers, Ph. D. Thcsis, Univ. of 
Wisconsin. Also Ann. Marh. Logic 4 (1972), 1-31. 
Regularity of ultrafilters. Israel J. Math. 17, 231-240. 
A system of axiomatic set theory, Parts I-V, J. Svmb. Logic 2 (1937) 65-77; 
(1922) 
J. L. BELL and A. B. SLOMSON 
(1969) 
M. BENDA 
(1969) 
(1970) 
M. BENDA and J. KETONEN 
(1974) 
P. BERNAYS 
(1937) 
E. W. 
BETH 
(1953) 
6 (1941) 1-17; 7 (1942) 65-89; 7 (1942) 133-145; 8 (1943) 89-106. 
On Padoa's method in the theory of definition, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Werensch. 
Proc. Ser. A 56 (= indag. Marh. 15) 330-339. 
G. BIRKHOFF 
(1935) On the structure of abstract algebras, Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 31,433454. 
(1961) Larrice Theory, A. M. S .  Colloq. Publ. Vol. 25 (Am. Math. SOC., Providence, 
R.I.) xixS283 pp. 
623 

624 
REFERENCES 
G. CANTOR 
(1895) Beitriige zur Begriindung der transfiniten Mengenlehre, Math. Ann. 96, 481- 
512. [English transl.: Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transfinite 
Numbers (Dover Publications, New York, 1915).] 
Some general theorems on direct products and their applications in the theory 
of models. Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 57 (= Indag. Math. 16) 
(1959) On unions of chains of models, Proc. Am. Math. Soc. 10, 120-127. 
(1960) A lemma on ultraproducts and some applications, Prelim. Rept., Notices Am. 
Math. Soc. 7, 635. 
(1964a) On the formula ‘there exists x such thatf’(x) for all/€ F’, Notices Am. Math. 
SOC. 11, 587. 
(1964b) Some new results in definability. Bull. Am. Math. SOC. 70, 808-813. 
(196Sa) A note on the two-cardinal problem, Proc. Am. Math. SOC. 16, 1148-1155. 
(1965b) A simple proof of the Rabin-Keisler theorem, Bull. Am. Math. Soc. 71, 642- 
(1967a) Omitting types of prenex formulas, J. Sj’mb. Logic 32, 61-74. 
(1967b) Ultraproducts and other methods of constructing models, Sers, Models and 
(1967~) Descendingly incomplete ultrafilters, Trans. Am. Math. Soc. 126, 108-1 18. 
( I  968a) Infinitary properties of models generated from indiscernibles, Logic, Methodol- 
ogy, and the Philosophy of Science, B. van Rootselaar and J. F. Staal, eds. 
(North-Holland, Amsterdam) 9-21. 
(1968b) Some remaiks on the model theory of infinitary languages, The Syntax ond 
Semantics of /n/irritary Languages, Lecture Notes in Math. 72, J. Barwise, ed. 
(Springer, Berlin) 36-63. 
(1968~) A generalization of the Craig interpolation theorem, Notices Am. Moth. Soc. 
15. 934, also see Symposia Mathematics Y (1971) 1-19 (Academic Press). 
(1962) Applications of ultraproducts of pairs of cardinals to the theory of models, 
Pacific J. Math. 12, 835-845. 
(1966) Continuous Model Theory (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J.) xii+ 165 pp. 
C. C. CHANG 
and A. C. MOREL 
(1958) On closure under direct product, J. Sy~nb. Ligic 23, 149-154. 
C. C. CHANG 
and Y. N. MOSCHOVAKIS 
(1968) On xi-relations on special models, Notices Am. Math. SOC. 15, 934. 
D. 
V. CHOODNOVSKY 
and G .  V. CHOODNOVSKY 
(1974) Descendingly incomplete ultrafilters, Soviet Math. Doklady 15, 1472-1476. 
A. CHURCH 
(1956) 
Introduction to Mathenlatical Logic, Vol. 1 (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 
N.J.) x+378 pp. 
P. J. COHEN 
(1963) The independence of the continuum hypothesis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
(1966) Set Theory and the Continuum Hypothesis (Benjamin, New York) 154 pp. 
(1969) Decision procedures for real and p-adic fields. Comm. Pure and Applied Math. 
22. 131-151. 
P. M. COHN 
(1965) 
Unioersal Algebra (Harper and Row, London) xv+333 pp. 
W. CRAIG 
(1957) Three uses of the Herbrand-Gentzen Theorem in relating model theory and 
C. C. CHANG 
(1954) 
592-598. 
643. 
Recursion Theory, J. N. Crossley, ed. (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 85-121. 
C. C. CHANG and H. 1. KEISLER 
50, 1143-1 148; 51 (1964) 105-1 10. 

REFERENCES 
625 
proof theory, J. Symb. Logic 22, 269-285. 
(1961) so-homogeneous relatively universal systems, Notices Am. Math. SOC. 8, 265. 
A. EHRENFEUCHT 
(1957) 
(1961) 
On theories categorical in power, Fund. Math. 44, 241-248. 
An application of games to the completeness problem for formalized theories, 
Fund. Math. 49, 129-141. 
A. EHRENFEUCHT 
and A. MOSTOWSKI 
(1956) Models of axiomatic theories admitting automorphisms, Fund. Math. 43, 50-68. 
E. ENCELER 
(1959) A characterization cf theories with isomorphic denumerable models, Notices 
Am. Mnrh. SOC. 6, 161. 
P. ERDOS 
(1942) Some set-theoretical properties of graphs, Reu. Unio. Nacl. Tucitmdn Ser. A 3, 
363-367. 
P. ERDOS, L. GILLMAN 
and M. HENRIKSEN 
P. ERDOS and A. HAJNAL 
(1955) An isomorphism theorem for real closed fields, Ann. Math. Ser. 2,61, 542-554. 
(1958) On thc structure of set mappings, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hung. 9, 111-131. 
(1962) Some remarks concerning our paper 'On the structure of set mappings', Acfa 
Math. Acad. Sci. Hung. 13, 223-226. 
(1966) On a problem of 8. J6nsson, Bit//. .4cnd. Polon. Sci. Se'r. Sci. Mntli. Asfron. 
P h y ~ .  14, 61-99. 
P. ERDOS, A. HAJNAL 
and P. RADO 
P. ERDOS and R. RADO 
P. ERDOS and A. TARSKI 
(1965) 
(1956) 
(1961) 
Partition relations for cardinal numbers, Acta Muth. 16, 93-196. 
A partition calculus in set theory, Bit//. Am. Mnth. SOC. 62,427-489. 
On some problems involving inaccessible cardinals, Essays on the Foundations 
of Mathematics (Magnus Press, The Hebrew Univ., Jerusalem) 50-82. 
Decidability of the elementary theory of relatively complemented distributive 
lattices and the theory of filters, Algebra i Logika Sem. 3 (3), 17 (in Russian). 
On the elementary theory of maximal normed fields, Dokl. Akad. Nuuk SSSR 
165 (in Russian; English Trans].: Sou. Math. 1390-1393). 
Yu. L. ERSHOV 
(1964) 
(1965) 
S. FEFERMAN 
(1968) Persistent and invariant formulas for outer extension, Comp. Math. 20, 29-52. 
(1959) The first order properties of algebraic systems, Fund. Math. 47, 57-103. 
(1958) Foundations of Ser Theory (North-Holland, Amsterdam) xf415 pp. 
R. F R A k k  
(1954) Sur quelques classifications des systkmes de relations, Pub/. Sci. Uniu. Alger 
SPr. A 1, 35-182. 
Reduced direct products, Fund. Math. 51, 195-228 (Abstract: Notices Am. 
Math. SOC. 5 (1958) 674). 
One hundred and two problems in mathematical logic. J .  Symbolic Logic 40. 
s. FEFERMAN 
and R. L. VAUGHT 
A. A. FRAENKEL 
and Y. BAR-HILLEL 
T. E. FRAYNE, 
A. C. MOREL and D. S. Scorn 
(1962) 
H. FRIEDMAN 
(1975) 
1 13-1 29. 

626 
REFERENCES 
G. FUHRKEN 
(1962) 
(1964) 
(1968) 
Bemerkung zu einer Arbeit E. Engelers, 2. Math. Logik u. Grundl. Moth. 8, 
Skolem-type normal forms for first-order languages with a generalized quanti- 
fier, Fund. Math. 54, 291-302. 
A model with exactly one undefinable element, Coll. Math. 19, 183-185. 
277-219. 
H. GAIFMAN 
(1967) 
F. CALVIN 
(1965) 
(1967) 
(1968) 
(1970) 
K. GODEL 
(1930) 
Die Vollstindigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalkuls. Monatsh. 
Math. Phys. 37, 349-360. 
(1931) uber formal unentscheidbare Satze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter 
Systeme I, Monatsh. Math. Phys. 38, 173-198. 
(1939) 
Consistency proof for the generalized continuum hypothesis, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U S A .  25, 220-224. 
(1 940) The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Continuum Hypo- 
thesis with the Axioms of Set Theory, Ann. Math. Studies 3 (Princeton Univ. 
Press, Princeton, N.J.). 
G. GRATZER 
(1968) 
Unioersal Algebra (Van Nostrand, New York) xvi t 3 6 8  pp. 
A. GRZEGORCZYK, 
A. MOSTOWSKI 
and C. RYLL-NARDZEWSKI 
(1961) 
Definability of sets in models of axiomatic theories, Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. SPr. 
Sci. Math. Astronom. Phys. 9, 163-167. 
Uniform extension operators for models, Sets, Models and Recirrsion Theory, 
J .  N .  Crossley, ed. (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 122-1 55. 
Horn sentences, Thesis, Univ. of Minnesota. 
Reduced products, Horn sentences, and decision problems, Bull. Am. Math. 
SOC. 13, 59-64. 
A generalization of Ramsey’s Theorem, Notices Am. Math. Soc. 15, 548. 
Horn sentences, Ann. Math. Logic 1, 389422. 
W. HANF 
(1964) 
Incompactness in languages with infinitely long expressions, Fund. Math. 13, 
309-324. 
W. HANF and D. SCOTT 
(1961) Classifying inaccessible cardinals, Notices Am. Math. Soc. 8, 445. 
F. HAUSDORFF 
(1914) Grundziige der Mengenlehre (Leipzig) 461 pp. 
M. HELLING 
( I  964) 
Hanf numbers for some generalizations of first-order languages, Notices An?. 
Math. SOC. 11, 679. 
(1965) Ph.D. Thesis, Univ. of California, Berkeley, Calif. 
(1949) The completeness of the first-order functional calculus, J. Synb. Logic 14, 
(1953) Some interconnections between modern algebra and mathematical logic, Trans. 
Am. Math. SOC. 74, 410-427. 
( I  954a) Metamathematical theorems equivalent to the prime ideal theorems for Boolean 
algebras, Prelim. Rept., Bull. Am. Math. SOC. 60, 387-388. 
(1954b) A generalization of the concept of o-consistency, J. Symb. Logic 19, 183-196. 
L. A. HENKIN 
159-1 66. 

REFERENCES 
627 
(1963) An extension of the Craig-Lyndon interpolation theorem, J. Symb. Logic 28, 
E. HEWITT 
(1948) Rings of real-valued continuous functions, Trans. Ant. Moth. Soc. 64, 45-99. 
W .  A. HODGES 
( I  969) 
The Ehrenfeucht-Mostowshi method of constructing models, Doctoral Disserta- 
tion, Univ. of Oxford, 139 pp. 
A. HORN 
(1951) On sentences which are true of direct unions of algebras, J. Sylnb. Logic 16, 
14-21. 
20 1-2 I 6. 
T. JECH 
(1971a) Lectures in Set Theory, Lecture Notes in Math. 27 (Springer, Berlin) 137 pp. 
(1971b) Trees, J. Symb. Logic 36, 1-14. 
B. JONSON 
(1956) Universal relational systems, Moth. Scond. 4, 193-208. 
(1960) Homogeneous universal relational systems, Moth. Scond. 8, 137-142. 
E. KAMKE 
(1950) The Theory of Sets, transl. by F. Bagemihl (Dover). 
A. KANAMORI, 
W. 
REINHARDT, 
and R SOLOVAY 
(1978) Strong axioms of infinity and elementary embeddings. Ann. Math. Logic 13, 
73-1 16. 
H. J. KEISLER 
(1960) Theory of models with generalized atomic formulas, J. Symb. Logic 25, 1-26. 
(1961) Ultraproducts and elementary classes, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. 
Ser. A 64 (= Indog. Moth. 23) 477495. 
(1962) Some applications of the theory of models to set theory, Logic, Methodology 
nnd Philosophy of Science. E .  Nagel, P. Suppes and A. Tarski, eds. (Stanford 
Univ. Press, Stanford, Calif.) 80-86. 
Limit ultrapowers, Trans. Am. Moth. SOC. 107, 383408. 
Michigon Moth. 1. 11, 71 -8 I. 
(1963) 
(1964a) Complete theories of algebraically closed fields with distinguished subfields, 
(1964b) Good ideals in fields of sets, Ann. Moth. 79, 338-359. 
(1964~) On cardinalities of ultraproducts, Biill. Am. Moth. SOC. 70, 644-647. 
(1 964d) Ultraproducts and saturated models, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. 
(1965a) A survey of ultraproducts, Logic, Methodology ond Philosophy of Science, 
(1965b) Limit ultraproducts, J. Symb. Logic 30, 212-234. 
(196%) Some applications of infinitely long formulas, J. Svmb. Logic 30, 339-349. 
(19654) Reduced products and Horn classes, Trans. Am. Moth. SOC. 117,307-328. 
(1966a) First order properties of pairs of cardinals, Bull. Am. Moth. SOC. 72, 141-144. 
(1966b) Some model-theoretic results for w-logic, Israel J. Moth. 4, 249-261. 
(1967a) Ultraproducts of finite sets, J. Symb. Logic 32, 47-57. 
(1967b) Ultraproducts which are not saturated, J. Symb. Logic 32, 2346. 
(1968a) Models with orderings, Logic, Methodology ond Philosophy of Science, B. van 
Rootselaar and J. F. Staal, eds. (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 35-62. 
(1968b) Formulas with linearity ordered quantifiers, The Syntax and Semanfics of 
lnfinitory Longuoges, Lecture Notes in Math. 72, J. Barwise, ed. (Springer, 
Berlin) 96-1 30. 
Logic with the quantifier 'there exist uncountably many', Ann. Math. Logic 1, 
1-93. 
A 67 (= Indog. Marh. 26) 178-186. 
Y .  Bar-Hillel, ed. (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 112-126. 
(1970) 

628 
REFERENCES 
(1971a) Model Theory for Infinitary Logic (North-Holland, Amsterdam) x+208 pp. 
(1971b) On theories categorical in their own power, J. Symb. Logic 36, 2 6 2 4 4 .  
(1967) 
(1968) 
(1965) 
H. J. KEISLER and M. MORLEY 
On the number of homogeneous models of a given power, Israel J. Math. 5, 
Elementary extensions of models of set theory. Israel J .  Math. 6, 49-65. 
Constructible sets and weakly compact cardinals, Notices Am. Math. SOC. 12, 
373. 
From accessible to inaccessible cardinals, Fund. Math. 53. 225-308. 
73-78. 
H. J. KEISLER and F. ROWBOTTOM 
H. J. KEISLER and A. TARSKI 
(1964) 
J. L. KELLEY 
(1955) 
General Topology (Van Nostrand). 
J. KETONEN 
(1976) 
Some remarks on ultrafilters, Notices Am. Math. Soc. 75, A-325 (abstract). 
E. KLEINBERG 
(1972) 
The equiconsistency of two large cardinal axioms (abstract), Notices Am. 
Mafh. SOC. 16, A-329. 
S. B. KOCHEN 
(1961) 
R. KOPPERMAN 
(1972) 
G. KREISEL 
(1962) 
G. KREISEL 
and J. L. KRIVINE 
(1967) 
222 pp. 
Generalized interpolation and definability, Ann. Math. Logic 1. 423468. 
Some applications of iterated ultrapowers in set theory, Ann. Mnrh. Logic 1, 
Ultrafilters and independent sets, Trans. Amer. Math. SOC., 172, 199-206. 
On descendingly incomplete ultrafilters, J. Symb. Logic 36 (1971) 650-652. 
Ultraproducts in the theory of models, .4nn. Math. Ser. 2: 74, 221-261. 
Model Theory and its Applications (Allyn and Bacon). 
Additions au Cows Polvcopit (Paris) 
Elemenrs o/ Marhematical Logic: Model Theory (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 
D. W. KUEKER 
(1970) 
K. KUNEN 
(1970) 
(1972) 
(1971) 
179-227. 
K. KUNEN and K. PRIKRY 
A. LACHLAN 
(1971) The transcendence rank of a theory, Paci/ic J. Math. 27, 119-122. 
C. H. LANGFORD 
(1927) 
Some theorems on deducibility, Ann. Math. Ser. 2, 28, 16-40. 
A. LEVY 
(1960) 
Axiom schemata of strong infinity, Pacific J. Math. 10, 223-238. 
P. LINDSTROM 
(1964) On model completeness, Theoria (Lund) 30, 183-196. 
(1968) 
Remarks on some theorems of Keisler, J. Syrnb. L.ogic. 33, 571-576. 
(1976) 
Independence of the gap one conjecturc from G .  C. H., 
Norices Am. Math. 
SOC. 23, A-495 (abstract). 
A. LITMAN and S. SHELAH 
E. G. K. LOPEZ-ESCOBAR 
(1965a) An interpolation theorem for denumerably long sentences, Fund. Math. 57. 
253-272. 

REFERENCES 
629 
(1965b) Universal formulas in the infinitary languages Lag, Bull. Acad. folon. Sci. Sir. 
Sci. Math. Astron. Phys. 13, 383-388. 
(1966) On definable well orderings, Fund. Math. 55, 13-21. 
(1954) On the categoricity in power of elementary deductive systems and some related 
problems, Colloq. Math. 3, 58-62. 
(1955a) Quelques remarques, theorhes et problhes sur les classes dkfinissables d’al- 
gkbres, Mathematical Iirterprerarion of Formal Systems (North-Holland, Am- 
sterdam) 98-1 13. 
J. Lo$ 
(1955b) On the extending of models I, Fund. Math. 42, 38-54. 
(1957) On the extending of models IV: Infinite sums of models, Fund. Math. 44, 52-60. 
(1915) 
Uber Miiglichkeiten im Relativkalkiil. Math. Ann. 76, 447470. 
(1959a) An interpolation theorem in the predicate calculus, facifc J. Math. 9, 155-164. 
(1959b) Existential Horn sentences, Proc. Am. Math. SOC. 10, 994-998. 
(1959~) Properties preserved under homomorphism, Pacific J. Math. 9, 143-154. 
(1959d) Properties preserved in subdirect products, Paci/ic J. Math. 9, 155. 
J. LoS and R. S u s z ~ o  
L. LOWENHEIM 
R. C. LYNDON 
R. MACDOWELL 
and E. SPECKER 
M. MAGIDOR 
(1961) Modelle der Arithmetik, Infinitistic Methods (Pergamon Press.London) 257-263. 
(1976) On existence of nonregdar ultrafilters, or variations on a theme by Kunen, 
Logic Symposium, Oxford 1976 (abstract). 
M. MAKKAI 
(1964) On a generalization of a theorem of E. W. Beth, Acta Math. Acad. Sci. Hung. 
(1965) A compactness result concerning direct products of models, Fund. Math. 57, 
IS, 227-235. 
31 3-325. 
J. A. MAKOWSKY 
(1974) 
A. MALCEV 
(1936) 
Untersuchungen aus dem Gebiete der mathematischen Logik, Rec. Math. N.S. 
On some conjectures connected with complete sentences, Fund. Math. 81, 
193-202. 
1, 323-336. 
E. MARCZEWSKI-SZPILRAJN 
(1930) 
W. MARSH 
(1966) 
R. MCKENZIE 
(1971) 
Sur I’extension de I’ordre partiel, Fund. Math. 16, 386-389. 
On w ,  but not w-categorical theories, Ph.D. Thesis, Univ. of Dartmouth. 
On semigroups whose proper subsemigroups have lesser power, Algebra Urri- 
cersalis 1 (1971) 21-25. 
(1943) The decision problem for some classes of sentences without quantifiers, J. Syrrrb. 
Logic 8, 61-76. 
D. J. MONK and D. SCOTT 
(1964) Additions to some theorems of Erdos and Tarski, Fund. Math. 53, 335-343. 
M. MORLEY 
(1965a) Categoricity in power, Trans. Am. Math. SOC. 114, 514-538. 
(1965b) Omitting classes of elements, The Theory of Models, J. W. Addison, L. Henkin 
J. C. C. MCKINSEY 
and A. Tarski, eds. (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 265-273. 

630 
REFERENCES 
(196%) Countable models of N,-categorical theories, Israel J. Ma’h. 5, 65-72. 
(1970) The number of coun:able models, J. Symb. Logic 35, 14-18. 
(1967) The Hanf number for K-logic, Notices Am. Math. Soc. 14, 556. 
(1962) Homogeneous universal models, Math. Scand. 11, 37-57. 
(1949) An undecidable arithmerical statement, Fund. Math. 36, 143-1 64. 
(1952) On direct products of theories, J. Symb. Logic 7, 1-3 I. 
(1949) Arithmetical classes and types of well-ordered systems, Prelim. Rept., Bd/. 
Am. Math. Soc. 55, 65. 
M. MORLEY 
and V. MORLEY 
M. MORLEY 
and R. VAL‘GHT 
A. MOSTOWSKI 
A. MOSTOWSKI 
and A. TARSKI 
A. OBERSCHELP 
(1958) 
S. OREY 
(1956) 
Uber die Axiome produkt-abgeschlossener arithmetischer Klassen, Arch. Math. 
Logik u. Grundl. Math. 4, 95-123. 
On w-consistency and related properties, J. Syrirb. Logic 21, 246-252. 
L. PACHOLSKI 
and C. RYLL-NARDZEWSKI 
(1970) 
A. PADOA 
( I  901 ) 
On countably compact reduced products I, Fund. Moth. 67, 155-161. 
Essai d’une Thiorie dlgebrique des Nonibres Entiers, priced6 d’une Introduclion 
Logique a une Thiorie Deductire Quelconque, Bibliotheque du Congr. Intern. 
de Philos. 3, Logique et Histoire des Sciences (Paris) 309-365. 
Introduction to a general theory of elementary propositons. Amer. J .  Moth. 
POST 
(1921) 
43, 163-185. 
M. PRESBURGER 
(1930) 
Uber die Vtillstandigkeit cines gewissen Systems der Arithmetik ganzer Zalilen 
in welchem die Addition als einzige Operation hervortritt, C. R. Ier Congr. des 
Mathemaficiens des Pays Slaves (Warsaw) 92-101, 3 95. 
K. PRIKRY 
(1968) Changing measurable into accessible cardinals, Doctoral Dissertation, Univ. of 
California, Berkeley. Calif. Also Diss. Math. 68 (1970). 1-55. 
(1971) On a problem of Gillman and Keisler, Ann. Morh. Logic 2, 179-1 88. 
(1973) On descendingly complete ultrafilters. Pp. 459-488 in Cambridge Summer 
School in Math. Logic, Lecture Notes in Math. 337 (Springer, Berlin). 
M. 0. RABIN 
(1959) Arithmetical extensions with prescribed cardinality, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. 
Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 62 (= Indag. Math. 21) 439-446. 
(1960) Characterization of convex systems of axioms, Notices Am. Math. Soc. 7, 
(1962) Classes of models and sets of sentences with the intersection property, Proc. B. 
Pascal Colloq., Ann. de In Facultt des Sci. de I’lJniversitt de Clermont 1, 39-53. 
(1965) 
Universal groups of automorphisms of models, The Theory of Models, J. W. 
Addison, L. Henkin and A. Tarski, eds. (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 74-84. 
(1930) On a problem in formal logic, Proc. London Mtrrh. Soc. Ser. 2, 30, 264-286. 
(1950) A proof of the completeness theorem of Godel, Fund. Math. 37, 193-200. 
503-504. 
F. P. RAMSEY 
H. RASIOWA 
and R. SIKORSKI 

REFERENCES 
63 1 
J. P. RESSAYRE 
(1969) Sur les theories du premier ordre categorique en un cardinal, Trans. Am. Math. 
G. E. REYES 
(1970) Local definability theory, Ann. Math. Logic 1, 95-137. 
I. RESNIKOFF 
(1965) Tout ensemble de formules de la logique classique est equivalent ;i un ensemble 
independant, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 260, 2385-2388. 
(1967) ThPorie des I’aluations, Publ. du DCpt. de Math.. Univ. de Montreal, 314 pp. 
(1951) On the Metamathematics of Algebra (North-Holland, Amsterdam) x+ 195 pp. 
(1956a) A result on consistency and its application to the theory of definition, Koninkl. 
Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 59 (= Indag. Math. 18) 47-58. 
(1956b) Complete Theories (North-Holland. Amsterdam) 129 pp. 
(1956~) On a problem of L. Henkin, J. Symb. Logic 21. 33-35. 
(1959) On thc concept of a differentially closed field, Bull. Res. Council Israel Sect. 
(1961a) Non-standard analysis, Koninkl. Ned. Ahad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 64 (= 
Indag. Math. 23) 432-440. 
(1961b) Model theory and non-standard arithmetic, Infinitistic Methods (Pergamon, 
London) 265-302. 
(1963) 
On the Metamathematics of Algebra (North-Holland. Amsterdam) xf284 pp. 
(1965) Introduction to Model Theory and to the Metarnathematics of Algebra, 2nd ed. 
(North-Holland, Amsterdam) ixf284 pp. (1st ed., 1963). 
( I  966) Non-Standard Analysis (North-Holland, Amsterdam) xi +293 pp. 
(1973) Metamathematical problems. J .  Symbolic Logic 38, 500-5 16. 
(1964) Large cardinals and small constructible sets, Doctoral Dissertation, Univ. of 
Wisconsin: Ann. Math. Logic 3 (1971) 1-44, also Ann. Math. Logic 3 (1971) 
1-44. 
The role of the axiom of induction in elementary arithmetic, Fund. Muth. 39, 
On the categoricity in power no, Bull, Acad. Polon. Sci. SPr. Sci. Math. 
Astron. Phys. 7, 545-548. 
SOC. 142, 481-505. 
P. RIBENBOIM 
A. ROBINSON 
F 8, 113-128. 
F. ROWBOTTOM 
C. RYLL-NARDZEWSKI 
(1952) 
(1959) 
239-263. 
C. SACKS 
(1972) 
J. SCHMERL 
(1969) 
(1977) 
Saturated Model Theorv (W. A. Benjamin). 
On hyperinaccessible-like models (abstract), Notices Am. Math. Soc. 19, 843, 
also see J. Synrb. Logic 37, (1972) 521-530. 
An axiomatization for a class of two-cardinal models. J. Symb. Logic 42, 
174-178. 
J. SCHMERL 
and S. SHELA!~ 
(1969) On models with orderings (abstract), Notices Am. Math. Sor. 19, 840. also see 
J .  Symb. Logic 37 (1972) 531-537. 
Measurable cardinals and constructive sets, Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. Sir. Sci. 
Muth. Asrron. Phys. 9, 52 1-524. 
Stable theories, Israel J. Math. 7, 187-202. 
D. SCOTT 
(1961) 
S. SHELAH 
(1969) 

632 
REFERENCES 
(1970a) On theories T categorical in /TI, J. Symb. Logic 35, 73-82. 
(1970b) Finite diagrams stable in power, Ann. Math. Logic 2, 69-119. 
(1970~) When every reduced product is saturated (abstract), Notices Am. Math. SOC. 
(1970d) Solution of tog’ conjecture for uncountable languages (abstract), Notices Am. 
(1971a) A note on Hanf numbers, Pacific J. Math. 34, 539-544. 
(1971b) A combinatorial problem; stability and order for models and theories in in- 
finitary languages, Pacific J. Math. 41, 247-261. 
(1971~) The number of non-isomorphic models of an unstable first-order theory, Israel 
J. Math., 9. 473-487. 
(1971d) Stability, the f.c.p., and superstability; model-theoretic properties of formulas 
in first-order theories, Ann. Math. Logic3 (1971) 271-362. 
(1972a) Uniqueness and characterization of prime models over sets for totally trans- 
cendental first-order theories, J. Symb. Logic 37, 107-1 13. 
(1972b) Every two elementarily equivalent models have isomorphic ultrapowers, Israel 
J. Math., 10, 224-233. 
(1972~) Remark to ‘Local definability theory’ of Reyes, Ann. Math. Logic 2(1971) 
441 4 4 8 .  
(1976) 
Refuting Ehrenfeucht conjecture on rigid models, Israel J .  Math. 25, 273-286. 
(1977) A two-cardinal theorem and a combinatorial problem, Proc. Amer. Math. SOC. 
(1980) On a problem of Kurosh, Jonsson groups, and applications, Word Problems I1 
(North-Holland, Amsterdam). 
(1976~) Ultraproducts of finite cardinals and Keisler order, Notices Am. Math. SOC. 23, 
A-494 (abstract ) . 
Mathematical Logic (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.) vii 4- 344 pp. 
Some applications of model theory in set theory, Doctoral Dissertation, Univ. of 
California, Berkeley, Calif., Ann. Math. Logic 3 (1971) 45-1 10. 
Every analytic set is Ramsey, J. Symb. Logic 35, 60-64. 
The independence of Kurepa’s conjecture and the two-cardinal conjectures in 
model theory, Axiomatic Set Theory, D. S. Scott, ed., Proc. Sympos. Pure 
Math. 13(1) (Am. Math. SOC.) 383-390. 
Boolean Algebras, 2nd ed. (Springer. Berlin). 
Logisch-kombinatorische Untersuchungen iiber die Erfiillbarkeit oder Beweis- 
barkeit mathematischer SPtze nebst einem Theorem iiber dichte Mengen, 
Skrifter utgitt air Videnskapsselskapet i Kristiania, I. Mat. Naturu. Kl. 4. 36 pp. 
u ber die Nicht-Charakterisierbarkeit der Zahlenreihe mittels endlich oder ab- 
zahlbar unendlicht vieler Aussagen mit ausschliesslich Zahlenvariablen. Fund. 
Math. 23, 150-161. 
R. SOLOVAY 
(1967) A nonconstructible A: set of integers, Trans. Am. Math. SOC. 127, 50-75. 
E. SpecKeR 
(1949) Sur un probltme de Sikorski. Colloq. Murh. 2. 9-12. 
E. STEINITZ 
(1910) Algebraische Theorie der Ktirper, J. Reine Angeiv. Math. 137, 167-309. 
M. H. STONE 
(1936) The representation theorem for Boolean algebra. Trans. Am. Math. SOC. 40, 
17, 453. 
Math. SOC. 17, 1968. 
62, 134-136. 
J. R. SHOENFIELD 
( I  967) 
J. SILVER 
(1966) 
(1970) 
(1971) 
R. SIKORSKI 
(1964) 
T. SEOLEM 
(1920) 
(1934) 
37-1 1 I. 

REFERENCES 
633 
L. SVENONIUS 
(1959a) io-categoricity in first-order predicate calculus, Theoria fLund) 25, 82-94. 
(1959b) A theorem on permutations in models, Theorio (Lund) 25, 173-178. 
(1955) Elementary properties of Abelian groups, Fund. Math. 41, 203-271. (Abstract: 
null. Am. Math. SOC. 55 (1949) 65.) 
W. SZMIELEW 
( I  936) 
(1938) 
(1 949) 
(1 952) 
(1 954) 
(1955) 
(1 962) 
A. TARSKI 
(1930a) Uber einige fundamentale Begriffe der Metamathematik, C. R. Sdancrs SOC. 
Sci. Letrres Varsocie CI. 111 23, 22-29. (English Transl.: Logic, Semantics and 
1l4etamadrmntics (Oxford, 1959) 30-37.1 
Sur les ensembles dkfinissables de nombres r&ls 1. Fund. Math. 17, 210-239. 
[English Transl.: Logic, Semantics and Metomarhematics (Oxford, 1956) I 10- 
142.1 
(1935a) Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen, Studio Philos. (Warsaw) 
1, 261-405. [English Transl.: Logic. Semantics a d  Meramathematics (Oxford. 
(1 935b) Grundziige des Systemenkalkiils I, Fund. Mark 25, 503-526. [English Transl.: 
(1930b) Une contribution ti la thbrie de la mesure, Fund. Marh. 15.42-50. 
(1931) 
1956) 152-278. J 
Logic. Semantics nnd Meramat~ematics (Oxford, 1956) 343-383. ] 
Grundziige des Systemenkalkiils 11, Fund. Marh. 26, 283-301. 
Uber unerreichbaie Kardinalzahlen. Fund. Math. 30. 68-89. 
Arithmetical classes and types of Boolean algebras, Prelim. Rept.. Bull. Am. 
Math. SOC. 55, 64, 1192. 
Some notions and methods on the borderline of algebra and metamathematics. 
Pror. Inrern. Congr. of Marhemaricians. Cambridge, Mass. 1950, 1 (Am. Math. 
SOC., Providence. R. I.) 705-720. 
Contributions to the theory of models 1, 11. Koninkl. Ned. Aknd. Werensch. 
Proc. Ser. A 57 (= In&g. Marh. 16) 572-588. 
Contributions to the theory of models 111. Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. 
Ser. A 58 (= Indag. Marh. 17) 56-64. 
Some problems and results relevant to the foundations of set theory, Logic. 
Merhodology and Philosophy of Science, E. Nagel. P. Suppes and A. Tanki. 
eds. (University Press, Stanford, Calif.) 125-135. 
A. TARSKI, 
A. MOSTO!VSKI 
and R. M. ROBINSON 
( I  953) Undecidable Theories (North-Holland, Amsterdam). 
A. TARSKI 
and J. C. C. MCKINSEY 
(1948) A Decision Method for Flemenrory Algebra and Geometry. 2nd ed. (Berkeley, 
Los Angeles). 
(1957) Arithmetical extensions of relational systems, Cornposirio Math. 13, 81-102. 
A. TARSKI 
and R. VAUGHT 
S. ULAM 
(1930) Zur Masstheorie in der allgemeinen Mengenlehre, Fitnd. Mnth. 16, 140-1 50. 
R. VAUGHT 
(1954a) Applications of the Lawenheim-Skolem-Tanki theorem to problems of com- 
pleteness and decidability, Koninkl. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 57 
(= Indag. Math. 16) 467472. 
(1954b) Remarks on universal classes of relational systems, Koninkl. Ned. Aknd. 
Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A 57 (= Indag. Marh. 16) 589-59 1. 
(1954~) On sentences holding in direct products of relatiorial system, Proc. Intern. Congr. 
of Mathematicians, Amsterdam. 1954, 2 (Noordhoff. Groningen) 409. 

634 
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 
(1958a) Prime models and saturated models, Notices Am. Math. Soc. 5, 780. 
(1958b) Homogeneous universal models of complete theories, Notices Am. Moth. Sue. 
5,115. 
(1961) Denumcrable models of complete theories, lnfinitistic Methods (Pergmon, 
London) 303-32 1. 
(1963a) Indescribable cardinals, Notices Am. Math. SOC. 10, 126. 
(1963b) Elementary classes of models closed under descending intersection, Notices An!. 
Math. SOC. 10, 126. 
(1965a) The L6wenheim-Skolem Theorem. L ugic, Methodology and Phi/osoph>. of 
Science, Y. Bar-Hillel, ed. (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 8 1-89. 
(1965b) A Lawenheim-Skolem Theorem for cardinals far apart, The Theory of Models, 
J. W. Addison, L. Henkin and A. Tarski, eds. (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 
390-401. 
J. M. WEINSTEIN 
(1965) Firsf-order properties preserced by direct product, Ph. D. Thesis, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisc. 
(1913) frincipia Maf/ier/raficcr, 1.2, 3 (Cambridge Univ. Press, London; 2nd ed., 1925; 
2nd ed. of Vols. I ,  2, 1927). 
A. N. WHITEHEAD 
and B. RUSSELL 
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 
The following reference list contains papers explicitly referred to in the 
text, and a selection of books and expository articles. Many of these 
contain more extensive reference lists of papers in particular areas of 
model theory. 
A. ADLER and M. JORGENSEN 
(1972) Descendingly incomplete ultrafilters and the cardinality of ultrapowers, Canad. 
J. Math. 24, 830-834. 
Nonstandard Methods in Stochastic Analysis and Mathematical Physics (Aca- 
demic Press) xi + 514 pp. 
On a problem of Silver, Fund. Math. 116, 33-38. 
S. ALBEVERIO, 
J. E. FENSTAD, 
R. H0EGH-KROHN and T. LINDSTR0M 
(1986) 
A. AFTER 
(1983) 
J. T. BALDWIN 
(1973) 
(1987) 
(1988) 
(1981) 
(1973) 
(1974) 
aT is finite for HI-categorical T, Trans. Amer. Math. SOC. 181, 37-51. 
Classifcation Theory: Chicago 1985, Lecture Notes in Math. 1292 (Springer, 
Berlin) 500 pp. 
Fundamentals of Stability Theory (Springer-Verlag) xiii + 447 pp. 
Algebraically prime models, Ann. Math. Logic 20, 289-330. 
Back and forth through infinitary logic, Studies in Model Theory, M. Morely, 
ed., MAA Studies 8, 5-34. 
Axioms for abstract model theory, Annals of Math. Logic 7 ,  221-265. 
J. T. BALDWIN 
and D. KUEKER 
K. J. BARWISE 

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 
635 
(1975) 
(1977) 
(1985) 
(1971) 
(1975) 
Admissible Sets and Structures (Springer-Verlag) xiii + 394 pp. 
Handbook of Marhemarical Logic, ed. (North-Holland) xi + 1165 pp. 
Model-Theoretic Logics (Springer-Verlag) xviii + 893 pp. 
Completing theories by forcing, Ann. Math. Logic 2, 119-142. 
On recursively saturated models of arithmetic, Model Theory and Algebra, 
Lecture Notes in Math. 498, D. H. Saracino and V. B. Weispfenning, eds. 
(Springer, Berlin) 42-55. 
An introduction to recursively saturated and resplendent models, J. Symb. 
Logic 41, 531-536. 
J. L. BELL and M. MACHOVER 
A Course in Mathematical Logic (North-Holland) xviii + 599 pp. 
S. BEN-DAVID 
A Laver-type indestructability for accessible cardinals, Logic Colloquium ’86 
(North-Holland) 9-19. 
Nonstandard Asymptotic Analysis, Lecture Notes in Math. 1249 (Springer, 
Berlin) ix + 187 pp. 
(1984) Kueker’s conjecture for superstable theories, J. Symb. Logic 49, 930-934. 
M. CANIAR 
(1988) Countable ultraproducts without CH, Ann. Pure and Appl. Logic 37, 1-80. 
G. CHERLIN 
(1973) Algebraically closed division rings, J .  Symb. Logic 38, 493-499. 
(1976) Model Theoretic Algebra. Selected Topics, Lecture Notes in Math. 521 (Spring- 
er, Berlin) 234 pp. 
(1984) Totally categorical structures, Proc. In?. Cong. Math. (Warsaw 1983) 301-306. 
(1985) KO-categorical KO-stable structures, Ann. Pure and Appl. Logic 28, 103-135. 
(1972) Ultrafilters and ultraproducts in non-standard analysis, Contributions to Non- 
standard Analysis, W. A. J. Luxemburg and A. Robinson, eds. (North-Holland) 
K. J. BARWISE 
and S. FEFERMAN 
K. J. BARWISE 
AND A. ROBINSONS 
K. J. BARWISE 
and J. SCHLIPF 
(1976) 
(1977) 
(1988) 
I. VAN DEN BERG 
(1987) 
S. BUECHLER 
G. CHERLIN, 
L. HARRINGTON, 
and A. LACHLAN 
G. CHERLIN 
and J. HIRSCHFELD 
261-280. 
K. L. CLARK 
(1978) Negation as failure, Logic and Databases, H. Gallaire and J. Minker, eds. 
(Plenum Press) 293-322. 
W. W. COMFORT 
and S. NEGREPONTIS 
(1974) 
The Theory of Ultrafilters (Springer-Verlag) x + 482 pp. 
W. CRAIG and R. L. VAUGHT 
(1958) Finite axiomatizability using additional predicates, J. Symb. Logic 23, 289-308. 
L. CRISMA and S. HOLZER 
(1983) Starconcepts, Boll. Unione Matematica Ital. Serie VI, 2, 175-192. 
N. CUTLAND 
(1988) Nonstandard Analysis and its Applications, ed. (Cambridge Univ. Press) xiii + 
346 pp. 
Applied Nonstandard Analysis (Wiley) xii + 181 pp. 
M. DAVIS 
(1977) 

636 
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 
K. DEVLIN 
(1973) 
(1984) 
(1981) 
(1988) 
(1981) 
Some weak versions of large-cardinal axioms, Ann. Math. Logic 5 ,  291-325. 
Constructibility ( Springer-Verlag) xi + 425 pp. 
The core model, Ann. Math. Logic 20, 43-75. 
Regularity of ultrafilters and the core model, Israel J .  Math. 63, 289-322. 
Some applications of the core model, Set Theory and Model Theory, Lecture 
Notes in Math. 872 (Springer, Berlin) 55-97. 
On the consistency strength of 'accessible' Jonsson cardinals and of the weak 
Chang conjecture, Ann. Pure and Appl. Logic 25, 233-361. 
Set Theory: An Introduction to Large cardinals (North-Holland) xii + 354 pp. 
Syntactical methods in infinitesimal analysis, Cutland (1988) 258-281. 
Large Infinitmy Languages (North-Holland) xv + 464 pp. 
A, J. DODD and R. B. JENSEN 
H.-D. DONDER 
H.-D. DONDER, R. JENSEN, and B. KOPPELBERG 
H.-D. DONDER and P. KOEPKE 
(1983) 
F. R. DRAKE 
F. DIENER and K. D. STROYAN 
M. DICKMANN 
(1974) 
(1988) 
(1975) 
H.-D. EBBINGHAUS 
P. EKLOF 
and G. SABBAGH 
(1985) 
(1971) 
J. FLUM 
(1985) 
J. FLUM and M. ZIEGLER 
(1980) 
M. FOREMAN 
Extended Logic: The General Framework, Banvise and Feferman (1985) 25-76. 
Model-completions and modules, Ann. Math. Logic 2, 251-295. 
Characterizing Logics, Barwise and Feferman (1985) 77-120. 
Topological Model Theory, Lecture Notes in Math. 769 (Springer, Berlin) 
x + 151 pp. 
Large cardinals and strong model-theoretic transfer properties, Trans. Amer. 
(1982) 
R. FRAISSB 
(1986) 
H. FRIEDMAN 
(1970) 
Math. SOC. 272, 427-463. 
Theory of Relations (North-Holland) xii + 397 pp. 
Why first-order logic? Manuscript (Stanford Univ. and the Univ. of Wisconsin) 
19 PP. 
Elementary embeddings of set theory, Axiomatic Set Theory, Proc. Sympos. 
Pure Math. 13(2), T. J. Jech, ed. (Am. Math. SOC.) 33-101. 
Collected Works, Volume 1, S .  Feferman, ed. (Oxford Univ. Press) xvi + 474 
PP. 
H. GAIFMAN 
(1974) 
K. GODEL 
(1986) 
V. HARNIK and L. HARRINGTON 
L. HARRINGTON, 
M. D. MORLEY, A. SCEDROV 
and S. G. SIMPSON 
(1984) 
(1985) 
Fundamentals of forking, Ann. Pure and Appl. Logic 26, 245-286. 
Harvey Friedman's Research on the Foundations of Mathematics (North- 
Holland) xvi + 408 pp. 

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 
637 
L. HARRINGTON, 
M. MAKKAI, 
and S. SHELAH 
(1984) 
L. HENKIN 
(1974) 
A proof of Vaught’s conjecture for o-stable theories, Israel J .  Math. 49, 
259-280. 
Proceedings of the Tarski Symposium, L. Henkin et al., eds., Amer. Math. SOC. 
Proc. of Symp. in Pure Math., xx + 498 pp. 
Cylindric Algebras, Part I (North-Holland) vi + 508 pp. 
Cylindric Algebras, Part I1 (North-Holland) vii + 302 pp. 
The isomorphism property in nonstandard analysis and its use in the theory of 
Banach spaces, J. Symb. Logic 39, 717-736. 
Forcing, Arithmetic, Division Rings, Lecture Notes in Math. 454 (Springer, 
Berlin) 266 pp. 
Building Models by Games (Cambridge Univ. Press) 311 pp. 
Kueker’s conjecture for stable theories, Preprint. 
An Introduction to Nonstandard Real Analysis (Academic Press) xii + 232 pp. 
L. HENKIN, J. D. MONK and A. TARSKI 
(1971) 
(1985) 
W. HENSON 
(1974) 
J. HIRSCHFELD 
and W. WHEELER 
(1975) 
W. HODGES 
(1985) 
E. HRUSHOVSKI 
(19??) 
A. HURD and P. LOEB 
(1985) 
T. JECH 
(1978) Set Theory (Academic Press) xi + 621 pp. 
K. KAISER 
(1969) Uber eine verallgemeinerung der Robinsonschen modellvervollstandigung I, Z. 
Math. Logik Grund. Math. 15, 37-48. 
The evolution of large cardinal axioms in set theory, Higher Set Theory, Lecture 
Notes in Math. 669 (Springer, Berlin) 99-275. 
Finite quantifier equivalence, Addison, Henkin, and Tarski (1965) 407-412. 
Forcing and the omitting types theorem, Studies in Model Theory, M. Morley, 
ed., M.A.A. Studies, 8, 96-133. 
Foundations of Infinitesimal Calculus (Prindle, Weber and Schmidt) ix + 214 pp. 
Fundamentals of model theory, Barwise (1977) 47-104. 
An Infinitesimal Approach to Stochastic Analysis, Mem. Amer. Math. SOC. 48, 
no. 297, x + 184 pp. 
Elementary Calculus (Prindle, Weber and Schmidt) xi + 913 pp. 
Rowbottom and J6nsson cardinals are almost the same, J .  Symb. Logic 38, 
A. KANAMORI 
and M. MAGIDOR 
(1978) 
C. KARP 
(1965) 
H.J. KEISLER 
(1973) 
(1976) 
(1977) 
(1984) 
(1986) 
(1973) 
P. KOEPKE 
(1988) 
H. K. KUNEN 
(1978) 
(1980) 
E. M. KLEINBERG 
423-427. 
Some applications of short core models, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 37, 179-204. 
Saturated ideals, J .  Symb. Logic 43, 65-76. 
Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs (North-Holland) xvi + 313 
PP. 

638 
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 
A. LACHLAN 
(1973) 
D. LASCAR 
(1986) 
(1987) 
On the number of countable models of a countable superstable theory, Logic, 
Methodology and Philosophy of Science IV (North-Holland) 45-56. 
StabilitC en thkorie des modeles (French) Univ. Cath. de Louvain (Cabay 
Liabraire-Editeur S.a.) ii + 231 pp. 
Stability in Model Theory (English translation of preceding reference) (Wiley) 
viii + 193 pp. 
An introduction to forking, J. Symb. Logic 44, 330-350. 
Instances of the conjecture of Chang, Israel J. Math. 48, 225-243. 
First order predicate logic with generalized quantifiers, Theoria 32, 186-195. 
On extensions of elementary logic, Theoria 35, 1-11. 
A characterization of elementary logic, Modality, Morality, and other Problems 
of Sense and Nonsense, B. Hallden, ed. (CWK Gleerup Bokolforlag) 189-191. 
On characterizing elementary logic, Logical Theory and Semantic Analysis, S .  
Stenlund, ed. (D. Reidel Publ. Co.) 129-146. 
An invitation to nonstandard analysis, Cutland (1988) 1-105. 
The additive structure of models of arithmetic, Proc. Amer. Math. SOC. 68, 
D. LASCAR and B. POIZAT 
J.-P. LEVINSKI 
P. LINDSTROM 
(1979) 
(1984) 
(1966) 
(1969) 
(1973) 
(1974) 
T. LINDSTRBM 
(1988) 
(1978) 
Lo, LI Bo 
(1980) 
(1985) 
(1981) 
L. LIPSCHITZ 
and M. NADEL 
331-336. 
Union and product of models, and homogeneous models (Chinese) Beijing 
Shifan Daxue Xuebao, 31-39. 
Vaught conjecture for homogeneous models, J. Symb. Logic 48, 539-541. 
Nonstandard Analysis. A Practical Guide with Applications, Lecture Notes in 
Math. 881 (Springer, Berlin). 
W. A. J. LUXEMBURG 
Applications of Model Theory of Algebra, Analysis, and Probability, ed. (Holt) 
i + 307 pp. 
R. LUTZ and M. GOZE 
(1969) 
(1969a) A general theory of monads, Luxemburg (1969) 18-86. 
A. MACINTYRE 
A. MACINTYRE, 
K. MCKENNA 
and L. VAN DEN DRIES 
M. MAGIDOR 
(1977) 
(1983) 
(1979) 
Model completeness, Barwise (1977) 139-180. 
Elimination of quantifiers in algebraic structures, Advances in Math. 47, 74-87. 
On the existence of nonregular ultrafilters and the cardinality of ultrapowers, 
Trans. Amer. Math. SOC. 249, 97-111. 
A. 1. MALCEV 
(1971) 
The Metamathematics of Algebraic Systems, Collected papers, 1936-1967 
(North-Holland) xviii + 494 pp. 
T. MILLAR 
(19??) To appear. 
J. D. MONK 
(1976) 
Mathematical Logic (Springer-Verlag), ix + 531 pp. 

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 
639 
R. MONTAGUE 
(1961) 
E. NELSON 
(1977) 
(1988) 
J. F. PABION 
(1982) 
M. G. PERETYATKIN 
(1980) 
A. PILLAY 
(1983) 
B. POIZAT 
(1985) 
C. PURITZ 
(1971) 
J. RESSAYRE 
(1973) 
( 1977) 
A. ROBERT 
(1988) 
A. ROBINSON 
(1967) 
(1971a) Forcing in model theory, Symposia Math. 5, 69-82. 
(1971b) Infinite forcing in model theory, Proc. 2nd Scandinavian Symposium in Logic 
(North-Holland) 317-340. 
(1971~) Forcing in model theory, Les Actes du Congrks International des Mathkmaticiens 
1 (Gautheir-Villars, Paris) 245-250. 
(1973) Model theory as a framework for algebra, Srudies in Model Theory, M. Morley, 
ed., MAA Studies 8, 134-157. 
(1979) Selected Papers, Vol. I, Model Theory and Algebra (Yale Univ. Press) xxxvii + 
694 pp. 
(1979a) Selected Papers, Vol. 11, Nonstandard Analysis and Philosophy (Yale Univ. 
Press) xiv + 582 pp. 
A set-theoretical characterization of enlargements, Luxemburg (1969) 109-122. 
Non-isomorphic hyper-real fields from non-isomorphic ultrapowers, Math. 2. 
Fraenkel’s addition to the axioms of Zermelo, Essays on the Foundations of 
Mathematics, Y. Bar-Hillel, ed. (Magnes Press) 91-114. 
Internal set theory, Bull. Amer. Math. SOC. 83, 1165-1198. 
The syntax of nonstandard analysis, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 38, 123-134 
Saturated models of Peano Arithmetic, J. Symb. Logic 47, 625-637. 
An example of an w,-categorical complete finitely axiomatizable theory (En- 
glish translation) Algebra i Logika 19, 224-251. 
An Introduction to Stability Theory (Clarendon Press, Oxford) xi + 146 pp. 
Cours de Thtorie des Modeles, Nur al-Mantiq wal-Ma’rifah, 82 Rue Racine, 
69100 Villeurbanne, France, 584 pp. 
Ultrafilters and standard functions in non-standard arithmetic, Proc. London 
Math. SOC. 22, 705-733. 
Boolean models and infinitary first-order languages, Ann. Marh. Logic 6, 
Models with compactness properties relative to an admissible language, Annals 
of Math. Logic 11, 31-55. 
Nonstandard Analysis (Wiley) xx + 156 pp. 
Nonstandard theory of Dedekind rings, Nederl. Akad. Wetensch. Proc. Ser. A70 
and Indag. Math. 29, 444-452. 
41-92. 
A. ROBINSON 
and E. ZAKON 
( 1969) 
J. ROITMAN 
( 1982) 
G. SACKS 
(1983) 
181, 93-96. 
On the number of countable models, Southeast Asian Conference on Logic 
(North-Holland) 185-195. 

640 
ADDITIONAL REFERENCES 
D. SARACINO 
(1973) 
J. SCHLIPF 
Model companions for &,-categorical 
theories, Proc. Amer. Math. SOC. 39, 
591 -598. 
(1975) Some hyperelementary aspects of model theory, Ph. D. Thesis, Univ. of 
Wisconsin, Madison, 165 pp. 
(1978) Toward model theory through recursive saturation, J. Symb. Logic 43, 183- 
206. 
JURG SCHMIT and JURGEN SCHMIDT 
(1987) 
S. SHELAH 
(1978) 
Class$cation 
Theory arzd the Number of Nonisomorphic Models (North- 
Holland) xvi + 544 pp. 
(1979) O n  successors of singular cardinals, Logic Colloquium ’78 (North-Holland) 
(1982) Proper Forcing, Lecture Notes in Math. 940 (Springer, Berlin) xxix + 496 pp. 
(1985) Classification of first order theories which have a structure theory, Bull. Amer. 
Math. SOC. 12, 227-232. 
(1988a) On spread of B.A. and the singular cardinal problem, isometric ultrapowers, 
Abstracts Amer. Math. SOC. 9, 266. 
(1988b) On successors of singulars, Abstracts Amer. Math. SOC. 
9, 500. 
(19??) 
Classification Theory and the Number of Nonisomorphic Models, Completed. 
(North-Holland) . 
(19??a) On isomorphic countable ultraproducts, To appear. 
(1984) 
Enlargements without urelements, Colloq. Math. 52, 1-22. 
357-380. 
S. SHELAH, L. HARRINGTON, 
and M. MAKKAI 
A proof of Vaught’s conjecture for totally transcendental theories, Israel J. 
Math. 49, 259-278. 
A theorem on quantifier elimination, Symposia Math. 5 ,  173-176. 
O n  Vaught’s Conjecture, Cabal Seminar 76-77, Lecture Notes in Math. 689 
(Springer, Berlin) 193-208. 
Foundations of Infinitesimal Stochastic Analysis (North-Holland) xii + 478 pp. 
An omitting types theorem with applications to the construction of generic 
structures, Math. Scand. 33, 46-54. 
Companion Theories (Forcing in Model Theory). Seminaires de Mathemetique 
pure Mensuel, Inst. Math. Pure et Appl. (Univ. Catholique de Louvain) 61 pp. 
J. SHOENFIELD 
(1971) 
J. STEEL 
(1978) 
K. D. STROYAN 
and J. M. BAYOD 
(1986) 
H. SIMMONS 
(1973) 
(1975) 
J. TRYBA 
(1984) 
E. ZAKON 
(1974) A new variant of nonstandard analysis, Victoria Symposium on Nonstandard 
Analysis, A. Hurd, ed., Lecture Notes in Math. 369 (Springer, Berlin) 313-339. 
B. I. ZILBER 
(1980) Totally categorical theories, Model Theory and Arithmetic, Lecture Notes in 
Math. 834 (Springer, Berlin). 
(1984) The structure of models of uncountably categorical theories, Proc. Int. Cong. 
Math., Warsaw 1983, 359-368. 
O n  J6nsson cardinals with uncountable confinality, Israel J .  Math. 49, 315-324. 

INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
Abelian group 40 
absolute formula 562 
absorption laws 38 
abstract logic 128 
additive function 386 
additive number theory 43 
admit elimination of quantifiers 202 
admit a pair of cardinals 154 
admit a pair of cardinals omitting a type 532 
admit a triple of cardinals 532 
algebraic in a theory 496, 529 
algebraically closed field 41 
algebraically independent 348 
algebraically prime model 195 
amalgamate 196 
amalgamation property 195 
antisymmetric 580 
antisymmetric property 37 
Archimedean ordered field 70 
arithmetical predicate 415 
arithmetical set 125 
arithmetical statement 415 
arithmetically saturated model 125 
Aronsajn tree 525 
arrangement 51, 55 
Artin’s Conjecture 368 
assignment 7 
associativity 39 
atom of Boolean algebra 39 
atomic Boolean algebra 39 
atomic element of a Boolean algebra 373 
atomic formula 22 
atomic model 97 
atomic theory 97 
atomless Boolean algebra 39 
atomless element of a Boolean algebra 373 
Automorphism Theorem 172 
automorphism type 176 
autonomous set of formulas 426 
Axiom of Choice 584, 593 
Axiom of Constructibility 238 
Axiom of Regularity 588 
axioms of a theory 12, 37 
a-categorical 2, 482, 507 
a-complete filter 227 
a-enlargement 283 
a-good ultrafilter 386 
a-homogeneous model 297 
a-isomorphism property 305 
a-like model 557 
a-omit 87 
a-realize 87 
a-regular filter 248 
a-saturated model 256, 283, 292 
a-saturated over V ( X )  283 
a-standard model 529 
a-universal model 255, 297 
a-universal with respect to K 297 
back and forth condition 114 
back and forth construction 98 
Back and Forth Lemma 298 
base set 263 
basic elementary class 220 
basic formula 50 
basic Horn formula 407 
Bernays set theory 594 
Bernays-Morse set theory 595 
Beth’s Theorem 90 
bit of a tuple in a Boolean algebra 379 
Boolean algebra 38 
Boolean combination 50 
bound variable 22 
bounded elementary chain theorem 287 
64 1 

642 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
bounded elementary embedding 266 
bounded elementary submodel 266 
bounded limit ultrapower 457 
bounded quantifier 265 
bounded quantifier formula 265, 562 
bounded ultrapower 269 
branch of a tree 244 
built-in Skolem functions 165 
built up from constants 66 
Cantor diagonal method 592 
cardinal 586 
cardinal exponent 586 
cardinal of a language 19 
cardinal of a model 21 
cardinal power 586 
cardinality of a set 586 
Cartesian product 579, 580 
categorical in power a 2, 482, 507 
Cauchy sequence 351 
CH 586 
chain 580 
chain, elementary 140 
chain of models 140 
Chang’s Conjecture 156, 534 
Chang’s Two Cardinal Theorem 520 
Chang-Makkai Theorem 333 
characteristic of a field 41 
Choice Axiom 593 
Church’s Thesis 110 
classification theory 502 
closed set of ordinals 246 
closed theory 12, 36 
closed unbounded set 246 
closed under directed unions 146 
closed under elementary equivalence 220 
closed under reduced roots 446 
closed under roots 354 
closed under ultraproducts 220 
closed under union of well ordered chains 
Closure Property 128 
cofinal 589 
cofinality 589 
collection scheme 593 
commutative ring 40 
compact class of models 446 
Compactness Theorem 11, 33 
companion operator 205 
completable formula 97 
complete arithmetic 42 
complete, a-(filter) 227 
146 
complete embedding 448 
complete extension 448 
complete formula 97 
complete number theory 42 
complete, w -  (theory) 82 
complete theory 17, 37 
Completeness Theorem 8, 32 
Completeness Theorem (Extended) 11, 33 
Completeness Theorem for w-logic 82 
completion of a model 448 
completion, valued field 351 
comprehension scheme 595 
Comprehensiveness Theorem 284 
concatenation 584 
concurrent relation 290 
condition, forcing 209 
conditional sentence 14 
congruence relation 64 
connected partial ordering 580 
consequence 11, 17, 32, 50 
consistent 9, 25 
consistent with T 79 
constant 20 
constant symbol 18 
Constructibility, Axiom of 238 
constructible set 559 
constructible universe 559 
continuum hypothesis 586 
core model 253 
corresponding relation 20 
cotheory 192 
countably compact logic 130 
countably homogeneous model 113 
countably incomplete filter 226 
countably prime model 99 
countably saturated model 100 
countably universal model 103 
cover of a model 404 
Craig Interpolant 87 
Craig Interpolation Theorem 87 
cross section axiom 351 
De Morgan laws 38 
deducible 9, 25 
deduction 9 
Deduction Theorem 10, 25 
definable element 35, 185 
definable function 461 
definable subset 259, 559 
define explicitly 90, 329 
define implicitly 90 
definitional extension 185 

643 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
degree of a field extension 348 
degree of a formula 496, 497 
dense order 38 
descendingly a-complete ultrafilter 258 
Detachment, Rule of 9 
determined formula 421 
diagonal intersection 246 
diagram 68 
direct factor 321 
direct limit 322 
direct product 224, 321 
direct product of formulas 428 
direct system 322 
directed relation 146 
discrete simple ordering 182 
distributive laws 38, 40 
divisible torsion-free Abelian group 40 
Downward Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski 
Theorem 66 
A,, formula 110 
effective process 423 
elementarily equivalent 32 
elementarily equivalent, abstract 129 
elementary chain 140 
Elementary Chain Theorem 140 
elementary class 199, 220 
elementary diagram 137 
elementary embedding 84 
Elementary Embedding Theorem 172 
elementary extension 84, 136 
elementary submodel 84, 136 
elimination of quantifiers 50, 202 
end extension 85, 163 
enlargement 283 
enumeration 584 
Enumeration Principle 585 
equivalence relation 59, 580 
equivalent 17 
equivalent formulas 50 
equivalent logics 129 
equivalent over Y 174 
Erdos cardinal 555 
Erdos notation 554 
Erdos-Rado Theorem 510 
Ershov’s Theorem 440 
essentially existential 125, 322 
essentially finite direct power 431 
existence of nonstandard universes 268 
Existence Theorem for Countably Saturated 
Models 102 
Existence Theorem for Recursively Saturated 
Existence Theorem for Special Models 296 
existential sentence 34 
existential-positive formula 319 
existentially closed 192 
expansion of a language 19 
expansion of a model 20 
Expansion Property 128 
Expansion Theorem 216, 279 
Extended Completeness Theorem 11, 33 
Extended Omitting Types Theorem 84 
extension of a model 22 
extension of a theory 37 
external set 276 
false in a model 7, 32 
field 41 
field of characteristic zero 41 
field of prime characteristic 41 
field of sets 39 
filter 46, 211 
filter generated by E 212 
finite cover property 404 
finite direct power sentence 412 
finite direct product 406 
finite direct product of formulas 428 
finite forcing companion 210 
finite forcing relation 209 
finite intersection property 46, 166, 212 
Finite Iteration Theorem 463 
finite ordinal 582 
finite spectrum problem 597 
finitely axiomatizable 12, 37 
finitely generated model 73 
finitely generic model 210 
finitely generic set 209 
finitely satisfiable 11 
first-order predicate language 18 
first-order theory 34 
forking 505 
formal power series 352 
formula 22 
Frayne’s Theorem 256 
Frechet filter 211 
free variable 22 
fully compact logic 129 
function 20, 579 
function symbol 18 
Fundamental Theorem of Ultraproducts 217 
gap n conjecture 524 
GCH 586 
Models 112 

644 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
generalized continuum hypothesis 586 
generalized w-logic 83 
generated from a set of indiscernibles 171 
germ of a meromorphic function 371 
Godel Completeness Theorem 33 
good ultrafilter 257, 386 
group 40 
Hanf number 134 
Hausdorff Maximal Principle 585 
Hensel field 353 
Hensel’s lemma 353 
henselization 354 
hereditary set 340 
homogeneous model 113, 297 
homomorphic 70 
homomorphic image 71 
homomorphically embedded 71 
homomorphism 71 
Horn formula 407 
huge cardinal 537 
hull, Skolem 171 
hypothesis of inaccessibility 590 
ideal in a Boolean algebra 373 
Idealization Scheme 285 
idempotent laws 38 
identity axioms 25 
identity formula 24 
identity symbol 22 
implicitly define 90 
improper filter 211 
inaccessible cardinal 590 
incompletable formula 97 
inconsistent 9, 25 
increasing sentence 13 
independent set of sentences 18 
independent unary relations 179 
indescribable cardinal 247 
indiscernible 169 
individual relative to V ( X )  263 
induction scheme 42 
inductive order, theory of 382 
infimum of a set of ordinals 582 
infinite forcing companion 209 
infinite forcing relation 209 
infinite order in a group 78 
infinitely generic 209 
infinity axiom 592 
initial ordinal 586 
initial segment 583 
inner model 537 
inseparable theories 88, 93 
integral domain 41 
Internal Definition Principle 277 
internal formula 285 
internal set 276 
Internal Set Theory 285 
Internalization Scheme 285 
Interpolation Theorem 17 
interpretation function 20 
invariants of a Boolean algebra 375 
inverse limit 322 
inverse system 322 
irreducible formula 496, 498 
isomorphic chains 580 
isomorphic embedding 22 
isomorphic models 21 
isomorphism 21 
isomorphism of well orderings 583 
isomorphism, partial 114 
Isomorphism Property 128 
Isomorphism Theorem for Ultrapowers 398 
IST 285 
iterated ultrapower 467, 468 
joint embedding property 195 
J6nsson algebra 554 
Jonsson cardinal 538 
Jonsson model 534 
Keisler Sandwich Theorem 31 1 
Keisler-Rabin Theorem 450 
Kueker Finite Definability Theorem 330 
Kueker’s conjecture 506 
Kurepa family 527 
Kurepa Hypothesis 527 
Kurepa tree 259 
language 18 
limit cardinal 586 
limit ordinal 582 
limit ultrapower 451, 452 
limited formula 265, 562 
Lindenbaum algebra 47, 74 
Lindenbaum’s Theorem 10, 26 
Lindstrom’s Characterization 132 
Lindstrom’s Second Theorem 135 
linear order 38 
Local Ultrapower Theorem 281 
locally omit 80 
locally realize 79 
logic, w 82 
logical symbols 22 

INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
645 
hi-Vaught Test 139 
Lowenheim number 129 
Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski Theorem 67 
Lyndon Interpolation Theorem 92 
Mahlo number 246 
Mahlo’s operation 247 
main gap 507 
maximal consistent 9, 25 
measurable cardinal 229 
medium compactness 245 
method of diagrams 68 
minimal nonstandard universe 291 
model companion 197 
model complete 186 
model completion 201 
model, first-order logic 20 
model of a sentence 32 
model pair 115 
model, sentential logic 4, 10 
Modus Ponens 9, 25 
monotonic function 386 
Morley Categoricity Theorem 494 
Morley Omitting Types Theorem 512 
Morley rank 497, 498 
Mostowski collapse 272 
Mostowski Collapsing Theorem 271 
narrowing a gap 254 
n-ary operation 580 
n-ary relation 579 
natural embedding 221 
natural model of set theory 45 
natural number 582 
neat elementary extension 156 
negation normal form (nnf) 93 
negative formula 313 
negative Occurrence 92 
nonprincipal filter 166 
nonstandard analysis 70 
nonstandard element, Peano arithmetic 78 
nonstandard model of number theory 42 
nonstandard universe 266 
normal ultrafilter 239 
n-tuple 579 
null set axiom 592 
number theory 42 
0 sharp 566 
0 sharp exists 566 
occur negatively 92 
occur positively 92 
Occurrence Property 128 
omit a set of formulas 78 
Omitting Types Theorem 80 
onto function 580 
open formula 51 
operation over X 580 
order of a group element 40 
order of a tree 244 
order type 583 
order type of a model of set theory 238 
ordered field 41 
ordered pair 579 
ordered tuple 579 
ordermorphic embedding 169 
ordermorphism 169 
ordinal 580 
ordinal sum 584 
outer extension 125, 322 
Overspill Principle 289 
w-categorical theory 104 
w-complete 82 
w-consistent 81 
o-homogeneous 113 
w-logic 82 
w-model 81, 515 
w-rule 82 
w-saturated 100 
p-adic numbers 366 
p-adic valuation 366 
pair, ordered 579 
pairs axiom 592 
partial isomorphism 114 
partial order, theory of 37 
partial ordering 580 
Peano arithmetic 42 
pin down 134 
positive diagram 70 
positive occurrence 82 
positive sentence 13, 72 
power of a language 19 
power of a model 21 
power of a set 586 
power set 588 
power set axiom 592 
preservation theorem 147 
preserved by reduced factors 419 
preserved under finite intersections 14 
preserved under homomorphisms 147 
preserved under intersections 15 
preserved under submodels 147 
preserved under unions of chains 147 

646 
INDEX OF DEFlNlTlONS 
Pressburger arithmetic 43 
prime model 99 
principal filter 46 
principal ideal in a Boolean algebra 374 
product of ultrafilters 463 
proof 25 
proper filter 212 
pseudo-elementary class 224 
Quantifier Axioms 24 
Quantifier Property 128 
quotient Boolean algebra 374 
r.e. 110 
Ramsey cardinal 539 
Ramsey’s Theorem 168 
rank function 588 
rank, Morley 497, 498 
rank of a set 588 
rank 1 valued field 371 
real closed field 41 
real closure 344 
realize a set of formulas 77 
Realizing and Omitting Types Theorem 172 
recursive language 110 
recursive set 110 
recursively enumerable 110 
recursively saturated model 111 
reduced power 215 
reduced power sentence 412 
reduced product 215, 216 
reduced product of formulas 428 
reduced product sentence 412 
reduct of a model 20 
reduction of a language 19 
reflexive property 37 
reflexive relation 580 
regular cardinal 589 
regular filter 248 
regularity axiom 592 
relation 20, 579 
relation symbol 118 
relative algebraic closure 354 
relatively compact class of models 260 
relativization of a formula 125, 321 
Relativization Property 129 
relativization to V 594 
Renaming Property 128 
replacement scheme 593, 595 
Representation Theorem for Boolean Al- 
gebras 39 
Representation Theorem for Nonstandard 
residue class field 352 
Restricted Omitting Types Theorem 94 
restriction 580 
restriction of a closed theory 37 
rigid model 598 
ring 40 
Robinson Consistency Theorem 91, 119 
Robinsonian analysis 262 
Rowbottom cardinal 546 
Rowbottom’s Theorem 545 
Rule of Detachment 25 
Rule of Generalization 25 
rule of inference 25 
Universes 457 
satisfaction relation, abstract 128 
satisfiable 10, 16, 32 
satisfy a formula 29 
satisfy a set of formulas 77 
saturated model 100, 292 
saturated over V ( X )  283 
saturated relative to A 511 
Scott’s Theorem 238 
selective filter 481 
selective ultrafilter 262 
self-determining set of formulas 425 
semantically equivalent 17 
semantics 3 
semigroup 558 
sentence, first-order logic 24 
sentence, sentential logic 5 
sentenial axioms 24 
sequence 584 
set relative to V ( X )  263 
set-theoretic arithmetic 594 
Silver’s Theorem 547 
simple expansion 19 
simple model 320 
simple order 38 
simple ordering 580 
singular cardinal 589 
Skolem expansion 164 
Skolem function 164 
Skolem hull 165 
Skolem Normal Form Theorem 175 
Skolem theory 164 
special Aronsajn tree 525 
special Horn sentence 419 
special model 295 
specializing chain 295 
spectrum problem 505 

647 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
stability theory 502 
stable in power a 485 
stable theory 485 
stand representation 172 
standard model of number theory 42 
standard set 276 
Standardization Scheme 285 
star 01 A 267 
Stretching Theorem 172 
strict basic Horn formula 418 
strict Horn formula 418 
strict well ordering 580 
strong homomorphism 321 
strong limit cardinal 586 
strongly compact cardinal 245 
subdirect product of models 419 
subformula 23 
submodel 21 
submodel complete theory 302 
submodel generated by X 34 
Subset Theorem 172 
subsets scheme 592 
substitution 22 
subtheory 37 
successor cardinal 586 
successor ordinal 582 
sum, ordinal 584 
supercompact cardinal 526 
superstable theory 505 
superstructure 263 
supremum of a set of ordinals 582 
Svenonius' Theorem 329 
symmetric relation 580 
syntax 3 
2,-formula 110 
Tarski's Theorem 346 
tautology 8, 24 
term 22 
theorem 25 
theory 12, 36 
theory of a model 37 
theory of a type 100 
three-cardinal problem 598 
torsion group 78 
torsion-free group 40 
totally indiscernible set 495 
totally transcendental theory 500 
transcendence basis 181 
transcendence rank of a field extension 181 
transcendence rank of a formula 497 
transcendence rank of a model 497 
transcendence rank zero 496 
transcendental set in a field extension 348 
Transfer Scheme 285 
Transfinite Induction 582 
transitive model 45 
transitive property 37 
transitive realization 49 
transitive relation 580 
transitive submodel 125, 270 
tree 244 
tree property 244 
trivial Boolean algebra 369 
trivial filter 211 
true in a model 7, 32 
truncation 271 
truth definition 1 
truth table 8 
tuple 579 
two-cardinal model 533 
type 78 
type of a model 100 
type of a tuple 100 
ultrafilter 46, 166, 213 
Ultrafilter Theorem 214 
ultrapower chain 260 
ultrapower extension 260, 448 
ultraproduct 215 
unbounded set 246 
uniform filter 252 
union of a chain of models 140 
union of a set of models 145, 321 
unions axiom 592 
Uniqueness Theorem for Countably Satu- 
Uniqueness Theorem for Special Models 300 
universal model 103, 297 
universal sentence 34 
universal-existential sentence 146 
universe 20 
universe class axiom 595 
unstable theory 505 
Upward Lowenheim-Skolem-Tarski 
Theo- 
Upward Morley Theorem 488 
valid sentence 7, 32 
valuation ring 352 
value group 351 
value of a sentence 8 
value of a term 27 
valued field 351 
rated Models 103 
rem 67 

648 
INDEX OF DEFINITIONS 
valued subfield 354 
Vaught's conjecture 506, 597 
Weak Compactness Theorem 232 
weakly compact cardinal 233 
weakly forces 209 
weakly homogeneous model 303 
weakly Horn formula 418 
well-founded partial order 78 
well-founded relation 237 
well-ordered chain 580 
well-ordered model 147, 535 
well-ordering 580 
Well-Ordering Principle 585 
witness 61 
Zermelo set theory 593 
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory 592 
zero sharp 566 
zero sharp exists 566 
ZF 592 
ZF - P 594 
ZFC 593 
Z-group 370 
Zorn's Lemma 585 
Z-valued field 371 

INDEX OF SYMBOLS 
7 
7, 32 
8,25 
11,32,50 
19 
21 
22 
24 
24 
25 
25 
28 
28 
29 
32 
32 
32,50 
33 
36 
36 
44 
45,588 
68 
68 
68 
70 
77 
77 
83,136 
99 
101 
110 
110 
114 
115 
115 
115 
115 
116 
125,314 
128 
128 
128 
128 
128 
129 
137 
137 
139 
143 
150 
154 
154 
165 

650 
INDEX OF SYMBOLS 
165 
168 
188 
192 
192 
209 
209 
209 
211,588 
214 
215 
22 1 
228 
235 
263 
263 
266 
266 
269 
270 
273 
282 
282 
285 
285 
285 
285 
285 
342 
406 
415 
417 
448 
448 
530 
554 
555 
557 
558 
559 
559 
561 
566 
579 
579 
580 
580 
580 
586 
586 
586 
586 
586 
586 
586 
588 
588 
588 
589 
592 
593 
594 

