T H E J E N N I F E R M O R G U E By Charles Stross S I N G U L A R I T Y SKY IRON S U
N R I SE ACCELERANDO G L A S S H O U S E THE ATROCITY ARCHIVES T H E J E N
N I F E R MORGUE TH E JENNIFER M O RG U E CHARLES STROSS orbit
www.orbitbooks.net ORBIT First published in the United States in 2006 by Golden Gryphon
Press First published in Great Britain in 2007 by Orbit Copyright © 2006 by Charles Stress
The moral right of the author has been asserted.
All characters and events in this publication, other than those clearly in the public domain,
are fictitious and any resemblance to real persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental.
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of the publisher, nor be
otherwise circulated in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition, including this condition, being imposed on the subsequent
purchaser.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-84149-570-5 Papers used by Orbit are natural, recyclable products made from
wood grown in sustainable forests and certified in accordance with the rules of the Forest
Stewardship Council Typeset in Garamond by M Rules Printed and bound in Great Britain
by Mackays of Chatham pic Paper supplied by Hellefos AS, Norway Orbit An imprint of
Little, Brown Book Group Brettenham House Lancaster Place London WC2E 7EN A
Member of the Hachette Livre Group of Companies www.orbitbooks.net For Andrew, Lorna,
and James  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS No book gets written in a vacuum, and this one is no
exception.
I'd like to thank my editors, Marty Halpern at Golden Gryphon and Ginjer Buchanan at Ace,
and my agent Caitlin Blasdell, all of whom helped make this book possible. I'd also like to
thank my hundreds of test readers - in no particular order: Simon Bradshaw, Dan Ritter,
Nicholas Whyte, Elizabeth Bear, Brooks Moses, Mike Scott, Jack Foy, Luna Black, Harry
Payne, Andreas Black, Marcus Rowland, Ken MacLeod, Peter Hollo, Andrew Wilson,
Stefan Pearson, Gavin Inglis, Jack Deighton, John Scalzi, Anthony Quirke, Jane McKie,
Hannu Rajaniemi, Andrew Ferguson, Martin Page, Robert Sneddon, and Steve Stirling. I'd
also like to thank Hugh Hancock, who valiantly helped me MST3K my way through the Bond
canon.
C O N T E N T S THE JENNIFER MORGUE 1 PIMPF 368 AFTERWORD: THE GOLDEN
AGE OF SPYING 397 GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS, ACRONYMS AND
ORGANIZATIONS 415 PROLOGUE: JENNIFER August 25, 1975 165°W, 30°N The guys
from the "A" and "B" crews have been sitting on their collective ass for five weeks, out in the
middle of nowhere. They're not alone; there's the ship's crew, from the captain on down to
the lowliest assistant cook, and the CIA spooks. But the other guys have at least got
something to do.
The ship's crew has a vessel to run: an unholy huge behemoth, 66,000 tons of deep-ocean
exploratory mining ship, 400 million bucks and seven years in the building. The CIA dudes
are keeping a wary eye on the Russian trawler that's stooging around on the horizon. And as
for the Texan wildcat drilling guys, for the past couple of days they've been working
ceaselessly on the stabilized platform, bolting one sixty-foot steel pipe after another onto the
top of the drill string and lowering it into the depths of the Pacific Ocean.
But the "A" and "B" teams have been sitting on their hands for weeks with nothing to do but
oil and service the enormous mechanism floating in the moon pool at the heart of the ship,
then twiddle their thumbs nervously for eighty hours as the drill lowers it into the crushing
darkness.
And now that Clementine is nearly on target, there's a storm coming.
"Fucking weather," complains Milgram.
"Language." Duke is a tight-ass. "How bad can it get”
?Milgram brandishes his paper, the latest chart to come out of the weather office on C deck

where Stan and Gilmer hunch over their green-glowing radar displays and the telex from
San Diego. "Force nine predicted within forty-eight hours, probability sixty percent and
rising. We can't take that, Duke. We go over force six, the impellers can't keep us on station.
We'll lose the string.”
The kid, Steve, crowds close. "Anyone told Spook City yet?" The guys from Langley hang
out in a trailer on E deck with a locked vault-type door. Everyone calls it Spook City.
"Nah." Duke doesn't sound too concerned. "Firstly, it hasn't happened yet. Secondly, we're
only forty fathoms up from zero." He snaps his fingers at the curious heads that have turned
in his direction from their camera stations: "Look to it, guys! We've got a job to do!”
Clementine - the vast, submersible grab at the end of the drill string — weighs around 3,000
tons and is more than 200 feet long. It's a huge steel derrick, painted gray to resist the
corrosive effects of miles of seawater. At a distance it resembles a skeletal lobster,
because of the five steel legs protruding from either flank. Or maybe It's more like a giant
mantrap, lowered into the icy stillness of Davy Jones's locker to grab whatever it can from
the sea floor.
Duke runs the engineering office from his throne in the center of the room. One wall is
covered in instruments; the other is a long stretch of windows overlooking the moon pool at
the heart of the ship. A door at one side of the window wall provides access to a steel-mesh
catwalk fifty feet above the pool.
Here in the office the noise of the hydraulic stabilizers isn't quite deafening; there's a loud
mechanical whine and a vibration they feel through the soles of their boots, but the
skull-rattling throbbing is damped to a survivable level. The drilling tower above their heads
lowers the endless string of pipes into the center of the pool at a steady six feet per minute,
day in and day out. Steve tries not to look out the window at the pipes because the effect is
hypnotic: they've been sliding smoothly into the depths for many hours now, lowering the
grab toward the bottom of the ocean.
The ship is much bigger than the grab that dangles beneath it on the end of three miles of
steel pipe, but it's at the grab's mercy. Three miles of pipe makes for a prodigious
pendulum, and as the grab sinks slowly through the deepocean currents, the ship has to
maneuver frantically to stay on top of it in the six-foot swells. Exotic domes on top of the
vessel's bridge suck down transmissions from the Navy's Transit positioning satellites,
feeding them to the automatic Station Keeping System that controls the ship's bow and
stern thrusters, and the cylindrical surge compensators that the derrick rests on. Like a
swan, it looks peaceful on the surface but under the waterline there's a hive of frantic activity.
Everything - the entire 400-megabuck investment, ten years of Company black operations
— depends on what happens in the next few hours. When they reach the bottom.
Steve turns back to his TV screen. It's another miracle of technology. The barge has
cameras and floodlights, vacuum tubes designed to function in the abyssal depths. But his
camera is flaking out, static hash marching up the screen in periodic waves: the pressure,
tons per square inch, is damaging the waterproof cables that carry power and signal. "This
is shit," he complains. "We're never going to spot it - if. . .”
He trails off. Good-time Norm at the next desk is standing up, pointing at something on his
screen. There's a whoop from the other side of the room. He squints at his screen and
between the lines of static he sees a rectilinear outline.
"Holy—”
The public address system crackles overhead: "Clementine crew. K-129 on screens two
and five, range approximately fifty feet, bearing two-two-five. Standby, fine thruster control.”
It's official — they've found what they're looking for.
The atmosphere in Spook City is tense but triumphant.
"We're there," announces Cooper. He smirks at the hatchetfaced Brit in the crumpled suit,
who is smoking an unfiltered Camel in clear violation of shipboard fire regulations. "We did
it!”
"We'll see," mutters the Brit. He stubs the cigarette out and shakes his head. "Getting there

is only half the struggle.”
Nettled, Murph glares at him. "What's your problem?" he demands.
"You're messing with something below 1,000 meters, in strict contravention of Article Four,"
says the Brit. "I'm here as a neutral observer in accordance with Section Two—”
"Fuck you and your neutral status, you're just sore because you guys don't have the balls to
stand on your waiver rights—”
Cooper gets between them before things can escalate again. "Cool it. Murph, how about
checking with the bridge again to see if there's been any sign of the commies taking an
interest? They'll twig when they see we've stopped lowering the string. James—" He
pauses. Grimaces slightly. The Brit's alias is transparent and, to a Company man,
borderline insulting: Cooper wonders, not for the first time, Why the fuck does he call himself
that? "—let's go take a hike down to the moon pool and see what they've found.”
"Suits me." The Brit stands up, unfolding like a stick insect inside his badly fitting gray suit.
His cheek twitches but his expression stays frozen. "After you.”
They leave the office and Cooper locks the door behind him. The Hughes GMDI ship may
be enormous — it's bigger than a Marine Corps assault carrier, larger than an Iowa-class
battleship - but its companionways and corridors are a cramped, gray maze, punctuated by
color-coded pipes and ducts conveniently located at shin-scraping and head-banging
height. It doesn't roll in the swells but it rocks, weirdly, held solidly on station by the SKS
thrusters (a new technology that accounts for a goodly chunk of the cost of the ship).
Down six flights of steps there's another passage and a bulkhead: then Cooper sees the
dogged-back hatch leading out into the moon pool at the level of the fifty-foot catwalk. As
usual it takes his breath away. The moon pool is just under 200 feet long and 75 feet wide, a
stillness of black water surrounded by the gantries and cranes required for servicing the
barge. The giant docking legs are fully extended below the waterline at either end of the
pool. The drill string pierces the heart of the chamber like a black steel spear tying it to the
ocean floor. The automatic roughneck and the string handling systems have fallen silent, the
deafening clatter and roar of the drill system shut down now that the grab has reached its
target. Soon, if all goes well, the derrick above them will begin hauling up the string,
laboriously unbolting the hundreds of pipe segments and stacking them on the deck of the
ship, until finally Clementine — also known as the HMB-1 "mining barge" — rumbles to the
surface of the pool in a flurry of cold water, clutching its treasure beneath it. But for now the
moon pool is a peaceful haven, its surface marred only by shallow, oily ripples.
The engineering office is a hive of activity in contrast to the view outside the windows, and
nobody notices Cooper and the British spook as they slip inside and look over the
operations controller's shoulder at his screens. "Left ten, up six," someone calls. "Looks like
a hatch," says someone else.
Strange gray outlines swim on the screen. "Get me a bit more light on t h a t . . .”
Everyone falls silent for a while. "That's not good," says one of the engineers, a wiry guy
from New Mexico who Cooper vaguely remembers is called Norm. The big TV screen in the
middle is showing a flat surface emerging from a gray morass of abyssal mud. A
rectangular opening with rounded edges gapes in it — a hatch? — and there's something
white protruding from a cylinder lying across it. The cylinder looks like a sleeve. Suddenly
Cooper realizes what he's looking at: an open hatch in the sail of a submarine, the
skeletonized remains of a sailor lying half-in and half-out of it.
"Poor bastards probably tried to swim for it when they realized the torpedo room was
flooded," says a voice from the back of the room. Cooper looks around. It's Davis, somehow
still managing to look like a Navy officer even though he's wearing a civilian suit. "That's
probably what saved the pressure hull — the escape hatch was already open and the boat
was fully flooded before it passed through its crush depth.”
Cooper shivers, staring at the screen. "Consider Phlebas," he thinks, wracking his brain for
the rest of the poem.
"Okay, so what about the impact damage?" That's Duke, typically businesslike: "I need to

know if we can make this work.”
More activity. Camera viewpoints swivel crazily, taking in the length of the Golf-II-class
submarine. The water at this depth is mostly clear and the barge floodlights illuminate the
wreck mercilessly, from the blown hatch in the sail to the great gash in the side of the
torpedo room. The submarine lies on its side as if resting, and there's little obvious damage
to Cooper's untrained eye. A bigger hatch gapes open in front of the sail. "What's that?" he
asks, pointing.
The kid, Steve, follows his finger. "Looks like the number THE JENNIFER MORGUE 7 two
missile tube is open," he says. The Golf-II class is a boomer, a ballistic missile submarine
— an early one, dieselelectric.
It had carried only three nuclear missiles, and had to surface before firing. "Hope they didn't
roll while they were sinking: if they lost the bird it could have landed anywhere.”
"Anywhere—" Cooper blinks.
"Okay, let's get her lined up!" hollers Duke, evidently completing his assessment of the
situation. "We've got bad weather coming, so let's haul!”
For the next half-hour the control room is a madhouse, engineers and dive-control officers
hunched over their consoles and mumbling into microphones. Nobody's ever done this
before - maneuvered a 3,000-ton grab into position above a sunken submarine three miles
below the surface, with a storm coming. The sailors on the Soviet spy trawler on the horizon
probably have their controllers back in Moscow convinced that they've been drinking the
antifreeze again, with their tale of exotic, capitalist hypertechnology stealing their sunken
boomer.
The tension in the control room is rising. Cooper watches over Steve's shoulder as the kid
twiddles his joystick, demonstrating an occult ability to swing cameras to bear on the huge
mechanical grabs, allowing their operators to extend them and position them close to the
hull. Finally it's time.
"Stand by to blow pressure cylinders," Duke announces.
"Blow them now.”
Ten pressure cylinders bolted to the grab vent silvery streams of bubbles: pistons slide
home, propelled by a three mile column of seawater, drawing the huge clamps tight around
the hull of the submarine. They bite into the mud, stirring up a gray cloud that obscures
everything for a while.
Gauges slowly rotate, showing the position of the jaws.
"Okay on even two through six, odd one through seven. Got a partial on nine and eight,
nothing on ten.”
The atmosphere is electric. Seven clamps have locked tight around the hull of the
submarine: two are loose and one •- appears to have failed. Duke looks at Cooper. "Your
call.”
"Can you lift it?" asks Cooper.
"I think so." Duke's face is somber. "We'll see once we've got it off the mud." "Let's check
upstairs," Cooper suggests, and Duke nods.
The captain can say "yes" or "no" and make it stick - it's his ship they'll be endangering if
they make a wrong call.
Five minutes later they've got their answer. "Do it," says the skipper, in a tone that brooks no
argument. "It's what we're here for." He's on the bridge because the impending bad weather
and the proximity of other ships - a second Russian trawler has just shown up — demands
his presence, but there's no mistaking his urgency.
"Okay, you heard the man.”
Five minutes later a faint vibration shakes the surface of the moon pool. Clementine has
blown its ballast, scattering a thousand tons of lead shot across the sea floor around the
submarine. The cameras show nothing but a gray haze for a while. Then the drill string
visible through the control room window begins to move, slowly inching upward. "Thrusters
to full," Duke snaps. The string begins to retract faster and faster, dripping water as it rises

from the icy depths. "Give me a strain gauge report.”
The strain gauges on the giant grabs are reading green across the board: each arm is
supporting nearly 500 tons of submarine, not to mention the water it contains. There's a loud
mechanical whine from outside, and a sinking feeling, and the vibration Cooper can feel
through the soles of his Oxford brogues has increased alarmingly — the Explorer's drill crew
is running the machines at full power now that the grab has increased in weight. The ship,
gaining thousands of tons in a matter of seconds, squats deeper in the Pacific swell.
"Satisfied now?" asks Cooper, turning to grin at the Brit, who for his part looks as if he's
waiting for something, staring at one screen intently.
"Well?" "We've got a little time to go," says the hatchet-faced foreigner.
"A l i t t l e . . . “
"Until we learn whether or not you've gotten away with it." "What are you smoking, man? Of
course we've gotten away with it!" Murph has materialized from the upper decks like a
Boston-Irish ghost, taking out his low-level resentment on the Brit (who is sufficiently
public-school English to make a suitable whipping boy for Bloody Sunday, not to mention
being a government employee to boot). "Look!
Submarine! Submersible grab! Coming up at six feet per minute! After the break, film at
eleven!" His tone is scathing. "What do you think the commies are going to do to stop us,
start World War Three? They don't even goddamn know what we're doing down here — they
don't even know where their sub went down to within 200 miles!”
"It's not the commies I'm worried about," says the Brit.
He glances at Cooper. "How about you”
?Cooper shakes his head reluctantly. "I still think we're going to make it. The sub's intact,
undamaged, and we've got it—”
"Oh shit," says Steve.
He points the central camera in the grab's navigation cluster down at the sea floor, a vast
gray-brown expanse stirred into slow whorls of foggy motion by the dropping of the ballast
and the departure of the submarine. It should be slowly settling back into bland desert-dunes
of mud by now. But something's moving down there, writhing against the current with
unnatural speed.
Cooper stares at the screen. "What's that”
?"May I remind you of Article Four of the treaty?" says the Brit. "No establishment of
permanent or temporary structures below a depth of one kilometer beneath mean sea level,
on pain of termination. No removal of structures from the abyssal plain, on pain of ditto.
We're trespassing: legally they can do as they please.”
"But we're only picking up the trash—”
"They may not see it that way.”
Fine fronds, a darker shade against the gray, are rising from the muddy haze not far from
the last resting place of the K-129. The fronds ripple and waver like giant kelp, but are
thicker and more purposeful. They bring to mind the blind, questing trunk of an elephant
exploring the interior of a puzzle box. There's something disturbing about the way they squirt
from vents in the sea floor, rising in pulses, as if they're more liquid than solid.
"Damn," Cooper says softly. He punches his open left hand. "Damn!”
"Language," chides Duke. "Barry, how fast can we crank this rig? Steve, see if you can get
a fix on those things. I want to peg their ascent rate.”
Barry shakes his head emphatically. "The drill platform can't take any more, boss. We're up
to force four outside already, and we're carrying too much weight. We can maybe go up to
ten feet per minute, but if we try to go much above that we risk shearing the string and losing
Clementine.”
Cooper shudders. The grab will still surface if the drill string breaks, but it could broach just
about anywhere. And anywhere includes right under the ship's keel, which is not built to
survive being rammed by 3,000 tons of metal hurtling out of the depths at twenty knots.
"We can't risk it," Duke decides. "Keep hauling at current ascent rate.”

THE JENNIFER MORGUE 11 They watch in silence for the next hour as the grab rises
toward the surface, its precious, stolen cargo still intact in its arms.
The questing fronds surge up from the depths, growing toward the lens of the under-slung
camera as the engineers and spooks watch anxiously. The grab is already 400 feet above
the sea floor, but instead of a flat muddy desert below, the abyssal plain has sprouted an
angry forest of grasping tentacles. They're extending fast, reaching toward the stolen
submarine above them.
"Hold steady," says Duke. "Damn, I said hold steady!”
The ship shudders, and the vibration in the deck has risen to a tooth-rattling grumble and a
shriek of over-stressed metal. The air in the control room stinks of hot oil. Up on the drilling
deck the wildcats are shearing bolt-heads and throwing sixty-foot pipe segments on the
stack rather than taking time to position them — a sure sign of desperation, for the pipe
segments are machined from a special alloy at a cost of $60,000 apiece. They're hauling in
the drill string almost twice as fast as they paid it out, and the moon pool is foaming and
bubbling, a steady cascade of water dropping from the chilly metal tubes to rain back down
onto its surface. But it's anyone's guess whether they'll get the grab up to the surface before
the questing tentacles catch it.
"Article Four," the Brit says tensely.
"Bastard." Cooper glares at the screen. "It's ours.”
"They appear to disagree. Want to argue with them”
?"A couple of depth charges . . ." Cooper stares at the drill string longingly.
"They'd fuck you, boy," the other man says harshly. "Don't think it hasn't been thought of.
There are enough methane hydrates down in that mud to burp the granddaddy of all gas
bubbles under our keel and drag us down like a gnat in a toad's mouth.”
"I know that." Cooper shakes his head. So much work! It's outrageous, an insult to the
senses, like watching a moon shot explode on the launch pad. "But. Those bastards." He
punches his palm again. "It should be ours!”
"We've had dealings with them before that didn't go so badly. Witch's Hole, the treaty zone
at Dunwich. You could have asked us." The British agent crosses his arms tensely.
"You could have asked your Office of Naval Intelligence, too.
But no, you had to go and get creative.”
"The fuck. You'd just have told us not to bother. This way—”
"This way you learn your own lesson.”
"The fuck.”
The grab was 3,000 feet below sea level and still rising when the tentacles finally caught up
with it.
The rest, as they say, is history.
1: RANDOM RAMONA IF YOU WORK FOR THE LAUNDRY LONG ENOUGH, eventually
you get used to the petty insults, the paper clip audits, the disgusting canteen coffee, and the
endless, unavoidable bureaucracy. Your aesthetic senses become dulled, and you go blind
to the decaying pea-green paint and the vomit-beige fabric partitions between office
cubicles. But the big indignities never fail to surprise, and they're the ones that can get you
killed.
I've been working for the Laundry for about five years now, and periodically I become blase
in my cynicism, sure that I've seen it all — which is usually the signal for them to throw
something at me that's degrading, humiliating, or dangerous — if not all three at once.
"You want me to drive a what?" I squeak at the woman behind the car rental desk.
"Sir, your ticket has been issued by your employer, it says here und here—" She's a
brunette: tall, thin, helpful, and very German in that schoolmarmish way that makes you
instinctively check to see if your fly's undone. "The, ah, Smart For two coupe. With the, the
kompressor. It is a perfectly good car. Unless you would like for the upgrade to pay”
?Upgrade. To a Mercedes SI90, for, oh, about two hundred euros a day. An absolute
no-brainer - if it wasn't at my own expense.

"How do I get to Darmstadt from here?" I ask, trying to salvage the situation. "Preferably
alive?" (Bloody Facilities.
Bloody budget airlines that never fly where you want to go.
Bloody weather. Bloody liaison meetings in Germany.
Bloody "cheapest hire" policy.) She menaces me with her perfect dentistry again. "If it was
me I'd take the ICE train. But your ticket—" she points at it helpfully "—is non-refundable.
Now please to face the camera for the biometrics”
?Fifteen minutes later I'm hunched over the steering wheel of a two-seater that looks like
something you'd find in your corn flakes packet. The Smart is insanely cute and compact,
does about seventy miles to a gallon, and is the ideal second car for nipping about town but
I'm not nipping about town. I'm going flat out at maybe a hundred and fifty kilometers per
hour on the autobahn while some joker is shooting at me from behind with a cannon that
fires Porsches and Mercedes. Meanwhile, I'm stuck driving something that handles like a
turbocharged baby buggy. I've got my fog lights on in a vain attempt to deter the other road
users from turning me into a hood ornament, but the jet wash every time another executive
panzer overtakes me keeps threatening to roll me right over onto my roof. And that's before
you factor in the deranged Serbian truck drivers driven mad with joy by exposure to a
motorway that hasn't been cluster-bombed and then resurfaced by the lowest bidder.
In between moments of blood-curdling terror I spend my time swearing under my breath.
This is all Angleton's fault.
He's the one who sent me to this stupid joint-liaison committee meeting, so he bears the
brunt of it. His hypothetical and distinctly mythological ancestry is followed in descendTHE
JENNIFER MORGUE 15 ing order by the stupid weather, Mo's stupid training schedule, and
then anything else that I can think of to curse. It keeps the tiny corner of my mind that isn't
focused on my immediate survival occupied — and that's a very tiny corner, because when
you're sentenced to drive a Smart car on a road where everything else has a speed best
described by its mach number, you tend to pay attention.
There's an unexpected lull in the traffic about two-thirds of the way to Darmstadt, and I make
the mistake of breathing a sigh of relief. The respite is short-lived. One moment I'm driving
along a seemingly empty road, bouncing from side to side on the Smart's town-car
suspension as the hairdryer- sized engine howls its guts out beneath my buttocks, and the
next instant the dashboard in front of me lights up like a flashbulb.
I twitch spasmodically, jerking my head up so hard I nearly dent the thin plastic roof. Behind
me the eyes of Hell are open, two blinding beacons like the landing lights on an off-course
747. Whoever they are, they're standing on their brakes so hard they must be smoking.
There's a roar, and then a squat, red Audi sports coupe pulls out and squeezes past my
flank close enough to touch, its blonde female driver gesticulating angrily at me. At least I
think she's blonde and female. It's hard to tell because everything is gray, my heart is trying
to exit through my rib cage, and I'm frantically wrestling with the steering wheel to keep the
roller skate from toppling over. A fraction of a second later she's gone, pulling back into the
slow lane ahead of me to light off her afterburners. I swear I see red sparks shooting out of
her two huge exhaust tubes as she vanishes into the distance, taking about ten years of my
life with her.
"You stupid fucking bitch!" I yell, thumping the steering wheel until the Smart wobbles
alarmingly and, heart in mouth, I tentatively lift off the accelerator and let my speed drift back
down to a mere 140 or so. "Stupid rucking Audi driving Barbie girl, brains of a chocolate
mousse—”
I spot a road sign saying DARMSTADT 20KM just as something — a low-flying Luftwaffe
Starfighter, maybe - makes a strafing run on my left. Ten infinitely long minutes later I arrive
at the slip road for Darmstadt sandwiched between two eighteen-wheelers, my buttocks
soaking in a puddle of cold sweat and all my hair standing on end. Next time, I resolve, I'm
going to take the train and damn the expense.
Darmstadt is one of those German towns that, having been landscaped by Allied heavy

bombers, rezoned by the Red Army, and rebuilt by the Marshall Plan, demonstrates perfectly
that (a) sometimes it's better to lose a war than to win one, and (b) some of the worst crimes
against humanity are committed by architecture students. These days what's left of the '50s
austerity concrete has a rusticated air and a patina of moss, and the worst excesses of'60s
Neo-Brutalism have been replaced by glass and brightly painted steel that clashes horribly
with what's left of the old Rhenish gingerbread.
It could be Anytown EU, more modern and less decrepit than its US equivalent, but
somehow it looks bash- ful and self-effacing. The one luxury Facilities did pay for is an in-car
navigation system (the better to stop me wasting Laundry time by getting lost en route), so
once I get off the Death Race track I drive on autopilot, sweaty and limp with animalistic
relief at having survived. And then I find myself in a hotel parking bay between a Toyota and
a bright red Audi TT.
"The fuck." I thump the steering wheel again, more angry than terrified now that I'm not in
imminent danger of death.
I peer at it — yup, it's the same model car, and the same color.
I can't be certain it's the same one (my nemesis was going so fast I couldn't read her number
plate because of the Doppler shift) but I wouldn't bet against it: it's a small world. I shake my
head and squeeze out of the Smart, pick up my bags, and slouch towards reception.
Once you've seen one international hotel, you've seen them all. The romance of travel tends
to fade fast after the first time you find yourself stranded at an airport with a suitcase full of
dirty underwear two hours after the last train left.
Ditto the luxury of the business hotel experience on your fourth overseas meeting of the
month. I check in as fast and as painlessly as possible (aided by another of those
frighteningly helpful German babes, albeit this time with slightly worse English) then beam
myself up to the sixth floor of the Ramada Treff Page Hotel. Then I hunt through the endless
and slightly claustrophobic maze of air-conditioned corridors until I find my room.
I dump my duffle bag, grab my toilet kit and a change of clothes, and duck into the bathroom
to wash away the stink of terror. In the mirror, my reflection winks at me and points at a new
white hair until I menace him with a tube of toothpaste.
I'm only twenty-eight: I'm too young to die and too old to drive fast.
I blame Angleton. This is all his fault. He set me on this path exactly two days after the board
approved my promotion to SSO, which is about the lowest grade to carry any significant
managerial responsibilities. "Bob," he said, fixing me with a terrifyingly avuncular smile, "I
think it's about time you got out of the office a bit more. Saw the world, got to grips with the
more mundane aspects of the business, that sort of thing. So you can start by standing in for
Andy Newstrom on a couple of low-priority, joint-liaison meetings.
What do you say”
?"Great," I said enthusiastically. "Where do I start”
?Well okay, I should really blame myself, but Angleton's a more convenient target — he's
very hard to say "no" to, and more importantly, he's eight hundred miles away. It's easier to
blame him than to kick the back of my own head.
Back in the bedroom I pull my tablet PC out of my luggage and plug it in, jack it into the
broadband socket, poke my way through the tedious pay-to-register website, and bring up
the VPN connection back to the office. Then I download an active ward and leave it running
as a screen saver. It looks like a weird geometric pattern endlessly morphing and cycling
through a color palette until it ends up in a retina-eating stereoisogram, and it's perfectly
safe to sneak a brief glance at it, but if an intruder looks at it for too long it'll PwnzOr their
brain. I drape a pair of sweaty boxer shorts across it before I go out, just in case room
service calls. When it comes to detecting burglars, hairs glued to door frames are passe.
Down at the concierge desk I check for messages. "Letter for Herr Howard? Please to sign
here." I spot the inevitable Starbucks stand in a corner so I amble over to it, inspecting the
envelope as I go. It's made of expensive cream paper, very thick and heavy, and when I
stare at it closely I see fine gold threads woven into it. They've used an italic font and a laser

printer to address it, which cheapens the effect. I slit it open with my Swiss Army cybertool
as I wait for one of the overworked Turkish baristas to get round to serving me. The card
inside is equally heavy, but hand-written: Bob, Meet me in the Liaguna Bar at 6 p.m. or as
soon as you arrive, if later.
Ramona "Urn," I mutter. What the fuck?
I'm here to take part in the monthly joint-liaison meeting with our EU partner agencies. It's
held under the auspices of the EU Joint Intergovernmental Framework on Cosmological
Incursions which is governed by the Common Defense provisions of the Second Treaty of
Nice. (You haven't heard of this particular EU treaty because it's secret by mutual
agreement, none of the signatories wanting to start a mass panic.) Despite the classified
nature of the event it's really pretty boring: we're here to swap departmental gossip about
our mutual areas of interest and what's been going on lately update each other on new
procedural measures and paperwork hoops we need to jump through to requisition useful
information from our respective front-desk operations, and generally make nice. With only a
decade to go until the omega conjunction — the period of greatest risk during NIGHTMARE
GREEN, when the stars are right - everyone in Europe is busy oiling the gears and wheels
of our occult defense machinery. Nobody wants their neighbors to succumb to a flux of
green, gibbering brain-eaters, after all: it tends to lower real estate values. After the meeting
I'm supposed to take the minutes home and brief Angleton, Boris, Rutherford, and anyone
else in my reporting chain, then circulate the minutes to other departments. Sic transit gloria
spook.
Anyway, I'm expecting an agenda and directions to a meeting room, not a bar invite from a
mysterious Ramona. I rack my brains: Who do I know who's called Ramona? Wasn't there a
song . . .? Joey Ramone . . . no. I fold the envelope and stuff it in my back pocket. Sounds
like a porn spammer's alias.
I break out of the slowly shuffling coffee queue just in time to annoy the furiously mustachioed
counter dude. Where the hell is the Laguna Bar?
I spot a number of dark, glass-partitioned areas clustered around the atrium in front of the
check-in desk. They're the usual hotel squeeze joints, overpriced restaurants, and 24- hour
shops selling whatever you forgot to pack yesterday morning at four o'dark. I hunt around
until I spot the word LAGUNA picked out in teensy gold Fraktur Gothic to one side of a
darkened doorway, in an evident attempt to confuse the unwary.
I peek round the partition. It's a bar, expensively tricked out in that retro-seventies style with
too much polished Italian marble and sub-Bauhaus chrome furniture. At this time of evening
it's nearly empty (although maybe the fact that they charge six euros for a beer has
something to do with it). I check my phone: it's 6:15. Damn. I head for the bar, glancing
around hopefully in case the mysterious Ramona's wearing a cardboard sign saying: I'M
RAMONA - TRY ME.
So much for subtle spy-work.
"Ein Weissbier, bitte," I ask, exhausting about sixty percent of my total German vocabulary.
"Sure thing, man." The bartender turns to grab a bottle.
"I'm Ramona," a female voice with a vaguely East Coast accent murmurs quietly in my left
ear. "Don't turn around." And something hard pokes me in the ribs.
"Is that the aerial of your mobile phone, or are you displeased to see me?" It probably is a
phone, but I do as she says: in this kind of situation it doesn't do to take chances.
"Shut up, wise guy." A slim hand reaches discreetly under my left arm and paws at my chest.
The bartender is taking an awfully long time to find that bottle. "Hey, what is this Scheiss”
?"You found the shoulder holster? Careful, that's my Bluetooth GPS receiver in there. And
that pocket's where I keep the noise-canceling headphones for my iPod - hey, watch out,
they're expensive! — and the spare batteries for my PDA, and—”
Ramona lets go of my fishing jacket and a moment later the stubby object disappears from
the small of my back. The bartender swings round, beaming and clutching a weirdlooking
glass in one hand and a bottle with a culturally stereotyped label in the other. "Dude, will this

do? It's a really good Weizenbock . . .”
"Bob!" trills Ramona, stepping sideways until I can finally see her. "Make mine a dry gin and
tonic, ice, but hold the fruit," she tells the barman, smiling like sunrise over the Swiss Alps. I
glance at her sidelong and try not to gape.
We're in supermodel territory here — or maybe she's Uma Thurman's stunt double. She's
almost five centimeters taller than me, blonde, and she's got cheekbones Mo would kill for.
The rest of her isn't bad, either. She has the kind of figure that most models dream about—if
indeed that isn't what she does for a living when she isn't sticking guns in civil servants'
backs—and whatever the label on her strapless silk gown says, it probably costs more than I
earn in a year before you add in the jewelry dripping from her in incandescent waves. Real
physical perfection isn't something a guy like me gets to see up close and personal very
often, and it's something to marvel at — then run away from, before it hypnotizes you like a
snake staring into the eyes of something small, furry, and edible.
She's beautiful but deadly, and right now she has one slim hand in her black patent-leather
evening bag: judging from the slight tension at the corners of her eyes I'll bet hard money
she's holding a small, pearl-handled automatic pistol just out of sight. , • MJ ; « ; "" ?j;; : One
of my wards bites me on the back of my wrist and I realize what's come over me: it's a
glamour. I feel a sudden pang of something like homesickness for Mo, who at least comes
from my own planet, even if she insists on practicing the violin at all hours.
"Fancy meeting you here like this, darling!" Ramona adds, almost as an afterthought.
"How unexpected," I agree, taking a step sideways and reaching for the glass and bottle.
The bartender, dazzled by her smile, is already reaching for a shot glass. I manage an
experimental grin. Ramona reminds me of a certain ex-girlfriend (okay, she reminds me of
Mhari: I admit it, try not to wince, and move on) done up to the nines and in full-on predator
mode. As I get used to the impact of her glamour I begin to get an edgy feeling I've seen her
before. "Is that your red Audi in the car park”
?She turns the full force of her smile on me. "What if it is”
?Glub glub . . . chink. Ice cubes sloshing into gin. "That'll be sixteen euros, man.”
"Put it on my room tab," I say automatically. I slide the card over. "If it is, you nearly rubbed
me out on the A45.”
"I nearly—" She looks puzzled for a moment. Then even more puzzled. "Was it you in that
ridiculous little tin can”
?"If my office would pay for an Audi TT I'd drive one, too.”
I feel a stab of malicious glee at her visible disquiet. "Who do you think I am? And who are
you, and what do you want”
?The bartender drifts away to the other end of the bar, still smiling blissfully under her
influence. I blink back little warning flickers of migraine-like distortion as I look at her.
That's got to be at least a level three glamour she's wearing, I tell myself, and shiver. My
ward isn't powerful enough to break through it so I can see her as she really is, but at least I
can tell I'm being spoofed.
"I'm Ramona Random. You can call me Ramona." She takes a chug of the G&T, then stares
down her nose at me with those disquietingly clear eyes, like an aristocratic Eloi
considering a shambling, half-blind Morlock who's somehow made it to the surface. I take a
preliminary sip of my beer, waiting for her to continue. "Do you want to fuck me”
?I spray beer through my nostrils. "You have got to be kidding!" It's more tactful than I'd
rather bed a king snake and sounds less pathetic than my girlfriend would kill me, but the
instant I come out with it I know it's a gut reaction, and true: 'What's under that glamour?
Nothing I'd want to meet in bed, I'll bet.
"Good," says Ramona, closing the door very firmly on that line of speculation, much to my
relief. She nods, a falling lock of flax-colored hair momentarily concealing her face: "Every
guy I've ever slept with died less than twenty-four hours later." It must be my expression,
because a moment later she adds, defensively: "It's just a coincidence! I didn't kill them.
Well, most of them.”

I realize I'm trying to hide behind my beer glass, and force myself to straighten up. "I'm very
glad to hear it," I say, a little too rapidly.
"I was just checking because we're supposed to be working together. And it would be real
unfortunate if you slept with me and died, because then we couldn't do that.”
"Really? How interesting. And what exactly is it you think I do?" She puts her glass down and
removes her hand from her bag. It's deja vu all over again: instead of a gun she's holding a
three-year-old Palm Pilot. It's inferior tech, and I feel a momentary flash of smugness at
knowing I've got the drop on her in at least one important department. She flips the
protective cover open and glances at the screen. "I think you work for Capital Laundry
Services," she says matter-of-factly.
"Nominally you're a senior scientific officer in the Department of Internal Logistics. You're
tasked with representing your department in various joint committees and with setting policy
on IT acquisitions. But you really work for Angleton, don't you? So they must see something
in you that I—" her suddenly jaundiced gaze takes in my jeans, somewhat elderly tee shirt,
and fishing vest stuffed with geek toys "—don't.”
I try not to wilt too visibly. Okay, she's a player. That makes things easier - and harder, in a
way. I swallow a mouthful of beer successfully this time. "So why don't you tell me who you
are”
?"I just did. I'm Ramona and I'm not going to sleep with you.”
"Fine, Ramona-and-I'm-not-going-to-sleep-with-you.
What are you? I mean, are you human? I can't tell, what with that glamour you're wearing,
and that kind of thing makes me nervous.”
Sapphire eyes stare at me. "Keep guessing, monkey-boy.”
Oh, for fuck's sake— "Okay, I mean, who do you work for”
?"The Black Chamber. And I always wear this body on business. We've got a dress code,
you know." The Black Chamber? My stomach lurches. I've had one runin with those guys,
near the outset of my professional career, and everything I've learned since has taught me I
was damned lucky to survive. "Who are you here to kill”
?She makes a faint moue of distaste. "I'm supposed to be working with you. I wasn't sent
here to kill anyone.”
We're going in circles again. "Fine. You're going to work with me but you don't want to sleep
with me in case I drop dead, Curse of the Mummy and all that. You're tooled up to _^ vamp
some poor bastard, but it's not me, and you seem to know who I am. Why don't you just cut
the crap and explain what you're doing here, why the hell you're so jumpy, and what's going
on”
?"You really don't know?" She stares at me. "I was told you'd been briefed.”
"Briefed?" I stare right back at her. "You've got to be kidding!
I'm here for a committee meeting, not a live-action role-playing game.”
"Huh!" For a moment she looks puzzled. "You are here to attend the next session of the
joint-liaison committee on cosmological incursions, aren't you”
I nod, very slightly. The Auditors don't usually ask you what you didn't say, they're more
interested in what you did say, and who you said it to.1 "You're not on my briefing sheet.”
"I see." Ramona nods thoughtfully, then relaxes slightly.
"Sounds like a regular fuck-up, then. Like I said, I was told we're going to be working
together on a joint activity, starting with this meeting. For the purposes of this session I'm an
accredited delegate, by the way.”
"You—" I bite my tongue, trying to imagine her in a committee room going over the
seventy-six-page agenda.
"You're a what”
?"I've got observer status. Tomorrow I'll show you my ward," she adds. (That clinches it. The
wards are handed out to those of us who're assigned to the joint committee.) "You can show
me yours. I'm sure you'll be briefed before that — afterward we'll have a lot more to talk
about.”

"Just what—" I swallow "—are we supposed to be working on”
?She smiles. "Baccarat." She finishes her G&T and stands up with a swish of silk: "I'll be
seeing you later, Robert.
Until tonight...”
I buy another beer to calm my rattled nerves and hunker down in a carnivorous leather sofa
at the far side of the bar. When I'm sure the bartender isn't watching me I pull out my Treo,
run a highly specialized program, and dial an office extension in London. The phone rings
four times, then the voice mail picks it up. "Boss? Got a headache. A Black Chamber
operative called Ramona showed up. She claims that we're supposed to be working
together. What the hell's 1 Blabbing secrets to beautiful femme fetale agents is frowned
upon, especially when they're not necessarily human.
going on? I need to know." I hang up without bothering to wait for a reply. Angleton will be in
around six o'clock London time, and then I'll get my answer. I sigh, which draws a dirty look
from a pair of overdressed chancers at the next table. I guess they think I'm lowering the tone
of the bar. A sense of acute loneliness comes crashing down. What am I doing here?
The superficial answer is that I'm here on Laundry business.
That's Capital Laundry Services to anyone who rings the front doorbell or cold-calls the
switchboard, even though we haven't operated out of the old offices above the Chinese
laundry in Soho since the end of the Second World War. The Laundry has a long memory. I
work for the -•*, Laundry because they gave me a choice between doing so . . . or not
working for anyone, ever again. With 20/20 hindsight I can't say I blame them. Some people
you just do not want to leave outside the tent pissing in, and in my early twenties,
self-confident and naive, I was about as safe to leave lying around unsupervised as half a
ton of sweating gelignite. These days I'm a trained computational demonologist, that
species of occult practitioner who really can summon spirits from the vasty deep: or at least
whatever corner of our local Calabi-Yau manifold they howl and gibber in, insane on the
brane. And I'm a lot safer to have around these days — at least I know what precautions to
use and what safety standards to obey: so call me a bunker full of smart bombs.
Most Laundry work consists of tediously bureaucratic form-filling and paper-pushing. About
three years ago I got bored and asked if I could be assigned to active service. This was a
mistake I've been regretting ever since, because it tends to go hand-in-hand with things like
being rousted out of bed at four in the morning to go count the concrete cows in Milton
Keynes, which sounds like a lot more fun than it actually is; especially when it leads to
people shooting at you and lots more complicated forms to fill in and hearings in front of the
Audit Committee. (About whom the less said the better.) But on the other hand, if I hadn't
switched to active service status I wouldn't have met Mo, Dr. Dominique O'Brien — except
she hates the Dominique bit — and from this remove I can barely imagine what life would be
like without her.
At least, without her in principle. She's been on one training course or another for months on
end lately, doing something hush-hush that she can't tell me about. This latest course has
kept her down at the secure facility in Dunwich Village for four weeks now, and two weeks
before that I had to go to the last liaison meeting, and frankly, I'm pining. I mentioned this to
Pinky at the pub last week, and he snorted and accused me of carrying on like I was already
married. I suppose he's right: I'm not used to having somebody wonderful and sane in my
life, and I guess I'm a bit clingy. Maybe I should talk about it with Mo, but the subject of
marriage is a bit touchy and I'm reluctant to raise it — her previous matrimonial experience
wasn't a happy one.
I'm about halfway down my beer and thinking about calling Mo — if she's off work right now
we could chat — when my phone rings. I glance at it and freeze: it's Angleton. I key the cone
of silence then answer: "Bob here.”
"Bob." Angleton's voice is papery-thin and cold, and the data compression inflicted by the
telephone network and the security tunnel adds a hollow echo to it. "I got your message.
This Ramona person, I want you to describe her.”

"I can't. She was wearing a glamour, level three at least— it nearly sent me cross-eyed. But
she knows who I am and what I'm here for.”
"All right, Bob, that's about what I expected. Now this is what I want you to do." Angleton
pauses. I lick my suddenly dry lips. "I want you to finish your drink and go back to your room.
However, rather than entering, I want you to proceed down the corridor to the next room
along on the same side, one number up. Your support team should be checked in there
already. They'll continue the briefing once you're in the secure suite. Do not enter your room
for the time being. Do you understand?" "I think so." I nod. "You've got a little surprise job
lined up for me. Is that it”
?"Yes," says Angleton, and hangs up abruptly.
I put my beer down, then stand up and glance round. I thought I was here for a routine
committee meeting, but •* suddenly I find I'm standing on shifting sands, in possibly hostile
territory. The middle-aged swingers glance disinterestedly at me, but my wards aren't
tingling: they're just who they appear to be. Right. Go directly to bed, do not eat supper, do
not collect... I shake my head and get moving.
To get to the elevator bank from the bar requires crossing an expanse of carpet overlooked
by two levels of balconies - normally I wouldn't even notice it but after Angleton's little
surprise the skin on the back of my neck crawls, and I clutch my Treo and my lucky charm
bracelet twitchily as I sidle across it. There aren't many people about, if you discount the
queue of tired business travelers checking in at the desk, and I make it to the lift bank
without the scent of violets or the tickling sense of recognition that usually prefigures a lethal
manifestation. I hit the "up" button on the nearest elevator and the doors open to admit me.
There is a theory that all chain hotels are participants in a conspiracy to convince the
international traveler that there is only one hotel on the planet, and it's just like the one in their
own home town. Personally, I don't believe it: it seems much more plausible that rather than
actually going somewhere I have, in fact, been abducted and doped to the gills by aliens,
implanted with false and bewildering memories of humiliating security probes and tedious
travel, and checked in to a peculiarly expensive padded cell to recover. It's certainly an
equally consistent explanation for the sense of disorientation and malaise I suffer from in
these places; besides which, malevolent aliens are easier to swallow than the idea that
other people actually want to live that way.
Elevators are an integral part of the alien abduction experience.
I figure the polished fake-marble floor and mirror-tiled ceiling with indirect lighting conspire
to generate a hypnotic sense of security in the abductees, so I pinch myself and force myself
to stay alert. The lift is just beginning to accelerate upwards when my phone vibrates, so I
glance at the screen, read the warning message, and drop to the floor.
The lift rattles as it rises towards the sixth floor. My guts lighten: we're slowing! The entropy
detector wired into my phone's aerial is lighting up the screen with a grisly red warning icon.
Some really heavy shit is going on upstairs, and the closer we get to my floor the stronger it
is. "Fuck fuck fuck," I mumble, punching up a basic countermeasure screen. I'm not carrying:
this is supposed to be friendly territory, and whatever's lighting up the upper levels of the
Ramada Treff Page Hotel is — I briefly flash back to another hotel in Amsterdam, a howling
wind sucking into the void where a wall should be— Clunk. The door slides open and I
realize at the same instant that I should have leapt for the lift control panel and the
emergency stop button. "Shit," I add — the traditional last word — just as the flashing red
dial on my phone screen whisks counterclockwise and turns green: green for safety, green
for normal, green to show that the reality excursion has left the building.
"Zum Teufel!”
I glance up stupidly at a pair of feet encased in bulletproof- looking, brown leather hiking
boots, then further up at the corduroy trousers and beige jacket of an elderly German tourist.
"Trying to get a signal," I mutter, and scramble out of the lift on all fours, feeling extremely
stupid.
I tiptoe along the beige-carpeted corridor to my room, racking my brains for an explanation.

This whole set-up stinks like a week-old haddock: What's going on? Ramona, whoever the
hell she is — I'd put hard money on her being mixed in with it. And that entropy blip was big.
But it's gone now. Someone gating in? I wonder. Or a proximal invocation?
I pause in front of my door and hold my hand above the door handle for a few seconds.
The handle is cold. Not just metal-at-ambient cold, but frigid and smoking-liquid-nitrogen
cold.
"Oops," I say very quietly, and keep on walking down the corridor until I arrive at the next
room door. Then I pull out my phone and speed-dial Angleton.
"Bob, Sitrep.”
I lick my lips. "I'm still alive. While I was in the elevator my tertiary proximity alarm redlined
then dropped back. I got to my room and the door handle feels like it's measuring room
temperature in single-digit Kelvins. I'm now outside the adjacent door. I figure it's a hit and
unless you tell me otherwise I'm calling a Code Blue.”
"This isn't the Code Blue you'te here to deal with.”
Angleton sounds dryly amused, which is pretty much what I expect from him. "But you might
want to make a note that your activation key is double-oh-seven. Just in case you need k
later." I "You what?" I glare at the phone in disbelief, then punch the number into the keypad.
"Jesus, Angleton, someday let me explain this concept called password security to you, I'm
not meant to be able to hack my own action locks and start shooting on a whim—”
"But you didn't, did you?" He sounds even more amused as my phone beeps twice and
makes a metallic clicking noise.
"You may not have time to ask when the shit hits the fen.
That's why I kept it simple. Now give me a Sitrep," he adds crisply.
"I'm going live." I frantically punch a couple of buttons and invisible moths flutter up and down
my spine; when they fade away the corridor looks darker, somehow, and more threatening.
"Half-live. My terminal is active." I fumble around in my pocket and pull out a small webcam,
click it into place in the expansion slot on top of my phone. Now my phone has got two
cameras.
"Okay, SCORPION STARE loaded. I'm armed. What can I expect”
?There's a buzzing noise from the door lock next to me and the green LED flashes.
"Hopefully nothing right now, but . . . open the door and go inside. Your backup team should
be in place to give you your briefing, unless something's gone very wrong in the last five
minutes.”
"Jesus, Angleton.”
"That is my name. You shouldn't swear so much: the walls have ears." He still sounds
amused, the omniscient bastard.
I don't know how he does it — I'm not cleared for that shit — but I always have a feeling that
he can see over my shoulder.
"Go inside. That's an order.”
I take a deep breath, raise my phone, and open the door.
"Hiya, Bob!" Pinky looks up from the battered instrument case, his hands hovering over a
compact computer keyboard. He's wearing a fetching batik sarong, a bushy handlebar
moustache, and not much else: I'm not going to give him the pleasure of knowing just how
much this disturbs me, or how relieved I am to see him.
"Where's Brains?" I ask, closing the door behind me and exhaling slowly.
"In the closet. Don't worry, he'll be coming out soon enough." Pinky points a digit at the row
of storage doors fronting the wall adjacent to my room. "Angleton sent us.
He said you'd need briefing.”
"Am I the only person here who doesn't know what's going on”
?"Probably." He grins. "Nothing to worry about, ol' buddy." He glances at my Treo. "Would
you mind not pointing that thing at me”
?"Oh, sorry." I lower it hastily and eject the second camera that turns it into a SCORPION
STARE terminal, a basilisk device capable of blowing apart chunks of organic matter within

visual range by convincing them that some of their carbon nuclei are made of silicon. "Are
you going to tell me what's happening”
?"Sure." He sounds unconcerned. "You're being destinyentangled with a new partner, and
we're here to make sure she doesn't accidentally kill and eat you before the ritual is
complete.”
"I'm being what?" I hate it when I squeak.
"She's from the Black Chamber. You're supposed to be working together on something big,
and the old man wants you to be able to draw on her abilities when you need help.”
"What do you mean draw on her? Like I'm a trainee tattooist now?" I've got a horrible feeling
I know what he's talking about, and I don't like it one little bit: but it would explain why
Angleton sent Pinky and Brains to be my backup team. They're old housemates, and the
bastard thinks they'll make me feel more comfortable.
The closet door opens and Brains steps out. Unlike Pinky he's decently dressed, for leather
club values of decency.
"Don't get overexcited, Bob," he says, winking at me: "I was just drilling holes in the walls.”
"Holes—”
"To observe her. She's confined to the pentacle on your bedroom carpet; you don't need to
worry about her getting loose and stealing your soul before we complete the circuit.
Hold still or this won't work.”
"Who's in what pentacle in my bedroom?" I take a step back towards the door but he's
approaching me, clutching a sterile needle.
"Your new partner. Here, hold out a hand, this won't hurt a bit—"i "Ouch!" I step backwards
and bounce off the wall, and Brains manages to get his drop of blood while I'm wincing.
"Great, that'll let us complete the destiny lock. You know you're a lucky man? At least, I
suppose you're lucky — if you're that way inclined—”
"Who is she, dammit”
?"Your new partner? She's a changeling sent by the Black Chamber. Name of Ramona. And
she is stacked, if that sort of thing matters to you." He pulls an amused face, oh so tolerant
of my heterosexual ways.
"But I didn't—”
A toilet flushes, then the bathroom door opens and Boris steps out. And that's when I know
I'm in deep shit, because Boris is not my normal line manager: Boris is the guy they send out
when something has gone terribly wrong in the field and stuff needs to be cleaned up by any
means necessary.
Boris acts like a cut-rate extra in a Cold War spy thriller — right down to the hokey fake
accent and the shaven bullethead — although he's about as English as I am. The speech
thing is a leftover from a cerebral infarction, courtesy of a field invocation that went
pear-shaped.
"Bob." He doesn't smile. "Welcome to Darmstadt. You come for joint-liaison framework. You
are attending meeting tomorrow as planned: but are also being cleared for AZORIAN BLUE
HADES as of now. Are here to brief, introduce you to support team, and make sure you
bond with your, your, associate. Without to be eated.”
"Eaten?" I ask. I must look a trifle tense because even Boris manages to pull an apologetic
expression from somewhere.
"What is this job, exactly? I didn't volunteer for a field mission—”
"Know you do not. We are truly sorry to put this on you,”
says Boris, running a hand over his bald head in a gesture that gives the lie to the sentiment,
"but not having time for histrionics." He glances at Brains and gives a tiny nod. "First am
giving briefing to you, then must complete destinyentanglement protocol with entity next
door. After that—”
he checks his watch "—are being up to you, but estimating are only seven days to save
Western civilization.”
"What?" I know what my ears just heard but I'm not sure I believe them.

He stares at me grimly, then nods. "If is up to me, are not be relying on you. But time running
out and is short on alternatives.”
"Oh Jesus." I sit down on the sole available chair. "I'm not going to like this, am I”
?"Nyet. Pinky, the DVD please. It is being time to expand Robert's horizons . . .”
2: GOI NG DOWN TO DUNWICH The river of time may wait for no man, but sometimes
extreme stress causes it to run shallow. Cast the fly back four weeks and see what you
catch, reeling in the month-old memories . . .
I T 'S LATE ON A RAINY SATURDAY MORNING IN February, and Mo and I are drinking the
remains of the breakfast coffee while talking about holidays. Or rather, she's talking about
holidays while I'm nose-deep in a big, fat book, reacquainting myself with the classics. To
tell the truth, each interruption breaks my concentration, so I'm barely paying attention.
Besides, I'm not really keen on-the idea of forking out money for two weeks in self-catering
accommodations somewhere hot. We're supposed to be saving up the deposit for a
mortgage, after all.
"How about Crete?" she asks from the kitchen table, drawing a careful red circle around
three column-inches of newsprint.
"Won't you burn?" (Mo's got classic redhead skin and freckles.) "We in the developed world
have this advanced technology called sunblock. You may have heard of it." Mo glares at me.
"You're not paying attention, are you”
?I sigh and put the book down. Damn it, why now? Just as I'm getting to Tanenbaum's
masterful and witty takedown of the OSI protocol stack . . . "Guilty as charged.”
"Why not?" She leans forwards, arms crossed, staring at me intently.
"Good book," I admit.
"Oh. Well that makes it all right," she snorts. "You can always take it to the beach, but you'll
be kicking yourself if we wait too long and the cheap packages are all over-booked and
we're left with choosing between the dregs of the Club 18-30 stuff, or paying through the
nose, or one of us gets sent on detached duty again because we didn't notify HR of our
vacation plans in time. Right”
?"I'm sorry. I guess I'm just not that enthusiastic right now.”
"Yes, well, I just paid my Christmas credit card bill, too, love. Face it, by May we're both
going to be needing a vacation, and they'll be twice as expensive if you leave booking it too
late.”
I look Mo in the eyes and realize she's got me metaphorically surrounded. She's older than I
am — at least, a couple of years older — and more responsible, and as for what she sees
in me . . . well. If there's one disadvantage to living with her it's that she's got a tendency to
organize me. "But.
Crete”
?"Crete, Island of. Home of the high Minoan civilization, probably collapsed due to rapid
climactic change or the explosion of the volcano on Thera — Santorini — depending who
you read. Loads of glorious frescos and palace ruins, wonderful beaches, and moussaka to
die for. Grilled octopus, too: I know all about your thing for eating food with tentacles.
If we aim for late May we'll beat the sunbathing masses.
I was thinking we should book some side tours - I'm reading up on the archaeology - and a
self-catering apartment, where we can chill for two weeks, soak up some sun before the
temperature goes into the high thirties and everything bakes . . .
How does that sound to you? I can practice the fiddle while you burn.”
"It sounds—" I stop. "Hang on. What's the archaeology thing about”
?"Judith's had me reading up on the history of the littoral civilizations lately," she says. "I
thought it'd be nice to take a look." Judith is deputy head of aquatic affairs at work. She
spends about half her time out at the Laundry training facility in Dunwich and the other half
up at Loch Ness.
"Ah." I hunt around for a scrap of kitchen roll to use as a bookmark. "So this is work, really.”
"No, it's not!" Mo closes the newspaper section then picks it up and begins to shake the

pages into order. She won't stop until she's got them perfectly aligned and smooth enough
to sell all over again: it's one of her nervous tics. "I'm just curious.
I've been reading so much about the Minoans and the precedent case law behind the
human/Deep One treaties that it just caught my interest. Besides which, I last went on
holiday to Greece about twenty years ago, on a school trip. It's about time to go back there,
and I thought it'd be a nice place to relax. Sun, sex, and squid, with a side order of
archaeology.”
I know when I'm defeated, but I'm not completely stupid: it's time to change the subject.
"What's Judith got you working on, anyway?" I ask. "I didn't think she had any call for your
approach to, well . . . whatever." (It's best not to mention specifics: the house we share is
subsidized accommodation, provided by the Laundry for employees like us — otherwise
there's no way we could honestly afford to live in Central London on two civil service salaries
— and the flip-side of this arrangement is that if we start discussing state secrets the walls
grow ears.) "Judith's got problems you aren't briefed on." She picks up her coffee mug,
peers into it, and pulls a face. "I'm beginning to find out about them and I don't like them.”
"You are”
?"I'm going down to Dunwich next week," she says sud- denly. "I'll be there quite some
time." "You're what”
?I must sound shocked because she puts the mug down, stands up, and holds out her arms:
"Oh, Bob!”
I stand up, too. We hug. "What's going on?" "Training course," she says tightly "Another
bloody training course? What are they doing, putting you through a postgraduate degree in
Cloak and Dagger Studies?" I ask. The only training course I did at Dunwich was in field
operations technique. Dunwich is where the Laundry keeps a lot of its secrets, hidden
behind diverted roads and forbidding hedges, in a village evacuated by the War
Department back during the 1940s and never returned to its civilian owners. Unlike Rome,
no roads lead to Dunwich: to get there you need a GPS receiver, four-wheel drive, and a
security talisman.
"Something like that. Angleton's asked me to take on some additional duties, but I don't
think I can talk about them just yet. Let's say, it's at least as interesting as the more obscure
branches of music theory I've been working on." She tenses against me, then hugs me
tighter. "Listen, nobody can complain about me telling you I'm going, so . . . ask Judith,
okay? If you really think you need to know. It's just a compartmentalization thing. I'll have my
mobile and my violin, we can talk evenings. I'll try to make it back home for weekends.”
"Weekends plural? Just how long is this course supposed to take?" I'm curious, as well as a
bit annoyed. "When did they tell you about it”
?"They told me about this particular one yesterday. And I don't know how long it runs for —
Judith says it comes up irregularly, they're at the mercy of certain specialist staff. At least
four weeks, possibly more.”
"Specialist staff. Would this specialist staff happen to have, say, pallid skin? And gill slits”
?"Yes, that's it. That's it exactly." She relaxes and takes a step back. "You've met them.”
"Sort of." I shiver.
"I'm not happy about this," she says. "I told them I needed more notice. I mean, before they
spring things like this special training regime on me.”
I figure it's time to change the subject. "Crete. You figure you'll be out of the course by then”
?"Yes, for sure." She nods. "That's why I'll need to get away from it all, with you.”
"So that's what this Crete thing is all about. Judith wants to drop you headfirst into Dunwich
for three months and you need somewhere to go to decompress afterwards.”
"That's about the size of it.”
"Ah, shit." I pick up my book again, then my coffee cup.
"Hey, this coffee's cold.”
"I'll fix a fresh jug." Mo carries the cafetiere over to the sink and starts rinsing the grounds
out. "Sometimes I hate this job," she adds in a singsong, "and sometimes this job hates m e

. . .”
The name of the job is mathematics. Or maybe metamathematics.
Or occult physics. And she wouldn't be in this job if she hadn't met me (although, on second
thoughts, if she hadn't met me she'd be dead, so I think we'll call it even on that score and
move swiftly on).
Look, if I come right out and say, "Magic exists," you'll probably dismiss me as a whack job.
But in fact you'd be — well, I say you'd be - mistaken. And because my employers agree
with me, and they're the government, you're outvoted.2 We've tried to cover it up as best we
can. Our predecessors did their best to edit it out of the history books and public
consciousness — the Mass Observation projects of the 1930s were rather more than the
simple social science exercises they were presented as to the public - and since then we've
devoted ourselves to the task of capping the bubbling cauldron of the occult beneath a
hermetic lid of state secrecy. So if you think I'm a whack job it's partly my fault, isn't it?
Mine, and the organization I work for — known to its inmates as the Laundry — and our
opposite numbers in other - countries.
The trouble is, the type of magic we deal with has nothing to do with rabbits and top hats,
fairies at the bottom of the garden, and wishes that come true. The truth is, we live in a
multiverse — a sheath of loosely interconnected universes, so loosely interconnected that
they're actually leaky at the level of the quantum foam substrate of space-time. There's only
one common realm among the universes, and that's the platonic realm of mathematics. We
can solve theorems and cast hand-puppet shadows on the walls of our cave. What most
folks (including most mathematicians and computer scientists — which amounts to the
same thing) don't know is that in overlapping parallel versions of the cave other beings — for
utterly unhuman values of "beings" — can also sometimes see the shadows, and cast
shadows right back at us.
Back before about 1942, communication with other realms was pretty hit and miss.
Unfortunately, Alan Turing 2 Not to mention outgunned.
partially systematized it — which later led to his unfortunate "suicide" and a subsequent
policy reversal to the effect that it was better to have eminent logicians inside the tent
pissing out, rather than outside pissing in. The Laundry is that subdivision of the Second
World War-era Special Operations Executive that exists to protect the United Kingdom from
the scum of the multiverse. And, trust me on this, there are beings out there who even Jerry
Springer wouldn't invite on his show.
The Laundry collects computer scientists who accidentally discover the elements of
computational demonology, in much the same way Stalin used to collect jokes about
himself.3 About six years ago I nearly landscaped Wolverhampton, not to mention most of
Birmingham and the Midlands, while experimenting with a really neat, new rendering
algorithm that just might have accidentally summoned up the entity known to the clueful as
"fuck, it's Nyarlathotep! Run!" (and to everyone else as "Fuck, run!").4 In Mo's case . . . she's
a philosopher by training.
Philosophers in the know are even more dangerous than computer scientists: they tend to
become existential magnets for weird shit. Mo came to the Laundry's attention when she
attracted some even-weirder-than-normal attention from a monster that thought our planet
looked good and would be crunchy with ketchup. How we ended up living together is
another story, albeit not an unhappy one. But the fact is, like me, she works for the Laundry
now. In fact, she once told me the way she manages to feel safe these days is by being as
dangerous as possible. And though I may bitch and moan about it when the Human
Resources fairy decides to split us 3 He had two Gulags full.
4 Except the Black Chamber, who would say, "You're late - we're going to dock your pay.”
up for months on end, when you get down to it, if you work for a secret government agency,
they can do that. And they've usually got good reasons for doing it, too. Which is one of the
things I hate about my life . . .
.. . and another thing I hate is Microsoft PowerPoint, which brings me back to the present.

PowerPoint is symptomatic of a certain type of bureau- cratic environment: one typified by
interminable presentations with lots of fussy little bullet-points and flashy dissolves and
soundtracks masked into the background, to try to convince the audience that the goon
behind the computer has something significant to say. It's the tool of choice for
pointy-headed idiots with expensive suits and skinny laptops who desperately want to look
as if they're in command of the job, with all the facts at their fiddling fingertips, even if Rome
is burning in the background. Nothing stands for content-free corporate bullshit quite like
PowerPoint. And that's just scratching the surface . . .
I'm sorry. Maybe you think I'm being unjustifiably harsh - a presentation graphics program is
just a piece of standard office software, after all — but my experience with PowerPoint is,
shall we say, nonstandard. Besides, you've probably never had a guy with a shoulder holster
and a field ops team backing him up drag you into a stakeout and whip out a laptop, to show
you a presentation that begins with a slide stating: THIS BRIEFING WILL
SELF-DESTRUCT IN FIFTEEN SECONDS. It's usually a sign that things have gone
wronger than a very wrong thing indeed, and you are expected to make them go right again,
or something doubleplus ungood is going to happen.
Double-plus ungood indeed.
"Destiny-entanglement protocol," I mutter, as Pinky fusses around behind me and turns the
fat-assed recliner I'm sitting in to face the wardrobe while Boris pokes at his laptop. As
protocols go, I've got to admit it's a new one on me. "Would you mind explaining—hey,
what's that duct tape for”
?"Sorry, Bob, try not to move, okay? It's just a precaution.”
"Just a—" I reach up with my left hand to give my nose a preemptive scratch while he's busy
taping my right arm to the chair. "What's the failure rate on this procedure, and should I have
updated my life insurance first”
?"Relax. Is no failure rate." Boris finally gets his laptop to admit that its keyboard exists, and
spins it round so I can see the screen. The usual security glyph flickers into view (I think that
particular effect is called wheel, eight spokes) and bites me on the bridge of my nose. It's
visual cortex hackery to seal my lips. "Failure not an option," repeats Boris.
The screen wheels again, and — morphs into a video of Angleton. "Hello, Bob," he begins.
He's sitting behind his desk like an outtake from Mission: Impossible, which would be a
whole lot more plausible if the desk wasn't a cramped, green metal thing with a contraption
on top of it that looks like the bastard offspring of a microfiche reader by way of a 1950s
mainframe computer terminal. "Sorry about the video briefing, but I had to be in two places
at once, and you lost.”
I catch Boris's eye and he pauses the presentation. "How the hell can you call this
confidential?" I complain. "It's a video! If it fell into the wrong hands—”
Boris glances at Brains. "Tell him.”
Brains pulls a gadget out of his goodie bag. "Andy shot it on one of these," he explains.
"Solid-state camcorder, runs on MMC cards. Encrypted, and we stuffed a bunch of footage
up front to make it look like amateur dramatics. That and the geas field will make anyone
who steals it think they've stumbled over the next Blair Witch Project — cute, huh”
?I sigh. If he was a dog he'd be wagging his tail hard enough to dent the furniture. "Okay, roll
it." I try to ignore whatever Pinky is doing on the carpet around my feet with a conductive
pencil, a ruler, and a breakout box.
Angleton leans alarmingly towards the camera viewpoint, looming to fill the screen. "I'm sure
you've heard of TLA Systems Corporation, Bob, if for no other reason than your complaints
about their license management server on the departmental network reached the ears of the
Audit committee last July, and I was forced to take preemptive action to divert them from
mounting a full-scale investigation.”
Gulp. The Auditors noticed? That wasn't my idea - no wonder Andy seemed pissed off with
me. When I'm not running around pretending to be Secret Agent Man and attending
committee meetings in Darmstadt, my job's pretty boring: network management is one

component of it, and when I saw that blasted license manager trying to dial out to the public
internet to complain about Facilities running too many copies of the TLA monitoring client, I
cc'd everyone I could think of on the memo— "TLA, as you know — Bob, pay attention at the
back, there — was founded in 1979 by Ellis Billington and his partner Ritchie Martin. Ritchie
was the software guy, Ellis the front man, which is why these days Ellis has a net worth of
seventeen billion US dollars and Ritchie lives in a hippie commune in Oregon and refuses to
deal with any unit of time he can't schedule on a sundial.”
Angleton's sallow visage is replaced (no dissolve, this time) by a photograph of Billington, in
the usual stuffed-suit pose adopted by CEOs hoping to impress the Wall Street Journal. His
smile reveals enough teeth to intimidate a megalodon and he's in such good condition for a
sixty-something executive that he's probably got a portrait squirreled away in a high-security
facility in New Mexico that gives people nightmares when they look at it.
"TLA originally competed in the relational database market with Ingres, Oracle, and the
othet seven dwarves, but rapidly discovered a lucrative sideline in federal systems—
specifically the GTO5 market.”
Lots of government departments in the '90s tried to save money by ordering their IT folks to
buy only commercial, off-the-shelf software, or COTS. Which is to say, they finally got a clue
that it's cheaper to buy a word processor off the shelf than to pay a defense contractor to
write one. After their initial expressions of shock and horror, the trough-guzzling,
platinum-wrench defense contractors responded by making GTO editions — ostensibly
commercial versions of their platinum- plated, government-oriented products, available to
anyone who wanted to buy them — $500,000 word processors with MILSPEC encryption
and a suite of handy document templates for rules of engagement, declarations of war, and
issuing COTS contracts to defense conttactors.
"TLA grew rapidly and among other things acquired Moonstone Metatechnology, who you
may know of as one of the primary civilian contractors to the Black Chamber.”
Whoops. Now he's definitely got my attention. The presentation cuts back to Angleton's
drawn-to-the-point-ofmummification face. He looks serious.
"Billington is from California. His parents are known to have been involved in the Order of
the Silver Star at one point, although Billington himself claims to be Methodist.
Whatever the truth, he has a stratospheric security clearance and his corporation designs
scary things for an assortment of spooky departments. I'd teference CRYSTAL CENTURY if
you were in London, but you can look it up later. For now, you can take it from me that
Billington is a player.”
Gran Turismo Omologato Now he throws in a fancy fade-to-right to show a rather old, grainy
photograph of a ship . . . an oil-drilling ship? A tanker? Something like that. Whatever it is,
it's big and there's something that looks like an oil rig amidships. (I like that word,
"amidships." It makes me sound as if I know what I'm talking about. I am to seagoing
vessels pretty much what your grandmother is to Windows Vista.) "This ship is the Hughes
Glomar Explorer. Built for Summa Corporation — owned by Howard Hughes - for the CIA in
the early 1970s, its official mission was to recover a sunken Soviet nuclear missile
submarine from the floor of the Pacific Ocean. It was mated with this —" another screen
dissolve, to something that looks like a stainless steel woodlouse adrift at sea — "the
HMB-1, Hughes Mining Barge, built by, you'll be interested to know, Lockheed Missiles and
Space.”
I lean forwards, barely noticing the duct tape holding my wrists and ankles against the chair.
"That's really neat," I say admiringly. "Didn't I see it in a Discovery Channel docu- mentary”
?Angleton clears his throat. "If you've quite finished”
?(How does be do that? I ask myself.) "Operation JENNIFER, the first attempt at recovering
the submarine, was a partial -* success. I was there as a junior liaison under the reciprocal
'"$• monitoring provisions of the Benthic Treaty. The CIA staff was . . . overly optimistic. To
their credit, the Black Chamber refused to be drawn in, and to their credit, the other
Signatory Party didn't use more than the minimum force necessary to prevent the recovery.

When Seymour Hersh and Jack Anderson broke the story in the Los Angeles Times several
months later, the CIA gave up, the Glomar Explorer was formally designated property of the
US government and mothballed, a discreet veil was drawn over the fate of the HMB-1 - it
was officially 'scrapped' - and we thought that was that.”
Pinky has finished drawing a pentacle around my chair, and he finally signals that he's got it
wired up to the isochronous signal generator — two thumbs up at Boris. Boris shuts the
laptop lid with a click and sticks it under his arm. "Is time for entanglement," he tells me,
"briefing will continue after.”
"Whoa! What has she—" I nod at the far wall, beyond which the sleeping beauty lies "—got
to do with this?" I glance at the laptop.
Boris harrumphs. "If had spend your time on briefing, would understand," he grumbles.
"Brains, Pinky, stations.”
'Yo. Good luck, Bob." Pinky pats me on the shoulder as he scuttles past the end of the beds
to a small ward he's already set up on the carpet in front of the TV set. "It'll be all right —
you'll see." Brains and Boris are already in their safety cells.
"What if someone's in the hall outside?" I call.
"The door's locked. And I put the DO NOT DISTURB sign out," Brains replies. "Stations,
everyone?" He pulls out a black control box and twists a knob set on its face. I force myself
to settle back in the chair; and in the other room, beyond the two spy-holes drilled through
the back of the wardrobe, a very special light comes on and washes over the trapped entity
in the pentacle.
When you go summoning extra-dimensional entities, there are certain precautions you
should be sure to take.
For starters, you can forget garlic, bibles, and candles: they don't work. Instead, you need to
start with serious electrical insulation to stop them from blowing your brains out through your
ears. Once you've got yourself grounded you also need to pay attention to the existence of
special optical high-bandwidth channels that demons may attempt to use to download
themselves into your nervous system — they're called "eyeballs." Timesharing your
hypothalamus with alien brain-eaters is not recommended if you wish to live long enough to
claim your index-linked, state-earningsrelated pension; it's about on a par with tap dancing
on the London Underground's third rail in terms of health and safety. So you need to ensure
you're optically isolated as well.
Do not stare into laser cavity with remaining eye, as the safety notice puts it. Most demons
are as dumb as a sack full of hammers. This does not mean they're safe to mess with, any
more than a C+ + compiler is "safe" in the hands of an enthusiastic com- puter science
undergrad. Some people can mess up anything, and computational demonology adds a
new and unwelcome meaning to terms like "memory leak" and "debugger.”
Now, I have severe misgivings about what Boris, Pinky, and Brains propose to do to me.
(And I am really pissed at Angleton for telling them to do it.) However, they're more than
passingly competent and they've certainly not skimped on the safety aspects. The entity that
calls itself Ramona Random — hell, that might even be her real name, back when she was
human, before the Black Chamber rebuilt her into occult equivalent of a guided missile — is
properly ^secured in the next room. Sitting in the bedroom closet — in front of the two holes
Brains has drilled in the wall - is a tripod with a laser, a beam splitter, and a thermostatically
controlled box containing a tissue culture grown from something that really ought not to exist,
all wired up to a circuit board that looks like M. C. Escher designed it after taking too much
LSD.
"Everyone clear?" calls Brains.
"Clear." Boris.
"Clear." Pinky.
"Totally unclear!" Me.
"Thank you, Bob. Pinky, how's our remote terminal”
?Pinky looks at a small, cheap television screen hooked up to a short-range receiver.

"Drooling slightly. I think she's asleep.”
"Okay. Lights." A diode on the back of the circuit board begins to flash, and I notice out of
the corner of my eye that Brains is controlling it with a television remote. That's smart of him,
I think, right before he punches the next button.
"Blood.”
Something begins to drip from the box, sizzling where it touches a wired junction on the
circuit, which suddenly flares with silver light. I try to look away but it sucks my eyes in, like a
bubble of boiling mercury that expands to fill the entire world. Then it's like my blind spot is
expanding, creeping up on the back of my head.
"Symbolic link established.”
There's an incredibly strong stink of violets, and a horde of ants crawl the length of my spine
before holing up in the pit of my stomach to build a nest.
**Hello, Bob.** The voice caresses my ears like the velvet fuzz on a week-dead aubergine,
sultry and somehow rotten to *he core. It's Ramona's voice. My stomach heaves. I can't see
anything but the swirling pit of light, and the violets are decaying into something
unspeakable. **Can you hear me?** **I hear you.** I bite my tongue, tasting the sound of
steel guitars. Synesthesia, I note distantly. I've read about this sort of thing: if the situation
wasn't so dangerous it would be fascinating. Meanwhile my right arm is straining against the
duct tape without me willing it to move. I try to make it stop and it won't. **Leave my arm
alone, damn you!** **I'm already damned,** she says flippantly, but the muscles in my arm
stop twitching and jumping.
Then I realize I haven't been moving my lips, and more importantly, Ramona hasn't been
speaking aloud. **How do we control this?** I ask.
**The will becomes the act: if you want me to hear, I hear you.** **Oh.** The light show is
beginning to slow down, with reality bleeding back in through the edges, and my head feels
like someone's rammed a railroad spike through my skull right behind my left eye. **1 feel
sick.** **Don't do that, Bob!** She sounds - feels? - disturbed.
**Okay.** Try not to think of invisible pink elephants, I think grimly, my skin crawling as the
implications set in. I've just been rendered uncontrollably telepathic with a woman - or
something woman-shaped — from the Black Chamber, and I'm such a dork my first reaction
wasn't to run like fuck.
Why'd Angleton do a thing like that? Hey, isn't this asking for a really gigantic security
breach - at least, if both of us survive the experience? How am I going to keep Ramona out
of my head—?
**Hey, stop blaming me!** Somehow I can tell she's irritated by my line of thought. **My head
hurts, too.** **So why didn't you run away?** I let slip before I manage to clamp a lid down on
the thought.
**They didn't give me the option.** A metallic, bitter taste fills my mouth. **I'm not entirely
human.
Constitutional rights don't apply to non-humans. All I can say is, those bastards better hope I
never get loose from this geas . . .** I feel like spitting, then I realize the glands full of warmth
at the back of her throat aren't salivary ducts.
"Bob.”
I blink in confusion. It's Brains. He looms over me, out of his grounded pentacle. "Can you
hear me”
?"Yuh, yeah." I try to swallow, feeling the sensation of venom sacs throbbing urgently inside
my cheeks begin to fade. I shudder. There's a trailing wisp of wistfulness from Ramona, and
a malicious giggle: she doesn't have fangs, she just has a really good somatic imagination.
**Let me get my » head together,** I tell her, and then try to do the invisible v pink elephant
thing in her general direction.
"How do you feel?" asks Brains. He sounds curious.
"How the fuck do you think you'd feel?" I snarl. "Jesus fuck, give me ibuprofen or give me a
straight razor. My head is killing me." Then I realize something else. "And cut me loose from

here. Someone's got to go next door and release Ramona, and I don't think any of you guys
want to get within spitting range of her without a chair, a whip, and a \ can of pepper spray.”
I remember the shape of her anger at her employers and shiver again. Working with
Ramona is going to be like riding sidesaddle on a black mamba. And that's before I get to
tell Mo, "Honey, they partnered me with a demon.”
3: TANGLED UP IN GRUE T H E Y WAIT FOR THE IBUPROFEN TO START WORKING
before they untie me from the chair, which is extremely prudent of them.
"Right," I say, leaning against the back of the chair and breathing deeply. "Boris, what the
fuck is this about”
?"It is to be stopping her from killing you." Boris glowers at me. He's annoyed about
something, which makes two of us. "And to be creating an untappable communication, for
mission which you have not be briefed on because—" He gestures at the laptop and I
realize why he's so irritated: they weren't joking when they said the briefing would
selfdestruct.
"Here are your ticket for flight, is open for next available seat. Will continue the briefing in
Saint Martin.”
He shoves a booklet of flight vouchers at me.
"Where?" I nearly drop them.
"They're sending us to the Caribbean!" It's Pinky. He's almost turning handstands. "Sun!
Sand! And skullduggery!
And we've got great toys to play with!" Brains is methodically packing up the entanglement
rig, which breaks down into a big rolling suitcase. He seems amused by something.
I try to catch Boris's eye: Boris is staring at Pinky in either deep fascination, pity, or
something in between. "Where in the Caribbean?" I ask.
Boris shakes himself. "Is joint operation," he explains. "Is European territory, joint
Franco-Dutch government — they ask us to operate in there. But Caribbean is American
sea. So L Black Chamber send Ramona to be working with you.”
I wince. "Tell me you're joking.”
Another voice interrupts, inaudible to everyone else: **Hey, Bob! I'm still stuck here. A girl
could get bored waiting.** I have a feeling that a bored Ramona would be a very bad girl
indeed, in a your-life-insurance-policy-just-expired kind of way.
"Am not joking. This is joint operation. Lots of shit to spread all round." He carefully picks up
his dead laptop and drops it into an open briefcase. "Go to committee meeting tomorrow,
take memos, then go to airport and fly out. Can file liaison report later, after save the
universe.”
"Uh-huh. First I better go unlock Ramona from that containment you stuck her in." **I'm
coming,** I send her way.
"How trustworthy is she, really”
?Boris smiles thinly. "How trustworthy is rattlesnake”
?I excuse myself and stagger out into the corridor, my """ head still throbbing and the world
crinkling slightly at the edges. I guess I now know what that spike of entropy change was. I
pause at the door to my room but the handle is no longer dewed with liquid nitrogen, and is
merely cold to the touch.
Ramona is sitting in an armchair opposite the wall with the holes in it. She smiles at me, but
the expression doesn't » reach her eyes. **Bob. Get me out of this.** This is the pentacle
someone has stenciled on the carpet around her chair and plugged into a compact, blue,
noise generator. It's still running—Brains didn't hook it up to his remote. **Give me a
moment.** I sit down on the bed opposite her, kick off my trainers, and rub my head. **If I let
you go, what are you going to do?** Her smile broadens. **Well, personally—** she glances
at the door **—nothing much.** I get a momentary flicker of unpleasantness involving
extremely sharp knives and gouts of arterial blood, then she clamps down on it, with an
almost regretful edge, and I realize she's just daydreaming about someone else, someone a
very long way away. **Honest.** **Second question. Who's your real target?** **Are you

going to let me go once we get through this game of twenty questions? Or do you have
something else in mind?** She crosses her legs, watching me alertly. Every guy I've ever
slept with died less than twenty-four hours later, I recall.
**I wasn't joking,** she adds, defensively.
**I didn't think you were. I just want to know who your real target is.** She sniffs. **Ellis
Billington. What's your problem?** **I'm not sure. Bear with me for one last test?** **What?**
She half stands as I get off the bed, but the constraining field prohibits her from reaching me:
**Hey!
Ow! You bastard!** It brings tears to my eyes. I clutch my right foot and wait for the pain to
subside from where I kicked the bed-base.
Ramona is bent over, hugging her foot as well. **Okay,** I mumble, then kneel down and
switch off the signal generator.
I don't particularly want to switch it off—I feel a hell of a lot safer with Ramona trapped inside
a pentacle; the idea of setting her free makes my skin crawl—but the flip side of the
entanglement is fairly clear: not only can we talk without being overheard, there are other
(and drastically less pleasant) side effects.
**You're not a masochist, are you?** she asks tightly as she hobbles towards the bathroom.
**No ** **Good.** She slams the door shut. A few seconds later I clutch at my crotch in horror
as I feel the unmistakable sensation of a full bladder emptying. It takes me seconds to
realize it's not mine. My fingers are dry.
**Bitch!** Two can play at that game.
**It's your fault for keeping me waiting for ages.** I breathe deeply. **Look. I didn't ask for
this—** **Me neither!** **—so why don't we call it a truce?** Silence, punctuated by a sharp
sense of impatience.
**Took you long enough, monkey-boy.** **What's with the monkey-boy business?** I
complain.
**What's with the abhuman-bloodsucking-demon-whore imagery?** she responds acidly.
**Try t0 keep your gibbering religious bigotry out of my head and I'll leave your bladder
alone. Deal?** **Deal — hey! How the hell am I a gibbering religious bigot? I'm an atheist!**
**Yeah, and the horse you rode in on is a member of the College of Cardinals.** I hear the
toilet flush through the door, a sudden reminder that we're not actually talking.
**You may not believe in God but you still believe in Hell.
And you think it's where people like me belong.** **But isn't that where you come from . . .?**
The door opens. Her glamour's as strong as ever: she looks like she just stepped out of a
cocktail party to powder her nose.
**We can go over it some other time, Bob. You can just call room service if you want to eat, I
have to make more elaborate arrangements. See you tomorrow.** With that, she picks up
her evening bag from the bedside table and departs in a snit.
"Mo”
?"Hi! Where are — hold on a moment - Bob? You still there? I was about to jump in the bath.
How's it going”
?Gulp. "About a ton of horse manure just landed on me.
Have you seen Angleton this week”
?"No, they've billeted me in the Monkfish Motel again and it's really dull - you know what the
night life in Dunwich is like. So what's Angleton up to now”
?"I, uh, well, I got here - Darmstadt — to find—" I double- check my phone to confirm we're in
secure mode "—new orders waiting for me, care of Boris and the two mad mice.
Almost got run off the autobahn on the way in and, well—”
"Car accident”
?"Sort of. Anyway, I'm being shunted off on a side trip instead of coming home. So I won't be
back for the weekend." "Shit.”
"My thoughts exactly.”
"Where are they sending you”

?"To Saint Martin, in the Caribbean.”
"The—”
"And it gets worse.”
"Do I want to hear this, love”
?"Probably not." Pause. "Okay. I'm sitting down.”
"It's a joint operation. They've inflicted a minder from the ^ Black Chamber on me.”
"But — Bob! That's crazy! It just doesn't happen! Nobody even knows what the Black
Chamber is really called! 'No Such Agency' meets 'Destroy Before Reading.' Are you telling
me . . .”
?"I haven't been fully briefed. But I figure it's going to be extremely ungood, for, like,
Amsterdam values of ungood." I shudder. Our little weekend trip to Amsterdam involved
more trouble than you can shake a shitty stick at. "I guess you know the Chamber
specializes in taking the HUM out of HUMINT? Golems and remote viewing and so forth,
never send a human agent to do a job a zombie can do? Anyway, the minder they've sent
me is, you know, existentially challenged.
They've sicced a demon on me.”
"Jesus, Bob.”
"Yeah, well, He isn't answering the phone.”
"I can't believe it. The bastards.”
"Listen, I've got a feeling there's more to this than meets the eye and I need someone
watching my back who isn't just looking for a good spot to sink their fangs into. Can you do
some discreet digging when you get back to the office? Ask Andy, perhaps? This is under
Angleton, by the way.”
"Angleton." Mo's voice goes flat and cold, and the hair on the back of my neck rises. She
blames Angleton for a lot of things, and it could turn very ugly if she decides to let it all hang
out. "I should have guessed. It's about time that bastard faced the music.”
"Don't go after him!" I say urgently. "You're not meant to know this. Remember, all you know
is I've been sent off somewhere to do a job.”
"But you want me to keep my ear to the ground and listen for oncoming train wrecks.”
"That's about the size of it. I'm missing you.”
"Love you, too." A pause. "What is it about this spook that's got you so upset”
?Whoops. I'm no good at hiding things from her, am 1?
"For starters she's crazier than a legful of ferrets. She's seriously bad magic, wearing a
perpetual glamour — level three, if I'm any judge of such things. The only thing keeping her
on track is the geas that ate Montana. She's not a free actor.
Actress.”
"Uh-huh. What else”
?I lick my lips. "Boris, um, applied some sort of destinyentanglement protocol to us. I didn't
run away fast enough.”
"Destiny — what? Entanglement? What's that”
?I take a deep breath. "I'm not sure, but I'd appreciate it if you could find out and tell me.
Because whatever it is, it's scaring me.”
It's still early in the evening, but my encounter with Ramona has shaken me, and I don't much
want to run into Pinky and Brains again (if they haven't already packed up and left: there's
quite a lot of banging coming from next door). I decide to hole up in my room and lick my
wounded dignity, so I order up a cardboard cheeseburger from room service, have a long
soak under the shower, watch an infinitely forgettable movie on cable, and turn in for the
night.
I don't usually remember my dreams because they're mostly surreal and/or
incomprehensible — two-headed camels stealing my hovercraft, bat-winged squid gods
explaining why I ought to accept job offers from Microsoft, that sort of thing — so what
makes this one stand out is its sheer gritty realism. Dreaming that I'm me is fine. So is
dreaming that I'm an employee of a vast software multinational, damned and enslaved by an

ancient evil. But dreaming that I'm an overweight fifty-something German sales executive
from an engineering firm in Dusseldorf is so far off the map that if I wasn't asleep I'd pinch
myself. I'm at a regional sales convention and I've been drinking and living large. I like these
conferences: I can get away from Hilda and cut loose party like a young thing again. The
awards dinner is over and I split off with a couple of younger fellows I know vaguely, which is
how we end up in the casino. I don't usually gamble much but I'm on a winning streak at the
wheel, and all the ladies love a winning streak; between the brandy, the Cohiba panatelas,
and the babe who's attached herself to my shoulder — a call girl, naturlich but classy — I'm
having the time of my life. She leans against me and suggests I might cash in my winnings,
and this strikes me as a good idea. After all, if I keep gambling, my streak will end sooner or
later, won't it? Let it pay for her tonight.
We're in the lift, heading up to my room on the fourteenth floor, and she's nuzzling up against
me. I haven't felt smooth flesh like this in . . . too long. Hilda was never like that and since the
kids the only side of her body she's shown me is the sharp edge of her tongue: serves her
right if I enjoy myself once in a while. The babe's got her arms around me inside my jacket
and I can feel her body through her dress.
Wow. This has been a day to remember! We cuddle some more and I lead her to my room,
tiptoeing — she's giggling quietly, telling me not to make a noise, not to disturb the
neighbors — and I get the door open and she tells me to go wait in the bathroom while she
gets ready. How much does she want? I ask. She shakes her head and says, Two hundred
but only if I'm happy. Well, how can I refuse an offer like that?
In the bathroom I take my shoes off, remove my jacket and tie — enough. She calls to say
she's ready, and I open the door. She's lying on the bed, in a provocative position that still
allows her to see me. She's taken off her dress: smooth, stocking-clad thighs and a waterfall
of pure corn-silk hair, blue eyes like ice diamonds that I can fall into and drown.
My heart is pounding as if I've run a marathon, or I'm about to have a heart attack. She's
smiling at me, hungry, needy; I take a step forwards. My back is clammy with cold sweat and
my crotch feels like a steel bar, painfully erect. I need her like I've never needed a woman
before. Another step. Another.
She smiles and kneels on the carpet in front of me, opening her mouth to take me in. I dread
her touch, even though I blindly crave it. Tap-dancing on the third rail, I think fuzzily, trying to
force my paralyzed ribs to take a racking breath of air as she reaches out to touch me.
"Uh-uh!”
I open my eyes. It's dark in the hotel room, my heart's hammering, and I'm lying in a puddle of
cold sweat with an erection like a lump of wood and a ghastly sense of horror squatting on
my chest. "Uh!" All I can do is grunt feebly. I flail for a bit, then shove the clammy sheet away
from me.
I'm erect - and it's not like waking from an erotic dream, it's more like someone's using a
farmyard device to milk me. "Ugh." I begin to sit up, meaning to go to the bathroom and
towel my back off, and right then I come.
It's weird, and wonderful, like no orgasm I've ever had before. It seems to go on and on
forever, scratching the unscratchable itch inside me with an intensity that rapidly becomes
unbearable. There's something about it that feels terminal - not repeatable, an endpoint in
someone's life.
When it begins to subside I whimper slightly and reach for my crotch. Surprise: I'm still erect
— and my skin is dry.
That wasn't me, I realize, disturbed. That was Ramona — I clutch my prick protectively.
Distant laughter. **Go on, jerk yourself off.** There's a warm glow of satisfaction in her
stomach. **You know you really want to, don't you?** she thinks, licking her lips and sending
me the taste of semen. Then I feel her reach over and pull the sheets up over the dead
businessman's face.
I manage to reach the bathroom and lift the toilet lid before I throw up. My stomach knots and
tries to climb my throat. Every guy I've ever slept with died less than twenty-four hours later,

she said, and now I know why. She's right about one thing: despite the sudden gag reflex I'm
still sprouting a woody. Despite everything, despite the dread, despite the almost furtive guilt
I feel, I really enjoyed whatever it is Ramona just did. And now I feel inexplicably guilty on
account of Mo, because I wasn't looking for an adventure on the side — and I feel really dirty
as well, because I found it exciting.
The overspill from what Ramona was doing turned me on in my sleep, but the reason I'm
throwing up now is that what she was doing wasn't sex: she was feeding on the guy's mind,
and he died, and it gave her an orgasm, and I got off on it. I want to scrub my brains out with
a wire brush, and I want to crawl into a deep hole m the ground, and I want to do it all over
again . . . because I'm entangled with her, I hope, but the alternative is worse: there are
some things I don't want to find out about myself, and a secret taste for hot, kinky demon sex
is one of them.
I really hope Mo finds out that this entanglement thing is reversible. Because if it isn't, the
next time she and I go to bed together— Let's not think about that right now.
I spend an uneasy night tossing and turning between damp sheets despite the dream
catcher Screensaver I leave running on my tablet PC. By dawn I've just about worried myself
into a mild nervous breakdown: if it's not trying to avoid thinking about invisible pink
elephants (subtype: maneaters), it's what Angleton's got in mind for me in Saint Martin. I
don't even know where the place is on a map.
Meanwhile, the committee meeting is another unwelcome distraction. How am I supposed
to represent my organization when I'm terrified of falling asleep?
I somehow manage to fumble my way into my suit — an uncomfortable imposition required
for overseas junkets — then shamble downstairs to the dining room for breakfast.
Coffee, I need coffee. And a copy of the Independent, imported from London on an overnight
flight. The restaurant is a model of German efficiency and the staff mostly leave me alone,
for which I'm grateful I'm just about feeling human again by a quarter to nine, the meeting's
optimistically scheduled to start in another fifteen minutes, but at a guess half the delegates
will still be working on their breakfasts. So I wander over to the lobby where there's free
WiFi, to see if there are any messages for me, and that's when I run into Franz.
"Bob? Is that you”
?I blink stupidly. "Franz”
?"Bob!" We do the handshake thing, feinting around our centers of gravity with briefcases
held out to either side, like a pair of nervous chickens sizing each other up in a farmyard.
I haven't seen Franz in a suit before, and he hasn't seen me in one either. I met him on a
training seminar about six months ago when he was over from Den Haag. He's very tall and
very Dutch, which means his accent is a lot more BBC-perfect than mine. "Fancy meeting
you here.”
"I guess you must be on the joint-session list”
?"I'll show you mine if you show me yours," he jokes. "I was just looking for a postcard before
I go upstairs . . . will you wait”
?"Sure." I relax slightly. "Have you done one of these before”
?"No." He spins the rack idly, looking at the picturesque gingerbread castles one by one.
"Have you”
?"I've done one, period. Shouldn't talk about it outside class, but what the hell.”
Franz finds a postcard showing a beaming buxom German barmaid clutching a pair of
highly suggestive jugs. "I'll have this one." He attracts the attention of the nearest sales clerk
and rattles something off in what sounds to me like flawless German. My tablet finishes
checking for mail, bins the spam, and dings at me to put it away. I rub my head and glance
at Franz enviously I bet he wouldn't have any problems with Ramona: he's scarily bright,
good-natured, incisive, handsome, cultured, and all-round competent. Not to mention being
able to out-drink me and charm the socks off everyone who meets him. He's clearly on his
way up the ladder of the ATVD's occult counterintelligence division, and he'll make deputy
director while I'm still polishing Angleton's filing cabinet.

"Ready?" he asks.
"Guess so.”
We head for the lift to the conference room. It's on the fourth floor. Lest you think this is an
altogether too casual approach to confidential business, the hotel is security certified and
our hosts have block-booked the adjacent rooms and the suites immediately above and
below. It's not as if we're going to be discussing matters of national security, either.
Franz and I are early. There's a coffee urn and cups in place on the sideboard, an LCD
projector and screen next to the boardroom table, and comfortable leather-lined swivel
chairs to fall asleep in. I claim one corner of the table, opposite the windows with their
daydream-friendly view of downtown Darmstadt, and plunk my tablet down on the leather
place mat beside the hotel notepad. "Coffee?" asks Franz.
"Yes, please. Milk, no sugar." I pick up the agenda and carry it over.
"What's the routine?" he asks. He actually sounds interested.
"Well. We show each other our authorizations first. Then the chair orders the doors sealed." I
wave at the far end of the suite: "Rest room's through there. Chair this time is—" I riffle the
sheets "— Italy, which means Anna, unless she's ill and they send a replacement. She'll
keep things tight, I think. Then we get down to business." -^'u•»'**• t-^i v.-»- "I see. And the
minutes . . .”
?"Everyone who's got a presentation is supposed to bring copies on CD-ROM. The host
organization6 provides a secretarial service, that's the GSA's job this time.”
6 The Geheime Sicherheit Abteilung to their mothers, although everyone else calls them the
Faust Force.
Franz's brow wrinkles. "Excuse me for saying, but this sounds as if the meeting itself is . . .
unnecessary? We could take it to email.”
I shrug. "Yup. But then we wouldn't get to do the real business, over coffee and biscuits.”
His expression clears. "Ah, now I see—”
The door opens. "Ciao, guys!" It's Anna, short and bubbly and (I suspect) a little hung-over,
judging from her eyes.
"Oh, my head. Where is everybody? Let us keep this short, shall we”
?She makes a beeline for the coffee pot. "Tell Andrew he is a naughty, naughty man," she
chides me.
"What's he done now?" I ask, steeling myself.
"He got my birthday wrong!" Flashing eyes, toothy grin.
"A, what is it, a fencepost error.”
"Oh, uh, yeah, I'll do that." I shrug. I'm still uncomfortable in this type of situation. Most of the
people here were grades above me until six months ago, and half of them still are, I'm very
much the junior delegate and Andy — who used to be one of my managers - is the guy into
whose boots I've stepped. "Last time I saw him he was kind of busy. Overworked dealing
with fallout from—" I clear my throat.
"Oh, say no more." She pats me on the arm and moves on to say hello to the other
delegates who're letting themselves in. We ought to have a full house of security
management types from Spain Brussels, and parts east within NATO, but for some reason
attendance today looks unusually light.
Delegates are beginning to arrive, so I head back towards my seat. "Who's that?" Franz
asks me quietly, with a nod at the door. I glance round and do a double-take: it's Ramona.
She's almost unrecognizable in a business suit with her hair up, but being this close to her
still makes the skin crawl in the small of my back.
"That's, urn, Ms. Random. An observer. We're privileged to have her here." My cheek
twitches and Franz stares at me from behind his rimless spectacles.
"I see. I was unaware that we had that type of guest present.”
I get the feeling he sees a whole lot more than I told him, but there's not a lot I can say.
**Hello, darling, slept well?** she asks. I start: then I realize she's still on the other side of the
room, coolly pouring herself a cup of coffee and smiling at Anna.

**No thanks to you,** I think at her.
I hear a rude noise. **A girl's got to eat sometime.** **Yes, but midnight snacking—**
Invisible pink elephants.
Think of invisible pink elephants, Bob. Think of invisible pink throbbing elephants in the night
- no, cancel the throbbing— I sit down dizzily. "Is something wrong?" asks Franz.
"Supper disagreed with me," I say weakly. Ramona's supper, that is: pfai de gros ingenieur.
"I'll be okay if I sit down." A hot flush is trying to follow the shivers up and down my spine. I
glance at her across the room and she looks back at me, blank-faced.
People are heading towards the table, apparently following my lead. To my annoyance
Ramona oozes into the chair next to me then stares sharply at Anna's end of the table.
"Ciao everybody. I see a lot of vacant seats and new faces today! This meeting will now
commence. Badges on the table, please." Anna looks up and down the table pointedly as
clusters of conversation die down.
I reach into my pocket and slide my Laundry warrant card onto the table. Everyone else is
doing likewise with their own accreditation: the air twists and prickles with the bindings.
"Excuse moi." Francois leans across the table towards Ramona: "You have credentials”
?Ramona just looks at him. "No. As a matter of policy my organization does not issue
identification papers." Heads turn and eyes narrow around the table.
I clear my throat. "I can vouch for her," I hear myself saying. "Ramona Random—" words
slide seamlessly into my mind "—Overseas Operations Directorate, based out of Arkham."
**Thanks,** I tell her silently, **now get out of my head.** "Here by direct invitation of my own
department, full observer status under Clause Four of the Benthic Treaty.”
Ramona smiles thinly. There's a low buzz of surprised conversation.
"Quiet!" calls Anna. "I'd like to welcome our . . .
today's observer here." She looks slightly flustered. "If you could contrive some form of
identification in future, that would be helpful, but—" she looks at me hopefully "—I'm sure
Robert's superiors will cover this time-' I manage to nod. I can't cover it on my authority, but
this is Angleton's bloody fault, after all, and he actually gets to talk to Mahogany Row. Let
them sort it out.
"Fine!" She claps her hands together. "Then, to business!
First item, -attendees, I believe we have takes care of. Let the doors be locked. Second
item, travel expense claims in pursuit of joint, investigation warrants on overseas territory, at
the request of non-issuing governments. Arbitration of expense allocation among
participating member states - traditionally this has been carried out on an ad hoc basis, but
since the Austrian civil service strike last year rhe urgency of formalizing arrangements has
become apparent. . .”
The next hour passes uneventfully. It's basically bureaucratic legwork, to ensure that none of
the European partner agencies tread on each other's toes when operating on each other's
soil. Proposals to allow agents of charter countries to claim expenses for mopping up after
another member's business are agreed upon and bounced up to the next level of
management for approval. Suggestions for standardizing the various forms of ID we use are
proposed, and eventually shot down because they serve very different purposes and some
of them come with powers which are considered alarming illegal, or immoral in different
jurisdictions. I take notes on my tablet, briefly consider a game of Minesweeper before
deciding its not worth the risk of exposure, and finally settle down to the grim business of not
falling asleep and embarrassing myself in public.
Glancing around the table I realize things are pretty much the same all round. Anyone who
isn't actively talking or jotting notes is twiddling their thumbs, gazing out the window, staring
at the other delegates, or quietly drooling over their complementary notepad. Ah, the joy of
high-level negotiations. I glance at Ramona and see she's one of the doodlers.
She's inscribing something black and scary on her notepad: geometric lines and arcs,
repeated patterns that sink into one another in a self-similar way. Then she glances sidelong
at me, and very deliberately slides a blank sheet of paper across her pad.

I shake myself; must stay focused. We're up to item four on the agenda, drilling down into
issues of software resource management and a proposal to jointly license an auditing and
license management system being developed by a subsidiary of — TLA Systems I sit bolt
upright. Sophie from Berlin is soporifically talking us through the procurement process Faust
Force has come up with, a painfully politically correct concoction of open market tenders
and sealed bidding processes intended to evaluate competing proposals and then roll out a
best-ofbreed system for common deployment. "Excuse me," I say, when she pauses for
breath, "this is all very well, but what can you tell us about the winning bid? I assume the
process has already been approved," I add hastily, before she can explain that this is all
very important background detail.
"Ah, but this is necessary to understand the process-oriented quality infrastructure, Robert."
She looks down her nose at me over her bifocals and brandishes a scarily thick sheaf of
papers. "I have here the fully documented procurement analysis for the system!" The only
inflection in her voice is on the last word, making a sort of semantic hiccup out of it. She
sounds like a badly programmed speech synthesizer.
"Yes, but what does it do}" Ramona butts in, leaning forwards.
It's the first thing she's said since I introduced her, and suddenly she's the focus of attention
again. "I'm sorry if this is all understood by everybody present, but. .." she trails off.
Sophie pauses for a few seconds, like a robot receiving new instructions. "If you will with me
bear, I shall explain it. The contractors have a presentation prepared, to be played after
lunch." Oops, I think, visions of the usual postprandial siesta torture running through my
head. Dim the lights, turn the heating up, then get some bastard in a suit to stand up and
drone through a PowerPoint presentation — have I said how much I hate PowerPoint? —
while you try to stay awake.
Then I blink and notice Ramona's sidelong glance. Oops again. What's going on?
Lunch arrives mercifully soon, in the form of a trolley, parked outside the conference suite
door, laden with sandwiches and slices of ham. Sophie accepts the enforced pause with
relatively good grace, and we all stand up and head for the buffet, except Ramona. While I'm
stuffing my face on tuna and cucumber I catch Franz looking concerned. "Are you hungry? '
he asks her quietly.
Ramona smiles at him, turning on the charm. "I'm on a special diet.”
"Oh, I'm so sorry.”
She beams up at him: "That's all right, I had a heavy meal last night.”
**Don't,** I warn her silently, and she flashes a scowl at me.
**You're no fun, monkey-boy.** Eventually we go back to the table. Anna fidgets with the
remote control to the blinds until she figures out how to block off the early afternoon sunlight.
"Very good!" she says approvingly. Sophie, If you will continue”
?"Danke." Sophie fidgets with her laptop and the projector cable. "Ah, gut. Here we go, very
soon . . .”
There is something about PowerPoint presentations that sends people to sleep. It's
particularly effective after lunch, and Sophie doesn't have the personal presence to get past
the soothing wash of pastel colors and flashy dissolves and actually make us pay attention. I
lean back and watch, tiredly. TLA GmBH is a subsidiary of TLA Systems Corporation, of
Ellis Billington. They're the guys who do for the Black Chamber what QinetiQ does — or
used to do — for the UK's Ministry of Defense. This integrated system we re watching a
promo video for is basically just a tarted-up-for-export — meaning, it speaks Spanish,
French, and German technobabble - version of a big custom program they wrote for
Ramona's faceless employers. So what's Ramona doing here? I wonder. They must already
know all this. Wake up, Bob! I've got a stomach full of tuna mayo and smoked salmon on rye,
and it feels like it weighs a quarter of a ton. The sunlight slanting through the half-drawn
blinds warms the back of my hands where they lie limply on the tabletop.
Asset-management software is so not my favorite afternoon topic of conversation. Bob, pay
attention at the back! Ramona shouldn't be here, I think fuzzily. Why is she here? Is it

something to do with Billington's software.
*Bob! Pay attention right now!** I jolt upright in my seat as if someone's stuck a cattle prod
up my rear. The sharp censorious voice in my head is Ramona's. I glance along the table but
everybody else is nodding or dozing or snoozing m tune to Sophie's repetitive cadence —
except Ramona, who catches my eye. She's alert, ready and waiting for something.
What's going on?** I ask her.
**We're at slide twenty-four,** she tells me. **Whatever happens next, it happens between
numbers twenty-six and twenty-eight.** **What. . . ?** **We're not omniscient, Bob. We just
caught wind of— aha twenty-five coming up.** I glance at the end of the table. Sophie stands
next to the projector and her laptop, swaying slightly like a puppet in the grip of an invisible
force. " . . . The four-year rolling balance of assets represents a best-of-breed optimization
for control of procurement processes and the additional neural network intermediated
Bayesian maintenance workload pre- diction module will allow you to control your inventory
of hosts and project a stable cash flow . . . " My guts clench. A whole lot of things suddenly
come clear: The bastards are trying to brainwash the committee!
It's PowerPoint, of course. A hypnotic slide into a bulleted list of total cost of ownership
savings and a pie chart with a neat lime-green slice taken out of it — ooh look, it's three
dimensional; it's also a bar graph with the height of the slices denoting some other
parameter — and a pale background of yellow lines on white that looks a little like the TLA
logo we began the slide show with: an eye floating in a tetrahedral Escher paradox, and a
diagram a little bit like whatever Ramona was sketching on her notepad -1 grab my tablet
PC and poke the power button, trying to keep my hands from shaking.
Screen saver. Screen saver. I eject the pen and hastily hit on the control panel to bring up
the screen saver. The dream catcher routine I had running last night is all I can think of right
now.
I set it running then slide the tablet face-up, with the hypnotic blur of purple lines cycling
across it, on the conference table so that it lies directly between me and the projection
screen.
**Good move, monkey-boy.** Franz is leaning back in his chair beside me. His eyes are
closed and there's a fine thread of spittle dangling from one side of his mouth. Francois is
face-down on the mat, snoring, and Anna is frozen, glassy-eyed, at the foot of the table, her
open eyes fixed unseeing on the projector screen. I take care not to look at it directly.
**What's it meant to be doing?** I ask Ramona.
**That's what we're here to find out. Nobody who's been in one of these sales sessions
before has come out in any state to tell us.** **What? You mean they were killed?** **No,
they just insisted on buying TLA products. Oh, and they'd had their souls eaten.** **What
would you know about that?** v : *? * **They don't taste the same. Shut up and get ready to
yank the projector cable when I give the word, okay?** Sophie hits the mouse button again
and the light in the room changes subtly, signaling a dissolve from one frame to another. Her
voice mutates, morphs and deepens, taking on a vaguely familiar cadence. "Today, we
celebrate the first glorious anniversary of the Information Purification Directives.
We have created, for the first time in all history, a garden of pure ideology. Where each
worker may bloom secure from the pests of any contradictory and confusing truths . . .”
The dream catcher in front of me is going crazy. **I've seen that before. It's the Apple 1984
ad, the one they commissioned Ridley Scott to direct for the launch of the Macintosh
computer. The most expensive ad in the entire history of selling beige boxes to puzzled
posers. What the hell are they doing with that?** **Law of contagion.** Ramona sounds
tense. **Very strong imagery of conformity versus mold-breaking, concealing conformity
disguised as mold-breaking. Ever wondered why Mac users are so glassy-eyed about their
boxes? This is slide twenty-six; okay, we've got about ten seconds to go . . .** I briefly
debate standing up right there and yanking the power cable. I've seen the original ad so
many times I don't need to look at the screen to follow it; it's famous throughout the computer
industry. "Our Unification of Thoughts is more powerful a weapon than any fleet or army on

Earth. We are one people, with one will, one resolve, one cause. Our enemies shall talk
themselves to death and we will bury them with their own confusion. We shall prevail!”
Seconds to go. The female runner races towards the huge screen in front of the arena,
clutching a sledge hammer, poised to hurl it through Big Brother's face — and I know exactly
what's going to happen, what those shards of glass are going to morph into with the next
dissolve as I take my tablet by both sides (careful to keep my hands from touching the
toughened glass screen cover) and pick it up, flipping it over as the crescendo builds
towards what would be, in the real advertisement, the announcement of a revolutionary new
type of computer— **Ready—** The light flickers and something that feels like an
out-ofcontrol truck punches into the screen of the tablet PC as I hold it between my face and
the projection screen. It's not a physical force, but it might as well be from the acrid smoke
spewing from the vents under my fingertips and the way the battery compartment begins to
glow.
I drop the PC, cover my eyes with one hand, and dive for where the back of the projector
used to be. I flop on my belly halfway across the table, flailing around until I catch a bunch of
wires and yank hard, pulling and tearing at them, too frightened to open my eyes and see
which ones I've got hold of. Someone is screaming and someone else is crying behind me,
emitting incoherent moans like an animal in pain. Then someone punches me in the ribs.
I open my eyes. The projector's out and Ramona is sitting on top of Sophie from the Faust
Force, or the thing that's animating Sophie's body, methodically whacking her head on the
floor. Then I realize that the pain in my side is Ramona's: Sophie is fighting back. I roll over
and find myself facing Anna. Her face hangs like a loose mask and her eyes glow faintly in
the twilight that the almost-closed blinds allow into the room. I scrabble desperately, grab the
edge of the table, and pull myself over it into her lap. She grabs for my head but whatever's
inside her isn't very good at controlling a human body and I roll again, drop arse-first onto the
floor (my coccyx will tell me about it tomorrow), and scramble to my feet.
The previously orderly meeting is dissolving into the kind of carnage that can only ensue
when most of the members of an international joint-liaison committee turn into braineating
zombies. Luckily they're not Sam Raimi zombies, they're just midlevel bureaucrats whose
cerebral cortices have been abruptly wiped in the presence of a Dho-Na summoning
geometry (in this case, embedded in the dissolve between two PowerPoint slides), allowing
some random extradimensional gibberers to move in. Half of them can't even stand up, and
those who can aren't very effective yet.
**Have you got her?** I ask Ramona, working my way past Anna (who is currently keeping
Francois occupied by chewing on his left hand) and nearly tripping over the wreckage of my
tablet PC.
**She's fighting back!** A stray, booted foot lashes out at me and now I succeed in falling
over, on top of Sophie as luck would have it. Sophie looks up at me with blank eyes and
makes a keening noise like a cat that wants to break a furry critter's neck.
**WelI fucking do something!** I yell. **Okay.** Sophie jerks underneath me and tries to sink
her teeth into my arm. But Ramona's ready with a springloaded syringe and nails her right
through the shoulder.
**You'lI need to open the wards so we can get out.** **I'm going to—** Oh, right. Ramona's a
guest. I lurch upright and lunge for the blotter in front of Anna's seat, grab at her gavel, and
rap it on the table. "As the last quorate member standing I hereby unanimously promote
myself to Chair and declare this session closed." Five heads, their eyes swimming with
luminous green worms, turn to face me.
"School's out." I race for the door, piling into Ramona as I yank the handle open. **Got
her?** **Yes. Grab her other arm and move!** Sophie is kicking and writhing wordlessly but
Ramona and I drag her through the doorway and I yank it shut behind us. The latch clicks,
and Sophie goes limp. **Hey.** I look sideways. **What's—** Ramona lets go of her other
arm and I stagger. **Well isn't that a surprise,** she comments, looking down at Sophie, who
sprawls on the hotel carpet in front of the door.

**She's dead, Jim.** **Bob,** I correct automatically. **What do you mean, she's dead?**
**Poison-pill programming, I think.** I lean against the wall, dizzy and nauseated. **Wie've
got to go back! The others are still in there. Can we break it? The control link, I mean. If it's
just a transient override—** Ramona winces and stares at me. **Will you stop that?
It's not a transient and there's nothing we can do for them.** **But she's dead! We've got to
do something! And they're—** **They're dead, too.** Ramona stares at me in obvious
concern. **Did you hit your head or something? No, I'd have felt that. You're squeamish,
aren't you?** **We could have saved them! You knew what was going to happen! You could
have warned us! If you hadn't been so fucking curious to know what was buried in the
presentation—shit, why didn't you just snarf a copy and edit it yourself? This isn't the first
time it's happened, is it p*# She lets me rant for a minute or so, until I run down.
**Bob, Bob. This is the first time this has happened. At least, the first time anyone's gotten
out of one of these presentations alive.** **Jesus. Then why do you keep having them?** I
realize I'm waving my arms around but I'm too upset to stop. I have a terrible feeling that if I'd
just given in to my first impulse to yank the cord on the projector—**lt's murder! Letting it go
ahead like that—** **We don't. My ~ department — doesn't. TLA is selling hard outside the
US, Bob. They sell in places like Malaysia or Kazakhstan or Peru, and in places that aren't
quite on the map, if you follow me. We've heard rumors about this. We've seen some of the .
. . fallout. But this is the first time we've gotten in on the ground floor. Sophie Frank was
fingered by your people, if you must know. Your Andy Newstrom raised the flag. She's been
behaving oddly for the past couple of months. You were sent because, unlike Newstrom,
you're trained for this category of operation. But nobody else took the warnings sufficiently
seriously — except for your department, and mine.** **But what about the others?** She
stares at me grimly. **Blame Ellis Billington, Bob.
Remember, if he wasn't into the hard sell, this wouldn't have happened.** Then she turns and
stalks away, leaving me alone and shaking in the corridor, with a corpse and a locked
conference room full of middle-management zombies to explain.
4: YOU'RE IN THE JET SET NOW MY CHECKOUT IS EVER SO SLIGHTLY DELAYED. I
spend about eight hours at the nearest police station being questioned by one GSA desk
pilot after another. At first I think they're going to arrest me — shoot the messenger is a
well-known parlor game in spook circles - but after a few fraught hours there's a change in
the tone of the interrogation.
Someone higher up has obviously got a handle on events and is smoothing my path. "It is
best for you to leave the country tomorrow," says Gerhardt from Frankfurt, not smiling. "Later
we will have questions, but not now." He shakes his head. "If you should happen to see Ms.
Random, please explain that we have questions for her also." A taciturn cop drives me back
to the hotel, where a GSA cleaning team has replaced the conference room door with a
blank stretch of brand-new wall. I walk past it without quite losing my shit, then retreat to my
shielded bedroom and spend a sleepless night trying to second guess myself. But not only
is the past another country, it's one that doesn't issue visas; and so, first thing in the morning,
I head downstairs to collect the hire car.
A tech support nightmare is waiting for me down in the garage. Pinky is goose-stepping
around with a clipboard, trying to look officious while Brains is elbow-deep in the trunk with a
circuit tester and a roll of gaffer tape.
"What. The. Fuck?" I manage to say, then lean against a concrete pillar.
"We've been modifying this Smart car for you!" Pinky says excitedly. "You need to know how
to use all its special features.”
I rub my eyes in disbelief. "Listen guys, I've been attacked by brain-eating zombies and I'm
due on a flight to Saint Martin tonight. This isn't the right time to show me your toys. I just
want to get home—”
"Impossible," Brains mutters around a mouthful of oily bolts that look suspiciously as if
they've just come out of the engine manifold.
"Angleton told us not to let you go until you'd finished your briefing!" Pinky exclaims.

There's no escape. "Okay." I yawn. "You just put those bolts back and I'll be going.”
"Look in the boot, here. What our American friends would call the trunk. Careful, mind that
pipe! Good. Now pay attention, Bob. We've added a Bluetooth host under the driver's seat,
and a repurposed personal video player running Linux. Peripheral screens at all five cardinal
points, five grams of graveyard dust mixed with oil of Bergamot and tongue of newt in the
cigarette lighter socket, and a fully connected Dee-Hamilton circuit glued to the underside of
the body shell. As long as the ignition is running, you're safe from possession attempts. If
you need to dispose of a zombie in the passenger seat, just punch in the lighter button and
wait for the magic smoke. You've got a mobile phone, yes?
With Bluetooth and a Java sandbox? Great, I'll email you an applet — run it, pair your phone
with the car's hub, and all you have to do is dial 6-6-6 and the car will come to you, wherever
you are. There's another applet to remotely trigger all the car's countermeasures, just in
case someone's sneaked a surprise into it.”
I shake my head, but it won't stop spinning. "Zombie smoke in the lighter socket,
Dee-Hamilton circuit in the body shell, and the car comes when I summon it. Okay. Hey,
what's—”
He slaps my hand as I reach for the boxy lump fastened to the gearshift with duct tape.
"Don't touch that button, Bob!”
"Why? What happens if I touch that button, Pinky”
?"The car ejects!”
"Don't you mean, the passenger seat ejects?" I ask sarcastically.
I've had just about enough of this nonsense.
"No, Bob, you've been watching too many movies. The car ejects." He reaches across the
back of my seat and pats the fat pipe occupying the center of the luggage area.
I swallow. "Isn't that a little . . . dangerous”
?"Where you're going you'll need all the help you can get.”
He frowns at me. "The tube contains a rocket motor and a cable spool bolted to the chassis.
The airbags in the wheel hubs blow when the accelerometer figures you've hit apogee, if you
haven't already used them in amphibious pursuit mode. Whatever you do don't push that
button while you're in a tunnel or under cover." I glance up at the concrete roof of the car park
and shudder. "The airbags are securely fastened, if you land on water you can just drive
away." He notices my fixed, skeptical stare and pats the rocket tube.
"It's perfectly safe — they've been using these on helicopter gunships for nearly five years!”
"Jesus." I close my eyes and lean back. "It's still a fucking Smart car. Range Rovers carry
them as lifeboats. Couldn't you get me an Aston Martin or something”
?"What makes you think we'd give you an Aston Martin, even if we could afford one?
Anyway, Angleton says to remind you that it's on lease from one of our private sector
partners. Don't bend it, or you'll answer to the Chrysler Corporation. You've already
exceeded our consumables budget, totalling that Compaq in the meeting — there's a new
one waiting for you in the case in the boot, by the way. This is serious business: you're
representing the Laundry in front of the Black Chamber and some very big defense
contractors, old school tie and all that.”
"I went to North Harrow Comprehensive," I say wearily, "they didn't trust us with neckties, not
after the upper fifth tried to lynch Brian the Spod.”
"Oh. Well." Pinky pulls out a thick envelope. "Your itinerary once you arrive at Juliana Airport.
There's a decent tailor in the Marina shopping center and we've faxed your measurements
through. Um. Do you dress to the left, or. . .”
?I open my eyes and stare at him until he wilts. "Eight dead." I hold up the requisite number
of fingers. "In twentyfour hours. And I have to drive up the fucking autobahn in this pile of
shit—”
"No, you don't," says Brains, finally straightening up and wiping his hands on a rag. "We've
got to crate up the Smart if we're going to freight it to Maho Beach tomorrow—you're riding
with us." He gestures at a shiny black Mercedes van parked opposite. "Feel better”

?Wow — I'm not going to be strafed with BMWs again.
Miracles do sometimes happen, even in Laundry service. I nod. "Let's get going.”
I sleep most of the way to Frankfurt. We're late getting to the airport — no surprise in light of
preceding events — but Pinky and Brains prestidigitate some sort of official ID out of their
warrant cards and drive us through two chain-link barriers and past a police checkpoint and
onto the apron, hand I me a briefcase, then drop me at the foot of the steps of an air bridge.
It's latched onto a Lufthansa airbus bound for Paris's Charles de Gaulle and a quick transfer.
"Schnell!" urges a harried- looking flight attendant. "You are the last. Come this way.”
One and a half hours and a VIP transfer later, I'm in business class aboard an Air France
A300 bound for Princess Juliana International Airport. The compartment is halfempty.
"Please fasten your seatbelts and pay attention to the preflight briefing." I close my eyes
while they close the doors behind me. Then someone shakes my shoulder: it's a flight
attendant. "Mr. Howard? I have a message to tell you that there's WiFi access on this flight.
You are to call your office as soon as we are airborne at cruising altitude and the seatbelt
light goes off.”
I nod, speechless. WiFi? On a thirty-year-old tourist truck like this? "Bon voyage!" She
stands up and marches to the back of the cabin. "Call if you need anything.”
I doze through the usual preflight, waking briefly as the engine note rises to a thunderous
roar and we pile down the runway. I feel unnaturally tired, as if drained of life, and I've got a
strange sense that somebody else is sleeping in the empty seat beside me, close enough
to rest their head on my shoulder—but the next seat over is empty. Overspill from Ramona?
Then my eyes close again.
It must be the cabin pressure, the stress of the last couple of days, or drugs in the
after-takeoff champagne, because I find myself having the strangest dream. I'm back in the
conference suite in Darmstadt, and the blinds are down, but instead of a room full of
zombies I'm sitting across the table from Angleton. He looks half-mummified at the best of
times, until you see his eyes: they're diamond-blue and as sharp as a dentist's drill. Right
now they're the only part of him I can see at all, because he's engulfed in the shadows cast
by an old-fashioned slide projector lighting up the wall behind him. The overall effect is very
sinister. I look over my shoulder, wondering where Ramona's gotten to, but she's not there.
"Pay attention. Bob. Since you had the bad grace to take so long during my previous
briefing that it self-erased before you completed it, I've sent you another." I open my mouth to
tell him he's full of shit, but the words won't emerge. An Auditor ward, I think, choking on my
tongue and beginning to panic, but right then my larynx relaxes and I'm able to close my jaw.
Angleton smiles sepulchrally. "There's a good fellow.”
I try to say blow me, but it comes out as "brief me" instead.
It seems I'm allowed to speak, so long as I stay on topic.
"Certainly. I have explained the history of the Glomar Explorer, and Operations JENNIFER
and AZORIAN. What I did not explain — this goes no further than your dreams, and the
inside of your own eyeballs, especially when Ramona is awake - was that JENNIFER and
AZORIAN were cover stories. Dry runs, practical experiments, if you like. To retrieve
artifacts from the oceanic floor, in the zones ceded by .humanity to BLUE HADES - the
Deep Ones - in perpetuity under the terms of the Benthic Treaties and the Agreement of the
Azores.”
Angleton pauses to take a drink from a glass of ice water beside his blotter. Then he flicks
the slide advance button on the projector. Click-clack.
"This is a map of the world we live in," Angleton explains. "And these pink zones are those
that humans are allowed to roam in. Our reservation, if you like. The arid airswept continents
and the painfully bright low-pressure top waters of the oceans. About thirty-four percent of
the Earth's surface area. The rest, the territory of the Deep Ones, we are permitted to sail
above, but that is all. Attempts to settle the deep ocean would be resisted in such a manner
that our species would not survive long enough to regret them.”
I lick my lips. "How? I mean, do they have nuclear weapons or something”

?"Worse than that." He doesn't smile. "This—" click-clack "—is Cumbre Vieja, on the island
of La Palma. It is one of seventy-three volcanoes or mountains located in deep water —
most of the others are submerged guyots rather than climbable peaks - that BLUE HADES
have prepared. Threequarters of humanity live within 200 miles of a sea coast. If they ever
lose their patience with us, the Deep Ones can trigger undersea landslides. Cumbre Vieja
alone is poised to deposit 500 billion tons of rock on the floor of the North Atlantic,
generating a tsunami that will be twenty meters high by the time it makes landfall in New
York. Make that more like fifty meters by the time it hits Southampton. If we provoke them
they can wreak more destruction than an allout nuclear war. And they have occupied this
planet since long before our hominid ancestors discovered fire.”
"But we've got a deterrent, surely . . .”
?No." Angleton's expression is implacable. "Water absorbs the energy of a nuclear
explosion far more effectively than air. You get a powerful pressure wave, but no significant
heat or radiation damage: the shock wave is great for crushing submarines, but much less
effective against undersea organisms at ambient pressure. We could hurt them, but nothing
like as badly as they could hurt us. And as for the rest of it— he gestures at the screen
"—they could have wiped us out before we discovered them, if they were so inclined. They
have access to technologies and tools we can barely begin to imagine.
They are the Deep Ones, BLUE HADES, a branch of an ancient and powerful alien
civilization. Some of us suspect the threat of the super-tsunami is a distraction. It's like an
infantryman pointing his bayonet-tipped assault rifle at a headhunter, who sees only a blade
on a stick. Don't even think about threatening them, we exist because they bear us no innate
ill will, but we have at least the power to change that much if we act rashly.”
"Then what the hell was JENNIFER about”
?Click-clack. "A misplaced attempt to end the Cold War prematurely, by acquiring a
weapon truly hellish in its potential.
The precise nature of which you have no need to know right now, in case you were thinking
of asking.”
I'm looking down on a gloomy gray scene. It takes me a few seconds to realize that it's a
deep-ocean mudscape.
Scattered across the layered silt are small irregular objects, some of them round, some of
them long. A couple more seconds and my brain acknowledges that what my eyes are
seeing is a watery field of skulls and femurs and ribs. I've got an idea that not all of them are
entirely human.
"The Caribbean sea hides many secrets. This field of silt covers a deep layer rich in
methane hydrates. When some force destabilizes the deposits they bubble up from the
depths - like the carbon dioxide discharge from the stagnant waters of Lake Nyos in the
Cameroon. But unlike Lake Nyos, the gas isn't confined by terrain so it dissipates after it
surfaces.
It's not an asphyxiation threat, but if you're on a ship that's caught above a hydrate release,
then the sea under your keel turns to gas and you're going straight down to Davy Jones's
locker." Angleton clears his throat. "BLUE HADES have some way of replenishing these
deposits and triggering releases. They use them to keep us interfering hominids away from
things that don't concern us, such as the settlement at Witch's Hole in the North Sea . . . and
the depths of the Bermuda Triangle.”
I swallow. "What's down there”
?"Some of the deepest oceanic trenches on Earth. And some of the largest BLUE HADES
installations we're aware of.”
Angleton looks as if he's bitten into a lemon expecting an orange. "That isn't saying
much—most of their sites are known to us only from neutrino mapping and seismology.
The portion of the biosphere we understand is limited to the surface waters and continental
land masses, boy. Below a thousand fathoms of water, let alone below the Mohorovicic
Discontinuity, it's a whole different ball game.”

"The Moho-what”
?"The underside of the continental plates we live on — below the discontinuity lies the upper
mantle. Didn't you study geography at school”
?"Uh . . . " I spent most of my school geography lessons snoozing, doodling imaginary
continents in the backs of exercise books, or trying to work up the courage to pass a
message to Lizzie Graham in the next row. Now it looks like those missed lessons are
about to come back and bite me.
"Moving swiftly on, let me see if I've got this straight. Ellis Billington has purchased a CIA spy
ship designed for probing BLUE HADES territory. He's got a high enough security
clearance to be aware what it's capable of, and his people are trying to suborn various
intelligence organizations, like in Darmstadt. He's playing some kind of endgame and you
don't like the smell and neither does the Black Chamber, which explains me and Ramona.
Am I right so far”
?Angleton nods minutely. "I should remind you that Billington is extraordinarily rich and has
fingers in a surprising number of pies. For example, by way of his current wife — his third —
he owns a cosmetics and haute couture empire; in addition to IT corporations he owns
shipping, aviation, and banking interests. Your assignment — and Ramona's — is to get
close to Billington. Ideally you should contrive to get yourself invited aboard his yacht, the
Mabuse, while Ramona remains in touch with your backup team and the local head of
station. Your technical backups are Pinky and Brains, your muscle backup is Boris, and
you're to liaise with our Caribbean station chief, Jack Griffin. Officially, he's your superior
officer and you'll be under his orders when it comes to nonoperational matters but you're to
report directly to me, not to him. Unofficially, Griffin is out to pasture — take anything he says
with a pinch of salt. Your job is to get close to Billington, remain in touch with us, and be
ready to act if and when we decide to take him down.”
I manage not to groan. "Why does it have to be me aboard the yacht - why not Ramona? I
think she'd be a whole lot better at the field ops thing. Or the station chief guy? Come to
think of it, why aren't the AIVD doing this? It's their territory—”
"They invited us in; all I can say for now is, we have specialist expertise in this area that they
lack. And it has to be you, not Ramona. Firstly, you're an autonome, a native of this
continuum: they can't trap you in a Dho-Nha curve or bind you to a summoning grid. And
secondly, it's got to be you because those are the rules of Billington's game." Angleton's
expression is frightening. "He's a player, Bob. He knows exactly what he's doing and how to
work around our strengths. He stays away from continental land masses, uses games of
chance to determine his actions, sleeps inside a Faraday cage aboard a ship with a
silver-plated keel. He's playing us to a script. I'm not at liberty to tell you what it is, but it has
to be you, not Ramona, not anyone else.”
"Do we have any idea what he's planning? You said something about weapons—”
Angleton fixes me with a steely gaze. "Pay attention, Bob.
The presentation is about to commence." And this time I can't stifle the groan, because it's
another of his bloody slideshows, and if you thought PowerPoint was pants, you haven't
suffered through an hour of Angleton monologuing over a hot slide projector.
SLIDE 1: Photograph of three men wearing suits with the exaggerated lapels and wide ties
of the mid-1970s. They're standing in front of some sort of indistinct building-like structure,
possibly prefabricated. All three wear badges clipped to their breast pockets.
"The one on the left is me: you don't need to know who the other two are. This photograph
was taken in 1974 while I was assigned to Operation AZORIAN as our liaison — officially
from MI6 as an observer, but you know the drill. The building I'm standing in front of is .. .”
SLIDE 2: A photograph taken looking aft along the deck of a huge sea-going vessel. To the
left, there's a gigantic structure like an oil drilling rig, with racks of pipes stacked in front of it.
Directly ahead, at the stern, is the structure glimpsed in the previous slide—a mobile office,
jacked up off the deck, its roofline bristling with antennae. Behind it, a satellite dish looms
before the superstructure of the ship.

"We're aboard the Hughes Glomar Explorer on its unsuccessful voyage to raise the sunken
Soviet Golf-II-class ballistic missile submarine K-129. Announced as Operation JENNIFER,
this was leaked to the press by someone acting on unofficial orders from the director of ONI
- the usual goddamn turf war — and Watergated to hell by mid-197 5.1 said Operation
JENNIFER was unsuccessful. Officially, the CIA only retrieved the front ten meters or so of
the sub because the rear section broke off. In reality . . .”
SLIDE 3: Grainy black-and-white photographs, evidently taken from TV screens: a long
cylindrical structure grasped in the claws of an enormous grab. From below, thin streamers
rise up towards it.
"BLUE HADES took exception to the intrusion into their territory and chose to exercise their
salvage rights under Article Five, Clause Four of the Benthic Treaty. Hence the tentacles.
Now . . .”
SLIDE 1 (Repeat): This time the man in the middle is cir- cled with a red highlighter. "This
fellow in the middle is Ellis Billington, as he looked thirty years ago. Ellis was brilliant but not
well socialized back then. He was attached to the 'B' team as an observer, tasked with
examining the circuitry of the cipher machine they hoped to recover from the sub's control
room. I didn't pay much attention to him at the time, which was a mistake.
He already had his security clearance, and after the JENNIFER debacle he moved to San
Jose and set up a small electronics and software business.”
SLIDE 4: A crude-looking circuit board. Rather than fiberglass, it appears to be made of
plywood that has been exposed to seawater for too long, and has consequently warped.
Sockets for vacuum tubes stud its surface, one of them occupied by the broken base of a
component; numerous diodes and resistors connect it to an odd, stellate design in gold that
covers most of the surface of the board.
"This board was taken from a GRU-issued Model 60 oneiromantic convolution engine found
aboard the K-129. As you can see, it spent rather longer in the water than was good for it.
Ellis reverse-engineered the basic schematic and pieced together the false vacuum
topology that the valves disintermediated. Incidentally, these aren't your normal vacuum
tubes—isotope imbalances in the thorium-doped glass sleeves suggest that they were
evacuated by exposure in a primitive wake-shield facility, possibly aboard a modelthree
Sputnik satellite similar to the one first orbited in I960.
That would have given them a starting pressure about six orders of magnitude cleaner than
anything available on Earth at the time, at a price per tube of about two million rubles, which
suggests that someone in the GRU's scientific directorate really wanted a good signal, if
that wasn't already obvious. We now know that they'd clearly cracked the Dee- Turing Thesis
by this point and were well into modified Enochian metagrammar analysis. Anyway, young
Billington concluded that the Mod-60 OCE, NATO code 'Gravedust,' was intended to allow
communication with the dead.
Recently dead, anyway.”
SLIDE 5: An open coffin containing a long-dead body.
The corpse is partially mummified, the eyelids sunken into the empty sockets and the jaw
agape with lips retracted.
"We're not sure exactly what a Gravedust system was doing aboard the K-129. According to
one theory that was remarkably popular with our friends at ONI around the time, it had
something to do with the former Soviet Union's postmortem second strike
command-and-control system, to allow the submarine's political officer to ask for instructions
from the Politburo after a successful decapitation stroke.
They were very keen on maintaining the correct chain of command back then. There's just
one problem with that theory: it's rubbish. According to our own analysis after the event - I
should add, the Black Chamber was remarkably reluctant to part with the Gravedust
schemata, we finally got it out of them by remote viewing — Billington underestimated the
backreach of the Gravedust interrogator by a factor of at least a thousand. We were told that
it would only allow callbacks to the recently dead, within the past million seconds. In actual

fact, you could call up Tutankhamen himself on this rig. Our best guess is that the Soviets
were planning on talking to something that had been dead for a very long time indeed,
somewhere under the ocean.”
SLIDE 6: A Russian submarine, moored alongside a pier.
In the distance, snow-capped mountains loom above the far shore of a waterway.
"The K-129 was rather an elderly boat at the time she sank. In fact, a few years later the
Soviets retired the last of the Golf-II class — except for one of the K-129's sister ships, which
was retained for covert operations duty. As a ballistic missile boat it had a large hold that
could be repurposed for other payloads, and as a diesel-electric it could run quietly in littoral
waters. Diesel-electrics are still popular for that reason: when running on battery juice they're
even quieter than a nuke boat, which has to keep the reactor coolant pumps running at all
times. Without the rear section - including the missile room — we could only theorize that K-
129 had already been converted to infiltration duty.
However...”
SLIDE 7: A blurry gray landscape photographed from above. A structure, clearly artificial,
occupies the middle of the image: a cylindrical artifact not unlike a submarine, but missing a
conning tower and equipped with a strange, roughly surfaced conical endcap. Its hull is
clearly damaged, not crumpled but burst open as if from some great internal pressure.
Nevertheless, it is still recognizable as an artificial structure.
"We believe this was the real target of K-129's abortive operation. It's located on the floor of
the Pacific, approxi- mately 600 nautical miles southwest of Hawaii and, by no coincidence
at all, on the K-129's course prior to the unfortunate onboard explosion that resulted in the
submarine's loss with all hands.”
SLIDE 8: Not a photograph but a false-color synthetic relief image of the floor of the Pacific
basin, southwest of Hawaii. The image is contoured to represent depth, and colored to
convey some other attribute. Virulent red spots dot the depths — except for a single, much
shallower one.
"Graviweak neutrino imaging spectroscopes carried aboard the SPAN-2 Earth resources
satellite are a good way of pinpointing BLUE HADES colonies. For obvious reasons, BLUE
HADES do not make extensive use of electricity for their domestic and presumed industrial
processes; Monsieur Volt and Herr Ampere are not yout friends when you live under five
kilometers of saltwater. Instead, BLUE HADES appear to control inaccessible condensed
matter states by varying the fine-structure constant and tunneling photinos —
super-symmetrical photon analogs that possess mass — between nodes where they want
to do things. One side effect of this is neutrino emissions at a very characteristic spectrum,
unlike anything we get from the sun or from our own nuclear reactors. This is a density scan
for the zone around the K-l 29 and Hawaii, As you can see, that isolated shallow point —
near where the K-129 went down — is rather strong. There's an active power source in
there, and it's not connected to the rest of the BLUE HADES grid as far as we can tell. The
site is classified, incidentally, and is known as Site One.' SLIDE 9: A rock face, evidently
inside a mine, is illuminated by spotlights. Workers in overalls and hard hats surround it, and
are evidently working on something — possibly a fossil — with small hand-tools.
"As you can see, this is not a BLUE HADES specimen. It's some other palaeosophont. This
photograph was taken in 1985 in the deep mine at Longannet in Fife, right on our doorstep.
Longannet - and indeed the rest of the British deep-mining industry — was shut down some
time ago, officially for economic reasons. However, you would be right to conclude that the
presence of nightmates like this was a contributing factor. This is in fact a DEEP SEVEN
cadaver, and appears to have undergone some sort of postmortem vitrification process, or
perhaps a hibernation from which it failed to emerge, approximately seven million years
ago. We believe that DEEP SEVEN were responsible for the JENNIFER MORGUE
machines and the neutrino anomaly in the previous slide. We know very little about DEEP
SEVEN except that they appear to be polymorphous, occupy areas of the upper crust near
the polar regions, and BLUE HADES are terrified of them.”

SLIDE 10: A close-up of the cylindrical structure from > Slide 7. Intricate traceries of inlaid
calligraphy - or perhaps circuit diagrams - cover the walls of the machine, disturbing in their
non-linearity. At one edge of the picture the conical top is visible, and in close-up the details
become apparent: a conical spike with a cutting edge spiraling around it.
"This is our closest photograph of JENNIFER MORGUE Site One. It presents a clear hazard
to this day: K-129 was lost inspecting it, as were several ROVs sent by the US Office of
Naval Intelligence. It was the secondary target for Operation AZORIAN/JENNIFER before
that project was Watergated. It's a rather recalcitrant target because there seems to be
some sort of defense field around it, possibly acoustic—anything entering within a
two-hundred-and-sixmeter radius stops working. (If you look near the top right of this
photograph you'll see the wreckage of a previous visitor.) Our current theory is that it is
either a DEEP SEVEN artifact or a BLUE HADES system designed to prevent incursions
by DEEP SEVEN. We presume the Soviets were trying to make contact with DEEP
SEVEN by way of the Gravedust system on the K-129 - and failed, catastrophically.”
SLIDE 11: A similar-looking photograph of another machine, this time looking less badly
damaged. The photograph is taken from much closer range, and though one curved side
has a jagged hole in it, the hull is otherwise intact.
"This is a similar artifact, located near the north end of the Puerto Rico Trench, about four
kilometers down on a limestone plateau. JENNIFER MORGUE Site Two appears to be
damaged, but the same exclusion field is still in place and operational. Initial exploratory
investigation with an ROV discovered . . .”
SLIDE 12: A very dim, grainy view through the jagged hole in the side of the artifact. There
appears to be a rectangular structure within. Odd curved objects surround it, some of which
recall the shape of internal organs.
"This structure appears to contain — or even consist of — vitrified or otherwise preserved
DEEP SEVEN remnants.
You'll note the similarity of this structure to some sort of cockpit: we believe it to be a
deep-crustal or high-mantle boring machine, possibly making it the DEEP SEVEN
equivalent of a tank or a space suit. We're not sure quite what it's doing here, but we are
now extremely intrigued by Ellis Billington's interest in it. He's purchased the Explorer,
heavily modified it, and, using it as a host, has been conducting sea trials with a remotely
operated vehicle. Our intel on Billington's activities is alarmingly deficient, but we believe he
intends to raise and possibly activate the DEEP SEVEN artifact. His expertise in Gravedust
systems suggests that he may try to retrieve information from the dead DEEP SEVEN
aboard it, and the direction of his operation suggests that he has some idea of what it's
doing there.
"I do not intend, at this point, to get into a lengthy discussion of the consequences of
annoying the Chthonians — excuse me, DEEP SEVEN — or of getting involved in a
geopolitical pissing match between DEEP SEVEN and BLUE HADES. Suffice to say,
preserving the collective neutrality of the human species is a high priority for this
department, and you should take that as your primary point of reference in the days ahead.
"But in summary, your mission is to get close to Billington and find out what the hell he's
planning on doing with JENNIFER MORGUE Site Two. Then tell us, so we can work out
what action we need to take to stop him pissing off BLUE HADES or DEEP SEVEN. If he
wakes the ancient sleeping horrors I am going to have to brief the private secretary and the
Joint Intelligence Oversight Committee so that they can explain CASE NIGHTMARE
GREEN to the COBRA Committee, chaired by the Prime Minister, and I expect that will
make them extremely unhappy. Britain is relying on you, Bob, so try not to make your usual
hash of things.”
Angleton fades out, to be replaced by a more normal dream sleep, punctuated by vague
echoes of thrashing around restlessly in a huge hotel bed. I wake up eventually, to discover
that the in-flight movie is over and we're in the middle of nowhere in particular. The airbus
bores on through the clear Atlantic skies, ghosting high above the sunken treasure galleons

of the Spanish Main. I stretch in place, try to massage the crick out of the side of my neck,
and yawn. Then I wake up my laptop. Almost immediately the Skype window starts flashing
for attention. You have voice mail, it says.
Voice mail? Hell, yes - in this Brave New World there's no escape from the internet, even at
40,000 feet. I yawn again and plug in my headset, trying to shake off the influence of
Ramona's distantly sensed repose. I glance at the screen. It's Mo, and she's on Skype, too,
so I place a call.
"Bob?" Her voice crackles a little - the signal is being bounced via satellite to the plane and
the latency is scary.
"Mo, I'm on a plane. Are you in the Village”
?"I'm in the Village, Bob — checking out tomorrow. Listen, you asked me a question
yesterday. I've been doing some poking around and this destiny-entanglement stuff is really
ugly. Have they already done it to you? If not, run like hell.
You'll start to share dreams, there's telepathy going with it, but worse, there's reality leakage,
too. You end up taking up aspects of your entanglement partner, and vice versa. If they're
killed you're likely to drop dead on the spot; if it lasts more than a couple of weeks it goes
beyond sharing thoughts, you could end up merging with them permanently.
The good news is, the entanglement can be broken by a fairly simple ritual. The bad news
is, it takes both parties cooperating to do it. Do you have any way out of it”
?"Too late. They ran it yesterday—”
"Shit. Love, how long is it going to take you to realize that if they ask you to do them a
special favor you need to run like—”
"Mo.”
"Bob”
?"I know—" My throat closes up and I stop talking for a moment. "I love you.”
"Yes." Her voice is faint at the end of the internet connection.
"I love you, too—”
This is too painful to hear. "She's asleep.”
"She”
?"The demon." I glance round, but there's nobody in the row in front of me and I'm directly in
front of the partition between business and cattle class. "Ramona. Black Chamber
operative. I don't —" This is too unpleasant: I start trying to figure out another way of
approaching the subject.
"Has she hurt you?" Mo's tone is chilly enough to freeze my ear.
"No." Not yet. "I don't want you to go near her, Mo. It's not her fault. She's as much a victim of
this as—”
"Bullshit, love. I want you to tell her, from me, that if she even thinks about messing with you
I'll break every bone in her body—”
"Mo! Stop it!" I lower my tone of voice. "Don't even think about it. You don't want to get
involved in this. Just don't.
Wait 'til it's all over and we'll go on holiday together and get away from it all.”
A pause. I tense up inside, desperately hoping for the best. Finally: "It's your judgment call
and I can't stop you.
But I'm warning you, don't let them fuck with you. You know how they use people, what they
did to me, right?
Don't let them do it to you, too." A sigh. "So why did they send you”
?I swallow. "Angleton says he needs me to get inside an operation and I think he wants an
unblockable communica- tions channel back to the field controller. Did you ask him what it's
about—”
"Not yet I haven't. Hang in there, love. I'm finishing up here and I've got to go back to London
tomorrow: I'll drag everything out of Angleton before sunset. Where is he sending you?
Who's your backup”
?"I'm on my way to the Princess Juliana Airport on Saint Martin, staving in the Sky Tower at

Maho Bay. He's sent Boris, Pinky, and Brains to look after—" I suddenly realize where this is
leading. Quick on the uptake I ain't. "Listen, don't bother trying to—”
"I'll be on the next flight out, I just have to touch base long enough to mug Harry the Holiday
Piggy Bank. It'll be a cold day in Hell before I'm trusting your skin to their—”
"Don't!" I can see it already, horrible visions welling up out of the twisted depths of my
subconscious. Does Mo real- ize what my being entangled with Ramona means? I hate to
think what she'll do if she figures it out and Ramona's on the same continent. Mo is a very
tactical person. Tactile, too — passionate, fiery, and capable of thinking outside the box —
but if you show her an obstacle, she has a disturbing tendency to punch right through it.
That's how she ended up in •> the Laundry, after all: making an end run round the Black
Chamber, straight into our organization's lap. I love her dearly, but the thought of her turning
up at my hotel room and me trying not to touch her while I'm in this embarrassing bind with
Ramona scares the shit out of me. It's not exactly your normal sordid extramarital affair, is it?
It's not as if I'm actually sleeping with Ramona and it's not as if I'm married to Mo, either. But
it's got all the same potential to explode in-my face - and that's before you factor in the little
extra details like Ramona being the corporeal manifestation of a demonic entity from
beyond space-time and Mo being a powerful sorceress.
"You're breaking up. Hang in there! See you the day after tomorrow!" She buzzes, then the
connection drops.
I stare at the screen for a moment. Then I dry-swallow and press the SERVICE button for the
flight attendant. "I need a drink," I say, "vodka and orange oti the rocks." Then some instinct
makes me add: "Shaken." Just like me.
I spend a good chunk of the rest of the flight determinedly trying to get drunk. I know you're
not supposed to do that sort of thing when flying in a pressurized cabin—you get
dehydrated, the hangover's worse—but I don't give a shit.
Somewhere near Iceland Ramona wakes up and snarls at me for polluting her cerebral
cortex with cocktail fallout, but either I manage to barricade her out or she decides to give
me the day off for bad behavior. I play a drunken round of Quake on my Treo, then bore
myself back to sleep by reading a memorandum discussing my responsibility for processing
equipment depreciation and write-off claims pursuant to field-expedient containment
operations. I don't want to be on the receiving end of a visit from the Auditors over a misfiled
form PT-411/E, but the blasted thing seems to be protected by a stupefaction field, and
every time I look at it my eyelids slam shut like protective blast barriers .
I wake up half an hour before landing with a throbbing forehead and a tongue that tastes like
a mouse died on it. The huge gleaming expanse of Maho Beach is walled with hotels: the
sea is improbably blue, like an accident in a chemistry lab. The heat beats down on me like
a giant oven as I stagger down the steps onto the concrete next to the terminal building.
Half the passengers are crumblies; the rest are surf Nazis and dive geeks, like extras
auditioning for an episode of Baywatch. A strike force of hangover faeries is diving and
weaving around me on pocket jet-packs when they're not practicing polo on my scalp with
rubber mallets. It's two in the afternoon here, about six o'clock in Darmstadt, and I've been in
transit for nearly twelve hours: the business suit I'm wearing from the meeting in the Ramada
feels oddly stiff, as if it's hardening into an exoskeleton. I feel, not to put too fine a point on it,
like shit; so when I come out of baggage claim I'm deeply relieved to see a crusty old buffer
holding up a piece of cardboard upon which is scrawled: HOWARD - CAPITAL LAUNDRY
SERVICES.
I head over towards him. "Hi. I'm Bob. You are . . .”
?He looks me up and down like I'm something he's just peeled off the underside of his shoe.
I do a double-take. He's about fifty, very British in a late-imperial, gin-pickled kind of way —
in his lightweight tropical suit, regimental tie, and waxwork mustache he looks like he's just
stepped out of a Merchant-Ivory movie. "Mr. Howard. Your warrant card, please." "Oh." I
fumble with my pocket for a while until I find the thing, then wave it vaguely in his direction.
His cheek twitches.

"That'll do. I'm Griffin. Follow me." He turns and strides towards the exit. "You're late.”
I'm late? But I only just got here! I hurry after him, trying not to lurch into any walls. "Where are
we going?" I ask.
"To the hotel." I follow him outside and he waves an arm peremptorily. An old but well-kept
Jaguar XJ6 pulls up and the driver jumps out to open the door. "Get in." I almost fall into the
seat, but manage to cushion my briefcase just in time to save the laptop. Griffin shoves the
door shut on me then gets into the front passenger seat and raps the dashboard: "To the
Sky Tower! Chop-chop.”
I can't help it: my eyes slide closed. It's been a long day and my snatch of sleep aboard the
airbus wasn't exactly refreshing. My head's spinning as the Jag pulls out onto a freshly
resurfaced road. It's oppressively hot, even with the air conditioning running flat-out, and I just
can't seem to stay awake. Seemingly seconds later we pull up in front of a large concrete
box and someone opens the door for me. "Come on, get out, get out!" I blink, and force
myself to stand up.
"Where are we?" I ask.
"The Sky Tower Hotel; I've booked you in and swept the room. Your team will be working out
of a rented villa when they arrive — that's in hand, too. Come on." Griffin leads me past
reception, past a stand staffed by Barbies giving away free cosmetic samples, into an
elevator, and down another anonymous hotel-space passage decorated randomly with cane
furniture. We end up in some corporate decorator's vision of a tropical hotel room, all
anonymous five-star furniture plus a French door opening onto a balcony exploding with
potted greenery. A ceiling fan spins lazily, failing to make any impression on the heat. "Sit
down. No, not there, here." I sit, suppress a yawn, and try to force myself to look at him.
Either he's frowning or he's worried. "When are they due, by the way?" he asks.
"Aren't they here yet?" I ask. "Say, shouldn't you show me your warrant card”
?"Bah." His mustache twitches, but he reaches into his jacket pocket and pulls out a thing
that anyone who isn't expecting a warrant card will see as a driving license or a passport.
There's a faint smell of sulfur in the air. "You don't know.”
"Know what”
?He peers at me sharply, then apparently makes his mind up. "They're late," he mutters.
"Bloody cock-up." Louder: "Gin and tonic, or whisky soda”
?My head's still throbbing. "Have you got a glass of water?" I ask hopefully.
"Bah," he says again, then walks over to the minibar and opens it. He pulls out two bottles
and two glasses. Into one of thern he pours a double-finger of clear spirits; the other he puts
down next to the tonic water. "Help yourself," he says grudgingly.
This isn't what I'm expecting from a station chief. To tell the truth, I'm not sure what I should
be expecting: but antique Jaguars, regimental ties, and gin-tippling in midafternoon isn't it.
"Have you been told why I'm here?" I ask tentatively.
He roars so loudly I nearly jump out of my skin. "Of course I have, boy! What do you think I
am, another of your goddamn paper-pushing Whitehall pen-pimps?" He glares at me
ferociously. "God help you, and God help both of us because nobody back home is going to.
Bloody hell, what a mess.”
"Mess?" I try to sound as if I know what he's talking about, but there's a quivery edge to my
voice and I'm feeling fuzzy about the edges from jet lag. "Look at you." He looks me up and
down with evident contempt - or mild disdain, which is worse — in his voice.
"You're a mess. You're wearing trainers and a two-guinea suit, for God's sake you look like
a hippie on a job interview, you don't know where your fucking backup team has gotten to,
and you're supposed to get into Billington's hip pocket!”
He sounds like Angleton's cynical kid brother. I know I mustn't let him get to me, but this is
just too much "Before you go on, you ought to know that I've been up for about thirty hours. I
woke up in Germany and I've already crossed six time zones and had a roomful of
flesh-eating zombies try to chow down on my brain." I gulp the glass of water. "I'm not in the
mood for this shit.”

"You're not in the mood?" He laughs like a fox barking.
"Then you can just go to bed without your dinner, boy.
You're not in London anymore and I'm not going to put up with temper tantrums from
undisciplined wet-behind-theears amateurs." He puts his glass down. "Listen, let's get one
thing absolutely clear: this is my turf. You do not fly in, shit all over the place, squawk loudly,
and fly out again, leaving me to pick up the wreckage. While you're here, you do exactly as I
say. This isn't a committee exercise, this is the Dutch Antilles and I'm not going to let you
fuck up my station.”
"Eh?" I shake my head. "Who said anything about. . .”
?"You didn't have to," he says with heavy and sarcastic emphasis. "You turn up six hours
behind a FLASH notice from some dog-fucker in Islington who says you're to have the run of
the site facilities and I'm to render all necessary et cetera. If you get the opposition stirred up
you'll be dead in a gutter within six hours and I'll get landed with the paperwork.
This isn't Camden Matket and I'm not the bloody hotel concierge. I'm the Laundry point man
for the Caribbean, and if you put a step wrong on my patch you can bring all the hounds of
Hell down on our collective neck, boy, so you're not going to do that. While you're working on
my station, if you want to fart you ask me for permission first. Otherwise I'll rip you a new
sphincter. For your own good. Got that”
?"I guess." I do a double-take. "What's the opposition presence like, hereabouts?" I ask.
Actually I want to say, What is this "opposition" you speak of, strange person?—but I figure
it'll just make him shout at me again.
Griffin stares at me in disbelief. "Are you trying to tell me they haven't briefed you about the
opposition”
?I shake my head.
"What a mess. This is the Caribbean: Who do you think the opposition are? Tourists!
Wander around, drop in on the casinos and clubs, and what do you see? You see tourists.
Half of 'em are Yanks, and maybe half of those are plants. Okay, not half, maybe one in a
hundred thousand. But you see, we're about 200 miles from Cuba here, which means they're
always trying to sneak assets into the generalissimo's territory.
And you wouldn't want to mess with the smugglers, either. We've got money laundering,
we've got the main drug pipeline into Miami via Cuba, and we've got police headaches
coming out of our ears before we add the fucking opposition trying to use us as a staging
post for their crazyass vodoun pranks." He shakes his head then stares at me. "So you've
got to keep one eye peeled for the tourists. If the oppo send an assassin to polish your
button they'll be disguised as a tourist, you mark my words. Are you sure they didn't brief
you”
?"Um." I do my best to consider my next words carefully, but it's difficult when your head
feels like it's stuffed with cotton wool: "You are talking about the Black Chamber when you
use the term 'opposition,' aren't you? I mean, you're not really trying to tell me that the tourists
are all part of some conspiracy—”
"Who the hell else would I be talking about?" He stares at me in disbelief, chugs the rest of
his glass back, and thumps it down on the side table.
"Okay, then I've been briefed," I say tiredly. "Listen, I really need to get settled in and catch
up on my briefing papers. I don't think they're going to assassinate me, my boss has
arranged an, uh, accommodation." I manage to stand up without falling on the ceiling, but my
feet aren't responding too well to commands from mission control. "Can we continue this
tomorrow”
?"Bloody hell." He looks down his nose at me, his expression unreadable. "An
accommodation. All right, we'll continue this tomorrow. You'd better be right, kid, because if
you guessed wrong they'll eat your liver and lights while you're still screaming." He pauses in
the doorway. "Don't call me, I'll call you.”
5: HIGH SOCIETY T H E NEXT HOUR PASSES IN A HAZE OP EXHAUSTION.
I lock the door behind Griffin and somehow manage to make it to the bed before I collapse

face-first into the deep pile of oblivion. Only strange dreams trouble me - strange because I
seem to be dressing up in women's clothing, not because my brain's being eaten by
zombies.
An indeterminate time later I'm summoned back to wakefulness by a persistent banging on
my door, and a warmly sarcastic voice at the back of my head: **Get up, monkey-boy!** "Go
'way," I moan, clutching the pillow like a life pre- server. I want to sleep so badly I can taste it,
but Ramona's not leaving me alone.
"Open the door or I'll start singing, monkey-boy. You wouldn't like that.”
"Singing?" I roll over. I'm still wearing my shoes, I realize.
And I'm still wearing this fucking suit. I didn't even take it off for the flight - I must be turning
into a manager or something. I have a sudden urge to wash compulsively. At least the tie's
snaked off to wherever the horrid things live when they're not throttling their victims.
"I'll start with D:Ream. 'Things can only get better—" "Aaaugh!" I flail around for a moment,
and manage to fall off the bed. That wakes me up enough to sit up. "Okay, just hold it right
there . . .
I stumble over to the entrance and open the door. It's Ramona, and for the second time since
I arrived here I experience the sense of existential angst that afflicts chewing gum cling-ons
on the shoe sole of a higher order. Her supermodel- perfect brow wrinkles as she looks me
up and down.
"You need a shower.”
"Tell me about it." I yawn hugely. She's dressed up to the nines in a slinky, black strapless
gown, with a fortune in diamonds plugged into her ear lobes and wrapped around her throat.
Her hairdo looks like it cost more than my last month's salary. "What's up? Planning on
dining out”
?"Reconnaissance in force." She steps into the room, shoves the door shut behind her, and
locks it. "Tell me about Griffin. What did he say?" she demands.
I yawn again. "Let me freshen up while we talk." Pinky said something about a toilet kit in my
briefcase, didn't he? I rummage around in it until I come up with a black Yves Saint Laurent
bag, then wander through into the bathroom.
The dream was overspill, I realize unhappily. This is going to get even more embarrassing
before it's over. I hope like hell Angleton's planning on disentangling me from her as soon as
possible — otherwise I'm in danger of turning into a huge unintentional security leak. Nastier
possibilities nag at the back of my mind, but I'm determined to ignore them. In this line of
work, too much paranoia can be worse than too little.
I open the toilet bag and poke around until I come up with a toothbrush and a tube of
toothpaste. **Griffin's nuts,** I send to her while I'm scrubbing away at the inside of my lower
jaw. **He's completely paranoid about you guys. He also insists that he gets a veto over my
actions, which is more than somewhat inconvenient.** I switch to my upper front teeth.
**Have you been fucking with his head?** **You wish.** I can almost feel her disdainful sniff.
**We've got him pegged as a loose cannon who's been put out to pasture to keep him out of
your agency's internal pol- itics. He's stuck in the 1960s, and not the good bits.** **Well.** I
carefully probe my molars, just in case Angleton's planted a microdot briefing among them
to tell me how to handle situations like this. **I can't comment on _ Laundry operational
doctrine and overseas deployments in the Caribbean—** (because I don't know anything
about them: Could that be why they picked me for this op? Because I'm a designated
mushroom, kept m the dark and fed shit?) **—but I would agree with your assessment of
Griffin. He's a swivel-eyed nutter.** I step into the shower and dial it all the way up to
Niagara. I'm supposed to report to Angkton while letting Griffin think he's in my chain of
command: What should this tell me about the home game Angleton's playing here? I shake
my head. I'm not up to playing Laundry politics right now.
I focus on showering, then get out and dry myself. **One question deserves another. Why did
you get me out of bed?** -* **Because I wanted to fuck with your head, not Griffin's.** She
sends me a visual of herself pouting, which is a bloody distracting thing to see in the mirror

when you're trying to shave. **I got news from my ops desk that Billington flew in a few hours
ago. He's probably going to visit his casino before—** **His casino?** **Yeah. Didn't you
know? He owns this place.** **Oh. So-—** **He's downstairs right now.** I flinch, and
discover the hard way that it is indeed possible to cut yourself on an electric razor if you try
hard enough. I finish off hurriedly and open the door. Ramona thrusts a bulky carrier bag at
me.
"Put this on.”
"Where did you get this?" I pull out a tuxedo jacket, neatly folded; there's more stuff below it.
"It was waiting for you at the front desk." She smiles tightly. "You have to look the part if
we're going to carry this off”
"Shit." I duck back into the bathroom and try to figure out what goes where. The trousers
have odd fasteners in strange places and I've got no idea what to do with the red silk
scarf-like thing, but at least they cheated on the bow tie.
When I open the door Ramona is sitting in the chair by the bed, carefully reloading
cartridges into the magazine of an extremely compact automatic pistol. She looks at me and
frowns. "That's supposed to go around your waist," she says.
"I've never worn one of these before.”
"It shows. Let me." She makes the gun vanish then comes over and adjusts my appearance.
After a minute she steps back and looks at me critically. "Okay, that'll do for now. In a dim
light, after a couple of cocktails. Try not to hunch up like that, it makes you look like you need
to sue your orthopedic surgeon.”
"Sorry, it's the shoes. That, and you managed to land a critical hit on my geek purity score.
Are you sure I can't just wear a tee shirt and jeans”
?"No, you can't." She grins at me unexpectedly. "Monkeyboy isn't comfortable in a monkey
suit? Consider yourself lucky you don't have to deal with underwire bras.”
"If you say so." I yawn, then before my hindbrain can start issuing shutdown commands
again I go over to my briefcase and start gathering up the necessaries Boris issued to me: a
Tag Heuer wristwatch with all sorts of strange dials (at least one of which measures thaumic
entropy levels — I'm not sure what the buttons do) a set of car keys with a fob concealing a
teensy GPS tracker, a bulky old-fashioned cellphone . . .
"Hey, there's something fishy about this phone! Isn't it—" I pick it up "—a bit heavy”
?I suddenly realize that Ramona is standing behind me.
"Switch it off!" she hisses. "The power switch is the safety catch.”
"Okay already! I'm switching it off!" I put it in my inside pocket and she relaxes. "Boris didn't
say anything about— what does it do?" Then the penny drops. "Holy fuck.”
"That's what you'd get if you switched it on, pointed it at the pope, and dialed 1-4-7-star,"
she agrees. "It takes nine millimeter ammunition. Are you okay with that?" She raises one
perfectly sketched eyebrow at me.
"No!" I'm not used to firearms, they make me nervous; I'm much happier with a PDA loaded
with Laundry CAT-A countermeasure invocations and a fully charged Hand of Glory. Still,
nothing wakes me up quite like nearly shooting someone by accident. I fidget with the new
tablet PC that Brains provisioned for me, plugging it in and setting it for counter-intrusion
duty. "Shall we go drop in on Billington”
?I'm not much of a beach bunny. I'm not a culture vulture or a clothes horse either. Opera
leaves me cold, clubbing is something bad guys do to baby seals, and I'm no more inclined
to work the slots than I am to stand in the middle of a railway station ripping up twenty-pound
notes. Nevertheless, there's a certain vicarious amusement to be had in stepping out at
night with a beautiful blonde on my arm and a brown manila envelope in my inside pocket
labeled HOSPITALITY EXPENSES - even if I'm going to have to account for any cash I pull
out of it, in triplicate, on a form F.219/B that doesn't list "gambling losses" as an acceptable
excuse.
It's dark, and the air temperature has dropped to about gas mark five, leaving me feeling
like a Sunday roast in a tinfoil jacket. There's an onshore breeze that gives a faint illusion of

coolness, but it's too humid to do much more than stir the sand grains on the sidewalk. The
promenade is a modern pastel-painted concrete walkway decorated to a tropical theme,
like Neo-Brutalist architecture on holiday. It's bright and noisy with late-opening boutiques,
open-windowed bars, and nightclubs. The crowd is what you'd expect: tourists, surfers, and
holiday-makers, all dressed up for a night out on the town. By the morning they'll be puking
their margaritas up on the boardwalk at the end of the development, but right now they're a
happy, noisy crowd. Ramona leads me through them with supreme confidence, straight
towards a garishly illuminated, red-carpeted lobby that covers half the block ahead of us.
My nose prickles. Something they never mention in the brochures is that the night-blooming
plants let rip during the tourist season. I try not to sneeze convulsively as Ramona sashays
right up the red carpet, bypassing the gaggle of tourists being checked at the door by
security. A uniformed flunkey scrambles to grovel over her gloved hand. I follow her into the
lobby and he gives me a cold-fish stare as if he can't make up his mind whether to grope my
wallet or punch me in the face. I smile patronizingly at him while Ramona speaks.
"You'll have to excuse me but Bob and I are new here and I'm so excited! Would you mind
showing me where the cashier's office is? Bobby darling, do you think you could get me a
drink? I'm so thirsty!”
She does an inspired airhead impersonation. I nod, then catch the doorman's eye and let
the smile slip. "If you'd show her to the office," I murmur, then turn on my heel and walk
indoors — hoping I'm not going in the wrong direction — to give Ramona space to turn her
glamour loose on him. I feel a bit of a shit about leaving the doorman to her tender mercies,
but console myself with the fact that as far as he's concerned, I'm just another mark: what
goes around comes around.
It's darker and noisier inside than on the promenade and a lot of overdressed, middle-aged
folks are milling around the gaming tables in the outer room. Mirror balls scatter rainbow
refractions across the floor, at the far end of the room a fourpiece is murdering famous jazz
classics on stage. I spot the bar eventually and manage to catch one of the bartender's
eyes. She's young and cute and I smile a bit more honestly.
"Hi! What's your order, sir”
?"A vodka martini on the rocks." I pause for just a heartbeat, then add, "And a margarita."
She smiles ingratiatingly at me and turns away, and the ghostly sensation of a stiletto heel
grinding against my instep fades as quickly as it arrived.
**That was entirely unnecessary,** I tell Ramona stiffly.
**Wanna bet? You're falling into character too easily, monkey-boy. Try to stay focused.**
When I find her she's leaning up against a small, thick window set in one wall, scooping
plastic chips into her purse.
I wait alongside with the drinks, then hand her the margarita.
"Thanks." She closes the purse then leads me past a bunch of chattering one-armed-bandit
fans towards an empty patch of floor near a table where a bunch of tense-looking
coffin-dodgers are watching a young chav in a white shirt and dickey-bow deal cards with
robotic efficiency.
"What was that about?" I murmur.
"What was what?" She turns to stare at me in the darkness, but I avoid making eye contact.
"The thing with the doorman.”
"It's been a hard day, and American Airlines doesn't cater for my special dietary
requirements.”
"Really?" I stare at her. "I don't know how you can live with yourself.”
"Marc over there—" she jerks her head almost imperceptibly, back towards the door
"—likes to think of himself as a lone wolf. He's twenty-five and he got the job here after a
dishonorable discharge from the French paratroops. He served two years of a five-year
sentence first. You wouldn't believe the things that happen on UN peacekeeping missions . .
.”
She pauses and takes a tiny sip of her drink before continuing.

Her voice is over-controlled and just loud enough to hear above the band: "He's not in
contact with his family back in Lyon because his father kicked him out of the house when he
discovered what he did to his younger sister. He lives alone in a room above a bike repair
shop. When a mark runs out of cash and tries to stiff the house, they sometimes send Marc
around to explain the facts of life. Marc enjoys his work. He prefers to use a cordless
hammer-drill with a blunt threeeighths bit. Twice a week he goes and fucks a local whore, if
he's got the money. If he hasn't got the money, he picks up tourist women looking for a good
time: usually he takes their money and leaves their flight vouchers, but twice in the past year
he's taken them for an early morning boat ride, which they probably didn't appreciate on
account of being tied up and out of their skulls on Rohypnol. He's got an eight-foot dinghy
and he knows about a bay out near North Point where some people he doesn't know by
name will pay him good money for single women nobody will miss." She touches my arm.
"Nobody is going to miss him, Bob.”
"You—" I bite my tongue.
"You're learning." She smiles tensely. "Another couple of weeks and you might even get it.”
I swallow bile. "Where's Billington”
?"All in good time," she croons in a low singsong voice that sends chills up and down my
spine. Then she turns towards the baccarat table.
The croupier is shuffling several decks of cards together in the middle of the kidney-shaped
table. A half-dozen players and their hangers-on watch with feigned boredom and avaricious
eyes: leisure-suit layabouts, two or three gray-haired pensioners, a fellow who looks like a
weasel in a dinner jacket, and a woman with a face like a hatchet. I hang back while
Ramona explains things in a monotone in the back of my head — it sounds like she's
quoting someone: **'lt's much the same as any other gambling game. The odds against the
banker and the player are more or less even. Only a run against either can be decisive and
"break the bank" or break the players.' That's Ian Fleming, by the way.** **Who, the guy with
the face . . .?** **No, the guy I was quoting. He knew his theory but he wasn't as competent
at the practicalities. During the Second World War he ran a scheme to get British agents in
neutral ports to gamble their Abwehr rivals into bankruptcy. Didn't work. And don't even think
about trying that on Billington.** The croupier raises a hand and asks who's holding the
bank. Hatchet-Face nods. I look at the pile of chips in front of her. It's worth twice my
department's annual budget. She doesn't notice me staring so I look away quickly.
"So how does it go now?" I ask Ramona quietly. She's scanning the crowd as if looking for
an absent friend. She smiles faintly and takes my hand, forcing me to sidle uncomfortably
close.
"Make like we're a couple," she whispers, still smiling.
"Okay, watch carefully. The woman who's the banker is betting against the other gamblers.
She's got the shoe with six packs of cards in it — shuffled by the croupier and
doublechecked by everyone else. Witnesses. Anyway, she's about to—”
Hatchet-Face clears her throat. "Five grand." There's a wave of muttering among the other
gamblers, then one of the pensioners nods and says, "Five," pushing a stack of chips
forwards.
Ramona: "She opened with a bank of five thousand dollars.
That's what she's wagering. Blue-Rinse has accepted. If nobody accepted on their own, they
could club together until they match the five thousand between them.”
"Ri-ight." I frown, staring at the chips. Laundry pay scales are British civil service level — if I
didn't have the subsidized safe house, or if Mo wasn't working, we wouldn't be able to afford
to live comfortably in London. What's already on the table is about a month's gross income
for both of us, and this is just the opening round. Suddenly I feel very cold and exposed. I'm
out of my depth here.
Hatchet-Face deals four cards from the shoe, laying two of them face-down in front of
Blue-Rinse, and the other two cards in front of herself. Blue-Rinse picks her cards up and
looks at them, then lays them face-down again and taps them.

"The idea is to get a hand that adds up to nine points, or closest to nine points. The banker
doesn't get to check his cards until the players declare. Aces are low, house cards are zero,
and you're only looking at the least significant digit: a five and a seven make two, not twelve.
The player can play her hand, or ask for another card — like that — and then — she's
turning.”
Blue-Rinse has turned over her three cards. She's got a queen, a two, and a five.
Hatchet-Face doesn't smile as she turns her own cards over to reveal two threes and a two.
The croupier rakes the chips over towards her: Blue-Rinse doesn't bat an eyelid.
I stare fixedly at the shoe. They're nuts. Completely insane! I don't get this gambling thing.
Didn't these people study statistics at university? Evidently not. , .
"Come on," Ramona says quietly. "Back to the bar, or they'll start to wonder why we're not
joining in.”
"Why aren't we?" I ask her as she retreats.
"They don't pay me enough.”
"Me neither." I hurry to catch up.
"And here I was thinking you worked for the folks who gave us James Bond.”
"You know damn well that if Bond auditioned for a secret service job they'd tell him to piss
off. We don't need upperclass twits with gambling and fast car habits who think that all
problems can be solved at gunpoint and who go rogue at the drop of a mission abort code.”
"No, really?" She gives me an old-fashioned look.
"Right." I find myself grinning. "They go for quiet, bookish accountant-types, lots of attention
to detail, no imagination, that kind of thing.”
"Quiet, bookish accountant-types who're on drinking terms with the head-bangers from
Two-One SAS and are field-certified to Grade Four in occult combat technology”
?I may have done a couple of training courses at Dunwich but that doesn't mean I've
graduated to breathing seawater, much less inhaling vodka martinis. When I stop spluttering
Ramona is looking away from me, whistling tunelessly and tapping her toes. I glare at her,
and I'm about to give up on it as a bad job when I see who she's watching. "Is that
Billington?" I ask.
"Yep, that's him. Aged sixty-two, looks forty-five.”
Ellis Billington is rather hard to miss. Even if I didn't recognize his face from the cover of
Computer Weekly, it'd be pretty obvious that he was a big cheese. There's a nasty facelift in
a big frock hanging on his left arm, a briefcase-toting woman in wire-frame spectacles and a
tailored suit that screams lawyer shadowing him, and a pair of thugs to either side, who
wear their tuxedos like uniforms and have wires looped around their ears. A gaggle of Bright
Young Things in cocktail dresses and tuxes bring up the rear, like courtiers basking in the
reflected glory of a medieval monarch; the dubious doorman Ramona fingered for her
midnight snack is oozing up to one of them. Billington himself has a distinguished
silver-streaked hairdo that looks like he bought it at John De Lorean's yard sale and feeds it
raw liver twice a day.
For all that, he looks trim and fit — almost unnaturally wellpreserved for his age.
"What now?" I ask her. I can see a guy who looks like the president of the casino threading
his way across the floor towards Billington.
"We go say hello." And before I can stop her she's off across the floor like a missile. I
scramble along in her wake, dodging dowagers, trying not to spill my drink — but instead of
homing in on Billington she makes a beeline towards the Face Lift That Walks Like a Lady.
"Eileen!" squeaks Ramona, coming over all blonde. "Why, if this isn't a complete surprise!”
Eileen Billington — for it is she — turns on Ramona like a cornered rattlesnake, then
suddenly smiles and switches on the sweetness and light: "Why, it's Mona! Upon my word, I
do declare!" They circle each other for a few seconds, sparring congenially and exchanging
polite nothings while the courtier-yuppies home in on the baccarat table. I notice Billington's
attorney exchanging words with her boss and then departing towards the casino office. Then
I see Billington look at me. I take a deep breath and nod at him.

"You'rewith her." He jerks his chin at Ramona. "Do you know what she is?" He sounds dryly
amused.
"Yes." I blink. "Ellis Billington, I presume”
?He looks me in the eye and it feels like a punch in the gut. Up close he doesn't look human.
His pupils are a muddy gray-brown and slotted vertically: I've seen that before in folks who've
had an operation to correct nystagmus, but somehow on Billington it looks too natural to be
the after-effect of surgery. "Who are you?" he demands.
"Howard — Bob Howard. Capital Laundry Services, import/export division.”
I manage to make a dog-eared business card appear between my fingers. He raises an
eyebrow and takes it. "I didn't know you people traded over here.”
"Oh, we trade all over." I force myself to smile. "I sat through a most interesting presentation
yesterday. My colleagues were absolutely mesmerized.”
"I have no idea what you're talking about." I take half a step back but Ramona and Eileen
are laughing loudly over some shared confidence behind me: there's no escape from his
lizardlike stare. Then he seems to reach some decision, and lets me down gently: "But that's
not surprising, is it?
My companies have so many subsidiaries, doing so many things, that it's hard to keep track
of them all." He shrugs, an aw-shucks gesture quite at odds with the rest of his mannerisms,
and produces a grin from wherever he keeps his spare faces when he isn't wearing them.
"Are you here for the sunshine and sea, Mr. Howard? Or are you here to play games”
?"A bit of both." I drain my cocktail glass. Behind him, his lawyer is approaching, the casino
president at her elbow. "I wouldn't want to keep you from business, so . . .”
"Perhaps later." His smile turns almost sincere for a split second as he turns aside: "Now, if
you'll excuse me”
?I find myself staring at his retreating back. Seconds later Ramona takes hold of my elbow
and twists it, gently steering me through the crowd towards the open glass doors leading
onto the balcony at the back of the casino floor. "Come on”
she says quietly. The courtiers have formed an attentive wall around the fourth Mrs.
Billington, who is getting ready to recycle some of her husband's money through his bank. I
let Ramona lead me outside.
"You know her!" I accuse.
"Of course I damn well know her!" Ramona leans against the stone railing that overhangs
the beach, staring at me from arm's length. My heart's pounding and I feel dizzy with relief
over having escaped Billington's scrutiny. He was perfectly polite but when he looked at me I
felt like a bug on a microscope slide, pinned down by brilliant searchlights for scrutiny by a
vast, unsympathetic intellect: trapped with nowhere to hide. "My department spent sixty
thousand bucks setting up the first introduction at a congressman's fund-raiser two weeks
ago, just so she'd recognize me tonight. You didn't think we'd come here without doing the
groundwork first”
?"Nobody tells me these things," I complain. "I'm flailing around in the dark!”
"Don't sweat it." Suddenly she goes all apologetic on me, as if I'm a puppy who doesn't
know any better than to widdle on the living room carpet: "It's all part of the process.”
"What process?" I stare her in the eyes, trying to ignore the effects of the glamour that tells
me she's the most amazingly beautiful woman I've ever met.
"The process that I'm not allowed to tell you about." Is that genuine regret in her eyes? "I'm
sorry." She lowers her eyelashes. I track down instinctively, and find myself staring into the
depths of her cleavage.
"Great," I say bitterly. "I've got a station chief who's as mad as a fish, an incomplete briefing,
and a gamblingobsessed billionaire to out-bluff. And you can't fucking tell me what I'm
supposed to be doing”
?"No," she says, in a thin, hopeless tone. And to my complete surprise she leans forwards,
wraps her arms around me, props her chin on my shoulder, and begins to weep silently.
This is the final straw. I have been clawed at by zombies condescended to by Brains,

shipped off to the Caribbean and lectured in my sleep by Angleton, introduced to an
executive with the eyes of a poisonous reptile, and ranted at by an oldschool spook who's
fallen in the bottle — but those are all part of the job. This isn't. There's no briefing sheet on
what to do when a supernatural soul-sucking horror disguised as a beautiful woman starts
crying on your shoulder. Ramona sobs silently while I stand there, paralyzed by indecision,
selfdoubt, and jet lag. Finally I do the only thing I can think of and wrap my arms round her
shoulders. "There, there," I mutter, utterly unsure what I'm saying: "It's going to be all right.
Whatever it is.”
"No, it isn't," she sniffles quietly. "It's never going to be all right." Then she straightens up. "I
need to blow my nose.”
I can take a hint: I let go and take a step back. "Do you want to talk”
?She pulls a hand-sized pack of tissues out of her bag and dabs at her eyes carefully.
"Do I want to talk?" She sniffs, then chuckles. Evidently something I said amused her. "No,
Bob, I don't want to talk." She blows her nose. "You're far too nice for this. Go to bed.”
"Too nice for what?" These dark hints of hers are getting really annoying, but I'm upset and
concerned now that she's pulling herself together; I feel like I've just sat some kind of exam
and failed it, without even knowing what subject I'm being tested on.
"Go to bed," she repeats, a trifle more forcefully. "I haven't eaten yet. Don't tempt me.”
I beat a hasty retreat back through the casino. On my way out, I go through the side room
where they keep the slot machines. I pass Pinky — at least, I'm half-sure it's Pinky —
creating a near riot among the blue-rinse set by playing an entire row of one-armed bandits
in sequence and winning big on each one. I don't think he notices me. Just as well: I'm not in
the mood for small talk right now.
Damn it, I know it's just the effects of a class three glamour, but I can't stop thinking about
Ramona — and Mo's flying in tomorrow.
6: CHARLIE VICTOR I MAKE IT BACK TO MY HDTEL ROOM WITHOUT BETTING lost,
falling asleep on my feet, or accidentally looking at the screen saver. I slump in the chair for
a while, but there's nothing on TV except an adventure movie starring George Lazenby, and
it'll take more than that to keep me awake. So I hang out the DO NOT DISTURB sign,
undress, and go to bed.
I fall asleep almost instantly, but it's not very restful because I'm in someone else's head, and
I really don't want to be there. Last time this happened, the fifty-something engineering
salesman from Dusseldorf trapping off with the blonde call girl was just sad, and a bit
pathetic on the side; this time it feels dirty. I (no, he: I struggle to hold myself aside from his
sense of self) work out daily in a gym round the corner from the casino before I go in to work,
and it's not just pumping iron and running on a track—there's stuff I don't recognize, practice
routines with odd twisting and punching and kicking motions, somatic memories of beating
people up and the warm sensual excitement that floods me when I stomp some fucking idiot
for getting in my face. I've had a call from the customer, and I'm about ready to go off work
and go looking for the merchandise he wants, when this blonde American princess comes
out of the salle and what do you know, but she's giving me a come-on? She's lost the rich
nerd she showed up with, and good riddance; guess I'll have to take her home and that
means . .. yeah, she'll do. Two birds, one stone, so to speak. Or two stones, in my case.
Mind you, she's a customer — I'll just have to be discreet. So I smile at her and make
nicey-nice while she giggles, then I offer to buy her a drink and she says, "Yes," and I tell her
to meet me over the road at the Sunset Beach Bar so I can show her the town. She heads
off, shaking her booty, and I go and get squared away.
Time to do another line of Charlie in the John.
Checking out, walking over the road I get that thrill of arousal. I'm on top of the world again
with cold fire coursing through my veins, like the time in the village near Bujumbura when
Jacques and I caught that kid stealing and we — the memory skids away from me as if it's
made of grease, only an echo of the blood and shit-smell of it and the screams lingering in
my ears — and I get the hot tension again, like lightning seeking a path to earth. Sex, that'll

help.
Long as she doesn't make a fuss.
She's waiting for me on a bar stool, legs crossed and face hopeful. Plump cheeks, lips like
throttled . . . I let my face smile at her and order her a drink and make chitchat. She smiles
sympathetically and asks me questions trying to find out if I have — hey! She's worried I
might have a regular girlfriend, the stupid cunt, so I explain that no my Elouise died in a car
crash two years ago and I have been mourning since.
She's so stupid she laps it up, asks me lots of questions and sounds concerned. I figure I'll
drop her off with the rich guy's pilot at Anse Marcel tomorrow: but first we'll have some fun
together. I act coy but let her draw me out because half the bitches want to be fucked hard
by a stranger, they just have to convince themselves he's sensitive and caring at first to get
over their inhibitions. After a while she looks at me slack-mouthed like she's already
dripping, and I figure it's time. So I ask if she wants to come back to my place and she
accepts.
We walk — it's only three blocks — and she doesn't bat an eyelid at the rubbish and the
locked shutters. I show her upstairs and unlock the door, and when I turn back to pull her
inside she actually gropes me! Normally they get cold at this point and start making excuses
but this is going really smooth. I'm hard, of course, and when she kisses me I get an arm
round her and start hiking up her skirt. The Rohypnol's in the fridge and it'd be more sensible
to slip it to her first, then add a geas on top for safety's sake, but what the hell, she seems
willing enough. This one really does seem to want a rough fuck—shame for her she doesn't
know about the customer but those are the breaks. I pick her up and carry her inside, kick
the door shut, then dump her on the bed and jump her. And the funny thing is she lets me,
she doesn't fight, and my heart is in my mouth pounding away between her legs, wet meat,
warm meat, it's like she doesn't even know the father says it's wrong to do this beat my meat
it's not ever this easy and I can't let her talk afterwards even though she's biting my shoulder
and sucking me, and oh father my chest hurts— I open my eyes and stare at the hotel ceiling
until my pulse begins to slow. I'm engorged and erect and freezing cold on the damp sheets,
and I feel as if I'm about to throw up. "Ramona!" I croak, my larynx still half-paralyzed with
sleep.
**The fucker just flatlined on me!** I can't feel his mind anymore, but he's lying on top of her,
still twitching spastically, and I can taste her desperation and fear. **He must have had a
dodgy heart, done one line too many. Finish me off, Bob!** **What—** I realize I've been
holding my penis and yank my hands away as if they're covered in chili oil.
**Finish me off! Please!** I can sense her succubus now, coiling like a black vortex of
emptiness behind her conscious thoughts. There's nothing human about it, nothing warm —
it's like death itself, not the small oblivion of orgasm but its complete antithesis, freezing and
vacant, a hunger for life. It needs filling, it's searching for a sacrifice and she'd set her eyes
on Marc but he checked out early and now—**It needs a little death to go with the big one,
and the longer you wait the hungrier it gets.** She sounds breathless. **If you don't give it
one it'll eat me, and you may think that would be a good thing but in case it's escaped your
attention we're entangled—*.* **But I—** I want Mo, don't I? Don't I? Mo isn't hiding behind a
glamour. Mo doesn't eat people like a fuck-vampire.
Mo isn't a drop-dead gorgeous blonde, she's just Mo, and we're probably going to end up
getting married sooner or later, and I feel guilty and frightened because Mo won't understand
what Ramona wants me to do.
**But nothing!** I can sense Ramona's arousal and, behind it, a canker of upwelling fear.
**Jesus, Bob, do something, please help me here . . .!** She's helpless and small before the
emptiness of her hunger, and Mo isn't here, and neither is she. I feel the empty hunger, and I
try to wall it out, but Ramona needs me. She's teetering on the edge of an orgasm, the
hunger is waiting for her, and if she meets it alone she won't come out the other side alive. I
can't not do it.
Can I?

**I'm not cleared for sex magick,** I tell her, gritting my teeth. But she sends me a
touch-sense picture of herself: the warm weight on her chest, Marc's head lolling, the turgid
stretch of her vulva occupied by a dead man's dick, a delicious sense of proximity to
catastrophic nothingness, teetering on the edge of a cliff—and I clutch myself and begin to
spasm wildly because I'm still massively turned on from the overspill of her sex. The sense of
doom recedes immediately, and then something I wasn't expecting happens - Ramona
comes, taking me completely by surprise.
She goes on and on and on until I'm almost ready to scream for mercy. Finally the waves of
sensation finally begin to slow down and recede, leaving her panting and pinned beneath
Marc's cooling cadaver. A warm afterglow floods her with life. I can feel her reveling in it.
**Thank you,** she says fervently, and I can't tell at first whether she's talking to me or to the
dead serial rapist. **If you hadn't joined in, it would have had me for sure.** The corpse's
head lolls on her shoulder, a drop of spittle dangling from his mouth. She reaches up and
shoves it aside. **Was it good for you, too?** she asks, and tenderly kisses his soft,
unresponsive lips.
My skin crawls. **You enjoyed that a whole lot,** I tell her before I bite my tongue. But it's too
late.
**You enjoy eating, too, but pleasure's not the only reason you do it,** she snaps. **And don't
tell me you didn't enjoy this.** I cringe at her anger: What will Mo say when she finds out? It's
not sex — no, it's just having a simultaneous orgasm with a consenting adult, my conscience
jabs me. Oh hell, what a mess. I gingerly sit up and shuffle towards the bathroom and a
late-night appointment with the shower.
**Hey, what about me?** Ramona complains bitterly, bracing herself to dislodge the drained
husk of her prey.
**I don't want to taik about it right now,** I mutter. I twist the shower dial, feeling dirty.
**Typical fucking male . . .** **Look who's talking! You're a real piece of work.** I turn the
temperature right up until it hurts, then bite my tongue and stand underneath it. **You wanted
to get into my pants, didn't you?** **Anyone ever tell you you're an asshole, monkey-boy? If I
wanted you I'd have had you right there on the casino balcony, instead of nearly dying in a
shit-hole.** She's working on getting her clothes back into a semblance of order. Marc lies
on the floor beside the bed. She lashes out and kicks him hard enough to hurt my toes and I
suddenly realize she's shaking with adrenalin, the aftermath of a terror trip.
**Bastard!** She's really scared. That's my conscience talking; he's been beating on the
door for the past couple of minutes but I've only just heard him over the racket in my head.
Why wouldn't she be telling the truth} I swallow, forcing back stomach acid. She likes me.
Fuck knows why.
I force myself to come up with an apology. **Being scared makes me more of an asshole
than usual.** It sounds weak in the silence afterwards, but I don't know what else to say.
**You bet,** she says tightly. **Go back to bed, Bob. I won't bother you again tonight. Sweet
dreams.** I wake up with the early morning light from the window as it streams in across my
face. One of my arms is lying over the edge of the bed, and the other is twisted around
someone's shoulders — What the fuck? I think fuzzily.
It's Ramona. She's curled up against me on top of the sheets, sleeping like a baby. She's
still wearing her glad rags, her hair a wild tangle. My breath catches with fear or lust or guilt,
or maybe all three at the same time: guilty, fearful lust.
I can't make up my mind whether I want to gnaw my arm off at the shoulder or ask her to
elope with me.
Eventually I work out a compromise. I sit up, slowly pulling my arm out from under her: "How
do you take your coffee”
?"Uh?" She opens her eyes. "Oh . . .hi." She looks puzzled.
"Where am I. . . oh." Mild annoyance: "I take it black. And strong." She yawns, then rolls over
and begins to sit up.
Yawns again. "I need to use your bathroom." She looks displeased, and it's not just her

eyeliner running: somehow she looks older, less inhumanly perfect. The glamour's still there,
masking her physical shape, but what I'm seeing now is unfogged by implanted emotional
bias.
"Be my guest." I walk over to the filter machine and start prodding at it, trying to figure out
where the sachet of coffee goes. My head's spinning - "How did you get in here”
?"Don't you remember”
?"No.”
"Well that makes two of us," she says as she closes the door. A moment later I hear the
sound of running water and realize too late that I need to use the bathroom, too.
Oh, great. There was the, whatever the fuck you call it, with the predator, Marc — and she
needed me to — I try not to think too closely about it. I remember that much. How the hell did
she get in here? I ask myself.
I get the coffee maker loaded and go prod my tablet PC.
It's sitting where I left it last night, with a clear line of sight on the door and window, and it's
still up and running. I look too closely and the ward tries to bite me between the eyes but
misses. Good. So then I go and inspect the other wards I put on the door by opening it and
gingerly pulling in the DO NOT DISTURB sign. The silver diagram, sketched on the sign
using a conductive pencil and a drop of blood, shimmers at me. It's still live: anyone other
than me who tries to get past it is going to get a very unpleasant surprise. Finally, as the
coffee maker begins to spit and burble, I check the seal on the window. My mobile phone
(the real one, the Treo with the Java countermeasure suite and the keyboard and all the
trimmings, not the bullet-firing fake) is still propped up against it.
I glance up and down, then shake my head. There are no holes in the walls and ceiling,
which means Ramona can't be here — the place is about as secure as a hotel room can be,
stitched up tighter than Angleton's ass.
"I don't want to hurry you or anything, but I need the toilet, too," I call through the door.
"Okay, okay! I'm nearly ready." She sounds annoyed.
"Are you sure you don't remember how you got in here”
?I add.
The door opens. She's repaired her glamour and is every bit the air-brushed, drop-dead
gorgeous model she was when I first saw her in the Laguna Bar: only the eyes are different.
Old and tired.
"How much of what happened last night do you remember”
?she asks.
"I—" I stop. "What, do you mean after we met Billington? Or after I left the casino”
?"Did we leave together?" She frowns.
"You don't—" I bite my tongue and stare at her. How did you get into my room? Maybe it's a
side effect of destiny entanglement — my wards can't tell us apart. "I had some really weird
dreams," I say then hold out a coffee cup for her.
"Well, that's a surprise." She snorts then takes the cup.
"But it doesn't have to mean anything.”
"It doesn't—" I stop dead. "I dreamed about you," I say reluctantly. I find it really hard to pick
the right words. "You were with some guy you'd picked up who worked at the casino.”
She looks me in the eye calmly. "You dreamed about me, Bob. Things happen in dreams
that don't always happen in real life.”
"But he died while you were in bed with—”
"Bob?" Her eyes are greenish blue, flecks of gold floating in them, rimmed in expensive
eyeliner that makes them look wide and innocent — but somehow they're deeper than an
arctic lake, and much colder. "For once in your life, shut up and listen to me. Okay”
?She's got the Voice of Command. I find myself leaning against the wall with no definite
memory of how I got here.
"What”
?"Primus, we're destiny-entangled. I can't do anything about that. You stub your toe, I hurt'; I

call you names, you get pissy. But you're making a big mistake. Because, secundus, you
had a weird dream. And you're jumping to the conclusion that the two are related, that
whatever you dreamed about is whatever happened to me. And you know what?
That ain't necessarily so. Correlation does not imply causation.
Now—" she reaches over and pokes me in the chest with a fingertip "—you seem a little
upset over whatever it was you dreamed about. And I think you ought to think very hard
before you ask the next question, because you can choose to ask whether there was any
connection between your weird dream and my night out — or you can just tell yourself you
ate too many cheese canapes before bed and it was all in your head, and you can walk
away from it. Is that clear? We may be entangled, but it doesn't have to go any further.”
She stands there expectantly, obviously anticipating a reply. I'm rooted to the spot by the
force of her gaze. My pulse roars in my ears. I don't — truly I don't — know what to do! My
mind spins. Did I simply have a wet dream last night? Or did Ramona suck a serial rapist's
soul right out of his body then use me for sex magick to keep her daemon in check . . .? And
do I really want to know the truth? Really?
I feel my lips moving without any conscious decision.
"Thank you. And if you don't mind, I'm going to un-ask that question for the time being.”
"Oh, I mind all right." A flash of unidentifiable emotion flickers in her eyes like distant
lightning. "But don't worry about me, I'm used to it. I'll be all right after breakfast." She
glances down, breaking eye contact. "Jesus, stripy pajamas.
It's too early in the morning for that.”
"Hey, it's all I've got, anyway, it's better than sleeping in a tux." I raise an eyebrow at her
dress. "You're going to have to get that professionally cleaned.”
"No, really?" She takes a mouthful of coffee. "Thanks for the tip, monkey-boy, I'd never have
guessed. I'll be going back to my room when I finish this." Another mouthful.
"Got any plans for today”
?I pause for thought. "I need to touch base with my backup team and file a report with head
office. Then I'm supposed to visit a tailor's shop. After which—" a ghost of a dream memory
gibbers and capers for attention "—I heard there's a nice beach up at Anse Marcel. I figure I
might hang out there for a while. How about you”
?I eat breakfast on a balcony overlooking an expanse of white beach, trying not to flinch as
the occasional airbus rumbles past on final approach into Princess Juliana Airport. Midway
through a butter croissant that melts on the tongue, my Treo rings: "Howard!”
"Speaking." I get a sinking sensation in the pit of my stomach: it's Griffin.
"Get yourself over here, chop-chop. We've got a situation.”
Shit. "What kind of situation? And where's here”
?"Face time only." He rattles off an address somewhere near Mullet Beach and I jot it down.
..«-> ,. -.
"Okay, I'll be over in half an hour.”
"Make sure you are!" He hangs up, leaving me staring at my phone as if it's turned into a
dead slug in my hand. What a way to start a day: Griffin's found something to go nonlinear
over. I shake my head in disgust. As if I haven't got enough problems already.
I'm just about up and running on local time. Even so, it takes me a while to figure out my way
to the address Griffin gave me. It turns out to be a holiday villa, white clapboard walls and
wooden shutters overlooking the road behind the beachfront. The temperature's already up
to the mid-twenties and rising as I trudge towards the front door. I'm about to knock when it
opens and I find myself eyeball to hairy eyeball with Griffin.
"Get in here!" he half-snarls, grabbing me by my jacket.
"Quick!”
I take in his red-rimmed eyes, stubbly chin, and general agitation. "Something bad happen”
?"You could say that." I follow him into the back room.
The windows are shuttered, several large nylon hold-alls are lined up against one wall, and
there's a mass of electronics spread across the dining table. After a couple of seconds I

figure out that I'm looking at a clunky electrodynamic rig and a Vulpis-Tesla mainframe: it
looks like it was invented by a mad pervert who was into torturing chickens, but it's really just
a tool for summoning minor abominations. By the look on his face Griffin's been bolting it
together and hitting the bottle for the past twelve hours or so—not a combination I'm
sanguine about. "I got a dispatch from head office. The oppo's acting up — they've sent us
one of their fast bowlers!”
"What's cricket got to do with us?" I ask, confused. It's too early in the morning for this.
"Who said anything about cricket?" Griffin hurries across the room and starts rearranging
the bakelite plug-board that configures the chicken-torturer. "I said they'd sent a fast bowler,
not a fucking cricketer.”
"Slow up." I rub my eyes. "How long have you been out here”
?He rounds on me. "Nineteen years, if it means anything to you, whipper-snapper!" he
snorts. "Kids these days . . .”
I shrug. "Slang changes, is what I'm saying.”
"Bah." He straightens up and sighs. "I got a flash code from the Weather Service this
morning: Charlie Victor is in town. He's one of their top assassins, works for Unit Echo —
that's our designation for it, not theirs, nobody's got a fucking clue what the Black Chamber
internal org chart looks like — and generally we don't get advance warning because the first
warning anyone gets about Charlie Victor is when they wake up dead.”
"Whoa." I grab a chair and sit down hard. "When did he arrive”
?"Yesterday, while you were snoozing." Griffin stares at me.
"Well”
?"Do we know who his target is”
?"Weather Service says it's something to do with your mission, this billionaire.”
"Weather Service—" I pause. How to phrase my opinion of the Predictive Branch tactfully?
Just in case Griffin's got a gypsy cousin who's into fluffy chakra crystal ball-fu and works for
Precognitive Ops . . . "Weather Service has a certain reputation." A reputation for being
disastrously wrong about thirty percent of the time — as you'd expect of a bunch of
webcams hooked up to crystal balls scrying random number generators - and for being less
than half right about fifty percent of the time, which is even worse than the real
Meteorological Office. The only reason we don't ignore them completely is that about one
time in five they hit the jackpot — and then people live or die by their projections. But that
thirty percent gave us the amazing invisible Iraqi WMDs, the Falklands War ("nothing can
possibly go wrong"), and going back a bit further, the British Lunar Expedition of 1964.7-8 7
What lunar expedition?
8 Exactly.
"Weather Service is taking traffic flow at source from GCHQ and cross-correlating it with
validated HUMINT sources," Griffin rumbles ominously. "This is about as hard as it gets.
What are the implications for your mission”
?"I need to talk to Angleton — I thought we had an accommodation on this one, but if what
you're saying's right, all bets are off." I glance at the VT frame. "What's the chicken plucker
for”
?"A necessary precaution." Griffin stares at me speculatively.
"In case Charlie Victor tries to pay a visit. And to keep a lock on your special kit." He nods
at the cases in the corner.
"Uh-huh. Any sign of my backup team”
?"I called them for a meeting half an hour ago. They should be arriving any time—”
Right on cue, there's a knock at the door.
I head over to open the door but Griffin beats me to it, shoving me out of the way and raising
a finger to silence me.
He pulls an elderly looking revolver from under his jacket, holding it behind his back as he
turns the door handle.
It's Brains, wearing sunglasses and a loud Hawaiian shirt.

"Yo, Bob!" he calls, ignoring Griffin. Boris slouches on the front stoop behind him.
"Come in," Griffin mutters uninvitingly. "Don't just stand there!”
"Where's Pinky?" I ask.
"Parking your car by the hotel." Brains walks past Griffin, whistling nonchalantly, then stops
when he sees the VT frame. "Haven't seen one of those in a long while!" He closes in on it
and peers at the plug-board. "Hey, this is wired up all wrong—”
"Stop that at once!" Griffin is about to hit the ceiling.
"Before you start meddling—”
"Boys, boys." Boris grimaces tiredly. "Chill.”
"I need to call Angleton," I manage to slip in. "And I've got to get closer to the target. Can we
please try to keep on track, here? What do we know about Billington's arrival? I didn't think
he was meant to be here yet.”
"Billington is here?" Boris frowns. "Is ungood news.
How”
?"He flew in last night." I glance at Griffin, but his mouth is clamped in a thin line. He's not
volunteering anything. "I met him briefly. Do we know where this yacht of his is? Or his
schedule?" I ask Griffin directly, and he frowns.
"His yacht, the Mabuse, is moored off North Point - he's not using the marina at Marigot for
some reason. While he's on the island he's got a villa on Mount Paradis, but I think you're
more likely to find he's staying on the yacht." Griffin crosses his arms. "Thinking of paying
him a visit”
?"Just puzzled." I glance at the wall where someone has pinned a large map of the island.
North Point is about as far away from Maho Beach — and the casino — as you can get. It
must be close to fifteen kilometers, and longer if you cover the distance by boat. "I was
wondering how he got here last night.”
"Simple; he flew." Griffin looks as if he's sucking a lemon.
"Calling that monster a yacht is like calling a Boeing 777 a company light twin.”
"How big is it?" asks Brains.
"Naval Intelligence knows." Griffin walks over to the sideboard and pulls out a bottle of tonic
water. "Seeing as how it started life as a Russian Krivak-III-class frigate.”
"Wheel Do you think they'd let me drive it?" Pinky's somehow slipped in under the radar.
"Hey, Bob: catch!" He chucks me a key fob.
"You're telling me Billington owns a warship?" I sit down heavily.
"No, I'm telling you his yacht used to be one." Griffin fills his glass and puts the bottle down.
He looks amused, for I malicious values of amusement. "A Type 113 5 guided missile
frigate, to be precise, late model with ASW helicopter and vertical launch system. The
Russians sold it off to the Indian Navy during a hard currency hiccup a few years ago, and
they sold it in turn when they commissioned the first of their own guided missile destroyers.
I'm pretty sure they took out the guns and VLS before they decommissioned it, but they left in
the helideck and engines, and it can make close to forty knots when the skipper wants to go
somewhere in a hurry. Billington sank a fortune into converting it, and now it's one of the
largest luxury yachts in the world, with a swimming pool where the nuclear missile launchers
used to be.”
"Jesus." It's not as if I was planning to do the scuba-diveand- climb-aboard thing — for
starters, I know just enough about diving to realize I'd probably drown — but when Angleton
mentioned a yacht I wasn't thinking in terms of battleships. "What's he use it for”
?"Oh, this and that." Griffin sounds even more amused. "I hear it comes in handy for water
skiing. More realistically, he can zip anywhere in the Caribbean in about twelve hours.
Chopper into Miami brief excursion out to sea, chopper into Havana, and nobody's any the
wiser. Go visit his bankers in Grand Cayman, entertain visiting billionaires, hold meetings in
real secrecy and we can't keep an eye on him without getting the Navy involved.”
I can almost see the cards he's got stuffed up his sleeve.
"What's your point”

?"My point?" He stares at me. "My point is that I happen to know a damn sight more about
what's going on in my patch than all of you lot put together, or the clowns at head office for
that matter. And I would appreciate it if you'd run any harebrained schemes past me before
you put them into practice just in case you're about to put your foot in it.
Human Resources may have told you that I'm a garden leave case and you're reporting
direct to Angleton, but you might also like to consider the possibility that Human Resources
couldn't find their arse with a map, a periscope, and a tub of Vaseline.”
Boris rises to the bait: "Am not possible commenting on Human Resources!”
Pinky snorts loudly.
I shrug: "Okay, I'll run any harebrained schemes I hatch past you if you give me the benefit of
your advice. But if it's just as well with you, I need to go check in with my liaison.”
And I still have to call Angleton - who told Griffin about his control issues? "Then I've got to
pick up some clothes and go wangle myself an invitation aboard the . . . What did you say
the yacht was called”
?"The Mabuse," Griffin repeats. His cheek twitches. "And Charlie Victor is in town. You
ought to take precautions.”
"Sure." If the bastard thinks he can spook me that easily he's got another thing coming.
"Boris, any immediate updates”
?Boris shakes his head: "Not yet.”
"Okay, then I'll be going." And before Griffin can object I'm out the door.
I need to get my head together, so I start by heading for the tailor's shop they pointed me at
back in Darmstadt. After half an hour of wandering among fast-food concessions, tourist
traps, and free cosmetic sample stands I find it, and half an hour later I'm back in my room
unwrapping — "What is this shit?" I ask myself, bemused. Whoever ordered it either didn't
have a clue what I normally wear or didn't care.
There's a lightweight suit, a bunch of shirts, a choice of ties — I corral them in the wardrobe
and lock it carefully, in case they sneak out and try to strangle me in the night — and the
nearest thing to wearable clothing is a polo shirt and a pair of chinos. Which are not only
totally un-me, they're not even black. "Shit!" I blew out of Darmstadt with nothing but the
business suit and a borrowed toilet bag: it's this or nothing. I make the best of a bad job, and
end up looking like a second-rate parody of my rather. I give up. I'll just have to go shopping,
once I can find some cheap broadband access. Maybe Think Geek can ship me a care
package by express airmail? I pick up my Treo — not the crazy mechanical phonegun but
real, reliable, understandable electronics - and head down to the car park. I hunt among the
pickups and sports cars until I find the Smart Fortwo. I stare at it and it stares right back at
me, mockingly. It's not even a convertible.
"Someone's going to regret this," I mutter as I strap it on.
Then it's the moment of truth: time for me to go check out a dream of a ghost of a memory,
to see if someone's waiting for Marc the doorman to deliver a body to North Bay.
It's already getting hot, the sun burning through the deep blue vault of sky that arches
overhead. I fumble my way out of Maho Bay and onto the road that winds towards the
northern end of the island. Motoring here is just about as different from the autobahn
experience as it's possible to get and still be on wheels, for which I'm fervently grateful. The
road is narrow, barely graded and marked, and winds around the landscape as it climbs the
picturesque but steep slopes of Mount Paradis. I pass numerous signs for tourist beaches,
brightly painted shop fronts and restaurants . . . it's resort central. I crawl along behind a
gaggle of taxis and a tourist 4x4 for about half an hour, then we're over the top of the island.
The road more or less comes to a dead end in a depres- sion between two hills, and I pull
over beside a road sign to take a look. The sign says: ANSE MARCEL. There's a scattering
of shops and hotels alongside the road, shaded by palm trees. On the downhill slope, I can
see the sea in the distance, out across a brilliant white expanse of beach dotted with
sunbathing tourists. Off to one side a hundred meters away, a clump of masts huddle
together in a small marina. Looks like it's time to get out and walk.

I get out, feeling horribly overdressed: most of the punters hereabouts are wearing clothes
that go well with thongs and sandals. Idyllic tropical beach paradise, with added ultraviolet
burns and sand itch. And they're all so buff! I'm your typical pallid cube-maggot, and the
six-pack is a high-cost luxury extra on that model. I shuffle down the street towards the
marina, feeling about six centimeters tall, hoping that I'm wrong: that nobody's there, and I
can go back to the hotel and write it all off as a bad dream brought on by vodka and jet lag.
The marina is little more than three piers with sailboats tied up on either side; two larger
motorboats belonging to tour companies bob at the outer edge. A couple of guys are
working on one of these, so I head up the pier until I can get a better view.
"Bonjour." One of the boatmen is watching me. "You want something”
?"Possibly." I glance out to sea. A distinctly dead-looking seagull sits on a bollard nearby,
watching me stonily.
Watching me watching you . . . it suddenly occurs to me that coming out here on my own
might be a bad idea if Billington is serious about his privacy and is also, as Angleton put it,
a player. "Does a boat from the Mabuse call here”
?"I think you want to find somewhere else to hang out.”
He smiles at me but the expression doesn't reach his eyes.
He's holding a mallet and a big chisel.
"Why? They friends of yours?" I feel an itching in my fingertips and a distinct taste of blue -
my wards are responding to something nearby. Mr. Mallet glares at me. He's about my age,
but built like a brick outhouse and tanned to the color of old oak. "Or maybe they aren't”
?"Non." He turns his head and spits across the side of the pier.
"Pierre—" The other guy lets loose a stream of rapid-fire, heavily accented French that I
can't hope to follow. He's in late middle-age, receding hair, salt-and-pepper beard: the
picturesque Old Salt hanging out on the jetty, image only slightly spoiled by his Mickey
Mouse tee shirt and blue plastic sandals. Pierre - Mr. Mallet - stares at me suspiciously.
Then he turns and looks out across the sapphire sea.
I follow his gaze. There's a warship in the distance, a kilometer offshore: long, low, and lean,
with a sharply raked superstructure. It takes me a few seconds to realize that it's the wrong
color, gleaming white rather than the drab gray most navies paint their tubs.
I glance back at the pier. The goddamn seagull is staring at me, its eyes white and milky
like— Goddamn.
"Do you know a guy called Marc, from Maho Beach?" I ask.
A palpable hit: Pierre's head whips round towards me. He raises the chisel warningly as the
seagull opens its beak. I pull out my Treo. "Smile for the camera, birdie.”
The seagull stares at my smartphone accusingly, then topples off its perch and falls into the
water like a dead weight.
Which, in fact, is exactly what it is now that I've zapped it with my patent undead garbage
collector.
"We've got about two minutes before they send another watcher," I say conversationally. "If
they're awake, of course.
So. Do you know Marc”
?"What's it worth?" He lowers the chisel, looking at me as if I've sprouted a second head.
I pull out two fifty-euro notes. "This.”
"Yeah, I know Marc.”
"Describe him.”
"Oily bastard. Works out at the gym down the back of Rue de Hollande in Marigot, fills in on
the door of the Casino Royale as a doorman and bouncer. He's the one you're asking
about”
?I pull out two more notes. "Tell me everything you know.”
The old guy glares at him, mutters something, gets up, and goes aboard the boat.
"I'll take those." Pierre puts down the chisel and I hand him the notes. "Marc is a piece of
shit. He hits on tourist women and takes them for everything they've got. Nearly got himself

arrested a year ago but they couldn't prove anything - or find the woman. Sometimes—"
Pierre glances over his shoulder "—you see him in the early morning with some broad,
going out on his boat. That one, there." He nods at a dinghy with a mounting for an outboard
engine.
"Meeting up with another boat. The women don't come back.”
I have A heavy, sick feeling. "Would this other boat happen to be from the Mabuse?" I ask.
He looks at me sidelong. "I didn't say anything," he says.
I nod. 'Thanks for your time.”
"Thank you for taking out the trash." He gestures at the bollard where the bird was watching.
"Now get out of here and please don t come back.”
7: NIGHTMARE BEACH I 'M TWO KILOMETERS DOWN THE ROAD TO GRAND Case
and the coastal route to Marigot when I realize I'm being tailed. I'm crap at this private eye
stuff, but it's not exactly rocket science on Saint Martin — the roads are only two lanes wide.
There's a Suzuki SUV about a quarter-kilometer behind me. I speed up, it speeds up. I slow
down, it slows down. So I pull over and park at a tourist spot and watch it tool past. Just
before the next bend in the road it pulls over. How tedious, I think. Then I get on the ethereal
blower.
**Ramona? You busy?** **Powdering my nose. What's up?** I stare at the car ahead of me,
trying to visualize it well enough to shove it at her as a concrete image. **I've got company.
The unwelcome kind.** **Surprise!** I can feel her chuckle. **What did you do to annoy
them?** **Oh, this 'n' that.** I'm not about to go into my snooping activities just yet.
**Billington's yacht is anchored off North Point, and some of the locals aren't too happy
about if ## ••Surprise indeed. So what's with the car?** **They've been tailing me!** I sound
a bit peevish to myself- petulant, even. **And Billington's got the marina under surveillance.
He's using seagulls as watchers. That makes me nervous.** I couldn't care less about the
flying sea-rats, but I'm not terribly happy about the fact that someone aboard that yacht has
got the nous to run the Invocation of Al-Harijoun on them, not to mention having enough
spare eyeballs to monitor the surveillance take from several hundred zombie seagulls.
**So why don't you lose them?** I take a deep breath. **That would entail breaking the traffic
regulations, you know? I'm not supposed to do that.
It's called drawing undue attention to yourself. Besides, there's a whole stack of documents
to file, starting with a form A-19/B, or they'll throw the book at me. I could lose my license!**
**What, your license to kill?** **No, my license to drive!** I thump the steering wheel in
frustration. **This isn't some kind of spy farce: I'm just a civil servant. I don't have a license to
kill, or authorization to poke my nose into random corners of the world and meet interesting
people and hurt them. Capisce?** For a moment I feel dizzy. I pinch the bridge of my nose
and take a deep breath: my vision fades out for a scary moment, then comes back with this
weird sense that I'm looking through two sets of eyes at once. **What the fuck?** **It's me,
Bob. I can't keep this up for long . . . Look, you see that SUV parked ahead?** **Yeah?** I'm
looking at it but it doesn't register.
**The guy who just got out of it and is walking toward you is carrying a gun. And he doesn't
look particularly friendly. Now I know you're hung-up on the speed limit and stuff, but can I
suggest you—** There is one good thing about driving a Smart car: it has a turning circle
tighter than Ramona's hips. I hit the gas and yank the wheel and make the tires squeal,
rocking from side to side so badly that for a moment I'm afraid the tiny car is about to topple
over. The bad guy raises his pistol slowly but I've floored the accelerator and it's not that
slow in a straight line. My wards are prickling and tickling like a sandstorm and there's a
faint blue aura crawling over the dash.
Something smacks into the tailgate—a stray pebble, I tell myself as I swerve back up the
coast road towards Orleans.
**I knew you could do it!** Ramona enthuses like she's channeling a cheerleader. **What
did you do to get them riled up like that?** **I asked about Marc.** I glance in the mirror and
flinch; my tail is back in the SUV and has gotten it turned around.

It's kicking up a plume of dust as it follows me. I swerve wildly to overtake a Taurus full of
pensioners who're drifting along the crest of the road with their left turn signal flashing
continuously, then I overcompensate to avoid rolling the Smart.
**That wasn't very rucking clever of you, was it?** she asks sharply. **Why did you do it?**
Irrelevant distractions nag at the edges of my perception: a twin-engine pond-hopper buzzes
overhead on final approach into Grand Case Airport.
**I wanted to see if my suspicions were correct.** And if I was dreaming or not.
There's a van ahead, moving slowly, so I pull out to look past it and there's an oncoming
truck so I pull back in. And behind me, closing the gap again, is the SUV. **I am going to
have to lose these guys before they phone ahead and get some muscle ahead of me on the
road to Philipsburg. Any ideas?** **Yes. I'll be on my way in about five minutes. Just stay
ahead of them for now.** **Be fast, okay? If you can't be safe.** I pull out recklessly and floor
the accelerator again, passing the van as the driver waves angrily at me. There's a kink in
the road ahead and I take it as fast as I dare. The Smart is bouncy and rolls frighteningly but
it can't be any worse at road-holding than the SUV tailing me, can it? **Just what are they
doing with the women?** **What women?** **The women Marc was kidnapping and selling
to the boat crew. Don't tell me you didn't know about that?** The Suzuki has pulled past the
van and is coming up behind me and I'm fresh out of side streets. From here, it's a
three-kilometer straight stretch around the foothills of Paradise Peak before we get to Orient
Beach and the fork down to the sea. After that, it's another five kilometers to the next turnoff.
I'm doing eighty and that's already too damn fast for this road. Besides, I feel like I'm driving
two cars at once, one of them a sawed-off subcompact and the other a topless
muscle-machine that dodges in and out of the tourist traffic like a steeplechaser weaving
through a queue of pensioners.
It's deeply confusing and it makes me want to throw up.
**What do you know about—** pause **—the abductions?** **Women. Young. Blonde. His
wife owns a cosmetics company and he looks too young. What conclusion would you
draw?** **He has a good plastic surgeon. Hang on.** The muscle car surges effortlessly
around another bus. Meanwhile the SUV has pulled even with me, and the driver is waving
his gun at me to pull over. I glance sideways once more and see his eyes. They look dead
and worse than dead, like he's been in the water for a week and nothing's tried eating him. I
recognize that look: they're using tele-operator-controlled zombies. Shit. My steering wheel
is crawling with sparks as the occult countermeasures cut in, deflecting their braineating
mojo.
I tense and hit the brakes, then push the cigarette lighter home in its socket during the
second it takes him to match my speed. We come to a halt side by side on the crest of a low
hill. The SUV's door opens and the dead guy with the gun gets out and walks over. I sniff:
there's a nasty fragrant smoke coming out of the lighter socket.
He marches stiffly round to my side door, keeping the gun in view. I keep my hands on the
steering wheel as he opens the door and gets in.
"Who are you?" I ask tensely. "What's going on”
?"You ask too many questions," says the dead man. His voice slurs drunkenly, as if he's not
used to this larynx, and his breath stinks like rotting meat. "Turn around. Drive back to Anse
Marcel." He points the gun at my stomach.
"If you say so." I slowly move one hand to the gearshift, then turn the car around. The SUV
sits abandoned and forlorn behind us as I accelerate away. I drive slowly, trying to drag
things out. The stink of decaying meat mingles with a weird aroma of burning herbs. The
steering wheel has sprouted a halo of fine blue fire and my skin crawls - I glance sideways
but there are no green sparks in his eyes, just the filmed-over lusterless glaze of a day-old
corpse. It's funny how death changes people: I startle when I recognize him.
"Drive faster." The gun pokes me in the ribs.
"How long have you had Marc?" I ask.
"Shut up.”

/ need Ramona. The smell of burning herbs is almost overpowering.
I reach out to her: **Phone me.** **What's the problem? I'm driving as fast as—** **Just
phone me, damn it! Dial my mobile now!** Fifteen or twenty endless seconds pass, then my
Treo begins to ring.
"I need to answer my phone," I tell my passenger. "I have to check in regularly.”
"Answer it. Say that everything is normal. If you tell them different I'll shoot you.”
I reach out and punch the call-accept button, angling the screen away from him. Then in
quick succession I punch the program menu button, and the pretty icon that triggers all the
car's countermeasures simultaneously.
I don't know quite what I was expecting. Explosions of sparks, spinning heads, a startling
spewage of ectoplasm? I get none of it. But Marc the doorman, who managed to die of one
of the effects of terminal cocaine abuse just before Ramona's succubus could suck him dry,
sighs and slumps like a dropped puppet. Unfortunately he's not belted in so he falls across
my lap, which is deeply inconvenient because we're doing fifty kilometers an hour and he's
blocking the steering wheel. Life gets very exciting for a few seconds until I bring the car to
rest by the roadside, next to a stand of palm trees.
I wind down the window and stick my head out, taking in deep gasping breaths of blessedly
wormwood- and fetor-free ocean air. The fear is just beginning to register: I did it again, I
realize, I nearly got myself killed. Sticking my nose into something that isn't strictly any of my
business. I shove Marc out of my lap, then stop. What am 1 going to do with him?
It is generally not a good idea when visiting foreign countries to be found by the cops
keeping company with a corpse and a gun. An autopsy will show he had a cardiac arrest
about a day ago, but he's in my car and that's the sort of thing that gives them exactly the
wrong idea — talk about circumstantial evidence! "Shit," I mutter, looking around.
Ramona's on her way but she's driving a two-seater. Doubleshit.
My eyes fasten on the stand of trees. Hmm.
I restart the engine and reverse up to the trees. I park, then get out and start wrestling with
Marc's body. He's surprisingly heavy and inflexible, and the seats are inconveniently
form-fitting, but I manage to drag him across to the driver's side with a modicum of sweating
and swearing.
He leans against the door as if he's sleeping off a bender.
I retrieve the Treo, blip the door shut, then start doodling schematics in a small application I
carry for designing fieldexpedient incantations. There's no need to draw a grid round the car
- the Smart's already wired — so as soon as I'm sure I've got it right I hit the upload button
and look away. When I look back I know there's something there, but it makes the back of
my scalp itch and my vision blur. If I hadn't parked the Car there myself I could drive right
past without seeing it.
I shamble back to the roadside and look both ways — there's no pavement — then start
walking along the hard shoulder towards Orient Beach.
It's still morning but the day is going to be baking hot.
Trudging along a dusty road beneath a spark-plug sky without a cloud in sight gets old fast.
There are beaches and sand off to one side, and on the other a gently rising hillside covered
with what passes for a forest hereabouts — but I'm either overdressed (according to my
sweating armpits) or underdressed (if I acknowledge the impending sunburn on the back of
my neck and arms). I'm also in a foul mood.
De-animating Marc has brought back the sense of guilt from Darmstadt: the conviction that if
I'd just been slightly faster off the ball I could have saved Franz and Sophie and the others.
It's also confirmed that my dreams of Ramona are the real thing: so much for keeping a fig
leaf of deniability. She was right: I'm an idiot. Finally there's Billington, and the activities of
his minions. Seeing that long, hungry hull in the distance, recognizing the watcher on the
quay, has given me an ugly, small feeling. It's as if I'm an ant chewing away at a scab on an
elephant's foot — a foot that can be raised and brought down on my head with crushing
force should the pachyderm ever notice my existence.

After I've been walking for about half an hour, a bright red convertible rumbles out of the heat
haze and pulls up beside me. I think it's a Ferrari, though I'm not much good at car spotting;
anyway, Ramona waves at me from the driver's seat. She's wearing aviator mirrorshades, a
bikini, and a see-through silk sarong. If my libido wasn't on the ropes from the events of the
past twelve hours my eyes would be halfway out of my head: as it is, the best I can manage
is a tired wave.
"Hi, stranger. Looking for a lift?" She grins ironically at me.
"Let's get out of here." I flop into the glove-leather passenger seat and stare at the trees
glumly.
She pulls off slowly and we drive in silence for about five minutes. "You could have gotten
yourself killed back there,”
she says quietly. "What got into you”
?I count the passing palm trees. After I reach fifty I let myself open my mouth. "I wanted to
check out a hunch.”
Without taking her eyes off the road she reaches over with her right hand and squeezes my
left leg. "I don't want you getting yourself killed," she says, her voice toneless and
overcontrolled.
I pay attention to her in a way I can't describe, feeling for whatever it is that connects us. It's
deep and wide as a river, invisible and fluid and powerful enough to drown in. What I sense
through it is more than I bargained for. Her attention's fixed on the road ahead but her
emotions are in turmoil. Grief, anger at me for being a damn fool, anxiety, jealousy.
Jealousy} "I didn't know you cared," I say aloud. And I'm not sure I want you to care, I think to
myself.
"Oh, it's not about you. If you get yourself killed what happens to me”
?She wants it to sound like cynical self-interest but there's a taste of worry and confusion in
her mind that undermines every word that comes out of her mouth.
"Something big is going down on this island," I say, tacitly changing the subject before we
end up in uncharted waters.
"Billington's crew has got watchers out. Seagull monitors controlled from, um, somewhere
else. And then I ran into Marc.
Judging by the state of my wards every goddamn corpse on the island must be moving - why
the hell haven't they chained up the graveyards? And what's this thing they've got about
single female tourists”
?"That might not be part of Billington's core program.”
Ramona sounds noncommittal but I can tell she knows more than she's admitting. "It might
be his crew carrying on behind his back. Or something less obvious.”
"Come on! If his sailors are kidnapping single females, you think he's not going to know
about it”
?Ramona turns her head to look me in the eye: "I think you underestimate just how big this
scheme is.”
"Then why won't you teil me?" I complain.
"Because I'm—" She bites her tongue. "Listen. It's a nice day. Let's go for a walk, huh”
?"A walk — why?" I get the most peculiar sense that she's trying to tell me something without
putting it into words.
"Let's just say I wanna see your boxers, okay”
?She grins. Her good humor's more fragile than it looks, but just for a moment I like what I
can see. "Okay." I yawn, the aftereffects of the chase catching up with me. "Where do you
want to go”
?"There's a spot near Orient Bay.”
She drives past tourists and local traffic in silence. I keep my mouth shut. I'm not good at
handling emotional stuff and Ramona confuses the hell out of me. It's almost enough to
make me wish Mo was around; life would be a lot simpler.
We hit a side road and drive along it until we pass a bunch of the usual beach-side shops

and restaurants and a car park. Ramona noses the Ferrari between a Land Rover and a
rack of brightly painted boneshaker bicycles and kills the engine. "C'mon," she says,
jumping out and popping open the trunk. "I bought you a towel, trunks, and sandals.”
"Huh”
?She prods me in the ribs. "Strip off!" I look at her dubiously but her expression is mulish.
There's a concrete convenience nearby so I wander over to it and go inside. I pull my polo
shirt off, then lose the shoes, socks, and trousers before pulling on the swimming trunks. I
have my limits: the smartphone I keep. I go back outside. Ramona is just about hopping up
and down with impatience. "What are you doing with that phone?" she asks. "Come on, it'll
be safe in the glove compartment.”
"Nope. Not doing." I cross my arms defensively. The Treo doesn't fit nicely in the baggy
boxer-style trunks' pocket, but I'm not handing it over. "You want my wallet, you can have it,
but not my Treo! It's already saved my life once today.”
"I see." She stares at me, chewing her lip thoughtfully.
"Listen, will you turn it off?" f "What? But it's in sleep mode—”
"No, I want you to switch it right off. No electronics is best, but if you insist on carrying—”
I raise an eyebrow and she shakes her head in warning. I look her in the eye. "Are you sure
this is necessary”
?"Yes.”
My stomach flip-flops. No electronics? That's heavy. In fact it's more than heavy: to compute
is to be, and all that. I don't mind going without clothes, but being without a microprocessor
is truly stripping down. It's like asking a sorcerer to surrender his magic wand, or a politician
to forswear his lies.
Haw far do I trust her? I wonder, then I remember last night, a moment of vulnerability on a
balcony overlooking the sea.
"Okay." I press and hold the power button until the phone chimes and the signal LED winks
out. No electronics. "What now”
?"Follow me." She picks up the towels, shuts the car trunk, and heads towards the beach.
While I wasn't looking she's shed the sarong: I can't keep my eyes from tracking the hypnotic
sway of her buttocks.
The sand is fine and white and the vegetation rapidly gives way to open beach. There's a
rocky promontory ahead, and various sunbathers have set up their little patches; offshore,
the sailboards are catching the breeze. The sea is a huge, warm presence, sighing as
waves break across the reef offshore and subside before they reach us. Ramona stops and
bends forwards, rolls her briefs down her legs, and shrugs out of her bikini top. Then she
looks at me: "Aren't you going to strip off”
?"Hey, this is public—”
There's an impish gleam in her eyes. "Are you?" She straightens up and deliberately turns to
face me. "You're cute when you blush!”
I glance at the nearest tourists. Middle-aged spread and a clear lack of concealing fabric
drives the message home. "Oh, so it's a nudist beach.”
"Naturist, please. C'mon, Bob. People will stare if you don't.”
Nobody taught me how to say no when a beautiful naked woman begs me to take my
clothes off. I fumble my way out of my trunks and concentrate very hard on not concentrating
on her very visible assets. Luckily, she's Ramona. She's strikingly beautiful - with or without
the glamour, it doesn't matter — but I also find her intimidating. After a minute or so I figure
out I'm not about to sprout a semaphore pole in public, so I begin to relax. When in Rome, et
cetera.
Ramona picks her way past the clots of slowly basting sunseekers - I notice with displeasure
a scattering of heads turning to track us - and detours around a battered hut selling ice
cream and cold drinks. The beach is narrower at this end, and proportionately less
populated as she veers towards the waterline. "Okay, this'll do. Mark the spot, Bob." She
unrolls her towel and plants it on the sand. Then she holds out a waterproof baggie. "For

your phone—sling it around your neck, we're going swimming.”
"We're going swimming?" **Naked?** She looks at me and sighs. "Yes Bob, we're going
swimming in the sea, bare-ass naked. Sometimes I despair of you . . .”
Oh boy. My head's spinning. I bag up my phone, make sure it's sealed, and walk into the sea
until I'm up to my ankles, looking down at the surf swirling grains of sand between and over
my toes. I can't remember when I last went swimming.
It's cool but not cold. Ramona wades into the waves until she's hip-deep then turns round
and beckons to me. "What are you waiting for”
?I grit my teeth and plod forwards until the water's over my knees. There's an island in the
distance, just a nub of trees waving slowly above a thin rind of sand. "Are you planning on
wading all the way out there”
?"No, just a little farther." She winks at me, then turns and wades out deeper. Soon those
remarkable buttocks are just a pale gleam beneath the rippling waves.
I follow her in. She pitches forwards and starts swimming.
Swimming isn't something I've done much of lately, but it's like riding a bicycle—you'll
remember how to do it and your muscles will make sure you don't forget the next morning. I
splash around after her, trying to relearn my breast stroke by beating the waves into
submission. Damn, but this is different from the old Moseley Road Swimming Baths.
**This way,** she tells me, using our speech-free intercom.
**Not too far. Can you manage ten minutes without a rest?** **I hope so.** The waves aren't
strong inside the barrier formed by the reef, and in any event they're driving us back
onshore, but I hope she's not planning on going outside the protective boundary.
**Okay, follow me.** She strikes out away from the sunbathers and towards the outer reef, at
an angle. Pretty soon I'm gasping for breath as I flail the water, trailing after her. Ramona is a
very strong swimmer and I m out of practice, and my arms and thigh muscles are screaming
for mercy within minutes. But we're approaching the reef, the waves are breaking over it —
and to my surprise, when she stands up the water barely reaches her breasts.
"What the hell?" I flap towards her, then switch to treading water, feeling for the surface
beneath my feet. I'm half-expecting to kick razor-sharp coral, but what I find myself standing
on is smooth, slippery-slick concrete.
"No electronics, because someone might have tapped into it. No clothing because you
might be bugged. Seawater because it's conductive; if they'd tattooed a capacitive chart on
your scalp while you were asleep it'd be shorted out by now. No bugs because we've got a
high-volume white noise source all around us." She frowns at me, deadly serious.
"You're clean, monkey-boy, except for whatever compulsion filters they've dropped on you,
and any supernatural monitors.”
"Shit." Enlightenment dawns: Ramona has dragged me out here because she thinks I'm
bugged. "What's down below us . . .”
?"It's a defensive emplacement. The French got serious about that in the early '60s, before
the treaty arrangements got nailed down. You're standing on a discordance node, one of a
belt of sixteen big ones designed to protect the east coast of Saint Martin against
necromantic incursions. If you swim through it, any thaumaturgic bugs they've planted on you
will be wiped — it's a huge occult degaussing rig. Which is one of the reasons I brought you
here.”
"But if it's a defensive emplacement, how come the zombies up at—" I bite my tongue.
"Exactly." She looks grave. "That's part of what's wrong here, which is the other thing I want
to check out. About four months ago one of our routine geomantic surveillance flights
noticed that the defensive belt was - not broken, exactly, but showed signs of tampering.
One of Billington's subsidiaries, a construction company, landed the contract to maintain the
concrete ballast units. Do I need to draw you a diagram”
?Here we are surrounded by ocean, and my mouth is dry as a bone. "No. You think
somebody's running a little import/export business, right”
?"Yes.”

I take a deep breath. "Anything else”
?"I wanted to get you alone, with no bugs.”
"Hey, you only had to ask!" I grin, my heart pounding inappropriately.
"Don't take this the wrong way." She smiles ruefully. "You know what would happen if—”
"Only kidding," I say, abruptly nervous. The conversation is veering dangerously close to
territory I'm uncomfortable with. I look at her — correction: I force my eyes to track about
thirty degrees up until I'm looking at her face. She's watching me right back, and I find I can't
help wondering what it would be like to .. . well. Sure she's attached to a level three glamour
so tight you'd need a scalpel to peel it off her, but I can probably cope with whatever's
underneath it, I think.
Her daemon is something else again, but there are things we could do, without intercourse .
. . but what about Mo? My conscience finally catches up with my freewheeling speculation.
Well, what indeed? But the thought drags me back down to Earth after a fashion. I manage
to get my worst instincts under control then ask: "Okay, so why did you really bring me out
here”
?First, I need to know: Why the fuck did you go rushing off to Anse Marcel “
?The question hits me like a bucket of cold water in the face. "I, I, I wanted to check
something out," I stutter. It sounds lame. "Last night, I was inside Marc's head. He was going
to—" I trail off.
'You were inside his head”
?"Yes, and it wasn't a nice place to be," I snap "You were inside—" She blinks rapidly. "Tell
me what you picked up”
?"But I thought you knew—”
"No," she says tightly. "I didn't know it went that far.
This is as new to me as it is to you. What did you learn?" I lick my lips. "Marc had an
arrangement. Every couple of weeks he'd pick up a single female who wouldn't be missed
and he'd — let's not go into that. Afterwards he'd drop a geas on her, a control ring he'd
learned from the customer, and he'd drive her up to Anse Marcel where a couple of guys
would come in on a boat to pick the victim up. They paid in coke, plus extras." "Ri-ight."
Rarnona pauses. "That makes sense." I can feel it snapping into place in her mind, another
part of a lethal booby-trapped jigsaw puzzle she's trying to solve. I realize in the silence
between heartbeats that we've stopped pretending.
It feels as if some huge external force is pushing us together, squeezing us towards
intimacy. She gave me an opening to pretend that I wasn't involved, and I didn't take it. But
why?
I wouldn't normally do this kind of thing; maybe the tropical clime's addled me.
"What part of the picture does it fit?" I meet her gaze. I have the most peculiar feeling that I'm
watching myself watching her through two pairs of eyes.
"Billington's diversified into a variety of fields. You shouldn't think of him as simply a
computer industry mogul.
He's got his tentacles into a lot more pies than Silicon Valley.”
"But kidnapping? That's ridiculous! It can't possibly be cost-effective, even if he's selling
them off for spare parts." I swallow and shut up: she's broadcasting a horrible sense of
claustrophobic dread, fear rising off her like a heat haze. I shuffle, grounding my feet against
the concrete defense platform, and for a moment her skin acquires a silvery sheen.
"What is it? Is he—”
"You know better than to say it aloud, Bob.”
"I was afraid that was what you were trying to tell me." I look away, towards the breakers
foaming across the reef and the open seas beyond. And it's not just her sense of dread
anymore.
Some types of invocation need blood, and some require entire bodies. Whatever lives in the
back of Ramona's head is a trivial, weak example; the creature I ran across in Santa Cruz
and Amsterdam three years ago was a much more powerful one. Ramona is afraid that

we're dealing with a life-eating horror that lives off the entropy burst that comes from draining
a human soul: I'm pretty sure she's right. Which means the next question to ask is, who on
Earth would summon such a thing, and why? And as I'm pretty sure we know the answer to
who . ..
"What's Billington trying to do? What is he summoning up”
?"We don't know.”
"Any guesses?" I ask sarcastically. "The Deep Ones, maybe”
?Ramona shakes her head angrily. "Not them! Never them." The sense of dread is choking,
oppressive: she feels it personally, I realize.
I stare at her. That flash of silver again, the water lapping around her chest, drawing my eyes
back towards those amazingly perfect breasts — I fight to filter out the distraction.
This isn't me, is it? It's hard work, fighting the glamour. I want to see her as she really is.
Taking a deep breath I force myself back to the matter in hand: "What makes you so sure
the Deep Ones aren't behind him? You're holding out on me.
Why”
?"Because they don't think that way. And yes, I am fucking holding out on you." She glares at
me, and I can feel her wounded pride and defensive anger fighting against something else:
Concern? Worry? "This is all going wrong. I brought you out here so I could tell you why
you're being kept in the dark, not to pick a fight—”
"And here I was thinking you wanted me for my body." I hold my hands up before she has
time to swear at me: "I'm sorry, but have you got any idea just how bloody distracting that
glamour is?" It's amazing and frightening and beautiful, and it makes it a real bitch to try to
concentrate on a conversation about subterfuge and lies without wondering what horrors
she's concealing from me.
Ramona stares at me, until I can feel her inside my head, watching herself through my
glamour-ensnared eyes. "Okay, monkey-boy: you want it, you got it." Her voice is flat and
hard. "Just remember, you asked for it.”
She lets go of the anchor of the glamour she's been clinging on to. The constant repulsive
force emanating from the concrete countermeasure emplacement we're standing on blows it
away, like a hat in a hurricane — and I see Ramona as she truly is. Which gives me two very
big surprises.
I gasp. I can't help myself. "You're one of them!" I meet her clear emerald gaze. And, quietly:
"Wow.”
Ramona says nothing, but one perfect nostril flares minutely. Her skin has a faint silvery
iridescent sheen to it, like the scales of a fish; her hair is long and green as glass, framing a
face with higher cheekbones and a wider mouth, rising from an inhumanly perfect long neck,
the skin broken by two rows of slits above her clavicle. Her breasts are smaller, not much
larger than her nipples, and two tinier ones adorn her rib cage beneath them. She raises her
right hand and spreads her fingers, revealing the delicate tracery of webbing. "So what do
you think of me now, monkey-boy”
?I swallow. She's like a sculpture in quicksilver, created by inhuman sea-dwelling aliens who
have taken the essence of human female beauty and customized it to meet their need for an
artificial go-between who can walk among the lumpen savages of the arid continental
surfaces. "I've met half— sorry, the sea-born — before. At Dunwich. But not like, uh, you.
Uh. You're different." I goggle at her, my mouth open like a fish. Different is an
understatement and a half. The glamour she customarily wears doesn't make her look
unnaturally beautiful to human eves; rather, it conceals the more exotic aspects of her
physiognomy. Strip it away and she's devastating, as unlike the weak-chinned followers of
St. Monkfish as it's possible to imagine.
"So you've met the country cousins." Her cheek twitches.
"Yes, I can understand your surprise." She stares at me, and I'm not sure whether she's
disappointed or surprised. "So do you still think I'm a monster”
?"I think you're a—" I grind to a stop, before I can push my foot any further down my throat.

"Urn." An inkling comes to me. "Let me guess. Your people. Go-betweens, like the colony at
Dunwich. And you were given to the BC and they dropped the, your daemon on you to
control you. Am I right”
?"I can neither confirm nor deny anything to do with my employers," she says with the
flat-voiced emptiness of a necromancer's answering machine, before snapping back into
focus: "My folks lived offBaja California. That's where I grew * up." For a moment her eyes
overflow with a sense of loss.
"The Deep Ones did . . . well, they did what they did at Dunwich. My folks have been
go-betweens for generations, able to pass as human and visit the depths. But we're not
really at home among either species. We're constructs, Bob.
And now you know why I use the glamour!" she adds harshly. "There's no need for flattery. I
know damn well what I look like to you people.”
You people: Ouch! "You're not a monster. Exotic, yes." I can't look away from her. I try to pull
my eyes away from those perfect breasts and I keep looking down and there's another
pair—"It just takes a little getting used to. But I don't mind, not really. I've already gotten over
it." Down in the Laundry compound at Dunwich they've got a technical term for human
employees who start spending too much time skinny-dipping with a snorkel: fish-fuckers. I've
never really seen the attraction before, but with Ramona it's blindingly obvious. "You're as
attractive without the glamour as with it. Maybe more so.”
"You're just saying that to fuck with my head." I can taste her bitter amusement. "Admit it!”
"Nope." I take a deep breath and duck under the water, then kick off towards her. I can open
my eyes here: everything is tinged pale green but I can see. Ramona dodges sideways then
grabs me by the waist and we tumble beneath the reflective ceiling, grappling and pushing
and shoving. I get my head above water for long enough to pull in a lungful of air, then she
drags me under and starts tickling me. I convulse, but somehow whenever I really need air
she's pushing me up above water rather than trying to pull me down.
Weirdly, I seem to need much less air than I ought to. I can feel the gills working powerfully in
her pleural cavity; it's as if there's some kind of leakage between us, as if she's helping
oxygenate both our bloodstreams. When she kisses me she tastes of roses and oysters.
Finally, after a few minutes of rubbing and fondling we settle to the bottom and lie, arms and
legs entangled, in the middle of the circuit-board tracery of gold that caps the concrete table.
**Fish-fucker!** She mocks me. *'"i * **lt takes two to tango, squid-girl. Anyway, we haven't.
I wouldn't dare.** **Coward!** She laughs ruefully, taking the sting out of the word. Silver
bubbles trickle and bob towards the surface from her mouth. **Y'know, it's hard work
breathing for both of us. If you want to help, go up to the surface . . .** **Okay.** I let go and
allow myself to stand up. As I pull away from her I feel a tightness in my chest that rapidly
grows: we may be destiny-entangled, but the metabolic leakage is strictly short-range. I
break surface and shake my head, gasping for air, then look towards the beach. There's a
loud ringing in my ears, a deep bass rattle that resonates with my jaw, and a shadow dims
the flashing sunlight on the reef.
Huh? I find myself looking straight up at the underside of a helicopter.
"Get down!" Ramona hisses through the deafening roar.
She wraps a hand around my ankle and yanks, pulling me under the surface. I hold my
breath and let her drag me down beside her—my chest eases — then I realize she's
pointing at a rectangular duct cover at one side of the concrete platform.
**Come on, we've got to get under cover! If they see us we're screwed!** **lf who see us?**
**Billington's thugs! That's his chopper up there.
Whatever you did must have really gotten them pissed.
We've got to get under cover before—** **Before what?** She's wrestling with the iron duct
cover, which is dark red with rust and thinly coated with polyps and other growths. I try to
ignore the tightness in my * chest and brace myself to help.
**That.** Something drops into the water nearby. I think it's rubbish at first, but then I see a
spreading red stain in the water. **Dye marker. For the divers.** **Whoops.** I grab hold of

the handles and brace myself, then put my back into it. **How long—** the grate begins to
move **—do we have?** **Fresh outa time, monkey-boy.** Shadows flicker in the turbid
waters on the other side of the coral barrier: barracuda or small sharks circling. My chest
aches with the effort of holding my breath and I think I've ripped open the skin on my hands,
but the grate is moving now, swinging up and out on a hinged arm. **C'mon in.** The
opening is about eighty by sixty, a tight squeeze for two: Ramona drops into it feet first then
grabs my hand and pulls me after.
**What is this?** I ask. I get an edgy, panicky feeling: we're dropping into a concrete-walled
tube with hand-holds on one side, and it's black as night inside.
**Quick! Pull the cover shut!** I yank at the hatch and it drops towards me heavily. I flinch as
it lands on top of the tunnel, and then I can't see anything but a vague phosphorescent glow. I
blink and look down. It's Ramona. She's breathing — if that's what you call it — like she's
running a marathon,-and she looks a bit peaked, and she's glowing, very dimly.
Bioluminescence.
**k's shut.** **Okay. Now follow me.** She begins to descend the tunnel, hand over hand. My
chest tightens.
**Where are we going?** I ask nervously.
**1 don't know — this isn't in the blueprints. Probably an emergency maintenance tunnel or
something. So how about we find out, huh?** I grab a rung and shove myself down towards
her, trying to ignore the panicky feeling of breathlessness and the weird sensations around
my collarbone. **Okay, so why not let's climb down a secret maintenance shaft in an
undersea occult defense platform while divers with spear guns who work for a mad
billionaire wait for us up top, hmm? What could possibly go wrong?** **Oh, you'd be
surprised.** She sounds as if she does this sort of thing every other week. Then, a second
later, I sense rather than feel her feet hit bottom: **Oh. Well that's a surprise,** she adds
conversationally.
And suddenly I realize I can't breathe underwater.
agio 3ds.-Kf.frij! I s a n t i %t'-23.im jwea 'M!v ,M* WB •.•• 8: WHITE HAT/BLACK HAT AN
ADVENTURE DEMANDS A HERO, AROUND WHOM the whole world circles; but what use
is a hero who can't even breathe under water?
To spare you Bob's embarrassment, and to provide a shark's-eye view of the turbid waters
through which he swims, it is necessary to pause for a moment and, as if in a dream—or an
oneiromantic stream ripped from the screen of Bob's smartphone—to cast your gaze
across the ocean towards events transpiring at exactly the same time, in an office in
London.
Do not fear for Bob. He'll be back, albeit somewhat moist around the gills.
"The Secretary will see you now, Miss O'Brien," says the receptionist.
O'Brien nods amiably at the receptionist, slides a bookmark into the hardback she's
reading, then stands up. This takes some time because the visitor's chair she's been
waiting in is ancient and sags like a hungry Venus' flytrap, and O'Brien is trying to keep her
grip on a scuffed black violin case. The receptionist watches her, bored as she shrugs her
khaki linen jacket into place, pats down a straying lock of reddish-brown hair, and walks
over towards the closed briefing- room door with the AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY
sign above it. She pauses with one hand on the doorknob. "By the way, it's Professor
O'Brien," she says, smiling to take the sting out of the words. "'Miss' sounds like something
you'd call a naughty schoolgirl, don't you think”
?The receptionist is still nodding wordlessly and trying to think of a comeback when O'Brien
closes the door and the red light comes on over the lintel.
The briefing room contains a boardroom table, six chairs, a jug of tap water, some paper
cups, and an ancient Agfa slide projector. All the fittings look to be at least a third of a
century old: some of them might even have seen service during the Second World War.
There used to be windows in two of the wails, but they were bricked up and covered over
with institutional magnolia paint some years ago. The lighting tubes above the table shed a

ghastly glare that gives everybody in the room the skin tint of a corpse — except for
Angleton, who looks mummified at the best of times.
"Professor O'Brien." Angleton actually smiles, revealing teeth like tombstones. "Do have a
seat.”
"Of course." O'Brien pulls one of the battered wooden chairs out from the table and sits
down carefully. She nods at Angleton, polite control personified. The violin case she places
on the tabletop.
"As a matter of curiosity, how are your studies proceeding”
?"Everything's going smoothly." She carefully aligns the case's neck in accordance with the
direction of the wards on Angleton's door. "You needn't worry on that account." Then she
exhausts her patiently husbanded patience. "Where's Andy Newstrom”
?Angleton makes a steeple of his fingers. "Andrew was unable to attend the meeting you
called at short notice. I believe he has been unexpectedly detained in Germany.”
O'Brien opens her mouth to say something, but Angleton raises a bony finger in warning: "I
have arranged an appropriate substitute to deputize for him.”
O'Brien swallows. "I see." Fingers drum on the body of the violin case. Angleton tracks them
with his eyes. "You know this isn't about my research," she begins, elliptically.
"Of course not." Angleton falls silent for a few seconds.
"Feel free to tell me exactly what you think of me, Dominique.”
Dominique — Mo — sends him a withering stare. "No thank you. If I get started you'll be late
for your next meeting.”
She pauses for a moment. Then she asks, with the deceptive mildness of a police
interrogator zeroing in on a confession: "Why did you do it”
?"Because it was necessary. Or did you think I would send him into the field on a whim”
?Mo's control slips for a second: her glare is hot enough to ignite paper.
"I'm sorry," he adds heavily. "But this was an unscheduled emergency, and Bob was the only
suitable agent who was available at short notice.”
"Really?" She glances at the black velvet cloth covering the files on his desk. "I know all
about your little tricks," she warns. "In case you'd forgotten.”
Angleton shrugs uncomfortably. "How could I? You're perfectly right, and we owe you a
considerable debt of gratitude for your cooperation in that particular incident. But
nevertheless—" he stares at the wall beside her chair, a whitepainted rectangle that doubles
as a projector screen "—we are confronted with AZORIAN BLUE HADES, and Bob is the
only field-certified executive who is both competent to deal with the matter and sufficiently
ignorant to be able to, ah, play the role with conviction. You, my dear, couldn't do this
particular job, you're too well-informed, leaving aside all the other aspects of the affair. The
same goes for myself, or for Andrew, or for Davidson, or Fawcett, or any of a number of
other assets Human Resources identified as preliminary candidates during the search
phase of the operation. And while we have plenty of other staff who are not cleared for
AZORIAN BLUE HADES, most of them are insufficiently prepared to meet its challenges.”
"Nevertheless." Mo's hand closes on the neck of her case "I'm warning you, Angleton. I know
you entangled Bob with a Black Chamber assassin and I know what the consequences are.
I know that unless someone collapses their superposition within about half a million
seconds, he's not coming back, at least not as himself. And I'm not putting up with the usual
excuses — 'he was the only round peg we had that fit that particular hole, it was in the
interests of national security' — you'd better see he comes back alive and in one body. Or I
am going to the Auditors.”
Angleton eyes her warily. O'Brien is one of very few people in the organization who would
make such a threat, and one of even fewer who might actually follow through on it. "I do not
believe that will be necessary," he says slowly.
"As it happens, I agreed to your request for a meeting because I intended to tap you for the
next phase. Contrary to the impression you may have received, I don't consider Bob to be
an expendable asset. But I believe you're allowing your relationship with him to color your

perceptions of the risk inherent in the situation. I assume you'd be willing to help bring him
back safe and sound”
?Mo nods sharply. "You know I would.”
"Good." Angleton glances at the door, then frowns. "I do believe Alan's late. That's not like
him.”
"Alan? Alan Barnes”
?"Yes.”
"What do you want him for”
?Angleton snorts. "A moment ago you were getting uptight about your boyfriend's security.
Now you're asking why I asked Captain Barnes—”
The door bursts open, admitting a wiry pint-sized tornado.
"Ah the fragrant Professor O'Brien! How you doing, Mo? And you, you old bat. What do you
want now?" The force of nature grins widely With his owlishly large glasses, *
leather-patched tweed jacket, and expanding bald spot he could pass for a schoolteacher
— if schoolteachers habitually wore shoulder holsters. Angleton pushes his spectacles up
on his nose. "I was explaining to Professor O'Brien that I've got a little job for you. Bob's
accepted the starring role in the approach plan for AZORIAN BLUE HADES and now it's
time to set up the payoff. Not unnaturally, Mo has expressed certain reservations about the
way the project has been conducted to date.
I believe that, in view of her special skills, she can make a valuable contribution to the
operation. What do you think”
?While Barnes is considering the question, Mo glances between the two of them. "This is a
setup!”
Barnes grins at her: "Of course it is!”
She looks at Angleton. "What do you want me to do”
?She grips the neck of her violin case tensely.
Barnes sniggers quietly, then pulls out a chair. Angleton doesn't deign to notice. Instead, he
reaches across the table and switches on the projector.
"You're going on vacation. Officially you're on leave, flagged as a home visit to your elderly
mother. That's because we can't rule out the possibility of an internal security leak,”
he adds.
Mo whistles tunelessly between her teeth. "Like that, is it”
?"Oh yes." A thin blade appears silently between Alan's fingers, as if it congealed out of thin
air. He begins to probe a cuticle on his other hand. "It's very like that indeed. And we want
you to look into it on your way to the main performance.”
"You'll be on board tomorrow's flight from Charles de Gaulle to Saint Martin. Your cover
identity is Mrs. Angela Hudson, the wife of a tire-and-exhaust magnate from Dorking."
Angleton slides a document wallet across the table towards Mo, who handles it as if it's
about to explode. "This is a weak cover. It's been cleared with Customs and Immigration at
both ends but it won't hold up to scrutiny.
On the other hand you won't have to use it for more than about forty-eight hours. After this
briefing, take yourself down to Wardrobe Department and they'll set you up with suitable
clothing and support equipment for Mrs. Hudson.
You may take—" he points at the violin case "—your instrument, and any other equipment
you deem necessary. You'll be staying at a hotel in Grand Case. You should be aware that
our local station chief, Jack Griffin, or someone working for him, has been compromised.
We want to keep you out of Billington's sights for as long as possible, so bypassing Griffin's
organization is top of your playlist. If you can identify the source of the leak and deal with it,
I'd be grateful.
Once you've settled in, Alan will be your backup. You'll be operating without a field controller;
if you need a shoulder to cry on you come straight to me.”
He turns to face Barnes. "Alan. Pick two of your best bricks. Make sure they're happy
working with booties, I don't want any interservice cock-ups. You'll be flying out pronto and

will rendezvous with HMS York, which is currently on APT(N). She's hosting a troop from M
squadron SBS under Lieutenant Hewitt, who has signed Section Three and is cleared for
level two liaison. The booties are available if you need additional muscle. Your job is to
provide backup for Professor O'Brien, who is poinr on this mission. In case you were
worried about BLUE HADES, Professor O'Brien speaks the language and is qualified to
liaise. She's also completed her certification in combat epistemology and can operate as
your staff philosopher, should circumstances require it. I have complete faith in her abilities
to complete the mission and bring Bob back.”
Angleton pauses for a moment. Then he adds: "In a real emergency - if HADES cooks off—
you've got a hot line of credit with HMS Vanguard, although if you have to use a big white
one I'm supposed to go to the board and get them to clear it with the Prime Minister first. So
let's not go there, shall we”
?Mo looks back and forth between the two spooks. "Would you mind not speaking in slang?
I know about Alan's men, but what's a 'big white one'“
?Barnes looks slightly distracted. "It's just a necessary backup precaution — I'll explain
later," he assures her. "For now, the main thing is, you'll be operating independently but you'll
have backup, starting with my lads and working up through the Royal Navy's North Atlantic
Patrol, right to the top if you need it. Unfortunately we're dealing with a really powerful
semiotic geas field — Billington's set things up so that we have to play by his rules - and that
limits our moves. It would be a really bad mistake for you to come inframe too soon." He
raises an eyebrow at Angleton. "Are we definitely moving into the endgame”
?Angleton shrugs. "It's beginning to look that way." He nods at Mo. "We'd prefer not to have
to do it this way, but our hands are unfortunately tied.”
Mo frowns. "Wouldn't it make more sense for me to fly out with Alan and his soldiers? I
mean, if you're borrowing a warship, why are you bothering with the undercover stuff?
What exactly do you expect me to do”
?Barnes snorts and raises an eyebrow at Angleton: "Are you going to tell her, or am I”
?"Ill do it." Angleton picks up the control to the slide projector.
"Would you mind switching off the lights”
?"Why the dog and pony show?" O'Brien demands, her voice rising.
"Because you need to understand the trick we're trying to play on the opposition before you
can deal the cards. And it's best if I illustrate . . .”
Events have echoes, and almost exactly two weeks earlier, a similar meeting took place on
another land mass.
While Bob continues to panic over his impending death by drowning, spare a thought for
Ramona. It's not her fault that she's in the fish tank with Bob, quite the opposite.
Given even the faintest shred of an excuse, she'd have managed to avoid this briefing in
Texas. Unfortunately her controllers are not interested in excuses. They want results.
And that's why we join her in the front seat of a Taurus, driving up a dusty unsurfaced lane
toward a sun-blasted ranch house in the middle of nowhere.
This is so not Ramona's scene. She's too smart to be a Valley Girl, but she grew up in that
part of the world. She's happiest when the bright sunlight is moderated by an onshore
breeze and the distant roar of the surf is just crowding the edge of the white noise in her
ears: ah, the smell of sagebrush. This part of west Texas, between Sonora and San Angelo,
is just way too far inland for Ramona's taste. It's also too . .. Texan. Ramona doesn't care for
good ol' boys. She doesn't much like arid, dusty landscapes with no water. And she
especially doesn't like the Ranch, but that's not a matter of prejudice so much as common
sense.
The Ranch scares her more every time she visits it.
There's a parking lot up front: little more than a patch of packed earth. She pulls up between
two unfeasibly large pickups. One of them actually has a cow's skull lashed to the front
bumper and a rifle rack in the back. She gets out of the Taurus, collects her shoulder bag
and her water bottle - she never comes here without a half-gallon can, minimum — and

cringes slightly as the arid heat tries to suck her dry. Walking around the parked vehicles,
she doesn't bother to check the cow's skull for the faint matching intaglio of a pentacle: she
knows what she'll find. Instead she heads for the porch, and the closed screen door, with a
wizened figure rocking in a chair beside it.
"You're five minutes and twenty-nine seconds late," the figure recites laconically as she
climbs the front step.
"So bite me," Ramona snaps. She hikes her bag up her shoulder and shivers despite the
heat. The guardian watches her with dry amusement. Dry. There is no water here, certainly
not enough to hydrate the bony nightmare in bib overalls that hangs out next to the door,
endlessly rocking its chair.
"You're expected," it rasps. "Go right in.”
It makes no move toward her, but the skin on the back of her neck prickles. She takes two
steps forward and twists the doorknob. At this point, an unexpected visitor can reasonably
be expected to die. At this point, expected visitors also die - if Internal Affairs has issued a
termination order. Ramona does not die this time. The door latch clicks open and she steps
inside the cool air-conditioned vestibule, trying to suppress a shuddery breath as she leaves
the watcher on the threshold behind.
The vestibule is furnished in cheap G-plan kit, with a sofa and chairs, and a desk with a
human receptionist sitting behind it who looks up at Ramona and blinks sheep-eyes at her.
"Ms. Random, if you'd care to take the second door on the left, go straight ahead, then take
the first right at the end of the corridor. Agent McMurray is expecting you.”
Ramona smiles tightly. "Sure thing. Can I use the ladies' room on the way”
?The receptionist makes a show of checking her desk planner.
"I can confirm that you are authorized to use the ladies' room," she announces after a few
seconds.
"Good." Ramona nods. "See you around." She walks through the second door on the left. It
opens onto an anonymous beige-painted corridor, which she walks down for some
distance. Partway along, she takes time out to hole up in the toilet. She bends over a wash
basin and throws water on her face, her neck, and the base of her throat. She notes that
there are no windows in the facility: just ventilation ducts high up in the walls.
Back in the corridor she continues toward its end where there are three identical doors. She
pauses outside the one on the right, and knocks.
"Come in," a man's gravelly voice calls through the door.
Ramona opens the door. The room beyond is spacious, floored in rough-cut timber, and
walled in glass-fronted cabinets.
The door at the far end is open, a staircase leading down to what Ramona knows to be
another corridor with more display rooms opening off to either side. She's already far
enough inside the ranch house that by rights she should be standing with her feet firmly
planted in the dirt fifty feet behind it — outside, but that's not how things work here.
Instead, her controlling agent is waiting for her, a tall, slightly pudgy fellow with wire-rimmed
glasses, thinning, close-cropped hair, and a checkered shirt. He smiles, faintly indulgently.
"Well, well. If it isn't agent Random." He holds out a hand: "How was your trip out”
?"Dry," she says tersely, allowing her hand to be shaken.
She squints slightly, sizing McMurray up. He looks human enough, but appearances at the
Ranch are always deceptive.
"I need to find a pool at some point. Apart from that—" she shrugs "—I can't complain .”
"A pool." McMurray nods thoughtfully. "I think we can arrange something for you." His voice
has a faint Irish lilt to it, although Ramona is fairly sure he's as American as she is.
"It's the least we can do, seeing as how we've dragged you all the way out here. Yes
indeed." He gestures at the steps leading down to the passageway. "How well did you
understand your briefing”
?Ramona swallows. This bit is hard. As her controlling agent McMurray has certain powers.
He was the key operative who compelled her to service; as long as he lives, he, or whoever

holds his tokens of power, has the power of life and death over her, the ability to bind and
release her, to issue orders she cannot refuse. There's stuff she doesn't want to talk
about—but if he suspects she's holding out on him it'll be a lot worse for her than confessing
to everything. Best to give him something, just hope it's not enough to raise more suspicions
than it allays: "Not entirely," she admits. "I don't understand why we're letting TLA's chief
executive run riot in the Caribbean. I don't understand why the Brits are involved in this, or
what the hell TLA think they're doing. I mean—" she pats her shoulder bag "—I read it all, but
I don't understand it. Just what's supposed to be going on”
?This is the point at which McMurray can — if he's suspicious — make her mouth open
without her willing it, and spill her deepest secrets and most personal hopes and fears.
Just considering the possibility makes her feel small and contemptibly weak. But McMurray
doesn't seem to notice her discomfort. He nods and looks thoughtful. "I'm not sure anybody
knows everything," he says ruefully.
A rueful apology? From a controlling agent? Stop jerking me around, Ramona prays, a cold
knot of fear congealing in her stomach. But McMurray doesn't raise his left hand in a sigil of
command; nor does he pronounce any words of dread.
He just nods in false amity and gestures once again at the stairs.
"It's a mess," he explains. "Billington's a big campaign donor and word is, we're not
supposed to rock the boat. Not under this administration, anyway. It would embarrass
certain folks if he were exposed — at least on our soil. And just in case anyone gets any
ideas about going around Control's back, he doesn't set foot on land these days. He's got
the whole thing set up for remote management from extraterritorial waters. We'd have to
send the Coast Guard or the Navy after him, and that would be too public.”
"Too public and two bucks will get you a coffee," Ramona says acidly; then, fearful that she
might have gone too far, adds: "But why did you need to bring me out here? Is it part of the
briefing”
?She realizes too late that this was the wrong thing to say.
McMurray fixes her with a penetrating stare. "Why else do you think you might have been
ordered to the Ranch?" he asks, deceptively mildly. "Is there something I should know, agent
Random”
?A huge fist grips her around the ribs, squeezing gently.
"Nuh — no, sir!" she gasps, terrified.
Merely annoying McMurray can have enormous, terrible consequences for her: there's
nothing subtle about the degree of control the Black Chamber exercises over its subjects, or
the consequences of error. The Chamber has a secret ruling from the Supreme Court that
citizenship rights only apply to human beings: Ramona's kin are barely able to pass with the
aid of a glamour. For failure, the punishment can be special rendition to jurisdictions where
the very concept of pain is considered a fascinating research topic by the natives. But he
merely stares at her for a moment with watery blue eyes, then nods very slightly, relaxing the
constraint binding. The pressure recedes like the backwash of an imagined cardiac arrest.
"Very good." McMurray turns and begins to descend the staircase at the end of the room.
Ramona follows him, eager to get away from the things in the pickle jars behind the glass
display panels. "I'm glad to see that you've still got a . . . sense of humor, agent Random.
Unfortunately this is no laughing matter." He pauses at the bottom step. "I believe you've
been here before.”
Ramona's hand tightens on the stair rail until her knuckles turn white. "Yes. Sir.”
"Then I won't have to explain." He smiles frighteningly, then walks down the corridor toward
one of the display rooms. "I brought you here to see just the one exhibit, this time.”
Ramona forces herself to follow him. She feels as if she's walking through molasses, her
chest tight with an almost palpable sense of dread. It's not as if anything here is aimed at
me, she tries to tell herself. It's all dead, already. But that's not strictly true.
Most advanced military organizations maintain libraries of weapons, depositories like
armories that store one of everything — every handgun, artillery round, mine, grenade, knife

— used by any other army that they might face in battle. The exhibits are stored in full
working order, with specialist armorers trained in caring for them. Associated with their staff
colleges, these depots are a vital resource when training special forces, briefing officers
tasked with facing a given enemy, or merely researching future requirements.
The Black Chamber is no different: like the Army repository at the Aberdeen Proving
Ground, they maintain their own collection. There is a subtle difference, however.
The Black Chamber's archive of reality-warping occult countermeasures is partially alive.
Here lie unquiet roadside graves dug by ghoulish reanimators. Over there is a cupboard full
of mandrakes, next door to a summoning grid that's been live for thirty years, the unquiet
corpse of its victim dancing an eternal jig within the green-glowing circle, on legs long since
worn down to blood-encrusted ivory stumps.
You can die if you get too close to some of the exhibits in the Ranch. And then they'll add you
to the collection.
McMurray knows his way through the corridors and passages of the repository. He threads
his way rapidly past doorways opening onto vistas that make Ramona's hair stand on end,
then through a gallery lined with glass exhibit cases, some of them covered by protective
velvet cloths. Finally he comes to a small side room and stops, beckoning Ramona toward a
glass-topped cabinet.
"You asked about Billington," he says, his tone thoughtful.
Yes, sir.”
"You can cut the 'sir' bit; call me Pat." He half-smiles. "As I was saying. Billington's current
actions worry the Dark Commissioners. In fact, they're extremely concerned that his motive
for purchasing the Explorer and moving it to the Bahamas is to make a retrieval attempt on
the eastern JENNIFER MORGUE site — that was in your briefing pack, yes?
Good. If it turns out that JENNIFER MORGUE is a chthonian artifact, then an attempted
retrieval operation could place us - that is, the United States government, not to mention the
human species - in breach of the Third Benthic Treaty. That would be a bad place to go. On
the other hand, the rewards to be reaped from such an artifact are huge. And your cousins
have a very limited presence in the Caribbean.
They prefer the deep ocean. It's possible that they're not even aware of the location of the
artifact." « < .•* McMurray turns to stare at the glass-topped cabinet.
"Billington's not doing this for the good of the nation, needless to say. We're not sure just
what he plans to do with JENNIFER MORGUE if he gets his hands on it, but frankly,
CenCom isn't keen to find out. He needs to be stopped. Which is where we run into an
embarrassing problem.
He already figured we'd take steps to interdict him, so he's preempted us." He glances at
Ramona, and her blood freezes at his expression.
"Sir”
?McMurray gestures at the cabinet. "Look at this.”
Ramona peers through the glass warily. She sees a wooden tabletop: perfectly mundane,
but for a strange diorama positioned in its center. It seems to consist of a pair of dolls, male
and female, wearing wedding clothes; adjacent to them are a pair of engagement rings and
a model of a stepped wedding cake. The whole diorama is enclosed within a Mobius-loop
design in conductive ink, connected to a breadboard analog-digital converter and an elderly
PC.
"This is probably the least dangerous exhibit you'll find here," McMurray says calmly, his
momentary anger stilled.
"You're looking at a hardware circuit designed to implement a love geas using vodoun
protocols and a modified Jellinek- Wirth geometry engine." His finger traces out the Mobius
loop below. "Symbolic representations of the entities to be influenced are placed within a
geometry engine controlled by a clocked recursive invocation. There are less visible
signifiers here — the skin and hair samples, necessary for DNA affinity matching, and
concealed within the dolls — but the intent should be obvious. The two individuals linked by

this particular grid have been happily married for sixteen years at this point. It's a reinforcing
loop; the more the subjects work within the framework, the stronger the feedback frame
becomes. The geas itself extends its influence by altering the probability gauge metric
associated with the subjects' interactions: outcomes that reinforce the condition are simply
rendered more likely to occur while the circuit is operational.”
Ramona blinks. "I don't understand.”
"Obviously." McMurray steps back, then crosses his arms.
"Try to get your head around the fact that it's a contagion spell that generates compliant
behavior. This couple, for example, started out hating each other. If you were to destroy this
generator, they'd be in divorce court—or one of them would be in a shallow grave—within
weeks. Now bear in mind that Billington's cruising around the Caribbean in a huge yacht,
plotting some kind of scheme. He isn't stupid.
We figure that about six months ago he created a similar hardware-backed geas engine
aboard his yacht, the Mabuse.
The precise nature of the geas is not entirely clear to us, but it has been extremely
detrimental to our counterforce operations — in particular, attempts to act against him
through normal channels fail. Telex requests dispatched to the Cayman police force via
INTERPOL get unaccountably lost FBI agents develop random brain tumors, associates
who might plea-bargain their way to giving evidence wake up embedded in concrete
foundations, that sort of thing.
CenCom's not convinced, but Sensor Ops believes that Billington has used the geas engine
to create a Hero trap — only a single agent conforming to the right archetype can actually
approach him; and even then, the geas will screw with their ability to take correct action. And
because Billington figured he's got the most reason to be afraid of us, he picked a goddamn
limey as the Hero archetype.”
Ramona shakes her head. "We can't get to him ourselves”
?"I didn't say that." McMurray walks toward the door, then pauses in front of a picture on the
wall. "Look.”
Ramona stares at the picture. It's a photograph of an oriental longhair cat, reposing on a
sofa. The cat is wellgroomed and white, but lacks the distinctive pinkish eyes characteristic
of albinism. It stares at the camera with haughty disdain.
"I've seen that cat before," she murmurs, chewing her lip.
She glances at McMurray: "Is this what I think it is”
?McMurray nods. "It's a show-grade Persian cat, a torn.
D'Urbeville Marmeduke the Fourth. Billington acquired this - pet is perhaps too loose a
word, perhaps familiar is closer to the truth — some time ago. Probably when he began
planning his current venture. He keeps him aboard the Mabuse. Fluffy white cat, yacht
cruising around the Caribbean, huge mother ship with a sectet undersea module — this
geas isn't powered by some goddamn dolls and a wedding ring, agent Random, it's got
legs. It'd take a miracle for anyone except the Brits to get close to him. One Brit in particular
— an agent who doesn't exist." Then he stares at Ramona. "Except we've figured out a
loophole, one that'll let us reach out and touch Billington where it hurts.
You are going to go in through that loophole, you and me.
And you will nail Billington s head to the table to prevent JENNIFER MORGUE Two from
falling into the wrong hands.
"Here's how we're going to do i t . . .”
Three people sit in a conference room with bricked-up windows in London. The slide
projector clunks to an empty slide and Angieton leans over to switch it off. For a minute
there's silence, broken only by the emphysemic rasp of Angieton's breathing.
"Bastard." Mo's voice is cold and superficially emotionless.
"We're going to get him back, Mo, I promise you.”
Barnes's voice is flat and assured.
"But damaged.”

Angieton clears his throat.
"I can't believe you did this," she says bitterly.
"We didn't choose to, girl." His voice is a gravelly rasp, hoarse from too many late-night
meetings this past week.
"I can't believe you let some snake oil defense contractor get the jump on you. Using it as an
excuse. Shit, Angleton, what do you expect me to say? The bait-and-switch you're planning
is stupid enough to start with, and you've handed my boyfriend over to a sex vampire and I'm
supposed to lie back and think of England? You expect me to tamely pick up the pieces
when she's finished banging his brains out and pat him on the head and take him home and
patch his ego up?
What am I meant to do, turn into some kind of angel-nursechild- minder figure when all this is
over? You've got a fucking nerve!" She's got the violin case by the neck and she's leaning
across the table towards Angleton, throwing the words in his face. She's too close to see
Barnes staring at her fingers on the neck of the instrument case like it's the barrel of a gun,
and he's trying to judge whether she's going to reach for the trigger.
"You're understandably upset—”
"Understandably?" Mo stands up, shifting the case to the crook of her left arm as she toys
with the clamp alongside its body. "Fuck you!" she snarls.
Angleton pushes the file across the table at her. "Your tickets.”
"Fuck you and your tickets!" She's making chicken-choking motions with the fingers of her
right hand, the other hand vaguely patting at the body of the violin case. Barnes slides to his
feet, backing away, his right hand half-raised to his jacket until he catches Angleton's minute
shake of the head. "And your fucking grade six geas!" Her voice is firm but congested with
emotion. "I'm out of here.”
She freezes in place for a moment as if there's something more to say, then grabs the file
and storms out of the conference room, slamming the door behind her so hard that the latch
fails and it bounces open again. Barnes stares after her, then, seeing the wide eyes and
open mouth of the receptionist, he nods politely and pulls the door shut.
"Do you think she'll take the assignment?" he asks Angleton.
"Oh yes." Angleton stares bleakly at the door for a few seconds. "She'll hate us, but she'll do
it. She's operating inside the paradigm. In the groove, as Bob would say.”
"I was afraid for a minute that I was going to have to take her down. If she lost it completely.”
"No." Angleton gathers himself with a visible effort and shakes his head. "She's too smart.
She's a lot tougher than you think, otherwise I wouldn't have put her on the spot like that. But
don't sit with your back to any doors until this is all over and we've got her calmed down.”
Barnes stares at the pitted green desktop. "I could almost pity that Black Chamber agent
you've hitched Bob to.”
"Those are the rules of the game." Angleton shrugs heavily.
"I didn't write them. You can blame Billington, or you can blame the man with the typewriter,
but he's been dead for more than forty years. O'Brien's not made of sugar and spice and all
things nice. She'll cope." He stares at Barnes bleakly. "She'll have to. Because if she
doesn't, we're all in deep shit.”
9 : SKIN DIVING " T H A T ' S INTERESTING,** RAMQNA SAYS TO THE pitch darkness as
I choke on a throatful of stinging cold saltwater, **1 didn't know you could do that.** My chest
is burning and it feels like ice picks are shoving at my eardrums as I begin to thrash around.
I can feel my heart pounding like a trip hammer as the fear grips me like a straitjacket. I
manage to bang one elbow on the side of the tunnel, a sharp stab of pain amidst the black
pressure. **Stop struggling.** Slim arms slide around my chest; her heart is hammering as
she hugs me to her, pulling my face between her breasts.
She drags me down like a mermaid engulfing a drowning sailor and I stiffen, panicking as I
begin to exhale. Then we're in a bigger space — I can feel it opening up around me — and
suddenly I don't need to breathe anymore. I can feel her/our gills soaking in the cool
refreshing water, like air off a spring meadow, and I can feel her borrowed underwater

freedom again.
**Where are we?** I ask, shuddering. **What the hell was that?** **We're right under the
platform's central deflection circuit.
I figure it throttled our link while we were passing through.** My eyes are starting to adjust
and I can see a diffuse green twilight. A black ceiling squats above us, rough and pitted as I
run my fingertips across it: the tunnel is a square opening in the middle of a room-sized
dome under the middle of the flat ceiling. Off to the sides I can just about see other black
silhouettes, support pillars of some sort that vanish into the murk below. Beyond them, the
turbidity speaks of open seas.
**1 thought it was poured onto the bottom?** **Nope. The reef comes to within meters of the
surface, but offshore it falls away rapidly; the bottom hereabouts is nearly sixty meters down.
They built it on the edge of an undersea cliff and jacked it off the bottom with those pillars.**
**Right, right.** I experiment, pushing off and swimming a little distance away from her until
the tightness in my chest begins to return. I can make it to about eight meters out on my own,
down here in the penumbra of the coastal defense ward. I turn and drift slowly back towards
her. **What was it you were wanting to tell me? Before we got interrupted.** Her face is a
ghostly shade in the twilight. **No time.
The bad guys are coming.** **Bad guys—** I hear a distant churning rumble and look up, out
from under the poured concrete ceiling. **Let me see. They've got spear guns?** **Good
guess, monkey-boy. Follow me.** She swims out towards one of the pillars and I follow
hastily, afraid of being left behind by our bubble of entangled metabolic processes.
The pillar is as thick as my torso, rough-pored concrete covered with lumpy barnacles and
shells and a few weird growths that might be baby corals. Beyond it, the open sea:
greenness above us - we must be at least ten meters down — and darkness below.
Ramona pulls her knees up and rolls head down, then kicks, spearing into the gloomy
depths. I swallow, then turn and clumsily follow her. My inner ear is churning but I can almost
fool it into thinking I'm climbing alongside the fat, gray pillar. I feel a bit breathless, but not too
bad — all things considered. **Are you doing okay?** I ask.
**I'm okay.** Ramona's inner voice is tense, like she's breathing for two of us.
**Slow down, then.** There's a great beige wall looming behind us in the gloom, bulging
closer to the pillar. In the distance I see the streamlined torpedo silhouettes of hunting fishes.
**Let's get between the pillar and the cliff face.** Distant plopping, bubbling noises from
above. **Here they come.** Ramona peers up towards the surface.
**C'mon.** The cleft between the pillar and the rock face is about a meter wide at this depth.
I swim into it then reach out and take her hand. She drifts towards me, still staring up at the
distant sky, as I pull her into the shadow of the pillar.
**How long can we hide down here? If they figure we're just skinny-dippers, they may not
think to come this deep.** **No such luck.** She closes her eyes and leans back against
me. ** Have you ever killed anyone, Bob?** **Have I ever .. .?** It depends what you mean
by anyone. **Only paranormal entities. Does that count?** **No. Has to be human.** She
tenses. **1 should have asked earlier.** **What do you mean, has to be human?** **That's
an oversight,** she says tightly. **You were supposed to be blooded.** **What are you—**
**The geas. You have to kill one of them.** She turns round slowly, her hair swirling around
her head like a dark halo. Here we are under twenty meters of seawater and my mouth's
gone as dry as the desert. **There are steps you have to carry out in sequence in order to
adopt your role in the eigenplot. Jeopardy in a distant city, meet the dark anima, kill one of
the other side's assassins — at least one, more would be better — and then we have to
figure out a way around my — damn, here they come. We'll have to cover this later. Get
ready.** She shoves something hard into my hand. After a moment's confusion I realize it's
the handle of a vicious-looking knife with a serrated edge. Then she vanishes into the
shadows lining the cliff face. I glance round as a shadow glides overhead: tracking up and
over I see a diver in a wetsuit, head down, peering into the depths.
I pass through a moment of acute disbelief and resentment.

I've been in mortal danger before, but I'm not used to being in mortal danger from humans. It
feels wrong. Any one of Alan's mad bastards is probably capable of whacking half a dozen
al Qaeda irregulars before breakfast and not working up an existential sweat, but I'm not
prepared for this. I can shoot at targets, sure, and I'm death on wheels when it comes to
terminating cases of demonic possession with extreme prejudice, but the idea of killing a
real human being in cold blood, some eating breathing sleeping guy with a job on a rich
man's yacht, makes all the alarm bells in my head go tilt.
Trouble is, I also have a deep conviction in my guts that whatever the hell Ramona is on
about, she's right. I'm here for a purpose, and I've got to move my feet through the occult
dance steps in the right sequence or it'll all be for nothing. And it doesn't matter what I want
or don't want if Angleton's right and Billington is gearing up to drop the hammer on us. When
you come down to it, if there's a war on, the bombs don't care whether they're falling on
pacifists or patriots. And speaking of bombs . . .
The diver has seen something. Either that or he's into swimming head down into the depths
beside a decaying defense station just for the hell of it. He's heading parallel to the pillar and
he's got something in his arms. I glance down and see Ramona below me her skin a silvery
flash like moonlight on ice, circling the pillar. My chest tightens. A stab of anger: **What the
hell are you playing at?** **Hanging my ass out to give you a clear shot.** She sounds
lighthearted, but I can tell she's wound up like a watch spring inside. I taste the overspill of
her uncertainty: Is he up to it? And my blood runs cold, because under the uncertainty, she
harbors the rock-solid-conviction that, if I'm not up to it, we're both going to die.
Outmaneuvered.
The guy above me is turning in tight circles as he descends, keeping an eye open for signs
of an ambush as he heads towards Ramona, who is feigning a false sense of security, her
back to the outside of the cliff next to the point where the pillar merges with it in a jagged
mass of crumpled volcanic rock. I shelter in the cleft between pillar and cliff as he strokes
steadily down, hugging the far side of the pillar from Ramona. In his arms he's clutching
something that looks like a shotgun, if shotguns had viciously barbed harpoons jutting from
their muzzles. Just great, I think. What was it Harry the Horse tried to beat into my head?
Never bring a dagger to a harpoon duel, or something like that.
My luck runs out while he's still about three meters above me, ten meters above Ramona.
He slows his corkscrew, peering into the shadowy cleft, and I see a change in his posture.
Shit. Everything happens in nightmarish slow-mo. I've got my feet braced against the pillar
and I let go like a spring, kicking straight up towards him, knife-first. Something sizzles past
my shoulder, drawing a hot line across my chest, then I ram him with my shoulder. He's
already tumbling out of the way of my knife and I try and bring it back round towards him. I
can't breathe — I'm out of range of Ramona's gills — and in a bleak flash of clarity I realize
I'm going to die here. The pressure in my chest eases as he takes a swing at me with a
knife I sense rather than see, but I'm inside his reach and I grab his forearm and we go
tumbling. He's strong but I'm desperate and disoriented and I somehow manage to get my
other arm around his neck and something snags my knife. I yank on it as hard as I can, as he
tenses his knife arm — we're arm-wrestling at this point — and something gives way. He
thrashes spasmodically and lets go, kicks towards the surface, and there's a silvery stream
of bubbles rising above him that's much too big and bright to be normal.
Ramona's right below me. **Let's go,** she gasps, tugging at my ankle. **Deeper!** **But I
just—** **1 know what you just did! Come on before they do it right back to us! Nobody in
their right mind dives alone.** She lets go for a moment, kicks out, and moves her grip to my
arm. **Let's move it.** She rolls us round and pulls me away from the pillar, back up towards
the murky gloom beneath the defense platform. I feel her fear and let it pull me along behind
her, but my mind's not home: I'm not feeling queasy, exactly, but I've got a lot to think about.
**We've got to get back to the tunnel,** she says urgently.
**The tunnel? Why?** **They'll have searched it first. And most divers don't like confined
spaces, caves. I figure they'll concentrate on the open waters outside the reef, now they've

got the sighting.
We just wait them out.** **In the tunnel.** What are we doing here? I shake my head. What's
it all for?
I keep rerunning the video stream captured in my mind's eye, the silvery parabola of bubbles
rising above the drowning diver— **We're missing something important,** Ramona muses
darkly.
**How did they find us?** **Not sure. They've opened a channel to let them bring their
minions in, but the core defensive wards are still working, you're cleaner than—** She blinks
at me. **Oh. That's how.** The ceiling is right above our heads now, the dome set into it
framing the deeper blackness of the tunnel. **What is it?** **I was wrong about them
planting a tracker on you.
They don't need to bug you,** she says tersely. **They can find you anywhere. All they have
to do is zero in on the eigenplot. Except here, right where you're shielded by the defense
platform's wards, even if they have hacked a tunnel right through them to let their associates
in . . .
**What is this eigenplot you keep talking about?** I ask.
I'm dangerously close to whining. I really hate it when everyone else around me seems to
know more about what's going on than I do.
**The geas Billington's running. It's the occult equivalent of a stateful firewall. It keeps out
intruders, unless they run through the approach states in a permitted sequence. The
sequence is determined by the laws of similarity and contagion, drawing on a particularly
powerful source archetype.
When you run through them, that's called 'walking the eigenplot,' and you're doing it real well
so far. Only a few people can do it at all — you can but I can't, for example - and there's an
added catch: You can't do it if you know what the requirements are beforehand, it doesn't
permit recursive attacks.
That's why you're just going to have to be brave and .. .** she trails off**. . . shit. Forget I said
that bit. I mean forget it.
You'll just have to see for yourself.** She centers herself under the pitch-black rectangle of
the tunnel mouth. **C'mon.** **But you said—** **lf we're outside the tunnel we're not
shielded. You want to learn how to breathe with a harpoon through you?** **No way.** I swim
closer to her, until we're both right under the mouth. **1 nearly drowned last time we went
through here.** **The effect's attenuated only a couple of meters in.
Closer. Hug me. Not like that, like this.** She wraps her arms and legs around me. **Think
you can swim? Straight up, until you don't feel like you're drowning?** **Like I'm going to say
no?** I look into her eyes from so close that we're almost touching noses. **Okay. Just this
once. For you.** Then I kick off straight up, into the black heart of the drowning zone.
Bands of steel around my chest. A pounding in my ears.
Then the clean air of a spring meadow, Ramona's arms cradling me, her legs entwined
around me, her lips locked against mine like a lovesick mermaid trying to kiss the drowned
sailor back to life — or infuse his blood with oxygen through force of proximity alone.
Ob. We're in the tunnel. Totally black, walls either side of me, five meters of water between
my head and the heavy iron grating, nothing but delirium's arms holding my sanity together.
Distracting me. I am distracted. It's incongruous.
There are divers out there hunting the waters for us, and here I'm getting an erection.
Ramona's tongue, tentacular, searches my lips. She's aroused, I can feel it like an itch at the
back of my mind.
**This is a really bad idea,** I overhear her thinking.
**We're feeding off each other.** I'm drowning. I'm horny. I'm drowning. I'm — feedback. Too
far apart and I start to choke, too close together and I start noticing her body, and whichever
I'm paying attention to bleeds through into her head. **Got to stop.** **Tell me about it.** An
uneasy thought. **How much of this before the Other notices?** **It's not ready yet — I
think.** She pulls back a few centimeters while I concentrate on not thinking about drowning.

**How long do you think we've been down here?** **I've lost track,** I admit. **Half an
hour?** I lean back against the rough wall of the tunnel that shouldn't exist. **Longer?**
**Damn.** I can feel the clockwork of her thoughts, tasting of rusty iron. It's like there's a
weird tube of pressure squeezing us together down here; the tunnel is a flaw in the
countermeasure wards, but outside it there's an almost unimaginable amount of power
chained down and directed towards the exclusion of occult manifestations - like our own
entanglement. Threatening to crush us to a bloody paste between walls of concrete. **Can
we leave yet?** **Your breathlessness — have you ever been claustrophobic before?** Is
that what it is? **Great time to find out.** I shudder and my heart tries to flutter away.
**We're in as much danger if we stay down here as if we surface ** she announces. **Come
on. Slowly.** Still locked together, we finger-and-toe our way up the narrow chimney in the
rock, feeling ahead for rough bumps and the joints between concrete castings. As we rise,
the nightmare awareness of my own death begins to fade. All too soon we reach the grating
at the top, a cold wall of rusty iron.
I tense up and try not to give in to the scream that's bubbling up inside. **Can you lift it?** I
ask.
**On my own? Shit.** I feel her straining. **Help me!** I brace my legs against one wall and
my back against the opposite and raise my arms; Ramona leans against me and puts her
back into it, too. The roof gives a little. I tense and shove hard, putting all my fear of drowning
into it, and the lid squeals and lifts free above us. **Turn!** I start twisting, rotating the
rectangular lid so that when we let go it won't settle back into place. There's a roaring in my
ears. I can hear my pulse. And suddenly I'm choking underwater with a lungful of air: we've
lost skin contact and I'm going to have aching muscles tomorrow — if there is a tomorrow —
and I can't get enough oxygen, so I kick out in near panic and the lid slides away and I kick
out again, rising nightmarishly slowly towards the silver ceiling high above me, with my lungs
on fire. Then I'm on the surface, bobbing like a cork in a barrel and I breathe out explosively
and start to inhale just as a wave comes over the top of the reef and the platform and breaks
over me.
The next few seconds are crazy and painful and I'm coughing and spluttering and close to
panic again. But Ramona's in the water with me and she's a strong swimmer, and the next
"^^ thing I know I'm on my back, coughing up my guts as she tows me towards the shallows
like a half-drowned kitten. Then there's sand under my feet and an arm round my shoulders.
"Can you walk”
?I try to talk, realize it's a bad idea, and nod instead. A sidelong glance tells me her
glamour's back in place. "Don't look back. There's a dive boat just over the far side of the
reef and they're looking out to sea. I figure we've got maybe two minutes before they check
their tracker ward and see you're showing up again. Have you got any smoke screens on
that fancy phone of yours?
Think fast. I try to remember what I've loaded on it, remember the block I put on the car, and
nod again. I'm not certain it'll work, but if it doesn't we're fresh out of options.
"Okay." We're about waist-deep now. "Blanket's over there. Think you can run”
?"Blanket—" I start coughing again.
"Run, monkey-boy!”
She grabs my hand and tugs me forwards. At the same time there's a ghostly sensation in
my chest: she starts coughing, but I feel a whole lot better. Moments later I'm the one who's
tugging her along through knee-deep water across a silvery beach, sunlight blazing down on
my shoulders. I feel horribly exposed, as if there's a target painted on the small of my back.
The towel is just ahead, up a gentle rise. Ramona stumbles. I get an arm round her waist
and help her up, then we stagger on up the beach.
Towel. Trunks. A little pile of everyday tourist detritus.
"This ours”
?She nods, gasping for breath: she's swallowed my water, I realize. I fumble under the towel
and find the sealed polythene bag. Fingers shaking, I unseal it and pull out my Treo.

The damn thing seems to take half an hour to boot up, and while I'm waiting for it I see heads
bobbing to the surface near the boat on the far side of the reef. They're tiny in the distance
but we're running out of time— Ah. Scratchpad. "Lie down on the towel. Make like you're
sunbathing," I tell her. Squinting at the tiny screen, I shield it with one hand so that I can see
the schematic. A circuit design, I need a circuit design. But we're on a beach, right? Sand is
porous. And about fifty centimeters below us there's a layer of conductive saline. Which
means— I squat on the sand and start drawing lines on the beach around us with my
fingertips. I don't have to go all the way down to the water, I just have to reduce the resistivity
of the layer of insulating sand above it in a regular pattern. Divers are crawling back into the
boat as I finish the main loop and add the necessary terminals. Phone, phone... the bloody
thing has gone to sleep on me. I'm about to poke at the screen when I realize there's sand
on my fingertips. Silly me. I wipe them on the towel beside Ramona's hip and carefully wake
the Treo up, stroke it into life, and hit the upload button.
Then I sit down next to her and wait to learn if I've rendered us invisible.
About half an hour later, the divers give up. The boat turns, its outboard engine spouting a
tail of white foam, and it slowly motors around the headland. Which is just as well because
we don't have any sunscreen and my shoulders and chest are beginning to itch badly.
"You okay?" I ask Ramona.
"Pretty much." She sits up and stretches. "Your trick worked.”
"Yeah, well. Trouble is, it's stationary: I can't take it with us. I figure our best bet would be to
head back into town as fast as possible and lose ourselves in the crowd.”
"You really got them stirred up. And their surveillance net is disturbingly good." She looks at
me. "You're sure it was just Marc you were pushing on”
?"Yes." I look at her closely. "Marc, and his unfortunate habit of supplying single female
tourists to friends with a boat and an unlimited supply of Charlie." Her expression doesn't
change but her pupils tell me what I want to know.
"Virgins aren't necessary, if this is what I think it is. But they have to be healthy and relatively
young. Ring any bells”
?"I didn't know you were a necromancer, Bob." She looks at me calculatingly.
"I'm not." I shrug. "But I do countermeasures. And what I see here is that the island's
defenses aren't worth jack shit if you've got a scuba kit and a boat. Someone's buying up
single women, and they're sure as hell not shipping them to brothels in Miami. There's a
surveillance net centered on Billington's boat, and it's tied in to your friend Marc." I stare at
her eyes. "Are you going to tell me it's a coincidence”
?She bites her lower lip. "No," she admits. A pause. "Marc wasn't a coincidence.”
"What, then”
?"It centers on Billington but it's not all about Billington." She looks away from me and stares
out to sea, morosely. "He's got his own . . . plans. To expedite them, he had to hire a bunch
of specialists with eccentric tastes and needs. His wife — she's not harmless. She's scum."
If looks could kill, the wave crests would be boiling into steam under her stare. "And she's
got retainers. Call it a tactical marriage of convenience. She's got certain powers and he
wants to make use of them. He's got shitloads of wealth and more ambition than — well, she
likes that because it buys her immunity. Eileen . . . her predecessor Erzabet was probably
framed by a rival, a duke who wanted her lands and her castle, but Eileen is the genius who
figured out there was a skincare program in the old legend productized the hell out of it, and
sold it as Bathory™ Pale Grace™9 Cosmetics, with added ErythroComplex-V. It's basically
a mass-produced level one glamour. She sources most of the wholesale supplies from
commercial slaughterhouses and leftover blood bank stock, and on paper she's clean, but
you still need a better than homeopathic quantity of the real thing to make it work.
And that's before you start asking how many regulatory committees she had to buy off to
bury the details of her research.”
"Why not go after her directly”
?"Because—" Ramona shrugs. "Eileen's not the main 9 Pale Grace™, Pale Grace™ Skin

Hydromax®, Pale Grace™ Bright Eyes®, and Pale Grace™ Number Three® [reference
footnote 13] are registered trademarks of Bathory™ Cosmetics Corporation: "It'd better be
bloody worth it at this price.”
target. She's not even the appetizer. What she does amounts to at most a few dozen deaths
per year. If Ellis gets what my boss thinks he wants the whole human species gets to deal
with the fallout. So he figured I should get close to Eileen — to introduce you to Ellis, as
much as anything else — and meanwhile get enough of a grip on the rest of her project to
mop them up afterward.”
"You were going to get information out of Marc after your Other got through chowing down
on his soul?" "You'd be surprised." She sniffs primly. "Anyway, you should know, mister
computational demonologist: How hard would it be to summon up a puppeteer and
schedule a latebinding, voice-directed linkage to keep the body dancing”
?I think back to the dead seagulls. To the bad guys and what they did to Marc after his fatal
heart attack. "Not very.”
"Okay, just so you know the score." She reaches out and grasps my wrist. Her fingers are
warm and much too human.
"Billington's plans," I prompt. "The business with the Explorer.”
"I'm not allowed to tell you everything I know," she says patiently. "If you know too much, his
geas will spit you out like a melon seed and we won't have any time to prep a replacement."
"But you need me to get aboard his ship because I'm play- ing a role in some sort of script.
While you stay entangled with me so you get to come along, too." I swallow.
"Punching a hole in his firewall.”
"That's the idea:" "Any idea how to do it”
?"Well—" a hint of a smile "—Billington usually visits the casino every evening when he's in
range. So I'd say we ought to get back to the hotel and get ready for a high-rolling evening,
and try to finesse an invitation. How does that sound”
?I stand up. "That sounds like a plan," I say doubtfully. "I expected something a bit more
concrete, though." I glance around. "Where did I put my boxers”
?We head back up the beach and when we get to the car Ramona hands me my clothes. By
the time I get out of the toilet she's changed into a white sundress, head scarf, and shades
that conceal her eyes. She's unrecognizable as the naked blonde from the beach. "Let's
go," she suggests, turning the ignition key. I belt in beside her and she guns the engine,
backing out of the parking lot in a spray of sand.
Ramona drives carefully along the coast road, back towards the west end of the island and
the hotels and casinos.
I slump down in the passenger seat and check my email as soon as we get adequate
cellphone coverage. All that's waiting for me are two administrative circulars from the office,
an almost plaintive request for a Sitrep from Angleton, and an interesting business
proposition from the widow of the former president of Nigeria10. Ramona doesn't seem to
be in a talkative mood right now, and I'm not sure I want to risk upsetting her by asking why.
Eventually, as we're entering Philipsburg, she nods to herself and begins talking. "You'll want
to report in to your support team." She downshifts a gear and the engine growls.
"Keep your station chief off your back, pick up the toys your tech guys have been unpacking,
and call home.”
"Yes. So?" I study the roadside. Pedestrians in bright summer holiday gear, locals in
casuals, rickshaws, parked cars. Heat and dust.
10 I briefly consider replying to the latter in the person of a highly placed agent of a secret
British government agency, but the last time I did that Tony from Internal Security called me
into his office and waxed sarcastic for almost half an hour before ordering me to give them
back their bank.
"Just saying." We're crawling along. "Then I figure we need to meet up, late afternoon. To go
sort out your invitation to the floating party aboard the Mabuse.”
Late afternoon. A stab of guilt gets to me: it's about six o'clock back home, and I really ought

to call Mo. I've got to reassure her that everything's under control and make sure she doesn't
do something stupid like drop everything and come out here. (Assuming everything is under
control, a quiet comer of my conscience reminds me. If you were Mo, and you knew what
was going on, what would you do?) "You sound very certain that I'll get an invite," I speculate.
"Oh, I don't think it'll be too difficult." Ramona focuses on the road ahead. "You already got
Billington's attention yesterday. After today, he'll want another look at you." She looks
pensive. "Just in case, I've got some ideas. We can go over them later.”
I steel myself. "I get the feeling you're trying very hard not to tell me something that's not
related to the mission," I begin. "And you know I know but I don't know what I'm not supposed
to know, and so—" I wind down, trying to keep track of all the double-indirect pointers and
Boolean operators before I succumb to a stack crash.
"Not your problem, monkey-boy," she says with a false smile and a toss of her beautiful
blonde hair, now coiling up into tight ringlets as the seawater dries in the breeze over the
windscreen. "Don't worry yourself about me.”
"What—" My skin crawls.
She looks at me, her eyes abruptly distant and hard. "You just have to get aboard the yacht,
figure out what's going on, and expedite a solution," she tells me. "I've got to sit it out back
here.”
"But." I shut my mouth before I can stick any of my feet in it by accident. Then I point my head
forwards, watching her out of the corner of my eye. Thin-lipped and grim-faced, knuckles
gripping the steering wheel. The mermaid who clutched me to her watery bosom is
frightened. Ramona, who plays with her food and never slept with a man who didn't die
within twenty-four hours, is concerned. Driving me back to the hotel and the safe house and
a setup where she'll have to hand me over to people she seems to despise - Ramona, the
spy who loves me? No, that dog won't hunt. It must be something else, but whatever it is, she
isn't talking.
So we drive the rest of the way to the hotel in lonely silence, grappling with our respective
demons.
10: DEAD LUCKY W H E N I BET BACK TO MY HOTEL ROOM I FIND BORIS pacing the
carpet like a trapped tiger. "What time you are naming this?" he asks, tapping his heavy
stainless steel wristwatch. "Am being on edge of calling in Code Red on you!”
Pinky has plugged a PlayStation into the TV set and is making zooming sounds, bouncing
up and down on the bed; and from the sounds leaking under the bathroom door Brains is
testing a radio-controlled hovercraft in the shower.
"I've been running some errands," I say tiredly. "And then I went swimming.”
"Swimming?" Boris shakes his head. "Am not enquiring.
Are giving Angleton the Sitrep yet”
?"Oops. My bad." I pull out the desk chair and slump into it. My forearms and thighs are
aching in unaccustomed places: I'm going to feel like shit tomorrow. "How did you get in
here”
?Pinky saves his game and looks round. "Picked the lock,”
he says, waving what looks suspiciously like a hotel card key at me.
"You picked." I stare at it. "The lock.”
"Yup." He flips it at me and I catch it. "It's a smartcard, got an induction loop instead of the
usual dumb mag stripe on the back. Guaranteed to run through the complete list of makers'
override keys in under twenty seconds.”
"Right." I put it down carefully.
"Hey, I'll want it back in a minute — where'd you think I saved my game”
?Boris snorts, then stares at me. "Report, Bob, now.”
"Okay." I cross my arms. "When I left this morning, I thought I'd check out a hunch. I found out
the hard way that Billington's got a total surveillance lockdown on the French Cul de Sac
north of Paradise Peak. Dead birds on Anse Marcel, seagulls everywhere. His people are
running zombies.

Human ones, too." Boris looks like he's about to interrupt, but I keep on talking: "I had a
run-in with one of them. Ramona helped me get out of it, and we lost them by going
swimming close to the island defense chain. Which has been tampered with, incidentally,
compromising the three-mile offshore thaumaturgic-exclusion zone — did you know that?
Ramona says her sources say Billington's going to be back at the casino tonight, so we
made a date. How does that fit with your plans”
?When I finish Boris nods. "Is making progress. Please to be continuing it." He turns to
Pinky: "Get Brains." To me: "Am authorizing contact tonight. These two are being explain
gizmos for self-defense. Call me later." And he leaves, just as there's a loud toilet-flushing
sound and Brains comes out of the bathroom.
"Okay," I say, pointing at the half-inflated, bright yellow life belt hanging round his waist.
"What's that about? And do I want to know”
?"Just testing." Brains pushes it down around his feet then steps out of it. "Can I have your
dress shoes, please”
?"My shoes?" I bend down and rummage for them in my luggage. They're horrible things,
shiny patent leather with soles that feel like lumps of wood. "What do you want them for”
?Pinky is doing something to the PlayStation. "This." He flourishes another smartcard, which
Brains takes and slides into a hitherto invisible seam in the leather tongue of my right shoe.
"And this," Brains says, holding up a shoelace. "That's a—" "Miniature 100BaseT cable.
Pay attention, Bob, you don't want to lose your network connectivity, do you? It goes in like
this and to activate it you twist and pull like that; it •*- uncoils to three meters and the plastic
caps expand to fit any standard network socket. It doubles as a field-expedient grounding
strap, too. That's right. No, you don't want to tie your shoelaces too tight.”
I try to stifle a groan. "Guys, is this really necessary? Does it help me do the job”
?Pinky cocks his head to one side. "Predictive Branch says there's a ten percent chance of
you failing on the job and dying horribly if you don't take it." He giggles. "Feeling lucky,
punk?" "Bah. What do I really need to know”
?"Here." Brains tosses a stainless steel Zippo lighter to me: "It's an antique, don't lose it.
Predictive Branch said it would come in handy." ._ "I don't smoke. What else”
?"The usual stuff: There's a USB memory drive preloaded with a forensic intrusion kit hidden
in each end of your dickey-bow, a WiFi-finder on your key ring, a roll-up keyboard in your
cummerbund, the pen's got Bluetooth and doubles as a mouse, and there's a miniaturized
Tillinghast resonator in your left heel. You turn it on by twisting the heel through one-eighty
degrees; turn it off the same way.
Your other heel is just a heel: We were going to hide a Basilisk gun in it but some ass-hat in
Export Controls vetoed our requisition because it was going overseas. Oh, and there's this."
Brains reaches over to a briefcase on the bed and pulls out a businesslike nylon shoulder
holster and a black automatic pistol. "Walther P99, 9mm caliber, fifteen-round magazine,
silvercap hollow-points engraved with a demicyclic banishment circuit in ninety-nanometer
Enochian.”
"Banishment rounds?" I ask hesitantly, then: "Hang on.”
I hold up one hand: "I'm not cleared for carrying guns in the field!”
"We figured the exorcism payload means it's covered by your occult weapons certification. If
anyone asks, it's just a gadget for installing exorcism glyphs at high speed." Brains sits
down on the bed, ejects the magazine, works the action to make sure there's no round in the
chamber, then starts stripping it down. "Word from Angleton is the bad guys are likely to get
heavy and he wants you carrying.”
"Oh my." I blank for a moment. It's only about an hour since I sliced some poor bastard's air
hose in half, and having to deal with this so soon afterwards is doing my head in.
"Did he really say that”
?"Yes. We don't want to end up losing you by accident because someone starts shooting
and you're unarmed, do we”
?"I guess not." He passes the shoulder holster to me and I try to figure out how it goes on.

"Well, if you're all done now, maybe you could leave so I can phone home”
?After Pinky and Brains leave, I call down to room service for a light lunch, put the door chain
on, then go run a bath.
There's a wet suit hanging over the shower rail and an oxygen tank leaning up against the
toilet. While the bath's filling I try phoning home, but get the answering machine. I try Mo's
mobile, but that's switched off, too. She must still be in Dunwich under lockdown. Feeling
sorry for myself, I go and rinse the salt off my skin: but I can't hang around in the bath without
thinking of Ramona, and that's not a healthy sign either. I'm confused about her, I feel guilty
whenever I think about Mo, and the smell of saltwater brings back that frightening
slow-motion underwater tumble, knife in hand. This isn't me: I'm just not the cold-blooded
killer type. When shit needs kicking and throats need slitting we send in Alan's goon squad.
I'm supposed to be the quiet geek who sits at the back of the computer lab, right?
Except I signed my name on the line a few years ago, right ..below the paragraph that said I
accepted the Crown's com- mission to go forth and perpetrate mayhem in the defense of
the realm, as lawfully directed and commanded by my designated superiors. And while most
of the time it's trivial shit — like breaking into an office and leaving evidence to shitcan some
poor bastard who's stumbled too close to the truth — there's nothing there that says I'm not
required to wrestle killers in wet suits or molest alien monsters. Quite the contrary, in fact. I
don't have a license to kill, but I don't have orders not to kill in the course of my duties, either.
Which realization I find extremely disturbing; its like the sensation in your stomach the first
time you get into a car after getting your driving license, when you suddenly realize there's
no instructor in the seat next to you and this is not a test. I wrap myself in a bath sheet and go
back out into the bedroom. It's about one in the afternoon and I've got a few hours to kill
before Ramona is due back. Lunch shows up and is as blandly tasteless as usual — I swear
that there's a force field in the hotel dimensions that sucks the flavor out of food. I badly want
something that'll distract me from pursuing this morbid introspection. Pinky left the
PlayStation behind, so I plop myself down in front of the TV, pick up the controller, and poke
at it in a desultory sort of way. Candy-bright graphics and a splash screen flicker by as the
machine clunks and whirs, loading; then it launches a road race game, in which I'm driving a
variety of cars along winding roads around a jungle-covered island while zombies shoot at
me. "Arse," I mutter, and switch off in disgust.
I check that my tablet PC is plugged into all the wards correctly, then draw the curtains and
He down on the bed for a short nap.
I'm awakened what feels like a split second later by a banging on the door. "Hey,
monkey-boy! Rise and shine!”
Jesus. I've been asleep for hours. "Ramona?" I stand up and stagger towards the vestibule.
My upper thighs and forearms ache as if I've been beaten — must be the swimming. I draw
the chain and open the door.
"Had a good nap?" She raises an eyebrow at me.
"Got to get—" I pause. "Dressed." Damn, I haven't phoned Mo, I realize. Ramona is looking
like about a million dollars, in a blue evening dress that clings to her improbably well — it
seems to be held on with double-sided sticky tape. There's several meters of pearl rope
wound into her hair: she must have found a handy time warp for the make-up crew to have
had time to get her ready for the fashion photo-shoot.
Meanwhile, I'm wearing yesterday's underpants and I feel like I've been run over by a train.
"You're running late," she says, pushing past me; one nostril wrinkles aristocratically as she
surveys the wreckage. She bends over a large carrier bag with the logo of that goddamned
tailor on it: "Here, catch.”
I find myself clutching a pair of boxer shorts. "Okay, I get the message. Give me a minute”
?"Take ten," she says, "I'll go powder my nose." Then she disappears into the bathroom.
I groan and retrieve my tuxedo from the leg-well of the desk. There's a fresh shirt in the bag,
and I manage to install myself in it without too much trouble. I leave the goddamn squeaky
shoes for last. Then I have a mild anxiety attack when I realize I've forgotten the shoulder

holster. Should I or shouldn't I? I'll probably end up shooting myself in the foot.
In the end I compromise - I've still got Ramona's phonegun, so I'll carry that in one pocket.
"I'm ready," I call.
"I'll bet." She comes out of the bathroom, adjusting her evening bag, and smiles brilliantly.
Her smile fades.
"Where's your gun”
?I pat my jacket pocket.
"No, no, not that one." She reaches in and removes the phonegun, then gestures at the
shoulder holster: "That one.”
"Must I?" I try not to whine.
"Yes, you must." I shrug out of my jacket and Ramona helps me into the shoulder rig. Then
she straightens my bow tie. "That's more like it. We'll have you attending diplomatic cocktail
parties in no time!”
"That's what I'm afraid of," I grumble. "Okay, where now”
?"Back to the casino. Eileen's throwing a little party in the petit salle, and I've got us tickets.
Seafood canapes and crappy lounge music with a little gambling thrown in. Plus the usual
sex and drugs rich people indulge in when they get bored with throwing their money away.
She's using the party to reward some of her best sales agents and do a little quiet
negotiating on the side. I gather she's got a new supplier to talk to. Ellis won't be there at
first, but I figure if we can get you an invitation onto the ship . . .”
?"Okay," I agree. "Anything else”
?"Yes." Ramona pauses in the doorway. Her eyes seem very large and dark. I can't look
away from them because I know what's coming: "Bob, I don't, I don't want to—" She reaches
for my hand, then shakes her head. "Ignore me. I'm a fool.”
I keep hold of her hand. She tries to pull away. "I don't believe you," I say. My heart is beating
very hard. "You do, don't you”
?She looks me in the eye. "Yes," she admits. Her eyes are glistening, and in this light I can't
tell whether it's cosmetics or tears. "But we mustn't.”
I manage to nod. "You're right." The words feel very heavy to me, to both of us. I can feel her
need, a physical hunger for an intimacy she hasn't allowed herself to indulge in years. It's not
sex, it's something more. Oh what a lovely mess! She's been a solitary predator for so long
that she doesn't know what to do with somebody she doesn't want to kill and eat. I feel ill with
emotional indigestion: I don't think I've ever felt for Mo the kind of raw, priapic lust I feel for
Ramona, but Ramona is a poisonous bloom — off-limits if I value my life.
She closes the gap between us, wraps her arms around me, and pulls me against her. She
kisses me on the mouth so hard that it makes my hair stand on end. Then she lets go of me,
steps back, and smoothes her dress down. "I'd better not do that ever again," she says
thoughtfully. "For both our sakes: it's too risky." Then she takes a deep breath and offers me
her arm. "Shall we go to the casino”
?The night is young. It's just beginning to get dark, and some time while I was sleeping there
was a brief deluge of rain. It's cut the baking daytime heat down a few notches, but steam is
rising from the sidewalk in thin wisps and the humidity setting is somewhere between
"Amazonian" and "crash dive with the torpedo tubes open." We stroll past a few street
vendors and a bunch of good-time folks, under awnings with bright lights and loud noises.
The brightly painted gazebos in front of the restaurants are all full, drowning out the creaking
insect life with loud chatter.
We arrive at the casino entrance and I nod at the un- familiar doorman. "Private party," I say.
5* "Ah. If monsieur et madame would come this way ....•'" He backs into the foyer and
directs us towards a nondescript staircase. "Your card, sir?" Ramona nudges me discreetly
and I feel her slide some- thing into my hand. I flip it round and pass it to the doorman.
"Here." He scrutinizes it briefly, then nods and waves us upstairs. "What was that?" I ask
Ramona as we climb. "Invitation to Eileen's little recreation." It's all polished brass and rich,
dark mahogany here. Deeply tedious landscape paintings in antique frames dot the walls,

and the lights are dim. Ramona frowns minutely as we reach the landing: "Under our own
names, of course.”
"Right. Do the names signify”
?She shrugs. "Probably, on some database somewhere. They're not stupid, Bob.”
I offer her my arm and we walk down the wide hallway towards the open double-doors.
Beyond them I can hear the clink of glassware and voices raised in conversation, layered =*
above a hotel jazz quartet mangling something famous. The crowd here feels very different
to the gamblers in the public areas of the casino downstairs, and I instantly feel slightly out of
place. There are dozens of women in their thirties and forties, turned out in an overly formal
parody of office wear. They have a curious uniformity of expression, as if the skin of their
faces has been replaced with blemish- ,,-.
resistant polymer coating, and they're pecking at finger food and networking with the perky
ferocity of a piranha school on Prozac; it's like the Stepford Business School opening day,
and Ramona and I have wandered in by mistake from the International Capitalist Conspiracy
meeting next door. I briefly wonder if anyone's going to ask us to announce the winners of
the prize for most cutthroat business development plan of the year. But past the buffet I spot
another set of open double-doors, at a guess the ICC meeting's going to be through there,
along with the roulette wheels and the free bar.
**I'm going to go say 'hi' to our hostess,** Ramona tells me. **See you in a couple of
minutes?** I can tell when I'm not needed. **Sure,** I say. **Want me to get you a drink?**
**I'll handle it from here.** She smiles at me then opens her mouth and gushes, "Isn't this
wonderful, Bob? Be a dear and circulate while I go powder my nose. I'll just be a sec!”
Then she's off, carving a groove through the little black dresses and plastic smiles.
I shrug philosophically, spot the bar, and go over to it.
The bartender is busily pouring glass after glass of cheap, fizzy white plonk, and it takes me
a while to catch his eye.
"Service over here”
?"Sure. What do you want”
?"I'll—" a thousand fragments of half-grasped TV movies take control of my larynx "—can
you make it a dry martini?
Shaken, not stirred.”
"Heh." He looks amused. "You're not the first guy who's asked me that." He grabs a cocktail
shaker and reaches for the gin, and in just a matter of seconds he's handing me a conical
glass full of clear, oily liquid with a pickled sheep's eyeball at the bottom. I sniff it cautiously. It
smells of jet fuel.
"Thanks, I think." Holding it at arm's length I turn away from the bar and nearly dump it all
over a woman in a severe black suit and heavy-framed spectacles. "Oops, I'm sorry.”
"Don't mention it." She doesn't smile. "Mr. Howard? Of Capital Laundry Services?" She
pronounces my name as if she's getting ready to serve a writ.
"Um, yes. You are . . .”
?"Liza Sloat, of Spleen, Sloat, and Partners." Her cheek twitches in something that might be
a smile, or just neuralgia.
"We have the privilege of handling the Billingtons' personal accounts. I believe we nearly met
yesterday.”
"We did?" Suddenly I remember where I know her from.
She's the lawyer who was dogging Billington's footsteps, the one with the briefcase who
went to see the casino president.
I smile. "Yes, I remember now. To what do I owe the pleasure”
?The twitch turns into a genuine smile, albeit about as warm as liquid nitrogen. "Mr.
Billington is running late today. He'll be along later in the evening, and meanwhile you're to
make yourself at home." The smile slides away, replaced by a stare so coldly calculating
that I shiver. "That is his prerogative. Personally, I think he is a little too trusting.
You're rather young for a bidding agent in this auction.”

The smile reappears. "You might want to remind your employers of our history of successful
litigation against individuals, organizations, and entities that try to interfere with the smooth
running of our legitimate commercial operations.
Good day.”
She turns on one spiked black heel and clicks back in the direction of the inner room. What
the hell was that about? I wonder unwisely taking a mouthful from my glass. I manage not to
spew it everywhere, but it tastes even worse than it smelled: pure essence of turpentine with
a finish of cheap gin and a tangy undernote of kerosene. "Gah." I swallow convulsively, wait
for the steam to stop trickling out of my nose, and go looking for a potted plant that appears
hardy enough to survive being irrigated with the stuff.
The salon next door is thickly carpeted, and curtained like an up-market whorehouse in a
movie about fin-de-siecle Paris.
Most of the folks here are clustered around the gaming tables and while some of the ladies
from Pale Grace™ Cosmetics have wandered in, it looks to be mostly Billington's court of
louche shareholders and their anorexic, artistically inclined, fashion-model fuck-bunnies. I'm
moving towards the baccarat table when one of the younger and pushier sales associates
appears in front of me, smiles ingratiatingly, and holds out her hand. "Hi! I'm Kitty. Isn't it
great to be here”
?I squint at her from behind my regrettably full glass, then raise an eyebrow. "I suppose it is,"
I concede, "for some values of'great.' Do I know you”
?Kitty stares at me, freezing like a rabbit in the headlights of an oncoming juggernaut. She's
blonde, her hair lacquered into place like the glass fiber weave of a crash helmet awaiting
the resin spray: she's pretty in a mascara'd and lip-glossed kind of way. "Aren't you, uh,
really famous or something”
?she stammers. "Mrs. Billington always invites famous speakers to these events—”
I force myself to smile benevolently. "That's okay, I don't mind you not recognizing me." I take
a sip of the martini: it's revolting but it's got alcohol in it, so it can't be all bad. "It's rather
refreshing, actually, being a nobody who people overlook all the time." Kitty smiles
uncertainly, as if she's not sure whether I'm deploying irony or something equally exotic.
"What brings you here, Kitty?" I ask, putting on my sincerest expression.
"I'm Busy Bee Number One for the Minnesota sales region! I mean, I have a really great
team and they're amazingly great workers but it's such an honor, don't you think?
And only last year we were sixty-second out of seventy-four regional teams! But I figured my
girls just needed something to shoot for so I gave them new targets and a new promotional
pricing structure with discount incentivization and it worked like crazy!" She half-covers her
mouth: "And the viral marketing thing, too, but that's something else. But it was my worker
bees who did it all, really! There are no drones in my hive!”
"That's, uh, truly excellent," I say, nodding. A thought strikes me: "What particular products
are doing well at the moment? I mean, is there anything special that's responsible for your
sales growth”
?"Oh, well, you know we've tracked the vertical segmentation of our region and different
hives have different merchandise footprints, but you know something? It's the same
everywhere, the Pale Grace™ Skin Hydromax® cream is, you know, walking off the
shelves!”
"Hmm." I try to look thoughtful, which isn't difficult: How the hell do you package a glamour in
an ointment pot? I shake my head in admiration and take another sip of drain cleaner.
"That's really good to know. Maybe I should use it myself”
?"Oh, of course you should! Here, take my card; I'd be happy to set you up with a range of
free samples and an initial consultation." Her card isn't just a piece of cardboard, it's a
scratch 'n' sniff sample as complex as a Swiss Card survival tool — I manage to slide it into
my pocket without getting any of the stuff on my skin. Kitty gushes in my direction, her eyes
lighting up as she moves into the standard sales script, her voice softening and lowering
with a compelling sincerity that is at odds with her natural bubbly extroversion: "The

ErythroComplex-V in the Pale Grace™ Skin Hydromax® range is clinically proven to
reverse ageing-induced cytoplasmic damage to the skin and nail cuticles. Just one
application begins to undo the ravages of free radicals and enhance the body's natural
production of antioxidants and cytochrome polyesterase inhibitors. And it's so creamy
smooth! We make it with one hundred percent natural ingredients, unlike some of our
competitors . . .”
I slip away while she's reciting her programmed spiel, and she doesn't even notice as I sidle
up to a potted palm and take a last reflective mouthful of dry martini. My wards blipped
slightly as her script kicked in, but that doesn't have to mean she's a robot, does it? We
make it with one hundred percent natural ingredients, like the bottom tenth percentile of our
sales force, the ones who don't get invited to this end of the marketing conference by the
Queen Bee. Maybe Kitty's just a natural void, only too happy to be filled by the passing
enthusiasm of the traveling salesman invocation, but somehow I doubt it: that kind of perfect
vacuum doesn't come cheap.
I scuff my left heel on the ground. If I switched it on, the Tiilinghast resonator that Brains
installed in my shoe would let me see the sales-daemon riding her spine like a grotesquely
bloated digger wasp, but I'd just as soon keep my lunch — and anyway the first law of
demonoiogy is that if you can see it, // can see you. But the small of my back itches as I
glance round at the overdressed hedonists and the scarily neat saleswomen because I'm
putting together a picture here that I really don't like: dinner jacket or no, I'm underdressed for
the occasion, although Ramona fits right in.
While I'm having these grim thoughts, I notice that my martini glass is nearly empty. It's not a
terribly endearing drink—it tastes like something that got hosed off a runway then diluted
with antifreeze —but it does what it says on the label. I've got a nasty feeling I'm going to
need plenty of Dutch courage to get through this evening. What that horrible lawyer-creature
Sloat was saying is sinking in: This is either a cover or a warm-up for some sort of auction,
isn't it?
Maybe Billington is planning on selling whatever he dredges up from JENNIFER MORGUE
Site Two to the highest bidder. That would make plenty of sense and it'd explain why the
Black Chamber and the Laundry are both riled up about it, but I can't shake the feeling that
this isn't the whole story: What was the business with Marc all about? Assuming it's
connected. Maybe Ramona knows something she'd be willing to share with me.
I shake my head and look around. I don't see her among the glitterati at the gaming tables,
but there are enough people here that she could have wandered off. **You there?** I ask
silently, but she isn't answering and I can't sense what she's doing. It's as if she's figured out
how to draw a thick blackout curtain around her mind, keeping me out when she doesn't
want me around. That'd be a neat skill to "*.
have, I think, then mentally kick myself. What one of us can do the other can learn really fast.
I'll just have to ask her how she does it whenever she comes out of hiding. At least she's not
in trouble, I guess; given the nature of our link, I'm certain I'd know if she was.
I circulate back towards the bar in the other room and plant my glass on it, then turn round to
see if I can spot either of the Billingtons among the happy-clappy flock of saleswomen: Ellis
may be delayed but I can't see his wife throwing a revival-style party for her faithful without
circu- lating to stroke her flock. "Another of the same?" murmurs the barman, and before I
can make up my mind to say "no" he's fished but a glass and is pouring gin with a soup
ladle. I nod at him and take it, then head back towards the gaming tables in the back room.
I'm not going to drink it, I decide, but maybe if I keep it in my hand it'll stop anyone from trying
to refill the bloody glass again.
The crowd near the tables is noisy and they're smoking and drinking like there's no
tomorrow. I strain to see what's going on over a gaggle of sericulture-vultures with big hair.
It's a baccarat table and from the disorganization there it looks like a game's just ended.
Half a dozen of Billingtons crowd are moving in while an old fart who looks like a merchant
banker leans back in his chair, sipping a glass of port.

"Ah, Mr. Howard I believe." I nearly jump out of my skin before I recall that I'm supposed to
be suave and sophisticated, or at least gin-pickled to the point of insensibility.
"Care for a game”
?I glance round. I vaguely recognize the guy who knows my name. He's in early middle-age,
crew cut, solidly built, and he fills his tuxedo with an avuncular bonhomie that I instinctively
mistrust; he reminds me of the sort of executive who can fire six thousand people before
lunch and go to a charity fundraiser the same evening with his sense of selfrighteousness
entitlement undented. "I'm not much of a gambler," I murmur.
"That's okay, all I ask is that you're a good loser." He grins, baring a perfect row of teeth at
me. "I'm Pat, by the way. Pat McMurray. I consult on security issues for Mr.
Billington. That's how I know about you.”
"Right." I nod as I give him the hairy eyeball. He winks at me slowly, then tugs his left ear
lobe. He's wearing an earring that looks a lot like a symbol I see most days at the office on
my way past the secure documents store in Dansey House.
This isn't in the script: Security consultants who've been briefed on me? Gulp. I try to feel
what Ramona's doing again, but no luck. She's still got that blackout curtain up. "What kind
of security issues do you consult on?" I ask. <' "Well, you know, that's a good question." He
points at my glass. "Why are you drinking that garbage when there's perfectly good liquor
behind the bar”
?I stare at it. "It just sort of slipped into my hand.”
"Heh. You come over to the bar and we'll get you a real man's drink. One that doesn't taste
like drain cleaner." He turns and heads for the bar in complete certainty that I'll follow him, so
I do. The bastard knows I need to know what he knows and he knows I can't say no. He
leans on the bar and announces: "Two double tequila slammers on the rocks.”
Then he turns to me and raises an eyebrow. "You're wonder- ing what I do here, aren't you?"
"Um." Well, yes.
He must take it as agreement, because he nods encouragingly.
"Ellis Billington's a big guy, you've got to know that.
Big guys tend to pick up parasites. That's nothing new.
Trouble is, what Ellis picks up is a different class of blood-,^gpsucker. See, you know who
his company subcontracts for: this makes him a target for people who don't want just his
money, they want a piece of him. So he hires specialist talent to keep them at arm's reach.
Mostly ex-employees of you-know-who, plus a few freelancers." He taps his chest. The
bartender sets two glasses down in front of us; crystals frost their edges and they're full of a
colorless, slightly oily liquid, along with a slice of lemon. "C'mon. Back to the table, bring
your glass.
Let's play a round.”
"But I don't gamble—" I begin, and he stops dead.
"You'll gamble and like it, son. Or Ellis Billington ain't going to make time for you." -* Huh? I
blink. The brown envelope labeled EXPENSES feels extremely hot and as heavy as a gold
brick in my breast pocket. "Why”
?"Could be that he don't approve of limp-dicked limeys,”
McMurray mugs. "Or could be it's all part of the script.
Besides, you'll enjoy it, you know you will. Go on, over to -% the cashier. Get yourself
chipped up." Moments later I'm swapping the contents of the envelope for a pile of plastic
counters. Black, red, white: six months' salary gone to plastic. My mind's spinning like a
hamster wheel. This isn't in the script I'm working from, either the gambling or McMurray's
stark ultimatum. But it's all running on rails, and there's no way to get off this train without
blowing the timetable. So I follow McMurray over to the table, trying to figure out the odds.
House cards: nil. That's four in fourteen of anything I draw. Then it's modular arithmetic down
to the wire, the sort of thing I could do in my head if it was in hexadecimal. Alas, playing
cards predates hex and I've just sunk four shots of expensive gin and I'm not sure I can build
a lookup table in my head fast enough to be of any use.

I sit down. The old toad with the cigar nods at us. "I bought the bank," he announces. "Place
your bets. Opening at five thousand." The croupier next to him holds up the shoe and six
sealed packs of cards. Four elderly vultures in frocks giggle and hunch at one end of the
kidney-shaped table and two guys in DJs and big moustaches sit at the other end.
McMurray and I end up in the middle opposite the old toad.
A couple more gamblers take their seats - a woman with skin the color of milk chocolate
and the complexion of a supermodel, and a guy in a white suit, open-necked shirt, and more
bling than the Bank of England. "Opening at five thousand," repeats the banker.
Without willing my hands to move, I slide a handful of chips forwards. McMurray does
likewise. The cards go into the mechanical shuffler in front of us, then two of the vultures
squabble for the privilege of cutting them before they end up in the brass and wood shoe.
My fingertips and nasal sinuses are itching: I actually want a cigarette, even though I don't
smoke. There's a hollow sense of dreadful anticipation in the pit of my stomach as the toad
positions the shoe in front of himself and then flicks out cards, face-down, one towards each
of us. Then he repeats the deal. A second card lands in front of me, half on top of the first. I
sneak a look at the cards. Six of hearts, five of clubs. Shit. Around me everyone else is
turning their cards. I lay mine down face-up and watch with numb disbelief as the croupier
rakes in my stake.
"Next round." The banker glances round. Again, I can't stop myself, even though there's a
cold itch at the base of my spine and my wards are ringing like alarm bells. I slide another
ten thousand forwards. This time I twitch and nearly scatter the stack everywhere. McMurray
spares me a coldly amused glance; then the banker holds up the shoe and the card deck
and begins to deal. There's something very wrong here, I tell myself. But it's no compulsion
or geas I'm familiar with. There's a pattern to it, something I can't quite put my finger on.
Where's Ratnona? I can sense nothing but velvety darkness where she ought to be. I'm
alone in my own head for the first time in days, and it's not a good feeling. Cards.
Queen of diamonds, eight of spades— A stack of chips approaches me across the table. I
pick up my glass and throw back the tequila slammer, shuddering as it hits my throat. I feel
out-of-control drunk and coldly sober at the same time: it's like my brain's trying to do the
splits, its lobes skittering in opposite directions.
"Again, anyone?" asks the banker, looking round the table. I mechanically begin to push my
chips forwards, then manage to divert the action, bend down, and twist the heel of my left
shoe. Coming up above the level of the table I finish the motion before I can stop myself, all
my chips gliding into a pile in front of the banker. He deals. I look around the room.
McMurray's earring is a burning cold teardrop of radium fire. The shadows lengthen behind
the drapes, hiding the screams of trapped tree-spirits embedded in the fine wall paneling.
The Tillinghast resonator is humming along, but when I look at the toad he's just an ordinary
retired fat-cat with a trust fund and a big bank account, enjoying his gambling habit. The
same isn't true of the vultures - I look at them and try not to recoil. Instead of ageing former
trophywives and heiresses I see hollow bags of translucent skin and hair held together by
their clothes, hunched over their cards like blood-sucking parasites waiting to be filled.
"Hold or play?" someone asks. I glance at the guy in the white suit and open-necked shirt
and see a half-decayed cadaver grinning at me from behind his cards, skin peeling back
from dark hollows lined with strips of adipocere the effect of the resonator reaches my nasal
sinuses and I smell him as well. The supermodel on his arm looks exactly the same as
before, inhumanly calm and poised as she leans against him, but the shadows behind her
are thick and fuliginous, and something about her expression makes me think of a hangman
waiting proudly beside his latest client as the warden signs the death certificate.
"Play." I try hard not to gag as I turn my cards over. Fuck, fuck, fuck. The croupier is raking
the chips across to the toad.
"Excuse me," I gasp, pushing my chair back from the table.
I stumble towards the discreet side door, my throat burning as the woodwork screams at me
and hollow bags of skin turn their empty faces to follow my trajectory to the toilets.

I just lost twenty thousand bucks, I realize numbly as I splash water on my face and look at
myself in the mirror above the wash basin. My face in the mirror leers at me and winks. I lift
my leg hastily and twist the heel back into place: the face freezes in shock. / can't afford that.
Ghastly visions dance in my mind's eye: Angleton will call the Auditors on me, Mo will
scream blue murder. It's more than our combined savings account, the money we've been
socking away this past year towards a deposit on a house. I shudder. My lips are numb from
the alcohol I've been putting away. My throat and stomach feel raw. I still can't sense
Ramona, and that's critical: if she's out of touch we've got a real problem with the whole
operation. Pull yourself together, I tell the man in the mirror. He nods at me, looking shaken.
What to do first?
McMurray: The bastard set me up somehow, didn't he?
The realization gives me something concrete to focus on: I straighten up, carefully check out
the stranger in the mirror to make sure he looks suitably composed, square my shoulders,
and head back towards the party. But when I reach the door back to the room, I pause. The
baccarat game is over. Everyone except the bank-toad is standing up, and new players are
milling around their seats, buzzing like a <- swarm of flies around a — don't go there. I look
away hastily, my eyes watering. I don't see McMurray anywhere, and my wards are kicking
up a fuss. It feels like a major supernat- j ural manifestation is happening somewhere
nearby. "You must be Mr. Howard?" a calm, somewhat musical voice says from right beside
me. I don't jump out of my skin this time: I barely twitch.
The urgent nagging of my wards spikes in time with her voice. "Everyone seems to know
who I am. Who are you”
?Looking round I recognize her at once. She's the supermodel type with the hangman's eyes
who was chilling with Mr. Stiffy: she's got skin the color of a perfect mocha, her dancer's
body exposed rather than concealed by her sheer white gown, a fortune in sapphires at ears
and throat. Looks to die for, like Ramona — yes, it's a glamour. Predictably, she's the center
of the manifestation my wards are yammering about. "I'm Johanna, Mr. Howard, Johanna
Todt. I work for the Billingtons." I shrug. "Doesn't everyone?" It's meant to be a black joke,
but Johanna doesn't seem to take it in the intended spirit. She frowns: "Not yet." Then she
sniffs dismissively. "I'm supposed to bring you to see him.”
"Really." I make myself look her in the eye. She really is beautiful, so much so that normally
I'd be tongue-tied and babbling in her presence. But thanks to the time I've been spending
with Ramona, supernatural beauty isn't as dazzling as it used to be, and besides, I've got
other preoccupations right now. I manage to keep a lid on it. "Liza Sloat just got through
warning me off, then I had some security consultant called McMurray all over me like a vest.
What's the story”
?"Interdepartmental rivalry. Sloat and McMurray don't get on." Johanna tilts her head to one
side and looks at me.
"There are many mansions in the house of Billington, Mr.
Howard. And as it happens, Mr. McMurray is my manager.”
She lays a long-fingered hand on my arm. "Walk with me.”
She steers me past the bar and into the outer room, past the jazz butchers. There are
French doors open on the balcony.
Where's Ramona? I worry. She wasn't in the back room, she's not here . . .
"For obvious reasons we don't make it too easy to reach the chief," Johanna murmurs.
"When you're as rich as the Billingtons it makes you a target. Money is an attractive
nuisance.
We're currently tracking six stalkers and three blackmailers, and that's before you count the
third-world governments. We've got enough schizophrenics to fill onepoint- four psychiatric
hospitals, plus an average of two-point-six marriage proposals and eleven-point-one death
threats per week, and a federal antitrust investigation which is worse than all of them
combined.”
Put that way, I can almost feel a sneaking sympathy for the man. "So why am I here?" I ask.

The ghost of a smile tugs at her lips. "You're not a stalker or a blackmailer." A faint ghost of
a breeze comes through the open doors. She leads me out onto the balcony. "You're asking
inconvenient questions and silencing you won't stop them, because the organization you
work for is staffed by determined, intelligent, and very dangerous people. It's much better to
get everything out in the open and discuss it like sensible people, don't you think”
?"Yeah, well." My mind's eye flickers back to the nightmare meeting in Darmstadt, the
shadow of a diver's oxygen tank rippling across encrusted concrete . . . Dammit, where's
Ramona? She should be relaying this! "Incidentally, who was your boyfriend?" She raises an
eyebrow. "Humor me. The guy in the white suit.”
"What, him?" She shakes her head. "Just an ex of mine. He hangs out with me sometimes."
My wards are still tin- -* gling and I get a sharp stab of pain as I look at her. Her smile slowly
widens. "I walk the body — one at a time. Not all of us ••!are as snobbish as prissy Miss
Random." I used to wonder why the most beautiful women always ended up with rotters, but
as explanations go this one stinks.
I try to take a step back but she's still holding my arm and she's got a grip like a steel
mooring cable, and I'm backed up against the wall. My wards are flaring now, incandescent
spectral light from the chain I'm wearing under my shirt.
"What have you done with her?" I demand.
"Nothing, personally. But if you want to see her again you'll come with—" *• The velvet wall
between us rips open shockingly fast, and Ramona comes slamming through. I'm not
sensing the shape of her emotions, or even seeing a blurry inner vision through her eyes, I'm
inside her, I am Ramona for a random moment?
and the somatic realization is simultaneously very wrong and very right. The floor beneath
her feet is carpeted but it'sm?
slowly turning. Unsteady on her heels she looks round the gloriously upholstered salon, past
the windows, sees the sea •* and the headland. Three black-clad guards with guns flank a
monster just like the corpse in the white suit as her heart tries to climb her throat. **Bob?**
Her cold apprehension hits me like a hammer. This isn't random fear of the unknown: she
knows precisely what she's afraid of. I follow her gaze down to the floor, and the carpet she
stands on. It's a glorious antique Isfahan carpet. Woven into it, almost invisible silver threads
trace out a design identical to the one on my wards, on McMurray's earring. From one edge
of the carpet a coiled cable leads to a control box grasped in the walking corpse's hands.
**lt's a trap, Bob, don't let them—** The corpse pushes a button on the control box and
suddenly I can't feel Ramona anymore. I stagger, disoriented: it's like having a full-body local
anesthetic. I blink until I can focus my eyes. Johanna is smiling at me in a satisfied, catgot-
the-canary manner. "Who do you work for again?" I ask, trying to regain control.
"Ellis Billington." Her smile vanishes, replaced by casual authority. "He says I'm to take you
aboard the Mabuse. You will do exactly as I say — assuming you ever want to see her
again.”
"What?" I ask, feeling sick and sober with the backwash from Ramona's fright. "But I came
here to see him anyway!”
"Perhaps, but you've also acquired adversary status, according to our reading of the main
security geas. It's probably a memory leak in the code, but until we've terminated this phase
of the operation we're going to treat you as threat number one." She steps closer to me and
before I realize what she's doing she reaches into my jacket and removes the pistol Ramona
made me wear. She takes two steps back and I find myself staring up the muzzle of my own
gun, feeling stupid.
"Lights out, Mr. Howard.”
I'm opening my mouth to say something when the ward they've trapped Ramona in shuts
down and her presence floods into me again. I've got time for a brief moment of relief —
time to think we're whole again — then the walking corpse shoots her with a Taser, and
while Ramona and I are both flopping around on the floor Johanna steps forwards and sinks
a disposable syringe into my neck.

1 1 : DESTINY ENTANGLED I AM ASLEEP AND DREAMING AND AWARE AT THE
same time — I appear to be having a lucid dream. I really wish I wasn't, because that
rat-bastard Angleton has taken advantage of my somnambulant state to sneak into my head
with his slide projector and install another precanned top secret briefing, using my eyelids
as stereoscopic projection screens. And I don't care how bad your nightmares are, they
can't possibly be as unpleasant as a mission briefing con-*^ducted by old skull-face while
you're asleep, unable to wake up, and suffering from an impending hangover. "Pay attention,
Bob," he admonishes me sternly. "If you're alive you're getting this briefing because you've
pene- trated Billington's semiotic firewall. This means you're approaching the most
dangerous part of your mission — and you're going to have to play it by ear. On the other
hand, you've got an ace up your sleeve in the form of Ms. Random.
She should be secure in the safe house your backup team has organized, and she'll be your
conduit back to us for advice and instructions.”
No she bloody isn't! I try to yell at him, but he's playing the usual tricks with my vocal chords
and I'm not allowed to say anything that isn't on the menu. Propelled by the usual inexorable
dream logic the briefing continues.
"Billington has let it be known that he will be conducting an advance Dutch auction for the
specimens he expects to raise from JENNIFER MORGUE Site Two. These are described
in vague but exciting terms, as chthonic artifacts and applications. There is of course no
mention of his expertise in operating Gravedust-type oneiromantic convolution engines, or
of the presence of a deceased DEEP SEVEN in the vicinity.
"He is restricting bidding to authorized representatives of governments with seats at the G8,
plus Brazil, China, and India. Sealed bids are solicited in advance of the operation, which
will be honored once the retrieval is complete. This indirect pressure makes it difficult for us
to stay out of the auction, while simultaneously rendering It nearly impossible for us to take
direct action against him — he's very carefully played the bidders off against one another. Of
rather more concern is who Billington hasn't invited to bid — namely BLUE HADES. As I
mentioned in your earlier briefing, our immediate concern is the response of BLUE HADES
to Billington's activities around the site, followed .n turn by what Billington really intends to do
with the raised artifacts.
"Regardless, your actual task remains, as briefed, to determine what Billington is planning
and to stop him from doing anything that arouses BLUE HADES or DEEP SEVEN —
especially, anything likely to convince them that we're in violation of our treaty obligations. To
supplement your cover you are officially designated as an authorized representative of Her
Majesty's Government, to deliver our bid for the JENNIFER MORGUE Site Two artifacts.
This is a genuine bid, although obviously we hope we won't be called upon to make good on
it, and the terms are as follows: for an exclusive usage license as designated in schedule
one to be appended to this document, hereinafter designated 'the con- tract' between the
seller 'Ellis Billington' and associates, corporations, and other affiliates and the purchaser,
the Government of the United Kingdom, the sum of two billion pounds sterling, to be paid . .
.”
Angleton rattles on in dreary legalese for approximately three lifetimes. It'd be tedious at the
best of times, but right now it's positively nightmarish; the plan has already run off the rails,
and the worst thing of all is, I can't even yell at him. -I'm committing this goddamn contract
that we're never going to use to memory, seemingly at Angleton's posthypnotic command,
but the shit has hit the fan and Ramona's a prisoner. I'd gnash my teeth if I was allowed to.
I've got a feeling that Angleton's sneak strategy — use me to leak dis*^(information to the
Black Chamber via Ramona, of course — is already blown, because I don't think Billington
is serious about running an auction. If he was, would he be dicking around risking a murder
investigation in order to push a line ~* of cosmetics? And would he be kidnapping
negotiators? This is all so out of whack that I can't figure it out. I've got a s k R feeling that
Angleton's scheme was toast before I even boarded the airbus in Paris: if nothing else, his
bid is implau*.

sibly low given what's at stake.
Eventually the briefing lets go of me and I slide gratefully beneath the surface of a dreamless
lake. I'm rocking from side to side on it, with the leisurely wobble of a howdah perched on an
elephant's back. After a brief infinity of unconsciousness I become aware that my head is
throbbing fiercely and my mouth feels like a family of rodents has set up a campsite,
complete with latrine, on my tongue. And that I'm awake. Oh no. I twitch, taking stock. I'm
lying on my back which is never the right place to be, breathing through my mouth, and—
"He's awake.”
"Good. Howard, stop fooling around.”
This time I groan aloud. My eyes feel like pickled onions and it takes a real effort to force
them open. More facts flood in as my brain reboots. I'm lying on my back, fully dressed, on
something like a padded bench or sofa. The voice I recognize: it's McMurray. The room's
well-lit, and I notice that the padded surface beneath me is covered in beautifully finished
fabric. The lights are tasteful and indirect, and the curving walls are paneled in old
mahogany: the local police cells, it ain't. "Give me a second," I mumble.
"Sit up." He doesn't sound impatient; just sure of himself.
I force arms and legs that are heavy and warm from toorecent sleep to respond, swinging
my legs round and sitting up at the same time. A wave of dizziness nearly pushes me right
back down, but I get over it and rub my eyes, blinking.
"What is this place?" I ask shakily. Andivhere's Ramona? Still trapped?
McMurray sits down on the bench opposite me. Actually, it's a continuation of the one I was
lying on — it snakes around the exterior of the trapezoid room, past out-tilting walls and a
doorway in the middle of the only rectilinear wall in the cabin. It's a nice room except that the
doorway is blocked by a gorilla in a uniform-like black jumpsuit and beret, plus
mirrorshades. (Which is more than somewhat incongruous, in view of it being well past
midnight.) The windows are small and oval with neatly decorated but very functional-looking
metal covers hinged back from them, and there are drawers set in the base of the padded
bench — obviously storage of some kind. The throbbing isn't in my head; it's coming from
under the floor. Which can only mean one thing.
"Welcome aboard the Mabuse," he says, then shrugs apologetically.
"I'm sorry about the way you were handed your boarding pass: Johanna isn't exactly Little
Miss Subtlety, and .I told her to make sure you didn't abscond. That would totally ruin the
plot." I rub my head and groan. "Did you have to — no, don't answer that, let me guess: it's a
tradition or an old charter, something like that." I continue to rub my head. "Is there any
chance of a glass of water? And a bathroom?" It's not just a barbiturate hangover — the
martinis are extracting a vicious revenge. "If you're going to take me to see the big cheese
shouldn't I freshen up a bit first?" Please say yes, I pray to JL, whatever god of whimsy has
got me in his grip, being hung- over is bad enough without a beating on top of it.
For a moment I wonder if I've gone too far, but he gestures at the gorilla, who turns and
opens the door and retreats down the narrow corridor a couple of paces. "The head's next
-*door. You have five minutes.”
He watches as I stumble to my feet. He nods, affably enough, and gestures at another door
set next to the rec room or wherever the hell it is they'd put me in to sleep things off. I open
the door and indeed find a washroom of sorts, barely bigger than an airliner's toilet but
beautifully finished. I take a leak, gulp down half a pint or so of water using the plastic cup so
helpfully provided, then spend about a minute sitting down and trying not to throw up.
**Ramona, are you there?** If she is, I can't hear her. I take stock: my phone's missing, as is
my neck-chain ward, my wristwatch, and my shoulder holster. The bow tie is dangling from
my collar, but they weren't considerate enough to remove my uncomfortable toe-pinching
shoes. I raise an eyebrow at the guy in the mirror and he pulls a mournful face and shrugs:
no help there. So I wash my face, try to comb my hair with my fingertips, and go back
outside to face the music.
The gorilla is waiting for me outside. McMurray stands in front of the closed door to the rec

room. The gorilla beckons to me then turns and marches down the corridor, so I play nice
and tag along, with McMurray taking up the rear. The corridor is punctuated by frequent
watertight bulkheads with annoying lintels to step over, and there's a shortage of portholes to
show where we are: someone's obviously done a first-rate coach-building job, but this ship
wasn't built as a yacht and its new owner clearly places damage control ahead of aesthetics.
We pass some doors, ascend a very steep staircase, and then I figure we're into Owner
Territory because the metal decking gives way to teak parquet and hand-woven carpets,
and up here they have widened the corridors to accommodate the fat-cats: or maybe it's just
that they built the owner's quarters where they used to stash the Klub-N cruise missiles and
the magazine for the forward 100mm gun turret.
Klub-N vertical launch cells are not small, and the owner's lounge is about three meters
longer than my entire house. It appears to be wallpapered in cloth-of-gold, which for the most
part is mercifully concealed behind ninetycentimeter Sony displays wearing priceless
antique picture frames. Right now they're all switched off, or displaying a rolling Screensaver
depicting the TLA Corporation logo. The furniture's equally lacking in the taste department.
There's a sofa that probably escaped from Versailles one jump ahead of the revolutionary
fashion police, a bookcase full of selfhelp business titles (A Defendant's Guide to the
International Criminal Court, The Twelve-Step Sociopath, Globalization for Asset-
Strippers), and an antique sideboard that abjectly fails to put the rock into baroque. I find
myself looking for a furtive cheap print of dogs playing poker or a sad-eyed clown —
anything to break the monotony of the collision between bad taste and serious money.
Then I notice the Desk.
Desks are to executives what souped-up Mitsubishi Colts with low-profile alloys, metal-flake
paint jobs, and extraloud, chrome-plated exhaust pipes are to chavs; they're a big swinging
dick, the proxy they use to proclaim their sense of self-importance. If you want to understand
an executive, you study his desk. Billington's Desk demands a capital letter.
Like a medieval monarch's throne, it is designed to proclaim to the poor souls who are
called before it: the owner of this piece of furniture is above you. Someday I'll write a text
book about personality profiling through possessions; but for now let's Just say this example
is screaming "megalomaniac!" at me. Billington may have an ego the size of an aircraft
carrier but he's not so vain as to leave his desk empty (that would mean he was pretending
to lead a life of leisure) or to cover it with meaningless gewgaws (indicative of clownish
triviality).
This is the desk of a serious executive. There's a functionallooking (watch me work!') PC to
one side, and a phone and a halogen desk light at the other One of the other items dot- ting
it gives me a nasty shock when I recognize the design inscribed on it: millions wouldn't, but
the owner of this hunk of furniture is using a Belphegor-Mandelbrot Type Two containment
matrix as a mouse mat, which makes him either a highly skilled adept or a suicidal maniac.
Yup, that pretty much confirms the diagnosis. This is the desk of a diseased mind, hugely
ambitious prone to taking insanely dangerous risks. He's not ashamed of boasting about it
— he clearly believes in better alpha-primate dominance displays through carpentry.
McMurray gestures me to halt on the carpet in front of the Desk. "Wait here, the boss will be
along in a minute." He gestures at a skeletal contraption of chromed steel and thin, black
leather that only Le Corbusier could have mistaken for a chair: "Have a seat.”
I sit down gingerly, half-expecting steel restraints to flash out from concealed compartments
and lock around my wrists. My head aches and I feel hot and shivery. I glance at McMurray,
trying for casual rather than anxious. The Laundry field operations manual is notably short on
advice for how to comport one's self when being held prisoner aboard a mad billionaire
necromancer's yacht, other than the usual stern admonition to keep receipts for all expenses
incurred in the line of duty. "Where's Ramona?" I ask.
"I don't remember saying you were free to ask questions.”
He stares at me from behind his steel-rimmed spectacles until icicles form on the back of
my neck. "Ellis has a specific requirement for an individual of her . . . type. I'm a specialist in

managing such entities." A pause. "While you remain entangled, she will be manageable.
And as long as she remains manageable, there will be no need to dispose of her.”
I swallow. My tongue is dry and I can hear my pulse in my ears. This wasn't supposed to
happen; she was supposed to be back in the safe house, acting as a relay! McMurray nods
at me knowingly. "Don't underestimate your own usefulness to us, Mr. Howard," he says.
"You're not just a useful lever.”
There's a discreet buzz from his belt pager: "Mr. Billington is on his way now.”
The door behind the Desk opens.
"Ah, Mr. B—Howard." Billington walks in and plants himself firmly down on the black
carbon-fiber Aeron chair behind the Desk. From the set of his shoulders and the tiny smile
playing around his lips he's in an expansive mood. "I'm so pleased you could be here this
evening. I gather my wife's party wasn't entirely to your taste”
?I stare at him. He's an affable, self-satisfied bastard in a dinner jacket and for a moment I
feel a nearly uncontrollable urge to punch him in the face. I manage to hold it in check: the
gorilla behind me will ensure I'd only get one chance, and the consequences would hurt
Ramona as much as they'd hurt me. Still, it's a tempting thought. "I have a bid for your
auction," I say, very carefully keeping my face straight. "This abduction was unnecessary,
and may cause my employers to reconsider their very generous offer.”
Billington laughs. Actually, it's more of a titter, high- pitched and unnerving. "Come now, Mr.
Howard! Do you really think I don't already know about your boss's paltry little
two-billion-pound bait-worm? Please! I'm not stupid.
I know all about you and your colleague Ms. Random, and the surveillance team in the safe
house run by Jack Griffin.
I even remember your boss, James, from back before he became quite so spectral and
elevated. I know much more than you give me credit for." He pauses. "In fact, I know
everything.”
Whoops. If he's telling the truth, that would put a very bad complexion on things. "Then what
am I doing here?" I ask, hoping like hell that he's bluffing. "I mean, if you're omnipotent and
omniscient then just what is the point of abducting me — not to mention Ramona - and
dragging us aboard your yacht?" (That's a guess about Ramona, but I don't see where <else
he might be keeping her.) "Don't tell me you haven't got better things to do with your time
than gloat; you're trying to close a multi-billion-dollar auction, aren't you?" He just looks at me
with those peculiar, slotted lizard-eyes and I have a sudden cold conviction that maybe
making money is the last thing on his mind right now. "You're here for several reasons," he
says, quite agreeably.
"Hair of the dog?" He raises an eyebrow, and the gorilla hurries over to the sideboard.
"I wouldn't mind a glass of water," I confess "Hah." He nods to himself. "The archetype hasn't
taken full effect yet, I see.”
"Which archetype”
?McMurray clears his throat. "Boss, do I need to know this”
?Billington casts him a fish-eyed stare: "No, I don't think you do. Quick thinking.”
"I'll just go and check in on Ramona then, shall I? Then I'll go polish the binnacle and check
for frigging in the rigging or something." McMurray slithers out through the door at high
speed Billington nods thoughtfully.
"He's a smart subordinate." He raises an eyebrow at me.
"That's half the problem, you know.”
"Half what problem?" ^ j r ; . - "The problem of running a tight ship." The gorilla hands
Billington a glass of whisky, then plants a glass full of mineral water in front of me before
returning to his position by the door. "If they're smart enough to be useful they get ideas
about making themselves indispensable — ideas about getting above their station, as you
Brits would put it.
If they're too dumb to be useful they're a drain on your management time. All corporations
are an economy of attention, from the top down. You should take McMurray as a role model,

Mr. Howard, if you ever make it back to your petty little civil service cubicle farm. He's a
consummate senior field agent and a huge asset to his employers.
No manager in their right mind would ever terminate him, but because he likes fieldwork he
doesn't spend enough time in the office to get a leg up the promotion ladder. And he knows
it." He falls silent. I take advantage of the break in his spiel to take a mouthful of water.
"That's why I headhunted him away from the Black Chamber," Billington adds.
When I finish coughing, he looks at me thoughtfully.
"You strike me as being a reasonably adaptable, intelligent young man. It's really a shame
you're working for the public sector. Are you sure I can't bribe you? How would a million
bucks in a numbered account in the Caymans suit you”
?"Get lost." I struggle to maintain my composure.
"If it's just that silly little warrant card you guys carry, we can do something about it " he adds
slyly.
Ouch. That's a low blow. I take a deep breath: "I'm sure you can, but—”
He snorts. And looks amused. "It's to be expected. They wouldn't have sent you if they
thought you had an easy price.
It's not just money I can offer, Mr. Howard. You're used to working for an organization that is
deliberately structured to stifle innovation and obstruct stakeholder-led change. My
requirements are a bit, shall we say, different. A smart, talented, hard-working man -
especially a morally flexible one — can go far. How would you like to come on board as
deputy vice-president for intelligence, Europe, Middle East, and Africa division? A learning
sinecure, initially, but with your experience and background in one of the world's leading
occult espionage organizations I'm sure you'd make your mark soon enough.”
I give it a moment's thought, long enough to realize that he's right — and that I'm not going to
take the offer. He's offering me crumbs from the rich man's table, and not even bothering to
find out in advance if that's the sort of diet I enjoy. Which means he's doing me the
compliment of not taking the prospect of my defection seriously, which means he considers
me to be a reliable agent. And now I stop to think about it, I realize to my surprise that I am. I
may not be happy about the circumstances under which I took the oath, and I may gripe and
moan about the pay and conditions, but there's a big difference between pissing and
moaning and seriously contemplating the betrayal of everything I want to preserve. Even if
I've only just come to realize it.
"I'm not for sale, Ellis. Not for any price you can pay, anyway. What's this archetype
business”
?He nods minutely, examining me as if I've just passed some sort of important test. "I was
getting to that." He rotates his chair until he's half-facing the big monitor off to my right. He
stabs at the mouse mat with one finger and I wince, but instead of fat purple sparks and a
hideous soulsucking manifestation, it simply wakes up his Windows box.
(Not that there's much difference.) For a moment I almost begin to relax, but then I recognize
what he's calling up and my stomach flip-flops in abject horror.
"I do everything in PowerPoint, you know." Billington grins, an expression which I'm sure is
intended to be impish but that comes across to his intended victim — me — as just plain
vicious. "I had to have my staff write some extra plugins to make it do everything I need, but,
ah, here we are . . .”
He rapidly flips through a stack of tediously bulleted talking points until he wipes into a
screen that's mercifully photographic in nature. It's a factory, lots of workers in gowns and
masks gathered around worktops and stainless steel equipment positioned next to a series
of metal vats.
"Eileen's Hangzhou factory, where our Pale Grace™ Skin Hydromax® range of products
are made. As you probably already figured out, we apply a transference-contagion glamour
to the particulate binding agent in the foundation powder, maintained by brute force from our
headquarters operation in Milan, Italy. Unlike most of the cosmetics on the market, it really
does render the wrinkles invisible. The ingredients are a bit of a pain, but she's got that well

in hand; instead of needing an endless supply of young women just to keep one old bat
pretty we can make do with only about ten parts per million of maid's blood in the mix. It's
just one of the wonders of modern stem cell technology. Shame we can't find a replacement
for the stress prostaglandins, but those are the breaks.”
He clicks his mouse. "Here's the other end of the operation." It's a room full of skinny,
suntanned guys in short-sleeved shirts hunched over cheap PCs, row upon row of them: "My
floating offshore programmer ranch, the SS Hopper. You've probably read about it, haven't
you? Instead of offshoring to Bangalore, I bought an old liner, wired it, and flew in a number
of Indian programmers to live on board. It stays outside the coastal limit and with satellite
uplinks it might as well be in downtown Miami. Only they're not, um, actually programming
anything. Instead, they're monitoring the surveillance take from the mascara. Because the
Pale Grace™ Bright Eyes® products don't just link into the transferencecontagion glamour,
they contain particles nano-engraved with an Icon of Bhaal-She'vra that backdoors them into
my surveillance grid. That's actually the main product of my sixty-nanometer fab line these
days by the way, not the bespoke microprocessors everyone thinks it makes. It's a very
useful similarity hack — anything the wearer can see or hear, my monitors can pick up, and
we've got flexible batch manufacturing protocols that ensure every single cosmetics product
is uniquely coded so we can tell them apart. It's almost embarrassing how much intelligence
you can gather from this sweep, especially as Eileen's affiliates are running a loyalty
scheme that encourages users to register their identity with us at time of sale for free
samples, so that we know who they are.”
I'm boggling already. "Are you telling me you've turned your cosmetics company into some
kind of occult ubiquitous surveillance operation? Is that what this is”
?"Yup, that's about the size of it." Billington nods smugly. "Of course, it's expensive — but
we manage to just about break even on a twenty buck tube of mascara, so it works out all
right in the end. And it's less obvious than using several million zombie seabirds." He clears
his throat.
"Anyway, that's by way of demonstrating to you that you can run, but you can't hide. Now, to
explain why you shouldn't run . . .”
He flicks to the next slide, and it's not a photograph, it's a live surveillance take from a
camera somewhere. I'm pretty sure it's aboard this very ship. It's Ramona, of course. She's
sprawling across a double bed in a stateroom, out cold.
"Here's Ms. Random. I figure you know by now that you don't get to talk to her without my
say-so. You need to know three things about her. Firstly, if I've got you, I can make her do
anything I want — and vice versa. You've figured that out?
Excellent.”
He pauses for a few seconds while I force myself to stop trying to break the arms of my
chair. "There's no need for that, Mr. Howard. No harm will come to either of you unless you
force my hand. You're here because I need her to do a little job for me, one relating to the
recovery of the alien artifact — and I need her willing cooperation. So that's item two out of
the way. Item three, I gather you've met Mr.
McMurray? Good. It might interest you to know that he's a specialist in controlling entities
like Ramona's succubus, or Johanna's necrophage. I could threaten to hurt you if she tries to
resist, but I always find that positive incentivization works much better than the big stick on
employees: so I'm going to offer her a deal. If you and Ms. Random cooperate fully, I'll have
Mr. McMurray see if he can permanently separate her from her little helper. As he was part
of the team who invoked and bound it to her in the first place . . . well, what do you think she'll
say to that”
?I pick up my water glass and drain it, hoping for something, anything, to occur to me that'll
show me a way out.
Billington may not have tried to figure out my price, but I'm pretty sure he's got Ramona's.
"What's the job”
?Billington prods at his fancy remote again and another screen comes to life: a view of a

huge metal chamber, something like a factory floor—only the floor itself is covered in black
water. A moment's confusion, then it springs into focus for me. "Isn't that the Glomar
Explorer”
?"It's now the TLA Explorer, but yes, well-spotted, Mr.
Howard.”
I focus on the pipe that pierces the heart of the pool of water. There's something big and
indistinct lurking just under the surface down there, impaled on the end of the drill string.
"What's that”
?"Can't you guess? It's the TMB-2, a clone of the original Hughes Mining Barge 1, equipped
with updated telemetry and new materials so that pressure-induced brittleness in the grab
cantilever arms won't stop it from working this time.”
"But you know the Deep Ones won't let you retrieve—”
"Really?" His grin widens.
"But!" My head's spinning. I know about the original HMB-1, Operation JENNIFER, the
BLUE HADES defense system that nearly dragged the mother ship down. "You said this
was about Ramona”
?"She's one of the in-laws," Billington explains cheerfully.
"She's got the Innsmouth look, you know? She tastes right to their minions the abyssal
polyps. You didn't think the Deep Ones guarded every inch of their territory in person, did
you?
The polyps are subsentient just like your burglar alarm. They work by biochemical tracers,
discriminating self from other.”
He picks up his whisky. "I need her to ride the grab down and keep an eye on it while it locks
onto the target. If the defenders of the deep smell Old One in the water they'll stay cowering
in their burrows in the abyssal mud. What do you say to that”
?"It's an interesting theory," I admit, which is true because I don't know one way or the other
whether it'll work.
"It's more than a theory. I sank a lot of money into arranging for the Black Chamber to send
her, boy. Her folk aren't so numerous and most of them would die rather than let themselves
be turned to such a purpose. She's been tamed, which is unusual, and you've got a handle
on her, and I've got you. So, I'll make you a new offer. Convince her to ride the barge for me
willingly, and I'll have McMurray free her from her curse. Convince her to ride the barge and I
won't even have to threaten you. How about it”
?He's backed me into a corner, I realize. And not just with menaces; the thing is, he has
found Ramona's price. And having been inside her skull, even if only a bit, I'm not sure I can
criticize her. Or easily stand in her way, if she really wants to do it. Threats of torture are
redundant — just forcing her to go on living in her current state is torment enough.
Plus, if she doesn't cooperate, Billington might turn nasty and take it out of my hide. Which
reminds me of something else . . .
"Why me?" I finally burst out. "I mean, if you needed her, surely you don't specifically need
me to control her? I'm nothing to you. You've got McMurray. You already know about my
government's offer. What am I doing here? Why don't you just do the disentangling ritual and
dump me overboard”
?Billington's smile widens, disturbingly: "Ah, but that's where you're wrong, Mr. Howard. Your
presence here prevents anyone else — like the US Navy, for example — from turning up
and spoiling my scheme. Which I realized would be a likely response to my current
operation right at the outset, and took steps to prevent, in the form of a monumentally
expensive and rather intricate destiny-entanglement geas that compels the participants to
adopt certain archetypal roles that have been gathering their strength from hundreds of
millions of believers over nearly fifty years. The geas doesn't mess with causality directly, but
it does ensure that the likelihood of events that mesh with its destiny model are raised, while
other avenues become less . . . probable. Going against the geas is hard; agents get run
over by taxis, aircraft suffer inexplicable mechanical failures, that sort of thing. Now you've

jumped through all the hoops in the geas and in so doing massively reinforced it. You've
taken on the role of the heroic adversary. Which in turn means that nobody else is allowed to
play the hero around here. And in accordance with another aspect of the geas, you're in my
power for the time being and you're going to stay there until a virtuous woman turns up to
release you. Got that”
?My head's spinning. What the hell is he on about? And where am I going to find a virtuous
woman on board a mad billionaire's yacht at three in the morning as we steam towards the
Bermuda Triangle? "What about the auction?" I ask plaintively.
Billington laughs raucously. "Oh, Mr. Howard! The auction was only ever a blind, to make
your superiors believe I could be bought and sold!" He leans forwards across the Desk, and
his eyebrows furrow like thunderclouds: "What use do you think I have for mere gigabucks?
This is the highstakes table." He looks past my shoulder, towards the gorilla.
"Take him back to his room and lock him in until morning.
We'll continue this conversation over breakfast." The gorilla stomps over and lays a beefy
hand on my shoulder. "When I have JENNIFER MORGUE they'll do anything I want," he
mutters, and my skin crawls because I don't think he's talking to me anymore. "Anything at
all. They'll have to listen to me once I own the planet.”
The gorilla herds me back down a short flight of steps and onto a passage that sports a row
of mahogany-paneled doors like a very exclusive hotel. He opens one of them and gestures
me inside. I briefly consider trying to take him, but realize it won't work: they've got Ramona
and they've got the surveillance network from Hell and I'm on a ship that's already out of sight
of land. I'll only get one chance, at most, and I'd better make sure I don't blow it. So I go
inside without a struggle, and look around tiredly as he turns the key in the lock.
Being locked in one of Billington's guest rooms is a comfortable step up from a police cell.
It's aboard ship so it's smaller than a five-star hotel suite, but that's about the only way it
suffers by comparison. The bed's a double, the carpet is luxuriously thick, there's a porthole
(non-opening), a wet bar, and a big flat-screen TV, a shelf next to it holds a handful of
paperbacks and a row of DVDs. I assume I'm supposed to drink myself comatose while
watching cheesy spy thrillers.
The desk (small, guest-room-sized) opposite the bed shows raw patches where they must
have yanked out a PC earlier — it's a damn shame, but Billington's people are smart
enough not to leave a computer where I can get my hands on it.
"Shit," I mutter, then sit down in the sinfully padded leather recliner next to the wet bar.
Surrender has seldom been such an attractive prospect. I massage my head. Looking out
the porthole there's nothing but an expanse of nightblack sea, overlooked by stars. I yawn.
Whatever that bitch Johanna used to put my lights out was fast-acting; it can't be much past
three in the morning. And I'm still tired, now that I think about it. I look around the room and
there's nothing particularly obvious in the way of escape routes.
Plus, they're probably watching me, via a peephole in the door if they've got any sense.
"What a mess.”
**You can say that again, monkey-boy.** I flinch, then force myself to relax. Trying to show no
sign of anything in particular, I open my inner ear again.
**Ramona?** **No, I'm the fucking tooth fairy. Have you seen my pliers lying around? There's
a couple of folks here in line for some root-canal surgery when I get free.** The wash of relief
is visceral; if I was standing I'd probably collapse on the spot. It's a good thing I found the
recliner first **You're all right?** She snorts. **For what it's worth.** I can feel something itchy
where my eyes can't see. Focusing on it, I see the inside of another room, much like this
one. She's kicked off her heels and is pacing the floor restlessly, examining everything,
looking for an exit.
They've wired the walls. There's a shielding graph in the floor but they must have switched it
off for the time being to let us talk. I don't think they can overhear us, but they can stop us any
time they want.** **Nice of them—** **To let us know they've got us where they want us?
Don't be silly.** **How'd they catch you?** I ask, after an uncomfortable pause.

**It's probably the oldest trick in the book.** She stops pacing. **I was looking for Eileen's
inner circle when I ran into a lure, a daemon disguised as someone I know professionally —
a real class act, I could have sworn it was really him. He suckered me into an upstairs
meeting room and before I knew what was happening they had me in a summoning lock.
Which should be impossible unless they've got the original keys the Contracts Department
used when they enslaved me, yet they did it. So I guess it's not impossible after all.** I stare
at the blank TV set. **Not if it was the real thing.
His name's McMurray, isn't it?** I can taste her shock. **How the fuck did you know that?**
she demands.
**Because he took me for my entire expenses tab at baccarat,** I confess. **He's got a new
employer with very deep pockets. Has Billington tried to buy you yet?** She starts pacing
again. **No, and he won't. Where he comes from there are different rules for people like me.
You're employable. You're human. I'm . . .** I can feel her working her jaws, as if she's about
to spit: **Let's just say, there are minorities it's still okay to shit on.** I wince. **He led me to
believe t h a t . . . well, if you don't think he's going to try to buy you, what's he got on you?
Besides the obvious.** She tenses. **He's got you. That's bad enough, in case you hadn't
figured it out.** Whoops. **He knows all about your curse.** The idea begins to sink in. **Tell
me about McMurray. You worked with him, right? In exactly what capacity?** **He made
me.** Her voice is chilly enough to liquefy nitrogen. **I'd rather not discuss it.** **Sorry, but
it's relevant. I'm still trying to work out what's going on. How Billington turned him. I wonder
what the key was, if it's just money, like Billington said, or if there's something else we can
use . . .** Ramona snorts. **Don't waste your time. When I get out of here I'm going to kick
his ass.** ;6 I pause. **I think you may be wrong about Billington. I think he has every
intention of trying ro buy you. He's got your heart's desire in a box, if you'll just turn a trick for
him.** **You English guys, you've got such a way with words!
Look, I don't bribe, okay? It's not a matter of being too honest, it's just not possible.
Suppose, for the sake of argument, I go down for him and he gives me whatever it is you're
hinting at in return. What happens then? Has that occurred to you? I'd be dead meat, Bob.
No way can he let me walk.** **Not so fast. I mean, I think he's nuts. But I think he believes
that if he succeeds there won't be an 'after,' in the conventional sense; he'll be home clean
and dry, immune to ^any consequences. I put the offer Angleton — my boss - gave me on
the table, and Billington just laughed at me! He laughed off about five billion dollars at
today's exchange rate.
He's not in this for the money, he's in it because he thinks he's going to come out of it
owning the entire planet.** She snorts theatrically. **How boring, just another bil- lionaire
necromancer cruising the Caribbean in his thinly disguised guided missile destroyer,
plotting total world domination.** I shudder. **You think you're joking? He monologued at me.
With PowerPoint** **He what? And you're still sane? Obviously I underestimated you.** I
shake my head. **I didn't have much choice. I figure we're stuck here for the duration. Or at
least until he gets wherever he's taking us.
**The other ship.** **Yeah, there's that.** I stand up and walk over to the sliding door at the
far side of the room. The bathroom beyond it is small but perfectly formed. There's no
porthole, though.
**If we could figure out a way to spring you, could you do your invisibility thing?** The
question takes me by surprise. **Not sure. Damn it, "^ they took my Treo. That would make it
a whole lot easier.
Plus, he's got an occult surveillance service that's going to be murder to evade. You don't
use Eileen's make-up, do you?
Especially not the mascara?** **Do I look like a dumb blonde?** she snorts. **Pale Grace™
is for department store sales clerks and middle-management types trying to glam up their
suits.** **Good for you, because he's got a contagious proximityawareness binding mixed in
with it — that's what he married Eileen for, that's why he bankrolled her business. The
goddamn seagulls weren't how he was watching us, they were just cover: it was all the

thirty-something tourist women. All of them, at least the ones who take the free samples
down at the promenade. And I reckon if he's got any sense, all of the crew on this boat will
be using it, or something similar.** **At least they'll all have beautiful complexions.** She
pauses. **So what does he want with us? Why are we still alive?** **You're alive because he
wants you to do a job. Me . . .
probably because he needs someone to monologue at. He said something about a geas,
but I'm not sure what he meant.
And we're still entangled, so I guess . . .** I stop. While I was wibbling, Ramona realized
something.
**You're right, it is the geas,** she says sharply.
**Which means nothing's going to happen until we arrive.
So go to sleep, Bob. You're going to need all the sleep you can get before tomorrow.**
**Lights out.** And with that, she pushes me out of her head, blocking me off from that
sudden flash of understanding.
12: POWER BREAKFAST I AWAKEN IN A STRANGE BCD THAT FEELS AS IF it's
vibrating slightly, with a head like thunder, and muscles I didn't know I had aching in my arms
and legs. The thin light of dawn is pouring in through a porthole. Sleep held me down and
tried to drown me, but waking comes as fast as a bucket of seawater in the face: I'm on
Billington's yacht!
I roll out of bed and use the bathroom. My eyes are blood- shot and I could strip paint with
my chin, but I'm not even remotely sleepy. I'm out of touch with Control! That fact is sitting on
my shoulder, screaming in my ear with a megaphone; forget little organizational tics like
Griffin, I need to talk to Angleton and I need to talk to him right now, if not about six •'- hours
ago, and especially before the upcoming power breakfast.
Last night's sense of apathetic passivity is a million miles away, so alien that I frown at
myself in the mirror: How the fuck could I do that? It's not like me at all!
It's got to be something to do with this geas that Billington's running on me, the one Ramona
refuses to explain in words of one syllable. I can't trust my own reflexes.
Which sucks mightily. Billington is racing headlong towards a full-scale sanity excursion, he's
penetrated the Black Chamber, the auction for JENNIFER MORGUE is a decoy, and I'm in
the shit just about up to my eyebrows — and not a snorkel in sight.
"Right," I mutter to myself. I look at my clothes from last night in distaste. "Let's see." I pull on
my trousers and shirt, then pause. Gadgets. Pinky was talking about. .. toys. I snort.
I pick up the bow tie, meaning to flick it across the room, then notice something lumpy in
either end. That'd be the USB drives with the dog-fucker kit, right? "Ludicrous," I mutter, and
roll the thing up. It'd be bloody handy if they'd locked me in a cell with a computer plugged
into Billington's shipboard network, but they're not that stupid.
I stare longingly at the bare chunk of space on the desktop.
There may be a keyboard stitched into the lining of my cummerbund, but without a machine
to plug it into it's about as much use as a chocolate hacksaw.
With nothing to do but wait for breakfast, I sit down next to the flat-screen TV and glance
through the titles on the shelf. There's a bunch of paperback thrillers with titles familiar from
the movie series: Thunderball. On Her Majesty's Secret Service. Next to them, a bunch of
DVDs. It's all the same goddamn series about the most famous non-existent spy in history.
Whoever furnished this room had a James Bond fixation.
I sigh, and pick up the remote, thinking maybe I can watch a mindless movie for a while.
Then the screen comes on, showing a familiar menu on a blue background and I stare at it,
transfixed, like a yokel who's never seen a television before.
Because it's not a TV. It's a flat-screen PC running Windows XP Media Center Edition.
They can't be that dumb. It's got to be a trap, I gibber to myself. Not even the clueless
cannon-fodder-in-jumpsuits who staff any one of the movies on the shelf would be that dumb!
Or would they? I mean, they've got me locked in a broom closet on the bastard's yacht and
everything else is conform- ing to cliche, so why the hell not?

I randomly pull one of the DVDs down from the shelf — it's Thunderball, which seems
appropriate although this yacht makes the Disco Volante look like a bath toy — and use it
as an excuse to run my fingers around the rim of the TV. There's a slot for discs, and then,
just below it, the giveaway: two small notches for USB plugs.
Bingo. Okay, they weren't totally stupid. They took the keyboard and mouse and locked the
PC down in kiosk mode with nothing but a TV remote for access. With no administrator
password and no keyboard and probably no network connection they figured it was safe.
You figured wrong, I admonish them. I push the disc eject button and a tray pops out, and I
stick the movie in. Returning to my chair I pick up the cummerbund and bow tie and drop
them on the desk in front of the TV. What else? Oh . . . I pull on my jacket, frown, then
casually take the pen from my inside pocket and toss it on the desk. Finally I sit down and
spend the next five minutes doing the obvious thing in the most obvious way imaginable, just
in case they're watching.
I'm about ten minutes into the "Making of . . ." documentary feature when suddenly the door
opens. "Mr.
Howard? You're wanted upstairs for a breakfast meeting." *"*• I turn round then stand up
slowly. The guard stares at me impassively from behind his mirrored aviator shades. The
uniform hereabouts tends towards black — black beret, black tunic, black boots — and so
do the guns: he's not actually pointing his Glock at me right now but he could bring it up and
nail me to the bulkhead faster than I could cover the distance between us.
"Okay," I say, and pause, staring at the weapon. "Are you sure that's entirely safe”
?He doesn't smile: "Don't push your luck.”
I slowly move towards him and he steps back smartly into the corridor before gesturing me
to walk ahead of him. He's not alone, and his partner's carrying a cut-down Steyr
submachine gun with so many weird sensors bolted to the barrel that it looks like a portable
spy satellite.
"How much is he paying you?" I ask casually, as we reach a staircase leading back up to
owner territory.
Beret Number One grunts. "We got a really good benefits package." Pause. "Better than the
Marine Corps.”
"And stock options," adds the other joker. "Don't forget the stock options. How many other
dot-coms offer stock options for gun-toting minions”
?"You can't afford us," his partner says casually. "Not after the IPO, anyway." - I can tell when
they're trying to fuck with my head; I shut up. At the top of the stairs I glance over my
shoulder. "Door on the left," says Beret Number One. "Go on, he won't bite your head off.”
"Unless you make him eat his hash browns cold," adds Beret Number Two.
I open the door. On the other side of it is a large, exquisitely panelled dining room. The table
in the middle of the room is currently set for breakfast and I can smell frying bacon and eggs
and toast and fresh coffee. My stomach tries to climb my throat and chow down on my
sinuses: I am hungry. Which would be great except I'm simultaneously exposed to an
appetite-suppressing sight: two stewards, the Billingtons, and their special breakfast guest,
Ramona.
"Ah, Mr. Howard. Would you care for a seat?" Ellis smiles broadly. Today he's wearing one
of those odd collarless Nehru suits that seem to be de rigueur for villains in bad
technothrillers — but at least he hasn't shaved his head and acquired a monocle or a
dueling scar. Eileen Billington is a violent contrast in her cerise business suit with shoulder
pads sized for an American football quarterback. She grimaces at me like I'm something
her cat's dragged in, then goes back to nibbling at her butter croissant as if she's had her
stomach stapled.
I glance at Ramona as I step towards the table, and we make eye contact briefly.
Someone's raided her hotel room for her luggage - she's swapped last night's gown for
casuals and a freshly scrubbed girl-next-door look. "Is that coffee?" I ask, nodding towards
the pot.

"Jamaican Blue Mountain." Billington smiles thinly.
"And yes, you may have some. I prefer not to conduct interviews while the subjects are
comatose.”
The steward pours me a cup of coffee as I sit down, and I try hard not to be obvious about
how desperate I am for the stuff. (Another couple of hours without it and the merciless
headache would be setting in, visited on me by my caffiend in retaliation for withdrawal of
his drug.) As I take the first mouthful something brushes up against my ankle. I manage to
control my knee-jerk reflex; it must be the cat, right? "^ The coffee is as good as you'd
expect from a billionaire's buffet. "I needed that," I admit. "But I'm still somewhat per- plexed
as to why you want me here at all." (Although it beats the hell out of the alternatives, I don't
say.) "I'd have thought that was perfectly obvious." Billington ~"*' grins, with the boyish charm
of a boardroom bandit whose charisma is his most potent weapon. "You're here because
you're both young, intelligent, active professionals with good prospects. It's so hard to get
the help these days—" he nods at Eileen, who is sitting at the opposite end of the table,
ignoring us by staring into inner space "—and I've found that interviewing candidates in
person is a remarkably good way of avoiding subsequent disappointments. Human
resources will only get you so far, after all.”
I notice that Ramona is watching Eileen. "What's up with her?" I ask.
"Oh, her mind wanders." Billington picks up his knife and fork and slices into a sausage.
"Mostly all over her manufacturing sites; remote viewing is a marvelous management tool,
don't you think?" The sausage bleeds juice across his plate. I suddenly realize there are no
hash browns or tomatoes or mushrooms or anything like that in front of him - it's wall-to-wall
dead animal flesh. "You should try it sometime.”
Ramona looks me in the eye. "He told me what he wants me to do, Bob.”
I raise an eyebrow. "What, ride the grab down to the abyssal plain . . .”
?"With you providing a running commentary," Billington slides in unctuously. "After all, your
current unfortunate state has certain transient advantages, does it not?" He smiles.
"He also told me what he was offering." She looks away, distraught. "I'm sorry, Bob. You
were right.”
"You—" I stop. **You're going to trust him?** I ask via our private channel.
**It's not just the, the binding to my aspect,** she says, tongue-tied as she hunts for words.
**If I do this for him, he makes McMurray set me free. What alternative do I have?**
Billington's been watching us in silence for the past short while. Now he interrupts, in my
direction: "If I may explain?" He nods at Ramona. "You have a simple choice.
Cooperate and I will have one of my associates perform the rite of disentanglement. You two
will be free of each other forever if you so choose, and free of Ms Random's daemon.
You'll both live happily ever after, aside for a period of a few weeks during which you will be
guests with limited freedom of movement, while I complete my current project. After it is
finished, I can promise you there will be no reprisals from your employers. Nothing can
possibly go wrong. You see, I don't need to be nasty: it's a win-win situation ail round.”
I lick my dry lips. "What if I don't want to cooperate”
?Billington shrugs. "Then you don't run my errand, and I don't pay you for it." He spears a
strip of bacon, saws it in half, and raises it to his teeth. "Business is business, Mr.
Howard.”
I flinch as if someone's walked over my grave. He's making me an offer I can't refuse,
disguising a threat of lethal violence as passive inaction. All he has to do to threaten us is let
the nature of our entanglement take its course. I flash back to the yawning horror hiding
behind Ramona's soul, the dead weight of Marc's body lying on top of her, suffocating and
squeezing the breath from her body. Lock her up in her cabin for a few days and what will
she eat? The thing inside her needs to feed. I have a sudden, disquieting vision: Ramona
and myself, blurring at the edges, one confused mind in two bodies locked in separate cells,
stalked by the dark side of our hybrid soul as the Other works itself up into an orgiastic fever
that can only be satisfied by swallowing our minds— **I'm not giving up,** I tell her silently,

then nod at Billington. "I get the picture. Business is business; I'll cooperate.”
"Excellent. Or jolly good, as I believe you English would say." He smiles in evident delight as
he spears the other half of the strip of bacon and dangles it at knee level. A white streak
blurs out of the shadows under the table and snaps the bacon right off his fork.
"Ah, Fluffy. There you are!" Billington reaches down and picks up the large, white cat, who
turns his head and stares at me with sky-blue eyes that are disturbingly human. "I believe it's
about time you were introduced. Say hello to Mr.
Howard, Fluffy.”
Fluffy stares at me like I'm an oversized mouse, then hisses charmlessly.
Billington grins at me from behind six kilos of annoyed cat. "Fluffy is what this is really about
Mr. Howard. I'm only doing this to keep him in kitty kibble, after ail.”
"Kitty kibble?" I shake my head. Fluffy is wearing a diamond collar that belongs in the Tower
of London with a platoon of Beefeaters standing guard over it. "I for one welcome our new
feline overlords." I tip the cat an ironic nod.
"I thought you could cover the cat-food bill out of the petty cash?" asks Ramona.
"Fluffy has very expensive tastes." Billington dotes on the wretched animal, which has
calmed down slightly and is permitting him to scratch it behind the ears.
Eileen chooses this particularly surreal moment to quiver as if electrocuted, then she shakes
her head, yawns, and looks about. "Have I missed anything?" she asks querulously.
"Not a lot, dear." Her husband regards her fondly.
Breakfast with the Hitlers, I think, glancing between them.
"Any news”
?"Ach." Eileen hunches like a vulture when she's aware.
"Everything is in order, the central business groups advance on all fronts, nothing to report
today." She glances at me sharply, then at Ramona. "I think we ought to continue this in the
office, though. Flapping ears and all that.”
Billington glances down at the table spread before him. I hastily refill my coffee cup before
he looks up. "All right.”
He nods, then stands up abruptly — still holding Fluffy - and nods at me, then at Ramona.
"Feel free to finish up," he says curtly. "Then you may return to your quarters. It won't be long
now.”
He and Eileen stalk out of the dining room via a door at the back, leaving me alone with
Ramona, the remains of breakfast, and the disturbing sense that I've somehow strayed onto
loose gravel at the edge of a precipice, and it may be too late to turn back and reach safe
ground. In the end, pragmatism wins: when you're being held prisoner you never know where
the next power breakfast is coming from, so I grab some slices of toast and a plate full of
other munchies. Ramona sits hunched in her chair, looking out the porthole above the
sideboard. Misery and depression is coming off her in black, stultifying waves. **We've not
failed yet,*** I tell her silently, my mouth full of hash browns. **As long as we can reestablish
communications with Control we can get back on top of the situation.** **You think?** She
holds out her coffee cup and the steward, who's still waiting on us, fills it up. **What do you
think they'll do if we tell them what's really going on? Give us time to get off the ship before
they start shooting?** She takes a mouthful of coffee and puts her cup down. I can feel it
scalding her tongue, too hot to swallow: nevertheless, she gulps it down. I wince at the
sudden paralyzing heartburn.
**We'll just have to stop him ourselves, then,** I say, trying to encourage her. **Whatever. It
doesn't work that way, Bob.** **What doesn't?** **The geas.** She stands up then smiles at
the steward. "If you don't mind?" she says. The steward stands aside. There's nobody
human home behind his eyes; I sidle past him with my back to the wall.
Ramona opens the side door beside the staircase. There's a short passage with several
doors opening off it. "I've got something to show you," she tells me.
Huh? Since when does Ramona have the run of Billington's yacht? I follow her slowly, trying
to worry out what's going on.

"In here." She opens a door. "Don't worry about the guards they're either down below or up
on the superstructure — this is the owner's accommodation area and they're not needed as
long as we stay in it. This is the grand lounge.”
The lounge is surprisingly spacious. There are molded leather-topped benches all around
the walls, and bookcases and glass cabinets. In the middle of the floor is something that
might have been a pool table once, before a monomaniacal model maker repurposed it as
his display cabinet.
"What the hell is it?" I lean closer. On one side are two model ships, one being the Explorer,
which I recognize from the huge drilling derrick; but the center of the table is occupied by a
bizarre diorama: old dog-eared hardback novels and a worn-looking automatic pistol, piled
on top of a reel of film and a map of the Caribbean. Something else: a set of fine wires
tracing out — "Shit. That's a Vulpis-Tesla array. And that box must be a — is that a Mod-60
Gravedust board it's plugged into? Summoning up the spirits of the dead. What the hell”
?There's a GI Joe doll in evening dress, clutching a pistol.
It's wired up to the summoning grid by its plastic privates.
On either side of it stand two Barbies in ball gowns, one black, one white. Behind them lurks
another GI Joe, this time hacked so that he's bald and bearded, in something that looks like
Wehrmacht dress grays.
All at once, I get the picture.
"It's the core of his coercion geas, isn't it? It's a destinyentanglement conjuration, on a bigger
scale. James Bond, channelling the ghost of Ian Fleming as scriptwriter . . .
Jesus." I glance across the table at Ramona. She looks flushed and apprehensive.
"Yes, James—" She bites her lip. "Sorry, monkey-boy. It's too strong in here, isn't it”
?I stare at her through narrowed eyes. Oh yes, I'm beginning to get it. I'm half-tempted to
shoot the bint now, then stuff her through the porthole before the bad guys get their mileage
out of her, but I need all the friends I can get right now, and until I'm sure she's gone over to
SPECTRE I can't afford to— What. The. Fuck?
I blink rapidly. "Is there somewhere we can go that's not quite so . . .”
?"Yeah. Next door.”
Next door is the library or smoking room or whatever the hell it's called. My head stops
swimming as soon as we get a wall between us and that diorama from Hell. "That was bad.
What's the big idea? Why does Billington want to turn me into James Bond”
?Ramona slumps into an overstuffed chair. "It's not about you, Bob, it's all about plot. The
way the geas works, he's set himself up as the evil villain in this humongous
destinyentanglement spell targeted against every intelligence agency and government on
the planet. The end state for this conjuration is that the hero - which means whoever's being
ridden by the Bond archetype — comes and kills the villain, destroys his secret floating
headquarters, stymies his scheme, and gets the girl. But Billington's not stupid. He may be
riding the Villain archetype but he's in control of the geas and he's got a good sense of
timing. Before the Hero archetype gets to resolve the terminal crisis, he ends up in the
villain's grasp under circumstances such that nobody else is positioned to deal with the
villain's plan. Ellis figures that he can short the geas out before it goes terminal and makes
the Bond figure kill him. At which point Billington will be left sitting in an unassailable position
since the only agent on the planet who's able to stop him wakes up and suddenly
remembers that he's not James Bond.”
I consider this for a full minute. "Whoops.”
"That's how we screwed up," she says bleakly. "Billington had a handle on me all along. I'm
his handle on you, and you're his handle on Angleton. He's stacked us up like a row of
dominos.”
I take a deep breath. "What happens if I go next door and smash the diorama”
?"The signal strength—" She shakes her head. "You noticed how fast it drops off? If you're
close enough to smash it the backwash will kill you, but it'll probably leave Billington alive. If
we could get word out about what's going on it might be worth trying, but nobody's close

enough to do anything right now — so we're back to square one. It really has to be shut
down in good order, the same way it was set up, and I'd guess that's why Billington's brought
that fucker Pat aboard.”
"Hang on," I say slowly. "Griffin was sure there was a shithot Black Chamber assassin in
town this week. Some guy code named Charlie Victor. Could he do anything about
Billington if we cleared a path”
?"Bob, Bob. I'm Charlie Victor." She looks at me with the sort of sympathetic expression
usually reserved for terminal cases.
I consider this for a moment. Then an atavistic reflex kicks in and I snap my fingers. "Then
you must be, urn . . .
you're the glamorous female assassin from a rival organization, right? Like Major Amasova
in the film version of The Spy Who Loved Me, or Jinx in Die Another Day. Does that mean
you're the Good Bond Babe archetype or the Bad Bond Babe”
?"Well, I don't think I'm bad—" She's looking at me oddly. "What the hell are you talking
about”
?"There are usually two Babes in every Bond movie," I say slowly. Shit, she isn't British, is
she? I keep forgetting. She hasn't suffered through the ritual Bond movie every Christmas
afternoon on ITV since the age of two. I'd probably seen them all by the time I was fifteen,
and read some of the books, but I've never had to use the knowledge before now . . .
"Look, Bond almost always has two Babes. Sometimes it's three and in a few of the later
movies they experimented with one, but it's almost always two. The first to show up is the
Bad Bond Babe, who usually works for the villain and who sleeps with Bond before coming
to a nasty end. The second, the Good Bond Babe, helps him resolve the plot and doesn't
shag him until just before the closing credits. You haven't slept with me so far, which
probably means you're safe — at least, you're not the Bad Bond Babe. But you might be the
glamorous female assassin from a rival organization, who's sort of a revisionist merge
between the Bad Bond Babe and the Good Bond Babe, who turns up later, gets Bond out of
a load of grief, tries to kill him, and eventually sleeps with him—”
"—I hope this isn't a come-on, monkey-boy, because if it is—”
"The setup's skewed. And I reckon we're going to have company soon.”
"Huh? What do you mean”
?"There are never two girls in the movies that feature the glamorous rival assassin," I say,
trying to get my head around what this signifies. "And this plot doesn't fit that mold. Not with
Mo on her way out here.”
"Mo? Your girlfriend?" Ramona gives me a hard-edged stare.
I look around. The shelves are covered in business administration titles with an admixture of
first editions of Ian Fleming novels — boosters for the geas, at a guess — and the portholes
show me a view of a dark blue sea beneath a turquoise sky.
"She said she was coming out here right after she finished reaming Angleton," I add, and
wait for the double take.
"I find that hard to believe," Ramona says primly. "I've read her dossier. She's just an
academic who stumbled into some classified topics!”
"Yes, but I'll bet that dossier doesn't have much on her after your organization gave her
permission to leave, does it?
That was three years ago. Did you know she works for the Laundry these days? And have
you heard her violin? She plays music to die for . . .”
After digesting breakfast I find I've lost my appetite for socializing. I figure I could probably
poke my nose all over the ship and make a nuisance of myself, but I'm not sure I want to
jeopardize my tenuous status as a guest quite so soon.
The real James Bond would be swarming through the ventilation ducts by now, kickboxing
black berets overboard and generally raising hell, but my muscles are still aching from
yesterday's swim and the nearest I've ever gotten to kickboxing is watching it on TV.
Billington's fiendish plot is very well thought out, and the box he's slotted me into is

dismayingly effective: I'm simply not a cold-blooded killer. If Angleton had sent Alan Barnes
instead, he'd know how to raise seven shades of shit, but I'm not a graduate of the Hereford
advanced college of mayhem and murder. Bluntly, I'm what used to be called a boffin, and
these days is known as a geek, and while I know all the POSIX options to the kill(l)
command, doing it with my bare hands is beyond my sphere of competence. I'm still having
guilt attacks whenever I think of the guy offshore of the defense platform, and he was trying
to make stabby on my arse at the time. So if I can't do the Bond thing, all that's left is to be
true to my inner geek.
I slouch downstairs and go back to my room, where, on the TV, Thunderball has just about
gotten round to the bit when it's all going pear-shaped and Largo pushes the panic button on
his yacht and it turns into a hydrofoil. I shut the door, wedge the chair under it, plug my
cummerbund into one USB port and my bow tie into the other, then do a quick in-and-out
with the power cable.
While the usual messy list of device drivers is scrolling up the screen I check inside my
wardrobe. Sure enough, someone's transferred my luggage from the hotel. The suitcase I
took to Darmstadt has finally caught up with me, because presumably one of the perquisites
of being employed by a mad billionaire with designs on global domination is that he has a
gigantic logistics and fulfillment operation dedicated to ensuring that nothing is ever missing
when it's needed. I pull on a fresh pair of black jeans, a faded Scary Devil Monastery tee
shirt, and a pair of rubber-soled socks: I feel much better immediately. It's as if my brain is
slowly rebooting, just like the Media Center PC. It might all be for nothing if the bloody thing
isn't netwotked, but you never know until you try to find out; and I might be suffering from
acute cravings for unfiltered Turkish cigarettes, but at least now I know why. It's like finding
out that the reason your machine's running slow is because some virus-writing spod from
Maui has shanghaied it into a botnet and is using your bandwidth to spam penis
enlargement ads across the Ukraine; it's a pain in the neck, but knowing what's going on is
the first step to dealing with it.
The boot sequence is complete. It's amazing what you can cram into a memory stick these
days: it loads a Linux kernel with some very heavily customized device drivers, looks
around, scratches its head, spawns a virtual machine, and rolls right on to load the Media
Center operating system on top. I hit the boss key to bring the Linux session front and
center, then have a poke around. If anyone interrupts me, another tap on the boss key will
bring the brain-dead TV back on-screen.
I hunker down and take a look around the/proc file system to see what I've got my hands on.
Yep, it definitely beats ductcrawling as a way of kicking black beret ass.
It turns out that what I've got my hands on is annoyingly close to a stock Media Center PC. A
Media Center PC is meant to look like a digital video recorder on steroids, able to play
music and do stuff with your cable connection. So it's a fair bet that there's some sort of
cable going into the back of the box, I reason. The box itself is pretty powerful — that is, it's
roughly comparable to a ten-year-old super-computer or a five-year-old scientific
workstation - and when it isn't spending half its energy scanning for viruses or painting a
pretty drop-shadow under the mouse pointer it runs like greased whippet shit. But it doesn't
have all the occult applications support I'm used to finding preloaded, and as a development
box it sucks mud — if I hadn't brought my USB key I wouldn't even have a C compiler Having
OwnZored the box, I go looking for network interfaces. First results aren't promising: there's
a dedicated TV tuner card and a cable going into the back, but no wired Ethernet. But then I
look again, and see the kernel's autoloaded an Orinoco driver. It hasn't come up by default,
b u t . . .
Hah! Five minutes of poking around tells me what's going on here. This box probably came
with an internal WiFi card, but it's not in use. The PC is simply being used as a television,
hooked up to the ship's coaxial backbone, and nobody's even configured the Ethernet setup
under Windows. Possibly they don't know about the network card? The Laundry-issue USB
stick detected it straight off and started running AirSnort in promiscuous node, hunting for

wireless traffic, but it hasn't found anything yet. After about thirty seconds I realize why, and
start cursing.
I'm on board the Mabuse. The Mabuse is a converted Type 1135.6 guided missile frigate,
from the Severnoye Design Bureau with love, by way of the Indian Navy. They may have
stripped out the VLS cells and the deck guns, but they didn't remove the damage control or
countermeasures suites or rip out the shielded bulkheads. This used to be a warship, and
its internal spaces are designed to withstand the EMP from a nearby nuclear blast: WiFi
doesn't tunnel through solid steel armor and a Faraday cage very well. If I'm going to hack
my way into Billington's communication center I'm going to need to find a back door in: an
occult network as opposed to an encrypted one.
I pop the other USB stick out of the distal end of the bow tie. It's a small plastic lozenge with
a USB plug at one end and a handwritten label that says RUN ME. I plug it in, then spend ten
minutes adding some modifications to its startup scripts. I pop it out then reach down and
pick up my dress shoes. What was it, left heel and right shoelace? I strip out the relevant
gizmos and stuff them in my pockets, hit the boss button, and flip the cummerbund upside
down so that it's just taking a nap in front of the TV. They haven't given me back my gun, my
phone, or my tablet PC, but I've got a Tillinghast resonator, an exploding bootlace, and a
Linux keydrive: down but not out, as they say. So I open the door and go looking for a source
of bandwidth to leech.
A modified type three Krivak-class frigate displaces nearly 4,000 tons when fully loaded, is
120 meters long — nearly twice as long as a Boeing 747 - and can slice through the water
at sixty kilometers per hour. However, when you're confined in a luxury suite carved out of the
vertical launch missile cells and what used to be the forward magazine and gun turret, it
feels a whole lot smaller: about the size of a large house, say. I make the mistake of going
too far along a very short corridor, and find myself eyeball to hairy eyeball with a guard in
standard-issue black beret and mirrorshades.
One sickly smile later I'm staring at a closed door: I'm on a long leash, but this is as far as I'm
going to get.
I'm about to go back to my room when two guards step into the corridor ahead of me. "Hey,
you.”
"Me?" I try to act innocent.
"Yes, you. Come here.”
I don't have much in the way of options, so I let them lead me downstairs, along a corridor
under the owner's territory, and then out into the working spaces of the ship. Which are
painted dull gray, have no carpet or woodwork to speak of, and are full of obscure bits of
mechanical clutter. Everything down here is cramped and roughly finished, and from the
vibration and noise thrumming through the hull they've only soundproofed the executive suite.
"Where are we going?" I ask.
"Com center. Mrs. Billington wants you." We pass a bunch of sailors in black, working on
bits of who-knowswhat equipment, then they take me up a staircase and through another
door, down a passage and into another doorway.
The room on the other side of it is long and narrow, like a railway carriage with no windows
but equipment racks up to the ceiling on both sides of the aisle and instrument consoles
every couple of feet. There are seats everywhere, and more minions in black than you can
shake a stick at, still wearing mirrorshades — which is weird, because the lighting's dim
enough to give me a headache. There's a continuous rumbling from underfoot which
suggests to me that I'm standing right above the engine room.
Eileen Billington's suit is a surreal flash of pink in the twilight as she walks towards me. "So,
Mr. Howard." Her smile's as tight as a six-pack of BOTOX injections. "How are you enjoying
our little cruise so far”
?"No complaints about the accommodation, but the view's a bit monotonous," I say truthfully
enough. "I gather you wanted to talk to me”
?"Oh yes." She probably means to smile sweetly but her lip gloss makes her look as if she's

just feasted on her latest victim's throat. "Who is this woman”
?"Huh?" I stare blankly until she gestures impatiently at the big display screen next to me.
"Her. There, in the cross hairs.”
We're standing beside a desk or console or whatever with a gigantic flat display. A black
beret sitting in front of it is riding herd on a bunch of keyboards and a trackball: he's got
about seventy zillion small video windows open on different scenes. One of them is paused
and zoomed to fill the middle of the screen. It's an airport terminal and it looks vaguely
familiar, if a little distorted by the funny lens. Several people are crossing the camera
viewpoint but only one of them is centered—a woman in a sundress and big floppy hat, large
shades concealing her eyes. She's got a messenger bag slung carelessly over one
shoulder, and she's carrying a battered violin case.
Very carefully, I say, "I haven't a clue." Hopefully the noise of my heart pounding away won't
be audible over the ship's engines. "Why do you think I ought to know her? What is this,
anyway?" I force myself to look away from Mo and find I'm staring at the console instead, tier
upon tier of nineteeninch rackmount boxes stacked halfway to the ceiling. I blink and do a
double take. They've got lockable. cabinet fronts, but there's a key stuck in the one right
above the monitor. I can see LEDs blinking behind it, set in what looks suspi- ciously like the
front panel of a PC. Suddenly the USB thumb drive in my pocket begins to itch furiously.
"You've sure got a lot of toys here.”
Eileen isn't distracted: "She has something to do with your employers," she informs me.
"This is the monitoring hub." She pats the monitor. Some imp of the perverse tickles her
ego, or maybe it's the geas. "Here you see the filtered take from my intelligence queue.
Most of the material that comes in is rubbish, and filtering it is a big overhead; I've got entire
call centers in Mumbai and Bangalore trawling the inputs from the similarity grid, looking for
eyes that are watching interesting things, forwarding them to the Hopper for further analysis,
and finally funneling them to me here on the Mabuse. Computer screens and keyboards
where the owners are entering passwords, mostly. But sometimes we get something more
useful . . . the girl on the cosmetics stand in the arrivals terminal at Princess Juliana Airport,
for example.”
"Yes, well." I make a show of peering at the screen. "Are you sure she's who you're looking
for? Could it be one of that group, there?" I point at a bunch of wiry-looking surf Nazis with
curiously even haircuts "Nonsense." Eileen sniffs aristocratically. "The surge in the Bronstein
Bridge definitely coincided with that woman crossing the immigration desk—" She stops
and stares at me with all the warmth of a cobra inspecting a warm furry snack. "Am I
monologuing? How unfortunate." She taps the black beret on his shoulder. "You, take five.”
The black beret gets up and leaves in a hurry. "It's very unfortunate, this geas," she explains.
"I could spill important stuff by accident, and then I'd have to send him to Human Resources
for recycling." Her shoulder pads twitch up and down briefly, miming: What can you do? "It's
hard enough to get the staff as it is.”
"This looks like a great system," I say, fingering the frame of the workstation. "So you've got
access to the eyeballs of anyone who's wearing Pale Grace™ eye shadow? That must be
really hard to filter effectively." I'm guessing that I've got Eileen's number. I've seen her type
before, stuck in a pale green annex block our behind rhe donut in Cheltenham, desperate to
show off how well she's organized her departmental brief. Eileen's little cosmetics operation
is genuine enough, but she came out of spook country just the same as Ellis did: staring at
goats for state security. (Forget the whack-jobs at Fort Bragg; there's stuff the Black
Chamber gets up to that makes it very useful to have a bunch of useful idiots prancing
around in public out front, convincing everybody that it's all a bunch of New Age twaddle.)
Eileen isn't much of a necromancer, but she's got the ghostly spoor of midlevel occult
intelligence management all over her designer suit, and she's desperate for professional
recognition.
"It's top of the range." She pats the other side of the rack, as if to make sure it's still there:
"This baby's got sixteen embedded blade servers from HP running the latest from Microsoft

Federal Systems division and supporting a TLA Enterprise Non-Stop Transactional
Intelligence™ middleware cluster11 connected to the corporate extranet via a leased
Intelsat pipe.”
Her smile softens at the edges, turning slightly sticky: "It's the best remote-viewing mission
support environment there is, including Amherst. We know. We built the Amherst lab.”
Amherst lab? It's got to be a Black Chamber project. I keep my best poker face on: this is
useful shit, if I ever get a chance to tell Angleton about it via a channel who isn't code named
Charlie Victor. But right now I've got something more immediate to do. "That's impressive," I
say, putting all the honesty I can muster at short notice into my voice. "Can I have a look at
the front panel”
?Eileen nods. The hairs at the nape of my neck stand on end: for a moment everything
seems to be limned in an opalescent glow and her gaze is simultaneously fixed on my face
and looking at something a million miles away — no, infi- 11 Translation: "a bunch of
computers.”
nitely far away: at an archetype I've borrowed, at an identity with the ability to sway any
woman's sanity, the talent to lie like a rug and charm their knickers off at the same time. "Be
my guest." She giggles, which is a not entirely appropriate sound — but sanity and
consistency are in decreasing supply this close to the geas field generator (which, unless I
am very much mistaken, is one deck up and five meters over from where we're standing). I
reach up with one hand and flip the front panel down to look at the blinkenlights and status
readouts on the front of the box. Eileen's still looking at me, glassily: I run my hand down the
front panel, the palmed thumb drive between two fingers, and a moment later I twitch my
finger over the reset button then flip the lid closed.
The screen freezes for a moment, then an error message dialog box flashes up. Eileen
blinks and glances at the monitor then her head whips round: "What did you just do”
?I roll out my best blank look. "Huh? I just closed the front panel. Is it a power glitch?" I can't
believe my luck.
Now if only Eileen didn't notice me stick the stubby little piece of plastic in the exposed USB
keyboard socket. ..
She leans forwards, over the screen. "One of the servers just went offline." She sniffs then
straightens up and waves the nearest beret over: "Get Neumann back here, his station's
acting up." She looks at me suspiciously then glances at the workstation, her gaze flickering
across the lid of the blade server. "I thought they'd fixed the rollover bug," she mutters.
"Do you still need me around?" I ask.
"No." She knows something's not right but she can't quite put her finger on it: the alarm bells
are ringing in her head but the geas has wrapped a muffling sock disguised as a software
bug around the hammer. "I don't like coincidences, Mr.
Howard. You'd better stick close to your quarters until further notice.”
The goons escort me back to the padded-cell luxuries of the yacht. I'm trying not to punch the
air and shout "Yes!" at the top of my voice: it's bad form to gloat. So I let them shut me in and
look appropriately chastened until they go away again. I chucked the tux jacket in the closet
this morning. Now I rifle through the pockets quickly until I find the business !
card Kitty gave me. Yes, it is scratch 'n' sniff on steroids: about five tiny compartments full of
Pale Grace™ mascara, eye shadow, foundation, and other stuff I don't recognize.
There's even a teensy brush recessed into one side of it, like the knife on a Swiss Card.
Humming tunelessly I pull out the brush and quickly sketch out a diagram on the bathroom
mirror — a reversed image of the one I sketched in the sand around the hire car. With any
luck it'll damp down any access they've got to the cabin until they wise up and come to look
in on me in person. Then I take a deep breath and imagine myself punching the air and
shouting "Yes!" by way of relief. (Better safe than sorry.) Let me draw you a diagram: Most
of what we get up to in the Laundry is symbolic computation intended to evoke decidedly
nonsymbolic con- sequences. But that's not all there is to . . . well, any sufficiently alien
technology is indistinguishable from magic, so let's call it that, all right? You can do magic by

computa- ** tion, but you can also do computation by magic. The law of similarity attracts
unwelcome attention from other prox- imate universes, other domains where the laws of
nature worked out differently. Meanwhile, the law of contagion spreads stuff around. Just as
it's possible to write a TCP/IP protocol stack in some utterly inappropriate programming
language like ML or Visual Basic, so, too, it's possible to implement TCP/IP over carrier
pigeons, or paper tape, or daemons summoned from the vasty deep.
Eileen Billington's intelligence-gathering back end relies on a classic contagion network.
The dirty little secret of the intelligence-gathering job is that information doesn't just want to
be free—it wants to hang out on street corners wearing gang colors and terrorizing the
neighbors. When you apply a contagion field to any kind of information storage system, you
make it possible to suck the data out via any other point in the contagion field. Eileen is
already running a contagion field - it's the root of her surveillance system.
I've got a PC on my desk that isn't connected to the ship's network, but I've just stuffed a
clone of its brain into a machine that is on that network — so all I need to do is contaminate
my own box with Pale Grace™, and then . . .
Well, it's not as easy as all that. In fact, at first I'm shitscared that I've broken the TV (I'm
pretty sure the warranty specifically excludes damage due to the USB ports being full of
mascara) but then I figure out a better way. Tracing the Fallworth graph on the bathroom
mirror backwards with a Bluetooth pen hooked into the television is not the recommended
way of establishing a similarity link with a network you're trying to break into — it's not even
the second worst way of doing so - but it just happens to be the only one I've got available to
me, so I use it. Once I've brought up the virtual interface I poke around until I find the VPN
port that the USB dongle I planted in Eileen's server farm is running.
The keystroke logger is happily snarfing login accounts, and I figure out pretty rapidly that
Eileen's INFOSEC people aren't paranoid enough - they figure that for systems aboard a
goddamn destroyer, who needs to go to the bother of biometrics or a challenge/response
system like S/Key? They want something they can get into fast and reliably, so they're using
passwords, and my dongle's captured six different accounts already. I rub my knuckles and
go poking around the server farm to see what they're doing with it. Give me a bottle of
Mountain Dew, an MP3 player hammering out something by VNV Nation, and a ctate of
Pringles: that's like being at home. Give me root access on a hostile necromancer's server
farm, and I am at home.
Still, I'm worried about Mo. That view Eileen wanted me to vet — even if Eileen bought my
story — means that Mo is here, on the island, and she's under the gun. The Pale' Grace™
surveillance net is tracking her and the stabbing sense of anxiety that doubles as my guilty
conscience tells me I need to make sure she's all right before I start trying to figure out a way
to reestablish communications with Control.
So I pull up a VNC session, log into one of Eileen's server blades using a password looted
from one of the black berets, and go hunting for a chase cam.
13: FIDDLER HITS THE ROOF T E N HOURS ABOARD AN AIRBUS IS NEVER A HAPPY
fun experience, even in business class. By the time Mo feels the nose gear touch down on
the centerline of the runway, rattling the glasses up front in the galley, she's tired, with a
bone-weary exhaustion that is only going to go away if she can find the time to crash for
twelve straight hours on an oversprung hotel mattress.
But. But. Mo hums tunelessly to herself as the airbus taxis towards the terminal. What's he
gotten himself into this time?
she asks herself, a bright point of worry burning through the blanket of fatigue. Angleton
wasn't remotely reassuring, and after that disturbing interview with Alan she went and did
some digging. Asked Milton, actually, the one-armed, old security sergeant with the keys to
the conservatory and the instrument store. "What's a big white one?" she repeated, refusing
to take the first answer he offered — or to notice the prickling in her ears and the flush of
blood to her cheeks until he set her straight.
Fuck. Nukes? What the wily old bastard had been offering Alan — right under her nose! —

was a kamikaze insurance policy. The realization fills her with even more apprehension.
Bob's got himself into something so dicey that Angleton thinks a destroyer full of SAS and
SBS special forces isn't enough, and they may need to call in a Trident D-5 ballistic missile
to nail whatever's been stirred up down there. That kind of overkill isn't on the menu, outside
of a bad spy thriller: that or CASE NIGHTMARE GREEN?* anyway, and CASE
NIGHTMARE GREEN hasn't started yet, and even then the real nasties probably won't arrive
until at least ten years after the grand alignment commences.12 As soon as the seatbelt
sign blinks off and the cabin crew announces that it's safe for passengers to leave their
seats, Mo is up like a jack-in-the-box to haul down her overnight bag, wide-brimmed hat,
and the battered violin case from the overhead locker. She clutches the instrument case pro-
tectively all the way to the baggage claim area and immigration queue, as if she's walking
through a dangerous part of town and it's a gun. But when the customs officer gives her the
hairy eyeball and asks her to open it she smiles brightly and clicks back the locks to reveal
— a violin.
"See?" she says. "It's an Erich Zahn special, wired with Hilbert-space pickups. I don't think
there's another one on this side of the Atlantic." She's relying on his ignorance to let her
through. Polished to the creamy gleam of old ivory, the electric violin nestles in its case like
a Tommy gun, to all outward appearances nothing but a musical instrument. Just ** don't ask
me to play it, she prays. The custom officer nods, sat- isfied it's not an offensive weapon,
and waves her on. Mo closes the case with false calm, nods her head, and locks the
instrument back in. If only you knew . . .
One airport concourse is much like any other. Mo tows her suitcase over to the exit, where
taxis jostle for position oppo- 12 They tend to oversleep.
site the curb. It smells hot and damp with a faint undertone of rotting seaweed. There are
people everywhere, tourists in bright clothes, natives, business types. A woman in a suit
brandishes a clipboard at her: "Hi! How would you like a free sample of eyeliner, ma'am”
?Why the hell not? Mo nods and accepts the sample, smiles, idly rubs a smear of it on her
wrist to check the color, and moves on before the woman can deliver her sales spiel. Okay,
the hotel next. That'll do. As she walks through the door the Saint Martin climate clamps
down on her like a warm, wet blanket, coating her in sweat. Abruptly, she's grateful for the
hat and the sundress Wardrobe Department insisted she wear. It's not her style at all, but her
usual jeans and blouse would be . . . Hell, call me the Wicked Witch of the West and have
done with it. She fans herself with the hat as she walks over to the taxi queue. What a mess.
"Where to, ma'am?" asks the taxi driver. He's pegged her for a tourist, probably American;
he doesn't bother to get out and help her with the suitcase.
"Maho Beach Hotel, if you don't mind." She glances at him in the mirror: he's got crow's-feet
around prematurely aged eyes, hair the color of damp newsprint.
"Okay. Twenty euros.”
"Got it.”
He starts the engine. Mo leans back and closes her eyes.
She doesn't let her fingers stray from the violin case, but to a casual onlooker she could be
snoozing off a case of jet lag. In fact, when she's not keeping a surreptitious eye open for
tails, she's working her way down a checklist she's already committed to memory. Let's see.
Check in, phone home for a Sitrep, confirm Alan's on site, then . . . a guilty frisson: off the
roadmap.
Find Bob. If necessary, find this Ramona person. Make sure Bob's safe. Then figure out how
to get him disentangled before it sucks him in too deep . . .
Anxiety keeps her awake every meter of the way to the hotel drags her tired ass to the front
desk for checkin: "Mrs. Hudson? Your husband checked in this morning. He said you'd be
arriving and to leave you a key to your suite." The receptionist smiles mechanically. "Have a
nice stay!" * Husband? Mo blinks and nods, making thankful sounds on autopilot. "Which
room is he in?" "You're in 412. Elevators are left past the fountain.”
She rides the elevator upstairs in thoughtful silence.

Husband? It's not Bob. He wouldn't pull a stunt like this without forewarning her. And it's a
suite: Laundry expense accounts don't usually run that high. Alan Barnes? Or . . .? .
Mo pauses outside the door to room 412. She sets down her overnight bag on top of her
suitcase, takes off her sunglasses and hat, and opens the violin case. She slides the card
key into the lock with the same hand that grips the end of her bow, then nudges the door
handle: by the time it's halfopen she has the violin raised to her chin and the bow poised
above a string that seems to haze the air around it in a blue glow of Cerenkov radiation.
"Come on out where I can see you," she calls quietly, then kicks the ungainly train of bags
forwards through the door, steps forwards after it, and lets the door shut itself behind her.
"I'm over here." The middle-aged white guy in the tropical suit isn't Alan. He's sitting in the
office chair behind the — hotel room desk, nursing a glass of something that probably isn't
water, he's got a twelve-hour beard and he looks haggard.
"You're all that Angleton sent? Jesus.”
"What are you doing here?" Mo takes another step into the room, glancing sidelong through
the doorways into the two bedrooms and the bathroom. "You're not part of my cover.”
"Last minute change of plan." He smiles lopsidedly. "You can put the violin down - what were
you planning to do with it, make me dance”
?"Who are you?" Mo keeps the violin at the ready, its neck aimed at the interloper.
"Jack Griffin, P Division." The station chief, she remembers.
He waves at the room. "It's all yours. Bit of a mess really.”
Mo's left earring tingles. It's a ward, attuned to warn her when someone's being truthful. In her
experience, the average human being tells a little white lie once every three minutes.
Knowing when they're telling the truth is much more useful than knowing when they aren't.
"So what are you doing here?" she asks tensely.
"There's been a problem." Griffin's accent is clipped, very old-school-tie, and he sounds
rueful. "Your predecessor ran into a spot of bother and Angleton asked me to take you in
hand and make sure you didn't follow his example.”
"A spot of bother, you say." Mo has half-closed the gap separating them before she realizes
what she's doing. The violin string hums alarmingly, feeding off her anxiety. "What
happened”
?"He was working with a bint from the opposition.”
Griffin puts his glass down and stares at her. "Billington lifted them both about, oh, twelve
hours ago. Invited them to some sort of private party at the casino and the next thing you
know they were over the horizon on a chopper bound for his yacht: the coastal defenses are
compromised, you know.”
Griffin shrugs. "I told him not to trust the woman, she's obviously working for Billington by way
of a cut-out. . .”
Her earring is itching, throbbing in Morse: Griffin is mixing truth and falsehood to concoct a
whirlpool of misdirection.
Mo sees red. "You listen to me—”
"No, I don't think I will." Griffin reaches into his pocket for something that looks like a metal
cigarette case. "You folks from head office have fucked up, pardon my French, all the way
down the line, sending lightweights to do a professional's job. So you're going to do things
my way—”
Mo takes a deep breath and draws the bow lightly across one string. It makes a noise like a
small predator screaming * in mortal agony and terror, and that's just the auditory backwash.
A drop of blood oozes from each fingertip where she grips the neck of the instrument.
Griffin's gin and tonic spreads in a puddle across the carpet from where he dropped it. She
walks over to him, rolls his twitching body into the recovery position, and squats beside him.
When the convulsions cease, she touches the end of the instrument to the back of his head.
"Listen to me. This is an Erich Zahn, with electroacoustic boost and a Dee-Hamilton circuit
wired into the soundboard.
I can use it to hurt you, or I can use it to kill you. If I want it to, it won't just stop your heart, it'll

slice your soul to shreds and eat your memories. Do you understand? Don't nod, your nose
is bleeding. Do you understand?" she repeats sharply.
Griffin shudders and exhales, spraying tiny drops of blood across the floor. "What's—”
"Listen closely. Your life may depend on whether you understand what I'm about to tell you.
My predecessor, who is missing, means rather a lot to me. I intend to get him back.
He's entangled with a Black Chamber agent: fine, I need to get her back, too, so I can
disentangle them. You can help me, or you can get in my way. But if you obstruct me and ^
Bob dies as a result, I'll play a tune for you that'll be the last thing you ever hear. Do you
understand”
?Griffin tries to nod again. "Beed. A. T'shoo.”
Mo stands up gracefully and takes a step back. "Get one, then." She tracks him with the
neck of the violin as he pushes himself upright slowly then shuffles towards the bathroom.
"You're a bard. Woban," he says aggrievedly, standing in the doorway clutching a tissue to
his nose. It's rapidly turning red. "I'b on you're sibe.”
"You'd better be." Mo leans against the sideboard and raises her bow to a safe distance
above the fiddle. "Here's what we're going to do: You're going to go downstairs and hire a
helicopter. I'm going to phone home and find out where my backup's gotten to, and then
we're going to go for a little run out to visit Billington's yacht, the Mabuse. Got that”
?"Bub he'd be aboard the yacht! He'b geb you!”
Mo smiles a curious, tight smile. "I don't think so." She keeps the fiddle pointed at Griffin as
he splutters at her.
"Billington is all about money. He doesn't do love, or hate.
So I'm going to hit him where he doesn't expect to be hit.
Now get moving. I expect you back here inside an hour," she adds coolly. "You really don't
want to be late.”
I'm punch-drunk from surprises — the sight of Mo strongarming Griffin into hiring her a
helicopter is shocking enough, and the idea that she's willing to jump in on the Billingtons
without a second thought just because of me is enough to turn my world upside down — but
then I realize: If/ can see her, what about the bad guys?
I may not be able to send her a message — the surveillance feed is strictly one-way — but I
can try to cover her ass on this side of the firewall. I rummage around for what's left of the
Pale Grace™ sample, then draw some more patterns on the side of the PC and trace them
with the 'toothpen. They're interference patterns, stuff to break up the contagious spread of
the information on my screen. Then I go back to watching.
There's not a lot I can do right now, not until we dock with the Explorer, but if Mo makes it out
there I can make damn sure that, geas or no geas, whatever she's planning takes the
Billingtons by surprise.
Griffin has barely closed the door when Mo's energy gives out and she slumps in on herself
with a tiny whimper. She puts the violin down, then pulls a black nylon tactical strap from a
side pocket in its case - her hands shaking so badly it takes her three attempts to fasten it -
then slings the instrument from her shoulder like a gun. She walks over to the desk, wobbling
almost drunkenly with fatigue or the relief of tension, and flops down in the chair. The
message light on the phone is blinking. She picks up the handset and speed-dials.
"Angleton”
?"Dr. O'Brien.”
"Your station chief. Griffin. Is he meant to be in on this side of the operation?" Angleton is
silent for three or four seconds. "No. He wasn't on my list.”
Mo stares at the door, bleakly. "I sent him on a wild goose chase. I may have up to an hour
until he gets back.
Penetration confirmed he's your pigeon. At a guess, Billington got to him via his wallet. Got
any suggestions?" "Yes. Leave the room. Take hand luggage only. Where did you tell him
you were going”
?"I sent him to hire a chopper. For the Mabuse.”

"Then you should go somewhere else, by any means necessary.
I'm opening your expense line: unlimited fund. I'll *have local assets take Griffin out of the
picture.”
"I can live with that." Mo's shoulders are shaking with barely repressed fury. "I could kill him.
Do you want me to do that?" Angleton falls silent again. "I don't think that would be useful at
this point," he says finally. "Do you have your primary documents with you”
?"I'm not stupid," she snaps.
"I didn't say you were." Angleton's tone is unusually mild.
"Go to ground then call me with a sanitized contact number.
Stay there and don't go anywhere. I'll have Alan make contact and pick you up when it's safe
to proceed.”
"Got it," she says tensely, and hangs up. Then she stands up and collects her violin case.
"Right," she mutters under her breath. "Go to ground.”
Mo packs methodically and rapidly. The instrument goes back in its carrier. Then she opens
her hand luggage — a black airline bag — and tips the contents out on the bed. She
squeezes the violin case inside, adds a document wallet and a toilet bag from the pile on
the quilt, then zips it up and heads for the door. Rather than using the elevator she takes the
emergency stairs, two steps at a time. At the ground floor, there's a fire exit. She pushes the
crash bar open — it squeals slightly, a residue of rust on the mechanism —and slips out into
the crowd along the promenade at the back of the hotel. > '.;••• Over the next hour Mo puts
her tradecraft to work. She doubles back around her route, checking her trail in window
reflections in shop fronts: changes course erratically, acts like a tourist, dives into souvenir
markets and cafes to make a show of looking at the menu while keeping an eye open for
tails. Once she's sure she's clean she walks the block to the main drag and goes into the
first clothes shop she passes, and then the second. Each time, she comes out looking
progressively different: a tee shirt under her sundress, then a pair of leggings and an open
shirt. The dress has vanished. With the addition of a new pair of sunglasses and a colorful
scarf to keep the sun off her head, there's no sign of Mrs. Hudson.
She finishes up at a cafe: diving into its coolly air-conditioned interior she orders two double
espressos and drinks them straight down, shuddering slightly as the caffeine hits her. What
next? Mo is clearly fighting off the effects of jet lag.
She stands up tiredly and steps outside again, shouldering the heat like a heavy burden.
Then she heads directly away from the row of nearby hotels, towards the marina on the edge
of the harbor and the row of motorboats for hire.
I am just beginning to get my head around the fact that Mo is not only out here, but she's a
player — and she isn't going to follow Angleton's instructions - when there's a pounding on
my door. I hammer the boss key and spin round in my chair, slamming one leather-padded
arm into my right kidney as I try to stand up; then the door opens and the black beret is
pointing his mirrorshades at me, lips set in a disap- proving scowl. "Mr. Howard, you're
wanted on deck.”
I scramble to my feet dizzily, wincing and rubbing my side. It's probably a good thing I
whacked it — I don't think I could avoid looking disturbed or guilty if I wasn't actually in
physical pain. I don't know what the hell Mo thinks she's doing, but it doesn't look like she's
planning on following orders and going to the mattresses until Alan calls for her.
And what's Alan doing here anyway? I wonder as I follow the two guards up the stairs to the
deck. Angleton only calls Alan in when there's some serious head-breaking to be done.
He's OIC for the Territorial SAS squadron tasked with supporting Occult Operations in the
field — some of the scariest - not to mention most eccentric — special forces soldiers in the
British Army. I've been along for the ride when they went right through a rip in space-time to
head-butt an ancient evil that was threatening to squirm through, I've seen them secure an
industrial estate in Milton Keynes with a suspected basilisk on the loose; and I've had the
dubious pleasure of being rescued by them on exercise at Dunwich.
Maybe Angleton's sent the heavy cavalry, I decide, hopefully: it's easier to swallow than the

alternative, which is that Angleton's written me off as beyond hope and has called them in for
Plan B.
The guard up front surprises me when we get to deck level, by turning away from the door to
the conservatory and instead opening a hatch onto a narrow green-painted corridor leading
aft. "This way," he tells me, while his backup guy hangs behind.
"Okay, I'm going," I say, as agreeably as I can manage.
"But where are we going to”
?Mirrorshades man opens a door at the far end of the tunnel and steps through. "HQ," he
says over his shoulder.
I emerge, blinking, onto a stretch of deck I hadn't seen before, sandwiched between a big
outboard motorboat and a whole bunch of gray cylinders sticking out of the superstructure
beneath a rack of masts and antennae. The motorboat hangs from some sort of crane affair.
It's getting crowded here: the space is already occupied by Ramona, in company with
McMurray, his designer-clad thugette Miss Todt, and a couple more black berets. "Ah, Mr.
Howard.”
McMurray nods at me. "Feel up to a little cruise”
?"Where are you—”
My guard pokes me in the back with a finger. "Jump in.”
The black berets on deck are setting up a control station for the crane. McMurray gestures
at the boat: "This won't take long. We're nearly there.”
"Where are we going?
"To the Explorer." McMurray seems to be in a hurry. "Go on, it doesn't do to be late.”
"Come on." That's Todt. She clambers over the motorboat's side and jumps down inside.
Ramona follows her, not without a murderous look at McMurray. **Can you—?** I begin to
think, then I realize I can't hear her inside my head. Shit, I glance round and the guard who
led me up here nods significantly at the boat.
Double-shit. They must have come up with a portable version of the jammer they used on
me and Ramona last night. I climb over the side of the boat and sit down next to Ramona, at
the opposite side from Todt and McMurray.
"Where's the jammer?" I ask quietly.
"I think he's got it." She doesn't meet my eyes. "They don't trust us.
"If our positions were reversed, would you?" asks Johanna.
I startle. She smiles: it's not a friendly expression.
"I'd trust you anywhere, darling," says Ramona: "I'd trust you to fuck up.”
"You—" Todt turns a peculiar shade, as if she's getting ready to explode. McMurray puts a
hand on her arm before she can stand up.
"You'll both be quiet," he says in a curiously calm tone, and oddly, they both shut up. I glance
sideways and see Ramona's cheek twitching. She rolls her eyes frantically at me, and the
penny drops.
I lean over towards McMurray. "You've made your point.
Let them talk. They won't do it again.”
"You sure of that, boy?" McMurray looks amused. "I've known these hellcats and their type
longer than you've been alive, and they'll—”
"That's not the point!" I stab one finger at him. "Do you want her willing cooperation, or not”
?He makes a sound halfway between a laugh and a snigger, just as there's a loud grinding
noise from the crane and the boat lurches. "All right, have it your way," he says indulgently as
we lift off the deck with a bump that throws Ramona against me.
"Bastard," she says indistinctly. Then the mist clears and I can suddenly feel her presence in
my mind again, as warm and vibrant as my own pulse. **Not you, him,** she adds internally.
**Thanks. It's not like Pat to make a mistake like that, lifting both blocks at the same time.** '
t A- **Think it's intentional?** I ask, wondering how long we've got to talk.
**Not really.** McMurray is saying something to Todt, who's slumped against the railing
away from him. I try to make the most of his lapse: **I've noticed them making other

mistakes. Listen, I got into Eileen's surveillance network. Mo's arrived, and there's a backup
team on the way to rescue us.** The crane swings us over the edge of the Mabuse and the
boat drops like a lift towards the sea below, leaving my stomach somewhere above my
head. **Griffin's on the spot, looks like he's been playing an inside game. Ramona, if you run
into Mo, don't get her pissed-off, she's brought her—** I suddenly realize that my head's full
of cotton-wool and Ramona isn't listening. She looks at me and blinks, then stares at
McMurray, who smiles faintly in response. "What's that about?" she asks, aggrieved.
"No talking out of class." He looks at me speculatively. A porthole winds past the back of his
head, embedded like a zit in the flank of a behemoth. "Orders from the boss. Once you're
aboard the TMB-2, then you get to talk among yourselves.”
"Enjoy the peace and quiet while you can," Todt sneers.
We hit the water with a neck-jarring thump, and everything gets very busy for a minute or two.
The two black berets who've been riding down with us fire up the engine and cast-off the
cables securing us to the crane, which in turn throws us variously into one another and
across the bottom of the boat. It's a bouncy, jarring ride, and I get a lungful of spray as I try to
sit up. It ends with me coughing over the side, wishing I had Ramona's gills. By the time I'm
halfrecovered we're turning away from the Mabuse and accelerating across open water. I
finally get some air back and look around to see that we've circled the former destroyer. In
the distance, there's land on the horizon, but much closer to home a monstrous cliff-like bulk
looms over us — the former Glomar Explorer.
My sense of scale fails me when I try to take it in. I find myself looking up, and up, and up —
the thing's as big as a skyscraper, nearly a fifth of a kilometer long. After the Explorer was
retired and mothballed in the 1970s they cut the superstructure away, but Billington's people
have rebuilt the huge derrick that towers ten stories above the deck, the two huge docking
legs and the big cranes at each end of the moon pool, and the entire drilling platform and
pipe management system. It looks like an oil rig humping a supertanker. There are loud
pumps or engines running up on the deck, and a hammering noise overhead; looking up I
see a chopper closing in on the helipad at the stern of the ship. "Who's that”
?I ask.
"That'll be the boss arriving," says McMurray. To the driver: "Take us in.”
We motor steadily towards a platform hanging near the waterline, halfway along one flank of
the giant ship. The ship sits eerily still in the water, as if it's embedded in the top of a granite
pillar anchored to the sea floor. As we get closer, the noise from the drilling platform up top
gets louder, a percussion of rhythmic clanking and clattering sounds adding to the bass line
of the motors and the squeal of drill segments grating across each other as the pipe-feeding
mechanism winches them off the huge pile under the superstructure and passes them to the
automatic roughneck mechanism. When we tie up alongside the metal staircase I feel the
deep humming vibration of the bow and stern thrusters holding the ship on position against
the waves.
"Up and out!" The black berets are waving us onto the platform. While Todt and the guards
are busy down below, Ramona and I follow McMurray up the ladder towards a door two
decks up. He leads us on a bewildering tour of the colossal drilling ship, up and down
narrow corridors and cramped stairwells and finally along a catwalk overlooking a giant
room with no floor - the moon pool. A black beret on duty at the door passes us ear
defenders as we step out onto the catwalk. The noise is deafening and the air feels like I've
walked into a cross between a sauna and a machine shop: greasy and humid with a stink of
overheated metal parts. A sickly sweet undertone hints of fishy things that have died and not
gone to heaven, embedded in the machinery that moves the underwater doors at the bottom
of the moon pool.
It's not like this in the movies: presumably James Bond's enemies all employ crack
task-forces of janitors spritzing everything with pine-scented disinfectant at fifteen-minute
intervals to keep down the rotten shellfish stink.
About ten meters in front of me, a metal pipe as thick as my thigh descends from the

underside of the drilling deck, hypnotically spearing into the pool below. I stare at it, following
it down to the bubbling point of white water where it plunges into the moon pool and the
deep ocean below.
Somewhere far down there a drowned alien artifact awaits its arrival. Presumably Billington,
with his expertise in Gravedust interrogations, knows what to expect. Above us the drilling
platform shudders and roars, hellishly loud as it feeds infinite numbers of pipe segments to
the sea god.
McMurray walks along the catwalk until he reaches a row of incongruous office windows and
a door, just as you'd expect to find overlooking the shop floor of a factory or a workshop. We
follow him inside.
It's a big room, and as befits the villain's working headquarters one wall is occupied by a
gratuitously large projection screen showing a map of the sea floor below the Explorer.
There are lots of consoles with blinking lights, and half a dozen black berets sitting at desks
where they mouse around schematics on a computer-controlled engineering interface. So
far so good. It would look a lot like the control room of a power station, if not for the fact that
there's something- that resembles a dentist's chair in the middle of the floor. The ankle and
wrist straps and the pentacles around its base suggest that it's not designed for root canal
jobs. To top it all off there's a gloating villain standing front and center, wearing a Nehru suit
and cradling an excessively somnolent Tiddles in his arms.
"Ah, Ms. Random, Mr. Howard! So glad you could make the show!" I twitch at Billington's
victorious smirk.
Somehow or other I'm having difficulty controlling the urge to punch him out, sap two or three
black-uniformed guards, steal an MP5K, and let fly.
"You need to turn down the gain on that geas: it's overpowering,”
I suggest.
"All in due course." Billington looks amused, then mildly concerned. "Are you feeling up to
the job, Ms. Random? You look a bit peaked.”
Ramona snorts. "If you want me to do this thing, you really ought to tell Pat to drop the
interference. I can't hear myself think, much less Bob.”
"Thinking is not what I'm paying you for. However, no purpose is served by separating you at
this time." Billington nods to McMurray: "Allow them full intercourse.”
McMurray looks alarmed: "But the suppressor's all that's keeping their entanglement from
proceeding to completion!
If I stop it now they'll only have about two days' individuality left, then we'll have to cut them
loose or deal!”
Shit. I glance at Ramona. She stares at me, wide-eyed. "I understand," Billington says
affably, "but as it will take less than twenty-four hours to accomplish the retrieval, I fail to see
what the objection is?" He thinks for a moment then comes to a decision. "Drop the
suppressor field now. When Ms. Random returns, you will immediately end their state of
entanglement, as we discussed earlier." He turns to me, and gestures at the dentist's chair
arrangement: "Please take a seat, Mr. Howard.”
I stare at him. "What is that thing”
?Billington's pupils narrow, lizardlike: "It's a comfy chair, Mr. Howard. Don't make me ask
twice.”
"Uh-huh." Behind me I sense more than see McMurray adjust some sort of compact ward he
keeps strapped to his left wrist: the fuzzy fogbank in my head fades away and I can feel
Ramona's unease, the cold, hard deck beneath her feet, and the churning emptiness in her
stomach.
**Bob, do as he says!** Ramona's sense of urgency carries over leaving a nasty metallic
taste in my mouth. I edge towards the chair nervously.
. "What are the straps for?" I ask.
"They're just in case of convulsions," Billington says soothingly, "nothing you need to worry
about.”

**lt's a high-bandwidth sympathetic resonator,** Ramona tells me. Snowflakes of
half-remembered knowledge slide into place in my head. Control cables suffer weird
anomalies when you stick them under kilometers of water; Billington wants a better way of
tracking his submersible grab, of staying in control over the retrieval process. Unlike its
seventies predecessor, the new grab that Billington's had built is designed to be manually
operated by one of Ramona's people, the Deep One/human hybrids. And it doesn't use fiber
optics or electrical cables for monitoring the process via TV — it uses two entangled occult
operatives. This chair will plug me right into Eileen's surveillance grid, far more efficiently
than a swipe of mascara across the eyelashes. **Look, if you don't do it, we're screwed so
hard it's not funny.** I weigh my chances, then swallow. "The straps go," I say.
Then I sit down tensely before I can change my mind.
"Jolly good." Billington smiles. "Pat, if you'd be so good as to escort Ms. Random to the
pool, I believe her watery chariot is ready to depart.”
That's about the last thing I hear, because as my butt hits the padding on the chair I almost
black out. I've been strongly aware of Ramona's presence ever since McMurray dropped his
blocking ward, like having a mild case of double vision. But that was before I plugged myself
into the chair.
It's an amplifier. I'm not sure how they've managed to make it work, but Ramona's
perceptions almost overwhelm my awareness of my own body. She's got a sharper sense of
smell than me, and I can appreciate her mild disgust with Billington's after-shave — there's a
bilious undernote of ketosis to it, as if it's covering up something rotten — and the tang of
ozone and leaking hydraulic fluid as she moves towards the doorway. Her dislike and fear of
McMurray is gnawing away in the background, and there's her concern for - I shy away.
It takes a real effort of will to move my arms, even to realize that they're still there: I manage
to lie down, or rather to flop bonelessly, then close my eyes.
**Ramona?** I ask.
**Bob?** She's curious, worried, and anxious.
**This chair, it's an amplifier—** **You really didn't know? You weren't being sarcastic?**
She pauses with her hand on the doorknob. McMurray looks round.
**No shit, what am I meant to do here? What's it for?** **If you're asking, they haven't
switched it on yet.** She looks round and now I can see myself lying in the chair, with a
couple black berets leaning over me— **Hey! What are they doing—** **Relax, it's in case
you start convulsing.** McMurray starts to say something, and Ramona speaks aloud: "It's
Bob.
You didn't tell him what to expect.”
'i-i "I see," says McMurray. "Ramona, channel. Bob, can you hear me”
?I swallow - no, I swallow with Ramona's throat muscles.
"What's happening?" My voice sounds oddly high. Not surprising, considering whose throat
it's coming out of.
McMurray looks pleased. He glances at the guards bending over my body, and I turn my
head to follow, feeling the unaccustomed weight of her hair, the faint pull of tension on the
gills at the base of her throat: I see myself— Bob — lying flat out, strapped down while they
hook up bits of bleeping '"-> biotelemetry. A medic stands by, holding a ventilator mask.
"Amplification to level six, please," says McMurray, then he looks back at me — at Ramona,
that is. "Your entanglement lets you see through Ramona's eyes, Bob. It also lets her speak
through your mouth, when you're at depth. The defense field around the chthonic artifact
plays hell with electronics and scrambles ordinary scalar similarity fields, but the deep
entanglement between you and Ramona is proof against just about any interference short of
the death of one of the participants. When she's at depth, Ramona will operate the controls
of the retrieval grab by hand - they're simple hydraulic actuators — to lock onto the artifact,
then signal through you to commence the lift process.”
"But I thought, uh, doesn't it take days to ride the grab down”
?McMurray shakes his head. "Not using this model." He looks insufferably smug. "Back in

the sixties they designed the grab to be fixed to the end of the pipe string. We've updated it
a little; the grab clamps to the outside of the string and drops down it on rollers, then locks
into place when it reaches the end. If we were going to unbolt and store the pipe sections
when we retrieved it, we'd take two days to suck it all back up, it's true — but to speed things
up we've got a plasma cutter up top that can slice them apart for recycling instead of
unbolting each joint. This baby is nearly four times faster than the original.”
"Doesn't Ramona need to decompress or something, on the way up?
"That's taken care of: her kind have different needs from us land-dwellers. It'll still take us a
whole day to bring the string up; she'll be all right." He turns away, dismissively.
"Dive stations, please.”
Ramona follows him through the door and along the catwalk to a dive room where there's a
whole range of esoteric kit laid out for her. She's done this sort of thing before and finds a
kind of comfort in it. It's very strange to feel her hands working with straps and connectors
that feel large to her slim fingers — shrugging out of her clothes and across the chilly steel
deck plates, then one leg at a time into a wet suit.
There's more unfamiliar stuff: an outer suit threaded with thin pipes that connect to an
external coupling, weight belt, a knife, torches. **What's the plumbing for?** I ask. **I thought
you could breathe down there.** **I can, but it's cold, so they're giving me a heated suit.** I
get a picture: hot water is pumped down through the pipe string under high pressure, used
to power the grab assembly via a turbine. Some of the water is bled off and cooled by a
radiator until it's at a comfortable temperature for circulating through Ramona's suit. She's
going to be down there for more than a day— **You're taking a bar of chocolate?** I ask,
boggling slightly as she slides the foil-wrapped packet into a thigh pocket.
**There are fish down there, but you wouldn't want to eat them raw. Shut up and let me run
through this checklist again.** I hang back and wait, trying not to get in the way. A dive error
wouldn't be the lethal disaster for Ramona that it would be for me but it could still leave her
stranded and exposed in the chilly darkness, kilometers below the surface.
Even if she's immune to the predations of the BLUE HADES defense polyps, there are
other things down there — things with teeth out of your worst nightmares, things that can see
in the dark and burrow through flesh and bone like drillmouthed worms. "\,L Ramona finally
pulls her helmet on. Open-faced, with no mask or regulator, she turns and faces McMurray.
"Ready when you are." .-< "Good. Take her to the pool," he says to the technicians, and
strides back out in the direction of the observation room.
Down in the moon pool, the waters are warm and still.
The drill string has stopped descending, although there are muted clanking and clattering
noises from the platform overhead.
Around the walls of the pool the sea is dark, but something bulky and flat squats below the
water in the middle of the pool. There are technicians in the water, scudding about in a
Zodiac with an electric outboard: they seem to be collecting cables that connect the
submerged platform to the instrument bay below the observation room windows.
Ramona walks heavily down the metal steps bolted to the wall of the pool until she's
standing just above the waterline.
There are lights on top of the submersible grab, lined up in two rows to either side of an
exposed platform with railings and, incongruously, an operator's chair, its seat submerged
beneath two meters of seawater. There are two divers working on a panel in front of the
seat; behind it, there's a bulky arrangement of shock absorbers and rollers clamped around
a steel yoke the size of a medium truck, threaded around the drill string. Ramona steels
herself, then steps off the platform.
Water slaps her in the face, cool after the humid air in the moon pool. She drops below the
surface neatly, opens her eyes, and — this fascinates me — blows a stream of silver
bubbles towards the surface. Her nasal sinuses burn for a moment as she inhales a deep
draught of water, and there's a moment of panicky amphibian otherness before she relaxes
the flaps at the base of her throat, and kicks off towards the submerged control platform,

reveling in the sense of freedom and the flow of water through her gills. Nictitating
membranes slide down across my — no, her - eyes, adding a faint iridescent haze to the
view.
"Ready to go aboard," I feel her saying through my throat.
"Can you hear me, Billington?" Somewhere a long way away I can hear my body coughing
as Ramona swims over the seat and lets the two support divers strap her into it and hook up
her warm-water hoses. She's doing something funny with my larynx and it's not used to it.
**Hey, careful about that,** I nudge her.
There's an echoing flash of surprise. **Bob? That feels really weird . . .** **You're not doing it
right. Try using it like this.** I show her, swallowing and clearing my throat. She's right, it feels
really weird. I close my eyes and try to ignore my body, which is lying on the dentist's chair
as Ellis Billington leans close to listen to her.
There's a panel with about six dozen levers and eight mechanical indicator dials on it, all
crude-looking industrial titanium castings with rough edges. Ramona settles in her seat and
waves a hand signal at the nearest diver. There's a lurch, and the seat drops under her. A
loud metallic grating sound follows, felt as much as heard, and she glances round to watch
the huge metal harness grip the pipe string. I feel a pressure in her ears and I swallow for
her. The pipe is rising through the docking collar — no, the platform I'm sitting on is sinking,
about as fast as an elevator car. The great wheels grip the pipe, held in place to either side
by hydraulic clamps. I manage to prod her into looking up: the moon pool and the ship
merge into a dark fish-shaped silhouette against a deep blue sky, already darkening
towards a stygian night broken only by the spotlights that ridge the spine of the huge grab
we're riding on.
It's odd how Ramona's senses differ from my own. I can feel the pressure around me, but it's
different from the way it feels to me in my own skin. Waves of sound move across me,
sounds too low- or too high-pitched to hear with my own ears. Ramona can sense them in
the small bones of her skull, though. There are distant clicking hunting noises from marine
mammals, strange sizzling and clattering noises — krill, tiny crustaceans floating in the high
waters like a swarm of locusts grazing on the green phytoplankton. And then there are the
deep bass whoops and groans of the whales, growing abruptly louder as we drop below a
thermocline.
The water on my exposed face is suddenly cold, and there's a sense of pressure on my
skull, but a few deep gulps of water flushing through my gills clears it. Ramona swallows
seawater as well as breathing it, letting it flood her stomach and feeling the chill as it
infiltrates her gut. Rarely used muscles twitch painfully into life, forcing strange structures to
realign themselves. **How are you taking this?** she asks me.
**I'U cope,** I tell her. The light outside our charmed circle of lamps has dimmed to a faint
twilight. In the distant murk I spot a gray belly nudging past, possibly a deep-ranging tiger
shark or something less well-known. The pipe rolls endlessly up through the docking
harness.
"Dive stable at one meter per second," Ramona tells Billington. I lie back, do the math: it's
going to take us a little over an hour to reach the abyssal plain where JENNIFER MORGUE
Two lies broken and desolate beneath 400 atmospheres of pressure, on a bed of gray ooze
that's been accreting since before hairless apes slouched across the plains of Africa.
There's something soothing about the motion of the pipe string. Once every few minutes
Ramona opens my mouth and murmurs something technical: some of the time Billington
turns and relays an instruction or two to the everpresent flunky waiting at his shoulder. I lapse
into a dreamy, ~— near-hypnotized state. I know something's wrong, that I shouldn't be this
relaxed under the circumstances — but a great sense of lassitude has come over me as our
entanglement nears completion. Lie back and think of England. Where the hell did that
come from? I blink and try to throw back^ the sense of disengagement.
* * Ramona—* * **Shut up and let me concentrate here.** She's working two of the levers
and there's a loud dank-bump that I feel more than hear. **Okay, that's it.** We resume our

descent, passing an odd bulge where the pipe triples in diameter for about three meters,
like a python that's just swallowed a small pig. **What is it?** **What do we do after you
raise the artifact?** **What do—** She stops. **We get disentangled. right?** **Yes, but
what then?** I persist. For some reason I feel dizzy when I try to follow this line of reasoning. I
can almost sense my own body again, see Billington leaning over me expectantly like an
eager cultist inspecting his dead leader for signs of imminent resurrection. **Aren't we
supposed to do . . . something?** **Oh, you mean kill Ellis, massacre his guards, and set
the ship on fire, before making our escape on jet skis?** she says brightly.
**Something like that.** A thought bubbles up to the surface of my mind and pops,
halfheartedly: **You gave that a lot of thought, huh?** **The jet skis are on C deck, and there
are only two of them. I've got to get Pat out of here — I'm afraid you'll have to make your own
arrangements,** she says briskly. **But yeah, I can definitely nail Billington.** The penny
drops — icy and cold, right down the back of my metaphorical net. **You've been planning
this as a hit on Billington right from the start!** **Well, that's the whole point of my being here,
isn't it?
Why else would they send an assassin? I mean, d'oh!** I ought to be more shocked; maybe
it's had time to sink in, what she really is. (And there's the whole escape thing, of course. Am
I imagining things or did she feel a twinge of guilt when she told me I'd have to swim for
myself?) **Your people used me to get close to Billington,** I accuse.
**Yup.** It's funny how these little misunderstandings only come clear when you're 800
meters below sea level and dropping like an express elevator towards Davy Jones's
tentacle- enhanced locker. **As soon as Billington shuts down the geas field I'll be free to act
on my own agency.** I can feel a funny tight smirk tugging at the sides of her mouth.
It's not humor. **He doesn't realize it yet, but he's so screwed you could plug him into the
mains and call him Albert Fish.** **But you can't do that unless we're disentangled, surely?
And for that you need—** The other shoe drops, or rather, she kicks me between the eyes
with it in her next comment: **Yes, that's why Pat is here. You didn't think supervisors from
Department D routinely defect, did you? He's under even tighter control than I am.** And at
that moment I can see the geas that's binding her to the Black Chamber tying her to the
daemon they've imposed on her will: bright as chromed steel, thick as girders, compelling
obedience. The Laundry warrant card is bad enough — if you try to spill our secrets you'll
die, not to put too fine a point on it — but this is even worse. We do it for security. This is
nothing short of vindictive. If she thinks a disloyal thought too far, the Other will be let loose -
and the first thing it will do is feed on her soul. No wonder she's terrified of falling in love.
I'm fully awake now, mind spinning like a hamster on a—wheel in a cage on a conveyor belt
heading for the maw of an industrial-scale wood chipper: there are thoughts I really
desperately don't want to think while I'm inside her skull and vice versa. On the other hand,
something does occur to me . . .
**If McMurray's working with you, do you think you can^ convince him to give me back my
mobile phone?** **Huh?** **It's no big deal,** I explain, **it's just, if I've got my phone I can
escape. You want that to happen, right? Once we get back to the surface, you and McMurray
want me out of the picture as soon as possible. I can get a ride home just about any time, as
long as I've got my phone.** **But we're out of range of land,** she points out logically.
**What makes you think I was going to use it to make a ,^-~ phone call?** **Oh.** We watch
the pipe string unreel for a minute or "*”
two in silence. Then I feel her acquiesce: **Yeah, I don't think that'll be a problem. In fact, why
don't you just ask him for it? I mean, it's not as if you can phone home, so you can probably
use some of your super-agent mojo while you've got it.** I am conflicted between wanting to
hug Ramona, and kick her in the shins for being a smart-arse. But I guess that's her job, I
mean, she really is a glamorous, high-flying superspy and assassin and I'm just an office
nerd who's along for the ride. It doesn't matter what Angleton thinks of me, all I can really do
here is lie back and think of— England— not to mention the . . . game ofTetris . . . on my
phone— **Stop trying to think, monkey-boy, you're making my head hurt and I've got to drive

this thing.** Monkey-boy? That does it. I send her a picture of a goldfish gasping in a puddle
of water beside a broken bowl. Then I clam up.
1 4 : J E N N I F ER M O R G U E •-£ \ A / E RIDE DOWN TO THE ABYSSAL PLAIN IN
SILENCE, doing our best to barricade each other out of our minds.
The journey down actually takes nearer to three hours than one. There's a lengthy pause in
the darkness of the bathypelagic zone, a kilometer down, while Ramona stretches and
twists in strange exercises she's learned for adapting to the pressure. Her joints make
cryptic popping noises as she moves, accompanied by brief stabbing pains. It's almost
pitch-black outside our ring of lights, and at one point she unstraps herself from the seat and
swims over to the,^* edge of the platform to relieve herself, still tethered by the umbilical
hose that pumps warm water through her suit.
Looking out into the depths, her eyes ad just slowly: I can see a cluster of faint reddish
pinpricks swimming at the edge of visibility. There's something odd about her eyes down
here, as if their lenses are bulging and she can see further into the red end of the spectrum;
by rights she ought to be as blind as a bat. From the sounds these sea creatures are
making they're some sort of shrimp, luminescent and torpid as they feed on the tiny scraps
of biomass raining down from the illuminated surface like oceanic dandruff.
The water down here is frigid — if Ramona didn't have the heated suit she'd likely freeze to
death before she could surface again. She messes with a pair of vents near her chin, and a
tepid veil of warm water flows across her face, smelling faintly of sulfur and machine oil.
"Let's get this over with,”
she mutters as a weird itching around her gills peaks and begins to subside: "If I stay down
here much longer I'll begin to change." She says it with a little shudder.
She fastens herself back into the control chair and throws the lever to resume our descent.
After an interminable wait, there's a loud clang that rattles through the platform. "Aha!”
She glances round. The descent rollers have just passed a football-shaped bulge in the pipe
painted with the white numerals "100." "Okay, time to slow down." Ramona hits the brakes
and we slide over another football, numbered "90," then "80." They're counting down meters,
I realize, indicating the distance to go until we hit something.
I feel Ramona working my jaws remotely; it's most unpleasant — my mouth tastes as if
something died in it.
"Nearly there," she tells the technician who's taken Billington's place during the boring part of
the descent.
"Should be seated on the docking cone in a couple of minutes.”
She squeezes the brake lever some more. "Thirty meters. What's our altitude”
?The technician checks a screen that's out of my line of sight: "Forty meters above ground
zero, one-seventy degrees out by two-two-five meters.”
"Okay . . ." We've slowed to a crawl. Ramona squeezes the brake lever again as the "10"
meter football creeps past, climbing the pipe string. The brakes are hydraulically
boosted—the grab she's sitting on weighs as much as a jumbo jet—and the big rollers
overhead groan and squeal against the pipe string, scraping away the paint to reveal the
gleam of titanium-graphite composite segments. (No expense is spared: that stuff is usually
used for building satellites and space launchers, not drilling pipes that are going to be cut
apart once they've been hauled back up to the surface.) I watch as Ramona frowns over a
direction indicator and carefully uses another lever to release water to the directional control
jets, shoving the platform round until it's lined up correctly with the docking cone below. Then
she releases the brake again, just enough to set us gliding down the final stretch.
The pipe flares out to three times its previous diameter, then stops being a pipe: there's an
enormous conical plug dangling from the drill string, point uppermost, with flanges %- that
lock into a tunnel on the underside of the platform's harness, like Satan's own butt-plug. We
drop steadily, and the rollers are pushed outwards by the cone until the harness locks into
place around the cone. "Okay securing the grab now," Ramona comments, and throws the
final lever. There's an uneven series of bangs from below the deck as hydraulic bolts slide

into place, nailing us to the end of the pipe. "You want to begin steering us over to the target
zone”
?"Make sure you're secured in your seat," the tech advises her whispering in my ear. "Visual
check. Are your wards con- tiguous?" Ramona switches on her hand torch, casts the beam
around the metal panels at her feet. Pale green light picks out the non-Euclidian circuitry of a
Vulpis exclusion array etched into the deck with a welding torch. It extends all the way
around her chair. "Check. Wards clear and unobstructed. •How are they powered”
?"Don't worry, we took care of that." Oh great, I realize, they're going to drop Ramona into
the field around JENNIFER MORGUE Site Two - a field that tends to kill electronics and,
quite possibly people — with only a ward for protection, one that needs blood to power it.
"It's full of Pale Grace™ Number Three®13, and we've got a sacrifice waiting in cell four to
energize it. Should be commencing exsanguination in two minutes.”
"Um, okay." Ramona checks her compass, suppressing a stab of anger so strong it nearly
shocks me into a languorous yawn. "What did the subject do to rate a starring role”
?"Don't ask me — underperforming sales rep or something.
There's plenty more where she came from." The technician steps back for a while, at
Billington's command, then nods, and steps forwards into view again. "Right. You're about to
see the wards light up. Tell me immediately if they stay dark.”
Ramona glances down. Eerie red sparks flicker around the runes on the deck. "It's lit.”
"Good." Somewhere disturbingly close to the back of my own mind I can feel her daemon
coil uneasily in its sleep, a sensual shudder rippling through us as it senses the proximity of
death. The skin of my scrotum crawls; I feel Ramona's nipples tighten. She shudders.
"What's that”
?Billington leans over me now. "You're twenty meters off the counter-intrusion field rim,
sitting in the middle of a contagion mesh with a defensive ward around you. If my analysis is
correct, the field will absorb the sacrifice and let you in. Your entanglement with Bob up here
will confuse its proximity sense and should let you survive the experience.
You might want to uncap your periscope at this time: from now on, you're on your own until
you dump the ballast load.”
He steps back smartly and the wards inscribed on the 13 The word "Three" and the digit "3"
(and non-English localizations thereof) are patented intellectual property of TLA Systems
Corporation and denote the entity that, in the set of integers, is the ordinal successor of 2
and predecessor of 4. Used by kind permission.
floor around my chair light up so bright that the glare reflects off the ceiling of the control
room above me, pulling me back into my own head for a moment. "Hey—" I begin to say,
and just then . . .
Things.
Get.
Confused.
I'm Ramona: leaning over a narrow, glass letter box in the & middle of the console, staring
down at a brown expanse of mud as I twitch the thruster control levers, flying the platform and
its trailing grapple arms closer towards a cylindrical outcropping in the middle of the
featureless plain. I'm in my element, slippery and wet, comfortably oblivious to the thousands
of tons of pressure bearing down on me from above.
I'm Bob: limp as a dishrag, passive, lying on a dentist's chair in the middle of a pentacle with
lights flaring in my eyes, a cannula taped into my left forearm, and a saline drip emptying into
it through an infusion pump — They've drugged me, I realize dizzily - a passenger, along for
the ride.
And I'm someone else: frightened half to death, strapped down on a stretcher with cable ties
so I can't move, and the robed figures around me are chanting, and I'd scream if I could but
there's something wrong with my throat and why ^won't anyone rescue me? Where are the
police? This isn't supposed to happen! Is it some kind of sorority initiation thing? One of the
sisters is holding a big knife. What's she doing? When I get out of here I'm going to— I stare

down at the muddy expanse unrolling beneath the platform. Rotating the periscope I check
the ten grab-arms visually: they all look okay from here, though it won't really be possible to
tell for sure until I fire the hydraulic rams.
They cast long shadows across the silt. Something white gleams between two of them,
briefly: skeletal remains or something. Something.
Glimpse of silvery strings across the grayness, like the webs of a spider as big as a whale.
Conical spires rising from the mud, dark holes in their peaks like the craters of extinct
volcanoes. Guardians sleeping. I can feel their dreams, disturbed thoughts waiting: but I can
reassure them, I'm not who you want. Beyond them, more open ground and a sense of
prickling fire that ripples across my skin as I float past an invisible frontier left over from a
war that ended before humans existed— She screams silently and the terror gushes inside
my head as the knife tears through her throat, blood spurting in thick pulses draining towards
zero— The daemon in my head is awake now, noticing— The blood vanishing, drained into
the fiery frontier on the sea floor— And we're inside the charmed circle of death around
JENNIFER MORGUE Site Two.
A long time later, McMurray comes up to me and clears his throat. "Howard, can you hear
me?" he asks I mumble something like leave me alone. My head aches like it's clamped in a
vice, and my mouth is a parched desert.
"Can you hear me?" he repeats patiently.
"Feel. Like shit." I think for a minute, during which time I manage to crowbar my eyes open.
"Water?" Something's missing, but I'm not sure what.
McMurray turns away and lets a medical type approach me with a paper cup. I try to sit up to
drink but I'm as weak as a baby. I manage a sip, then I swallow: half the contents of the cup
go down my chin. "More." While the paramedic is busy I get my throat working again. "What
happened”
?"Mission accomplished." McMurray looks self-satisfied.
"Ramona's on her way back up with the goods.”
"But, the—" I stop. Hunt around in my head. "You put the block back," I accuse.
"Why wouldn't I?" He steps out of the way to let the nurse or paramedic or whoever pass me
another cup of water.
This time I manage to lift a hand and take hold of it without making a mess of things. "It's
going to take another twelve hours or so to bring her up, and I don't want you deepening the
entanglement while that's happening." I stare into his pale blue eyes and think, Got you, you
has- tard. Even though it's treachery against Billington, who thinks he owns McMurray body
and soul, I get the picture.
"Did she get the, the thing?" I ask. Because that's when I blacked out, right after we entered
the zone of the death spell or curse or force field or whatever it is around the wrecked
^^chthonian war machine on the seabed. Right when Ramona recognized what she was
looking for, bang in the middle of the periscope, and opened my mouth to announce, "I've
got it. Give me three more meters, and stand by for contact.”
"Yes, she got it.”
"When, when are you going to unhook us”
?"When Ramona's back up and decompressed — tomorrow.
She has to be physically present, you know." His expression turns sour. "So it's back to your
room for the duration." . "Agh." I try to sit up and nearly fall off the chair. He puts one hand on
my shoulder to steady me. I glance around, my vision still blurry. Billington's across the room
conversing with his wife and the ship's officers; I'm all on my own over here with McMurray
and the medic. Icy fear clamps around my stomach. "How long have I been under”
?McMurray glances at his watch, then chuckles. "About six hours." He raises one eyebrow.
"Are you going to come quietly or am I going to have to have you sedated”
?I shake my head. Quietly I say, "I know about Charlie Victor." His fingers dig into my
shoulder like claws. "You want to settle with Billington, that's none of my business," I add
hastily. "But give me back my phone first.”

"Why?" he asks sharply. Heads turn, halfway across the control room floor: his face slides
into an effortless smile and he waves at them then turns back to me. "Blow my cover and I'll
take you down with me," he hisses.
"No fear." I swallow. How much can I safely reveal. ..? At least Ramona isn't listening in; I
don't need to doublethink around McMurray right now. "She told me about the jet skis, I know
how we're getting out of here." / know that there's a seat reserved for you, but no room for
me. It's time to lie like a rug: "The phone isn't official issue, it's mine. I bought it unlocked, not
on contract. Cost me close to a month's wages, I really can't afford to lose it when the shit
hits the fan." I put a whine in my voice: "They'll take that expenses packet you made me
gamble away out of my pay for the next year and I am going to be so screwed—”
"We're out of range of land," he says absent-mindedly, and his grip relaxes. I swing my legs
over the floor and steady myself until the world stops spinning around my head.
"Doesn't matter: I'm not planning on phoning home. But can I have it back anyway?" I get one
foot on the deck outside the ward.
McMurray cocks his head to one side and stares at me.
"Okay," he says, after a moment, during which I feel none of the weirdly other-worldly sense
of strangeness that came over me while I was putting one across Eileen in the monitoring
center. "You can have your damned phone back tomorrow, before Ramona surfaces. Now
stand up — you're going back to the Mabuse.”
McMurray details four black berets to escort me back to my room aboard the Mabuse, and it
takes all of their combined efforts to get me there. I'm limp as a dishcloth, hung-over from
whatever drugs Billington's tame Mengele pumped into me. I can barely walk, much less
climb into a Zodiac.
It's dark outside — past sunset, anyway — and the sky is black but for a faint red haze on
the western horizon. As we bump up against the side of the Mabuse, where they've lowered
a boarding platform, I notice the guards are still wearing their trademark items: "Hey what's
with the mirrorshades”
?I ask, slurring my words so that I sound half-drunk. " 'S nighttime, y'know”
?The goon who's climbing the steps ah'ead of me stops and looks round at me. "It's the
eyeliner," he says finally. "You think wearing mirrorshades at night looks stupid, you should
try carrying an MP-5 with a black jumpsuit and a beret m while wearing eye shadow.”
"Cosmetics don't go/with GI Joe," chants the goon behind me, a semitone out of tune with
himself.
"Eye shadow?" I shake my head and manage to climb another step.
"It's the downside of our terms and conditions of employment,”
says Goon Number One. "Some folks have to piss in a cup to pass federally mandated
antidrug provisions; we have to wear make-up.
"You're shitting me." -^ "Why would I do a thing like that? I've got stock options that're going
to be worth millions after we IPO. If someone offered you stock options worth a hundred
million and said you had to wear eyeliner to qualify . . .”
I shake my head again. "Hang on a moment, isn't TLA Corporation already publicly traded?
How can you IPO if it's already listed on NASDAQ”
?Goon Number Two behind me chuckles. "You got the wrong end of the stick. That's Install
Planetary Overlord, not Initial Public Offering.”
We climb the rest of the steps in silence and I reflect that it makes a horrible kind of sense: if
you're running a ubiquitous surveillance web mediated by make-up, wouldn't it make sense
to plug all your guards into it? Still, it's going to make breaking out of here a real pain in the
neck — much harder than it looked before — if the guards are also nodes in the surveillance
system. As we trudge through the corridors of the ship, I speculate wildly. Maybe I can use
my link into Eileen's surveillance network to install an invisibility geas on the server, and use
the sympathetic link to their eyes as a contagion tunnel so that they don't see me. On the
other hand, that sort of intricate scheme tends to be prone to bugs — get a single step
wrong in the invocation and you might as well be donning a blinking neon halo labeled

ESCAPING PRISONER.
Right now I'm so tired that I can barely put one foot in front of another, much less plan an
intricate act of electronic sabotage: so when we get to my room I stagger over to the bed
and lie down before they even have time to close the door.
Lights out.
It's still dark when I wake up shuddering in the aftershock of a nightmare. I can't remember
exactly what it was about but something has filled my soul to overflowing with a sense of
profound horror. I jerk into wakefulness and lie there with my teeth chattering for a minute. It
feels like an entire convention of bogeymen has slithered over my grave. The shadows in my
room are full of threatening shapes: I reach out and flick the bedside light switch, banishing
them. My heart pounds like a diesel engine. I glance at the bedside clock. It's just turned five
in the morning.
"Shit." I sit up and hold my head in my hands. I'm not making a good showing for myself, I
can tell that much: frankly, I've been crap. After a moment I stand up and walk over to the
door, but it's locked. No moonlight excursions tonight, I guess. Somewhere a kilometer
below the surface, Ramona will be dozing in that chair slowly decompressing as a
nightmare dreams on in the ancient war machine tucked between the ten mechanical grabs
on the underside of the retrieval platform. Aboard the Explorer, Billington paces the
command center of his operation, those weirdly catlike eyes slitted before the prospect of
world domination. Somewhere else on board the Explorer, the treacherous McMurray is
waiting for Billington to terminate the Bond geas, so that he can •* release Ramona's
daemon and then she can assassinate the crazed entrepreneur, delivering JENNIFER
MORGUE Site Two into the hands of the Black Chamber.
It's pretty damn clear now, isn't it? And what am I doing about it? I'm sitting on my arse in a
gilded cage, looking pretty while acting pretty ineffectual. And I keep finding myself
mumbling lie back and think of England, which is just plain humiliating. It's almost as if
Billington has already terminated the invocation that's binding me to the heroic role— "Shit,"
I say again, startling myself. That's it! That's what I should have noticed earlier. The heroic
pressure of the geas is no longer bearing down on me, skewing my perspective.
I'm back to being myself again, the nerdy guy in the corner.
In fact, it feels like I'm being squeezed into a state of fatalis- —.
tic passivity, waiting for a rescuer to come get me out of this situation. The reason I feel so
indecisive and like crap is, I'm going through cold turkey for heroism. Either that or the focus
of the Hero trap has shifted— I check the alarm clock again. It's now ten past five. What did
McMurray say? Sometime today. I pull out the chair and sit down in front of the Media Center
PC. Jet skis on C deck.
They're going to give me my phone back soon. What was the speed dial code? As soon as
we're untangled Charlie Victor is going to kill Billington. Gravedust systems. JENNIFER
MORGUE isn't as dead as McMurray seems to think. That's the only explanation I can come
up with for Billington's behavior.
"Oh Jesus, we are so rucked," I groan, and hit the boss key so I can see whether Mo, at
least, is safe.
"It's like this," says Mo, checking the seals on her instrument case once more, "I can do it
without attracting attention.
Whereas, if you guys do it, you're not exactly inconspicuous.
So leave the job to me.”
She's sitting on a gray metal platform slung over the side of a gray metal ship. A
flashy-looking cigarette boat is tied up next to it, all white fiberglass and chromed trim until
you get back to the enclosed cockpit and the two gigantic Mercury outboards in the tail. The
man she's talking to is wearing a wet suit, a bullet-proof vest, and horn-rimmed spectacles.
"What makes you think you can do it?" he asks, with barely concealed impatience.
"Because it's what I've spent the past four bloody months training for, thank you very much."
She squints at the lock, then nods minutely and puts the case down. "And before you say it's

what you've spent the last twenty years specializing in, I'd like to remind you that there are
any number of reasons why you shouldn't go in first, starting with their occult defenses, which
are my specialty. Then there's the small matter of their point defense systems, starting with
an Indian Navy sensor suite that Billington's spent roughly fifty million on, upgrading to NATO
current standards. The bigger the initial insertion the greater the risk that it'll be spotted, and
I don't think you want them to realize they're being stalked by a Royal Navy task group, do
you”
?Barnes nods thoughtfully. "I think you underestimate how fast and hard we can hit them, but
yes, it's a calculated risk.
But what makes you think you can do it alone”
?Mo shrugs. "I'm not going in without backup — that would be stupid." She grins
momentarily. "On the other hand, you know how this setup works. If I stay back at HQ it all
goes pear-shaped. I think the smart money is riding on them already having retrieved
JENNIFER MORGUE: the worst-case operational contingency is that, with Billington's
expertise in necro-cognitive decoding, he also knows how to make it work. I expect any first
attempt we make to fail - unless I'm along for the ride and in a position to act out my
assigned role in accordance with the geas he's got running.
I'm not trying to be sticky here, I'm just reading the rules.”
"Shit." Barnes is silent for a moment, evidently running some sort of scenario through his
mind's eye. Then he nods briskly. "All right, you convinced me. One reservation: you've got a
ten-minute lead, maximum, and not a second longer. If there's even a hint of instability in the
geas field, all bets are off and I'm taking both teams in immediately. Now, one last time —
can you enumerate your priorities”
?"First, secure the field generator so Billington can't shut it down on schedule. Next, release
the hostages and hand them off to the 'B' team for evac. Third, neutralize the chthonian
artifact and if necessary sink the Explorer. That's all, isn't it”
?Captain Barnes clears his throat. "Yes. Which I'm afraid means you just passed Angleton's
cricket test. But you need this, first." He hands Mo a red-striped document wallet.
"Read it, then sign here.”
"Oh dear," Mo says mildly, running one finger down a series of closely typed paragraphs of
legalese drafted by a bunch of Home Office lawyers with too much time on their hands: "Do I
have to”
?"Yes," Barnes says grimly. "You must. That's also in the rules. They don't hand these out
every day. In fact, they're so rare I think they probably had to invent it just for you . . . " "Well,
pass me the pen." Mo scrawls a hasty signature then hands the document back to him.
"That all square”
?"Well, there's one other thing I'd like to add," Barnes says as he seals the document into a
waterproof baggie and passes it to a sailor waiting on the bottom steps of the ladder. "Just
between you and me, just because you've got the license, it doesn't mean you've got to use
it. Remember, you're going to have to live with yourself afterwards.”
Mo smiles, her lips drawn razor-thin. "It's not me you should be worrying about." She picks
up a waterproof fiberglass black case and checks the latches on it carefully. "If this goes to
pieces, I'm going to have words with Angleton.”
"Really? I'd never have guessed." Barnes's tone is withering, but he follows it by sitting down
next to Mo and leaning close: "Listen this is not going to go pear-shaped. One way or
another, we've got to make it work, even if none of us end up going home. But more
importantly — you listen — this isn't about you, or me, or about Bob, or about Angleton. If the
Black Chamber gets their hands on JENNIFER MORGUE it's going to destabilize
everything. But that's just the start.
We don't know why Billington wants it but the worst-case analyses — well, use your
imagination. Watch out for any signs — anything, however small — that suggests Billington
isn't in the driving seat, if you follow my drift. Got that”
?Mo stares at him. "You think he's possessed”

?"I didn't say that." Andy shakes his head. "Once you start asking which captains of industry
are being controlled by alien soul-sucking monsters from another dimension, why, anything
might happen. That sort of thing leads to godless communism and in any case they've got
friends in high places like Number Ten, if you know what I mean. No, let's not go there." His
cheek twitches. "Nevertheless, there is no obvious reason why a multibillionaire needs to
acquire alien weapons of mass destruction—it's not exactly on the list of best business
practices — so you be careful in there.
As I said, you can call 'A' troop in at any time after you make contact, but once you've made
contact they're going in ten minutes later whether you ask for them or not. Let's check your
headset—”
There's a knock on the door. I hit the boss key, flip the keyboard upside down, and stand up
just as the door begins to open. It's one of the stewards from upstairs, not a black beret.
"Yes?" I demand, slightly breathless.
He holds out a silver tray, half-covered by a crisp white linen cloth. My Treo sits in the middle
of it, pristine and untouched. "This is for you," he says dully. I look at his face and shudder as
I reach for the phone — he's not himself, that's for sure. Green lights in the back of the eye
sockets and a distinct lack of breathing are usually indicators that you're looking at a
nameless horror from outside space-time rather than something really sinister like, say, a
marketing executive: but you still wouldn't want to invite one back to your cabin for a drink
and afterdinner conversation.
I take the phone and hit the power button. "Thanks," I say. "You can go now." The dead man
turns and leaves the room. I close the door —*^> and hit the button to fire up the phone's
radio stage — not much chance of getting a signal this far from land, but you never know.
And in the meantime . . . well, if I can get back in touch with Control somehow and tell them
not to send Mo in after me that would be a good thing. I find I'm shaking. This new "* Mo,
fresh from some kind of special forces class at Dunwich, spilling blood with casually ruthless
abandon, and working as an assault thaumaturgist with Alan's head-bangers, scares me.
I've lived with her for years, and I know how hard she can be when it's time to rake a folk
festival organizer over the coals, but that new violin she's carrying gives me the willies.
It's as if it comes with a mean streak, a nasty dose of ruthlessness that's crawled into the
tough-minded but intermittently tender woman I love, and poisoned her somehow. And she's
heading fot the Explorer, now, to - secure the field generator, release the hostages,
neutralize the chthonian artifact, sink the Explorer— I stop dead in mid-thought. "Huh?" I
mumble to myself.
"Secure the field generator”
?That was the geas field she and Alan were discussing. The probability-warping curse that
dragged me kicking and screaming into this stupid role-play thing, the very invocation I'm
supposed to be destroying. She thinks it's aboard the Explorer! And Angleton wants her to
keep it running!
I stare at my phone. There's no base station signal, but I've still got a chunk of battery
charge. "Does not compute," I say, and stub my thumb on the numeric keypad. I'm frustrated:
I admit it. Nobody tells me anything; they just want to use me as a communications link, keep
me in the dark and feed me shit, pose around in evening drag at a casino and drink
disgusting cocktails. I go back to the desk, flip the keyboard rightside up, and hit the boss
key again. Mo's sitting in the cockpit of the cigarette boat, fastening her five-point safety
harness. A pair of sailors is installing a kit-bag full of ominous black gadgets in the seat next
to her; over the windscreen I can see the gray flank of a Royal Navy destroyer, bristling with
radomes and structures that could be anything from missile batteries to gun turrets or paint
lockers, to my uneducated eye. The horizon is clear in all directions but for the rulerstraight
line of an airplane's contrail crawling across the sky.
I glance sidelong at the phone, longingly: if I could call her up I could tell her — if only I wasn't
stuck on board this goddamn yacht, moping like the token love interest in a bad thriller while
the shit is going to hit the fan in about two hours aboard the Explorer, which is sitting less

than half a kilometer away— "What the flack has gotten into me?" I ask, wondering why I'm
not angry. This bovine passivity just isn't me: Why does it feel like my best option is to just sit
here and wait for Mo to arrive? Damn it, I need to get things moving.
McMurray can't afford to lose me before Ramona's delivered her surprise party trick to
Billington: that gives me a lever I can pull on. And Angleton wants the geas field generator
kept running? That's my cue. The penny drops: if the geas field actually works, and Billington
can't shut it down, then he's going to be in a world of hurt. Could that be Angleton's plan? It's
so simple it's fiendish. Almost without thinking, I dial 6-6-6. It's time to call my ride and get
moving. After all, even the Good Bond Babe — token love interest and all — doesn't always
spend the final minutes of the movie waiting for her absent love to come rescue her. It's time
to kick ass and set off explosions.
15: SCUTTLE TO COVER AN HOUR LATER, HAVING DONE EVERYTHING I CAN via the
Media Center PC, I pocket my phone and open the door to my room. There's a lot you can
do in an hour with a PC on a supposedly secure but in reality penetrated-to-Hell-and-back
network, especially if you've got a USB flash drive full of hacking tools. Unfortunately there's
rather less you can do on such a network without making it blindingly and immediately
obvious that it's been 0wnZor3d. But on the third hand, by this point I don't give a shit. I
mean, I thori^ oughly expect what I've done to the PC to be exposed within a matter of hours,
but worrying about it is taking second place right now to worrying whether I'll still be alive by
then. There's a time when you've got to look at any asset and think, Use it or lose it, baby,
and that time is definitely up when you're counting down the minutes in the last hour before
the men in black come for you. So, what the hell.
To start with, I disable all the system logging mechanisms, so they won't be able to figure out
what's going on in a hurry. I set the remote login ports to shut down an hour hence and
scramble the password databases they're so quaintly relying on, and whip up a shell script
that'll fry the distributed relational database behind the surveillance management system by
randomly reversioning everything and then subtly corrupting the backups.
But that's just a five-fingered warm-up exercise. Billington's empire is based on the premise
that you buy commercial, off-the-shelf gear, customize it to meet a MILSPEC requirement,
and sell it back to the government at a 2,000 percent markup. An awful lot of his network —
all the workstations those cubicle drones from Mumbai have on their desks, basically — run
Windows. You'd expect a corporate enterprise rollout of Vista to be locked down and
patrolled by rabid system administrators wearing spiked collars, and you'd be right: by
ordinary commercial standards, Billington's network is pretty good. The trouble is, the
Windows security model has always been inside out and upside down, and they're all
running exactly the same service pack release. It's a classic corporate monoculture, and I've
got exactly the right herbicide stuffed up one end of my bow tie, thanks to the Laundry's
network security tiger team. Eileen's mission-critical surveillance operation may be running
on horribly expensive blade servers with a securely locked-down NSAapproved UNIX
operating system, but the workstations are . . . well, the technical term for what they'll be
when I get through with them is toast. And by the time I get through with them Eileen is going
to have a whole lot of the wrong kind of zombies on her hands.
The Laundry carped over giving me a decent car, even though I can prove that Aston Martins
depreciate more slowly and cost less in running repairs than a Smart (after all, half the Aston
Martins ever built are still on the road, and they've been in business for three-quarters of a
century). But they didn't even blink over giving me a key drive stuffed full of malware that
must have cost CESG about, oh, two million to develop, and which I am about to expend in
the next halfhour, and which will subsequently leak out into the general public domain,
whereupon it will give vendors of virus scanners spontaneous multiple orgasms and cause
the authors to be cursed from one pole of the planet to the other. It's a classic case of
misplaced accounting priorities, valuing depreciable capital assets a thousand times more
highly than the fruits of actual labor — but that's the nature of the government organization.
Let's just say that if what I'm about to unleash on the Billingtons' little empire doesn't take

several hundred sysadmin-years and at least a week of wall-clock time to clean up, my
middle names aren't Oliver and Francis.
My work done, I glance at my phone. The display is showing a cute little animated icon of a
baby-blue Smart car, dust bunnies scudding beneath its tires, and a progress bar captioned
62Km/74% Complete. I stick it back in my pocket, then pick up the dress shoes Pinky and
Brains issued to me.
Grimacing, I tie the shoe laces. Then I reach down and trench the left heel round. Instantly,
the shadows in my cabin darken and deepen, taking on an ominous hue. The Tillinghast
resonator is running: in this confined space it should give me just enough warning to shit
myself before I die, if Billington's entrusted his operational security to daemons, but in the
open . . . well, it adds a whole new meaning to take to your heels.
The corridor outside my door is dark and there's an odd, musty smell in the air. I pause,
skulking just inside the doorway as I wait for my eyes to adjust. Ellis Billington and his
cronies are aboard the Explorer, but there's no telling who's still here, is there? I can make
myself useful while I wait for Mo by finding out what's going on aboard the Mabuse. Ellis isn't
so stupid he won't have some kind of getaway plan in mind, in case things go pear-shaped
— and backup plans "C”
and "D" behind plan "B," for multiple redundancy — but if find out what they are . . .
Oops. The door at the end of the corridor opens. "You.
What are you doing outside your room? Go back at once!" The black beret draws his pistol.
My mind blanks for a moment, and there's a big hollow feeling. I feel a doubled heartbeat:
**Is that you, Ramona?** **What are you—** "There's a problem with my faucet?" I hear my
mouthy saying. "Can you take a look at it?" And I'm opening the door and stepping
backwards to make room.
**Let me handle this, monkey-boy.** I can taste seawater in my sinuses.
**What are you doing? Has McMurray lost it—** **No, but Ellis has, he ordered Eileen off
the Mabuse ten minutes ago and there are scuttling charges due to blow as soon as she's
clear. Something about contagious corruption in his oneiromantic matrix; he figures
someone's sabotaged the ship and he's not in the mood for half-measures—** Shit. That
would be me, wouldn't it? The goon steps closc*^ and I can see green shadows behind his
mirrorshades, green writhing worms twitching and squirming in rotting cadaverous eye
sockets as he steps closer and raises the pistol in*.
both hands— **—Glock 17,** says Ramona.
And she takes over.
I jackknife forwards from the opposite side of the narrow room and bring my left hand down
on the pistol, grabbing the slide and pushing it back, as my right hand comes up, curling
uncomfortably to punch at his left eye. Glass shatters as he pushes up with the gun, not
knowing to pull it back out of reach, and I twist it sideways. It goes off, and the noise is so
loud in the confined space that it's like someone's slammed my head in a door. It feels like
I've torn half the skin off my right hand but I somehow keep turning while maintaining my grip,
and kick and twist away from his follow-on punch, with a searing pain in my side, like I've
pulled a muscle — then I'm facing the half-rotted zombie with a gun barrel in my left hand. I
grab the butt with my right, which is dripping blood, and I pull the trigger, bang, and pull it
again because somehow I managed to miss at a range of about half a meter — bang —
and there's blood all over the inside of the door and a faint distant tinkling of cartridges
rattling as they bounce off the screen of the PC.
I gasp for breath and gag at the stench. The thing on the floor — at least, what the Tillinghast
resonator is showing me — has been dead for weeks. **What just happened again?** I ask
Ramona.
**Billington.** She opens her eyes and I push myself into her head. She's still underwater,
but she's not sitting in the control chair on board the submersible grab anymore: she's
free-swimming in near-total darkness, stroking upwards alongside the drill string, and I can
feel the exhaustion as a tight band across the tops of her thighs. **It's a doublecross.** I can

taste her fear.
**Talk to me!** I force myself to bend over and go through the corpse's pockets. There's
another magazine for the pistol, and a badge: some species of RFID tag. I take it and
glance around the cabin. My right hand is still bleeding but it doesn't look as bad as it feels.
(Memo to self: do not make a habit of gripping the slide of an automatic pistol while it is
being fired.) **How long have I got? Where are you?** **The grab — I was halfway home
when one of the docking splines engaged, and the control deck disconnected and stayed
stuck on the pipe string while the payload kept going up. It's got to be intentional. He was
planning on leaving me down there all along!** I can feel the panic, ugly and personal and
selfish and pitiful.
**Hang in there,** I tell her. **If you can make it to the surface we can pick you up—** **You
don't understand! If I stay down here too long I'll begin the change - it's hereditary! I've put it
off this long by staying on land most of the time, but I'm an adult and if I spend too long in the
deeps I begin to adapt, irreversibly. And if I do that, my daemon will decide I'm trying to
escape . . .** **Ramona.** I find I'm breathing fast and shallow.
**Listen to me—** **Billington knows! He must know! That's why he sent the guard to kill
you! He'll have McMurray under arrest or dead or worse!** **Ramona. Listen.** I take a
deep breath and try to focus on air and dry land. **Listen to me. Feel through my skin.
Breathe through my lungs. Remember where you come from.** I stand over a cadaver and
force myself to think of lush green landscapes. **You were able to let me share youi
metabolism when I nearly drowned. Let's try doing it the, other way.** Breathe. Keep
breathing for two people, lest one of them start sprouting tentacles and scales. It's not as
easy as it sounds: you should try it one day.
**You've got to get off the ship!** **How do you know what Ellis is doing?** I ask. I step over
the body and into the corridor. It's even less welcoming, stinking of the grave, of soil and
darkness and blind burrowing things. First door on the right, up the stairs, left, corridor—
**Pat and I have a back channel.** Ramona concentrates on swimming, letting the calming
repetitive motions occupy her mind. (Is it my imagination, or is it beginning to get slightly
less dark?) **Last time he checked in he warned me about the scuttling charge. He figured
Billington would have you taken off the ship, along with Eileen. Next thing, he drops the block
between us. That's all I know, I swear!** **Uh-huh.** The stairs feel as if they're on the edge
of crumbling beneath my shoes, maggot-riddled boards creaking warnings to one another.
The air is turning clammy. Keep breathing, I remind myself. **You haven't been entirely
honest with me, have you? You and Pat. You've been using that block of his to keep me from
dumpster-diving your head for intelligence. Playing me like an instrument:** **Hey, you're a
fine one to talk!** Too late: I realize she's glimpsed my memory of Mo's briefing. Secure the
geas generator.
**You guys want it, too.** **No,** I say grimly, **we want to stop anyone from getting it.
Because if you think through the political implications of a human power suddenly starting to
play with chthonian tech, you need to ask yourself whether BLUE HADES would view it—**
Creepy violin music in the back of my head raises the hair on the nape of my neck, just as I
round the corner at the top of the stairs and come face to face with another zombie in a
black uniform. He's got an MP-5 in a tactical sling at the ready, but I've got adrenalin and
surprise on my side — I'm so jittery that I pull the trigger three times before I can make
myself stop.
**—as a Benthic Treaty violation,** I finish, then draw a deep breath and try to stop my
hands shaking. **What's with all the zombies? Is Billington killing his optioned employees as
a tax dodge or something?** **I don't know.** She takes out her frustration on the water.
**Will you move it? You've got maybe six minutes to get off that ship!** Secure the geas
generator. The corridor seems to pulse, contracting and dilating around me like a warm
fleshy tube — a disturbingly esophageal experience. The smell of decay is getting stronger. I
pick up the MP-5, managing not to lose my non-existent breakfast as the zombie's neck
disintegrates.

I brush rotting debris off the sling, stick the pistol in my pocket, and let Ramona take over my
hands to check the burst selector on the machine pistol. I duck-walk down the passage and
then there's a crossway and another door opposite me. I open the door to the owner's
lounge— I've got company. "Well, if it isn't the easily underestimated Mr. Howard!”
She smiles like a snake. "Better not squeeze that trigger, all the carbines are loaded with
banishment rounds in case the Black Chamber tries something — you'll fry the generator if
you shoot. And you wouldn't want to do that, would you”
?It's Johanna Todt, McMurray's thugette. It's funny how she's nothing like as glamorous when
I'm sharing my eyeballs with Ramona: or maybe it's something to do with the combat
fatigues, life preserver, and smudged make-up, not to mention the stench of ancient death
she drags around like a favorite toy she can't bear to let go of. She's standing behind the
diorama at the center of the geas generator grid, holding a hammer about ten centimeters
above the Bond-mannequin's head. Whoops. I'm still trying to think of something to say when
Ramona takes the initiative: "Fancy meeting you here, dear.
Did Pat deep-six you or did you decide you needed a bit more bargaining power”
?"Ramona?" She cocks her head to one side. "Ah, I should have guessed. Three's a crowd:
Why don't you butt out, bitch”
?I manage to temporarily regain control of my larynx: "She stays," I say. Remember to
breathe deeply, I tell myself. My dou- bled vision is beginning to annoy me: the light around
Ramona is definitely brightening towards a predawn twilight.
I try to keep the MP-5 pointing in Johanna's general direction, but she's right - if I start
shooting, I'm as likely to take out the geas generator as hit her. "What are you doing here”
?"Unlike some, I know who I'm loyal to. I figured I'd help myself to the leftovers at the rich
man's buffet, seeing I've just armed the scuttling charges. And aren't you just the dish? I think
you'll do for starters." Johanna's grin widens, carnivorously: I catch a whiff of breath that's not
so much stale as cadaverous, reeking of the crypt. "I can disentangle you, 'Mona, did you
know that? I can even unlock your binding without killing McMurray. I stole his tokens while I
was helping him consider the error of his ways down in the brig.”
She turns her free hand so that I can see she's holding a small plastic box. "It's all in here. I
own you both.”
Breathe. Ramona tenses and kicks harder towards the light. Her buttocks are a solid slab of
agony: she's swum nearly a kilometer straight up, and she's beginning to tire of struggling, of
fighting off the adaptive stress that seductively taunts her, the knowledge that if she just uses
her other muscles everything will become so much easier— "So what do you want with us?"
I ask, taking a short step towards her.
"Stop. Don't move." She stares at me. "I want you to adore me," she says, almost wistfully. "I
want you to be my body.
'Mona, give him to me and I'll even set you free, Ellis doesn't need to know—”
For a moment I'm in Ramona's body, swimming free towards a surface that is slowly
brightening: it's still a dim twilight, utter darkness to merely human eyes, but I can see
shapes in the murk above me. Half of the horizon is dominated by a huge, black shadow that
the drill string disappears into, and there's another dark silhouette in the near distance.
I'm in control, I'm the one who's swimming with unfamiliar legs and weaker upper arms -1
begin altering course towards the distant, dark shape in the water— Meanwhile, Ramona is
in my body, and she's dropped the MP-5 and is halfway across the perspex lid covering the
dio- rama, making a noise in the back of her throat that I've heard when two cats get serious
about their territory. Johanna whacks the hammer hard, off the back of my neck — aiming
for my head, but she misses — causing a bright sharp pain, and then I'm in her face and
she's biting at me and trying to smash me on the side of the skull and Ramona does
something with my arms that I'm just not up to, some type of blocking move. I can feel
muscles, possibly a tendon, tearing as I punch Johanna overarm; she blocks, I bring up a
knee— Breathe for two because the Mabuse is holding station but it's still a third of a
kilometer away— "Bitch!" screams Johanna, then sinks her teeth into my shoulder and goes

for my balls.
Ramona, not used to having that external hazard to guard, doesn't react in time to Johanna
— but I do, and I manage to squirm sideways so that Johanna grabs my inner thigh painfully,
rather than turning me into a pile of screaming %.
jelly. The Glock in my pants is digging in uselessly. Then I notice Johanna's teeth in my right
shoulder. They burn and they're icy-cold at the same time, which is wrong: bite injuries aren't
meant to freeze. Everything about Johanna is wrong: this close with the Tillinghast resonator
powered up I can feel something moving just behind her face, something horrifyingly similar
to Ramona's succubus, but different.
Instead of feeding on the small death I can hear it calling for the great one, the ending of
time. I feel weak in its presence, enervated and crushed by a numinous dread.
**Fuck it, keep breathing, monkey-boy! What are you doing, shit-for-brains, trying to kill us
both?** That's Ramona. She sounds as if she's calling to me from the far end of along
corridor.
Breathe? I'm lying on top of Johanna on the floor. How did we get here? She's still as a
corpse, but she's got her teeth embedded in my shoulder and she's hugging me like her one
true love. And I feel so heavy. Breathing is a huge effort.
There's a haze forming around my vision. Breathe?
A hand — mine? — is fumbling with the lump in my pocket.
Breathe.
Everything is going gray. The tunnel is walled in darkness.
Johanna Todt waits at the end of it, smiling coolly, as inviting and desirable as a glass of
liquid helium. But I can also tell somehow that Johanna isn't what's waiting for me if I take
that drink: Johanna is like the bioluminescent lure dangling before an angler fish's head,
right in front of the sharp jaws of oblivion. She's got me in her arms and if I take the lure,
when I get up I'll be as hollow as she is, I won't be me anymore, just a puppet rotting slowly
on its feet while her daemon tugs it through the motions of life.
Breathe?
BANG.
Johanna spasms beneath me, shuddering and tensing. Her thighs flex.
BANG.
I remember to breathe, then nearly choke on the hot stink of burned powder.
She's vibrating away, drumming her heels on the floor, and there's a flood of blood and
tissue everywhere around her head, like a spray of hair. As I pant for breath I realize there's
a hand clutching a pistol inches away from my head, and my arm feels as if it's twisted half
out of its socket. A combined wash of fear and revulsion makes me bounce off the floor,
muscles screaming. **Ramona?** **Still here, monkey-boy.** She's gasping - no, that's
wrong — she's struggling for breath. There's a burning sensation in her gills as she fights
down the reflex to extend them fully. Stroking towards the slim shadow of the Mabuse
outlined against the brightness of the surface, still some 200 meters overhead: **Breathe,
dammit! I'm getting cramps! I can't keep this up.** I pant like a dog, then carefully lower the
pistol. I've got more pulled muscles and my right arm is screaming at me, plus a savage bite
that makes me dizzy when I poke at it with my left hand. I look at my fingertips. Blood. **Shit.
How long—** **If that bitch was telling the truth, you've got two or three more minutes to get
the diorama and make it up on deck.** I look around, trying to make sense out of nonsense,
a lux- urious lounge aboard a yacht, a dead woman on the floor. . .
and a diorama in a large, locked display case. I can't move the case, it's the size of a pool
table. I groan. It looks like the proximate effect of my first stab at hatching a Plan B was to
spook Billington into ordering the ship sunk - and right now, I seem to be short of options.
But. Secure the field generator. That's the core of the geas Billington's set up, and he's now
trying to destroy it in the crudest way imaginable - not just by throwing the "off' switch, but by
blowing up the ship. (Why? Because I got a little too clever and let slip the yipping
Chihuahuas of infowar.) If I can keep it running, then the semantics of the spell demand that

James Bond — or a good knockoff — will save us. It's just a matter of figuring out how to
keep the thing running while I get it off the sinking ship.
My Treo is in my back pocket. I nearly scream as I reach for it with my right arm, then shakily
switch it on and aim the camera lens at the display. Once I've filled the memory card that'll
have to do. I check the display — 72Km/97% Complete — then shove it in a hip pocket.
Looking around the owner's lounge, I don't see anything obvious, but the dining room was
just up the corridor. I duck out and stumble towards it, shove my way through the door, and
what I want is waiting for me under a pile of uncollected dirty dishes. I grab the linen
tablecloth, wait for the clatter of crockery to stop, and stagger back to the lounge. Then I
whack the display case hard with the butt of my pistol, knocking out as much glass as
possible.
Breathe. I catch a glimpse of Ramona, the agony spreading to her lower back. There are
burning wires of pain in her shoulders as she scrabbles towards the surface close by the
port side of the Mabuse. The air in here is foul, a stench of sewers and decaying, uncooked
meat. I shove the pistol in a pocket then take the tablecloth in both hands and drop it across
the broken glass and the diorama. I lean forwards — remember to breathe — and gather it
all in with both hands.
Then I fumble on the floor for the plastic box containing the tokens that Johanna taunted
Ramona with. My hands shake as I finally tie off the corners of the tablecloth in a rough knot.
**Got it,** I tell her.
**Get the hell out!** She doesn't need to tell me twice. I head for the door, grabbing the
MP-5 on the way, and cast around the corridor for the door onto the sun deck.
**That one, Bob—** The daylight glare nearly brings tears to my eyes after the death-stink
below decks. I step out onto the deck and walk to the side of the ship, then look aft. In the
distance there's a white trail etched across the wave crests. Breathe. I blink, and see
through Ramona's eyes, looking up at the light from beneath the keel of the frigate. From
down here it looks enormous, the size of a city. Run. I weave my way aft, back into the
access passage to the boat deck. There's a crane and boarding steps descending over the
side, ending just above a floating platform at the waterline. I take the steps two at a time,
nearly tumbling into the water in my haste.
**Get yourself overboard! Now!** Breathe. She can see the grid of the platform, the
shadows of my feet on the metal grating.
**Not yet.** I gasp for breath, my vision flickering with the bright sparkles of hyperventilation
as I set down the stolen diorama and pull out my phone: 74Km/99% Complete. m **How do
you think we're going to get onto the Explorer?
Neither of us is in any condition to swim that far, and anyway — it's moving.** There's white
foam at the bow of the huge drilling ship as its positioning thrusters power up. Billington isn't
stupid enough to sit too close while his yacht self-destructs: even if he isn't afraid of the
backwash from the geas generator he's got to be worried about the fuel tanks. **We've got
to get over there!** She's near the surface.
**I've got a plan.** Breathe. I reach down into the water as— With all her remaining energy
she reaches up towards the * hand breaking through the silvery mirror-surface above her
and— "Ow!" Water splashes over me as Ramona breaks the surface and grabs onto my
hand.
"Plan. What plan? Ow . . . " I heave. Something in my back registers a complaint, in
triplicate, then locks up and goes on strike.
Ramona twists round and falls back onto the platform.
Out of the water, she goes limp. I can feel her muscles. I wish I couldn't. "Look over there." I
point. The silvery trail is curving towards us like a bizarre missile running just above the
surface of the water. There's something that looks like a glassy black sphere in the middle of
it, surrounded by four huge orange balls: "It's my car.”
"You. Have got to be. Kidding.”
"Nope." I grin like a mad thing as the Smart Fortwo whines towards me eagerly, its

hub-mounted air bags thrashing the water into submission. "It may not be a BMW or an
Aston Martin, but at least it comes when I call it." It slows as it nears the edge of the platform.
Ramona sits up wearily and begins to peel off her outer-heated wet suit. Her skin is
silvery-gray, the scales clearly visible: even the few hours underwater have been enough to
cause the change to set in, and her fingers have begun to web. By the t she's got her top
layer unzipped, the car has slowly pulled up to platform edge and driven aboard. The engine
stops.
"Who's that?" she asks, pointing through the windscreen.
"Oops, I forgot about him." It's Marc, sometime procurer and latterly zombie. He's bloated up
against the front windscreen and the driver's side door. "You'll have to help me get him out of
there.”
"This is why I never date the same guy twice — avoids raisv ing a stink, you know”
?I get the door open, just in time to be hit by an olfactory experience almost as good as
Johanna's buffet. "Ick.”
"You can say that again, monkey-boy. He's leaked all over the seats — you expect me to
ride in this”
?"You're the one who told me about the scuttling charges, I'm the one with the biometrics
that match the ignition button. Your call.”
I grab hold of one arm. To my great delight, it doesn't come off in my hand. Ramona opens
the opposite door and shoves him towards me. I do a two-step with the stiff, twist him round,
and shove him onto the platform. I grab the bundled- up geas generator and shove it into the
shoe box that passes for a boot in this thing. Ramona winces as she tries to belt herself in,
and holds something up: "What's this”
?"Marc's idea of a conversational intro." I pass her the MP- 5. "You know how to use one of
these, I figure I'll take the pistol." It's another Glock, of course, with a whizzy lasersighting
widget and an extended magazine. "Now let's go visit Ellis, huh”
?I push the ignition button, check that the doors and windows are closed, then gently tap the
gas pedal. There's a red light blinking on the dash, but the engine starts. We tilt alarmingly
as I drive off the edge of the platform, but the car stabilizes fairly fast, leaving us bobbing like
a cork in the water. I stroke the accelerator again. That starts a lot of spray flying — this thing
isn't the world's most efficient paddle boat — but we begin to move away from the Mabuse,
and I start the windscreen wipers so I can see where we're going. The Explorer is a huge,
gray bulk about 400 meters away.
There's the beginning of a trail of foam at her stern, but I'm pretty sure I can catch her - even
a Smart car can outrun a 60,000-ton, deep-ocean drilling ship, I figure. Ramona leans
against my sore shoulder and I feel her bone-deep exhaustion, along with something else, a
creeping smugness. "We make a pretty good team," she murmurs.
I'm about to say something intended to take the place of a witty reply when the rearview
mirror lights up like a flash bulb. I goose the accelerator and we lurch wildly, nearly nosing
over as a spray of water goes everywhere. Then there's a sound like the door of Hell
slamming shut behind me, and another huge lurch sets us bobbing side to side. A water
spout almost as high as the topmost radar mast hangs over the ship, then comes crashing
back down "Fuck fuck fuck . . . " We're less than a ship-length away from the Mabuse, on the
opposite side to the scuttling charge, and that's probably what saves us: most of the blast is
heading in the opposite direction. On the other hand, the ship is rolling, heeling over almost
sixty degrees, and there's a gash below the waterline that's raised so high above the
surface I can see it in my rearview mirror. It looks large enough to take on a hundred tons of
water a second. Johanna opened the bulkhead doors below the waterline, and as if it isn't
enough that the charge has ripped the yacht's skin open, cavitation from the explosion has
broken her keel. I suppose Billington doesn't much care about money at this point — when
he's Planetary Overlord he can have as many yachts as he likes — but right now / care
because we're less than 200 meters away from something as massive as a ten-story office
block that's just begun to disintegrate. As a way of ensuring that annoying witnesses are

silenced and the geas generator stops working, it's overkill, but if it succeeds I suppose
Lloyds of London are the only people who're going to complain.
The ship's superstructure hangs in the air like a hallucination heeled over through almost
ninety degrees. Loose life rafts and stores tumble across the deck and fall into the sea.
With majestic slowness it begins to roll back upright — warships aren't designed to capsize
easily — and I steel myself for the inevitable backwash when four or five thousand tons of
ship go under I floor the accelerator pedal to open up some distance behind us which is, of
course, the cue for the engine to die.
There's an embarrassed beep from the dashboard. I mash my thumb on the START button,
but nothing happens, and I realize that the blinking red light on the dash has turned solid.
There's a little LCD display for status messages and as I stare at it in disbelief a message
scrolls across: MANDATORY SERVICE INTERVAL REACHED RETURN TO MAIN
DEALER FOR ENGINE MANAGEMENT RESET.
Behind me, there's a sinking frigate, while ahead of me, the Explorer has begun to make
way. I start swearing: not my usual "shirfuckpisscuntbugger" litany, but really rude words.
Ramona sinks her fingers into my left arm. "This can't be happening!" she says, and I feel a
wash of despair rising off her.
"It's not. Brace yourself." I flip open the lid on top of the gear-stick and punch the eject button.
And the car ejects.
The car. Ejects. Three words that don't belong in the same sen- tence or at any rate in a
sentence that's anywhere within a couple hundred meters of sanity street. In real life, cars do
not come with ejector seats, for good reason. An ejector seat is basically a seat with a
bomb under it. The traditional way they're used is, you pull the black-and-yellow striped
handle, say goodbye to the airplane, and say hello to six weeks in traction, recovering in
hospital — if you're lucky. The survival statistics make Russian roulette look safe. Very
recent models buck the trend — they've got computers and gyroscopes and rocket motors
to stabilize and steer them in flight, they've probably even got cup holders and cigarette
lighters — but the basic point is, when you pull that handle, Elvis has left the cockpit, pulling
fifteen gees and angling fifteen degrees astern. Now, the ejector system Pinky and Brains
have bolted to the engine block of this car is not the kind you get in a fifthgeneration jet
fighter. Instead, its closest relative is the insane gadget they use to eject from a helicopter in
flight. Heli- copters are nicknamed "choppers" for a reason. In order to avoid delivering a
pilot-sized stack of salami slices, helicopter ejection systems come with a mechanism for
getting those annoying rotor blades out of the way first. They started out by attaching
explosive bolts to the rotor hub, but for entirely understandable reasons this proved
unpopular with the flight crew. Then they got smart.
Your basic helicopter ejector system is a tube like a recoilless antitank missile launcher,
pointing straight up, and bolted to the pilot's seat. There's a rocket in it, attached to the seat
by a steel cable. The rocket goes up, the cable slices through the rotor blades on the way,
and only then does it yank the seat out of the helicopter, which by this time is approximately
as airworthy as a grand piano.
What this means to me: There's a very loud noise in my ear, not unlike a cat sneezing, if the
cat is the size of the Great Sphinx of Giza and it's just inhaled three tons of snuff. About a
quarter of a second later there's a bang, almost as loud as the scuttling charge that broke
the Mabuse, and an elephant sits down on my lap.
My vision blurs and my neck pops, and I try to blink. A second later, the elephant gets up and
wanders off. When I can see again — or breathe — the view has changed: the horizon is in
the wrong place, swinging around wildly below us like a fairground ride gone wrong. My
stomach flip-flops — look ma, no gravity! — and I hear a faint moan from the passenger
seat. Then there's a solid jerk and a baby hippopotamus tries me for a sofa before giving up
on it as a bad deal — that's the parachute opening.
And we're into injury time.
Most of the time when someone uses an ejector seat, the pilot sitting in it has a pressing

reason for pulling the handle — for example he's about to fly into the type of cloud known as
cumulo-granite — and the question of where the seat — and pilot — lands is a bit less
important than the issue of what will happen if it doesn't go off. And this much is true: if you
eject over open water, you probably expect to land on the water, because there's a hell of a
lot more water down there than ships, or whales, or desert islands stocked with palm trees
and welcoming tribeswomen.
However, this isn't your normal ejection scenario. I've got Billington's Bond-field generator
stuffed in the trunk, a glamorous female assassin with blood in her eye clutching a
submachine gun in the passenger seat, and a date with a vodka martini in my very near
future — just as soon as I make landfall alive. Which is why, as we swing wildly back and
forth beneath the rectangular, steerable parachute (the control lines of which are fastened to
handles dangling just above the sunroof), I realize that we're drifting on a collision course
with the forward deck of the Explorer. If we're not lucky we're going to wrap ourselves around
the forward docking tower.
"Can you work the parachute?" I ask. "Yes—" Ramona unfastens her seat belt, yanks at the
sun- roof release latch: "Come on! Help me!" We slide the roof back and she stands up,
makes a grab for the handles, catches them, and does something that makes my eyes
water and bile rise in the back of my throat. "Come on, baby," she pleads, spilling air from
one side of the parachute so that it side-slips away from the docking tower, "you can make
it, can't you”
?We swing back and forth like a plumb bob held by a drunken surveyor. I look down, trying to
find a reference point to still my stomach: there's a tiny boat down there beside the Explorer
— it's a speedboat, and from here it looks alarmingly similar to the boat I saw Mo loading
stuff into. It can't be, I think, then hastily suppress the thought. It's best not to notice that kind
of thing around Ramona.
We swing round and the deck rushes up towards us terri- fyingly fast. "Brace!" calls
Ramona, and grabs me. There's a long-drawn-out metallic scraping crunching noise and the
elephant makes a last baby-sized appearance in my lap, then we're down on the foredeck.
Not that I can see much of it — it's shrouded beneath several dozen meters of collapsing
nylon parachute fabric — but what I saw of it right before we landed wasn't looking
particularly hospitable. Something about the dozens of black berets racing towards us, guns
at the ready, suggests that Billington isn't too keen on the local skydiving club dropping in for
tea.
"Get ready to run," Ramona says breathily, just as there's a metallic racking noise outside
the parachute fabric that's blocking our view. A i i rl•• 7 •• "Come out with your hands up!"
someone calls through a megaphone that distorts their voice so horribly that I can't hope to
identify them.
I glance at Ramona. She looks spooked.
"We have a Dragon dialed in on you," the voice adds, conversationally.
"You have five seconds.”
"Shit." I see her shoulders droop in despair and disgust.
"It's been nice knowing you—”
"It's not over yet.”
I flick the catch and push the door open, wincing, then swing my feet out onto the deck. It's
time to face the music.
16: REFLEX DECISION " S o , " SAYS BlLLINBTON, PACING OUT A LAZY CIRCLE on
the deck around me, "the rumors of your resourcefulness were not misplaced, Mr. Howard.”
He flashes a cold smile at me, then goes back to staring at the deck plates in front of his
feet, inspecting the wards around us. After a few seconds he passes out of my field of
vision. I can feel Ramona flexing her arms against the straps; a moment later she spots him
coming into view. Two more of the dentist's chairs are mounted side by side, feeing in
opposite directions, on the same pedestal in the control room: Billington probably gets a
bulk discount on them at villain- supply.com. Unfortunately he's also got Ramona and me

strapped to them, and an audience of about fifty black berets who are either brandishing
MP-5s or leaning over instrument consoles. These particular black berets are still human,
not having succumbed to the dubious charms of Johanna Todt, but the freshly painted
wards, inked out in human blood, sizzle and glow ominously before my Tillinghast- enhanced
vision. "Unfortunately your usefulness appears to have expired,”
says Ellis, walking back into view in front of me. He smiles again, his weird pupils
contracting to slits. There's something badly wrong about him, but I can't quite put my ringer
on it: he's not a soulless horror like the zombie troops, but he's not quite all there, either.
Something is missing in his mind, some sense of self. "Shame about that," he adds
conversationally. •-*' • »'• "What are you going to do to us?" asks Ramona.
**I really wish you hadn't asked that,** I tell her silently, my heart sinking.
**Bite me, monkey-boy. Just keep him talking, okay?
While he's monologuing he isn't torturing us to death . . .** "Well, that's an interesting
conundrum." Billington glances over his shoulder at a clipboard-toting minion: "Would you
mind finding Eileen and asking her why she's late? It doesn't normally take her this long to
terminate an employee." The minion nods and hurries away. "Following the logic of the
situation that prevailed until I ended the invocation field by sinking the Mabuse, I ought to
have you tortured or fed to a pool of hungry piranhas. Fortunately for you, the geas should be
fully dissipated by now, I'm short on torturers, and urban legends to the contrary, piranhas
don't much like human flesh." He smiles again. "I was inclined to be merciful, earlier: I can
always find a niche for a bright, young manager in Quality Assurance, for example—" I
shiver, half-wondering if maybe the piranha tank wouldn't be preferable "—or for a
presentable young lady with your talents." Then the smile drops away like a camo sheet
covering an artillery tube: "But that was before I discovered that you—" he stabs a finger at
Ramona "—were sent here to murder me, and that you—" I flinch from his bony digit
"—were sent here as a saboteur.”
He hisses that last, glaring at me malevolently.
"Saboteur?" I blink and try to look perplexed. When in doubt, lie like a very flat thing indeed.
"What are you talking about”
?Billington gestures at the huge expanse of glass walling the control room off from the moon
pool. "Look." His hand casually takes in the huge skeletal superstructure hanging from the
ceiling by steel hawsers, its titanium fingers cradling a blackened cylinder with a tapered
end: JENNIFER MORGUE Two, the damaged chthonian weapon. An odd geometric
meshwork scarifies its hull: there are whorls and knots like the boles of a tree spaced evenly
along it. From this angle it looks more like a huge, fossilized worm than a tun- *"“
neling machine. It's quiescent, as if dead or sleeping, b u t . . . «I'm not sure. The Tillinghast
resonator lets me notice things that would otherwise be invisible to merely human eyes, and
something about it makes my skin crawl, as if it's neither dead nor alive, or even undead, but
something else entirely; something waiting in the shadows that is as uninterested in issues
of life and death as a stony asteroid rolling eternally through the icy depths of space, pacing
out a long orbit that will end in the lithosphere of a planet wrapped in a fragile blue-green
ecosystem. Looking at it makes me feel like the human species is simply collateral damage
waiting to happen.
"Your masters want to stop me from helping him," Billington explains. "He's very annoyed.
He's been trapped for thousands of years, stranded on a plateau in the rarefied and chilly
dark, unable to move. Unable to heal. Unable even to revive." Huge hoses dangle from the
underside of the Explorer's, drilling deck, poking into the skin of the chthonian artifact like
intravenous feeding lines. I blink and look back at Billington. He's lost it, I tell myself, with
gathering "* horror. Hasn't he?
**You've only just figured that out?** asks Ramona.
**And here I was thinking you were quick on the uptake.** Despite the sarcasm, she feels
very frightened, very cold. I think she knew some of this, but not the full scope of Billington's
deviancy.

"I know all about your masters," Billington adds in her direction. He can't hear our silent
exchange, feel Ramona testing the strength of her bonds, or recognize me scoping out the
parametric strength of the wards he's positioned around us - he just wants to talk, wants
someone to listen and understand the demon urges that keep him awake late in the night. "I
know how they want to use him. They sent you to me in the hope of trading in a strong tool
for a more powerful one. But he's not a tool! He's a cyborg warrior-god, a maker of
earthquakes and an eater of souls, birthed for a single purpose by the great powers of the
upper mantle. It is his geas to rejoin the holy struggle against the numinous aquatic vermin
as soon as his body is sufficiently restored for him to resume residence in it. And it is our
nature that the highest expression of our destiny must be to submit to his will and lend our
strength to his glorious struggle.”
Billington spins round abruptly and jabs a stiff-armed salute at the thing hanging in its
titanium cradle outside the window. He raises his voice: "He demands and requires our
submission!" Turning back to me, he shouts, "We must obey!
There is glory in obedience! Fitness in purpose!" He raises a clenched fist: "The deep god
commands that his body be restored to its shining terror! You will help me! You will be of
service!" Spittle lands on my face. I flinch but I can't do anything about it — can't move, don't
dare express skepticism, don't piss off the lunatic . . . I'm half-convinced, with an icy certainty
verging on terror, that he's going to kill one of us in the next couple of minutes.
"How does he talk to you?" Ramona asks, only a faint unevenness in her voice betraying the
fact that her palms are clammy and her heart is pounding like a drum.
Billington deflates like a popped balloon, as if overcome with a self-conscious realization of
what he must look like.
"Oh, it's not voices in my head, if that's what you're worrying about," he says disparagingly.
His lips quirk. "I'm not mad, *”
you know, although it helps in this line of work." A guard is walking along the catwalk
outside, followed by a flash of pink. "He doesn't really approve of madness among his min-
ions. Says it makes their souls taste funny. No, we talk on the telephone. Conference calls
every Friday morning at 9:00 a.m. EST." He gestures at a console across the room, where
an old bakelite handset squats atop an old graypainted circuit box that I recognize as an
enclosure for*' Billington's Gravedust communicator. "It's so much easier to <*• just dial 'D'
for Dagon, so to speak, than to bother with the eerie voices and walls softening under your
fingertips. And these days we've sorted out a telepresence solution: he's taken up residence
in a host body so he can keep an eye on things in person, while we restore his primary core
to full functionality.
Of course it's energetically expensive for him to occupy another body, so we have to keep
the sacrifice schedule in mind as a critical path element in the restoration project, but there's
no shortage of centh-decile underperformers on the sales force . . . ah, yes." He glances at
his watch. "Top of the hour, right on time." The guard and the woman in the pink suit arrive
just as Billington gestures at the window. Outside, on the moon pool floor, a structure like an
airport baggage-conveyor ter- minates in a platform just underneath the chthonian's conical
head. I squint: there are lines and curves on that pointed end, almost like the helical coils of
a drill, or a squid's tightly coiled tentacles. Down on the conveyor, something wriggly is
working its way towards the platform. Or rather, something on the conveyor is being fed
forwards remorselessly, wriggling and twitching like a worm on a hook.
**What's that—?** Ramona is in my head, using my eyes.
**Not what — who.** I peer closer, then blink. The hairworm on the conveyor is still alive, but
black fire crawls along the edges of the platform at the far end. It twists and rolls, and it's
funny how a change of angle changes your entire perspective on things because suddenly I
see his face, eyes bugging out with fear, and what I'm looking at snaps into focus. He's been
trussed up in gaffer tape and his mouth taped shut to stop him screaming but I recognize
McMurray, and I recognize a human sacrifice when I see him.
He's heading towards that platform, and now I realize— "You've got to stop it!" I shout at

Billington. "Why are you doing this? It's insane!”
"On the contrary." Billington turns away from me and holds his hands behind his back. "I
don't like doing this, but it's necessary if we're to meet our third-quarter target for energizing
the revivification matrix," he says tightly. "By the way, you ought to relax: you're in the circuit,
too.”
I jackknife against the straps and nearly choke myself.
"What—”
"Oh shit," swears Ramona, despair and apprehension sweeping over her.
"Considering you appear to have prevented Johanna from returning, it's the least you can do
for me," Billington explains. "I need a soul devourer. Otherwise it's just more dead meat,
which doesn't help anyone. And while you're so inconveniently entangled I might as well plug
both of you into the summoning grid to reduce the side-band leakage.”
The platform unfolds shutterlike flaps as McMurray nears it. I can distantly hear his voice
screaming in Ramona's head.
**Get me out of this! That's an order!** Billington needs an infovore, I realize. He's feeding
the chthonian by destroying souls in its presence. My knees feel like jelly: I've seen this sort
of thing before. Which means— Ramona convulses against the straps and begins to choke.
I gag my guts rolling, because I can feel the backwash from McMurray's ill-considered words
echoing off the inside of her skull like thunder and lightning. Ramona can't not obey, but
she's immobile, unable to respond to her master's voice, and she's capable of choking
herself to death and taking me with her.
**Get me out.'** McMurray howls as the conveyor deposits him on the killing platform under
the cylinder. Then the platform begins to sink and the shutters close in on top of it and I
realize what I'm looking at: a hydraulic iron-maiden, a car crusher built for humans.
Ramona's daemon is rising. I can feel a monstrous pressure in my balls. I can't see properly
and I'm choking, I can't move - Ramona can't move — and a hideous heat spreads through
my crotch. Her crotch. Proximity to death excites it, whether hers or her victim's. And this is
about as close as it gets: the shutters are steel slabs, driven by hydraulic rams.
There's a whine of motors, deepening and slowing, and a muffled noise I can't identify. I can't
breathe, or Ramona can't breathe, and her daemon senses the flow of life from the killing
box down below. As the flow spurts into us the daemon feeds greedily, and Ramona
convulses and falls unconscious.
With the last of my energy I inhale in a ragged breath, and scream.
"Oh dear," says Billington, turning round. "What seems to be the problem”
?I draw another breath.
"You really shouldn't have done that," says the woman in the pink suit, standing in the
doorway.
"Hurt her—" I gasp. Then I start coughing. I can't sense Ramona's daemon, but Ramona
herself is deeply unconscious.
"She needs water. Lots of seawater." I'm breathing for two of us but I can't quite get enough
air, because what Ramona needs now is full-body immersion. I can feel it, the changes in
her cells, her organs slowly contracting and rearranging inside her frame, the fever of
mutation that will only end in her death or complete metamorphosis— "What took you so
long, dear?" asks Billington, looking at the doorway.
"I was putting my face on," says the woman in pink. I'm still gasping as a pair of black berets
close in on Ramona's chair with buckets in hand, but something about the woman in pink
trips my attention. Hang on, that's not Eileen— "Excellent." Billington glances at the black
berets bending over Ramona and frowns. "We seem to have a little problem, this one isn't
as robust as the last.”
I peer at the woman in pink. In one hand, she holds a shiny metal briefcase; the other arm is
stretched rigidly down, close to her body, as if she has a ruler up her sleeve. I try to focus on
the sparkling around her: class three glamour, at least, I realize. She's taller and younger
than Eileen, and if I squint — I look past her at her reflection in the glass — red hair— "What

do you expect?" asks the woman everyone but me seems to think is Eileen Billington.
"She's not a movie hero, is she? And neither is he, for that matter.”
"Not now that I've terminated the reel," Billington says briskly. "You, you, and you, go chuck
the piranhas overboard, fill the fish tank with seawater, and get it over here—”
"Really?" asks the woman. "Are you sure it's all over”
?Billington glances at her. "Pretty much, apart from a few little details — mass human
sacrifices, invocations of chthonic demigods, Richter-ten earthquakes, harrowing of the
Deep Ones, rains of meteors, and the creation of a thousand-year world empire, that sort of
thing. Trivial, really. Yes, it's all nailed down, dear. Why do you ask”
?"I was curious: Does it mean we're safe from any risk that the Hero-designate playing the
archetypical role is going to leap out of the shadows, armed to the teeth with specialized
lethal hardware, and wreck all our plans”
?Billington begins to turn. "Yes, of course. Why are you worrying about—”
To my necromancy-stunned eyes it all seems to happen in very slow motion. Her clenched
fist unclenches: a bone-colored bow drops down her sleeve like a concealed cosh until she
grips it by one end and brings her hand up to unlatch the briefcase. Both sides of the case
eject, leaving her clutching a handle and a sling attached to a pale violin that she raises to
her chin in a smooth motion that speaks of long practice. The halves of the case contain
compact amplified speakers, and there's a stark black-on-yellow sticker on the underside of
the violin: THIS MACHINE KILLS DEMONS. I start to shout a warning as Ramona begins to
stir, her gills flexing limply against the base of her throat and her mouth pouting, and
Billington begins to inscribe a sigil in the air in front of his face— "This is a song of
unbinding," says Mo, and the bow slides across the faintly pulsing things-that-aren't-strings,
glowing like gashes in my retinas and trailing a ghostly haze when she moves. The first note
sounds, wavering eerily on the air and building like the first breezy harbinger of a hurricane.
"It unlocks — everything.”
Across the room, a particularly alert black beret shouts a warning and raises his MP-5. The
second note wavers and screams from the body of the instrument, resonating painfully with
my back teeth. Every hair on my body is trying to stand on end simultaneously. These aren't
sounds the human ear is supposed to be able to hear the psychoacoustic model is all
wrong: I feel like I'm suddenly listening to bat song, the noises that drive dogs wild, the raw
and bloody notes of silence. The brief hammering of gunfire drives nails into my eardrums
then stops in a shattering of glass and a brief scream as Mo squeezes the fingerboard. The
bow string is glowing red. A third note quavers weirdly out of the instrument, somehow
building simultaneously with the first and second, which haven't stopped — they've taken
root in the air of the room, thickening and turning it blue - and there's a popping noise as the
buckles of the straps holding me down spring open.
More screams. Billington, being non-stupid, dashes for the door onto the catwalk outside.
The bow reaches the end of its arc and begins to slice back across the bridge of the violin
as lockers burst apart, spilling paper and supplies across the floor: zippers break belts
unfasten, doors fly open.
The noise is so loud now that it feels like a god is ripping the two halves of reality apart: the
sound of tearing inside my head is deafening. I can't hear or feel Ramona anymore, and the
lack of her presence is a huge vacuum in my soul, trying to split me in two. The noise of
another shot slams in my ears as I sit up and see Mo advancing across the room towards
the guards, still playing one hideous note after another. Her skin crackles with static
discharge and her hair stands on end as the black beret with the pistol takes aim again and
I gulp air, about to shout a warning: but she notices him and anything I could say would be
redundant because she merely points the fingerboard of her instrument at him and there's a
spray of blood, unlocked from the skin that binds it. Across the room, there's a sudden flash
of light and smoke begins to pour out of one of the equipment racks.
An alarm klaxon begins to blare on and off mournfully, then a speaker crackles into life:
"Alert! Incoming helicopters!

All hands to point defense!”
Where's Billington gotten to? I shake my head, trying to dislodge the dreadful keening sound
of strings. The straps are gone. I sit up and lean over the side of the chair, then stumble to
my feet and stagger round to the other side. Ramona's out for the count, and she looks really
ill — breathing fast, the * livid, bruised stripes of her gill slits pulsing against the fishwhite
scales around the base of her neck. She's too dry, I realize. Too dry? A stab of guilt: I glance
across at Mo, who is single-mindedly driving the surviving black berets out of the room.
They're panicking, running for safety. Where's their master?
I glance through the shattered window overlooking the moon pool and my blood runs cold.
The thing in the cradle dangling from the drilling rig is twitching fitfully. Down below it a
familiar figure hunkers down on the deck, staring up at the chthonic killing machine. Shit, so
that's where he's gotten to. Then I notice the second, smaller creature standing in front of
him. And that's the host body. He's going to try to reactivate it! Which means— I shuffle
painfully away from the chairs, and nearly trip over a pistol. Bending down, I pick it up: it's
either the futuristic-looking P99 with laser scope that Marc had, or its identical twin. "Mo?" I
call.
She turns round and says something. I can't hear a single word over the howling
reverberation of her violin.
"I've got to stop him!" I yell. I can barely hear myself. She looks blank, so I point at the door
onto the catwalk. "He's out there!”
She points at one of the inner doors emphatically, as if suggesting I should head that way
instead. So I shake my head and stumble towards the catwalk. Behind me, the flickers of
light suggest more electrical fires breaking out among the high-voltage bearers. I lean over
the railing and look down dizzily. It's about twenty meters away — a small target *at that
range. I fumble with the pistol and switch on the laser. My hand's shaking. If I'm right— The
red dot dances across the far wall. I trace it down the wall, swearing under my breath, and
run it rapidly across the deck towards the drained floor of the moon pool. I keep my finger
away from the trigger. If I'm wrong— Billington is an expert at soul-sucking abominations.
Now he's in thrall to another, greater evil: one with a damaged body, so he's provided it with
a convenient temporary replacement while he comes up with enough sacrificial victims and
spare parts to repair its original one. What entity aboard this ship exhibits all the personality
traits of a coldblooded killing machine, combined with the monstrous, overweening vanity
and laziness of a convalescent war god lounging in their personal Valhalla while their
minions prepare their armor? There's only one answer.
The Persian tomcat sits underneath the alien horror, washing itself without concern. "C'mon,
Fluffy," I tell it. "Show me what you are." We all know about cats and lasers. Lasers are the
best cat toy ever invented: the red-dot machine that comes out for playtime. Used skillfully,
you can make a cat chase the dot so slavishly that she'll run headfirst into a wall.
It's like the sitting-in-cardboard-boxes thing, or the sniffingan- extended-finger reflex. All cats
do it, unless they're so enervated that they choose to ignore the lure and groom their fur
instead.
Fluffy takes a few seconds to lock on, and when he does, his response is immediate and
drastic. He glances down at the deck sees the red dot dancing around nearby - and dashes
away like his tail's on fire.
"Bob! We've got to get out of here! Ellis has gotten away.”
I look round. Mo stands in the doorway, one hand cupped around an ear: "There are
scuttling charges due to blow as soon as he's clear—”
It's deja vu all over again. At least her eyeballs aren't glowing blue and she isn't levitating. I
shake my head and point down at the moon pool: "Help me! We've got to stop him!”
"Who's the target?" Mo ducks out and stands beside me.
"Him!" I pull the trigger. There's an ear-stinging ricochet a fraction of a second after the shot.
I'm nowhere near the target. "Damn, missed.
"Bob, we've got to get out of here! Can you still feel that Black Chamber bitch? The

chromatic disintermediator should have broken your entanglement, but — why are you trying
to shoot that cat”
?"Because—" I squeeze off another shot "—it's possessed!”
"Bob." She looks at me as if I'm mad. There's a loud bang from inside the control room, and
a human figure in a black beret runs out onto the sealed doors flooring the pool: I shoot
instinctively and miss, and he dives for cover. "Leave the fucking cat — hey, that's Billington
down there!" She raises her instrument and prepares to let fly.
The cat squirts out across the floor, a white blur targeting the downed bad guy. I shoot again,
and again, and keep missing.
"Not Billington! Get the cat!”
Mo sniffs skeptically. "Are you sure”
?"Yes, I'm goddamn sure!" Billington's standing in front of the iron maiden, as if steeling
himself to jump inside. "It's the enemy! Get it now, or we're fucked!”
Mo raises her violin, squints darkly down at the deck below us, and drops a noise like a
million felines being disemboweled down on top of Fluffy. Who opens his fanged maw to
howl, then explodes like a gore-filled, white dandelion head. Mo turns and looks at me
harshly. "That looked just like a perfectly ordinary cat to me. If you've—”
"It was possessed by the animation nexus behind JENNIFER MORGUE Two!" I gabble.
"The clue - he saw a laser dot and dodged—”
"Bob. Back up a moment.”
"Yes”
?"The cat. You said it was the enemy. You didn't say it was occupied by the mind of that
thing?" She points up at the ceiling, where the chthonic warrior is definitely twitching and
writhing. I stare.
"Uh, well, I meant—”
"And you thought killing it would improve matters”
?"Yes”
?One of the bole-like knots in the warrior's hide is growing larger. Then it opens, revealing
an eye the size of a truck tire.
It stares right back at me.
She clouts me on the back of the head: "Run!”
The huge tentacle slams down onto the deck where Ellis Billington kneels in supplication
before his god, landing with a percussive clang that rattles the remaining windows and
reduces him to a greasy stain on the bulkhead. Which is probably why Mo and I survive: we
stumble back through the control room doorway about two seconds before the treetrunk-
thick limb slams into the wall with the force of a runaway locomotive. Support trusses
scream and buckle beneath the blow. I start coughing and my eyes water immediately.
The air is gray with smoke and thick with the greasy fish-oil smell of burning insulation. I
thump the big red button beside the door and metal shutters begin to drop down behind the
broken glass — maybe it's too little too late, but at least it makes me feel better. "Where's
Ramona?
We've got to get her out of here!”
Mo glares at me. "What makes you think rescuing her's on my list of mission objectives?
You're disentangled, aren't you”
?I stare back at her, wondering who the hell she thinks she is, barging in here with her Class
A thaumaturgic weapons.
Then I blink and remember sharing a slow breakfast with her back before all this started, all
those endless weeks ago — Is that all? "I think I know what you're thinking," I say slowly,
feeling an awful weary emptiness inside me, "but that's not what's been going on between
us. And if you leave her because you're jealous, you'll be making a mistake you can never
undo. Plus, you'll be leaving her to that.”
JENNIFER MORGUE thumps against the outside of the security shutters, sending a shower
of glass daggers crackling and clinking across the floor. The shutters bend but they hold:

something's clearly wrong with the beast, or it should have been out of the moon pool by
now, leaving a twisted trail of titanium structural members behind it. Dumping the controlling
intelligence out of its temporary host body must have awakened the chthonian prematurely,
still deathly weak and hungry. Mo doesn't look away from my face. She's searching me for
something, some sign. I stare at her, wondering which way she's going to jump, whether the
geas has gone to her head: if it has conferred not only the power that goes with her role, but
also the callousness.
After a few seconds Mo looks away. "We'll sort this out later.”
I stumble back towards the sacrifice chairs. Ramona is still out. I rest a palm on her
forehead, then snatch it back fast: she's fever-hot. "Give me a hand . . . " I manage to get
one arm over my shoulder and begin to lift her off the chair, but in my present state I'm too
weak. Just as my knees begin to give out under me someone takes her other arm.
"Thanks—”
I glance round her lolling head.
"This way, mate." The apparition grins at me around its regulator. "Sharpish!”
"If you say so." More black-clad figures appear — this time, wearing wet suits and body
armor. "Is Alan here”
?"Yeah. Why”
?"Because—" there's a crashing noise from the far wall, and I wince "—there's an alien
horror on the other side of that wall and it wants in bad. Make sure somebody tells him." I
start coughing: the air in here becoming unbreathable.
"Ah, Bob, exactly the man! Don't worry about the eldritch horror, we've got a plan for this
contingency - as soon as we've evac'd we'll just pop a brace of Storm Shadows on his ass
and send him right back down where he came from. But you're exactly the man I was hoping
to see. How are you doing, old chap? Got a Sitrep on the opposition for me”
?I blink, bleary-eyed. It's Alan all right: wearing scuba gear and a communications headset
only the Borg could love, he still manages to look like an excitable schoolteacher. "I've had
better days. Look, the primary opposition movers are dead, and I think Charlie Victor might
be amenable to an offer of political asylum if the rite of unbinding did what I think it did to her,
but about the Smart car on the drilling deck—”
"Yes, yes, I know it's a bit scorched around the edges and there are some bullet holes, but
you don't have to worry: the Auditors won't mind normal wear and tear—”
"No, that's not it." I try to focus. "In the boot. There's a tablecloth with a diorama wrapped up
in it. Would you mind having one of your lads blow it up? Otherwise all the Bond mojo
zapping around in here is going to follow us home and wreck any chance of me and Mo
getting back together again for anything but a one-night stand.”
"Ah! Good thinking." Alan pushes a button and mutters into his mike. "Anything else”
?"Yeah." Either there's a lot of gray smoke in here, or — "I'm feeling dizzy. Just let me sit
down, for a moment...”
E P I LOGUE: THREE'S COMPANY I T ' S AUGUST IN ENGLAND, AND I'M ALMOST
functioning on British Summer Time again. We're having another heat wave, but up here on
the Norfolk coast it's not so bad: there's an onshore breeze coming in from the Wash, and
while it isn't exactly cold, it feels that way after the Caribbean.
We call this place the Village: it's an old in-joke. Once upon a time it was a hamlet, a village
in all respects save its lack of a parish church. It was one of three churchless hamlets that
had clustered in this area, and the last of them still standing, for the others slid under the
waves a long time ago.
There was only the one meandering road in the vicinity, and it was potholed and poorly
maintained. Go back sixty or seventy years and you'd find it was home to a small community
of winkle-pickers and fishermen who braved the sea in small boats. They were a curious,
pale, inbred lot, not well liked by the neighbors up and down the coast, and they kept to
themselves.
Some of them, it's said, kept to themselves so efficiently that they never left the company of

their own kind from birth unto death.
But then the Second World War intervened. And someone remembered the peculiar paper
the village doctor had tried to publish in the Lancet, back in the '20s, and someone else
noticed its proximity to several interesting underwater obstructions, and, with the stroke of a
pen, the War Ministry relocated everyone who lived next to the waterline. And the men from
MI6 Department 66 came and installed electricity and telephones and concrete coastal
defense bunkers, and they rerouted the road so that it doubled back on itself and missed the
village completely before merging with the road to the next hamlet up the coast. And they
systematically erased the Village from the Ordnance Survey's public maps, and from the
post office, and from the discourse of national life. In a very real sense, the Village is as far
away from England as Saint Martin, or the Moon. But in another sense, it's still too close for
comfort.
Today, the Village has the patina of neglect common to building developments that subsist
on the largess of government agencies, and rely for their maintenance on duct tape and the
extensive use of the power of Crown Immunity to avoid planning requirements. It's not a
white-painted picturesque Italianate paradise like Portmeirion, and we inmates aren't
issued numbers instead of names. But there's a certain resemblance to that other Village —
and there is, overlooking the harbor mole, a row of buildings that includes an old-fashioned
pub with paint peeling from the wooden decking outside, worn linoleum floors, and
hand-pumps that dispense a passable if somewhat briny brew.
I came up from London yesterday, after the board of enquiry met to hear the report on the
outcome of the JENNIFER MORGUE business. It's over now, buried deep in the secret files
in the Laundry stacks below Mornington Crescent tube station. If you've got a high enough
clearance you can get to read them — just go ask the librarians for CASE BROCCOLI
GOLDENEYE. (Who says the classification office doesn't have a sick sense of humor?) I'm
still feeling burned by the whole affair. Bruised and used about sums it up; and I'm not ready
to face Mo yet, so I had to find somewhere to hole up and lick my wounds. The Village isn't a
resort, but there's a three-story modern building called the Monkfish Motel that's not entirely
unlike a bad '60s Moat House — I think it was originally built as MOD married quarters - and
there's the Dog and Whistle to drink in, and if I get drunk and start babbling about beautiful
man-eating mermaids and sunken undersea horrors, nobody's going to bat an eyelid.
It's late afternoon and I'm on my second pint, slumped in the grasp of the sofa in the east
corner of the lounge bar. I'm the only customer at this time of day - most everyone else is off
attending training courses or working — but the bar stays open all the same.
The door opens. I'm busy failing to reread a dog-eared paperback biography, my mind
skittering off the words as if they're polished ice cubes that melt and slide away whenever I
warm them with my glance. Right now it's gathering moss on the coffee table in front of me
as I idly flip the antique Zippo lighter that's the one part of my disguise kit I ended up bringing
home. Footsteps slowly approach, clattering on the bare floor. I sit there in the corner, and I
wonder tiredly if I ought to run away. And then it's too late.
"He told me I'd find you here," she says.
"Really?" I put the Zippo down and look up at her.
The prelude to this little drama took place the day before yesterday in Angleton's office. I
was sitting in the cheap plastic visitor's seat he keeps on the other side of his desk, my line
of sight partially blocked by the bulky green-enameled flank of his Memex, trying to hold my
shit together. Up until this point I'd been doing a reasonable job aided by Angleton going out
of his way to explain how we were going to clear my entirely unreasonable expense claims
with the Auditors: but then he decided to try and get all human on my ass. f <; "You'll be able
to see her whenever you want," he said, right out of the blue, without any warning.
"Fuck it! What makes you think—”
"Look at me, boy." There's a tone of voice he uses that reaches into the back of your head
and pulls the control wires, grating and harsh and impossible to ignore: it got my attention.
I looked directly at him. "I am sick and tired of everyone tiptoeing around me as if I'm going

to explode," I heard myself say. "Apologizing won't help: what's done is done, there's no
going back on it. It was a successful mission and the ends, at least in this case, justify the
means. However underhanded they were.”
"If you believe that, you're a bigger fool than I thought." Angleton closed the cover of the
accounts folder and put his pen down. Then he caught my gaze. "Don't be a fool, son.”
Angleton's not his real name — real names confer power, which is why we always, all of us,
use pseudonyms — nor is it the only thing about him that doesn't ring true: I saw the
photographs in his dream-briefing, and if he was that old when he was along for the ride on
Operation JENNIFER, he can't be a day under seventy today. (I've also seen an eerily
similar face in the background of certain archival photographs dating from the 1940s, but
let's not go there.) "Is this where you give me the benefit of your copious decades of
experience? Stiff upper lip, the game's the thing, they also serve who
whatever-the-hell-the-saying goes”
?"Yes." His cheek twitched. "But you're missing something.”
"Huh. And what's that?" I hunker down in my chair, resigned to having to sit through a
sanctimonious lecture about wounded pride or something.
"We fucked with your head, boy. And you're right, it is just another successful operation, but
that doesn't mean we don't owe you an apology and an explanation.”
"Great." I crossed my arms defensively. He picked up his pen again, scratching notes on his
desk pad. Two weeks' compassionate leave. I can stretch it to a month if you need it, but
beyond that, we'll need a medical evaluation.”
Scribble, scribble. "That goes for both of you. Counseling, too.”
"What about Ramona?" The words hung in the air like lead balloons .
"Separate arrangements apply." He glanced up again, fixing me with a wintry blue stare. "I'm
also recommending <% that you spend the next week at the Village.”
"Why?" I demanded. "Because that's where Predictive Branch says you need to go, boy.
Did you want fries with that”
?"Fucking hell. What do they have to do with things”
?"If you'd ever studied knife fighting, one of the things your instructors would have drilled into
you is that you*«always clean your blade after using it, and if possible sharpen and lubricate
it, before you put it away. Because if you want j to use it again some time, you don't want to
find it stuck to the scabbard, or blunt, or rusted. When you use a tool, you "“
take care to maintain it, boy, that's common sense. From the organization's point of view . . .
well, you're not just an inter- changeable part, a human resource: we can't go to the nearest
employment center and hire a replacement for you just like that. You've got a unique skill mix
that would be very difficult to locate — but don't let it go to your head just yet - which is why
we're willing to take some pains to help you get over it. We used you, it's true. And we used
Dr. O'Brien, and you're both going to have to get used to it, and what's more important to
you right now - because you expect to be used for certain types of jobs now and again — is
that we didn't use you the way you expected to be used. Am I right?" I spluttered for a
moment. "Oh, sure, that's everything! In a nutshell! I see the light now, it's just in my nature to
be all offended about having my masculinity impugned by being cast in the role of the Good
Bond Babe, hero-attractor and love interest for Mo in her capacity as the big-swinging-dick
secret agent man with the gun, I mean, violin, and the license to kill. Right? It's just vanity. So
I guess I'd better go powder my nose and dry my tears so I can look glamorous and loving
for the closing romantic-interest scene, huh”
?"Pretty much." Angleton nodded. His lip quirked oddly.
A suppressed smile?
"Jesus fucking Christ, Angleton, that's leaving just a little bit out. Not to mention Ramona. If
you think you could tie our brains together like the Kilkenny cats, then just cut us loose — it
doesn't work that way, you know”
?"Yes." He nodded again. "And that's why you need to go to the Village," he said briskly.
"Talk to her. Settle where you both stand, in your own mind." He picked up his papers and

looked away, an implicit dismissal. I rose to my feet.
"Oh, and one other thing," he added.
"What”
?"While you're about it, remember to talk to Dr. O'Brien as well. You both need to sort things
out — and sooner, rather than later.”
"He made it an order." She shrugs. "So here I am." Looking as if she'd rather be anywhere
else on the planet.
"Enjoying yourself?" I ask. It's the sort of stilted, stupid question you ask when you're trying to
make small talk but walking on eggshells in case the other person explodes at you. Which is
what I'm half-expecting — this situation is a"* minefield.
"No," she says with forced levity. "The weather sucks, the beer's warm, the sea's too cold for
swimming, and every time I look at it . . ." She stalls, the thin glaze of collectedness cracking.
"Can I sit down”
?I pat the sofa beside me. "Be my guest.”
She sits down in the opposite corner, an arm's length away.
"You're acting like you're mad at me." I glance at the book on the table. "I'm not mad at you."
I try to figure out what to say next: "I'm mad at the way the circumstances made things turn
out. Ate you still mad at her”
?"At her?" She chuckles, startled. "I don't think she had any more choice in it than you did.
Why should I be mad at her?" I pick up my glass and take a long mouthful of beer.
"Because we slept together?" "Because you - what?" A waspish tone creeps into her,>
voice: "But I thought you said you hadn't!”
I put my glass down. "We didn't." I meet her eye. "In the Bill Clinton sense of things, I can
honestly say I have not had sexual intercourse with that woman. You know what t h Black
Chamber did to her? If I had slept with her I'd be^, dead." "But how can you—" Mo is
confused. "Her monster had to feed. Before you came and unbound** it, it had to feed. She
had to feed it, or it would have eaten her. I was along for the ride.”
Enlightenment dawns. "But now she's there—" a wave i the vague direction of the drowned
village of Dunwich, a mile out to sea, where the Laundry maintains its outpost "— and you're
here. And you're both safe.”
Acid indigestion. "Safe from what?" I ask, watching her sidelong.
"Safe from—" She stops. "Why are you looking at me”
?"She's undergoing the change, you know that? They can usually hold it off, but in her case
it's looking irreversible.”
Mo nods, reluctantly.
"Probably it was triggered by the deep-diving excursion,”
I add. "Although proximity to certain thaumic resonances can bring it on prematurely." Which
you would be in a position to know all about, I don't say. It's a horrible thing to suspect of
anyone, especially your partner who you've been sharing a house with for enough years that
it's getting to be a habit. "I gather they expect her to make it, with her mind intact.”
"That's good," Mo says automatically. A double take: "Isn't it”
?"I don't know. Is it a good thing?" I ask.
"That's not a question I'd have expected you to ask.”
I sigh. None of this is straightforward. "Mo, you could have warned me they were training you
in deep-cover insertion and extraction operations! Jesus, I thought / was the one on the
sharp end!”
"And you were!" she snaps at me suddenly. "Did you wonder how I felt about it, every time
you disappeared on a black bag job? Did you ask if maybe I was worried sick that you were
never coming back? You know what I know, how helpless do you think that left me feeling”
?"Whoa! I didn't want you to worry—”
"You didn't want! Jesus, Bob, what does it take to get through to you? You can't stop other
people worrying just by not wanting them to. It's not about you, dim-bulb, it's about me. At
least, this time it was. Or do you think I turned up there on your ass by accident”

?I stare at her, at a loss for words.
"Let me lay it out for you, Bob. The whole solitary reason Angleton assigned you to that
stupid rucking arrangement with Ramona was precisely because you didn't know what was
going on. What you didn't know, you couldn't leak to Ramona.”
"I got that much, but why—”
"Billington was enslaved by JENNIFER MORGUE Two sometime in the 70s, after the
abortive attempt to raise the K-129. He tried to contact the chthonian using the Gravedust
rig — a little private free enterprise, if you like.
JENNIFER MORGUE Two wanted out, and wanted out bad, but it needed someone to
come and repair it. Billington provided it with a temporary host body, kitty kibble, and he had
the resources to buy the Explorer — once the US Navy decommissioned it — and kit it out
for a retrieval run. And we knew all this, on deep background, three years ago.”
I blink. "Who is this 'we' you speak of”
?"Me." She looks impatient. "And Angleton. And everybody else with BLUE HADES
clearance who's been working on the project. Except for you, and a couple of others, who've
been kept in a mushroom box against the day.”
"Damn." I pick up my glass and drain what's left of the beer. "I need another drink." Pause.
"You too”
?"Make mine a double vodka martini on ice." She pulls a face. "I can't seem to kick the
habit.”
I stand up and walk inside to the bar, where the middle- aged barwoman is sitting on a stool
poring over the Sudoku in the back of the Express. "Two double vodka martinis on ice." I
say diffidently.
The woman puts her magazine down. She stares at me like I crawled out from under a rock.
"You're going to say shaken, not stirred, ain't cha?" She's got a Midwestern accent:
probably another defector, I guess. "You know how bad that tastes”
?"Make it one shaken, one stirred, then. Off the ice. And easy on the vermouth." I wink. I go
back towards the corner I'd claimed, then pause in the archway. Mo's leaning back in the
sofa, infinitely familiar.
For a moment my breath catches in my throat and I have to stop and try to commit the
picture to memory in case it turns out to be one of the last good times. Then I force myself to
get my legs moving again.
"They'll be over in a minute," I say, dropping onto the sofa beside her.
"Good." She stares at the windows overlooking the beach.
"You know the Black Chamber wanted to get their hands on JENNIFER MORGUE. That's
what McMurray was doing there.”
"Yes." So she thinks I want to talk about business?
"We couldn't let them do that. But luckily for us, Billington . . . well, he wasn't entirely sane to
begin with, and when he came up with the idea of implementing a Hero trap, that made
things a lot easier.”
"Easier?" It's a good thing I don't have a drink in my hand.
"Absolutely." She nods. "Imagine if Billington had simply gone to the Black Chamber and
said, 'Ten billion and it's yours,' keeping his fix-it plan to himself. But instead, he gets this
idea that he's got to act in solitary as the prime mover in the scheme, and of course he's the
archetype of the billionaire megalomaniac, so he does the obvious thing: leverages his
assets. The Hero trap — the geas he built around that yacht — required a hero to trigger it.
He figured the plot structure is deterministic: the hero fells into the bad guy's hands, the bad
guy monologues — and at that point, he was going to destroy the trap, neuter the hero, who
is just another civil servant at this point, stripped of the resonances of the Bond invocation —
and allow his plan to proceed to completion.”
"Except...”
"You know the alternative plot?" She glances at the book I've been reading: a biography of a
playboy turned naval intelligence officer, news agency manager, and finally spy novelist.

"What?" I shake my head. "I thought it was—”
"Yes, it's so neat you can draw a flow chart. But it's nondeterministic, Bob: the Bond plot
structure has a number of forks in it before it converges on the ending, with Mr. Secret Agent
Man and his love interest getting it on in a lifeboat or the honeymoon suite of the QE2 or
something. Including the approach to the villain. Billington didn't look into it deeply enough;
he assumed that the Hero archetype would come looking for him and fall into his clutches
directly.”
"But." I snap my fingers, trying to collect my scattered thoughts. "You. Me. He got me, but I
wasn't the real Bondfigure, right? I was a decoy.”
She nods. "It happens. If the love interest ends up on t h e* villain's yacht, being held
prisoner, then the hero has to go after her. Or him. The real trick was the idea -1 think it was
Angleton's — of using the Good Bond Girl as a decoy by dressing her up in a tux and a
shoulder holster. And then to figure out how to use this to get the Black Chamber to put one
over on Billington." "Ramona. She knew that I thought I was the agent in** place, so she
naturally assumed I really was the agent." ** "Right. And this also let us identify a leak in our
own -organization, because how else did Billington make you so rapidly? Which turns out to
have been Jack. Last of the public school assholes, hung out to dry out where he couldn't do
any damage — so he develops a sideline in selling intel to what he thinks is another
disgruntled outsider." "Urk." I suddenly remember the electrodynamic rig Griffin had stuck in
his safe house and briefly wonder just what the hell else he might have been picking up on it,
sitting pretty in the middle of the Caribbean with no supervision.
Mo falls silent. I realize she's waiting for something. My tongue's frozen: there are questions I
want to ask, but it's a bad idea to ask something when you're not sure you want to hear the
answer. "Did you enjoy being . . . Bond?" I finally manage.
"Did I?" She raises an eyebrow. "Hell." She frowns. "Did you?" she demands.
"But I wasn't—”
"But you thought you were.”
"No!" The very question is freighted with significance I don't want to explore. "I don't do high
society, I don't smoke, I don't like being beaten up, being taken prisoner, being tortured, or
fighting people, and I'm no good at the womanizing bit." I dry-swallow. "How about you”
?"Well," she pauses to consider, "I'm nogood at womanizing either." Her cheek twitches. "Is
that what this is about, Bob? Did you figure I was cheating on you”
?"I was—" I clear my throat "—unsure where I stood.”
"We need to talk about this. Get it out in the open some time. Don't we”
?I nod. It's about all I can do.
"I didn't jump into bed with anybody else," she says briskly. "Does that make you feel better”
?No, it doesn't. Now I feel like a shit for having asked in the first place. I make myself nod.
"Well, great." She crosses her arms, then taps her fingers on her upper arm: "Where have
our drinks gotten to”
?"I ordered the martinis. I guess she's taking her time.”
Quick, change the subject. I really don't want us to fall down one of those embarrassing
conversational potholes where the silence stretches out into an eloquent statement of mutual
miscommunication: "So how did you manage to disguise yourself as Eileen? You really had
me convinced at first.”
"Oh, that was no big deal." Mo looks relieved. She smiles at me and my heart beats faster.
"You know Brains has a~ sideline in cosmetology? Says some of his best friends are^ drag
queens. Well, we've got enough surveillance background on Eileen to know what she looks
like, so I got Brains out to the York to provide make-up services before the assault. Stick a
class two glamour on top of the basics — a wig, the right clothes, some latex paint - and her
own.
daughter wouldn't make her. We used Pale Grace™ for thejj* finishing touch; it might be
bugged, but we made sure I wouldn't see anything until I was aboard the ship. So I just
headed for the control room using the maps we had on file from Angleton's—”

I raise a hand. "Hold it.”
"What?" Mo stares at me.
"Have you got your violin?" I whisper, hunkering down.* "No, why—" Shit. "Our drinks are
well overdue." "And?" "And this plot was set up by a document that's classified CASE
BROCCOLI GOLDENEYE, Angleton said, and Predictive Branch said I needed to be here,
and..." "And?" —^* I kneel on the floor and pull my mobile phone out, flick^ the switch to
silence it, then put it in camcorder mode. I sneak it out from behind the sofa, then pull it back
and inspect the bar. There's nobody there. I swear quietly, and call up my thaumic
scratchpad application. Then I tip my glass upside down over the table, and draw my fingers
through the resulting beer suds frantically, wishing I hadn't downed the pint and left myself
mere drops to work with.
"Have you got that stupid piece of paper on you”
?"What, the license to kill? It's just a prop, it doesn't mean anything—" -% "So pass it here,
then. We haven't had plot closure yet, and you're not the only one who can use cosmetics
and a class two glamour.”
"Shit," Mo whispers back at me, and rolls forwards onto the floor. "Are you thinking what I
think you're thinking”
?"What, that we've been followed home by a manifestly evil mistress of disguise who is
hankering for revenge because we got her husband stomped into pink slime by a chthonian
war machine”
?There's a disturbingly solid click-chunk from the front door, like a Yale lock engaging.
"Do you know the ending of Diamonds Are Forever? The movie version with Sean
Connery?" I meet Mo's eyes for a moment, and in a disturbing flash of clarity I realize that
she means a whole lot more to me than the question of who she has or hasn't been having
sex with. Then she nods and rolls away from the floor in front of the sofa, and I hit the button
on my phone just as there's a flat percussive bang: not the ear-slamming concussion I
expect from a pistol, but muffled, much quieter.
I look round.
The middle-aged barwoman is waving a pistol inexpertly around the room, the long tube of a
silencer protruding from its muzzle: she looks subtly familiar this time. "Over here!”
I call.
She makes the classic mistake: she glances my way and blinks, gun muzzle wavering.
"Come out where I can see you!" Eileen snaps querulously.
"Why? So you can kill us more easily?" I'm ready to jump up and dive through the window if
necessary, but she can't see me — the concealment spell is still working, at least until the
remaining beer evaporates. I go back to folding a paper airplane out of Mo's license, my
fingers shaking with tension.
"That would be the idea," she says. "A lovers' quarrel, male agent kills partner then shoots
self. It doesn't have to hurt.”
"No shit?" Mo asks. I squint and try to spot her, but one thing we've both got going for us is
that pubs tend to be gloomy and poorly lit, and this one's no exception.
Eileen spins round through ninety degrees and unloads a bullet into the wall of optics behind
the bar.
I glance at the drying suds then roll to my hands and knees and creep around the sofa, trying
to stay low. I think the paper plane's balanced right — it had better be, I'm only going to get
the one chance to use it. There are forms, and this i s . .. well, it might work. If it doesn't we're
trapped in a locked pub with a madwoman with a gun, and our invisibility spell has a half-life
measured in seconds rather than minutes. There are two martini glasses on the bar, one of
** them half full: Maybe Eileen wanted to steady her nerves first? There's probably an
unconscious or dead bartender out ,back. What a mess: I don't think an intruder's ever pene-
trated the Village before. I doubt it would be possible without the blowback from the Hero
trap to help.
There's a creak from a floorboard and another shot goes flying, to no apparent effect. Eileen

looks spooked. She takes a step backwards towards the bar, gun muzzle questing <*about,
and then another step. My heart's pounding and I'm feeling lightheaded with anger — no,
with rage - You think anyone would ever believe I'd hurt Mo? And then she's at the bar.
There's a glassy chink.
Eileen spins round, and pulls the trigger just as the halffull martini glass levitates and flies at
her face. She manages to shoot the ceiling, then recoils. "Ow! Bitch!" I raise the paper dart
and take aim. She wipes her eyes as she brings her gun down to bear on a faint distortion in
the air, a snarl of satisfaction on her face: "I see you now!”
I flick the Zippo's wheel and then throw the flaming dart at her martini-irrigated head.
Afterwards, as the paramedics load her onto a stretcher and zip the body bag closed, and
Internal Security removes the CCTV hard drives for evidence, I hold Mo in my arms. Or she
holds me: my knees feel like jelly and it would be downer right embarrassing if Mo wasn't
shuddering, too. "You're all right," I tell her, "you're all right.”
She laughs shakily. "No, you're all right!" And she hugs me hard.
"Come on. Let's take a walk.”
There's a mess on the floor, fire extinguisher foam halfconcealing the scorch marks, and we
skirt it carefully on our way to the door. Security has placed us under a ward of compulsion
and we'll be seen by the Auditors tomorrow: but for the time being, we've got the run of the
Village. Mo seems to want to head back to our quarters, but I pull back. "No, let's go walk on
the beach." And she nods.
"You knew that was coming," she says as we jump down off the concrete wall and onto the
rough pebbles.
"I had an idea something bad was in the air." The onshore breeze is blowing, and the sun is
shining. "I didn't know for sure, or I'd have been better prepared.”
"Bullshit." She punches me lightly on the arm, then puts an arm around my waist.
"No, would I lie to you?" I protest. I stare out to sea.
Somewhere out there Ramona is lying in a watery hostel, learning what she really is. A new
life lies ahead of her: she won't be able to come ashore after the change is complete.
Hey, if I really was James Bond, I could have a girl in every port — even the drowned ones.
"Bob. Would you have left me for her”
?I shiver. "I don't think so." Actually, no. Which is not to say Ramona didn't have glamour of
the non-magical kind as well, but there's something about what I have with Mo— "Well, then.
And you're cut up about the idea that I might have been cheating on you.”
I consider this for a few seconds. "Surprised”
?"Well." She's silent, too. "I was worried. And I'm still worried about the other thing.”
"The other thing”
?"The possibility that we're going to be haunted by the ghost of James Bond.”
"Oh, I dunno." I kick a pebble towards the waterline, watch it skitter, alone. "We could always
do something totally un-Bond-like, to break any remaining echoes of the geas.”
"You think?" She smiles. "Got any ideas”
?My mouth is dry. "Yeah — yes, as a matter-of-fact I do." I take her in my arms and she puts
her arms around me, and rests her face against the side of my neck. "If this was really the
end of a Bond story, we'd go find a luxury hotel to hole up in, order a magnum of
champagne, and fuck each other senseless.”
She tenses. "Ah, I hadn't thought of that." A moment later, and faintly: "Damn.”
"Well. I'm not saying it's impossible. But—" My heart is pounding again, and my knees are
even weaker than they were when I realized Eileen hadn't shot her. "We've got to do it in
such a way that it's completely incompatible with the geas.”
"Okay, wise guy. So you've got a bright idea for an ending that simply wouldn't work in a
Bond book”
?"Yes. See, the thing is, Bond's creator — like Bond himself — was a snob. Upper crust, old
Etonian, terribly conventional. If he was around today he'd always be wearing a tailored suit,
you'd never catch him in ripped jeans and a Nine Inch Nails tee shirt. And it goes deeper. He

liked sex, but he was deeply ingrained with a particular view of gender relationships. Man of
action, woman as bit of fluff on the side. So the one thing Bond would never expect one of
his girls to say is—" it's now or never "—will. . . will you marry me?" I can't help it; my voice
ends up a strangled squeak, as befits the romantic interest doing something as shockingly
unconventional as proposing to the hero.
"Oh, Bob!" She hugs me tighter: "Of course! Yes!" She's squeaking, too, I realize dizzily: Is
this normal? We kiss.
"Especially if it means we can hole up in a luxury hotel, order in a magnum of champagne,
and fuck each other senseless without being haunted by the ghost of James Bond. You've
got a sick and twisted mind — that's why I love you!”
"I love you, too," I add. And as we walk along the beach, holding hands and laughing, I
realize that we're free.
PIMPF I HATE DAYS LIKE T H IS I T ' S A RAINY MONDAY MORNING AND I'M LATE IN to
work at the Laundry because of a technical fault on the Tube. When I get to my desk, the first
thing I find is a note from Human Resources that says one of their management team wants
to talk to me, soonest, about playing computer games at work. And to put the cherry on top
of the shit-pie, the office's coffee percolator is empty because none of the other inmates in
this goddamn loony bin can be arsed refilling it. It's enough to make me long for a high place
and a rifle . . . but in the end I head for Human Resources to take the bull by the horns
decaffeinated and mean as only a decaffeinated Bob can be.
Over in the dizzying heights of HR, the furniture is fresh and the windows recently cleaned.
It's a far cry from the dingy rats' nest of Ops Division, where I normally spend my working
time. But ours is not to wonder why (at least in public).
"Ms. MacDougal will see you now," says the receptionist on the front desk, looking down her
nose at me pityingly.
"Do try not to shed on the carpet, we had it steam cleaned this morning." Bastards.
I slouch across the thick, cream wool towards the inner sanctum of Emma MacDougal,
senior vice-superintendent, Personnel Management (Operations), trying not to gawk like a
resentful yokel at the luxuries on parade. It's not the first time I've been here, but I can never
shake the sense that I'm entering another world, graced by visitors of ministerial import and
elevated budget. The dizzy heights of the real civil service, as opposed to us poor Morlocks
in Ops Division who keep everything running.
"Mr. Howard, do come in." I straighten instinctively when Emma addresses me. She has that
effect on most people — she was born to be a headmistress or a tax inspector, but
unfortunately she ended up in Human Resources by mistake and she's been letting us know
about it ever since.
"Have a seat." The room reeks of quiet luxury by Laundry standards: my chair is big,
comfortable, and hasn't been bumped, scraped, and abraded into a pile of kindling by
generations of visitors. The office is bright and airy, and the window is clean and has a row
of attractively un-browned potted plants sitting before it. (The computer squatting on her
desk is at least twice as expensive as anything I've been able to get my hands on via official
channels, and it's not even switched on) "How good of you to make time to see me." She
smiles like a razor. I stifle a sigh; it's going to be one of those sessions.
"I'm a busy man." Let's see if deadpan will work, hmm?
;" "I'm sure you are. Nevertheless." She taps a piece of paper sitting on her blotter and I
tense. "I've been hearing disturbing reports about you, Bob.”
Oh, bollocks. "What kind of reports?" I ask warily.
Her smile's cold enough to frost glass. "Let me be blunt.
I've had a report — I hesitate to say who from — about you playing computer games in the
office.”
Oh. That. "I see.”
"According to this report you've been playing rather a lot of Neverwinter Nights recently."
She runs her finger down the printout with relish. "You've even sequestrated an old

departmental server to run a persistent realm — a multiuser online dungeon." She looks up,
staring at me intently. "What have you got to say for yourself”
?I shrug. What's to say? She's got me bang to rights. - "Um.”
"Urn indeed." She taps a finger on the page. "Last Tuesday you played Neverwinter Nights
for four hours. This Monday you played it for two hours in the morning and three hours in the
afternoon, staying on for an hour after your official flexitime shift ended. That's six straight
hours. What have you got to say for yourself?" "Only six?" I lean forwards.
"Yes. Six hours." She taps the memo again. "Bob. What are we paying you for”
?I shrug. "To put the hack into hack-and-slay.”
"Yes, Bob, we're paying you to search online role-playing games for threats to national
security. But you only averaged four hours a day last week .. . isn't this rather a poor use of
your time”
?Save me from ambitious bureaucrats. This is the Laundry, the last overmanned
organization of the civil service in London, and they're everywhere — trying to climb the
greasy pole, playing snakes and ladders with the org chart, running esoteric
counterespionage operations in the staff" toilets, and rationing the civil service tea bags. I
guess it serves Mahogany Row's purposes to keep them running in circles and distracting
one another, but sometimes it gets in the way. Emma MacDougal is by no means the worst
of the lot: she's just a starchy Human Resources manager on her way up, stymied by the full
promotion ladder above her. But she's trying to butt in and micromanage inside my
department (that is, inside Angleton's department), and just to show how efficient she is,
she's actually been reading my time sheets and trying to stick her oar in on what I should be
doing. -' To get out of MacDougal's office I had to explain three times that my antiquated
workstation kept crashing and needed a system rebuild before she'd finally take the hint.
Then she said something about sending me some sort of administrative assistant — an
offer that I tried to decline without causing mortal offense. Sensing an opening, I asked if she
could provide a budget line item for a new computer — but she spotted where I was coming
from and cut me dead, saying that wasn't in HR's remit, and that was the end of it.
Anyway, I'm now looking at my watch and it turns out that it's getting on for lunch. I've lost
another morning's prime gaming time. So I head back to my office, and just as I'm about to
open the door I hear a rustling, crunching sound coming from behind it, like a giant hamster
snacking down on trail mix. I can't express how disturbing this is. Rodent menaces from
beyond space-time aren't supposed to show up during my meetings with HR, much less
hole up in my office making disturbing noises. What's going on?
I rapidly consider my options, discarding the most extreme ones (Facilities takes a dim view
of improvised ordnance discharges on Government premises), and finally do the obvious. I
push the door open, lean against the battered "~> beige filing cabinet with the jammed
drawer, and ask, "Who are you and what are you doing to my computer”
?I intend the last phrase to come out as an ominous growl, but it turns into a strangled
squeak of rage. My visitor looks up at me from behind my monitor, eyes black and beady,
and cheek-pouches stuffed with—ah, there's an open can of Pringles sitting on my intray.
"Yuh”
?"That's my computer." I'm breathing rapidly all of a sudden, and I carefully set my coffee
mug down next to the light-sick petunia so that I don't drop it by accident. "Back away from
the keyboard, put down the mouse, and nobody needs to get hurt." And most especially, my
sixth-level cleric-sorcerer gets to keep all his experience points and gold pieces without
some munchkin intruder selling them all on a dodgy auction site and re-skilling me as an
exotic dancer with chloracne.
It must be my face, he lifts up his hands and stares at me nervously, then swallows his cud of
potato crisps. "You must be Mr. Howard”
?I begin to get an inkling. "No, I'm the grim fucking reaper." My eyes take in more telling
details: his sallow skin, the acne and straggly goatee beard. Ye gods and little demons, it's
like looking in a time-traveling mirror. I grin nastily. "I asked you once and I won't ask you

again: Who are you”
?He gulps. "I'm Pete. Uh, Pete Young. I was told to come here by Andy, uh, Mr. Newstrom.
He says I'm your new intern.”
"My new what. . .?" I trail off. Andy, you're a bastard! But I repeat myself. "Intern. Yeah, right.
How long have you been here? In the Laundry, I mean.”
He looks nervous. "Since last Monday morning,”
"Well, this is the first anyone's told me about an intern,”
I explain carefully, trying to keep my voice level because blaming the messenger won't help;
anyway, if Pete's telling the truth he's so wet behind the ears I could use him to water the
plants. "So now I'm going to have to go and confirm that.
You just wait here." I glance at my desktop. Hang on, what would I have done five or so years
ago . . .? "No, on second thoughts, come with me.”
The Ops wing is a maze of twisty little passageways, all alike.
Cramped offices open off them, painted institutional green and illuminated by underpowered
bulbs lightly dusted with cobwebs. It isn't like this on Mahogany Row or over the road in
Administration, but those of us who actually contribute to the bottom line get to mend and
make do. (There's a malicious, persistent rumor that this is because the Board wants to
encourage a spirit of plucky us-against-the-world selfreliance in Ops, and the easiest way to
do that is to make every requisition for a box of paper clips into a Herculean struggle. I
subscribe to the other, less popular theory: they just don't care.) I know my way through these
dingy tunnels; I've worked here for years. Andy has been a couple of rungs above me in the
org chart for all that time. These days he's got a corner office with a blond Scandinavian
pine desk. (It's a corner office on the second floor with a view over the alley where the local
Chinese take-away keeps their dumpsters, and the desk came from IKEA, but his office still
represents the cargo-cult trappings of upward mobility; we beggars in Ops can't be choosy.)
I see the red light's out, so I bang on his door.
"Come in." He sounds even more world-weary than usual, and so he should be, judging from
the pile of spreadsheet printouts scattered across the desk in front of him. "Bob”
?He glances up and sees the intern. "Oh, I see you've met Pete.”
"Pete tells me he's my intern," I say, as pleasantly as I can manage under the circumstances.
I pull out the ratty visitor's chair with the hole in the seat stuffing and slump into it.
"And he's been in the Laundry since the beginning of this week." I glance over my shoulder;
Pete is standing in the doorway looking uncomfortable, so I decide to move White Pawn to
Black Castle Four or whatever it's called: "Come on in, Pete; grab a chair." (The other chair
is a crawling horror covered in mouse-bitten lever arch files labeled STRICTLY SECRET.)
It's important to get the message across that I'm not leaving without an answer, and camping
my henchsquirt on Andy's virtual in-tray is a good way to do that.
(Now if only I can figure out what I'm supposed to be asking . . .) "What's going on”
?"Nobody told you?" Andy looks puzzled.
"Okay, let me rephrase. Whose idea was it, and what am I meant to do with him”
?"I think it was Emma MacDougal's. In Human ^Resources." Oops, he said Human
Resources. I can feel my stomach sinking already. "We picked him up in a routine sweep
through Erewhon space last month." (Erewhon is a new Massively Multiplayer Online
Role-Playing Game that started up, oh, about two months ago, with only a few thousand
players so far. Written by a bunch of spaced-out games programmers from Gothenburg.)
"Boris iced him and "* explained the situation, then put him through induction.
Emma feels that it'd be better if we trialed the mentoring program currently on roll-out
throughout Admin to see if it's an improvement over our traditional way of inducting new staff
into Ops, and his number came up." Andy raises a fist and coughs into it, then waggles his
eyebrows at me signifi- cantly. ^"* "As opposed to hiding out behind the wet shrubbery for a
-^ few months before graduating to polishing Angleton's gear- wheels?" I shrug. "Well, I can't
say it's a bad Idea—" Nobody ever accuses HR of having a bad idea; they're subtle and
quick to anger, and their revenge is terrible to behold. "—but a little bit of warning would

have been nice. Some mentoring for the mentor, eh?" "*”
The feeble quip is only a trial balloon, but Andy latches onto it immediately and with evident
gratitude. "Yes, I completely agree! I'll get onto it at once.”
I cross my arms and grin at him lopsidedly. "I'm waiting." "You're—" His gaze slides
sideways, coming to rest on Pete. "Hmm." I can almost see the wheels turning. Andy isn't
aggressive, but he's a sharp operator. "Okay, let's start from the beginning. Bob, this fellow
is Peter-Fred Young.
Peter-Fred, meet Mr. Howard, better known as Bob. I'm—”
"—Andy Newstrom, senior operational support manager, Department G," I butt in smoothly.
"Due to the modern miracle of matrix management, Andy is my line manager but I work for
someone else, Mr. Angleton, who is also Andy's boss. You probably won't meet him; if you
do, it probably means you're in big trouble. That right, Andy”
?"Yes, Bob," he says indulgently, picking right up from my cue. "And this is Ops Division."
He looks at Peter-Fred Young. "Your job, for the next three months, is to shadow Bob. Bob,
you're between field assignments anyway, and Project Aurora looks likely to keep you
occupied for the whole time — Peter-Fred should be quite useful to you, given his
background.”
"Project Aurora?" Pete looks puzzled. Yeah, and me, too.
"What is his background, exactly?" I ask. Here it comes . . .
"Peter-Fred used to design dungeon modules for a living.”
Andy's cheek twitches. "The earlier games weren't a big problem, but I think vou can guess
where this one's going.”
"Hey, it's not my fault!" Pete hunches defensively. "I just thought it was a really neat
scenario!”
I have a horrible feeling I know what Andy's going to say next. "The third-party content tools
for some of the leading MMORPGs are getting pretty hairy these days. They're supposed to
have some recognizers built in to stop the most dangerous design patterns getting out, but
nobody was expecting Peter-Fred to try to implement a Delta Green scenario as a
Neverwinter Nights persistent realm. If it had gone online on a public game server —
assuming it didn't eat him during beta testing — we could have been facing a mass
outbreak.”
I turn and stare at Pete in disbelief. "That was him?"Jesus, I could have been killed!
He stares back truculently. "Yeah. Your wizard eats rice cakes!”
And an attitude to boot. "Andy, he's going to need a desk.”
"I'm working on getting you a bigger office." He grins.
"This was Emma's idea, she can foot the bill.”
Somehow I knew she had to be tied in with this, but •maybe I can turn it to my advantage. "If
Human Resources is involved, surely they're paying?" Which means, deep pockets to pick.
"We're going to need two Herman Miller Aeron chairs, an Eames bookcase and occasional
table, a desk from some eye-wateringly expensive Italian design studio, a genuine
eighty-year-old Bonsai Californian redwood, an OC3 cable into Telehouse, and gaming
laptops. Alienware: we need lots and lots of Alienware....”
Andy gives me five seconds to slaver over the fantasy before he pricks my balloon. "You'll
take Dell and like it." "Even if the bad guys frag us?" I try.
"They won't." He looks smug. "Because you're the best.”
One of the advantages of being a cash-starved department is^-that nobody ever dares to
throw anything away in case it •* turns out to be useful later. Another advantage is that
there's ,never any money to get things done, like (for example) refit old offices to comply with
current health and safety regulations.
It's cheaper just to move everybody out into a Portakabin in the car park and leave the office
refurb for another financial year. At least, that's what they do in this day and age; thirty, forty
years ago I don't know where they •* put the surplus bodies. Anyway, while Andy gets on the
phone to Emma to plead for a budget, I lead Pete on a fishing expedition.

"This is the old segregation block," I explain, flicking on a light switch. "Don't come in here
without a light or the grue will get you.”
"You've got grues? Here?" He looks so excited at the prospect that I almost hesitate to tell
him the truth.
"No, I just meant you'd just step in something nasty. This isn't an adventure game." The dust
lies in gentle snowdrifts everywhere undisturbed by outsourced cleaning services -
contractors generally take one look at the seg block and double their quote, going over the
ministerially imposed cap (which gets imposed rigorously on Ops, freeing up funds so
Human Resources can employ plant beauticians to lovingly wax the leaves on their office
rubber plants). '.:; i ' > "You called it a segregation block. What, uh, who was segregated”
?I briefly toy with the idea of winding him up, then reject it. Once you're inside the Laundry
you're in it for life, and I don't really want to leave a trail of grudge-bearing juniors sharpening
their knives behind me. "People we didn't want exposed to the outside world, even by
accident," I say finally.
"If you work here long enough it does strange things to your head. Work here too long, and
other people can see the effects, too. You'll notice the windows are all frosted or else they
open onto air shafts, where there aren't any windows in the first place," I add, shoving open
the door onto a large, executive office marred only by the bricked-up window frame in the
wall behind the desk, and a disturbingly wide trail of something shiny — I tell myself it's
probably just dry wallpaper paste — leading to the swivel chair. "Great, this is just what I've
been looking for.”
"It is”
?"Yep; a big, empty, executive office where the lights and power still work.”
"Whose was it?" Pete looks around curiously. "There aren't many sockets...”
"Before my time." I pull the chair out and look at the seat doubtfully. It was good leather once,
but the seat is hideously stained and cracked. The penny drops. "I've heard of this guy.
'Slug' Johnson. He used to be high up in Accounts, but he made lots of enemies. In the end
someone put salt on his back.”
"You want us to work in here?" Pete asks, in a blinding moment of clarity.
"For now," I reassure him. "Until we can screw a budget -for a real office out of Emma from
HR.”
"We'll need more power sockets." Pete's eyes are taking on a distant, glazed look and his
fingers twitch mousily: "We'll need casemods, need overclocked CPUs, need fuck-off huge
screens, double-headed Radeon X1600 video cards." He begins to shake. "Nerf guns,
Twinkies, LAN party—”
"Pete! Snap out of it!" I grab his shoulders and shake him.
He blinks and looks at me blearily. "Whuh”
?I physically drag him out of the room. "First, before we do anything else, I'm getting the
cleaners in to give it a class four exorcism and to steam clean the carpets. You could catch
something nasty in there." You nearly did, I add silently. ^_ "Lots of bad psychic backwash.”
"I thought he was an accountant?" says Pete, shaking his head. "No, he was in Accounts.
Not the same thing at all. You're ^”
confusing them with Financial Control.”
"Huh? What do Accounts do, then”
?"They settle accounts — usually fatally. At least, that's what they used to do back in the
'60s; the department was terminated some time ago.”
"Um." Pete swallows. "I thought that was all a joke? This is, like the BBFC? You know”
?I blink. The British Board of Film Classification, the people who certify video games and
cut the cocks out of PIMPF 379 movies? "Did anyone tell you what the Laundry actually
does}”
"Plays lots of deathmatches?" he asks hopefully.
"That's one way of putting it," I begin, then pause. How to continue} "Magic is applied
mathematics. The many-angled ones live at the bottom of the Mandelbrot set. Demonology

is right after debugging in the dictionary. You heard of Alan Turing? The father of
programming”
?"Didn't he work for John Carmack”
?Oh, it's another world out there. "Not exactly, he built the first computers for the government,
back in the Second World War. Not just codebreaking computers; he designed containment
processors for Q Division, the Counter-Possession Unit of SOE that dealt with
demon-ridden Abwehr agents.
Anyway, after the war, they disbanded SOE — broke up all the government computers, the
Colossus machines — except for the CPU, which became the Laundry. The Laundry kept
going, defending the realm from the scum of the multiverse.
There are mathematical transforms that can link entities in different universes - try to solve
the wrong theorem and they'll eat your brain, or worse. Anyhow, these days more people do
more things with computers than anyone ever dreamed of. Computer games are networked
and scriptable, they've got compilers and debuggers built in, you can build cities and film
goddamn movies inside them. And every so often someone stumbles across something
they're not meant to be playing with and, well, you know the rest.”
His eyes are wide in the shadows. "You mean, this is government work? Like in Deus Ex”
?I nod. "That's it exactly, kid." Actually it's more like Doom 3 but I'm not ready to tell him that;
he might start pestering me for a grenade launcher.
"So we're going to, like, set up a LAN party and log onto lots of persistent realms and
search 'n' sweep them fot demons and blow the demons away?" He's almost panting with
eagerness. "Wait'll I tell my homies!”
"Pete, you can't do that.”
"What, isn't it allowed”
?"No, I didn't say that." I lead him back towards the welllit corridors of the Ops wing and the
coffee break room beyond. "I said you can't do that. You're under a geas. Section Ill of the
Official Secrets Act says you can't tell anyone who "~ hasn't signed the said act that Section
III even exists, much less tell them anything about what it covers. The Laundry is one hundred
percent under cover, Pete. You can't talk about it to outsiders, you'd choke on your own
purple tongue.”
"Eew." He looks disappointed. "You mean, like, this is real secret stuff. Like Mum's work.”
"Yes, Pete. It's all really secret. Now let's go get a coffee and pester somebody in Facilities
for a mains extension bar and a computer.”
I spend the rest of the day wandering from desk to desk, filing requisitions and ordering up
supplies, with Pete snuffling and shambling after me like a supersized spaniel. The cleaners
won't be able to work over Johnson's office until next Tuesday due to an unfortunate
planetary conjunction, but I know a temporary fix I can sketch on the floor and plug into a
repurposed pocket calculator that should hold "Slug" Johnson at bay until we can get him
exorcised. Meanwhile, thanks to a piece of freakish luck, I discover a stash of elderly
laptops nobody is using; someone in Catering mistyped their code in their Assets database
last year, and thanks to the wonders of our ongoing ISO 9000 certification process, there is
no legal procedure for reclassifying them as capital assets without triggering a visit by the
Auditors. So I duly issue Pete with a 1.4 gigahertz Toshiba Sandwich Toaster, enlist his help
in moving my stuff into the new office, nail a WiFi PIMPF 381 access point to the door like a
tribal fetish or mezuzah ("this office now occupied by geeks who worship the great god
GHz"), and park him on the other side of the spacious desk so I can keep an eye on him.
The next day I've got a staff meeting at 10:00 a.m. I spend the first half hour of my morning
drinking coffee, making snide remarks in e-mail, reading Slashdot, and waiting for Pete to
show up. He arrives at 9:35. "Here." I chuck a fat wallet full of CD-Rs at him. "Install these on
your laptop, get on the intranet, and download all the patches you need.
Don't, whatever you do, touch my computer or try to log onto my NWN server - it's called
Bosch, by the way. I'll catch up with you after the meeting.”
"Why is it called Bosch?" he whines as I stand up and grab my security badge off the filing

cabinet. <.w v "Washing machines or Hieronymus machines, take your pick." I head off to
the conference room for the Ways and Means Committee meeting — to investigate new
ways of being mean, as Bridget (may Nyarlathotep rest her soul) once explained it to me.
At first I'm moderately hopeful I'll be able to stay awake through the meeting. But then Lucy, a
bucktoothed goth from Facilities, gets the bit between her incisors. She's going on in a
giggly way about the need to outsource our administration of office sundries in order to
focus on our core competencies, and I'm trying desperately hard not to fall asleep, when
there's an odd thudding sound that echoes through the fabric of the building. Then a pager
goes off.
Andy's at the other end of the table. He looks at me: "Bob, your call, I think.”
I sigh. "You think?" I glance at the pager display. Oops, so it is. '"Scuse me folks,
something's come up.”
"Go on." Lucy glares at me halfheartedly from behind her lucky charms. "I'll minute you.”
"Sure." And I'm out, almost an hour before lunch. Wow, so interns are useful for something.
Just as long as he hasn't gotten himself killed.
I trot back to Slug's office. Peter-Fred is sitting in his chair, with his back to the door.
"Pete?" I ask.
No reply. But his laptop's open and running, and I can hear its fan chugging away. "Uh-huh."
And the disc wallet is lying open on my side of the desk. I edge towards the computer
carefully, taking pains to stay out of eyeshot of the screen. When I get a good look at Peter-
Fred I see that his mouth's ajar and his eyes are closed; he's drooling slightly. "Pete?" I say,
and poke his shoulder. He doesn't move. Probably a good thing, I tell myself. Okay, so he
isn't conventionally possessed. . .
When I'm close enough, I filch a sheet of paper from the ink-jet printer, turn the lights out, and
angle the paper in front of the laptop. Very faintly I can see reflected colors, but nothing
particularly scary. "Right," I mutter. I slide my hands in front of the keyboard — still careful not
to look directly at the screen — and hit the key combination to bring — up the interactive
debugger in the game I'm afraid he's running.
Trip an object dump, hit the keystrokes for quick save, and quit, and I can breathe a sigh of
relief and look at the screen shot. It takes me several seconds to figure out what I'm looking
at. "Oh you stupid, stupid arsel" It's Peter-Fred, of course. He installed NWN and the other
stuff I threw at him: the Laundry-issue hack pack and DM tools, and the creation toolkit. Then
he went and did exactly what I told him not to do: he connected to Bosch. That's him in the
screenshot between the two. half-ore mercenaries in the tavern, looking very afraid.
* PIMPF 383 Two hours later Brains and Pinky are baby-sitting Pete's supine body (we
don't dare move it yet), Bosch is locked down and frozen, and I'm sitting on the wrong side
of Angleton's desk, sweating bullets. "Summarize, boy," he rumbles, fixing me with one
yellowing rheumy eye. "Keep it simple. None of your jargon, life's too short.”
"He's fallen into a game and he can't get out." I cross my i arms. "I told him precisely what
not to do, and he went ahead and did it. Not my fault.”
Angleton makes a wheezing noise, like a boiler threatening to explode. After a moment I
recognize it as two-thousand-year-old laughter, mummified and out for revenge. Then he
stops wheezing. Oops, I think. "I believe you, boy. Thousands wouldn't. But you're going to
have to get him out. You're responsible.”
I'm responsible? I'm about to tell the old man whatjjhink^ when a second thought screeches
into the pileup at the back of my tongue and I bite my lip. I suppose I am responsible,
technically. I mean, Pete's my intern, isn't he? I'm a management grade, after all, and if he's
been assigned to me, that makes me his manager, even if it's a post that comes with loads
of responsibility and no actual power to, like, stop him doing something really foolish. I'm in
loco parentis, or maybe just plain loco. I whistle quietly. "What would you suggest”
?Angleton wheezes again. "Not my field, boy, I wouldn't know one end of one of those
newfangled Babbage machine contraptions from the other." He fixes me with a gimlet stare.
"But feel free to draw on HR's budget line. I will make enquiries on the other side to see

what's going on. But if you don't bring him back, I'll make you explain what happened to him
to his mother.”
"His mother?" I'm puzzled. "You mean she's one of us”
?"Yes. Didn't Andrew tell you? Mrs. Young is the deputy director in charge of Human
Resources. So you'd better get him back before she notices her son is missing.”
James Bond has Q Division; I've got Pinky and Brains from Tech Support. Bond gets jet
packs, I get whoopee cushions, but I repeat myself. Still, at least P and B know about
firstperson shooters.
"Okay, let's go over this again," says Brains. He sounds unusually chipper for this early in the
morning. "You set up Bosch as a server for a persistent Neverwinter Nights world, running
the full Project Aurora hack pack. That gives you, oh, lots of extensions for trapping demons
that wander into your realm while you trace their owner's PCs and inject a bunch of spyware,
then call out to Accounts to send a blackbag team round in the real world. Right”
?"Yes." I nod. "An internet honeypot for supernatural intruders.”
"Wibble!" That's Pinky. "Hey, neat! So what happened to your PFY”
?"Well . . . " I take a deep breath. "There's a big castle overlooking the town, with a
twentieth-level sorceress running it. Lots of glyphs of summoning in the basement dungeons,
some of which actually bind at run-time to a class library that implements the core
transformational grammar of the Language of Leng." I hunch over slightly. "It's really neat to
be able to do that kind of experiment in a virtual realm — if you accidentally summon
something nasty it's trapped inside the server or maybe your local area network, rather than
being out in the real world where it can eat your brains.”
Brains stares at me. "You expect me to believe this kid took out a twentieth-level sorceress?
Just so he could dick around in your dungeon lab”
?PIMPF 385 "Uh, no." I pick up a blue-tinted CD-R. Someone — not me - has scribbled a
cartoon skull-and-crossbones on it and added a caption: DO'NT R3AD M3. "I've been
looking at this—carefully. It's not one of the discs I gave Pete; it's one of his own. He's not
totally clueless, for a crack-smoking script kiddie. In fact, it's got a bunch of interesting class
libraries on it. He went in with a knapsack full of special toys and just happened to fuck up by
trying to rob the wrong tavern. This realm, being hosted on Bosch, is scattered with traps
that are superclassed into a bunch of scanner routines from Project Aurora and sniff for any
taint of the real supernatural.
Probably he whiffed of Laundry business — and that set off one of the traps, which yanked
him in.”
"How do you get inside a game?" asks Pinky, looking hopeful. "Could you get me into
Grand Theft Auto: Castro Club Extreme”
?Brains glances at him in evident disgust. "You can virtualize any universal Turing machine,"
he sniffs. "Okay, Bob.
What precisely do you need from us in order to get the kid out of there”
?I point to the laptop: "I need that, running the Dungeon Master client inside the game. Plus
a class four summoning grid, and a lot of luck." My guts clench. "Make that a lot more luck
than usual." :' • "Running the DM client—" Brains goes cross-eyed for a moment "—is it
reentrant”
?"It will be." I grin mirthlessly. "And I'll need you on the outside, running the ordinary network
client, with a couple of characters I'll preload for you. The sorceress is holding Pete in the
third-level dungeon basement of Castle Storm.
The way the narrative's set up she's probably not going to do anything to him until she's also
acquired a whole bunch of plot coupons, like a cockatrice and a mind flayer's gallbladder —
then she can sacrifice him and trade up to a fourth-level demon or a new castle or
something. Anyway, I've got a plan.
Ready to kick ass”
?I hate working in dungeons. They're dank, smelly, dark, and things keep jumping out and
trying to kill you. That seems to be the defining characteristic of the genre, really. Dead

boring hack-and-slash - but the kiddies love 'em. I know I did, back when I was a wee
spoddy twelve-year-old. Fine, says I, we're not trying to snare kiddies, we're looking to
attract the more cerebral kind of MMORPG player — the sort who're too clever by half.
Designers, in other words.
How do you snare a dungeon designer who's accidentally stumbled on a way to summon up
shoggoths? Well, you need a website. The smart geeks are always magpies for ideas —
they see something new and it's "Ooh! Shiny!" and before you can snap your fingers they've
done something with it you didn't anticipate. So you set your site up to suck them in and lock
them down. You seed it with a bunch of downloadable goodies and some interesting chat
boards - not the usual MY MAGIC USR CN TW4T UR CLERIC, DOOD, but actual useful
information — useful if you're pro- *~ gramming in NWScript, that is (the high-level
programming language embedded in the game, which hardcore designers write game
extensions in). •"* But the website isn't enough. Ideally you want to run a networked game
server — a persistent world that your victims can connect to using their client software to
see how your bunch o' tricks looks in the virtual flesh. And finally you seed clues in the server
to attract the marks who know too damn much for their own good, like Peter-Fred.
The problem is, Bosch World isn't ready yet. That's why I told him to stay out. Worse, there's
no easy way to dig him out of it yet because I haven't yet written the object retrieval code —
and worse: to speed up the development process, I grabbed a whole bunch of published
code from one of the bigger online persistent realms, and I haven't weeded out all the
spurious quests and curses and shit that make life exciting for adventurers. In fact, now that I
think about it, that was going to be Peter-Fred's job for the next month. Oops.
Unlike Pete, I do not blunder into Bosch unprepared; I know exactly what to expect. I've got a
couple of cheats up my nonexistent monk's sleeve, including the fact that I can enter the
game with a level eighteen character carrying a laptop with a source-level debugger — all
praise the new self-deconstructing reality!
The stone floor of the monastery is gritty and cold under my bare feet, and there's a chilly
morning breeze blowing in through the huge oak doors at the far end of the compound.
I know it's all in my head - I'm actually sitting in a cramped office chair with Pinky and Brains
hammering away on keyboards to either side — but it's still creepy. I turn round and
genuflect once in the direction of the huge and extremely scary devil carved into the wall
behind me, then head for the exit.
The monastery sits atop some truly bizarre stone formations in the middle of the Wild
Woods. I'm supposed to fight my way through the woods before I get to the town of, um,
whatever I named it, Stormville? — but sod that. I stick a hand into the bottomless depths of
my very expensive Bag of Holding and pull out a scroll. "Stormville, North Gate," I intone
{Why do ancient masters in orders of martial monks always intone, rather than, like, speak
normally?) and the scroll crumbles to dust in my hands — and I'm looking up at a stone tower
with a gate at its base and some bint sticking a bucket out of a window on the third floor and
yelling, "Gardy loo." Well, that worked okay.
"I'm there," I say aloud.
Green serifed letters track across my visual field, completely spoiling the atmosphere: WAY
KOOL, B08. That'll be Pinky, riding shotgun with his usual delicacy.
There's a big, blue rectangle in the gateway so I walk onto it and wait for the universe to
download. It's a long wait — something's gumming up Bosch. (Computers aren't as powerful
as most people think; running even a small and rather stupid intern can really bog down a
server.) Inside the North Gate is the North Market. At least, it's what passes for a market in
here. There's a bunch of zombies dressed as your standard dungeon adventurers,
shambling around with speech bubbles over their heads. Most of them are web addresses
on eBay, locations of auctions for interesting pieces of game content, but one or two of them
look as if they've been crudely tampered with, especially the assheaded nobleman
repeatedly belting himself on the head with a huge, leather-bound copy of A Midsummer
Night's Dream. "Are you guys sure we haven't been hacked?" I ask aloud. "If you could

check the tripwire logs, Brains . . . " It's a long shot, but it might offer an alternate explanation
for Pete's predicament.
I slither, sneak, and generally shimmy my monastic ass around the square, avoiding the
quainte olde medieval gallows and the smoking hole in the ground that used to be the
Alchemists' Guild. On the east side of the square is the Wayfarer's Tavern, and some
distance to the southwest I can see the battlements and turrets of Castle Storm looming out
of the early morning mists in a surge of gothic cheesecake. I enter the tavern, stepping on
the blue rectangle and waiting while the world pauses, then head for the bar.
"Right, I'm in the bar," I say aloud, pulling my Project Aurora laptop out of the Bag of Holding.
(Is it my imagination, or does something snap at my fingertips as I pull my hand out?) "Has
the target moved”
?PIMPF 389 NOJOY,BO8.
I sigh, unfolding the screen. Laptops aren't exactly native to NWN, this one's made of two
slabs of sapphire held together by scrolled mithril hinges. I stare into the glowing depths of
its screen (tailored from a preexisting crystal ball) and load a copy of the pub. Looking in the
back room I see a bunch of standard henchmen, -women, and -things waiting to be hired,
but none of them are exactly optimal for taking on the twentieth-level lawful-evil chatelaine of
Castle Storm.
Hmm, better bump one of 'em, I decide. Let's go for munchkin muscle. "Pinky? I'd like you to
drop a quarter of a million experience points on Grondor the Red, then up-level him.
Can you do that?" Grondor is the biggest bad-ass half-ore fighter-for-hire in Bosch. This
ought to turn him into a oneman killing machine.
0<D00D.
I can tell he's really getting into the spirit of this. The barmaid sashays up to me and winks.
"Hiya, cute thing. (1) Want to buy a drink? (2) Want to ask questions about the town and its
surroundings? (3) Want to talk about anything else”
?I sigh. "Gimme (1)." *: "Okay. (1) G'bye, big boy. (2) Anything else”
?"(1). Get me my beer then piss off.”
One of these days I'll get around to wiring a real conversational 'bot into the non-player
characters, but right now they're still a bit— There's a huge sound from the back room, sort
of a creaking graunching noise. I blink and look round, startled. After a moment I realize it's
the sound of a quarter of a million experience points landing on a— "Pinky, what exactly did
you up-level Grondor the Red to”
?LVL 15 C0RTE5AN. LOL!
"Oh, great," I mutter. I'll swear that's not a real character class. A fat, manila envelope
appears on the bar in front of *•"' me. It's Grondor's contract, and from the small print it looks
like I've hired myself a fifteenth-level half-ore rent-boy for muscle. Which is annoying
because I only get one henchthug per game. "One of these days your sense of humor is
going to get me into really deep trouble, Pinky," I say as ••Grondor flounces across the
rough wooden floor towards me, a vision of ruffles, bows, pink satin, and upcurved tusks.
He's -*!' clutching a violet club in one gnarly, red-nailed hand, and he seems to be annoyed
about something.
After a brief and uncomfortable interlude that involves running on the walls and ceiling, I
manage to calm Grondor down, but by then half the denizens of the tavern are broken *and
bleeding "Grondor pithed," he lisps at me. "But Grondor thtill kickth ath. Whoth ath you
wanting kicked?" "The wicked witch of the west. You up for it”
?He blows me a kiss.
LOL! ! ! ROFL! ! ! whoops the peanut gallery. "Okay, let's go." Numerous alarums,
excursions, and open-palm five-punches death attacks later, we arrive at Castle Storm.
Sitting out in front of the cruel-looking portcullis, topped by the dismem- bered bodies of the
sorceress's enemies and not a few of her *%: friends, I open up the laptop. A miniature
thundercloud *hovers overhead, raining on the turrets and bouncing light- ning bolts off the
(currently inanimate) gargoyles. "Connect me to Lady Storm's boudoir mirror." I say. (I try —

to make it come out as an inscrutable monkish mutter rather than intoning, but it doesn't
work properly.) "Hello? Who is this?" I see her face peering out of the depths of my screen,
like an unholy cross between Cruella De Vil and Margaret Thatcher. She's not wearing
make-up and half her hair's in curlers — that's odd, I think.
"This is the management," I intone. "We have been notified that contrary to statutory
regulations issued by the Council of Guilds of Stormville you are running an unauthorized
boarding house, to wit, you are providing accommodation for mendicant journeymen.
Normally we'd let you off with .a warning and a fifty-gold-piece fine, but in this particular
case—”
I'm readying the amulet of teleportation, but she seems to be able to anticipate events,
which is just plain wrong for a non-player character following a script. "Accommodate this!”
she hisses, and cuts the connection dead. There's a hammering rumbling sound overhead. I
glance up, then take to my heels as I wrap my arms about my head; she's animated the
gargoyles, and they're taking wing, but they're still made of stone—and stone isn't known for
its lighter-than-air qualities.
The crashing thunder goes on for quite some time, and the dust makes my eyes sting, but
after a while all that remains is the mournful honking of the one surviving gargoyle, which
learned to fly on its way down, and is now circling the battlements overhead. And now it's my
turn.
"Right. Grondor? Open that door!”
Grondor snarls, then flounces forwards and whacks the portcullis with his double-headed
war axe. The physics model in here is distinctly imaginative, you shouldn't be able to reduce
a cast-iron grating into a pile of wooden kindling, but I'm not complaining. Through the
portcullis we charge, into the bowels of Castle Storm and, I hope, in time to rescue Pete.
I don't want to bore you with a blow-by-blow description of our blow-by-blow progress
through Cruella's minions.
Suffice to say that following Grondor is a lot like trailing behind a frothy pink main battle tank.
Thuggish guards, evil imps, and the odd adept tend to explode messily very soon after
Grondor sees them. Unfortunately Grondor's not very discriminating, so I make sure to go
first in order to keep him away from cunningly engineered deadfalls (and Pete, should we
find him). Still, it doesn't take us too long to comb the lower levels of the caverns under
Castle Storm (aided by the handy dungeon editor in my laptop, which allows me to build a
bridge over the Chasm of Despair and tunnel through the rock around the Dragon's Lair,
which isn't very sporting but keeps us from being toasted). Which is why, after a couple of
hours, I'm beginning to get a sinking feeling that * Pete isn't actually here.
"Brains, Pete isn't down here, is he? Or am I missing something?" H3YdONTB3 5AD
DOOD FIN| < OV V XP!!!
"Fuck off, Pinky, give me some useful input or just fuck off, okay?" I realize I'm shouting when
the rock wall next to me begins to crack ominously. The hideous possibility that I've lost Pete
is sinking its claws into my brain and it's worse than any Fear spell.
OK KEEP UR HAIR ON!! 15 THIS A QU3ST?? DO U N33D 2 CONFRONT S0RCR3SS
1ST?
I stop dead. "I bloody hope not. Did you notice how she x* was behaving”
?Brains here. I'm grepping the server logfile and did you know there's another user
connected over the intranet bridge? — "Whu—" I turn around and accidentally bump into
Grondor.
Grondor says, "(1) Do you wish to modify our tactics? (2) Do you want Grondor to attack
someone? (3) Do you think Grondor is sexy, big boy? (4) Exit”
?"(4)," I intone — if I leave him in a conversational state he won't be going anywhere,
dammit. "Okay, Brains. Have you tracerouted the intrusion? Bosch isn't supposed to be
acces- sible from outside the local network. What department are they coming in from”
?They;e coming in from — a longish pause — somewhere in HR.
"Okay, the plot just thickened. So someone in HR has gotten in. Any idea who the player

is?" I've got a sneaking suspicion but I want to hear it from Brains— Not IRL, but didn't
Cruella act way too flexible to be a 'bot?
Bollocks. That is what I was thinking. "Okay. Grondor: follow. We're going upstairs to see the
wicked witch.”
Now, let me tell you about castles. They don't have elevators, or fire escapes, or
extinguishers. Real ones don't have exploding whoopee cushions under the carpet and
electrified door-handles that blush red when you notice them, either, or an ogre resting on
the second-floor mezzanine, but that's beside the point. Let me just observe that by the time I
reach the fourth floor I am beginning to breathe heavily and I am getting distinctly pissed off
with Her Eldritch Fearsomeness.
At the foot of the wide, glittering staircase in the middle of the fourth floor I temporarily lose
Grondor. It might have something to do with the tenth-level mage lurking behind the transom
with a magic flamethrower, or the simultaneous arrival of about a ton of steel spikes falling
from concealed ceiling panels, but Grondor is reduced to a greasy pile of goo on the floor. I
sigh and do something to the mage that would be extremely painful if he were a real person.
"Is she upstairs?" I ask the glowing letters.
SUR3 THING DOOD!!!
"Any more traps”
?NO!!??!
"Cool." I step over the grease spot and pause just in front of the staircase. It never pays to
be rash. I pick up a stray steel spike and chuck it on the first step and it goes BANG with
extreme prejudice. "Not so cool." Rinse, cycle, repeat, and four small explosions later I'm
standing in front of the doorway facing the top step. No more whoopee cushions, just a
twentieth-level sorcetess and a minion in chains. Happy joy.
"Pinky. Plan B. Get it ready to run, on my word.”
I break through the door and enter the witch's lair.
Once you've seen one witch's den you've seen 'em all. This one is a bit glitzier than usual,
and some of the furniture is nonstandard even taking into account the Laundry hack packs
linked into this realm. Where did she get the mainframe from? I wonder briefly before
considering the extremely omi- nous Dho-Na geometry curve in the middle of the floor
(complete with a frantic-looking Pete chained down in the middle of it) and the extremely
irate-looking sorceress beyond.
"Emma MacDougal, I presume”
?She turns my way, spitting blood. "If it wasn't for you meddling hackers, I'd have gotten
away with it!" Oops, she's raising her magic wand. "Gotten away with what?" I ask politely.
"Don't you want to explain your fiendish plan, as is customary, before totally obliterating your
victims? I mean, that's a Dho-Na curve there, so you're obviously planning a summoning,
and this server is inside Ops block. Were you planning some sort of ,<-low-key downsizing”
?She snorts. "You stupid Ops heads, why do you always assume it's about you?" *"*
"Because—" I shrug. "We're running on a server in Ops.
What do you think happens if you open a gateway for an ancient evil to infest our
departmental LAN”
?"Don't be naive. All that's going to happen is Pimple- Features here is going to pick up a
good, little, gibbering infestation then go spread it to Mama. Which will open up the
promotion ladder once again." She stares at me, then her eyes narrow thoughtfully. "How
did you figure out it was me”
?"You should have used a smaller mainframe emulator, you know; we're so starved for
resources that Bosch runs on a three-year-old Dell laptop. If you weren't slurping up all our
CPU resources, we probably wouldn't have noticed anything was wrong until it was too late.
It had to be someone in HR, and you're the only player on the radar. Mind you, putting poor
Peter-Fred in a position of irresistible temptation was a good move. How did you open the
tunnel into our side of the network”
?"He took his laptop home at night. Have you swept it for spyware today?" Her grin turns

triumphant. "I think it's time you joined Pete on the summoning-grid sacrifice node.”
"Plan B!" I announce brightly, then run up the wall and across the ceiling until I'm above Pete.
P1AN 8 :):):) The room below my head lurches disturbingly as Pinky rearranges the furniture.
It's just a ninety-degree rotation, and Pete's still in the summoning grid, but now he's in the
target node instead of the sacrifice zone. Emma is incanting; her wand tracks me, its tip
glowing green. "Do it, Pinky!" I shout as I pull out my dagger and slice my virtual finger.
Blood runs down the blade and drops into the sacrifice node— And Pete stands up. The
chains holding him to the floor rip like damp cardboard, his eyes glowing even brighter than
Emma's wand. With no actual summoning vector spliced into the grid it's wide open, an
antenna seeking the nearest manifestation. With my blood to power it, it's active, and the
first thing it resonates with has come through and sideloaded into Pete's head. His head
swivels. "Get her!" I yell, clenching my fist and trying not to wince. "She's from personnel”
?"Personnel?" rumbles a voice from Pete's mouth — deeper, more cultured, and infinitely
more terrifying. "Ah, 1 see.
Thank you," The being wearing Pete's flesh steps across the grid - which sparks like a
high-tension line and begins to smolder. Emma's wand wavers between me and Pete. I
thrust my injured hand into the Bag of Holding and stifle a scream when my fingers stab into
the bag of salt within. "It's been too long." His face begins to lengthen, his jaw widening and
"“
merging at the edges. He sticks his tongue out: it's grayishbrown and rasplike teeth are
sprouting from it. "~<~ Emma screams in rage and discharges her wand at him. A
backwash of negative energy makes my teeth clench and turns my vision gray, but it's not
enough to stop the second coming of "Slug" Johnson. He slithers towards her across the
floor, and she gears up another spell, but it's too late. I close my eyes and follow the action
by the inarticulate shrieks and the wet sucking, gurgling noises. Finally, they die down.
I take a deep breath and open my eves. Below me the room is vacant but for a clean-picked
human skeleton and a floor flecked with brown — I peer closer — slugs. Millions of the
buggers. "You'd better let him go," I intone.
"Why should I?" asks the assembly of molluscs.
"Because—" I pause. Why should he? It's a surprisingly sensible question. "If you don't, HR -
Personnel - will just send another. Their minions are infinite. But you can defeat them by
escaping from their grip forever — if you let me lay you to rest.”
"Sendme on, then," say the slugs. ""* "Okayy." And I open my salt-filled fist over the mol-
luscs — which burn and writhe beneath the white powderfall until nothing is left but Pete,
curled fetally in the middle of the floor. And it's time to get Pete the hell out of this game and
back into his own head before his mother, or some even worse horror, comes looking for
him. — AFTERWORD: THE GOL D EN AGE OF S P Y I NG T H E M A R Y - S U E D F M
I6 " M Y NAME I S BOND - JAMES BOND.”
These six words, heard by hundreds of millions of people, are almost invariably spoken
during the first five minutes of each movie in one of the biggest media success stories of the
twentieth century. Unless you've lived under a rock for the past forty years, you hear them
and you know at once that you're about to be plunged into a two-hour-long adrenaline1-
saturated extravaganza of snobbish fashionable excess, violence, sex, car chases, more
violence, and Blowing Shit Up — followed by a post-coital cigarette and a lighthearted quip
as the credits roll.
It wasn't always so. When Casino Royale was first published in 1953, it got a print run of
4,750 hardcover copies and no advertising budget to speak of; while the initial reviews were
favorable, comparing Ian Fleming to Le Queux and Oppenheim (the kings of the prewar
British spy-thriller genre), it took a long time for his most famous creation to set the world on
fire. Despite his rapidly rising print runs {Casino Royale eventually sold over a million
paperbacks in 1 And testosterone.
the UK alone), and despite his increasing prominence among the postwar thriller writers, a
decade elapsed before any of Fleming's novels were filmed; indeed, their author barely

lived to see the commercial release of Dr. No and the runaway success of the icon he
created. (Nor were the films seen as a runaway success before they wete made — Dr. No
was notoriously made on a tight budget, even though it went on to gross nearly $60 million
around the world.) Literary immortality — or indeed, mere postmortem survival — is
dauntingly hard for a novelist to achieve. The limbo of postmortem obscurity awaits
ninety-five percent of all novelists — almost all novels go out of print for good within five
years of the death of their author. But in addition to being a million-selling bestseller,
Fleming was a ferociously well-connected newspaper executive with a strong sense of the
value of his ideas, and he pursued television and film adaptation remorselessly. Cinematic
success arrived just in time for his creation, and the synergy between bestselling books and
massive movie hype has sufficed to keep them in print ever since.
James Bond is a creature of fantasy, perhaps best described using a literary term looted
from that most curious and least respected of fields, fan fiction: the Mary-Sue. A Mary-Sue
character is a place-holder in a script, a hollow cardboard cutout into whose outline the
author can squeeze their own dreams and fantasies. In the case of Bond, it's cruelly easy to
make a case that the famous spy was his author's Mary-Sue, for Fleming had a curious and
ambiguous relationship with spying.
A dilettante and dabbler for his first three decades, unsuccessful as a stockbroker, foreign
correspondent, and banker, Fleming fortuitously landed his dream job on the eve of the
Second World War: Secretary to the Director of Naval Intelligence in the Admiralty. The war
was good for Ian Fleming, broadening and deepening him and giving him a job that
captured his imagination and drew out his not inconsiderable talents. But Fleming was the
man who knew too much: privy to too many secrets, he was wrapped in tissue paper and
prevented from pursuing his desire to go into the field. He ended the war with a
distinguished record — and absolutely no combat experience (if one excludes being
bombed by the Luftwaffe or watching the Dieppe raid from a destroyer safely far off the
Normandy coastline).
Fleming grew up in the shade of a father who died heroically on the Western Front in 1917,
and in adult life, he wrote in the shadow of an elder brother whose reputation as a novelist
surpassed his own. It's easy to imagine these unkind familial comparisons provoking the
imaginative but flighty playboy who almost found himself during the war, which goaded him
into imagining himself in the shoes of a hero who was not merely larger than life, but larger in
every way than his own life.
And, as it turns out, James Bond was larger than Ian Fleming. Not only do few novels survive
their author's demise, even fewer acquire sequels written by other hands; yet several other
authors (including Kingsley Amis and John Gardner) have toiled in Fleming's vineyard. Few
fictional characters acquire biographies written by third parties — but Bond has not only
acquired an autobiography (courtesy of biographer John Pearson) but spawned a small
cultural industry, including a study of his semiotics by Umberto Eco.
Now, that has got to be a sign of something . . .
As with every true pearl, there was a sand-grain of truth at the heart of Bond. Fleming wrote
thrillers informed by his actual experience. Years spent working out of the hothouse
environment of Room 39 of the Admiralty building — headquarters of the Naval Intelligence
Division of the Royal Navy — gave him a ringside seat on the operations of a major
espionage organization. On various trips to Washington, DC, he worked with diplomats and
officers of the OSS (predecessor organization to the CIA). There is also some evidence
that, as a foreign news manager at the Sunday Times after the war, Fleming made his
agency's facilities available to officers of MI6. His first Bond novels were submitted to that
agency for security clearance before they were published. Bond himself may have been
larger than life, but the strictures imposed by the organization he worked for were drawn
from reality, albeit the reality of an intelligence agency of the early 1940s.
The world of secret intelligence-gathering during the Second World War was, however, very
different from life in the intelligence community today. It was already changing by the late

1950s, as the bleeping, football-shaped Sputniks zipped by overhead and intelligence
directors began dreaming of spy satellites. By 2004, when MI5 (the counterintelligence
agency) openly placed recruiting advertisements in the press, we can be sure that Bond
would have been best advised to seek employment elsewhere. Spies are supposed to be
short — less than 180 centimeters (5 feet 11 inches) for men — and nondescript. As a
branch of the civil service, MI5's headquarters are presumably nonsmoking, and drinking on
the job is frowned upon. As intelligence agencies, MI5 and MI6 staffs aren't in the business
of ruthlessly wiping out enemies of the state: any decision to use lethal force lies with the
Foreign Secretary, the COBRA committee, and other elements of the British government's
security oversight bureaucracy. An MI6 agent driving a 1933 Bentley racer with a
supercharged engine, frequenting the high-stakes table at a casino as James Bond so
memorably did in his first print appearance, is an almost perfect inversion of the real picture.
Nevertheless, the archetype has legs. James Bond continued to grow and evolve, even after
his creator put away his cigarette holder for the last time. To some extent, this was the
product of storytelling expediency. The film adaptations started in the middle of a continuing
story arc — for Fleming wrote his novels with a modicum of continuity — and while Dr. No
was the first to make it to celluloid, the novel was in fact a sequel to From Russia with Love
(which was filmed second). Thus, various liberties were taken with the plot of the canonical
novels right from the start. You can read the novels at length without finding anything of the
banter between Bond and M's secretary Moneypenny that is a recurrent theme of the films,
for example, and that's before we get into the bizarre deviations of the midperiod Roger
Moore movies (notably The Spy Who Loved Me and Moonraker).
The literary James Bond is a creature of prewar London clubland, upper-crust, snobbish,
manipulative and cruel in his relationships with women, with a thinly veiled sadomasochistic
streak and a coldly ruthless attitude to his opponents that verges on the psychopathic. Over
the years, his cinematic alter ego has acquired the stamina of Superman, learned to defy
the laws of physics, ventured into space — both outer and inner — and deflowered more
maids than Don Juan. He's also mutated to fit the prejudices and neuroses of the day,
dabbling with (gasp!) monogamy, and hanging out with those heroic Afghan mujahedeen in
the late- '80s AIDS-and-Soviets-era the Living Daylights. He's worked under a ball-breaking
postfeminist M in GoldenEye2, and even confronted a female arch-villain in The World Is Not
Enough (an innovation that would surely have Fleming, who formed his views on appropriate
behavior for the fairer sex in the 1920s, rolling in his grave). But other aspects of the Bond
archetype remain timeless. Fleming was fascinated by 2 An excellent piece of casting that
places Dame Judi Dench in the role, apparently inspired by real-life MI5 head Stella
Rimington, who has taken to writing spy thrillers in her retirement.
fast cars, exotic locations, and intricate gadgetry, and all of these traits of the original novels
have been amplified and extrapolated in the age of modern special effects.
Just how does James Bond — a "sexist, misogynist dinosaur, a relic of the Cold War," to
use the words the scriptwriters on GoldenEye so tellingly put into M's mouth - survive in the
popular imagination more than fifty years after his literary birth? What does it mean when
Mary-Sue stalks the landscape of the imagination, blasting holes in the plot with a Walther
PPK (or the P99 Bond upgraded to in Tomorrow Never Dies)? If we're going to understand
this, perhaps we ought to start by looking at Bond's dark shadow, the Villain. In Search of
Mabuse Bond is, if you judge him by his work, a nasty fellow and not one you'd choose to
lend your car to. In order to make this rough diamond glitter, it is necessary to display him
against a velvet backdrop of darkest villainy. If you strip the Bond archetype of the
bacchanalia, glamorous locations, and fashion snobbery, you end up with an unappetizingly
shallow, cold-blooded executioner — the likes of Adam Hall's Quiller or James Mitchell's
Callan, only without the breezy cynicism, or indeed any redeeming features at all. The role of
adversary is thus a critical one in sustaining the appeal of the protagon- ist. Fleming set out
to depict a hard-edged contemporary world where the usual black-and-white picture of the
prewar thriller had blurred and taken on some of the murky gray-on- gray ambiguity of the

Cold War era; Bond was the knight shining armor, fighting for virtue and the free world
against the dragon — be they Mr. Big, Dr. No, Auric Goldfinger, or the looming shadow of
Bond's greatest enemy of all, Ernst Stavro Blofeld, Number One of SPECTRE, the Special
Executive for Counter-intelligence, Terrorism, Revenge, and Extortion.
It is interesting to note that Blofeld assumed his primacy as Bond's #1 enemy only in the
movie canon, Fleming originally invented him while working on the screenplay and novel of
Thunderball, and used him subsequently in On Her Majesty's Secret Service and You Only
Live Twice. (Prior to these later books, Bond typically tussled with less corporate enemies
— Soviet stooges, unregenerate Nazis, and psychotic gangsters.) Blofeld was born out of
mere corporate expediency.
Rather than demonize the Soviets and reduce their potential audience, the producers of the
film From Russia with Love appropriated SPECTRE as the adversarial organization.
With the success of Thunderball, the fourth of the films, Blofeld moved front and center, and
acquired a life of his own that far exceeded his prominence in the novels. Arguably,
Fleming's death in 1964 freed up the movie series to diverge from their original author's
plans; and so Blofeld may be seen as a demon of necessity, conjured up from the vasty
deep in order to provide Bond with a worthy adversary.
'Twas not always so. Back at the turn of the twentieth century, around the time that the British
spy thriller was gradually cohering out of the mists of the penny dreadful and the literature of
suspense (via the works of John Buchan and Erskine Childers — not to mention the
tangential contributions of Arthur Conan Doyle, by way of Sherlock Holmes), there was no
dualistic vision of the great champion confronting the villainous heart of evil. There was no
mighty champion: we were on our own against the masters of night and mist, the great and
terrible supercriminals. Professor Moriarty, Holmes's nemesis — the Napoleon of Crime —
was but one of these: Fantomas, the 1911 creation of Pierre Souvestre and Marcel Allain, is
another. The emperor of crime, Fantomas was a master of disguise and an agent of chaos
(not to mention standing astride Paris in black mask, top hat and tails in the posters for the
1913 movie of the same name: an icon of decadent wealth and criminal chaos). Nor was he
alone. Guy Boothby's 1890s supervillain Dr. Nikola fits the bill, too, right down to the fluffy
lap-cat and the fiendish plans. But perhaps the root of Bond's nemesis "* can be found in his
full-fledged form somewhat later, and somewhat further to the east — in the guise of Dr.
Mabuse.
Dr. Mabuse is an archetype and a runaway media success in his own right, famous from five
novels and twelve movies. The Doctor was created by author Norbert Jacques, and was
developed into one of the most chilling creations of the silent era in 1922 by no less a
director than Fritz Lang. Mabuse is a name, but one that nobody in their right mind speaks
aloud. He's a master of disguise, naturally, and a rich, wellconnected socialite and gambler.
(Some social context: M gambling at the high-stakes table is not so much an innocuous
recreation as an obscenity, in a decade of hyper-inflation and starvation, with crippled war
veterans dying of cold on the street corners, as was the case in Weimar Germany.) Mabuse
has his fingers in every pie, by way of a syndicate so shadowy and criminal that nobody
knows its extent; he's a spider, but the web he weaves is so broad that it looks like the
whole of reality to the flies trapped within. He is (in some of the stories) a psychiatrist, skilled
in manipulation, and those who hunt him are doomed to become his victims. If Mabuse has
a weakness it is that his schemes are over-elaborate and tend to implode messily, usually
when his most senior minions rebel, hopelessly late; nevertheless' he is a master of the
escape plan, and with his ability to brainwash minions into playing his role, he's a
remarkably hard phantom to slay.
It is all too easy to make fun of the likes of Fantomas and Dr. Nikola, and even their
modern-day cognates such as Dr. Mabuse and Ernst Stavro Blofeld — for do they not
represent such an obsessively concentrated pinnacle of entrepreneurial criminality that, if
they really existed, they would instantly be hunted down and arrested by INTERPOL?
Careful consideration will lead one to reconsider this hasty judgment. Criminology, the study

of crime and its causes, has a fundamental weak spot: it studies that proportion of the
criminal population who are stupid or unlucky enough to get caught. The perfect criminal,
should he or she exist, would be the one who is never apprehended — indeed, the one
whose crimes may be huge but unnoticed, or indeed miscategorized as not crimes at all
because they are so powerful they sway the law in their favor, or so clever they discover an
immoral opportunity for criminal enterprise before the legislators notice it. Such forms of
criminality may be indistinguishable, at a distance, from lawful business; the criminal a
paragon of upper-class virtue, a face-man for Forbes.
When the real Napoleons of Crime walk among us today, they do so in the outwardly
respectable guise of executives in business suits and thousand-dollar haircuts. The
executives of WorldCom and Enron were denizens of a corporate culture so rapacious that
any activity, however dubious, could be justified in the name of enhancing the bottom line.
They have rightfully been charged, tried, and in some cases jailed for fraud, on a scale that
would have been the envy of Mabuse, Blofeld, or their modern successor, Dr. Evil. When you
need extra digits on your pocket calculator to compute the sums you are stealing, you're in
the big league. Again, when you're able to evade prosecution by the simple expedient of
appointing the state prosecutor and the judges — because you're the president of a country
(and not just any country, but a member of the rich and powerful G8) - you're certainly not
amenable to diagnosis and detection in the same sense as your run-of-the-mill shoplifter or
petty delinquent. I'm naming no names (They have intelligence services! Cruise missiles!),
but this isn't a hypothetical scenario.
Interview with the Entrepreneur In an attempt to clarify the mythology surrounding James
Bond, I tracked down his old rival to his headquarters in the Ministry of Inward Investment in
the breakaway Republic of Transdniestria. Somewhat suspicious at first, Mr. Blofeld relaxed
as soon as he realized I was not pursuing him on behalf of the FSB, CIA, or IMF, and kindly
agreed to be interviewed for this book. Now at age seventy-two, Blofeld is a cheerful veteran
of numerous high-tech start-ups, and not a few multinationals where, as a specialist in
international risk management and arbitrage, he applied his unique skills to business
expansion. Today he is semi-retired, but has agreed to work in a voluntary capacity as
director of the state investment agency.
"It took me a long time to understand the agenda that the British government was pursuing
through the covert activities of MI6," he told me over a glass of sweet tea. "Call me ^ naive,
but I really believed — at least at first — that they were honest capitalists, the scoundrels.”
Over the course of an hour, Ernst explained to me how he first became aware that the UK
was attempting to sabotage - his business interests. "It was back in I960 or thereabouts^,
that they first tried to destroy one of my subsidiaries. Until then I hadn't really had anything to
do with them, but I ^ believe one of my rivals in the phosphate mining business at the time
put it about that my man on site was some sort of spy, and they sent this Bond fellow — not
just to arrest my “
man or charge him with some trumped-up nonsense, but to kill him." His lips paled with
indignation as he contemplated the iniquity of the situation: that agents of the British
government might go after an honest businessman for no better reason than an
unsubstantiated allegation that he was spying on American missile tests. "I warned Julius to
be care- fill and advised him to put a good lawyer on retainer, but \_ AFTERWORD 407
what good are lawyers when the people you're up against send hired killers? Julius brought
in security contractors, but this Bond fellow still murdered him in the end. And the British
government denies everything, to this day!”
Ernst obviously believes in his own moral rectitude, but I had to ask the obvious questions,
just for the record.
"Yes, I was chief executive of SPECTRE for twelve years.
But you know, SPECTRE was entirely honest about its activities!
We had nothing to hide because what we were doing was actually legal. We've been
mercilessly slandered by those rogues from MI6 and their friends in the newspapers, but the

fact is, we're no more guilty of criminal activity than any other multinational today: we simply
had the misfortune to be foreign and entrepreneurial at a point in time when Whitehall was in
the grasp of the communist conspirators Wilson and Callaghan, and their running-dog,
so-called 'Conservative' fellow Heath. And we were pilloried because what we were doing
was in direct competition with the inefficient state-run enterprises that my good friend Lady
Thatcher recognized as mosquitoes battening on the lifeblood of capitalism. That cad
Fleming put it about that SPECTRE stands for 'Special Executive for Counter-intelligence,
Terrorism, Revenge, and Extortion' — absolute tosh and nonsense! Would a group of
criminals really call themselves something that blatant? I'll remind you that SPECTRE is
actually a French acronym, as befits a nonprofit charity incorporated in Paris. The name
stands for 'Soci£te professionelle et ethique du capital technologique reinvesti par les
experts.5 Venture capitalists specializing in disruptive new technologies, in other words —
commercial space travel, nuclear power, antibiotics. Not some kind of half-baked 3 Literally:
"Professional and Ethical Society of Technological Capital Reinvested by Experts." - ,
terrorist organization! But you can imagine the threat we posed to the inefficient state
monopolies like the British Aircraft Corporation, the coal mining industry, and Imperial
Chemical Industries." '* Blofeld paused to sip his tea thoughtfully. "We were ahead of our
time in many ways. We pioneered business methods that later became mainstream - Sir
James Goldsmith, Ronald Perelman, Carl Icahn, they all watched us and learned - but by
then, the commies were out of power in the West thanks to our friends in the establishment,
so they had an easier time of it. No need to hire lots of expensive security and build
concrete bunkers on desert islands! And yes, that made us look bad, don't think I'm unaware
of it — but you know, you want bunkers and isolated jungle rocket-launch bases? All you
have to do is look at Arianespace! It's fine when the government bureaucracies do it, but if
an honest businessman tries to build a space launch site, and hires security to keep the
press and saboteurs from foreign governments out, it's suddenly a threat to world security!”
He paused for a while. "They put the worst complexion on everything we did. The plastic
surgery? Well, we had the clinic, why not let our staff use it, so the surgeons could sharpen
their skills between paying customers? It was a perk, nothing more. We did — I admit it —
acquire a few companies trading in exotic weapons, nonlethal technologies mostly.
And that business with Emilio and the yacht, I admit that looked bad. But did you know, it
originally belonged to Adnan Khashoggi or Fahd ibn Saud or someone? Emilio was acting
entirely on his own initiative — a loose cannon —and as soon as I heard about the affair I
terminated his employment.”
I asked Ernst to tell me about Bond.
"Listen, this Bond chap, I want you to understand this: however he's painted in the mass
media, the reality is that he's a communist stooge, an assassin. Look at the evidence. He
works for the state — a socialist state at that. He went to university and worked with those
traitors Philby and Burgess, that MacLean fellow — communist spies to a man. He didn't
resign his commission when the British government went socialist, like a decent fellow;
instead he took assignments to go after entrepreneurs who were a threat to the interests of
this socialist government, and he rubbed them out like a Mafia button man. There was no
due process of law there, no respect for property rights, no courts, no lawyers — just a
'License to Kill' enemies of the state, loosely defined, who mostly happened to be
businessmen working on start-up projects that coincidentally threatened state monopolies.
He's a damned commissar. Do you know why Moscow hated him?
It's because he'd beaten them at their own racket.”
Blofeld was clearly depressed by this recollection, so I tried to change the subject by asking
him about his personal management philosophy.
"Well, you know, I tend to use whatever works in day-today situations. I'm a pragmatist,
really. But I've got a soft spot for modern philosophers, Leo Strauss and Ayn Rand: the rights
of the individual. And I've always wanted to remake the world as a better place, which is
probably why the establishment dislikes me: I'm a threat to vested interests. Well, they're all

descended from men who were threats to vested interests, too, back in the day, only I
threaten them with new technologies, while their ancestors mostly did their threatening with a
bloody sword and the gallows. I don't believe in initiating force." He laughed
self-deprecatingly. "I suppose you could call me naive.”
Trade Goods When I played back my tape of our discussion, it took me some time to notice
that Ernst had carefully steered the conversation away from certain key points I had intended
to quiz him about.
One of the most disturbing aspects of the Bond milieu is the prevalence of technologies that
are strangely out of place.
Belt-buckle grappling hooks with wire spools that can support a man's weight? Laser rifles?
These aren't simple extrapolations of existing technology - they go far beyond anything that's
achievable with today's engineering tools or materials science. But forget Bond's toys, the
products of Q division. From Blofeld's solar-powered orbital laser in Diamonds Are Forever
to Carver's stealth cruiser in Tomorrow Never Dies, we are surrounded by signs that the
adversary has got tricks up his sleeve that far outweigh anything Bond's backers can
provide. These menacing intrusions of alien superscience — where could they possibly
have gotten them from?
The answer can be discerned with little difficulty if one cares to scrutinize the writings of the
sage of Providence, Howard Phillips Lovecraft. This scholar - whose path, regrettably, never
crossed that of the young Ian Fleming — asserted that our tenancy of this planet is but a
recent aberration.
Earth has in the past been home for a number of alien species of vast antiquity and
incomprehensibly advanced knowledge, and indeed some of them may still linger along-
side us — on the high Antarctic plateau, in the frigid oceanic depths, even in strange
half-breed colonies off the New England coastline.
If this strikes you as nonsensical, first contemplate your nearest city: How recognizable
would it be in a hundred years' time if our entire species silently vanished tomorrow?
How recognizable would it be in a thousand years? Would any relics still bear witness to the
once-proud towers of New York or Tokyo, a million years hence? Our future - and the future
of any once-proud races that bestrode our planet - is AFTERWORD 411 that of an oily stain
in the shale deposits of deep history.
Earth's biosphere and the active tectonic system it dances upon cleans house
remorselessly, erasing any structure that is not alive or maintained by the living.
Consider also the extent to which we really occupy the planet we live on. We think of
ourselves as the dominant species on Earth — but seventy-five percent of the Earth's entire
biomass consists of bacteria and algae that we can't even see with the naked eye.
(Bacteria from whose ranks fearsome pathogens periodically emerge, burning like wildfire
through our ranks.) Nor do we, in any real sense of the word, occupy the oceans. Certainly
our trawlers hunt the bounty of the upper waters. But submarines (of which there are only a
few hundred on the entire planet) fumble like blind men through the uppermost half-kilometer
of a world-ocean that averages three kilometers in depth, unable to dive beneath their
pressure limits to explore the abyssal plains that cover nearly two-thirds of the planetary
surface. Finally, the surface (both the suboceanic abyss and the thin skin of dry land we cling
tenuously to) is but a thousandth of the depth of the planet itself; we can't even drill through
the crust, much less contemplate with any certainty the nature of events unfolding within the
hot, dense mantle beneath.
We could be sharing the planet with numerous powerful alien civilizations, denizens of the
high-energy condensedmatter realm beneath our feet, and we'd never know it — unless they
chose to send emissaries into our biosphere, sprinkling death rays and other trade goods
like glass beads before the aboriginal inhabitants, extracting a ghastly price in return for
their largesse .. .> A Colder War?
James Bond was a creature of the Cold War: a strange period of shadow-boxing that
stretched from late 1945 to the winter of 1991, forty-six years of paranoia, fear, and the

creepy sensation that our lives were in thrall to forces beyond our comprehension. It's almost
impossible to explain the Cold War to anyone who was born after 1980; the sense of
looming doom, the long shadows cast by the two eyeball-to-eyeball _]_* superpowers, each
possessing vast powers of destruction, ready and able to bring about that destruction on a
planetary scale in pursuit of their recondite ideologies. It was, to use "* the appropriate
adjective, a truly Lovecraftian age, dominated by the cold reality that our lives could be
interrupted by torment and death at virtually any time; normal existence was conducted in a
soap-bubble universe sustained only by our determination to shut out awareness of the true
horrors lurking in the darkness outside it an abyss presided over by chilly alien warriors
devoted to death-cult ideologies and dreams of Mutually Assured Destruction. Decades of
distance have bought us some relief, thickening the wall of the bubble — memories misting
over with the comforting illusion that the Cold War wasn't really as bad as it seemed at the
time — but who do we think we're kidding? The Cold War wasn't about us. It was about the
Spies, and the Secret Masters, and the Hidden Knowledge.
It's no coincidence that the Cold War was the golden age of spying — the peak of the
second-oldest profession, the dig- gers in the dark, the seekers after unclean knowledge
and secret wisdom. Prior to 1939, spying of the international kind rather than the sordid
domestic variety (let us pass swiftly over the tawdry Stasi archives of sealed glass jars full of
worn underwear, kept as scent cues for the police dogs) was a small scale, largely
amateurish concern. With the outbreak of the Second World War, it mushroomed. Faced
with employment vacancies, the first response of a growing organization is to recruit close
to home. Just like any 1990s dot-com start-up, growing as the founders haul in all their
friends and anyone they know who has the right skill set, the 1940s espionage agencies
were a boom town into which a well-connected clubbable London playboy would inevitably
be sucked — and, moreover, one where he might try his hand and succeed, to everyone's
surprise. (In the 1990s he'd end up in marketing, with stock options up to here. Sic transit
gloria techie.) When the Second World War gave way to the Doomwatch days and
Strangelove nights of the Cold War, it entered a period in which the same clubbable fellow
might find himself working in a mature organization, vastly larger and more professional than
the half-assed amateurism of the early days.
The CIA was born in the shadow of the wartime OSS, and grew into the emblematic
Company (traders in secrets, overthrowers of governments), locked in titanic struggle with
that other superpowered rival, the KGB (and their less wellknown fellows in the GRU).
The age of the traditional sneak-spies with their Minox cameras gave way to the era of the
bugging device. With the 1960s came a new emphasis on supplementing human
intelligence (HUMINT) with intelligence from electronic sources (ELINT). New agencies—
the NSA in the United States, GCHQ in the UK—expanded as the field of "spyless spying”
went mainstream, aided by the explosion in computing power made possible by integrated
circuits and, later, the microprocessor. As telephony, television, telex, and other
technologies began to come online, a torrent of data poured through the wires, a deluge that
threatened to drown the agencies in useless noise. Or was it the whispering on the
deep-ocean cables? Maybe the chatter served to conceal and disguise the quiet whispering
of the hidden oracles, dribbling out strange new concepts that warped the vulnerable
primate minds to serve their inscrutable goals. The source of the incredible new
technologies that drove the advances of 414 CHARLES STROSS the mid-twentieth century
was, perhaps, the whispering of an alien farmer in the ears of his herd . . .
Times change, and the golden age of spying is over. We've delivered the harvest of fear that
the secret masters desired, or maybe they've simply lost interest in us for the time being.
Time will tell. For now, be content that it's all over: the Cold War was a time of strangely
rapid technological progress, but also of claustrophobic fear of destruction at three minutes'
notice, of the thermonuclear stars coming and bringing madness and death in their wake.
Retreat into your soap-bubble universe, little primate, and give thanks.
From the perspective of the twenty-first century, Bond was a poor archetype for a hero;

certainly he couldn't save us from the gibbering horrors of the Cold War, but only cast a
shadow beneath their unblinking ground-zero glare. But we found salvation in the end, in the
most unlikely place of all: if you turn on the TV you're likely to see one of old Ernst's proteges
being held up for praise as an object of emulation.
President of Italy, captain of industry or chief executive of Enron - SPECTRE won and it's
their world that we live in, the world of the lesser evil.
Charles Stross Edinburgh, UK February 2006 GLOSSARY OF ABBREVIATIONS,
ACRONYMS,AND ORGANIZATIONS Abwehr Foreign Bureau/Defense of the Armed
Forces High Command: the German intelligence organization founded in 1921; after WWII,
in order to appease the Allies, the organization supposedly focused only on defense, i.e.
counterespionage [Germany] AIVD General Intelligence and Security Office: the Dutch
domestic counterespionage agency [Netherlands] APT(N) Atlantic Patrol Task (North):
standing Royal Navy patrol in the Caribbean and North Atlantic area [UK] Black (Pertaining
to an organization or project) Secret and off the record, except to governmental intelligence
oversight bodies [All] Black Chamber American cryptanalysis agency, officially disbanded in
1929; predecessor to the NSA; nickname for the contemporary superblack agency dealing
with occult intelligence [US] CESG Communications Electronics Security Group: a division
within GCHQ [UK] CIA Central Intelligence Agency; also known as The Company [US] The
Company Nickname: see CIA [US] COBRA Cabinet Briefing Office Room "A": where the
Civil Contingencies Committee meets and is thus often referred to as COBRA; able to
invoke Section Two powers under the Civil Contingencies Act (aka Martial Law) [UK] COTS
Commercial, Off The Shelf: computer kit; a procurement term [US/UK] DERA Defense
Evaluation and Research Agency, privatized as QinetiQ [UK] FSB Federal Security Service,
formerly known as KGB [Russia] Faust Force Nickname: see GSA [Germany] GCHQ
Government Communications htQ (UK equivalent of NSA) [UK] GMDI Hughes Global
Marine Development, Inc.
[US] GRU Russian Military Intelligence; an intense rivalry existed between the GRU and
KGB [Russia] GSA Geheime Sicherheit Abteilung: contemporary German domestic occult
intelligence agency [Germany] HMG Her Majesty's Government [UK] HUMINT Human
Intelligence: intelligence gathered from human (as opposed to electronic) sources [All]
INTERPOL International Criminal Police Organization: created in 1923 to assist
international crim-' inal police cooperation [All] KGB Committee for State Security, principal
Soviet intelligence agency; renamed FSB in 1991 after disintegration of the Soviet Union
[USSR] The Laundry Nickname of the former Department Q of the SOE, dealing with occult
intelligence; spun off as a separate black organization in '••-": •!•'. 1945, no publicly known
name [UK] MI5 (originally Military Intelligence Section 5) Security Service, also known as
SS, responsible for internal security [UK] MI6 (originally Military Intelligence Section 6)
Secret Intelligence Service, also known as SIS, responsible for external security [UK] MOD
Ministry of Defense [UK] NSA National Security Agency (US equivalent ofGCHQ)[US]
Number Ten 10 Downing Street, London: the historic office and home of the British Prime
Minister [UK] ONI Office of Naval Intelligence [US] OSS Office of Strategic Services (US
equivalent of SOE), disbanded in 1945, remodeled as CIA [US] Politburo Political Bureau:
the executive organization for the Communist Party [USSR] Q Division Division within The
Laundry associated with R&D [UK] QinetiQ See DERA [UK] SAS Special Air Service:
British Army Special Forces [UK] SBS SIS SOE Superblack Territorial SAS TLA Two-One
SAS Special Boat Service: Royal Marines Special Forces [UK] See MI6 [UK] Special
Operations Executive (UK equivalent of OSS), officially disbanded in 1945; see also The
Laundry [UK] (Pertaining to a black organization or black project) Secret and off the record
to all, including governmental intelligence oversight bodies [All] Territorial Army, British
equivalent of the US National Guard. Territorial SAS, the part-time weekend soldier arm of
the SAS, mostly staffed by veterans [UK] Three Letter Acronym [All] 21 Special Air Service
Regiment; also known as Artists' Rifles [UK] Charles Stross is a full-time writer who was
born in Leeds, England in 1964. He studied in London and Bradford, gaining degrees in

pharmacy and computer science, and has worked in a variety of jobs, including pharmacist,
technical author, software engineer and freelance journalist. Find out more about Charles
Stross at: www.antipope.org/charlie/index.html You can read more about Charles and other
Orbit authors by registering for the free monthly newsletter at: www.orbitbooks.net 

