
Chemical and Biological 
Weapons and Terrorism


Chemical and Biological 
Weapons and Terrorism
Anthony Tu

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2018 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-138-03338-2 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reason-
able efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and pub-
lisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their 
use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material 
reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write 
and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, repro-
duced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.
copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
(CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organi-
zation that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have 
been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Tu, Anthony T., 1930- author.
Title: Chemical and biological weapons and terrorism / by Anthony Tu.
Description: Boca Raton : CRC Press, [2018] | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017022736| ISBN 9781138033382 (hardback : alk. paper) | 
ISBN 9781315305516 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Biological weapons. | Chemical weapons. | Bioterrorism. | 
Biological warfare. | Chemical warfare.
Classification: LCC UG447.8 .T879 2018 | DDC 363.325/3--dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017022736
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

v
CONTENTS
Preface	
ix
Author	
xi
Section I  Basic Information
	 1	 Chemical Agents and Weapons	
3
1.1	
Brief History	
3
1.2	
Types of Poisonous Gas	
5
1.3	
Properties of Chemical Agents	
7
1.3.1	
Nerve Agents	
7
1.3.1.1	
Sarin	
9
1.3.1.2	
Tabun	
12
1.3.1.3	
Soman	
13
1.3.1.4	
VX	
13
1.3.2	
Blister Agents	
14
1.3.3	
Blood Agents	
15
1.3.3.1	
Cyanogen Chloride	
15
1.3.3.2	
Hydrogen Cyanide	
16
1.3.4	
Vomiting Agents and Rioting Control Agents	
16
1.3.5	
Incapacitating Agents	
18
1.4	
Toxicology	
20
1.5	
Recent Use of Chemical Weapons in Syria and by ISIS	
22
1.5.1	
Use by Syria	
22
1.5.2	
Use by ISIS	
22
	 2	 Biological Agents and Weapons	
25
2.1	
Types of Biological Agents and Weapons	
25
2.2	
Biological Agents and Mechanisms of Action	
26
2.3	
Target: Domestic Animals and Crops	
29
2.4	
Toxin Weapons	
30
2.5	
Modification of Toxins and Artificial Toxins	
30

vi
Contents
2.6	
Biological Weapon Agents	
31
2.6.1	
Smallpox	
31
2.6.2	
Anthrax	
33
2.6.3	
Botulinum Toxins	
36
2.6.4	
Ricin and Other Ribotoxins	
38
2.6.5	
Fungal Toxins	
38
2.6.6	
Snake Neurotoxins	
40
2.6.7	
Marine Toxins	
42
	 3	 An Example of Chemical War: The Iran–Iraq War	
49
Sayid Abbas Foroutan and Anthony Tu
3.1	
Iran–Iraq War	
49
3.1.1	
Invasion of Iran by Iraq	
49
3.1.2	
Chemical Warfare	
50
3.2	
Military Field Hospitals	
53
3.3	
Use of Mustard Gas	
56
3.4	
Use of Nerve Gas	
59
3.5	
Tragedy in Halabja, a Kurdish Town in Iraq	
62
	 4	 An Example of Chemical Terrorism: Sarin Terrorism in Japan	
65
4.1	
Organization	
65
4.2	
Road to a Crime Organization	
66
4.3	
The Sarin Attack in Matsumoto	
70
4.4	
My Assistance with the First Chemical Terrorist Attack in Japan	
71
4.5	
The Tokyo Subway Sarin Terrorist Attact	
75
4.5.1	
The Kidnapping of Kiyoshi Karia	
75
4.5.2	
Planning	
76
4.5.3	
The Sarin Attack on the Tokyo Subway	
78
4.5.4	
The Rescue Operation in Tokyo	
78
4.5.5	
The Pathological Effects of Sarin	
79
4.5.6	
Decontamination of the Subway Train	
79
4.5.7	
Composition of the Sarin Used in the Tokyo Subway	
81
4.6	
Punishment	
82
4.6.1	
The Death Sentence in Japan	
82
4.6.2	
Death Row Inmates	
83
4.6.3	
My Visit with Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa, a Death Row Inmate	
84
4.6.3.1	
My First Question	
85
4.6.4	
The Appearance and Arrest of Three Fugitives	
86

vii
Contents
4.6.5	
The Case of Kazuaki Okazaki	
88
4.6.6	
The Case of Yoshihiro Inoue	
88
4.6.7	
The Case of Masami Tsuchiya	
88
4.6.8	
The Members Involved in the Tokyo Subway Sarin Attack	
89
4.6.9	
The Different Degrees of Crime for Those Sentenced
	
 to Death	
90
4.6.10	
An Opinion on the Death Sentences for the Cult Members: 
A Comment by Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa	
91
4.7	
Other Important Findings	
91
4.7.1	
Initially Aum Shinrikyo Emphasized Biological Weapons	
91
4.7.2	
Mass Production Plan of Sarin at Satyan No. 7	
92
4.7.2.1	
Outside of Satyan No. 7	
92
4.7.2.2	
Inside Satyan No. 7	
94
4.8	
Use of VX, the Most Toxic Nerve Gas	
95
4.9	
More Than Sarin and VX	
97
4.9.1	
Chemical Agents	
97
4.10	
Conclusion	
98
	 5	 An Example of Biological Terrorism: Anthrax Terrorism in the 
United States	
101
5.1	
A Publisher Dies of Anthrax	
101
5.2	
Anthrax	
102
5.3	
Analysis of Anthrax DNA	
103
5.4	
Dr. Steven Hatfill: The Wrong Suspect	
105
5.5	
Dr. Bruce Ivins: The New Suspect	
106
5.5.1	
Personality Profile of Dr. Bruce Ivins	
107
5.5.2	
Trash Search and Decoded Anthrax Letter	
108
5.5.3	
Circumstantial Evidence	
110
Section II  Applications
	 6	 Detection and Identification of Chemical and Biological Weapons	
115
6.1	
Laboratory Analysis	
115
6.2	
On-Site Detection	
116
6.3	
Chemical and Biological Weapon Reconnaissance Vehicles	
119
6.4	
Detection of Chemical and Biological Weapons from a Distance	
125
6.4.1	
Chemical Agent Detection Systems	
125

viii
Contents
6.5	
Biological Agent Analysis	
125
6.6	
Detection from Soil	
128
	 7	 Protection from Chemical and Biological Agents	
129
7.1	
Protecting an Individual	
129
7.2	
Protecting a Group of People	
132
7.3	
Laboratory Safety Considerations	
137
	 8	 Decontamination of Chemical and Biological Agents	
139
8.1	
Use of Chemicals	
139
8.2	
Decontaminating People	
141
8.3	
Decontaminating Equipment and Weapons	
142
8.4	
Decontaminating Buildings	
144
	 9	 Destruction of Chemical Weapons	
147
9.1	
Destruction of Chemical Weapons in the United States	
148
9.2	
Destruction of Chemical Weapons in Russia	
150
9.3	
Destruction of Chemical Weapons in Iraq	
153
9.4	
Destruction of Chemical Weapons Left in China by Japan	
154
9.5	
Destruction of Chemical Weapons in Other Countries	
160
9.5.1	
India	
160
9.5.2	
South Korea	
161
9.5.3	
Albania	
161
	10	 How to Deal with Terrorism	
163
10.1	
Making New Laws	
163
10.2	
Intelligence	
167
10.3	
Network of Storage Facilities	
168
10.4	
Operations on the Spot	
171
10.5	
International Cooperation	
171
10.5.1	
NATO	
171
10.5.2	
Binational Cooperation	
173
10.5.3	
Cooperation with International Organizations	
173
10.6	
We Should Not Neglect the E of NBCRE	
174
Index	
177

ix
PREFACE
My lifelong research began with the study of the structure–function 
relationship of snake venom. I also taught general toxicology covering 
all types of toxicology including chemical and biological weapons at 
Colorado State University from 1967 to 1998. While I was teaching, the 
Iran–Iraq War (1980–1988) began and a large-scale chemical war started. I 
was able to learn new aspects of chemical weapons. I had been interested 
in chemical and biological weapons since 1954 when I was a chemical offi-
cer in the Taiwan Army. In Taiwan, we had to serve for one year in the 
military after college graduation. In 1983, the U.S. government learned 
that the Soviet Union had developed toxin weapons using various bio-
logical toxins to make new types of biological weapons. One of the toxin 
weapons from Uzbekistan was a snake neurotoxin, my specialty. Since 
then, I have served as a consultant for various defense companies in the 
United States and different branches of the U.S. government.
In 1994, a terrorism attack using sarin occurred in Matsumoto, Japan, 
and the Japanese police struggled to find out who did it and where the 
sarin was made. I supplied the analysis of methylphosphonic acid in 
the soil to the Japanese police with the aid of the U.S. Army. Eventually, 
the Japanese police found sarin’s metabolite in the soil of Kamikuishiki 
­village, establishing direct scientific evidence that this was where the 
Aum Shinrikyo cult was making sarin. I also helped the Japanese police 
after Aum Shinrikyo struck the Tokyo subway with sarin in 1995. For my 
contribution, the Japanese Emperor awarded me with a medal, the Order 
of the Rising Sun, Gold Rays with Neck Ribbon. Since then, I have been 
invited by different countries to give lectures at various scientific meet-
ings including many defense departments.
I have published several books on sarin terrorism in Japanese, as well 
as biological and chemical weapon and terrorism books, two of which 
have been translated into Chinese in Taiwan. Since 1995, I have attended 
NBC (nuclear, biological, chemical) meetings, some as an invited speaker, 
in Croatia, Switzerland, Sweden, Egypt, the United States, Singapore, 
Qatar, Thailand, Taiwan, Japan, Indonesia, and Iran.
Chapter 3, titled “An Example of Chemical War: The Iran–Iraq War” is 
coauthored with Dr. Sayid Abbas Foroutan, a former Iranian military sur-
geon who actively participated in the treatment of Iranian soldiers who 

x
Preface
suffered from a poisonous gas used by Iraq. In 2007, I was sent to Iran 
by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) 
to participate in a meeting on chemical casualties held in Tehran, Iran. 
Before the meeting, the Iranian government invited me to Isfahan, for an 
annual check on the Iranian veterans who suffered chemical injuries from 
the earlier Iran–Iraq War. During the meeting in Tehran, I met Foroutan, 
who supplied me with many photographs of chemical weapon casualties.
I am very happy to have an opportunity to write a chemical and 
­biological weapons book in English and am grateful to CRC Press/Taylor 
& Francis. The aim of this book is to provide a bird’s-eye view of chemical 
and biological weapons to the public, so it is written in easy-to-understand 
language. As terrorism is becoming rampant in recent society, I hope this 
book will help the public to understand what chemical and biological 
weapons are.
I would like to express my sincere gratitude to those at CRC Press/ 
Taylor & Francis for their assistance. They include Jennifer Abbott, Mark 
Listewnik, and Misha Kydd. I also extend my thanks to Dr. Brenda Baker, 
who reviewed the entire manuscript to improve the English. Finally, I send 
my thanks to my late wife, Kazuko Yamamoto Tu, who was ­dedicated to 
helping me throughout her life, and who I dearly miss since her departure 
to heaven on December 16, 2012.

xi
AUTHOR
Dr. Anthony Tu is the world’s leading expert on the Tokyo sarin 
attacks and is much sought after globally for his insight on chemical and 
­biological weapons and weapons of mass destruction. He has written, 
coauthored, and edited 40 books on chemistry and weapons studies in 
his decades-long career. Dr. Tu also played an integral role in the investi-
gation of the sarin attacks, the first chemical terrorism attack on record, 
­pivoting the entire direction of the investigation with his knowledge of 
how the ­chemical weapon would leave deposits on surrounding soil.


Section I
Basic Information


3
1
Chemical Agents and Weapons
One should not confuse the terms chemical agent and chemical weapon. 
A chemical agent is an ingredient, which is not yet a chemical weapon. 
Chemical agents need to be packed in a proper container such as an artil-
lery shell or a bomb for transport. In Aum Shinrikyo’s sarin terrorist attack 
in Matsumoto, Japan, it used a homemade sprayer to deliver the sarin. In 
the Tokyo subway terrorist attack, Aum Shinrikyo members placed sarin 
in plastic bags, broke open the bags, and let the sarin diffuse by itself. So, 
you could say a plastic bag containing sarin is a sort of chemical weapon. 
Some countries have a device attached to an airplane’s wing to spray sarin 
from the air. With this device, one can spray the gas directly from an air-
plane instead of packing poisonous gas in bomb. A chemical agent refers 
to the ingredient and it always requires some mechanism to transport or 
deliver it.
1.1  BRIEF HISTORY
The first large-scale occurrence of poisonous gas was on April 22, 1915, 
in Ypres, France, during the World War I. Greenish yellow-colored clouds 
covered the air of Allied troops and many choked to death. The poisonous 
gas used was chlorine gas. On this occasion, the Germans used 168 tons of 
chlorine gas released from 5,730 cylinders. In retaliation, on February 22, 
1916, France used phosgene, which was more powerful than chlorine gas. 
World War I was the peak use of poisonous gas, and many varieties were 
used by both sides. Phosgene and mustard gas were the two most popular 
choices (see the following table).

4
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Phosgene is a chlorine derivative, as are many other poisonous gases. 
Why were chlorine-type poisonous gases used? One reason is chlorine is 
produced in large quantities when sodium hydroxide is manufactured 
and scientists were happy to make use of all of the excess chlorine.
Because using poisonous gas as a weapon to kill soldiers was so cruel, in 
1925, participating countries signed the Geneva Protocol, a treaty prohibiting 
the use of poisonous gas. The treaty was praised by everyone as a triumph 
for humanity, but it had one big flaw. The treaty did not prohibit the manu-
facturing of poisonous gas. If a country had a manufacturing plant, it tended 
to use it. And if a country had a chemical weapon, it was possible it could 
use it. Although many countries were signatories of the treaty, some countries 
disregarded the convention and used poisonous gas anyway. For instance, 
Japan used poisonous gas against the Chinese during the 1937 to 1945 war 
in China. China was poor at that time and its troops were not equipped with 
gas masks or other protective garments as the Japanese soldiers were. Italy 
used poisonous gas in the Ethiopian invasion in 1935. More recently, Iraq used 
poisonous gas in the Iran–Iraq War. One interesting point, is that Iraq did not 
use poisonous gas until it seemed to be losing the conflict. The Iran–Iraq War 
started in 1980 and ended in 1989, the longest war in modern times. In 1982, 
Iran pushed back Iraq’s invading forces from Iranian territory, and moreover, 
Iran started invading Iraqi territory. Saddam Hussein, the head of Iraq, started 
using chemical weapons in 1982, and eventually used a very large quantity. 
Iran never expected the use of chemical weapons by Iraq and the Iran offen-
sive against Iraq collapsed.
This suggested several important lessons. One is that the use of chemi-
cal weapons in massive quantities is very effective and can change the out-
come of war. The second lesson is that one always has to prepare against 
a chemical attack. The third is that possession of chemical weapons has a 
“deterrent effect.” In the Pacific War, after the Pearl Harbor attack, Japan 
forbade the use of poisonous gas because Japan knew the United States 
had chemical weapons and were afraid of retaliation. In the European the-
ater, poisonous gas was not used because both sides were also afraid of 
retaliation with poisonous gas. These are examples of chemical weapon 
Country
Phosgene (tons)
Mustard Gas (tons)
Germany
181,000
7,600
Britain
1,362
500
France
15,703
2,000
United States
1,400
900

5
Chemical Agents and Weapons
possession being a good deterrent. The same seems to hold true for nuclear 
weapons; that is, nobody dares to initiate the first use of a nuclear weapon 
attack for fear of retaliation with the same nuclear weapon.
1.2  TYPES OF POISONOUS GAS
Warfare poisonous gas is classified into several groups by the U.S. Army. 
The main chemical agents are listed in the following:
•	 Blister agents
•	 CX—phosgene oxime
•	 L—lewisite
•	 HD—sulfur mustard (yperite)
•	 HN—nitrogen mustard
•	 Nerve agents
•	 GA—tabun
•	 GB—sarin
•	 GD—soman
•	 GE—ethylsarin
•	 GF—cyclosarin
•	 VX—O-ethyl S-[2-(diisopropylamino)ethyl]methylphosphono-
thioate
•	 Blood agents
•	 CK—cyanogen chloride
•	 AC—hydrogen cyanide
•	 Choking agents
•	 PS—chloropicrin
•	 CG—phosgene
•	 DP—diphosgene
•	 CL—chlorine
In earlier days, the U.S. Army stockpiled several varieties of war-
fare chemical agents in several states: Tooele Army Depot in Utah, Pine 
Bluff Arsenal in Arkansas, Umatilla Depot Activity in Oregon, Pueblo 
Depot Activity in Colorado, Anniston Army Depot in Alabama, Aberdeen 
Proving Ground in Maryland, Newport Army Ammunition Plant in 
Indiana, and Blue Grass Army Depot in Kentucky, as well as on Johnston 
Island in the Pacific Ocean. (Actually, the United States had a chemical 
weapons base on Johnston Island that was ready to use in case of a war 
in Asia. See Photos 1.1 and 1.2.) The United States has decided not to use 

6
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Photo 1.1  Commander Dr. David Moss of Johnston Island (holding the machine 
gun), who obtained a ­doctorate degree from Colorado State University. (Used 
with permission from Dr. David Moss.)
Photo 1.2  Senator Daniel Inouye inspects the chemical weapons base on Johnston 
Island. (Used with permission from Dr. David Moss.)

7
Chemical Agents and Weapons
chemical and biological agents for war and is in the process of destroying 
its stockpiles. This will be discussed further in Chapter 9.
1.3  PROPERTIES OF CHEMICAL AGENTS
1.3.1  Nerve Agents
There are several different types of chemical agents that can become 
weapons and nerve gas. However, before discussing nerve gas, I 
would like to remind the reader that nerve gas or poisonous gas is 
not necessarily in “gas” form. From elementary physics, we know that 
matter has three phases: solid, liquid, and gas. So-called poisonous 
gas, including nerve gas, can be a liquid or even a solid. The important 
thing is that it becomes an “aerosol,” which is tiny particles of liquid 
suspended in the air. Even a solid material can become poisonous gas 
if it is dissolved in a proper solvent and sprayed into the air, thus 
becoming an aerosol.
Nerve gas was discovered accidently in Germany during the course 
of developing organophosphate insecticides before World War II. A sci-
entist, Gerhard Schrader, discovered the newly synthesized compound 
was very effective for lice. By placing just a drop on a laboratory table, the 
pupils of the persons involved shrank and the gas also caused difficulty 
in breathing. The news of this new type of organophosphate insecticide 
attracted the attention of the Nazi regime. Schrader was called to Berlin 
to develop a type of poisonous gas using his new discovery. Further 
experimentation showed that the new type of compounds caused muscle 
spasms in cats and dogs. In 1938, they synthesized the first nerve gas, 
tabun. Soon, German scientists developed another new organophosphate 
nerve gas called sarin. The term “sarin” came from the names of the sci-
entists who discovered it: Schrader, Ambros, Gerhard Ritter, and van der 
Linder. Sarin’s formula is shown in Structure 1.1.
O
O
F
P
CH
H3C
CH3
H3C
Structure 1.1  Chemical structure of sarin.

8
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Later, they also developed soman, another powerful nerve agent. In 
addition, Schrader developed the nerve agent, cyclosarin, which was desi­
gnated as GF by the U.S. Army. The chemical structures of tabun (GA), 
soman (GD), and cyclosarin (GF) are shown in Structures 1.2 through 1.4.
During WWII, Hitler’s close advisers, Martin Bormann and Albert 
Speer suggested the use of nerve gas, but Hitler prohibited its use because 
he had suffered from mustard gas poisoning during WWI. Later, when 
the war for Germany was in near collapse, Hitler did suggest using nerve 
gas. But during the later stages of the war, there were not enough air-
planes to drop the nerve gas bombs and not enough artillery to send the 
poison shells. Moreover, the Soviet Union quickly occupied the poisonous 
gas manufacturing site in Silesia, East Germany. Some German scientists 
escaped to the west and surrendered to Allied forces. America learned 
how to make nerve gas from these German scientists and set up their own 
nerve gas weapons program. Russia also learned how to make nerve gas 
from captured German scientists.
VX is a nerve gas that was discovered after WWII in the United 
Kingdom. The U.S. Army continued their research and the development, 
O
O
P
N
CN
Tabun
CH3
CH3
CH2CH3
Structure 1.2  Chemical structure of tabun.
Soman
H
O
P
F
O
C
CH3
(H3C)3C
CH3
Structure 1.3  Chemical structure of soman.
O
O
Cyclosarin
P
F
CH3
Structure 1.4  Chemical structure of cyclosarin.

9
Chemical Agents and Weapons
and finally VX was produced. VX is more toxic than the previously men-
tioned nerve gases and is less volatile, it can penetrate the skin and kill 
people. From the chemical structure of VX (Structure 1.5), it is an organo-
phosphate but it also contains part of the mustard gas structure. The 
chemical structure of the left portion is a G-type nerve gas while the mid-
dle portion has similarities to mustard gas. VX was never used in actual 
combat, but it was used for the first time by Aum Shinrikyo, killing one 
person and injuring two in Japan in 1994–1995.
Other manufactured nerve gases include GE (ethylsarin), GF (cyclo-
sarin or cyclohexymethyl phosphonoflouridate), and GV. GV was devel-
oped by former Czechoslovakia and was called GV because it has 
properties of VX and other G-type nerve gases such as GA, GB, and GD. 
During the Cold War, the United States knew of the presence of GV but 
called it GP.
A new type of nerve agent is currently being developed and one type, 
alkylquarternary salt of N-methyl carbamate, is considered to be one of 
the strongest nerve agents.
Some properties of nerve gases are described next.
1.3.1.1  Sarin
Physical properties
Melting point: −56°C
Boiling point: −147°C
Vapor pressure: 2.10 mmHg at 20°C
Volatility: 12,000 mg/m3
Specific gravity against air: 4.86; specific gravity against water: 1.09
Toxicity
Route of entry is inhalation, eye, skin
Lethal dose: 100 mg ⋅ min/m3 (gas) for man
Minimum toxic dose: 1 0×10−3 mg ⋅ min/m3 (gas)
Minimum concentration to incapacitate a person: 0.5 mg ⋅ min/
m−3 (gas)
O
C2H5O
CH2CH2N
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
VX
S
P
CH3
Structure 1.5  Chemical structure of VX.

10
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Toxic duration: Good weather on a clear day at 15°C: 15 min to 4 hr; 
Good weather and snow without wind at –10°C, windy or 
rain: 15 min to 1 hr
Because sarin was actually used in Japan against humans by Aum 
Shinrikyo, Japanese medical doctors reported clinical symptoms caused 
by sarin, and this was the only actual observation of sarin poisoning in 
humans. In the Iran–Iraq War, Iraq used sarin and tabun, but Iranian mili-
tary doctors told me they could not differentiate which one was sarin or 
tabun in the battlefield.
Acetylcholinesterase is essential for control of nerve transmission. A 
nerve transmitter, acetylcholine binds to the acetylcholine receptor. The 
enzyme acetylcholinesterase hydrolyzes acetylcholine after it binds to the 
receptor. Sarin binds to acetylcholinesterase rendering acetylcholine to keep 
it attached to the receptor (Structure 1.6). The result is a spasm of the muscle.
There is an antidote for sarin: PAM (pyridoxime chloride). It releases 
the enzyme from the acetylcholinesterase–sarin complex (Structure 1.7). 
PAM is a useful antidote for sarin and VX, but is less effective for tabun 
and soman. There are many other sarin antidotes. For someone who has 
liver disease, the alternative drug obidoxime (toxogonin) is recommended 
(Structure 1.8).
HI-6 (Hagedorn oxime) is an effective antidote for sarin, soman, and 
VX, but not for tabun (Structure 1.9).
Another drug, HGG-12, has a similar effect to HI-6 (Structure 1.10).
The drug compound Q [3-(2-phenyl-cyclopentyl-2-hydroxy)-quinucli-
dine] was developed by China’s People’s Liberation Army (Structure 1.11).
Atropine is also an effective antidote for sarin, but because of a differ-
ent mechanism. Actually, atropine is similar in some parts to acetylcho-
line in chemical structure, therefore atropine and acetylcholine become 
competitive for the acetylcholine binding receptor (Structure 1.12).
There is a prophylactic drug for sarin, which was used by Aum 
Shinrikyo members for their own protection before they conducted the 
AChE
E
E
Ser
O
O
O
CH
P
Ser
OH
F
O
O
CH
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
P
+
AChE-sarin complex
Sarin
Structure 1.6  Inhibition of acetylcholinesterase by sarin.

11
Chemical Agents and Weapons
HON
OCH(CH3)2
P
O
O
Ser
AChE
AChE-sarin complex
(inactive enzyme)
(CH3)
H
C
CH3
N+
N
H
C
CH3
CH3
O
OCH(CH3)2
Pralidoxime (PAM)
O
+
P
N+
OH
+
Ser
Regeneration of
active enzyme
AChE
Structure 1.7  The antidote mechanism of PAM against sarin poisoning.
NOH 2Cl–
CH2
CH2
O
HON
CH
N+
CH
N+
Structure 1.8  Chemical structure of obidoxime.
HON
CH
N+
N+
O
CH2
CH2
CONH2
Structure 1.9  Chemical structure of Hagedorn oxime.
HON
CH
N+
+N
CO
O
CH2
O
Structure 1.10  Chemical structure of HGG-12.
OH
C
O
CH2
f
N
Structure 1.11  Chemical structure of compound Q.

12
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
chemical terrorist attack with sarin. Pyridostigmine, PB, is used because it 
binds to acetylcholinesterase (AChE) reversibly. When one takes PB, about 
20% to 40% of it forms a complex with PB (AChE-PB) in the body. When 
one is exposed to sarin, the AChE-PB complex dissociates and releases 
AChE (Structure 1.13). The effective duration of PB is about 8 hours.
1.3.1.2  Tabun
Physical properties
Melting point: –49°C
Boiling point: 246°C
CH3
Acetylcholine
Atropine
HOCH2
N(CH3)3
CH
CH
CH
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
7A
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
H+N
O
O
C
O
O
C
Structure 1.12  Atropine has some similarities to the structure of acetylcholine. 
In other words, atropine is a competitive inhibitor of acetylcholine for the binding 
site of the acetylcholine receptor.
Br–
(AChE, 100%)
+
(PB)
CH3
(60 ~ 80%)
AChE
AChE-PB
+
E
Ser
OH
E
Ser
OH
E
Ser
O
E
Ser
OH
N(CH3)2
O
O
N(CH3)2
O
+N
Structure 1.13  The reason PB can be used as a prophylactic drug for sarin.

13
Chemical Agents and Weapons
Vapor pressure: 0.036 mm Hg at 20°C
Volatility: 560 mg/m3 at 20°C; Specific gravity against air is 5.6 
and 1.07 against water
Toxicity
Route of the entry is inhalation, eyes, and skin
Lethal dose against humans: 400 mg ⋅ min/m3 (gas)
Toxic duration: Good weather at 15°C: 1 to 4 days; Good weather and 
snow without wind at −10°C: 1 to 2 weeks; Wind and rain at 10°C: 
30 min to 6 hr
1.3.1.3  Soman
Physical properties
Melting point: –80°C
Boiling point: 167°C
Vapor pressure: 0.27 mm Hg at 20°
Volatility: 2.06 mg/m3
Specific gravity against air is 6.35 and 1.01 against water
Toxic duration: Good weather at 15°C: 2.5 to 5 days; Good weather and 
snow without wind at –10°C: 1 to 6 weeks; Wind and rain at 10°C: 
3 hr to 1.5 days
1.3.1.4  VX
Physical properties
Melting point: –20°C
Boiling point: 300°C
Vapor pressure: 0.044 mm Hg at 20°C
Volatility: 1.6 mg/m3
Specific gravity against air is 9.25 and 1.026 against water
Toxicity
Route of entry is skin, inhalation, and eye. It can kill a person 
at the concentration of 0.1mg ⋅ min/m3 and the lowest concentra-
tion to cause toxic effects is 110 × 10−3 mg ⋅ min/m3 in gas phase. 
Because of low volatility it can last 2 weeks on the battleground. 
Moreover it has a strong penetration ability, so it can kill a person 
from skin penetration. This is considered the most toxic among 
all nerve gases.
Aum Shinrikyo in Japan used VX, which injured two people. The 
cult members grabbed their victims and placed a drop of liquid VX onto 
them. Suddenly, the victims saw darkness because VX shrinks the pupils. 

14
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
In December 1994, Aum Shinrikyo killed Chyujin Hamaguchi who was 
suspected of being a police spy who penetrated into Aum Shinrikyo’s 
organization. In this case, Aum Shinrikyo injected VX directly into 
Hamaguchi. After he was injected with VX, he chased the kidnappers but 
collapsed after running for 500 meters and then died. Hamaguchi was the 
only person ever killed with VX.
Court records show that Hamaguchi was killed by six members of 
Aum Shinrikyo. I was curious as to how Aum Shinrikyo’s action group 
transported the extremely dangerous VX from Kamikuishiki to Osaka, 
which is quite a distance. So, I visited Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa, who was 
one of the six members, on death row. I asked him how they transported 
VX and injected it into Hamaguchi. Nakagawa told me they simply placed 
liquid VX in a syringe and had planned to remove the needle and attach a 
plastic tube to drip VX onto him just like they did with the two earlier vic-
tims. But because Hamaguchi, who had a black belt in judo, put up such a 
strong fight, they simply did not have time to remove the needle and just 
injected VX directly into his body.
At that time, the Japanese police did not know who killed Hamaguchi 
or why. The case was solved after the Tokyo subway attack in 1995. The 
blood of Hamaguchi has been stored in Osaka Criminal Laboratory and 
his death by VX was confirmed after finding the metabolites of VX. This 
finding indicates that we can detect VX from a victim’s blood by analyz-
ing VX metabolism products in a victim.
1.3.2  Blister Agents
Among the blister agents, mustard gas (HD, (ClCH2CH2)2S) was extensively 
used and caused most of the damage to Iranian combat troops inflicted by 
Iraq, who used many other poisonous gases during the Iran–Iraq War. The 
use of mustard gas by Iraq against Iran is described in detail in Chapter 3.
Aum Shinrikyo manufactured 200 kg of mustard gas in December 
1994. That was 6 months before the sarin attack in Matsumoto and 
15 months before they struck the Tokyo subway with sarin. Fortunately, 
the group never had a chance to use mustard gas for a terrorist action.
Mustard gas has a melting point of 14°C, a boiling point of 217°C, and 
a specific gravity against air of 5.4 and against water of 1.27. Toxicity for 
humans is 1500 mg min/m3 and the concentration to incapacitate a person 
is 100 mg min/m3. The duration for toxic activity is 2 to 7 days at 15°C on 
a clear day. On a clear day but with snow on the ground, the toxicity lasts 
2 to 8 weeks. On a rainy day with wind, the toxicity lasts 12 hours to 2 days.

15
Chemical Agents and Weapons
Unpurified mustard gas has been used many times. Purified mustard 
gas is called distilled mustard gas. Lewisite was the gas that was most often 
used during WWI and also in China by the Japanese troops during the 
1937–1945 period. Cleanup of the leftover poisonous gases in China was the 
responsibility of Japan, which will be described in more detail in Chapter 9.
Lewisite is also a well-known blister agent and was assigned the code 
name of “L” by the U.S. Army. The chemical structure of lewisite is shown 
in Structure 1.14. It was developed in the United States but was not used 
in WWI or WWII. The United States produced 20,000 tons of lewisite but 
eventually all the stockpile was destroyed in 2012, as the United States 
decided not to use chemical weapons for war. Although the United States 
never used lewisite, Japan used it extensively in the Chinese war zone. 
Lewisite contains arsenic atoms in its compound and this caused arsenic 
poisoning for many years after Japan buried it underground after WWII. 
Again, more on this in Chapter 9.
Lewisite is the inhibitor of pyruvic acid dehydrogenase and thus pre-
vents the formation of acetyl-CoA, which in turn prevents the formation 
of ATP in vivo. The action of lewisite is somewhat similar to mustard gas 
and produces blisters upon skin contact. It causes intensive pain in the 
skin and is also inhaled. The antidote for lewisite is dimercaprol, which 
can be injected to prevent systemic poisoning but will not to prevent the 
effects on the skin.
In addition to mustard gas and lewisite, phenyldichloroarsine (PD), 
­ethylchloroarsine (ED), and methylchloroarsine (MD) are also arsenic 
compounds with blister effects.
1.3.3  Blood Agents
Both cyanogen chloride and hydrogen cyanide are carried by the blood 
and bind to cytochrome oxidase in the cells and then become toxic.
1.3.3.1  Cyanogen Chloride
Cyanogen chloride has a code of CK and has the simple chemical structure 
of CNCl. The N is a triple bond and the chlorine atom attaches directly to 
CI
CI
CI
As
Structure 1.14  Chemical structure of lewisite.

16
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
the carbon atom. It is also called by different names, such as chlorine cya-
nide, cyanic chloride, chlorocyanogen, and chlorocyanide.
The toxic effect is that it damages the respiratory organs and eyes 
upon contact. It causes drowsiness, sore throat, coughing, nausea, vom-
iting, edema, convulsion, paralysis, and eventually death. It becomes 
hydrogen cyanide (HCN) after it enters the body.
The duration of toxicity in 15°C clear weather is only a few minutes, 
so it is highly diffusible. Even on a rainy day, the toxic effect lasts only a 
few minutes.
The melting point is −6.55°C and the boiling point is 13°C, so it is a 
gas in the normal temperature range of 20°C to 30°C. It is a colorless gas, 
and soluble in water and some organic solvents such as ethanol and ether. 
The specific gravity against air is 2.1, so it is heavier than air. The specific 
gravity of liquid cyanogen chloride is 1.22.
1.3.3.2  Hydrogen Cyanide
Hydrogen cyanide, HCN, is well known for its early use in execution gas 
chambers in California. It was also used by the Nazis for the extermina-
tion of Jews in concentration camps in Poland during WWII.
Hydrogen cyanide’s melting point is –15°C and its boiling point is 
26°C, so its liquid and gas phases depend on temperature. Hydrogen cya-
nide is used in military hand grenades. The Japanese Army had HCN 
hand grenades during WWII (Photo 1.3).
The specific gravity of hydrogen cyanide against air is 3.5, indicating 
that it is heavier than air, and because of this property it is utilized for 
poisonous gas. I have read two Chinese military books that list HCN as 
a chemical agent in hand grenades. HCN was packed in artillery, bombs, 
and rocket shells. In the Cold War days, a water solution containing hydro-
gen cyanide was used to kill targets.
Hydrogen cyanide is soluble in water, but it does not dissociate to 
a hydrogen ion and a cyanide ion. Because of the lack of ionic nature of 
hydrogen cyanide in water, it can penetrate the skin and many cell mem-
branes. Like cyanogen chloride, hydrogen cyanide binds to cytochrome 
oxidase and thus stops cell respiration. The leftover cyanide binds to hemo-
globin in the blood and the skin becomes red from cyanide poisoning.
1.3.4  Vomiting Agents and Rioting Control Agents
Vomiting agents are used because vomiting reduces the fighting capac-
ity of soldiers. Vomiting agents are also used for riot control in civil 

17
Chemical Agents and Weapons
disturbances. A typical agent is adamsite, which is an arsenic compound 
(Structure 1.15). Adamsite was used by the British in WWI, in the United 
States for riot control in 1932, and also during the Vietnam War. Now the 
agent is considered obsolete and is no longer used. It has very low solubil-
ity in water, so it was used by dissolving in organic solvents such as ace-
tone and dichloromethane to make an aerosol. For riot control, adamsite 
was replaced by tear gas, CS, that has the chemical name, [(2-chlorophe-
nyl)methylidene]propanedinitrile. It is also called by different names such 
as 2-(2-chlorobenzylidene)malononitrile, 2-chlorobenzylmalononitrile, or 
o-chlorobenzylidene malononitrile (Structure 1.16). Another commonly 
used riot control agent is chloroacetophenone (Structure 1.17).
In Taiwan in 1953, one year of military training was required before 
receiving a college degree. Therefore, I received poisonous gas training 
using tear gas at the chemical school of Taiwan’s army. Not only did the 
Photo 1.3  A Japanese army hydrogen cyanide hand grenade from WWII. 
The hand grenade was captured in the Philippines. (Courtesy of Dr. René Pita, 
Chemical Officer, Spain Ministry of Defence.)
H
N
As
CI
Structure 1.15  Chemical structure of adamsite. Notice it contains an arsenic atom.

18
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
tear gas produce plenty of tears, it also affects the mucous membranes 
such as the lips and throat, and I experienced severe pain and irritation. 
But after the contact with tear gas, I was exposed to fresh air, and the 
pain and irritation quickly disappeared. I realized that the effect of tear 
gas was severe but only temporary. Tear gas is considered nonlethal and 
is frequently used for training purposes. Once I was watching NHK, a 
Japanese television show that discussed the training of Japanese chemical 
troops, and I noticed they also used tear gas for chemical warfare training. 
Just as I experienced, the effects of tear gas usually last only 15 minutes. 
Some riot control agents last longer. For instance, the effects of pepper 
spray may continue for up to 2 hours after contact.
There are many other compounds that are used for riot control pur-
poses, including CS gas (ortho-chlorobenzylidene-malononitrile) and CR 
gas (dibenz-1,4-oxazepine).
1.3.5  Incapacitating Agents
In the 1980s, many airplanes were being hijacked, and thus many coun-
tries started developing special agents that could temporarily incapacitate 
a hijacker. The purpose was not to kill but to capture the hijackers.
In Moscow, on October 23, 2002, 800 people in a theater were suddenly 
hijacked by Chechen independent group members. In order to rescue the 
hostages days later, Russian special forces stormed the theater and for the 
first time used an incapacitating agent.
CI
N
N
Structure 1.16  Chemical structure of tear gas, CS.
O
CI
Structure 1.17  Chemical structure of chloroacetophenone, which is frequently 
used for riot control.

19
Chemical Agents and Weapons
There are several varieties of incapacitating agents and one common 
one is BZ (Structure 1.18). Fentanyl-type compounds are also used as inca-
pacitating agents. Fentanyl is a synthetic compound that has morphine-like 
activity; it is actually more active than the natural one. The incapacitating 
agent used in the rescue operation in Moscow’s theater was announced 
by Russia as a fentanyl type but was not specified to a particular type of 
fentanyl. The following types of fentanyl derivatives were tested for inca-
pacitating agents. Since we do not know which one was used, only the 
compounds with their chemical structures are shown in Structure 1.19.
In the rescue operation, the terrorists were killed. In addition, 117 hos-
tages were killed and 152 were hospitalized. An incapacitating agent is 
meant to temporarily incapacitate, but if the concentration is too high then 
it can kill. In the Moscow operation, the concentration of the gas used was 
five times too strong. Because it was the first time it was used, Russia did 
not know the proper concentration.
OH
O
N
O
Structure 1.18  Chemical structure of BZ.
N
CH3
N     N
O
OCH3
N
N
N
N
N
O
C
CH2CH3
CH2CH3
CH2CH3
CH3
O
CH2CH3
CH3 O
C
N
N
C
OCH3CH2CH3
O
C
N
F
N
C
C
N
N
S
N
N
C
CH2CH3
OCH3
O
N
C
N
O
CH3
CH3
N
C
N
O
O
CH2CH3
CH3
O
Structure 1.19  Chemical structures of fentanyl-type compounds that are fre-
quently used as incapacitating agents.

20
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Another reason for high casualties among the hostages was that the 
medical doctors were not notified as to what type of gas was used; there-
fore, they did not know what kind of treatment to use. This is why the 
analysis of an agent in case of chemical terrorism is important. By know-
ing the toxic agent used, then emergency physicians can provide proper 
treatment. In the case of the Matsumoto sarin terrorist attack on June 27, 
1994, the identity of the toxic agent was not immediately identified, but 
the physicians noticed that all the patients’ pupils had shrunk. This was 
a typical symptom of organophosphate poisoning, therefore, the physi-
cians used atropine for treatment, and fortunately, they administered 
the proper antidote. In the case of the Tokyo subway attack with sarin 
on March 20, 1995, the toxic agent was analyzed immediately and identi-
fied as sarin within 1 hour, thus emergency personnel could use the sarin 
­antidote PAM as well as atropine for treatment.
1.4  TOXICOLOGY
The toxic action of nerve gas is mentioned in more detail than other poi-
sonous gas, but it is important to see the overall toxicity. Most of the toxic 
action was studied in animals, but the importance is how humans are 
affected. Since we cannot use humans for such a study, toxicity against 
humans is the extrapolation of animal data and is estimated as the pos-
sible toxic value for the human.
Agent
Phase
Inhalation Route 
(mg/min/m3)
Entry into Skin 
(mg/min/m3)
Tabun
Gas
400
30,000
Liquid
—
1,000
Sarin
Gas
100
15,000
Liquid
—
1,700
Soman
Gas
40–70
11,000
VX
Liquid
0.1
—
Mustard gas
Liquid
1,500
10,000
Lewisite
Gas
1,500
10,000
Hydrogen cyanide
Gas
2,000
—
Phosgene
Gas
3,200
—
Chloroacetophenon
Gas
11,000
—
Adamsite
Gas
15,000
—
CS
Gas
25,000
—

21
Chemical Agents and Weapons
Usually, these agents are packed into bombs, artillery shells, rocket 
shells, missile heads, hand grenades, and mines to make chemical weap-
ons. For safety, the United States made a binary system in which two inac-
tive precursors were packed into two separate components. When such a 
binary system weapon is dropped from an airplane or fired as an artillery 
shell, they mix with one another to become an active chemical weapon as 
soon as they hit the ground. When an ordinary chemical weapon storage 
site is hit by an enemy bomb or shell, the stored chemical weapons explode, 
becoming very lethal. In contrast, a binary system weapon does not explode 
even when hit by an enemy attack. For an example of the binary system for 
sarin, one compartment contains difloromethylphosphonate and the other 
component contains isopropyl alcohol and isopropylamine (Figure 1.1). In 
Structure 1.20, the binary system of VX is shown.
However, I don’t think most countries have binary systems because 
they are too expensive to make.
CH3
P
O
OC2H5
CH2
CH2N
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
OL
VX
+
S
CH3
P
O
OC2H5
O
SCH2CH2N
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
Structure 1.20  Chemical reaction of a binary system of a chemical weapon.
Fuse
Precursor
Precursor
Booster
Figure 1.1  Simplified diagram of a binary system of chemical weapons.

22
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
1.5  RECENT USE OF CHEMICAL 
WEAPONS IN SYRIA AND BY ISIS
1.5.1  Use by Syria
The Syrian situation was still very messy at the time of this writing. Its 
civil war started in March 2011 with the cracking down on peaceful pro-
tests across cities. The United States started to provide arms to help the 
rebels in 2013. Since the start of the civil war, chemical weapon use was 
reported. Some said the Syrian government used these weapons and some 
reports stated it was the rebel forces that used them. In this section, the 
use of chemical weapons in Syria is briefly summarized and the chemical 
weapons used by ISIS are discussed in the next section.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad indeed used sarin in large quanti-
ties in March 2013 in Khan al-Asal and again on August 22–25, 2013, in 
Jobar, causing several hundred civilian deaths. The rebel forces also used 
chemical weapons, mainly chlorine and smaller quantities of mustard gas.
The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), 
watchdog for the spread of chemical weapons worldwide, sent a team to 
investigate the allegations in 2013. With deals brokered by Russia and the 
United States, Assad agreed to destroy all the chemical weapons. The Syrian 
government possessed 500 tons of sarin, VX, and other chemical weapons. 
In order to destroy them, OPCW used a specially made ship, which was 
fitted in Norfolk, Virginia. Sarin was hydrolyzed with sodium hydroxide 
and other chemical agents were destroyed by oxidation with hypochlorite.
All of Syria’s chemical weapons were supposed to be turned over to 
OPCW for destruction, but it was recently discovered that Assad had hid-
den some of them. On May 2016, Assad dropped bombs laden with sarin 
against ISIS forces to prevent the seizure of two air bases near Damascus.
1.5.2  Use by ISIS
ISIS’s name is translated into English as the “Islamic State of Iraq and 
Syria.” It is a militant group that follows the fundamentalist doctrine of 
Sunni Islam. It suddenly became big news when it captured an important 
town, Mosul, in western Iraq. It became even more well known when it 
captured several foreigners and beheaded them. The photograph of these 
captured foreigners who were about to be beheaded by ISIS shocked 
everyone. ISIS continued to surprise the world by announcing that it 
would set up a new nation covering territory of Syria and part of Iraq. It is 
rather unusual to claim a territory involving more than one nation.

23
Chemical Agents and Weapons
Chlorine was the first poisonous gas used by Germany on the west-
ern front during WWI. Since then, various more potent chemical agents 
have been used as chemical weapons. Nowadays, chlorine is still used as 
a disinfecting agent for drinking water and swimming pool water, but not 
for chemical weapons. When ISIS began to lose its fight, it started using 
chlorine. Since chlorine is abundant in quantity in modern society, ISIS 
grabbed the chlorine and just used it as a poisonous gas. When the supply 
ran out, the use of chlorine as a poisonous gas also stopped.
As for mustard gas, ISIS obtained it from two sources. One source was 
left over from the days of Saddam Hussein. Iraq used a massive quantity 
of mustard gas against Iran during the Iran–Iraq War of 1980–1988. Many 
chemical agents were still left over at various sites in Iraq. So, ISIS stole 
the stockpile of mustard gas in Iraq. It also stole some mustard gas from 
the stockpile of Syria. ISIS captured the Syrian army base in Darat Izza, 
in northern Iraq in 2012. To its surprise, ISIS found a large quantity of 
chlorine, sarin, and mustard gas. It used these chemical weapons against 
the Syrian army in the town near Aleppo and later at many more places. It 
was also reported that ISIS used mustard gas against American and Iraq 
troops in 2016. However, the second test was negative, so this news was 
not definitely proven. The mustard gas they used was not potent because 
the concentration was low. ISIS also tried to manufacture its own chemi-
cal agents in Mosul and hired Sleiman Daoud al-Afari, an engineer from 
Saddam Hussein’s reign, and experts from Chechnya. It is estimated that 
ISIS used chemical weapons about 20 times in Syria and Iraq.
In order to destroy the ISIS stockpile and manufacturing sites, the 
United States performed airstrikes. U.S. forces captured Afari and killed 
Abu Malik, an ISIS chemical weapons expert. The effectiveness of the air-
strikes has not been verified, so it is really not clear if the attacks struck 
their real targets.
If ISIS is using stolen chemical weapons, then its stockpile is limited. 
The big concern is whether ISIS is making its own chemical weapons. The 
OPCW also expressed its concern in May 2016. At the time of this writing, 
the answer is still not clear.


25
2
Biological Agents and Weapons
2.1  TYPES OF BIOLOGICAL AGENTS AND WEAPONS
Biological weapons come in several varieties and can be listed in the fol-
lowing manner by their origin of biological agent:
•	 Microorganism-type biological weapons—These include bacteria, 
virus, fungus, parasite, and rickettsia.
•	 Toxin weapons—These weapons use a naturally occurring toxin as 
a biological weapon. Usually, biological toxins are far more toxic 
than man-made toxins.
•	 Modified and genetically engineered toxins—Some toxins can be 
chemically modified so that their toxicity can be further increased 
or made resistant to antibiotics or vaccines. With the recent devel-
opment of genetic engineering, one can make an almost unlim-
ited number of man-made toxins.
Traditionally, the target for biological weapons was humans, but more 
recently the target has been expanded to include domestic animals and 
crops. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, I received a call from the U.S. 
State Department saying the United States wanted to help Uzbekistan sci-
entists by giving them a peaceful research project so that they would not 
be recruited by renegade countries. I agreed to assist and 2 weeks later, 
the State Department brought two scientists from Uzbekistan with one 
Russian translator. One scientist worked on Central Asian cobra venom 
as a toxin weapon and the other was working on a biological weapon to 
infect and destroy domestic animals. Based on my experience with these 

26
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
scientists, the former Soviet Union worked on biological weapons targeted 
for both humans and domestic animals.
Biological agents are much more broad and rich in variety and there-
fore it is impossible to cover all the types of biological weapons. So in this 
chapter, I have chosen to discuss only a few selective agents.
2.2  BIOLOGICAL AGENTS AND 
MECHANISMS OF ACTION
There are many varieties of biological agents that can be used for a bio­
logical weapon. For a chemical weapon the variety is more limited. I like 
the classification created by the U.S. Army (Table 2.1). It classifies bio­
agents by their origin and each is assigned a number. For instance, a virus 
is expressed as V, rickettsia as R, bacteria as B, and toxin as T.
Of the targets of biological weapons, humans are the most important 
and that kind of variety is also the largest. This will be discussed in more 
detail later.
Although biological weapons are banned by most countries, some 
countries still prepare these weapons. In the United States, development 
of offensive biological weapons is forbidden by law. However, defensive 
research and countermeasures are permissible. No one usually publicly 
announces the development of a biological weapons program. Even the 
name of a biological weapons institute is masked with an innocuous name 
such as the Institute of Prevention Medicine or Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry. If one knows what type of biological agents another country 
is working on, it is relatively easy to defend against it by using a specific 
antitoxin or vaccine. But every country that develops such a program usu-
ally keeps everything secret. Because of this, intelligence becomes impor-
tant. I was surprised to learn that the U.S. government knew everything 
the Soviet Union was doing with biological weapons down to detailed 
information about its institute. When visiting the biological and chemical 
weapons program in China, I was fascinated by its efforts to gather infor-
mation. China is sandwiched ideology-wise between two big countries—
the United States and Russia—and it takes great efforts to find out what 
these two countries are doing.
I am not an expert on biological weapons and don’t know much 
about what many countries are doing, but the following agents have been 

27
Biological Agents and Weapons
Table 2.1  U.S. Army Classification of Bioagents
Virus
V1
Chikungunya virus
V2
Congo-Crimean hemorrhagic fever virus
V3
Dengue fever virus
V4
Eastern equine encephalitis virus
V5
Ebola virus
V6
Hantaan virus
V7
Junin virus
V8
Lassa fever virus
V9
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
V10
Machupo virus
V11
Marburg vims
V12
Monkey pox virus
V13
Rift Valley fever virus
V14
Tick-borne encephalitis virus (Russian spring-summer 
encephalitis virus)
V15
Variola virus
V16
Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus
V17
Western equine encephalitis virus
V18
White pox
V19
Yellow fever virus
V20
Japanese encephalitis virus
Rickettsia
R1
Coxiella burnetii
R2
Rickettsia quintana
R3
Rickettsia prowasecki
R4
Rickettsia rickettsii
Bacteria
B1
Bacillus anthracis
B2
Brucella abortus
B3
Brucella melitensis
B4
Brucella suis
B5
Chlamydia psittaci
B6
Clostridium botulinum
B7
Francisella tularensis
(Continued)

28
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
studied or developed in programs. This list is probably just the tip of the 
iceberg.
Virus
Chlamydia psittaci
Aedena egypti
Dengue fever
Chikungunya
Mayaro virus
Ross River virus
Venezuelan equine encephalitis
Eastern equine encephalitis
Western equine encephalitis
Tick-borne encephalitis
Kyasanur Forest disease
Rift Valley fever
Lymphocytic choriomeningitis
Junin (Argentine hemorrhagic fever)
Hanteen
Table 2.1 (Continued)  U.S. Army Classification of Bioagents
B8
Fseudomonas mallei
B9
Fseudomonas pseudomallei
B10
Salmonella typhi
B11
Shigella dysenteriae
B12
Vibrio cholera
B13
Yersinia pestis
Toxin
T1
Botulinum toxins
T2
Clostridium perfringens
T3
Conotoxin
T4
Ricin
T5
Saxitoxin
T6
Shiga toxin
T7
Staphylococcus aureus
T8
Tetrodotoxin
T9
Verotoxin
T10
Microcystin (cyanginosin)
Note:	 V, virus; R, rickettsia; B, bacteria; T, toxin.

29
Biological Agents and Weapons
Lassa fever
Sindbis
Marburg
Ebola
Variola
Bacteria
Vibrio comma
Salmonella typhosa
Shigella
Francisella tularensis
Brucella species
Clostridium tetani
Clostridium perfringens
Pasteurella pestis
Bacillus anthracis
Actinobacillus mallei
Rickettsia
Rickettsia prowazekii
Rickettsia tsutsugamushi
Coxiella burnettii (Q fever)
Rickettsia rickettsii
Fungus
Puccinia graminis
Pyricularia oryzae
2.3  TARGET: DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND CROPS
An example of a virus that targets animals is Western equine enceph­
alitis.  It causes inflammation of brain parenchyma. It is spread by the 
mosquito Culex tarsalis. For bacterium Acetobacter pasteurianus Ab3 and 
Mycoplasma mycoides can be used. A. pasteurianus Ab3 is a bacterium that is 
resistant to acetic acid. The bacterium is a parasite that lives in ruminants. 
It is considered the most important threat to cattle farming. Other agents 
that target domestic animals are Rickettsia ruminantium, foot and mouth 
disease virus, and Tryvamosoma vivax.
Examples of agents that target crop plants include the following:
Claviceps purpurea
Colletotrichum coffeanum var. Virulans

30
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Dothistroma pini
Erwinia amylovora
Erwinia carotovora
Ralstonia solanacearum
Peronospora hyoscyami de Bary f. sp. Tabacina (Adam) skalicky
Puccinia graminis
Puccinia striiformiis (Puccinia glumarum)
Pyricularia oryzae
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum
Sugarcane Fiji disease virus
Tilletia indica
Ustilago maydis
Xanthomonas albilineans
Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri
Xanthomonas campestris pv. oryzae
2.4  TOXIN WEAPONS
One reason biological toxins are used for biological weapons is that they 
are far more toxic than man-made toxins. To be a biological weapon there 
are many factors. High toxicity, in other words, high mortality, is one fac-
tor. The following table illustrates the toxicity. Potassium cyanide’s toxic-
ity at 1 is used for comparison.
Biological Toxin
Toxicity
Sea snake neurotoxin
100
Tetrodotoxin from fugu fish
1,000
Palytoxin from coral
2,941
Botulinum toxin A
9,090,900
Botulinum toxin D
31,250,000
From this table it is clear that botulinum D is the most toxic in the 
world and actually Aum Shinrikyo manufactured it as a biological 
weapon. Fortunately, the botulinum they made failed and was inactive.
2.5  MODIFICATION OF TOXINS AND ARTIFICIAL TOXINS
A toxin can be chemically modified to increase the toxicity, and to increase 
its resistance to drugs and vaccines. Microorganisms can also be modified 

31
Biological Agents and Weapons
by genetic engineering. With the development of genetic engineering 
totally new toxins can be developed that never existed before. This will be 
the most traumatic for the future of defending against bioterrorism or the 
defense of the biological actions of weapons.
In the past, the quantity of biological toxins was important for mak-
ing toxin weapons. But this is no longer the case. Once the amino acid 
sequence of a protein is known, a toxin can be developed by first making 
cDNA, and then from that producing a protein-type toxin.
2.6  BIOLOGICAL WEAPON AGENTS
Unlike chemical weapon agents, biological agents are broader in variety 
and origin. Only a few selected agents are discussed here. Many bacteria 
are potentially good candidates for biological weapons because they are 
infectious and have a high mortality rate. A high mortality rate and high 
infection rate are of course good properties for biological weapons, but it 
is not necessary to use them as biological weapons. For terrorist use, many 
other factors should be considered. Terrorists will normally use an agent 
that is easy to make and administer. For instance, Ebola virus is highly 
infectious with a high mortality rate and is feared by many people. Ebola 
virus is transmitted from animals to humans. Moreover, it is not easy to 
culture and requires an elaborate facility to create. Therefore, Ebola virus 
is not a common material for a terrorist to use. If Ebola virus is used as a 
biological weapon, it would probably be from a state-sponsored laboratory.
Bacterial toxins are also good candidates for biological weapons 
because of their extreme high toxicity and ease of culturing. For a toxin to 
become a toxin weapon, there are many factors that need to be considered. 
They have to be easy to obtain, possess high toxicity, be stable, easy to 
handle, hard to detect, hard to cure, and, most important, have the ability 
to become a stable aerosol. You want someone to inhale the toxin. So, not 
every biological toxin will become a toxin weapon.
2.6.1  Smallpox
Smallpox, caused by Variola major, is an example of a biological agent. 
Symptoms begin after a 12-day incubation period. At that point, one will 
suffer fever, headache, and vomiting. One will get red spots all over the 
skin including the face. The red spots turn to water blisters, then the water 
disappears forming scabs, eventually becoming scars.

32
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
The last known natural case of smallpox was in 1977 and small-
pox was declared to be eradicated from the earth by the World Health 
Organization (WHO) in 1980. Yet, smallpox is still considered one of the 
most dangerous biological weapons candidates. It is officially stored 
in two places—one is the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) in Atlanta, Georgia, and the second is the Research Institute of 
Viral Preparation, in Moscow, Russia. However, the vaccine can be pro-
duced and stockpiled for possible future biological terrorism or for the 
national arsenal to use as a biological weapon. This is possible because 
cowpox, which is similar to the human smallpox virus can be used. Or 
in the future, if the virus reappears and spreads, some country may use 
it for a biological weapon. During the Cold War, the Soviet Union had the 
smallpox virus packed in bombs and missiles ready to be used in case of 
war. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, these smallpox viruses must 
still be in someone’s hands.
After the 9/11 terrorist attacks and the anthrax terrorism that both 
occurred in 2001, the public as well as the U.S. government realized the 
future reality of bioterrorism and took it more seriously. One consider-
ation was to stockpile the smallpox vaccine. In 2001, the WHO had enough 
vaccines for 500,000 people and the U.S. government had enough vaccine 
for 1.54 million people. This was not enough for the whole population of 
the United States. The U.S. government contracted with Acambis PLC, a 
British pharmaceutical company, to produce more vaccine. By 2003, the 
stockpile grew large enough to inoculate 5.40 million, which would pro-
tect part of the whole population of the United States. This is important 
because the United States stopped inoculation in 1972, and the majority 
of the population has never received a smallpox inoculation. This means 
that they do not have the antibodies to fight against the smallpox virus; in 
other words, there is no immunity to smallpox disease. Thus, it is specu-
lated that smallpox will spread rapidly once used as a biological weapon. 
The fear of smallpox spreading is not limited to the U.S. government; it is 
a worldwide concern because the disease has no boundaries and can cross 
all borders.
Besides the use of vaccine, what else can be done to stop the spread 
of smallpox? Years ago, when smallpox spread in India, the U.S. Health 
Authority assisted India in controlling the disease by using strict quar-
antine of an infected area. No person was allowed to enter or leave the 
affected area. As a result, smallpox disease died out within the quarantine 
area. Using this experience, the disease can be stopped from spreading 
outside an infected area.

33
Biological Agents and Weapons
2.6.2  Anthrax
Anthrax (Bacillus anthracis) is not common for humans, yet people are afraid 
because it is considered to be the most ideal candidate for a biological 
weapon. Many countries use anthrax as a biological weapon. By changing 
growing conditions, anthrax bacteria can convert to a spore that is used for 
a biological weapon. Anthrax spores are stable to heat, acid, and chemicals. 
In Australia, anthrax disease suddenly occurred after digging the soil for 
construction. In that same area, about 100 years ago, cattle were imported 
from India for meat but due to the occurrence of anthrax disease among 
the cattle, they were slaughtered and buried. This episode illustrates that 
the anthrax spore can survive more than 100 years in soil.
Anthrax disease occurs more often in animals that graze on grass 
because the anthrax bacteria is often present in soil. For humans, it occurs 
in those who have more contact with animals or with animal products, 
such as veterinarians or butchers. Therefore, sometimes anthrax is called 
a professional disease.
In March 1979, there was an outbreak of anthrax disease in Sverdlovsk 
in the Soviet Union, and the United States suspected this was due to a leak 
from a biological weapons lab in the city. After the collapse of the Soviet 
Union, Western inspectors confirmed that the anthrax outbreak was indeed 
due to an accidental leak from the biological weapons lab. The disease spread 
due to inhalation of airborne anthrax spores released from the laboratory.
The route of entry is important for anthrax. If it enters through a 
wound on the skin, then it is called skin anthrax. If one eats rotten meat 
from a slaughtered infected animal and gets sick, it is intestinal anthrax. 
The third type is lung anthrax and is rather rare in natural conditions 
because it is caused by inhaling anthrax.
Inhalation anthrax is not common in humans during ordinary con-
ditions, but this is the property utilized for biological weapons. When 
the spores are inhaled, the spores adhere to the lung cells and then enter 
the body through endocytosis. Inhalation anthrax is very dangerous and 
mortality is almost 100% if not treated immediately. For bioweapons, the 
key is to make anthrax spores into a fine powder and from that to cre-
ate an aerosol so that people who inhale the spores can be killed. That’s 
why anthrax terrorism in the United States in 2001 caused 7 deaths and 
infected 21 people with anthrax disease even though only five envelopes 
containing anthrax spore powder were delivered.
It is not the anthrax bacteria that kills, but rather it is the anthrax toxin 
released from the bacteria that is responsible. Cipro is a good antibiotic 

34
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
drug for anthrax disease (Structure 2.1), but the drug has to be used in 
the early stages of the illness. Once the toxin is released, administration 
of Cipro is not effective. During the Gulf War, all U.S. soldiers received 
vaccines prior to going to the battle zone for protection.
There are many strains of anthrax, but only three types are relatively 
well studied. They are the Ames, Vollum, and Sterne strains. The first, Ames, 
was isolated in Ames, Iowa, about 100 years ago and was well distributed 
in many laboratories in the United States and other parts of the world. Back 
then, there were no laws governing the transfer of the bacteria, and this 
strain of anthrax was possessed by many scientists throughout the world.
The Vollum strain was originally isolated and developed in Gruinard 
Island, England, in 1935. The biological weapons from the United Kingdom 
and Iraq used this strain. Iraq purchased this strain from an American 
company called American Type Culture Collection to develop its biologi-
cal weapons.
The Sterne strain was developed by Maxx Sterne in South Africa, 
and this strain has no toxicity for humans. The reason is that Sterne-type 
anthrax does not have a protective capsule and it is destroyed by macro-
phages when it enters the human body. Other than the lack of a protective 
capsule, it contains all the components of the other strains, thus Sterne-
type anthrax is used for the vaccine.
Anthrax toxin is a mixture of three proteins and they are
•	 Edema factor (EF)—Molecular weight (MW) of 89,000
•	 Protective antigen (PA)—MW of 83,000; PA consists of two parts: PA 
20 and PA 63; the MW of PA 20 is 20,000 and that of PA 63 is 63,000
•	 Lethal factor (LF)—MW of 90,000
To enter the cell, the PA attaches to the cell membrane’s receptor, 
then PA 63 forms a channel allowing EF to enter the cell. The EF has an 
enzymatic action of adenylate cyclase with the aid of calmodulin. In other 
words, the anthrax toxin will produce a large amount of cyclic AMP in 
HN
N
F
O
COOH
·HCI · H2O
N
4
1
3
6
7
Structure 2.1  Chemical structure of Cipro, an antibiotic for anthrax disease.

35
Biological Agents and Weapons
a short amount of time. Cyclic AMP is necessary for our normal living, 
but usually the body requires only a small amount. However, a sudden 
influx of cyclic AMP is harmful to humans. This is similar to the action of 
cholera toxin that also produces a sudden influx of cyclic AMP and causes 
extensive diarrhea that eventually leads to death by dehydration.
Lethal factor (LF) can also bind to PA 63 and has protease action. It is 
a zinc protease. LF cuts mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPKK) that 
promotes the action of phosphorous combining with a protein. MAPKK 
is essential for living, and the hydrolytic cleavage of MAPKK will cause 
the death of cells, which eventually causes death in humans (Figure 2.1).
The DNA base sequence of different strains of anthrax is small and 
99% percent are identical. The difference in DNA structures is the so-called 
EF
+
PA
63
Receptor in cell
Cell membrane
PA forms channel
EF
EF
PA63
PA20
EF
PA
63
PA
20
PA
20
EF
Figure 2.1  The mechanism of anthrax toxin entering a cell.

36
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
tandem sequences, such as AAA (----)n AAA and AT (AT)n AT, which are 
different. The analysis of anthrax DNA is difficult, but it is important to 
identify the different strains.
2.6.3  Botulinum Toxins
Botulism is caused by the bacteria Clostridium botulinum, and its toxin 
is the most toxic substance in the world. Therefore, the toxin was pre-
pared by many countries for the use of biological weapons. Even Aum 
Shinrikyo, which is known for the sarin terrorist attack in Matsumoto 
and Tokyo, Japan, also produced Clostridium botulinum in large quantities. 
Fortunately, its efforts failed.
Botulinum was discovered by E. Van Emengem in Belgium in 1897 
during a food poisoning episode. The origin of botulism comes from the 
Latin word botulus, which means “sausage”; this shows that botulinum is 
really related to food poisoning. The onset of botulinum is very fast, so 
immediate care is essential. The botulinum bacteria is anaerobic and can 
be converted to spores.
The most common route of entry for botulism bacteria is by oral 
means. Wound botulism is rare but can happen. Another rare case of 
occurrence is if an infant ingests honey that contains spores of botulism 
bacteria and becomes ill. Botulism symptoms include vomiting, abdomi-
nal pain, muscular weakness, and visual disturbance (double vision).
The lethality of botulism is caused by released toxins. The toxins can 
be distinguished by immunology. This is because the toxins have differ-
ent protein structures.
Toxin 
Type
Protein Structure
A
Composed of only A toxin
B
Composed of only B toxin
C
Type C toxin has two types:
C1, composed mainly of C alpha-type toxin with a small amount of 
D-type toxin
C2, composed of mainly C beta-type toxin with a small amount of C alpha
D
Mainly composed of D as major toxin with a small amount of C alpha
E
Mainly from protein types with C alpha
F
Composed of only F toxin
G
Composed of only G toxin

37
Biological Agents and Weapons
The amino acid sequence of L-chain indicates that A, B, and E types 
are similar to one another, and moreover they are also similar to teta-
nus toxin (Figure 2.2). The H-chain also indicates that the amino acid 
sequences of A, B, and E types are similar, yet they are different types 
of botulism toxins that can be differentiated by immunological methods.
Some botulism toxins have nicked polypeptide chains as shown in 
Structure 2.2.
Many bacterial toxins are potentially effective biological weapons 
because it is easy to collect large quantities of samples by culturing bacteria.
L-chain
H-chain
A type
P
P
P
P
V
T
K
K
N
I
I
L
K
5
N
N
N
K
10
N
N
W
G
15
N
D
F
V
N
R
M
D
T
T
Q
N
S
N
F
F
F
F
N
N
N
R
Y
Y
Y
Y
D
D
D
L
P
P
P
I
V
I
V
V
N
D
N
D
F
V
I
B type
E type
A type
B type
E type
N
P
K
D
G
S
L
5
I
I
N
10
D
N
N
N
N
W
E
G
D
D
E
L
L
L
F
15
F
F
F
S
I
P
A
S
E
20
D
F
C
C
C
I
I
I
K
D
E
V
V
I
A
A
L
Tetanus toxin
Figure 2.2  There are some similarities in the amino acid sequence for A, B, E, 
and tetanus toxin.
N-terminal
N-terminal
L-chain
H-chain
C-terminal
S
S
S
S
Cleavage of this bond
C-terminal
COOH
COOH
H2N
H2N
Structure 2.2  Cleavage of botulism toxin into the nicked molecule to form two 
chains, L- and H-chains.

38
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
2.6.4  Ricin and Other Ribotoxins
Ricin is a protein found in castor beans (Ricinus sanguineus) that was iso-
lated by Peter Hermann Stillmark at Tatu University of Estonia in 1890. 
Cases of poisoning in humans are rare because castor beans are known 
to be toxic. Ricin was used twice in London and in Paris in 1978 to assas-
sinate Bulgarians who opposed the communist government of Bulgaria. 
The killing device was supplied by the Soviet Union’s KGB to the commu-
nist Bulgarian government (Figure 2.3).
Ricin is isolated from castor bean seeds and similar toxins have been 
found in the plant seed Abrus preccatorius. A toxin was also found in O-157 
of Escherichia coli. It has shown they are identical toxins, although they 
were called by different names. It is remarkable that a plant origin toxin 
and bacterial toxin have the same structure and the same mechanism of 
action. Ricin, arbin, and E. coli O-157 toxins are glucosidase hydrolyzing 
the bond between the carbohydrates and base. Recently, the remarkable 
fact was found that many fungus toxins hydrolyze phosphodiester bonds 
close to the site of ricin, arbin, and O-157 toxins (Structure 2.3).
It is also remarkable that ricin becomes toxic by hydrolyzing only one 
glycosidic bond of A-4324 of ribosome 28S RNA. Because ricin, arbin, and 
α-sarcin act on ribosome RNA they are called “ribotoxins.” The fungus 
toxin that acts on the same ribosome RNA but hydrolyzes at different bonds 
is called α-sarcin. The reason they hydrolyze the bonds near each other is 
that they all recognize a particular portion of 28S RNA (Structure 2.4).
2.6.5  Fungal Toxins
Many fungi, such as Fursarium, Trichothecium, Myrothecium, and Stacchbotrys 
produce toxins. Among them, T-2 from Trichothecium is the most well 
Needle
Cylinder
Spring
Trigger
Capsule
containing
poison, ricin
Figure 2.3  This umbrella-type ricin injector was used to kill a person who was 
opposed to the Bulgarian government.

39
Biological Agents and Weapons
O
O
O
OH
Ricin, Abrin
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
O
O
O
OH
A4326
A4324
OH
–O
–O
O
G4325
α-sarcin
P
CH2
P
Structure 2.3  The site of hydrolysis of closely related toxins of different origins.
4292
GUGUUGUCGC
GAUAGCAGUGCA A
AUC
AA UAG
U
CCC
C
C
U
A
A
G
AC
U
G
A
A
UCUCCGCAA
G
U
C
A
G
U
A
UU
A
G
G
G
U
CUCU
CAGA
U
C
U
AU
UGGUGU UGU
UUGGCU
AACCGA
GGGU
G
G
A
G
GCG
AA
U
A
G
C
ACCACG
U
C
C G
U A
G C
C GCCAAG
G
A
G
A
G
C
Cut by ricin
α-sarcin cut here
Rich and α-sarcin recognized here
A
U
G
A
C
U
AAUC
5′ end
3′ end
Structure 2.4  All ribotoxins recognize the portion of ribosome 28S RNA.

40
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
known. It was suspected that Russia used the T-2 toxin in Afghanistan 
and also in Laos where it was called “yellow rain.” It was thought Russia 
tested new types of toxin weapons in such countries. The chemical struc-
ture of the T-2 toxin is shown in Structure 2.5. The T-2 toxin has an oxygen 
in the ring called epoxide, which is generally toxic. The toxin has many 
routes of entry for toxic action such as inhalation, oral ingestion, and skin 
penetration. Pathological symptoms are also broad causing vomiting, 
diarrhea, skin rash, blisters, bleeding, increasing blood pressure, muscle 
weakness, and dyspnea. T-2 has multiple actions and also inhibits the bio-
synthesis of DNA and protein formation. The toxin is harmful to humans 
as well as to many animals. Many fungal toxins are potentially suitable 
for biological weapons.
2.6.6  Snake Neurotoxins
Snake venom is a mixture of different proteins with diverse actions. From 
a pharmacological viewpoint, there are neurotoxins, hemorrhagic toxins, 
myotoxins, spreading factors, hemolytic toxins, many enzymatic activi-
ties, nerve growth factors, cardiotoxins, and nephrotic toxins. Among 
them, a postsynaptic-type neurotoxin, was used as a toxin weapon by 
Russia. In 1983, the U.S. government found that the Soviet Union had 
developed toxin weapons using neurotoxins from Uzbekistan’s cobra 
Naja oxiana. A Russian-cloned neurotoxin was found in Novosibirsk in 
Siberia. This news shocked the U.S. government, and the U.S. Army was 
ordered to find a countermeasure. From that point in time, the U.S. Army 
was in charge of all kinds of natural toxins including marine toxins. I vis-
ited several U.S Army laboratories that were working on natural toxins 
and was very impressed by the excellent facilities they had built in such 
a short time.
H3C
H3C
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
O
O
O
O
O
OH
H
H
O
C
O
C
Structure 2.5  Chemical structure of the T-2 toxin.

41
Biological Agents and Weapons
For normal nerve transmission, acetylcholine is released from the 
nerve ending and moves across the synaptic gap to reach the acetylcholine 
receptor. Acetylcholine is a membrane protein that is composed of five 
subunits: two α’s, β, γ, and δ. When the acetylcholine molecule attaches to 
the receptor, the channel then opens allowing the ions to move. This is the 
mechanism of nerve transmission to the muscle (Figure 2.4).
Snake neurotoxins attach to the same two α subunits but fail to open 
the channel (Figure 2.5). This means the nerve impulse does not reach the 
muscle. This is the reason that the muscle is paralyzed when one is bitten 
by cobras or sea snakes.
I had been working on the chemical structure of sea snake neuro-
toxins for many years, so I obtained a 6-year research contract from the 
U.S. Army to work on the structure–function relationship. My work was 
always basic research and I was never involved in biological weapons 
research, but I was very grateful to receive the research funding from 
the U.S. Army to continue my basic research on snake neurotoxins. 
Other toxins from spiders, scorpions, and ants are also potentially use-
ful for toxin weapons, but again, I was involved only in basic research 
ACh
ACh
ACh
ACh
α
α
α
α
Figure 2.4  The attachment of acetylcholine to the alpha-subunits of the acetyl-
choline receptor.

42
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
so I didn’t pay too much attention to the biological weapon aspects of 
natural toxins.
2.6.7  Marine Toxins
Marine toxins have unique properties and chemical structures not found 
in toxins of land origin. In 1996, the China’s People’s Liberation Army 
Navy published a 535-page book titled Marine Biotoxicology (Photo 2.1). In 
chapter 51, “Marine Toxins and Military Significance,” it was mentioned 
that “it is important for new generations of chemical weapons that the 
agents should be high toxicity, fast action, special pharmacological action, 
hard to defend, hard to cure, easy to produce, and not easy to be detected. 
Some marine toxins fit into these conditions.” There are many varieties 
of marine toxins, and it is impossible to discuss all the toxins of marine 
origin. In this book, only those marine toxins used for military purposes 
will be discussed.
Tetrodotoxin is a toxin isolated from puffer fish and studied by many 
countries as a potential biological weapon. It is the most well studied 
(Structure 2.6). Saxitoxin and gonyautoxin are closely related to tetrodo-
toxin in pharmacological action and are also similar in chemical struc-
ture (Structure 2.7). They are neurotoxic and act on the sodium channel 
Na+
No Na+ transport
No Na+ transport
Neurotoxin
Neurotoxin
Neurotoxin
Na+
Na+
Na+
α
α
α
α
Figure 2.5  Snake neurotoxin attaches to the same alpha sites of the receptor but 
fails to open the sodium channel.

43
Biological Agents and Weapons
Photo 2.1  Marine toxicology book, Marine Biotoxicology, published by the China’s 
People’s Liberation Army Navy. It emphasized the usefulness of marine toxins as 
a new type of biological weapon.

44
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
of the axon. Tetrodotoxin is a peripheral nerve toxin and does not affect 
the central nervous system. In earlier days, the U.S. Army made a large 
quantity of saxitoxin for biological weapons. In 1969, President Nixon 
announced that the United States would no longer use biological weap-
ons and it ceased all of its biological weapons programs. Saxitoxin is iso-
lated from Alaska’s clam called Saxidomus. Tetrodotoxin, saxitoxin, and 
OH
HO
HO
OH
HO
H2N
9
4
N
+
H2N+
H
N
N
1
H
NH
OH
O
O
O
6
R4
R3
Me
11
5
O
10
1
HO
8
1  TTX
8  1–hydroxy–5,11–deoxyTTX
9  5,6,11–trideoxyTTX
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
CH(OH)CH(NH2)COOH
R
S
H
11CH2OH
2  6–epiTTX
3  11–deoxyTTX
4  11–oxoTTX
5  11–norTTX–6R–ol
6  11–norTTX–6S–ol
7  Chiriquitoxin
4a
6
R2
R1
R1
11CH2OH
Me
CHO
H
OH
OH
OH
OH
H
H
R2
R3
R4
Structure 2.6  Chemical structure of tetrodotoxin.
H2N
O
O
HN
H H
H
N
N
N
OH
Saxitoxin
(a)
(b)
(c)
Gonyautoxin II
Gonyautoxin III
OH
NH2
+
H2N
+
H2N
O
O
HN
H H
H
N
N
N
OH
OSO3
–
OH
NH2
+
H2N
+
H2N
O
O
HN
H H
H
N
N
N
OH
OSO3
–
OH
NH2
+
H2N
+
Structure 2.7  Chemical structures of (a) saxitoxin, (b) gonyautoxin II, and 
(c) gonyautoxin III.

45
Biological Agents and Weapons
gonyautoxin stop sodium ion movement by blocking the entrance of the 
channel (Figure 2.6).
Conus, a genus of marine animals, catches prey by injecting venom 
from extended radular teeth, and the venom contains several variet-
ies of toxins (Figure 2.7). Conus toxin is used as a biological weapon 
because it is easy to obtain, the venom contains a variety of polypeptides 
with different pharmacological activities, the size of the polypeptides 
is relatively small and easy to synthesize, and with genetic engineer-
ing methods toxins can be easily manufactured. The µ-conotoxin 
Na+
TTX
TTX
Na-channel
Na-channel
Figure 2.6  This diagram shows how tetrodotoxin (TTX) blocks the entrance of 
the sodium channel.
Siphos
Radular sheath
Radular teeth
Venom duct
Venom bulb 
Foot
Proboscis esophagus
Tentacles
Proboscis
Figure 2.7  Overall view of Conus including its poisonous organ and radular 
tooth. (From Poisons and Drugs from the Sea, Maruzen, 2012, Tokyo, Japan.)

46
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
blocks the entrance of sodium channel just like tetrodotoxin and omega 
(ω)-conotoxin blocks the calcium channel. Their chemical structures are 
shown in Structure 2.8.
The peptides in Structure 2.9 made by organic peptide synthesis by 
China’s People’s Liberation Army Navy. Before conotoxin, the Chinese 
chemical weapons group studied palytoxin, a toxin from coral Palythoa 
toxicca, but the use was stopped because of difficulty in obtaining enough 
quantities and in synthesizing it due to its complicated chemical structure. 
Palytoxin’s chemical structure was identified by Y. Hirata and D. Uemura 
of Japan and also independently by Richard E. Moore of the University of 
Hawaii (Structure 2.10).
α-Conotoxin
GI
GIA
G II
MI
SI
SII
E C C N P A C G R H Y S C NH2
E C C N P A C G R H Y S C G K NH2
E C C H P A C G K H F S C NH2
G R C C H P A C G K N Y S C NH2
I C C N P A C G P K Y S C NH2
G C C C N P A C G P N Y G
G T S C S
C
NH2
R D C C T H y Hy K K C K D R Q C K
Q R C C A-
Hy
NH2
R D C C T H y Hy R K C K D R R C K
M K C C A-
Hy
NH2
-NH2
R D C C T H y Hy K K C K D R R C K
L K C C A
Hy
C K S Hy
Hy
Hy
T
T K R
Y
C ······
G S S
S
S
Y
Y
N
N
S
C
C
C
C R −
C K S Hy
Hy
Hy
T
T K R
YG
C ······
······
···
G S S
S
S
Y
Y
N
N
S
C
C
C
C R −
C K S Hy
Hy
Hy
T
T K R C
G S S
S
S
Y
Y
N
N
S
C
C
C
C R −
C K S Hy
S R G
G T Hy
M
S
R
L L Y S N
C R R Y
K
C
D
C
C C T −
C K S Hy
S R G
G T Hy
M
S
R
L S Y S N
C R R Y
K
C
D
C
C C T −
C K G K
S R L
G A K
M
S
Y D
R
S G K C
C
C
C
C T G
C
G
Gly−Glu−Gla−Gla−Tyr−Gin−Lys−Met−Leu−Gla−Asn−Leu−Arg
Gly−Glu−Gla−Gla−Leu−Gln−Gla−Asn−Gln−Gla−Leu−Lie−Arg
Trp−Ala−Gly−Gly−Asp−Ala−Ser−Gly−Glu
C F R N C P K G
C
C Y I Q N C P R G
I
I
R N C P R G
−Gla−Lys−Ser−Asn−NH2
−Gla−Ala−Glu−Val−Lys−Lys−Asn−Ala−NH2
E
L Q
N Q
L I R
K S N-NH2
γ γ
γ
γ
γ
K G K
H R T
G A S
S
S
Y D
N R
G K C
C
C
C
C T G
GVIIIA
GVIIIB
GVIIIC
GVIA
GVIB
GVIC
GVIIA
GVIIB
MVIIA
MVIIB
GV
Conotoxin-T
Sleeper peptides
Sleeper peptides GV
Delta sleeper peptide
Conopressin G
Conopressin S
Arg-vasotoxcin
μ-Conotoxin
ω-Conotoxin
Structure 2.8  There are many different kinds of toxins in Conus venom. Each 
peptide has a different pharmacological action.

47
Biological Agents and Weapons
As mentioned earlier, President Nixon announced that the United 
States would no longer be engaged in a biological weapons program, 
therefore all marine toxins including palytoxin were distributed to U.S. 
researchers. Apparently, the U.S. Army was also involved in develop-
ing palytoxin as a biological weapon before 1969. Palytoxin was given to 
Dr. P. J. Scheuer of the University of Hawaii and my friend Dr. T. Higa, 
a postdoctoral fellow at Scheuer’s Lab who was working on peaceful 
research using the palytoxin provided by the U.S. Army. I also received a 
letter from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) that had been requested 
by the U.S. Army to distribute saxitoxin to qualified U.S. scientists. 
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Conotoxin GI Glu
2.5 × 10–7
2.7 × 10–7
3.2 × 10–7
3.2 × 10–7
5.0 × 10–6
3.0 × 10–7
4.3 × 10–7
3.7 × 10–5
2.4 × 10–7
7.0 × 10–5
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
>1.0 × 10–4
1.0 × 10–4
(des–Glu1)CTxn GI
1 a & b
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Cys–Asn–Gly–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Glky–Arg–Phe–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–Leu–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Leu–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–dTyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Cys–Ala–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–DAla–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–DPhe–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Asp–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Dpr–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Asp–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Dpr–NH2
Ala–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Ala–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Cys–Ala–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–NH2
Cys–Ala–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–NH2
Cys–Ala–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–NH2
Cys–Ala–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–NH2
Cys–Ala–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–NH2
Cys–Ala–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–NH2
Cys–Ala–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Ala–NH2
Cys–Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Cys–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–Ser–NH2
Cys–Asn–Pro–Ala–Ala–Gly–Arg–His–Tyr–Ser–Cys–NH2
Structure 2.9  Conotoxin analogs were synthesized by the China’s People’s 
Liberation Army Navy. The right column is the toxicity expressed as IC-50 mol/L.

48
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
At that time, I was working on rattlesnake venom and sea snake venom, 
so I declined the saxitoxin offer.
When I gave lectures at the Defense Establishment in India, they were 
working on freshwater toxins. I didn’t inquire about their objective, but 
my guess was that it was to develop knowledge for defense purposes.
H2N
115
O
108
O
O
103
OH
OH
HO
O
O
O
O
HN
H
78
N
O
O
50
62
71
80
O
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
Y
OH OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
90
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
OH
1
OH
X
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
O
35
Me
(1)  n = 2
(2)  n = 3
(3)  n = 4
(5)  n = 2,
(6)  Z = OH
(4)  × =
Z
O
O
HN
N
H
HO
(CH2)n
OH
OH
20
HO
HO
HO
Y =
HO
HO
HO
O
Structure 2.10  Chemical structure of palytoxins.

49
3
An Example of Chemical War
The Iran–Iraq War
Sayid Abbas Foroutan and Anthony Tu
3.1  IRAN–IRAQ WAR
Among recent chemical wars, the poisonous gas used in the Iran–Iraq 
conflict was perhaps the most important because of its large-scale use and 
severe pathological effect on human victims. Why did these two neigh-
boring countries start fighting in the twentieth century?
3.1.1  Invasion of Iran by Iraq
On the dawn of September 22, 1980, Iraq invaded Iran by crossing the 
­644-km wide border in large force from three directions in a sudden 
attack. Iran never expected such an attack and was completely surprised 
and unguarded. Near Basra, the second largest city in Iraq, is a river that 
creates a border between the two countries. What events prompted Iraq 
to invade Iran?
In 1979 in Iran, pro-Western King Shah Muhammad Reza Pahlavi 
was ousted by revolutionary leader Ayatollah Khomeini. After Ayatollah 
Khomeini took power, he systematically eliminated and executed a large 
number of people who were associated with the Shah. I asked many 
Iranians why the new revolutionary government killed so many people. 

50
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
I was told that King Pahlavi was a brutal man. In 1963, he cracked down 
on dissidents and about 10,000 people were killed by his police and troops. 
Therefore, the new revolutionary leader wanted revenge and killed those 
who were associated with Pahlavi and those involved with the previous 
oppression. The revolutionary leader’s actions resulted in weakening 
the existing governmental structure, especially in the armed forces. All 
the top generals and senior members of the military were systematically 
executed and Iran’s military was severely weakened. The dictator of Iraq, 
Saddam Hussein, saw a vacuum in the Iranian military power structure 
and attacked Iran to take advantage of this unique opportunity.
Even though the country of Iran is three times larger in area than 
Iraq, initially Iraq had the upper hand and the war was mainly contained 
within Iranian territory. But as their country was invaded by the enemy, 
many Iranian youth volunteered to defend their country. Due to fierce 
resistance from Iranian forces, the war zone became somewhat stabilized 
by May 1981. By June 1982, Iran recovered the lost territory and started 
invading Iraq, capturing 30,000 Iraqi soldiers. Iraq felt it had to repel the 
Iranian invasion now that fighting was occurring in the Iraqi territory, so 
Iraq used poisonous gas for the first time.
3.1.2  Chemical Warfare
In 1980, Iraq started chemical weapons research and manufacturing, but it 
did not use poisonous gas until the war started to deteriorate. In 1983, Iraq 
used chemical weapons in small scales in war zones. But by 1984, it started 
to use poisonous gas extensively and in massive quantities. Iran didn’t 
know that Iraq had such weapons, and thus it did not have any defense 
measures against chemical warfare. Thus, Iran paid a very high price and 
suffered a large number of casualties. Approximately 200,000 soldiers and 
civilians were injured or killed by Iraq’s chemical weapons. Consequently, 
Iran’s offensive was stopped and the war situation somewhat stabilized, 
which illustrated that if chemical weapons are used on a massive scale 
and in a timely fashion, they can change the whole prospect of war.
Many chemicals used for making poisonous gas were imported from 
different countries, including the Netherlands, Singapore, Egypt, India, 
Germany, and the United Arab Emirates. In earlier days, East Germany 
helped Iraq, but later, Iraq developed its own chemical weapons.
Iraq used mustard gas, tabun, and sarin; 3,900 tons in total. The deliv-
ery system included several forms: bombs, artillery shells, missile rocket 
shells, mortar shells, aerosol sprays from airplanes, and hand grenades. 

51
An Example of Chemical War
Iraq admitted to using 54,000 chemical artillery shells, 27,000 chemical 
rockets, and 19,500 chemical bombs.
Chemical hand grenades were also used, but there are no statis-
tics recorded on their use. One day, a special forces officer from the U.S. 
Marines came to see me. He said, “My supervisor asked me to see you 
about the chemical hand grenades of hydrogen cyanide.” I told him, “I am 
not a chemical weapons expert and don’t know whether I can answer you 
or not.” He said, “Don’t say that. I need to report to my supervisor on this 
question.” I told him, “This is only my guess. It seems to me the chemical 
hand grenade probably has two compartments. One is potassium cyanide 
and the other part is sulfuric acid. When the hand grenade is activated, 
then the two compounds start mixing producing hydrogen cyanide gas.” 
He was happy to hear my words and suddenly patted my shoulder and 
shouted with excitement: “This is it! They found sulfuric acid on the 
ground. I will report to my superior immediately. We got our answer!”
Photos 3.1 through 3.3 are related to chemical warfare.
Photo 3.1  Chemical shells exploding in the field showing typical smoke as they 
explode. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)

52
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Photo 3.2  Iraq’s chemical bombs. This was photographed after the First Gulf 
War ended. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)
Photo 3.3  An Iraqi chemical missile showing the missile head where the poison-
ous gas was packed. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)

53
An Example of Chemical War
3.2  MILITARY FIELD HOSPITALS
In 2007, I was invited by the Iranian government to attend the chemical 
casualty meeting held in Teheran. The overseas travel expenses were paid 
by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). 
There I learned firsthand by talking with Iranian military personnel who 
were engaged in the treatment of injured soldiers. In spite of the unex-
pected use of chemical weapons by Iraq, Iranian military authorities used 
all efforts and utilized every resource to fight against this difficult new 
threat. First, they distributed all available gas masks to soldiers and to 
medical personnel. They constructed many field hospitals, as shown in 
Photos 3.4 through 3.9. After the hospitals were built, their locations were 
masked by covering them with sand so that the hospitals were invisible 
from above (Photos 3.4 and 3.5).
However, even the military field hospitals were not immune to attacks 
from the sky or from artillery bombardment. Once an underground army 
hospital was damaged by conventional artillery shells or by bombs from 
the air, other parts of the hospital would be susceptible to further attack 
(see Photo 3.6). Although built underground, the hospitals were not deep 
inside the earth. Instead, the hospitals were just covered with desert sand 
to make them invisible from the air, so the cover was very shallow. The 
entrance to the underground hospitals could not be covered so the hospi-
tals could be located if one found the entrance (see Photo 3.7).
Photo 3.4  Model of an underground army field hospital. (Courtesy of Sayid 
Abbas Foroutan.)

54
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
As the wounded soldiers were brought in, they were first decontami-
nated with a large amount of water. After the patients were clean, they were 
then divided into three groups. The most severely wounded soldiers received 
medical treatment first. However, many times there were no sufficient field 
hospitals so they had to use school buildings or even stadiums (Photo 3.8).
Photo 3.5  This field hospital was covered with sand so that it could not be seen 
from the air. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)
Photo 3.6  An Iranian field military hospital damaged by Iraqi bombardment.

55
An Example of Chemical War
Photo 3.7  The entrance of a military hospital protected by sandbags. (Courtesy 
of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)
Photo 3.8  A temporary military hospital was set up in a stadium as wounded 
soldiers increased in number due to heavy damage because of the extensive use 
of chemical weapons by Iraq. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)

56
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
In order to secure enough medical doctors, all medical students above 
their third year were mobilized as military surgeons. Those students in 
their first or second year of medical school were mobilized as physician’s 
aides (Photo 3.9). Thus, medical students gained practical field experience 
instead of learning at school.
3.3  USE OF MUSTARD GAS
Iraq used mustard gas and nerve gas extensively. Nerve gas is much more 
toxic than mustard gas, but mustard gas caused more damage. I was quite 
surprised to learn this when I visited Iran in 2007. There are several rea-
sons for this fact. Iraq made mustard gas first. With production running 
from 1978 to 1981, by 1983 it had 150 tons. In 1984, Iraq had only 60 tons of 
tabun, and in 1986 upped production of both tabun and sarin nerve gases. 
The Iran–Iraq War ended in 1988 and altogether Iraq used about 3,900 tons 
of poisonous gas.
Photo 3.9  Medical students in their first and the second years were used as phy-
sician’s aides. They were all provided with gas masks. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas 
Foroutan.)

57
An Example of Chemical War
Mustard gas was used extensively in World War I, but it was not 
used in World War II except in China by Japanese troops. In the Iran–Iraq 
War, mustard gas caused the most damage to its victims. I was told by an 
Iranian military surgeon that they were horrified to see such miserable 
conditions in so many patients. Mustard gas is corrosive and any place on 
the human body that came into contact with mustard gas had extensive 
damage to the tissue. The gas damaged the skin and eyes, forming blis-
ters. Mustard gas inflicted the most damage to Iranian soldiers because of 
its extensive use by Iraq and also due to its high purity 90%–95% (Photos 
3.10 through 3.12).
Dr. Gerhard Freilinger of Vienna, Austria, was invited to treat Iranian 
wounded soldiers exposed to mustard gas (Photo 3.13). Freilinger said he 
was happy to help Iranian wounded soldiers, but he had never treated 
mustard gas-inflicted patients. Actually, at the time, there were no spe-
cific drugs to treat mustard gas injuries. Exposure to mustard gas caused 
extreme pain and the only medical treatment was to reduce the pain and 
prevent infection. Many doctors who agreed to accept mustard gas patients 
also faced big problems because they had never treated such patients. 
One Swiss physician told me that he was a plastic surgeon and knew how 
to repair the skin damage, but it was the first time he had encountered 
Photo 3.10  Skin on the back and on a hand were damaged by blisters accompa-
nied by extreme pain. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)

58
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Photo 3.12  Skin damage on the legs due to mustard gas. (Courtesy of Sayid 
Abbas Foroutan.)
Photo 3.11  This soldier’s eyes and face were damaged by mustard gas. (Courtesy 
of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)

59
An Example of Chemical War
mustard gas patients. Another doctor told me he specialized in skin 
burned by heat. The skin damage due to mustard gas and heat burn is 
similar superficially, but they are fundamentally different wounds. Some 
patients were so severely wounded after contact with mustard gas that 
the physicians didn’t know how to handle them. Severely injured patients 
were sent to Austria, Sweden, and Switzerland for treatment.
3.4  USE OF NERVE GAS
Iraq used sarin and tabun (the identity of tabun was confirmed by mass 
spectroscopy analysis, Structure 3.1) against Iran, but the casualties were 
not as great as the mustard gas causalities. There are three reasons for 
this. One was the quantities of tabun and sarin used were less than mus-
tard gas. The second was that the purity of tabun was not very high 
Photo 3.13  Dr. Gerhard Freilinger of Austria during the Iran–Iraq War pro-
vided medical treatment to Iranian soldiers. In 2007, Dr. Freilinger was invited 
back to a conference (middle), author is at the left, along with a military surgeon 
(right), who treated many wounded Iranian soldiers. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas 
Foroutan.)

60
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
(on average of 50%–60%), and the sarin purity was even lower. The third 
reason was that nerve gas was used later in the war than mustard gas, 
thus there was a lack of surprise. By the time Iraq used nerve gas, Iran was 
prepared to cope with chemical agents and gas masks had been distrib-
uted to Iranian soldiers.
For the treatment of nerve gas victims, Iran used atropine. The atro-
pine used originally was not sufficient, so later the amount injected was 
increased five times. Atropine was a good antidote and competitor with 
­acetylcholine, a nerve-transmitting agent (Photo 3.14).
Iranian doctors told me that although atropine was a good drug for 
treating tabun and sarin, they did not have enough for all the victims, so 
they did not use atropine to treat nerve gas victims. They said if a patient 
was to survive, he would recover with time (Photo 3.15). Of course, many 
died because they did not receive treatment.
POCl3
C2H5OH
C2H5O
C2H5O
O
Main product
By-product
Cl
Cl
+
P
C2H5O
O
N(CH3)2
Cl
P
OC2H5
PCl3
OC2H5
OC2H5
O
P
C2H5O
(CH3)2NH
NaCN
O
Cl
P
OC2H5
Tabun
C2H5O
O
N(CH3)2
P
N(CH3)2
C2H5O
O
CN
P
Structure 3.1  Compounds detected by mass spectroscopy that confirmed that 
Iraq used tabun. Mass spectroscopy is a useful analytical technique for identify-
ing poisonous gas.

61
An Example of Chemical War
Acetylcholine
Atropine
Atropine
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2CH
C2H5
OOCCH
N
H+N
CH
CH
CH
C
O
O
CH2
CH
7A
HOCH2
CH2 N(CH3)3
O
C
O
(a)
(b)
Photo 3.14  (a) Atropine used by Iranian and (b) the chemical formula of acetyl-
choline and atropine. The top one was used initially and the bottom one was used 
later to increase the dose five times. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)
Photo 3.15  An Iranian soldier exposed to nerve gas became unconscious, started 
to wake up, and finally recovered consciousness 17 hours later (from left to right). 
(Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)

62
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
3.5  TRAGEDY IN HALABJA, A KURDISH TOWN IN IRAQ
At the end of the Iran–Iraq War in 1988, there was a tragic episode. The 
Kurdish ethnic group now without its own country immigrated to Turkey, 
Syria, Iraq, and Iran. Saddam Hussein was angry at the Kurdish people 
who were living in northern Iraq because they assisted the Iranians by 
fighting against Iraq. On March 16, 1988, an Iraqi force attacked the town 
of Halabja using airplanes and helicopters, bombarding and bombing 
with conventional weapons first. Later, Iraq used mustard gas and sarin. 
Some citizens died in their own homes. Those trying to escape the town 
were also killed by the poisonous gas, because the sarin was sprayed from 
the air. There was no escape. In Photos 3.16 through 3.18, the people who 
died were apparently killed by sarin, because there was no apparent sign 
of bodily damage. However, some people who inhaled both sarin and 
mustard gas vomited. Although the incident occurred during the war, the 
Photo 3.16  An entire family was killed in their home when Iraq sprayed the 
nerve gas sarin from the air in Halabja. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)

63
An Example of Chemical War
Photo 3.17  People tried to escape the town of Halabja, but they had no chance as 
the whole town was covered with sarin gas. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)
Photo 3.18  A father died holding his baby; the streets were littered with the bodies 
of those killed by Iraq’s nerve gas. (Courtesy of Sayid Abbas Foroutan.)

64
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
target was the townspeople. It was the largest civilian death toll due to a 
gas attack (5,000 people killed and about 10,000 injured).
The person in charge of this operation was Ali Hassan al-Majid, com-
mander of the northern Iraqi force and a cousin of Saddam Hussein. He 
was often called by the nickname Chemical Ali. For his crimes against 
humanity, he was sentenced to death and was executed by hanging on 
January 25, 2010. At his trial, he said he did it because of war’s necessity 
and for the interest of Iraq’s security.

65
4
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
Sarin Terrorism in Japan
The 1995 Tokyo subway sarin attack and the earlier sarin attack in 
Matsumoto in 1994 by Aum Shinrikyo using sarin are well known 
throughout the world. What most people do not know is what the Aum 
Shinrikyo is, its organization, or its objective. I will describe these briefly 
and will then discuss its terrorism actions.
4.1  ORGANIZATION
Aum Shinrikyo was a new religious group set up by cult leader Shoko 
Asahara in Japan in 1984. Initially called the “Aum Shinsen Association,” 
it had only 15 members who practiced yoga. By 1987, the membership 
swelled to 1,300. The biggest change occurred after the group obtained a 
license with the title of “Aum Shinrikyo” approved by Tokyo’s Metropolitan 
Government in 1989. Shortly after obtaining the formal title of Aum 
Shinrikyo, the membership swelled to 10,000 in Japan and 30,000 in Russia. 
It set up offices in Moscow, Vladivostok, Frankfurt, and New York. It was 
amazing to see such a quantum jump in Aum Shinrikyo’s organization in 
such a short time.
With this growth, Aum Shinrikyo also needed more funds. It used 
various fundraising methods including membership fees, selling various 
religious items to members, and setting up a number of commercial shops 
and factories unrelated to religion. For instance, Aum Shinrikyo manufac-
tured and sold computers, had a ramen (noodle) factory, and a restaurant. 

66
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Of these, the most important source of income was lifetime membership 
in which members were to give all their property to Aum Shinrikyo. With 
this type of donation, the cult organization promised lifetime support to 
the donor.
One characteristic of Aum Shinrikyo was its highly educated mem-
bers. It actively recruited its members from college campuses, often via 
yoga training classes.
4.2  ROAD TO A CRIME ORGANIZATION
Aum Shinrikyo had many strict rules. But, some cult members could not 
adhere to all the rules and some members did not donate all of their prop-
erty. Other members became disillusioned and wanted to leave the cult. 
Instead of letting dissatisfied members leave peacefully, Asahara became 
angry and tortured and murdered them.
Aum Shinrikyo’s teachings were based on ancient Tibet Buddhism 
(Vajrayana). Many parts of Vajrayana’s teaching were not clearly defined as 
to the real meaning. Thus, Asahara took advantage of this and explained 
the teachings in his own terms. Asahara said according to Vajrayana, a bad 
person would go to hell. Instead of letting that bad person go to hell, they 
should first be eliminated for the sake of society and for themselves. This 
action was called “porr.” If a bad person is porred, he will go to heaven 
instead of going to hell after he dies. Therefore, porr would be beneficial 
for the one killed and also good for the person who porred (killed) the 
bad guy. Thus, one should do porr in order to save a bad person from his 
afterlife fate. People who killed a bad guy are really helping the bad guy.
Many Japanese wonder why highly educated members would listen to 
Asahara, who was only a high school graduate. To answer this question, I 
had the opportunity to visit Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa during my last visit to 
the Tokyo Detention Center. Nakagawa, a senior member of Aum Shinrikyo, 
was sentenced to death and waiting to be hanged. All 13 senior members of 
Aum Shinrikyo are locked up in solitary in this center (Photos 4.1 and 4.2).
I asked Nakagawa during my visit on March 14, 2016, “Why would 
so many highly educated persons obey Asahara’s order to porr?” He 
answered, “Dr. Tu, higher education and religion are two different things.”
I asked him, “What do you mean by this? I don’t understand your 
answer. Can you explain more?” He replied, “We respected our leader 
and great teacher, Asahara, so when he said porr this guy, we automati-
cally did and thought this was all good for Asahara and also for Aum 

67
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
Shinrikyo. He had a charismatic nature and we all respected him and 
were also afraid of him.”
After killing some members, the first murder outside of the cult orga-
nization was of a lawyer, Tsutsumi Sakamoto, and his wife and infant 
child on January 4, 1989. Sakamoto helped the disillusioned members 
who wanted to leave Aum Shinrikyo. Thus, he was a target of elimination 
Photo 4.1  The author standing in front of the Tokyo Detention Center. The 
author visited Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa 11 times in order to learn about Aum 
Shinrikyo’s terrorism organization.
Photo 4.2  Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa gave a portrait of himself to the author. He 
said he did not have a more recent photo since his arrest in 1995.

68
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
by Aum Shinrikyo. Although there was some evidence of the crime, the 
Japanese police did not act on it until after the Tokyo subway attack with 
sarin on March 20, 1995. When the murder of the Sakamoto family went 
unnoticed by police, Aum Shinrikyo became bolder and started to mili-
tarize (Photos 4.3 through 4.5). Police did not investigate the murder case, 
although many people asked them to.
Asahara dreamed of overthrowing the Japanese government and 
being the head of a new government led by Aum Shinrikyo. The root of 
Asahara’s idea to become the leader of the nation started early in his life. 
He admired Hitler and also Mao Tse-tung. His admiration for Mao was 
not for communism but for his ability to become a leader of China by 
eliminating his opponents by brutal force. In order to achieve his dream, 
Asahara told people that the U.S. Army was going to attack them with 
poisonous gas and biological weapons. Therefore, they had to defend 
against this outside threat by militarizing the organization. He said 
unless the members followed his teaching, Armageddon would descend 
upon the earth soon and annihilate everyone. One could only survive the 
disaster of Armageddon if one followed Asahara’s teaching. He wanted 
to create a big disaster in Japan so that his prediction of Armageddon 
would occur. But the militarization’s real objective was to overthrow the 
Photo 4.3  Aum Shinrikyo selected Kamikuishiki to build its compound. 
Kamikuishiki was an isolated region in Japan, so it was well suited for Aum 
Shinrikyo’s preparation for militarization. (Courtesy of Seihi Takeuchi.)

69
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
Photo 4.4  A helicopter purchased from Russia was kept in Kamikuishiki vil-
lage. (Courtesy of Seihi Takeuchi.)
Photo 4.5  After the Tokyo subway attack, Japanese authorities destroyed all of 
Aum Shinrikyo’s facilities. This photo shows the dismantled helicopter. (Courtesy 
of Seihi Takeuchi.)

70
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Japanese government by coup d’état. But in order to convince his members 
to believe in Armageddon, he had to create a disaster.
4.3  THE SARIN ATTACK IN MATSUMOTO
On the night of June 27, 1994, toxic gas was released in the city of 
Matsumoto, causing 7 deaths and sickening 500 people (Photo 4.6). 
Initially, it was thought to be a gas leak, but there were no faults in the gas 
lines supplying the disaster area. Practically all the victims had shrink-
ing pupils, a typical symptom of organophosphate poisoning. The doctors 
thought it might be some kind of organophosphate insecticide poisoning. 
So, doctors administered atropine and the patients responded well.
The laboratory of Nagano Prefecture’s Public Health Institute strug-
gled to identify the poison. They tested all kinds of materials that might 
cause the air and water to become toxic, but to no avail; they didn’t find 
any material that matched the released toxic agent. They received a hint 
when the physicians treated the patients with atropine and it was effec-
tive. So, the scientists concentrated their efforts on various organophos-
phate insecticides. A mass spectra of samples obtained from a small pond 
were analyzed. In order to identify the compound, they checked the mass 
spectra library. The library of mass spectra refers to the book of assembled 
various mass spectra of different compounds. To their astonishment the 
sample obtained from the pond matched sarin, one of the most toxic nerve 
gases. They could not believe their findings, so they called the Food and 
Drug Administration (equivalent to U.S. FDA) in Tokyo to send the mass 
spectra of sarin from a different library of mass spectroscopy. Again, the 
spectra they obtained matched sarin’s (Figure 4.1).
Since there was no such compound in Japan, and researchers wanted 
to make sure their findings were absolutely correct, they examined the 
sample in gas chromatography. The index matched the reported value of 
sarin. The index is the ratio of time for the solvent and the sample in gas 
chromatography.
In order to test the toxicity, researchers purchased small fish and 
placed them in a container filled with the pond water. All the fish died 
within one hour. With these three pieces of evidence, they now believed 
the culprit of the toxic gas released must be sarin. On July 2, the Japanese 
police announced that the toxic substance released on the night of June 27 
was sarin. The news caused an uproar in Japan as to who released such a 
nerve gas that is used in war and who made it for what purpose.

71
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
4.4  MY ASSISTANCE WITH THE FIRST 
CHEMICAL TERRORIST ATTACK IN JAPAN
Aum Shinrikyo’s sarin terrorist attack is considered to be the biggest 
crime in the history of Japan and I was involved in helping to crack down 
on Aum Shinrikyo’s terrorism. I will briefly describe my role.
(a)
(b)
Photo 4.6  (a) On June 27, 1994, sarin was released at this point resulting in 
7 deaths and 500 injuries. (Courtesy of Yoshiyuki Kono.) (b) The same area in 
2004. The lower left area was a parking area where Aum Shinrikyo sprayed sarin 
from a van in 1994; and the photo in 2004 mainly shows the same parking area.

72
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
I suddenly received a fax on July 2 from Hirokazu Tai, chief editor 
of a Japanese chemistry magazine called Chemistry Today, asking me to 
write a review article on nerve gas including sarin because sarin had 
been released in Japan. I was puzzled because surely there was no sarin 
in peaceful Japan. Why did they ask me to write such an article? So, I tele-
phoned Tai in Japan from Colorado where I lived at the time.
Tai told me excitedly, “Yes, sarin was released in Matsumoto city and 
the Japanese government authority announced it was sarin. I know sarin 
is a powerful nerve gas used by the military. So, can you write an article 
immediately on nerve gas including sarin? The whole of Japan is in a panic 
and people are worried as to who released the sarin and for what purpose.”
In the article, I wrote that many poisonous gases can be detected from 
soil including sarin. The soil will absorb many gaseous materials and 
will convert them to relatively stable compounds in the soil. In the case of 
sarin, it will first be converted to isopropyl methyl phosphonic acid then 
to methylphosphonic acid and remain in the soil.
In the 1950s, the U.S. Army produced many poisonous gases, including 
sarin, and they were stored in artillery shells and inside bombs (Photo 4.7).
Peak 1
4.0
99
81
125
CH3
OCH(CH3)2
1 (molecular weight 140)
F
P
O
99
81
50
100
150
200
250
300 (m/z)
125
6.0
8.0
10.0 (    )
Peak 2
Peak 3
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.1  Mass spectra of sarin obtained from a pond showed to be identical to 
that of reported sarin. (a) Peak 1 was put in a mass spectrometer and (b) the mass 
spectrum of sarin used in Matsumoto was identical to the standard spectrum of 
sarin.

73
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
At that time in 1994, I taught biochemistry and also a class on toxi-
cology. There were many good toxicology textbooks but I felt they were 
too difficult for my students because they were mainly for medical profes-
sionals. The students taking my toxicology class were mostly from biol-
ogy, chemistry, and biochemistry concentrations. We didn’t have a medical 
school at Colorado State University, so I assembled teaching materials and 
distributed them to my students via a printed packet made at a local Kinko’s 
store. At that time, there was no Internet to search so I read many original 
papers, books, and scientific magazines to assemble my teaching materials. 
That’s how I knew that various poisonous gases could be detected from the 
soil. This small amount of knowledge helped the Japanese police and was 
useful for solving the biggest crime in Japan. So perhaps my help might 
have been accidental, but it was useful nevertheless.
Over the years, sarin might leak from its storage place. The U.S. Army 
worried about the effects of sarin leaking into the environment, thus it 
had studied how sarin might contaminate the soil. This result was applied 
to determine whether Saddam Hussein had actually used sarin in the 
Kurdish towns in northern Iraq. British scientists in Porton Down who 
examined the soil from northern Iraq believed it was used in 1988. They 
found methylphosphonic acid and thus scientifically proved that Hussein 
indeed used sarin to kill Kurdish village people.
My article in Chemistry Today was published on August 15, 1994. 
At that time, there were very few articles on sarin written in Japanese, 
Photo 4.7  Sarin stored at the U.S. Army chemical weapons base on Johnston 
Island in the Pacific Ocean. (Courtesy of Dr. David Moss.)

74
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
so my article was widely read in Japan. I received letters and e-mails from 
many friends in Japan informing me that the article was well received by 
Japanese readers, including the police and scientists (Photo 4.8).
On September 19, 1994, I received a fax from the Japanese Police 
Science Laboratory asking me to help them, specifically to tell them how 
Photo 4.8  Chemistry Today, the Japanese chemistry magazine that published an 
article by the book’s author describing how sarin can be detected from degrada-
tion products in soil.

75
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
to detect sarin degradation products in soil. I immediately thought that 
the only place with this kind of information was the U.S. Army. So, I 
made a call to Dr. Lester Velves of the U.S. Army, explaining the criti-
cal situation in Japan. The next day, I received 31 pages of information 
about the analytical method of detecting methylphosphonic acid from 
the soil. I immediately transferred all this information to the Japanese 
police by fax. With this knowledge, a Japanese policeman disguised as a 
farmer collecting medicinal plants got soil around Satyan No. 7 belong-
ing to Aum Shinrikyo in Kamikuishiki. The police analyzed the soil 
and found methylphosphonic acid (Structure 4.1). Finally, the Japanese 
police had scientific evidence that Aum Shinrikyo was producing sarin 
in Kamikuishiki village. The reason that the police selected the soil 
around Satyan No. 7 was because toxic gas had leaked there twice in 
July 1994 (Photo 4.9).
4.5  THE TOKYO SUBWAY SARIN TERRORIST ATTACK
Aum Shinrikyo struck a Tokyo subway by releasing sarin from bags in 
five trains on March 20, 1995 (Photo 4.10). The following sections describe 
the background and planning of the crime and its aftermath.
4.5.1  The Kidnapping of Kiyoshi Karia
On February 28, 1995, Aum Shinrikyo kidnapped Kiyoshi Karia who 
worked at the Tokyo Metropolitan Government office. His sister was a 
member of the cult and Aum Shinrikyo wanted to know her whereabouts. 
His sister was disillusioned with the cult and left the organization without 
notifying them. Aum Shinrikyo wanted to find her and force her to donate 
her property as she had promised. Dr. Nakagawa injected Karia with 
O
CH3
OH
CH3
CH3
H2O
H2O
in soil
in soil
P
O
P
OH
OH
O
P
F
Sarin
Isopropyl methyl
phosphonate
Methyl
phosphonic acid
OCH(CH3)2
OCH(CH3)2
Structure 4.1  Soil absorbs sarin and converts it into methylphosphonic acid, 
a stable compound that remains in the soil. The author supplied the analyti-
cal method to Japanese police who used this method to pin down the Aum 
Shinrikyo’s manufacturing site of sarin.

76
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
thiopental, kidnapped him, and took him from Tokyo to Kamikuishiki, 
Aum Shinrikyo’s facility. But Karia died.
4.5.2  Planning
When Aum Shinrikyo’s members kidnapped Karia, one member dropped 
a badge. As a result, the police knew that Aum Shinrikyo’s members were 
involved in the kidnapping. Aum Shinrikyo’s leader, Asahara, was wor-
ried that a Japanese police raid on Aum Shinrikyo’s facility was imminent 
and consulted with his close advisers. They decided to strike a Tokyo sub-
way on the morning of March 20, 1995. Hideo Murai, who Asahara trusted 
the most, would be in charge of the operation, and logistic support would 
supervised by Yoshihiro Inoue, the youngest inner circle member.
Murai told Seiichi Endo to make the sarin with the help of Nakagawa. 
Endo was a virologist and Nakagawa was a medical doctor, and they 
encountered many difficulties when they tried to make the sarin. They had 
to ask Masami Tsuchiya for advice, he was a brilliant chemist who had pro-
duced all the chemical weapons for Aum Shinrikyo. Tsuchiya was a nice 
person so he helped them and sarin was finally synthesized. Murai asked 
them for the purity of the sarin they had just made. Tsuchiya said it was 
Photo 4.9  Toxic fumes were released from a Satyan No. 7 building in July 1994. 
(Courtesy of Seihi Takeuhi.)

77
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
(a)
(b)
Photo 4.10  (a) Tokyo Fire Department firefighters rescue a subway victim. 
(Courtesy of Tokyo Fire Department.) (b) There were about 6,500 injured victims 
rushed to several hospitals in Tokyo. St. Luke’s International Hospital treated 
patients in every available space. (Courtesy of St. Luke’s International Hospital.)

78
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
not pure and would take several more hours to purify. Asahara and Murai 
decided to use the impure sarin. This was fortunate for Japan. If pure sarin 
had been used, then the casualties would have been higher. The purity of 
the sarin that was used for the Tokyo subway attack was about 20% to 30%.
4.5.3  The Sarin Attack on the Tokyo Subway
Asahara assigned five members to carry bags of sarin and break them 
open with sharpened umbrellas on five subway trains in Tokyo. These 
five people were called the “action group.” There were six sarin bags alto-
gether so one member carried two. There were five people who delivered 
the action group members to their assigned subway stations and picked 
them up at the next subway station after they released the sarin. These 
five people were called the “escort group.” The timing of breaking the 
sarin bags was exactly 8 a.m. The working time for government employ-
ees is 9 a.m. but police workers start at 8:30 a.m. So the purpose of select-
ing 8 a.m. was to target and kill as many police department workers as 
­possible. Asahara distrusted and hated the Japanese police and wanted 
revenge using this opportunity.
4.5.4  The Rescue Operation in Tokyo
At the time of the subway sarin attack, the Tokyo Metropolitan Police 
Department had 64 gas masks. But when the subway was attacked with 
sarin, they could not use the gas masks because they were stored and 
locked in a special room. Moreover, many police officers did not even 
know where the gas masks were stored. The Tokyo Fire Department 
had a special disaster group to combat chemical fire and explosions in 
­factories, and they were equipped with gas masks. The fire department 
did a ­marvelous job rescuing the victims in such a gigantic disaster.
Many hospitals also did a fantastic job by providing emergency 
treatment for the sudden influx of 6,000 patients in one morning. They 
used every available space, even hallways, offices, and churches inside 
the hospital. St. Luke’s International Hospital alone treated 1,000 victims 
the day of the attack. Since the Tokyo Metropolitan Police identified the 
gas as sarin after only 2 hours, physicians knew how to treat the vic-
tims. The drug PAM, for organophosphate poisoning, was used for the 
first time for human treatment for sarin poisoning at two hospitals: by 
Dr. Tetsu Okumura of St. Luke’s International Hospital and Dr. Takaaki 
Kikuno of National Tokyo Medical Center.

79
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
4.5.5  The Pathological Effects of Sarin
Almost all the victims suffered eye damage. There were two main effects. 
One was acute pain, with the pain gradually disappearing and recovery 
occurring in 4 to 5 days. The other effect was shrinking of pupils and it 
took several weeks for the pupils to return to their normal state (Photo 4.11). 
The results of the patients’ clinical symptoms are summarized in Table 4.1.
4.5.6  Decontamination of the Subway Train
The sarin-contaminated subway train was cleaned by Japan’s Self-Defense 
Ground Force chemical troop using a 5% sodium hydroxide solution, 
which hydrolyzes sarin (Photo 4.12).
Photo 4.11  Eye damage due to sarin. Sarin causes eye pain and shrinkage of the 
pupils. (Courtesy of St. Luke’s International Hospital.)

80
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Table 4.1  Clinical Symptoms Produced by Sarin
Body Area/System
Symptom
Number of 
Patients (Out 
of 111 Total)
Percentage of 
Individuals 
Who Exhibited 
Symptoms
Chest
Dyspnea
70
63.1
Cough
38
34.2
Tachypnea
28
31.8
Chest oppression
29
26.1
Wheezing
7
6.3
Ear, nose, and throat
Runny nose
28
25.2
Sneezing
5
9.0
Eye
Miosis
110
99.0
Eye pain
50
45.0
Blurred vision
44
39.6
Dim vision
42
37.8
Conjunctival 
injection
30
27.0
Tearing
10
9.0
Gastrointestinal tract
Nausea
67
60.4
Vomiting
41
36.9
Diarrhea
6
5.4
Neurological
Headache
83
74.8
Weakness
41
36.9
Fasciculation
26
23.4
Numbness in 
extremities
21
18.9
Decrease in 
consciousness 
level
19
17.1
Vertigo/
dizziness
9
8.1
Convulsions
3
2.7
Psychological
Agitation
37
33.3
Source:	 Data from Annals of Emergency Medicine, Elsevier, 1996, pp. 28, 131.

81
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
4.5.7  Composition of the Sarin Used in the Tokyo Subway
The sarins used in Matsumoto city and Tokyo subway were made with 
different methods. The Matsumoto sarin was made from the second step 
while the Tokyo subway was made from the final fifth step. Moreover, 
Tsuchiya used diethylaniline as a catalyst to remove the HF (hydroflu-
oric acid or hydrofluoride) released from the reaction. That is why the 
Japanese police found a large amount of diethylaniline in the Tokyo sub-
way samples (Figure 4.2). I received a fax from the Japanese police again 
after the subway attack as to why there was diethylaniline and asked me 
whether the U.S. Army also used this catalyst in making sarin. I answered 
them that diethylaniline is an acid neutralizer and the U.S. Army used 
isopropylamine.
Aum Shinrikyo basically produced sarin using five steps but it was 
modified slightly for each terrorism case (Structure 4.2). For the Matsumoto 
city sarin attack, the sarin was made from the second step. For the Tokyo 
subway sarin attack the synthesis was started from the fifth step because 
they had stock of the difluro compound from the previous synthesis. For 
the Satyan No. 7 building, Aum Shirikyo tried to make 70 tons of sarin 
from the first step.
Photo 4.12  The subway train was decontaminated by the Self-Protection 
Ground Force chemical troop. Detoxification of sarin was accomplished by using 
a solution of sodium hydroxide. The active F is rapidly replaced by OH. (Courtesy 
of Japan Self-Defense Ground Force PR Office.)

82
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
DEA is diethylanilin and it was used as a proton remover for the 
Tokyo subway sarin attack. But for the Matsumoto sarin attack the sarin 
synthesis used DEA2E.
4.6  PUNISHMENT
After the attack, the Japanese court sentenced the action group to 
death and the escort group to life in prison. There was an exception for 
Dr. Ikuo Hayashi, the medical doctor who told the police about the ter-
rorism plot immediately after his arrest. Other members would not talk 
because of their loyalty to their cult leader Asahara. Eventually, most of 
the members confessed and said they made a mistake, but many of them 
were still sentenced to death. This means that the timing of the confession 
was critical. In the Japanese judicial system, death sentences and life-in-
prison terms are separated by only one rank.
4.6.1  The Death Sentence in Japan
In Japan, the death sentence is finalized through a three-step judicial 
process: first at the local court, second at the high court, and finally the 
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court makes the final judgment. The only 
Sarin
DEP
DEA
DIMP
TIP
4.00
5.00
6.00
7.00
8.00
9.00
10.00
11.00
min.
Figure 4.2  Diethylaniline peak, sarin, and precursors and by-product com-
pounds can be seen in the mass spectrum of the Tokyo subway sample.

83
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
passage to avoid execution is to request a retrial. Although the possibility 
of a retrial is very small, most death row inmates do file a retrial motion.
4.6.2  Death Row Inmates
Thirteen senior members of the cult were sentenced to death by Japan’s 
Supreme Court. It took a long time from the first trial to the final sentence by 
the Supreme Court. From the arrest to the sentencing for all 13 members took 
16 years. The first man to receive the death sentence was Kazuaki Okazaki 
on April 7, 2005. The last person to receive the death sentence was Seiichi 
Endo, the head of the biological weapons program, on November 21, 2011.
The highest number of murder convictions was 27, which was cited for 
Shoko Asahara, the leader of Aum Shinrikyo. Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa, 
whom I was allowed to interview, was indicted for 25 murders, the third 
1st step
2nd step
3rd step
4th step
5th step
PCl3
4
CH3OH
CH3O
OCH3
OCH3
4
P
CH3
OCH3
OCH3
O
P
CH3
OCH3
OCH3
O
P
CH3
Cl
Cl
O
5
5
6
6
P
CH3
F
F
O
P
CH3
F
OCH(CH3)2
(CH3)2CHOH
DEA
Sarin
O
P
Structure 4.2  The manufacture of sarin by Aum Shinrikyo.

84
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
highest number among the 13 members. His murder cases were for the 
7 deaths in the Matsumoto sarin attack, the 13 deaths in the Tokyo ­subway 
sarin terrorist attack, the 3 deaths of the Sakamoto family ­members, and 
the 2 killings of Aum Shinrikyo’s members who were dissatisfied with the 
organization.
All 13 Aum Shinrikyo senior members were incarcerated at the Tokyo 
Detention Center waiting to be hanged. Japanese authorities planned to 
execute them in the beginning of 2012. Nakagawa was told in the begin-
ning of 2012 that he would be transferred to another location. He realized 
that his execution date was near and he started looking at many docu-
ments and packed a number of items for the move to a new location. But 
later, the transfer was canceled. On December 31, 2011, a few hours before 
the 2012 New Year, Makoto Hirata turned himself in to the police after 16 
years of hiding­ in order to delay the execution of his former colleagues. He 
said the execution was enough only for Asahara, the supreme cult leader 
and the rest should not be executed. Japan has a law stating that an execu-
tion can only be administered after all the co-criminals’ trials are over. 
With this rule, the Japanese government had to postpone the execution of 
13 death row inmates after Hirata’s appearance.
4.6.3  My Visit with Dr. Tomomasa 
Nakagawa, a Death Row Inmate
It is not easy to meet death row inmates as only five visitors are allowed, 
usually family members and very close friends. (Lawyers are not included 
among the five allowed visitors.) Every week, only two people are allowed 
to visit. So, how did I connect to Nakagawa? Dr. Richard Danzig was 
a former U.S. Secretary of the Navy for the Clinton administration and 
a member of the Center for a New American Security board of direc-
tors, a think tank for terrorism in Washington DC. Danzig visited Aum 
Shinrikyo’s death row inmates many times. The reason for his visits was 
to obtain inside information and the circumstances that led to the largest 
terrorist occurrence in Japan to help make America more secure. During 
his study, he learned that I was heavily involved in cracking the Aum 
Shinrikyo case so he asked Dr. David Franz, former director of the U.S. 
Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, to introduce me. 
Danzig told me I should meet Nakagawa and the meeting was still pos-
sible because his death sentence was not yet finalized. Once finalized, the 
meeting could not be arranged. Two weeks after I contacted Nakagawa 
by mail, his death sentence was finalized by Japan’s Supreme Court.

85
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
4.6.3.1  My First Question
On December 11, 2011, I visited Nakagawa for the first time at the Tokyo 
Detention Center. I was nervous and thought about how to start my con-
versation with him. After all, he was a criminal sentenced to death. As 
soon as I met him, my worries disappeared because he smiled at me and 
was friendly. He said, “Dr. Tu, I knew your work well. I read many of your 
scientific writings and I respect you very much. Thank you for coming 
here to see me all the way from America.” I immediately asked him ques-
tions about the many things I wanted to find out. The time allocated was 
30 minutes. This amount of time was exceptionally generous for Japanese 
standards. Normally, only 10 minutes was allowed.
My first question was how they selected sarin as a major arsenal in 
their chemical weapon program. To this question, Nakagawa immediately 
answered, “Mr. Tsuchiya got the idea of using sarin as a major chemical 
weapon agent from the book he read entitled [The Story of Poisons] that was 
translated into Japanese from the Bulgarian book written by Vachivarofu 
and Nederuchief.”
“Did you get help from Russia?” I asked. Many people in the United 
States think that Russia helped to make the sarin. “No,” he replied. “Mr. 
Tsuchiya made it by himself by studying the literature obtained from 
libraries of Tsukuba University, Tokyo Industrial University [Tokyo 
Kogyodaigaku], and from the National Library.”
Nakagawa volunteered to tell me many stories. He said: “From your 
article in Gendaikagaku [Chemistry Today] we knew that sarin could be 
detected from the degradation products in the soil, but never expected the 
Japanese police to use this method so soon. As a result of this finding, the 
Japanese police obtained the scientific evidence and this led to the eventual 
collapse of Aum Shinrikyo’s empire.” So I told him, “I helped the Japanese 
police on this investigation.” He was surprised and was speechless for 
a while and then said, “We did not know that you helped the Japanese 
police on the detection of the sarin degradation product in the soil.”
A moment later he continued: “Humans fate is so odd. With such a 
person now I am facing each other here, it is really a strange meeting. 
By looking back, it was good that your help led to the collapse of Aum 
Shinrikyo’s organization. Otherwise there would be more killings by 
the cult.”
At the end of our first meeting, he repeated again saying, “Our fate 
is so strange. I cannot believe I am facing such person. Dr. Tu, thank you 
very much for coming to see me from so far away. This is probably our last 
meeting, please take care of yourself. Goodbye, Dr. Tu.”

86
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
At that time, neither of us knew that we would meet again. Altogether, 
I met with Nakagawa 11 times by April 20, 2017.
4.6.4  The Appearance and Arrest of Three Fugitives
Most of Aum Shinrikyo’s members who were involved in criminal activ-
ity were arrested, but three relatively low-ranking members ran and hid 
for 16–19 years to avoid arrest. On New Year’s Eve of 2011, Makoto Hirata, 
one of the three fugitives (Photo 4.13), turned himself in to the police. It 
Photo 4.13  Photos of the Aum Shinrikyo fugitives were posted nationwide in 
Japan. As more fugitives were caught, the poster was down to three people. The 
trouble with the poster was that the drawn faces of the three fugitives were not 
similar to their actual faces.

87
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
is not known what motivated Hirata to turn himself in after 16 years of 
running. Because he felt that the rest of his comrades (except the leader 
Asahara) on death row should not be executed, it seems that Hirata’s 
motivation was to delay the executions. Eventually, the two other fugi-
tives were caught and tried. Hirata, the first one to appear, received a 
9-year prison sentence. The second person caught was Naoko Kikuchi 
who was initially sentenced to 5 years (the local court sentence), but at 
her second trial the high court pronounced her innocent and she was 
released. The prosecutor was not happy and appealed, and the case is 
now in the hands of the Supreme Court. As of August 2, 2017, at the time 
of this writing, the final court decision by the Supreme Court of Japan has 
not yet been made.
The last fugitive was Katsuya Takahashi who was caught on May 15, 
2012, and his first sentence was life in prison. He was not happy with this 
heavy punishment and appealed to the Tokyo High Court. His sentence 
will be finalized by the Supreme Court.
The year 2015 was the 20th anniversary of the Tokyo subway sarin 
attack, so many newspapers, television stations, and magazines had spe-
cial programs. I was invited by Television Tokyo to go to Tokyo for an 
interview. Since they paid my expenses, they asked me to refrain from 
interviewing at other stations. I wanted to attend the trial of Takahashi, 
so Television Tokyo got a ticket for me. The trial date was March 11, 2015. 
He was a tall and rather handsome person. He was brought into the court 
in handcuffs.
One reason I wanted to attend this trial was that Nakagawa would 
testify as to Takahashi’s criminal activity. This was the first case that a 
death row inmate was called on to testify as witness. I had met Nakagawa 
many times, and so was anxious to hear his testimony. There were several 
trials for Takahashi and I attended only one of them. The trial I attended 
was to find out Takahashi’s role in sending a bomb package to the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Government. I could hear Nakagawa, but could not see him 
because as a man with a death sentence, his presence was blocked by an 
artificial barrier.
Two days after the trial, I met with Nakagawa and asked how he felt 
about testifying in court. He smiled and said, “It is embarrassing to attend 
the court with so much publicity and strict escort.” There were many 
police cars that followed his car and helicopters flying above. But it seems 
to me that he was rather happy to have a chance to get out of his cell on 
this occasion.

88
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
4.6.5  The Case of Kazuaki Okazaki
Okazaki was the first one to be sentenced to die by the Supreme Court 
decision on April 7, 2005. His crime was for killing the lawyer Sakamoto 
and his wife and child. After the killing, Okazaki stole about $3 million 
from Aum Shinrikyo, but the cult recovered the money. Okazaki threat-
ened Aum Shinrikyo’s leader Asahara that unless he got money, he would 
report the killing of the Sakamoto family to the police. Asahara gave 
Okazaki about $2 million. Okazaki then sent an anonymous letter to the 
police about the bodies of the Sakamoto family, but the bodies were not 
found. At one time, the police did ask Okazaki whether he was involved 
in the killing, but Okazaki denied any involvement.
Later, Okazaki realized that the police knew he was involved, so he 
turned himself in admitting he was one of the six Aum Shinrikyo mem-
bers involved in killing the Sakamoto family. In Japan, if one voluntarily 
turns himself in and admits to the crime, the punishment is reduced. 
But in Okazaki’s case, he was sentenced to death by the first and second 
courts, as well as the Supreme Court. His life was not spared because he 
volunteered to turn himself in “too late.” He needed to turn himself in 
before the Japanese police knew of his crime.
4.6.6  The Case of Yoshihiro Inoue
Yoshihiro Inoue was the youngest among the 13 members who were sen-
tenced to death. But in his first low court judgment, he was sentenced to 
life in prison because he was the first to denounce Asahara in court. But the 
prosecutor was not happy with the lower court’s decision and appealed 
to the high court. In the high court, the judge reversed the lower court’s 
decision and sentenced Inoue to death. The Supreme Court also sentenced 
him to death. When Inoue was called to testify at the trials of the three 
fugitives, he said they were guilty of the crime because they knew of the 
murder plans. Inoue testified against the fugitives in the hopes of pleasing 
the prosecutor and having his sentence reduced back to life in prison.
4.6.7  The Case of Masami Tsuchiya
Masami Tsuchiya is the brilliant chemist who made all of the chemical 
weapons for Aum Shinrikyo including sarin, VX, phosgene, as well as 
narcotics and explosives. He made them mostly by himself within a very 
short time span. Without him, there would have been no Matsumoto and 
Tokyo subway sarin attacks.

89
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
Yet, he was not sentenced to death in the Matsumoto sarin attack case 
because he didn’t know how the sarin he made would be used. For the 
Tokyo subway attack, Endo and Nakagawa were the ones who were told 
to make the sarin. But they were not chemists, so they constantly asked for 
Tsuchiya’s advice. Murai told Tsuchiya to hide for a while in Hamamatsu 
City. It wasn’t until the next day that Tsuchiya learned from television of 
a sarin attack in the Tokyo subway. Yet, Tsuchiya was sentenced to death 
because the judge said Tsuchiya made sarin knowing where it would be 
used.
I think there is a conflicting assumption about Tsuchiya’s role. If 
Tsuchiya was not sentenced to death for the Matsumoto case, then it 
would be logical that he would not be sentenced to death for the Tokyo 
subway attack, because in both instances, Tsuchiya did not know before-
hand how the sarin was to be used. I personally think he deserved the 
death sentence because without him there would be no sarin.
The judges for the Matsumoto city case and Tokyo subway case were 
different; therefore, different court judgments were possible. Although 
Tsuchiya did not know exactly where the sarin would be used, he thought 
it would be used for people who were against Aum Shinrikyo. He helped 
Endo and Nakagawa make the sarin used for the Tokyo subway attack, so 
the judge considered he made saline.
4.6.8  The Members Involved in the Tokyo Subway Sarin Attack
For the criminal act in the Tokyo subway terrorist attack, the Japanese 
court decided on the following principles for punishment:
•	 Those involved in carrying sarin bags (action group) → Sentenced 
to death
•	 Those involved in transporting the action group (escort group) → 
Life in prison
There were five action group members and five members involved 
in transporting the action group. There were no problems for these five 
escort group members because life in prison does not involve the death 
penalty.
Dr. Ikuo Hayashi was one of the action group members, but his 
death was spared to a life-in-prison term because he cooperated with the 
Japanese authorities telling everything he knew about the Tokyo subway 
attack plan. Although the Japanese authorities knew Aum Shinrikyo insti-
gated the terrorism action, they did not have the details of how it was 

90
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
planned and executed. It was absolutely necessary to have solid evidence 
in order to prosecute the accused in court. Therefore, Hayashi’s confession 
was extremely useful for the Japanese police. The court thought Hayashi 
should be spared from death, otherwise there would be no collaborators 
in the future. Other members did not confess to the crime immediately 
out of loyalty to Asahara. But after some time, they were awakened from 
the brainwashing and denounced the cult’s actions, but it was too late to 
save their necks.
There were five subway lines attacked with sarin, but there were 
no deaths on the line where Mabito Yokoyama released sarin from the 
bag. Yokoyama was sentenced to death. It was understandable that he 
was involved in the action of releasing sarin, but by chance there were 
no deaths in his subway line. Yet, I feel if another judge was in charge of 
this case, it is possible that Yokoyama would have been sentenced to life 
in prison instead of death. I think his case was on the borderline of death 
and life. From the rank of punishment, there was only one rank differ-
ence, but there was a huge difference for the accused because it means his 
life could be saved or he would be killed.
4.6.9  The Different Degrees of Crime 
for Those Sentenced to Death
On March 13, 2016, for the occasion of the 21st anniversary of the Tokyo 
subway attack, the topic of discussion was the “death sentence.” The major-
ity of Japanese people wished to execute the 13 members whose death sen-
tences were finalized; they thought that the government had delayed the 
executions for too long. After all, the terrorism was done in 1994 and 1995, 
and 21 years later the criminals were still living.
Someone’s speech attracted my attention and interest. The speech 
noted the there was a huge difference in the degree of crimes, even for 
those whose death sentences were finalized. Everyone agreed that Asahara 
was the cult leader who ordered all the killings and should be hanged. But 
some members merely followed orders and participated in terrorism only 
once and yet received the same death sentence as Asahara. Someone at the 
anniversary program proposed that Japan should look into the death sen-
tence system in China. In China, there are two types of death sentences: 
one that executes immediately and the other in which “execution is to be 
delayed for another year depending on his degree of repentant and good 
behavior in the death row.”

91
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
4.6.10  An Opinion on the Death Sentences for the Cult 
Members: A Comment by Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa
Many of the death sentences given to the 13 members of Aum Shinrikyo 
were reasonable. But sentencing is after all made by a human against another 
human, so the sentence can be either death or life in prison. I talked about 
this topic with Nakagawa on death row and he told me that the death sen-
tence is often vague and can be determined by many factors, including the
•	 Judge
•	 Mood of the judge of that day
•	 Ability of the defense lawyer
•	 Ability of a defendant to defend himself
•	 Mood of the people in Japan at the time of the crime and court 
processing
•	 Fate, in other words, good luck or bad luck
I agree with Nakagawa’s assessment.
4.7  OTHER IMPORTANT FINDINGS
Many people think the whole story of Aum Shinrikyo was known because 
many members, nearly 100 people, were arrested and investigated. 
The story the Japanese people read was the story reported by the official 
media, but it was not the full story I heard. I would like to mention some 
important facts I learned during my meetings with high-ranking officers 
of Aum Shinrikyo.
4.7.1  Initially Aum Shinrikyo Emphasized Biological Weapons
Because the Matsumoto and Tokyo subway sarin attacks were both chem-
ical terrorism, everyone thought Aum Shinrikyo emphasized chemical 
weapons and that the biological weapons program was a minor project 
for Aum Shinrikyo. After I talked with Nakagawa, I discovered this was 
wrong. He told me that they emphasized biological weapons initially, but 
after they realized the biological weapons they produced were totally 
inactive, they switched to chemical weapons.
For biological weapons, Aum Shinrikyo concentrated on two toxins: 
botulinum and anthrax. This was quite surprising to me. As discussed 
earlier, in 2001, there was anthrax terrorism in the United States and 
anthrax spore powder was put in five envelopes and sent to different 

92
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
places causing 7 deaths and injuring 21 by infection. Aum Shinrikyo 
made anthrax in huge ­quantities and actually used anthrax, but nobody 
died. Many people in the United States wondered why Aum Shinrikyo’s 
anthrax was ineffective while the U.S. one was so potent. They thought 
Seichi Endo, the head of Aum Shinrikyo’s biological weapon program, 
made a mistake by using a ­nontoxic strain.
As mentioned previously, there are three types of anthrax strains: Ames, 
Vollum, and Sterne. The Sterne strain is nontoxic so it is used for ­vaccine 
preparation. But Nakagawa told me that Endo knew that  the anthrax he 
used was nontoxic, but he thought he could convert it into a toxic one by 
means of genetic engineering. The strain Endo used did not have plas-
mid PX02, therefore it was not possible to convert it to toxic anthrax. This 
was fortunate for Japan and also for the members making anthrax. If they 
had succeeded in making active anthrax, all the members involved in the 
manufacturing would also have been killed by the anthrax they produced. 
Nakagawa told me Endo’s failure was attributed to his lack of bacteriology 
knowledge, as Endo was a virologist and not a bacteriologist.
Aum Shinrikyo also made a large quantity of botulism toxin, but it 
was also noninfectious, not toxic, and nobody died from botulism. Again, 
Nakagawa said this was due to Endo’s ignorance.
4.7.2  Mass Production Plan of Sarin at Satyan No. 7
Aum Shinrikyo planned to produce 70 tons of sarin and constructed 
a huge plant called Satyan No. 7. Because the Japanese police detected 
methylphosphonic acid, the degradation product of sarin in the soil, 
Asahara decided to stop production and destroyed all chemical and bio-
logical weapons. I would like to mention the origin of methylphosphonic 
acid outside of Satyan No. 7 and inside the building. Sarin production at 
three different sites is shown in Photos 4.14 and 4.15. The sarin used for 
Matsumoto was manufactured at Jivaka Prefab, and for the Tokyo subway 
incident sarin was produced at the Kushiti Galva building. Satyan No. 7 
was made for the production of 70 tons of sarin, but Aum Shinrikyo gave 
up the production at the third production step.
4.7.2.1  Outside of Satyan No. 7
The Japanese police found methylphosphonic acid from the soil outside 
of Satyan No. 7 and established the scientific evidence that led to the col-
lapse of Aum Shinrikyo’s empire. Their finding was correct but the ori-
gin of where the methylphosphonic acid came from did not agree with 

93
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
the cult’s statement. The Japanese police thought the degradation product 
came from Satyan No. 7. But Aum Shinrikyo said this was not possible 
because it stopped making sarin there because it feared an imminent 
police raid. Nakagawa told me the degradation product probably came 
Photo 4.14  Aerial view of the sarin production site in the village of Kamikuishiki. 
(Courtesy of Nippon Television Network Corporation.)
Satyan No. 7
Photo 4.15  Three sarin production sites in closer view. The author stands in 
front of these buildings. From left to right, Jivaka Prefab, Kushiti Galva building 
(Tsuchiya’s lab), and Satyan No. 7.

94
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
from the Kushitigalva building (Tsuchiya’s lab) that was right next to 
Satyan No. 7. He said that Tsuchiya’s lab was making the sarin that was 
used for the Matsumoto attack and the surrounding soil must be heavily 
contaminated with sarin and other chemicals.
4.7.2.2  Inside Satyan No. 7
After successfully synthesizing a small amount of sarin, Asahara decided 
to manufacture a large amount of sarin at the Satyan No. 7 site (Photo 4.16).
The Japanese police published two papers by Seto and co-workers 
saying they found methylphosphonic acid from the facility at the third, 
fourth, and fifth facilities, therefore, it was shown that Aum Shinrikyo 
made sarin at Satyan No. 7.
At Satyan No. 7, sarin was synthesized in five steps. So, Aum Shinrikyo 
used five facilities for each step reaction. But when Aum Shinrikyo learned 
that the Japanese police had found the sarin degradation product in the 
soil, they were afraid of an imminent raid and started destroying all the 
facilities. So, only the first two-step facility was used.
When Danzig and I learned from Nakagawa that Aum Shinrikyo 
stopped producing sarin at the third stage at the beginning of 1995 because 
they feared a Japanese police raid, we were surprised. In order to make 
Photo 4.16  An inside view of Satyan No. 7. A huge machine for making 70 tons 
of sarin as the target is shown here but Aum Shinrikyo did not make sarin as it 
stopped at the third step.

95
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
sure this was the case, I met Nakagawa again at the detention center and 
asked him again: “Was there any possibility that Aum Shinrikyo made 
sarin at the Satyan No. 7 location while you were not in the building?” 
Nakagawa replied, “This was very unlikely, because I was a physician so 
I was always called when sarin was made to make sure there was a physi-
cian available for possible ­accidental poisoning.”
Sion Miura made a comment on this discrepancy between the claim of 
the Japanese police and Nakagawa’s statement in the newspaper, Yomiuri 
Shinbun, dated April 20, 2014. She said the discrepancy should be clarified 
and that it is the responsibility of the Japanese police to do so. American 
scientists think the police published that they found methylphosphonic 
acid as a fabrication in order to receive credit and to make a nice report.
4.8  USE OF VX, THE MOST TOXIC NERVE GAS
VX is the most toxic nerve gas and has strong penetration powers into 
the skin. The lethality is 0.1 mg-min/m3 as compared to sarin’s toxicity 
of about 100 mg-min/m3. VX was produced by Tsuchiya after he got a 
hint from the article I wrote for Chemistry Today, although I simplified the 
synthetic scheme.
As discussed earlier, Aum Shinrikyo used three types of chemical 
weapons: sarin (the most used), VX, and phosgene. VX killed one person 
in Osaka and two, Noboru Mizuno and Hiroyuki Nagaoka, were injured. 
Aum Shinrikyo’s members sprayed the VX solution and the two victims 
felt their surroundings suddenly become dark, even in broad daylight. 
This was because the pupils shrank so the light could not enter the eyes.
The only person who died of VX poisoning was Chyujin Hamaguchi, 
who was 28 years old at the time he was attacked on December 12, 1994. 
Aum Shinrikyo suspected he was a spy for the Japanese police and decided 
to kill him. The official court record said he was held by Aum Shinrikyo’s 
members and another member dropped VX from a plastic tube connected 
to a syringe. I wanted to verify the killing process so I went to the Tokyo 
Detention Center and talked to Nakagawa, one of the six members who 
killed Hamaguchi. I asked him, “Did you kill Mr. Hamaguchi by dripping 
VX attached to the syringe? But how did you carry such toxic nerve gas to 
Osaka from Kamikuishiki village?”
He replied, “We simply filled the syringe with VX and put a cap on 
the needle to carry it to Osaka from Kamikuishiki village. We planned 
to drop the VX onto the neck of Mr. Hamaguchi from the plastic tube 

96
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
attached to the syringe. But when we grabbed the victim, we were in a 
hurry to do the job. The result was we simply injected VX from the syringe 
through the needle. That’s why Mr. Hamaguchi died so soon. We killed 
him by directly injecting VX into his body. If we used a plastic tube for 
dripping, VX would get into him through skin penetration and would 
take a longer time to go through his body.”
The Japanese authorities didn’t know of Aum Shinrikyo’s use of VX 
until after the Tokyo subway attack. After the incident, most of the mem-
bers involved were arrested. One of the arrested members confessed to 
the authorities about killing Hamaguchi with VX. Almost one year after 
the killing, Osaka Prefecture police scientist, Dr. Hajime Tsuchihashi, 
examined the blood sample of Hamaguchi that was stored in a refrigera-
tor and identified the metabolites of VX. From this remarkable analysis, 
it was proven that Hamaguchi was indeed killed by VX (Structure 4.3).
+
+
+
CH3
P
O
OC2H5
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
DAEMS
CH(CH3)2
VX
Cleavage of P-S bond
S-Adenosyl-
L-methionine
S-Adenosyl-
L-homocysteine
O
CH3
OC2H5
OH
EMPA
HSCH2CH2N
CH(CH3)2
CH(CH3)2
DAET
DAET
P
SCH2CH2N
HSCH2CH2N
CH3SCH2CH2N
N
N
N
N
H
H
H
H
OH
O
OH
CH2
H
NH2
NH2
C
COOH
CH2
S
CH2
Thiol S-methyl-
transferase
COOH
H
NH2
NH2
N
N
N
N
C
CH2
CH3
S
+
H
H
H
H
OH
O
OH
CH2
CH2
Structure 4.3  The metabolites of VX in the human body were identified by 
Dr. Hajime Tsuchihashi.

97
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
4.9  MORE THAN SARIN AND VX
Aum Shinrikyo produced various chemical agents for chemical weapons, 
drugs for initiation and confession use, and explosives as part of their 
­militarization. These materials are briefly summarized next.
4.9.1  Chemical Agents
Chemical agents are compounds that are used for chemical weapons. 
Aum Shinrikyo made various agents in a very short span of time. This was 
done because of the brilliant chemist Tsuchiya. Tsuchiya made nerve gas 
such as soman, tabun, and cyclosarin in gram scales. But Aum Shinrikyo 
did not have a chance to use them because it realized that the Japanese 
police had found methylphosphonic acid in the soil and Aum Shinrikyo 
was afraid a police raid was imminent.
As to the nonnerve gas chemical weapons, Aum Shinrikyo made 
mustard gas, phosgene, and hydrogen cyanide gas. I was particularly hor-
rified to learn that it made 30 kilograms of mustard gas. As discussed, 
mustard gas was used extensively in the Iran–Iraq War and did a great 
deal of damage to Iranian soldiers and civilians. I asked Nakagawa why 
they made so much mustard gas while other chemical agents were only 
on a gram scale. He told me because mustard gas was relatively easy to 
make. I really feel that Japan was fortunate that Aum Shinrikyo did not 
have a chance to use this horrible chemical weapon because the Japanese 
police discovered Aum Shinrikyo’s plot.
Likewise, Tsuchiya also made gram-scale explosives such as 
­nitrotoluene, PETN (pentaeruthritol tetranitrate), and RDX (1,3,5-­trinitr
operhydro-1,3,5-triazine) (Structure 4.4). Actually, Aum Shinrikyo had 
plans to build a huge explosives manufacturing plant. They used RDX 
only once in order to send an explosive package to the Tokyo Metropolitan 
Government in April 1995. The officer who opened the package lost 
many fingers due to the explosion.
O
O
N+
N+
O–
O–
O–
O
N+
N
N
N
Structure 4.4  Chemical structure of the explosive RDX.

98
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Tsuchiya also made all kinds of recreational drugs such as musca-
rine, LSD, and PCP (pentachlorophenol). These were used in initiation 
ceremonies. When a person took LSD, he enjoyed a euphoric feeling. Aum 
Shinrikyo would tell members this was because Asahara’s magic and 
mysterious power made them this way. These drugs were also used for 
confessions. When a member was in a euphoric mind, an Aum Shinrikyo 
senior member would ask him or her, “Are you a spy for the police?” or 
“Are you loyal to the Aum Shinrikyo or to Asahara?”
Aum Shinrikyo also developed various stimulating agents such as 
methamphetamine. It was surprising that Aum Shinrikyo made so many 
drugs and even more fascinating to learn that these were mainly made by 
a single person, Tsuchiya.
4.10  CONCLUSION
Aum Shinrikyo’s terrorism has been considered the biggest crime in 
the history of Japan. It is fortunate that the cult was destroyed before it 
caused even more disturbances. I personally feel good that I could help 
Photo 4.17  The Order of Rising Sun was awarded to the author by his Imperial 
Majesty the Emperor Akihito in 2009.

99
An Example of Chemical Terrorism
the Japanese police crack down on the crime organization. I am also hon-
ored to have received a medal from the Japanese Emperor for my contri-
bution (Photo 4.17). Actually, many people participated in solving this 
huge crime, but only I received such an honor. I wish the Japanese gov-
ernment would also honor other worthy people. I am also grateful for the 
other honors I received in connection with helping Japan when it had a 
difficult time.
The biggest lesson is that weapons of mass destruction such as chemi-
cal and biological weapons previously thought to be used only in war 
can also be used on innocent civilians. From these Japanese terrorism 
cases, we learned that we have to be aware and prepare for such future 
disturbances.


101
5
An Example of Biological Terrorism
Anthrax Terrorism in the United States
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, were a shock to Americans 
because it had been a long time since a massive attack had occurred on 
U.S. soil. Although the United States participated in WWI and WWII, the 
wars were mainly fought outside the continental United States and the 
U.S. mainland never became a battleground. When bioterrorism occurred 
in the United States in October 2001, everyone thought it might be related 
to the 9/11 terrorists. However, it was later found that the bioterrorism 
was instigated by a domestic terrorist.
5.1  A PUBLISHER DIES OF ANTHRAX
On October 2, 2001, Robert Stevens, a journalist for American Media in 
Boca Raton, Florida, was suddenly infected by anthrax (Bacillus anthracis) 
disease and died on October 5th. This was major news at the time in the 
United States for several reasons:
•	 Anthrax disease is common in animals, but rare for humans. 
Human cases usually occur in those who have constant contact 
with animals, such as meat processors and veterinarians.
•	 Stevens died of anthrax disease with an aerosol-type sickness, 
which means he died from inhaling anthrax bacteria. Anthrax can 

102
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
invade a body through inhalation (lung anthrax), orally (intestine 
anthrax), and through a wound in the skin (skin anthrax).
•	 A few days before he died, he received a letter that contained 
white powder.
The incident occurred a few weeks after 9/11, so people associated it 
with terrorism and began to wonder whether this letter with white pow-
der might have some connection to a biological terrorist attack.
On October 6, 2001, I received two telephone calls—one from the 
Chicago Tribune and one from WHYY, a Philadelphia radio and TV 
­station—asking me whether the death in Florida was biological terrorism. 
I answered by saying that it was not because there was no other similar 
sickness case. If it was biological terrorism, another case of sickness would 
occur after several days of incubation.
However, on October 8th another person at American Media caught 
anthrax disease, and after October 12th anthrax disease also popped up in 
New York City and the Washington, DC area, all contracted via delivered 
mail. By this time, everybody, including myself, thought these anthrax 
cases were most likely due to biological terrorism.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) discovered that the let-
ters containing the anthrax powder were distributed from Trenton, New 
Jersey, to mail facilities in Hamilton and Carteret, New Jersey, and then 
mailed to their final destinations in New York City and the Washington, 
DC area.
5.2  ANTHRAX
A few days after several confirmed cases of anthrax, the FBI announced 
that the white powder was indeed anthrax. Note that the white powder 
was really a spore of anthrax and not anthrax itself. Anthrax bacteria will 
change to a spore when the living conditions change. Anthrax spores are 
surrounded by a tough membrane and are very stable to heat and chemi-
cals. They retain viability even in an extreme heat environment such as a 
desert.
Anthrax is a bacteria that is grown in soil in normal conditions and 
consists of three types (Photo 5.1). As discussed earlier, the first, the Ames 
strain, was isolated in Ames, Iowa, about 100 years ago. The second strain, 
Vollum, was originally isolated in Scotland in 1935 and used for biological 
weapons in the United Kingdom and Iraq. The third strain, Sterne, was 
isolated in South Africa and often used in vaccine production. The Sterne 

103
An Example of Biological Terrorism
strain does not have a protective capsule, therefore it enters the body and 
is destroyed by macrophages. Although it is noninfectious, the Sterne 
strain contains all the proteins possessed by the other strains, which is 
why it is used for vaccine production.
In order to create a biological weapon from anthrax, the spore powder 
is made into a fine powder by adding a stabilizer so that it can float in the 
air as an aerosol. In this way, one can inhale and become infected with 
lung anthrax. For the Iraqi anthrax weapons, bentonite was used, and the 
U.S. Army in earlier days used talc as a stabilizer.
When anthrax powder is placed in an envelope, one can inhale the 
fine powder when the letter is opened. Even without opening, the fine 
powder can pass through the envelope, which has many microscopic 
holes. This is how Thomas Morris, a post office worker in Brentwood 
Station in the Washington, DC area died—he inhaled the fine anthrax 
powder that came out through porous holes of an envelope (Figure 5.1).
5.3  ANALYSIS OF ANTHRAX DNA
Because the letters containing anthrax powder were dropped in New 
Jersey mailboxes and addressed to New York and Washington, DC, 
the FBI thought the culprit must be in the eastern region of the United 
States. The U.S. Postal Service and FBI posted a $1 million reward for 
information leading to solving the crime. The reward was increased to 
$2.5 million by January 23, 2002. The FBI determined that the anthrax 
sent to Florida, New York, Washington, DC, and New Jersey was the 
same, so investigators thought it was manufactured and sent from these 
(a)
(b)
Photo 5.1  (a) Cross section of an anthrax spore examined under an electron 
microscope. There are many layers of membranes protecting the chromosomes. 
(b)  An electron micrograph of anthrax bacteria (not a spore). (Courtesy of 
Kyushyu University.)

104
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
areas. Thus, many pharmaceutical companies and U.S. Army laborato-
ries became prime suspect sites. Many pharmaceutical companies volun-
teered to be examined and the U.S. Army said it would fully cooperate 
with the FBI investigation. The FBI thought roughly 100 laboratories pos-
sessed anthrax and about 12 laboratories were actively doing research at 
that time.
The strain of anthrax was determined to be an Ames strain that was 
of American origin. But this did not mean the criminal was an American, 
because anthrax is distributed worldwide. At that time, there were no 
laws forbidding the transfer of anthrax, so anyone who wanted anthrax 
simply wrote a letter and could obtain it freely.
A characteristic of anthrax bacteria is that many parts of DNA are 
conserved for different strains and 90% are identical. Another characteris-
tic is that anthrax DNA has many poly(A) tracts and many poly(AT) tracts. 
The FBI analyzed several anthrax DNA samples:
•	 Anthrax from the person who died from the anthrax letter in 
Florida
•	 Anthrax obtained from the University of California–Berkeley
•	 Anthrax obtained from Porton Down in the United Kingdom
•	 Anthrax from a cow killed by anthrax disease in Florida in 1925
•	 Anthrax from a cow killed by anthrax disease in California in 2001
•	 An anthrax sample from the U.S. Army
Envelope
Hole in envelope
Anthrax spore particle
(10–30μ)
100 μ
Figure 5.1  An envelope has many small holes, so fine anthrax powder particles 
can easily escape.

105
An Example of Biological Terrorism
The Porton Down sample was originally provided by the U.S. Army. 
The UC Berkley sample was provided by Porton Down that received it 
from the U.S. Army. So, the samples from Porton Down and UC Berkley 
were essentially identical.
The analysis of these samples indicated that the U.S. Army sample was 
almost identical to the Florida sample that killed Stevens with anthrax let-
ter powder. There were 12 differences between the anthrax found in a cow 
that died in 1925 and the anthrax found in the Florida man. There were 
also 15 differences between the anthrax found in the California cow that 
died in 2001 and the anthrax found in the Florida man. From the analyses, 
it was obvious to the FBI that the anthrax used for the letter terrorism 
must have originated from the U.S. Army. If it was from the U.S. Army, 
then the most likely sources were:
•	 Edgewood Chemical Biological Center, Edgewood, Maryland
•	 U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases 
(USAMRIID), Fort Detrick, Maryland
•	 Dugway Proving Ground, Dugway, Utah
I had given lectures in Edgewood and Fort Detrick before, so I had a 
particular interest and closely followed the case.
5.4  DR. STEVEN HATFILL: THE WRONG SUSPECT
Dr. Steven Hatfill was the initial prime suspect of the anthrax terrorism. 
Why was he suspected?
•	 He was a researcher at USAMRIID. But he said he worked in the 
virology laboratory at USAMRIID and not in the bacteriology sec-
tion. Anthrax is a bacteria and not a virus.
•	 Cipro is a good drug for treating anthrax disease and Hatfill pos-
sessed some. This was a coincidence because he had been pre-
scribed Cipro for a cold.
•	 The anthrax-containing letter sent to U.S. Senator Thomas Daschle 
had an elementary school name as the dispatching mailing 
address. The FBI searched for this school but there was no such 
named school in the United States. But a school of that name was 
found in the former Rhodesia in Africa. Hatfill lived in Rhodesia 
before he came to the United States.

106
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
•	 His former boss had received a contract from the government to 
study the possibility of a biological weapon attack on the United 
States. Hatfill assisted on the project, which concluded that a ter-
rorist might send bacteria powder in an envelope. This was exactly 
the situation of anthrax terrorism the United States was facing.
After 5 years of investigation, Hatfill was declared to be innocent, 
and ultimately awarded $5.8 million in compensation from the U.S. 
government.
5.5  DR. BRUCE IVINS: THE NEW SUSPECT
After the exoneration of Hatfill, the FBI disassembled the old investigat-
ing committee and organized a new one. The new committee members 
­reexamined all the evidence without being influenced by the previous 
committee’s findings. They checked every small detail and began to 
suspect Dr. Bruce Ivins (Photo 5.2), who was in charge of improving an 
anthrax vaccine at USAMRIID. The FBI began to suspect Ivins as the 
­person who sent the anthrax letters because of the following:
•	 When the white powder in the letter was found to be anthrax, the 
FBI invited Ivins to study it. At the time, he testified that the white 
powder contained anthrax spores with the stabilizer of benton-
ite. This was the signature of the Iraqi-made anthrax biological 
weapons. However, the FBI later found that instead of bentonite, 
talc was used, which was the signature of the U.S. Army-made 
anthrax. How could an expert like Ivins make that mistake? It 
might be that he wanted to mislead the investigation by saying 
that the anthrax-containing letter was of Iraqi origin.
•	 One day, a technician in his lab at USAMRIID dropped a flask con-
taining anthrax, but Ivins did not report the incident to the insti-
tute. The FBI suspected that perhaps he had something to hide.
•	 As the analysis techniques of anthrax DNA became more 
advanced, the FBI was able to identify the anthrax used in the letters 
as the same anthrax cultured by USAMRIID with the code name 
RMR-1029. Ivins was the custodian for the RMR-1029 batch and in 
charge of cultivating the anthrax to be used for vaccine production.
•	 The FBI searched Ivins’s work records at USAMRIID for the 
2 weeks before the mailings of the anthrax letters. He had worked 
almost every day until late at night and the FBI questioned 

107
An Example of Biological Terrorism
Ivins about what he was doing. Ivins could not answer properly 
and said he did not remember.
•	 The FBI secretly surveyed Ivins.
Eventually, the FBI was convinced that Ivins was the culprit and 
warned him that the government planned to indict him for mass murder. 
On July 27, 2008, Ivins committed suicide. The following traces the process 
of the investigation up until Ivins’s death by suicide.
5.5.1  Personality Profile of Dr. Bruce Ivins
Although the FBI was convinced Ivins was the person who developed the 
anthrax and then mailed it causing 5 deaths and 17 injuries, nobody saw 
him put the white powder into the envelopes or drop the envelopes into a 
mailbox. In other words, the evidence was circumstantial and not based 
on solid evidence. Because the FBI was wrong about Hatfill, members of 
Congress were skeptical whether Ivins was the culprit and acted alone.
Photo 5.2  Dr. Bruce Ivins was once honored for his help in analyzing the 
white anthrax powder. But he later became the main suspect in the 2001 anthrax 
attack.

108
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
In order to assemble the evidence to prove that Ivins was guilty of the 
terrorism, the FBI thoroughly investigated his past records. Some of the 
findings included:
	
a.	Ivins had mental weakness and consulted with a clinical psychol-
ogist for treatment.
	
b.	He constantly thought of his college girlfriend, and called and 
mailed her letters. Sometimes he would sign his name to the 
letters. The girlfriend also notified the FBI about his peculiar 
behavior.
	
c.	Ivins’s hobby was to crack codes and he occasionally sent coded 
letters to his friends.
5.5.2  Trash Search and Decoded Anthrax Letter
The FBI secretly watched Ivins day and night. On the night of November 7, 
2007, Ivins took his trash out to be picked up by the trash collectors. He 
waited until the truck came at 1 a.m. After the truck picked up his trash, 
he then went to eight neighboring houses to make sure their trash was 
also being hauled.
The FBI had a prearrangement with the trash collecting company 
and examined Ivins’s trash. The FBI found two items related to code 
­information. One was the “Language of DNA” and the other item was a 
code-related book. DNA’s base sequence determines amino acid sequence 
eventually. Thus, DNA is the language specifying different proteins. 
According to the book, sometimes there are hidden ­messages in paint-
ings, music, and mathematical expressions. The book also had informa-
tion on how to find codes:
•	 By looking, it seems nothing is unusual, but usually the author 
will provide some hint that there is a coded message.
•	 After one finds the outside message, one can really read the inside 
message.
•	 After one finds the outside message, he or she can really decode 
the hidden message.
The letters sent to television journalist Tom Brokaw and the New York 
Post were dated “09-11-01” and the text was as follows:
THIS IS NEXT
TAKE PENACILIN NOW
DEATH TO AMERICA

109
An Example of Biological Terrorism
DEATH TO ISRAEL
ALLAH IS GREAT
The FBI examined the anthrax letter sent to the New York Post and 
found that it matched three of the clues mentioned in the book.
	
1.	Penicillin was deliberately misspelled to attract the reader’s atten-
tion providing a hint that the letter’s author wanted to tell the 
reader that this was a coded letter.
	
2.	Some A’s and T’s were boldface, which indicated to readers that 
there was a coded message.
	
3.	The FBI arranged the boldface A’s and T’s into
TTTAATTAT
	
  They felt that it must be the part of the DNA expressing some 
kind of genetic information. If this was the DNA arrangement, 
then the other strand must be
AAATTAATA
	
  If so, the genetic information should be transferred to messen-
ger RNA, and the base arrangement would become
UUUAAUUAU
	
since three bases in messenger RNA (mRNA) will express one 
amino acid.
	
  UUU is translated to phenylalanine, AAU is asparagine, and 
UAU is tyrosine.
	
  Take the first character of three amino acids to spell “PAT,” 
which was the name of Ivins’s old girlfriend.
	
  Amino acids also can be expressed by one-letter symbols:
	
  By decoding a seemingly innocent letter, the FBI’s personality 
profile analysis of Ivins was very successful.
	
  Why did the FBI spend so much effort creating a personal-
ity profile on Ivins and analyzing his code-breaking hobby? By 
decoding the anthrax letter, the FBI hoped to prove that only Ivins 
could do this kind of job.
Phenylalanine
F
Asparagine
N
Tyrosine
Y
FNY means “Fuck New York.”

110
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
•	 Constructing the coded letter could not have been done by an 
ordinary terrorist. The code in the letter could only be done by 
someone who had a deep knowledge of biochemistry, molecular 
biology, and microbiology. Ivins had a PhD in microbiology.
•	 Dr. Ivins’s hobby was code cracking and he had written coded 
letters in the past. He had deep affection for his former girlfriend 
even though she was not interested in him. The results of the cur-
rent anthrax letter analysis confirmed his personality profile.
5.5.3  Circumstantial Evidence
The FBI tried to convince everyone, including congressional members, 
that Ivins was the perpetrator, but many people continued to believe that 
the evidence was only circumstantial and might not stand up in court. The 
FBI searched Ivins’s house and car but failed to find any traces of anthrax 
or any meaningful physical evidence. But after Ivins’s suicide, the case 
was closed. The FBI was probably the most relieved, because it didn’t 
have to make further efforts to assemble more meaningful evidence.
The crime seemed to be committed by a single person, but it was very 
difficult to prove. I personally think the FBI did a fantastic job, yet without 
solid physical evidence the case against Ivins might not have held up in 
court. I followed this case with great interest because at one time, I had 
a research contract with USAMRIID and visited the institute twice. My 
friend Dr. David Francis, the former commander of USAMRIID, told me 
many stories, and said Ivins was a very likable person and got along with 
his colleagues. When the news broke that Ivins was the main suspect of 
bioterrorism, everyone was surprised and could not believe that he could 
do such thing.
As to Ivins’s motive to commit such an unimaginable act, no one is 
sure because Ivins never acknowledged that he committed such a crime. 
But it was speculated that he was worried that the funding for his anthrax 
vaccine research might be cut off. So, he figured by creating an anthrax 
scare, his research would receive more funding. If this was his motive, 
then he succeeded because more funding was poured into the field of 
anthrax research and its vaccine production.
For more information on this case, I advise reading the report from 
the Department of Justice titled the “Amerithrax Investigative Summary” 
published on February 19, 2010 (Photo 5.3).

111
An Example of Biological Terrorism
The lesson we learned from this domestic-borne terrorism is that 
there are no boundaries for terrorism. An attack can occur from someone 
living outside or from someone living in the United States. A person may 
have good and evil thoughts at the same time. And you cannot say that a 
person is so nice that he or she would not do such things. We cannot judge 
by appearances.
Photo 5.3  The anthrax terrorism investigation was well summarized by the 
Department of Justice and released to the public in response to the Freedom of 
Information Act.


Section II
Applications


115
6
Detection and Identification 
of Chemical and 
Biological Weapons
In order to choose the proper treatment for a chemical or biological 
weapon (CBW) agent, you first need to identify the agent. There are a vari-
ety of ways to analyze and identify agents, and in this chapter I will dis-
cuss some of them.
When choosing a method for identification, the following trends are 
typical:
•	 The method should be simple and quick.
•	 The analysis can be done on the spot.
•	 The CBW agents can be detected without a human’s presence.
•	 The CBW agents can be detected from a great distance.
6.1  LABORATORY ANALYSIS
By analyzing the agent in a laboratory using a variety of sophisticated 
instruments, one can usually precisely pin down the identity of the CBW 
agent. Many elaborate instruments were used for identification in the 
Iran–Iraq War, the sarin terrorism in Japan, and the anthrax terrorism in 
the United States. Only a few of these will be described here as examples.

116
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Mass spectrometry is often used for analysis and it is a very powerful 
method. In the Iran–Iraq War, a nerve gas used by Iraq was identified as 
tabun by a Swiss laboratory in 1982. From the mass/charge (m/e) ratio of 
162 of the molecular ion product, it was immediately identified as tabun 
(Figure 6.1). In the Matsumoto attack in 1994 and in the Tokyo subway 
attack in 1995 with sarin, initiated by Aum Shinrikyo, the identification of 
sarin was correctly determined by Japanese police scientists using mass 
spectroscopy. This clearly indicated that mass spectroscopy was a very 
useful and powerful method for identifying chemical weapons. Mass 
spectroscopy analysis is not only used for organic compounds, but also 
for identifying various biological toxins developed by the U.S. Army.
Many other instruments can be used, but here I will mention only one 
more example. After the Tokyo subway attack, Japanese police also identi-
fied the agent as sarin using capillary column chromatography (Figure 6.2) 
for further confirmation.
6.2  ON-SITE DETECTION
Laboratory analysis using elaborate equipment yields accurate results but is 
time consuming. Thus, it is desirable to detect the agent used by enemies or 
terrorists on the spot. There are many such techniques and I will describe a 
few of them.
100
80
60
Rel. intensity
40
20
0.0
0.0
40
80
120
m/z
Tabun
Mass spectrum
160
200
Figure 6.1  Mass spectrum of a viscous liquid obtained from an unexploded 
artillery shell that was identified as the nerve gas tabun. (Data from G. Andersson: 
NBC Defense Technol., April 1994, Matsumoto. NIST image.)

117
Detection and Identification of Chemical and Biological Weapons
Two days after the 1995 Tokyo subway sarin attack, the Japanese police 
struck back and searched facilities nationwide. At that time, the Japanese 
police were afraid that Aum Shinrikyo might release more poisonous gas. 
But the police did not have a chemical agent monitor (CAM)—which is 
a portable, handheld piece of equipment used to detect poisonous gas 
(Photo 6.1), so they carried a canary. In the early days of America, miners 
often carried canaries when working in the mines. It is said that if toxic 
fumes are spread in a mine, the canary will die first. So, the miners used 
canaries as a sort of CAM. However, whether the canary is more sensitive 
than humans to poisonous gas had not been tested, therefore whether the 
“canary method” was effective was questionable (Photo 6.2).
4.00
5.00
Sarin
CH3
O
P
F
OCH (CH3)2
DIMP
DEA
DFP
6.00
7.00
8.00
Total ion chromatograph of a substance left in the subway cars
9.00
10.00
11.00
min.
CH3
O
P
OCH (CH3)2
OCH (CH3)2
N (C2H3)2
F
O
P
OCH (CH3)2
OCH (CH3)2
Figure 6.2  Capillary column chromatography showed sarin and also showed 
the presence of its starting compound diisopropyl flurophosphonic acid (DFP) 
and other compounds such as diisopropyl methylphosphonic acid (DIMP), tri-
isopropyl methylphosphonic acid (TIP), and diethylaniline (DEA). DEA was used 
as an acid neutralizer by Aum Shinrikyo and the presence of DEA indicated that 
Aum Shinrikyo used different methods to create the sarin for the Matsumoto and 
Tokyo subway attacks.

118
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Photo 6.1  A British soldier carries a CAM during a NATO chemical warfare 
exercise.
Photo 6.2  Japanese police carried canaries as a substitute for a CAM (chemical 
agent monitor) when they invaded Aum Shinrikyo’s facility.

119
Detection and Identification of Chemical and Biological Weapons
In June 1995, I gave a lecture at the Research Institute of Police Science 
in Tokyo and said, “Even Aum Shinrikyo has one CAM. The Japanese police 
should buy one soon.” A police scientist asked, “Dr. Tu, how do you know 
Aum Shinrikyo possesses a CAM?” I replied, “I don’t have any friends in 
Aum Shinrikyo, but I saw a CAM in a newspaper. Mr. Joyu, the spokesman 
for the cult, interviewed with the media, and they took pictures during the 
interview. I saw a CAM on the cabinet in one of the pictures.” The Japanese 
police had never seen a CAM so they didn’t realize Aum Shinrikyo had 
one even though it could be seen in a photograph in a newspaper.
The principle of a CAM is shown in Figure 6.3. Recently developed 
small, handheld chemical or biological agent detectors use infrared 
(IR) and Raman spectroscopy. Photo 6.3 shows an IR and Raman detec-
tor manufactured by Thermo Scientific. Similar detectors using Raman 
spectroscopy are made by Serstech of Sweden. Early in my career, I used 
Raman spectroscopy a lot for my research and the equipment occupied an 
entire room, but now the Raman device for chemical weapon detection is 
small enough to fit in the palm of your hand.
6.3  CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGICAL WEAPON 
RECONNAISSANCE VEHICLES
A CAM is useful, but the detection is limited. As CBWs became more 
complicated with more variety, it became desirable to have a vehicle 
Air inlet
Poisonous
gas
Air and gas
outlet
Ionization
source
Ionized
poisonous
gas
Ionized
air molecules
Collector
electrode
Grid
Figure 6.3  A CAM is based on the fact that each ionized poisonous gas particle 
moves differently in the air. When the signal reaches the collector electrode, it is 
converted to an electric current, amplified, and displayed after being processed 
in a microprocessor system.

120
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
packed with different instruments that can monitor different agents on- 
site. The first such vehicle was developed in Germany and was called the 
Fox (Photo 6.4). Many reconnaissance vehicles in other countries became 
bigger so the German version followed suit. The newer version of the Fox 
vehicle is shown in Photo 6.5. Judging from the photo, the vehicle shown 
here was for biological weapon detection. Some vehicles may be small in 
size and can only be outfitted with one type of detection agent: nuclear, 
biological, or chemical (NBC). All NBC equipment cannot be packed in 
one vehicle.
Many other countries also have similar vehicles so they can detect 
chemical, biological, or nuclear agents on the spot. Photo 6.6 through 
Photo 6.9 show reconnaissance vehicles from the United States, Japan, 
and Sweden. There are many different sizes of vehicles that can monitor 
agents on-site.
Photo 6.3  Serstech and Thermo Scientific’s portable detectors for chemical and 
explosives using Raman and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. 
The detectors can store their own library of spectra and then compare it with the 
unknown sample. (Used with permission from Thermo ScientificTM.)

121
Detection and Identification of Chemical and Biological Weapons
Photo 6.4  Original version of a German reconnaissance vehicle. Since the size is 
relatively small, each vehicle can carry only chemical, biological, or nuclear detec-
tion equipment separately. The back of the vehicle can collect outside samples man-
ually or automatically. (Photos obtained from the brochure of Rheinmetall Defence.)

122
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Photo 6.5  New version of the German Fox reconnaissance vehicle and its interior. 
(Photo obtained from the brochure of Rheinmetall Defence.)
Photo 6.6  The U.S. Army chemical reconnaissance vehicle called Stryker. (Photo 
courtesy of the U.S. Army.)

123
Detection and Identification of Chemical and Biological Weapons
(a)
(b)
Photo 6.7  The reconnaissance vehicle from General Dynamics in the United 
States. Because of its large size, the vehicle is packed with all sorts of equip-
ment for  chemical weapon detection. (a) Overall view and (b) inside the 
­vehicle. (The photo was taken by the author at an exhibit in Stockholm in June 
2016.)

124
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Photo 6.8  Japan’s Self-Defense Ground Force NBC reconnaissance vehicle. 
Notice the attached machine guns for protection on the battlefield.
Photo 6.9  A Swedish reconnaissance vehicle. An unmanned machine gun is 
mounted on the top. The machine gun is fired by pushing a button from inside 
the vehicle by looking at a screen that displays the vehicle’s exterior surroundings.

125
Detection and Identification of Chemical and Biological Weapons
6.4  DETECTION OF CHEMICAL AND 
BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS FROM A DISTANCE
It is important to identify CBW agents on the spot, but it is sometimes also 
necessary to identify the agents from a safer location farther away. The 
earlier the better, to allow more time for preparations.
6.4.1  Chemical Agent Detection Systems
The idea is to place many chemical agent detection (CAD) systems at the 
location where poisonous gas may pass through. When a poisonous gas 
contacts a CAD sampling station, electromagnetic waves are released, and 
the CAD control station catches the signal and identifies the poisonous 
gas (Figure 6.4a). This method can be modified to protect a community. 
For example, if a factory has 10 buildings. CAD sampling stations can 
be set up at each building. If poisonous gas hits one particular building, 
then an electromagnetic wave is released from the sampling station of 
that building, and the signal is received at the central CAD control. This 
way one knows immediately which building has come into contact with 
a poisonous gas.
Another distance detection system is an optical system. A powerful 
laser is shot against a cloud that may be a biological agent. The reflected 
light is collected and its fluorescence spectrum is analyzed to determine 
when the biological weapon agent will reach a particular destination. 
Some years ago, I was invited to a CBW detection agent meeting orga-
nized by the U.S. Army in North Carolina. At that time, a U.S. Army team 
from New Mexico presented this new analytical method and I was very 
impressed. I often do spectroscopy for my research, but in my system 
the distance between a sample and light source is less than a half meter. 
Similarly, the distance between a sample and detector is less than one 
meter. The method the U.S. Army used was to shoot a laser beam into the 
sky, which was on a totally different scale from my spectroscopy, although 
the principle is the same (Figure 6.4b).
6.5  BIOLOGICAL AGENT ANALYSIS
Some of the methods mentioned thus far, such as mass spectroscopy, can 
also be used for biological agent identification. There are some methods 
that can only be used for biological agents such as immune assays.

126
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
A sophisticated instrument based on the DNA analysis of bacteria 
or viruses that are used for biological weapons is also available. With 
this instrument one can identify an agent in a very short time. A chip 
contains the DNA base sequences of all known bacteria or viruses. The 
unknown biological agent’s DNA is amplified by a PCR (polymerase 
chain reaction) for many cycles. Then, the DNA base sequence of the 
unknown sample is compared to the known sample that is stored on 
the chip. If a DNA sequence match is found, then one can identify the 
unknown sample.
However, this highly advanced equipment is very expensive. I gave a 
lecture to a Japanese company where the employees showed me a biologi-
cal agent analyzer based on DNA analysis. I was very impressed. When 
Electromagnetic wave
(a)
(b)
Poisonous gas
CAD
sampling
station
Receiver
Analyzer
Computer
Reflected light
Poisonous gas
Fluorescence spectrum
Source
Laser
Figure 6.4  (a) A diagram showing the principle of a CAD (chemical agent detec-
tion) system. (b) A diagram of a fluorescence long-distance detection system.

127
Detection and Identification of Chemical and Biological Weapons
I asked how many units they had sold, they told me none so far. Yes, this 
company makes an excellent product, but the market is also important.
A leading American company asked me to give a lecture on biological 
weapons. It had organized committees to assess the feasibility of manu-
facturing such equipment. My lecture was connected by a conference call 
Chemical warfare agents
and degradation products
Thiodiglycol
1,4-Dithiane
Sulfur mustard
(dischlorodiethylsulfide)
1,4-Dithioxane
Sarin (GB)
D
Methylphosphonic acid
Isopropylmethylphosphonic
acid
CH2CH2CI
H2O
CH2CH2CI
CH2CH2OH
CH2CH2OH
CH2CH2
CH2CH2
CH2CH2
CH2CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH
O
P
F
O
CH3
H3C
H2O
H2O
H3C
CH
OH
OH
OH
O
P
O
O
P
S
S
S
S
O
S
Structure 6.1  Degradation of mustard gas and sarin in soil.

128
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
to Germany, Japan, and several places in the United States where commit-
tee members were present. I told them that by knowing their company, 
I had no doubt of their ability to make such an analyzer, but they needed 
to consider whether the market was ready for such expensive equipment. 
Later, I learned the company stopped making the analyzer. I think it based 
its decision on small market demand.
6.6  DETECTION FROM SOIL
Some of the poisonous gas can be detected from the soil that absorbs 
and converts it into stable compounds (Structure 6.1). This method was 
employed successfully in northern Iraq by analyzing the soil. The British 
scientists showed scientific evidence that Saddam Hussein had killed 
many Kurdish people in Halabja. This method was also used successfully 
in Japan, showing that the sarin used in Matsumoto in 1994 was manu-
factured in Kamikuishiki village by finding methylphosphonic acid in 
the soil. (I am particularly proud of this case because at that time, I was 
the one who supplied the information about the analytical method to the 
Japanese police to help solve the biggest crime in Japan.)

129
7
Protection from Chemical 
and Biological Agents
Chemical weapons, commonly called poisonous gas, are extremely toxic 
so it is absolutely necessary to filter out the gas before one breathes it in. 
Modern biological weapon agents are also developed as aerosols, killing 
people who breathe them in. When creating protective agents, they should 
be designed to protect an individual as well as many people.
7.1  PROTECTING AN INDIVIDUAL
The most important protective agent, of course, is a gas mask to first catch 
the poisonous gas, then allow the person to breathe the filtered air. Some 
chemical agents can penetrate the skin, so a protective garment is also 
necessary. Both a gas mask and a protective garment are standard equip-
ment in many countries. A Chinese solider wearing both items is shown 
in Photo 7.1.
It is easy to say just wear a gas mask, but actually it is not that simple 
because poisonous gas can seep in unless the mask is firmly in contact 
with your face. When I received chemical officers training in Taiwan, we 
had to put on gas masks in a bunker filled with tear gas. We were told that 
as soon as we put the mask on, to blow out all the poisonous gas inside the 
mask. But it was almost impossible to blow out the poisonous gas. In order 
to solve this problem, the inside of the mask has to have positive pressure 

130
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
by sending in filtered air by a pump. Many companies produce this type 
of special mask (Photo 7.2).
Modern gas masks are made in such a way that you can talk and com-
municate while wearing the mask. Some are made so that you can even 
drink when you wear the mask (Photo 7.3). Many countries also make 
inexpensive disposable garments (Photo 7.4).
Simple protection chambers have been developed. An example of a 
protection chamber for a child or an infant is shown in Photo 7.5a; and one 
for carrying a wounded soldier is shown in Photo 7.5b.
There is also fully protective dress for pilots. You may wonder why a 
pilot needs protection in an airplane. It is not used for flying, but for when 
a pilot touches down where the area may be highly contaminated with 
poisonous gas (Photo 7.5c).
In the Tokyo subway attack in 1995, a large number of the vic-
tims exposed to sarin were rushed to different hospitals in Tokyo. 
International Saint Luke’s Hospital alone treated about 1,000 patients 
immediately after the attack. Many physicians, nurses, and emergency 
workers suffered secondary poisoning because they helped the victims 
without protection. I was fortunate enough to be invited to observe the 
training of the Tokyo fire department’s special force for nuclear, biologi-
cal, and chemical (NBC) situations. They wore gas masks and protective 
Photo 7.1  The People’s Liberation Army soldier in China with a gas mask and 
wearing a full protective garment. (Courtesy of the Chinese Liberation Army 
Institute of Chemical Defense.)

131
Protection from Chemical and Biological Agents
Photo 7.2  A boy mannequin is protected by a mask that has positive pres-
sure inside. Such a positive pressure mask is common and also used in military 
masks and by civilian defense forces. (Photograph by the author at an exhibit in 
Stockholm in June 2016.)
Photo 7.3  A British-made gas mask. A person can drink with the mask on. 
(Photo was obtained from the brochure of NBC, United Kingdom.)

132
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
garments when they rescued and treated victims. This is the correct 
way to handle a rescue operation. You must protect yourself before you 
help others.
Nerve gas acts very fast, therefore you should administer atropine or 
pralidoxime immediately when you are exposed to nerve gas using an 
autoinjector kit. There are two types of autoinjectors: one is an atropine 
autoinjector containing 2 mg of atropine in 0.7 ml, and the other is a prali-
doxime autoinjector containing 600 mg in 2 ml. The injection site should 
be the buttocks. The advantage of these autoinjector kits is that you can 
inject yourself on the spot.
In case of convulsion, diazepam CANA (convulsant antidote for nerve 
agent) should be administered by someone other than yourself.
7.2  PROTECTING A GROUP OF PEOPLE
It is also important to be able to protect a relatively large number of peo-
ple, and in this aspect, Sweden and Switzerland are the most advanced. 
Photos 7.6 to 7.8 illustrate how these two countries have prepared to protect 
Photo 7.4  A Swedish soldier wearing a garment made of disposable plastic. 
(Photographed by the author in Sweden.)

133
Protection from Chemical and Biological Agents
civilians for future NBC warfare. I visited a Swedish NBC fort outside of 
Stockholm and was very impressed (Photo 7.6). They told me they have 
hundreds of these retreats in case of an NBC attack. Switzerland is also 
very advanced in civil defense against a future NBC attack (Photos 7.7 and 
7.8). It has many hospitals and living quarters for emergency NBC attacks 
and is well prepared to protect a large number of the population. In case 
of an attack, citizens will be notified by the 7,000 sirens set up nationwide. 
It is remarkable that such small countries like Switzerland and Sweden 
can establish such a civil defense program.
Usually, many people work in commercial buildings. How should 
we protect these people in case of a chemical attack? It depends on the 
location of the building. When the inside of a building is under pos-
itive pressure, then the infiltrated poisonous gas will be pushed out 
naturally. This can be done if the surrounding areas have no houses or 
people.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Photo 7.5  (a) A special chamber for children and (b) a chamber to carry a 
wounded person. (Both were photographed by the author at an exhibit in 
Stockholm.) (c) Protective dress for a pilot.

134
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
It is also possible to have one particular room with positive pressure 
so that the poisonous gas cannot enter. Then, the problem is who will be 
allowed to stay in this room in case of a chemical attack. In other words, 
who will be saved and who will face death?
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Photo 7.6  (a) Entrance of an NBC fort. (b) Looking at the entrance from inside. 
(c) A shower room for decontamination. (d) Between the rooms, a heavy steel door 
prevents poisonous gas from coming through. (Courtesy of the Swedish Defense 
Department.)

135
Protection from Chemical and Biological Agents
Photo 7.7  Protection rooms are built inside the Swiss Alps to receive civilians 
in case of an NBC attack. The top photo is a practice scene where many civil-
ians occupy the same room. The lower photo indicates the area empty of people. 
(Courtesy of the Swiss Civil Defense Authority.)

136
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
(a)
(b)
Gas filter
Roof, wall, and floor
Dividing wall
Emergency exit
and air supply
Air change
facility with
gas filter
A door for
dividing wall
Toilet
Air outlet with safety valve
Room before
the shelter
Entrance to the shelter
Defense door
Water inlet
Wall for
front room
Shelter room can occupy a
maximum of 50 people
Defense cover
Escape tunnel
and air supply
Emergency tunnel for
escape and air supply
Shelter room
for maximum of 50 people
Room before
entering shelter
Outside wall
Dividing wall
Entrance to the shelter
Door for shelter 
Air inlet with
safety valve
Toilet
Water use
Door within the
shelter room
Defense cover
Emergency exit
and air supply 
Photo 7.8  Blueprints for emergency protection rooms for future NBC attacks 
­prepared and provided by the Swiss Police Civilian Protection Agency. (a) For the 
use of 50 to 100 people; and (b) for the use of 101 to 200 people. (Courtesy of the 
Swiss Civil Defense Authority.)

137
Protection from Chemical and Biological Agents
7.3  LABORATORY SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
NBC laboratories require a special design for the safety of the people 
engaged in handling warfare agents. This is especially true for biological 
weapons research. I visited Spiez Laboratory, a Swiss institute for NBC 
protection. They were making a number of poisonous gases including the 
Photo 7.9  Biological agent handling rooms are classified by their ability to 
handle various dangerous biological agents. The higher-number laboratories 
are better equipped for safety. The bottom photograph is of a BL-3 lab at Spiez 
Laboratory in Spiez, Switzerland. (Diagrams obtained from a published U.S. 
Central Intelligence Agency document.)

138
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
nerve gas sarin. Because a standard compound is essential for ­identifying 
unknown poisonous gases, this laboratory was asked by the United 
Nations to make various chemical agents. The whole room was made to 
have negative pressure so that any chemical agents could not escape from 
the room. The walls had charcoal powder embedded in them to separate 
them from other rooms so that any leaked agents would be adsorbed.
I also saw a BL-3 biological laboratory. I hear they now have a BL-4 
laboratory. To handle biological agents is particularly dangerous, so labo-
ratories that handle biological agents are classified as BL-1 to BL-4 (BL 
stands for biosafety level). The higher the number, the better and safer 
(Photo 7.9). In 2015, I visited China’s biological weapons lab in Beijing and 
they were pleased to have a new BL-4 lab. Taiwan’s Institute of Preventive 
Medicine, Taiwan’s biological weapon laboratory, is also a BL-4 facility.

139
8
Decontamination of Chemical 
and Biological Agents
After a chemical and biological weapon attack, the area and people 
involved are contaminated, and there is also the possibility of those 
not directly involved suffering from secondary poisoning. Therefore, it 
is important to decontaminate the area and the people involved. This 
was illustrated in the Tokyo subway sarin attack in 1995. St. Luke’s 
International Hospital in Tokyo treated 1,000 patients exposed to sarin. 
Every available space for treatment was used, including offices, the cha-
pel, and hallways (Photo 8.1). However, as mentioned earlier, the medical 
personnel did not decontaminate themselves before treating patients, so 
they suffered secondary poisoning. In the hospital chapel, 45.8% of the 
emergency personnel suffered secondary poisoning. In the intensive care 
unit (ICU), 38.7% of workers also suffered secondary poisoning.
I highly recommend the book Medical Aspects of Chemical and Biological 
Warfare published by U.S. Army. The book was written by Frederick 
R. Sidel, Ernest T. Takafuji, and David R. Franz in 1997. It is part of the 
Textbook of Military Medicine for the U.S. Army.
8.1  USE OF CHEMICALS
Commercial detoxification equipment for poisonous gas uses strong oxi-
dizing agents such as sodium hypochlorite or sodium chlorite. The shape 
of the commercial equipment is somewhat similar to a fire extinguisher. 

140
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
The principle is to oxidize the poisonous gas to carbon dioxide, in other 
words burn the poisonous gas chemically. Many warfare chemical and 
biological agents contain carbon atoms, and they can be converted to car-
bon dioxide by oxidization.
For a large quantity of poisonous gas, high temperature burning is 
frequently used. The U.S. Army has used this method for the disposal of 
many tons of poisonous gas. Syria handed over its chemical weapons to 
the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and 
the weapons were burned at high temperatures on a ship at sea.
For sarin disposal, a sodium hydroxide solution is often used. Sarin 
contains an active fluorine atom that can be hydrolyzed in alkaline condi-
tions (Structure 8.1). For other nerve agents, hydrolysis with an alkaline 
solution can be used too. Since nerve gas contains a phosphorus atom in 
the form of ester, the enzymes can neutralize the nerve gas by hydrolysis. 
After the Tokyo subway sarin attack, this method of hydrolysis in alkaline 
solution was used successfully by Japan’s Self-Ground Force to decontami­
nate the subway train using a 5% sodium hydroxide solution.
Since each chemical agent has a different structure with different 
functional groups, one detoxification agent cannot be used for all chemi-
cal agents. There is a good review article titled “Decontamination of 
Photo 8.1  On the day of the Tokyo subway attack with sarin, St. Luke’s 
International Hospital used every space available for treatment, including the 
chapel that had no windows. Thus, the emergency personnel suffered the most 
and 45.8% of people engaged in treatment got secondary poisoning. (Courtesy of 
St. Luke’s International Hospital.)

141
Decontamination of Chemical and Biological Agents
Chemical Warfare Agents” by Y. C. Yang, J. A. Baker, and J. Richard Ward 
(Chemical Reviews, 1992, vol. 92, pp. 1729–1743).
8.2  DECONTAMINATING PEOPLE
For decontaminating people, the most important task is to wash away 
contaminated chemical and biological agents on the skin, and the best 
way to do so is to use a large amount of water quickly. Soap is a weak 
alkaline and can be used. However, strong chemical agents and oxidizing 
compounds cannot be used on people.
Photo 8.2 shows a Tokyo Fire Department decontamination vehicle. 
There are two hand-operated showers on both sides of the truck (Photo 
8.2b). The back compartment is made in such a way that a person on a 
stretcher can be decontaminated (Photo 8.2c). There are many other types 
of showers. An example of a mobile shower is shown in Photo 8.3.
When one is exposed to warfare agents, their clothes are also contam-
inated. A person should first shower with their clothes on. Then, the cloth-
ing should be completely removed and the person should shower again.
If decontamination does not occur in time, some chemical agents will 
penetrate the skin and enter the body’s system. Water cannot wash away 
a warfare agent that has penetrated the skin.
CH3
CH3
P
F
O
P
O
OH
NaOH
2 NaOH
2 NaOH
NaOH
+
HF
H2O
H2O
H2O
OCH (CH3)2
CH3
P
OH
O
OH
CH3
P
ONa
+
2 H2O
O
ONa
CH3
P
OH
+
NaF
O
OCH (CH3)2
OCH (CH3)2
Structure 8.1  Detoxification of sarin using sodium hydroxide. Sarin can be 
hydrolyzed in water, but it is a slow process. However, in an alkaline solution, the 
active fluorine atom is rapidly hydrolyzed, and eventually sarin is hydrolyzed all 
the way to methylphosphonic acid.

142
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
In lieu of water, the M291 resin kit and 0.5% hypochlorite can be 
used. M291 contains Ambergard XE-555 resin. This can be applied to spot 
decontamination of the skin. The warfare agent is trapped inside the resin 
particle.
8.3  DECONTAMINATING EQUIPMENT AND WEAPONS
High-pressure water from specialized decontamination equipment is 
used to decontaminate large objects such as tanks. An example of such a 
decontamination vehicle used in Germany is shown in Photo 8.4.
Photo 8.2  (a) A Tokyo Fire Department decontamination vehicle with decon-
tamination showers: (b) handheld shower and (c) compartment with a shower for 
those on stretchers.

143
Decontamination of Chemical and Biological Agents
Recently, gel has been used for decontamination (Photo 8.5). The gel is 
commercially available, but its exact chemical composition is not known. 
Usually, the decontamination for a biological agent is different from a 
chemical agent, but it is said that gel-form decontamination works well 
for both chemical and biological agents.
Photo 8.3  British-made shower. The tent is inflated and the vehicle controls the 
air for inflation of the tent and pumps the warm water for decontamination.

144
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
8.4  DECONTAMINATING BUILDINGS
After the anthrax terrorism in the United States in 2001 (see Chapter 5 for 
more detail), many buildings were decontaminated in New Jersey, New 
York City, Washington, DC, and Florida. On September 18, 2001, and a 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Photo 8.4  Decontamination equipment used for large weapons. This decontam-
ination vehicle used in Germany is mobile and operated by three people.

145
Decontamination of Chemical and Biological Agents
few weeks later, anthrax spores in envelopes were delivered to a media 
company in Florida, to senators in the Washington, DC area, and to the 
news media in New York City. This incident caused 7 deaths and more 
than 20 people became sick with anthrax disease.
Fumigation is used to decontaminate an entire building. Several 
­fumigants are used for different buildings; these include hydrogen perox-
ide, chlorine dioxide, and paraformaldehyde. In order to accomplish fumi-
gation, the building must be completely sealed first. The advantage to this 
method is that all the furniture and equipment can be decontaminated 
without removal. This method is rapid and economically feasible, and it is 
an effective whole-structure decontamination method.
All anthrax-contaminated buildings were eventually cleaned by the 
fumigation method, but it took time and was very expensive. For example, 
the decontamination of the Brentwood postal facility in Washington, DC, 
took 26 months. It was estimated the cost for decontamination of all the 
buildings affected by anthrax in Florida, New York City, New Jersey, and 
Washington, DC, was about $1 billion.
Photo 8.5  Decontamination of chemical and biological agents using gel as 
­demonstrated by the Croatian army.


147
9
Destruction of 
Chemical Weapons
In 1958, President Nixon announced that the United States would no 
longer use chemical or biological weapons, and mandated that the U.S. 
government was to start destroying them. The United States is the most 
powerful nation in the world in terms of military might. Therefore, the 
United States had the confidence to carry out any war without depend-
ing on chemical or biological weapons, so it volunteered to destroy its 
weapons. The pilot program for destroying chemical weapons was done 
in 1979, and the first mass destruction of chemical weapons was done on 
Johnston Island. By 2010, 22,300 tons of chemical weapons were destroyed. 
The United States altogether had about 31,500 tons of all types of chemi-
cal weapons. Although a substantial amount of chemical weapons were 
destroyed, there are still more and the destruction work was still being 
continued as of 2016.
Two main methods used by the United States for chemical weapons 
destruction are (1) incineration at high temperatures, about 1100°C, and 
(2) neutralizing the chemical agents.
The amount of chemical weapons possessed by the United States was 
second only to Russia; Russia had 40,000 tons of chemical weapons. Both 
the United States and Russia have agreed to reduce their chemical weap-
ons. The Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) 
was formed to prevent the spread of chemical weapons. If requested, the 
OPCW will help to destroy a country’s chemical weapons. For example, 
Syria has requested OPCW’s help in destroying its chemical weapons.

148
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
In this chapter, I will mainly describe the chemical weapons situation 
in the United States and Japan. Japan is responsible for destroying leftover 
chemical weapons stored in China after World War II.
9.1  DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL 
WEAPONS IN THE UNITED STATES
The destruction of chemical weapons is not a simple matter. It is prob-
ably an even bigger problem than making and storing chemical weap-
ons. Chemical weapons destruction is a dangerous operation because 
chemical weapons also contain propellants or explosives in addition to 
the chemical agents.
The United States has had chemical weapons since WWI and 
expanded its inventory after WWII. Nerve gas such as sarin, tabun, and 
VX were made after WWII and stored in several depots on the U.S. main-
land. They were also stored in chemical war bases on Johnston Island in 
the Pacific Ocean and in Germany.
In the United States, many of the chemical weapons had to be shipped 
through land routes. However, many residents along these routes were 
strongly opposed due to the danger they might encounter. Therefore, the 
U.S. government decided to construct destruction facilities at several loca-
tions to avoid transportation problems.
Earlier, the destruction of chemical weapons was mainly done on 
Johnston Island. Weapons stored in Germany were shipped to Johnston 
Island for destruction (Photo 9.1). After the chemical weapons arrived at 
the Johnston Island base, they were unpacked for the eventual removal 
of the poisonous gas agent (Photo 9.2, top). Removing the chemical agent 
from a chemical artillery shell or bomb is a risky operation and in the 
early days, the action of removing the chemical agent was done manu-
ally (Photo 9.2, bottom). Technicians were fully protected by wearing gas 
masks and protective garments (Photo 9.3).
Nowadays, removing chemical agents from weapons is fully auto-
mated. Automated destruction of chemical weapons is not simple. Figure 
9.1 shows a flow diagram of the destruction process. From the removal of 
the chemical agent from inside a weapon to the separation of gas and liq-
uid (Photo 9.4), to the removal of the toxic gas so that only nonpoisonous 
gas is released to the surrounding air is all automated.
In the United States, two methods, incineration and neutralization 
technology, are used. The sites using the incineration method include 

149
Destruction of Chemical Weapons
Tooele, Utah (Photo 9.5); Anniston, Alabama; Umatilla, Oregon; Pine 
Bluff, Arkansas; and Johnston Island in the Pacific Ocean. The sites using 
the neutralization method include Aberdeen, Maryland; Newport, 
Indiana; Pueblo, Colorado; and Blue Grass, Kentucky. Neutralization is 
done by adding sodium hydroxide and water to hydrolyze the chemical 
agents obtained from the nerve gas weapon. VX is hydrolyzed by this 
method at the sites of Aberdeen and Newport. Mustard gas is hydro-
lyzed at Aberdeen’s facility and VX is done at the Newport and Pueblo 
facilities. The Blue Grass facility hydrolyzes both nerve and blister 
agents.
Photo 9.1  A boat carrying chemical weapons from Germany arrives at Johnston 
Island in the Pacific Ocean. (Courtesy of Dr. David Moss.)

150
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
9.2  DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS IN RUSSIA
Russia had the largest quantity of chemical weapons in the world, with a 
total amount of 40,000 tons. The types of chemical weapons it possessed 
were nerve gas types—sarin, soman, and VX. Russian VX was slightly 
different in chemical structure than the type used in the United States. 
The blister agents were lewisite, mustard gas, and a mixture of these two. 
Photo 9.2  Top: Unpacking chemical weapons from crates. Bottom: An artillery 
shell removed from a crate. (Courtesy of Dr. David Moss.)

151
Destruction of Chemical Weapons
Photo 9.3  Technicians in full protective garments for the destruction of chemi-
cal weapons. (Courtesy of Dr. David Moss.)
Figure 9.1  Flow diagram of the automated destruction process of chemical 
weapons. (From the U.S. Army/DoD.)

152
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Russia not only made poisonous gas during and after WWII, but also 
inherited the chemical weapons produced during WWI; this included 
choking gas such as chlorine and phosgene. But the majority of the stock-
pile of chemical weapons were developed after WWII. The nerve gas was 
already packed in missile warheads, artillery projectiles, bombs, and 
spray equipment. Most of Russia’s chemical weapons were in the form of 
nerve gas, about 32,000 tons, and a lesser amount of blister agents such 
Photo 9.4  An automated facility used for removing chemical agents from 
­artillery shells. (From the U.S. Army/DoD.)
Photo 9.5  A chemical weapons destruction facility in Tooele, Utah. (From the 
U.S. Army/DoD.)

153
Destruction of Chemical Weapons
as mustard gas and lewisite, about 7,500 tons. There were seven stockpile 
sites in Russia. Most of Russia’s stockpile was east of the Ural Mountains 
and only one site was west of the Ural Mountains.
Russia is a signatory of the Chemical Weapon Convention, signed in 
1993 and ratified in 1997. Russia started to destroy its stockpile of chemical 
weapons, but the progress was very slow and always missed the target 
deadlines. One reason is that Russia did not have a fixed large facility 
site for destroying the weapons, like the United States did, and relied 
on mobile facilities. Thus, Russia could only destroy a limited quantity. 
Another reason was a lack of finances to do the job. For the financial 
problem, the United States made the largest contribution from outside of 
Russia. The budget was approved by the U.S. Congress as the Cooperative 
Threat Reduction Treaty and was in the amount of $140 million by 1999.
Russia used its own technology to destroy its chemical weapons. For 
nerve gas, it used the neutralization method first, then added chemicals 
to solidify the product so that the waste could be easily transported and 
disposed. The plan was initially to transport the weapons to be destroyed, 
but the residents along the transport route strongly opposed such meth-
ods. Eventually, Russia set up a facility at the site of storage.
The progress of destroying chemical weapons in Russia was slow and 
always behind schedule. By 2002, it was supposed to have destroyed 1% of 
its stockpiled chemical weapons, but it did not reach this goal until 2004. 
(The United States also had trouble meeting its goals.) However, Russia 
made some progress and destroyed 57% of its stockpile by 2011. The prog-
ress has been monitored by the OPCW and Russia wants to completely 
destroy its chemical weapons stockpile by 2020.
9.3  DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS IN IRAQ
The use of chemical weapons in massive quantities by Iraq against Iran is 
well documented, and in this book, substantial pages are devoted to the 
Iran–Iraq chemical war (see Chapter 3). In 1990, Iraq suddenly invaded 
Kuwait. This event eventually developed into the First Gulf War. Before 
Iraq invaded Iran, Iraq started a chemical weapons program. Iraq had 
several organophosphate insecticide manufacturing facilities, which were 
rapidly converted to poisonous gas factories because organophosphate 
insecticides are similar to nerve gas. Although Iraq made its own chemi-
cal weapons, it did not produce raw materials as it did not have a strong 
chemical industry; therefore, Iraq had to import the many chemicals that 

154
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
are precursors to various poisonous gases. These chemicals were mainly 
supplied by European and American companies. Iraq purchased a large 
amount of equipment for the production of organophosphate insecticides 
from the Karl Korb company in Germany. It also purchased 10,000 units of 
medical aid from a company in the United Kingdom in 1981, apparently in 
preparation of a chemical weapons war. Many chemicals that Iraq ordered 
were dual-use compounds, but they were also precursors for poisonous 
gases (Structure 9.1).
A coalition force consisting of 34 nations expelled Iraqi forces from 
Kuwait and invaded part of Iraq during the First Gulf War (August 2, 1990 
to February 28, 1991). After the success of the First Gulf War, the United 
Nations (UN) set up the UN Special Commission on Iraq and systemati-
cally investigated Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear, 
biological, and chemical weapon facilities and stockpiles. Iraq admitted 
it had such weapons, and the UN destroyed the facility and the chemical 
and biological weapons stockpiles one by one. The destruction of Iraq’s 
weapons of mass destruction continued until the Second Gulf War in 2003. 
The question at that time was whether Iraq destroyed all the chemical and 
biological weapons. UN weapons inspector Scott Ritter said in 1998 and 
1999 that Iraq possessed no more meaningful weapons of mass destruc-
tion. However, there was considerable suspicion that Iraq did not honestly 
carry out the promise of destruction and was still hiding a considerable 
amount of chemical and biological weapons. Due to this suspicion, the 
UN issued Resolution 1441 asking Iraq to prove that it was no longer 
hiding any chemical and biological weapons. The United States and the 
United Kingdom believed that Iraq still possessed a substantial amount of 
chemical weapons and this eventually led to invading Iraq for the second 
time. This was called the Second Gulf War starting in 2003.
9.4  DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL 
WEAPONS LEFT IN CHINA BY JAPAN
Thus far, we have discussed the destruction of chemical weapons by the 
owning country. Another country busy destroying chemical weapons 
is Japan. However, Japan has a different motivation as compared to the 
United States and Russia. Japan is obliged to destroy weapons leftover 
in China by the former Imperial Japanese Army at the end of the Second 
Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945). The Imperial Japanese Army buried many 

155
Destruction of Chemical Weapons
Phosphorous oxychloride
MeO
OMe
OMe
OMe
H3C
OMe
P
P
O
F
H3C
F
P
O
F
H3C
F
P
O
F
S
Mustard gas
Sarin
KF
CH2CH2CI
CH2CH2CI
HOCH2CH2SH
H3C
OCH(CH3)2
P
O
CI
H3C
CI
P
O
POCI3
Dimethyl-methyl-phosphonate
Potassium fluoride
Methylphosphonyl diflouride
Thioglycol
Structure 9.1  Some compounds are precursors to poisonous gas. Chemical 
structures closer to the final poisonous gas have few other uses. Earlier com-
pounds may have several multiple uses.

156
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
chemical weapons underground in China after the war. The locations of 
these chemical weapons are shown in Figure 9.2.
Over the years, the metal cases of the weapons began to corrode and 
affect Chinese people who accidently encountered the old weapons. So, 
according to a United Nations agreement, Japan is responsible for clean-
ing up the old army’s leftover chemical weapons.
Figure 9.2  Abandoned Japanese Army chemical weapons in China. Circles: 
known abandoned sites; squares: buried sites not opened yet.

157
Destruction of Chemical Weapons
Different types of Japanese chemical weapons are summarized in 
Table 9.1 (also see Figure 9.3). Ki agent means “yellow” and contains a 
mixture of two poisonous gases:
	
1.	Mustard gas: S(CH2CH2Cl)2
	
2.	Lewisite: ClCH=CHAsCl2
They are blistering agents commonly used by other countries, too.
There was also Ao, a “blue” agent. The only type of choking agent the 
Japanese Army used was phosgene with the chemical formula of COCl2. 
Blood agents were also used quite extensively by the old Japanese Army.
Cha, a “brown” agent was a hydrogen cyanide (HCN) gas that was 
used by the Japanese Army. HCN is volatile with a high diffusion rate, 
although its effective time period is relatively short in the field. Therefore, 
its use is relatively limited to the closed system. During the war, Chinese 
soldiers defended their position in small bunkers. Japanese soldiers would 
throw HCN hand grenades into the bunkers through a turret window.
A vomiting agent called Aka, meaning “red” agent (Structure 9.2) was 
also used.
Table 9.1  Chemical Weapons Used by the Japanese Army
Weapon
Size
Type of Poisonous Gas
Artillery shell
75 mm, 105 mm, 150 mm
Ki agent
Aka agent
Aoshira agent
Cha agent
Mortar shell
90 mm
Ki agent
Aka agent
Cha agent
Smoking shell
—
Aka agent
—
Midori agent
Pistol shell
—
Midori agent
Tekidan shell 
(a short-distance 
mortar shell)
Midori agent, Aka agent
Hand grenade 
(glass container)
Cha agent (hydrogen cyanite)
Bomb
Ki agent
Aka agent
Aoshira agent
Cha agent

158
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Japan also used a lewisite chemical agent, which is an arsenic com-
pound. After a long period of time underground, it caused serious 
environmental health problems due to the arsenic atom (Structure 9.3). 
Lewisite also degraded in the soil and caused dangerous environmental 
hazards (Structure 9.4).
Diphenylcyanoarsine (DC)
Diphenylchloroarsine (DA)
As
C
As
CI
N
Structure 9.2  Vomiting agents. Japanese Army name: Aka agent; meaning “red 
agent.” There were two types of vomiting agents used by the Japanese Army. 
They were diphenylcyanoarsine (DC) and diphenylchloroarsine (DA). These are 
fast-acting poisonous gases, frequently used for riot control by other countries. 
As both vomiting agents use the arsenic atom, it will cause an acute toxic action.
Chemical agent
Color-code
band
Explosive for a
shell or bomb
Explosive
for a fuse
Fuse
Figure 9.3  Chemical weapons of the former Japanese Army had a color-coded 
band around the metal case.

159
Destruction of Chemical Weapons
Because some chemical weapons have so much impact on environ-
ment health, it is important to destroy them all. But the challenge is how 
to safely handle products with poisonous residues. Because all the chemi-
cal weapons were buried underground, many are now corroded. So, 
the operation is not to just simply incinerate the chemical weapons, but 
the weapons have to be dug up and transported to the destruction sites, 
which is no simple matter. Because the process is so dangerous, an acci-
dent, injury, and/or death seems inevitable. There is a Japanese company 
called “Emergency Assistance” whose role is to rescue, treat, and trans-
port injured or deceased persons.
Emergency Assistance has three main businesses. The first one is to 
bring in Japanese diplomatic personnel in case there is a serious sickness 
and the company has a contract from Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
The second one is a connection with many overseas insurance companies 
to assist Japanese tourists when they get sick overseas. The third business 
As
CN
–HCN
2
1/2
As
2
2
2
As
O
OH
As
O
Diphenylcyanoarsine
Diphenylarsine hydroxide
Bis(diphenylarsine) oxide
Diphenylarsinic acid, DPAA
Diphenylchloroarsine
As
As
OH
CI
–HCI
2
2
As
O
OH
2
Diphenylarsine hydroxide
Diphenylarsinic acid
H2O
As
OH
2
–H2O
H2O
H2O
[O]
Structure 9.3  The degradation of Japan’s poisonous gas “Aka” that contains an 
arsenic compound eventually causes land pollution.
CICH = CHAsCL2
Arsine
HCL + AsH3 + CH2 
AsH3
As2O3
CH2 + CH3 – CH3
Structure 9.4  Degradation of poisonous gas, Lewisite, contains arsenic that 
causes environmental pollution.

160
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
is the chemical weapons role as just mentioned. I occasionally consult 
with Emergency Assistance on the third project.
In order to fund this project, Emergency Assistance submits an annual 
budget request to Japan’s cabinet office. I examined its application docu-
ment before it submitted the budget request. First, the company reviews 
the various operation requests from China and the requested document is 
written in Chinese, so company employees will translate it into Japanese. 
I examine the translated documents to see whether China’s request is 
appropriate. It is not very hard for me to help the company on this subject 
because I know the chemical weapons. But it surprised me that the com-
pany does not have anyone who really understands chemistry, especially 
chemical weapons. Another surprise is that the Japanese cabinet office has 
usually approved what the company requested. Apparently, the cabinet 
office does not have someone who knows chemistry well. My assistance to 
the company was very small, but I mention it here because it is somewhat 
related to the destruction of chemical weapons in China.
Leftover chemical weapons are mainly in China, but some have been 
found in several locations in Japan. During highway construction in 
Samukawa, Kagawa Prefecture, in September 2002, several poisonous gas 
agents such as mustard gas and lewisite were found. In April 2003, dur-
ing construction in Hiratsuka, 30 glass bottles were found. The analysis 
of the contents revealed that they contained mainly cyanic acid (HCN in 
water), and sulfuric acid was also found in another container. These were 
leftover Japanese army cyanide hand grenades. So, the problem of aban-
doned chemical weapons from the old Japanese army is not just in China 
but is also causing some problems in Japan itself. Because of the hazards 
affecting Japanese health, the Japanese government formed a special unit 
to handle this case. Two Japanese officers in this unit came to consult with 
me in Colorado.
9.5  DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL 
WEAPONS IN OTHER COUNTRIES
9.5.1  India
Not many people know that India is also abolishing chemical weapons, 
but India only destroyed its chemical weapons after producing nuclear 
weapons. The government of India felt confident that it could deal with 
future enemies without using chemical weapons; it is estimated that 

161
Destruction of Chemical Weapons
India has about 110 nuclear weapons. India signed the Chemical Weapons 
Convention in 1992; however, it is not a signatory of the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. India possessed 1,100 tons of sul-
fur mustard gas in 1997, and destroyed a substantial amount in 2006. It 
completely finished destruction in 2009; this was confirmed by the United 
Nations. India was the third country to completely destroy its chemical 
weapons, following South Korea and Albania. India said it did not make 
any biological weapons, so there were none to destroy.
I visited and gave lectures at the India Defence Research and 
Development Establishment in Gwalior twice and met several chemical 
and biological weapons officers. I am convinced that they were engaged 
in only defensive research work.
9.5.2  South Korea
South Korea was the second country (excluding the United States and 
Russia) after Albania to volunteer to destroy its chemical weapons. South 
Korea was a signatory of the Chemical Weapons Convention in 1997. 
South Korea destroyed all 3,100 tons of chemical weapons in 2008, and 
the completion was verified by the OPCW. South Korea completed the job 
a few months ahead of the schedule set up by OPCW. Due to a possible 
chemical weapons threat from North Korea, which has a huge quantity of 
chemical weapons, South Korea is prepared for a possible attack and has 
a defensive research program.
As for biological weapons, South Korea was a signatory member 
of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention in 1987, but it did not 
have biological weapons to destroy. However, considering a potential 
biological weapons attack from North Korea, South Korea is preparing 
defensive measures such as the production of a vaccine for smallpox and 
anthrax.
9.5.3  Albania
Albania is a tiny country located in the southern part of the Balkan 
Peninsula and was at one time a communist country. It was surprising 
that Albania was the first country to destroy all of its chemical weapons. 
Albania signed the Chemical Weapons Convention in 1993, and completed 
the destruction in 2003. Of course, the amount of chemical weapons it had 
was not that large: only 16 tons of mustard gas, lewisite, adamsite, and 
chloroacetophenone. Albania did not have a chemical industry so it could 

162
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
not make its own weapons. It probably obtained the weapons from China 
in the 1970s during the communist days.
Albania is not only a small country but it is also very poor. Destroying 
chemical weapons requires a lot of money and it could not have done so 
without financial help from the United States. The United States paid for 
most of the destruction cost under the Nunn–Lugar Cooperative Threat 
Reduction Program. Albania did not have biological weapons, but it did 
sign the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention in 1992. It is remark-
able that such a small country volunteered to destroy its chemical weap-
ons stockpile.

163
10
How to Deal with Terrorism
Dealing with terrorism is not easy. If we knew when a terrorist act would 
occur, then we could prepare. But in most cases, we cannot anticipate such 
occurrences. But we can take measures to discourage potential terrorists. 
Legal measures can discourage potential terrorists so that they might 
think twice before committing a terrorist act. In other words, we can use 
legal laws to deter future terrorists and restrain their plans.
10.1  MAKING NEW LAWS
We can make laws to forbid the possession of chemical and biological 
agents. Before Aum Shinrikyo sprayed sarin in the city of Matsumoto 
in 1994 and the Tokyo subway in 1995, there was no law in Japan that 
restricted the manufacture, possession, and transportation of such dan-
gerous chemical agents. Therefore, Aum Shinrikyo manufactured sarin 
without technically committing a crime. Of course, when it used sarin 
to kill people, this action itself was a crime so that the Japanese authori-
ties could crack down on the cult organization and arrest the members 
involved in the terrorism. If Japan had a law to prohibit the manufacture 
and possession of sarin, the biggest crime in Japan might never have 
happened. It is essential to forbid the purchase or possession of the final 
products of chemical agents and their immediate precursors. Table 10.1 
lists various precursor compounds. Many of the compounds can be used 
for making various nerve gases. These compounds should not be sold or 
possessed. However, many starting compounds have dual or multiuse 
properties, so you cannot simply ban their purchase. However, for such 

164
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Table 10.1  Precursors for Nerve Gas
Final Product
Compound
Ammonium bifluoride
Sarin, soman, GF
Diethylaminoethanol
VG, VM
Diethylethylposphonate
GE
Dimethylamine
Tabun
Dimethylamine HCI
Tabun
Oielhyl N,N-dimethyl-phosphoramidate
Tabun
Dimethylethylphosphonate
GE
Diethylmethylphosphonite
VX
Diisopropylamine
VX
Dimethylmelhylphosphonate
Sarin, soman, GF
Dimethylphosphite
Sarin, soman, GF
Ethylphosphonous dichloride
VE, VS, GE
Ethylphosphonous difluoride
VE, GE
Ethylphosphonyl dichloride
GE
Ethylphosphonyl difluoride
GE
Hydrogen fluoride
Sarin, soman, GE, GF
Methylphosphonous dichloride
VX
Methylphosphonous difluoride
VX, VM, sarin, soman, GF
Methylphosphonyl dichloride
Sarin, soman, GF
Methylphosphonyl difluoride
Sarin, soman, GF
N,N-Diisopropylamino-ethanethiol
VX, VS
N,N-Diisopropyl-2-aminoethylchloride 
hydrochloride
VX
N,N-Diisopropyl-(2)-amino ethanol
VX
N,N-Diisopropyl-(2)-aminoethylchloride
VX, VS
O-Ethyl, 2-diisopropyl aminoethyl methyl 
phosphonate
VX
Phosphorous oxychloride
Tabun
Phosphorous pentachloride
Tabun
Phosphorous pentasulfide
VG, VX
Phosphorous trichloride
Tabun, sarin, soman, GF
Pinacolone
Soman
Pinacolyl alcohol
Soman
Potassium bifluoride (KHF2)
Sarin, soman, GF
Potassium cyanide
Tabun
(Continued)

165
How to Deal with Terrorism
multiuse compounds, their purchase should be registered. For instance, 
trichlorophosphorus is a starting compound to manufacture sarin, but it 
also has many other uses. But difluoromethylphosphonic acid is a com-
pound one step before the synthesis of sarin and there is no other use for it 
other than making sarin. Because of this, difluoromethylphosphonic acid 
should be lawfully banned for purchase or possession.
When we look at the amount of various compounds that Aum 
Shinrikyo possessed when the Japanese police raided its facility, the quan-
tity and variety within its stockpile is astonishing. Table 10.2 shows a large 
quantity of chemicals used for the manufacture of chemical weapons and 
other illegal drugs.
The restriction of dangerous compounds and equipment that can be 
used for manufacturing chemical and biological weapons is done well 
internationally. The Australia Group is an international organization of 
industrial countries that meets once a year in Australia to discuss which 
compounds or equipment should not be exported to countries where they 
could be used to manufacture chemical or biological weapons. This type 
of arrangement is well done between cooperating countries. In a similar 
way, we should make laws in each country to restrict buying or possess-
ing such dangerous compounds or equipment. Perhaps we should regis-
ter the purchaser’s name if he is buying a large quantity.
Similar to Japan’s experience with sarin, there was no law to forbid 
the manufacture and possession of anthrax bacteria in the United States 
before the 2001 anthrax attacks. The Ames strain of anthrax was isolated in 
Ames, Iowa, more than 100 years ago and it was freely distributed to many 
Table 10.1 (Continued)  Precursors for Nerve Gas
Final Product
Compound
Potassium fluoride
Sarin, soman, GF
Sodium bifluoride (NaHF2)
Sarin, soman, GF
Sodium cyanide
Tabun
Sodium fluoride
Sarin, soman, GF
Triethylphosphite
VG
Trimethylphosphite
Sarin, soman, GF
Note:	 GE, ethylsarin; GF, cyclosarin; VE, O-Ethyl-S-[2-(diethylamino)ethyl]eth-
ylphosphonothioate; VG, O,O-Diethyl-S-[2-(diethylamino)ethyl]phospho-
nothioate; VM, O-Ethyl-S-[2-(diethylamino)ethyl]methylphosphonothioate; 
VX, O-Ethyl-S-[2-diisopropylamino)ethyl]methylphosphonothioate.

166
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Table 10.2  Chemicals Confiscated from Aum Shinrikyo’s Compounds in 1995
Compounds
Quantity
Possible Use
Acetone
—
Solvent
Acetonitrile
206 half-liter 
bottles
Solvent
Acetylcholinesterase
—
Interaction with sarin
Activated charcoal
—
Protection against sarin, 
for purification
Aluminum chloride
—
—
Ammonium chloride
—
—
Atropine
—
Drug for sarin
Calcium chloride
1.2 tons
Drying agent
Carbon monoxide
10 × 2 m 
cylinders
—
Chloroform
2 tons
Solvent
Diethylaniline
—
Solvent
Dimethylamino ethanol
—
Preparation for choline
Dimethylmethylphosphonate
—
Preparation for sarin
Ether
190 × 20 L drum 
cans
Solvent
Ethylalcohol
2 tons
Solvent
Glycerol
60 tons
Preparation for explosive
Hydrogen fluoride
—
Preparation for sarin
Isopropylalcohol
Several drum 
cans
Preparation for sarin
Magnesium chloride
—
—
Magnesium nitrate
50 bags
Preparation for explosive
Methanol
Large quantity
Solvent
Methyliodide
—
Preparation for sarin
Nitric acid
1.5 tons
Preparation for explosive
Peptone
200 cans of 
30 × 30 × 50 cm
Media for bacteria
Phenylacetonitrile
—
Preparation for 
amphetamine
Phosphorus trichloride
50 tons
Starting compounds for 
sarin
Potassium iodide
—
Preparation for sarin
(Continued)

167
How to Deal with Terrorism
laboratories all over the world. Now, many countries have laws to prohibit 
the purchase, sale, and transport of anthrax across country borders.
10.2  INTELLIGENCE
We cannot predict what agent an individual terrorist or group might use. 
However, state-sponsored chemical and biological weapons preparation 
is probably easier to know, as many countries have an intelligence net-
work to monitor other countries’ preparations. If we know what types of 
agents a country makes, then we can defend ourselves by preparing suit-
able vaccines, antitoxins, or specific drugs to deal with a potential attack.
However, terrorism plotters, especially the lone-wolf types, are hard to 
pin down. But by knowing the properties and accessibility of a particular 
biological or chemical agent, one can guess which agent is most likely to be 
used. A terrorist normally uses readily available materials for terrorism.
For instance, the Ebola virus is highly infectious with a high mortality 
rate that seems to be ideal for a biological weapons agent. But to be practi-
cal in the use of biological weapons agents there are other conditions. The 
Ebola virus is transmitted to humans from monkeys but that does not mean 
every monkey possesses Ebola virus. Moreover, the Ebola virus is hard to 
culture and it is highly infectious, therefore it is dangerous for a terrorist to 
Table 10.2 (Continued)  Chemicals Confiscated from Aum Shinrikyo’s 
Compounds in 1995
Compounds
Quantity
Possible Use
2-PAM 
(2-pyndine-aldoximethiodide)
600 ampules
Drug for sarin
Prophylactic drug for 
sarin
Sodium carbonate
—
Neutralization agent for 
sarin
Sodium cyanide
80 kg
Preparation for tabun
Sodium fluoride
10 tons
Preparation for sarin
Sodium hydroxide
—
Neutralization agent for 
sarin
Sodium hypochlorite
—
Oxidation agent for sarin
Sulfur
—
Preparation for VX
Sulfuric acid
320 bottles
For chemical reactions

168
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
handle. This means one needs an elaborate facility to safeguard one’s own 
health. By considering these factors, the Ebola virus is an unlikely candi-
date for terrorism committed by an individual. If Ebola is to be used as 
a biological weapons agent, it would probably be from a state-sponsored 
laboratory that has the capability to develop such a dangerous virus.
Ricin is a toxin from castor beans, and the plant is commonly found 
everywhere on earth. This means ricin is a readily available material. 
Moreover, it is simple to obtain the toxin. Normally, the crude extract is 
good enough to use and does not require a complicated method of isolation 
and purification. Another advantage for terrorists is that there is no antidote 
for ricin because nobody will eat castor beans and so there are no deaths. 
Therefore, nobody makes a vaccine or antitoxin. By considering these condi-
tions, ricin is probably more likely to be used than Ebola virus for terrorism.
When terrorism occurs, it is better to capture the terrorists instead 
of killing them on the spot. By capturing a terrorist we can obtain more 
information as to their motive, background, organization, financing sys-
tem, and future plans.
In 2005, the Chinese People’s Liberation Army published a book titled 
Response and Management of Bioterrorism (Figure 10.1). The level of China’s 
chemical and biological weapons is very high and the book is very infor-
mative. I was particularly interested to discover who might use bioterror-
ism against China, this included
	
1.	Homegrown terrorists
	
2.	Terrorists from another country
	
3.	False religious groups such as Falun Gong
	
4.	Ethnic minorities such as Muslims in the western part of China
All four can be a problem for any country. For example, related to 
the third item, Japan had Aum Shinrikyo, a religious cult that planned 
to overthrow the Japanese government by developing chemical and bio-
logical weapons. But China specifically named Falun Gong because it is 
banned in China, but free to exist in other countries. Also, the fourth item 
is somewhat similar to the problem that many countries face from violent 
religious extremists.
10.3  NETWORK OF STORAGE FACILITIES
We cannot predict when and where terrorism will occur. But we can-
not neglect preparing for future possible occurrences. One important 

169
How to Deal with Terrorism
preparation is the storage of drugs and creation of medical facilities for treat-
ment. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) formed the Strategic National Stockpile (SNT) program. The SNT is 
the nation’s largest supply of medicines and medical equipment, especially 
antidotes for chemical and biological weapons; enough for the treatment of 
5,000 people. The selection of medicine is critical and the CDC prioritizes 
according to the chemical and biological weapons agents most likely to 
be used for terrorism. High-priority agents are anthrax, plague, botulism, 
and tularemia. All bacteria can be treated with antibiotics. Smallpox and 
Ebola viruses are also possible agents in biological war and terrorism, so 
the treatment for these agents has a high priority. Recently, some diseases 
Figure 10.1  The first page of the antiterrorism book (Response and Management of 
Bioterrorism) published by China’s military in 2005. China is well prepared for the 
defense of chemical and biological war and terrorism.

170
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
from animal and insects that spread to humans have also been ­considered 
as potential biological agents. For these newly emerging diseases, vaccines 
are often not available. In the United States, human-to-human disease is 
controlled by the CDC in Atlanta, Georgia, and diseases from animals 
and insects are controlled by the CDC in Fort Collins, Colorado. I lived 
in Fort Collins for many years and I could move freely in and out of the 
CDC building. But after the 9/11 attacks, safety measures surrounding the 
CDC facilities became very tight and one can no longer freely enter the 
buildings.
The CDC has also planned for essential drugs to be shipped from 
pharmaceutical manufacturers within 24 to 36 hours in case of emer-
gency. It also has a plan to transport medical supplies quickly using com-
mercial carriers. This transportation plan is important and I would like 
to mention an actual case after the Tokyo subway sarin attack in 1995. 
For the treatment of sarin, atropine and PAM are effective and these 
drugs are mainly stored in rural hospitals because they are often used 
for organophosphate insecticide poisoning. The Japanese government 
immediately asked a pharmaceutical company in Osaka to ship these 
drugs by plane and rapid train (bullet train) in Japan. Another method 
was to ask hospitals to bring these drugs to the railroad stations so that 
the rapid train from Osaka could pick them up on the way to Tokyo. 
Therefore, the CDC’s plan of transporting, in addition to the SNT, are 
good and practical measures.
After the Tokyo subway attack in 1995, the Japanese government 
established the National Disaster Medical Center in Tachikawa. I visited 
the hospital and talked with doctors in charge of disaster treatment and 
was very much impressed by their work and efforts. It has stockpiled 
drugs such as atropine and PAM for a nerve gas attack and Cipro for an 
anthrax biological weapon attack. A great deal of medical equipment is 
also stockpiled that can be used on about 100 victims. Although I was 
impressed by the Japanese efforts, I felt this was not enough because 
Japan is a large country and needs more than one stockpile center. The 
country should have at least 10 such disaster hospitals. Chemical and 
biological weapons terrorism may be a rare occurrence, but without 
preparation, panic and confusion will ensue when it actually does occur. 
My other thought was that preparation for 100 victims is not enough and 
it should be prepared for thousands of victims. In the Tokyo subway 
attack, the number of injured victims was 6,500, although the death toll 
was only 13.

171
How to Deal with Terrorism
10.4  OPERATIONS ON THE SPOT
Analysis of chemical and biological agents in a laboratory will provide 
precise identification of the agents, but this is usually time consum-
ing because the sample has to be brought to the laboratory location. 
Sometimes it is important to know what the guilty agent is as soon 
as possible. Thus, a hand-operated detector is used. Although hand-­
operated equipment is convenient, it lacks the precision of a laboratory 
analysis. Therefore, many vehicles with various types of laboratory 
equipment have been developed. These vehicles are described in 
Chapter 6. In order to pack many instruments into a limited space of 
a vehicle, a lot of the equipment has been downsized. Likewise, decon-
tamination and treatment of victims can be done on the spot, which are 
discussed in Chapter 8.
Every country has special forces to deal with special crimes such as 
kidnapping and terrorism. In the United States, there is a special force to 
deal with chemical and biological weapon incidents, which is called the 
Chemical Biological Incident Response Force (CBIRF). This special unit of 
the Marine Corps was formed in April 1996 after the Tokyo subway sarin 
terrorism attack. CBIRF members are trained to respond to 25 different bio-
logical weapons and can deal with chemical weapons, including nerve gas 
and mustard gas. The CBIRF helps combat terrorists overseas when U.S. 
embassy or consulate facilities are occupied by chemical or biological ter-
rorists. If such terrorism occurs within a U.S. territory, the special force is 
under the control and direction of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
10.5  INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
10.5.1  NATO
Terrorism does not occur just within a country, but in many cases terrorism 
is borderless. It is therefore important to have coordination among coun-
tries. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is a military alliance 
of 29 countries, including the United States. The NATO headquarters is 
located in Brussels, Belgium, but it has many branches. There is an antiter-
rorism section of NATO and the headquarters is located in Ankara, Turkey 
(Photos 10.1 and 10.2). I had the honor of being appointed as a lecturer 
by NATO in April 2016 at a workshop. One lecture was “Sarin Chemical 
Terrorism in Japan in 1994–1995 and Anthrax Biological Terrorism in 

172
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
Photo 10.1  The headquarters for NATO’s Centre of Excellence Defense Against 
Terrorism is located on a military base in Ankara, Turkey. The author was invited 
as a lecturer at a NATO workshop on antiterrorism in April 2016.
Photo 10.2  The author (right) was a lecturer at a NATO workshop on antiterror-
ism held in Ankara, Turkey, in April 2016. On the left is Colonel Ilyas Okumus, 
the Turkish Army officer in charge of the NATO workshop.

173
How to Deal with Terrorism
the U.S. in 2001” and the other was “How to Deal with Chemical and 
Biological Terrorism.”
As terrorism was quite common in Turkey, the April 2016 NATO 
antiterrorism workshop in Ankara was held at a military base where the 
NATO antiterrorism headquarters is located. Actually, there were two sui-
cide bombings in Ankara before I arrived and one in Istanbul. The one in 
Ankara was executed by the Kurdish minority in Turkey and the one in 
Istanbul was by the ISIS group.
NATO conducts antiterrorism workshops occasionally at different 
locations and the publications related to antiterrorism are free to the 
public.
10.5.2  Binational Cooperation
The U.S. government has a chemical and biological weapons cooperation 
program with the Republic of Georgia called the Richard Lugar Center for 
Public Health Research. The Lugar Center, named after a U.S. senator, is 
part of Georgia’s National Center of Disease Control (NCDC). The center 
was created on July 25, 2011, and conducts all aspects of antiterrorism. 
This is the largest U.S. participation in the Republic of Georgia.
A vehicle that is used for chemical and biological weapons analysis is 
shown in Photos 10.3 and 10.4. The vehicle contains up-to-date equipment 
of chemical weapon agent analysis and has a BL-3 type laboratory for the 
analysis of biological weapons agents.
10.5.3  Cooperation with International Organizations
INTERPOL is a well-known international police organization created 
to apprehend criminals who escape national boundaries. INTERPOL 
also works on international security matters such as terrorism. It 
includes 190 member countries and is one of the largest international 
organizations. Cooperation with INTERPOL, especially on intelli-
gence, will greatly help in controlling and predicting possible attacks 
by terrorists.
The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) monitors 
the money flow of crime organizations. Terrorist groups often use the net-
work of organized crime to transfer the money they need to prepare for 
terrorist attacks.

174
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
10.6  WE SHOULD NOT NEGLECT THE E OF NBCRE
We are used to seeing the acronym NBC, which refers to nuclear, bio-
logical, and chemical. After the United States invaded Afghanistan, we 
now see NBCR more often, with R standing for “radiation.” We began 
to worry about a radiation bomb or “dirty bomb” after the United States 
Photo 10.3  This vehicle can analyze chemical and biological weapons agents by 
driving to the spot. (Courtesy of Captain Stef Stienstra of the Royal Netherlands 
Navy.)
Photo 10.4  A diagram showing the inside of the analytical vehicle pictured in 
Photo 10.3. (Courtesy of Captain Stef Stienstra of the Royal Netherlands Navy.)

175
How to Deal with Terrorism
invaded Afghanistan and captured documents about a radiation bomb, 
not a nuclear bomb. There are many radioactive materials in hospitals. If 
these radioactive materials were to be mixed with regular explosives, then 
the radioactive substances could be scattered in the air. By breathing such 
air, radioactive substances would stay in the body, which would then be 
bombarded with radiation. This is called “internal radiation.” Since many 
radioactive metals have a long half-life, this means a person would be 
irradiated within the body for many years.
More recently, another letter has been added to the NBCR acronym, 
resulting in NBCRE. E refers to “explosive.” Explosives are usually not 
considered as part of chemical weapons, but it is a more common sub-
stance than chemical weapons agents. Explosives are commonly used 
in construction and are therefore available materials. Terrorists tend to 
use readily available materials for terrorism. Although explosives are not 
a part of chemical weapons, I would briefly like to mention explosives. 
When we think of something explosive, we usually think of dynamite 
or TNT. But some common substances can be explosive. For instance, the 
Oklahoma City federal building explosion by two domestic terrorists, 
Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols, used ammonium nitrate, which is 
a fertilizer. When ammonium nitrate is mixed with gasoline and deto-
nated, it will cause a huge explosion. That’s why fertilizer manufactur-
ing factories occasionally explode by accident. Because of the danger of 
ammonium nitrate, the Department of Homeland Security enacted a rule 
to limit the quantity of ammonium nitrate purchases to prevent it from 
being used in crimes and terrorism. Ammonium nitrate for terrorism has 
also been used in other cities worldwide including Delhi, India, in 2011; 
Hyderabad, India, in 2013; and Oslo, Norway, in 2011. Similar fertilizers 
such as ammonium sulfate and calcium ammonium nitrate can also be 
potentially used as an explosive.
In China, criminal explosions are usually committed with dynamite 
and TNT because they are used frequently for construction and relatively 
easy to obtain.
Plastic bombs are another threat, such as RDX (trinitrohexahydro-
triazine), which is more powerful than TNT. RDX is very stable at room 
temperature and will explode only after detonation, so it is easy and safe 
to handle. Because it is physically flexible, it can be put in any space. 
Actually, RDX was used by the Japanese terrorist group Aum Shinrikyo 
in 1995. When I attended the trial in 2015 in Tokyo, I was astonished by 
its use in a cavity created in a book. The book was delivered to the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Office by mail and when a person opened the book,  it 

176
Chemical and Biological Weapons and Terrorism
exploded. He lost several fingers. Two days after I attended the trial at 
the High Court in Tokyo, I visited Dr. Tomomasa Nakagawa who had 
created the device. He was on death row awaiting to be hanged. I asked 
him how he could make such an explosive with a trigger to explode when 
one opened the book. He smiled and said that all the directions were on 
the Internet or in books.

177
INDEX
A
Acetobacter pasteurianus Ab3, 29
Acetylcholine, 61
Acetylcholinesterase, 10; see also Sarin
Adamsite, 17
Aerosol, 7
Analytical vehicle, 174
Anthrax, 33, 102–103; see also Biological 
terrorism; Ivins, Dr. Bruce
Cipro, 33–34
crime suspect, 105–106
DNA analysis, 103–105
entry of toxin, 35
powder particles, 104
spore, 103
strains of, 34, 103
terrorism in United States, 101
toxin, 34
white powder letter, 101–102
Atropine, 12, 61; see also Sarin
Aum Shinrikyo, 65; see also Chemical 
agents; Sarin terrorism
Asahara, 66
biological weapons program of, 
91–92
chemicals used by, 97–98, 166–167
facilities, 69
fugitives’ photos, 86
gram-scale explosives, 97
manufacture of sarin by, 82
militarization, 68
murder outside of cult 
organization, 68
Nakagawa, Dr. Tomomasa, 67
recreational drugs, 98
sarin terrorism by, 70–71
teachings, 66
Tsuchiya, Masami, 97
use of VX, 95–96
Aum Shinsen Association, see Aum 
Shinrikyo
Australia Group, 165
Autoinjector kit, 132
B
Bacterial toxins, 31; see also Anthrax; 
Biological weapon agents
Binational cooperation, 173
Biological agents, see Biological 
weapon agents
Biological terrorism, 101; see also Anthrax; 
Biological weapon agents
Biological weapon agents, 25; see also 
Anthrax; Chemical or 
biological weapons
Acetobacter pasteurianus Ab3, 29
action mechanisms, 26–29
analysis, 125–128
bacteria, 29
botulinum toxins, 36–37
fungal toxin, 29, 38, 40
handling rooms, 137
marine toxins, 42–48
ribotoxins, 38, 39
ricin, 38
rickettsia, 29
smallpox, 31–32
snake neurotoxin, 40–42
target, 29–30
toxins and artificial toxins, 30–31
toxin weapons, 30
types of, 25–26
U.S. Army classification of, 27–28
virus, 28–29
Blister agents, 5, 14; see also Chemical 
agents
lewisite, 15
mustard gas, 14–15

178
Index
Blood agents, 5, 15; see also Chemical 
agents
cyanogen chloride, 15–16
hydrogen cyanide, 16, 17
Botulinum toxins, 36–37; see also 
Biological weapon agents
Botulism, 36
British-made gas mask, 131
British-made shower, 143; see also 
Chemical or biological 
weapons
C
CAD, see Chemical agent detection
CAM, see Chemical agent monitor
CANA, see Convulsant antidote for 
nerve agent
CBIRF, see Chemical Biological 
Incident Response Force
CBW, see Chemical or biological 
weapons
CDC, see Centers for Disease Control
Centers for Disease Control (CDC), 32, 
169–170
Chemical agent detection (CAD), 
122–123; see also Chemical or 
biological weapons
principle of, 126
Chemical agent monitor (CAM), 117; 
see also Chemical or biological 
weapons
during NATO chemical warfare 
exercise, 118
principle, 119
Chemical agents, 3, 7; see also Chemical 
weapons; Nerve agents
blister agents, 5, 14
blood agents, 5, 15–16
chlorine, 23
choking agents, 5
history, 3–5
incapacitating agents, 18–20
phosgene, 4
poisonous gas types, 5
rioting control agents, 16–18
toxicology, 20
used by Aum Shinrikyo, 97–98
vomiting agents, 16
Chemical Biological Incident Response 
Force (CBIRF), 171
Chemical bombs of Iraq, 52; see also 
Iran–Iraq War
Chemical missiles of Iraq, 52; see also 
Iran–Iraq War
Chemical or biological weapons (CBW), 
115; see also Decontamination
autoinjector kit, 132
biological agent analysis, 125–128
biological agent handling rooms, 137
British-made gas mask, 131
canary method, 117, 118
capillary column chromatography, 
117
chamber for children, 133
chamber to carry wounded 
person, 133
detection from a distance, 125
detection from soil, 128
detection system, 125, 126
garment made with disposable 
plastic, 132
gas masks, 130
identification of, 115
laboratory analysis, 115–116
laboratory safety considerations, 
137–138
mass spectrum of viscous liquid, 116
monitoring, 117, 118
NBC fort, 134
on-site detection, 116–119
positive pressure mask, 131
to protect individuals, 129–133
protection rooms, 129, 135, 136
protective agents, 129
protective dress for pilots, 133
to protect people, 132
reconnaissance vehicle, 119–121

179
Index
Thermo Scientific’s portable 
detectors, 120
Chemical terrorism, 65; see also Sarin 
terrorism
Chemical war, 49; see also Iran–Iraq War
Chemical weapon, 3, 129; see also 
Chemical agents
binary system of, 21
chemical reaction of binary 
system of, 21
deterrent effect, 4
used by Japanese army, 157, 158
use in Syria and by ISIS, 22–23
Chemical weapons destruction, 147; 
see also Decontamination
abandoned Japanese Army’s chemical 
weapons in China, 156
in Albania, 161–162
automated destruction, 148, 151, 152
degradation of lewisite, 159
degradation of poisonous gas 
“Aka,” 159
facility in Tooele, Utah, 152
fast-acting poisonous gases, 158
full protective garments for, 151
incineration method, 148–149
in India, 160–161
in Iraq, 153–154
left in China by Japan, 154–160
methods, 147
neutralization method, 149
precursors to poisonous gas, 155
in Russia, 150–153
in South Korea, 161
in United States, 148–149
Chlorine, 23
Chloroacetophenone, 18
Choking agents, 5; see also Chemical 
agents
Cipro, 33–34
Compound Q, 11; see also Sarin
Conus, 45; see also Marine toxins
analogs, 47
toxin, 45, 46
Convulsant antidote for nerve agent 
(CANA), 132
CS ([(2-chlorophenyl) methylidene]
propanedinitrile), 17, 18
Cyanogen chloride, 15–16
Cyclosarin, 8; see also Nerve agents
D
DA (Diphenylchloroarsine), 158
Decontamination, 139
British-made shower, 143
building, 144–145
equipment and weapons, 142
equipment for large weapons, 144
using gel, 145
people, 141–142
sarin detoxification, 141
secondary poisoning, 140
use of chemicals, 139–141
vehicle of Tokyo Fire 
Department, 142
Deterrent effect, 4
Detoxification equipment, 139; see also 
Decontamination
Difluoromethylphosphonic acid, 165
DNA, 108
E
Ebola virus, 31, 167–168
Edema factor (EF), 34
EF, see Edema factor
Emergency assistance, 159–160
Explosives, 174–176
F
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), 
102, 171
Fentanyl, 19
Freilinger, Gerhard, 59
Fungal toxin, 38, 40; see also Biological 
weapon agents

180
Index
G
Gas masks, 130
German
Fox reconnaissance vehicle, 120, 122
reconnaissance vehicle, 121
Gonyautoxin, 42, 44; see also Marine 
toxins
Gram-scale explosives, 97
G-type nerve gas, 9; see also Nerve 
agents
H
Hagedorn oxime, 11; see also Sarin
Halabja tragedy, 62–64; see also 
Iran–Iraq War
Hatfill, Dr. Steven, 105–106; see also 
Anthrax
HGG-12, 11; see also Sarin
High-priority agents, 169
Hydrogen cyanide, 16, 17
I
Incapacitating agents, 18; see also 
Chemical agents
BZ, 19
casualties, 20
fentanyl type compounds, 19
Infrared (IR), 119
Inouye, Daniel, 6
Intensive care unit (ICU), 139
Internal radiation, 175
INTERPOL, 173
IR, see Infrared
Iran–Iraq War, see War, Iran–Iraq
ISIS, see Islamic State of Iraq and Syria
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), 22
Ivins, Dr. Bruce, 106, 107; see also 
Anthrax
evidence, 110–111
personality profile of, 107–108
trash search and decoded anthrax 
letter, 108–110
J
Japan Self-Defense Ground Force NBC 
reconnaissance vehicle, 124
L
Lethal factor (LF), 34, 35
Lewisite, 15, 159
degradation of, 159
LF, see Lethal factor
M
MAPKK, see Mitogen-activated protein 
kinase
Marine toxins, 42; see also Biological 
weapon agents
of Conus, 45, 46
gonyautoxin, 42, 44
palytoxins, 48
saxitoxin, 42, 44
tetrodotoxin, 42, 44–45
Mass spectrometry, 116
Matsumoto sarin terrorism, 20
Mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPKK), 35
Molecular weight (MW), 34
Moss, David, 6
Mustard gas, 14
blisters, 57
degradation in soil, 128
distilled, 15
eye and face damage, 58
skin damage, 58
usage in Iran–Iraq War, 56–59
use by ISIS, 23
MW, see Molecular weight
N
Nakagawa, Dr. Tomomasa, 67; see also 
Sarin terrorism
National Center of Disease Control 
(NCDC), 173

181
Index
National Disaster Medical Center in 
Tachikawa, 170
National Institutes of Health 
(NIH), 48
NATO, see North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization
NBCR, see Nuclear, biological, 
chemical, and radiation
NBCRE, see Nuclear, biological, 
chemical, radiation, and 
explosives
NCDC, see National Center of Disease 
Control
Nerve agents, 5, 7; see also Chemical 
agents
cyclosarin, 8
G-type nerve gas, 9
sarin, 7, 9–12
soman, 8, 13
tabun, 8, 12
toxic action of, 20
VX, 9, 13–14
Nerve gas, 140
atropine, 61
compounds detected by mass 
spectroscopy, 60
precursors for, 164–165
recovery stages, 61
usage in Iran–Iraq War, 59–61
NIH, see National Institutes of 
Health
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO), 171–173
Nuclear, biological, and chemical 
(NBC), 120
detection vehicle, 120
gas mask, 131
reconnaissance vehicle, 124
special force for, 130
Swedish fort, 132–133
Nuclear, biological, chemical, and 
radiation (NBCR), 174
Nuclear, biological, chemical, 
radiation, and explosives 
(NBCRE), 175
O
Obidoxime, 11; see also Sarin
OPCW, see Organisation for the 
Prohibition of Chemical 
Weapons
Organic solvents, 17
Organisation for the Prohibition of 
Chemical Weapons (OPCW), 
51, 22, 140
Oxidizing agents, 139
P
PA, see Protective antigen
Palytoxins, 48; see also Marine toxins
PCP (Pentachlorophenol), 98
PCR, see Polymerase chain reaction
PETN (Pentaeruthritol tetranitrate), 97
Phosgene, 4
Plastic bombs, 175
Poisonous gas, 4; see also Chemical agents
detoxification equipment for, 139
fast-acting, 158
precursors to, 155
types, 5
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 126
Positive pressure mask, 131
Protective agent, 129
Protective antigen (PA), 34
Pyridostigmine, 12; see also Sarin
R
RDX (Trinitrohexahydrotriazine), 97, 175
Reconnaissance vehicle, 119–121; 
see also Chemical or biological 
weapons
from General Dynamics, 123
German, 121
German Fox, 120, 122
Japan Self-Defense Ground Force 
NBC, 124
Swedish, 124
U.S. Army chemical, 122

182
Index
Recreational drugs, 98
Ribotoxins, 38, 39; see also Biological 
weapon agent
Richard Lugar Center for Public 
Health Research, 173
Ricin, 38, 168; see also Biological 
weapon agents
Rioting control agents, 16; see also 
Chemical agents
adamsite, 17
chloroacetophenone, 18
CS, 17, 18
S
Sarin, 7, 9; see also Nerve agents
antidote for, 10
atropine, 12
compound Q, 11
degradation in soil, 128
detoxification of, 81, 141
difluoromethylphosphonic acid, 165
disposal, 140
eye damage by, 79
Hagedorn oxime, 11
HGG-12, 11
inhibition of acetylcholinesterase 
by, 10
mass spectra of, 72
Matsumoto sarin terrorism, 20
obidoxime, 11
PAM against, 11
pyridostigmine, 12
in soil, 74
stored at U.S. chemical weapons 
base, 72
symptoms produced by, 80
Sarin terrorism, 65, 98; see also Aum 
Shinrikyo
action group, 78
arrest of fugitives, 86–87
attack in Matsumoto, 70–71
case of Kazuaki Okazaki, 88
case of Masami Tsuchiya, 88–89
case of Yoshihiro Inoue, 88
composition used in Tokyo subway, 
81–83
death row inmates, 83–84
death sentence, 82, 91
detoxification of sarin, 81
difference in degree of crime, 90
escort group, 78
findings, 91
kidnapping of Kiyoshi Karia, 74, 76
mass production plan of sarin at 
Satyan No. 7, 92–95
mass spectrum of Tokyo subway 
sample, 83
members involved in Tokyo 
subway sarin attack, 89–90
pathological effects of sarin, 79
planning, 76–78
punishment, 83
rescue operation in Tokyo, 78
sarin production site, 93
subway train decontamination, 79
Tokyo subway sarin terrorism, 74, 78
visit with Dr. Tomomasa 
Nakagawa, 84–86
Saxitoxin, 42, 44; see also Marine toxins
Secondary poisoning, 140
Second Gulf War, 154
Smallpox, 31–32; see also Biological 
weapon agents
Snake neurotoxin, 40–42; see also 
Biological weapon agents
SNT, see Strategic National Stockpile
Soman, 8, 13; see also Nerve agents
Strategic National Stockpile (SNT), 169
Swedish reconnaissance vehicle, 124
T
T-2 toxin, 40
Tabun, 8; see also Nerve agents
properties, 12–13
Terrorism, dealing with, 163
analysis of chemical and biological 
agents, 171
analytical vehicle, 174

183
Index
Australia Group, 165
Binational Cooperation, 173
bioterrorism against China, 168
CDC, 169–170
confiscated chemicals from Aum 
Shinrikyo, 166–167
cooperation with international 
organizations, 173
explosives, 174–176
intelligence, 167
internal radiation, 175
international cooperation, 171
INTERPOL, 173
making new laws, 163–167
National Disaster Medical Center 
in Tachikawa, 170
NATO, 171–173
network of storage places, 168–170
operations on spot, 171
SNT, 169
terrorism plotters, 167
Terrorism plotters, 167
Tetrodotoxin, 42, 44–45; see also Marine 
toxins
Thermo Scientific’s portable 
detectors, 120
Tsuchiya, Masami, 97; see also Aum 
Shinrikyo
U
United Nations (UN), 154
United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC), 17
UNODC, see United Nations Office on 
Drugs and Crime
USAMRIID, see U.S. Army Medical 
Research Institute of 
Infectious Diseases
U.S. Army chemical reconnaissance 
vehicle, 122
U.S. Army classification of bioagents, 
27–28
U.S. Army Medical Research Institute 
of Infectious Diseases 
(USAMRIID), 105
V
Vehicle, analytical, 174
Vomiting agents, 16; see also Chemical 
agents
VX, 9, 13–14; see also Nerve agents
metabolites in human body, 96
use by Aum Shinrikyo, 95
W
War, Iran–Iraq, 49
atropine, 61
chemical bombs, 52
chemical missiles, 52
chemical shell explosions, 51
chemical warfare, 50–52
compounds detected by mass 
spectroscopy, 60
damaged hospital, 54
field hospital, 54
Freilinger, G., 59
Halabja tragedy, 62–64
Iran invasion, 49–50
medical students, 56
military field hospitals, 53–56
mustard gas usage, 56–59
nerve gas usage, 59–61
sandbag protection, 55
temporary military hospital, 55
underground army field hospital 
model, 53
World Health Organization 
(WHO), 32
Y
Yellow rain, 40

