ISSN 2632-413X (online)
ISSN 2632-4121 (print)
Eddy Keming Chen
Laws of Physics
Philosophy of Physics
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Elements in the Philosophy of Physics
edited by
James Owen Weatherall
University of California, Irvine
LAWS OF PHYSICS
Eddy Keming Chen
University of California, San Diego
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge CB2 8EA, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of Cambridge University Press & Assessment,
a department of the University of Cambridge.
We share the University’s mission to contribute to society through the pursuit of
education, learning and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781009479356
DOI: 10.1017/9781009026390
© Eddy Keming Chen 2024
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provisions
of relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take
place without the written permission of Cambridge University Press & Assessment.
When citing this work, please include a reference to the DOI 10.1017/9781009026390
First published 2024
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
ISBN 978-1-009-47935-6 Hardback
ISBN 978-1-009-01272-0 Paperback
ISSN 2632-413X (online)
ISSN 2632-4121 (print)
Cambridge University Press & Assessment has no responsibility for the persistence
or accuracy of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will
remain, accurate or appropriate.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
Elements in the Philosophy of Physics
DOI: 10.1017/9781009026390
First published online: June 2024
Eddy Keming Chen
University of California, San Diego
Author for correspondence: Eddy Keming Chen, eddykemingchen@ucsd.edu
Abstract: Despite its apparent complexity, our world seems to be
governed by simple laws of physics. This Element provides a philosophical
introduction to such laws. It explains how they are connected to some of
the central issues in philosophy, such as ontology, possibility, explanation,
induction, counterfactuals, time, determinism, and fundamentality. The
Element suggests that laws are fundamental facts that govern the world by
constraining its physical possibilities. I examine three hallmarks of laws –
simplicity, exactness, and objectivity – and discuss whether and how they
may be associated with laws of physics.
This element also has a video abstract: www.cambridge.org/Chen
Keywords: time, constraint, simplicity, explanation, modality
© Eddy Keming Chen 2024
ISBNs: 9781009479356 (HB), 9781009012720 (PB), 9781009026390 (OC)
ISSNs: 2632-413X (online), 2632-4121 (print)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Conceptual Connections
4
3
Minimal Primitivism
20
4
Other Accounts
36
5
Simplicity
51
6
Exactness
65
7
Objectivity
73
8
Conclusion
77
References
79
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
1
1 Introduction
Much work in physics has been devoted to the discovery of its true funda-
mental laws: the basic principles that govern the world.1 The collection of all
such laws may be called the axioms of the ﬁnal theory of physics or the The-
ory of Everything (TOE). The fundamental laws cannot be explained in terms
of deeper principles (Weinberg 1992, p.18). We use them to explain observed
phenomena, including the formation of galaxies, the collisions of black holes,
the stability of matter, the tidal periods of ocean waves, and the melting of ice
cubes.
Laws are intimately connected to many long-standing philosophical issues,
such as modality, explanation, causation, counterfactuals, time, induction, and
determinism. For example, physical possibility and necessity can be deﬁned
in terms of laws; laws contribute to scientiﬁc explanations of natural phe-
nomena; laws support counterfactuals, predictions, and retrodictions; laws are
linked to the direction of time; determinism and indeterminism are properties
of laws; and so on. Anyone interested in those issues can beneﬁt from some
understanding of laws.
There are interesting puzzles about laws themselves:
1. Metaphysical issues: What kind of things are laws? Most people believe
that laws are different from material entities such as particles and ﬁelds,
because, for one thing, laws seem to govern the material entities. But what
is this governing relation? What makes material entities respect such laws?
2. Epistemological issues: How do we have epistemic access to laws? Many
different candidate laws can yield the same data, a phenomenon known as
empirical equivalence. How should we decide which ones to accept? Many
people believe that laws apply not just in our local region but everywhere
in spacetime. Are we justiﬁed in holding such beliefs given our ﬁnite and
limited evidence?
3. The marks of the nomic: There are certain features, such as simplicity, uni-
versality, exactness, and objectivity, that we normally associate with laws
(the nomic elements of reality). How should we understand those hallmarks,
in light of the metaphysics and the epistemology of laws?
Such questions do not have straightforward answers, and they cannot be
directly tested in empirical experiments. They fall in the domain of philosophy.
The Great Divide in metaphysical debates about laws is between Humeans,
who think that laws are merely descriptions, and non-Humeans, who think
1 I use “fundamental laws,” “laws of physics,” “physical laws,” and “laws” interchangeably
unless noted otherwise.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2
Philosophy of Physics
that laws govern.2 Humeans maintain that laws merely describe how matter
is distributed in the universe. In Lewis’s version (1973, 1983, 1986), laws are
just certain efﬁcient summaries of the distribution of matter in the universe,
also known as the Humean mosaic, an example of which is a four-dimensional
spacetime occupied by particles and ﬁelds. All there is in fundamental reality
is the Humean mosaic; nothing enforces patterns or moves particles or ﬁelds
around. On the face of it, Humeanism is highly revisionary; it regards patterns
in nature as ultimately unexplained. A common theme in non-Humean views is
that laws govern the distribution of matter. By appealing to the governing laws,
the patterns are explained. How laws perform such a role is a matter of debate,
and there are differences of opinion between reductionist non-Humeans such
as Armstrong (1983) and primitivist non-Humeans such as Maudlin (2007).
Many physicists and philosophers have non-Humean sympathies. However,
when they ﬁrst encounter the philosophical literature on laws, they face a
dilemma. They reject Humeanism, but they ﬁnd traditional non-Humeanism
unattractive. For example, some accounts explain laws in terms of other enti-
ties, such as Platonic universals or Aristotelian dispositions, which are foreign
to scientiﬁc practice. Other accounts severely limit the forms of laws one is
allowed to consider. It is sometimes assumed that the governing view requires
that all laws should be dynamical laws that produce later states of the world
from earlier ones, in accord with the direction of time that makes a funda-
mental distinction between past and future. Call this conception of governing
dynamic production. However, reﬂecting on the variety of kinds of laws that
physicists present as fundamental, we ﬁnd many that do not ﬁt in the form of
dynamical laws. These include principles of least action (that constrain physical
history between two times), the Einstein equation of general relativity (which
in its usual presentation is non-dynamical), and the Past Hypothesis (of a low-
entropy boundary condition of the universe). Moreover, even when physicists
postulate dynamical laws, dynamic production in accord with a fundamental
direction of time does not seem essential to how these laws govern the world
or explain the observed phenomena. Many physicists and philosophers regard
the direction of time as an emergent feature of reality, not something at the
fundamental level. Hence, we have good reasons to consider more ﬂexible
and minimalist versions of non-Humeanism that better accommodate modern
physics.
I present and develop a minimal primitivist view (MinP) about laws of
nature, introduced in Chen and Goldstein (2022), that disentangles the govern-
ing conception from dynamic production, and requires no reduction or analysis
2 This is an oversimpliﬁcation as there are some non-Humeans, such as Aristotelian Reduction-
ists, who do not think that laws govern. See Section 4.3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
3
of laws into something else. It is a non-Humean view where laws govern the
universe. On MinP:
• (Primitivism) Fundamental laws are regarded as fundamental facts of the
universe; they are not reducible or analyzable into universals, dispositions,
or anything else. MinP regards laws as elements of fundamental reality.
• (Minimalism) Fundamental laws govern by constraining the physical possi-
bilities of the entire spacetime and its contents.3 They need not exclusively
be dynamical laws, and their governance does not presuppose a fundamen-
tal direction of time.
MinP captures the essence of the governing view without taking on extraneous
commitments. Because of the primitivism and the minimalism, MinP accom-
modates a variety of candidate fundamental laws. The ﬂexibility of MinP is,
I believe, a virtue. It is an empirical matter what forms the fundamental laws
take on; one’s metaphysical theory of laws should be open to accommodating
the diverse kinds of laws entertained by physicists. MinP encourages openness.
My goal is to introduce readers to contemporary philosophical issues about
laws. I shall focus on MinP, as it provides a unifying lens for thinking about such
issues and a clear contrast from traditional accounts. First, various conceptual
connections are illustrated, more or less straightforwardly, by thinking about
how laws constrain. MinP is a useful entry point into this debate, as one can
appreciate the core issues about laws without prior familiarity with deep issues
in metaphysics (such as universals, dispositions, and Humean supervenience).
Second, MinP is the ideal non-Humean theory in contrast to Humeanism.
We are able to better appreciate their fundamental difference, which is about
explanatory priority. The better contrast clariﬁes the epistemological issues
concerning the discovery of physical laws on both Humeanism and non-
Humeanism. Our epistemic access to physical laws is based on certain epi-
stemic principles regarding the simplicity and explanatory virtues of physical
laws. It turns out that both Humeans and non-Humeans need to posit such epi-
stemic principles in addition to the metaphysical accounts about what laws
are.
3 As a ﬁrst approximation, I assume that spacetime is fundamental. This assumption is not essen-
tial to MinP. One can consider non-spatio-temporal worlds governed by minimal primitivist
laws. For those worlds, one can understand MinP as suggesting that laws constrain the physical
possibilities of the world, whatever non-spatio-temporal structure it may have. Indeed, if one
regards time itself as emergent, one may ﬁnd it natural to understand governing in an atemporal
and direction-less sense. I also assume that laws are global entities, governing entire spacetime
and its contents, rather than local ones that apply only to subsystems of the universe. For a
discussion about the latter perspective and its conceptual implications, see Ismael (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

4
Philosophy of Physics
Finally, a clear focus on the epistemic principles allows us to reexamine our
commitments to certain hallmarks of physical laws – simplicity, exactness,
and objectivity. The metaphysical and epistemological discussions provide
principled motivations for whether and how we should associate them with
laws.
This Element is intended for advanced undergraduate students, graduate stu-
dents, and professional researchers in philosophy, physics, and mathematics
who are interested in philosophical issues about laws. We will see how to nav-
igate competing concerns to arrive at a particular view about laws and assess
it in relation to other accounts. Thus, readers may ﬁnd in it an illustration of
the considerations, concepts, and tools that are presently employed in debates
about laws. I will keep technical details at an appropriate level, so that the
Element is accessible to those who do not specialize in philosophy of physics.
2 Conceptual Connections
Laws occupy a central place in a systematic philosophical account of the phys-
ical world. What makes them interesting is their connections to a wide range
of issues, such as ontology, modality, explanations, counterfactuals, causation,
time, induction, determinism, chance, and fundamentality. (This section can
also serve as a standalone introduction to the conceptual foundations about
physical laws that are often implicitly assumed in the philosophical literature.)
2.1 Ontology, Nomology, and Possibility
A well-formulated physical theory contains two parts: (1) a fundamental ontol-
ogy about what things there are in the physical world, and (2) a fundamental
nomology about how such things behave. The two are deeply connected. We
focus on (2) in the rest of this Element. Here we say a few words about (1) and
how the two are connected.
Let us start with a ﬁrst-pass deﬁnition of the fundamental ontology of a
theory:
Fundamental Ontology The fundamental ontology of a physical theory refers
to the fundamental material objects, their fundamental properties, and the
spacetime they occupy, according to that theory.
For a familiar example, consider a version of Newtonian gravitation theory. Its
fundamental ontology has three components:
• Fundamental material objects: N particles
• Fundamental properties: their masses, (m1,m2,. . .,mN), and their trajecto-
ries in physical space, (q1(t),q2(t),. . .,qN(t))
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
5
Figure 1 Conﬁguration of a two-particle universe, represented in (a) physical
space and (b) state space.
• Spacetime: a three-dimensional Euclidean space, represented by the Carte-
sian coordinate space R3, and 1-dimensional time, represented by R1
For simplicity, let us assume that all N particles have equal mass m = 1 in the
chosen unit. We can deﬁne the following concepts:
(i) Physical states. The fundamental physical state of the universe at time
t is the instantaneous state of the fundamental ontology at t, which speciﬁes
the arrangement of fundamental material objects and their properties at t. In
the example of Newtonian gravitation theory, the state of the N-particle uni-
verse at time t is a list (q1(t),q2(t),. . .,qN(t)) (see Figure 1(a)), together with
the mass values that do not depend on time. Call Q(t) = (q1(t),q2(t),. . .,qN(t))
a conﬁguration of the universe.
(It is often useful to consider other information, such as momenta of
the N particles, ( p1(t),p2(t),. . .,pN(t)), alongside positions. If we under-
stand momenta as velocities (changes in positions) multiplied by mass, then
momenta need not be fundamental properties of the particles. A state descrip-
tion with both positions and momenta, X(t) = (q1(t), q2(t),. . .,qN(t); p1(t),
p2(t),. . .,pN(t)), which includes more information than the fundamental phys-
ical state, can still be regarded as a physical state.)
(ii) State spaces. There are many possible states for the universe to be at any
time. A space of all such possible states is a state space. The space of all possible
conﬁgurations is called the conﬁguration space. Each point in the conﬁguration
space corresponds to a possible value of Q(t), a possible list of the positions of
N particles in R3. The conﬁguration space is represented by R3N (Figure 1(b)).
(When it is useful to consider momenta in addition to particle positions, as
in classical mechanics, we may deﬁne a space of higher dimensions called the
phase space. Each point in the phase space corresponds to X(t), a possible list
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6
Philosophy of Physics
Figure 2 Physical history of a two-particle universe, represented in two
spaces.
of the positions and momenta of N particles in R3. The list X(t) is twice as long
as Q(t). The phase space is represented by R6N.)
(iii) Physical histories. We can regard a physical history of the N-particle
universe as a history of its physical states at different times. The most intuitive
way is to represent the physical history as N curves in physical space, corre-
sponding to the positions of the N particles at different times (Figure 2(a)). The
state spaces provide mathematically convenient but more abstract representa-
tions. The physical history of the entire universe corresponds to a single curve
in the high-dimensional conﬁguration space, representing the conﬁgurations at
different times (Figure 2(b)). (It also can be represented as a single curve in
phase space.)4 Notice that the concept of physical histories does not presup-
pose a direction of time. The arrow-less curves that represent physical histories
can be regarded as direction-less histories that do not distinguish between the
past and the future. The curves tell us whether state B is temporally between
states A and C, but not whether state B is earlier than C.
Next, let us deﬁne the fundamental nomology of a theory.
Fundamental Nomology The fundamental nomology of a physical theory
refers to the fundamental laws in the physical theory.
The fundamental laws of Newtonian gravitation theory can be represented by
the following equations:
• The dynamical law: F = ma, or equivalently Fi(t) = mi
d2qi(t)
dt2
4 In the relativistic context, space and time become intertwined in such a way that there is no
fundamental notion of physical state at a time. The more fundamental notion is the spacetime
histories of N particles. We may represent this as N curves, also called world lines, in a four-
dimensional spacetime.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
7
• The force law: F = GMm/r2, or equivalently Fi(t) = −∑N
j,i Gmimj
qi(t)−qj(t)
|qi(t)−qj(t)|3 ,
with G the gravitational constant
For a Newtonian universe with N particles, these laws tell us which set of
physical histories are permissible. We may capture this with a natural inter-
pretation in terms of possible worlds. A possible world is a logically consistent
description of spacetime and its contents, namely the distribution of funda-
mental properties and material objects in spacetime. A possible world can
be represented in multiple ways, with N curves in physical space or space-
time, or a single curve in a high-dimensional state space. The collection of
all such worlds permitted by physical laws forms the set of nomological
possibilities.
More precisely, a nomologically possible world of theory T is a logically con-
sistent description of spacetime and its contents such that (1) the fundamental
objects and properties are restricted to those kinds mentioned by the fundamen-
tal laws in T, and (2) their arrangement is compatible with those laws. In other
words, a nomologically possible world of theory T is a model of the laws of T.
This deﬁnition can be specialized to the actual physical laws. The actual world
is a very special one – the spacetime with the actual arrangement of objects and
their properties. We deﬁne the following:
• A possible world w: a spacetime and a distribution of material contents.5
• The actual world α: the actual spacetime and the actual distribution of
material contents.
• Material contents: material objects and their qualitative properties.
• ΩT: the set of possible worlds that satisfy the fundamental laws speciﬁed in
theory T.
• Ωα: the set of possible worlds that satisfy the actual fundamental laws of
α, that is the set of all nomologically possible worlds.
Note that Ωα = ΩT only when T is the actual theory of the world, that is the
axioms of T correspond to the fundamental laws governing α. As a conceptual
truth, we also have that α ∈Ωα.
The deﬁnitions are global in character, as they concern entire possible
worlds. Sometimes we are also interested in parts of worlds, such as whether
certain events of a 30-minute interval is nomologically possible or impossible.
We may deﬁne the following:
5 For simplicity, I assume that possible worlds have a fundamental spatio-temporal structure.
See also footnote 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

8
Philosophy of Physics
Figure 3 Laws select a special subclass of physical histories as the
nomologically possible histories.
Nomological Possibility A sequence of events is nomologically possible if
and only if it occurs in some nomologically possible world.
Nomological Necessity A sequence of events is nomologically necessary if
and only if it occurs in every nomologically possible world.
We may think of a choice of a fundamental ontology as pinning down abstract
state spaces that tell us what kind of physical states are available. But it does
not pin down which histories in those state spaces are nomologically possible
(Figure 3(a)). The choice of a fundamental nomology selects a special subclass
of histories corresponding to the nomologically possible ones which are also
called physical possibilities (Figure 3(b)).
2.2 Counterfactuals and Causation
Laws support counterfactuals.6 A counterfactual is a conditional of the form “if
A were the case, then B would be the case.” (We often focus only on those for
which A does not occur.) In a counterfactual, the consequence does not follow
from the antecedent as a matter of logic; they are joined together by laws. For
example, consider:
C1 If this match had been struck, it would have lit.
C2 If this match had been struck, it would not have lit.
Suppose C1 is true and C2 false. For either one, the consequent and its nega-
tion are logically compatible with the antecedent. Hence, it is not logic alone
6 In Section 4.4, we discuss Lange’s view according to which counterfactuals ground laws.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
9
that renders C1 true and C2 false. What nonlogical fact is needed? Many agree
that it involves some laws. But why laws in particular, but not just general facts
of the form “every match that is struck in oxygen rich, dry, and no-wind con-
dition is lit?” Generality is not sufﬁcient, and lawfulness is crucial. Suppose
every coin in my pocket is silver. Nevertheless, the following counterfactual is
false:
C3 If this coin were in my pocket, it would have been silver.
The problem is that the general fact every coin in my pocket is silver is
accidental. To support a counterfactual, the nonlogical fact needs to have nom-
ological necessity, corresponding to a law. To see this more clearly, consider
counterfactuals about physical systems:
C4 If this ice cube were placed in a cup of hot tea, it would melt 30 seconds
later.
C5 If there were one more planet orbiting around the sun, it would have an
elliptical orbit.
C6 If the polarizer were oriented at 30 degrees from the median line, 25 percent
of the pairs of photons would pass.
To evaluate such counterfactuals, we need knowledge of the relevant laws (in
thermodynamics, classical mechanics, and quantum mechanics). For C4, we
can consider the nomologically possible worlds where this ice cube were placed
in a cup of hot tea, and check whether the ice cube is melted 30 seconds later in
all (or most) of them. If the answer the yes, then C4 is true. For C5, we consider
the nomologically possible worlds with a ninth planet orbiting around the sun
and check whether it has an elliptical orbit. And so on. There are conceptual
nuances and technical challenges in spelling out the exact nomic algorithms
for evaluating such counterfactuals. (For a range of different proposals, see
Lewis (1979), Albert (2000, 2015), Kutach (2002) and Loewer (2007a). For an
updated discussion, see Fernandes (2023).)
Counterfactuals are related to deliberation, inﬂuence, and control. Rational
deliberation depends on evaluating counterfactuals with various different sup-
positions, representing different options, and assessing their outcomes. If action
A were selected, outcome O would result. If counterfactuals have nomic
involvement, then so are those notions. Knowledge about counterfactuals is
practically relevant.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

10
Philosophy of Physics
Counterfactuals are often linked to causation. An inﬂuential approach seeks
to analyze causation in terms of counterfactual dependence. Roughly speaking,
event A causes event E if and only if the following two counterfactuals are true:
C7 If A were the case, then C would be the case.
C8 If A were not the case, then C would not be the case.
For example, Suzy throws a rock at a window and the window breaks. Her
throw causes the breaking of the window, because if she had not thrown the
rock at the window it would not have broken. Due to various counterexam-
ples to such an account, many people have given up the project of analyzing
causation in terms of counterfactual dependence. Nevertheless, counterfactual
dependence seems to capture an important aspect of causation. The central idea
is also preserved in contemporary structural equation models of causation. For
more on the latter, see Hitchcock (2023).
2.3 Dynamic Production and the Direction of Time
A concept closely related to causation is that of dynamic production. It is the
idea that events in the past, together with the laws, bring about events in the
future. (For a comparison of production and counterfactual dependence, see
Hall (2004).) For some people, dynamic production is constitutive of how laws
govern and explain. Laws govern the universe by dynamically producing the
subsequent states from earlier ones; an event is explained by appealing to the
laws and the prior events that produce it.
The emphasis on dynamic production is often associated with an emphasis
on dynamical laws and the direction of time. If dynamic production is how
laws govern, laws should presumably be dynamical laws that evolve the states
of the universe successively in time. They should be exclusively what Maudlin
(2007) calls Fundamental Laws of Temporal Evolution (FLOTEs). Examples
of FLOTEs include Newton’s F = ma, Schrödinger’s equation, and Dirac’s
equation, but not Einstein’s equation, Gauss’s law, or boundary-condition laws.
Moreover, for dynamic production to make sense, the temporal development
should be directed only from the past to the future. However, the laws in
modern physics are blind to the past-future distinction; they are (essentially)
time-reversal invariant in the sense that for any nomologically possible his-
tory going in one temporal direction, its temporal reverse is also nomologically
possible. Where does the direction of time come from? A natural idea, on this
picture, is to make the direction of time a fundamental feature of the universe.
We may summarize this package of ideas as (1) a restriction of the form of
laws:
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
11
Only FLOTEs The only kind of fundamental laws are fundamental laws of
temporal evolution (FLOTEs).
(2) a commitment to dynamic production as for how laws explain:
Dynamic Production Laws explain by producing later states of the universe
from earlier ones.
and (3) a metaphysical posit about the direction of time:
Temporal Direction Primitivism The direction of time is a fundamental fea-
ture of the universe.
Many people accept the package because it seems intuitive. Some build it into
their theories of lawhood. An example is Maudlin (2007), who expresses these
ideas eloquently:
The universe started out in some particular initial state. The laws of tempo-
ral evolution operate, whether deterministically or stochastically, from that
initial state to generate or produce later states. (p.174)
This sort of explanation takes the term initial quite seriously: the initial
state temporally precedes the explananda, which can be seen to arise from it
(by means of the operation of the law). (p.176)
The universe, as well as all the smaller parts of it, is made: it is an ongo-
ing enterprise, generated from a beginning and guided towards its future by
physical law. (p.182)
Despite the intuitive picture, in my view dynamic production is inadequate
for modern physics. It may be a useful heuristic picture to start out with, but
once we see more examples of candidate laws and appreciate the explanations
they provide, it is natural to replace the picture with something more ﬂexi-
ble (allowing non-FLOTEs to be laws) and without a commitment to dynamic
production or a fundamental direction of time.
An alternative approach, which I favor, is to understand the direction of time
and dynamic production as important but derivative features of the physical
world, partly explained by a boundary-condition law called the Past Hypothe-
sis. On this approach, the direction of time is understood in terms of an entropy
gradient that arises from a new law – at one temporal boundary, the universe
is in a low-entropy state. Given the Past Hypothesis as a nomic constraint, it is
plausible to expect that most solutions to the dynamical equations will be ones
that relax toward the thermodynamic equilibrium (maximum entropy) in the
direction away from the temporal boundary where the Past Hypothesis applies.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

12
Philosophy of Physics
Hence, almost all the nomological possible worlds are such that they will dis-
play an entropy gradient, giving rise to an emergent (nonfundamental) direction
of time. It has been argued that it is compatible with the Humean approach
of laws, but it is also compatible with non-Humeanism. On the non-Humean
account I introduce in Section 3, laws explain, not by producing the states
of the universe in time, but by constraining physical possibilities. Dynamic
production may also be regarded as a derivative concept.
Allowing non-FLOTEs to be laws, the alternative approach opens up many
new possibilities. Still, we may sometimes prefer FLOTEs, but the preferences
are not grounded in metaphysical prohibitions about the forms of laws, but in
methodological and epistemic reasons that certain dynamical laws offer sim-
ple and compelling explanations of observed phenomena. As I shall argue, the
alternative approach is better suited for accommodating the variety of kinds of
laws in modern physics and understanding the explanations they provide.
2.4 Determinism and Chance
Determinism and indeterminism are properties of laws. In his survey article,
Hoefer (2016) provides the following (ﬁrst-pass) characterization of determin-
ism (emphases original):
Determinism0 The world is governed by (or is under the sway of ) determin-
ism if and only if, given a speciﬁed way things are at a time t, the way things
go thereafter is ﬁxed as a matter of natural law.
As Hoefer notes, the word “thereafter” suggests that determinism in this sense
is future-directed but not past-directed.
The core idea about determinism can be captured with nomological possibil-
ities and without appealing to a direction of time. Borrowing ideas from (Mon-
tague 1974, pp.319–321), (Lewis 1983, p.360), and (Earman 1986, pp.12–13),
I deﬁne determinism as follows (also see Figure 4):
DeterminismT Theory T is deterministic just in case, for any two w,w′ ∈ΩT,
if w and w′ agree at any time, they agree at all times.
Determinismα The actual world α is deterministic just in case, for any two
w,w′ ∈Ωα, if w and w′ agree at any time, they agree at all times.
Determinism is true just in case α is deterministic. My deﬁnitions correspond to
what Earman (1986, p.13) calls Laplacian determinism. The basic idea is that
the nomologically possible worlds never cross in state space (like Figure 4 and
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
13
Figure 4 Schematic illustration of a deterministic theory T. ΩT contains six
nomologically possible worlds that do not cross in state space.
unlike Figure 3(b)). By using four-dimensional spacetimes, such deﬁnitions are
more suitable for relativistic contexts as well as worlds without a fundamental
direction of time.
Indeterminism is true just in case determinism is false. When a theory is
indeterministic, it may also posit objective probabilities, some of which play
roles similar to those of physical chances. There is an interesting question
whether chance can coexist with determinism. In classical and quantum sta-
tistical mechanics, even when the dynamical laws are deterministic, we may
still posit probabilistic boundary conditions over nomologically possible ini-
tial states of the universe. Ismael (2009) has argued that they are indispensable
for the predictive and explanatory success of those theories. Barrett (1995)
suggests that the probabilistic boundary conditions, in theories like Bohmian
mechanics, are as important for the empirical adequacy of the theory as the
dynamical equations. For a survey about deterministic chances, see Hoefer
(2016, sect. 5).
We can deﬁne a stronger variety of determinism called strong determin-
ism. According to Penrose (1989), strong determinism is “not just a matter of
the future being determined by the past; the entire history of the universe is
ﬁxed, according to some precise mathematical scheme, for all time” (empha-
sis original, p.432). While Penrose deﬁnes strong determinism in terms of
mathematical schemes, I propose to deﬁne it in terms of fundamental laws:
a strongly deterministic theory of physics is one that, according to its funda-
mental laws, permits exactly one nomologically possible world; our world is
strongly deterministic just in case it is the only nomologically possible world
(see also Figure 5):
Strong DeterminismT Theory T is strongly deterministic if |ΩT| = 1, that is
its fundamental laws are compatible with exactly one possible world.
Strong Determinismα The actual world α is strongly deterministic if Ωα={α}.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14
Philosophy of Physics
Figure 5 Schematic illustration of a strongly deterministic theory T. ΩT
contains exactly one nomologically possible world.
Under my deﬁnitions, strong determinism is stronger than determinism in a
precise sense: whenever the deﬁnition of determinism is applicable, strong
determinism logically implies determinism but not vice versa.
Strong determinism is more general than determinism. There are circum-
stances where strong determinism applies but determinism does not (at least
not naturally). That is because deﬁning strong determinism only requires the
minimal notion of the cardinality of the set of models, while deﬁning determin-
ism requires a notion of temporal agreement, which is not always guaranteed.
For example, we can contemplate worlds without a fundamental spatiotem-
poral structure (such as those without metrical or topological time) of which
there may not be natural extension of determinism. We may not be able to say
whether such worlds are deterministic, for the concept simply does not apply.
But even if w is such a world, we can still assess the cardinality of Ωw, the set
of models compatible with the fundamental laws that govern w. |Ωw| is either 1
or larger than 1. Hence, the entailment relation discussed in the last paragraph
is valid only when the proviso holds – whenever determinism is applicable.
There are many interesting works on free will, rational deliberation, and
agency under determinism. For some examples, see Hoefer (2002), Ismael
(2016), and Loewer (2020a). Strong determinism has not received much atten-
tion in the philosophical literature until recently. See Chen (2021b, 2022c,
2023b) and Adlam (2022a). Several proposed theories of quantum cosmology
aspire to be strongly deterministic. See Hartle and Hawking (1983) and Page
(2009). Strong determinism is a possible feature of our physical theory, but
Hartle (1996, 1997) goes further and suggests that it is a requirement.
2.5 Prediction and Explanation
To make predictions about the future, or retrodictions about the past, we rely
on laws. For example, to predict the positions of planets in the solar system
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
15
(relative to the sun), we need their current conﬁguration plus laws of Newtonian
gravitation theory to calculate their subsequent positions. We can also use the
same laws to retrodict the positions of those planets in the last millions of years.
Predictions and retrodictions are enabled by physical laws.
Laws are connected to scientiﬁc explanations. The search for physical laws
is motivated by various “Why” questions. Why do apples fall at this rate from
this height? Why do planets move in such orbits? Why do ice cubes melt in a
cup of hot tea? Laws provide answers to such questions.
There is no sharp line between explanations and predictions (or retrodic-
tions), as they often overlap. When there is an accurate prediction based on
laws, there is often a corresponding explanation enabled by laws. However,
they can come apart. Some laws provide accurate predictions but no satis-
fying explanation. For example, in orthodox quantum mechanics, we have
a practical algorithm that makes successful predictions. The algorithm asso-
ciates abstract mathematical objects on Hilbert space to experimental setups
and yields predictions about measurement outcomes. Those postulates may be
regarded as laws of orthodox quantum mechanics. They are, however, terrible
candidates for laws, for they are disuniﬁed and not appropriately linked to a
fundamental physical ontology. It would be far better to replace them with a
simpler and more uniﬁed set of laws, explicitly deﬁned over some fundamen-
tal physical states, from which those measurement postulates can be derived
as theorems. Hence, solutions to the quantum measurement problem (see Myr-
vold (2017) and Maudlin (2019) for reviews) can be seen as providing better
and more satisfying explanations. (Readers familiar with the recent discussion
about ‘explainable’ artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) may see a parallel.)
Let us connect prediction and explanation with the previous discussion about
determinism and strong determinism. We can distinguish different kinds of
prediction and explanation. On determinism, we have conditional predictions:
Conditional Prediction Conditional on the state of the universe at some time
(or states of the universe at some ﬁnite interval of time), one can in-principle
deduce, using the fundamental laws, the state of the universe at any time.
In contrast, strong determinism enables what I call strong prediction:
Strong Prediction One can in-principle deduce, using the fundamental laws
alone, the state of the universe at any time.
Similarly, deterministic laws account for a general temporal pattern (cf.
Russell (1913)):
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

16
Philosophy of Physics
Conditional Explanation Conditional on the state of the universe at some
time (or states of the universe at some ﬁnite interval of time), one can explain,
using the fundamental laws, the state of the universe at any time.
Strongly deterministic laws can explain more. They underwrite conditional
explanations but also account for unconditional facts:
Strong Explanation One can explain, using the fundamental laws alone, the
state of the universe at any time.
We may understand both types of explanations in the deductive-nomological
(DN) model. On this approach, a scientiﬁc explanation contains two parts: an
explanandum describing the phenomenon to be explained, and an explanans
that account for the phenomenon. There are two requirements for a successful
DN explanation. First, the explanation from the explanans to the explanandum
should take the form of a deductive argument. Second, the explanans must
involve, as premises for the deductive argument, at least one law of nature. As
an example, consider the explanation of the orbit of Earth around the sun via
Newtonian mechanics. The explanandum is the orbit. The explanans includes
facts about the mass of the Earth, the mass of the Sun, Newton’s law of uni-
versal gravitation, and Newton’s laws of motion. The exact orbit follows, as
a mathematical solution, from the laws plus initial condition of the positions
and velocities of massive objects. In the DN model, a conditional explanation
is one that involves at least one law and at least one non-law as the explanans;
a strong explanation is one where laws are the only explanans.
Philosophers have raised many objections to the DN model as a universal
model of scientiﬁc explanation (Woodward and Ross 2021, Sect. 2). However,
the DN model is a simple and fruitful approach to think about explanations in
physics. A difﬁculty of applying the DN model lies in the fact that we lack cri-
teria to distinguish laws from non-laws. The problem is not unique to the DN
model, as competing accounts of scientiﬁc explanation often invoke concepts
connected to laws, such as causation.7 Hence, the task of coming up with a sat-
isfactory account of explanation in physics is bound up with the task of coming
up with a satisfactory account of laws. Insofar as simplicity is an important fea-
ture of laws, it may be essential to explanations as well. How exactly simplicity
is connected to laws, and how it ﬁgures in explanations, is a topic we will return
in Sections 3–5.
7 I thank Tyler Hildebrand for the suggestion.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
17
2.6 Problems of Induction
Induction is the inference from observed phenomena to unobserved ones. It
is essential to the scientiﬁc enterprise, but difﬁcult to justify. There are two
problems of induction widely discussed in the philosophical literature: Hume’s
problem and Goodman’s problem (see Henderson (2022) for a review). Both
can be understood in relation to laws.
Hume asks us to consider what justiﬁes the inference from
I1 All observed instances of bread of a particular appearance have been
nourishing.
to
I2 The next instance of bread of that appearance will be nourishing.
We often appeal to a Principle of Uniformity:
PU Nature is uniform.
This is intended to explain why events in nature continue the same way, why
past and future are relevantly similar, and why the next instance of bread of that
type will also be nourishing. A major difﬁculty that Hume has identiﬁed is that
we do not have noncircular justiﬁcations for inductive inference, because our
justiﬁcation for PU comes from induction.
Many of us accept the rationality of induction. One might take the lesson of
Hume’s argument to be that we should make a substantive assumption about the
world as the basis for inductive inference. PU is a good candidate and should
be taken as epistemically fundamental that is not justiﬁed by anything else.
However, Goodman’s “new riddle of induction” shows that even PU is
insufﬁcient. Suppose, up to time t, all observed emeralds are green. Two inter-
pretations of PU will give us divergent predictions. Under the assumption that,
in nature, color distributions in terms of green and blue continue over time,
then we infer that all emeralds are green and the emerald observed after t will
be green. However, we can also understand uniformity in terms of the temporal
distribution of grue and bleen, where grue means green and observed before t
and blue and observed at or after t. Under the second interpretation of PU, we
should infer that all emeralds are grue and the emerald observed after t will be
blue. This can also be generalized to more realistic predicates used in physics.
Some respond by suggesting we need a speciﬁc version of PU. It should
license normal inductive inferences but not “gruesome” ones. Consider:
PU+ Nature is uniform for phenomena described in natural predicates.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18
Philosophy of Physics
On PU+, we stipulate that the pattern of green and blue continues over time.
This supports the inductive generalization that future observed emeralds are
green, and does not support the hypothesis that they are blue.
However, PU and its more speciﬁc version PU+ face more fundamental
problems. Speciﬁed in fundamental / natural predicates, nature is not uniform.
Moreover, the uniformity of nature is not necessary for induction.
The mosaic we inhabit, described in terms of the matter distribution in space-
time, is manifestly non-uniform. We do not live in an empty universe that is
completely homogeneous and isotropic, exactly the same in all regions and
directions. The spacetime region we occupy is quite different from regions with
violent collisions of stars and merging of black holes. What happens on earth
differs from even a nearby patch – the core of the sun, where nuclear fusion
converts hydrogen into helium. The variety and complexity in the matter dis-
tribution does not diminish our conﬁdence in the viability and the success of
induction. In fact, nonuniformity of a certain kind is arguably necessary for the
observed temporal asymmetries in our universe, which may be a precondition
for induction.8
Suppose we replace PU+ with the principle that we should expect that the
law L be uniform. This principle, with a focus on the law instead of the mosaic,
is in the right direction, but it still has problems. Suppose we understand the
uniformity of L to mean that it is of the form “for all x, if Fx then Gx,” which is
a regularity, that is a universally quantiﬁed statement about the mosaic, holding
for everything, everywhere, and everywhen. The principle becomes vacuous,
as any statement can be translated into a universally quantiﬁed sentence. That I
have ﬁve coins in my pocket is equivalent to the statement that, for everything
and everywhere and everywhen, I have ﬁve coins in my pocket. Suppose we
understand the uniformity of L to mean that it does not refer to any particular
individual, location, or time. The principle becomes too restrictive. There are
candidate laws that do refer to particular facts, such as the Past Hypothesis of
statistical mechanics, quantum equilibrium distribution in Bohmian mechan-
ics, the Weyl curvature hypothesis in general relativity, and the No-Boundary
Wave Function proposal in quantum cosmology (see Section 3.3). These laws
can be accepted on scientiﬁc and inductive grounds, and may be required to ulti-
mately vindicate our inductive practice. Suppose we understand it to mean that
the same law applies everywhere in spacetime. The principle again becomes
vacuous, as even an intuitively nonuniform law, unfriendly to induction, can
be described by a uniform law with a temporal variation, such as
8 See Albert (2000). See Wallace (2010) and Rovelli (2019) for the importance of the hydrogen-
helium imbalance in the early universe to the existence of the relevant time asymmetries.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
19
F = ma for (−∞,t] and F =
(
8m9 −1
7m5 + πm3 + km2 + m
)
a for (t,∞)
(1)
The same law can be applied to everywhere in spacetime.
As I suggest in Section 5, what induction ultimately requires is the reasonable
simplicity of laws (expressed in natural predicates and traded off with other
explanatory virtues).
2.7 Fundamentality
The ﬁnal issue concerns fundamentality. In metaphysics, there is much dis-
cussion about fundamental ontology (e.g. particles, ﬁelds, and spacetime) and
nonfundamental ontology (e.g. tables, cats, and galaxies). There is also a dis-
tinction between fundamental laws and nonfundamental laws. How should they
be distinguished?
Consider the following deﬁnition of fundamental laws:
Fundamental Laws For any world w, fundamental laws of nature in w are
the nonmathematical axioms (basic postulates) of the complete fundamental
physical theory of w.
For a physical theory to be complete in world w, it needs to entail all the
important regularities in w, including those described by nonfundamental laws
(such as laws of chemistry, biology, and so on). For a physical theory to be
fundamental in w, it cannot be derived from another nonequivalent physical
theory that is true in w. Hence, in a quantum world, classical mechanics is not
a fundamental theory, because it can be derived from quantum mechanics (via
approximations in some limit). However, in a classical world, classical mechan-
ics is a fundamental theory because quantum mechanics is not true in such a
world. The physical theory can employ some mathematics, but the mathemat-
ical axioms are not laws of nature. Hence, the fundamental laws of nature are
the nonmathematical axioms.
Laws in w are either fundamental or nonfundamental in w. I require
nonfundamental laws in w be derivable9 from fundamental laws in w. But
not all deductive consequences of fundamental laws are laws, for otherwise
we could trivialize the notion of laws by using disjunction introduction. Some
deductive consequences will be more important than others because they sup-
port counterfactuals and are extraordinarily useful and simple. Identifying the
9 The relevant derivations may also involve approximations and idealizations.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

20
Philosophy of Physics
sufﬁcient conditions for nonfundamental laws is an important project, but I
do not pursue it here. Instead, I suggest a necessary condition for a law to be
nonfundamental in w:
Necessary Condition for Nonfundamental Laws In any world w, if a law
of nature is a nonfundamental law in w, then it can be derived from the
fundamental laws in w.10
Consequently, a law that cannot be so derived in w is a fundamental law in w. An
example of a nonfundamental law in our world is the ideal gas law PV = nRT
that can be derived from the microphysics. Not all nonfundamental laws have
been successfully derived from the fundamental axioms in physics, but what
matters is that they can be.
In philosophy of physics, there are debates about the theoretical structure of
quantum ﬁeld theories, a theory that is remarkably accurate for certain pre-
dictions about the subatomic particles but employs methods and principles
(such as the renormalization technique) not straightforwardly interpretable as
fundamental laws. Those debates may give us a richer understanding of how
fundamental laws relate to nonfundamental laws. For recent discussions about
these issues in relation to fundamentality, see McKenzie (2022) and Williams
(2023).
What about fundamental laws themselves? Are they metaphysically funda-
mental? Or are they metaphysically explained by something else? We turn to
these questions in the next section.
2.8 Summary
The conceptual connections discussed above are evidence of the centrality of
laws in a comprehensive philosophy of science. As a ﬁrst step toward such a
philosophy, one needs to develop a metaphysical account of what laws are.
3 Minimal Primitivism
As an example of a metaphysical account of laws, I introduce the view about
laws that Sheldon Goldstein and I call Minimal Primitivism (MinP). It provides
a unifying lens for viewing the conceptual connections (Section 2) and a useful
starting point for discussing other accounts (Section 4).
10 For people who worry that this principle is too strong, they may restrict it to nonfundamental
laws in the domain of physics. Thanks to Tyler Hildebrand for the suggestion.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
21
3.1 Minimal Primitivism (MinP)
According to MinP, fundamental laws are metaphysically fundamental. They
do not require anything else to exist. For laws to govern, they are not required to
dynamically produce or generate later states of the universe from earlier ones,
nor are they required to presume a fundamental direction of time. On MinP,
laws govern by constraining the physical possibilities (nomological possibili-
ties). MinP is ﬂexible regarding the form of laws. To summarize, the ﬁrst part
of the view is a metaphysical thesis:
Minimal Primitivism Fundamental laws of nature are certain primitive facts
about the world. There is no restriction on the form of the fundamental laws.
They govern the behavior of material objects by constraining the physical
possibilities.
Even though there is no metaphysical restriction on the form of fundamental
laws, it is rational to expect them to have certain nice features, such as sim-
plicity and informativeness. On Humean Reductionism (Section 4.1), those
features are metaphysically constitutive of laws, but on MinP they are merely
epistemic guides for discovering and evaluating the laws. At the end of the
day, they are defeasible guides, and we can arrive at the wrong laws even if we
are fully rational in scientiﬁc investigations. The second part of our view is an
epistemic thesis:
Epistemic Guides Even though theoretical virtues such as simplicity, infor-
mativeness, ﬁt, and degree of naturalness are not metaphysically constitutive
of fundamental laws, they are good epistemic guides for discovering and
evaluating them.
Let me offer some clariﬁcations:
(i) Primitive Facts. Fundamental laws of nature are certain primitive facts
about the world, in the sense that they are not metaphysically dependent on,
reducible to, or analyzable in terms of anything else. If the concrete physical
reality corresponds to a Humean mosaic, then fundamental laws are facts that
transcend the mosaic. Many physicists may even regard fundamental laws as
more important than the mosaic itself. Depending on one’s metaphysical atti-
tude toward mathematics and logic, there might be mathematical and logical
facts that are also primitive in that sense. For example, arithmetical facts such
as 2+3 = 5 and the logical law of excluded middle may also be primitive facts
that transcend the concrete physical reality and constrain the physical possibil-
ities, since every physical possibility must conform to them. However, we do
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

22
Philosophy of Physics
not think that fundamental laws of nature are purely mathematical or logical.
Hence, fundamental laws of nature are not those kinds of primitive facts.11
(ii) The Governing Relation. On MinP, laws govern by constraining the
world (the entire spacetime and its contents). We may understand constrain-
ing as a primitive relation between fundamental laws and the actual world. We
can better understand constraining by drawing conceptual connections to phys-
ical possibilities. Laws constrain the world by limiting physical possibilities,
of which the actual world is a member. In other words, the actual world is
constrained to be compatible with the laws. To use an earlier example, F = ma
governs by constraining the physical possibilities to exactly those that are com-
patible with F = ma. If F = ma is a law that governs the actual world, then the
actual world is a possibility compatible with F = ma.
Constraint differs from dynamic production; it does not require a fundamen-
tal distinction between past and future, or one between earlier states and later
states. What the laws constrain is the entire spacetime and its contents. In some
cases, the constraint imposed by a law can be expressed in terms of differen-
tial equations that may be interpreted as determining future states from past
ones. (But not all constraints need be like that. I discuss some examples in
Sections 3.2 and 3.3.)
For a concrete example, consider Hamilton’s equations of motion for N point
particles with Newtonian masses (m1,. . .,mN) moving in a three-dimensional
Euclidean space, whose positions and momenta are (q1,. . .,qN; p1,. . .,pN):
dqi(t)
dt
= ∂H
∂pi
, dpi(t)
dt
= −∂H
∂qi
,
(2)
where H = H(q1,. . .,qN; p1,. . .,pN) is speciﬁed in accord with Newtonian
gravitation:
H =
N
∑
i
p2
i
2mi
−
∑
1≤j<k≤N
Gmjmk
|qj −qk| .
(3)
Suppose Equations (2) and (3) are the fundamental laws that govern our world
α. Let ΩH denote the set of solutions to (2) and (3). Represented geometrically,
ΩH corresponds to a special set of curves on the state space of the N-particle
system – the phase space represented by R6N. Saying that (2) and (3) govern
our world implies that α should be compatible with them. In other words, ΩH
delineates the set of physical possibilities, and α ∈ΩH.
In this example, the dynamical equations are time-reversible. For every solu-
tion in ΩH, its time reversal under t →−t and p →−p is also a solution in ΩH.
11 A Humean may worry about the intelligibility of those non-Humean primitives. See Hildebrand
(2022, Sect. 5) for a discussion about related worries and potential responses.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
23
Since the concept of governing in MinP does not presuppose a fundamental
direction of time, two solutions that are time-reversal of each other can be iden-
tiﬁed as the same physical possibility. (If one prefers the representation where
the set of physical possibilities contains each possibility exactly once, one can
derive a quotient set Ω∗
α from Ωα with the equivalence relation given by the
time-reversal map.)
(iii) Nomic Equivalence. We should not think that, in every case, a law is
equivalent to the set of possibilities it generates. The two can be different. For
example, there are many principles and equations that can give rise to the same
set of possibilities denoted by ΩH. But we expect laws to be simple. One way to
pick out the set ΩH is by giving a complete (and inﬁnitely) long list of possible
histories contained in ΩH. Another is by writing down simple equations, such
as (2) and (3), which express simple laws. Hence, the equivalence of laws is not
just the equivalence of their classes of models. For two laws to be equivalent,
it will require something more.
It is an interesting and open question, on MinP, what more is required and
how to understand the equivalence of laws. It seems to me that their equiva-
lence must be related to simplicity and explanations, because a central role for
laws to play is to provide an illuminating account of natural phenomena (see
Section 3.2). A natural idea, then, is to say that nomic equivalence requires
explanatory equivalence, for which simplicity is an important factor. Hence,
two fundamental facts that differ in their relative complexity cannot express
the same law. (For a survey of the related topic of theoretical equivalence, see
Weatherall (2019a, b).)
(iv) The Mystery Objection. Some might object that our notion of governing
is entirely mysterious (Beebee 2000). The notion of governing seems derived
from the notion of government and the notion of being governed. But laws of
nature are obviously not imposed by human (or divine) agents. So isn’t it myste-
rious that laws can govern? To that we reply that a better analogy for governing
laws is not to human government, but to laws of mathematics and logic. Arith-
metical truths such as 2 + 3 = 5 and logical truths such as the law of excluded
middle can also be said to constrain our world. That is, the actual world can-
not be a world that violates those mathematical or logical truths. In fact, every
possible world needs to respect those truths. In a similar way, laws of phys-
ics constrain our world. The actual world cannot be a world that violates the
physical laws, and every physically possible world needs to respect those laws.
Those modal claims reﬂect physical laws and mathematical laws. We can also
make sense of the difference in scope between those laws. Mathematical laws
are more general than physical laws, in the sense that the former are compatible
with “more models” than the latter. In any case, mathematical laws and logical
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

24
Philosophy of Physics
laws can also be said to govern the universe in the sense of imposing formal
constraints. They generate a class of models and constrain the actual world to
be one among them. There is also a difference in epistemic access. In some
sense, we discover mathematical and logical laws a priori, without the need
for experiments or observations, but we discover physical laws a posteriori,
empirically.
We do not claim that the analogy with mathematical and logical laws com-
pletely eliminates the mystery of how physical laws govern. However, we think
it dispels the objection as previously stated, in terms of how something can gov-
ern the world without being imposed by an agent. If there is more to the mystery
objection, it needs to be stated differently. On MinP, laws govern by constrain-
ing, and constraining is what they do. This provides the oomph behind scientiﬁc
explanations. (We return to this shortly.) However, in contrast to other non-
Humean accounts, such an oomph is minimalist. It does not require dynamic
production, and it does not require an extra process supplied by a mechanism
or an agent.
(v) Epistemic Guides. On MinP, even though theoretical virtues are not met-
aphysically constitutive of lawhood, they are nonetheless excellent epistemic
guides for discovering and evaluating them.
Regarding Epistemic Guides, one might ask why those theoretical virtues
are reliable guides for ﬁnding and evaluating laws. This is a subtle issue, one
related to the problems of induction. Unlike Humeans, we cannot appeal to
a reductive analysis of laws. (Humeans face a similar issue, as their account
raises the worry as to why the fundamental Humean mosaic is so nice that
it can be summarized in a simple way after all. Humean supervenience does
not by itself solve the problems of induction. See Section 5.) We can offer
an empirical justiﬁcation: the scientiﬁc methodology works. In so far as those
theoretical virtues are central to scientiﬁc methodology, they are good guides
for discovering and evaluating laws, and we expect them to continue to work.
Can they fail to deliver us the true laws? That is a possibility. However, if
the true fundamental laws are complicated and messy, scientists would not be
inclined to call them laws.
(vi) Temporal Variations of the Laws. According to MinP, can laws change
with time? In particular, can fundamental laws be time dependent in such a
way that different cosmic epochs are governed by different laws? In principle,
MinP allows that possibility. If there is scientiﬁc motivation to develop theories
in which laws take on different forms at different times, that is sufﬁcient reason
to consider a set of laws that govern different times, or a single law that varies
in form with time. As a toy example, if we have empirical or theoretical reasons
to think that the laws of motion are different on the two sides of the Big Crunch,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
25
say Newtonian mechanics and Bohmian mechanics, then different sides of the
Crunch can be governed by different laws, or by a single law with a temporal
variation. Similarly, MinP is compatible with fundamental constants of nature
that have spatial or temporal variations (Dirac (1937); see Uzan (2011) for a
review). Hence, on MinP, time-translation invariance may fail even for funda-
mental laws. Why then should we expect laws to be “uniform” in time so that
they are friendly to induction? This is an instance of the previous point (v), to
which I return in Section 5.
(vii) Fundamental vs. Non-fundamental Properties. According to MinP, can
fundamental laws refer to non-fundamental properties, such as entropy or tem-
perature? Many fundamental laws we put forward refer only to fundamental
properties. But it is reasonable to consider candidate fundamental laws that
refer to nonfundamental properties. Epistemic Guides allows for this, as long as
the nonfundamental properties are not too unnatural (all things considered). In
the case of the Past Hypothesis, for example, we may sacriﬁce fundamentality
of the property involved but gain a lot of informativeness and simplicity if we
invoke the property of entropy. The version of the Past Hypothesis that refers
to entropy can still govern by constraining the physical possibilities. (Another
strategy is to revise our deﬁnition of fundamental property such that any prop-
erty mentioned by a fundamental law is regarded as fundamental, although it
may be analyzable in terms of other fundamental properties. However, this may
present a problem for certain views of fundamentality.)
(viii) Fundamental vs. Non-fundamental Laws. According to MinP, how
are fundamental laws distinguished from nonfundamental laws? MinP allows
for a reductionist picture where nonfundamental laws, when properly under-
stood, are reducible to fundamental laws. We can distinguish them in terms of
derivability: non-fundamental laws can be (nontrivially) derived from funda-
mental laws (Section 2.7). For example, the ideal gas law is less fundamental
than Newton’s laws of motion, in the sense that the ideal gas law can be
derived from them in suitable regime. However, derivability may not be sufﬁ-
cient for nonfundamental lawhood, as other factors, such as counterfactual and
explanatory robustness, may also be relevant.
(ix) Related Views. Adlam (2022b) independently proposes an account that
is, in certain aspects, similar to MinP; she also suggests we take seriously
laws that do not have a time-evolution form. However, her account is not
committed to primitivism and seems more at home in a structural realist
framework. Meacham (2023)’s nomic-likelihood account is also similar to
MinP but Meacham takes objective probabilities as the starting point. Carroll
(1994) is often called a primitivist about laws, though recently Carroll (2018)
distances his view from primitivism and suggests a non-Humean reductive
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

26
Philosophy of Physics
analysis of laws in terms of causation. Bhogal (2017) proposes a “minimal
anti-Humeanism” on which laws are ungrounded (true) universal generaliza-
tions. It is compatible with primitivism, but it is less minimalist than MinP. For
example, on Bhogal’s view, laws cannot be singular facts about particular times
or places. However, Bhogal (p.447, fn.1) seems open to relax the requirement
that laws have to be universal generalizations. It would be interesting to see
how to extend Bhogal’s view to do so. Hildebrand and Metcalf (2021) consider
a theistic non-Humean account according to laws are created by a supernatu-
ral being. Their account is presumably as ﬂexible as MinP, since they do not
restrict the forms of laws (unlike Foster (2004)).
3.2 Explanation by Simple Constraint
On MinP, laws explain, but not by accounting for the dynamic production of
successive states of the universe from earlier ones. They explain by expressing
a hidden simplicity, given by compelling constraints that lie beneath complex
phenomena. A fundamental direction of time is not required for our notion of
explanation.12
In a world governed by Newtonian mechanics, particles travel along often
complicated trajectories because that is implied by the simple fundamental law
F = ma. Laws explain only when they can be expressed by simple principles
or differential equations. It is often the case that the complicated patterns we
see in spacetime can be derived from simple rules that we call laws.
Fundamental laws need not be time-directed or time-dependent. They may
govern purely spatial distribution of matter. For example, Gauss’s law
∇· E = ρ
(4)
in classical electrodynamics – one of Maxwell’s equations – governs the
distribution of electric charges and the electric ﬁeld in space.
Often the explanation that laws provide involves deriving striking, novel, and
unexpected patterns from simple laws. The relative contrast between the sim-
plicity of the law and the complexity and richness of the patterns may indicate
that the law is the correct explanation of the patterns.
For a toy example, consider the Mandelbrot set in the complex plane (Fig-
ure 6), produced by the simple rule that a complex number c is in the set just
in case the function
12 This type of explanation, sometimes called “constraint explanation,” has been explored in the
causation literature by Ben-Menahem (2018) and noncausal explanation literature by Lange
(2016). Their accounts, with suitable modiﬁcations, may apply here. See Hildebrand (2013)
for a critical discussion of primitive laws and explanations. His criticisms to primitivism are
addressed by the introduction of Epistemic Guides on MinP.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
27
Figure 6 The Mandelbrot set with continuously colored environment. Picture
created by Wolfgang Beyer with the program Ultra Fractal 3, CC BY-SA 3.0,
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0, via Wikimedia Commons
fc(z) = z2 + c
(5)
does not diverge when iterated starting from z = 0. (For example, c = −1
is in this set but c = 1 is not, since the sequence (0,−1,0,−1,0,−1,. . .) is
bounded but (0,1,2,5,26,677,458330,. . .) is not. For a nice description and
visualization, see Penrose (1989, Ch. 4).) Here, a relatively simple rule yields a
surprisingly intricate and rich pattern in the complex plane, a striking example
of what is called the fractal structure. Now regard the Mandelbrot set as cor-
responding to the distribution of matter over (a two-dimensional) spacetime,
the fundamental law for the world might be the rule just described. What is
relevant here is that given just the pattern we may not expect it to be generated
by any simple rule. It would be a profound discovery in that world to learn that
its complicated structure is generated by the aforementioned rule based on the
very simple function fc(z) = z2 + c. On our conception, it would be permissible
to claim that the simple rule expresses the fundamental law, even though it is
not a law for dynamic production. The Mandelbrot world is also an example of
strong determinism, a theoretical possibility allowed on MinP.
The previous examples illustrate some features of explanation on MinP:
1. Laws explain by constraining the physical possibilities in an illuminating
manner.
2. Nomic explanations (explanations given by laws) need not be dynamic
explanations; indeed, they need not involve time at all.
3. Explanation by striking constraint can be especially illuminating when an
intricate and rich pattern can be derived from a simple rule that expresses
the constraint imposed by a law.
On MinP, more generally, there are two ingredients of a successful scientiﬁc
explanation: a metaphysical element and an epistemic one. It must refer to the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

28
Philosophy of Physics
objective structure in the world, but it also must relate to our mind, remove
puzzlement, and provide an understanding of nature. We suggest that a suc-
cessful scientiﬁc explanation that fundamental laws provides should contain
two aspects: (i) metaphysical fundamentality and (ii) simplicity.
The ﬁrst aspect concerns the metaphysical status of fundamental laws: they
should not be mere summaries of, or supervenient on, what actually happens;
moreover, what the laws are should not depend on our actual practice or beliefs.
This aspect is the precondition for having a non-Humean account of scientiﬁc
explanations. On MinP, the precondition is fulﬁlled by postulating fundamental
laws as primitive (metaphysically fundamental) facts that constrain the world.
The constraint provides the needed oomph behind scientiﬁc explanations. Here
lies the main difference between MinP and Humean Reductionism.
The second aspect concerns how fundamental laws relate to us. Constraints,
in and of themselves, do not always provide satisfying explanations. Many con-
straints are complicated and thus insufﬁcient for understanding nature. What
we look for in the ﬁnal theory of physics is not just any constraint but simple,
compelling ones that ground observed complexities of an often bewildering
variety. The explanation they provide corresponds to an insight or realization
that leads us to say, “Aha! Now I understand.” Often, simplicity is related to
elegance or beauty. As Penrose reminds us:
Elegance and simplicity are certainly things that go very much together. But
nevertheless it cannot be quite the whole story. I think perhaps one should say
it has to do with unexpected simplicity, where one imagines that things are
going to be complicated but suddenly they turn out to be very much simpler
than expected. It is not unnatural that this should be pleasing to the mind.
(Penrose 1974, p.268)
The sense of unexpected simplicity is illustrated in the toy example of the
Mandelbrot set as well as the laws discovered by Newton, Schrödinger, and
Einstein.
Moreover, the second aspect of scientiﬁc explanation is connected to Episte-
mic Guides. It is obvious that fundamental laws should be empirically adequate
and consistent with all phenomena. But why should we expect them to be
simple? That is a challenging question that can be raised on any account
of laws, including versions of Humeanism. We postpone the discussion to
Section 5.
3.3 Examples and Further Clarifications
To further clarify MinP, I discuss some examples of dynamical laws and non-
dynamical constraint laws. There is no difﬁculty accommodating them, as
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
29
they can be understood as laws that constrain physical possibilities. Laws that
involve intrinsic randomness present an interesting challenge.
3.3.1 Dynamical Laws
Let us take a dynamical law to be any law that determines how objects move
or things change. Sometimes the label is restricted to dynamical laws that can
be understood as FLOTEs that guide the development of the universe in time.
Hamilton’s Equations. Consider classical mechanics for N particles,
described by Hamilton’s equations of motion (2) with a Hamiltonian speciﬁed
in (3), a paradigmatic example of a FLOTE. Hamilton’s equations are differ-
ential equations of a particular type: they admit initial value formulations. An
intuitive way of thinking about dynamical laws is to understand them as evolv-
ing the initial state of the world into later ones. However, this view is not
entirely natural for such a system. The view requires momenta to be part of
the intrinsic state of the world at a time; but it seems more natural to regard
them as aspects of extended trajectories, spanning continuous intervals of time.
Regarding governing as dynamic production leads to awkward questions about
instantaneous states and whether they include velocities and momenta.
The situation becomes even more complicated with relativistic spacetimes
having no preferred foliation of equal-time hypersurfaces. If there is no objec-
tive fact about which events are simultaneous, there is no unique prior Cauchy
surface that is responsible for the production of any later state. This seems
to detract from the intuitive idea of dynamic production as a relation with an
objective input, making it less natural in a relativistic setting.13
Instead of demanding that laws govern by producing subsequent states from
earlier ones, we can regard laws as constraining the physical possibilities of
spacetime and its contents. There is no difﬁculty accommodating Hamilton’s
equations or any other type of dynamical laws. A dynamical law speciﬁes a set
of histories of the system and need not be interpreted as presupposing a funda-
mental direction of time. The histories the laws allow can often be understood
as direction-less histories, descriptions of which events are temporally between
which other events.
A dynamical law such as (2) governs the actual world by constraining its
history to be one allowed by (2). And MinP requires no privileged splitting of
spacetime into space and time, as the physical possibilities can be stated in a
completely coordinate-free way in terms of the contents of the four-dimensional
spacetime.
13 Christopher Dorst raised a similar point in personal communication. See also Dorst (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

30
Philosophy of Physics
Principles of Least Action. Besides dynamical laws of Hamiltonian form,
other kinds of equations and principles are often employed even for Hamil-
tonian systems. Consider, for example, Hamilton’s principle of least action:
this requires that for a system of N particles with Cartesian coordinates q =
(q1,q2,. . .,qN):
δS = 0,
(6)
where S =
∫t2
t1 L(q(t), Ûq,t)dt, with Ûq = q(t)/dt, δ the ﬁrst-order variation of
S corresponding to small variation in q(t) with q(t1) and q(t2) ﬁxed, and L,
the Lagrangian, is the kinetic energy minus the potential energy of the system
of N particles. While mathematically equivalent to Hamilton’s equations, the
principle of least action feels very different from a law expressing dynamic
production. For those who take dynamic production to be constitutive of gov-
erning, the principle of least action cannot be the fundamental governing law.
They would presumably need to insist that the universe is genuinely governed
by some law of a form such as (2), with the principle of least action arising as
a theorem. On MinP, there is no problem regarding the principle of least action
as a candidate fundamental law, with no need for it to be derived from anything
else. For a universe to obey the principle, its history must be one compatible
with (6). That is the sense in which it would govern our universe.
Wheeler–Feynman Electrodynamics. Physicists have also considered
dynamical equations that cannot be reformulated in Hamiltonian form. On
MinP, there is no prohibition against laws expressed by such equations. For
example, Wheeler and Feynman (1945, 1949) considered equations of motion
for charged particles that involve both retarded ﬁelds (Fret) and advanced
ones (Fadv). On their theory, the trajectory of a charged particle depends on
charge distributions in the past (corresponding to Fret) as well as those in
the future (corresponding to Fadv). Since the total ﬁeld acting on particle j is
Ftot = ∑
k,j
1
2((k)Fret + (k)Fadv), the equation of motion for particle j of mass mj,
charge ej, and spacetime location qj is
mjÜq µ
j = ej
∑
k,j
1
2
(
(k)F µν
ret + (k)F µν
adv
)
Ûqj,ν
(7)
with the dot the time derivative with respect to proper time, (k)Fret the retarded
ﬁeld contributed by the past trajectory of particle k, and (k)Fadv the advanced
one, involving the future trajectory of particle k. (For more details, see Deckert
(2010) and Lazarovici (2018).) It is unclear how to understand equation (7) in
terms of dynamic production. In contrast, it is clear on MinP: the fundamental
law corresponding to such equations can be regarded as imposing a constraint
on all trajectories of charged particles in spacetime.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
31
Retrocausal Quantum Mechanics. There have been proposed reformulations
of quantum mechanics that involve two independent wave functions of the
universe: Ψi(t) evolving from the past and Ψf (t) evolving from the future.
Some such proposals, motivated by a desire to evade no-go theorems or pre-
serve time-symmetry, implement retrocausality or backward-in-time causal
inﬂuences (Friederich and Evans 2019). Consider Sutherland (2008)’s caus-
ally symmetric Bohm model, which speciﬁes an equation of motion governing
N particles moving in a three-dimensional space under the inﬂuence of both
Ψi(t) and Ψf (t):
dQj(t)
dt
=
Re(
ℏ
2imjaΨ∗
f ∇jΨi)
Re( 1
aΨ∗
f Ψi)
(Q(t),t)
(8)
with Q(t) = (Q1(t),. . .,QN(t)) ∈R3N the conﬁguration of the N particles at
time t, mj the mass of particle j, and a =
∫
Ψ∗
f (q,t)Ψi(q,t)dq. It is unclear
whether Sutherland’s theory is viable; it also has many strange consequences.
Nevertheless, MinP is compatible with regarding equation (8) as expressing a
fundamental law that constrains particle trajectories in spacetime (even though
we may have other reasons to not endorse the theory).
The Einstein Equation. In general relativity, the fundamental equation is the
Einstein equation:
Rµν −1
2Rgµν = k0Tµν + Λgµν,
(9)
where Rµν is the Ricci tensor, R is the Ricci scalar, gµν is the metric tensor, Tµν
is the stress–energy tensor, Λ is the cosmological constant, k0 = 8πG/c4 with G
Newton’s gravitational constant and c the speed of light. Roughly speaking, the
Einstein equation is a constraint on the relation between the geometry of space-
time and the distribution of matter (matter-energy) in spacetime. On MinP, we
have no problem taking the equation itself as expressing a fundamental law of
nature, one that constrains the actual spacetime and its contents. If Equation (9)
governs our world in the sense of MinP, then (9) expresses a fundamental fact
that does not supervene on or reduce to the actual spacetime and its contents.
There are ways of converting Equation (9) into FLOTEs that are suitable
for a dynamic productive interpretation. If certain constraints are met, the
Einstein equation can be decomposed in such a way that evolves an “initial
data” of a three-dimensional hypersurface forward in time. A famous example
is the ADM formalism (Arnowitt et al. 1962). However, they often discard
certain solutions (such as spacetimes that are not globally hyperbolic). For
non-Humeans who take dynamic production as constitutive for governing or
explanations, those reformulations will be necessary. For them, the true laws of
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

32
Philosophy of Physics
spacetime geometry should presumably be expressed by equations that describe
the evolution of a three-geometry in time. In contrast, on MinP there is no met-
aphysical problem for taking the original Einstein equation as a fundamental
law. The Einstein equation is simple and elegant and is generally regarded as
the fundamental law in general relativity. We prefer not to discard or modify it
on metaphysical grounds.
The Einstein equation allows some peculiar solutions. A particularly strik-
ing class of examples are spacetimes with closed timelike curves (CTCs). For
MinP, there would seem to be no fundamental reason why such a possibil-
ity should be precluded. But the possibility of CTCs is precluded if we insist
on dynamic production, since CTCs may lead to an event that dynamically
produces itself.
3.3.2 Non-dynamical Constraint Laws
The examples mentioned earlier are explicitly related to trajectories spanning
extended intervals of time. There are also important equations and principles
that are not. We call them non-dynamical constraint laws. The minimal notion
of governing easily applies to them. For example, some purely spatial con-
straints on the universe may be thought of as laws. In Section 3.2 we considered
two examples of such laws – (4) and (5). Here we consider some more.
The Past Hypothesis. In the foundations of statistical mechanics and ther-
modynamics, followers of Boltzmann have proposed a candidate fundamental
law of physics that Albert (2000) calls the Past Hypothesis (PH). It is a special
boundary condition that is postulated to explain the emergent asymmetries of
time in our universe, such as the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Here is one
way to state it:
PH At one temporal boundary of the universe, the universe is in a low-entropy
state.
This statement of PH is vague. We may be able to make it more precise by spec-
ifying the low-entropy state in terms of the thermodynamic properties of the
universe or in terms of some geometrical properties (Penrose 1979). Penrose’s
version in general relativity, called the Weyl curvature hypothesis (WCH),
renders it as follows:
WCH The Weyl curvature Cabcd vanishes at any “initial” singularity.
(For an extension of this idea to loop quantum cosmology, see Ashtekar and
Gupt (2016a, b).) Let us use ΩPH to denote the set of worlds compatible with
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
33
PH. If it is plausible that PH is a candidate fundamental law (Chen 2023a), then
the metaphysical account of laws should make room for a boundary condition
to be a fundamental law. On MinP, such an account is no problem. Together,
PH and dynamical laws can govern the actual world by constraining it to be
one among the histories compatible with all of them. They require the actual
world (history) lie in the intersection ΩPH ∩ΩDL, where the second conjunct
denotes the set of histories compatible with the dynamical laws. However, PH
is not a governing law in the sense of dynamic production.
The Initial Projection Hypothesis. In a quantum universe, we have theoretical
resources to postulate a stronger version of PH where the law selects a particular
initial microstate, represented by a mixed-state density matrix. In Chen (2021a),
I call this the Initial Projection Hypothesis (IPH):
IPH At one temporal boundary of the universe, the universal quantum state is
the normalized projection onto the Past-Hypothesis subspace.
This version of the boundary-condition law can be exact without incurring a
theoretical cost called untraceability (Chen 2022b). Since it pins down a unique
initial microstate (in terms of a fundamental density matrix), together with the
deterministic evolution equation for the quantum state, IPH yields a strongly
deterministic theory.
The No-Boundary Proposal. A famous initial condition for a quantum uni-
verse, proposed by two pioneers of quantum cosmology Hartle and Hawking
(1983), is the idea that the universe has no temporal boundaries; the spacetime
geometry smoothly rounds off and shrinks to a point in the “past.” They call it
the No-Boundary Wave Function (NBWF):
NBWF The universal quantum state satisﬁes the Hartle-Hawking formula
(1983), calculated over certain spacetime geometries that shrink to a point
in the “past.”
NBWF was proposed to solve the problem that quantum cosmology does not
yield any prediction unless one posits a boundary condition. Hartle (1996,
1997) regards this as a fundamental law of the universe on par with the dynamic
laws. If the Hartle–Hawking formula yields a unique solution of the wave
function of the entire spacetime, the theory will also be strongly deterministic.
Conservation Laws and Symmetry Principles. According to a traditional per-
spective, symmetries such as those of rotation, spatial translation, and time
translation are properties of the speciﬁc equations of motion. By Noether’s
theorem, those symmetries yield various conservation laws as theorems rather
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

34
Philosophy of Physics
than postulates that need to be put in by hand. On that perspective, symme-
tries and conservation laws can be regarded as ontologically derivative of the
fundamental laws, and are compatible with all metaphysical views on laws.
According to a more recent perspective, symmetries are fundamental. See
for example: Wigner (1985, 1964) and Weinberg (1992). Lange (2009) calls
them metalaws. For example, Wigner describes symmetries as “laws which
the laws of nature have to obey” (Wigner 1985, p.700) and suggest that “there
is a great similarity between the relation of the laws of nature to the events on
one hand, and the relation of symmetry principles to the laws of nature on the
other” (Wigner 1964, p.957). I do not take a ﬁrm stance on this perspective.
Nevertheless, the perspective is compatible with MinP. If there is a symmetry
principle K that a fundamental law of nature L must obey, then both K and
L are fundamental facts, where K constrains L in the sense that the physical
possibilities generated by L are invariant under the symmetry principle K, and
any other possible fundamental laws are also constrained by K. This introduces
further “modal” relations in the fundamental facts beyond just the constraining
of the spacetime and its contents by L.
Methodologically, one might prefer theories with dynamical laws, especially
FLOTEs, to those without them. MinP allows this preference. Even though
MinP does not restrict laws to FLOTEs, the principle of Epistemic Guides sug-
gests that we look for simple and informative laws. FLOTEs, when they admit
initial value formulations, may come with such theoretical virtues (Callender
2017, Chs. 7–8). The preference for FLOTEs and dynamical laws more gen-
erally may be explained by a preference for laws that strike a good balance
between simplicity and informativeness.
3.3.3 Probabilistic Laws
Candidate fundamental physical theories can also employ probability measures
and distributions. Such measures and distributions can be objective, and they
may be called objective probabilities. The probabilistic postulates in physi-
cal theories can be lawlike, even though the nature of those probabilities is
a controversial issue.
There are two types of probabilistic postulates in physics: (i) stochastic
dynamics and (ii) probabilistic boundary conditions. We start with (i) as it
is more familiar. Consider the Ghirardi–Rimini–Weber theory in quantum
mechanics, a theory in which observers and measurements do not have a central
place and in which the quantum wave function spontaneously collapses accord-
ing to precise probabilistic rules. On the GRW theory, the wave function of the
universe Ψ(t) evolves unitarily according to the Schrödinger equation but is
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
35
interrupted by random collapses. The probabilities of where and when the col-
lapses occur are ﬁxed by the theory. (For details, see Ghirardi et al. (1986) and
Ghirardi (2018).)
For an example of (ii), consider Albert and Loewer’s Mentaculus theory of
statistical mechanics, where they postulate, in addition to PH and the dynam-
ical equations (such as (2) and (3)), a probabilistic distribution of the initial
microstate of the universe:
Statistical Postulate (SP) At the temporal boundary of the universe when PH
applies, the probability distribution of the microstate of the universe is given
by the uniform one (according to the natural measure) that is supported on the
macrostate of the universe (compatible with PH).
One may also understand it in terms of typicality: that we regard the initial
probability distribution to pick out a measure of almost all or the overwhelm-
ing majority – a measure of typicality (Goldstein 2001, 2012). On this way of
thinking, SP says the following:
SP’ At the temporal boundary of the universe when PH applies, the initial
microstate of the universe is typical inside the macrostate of the universe
(according to the natural measure of typicality).
On the basis of SP’, one can then explore what the theory says about typical
histories and apply it to our universe.
A similar probabilistic boundary condition appears in Bohmian mechan-
ics, where one can interpret the initial probability distribution of particle
conﬁguration as representing a typicality measure:
ρt0(q) = |Ψ(q,t0)|2,
(10)
where t0 is when PH applies and Ψ(q,t0) is the wave function of the universe at
t0. Based on this measure, almost all worlds governed by Bohmian mechanics
will exhibit the Born rule. (For more details, see Dürr et al. (1992) and Goldstein
(2017).)
In fact, it is also possible to interpret stochastic dynamics as yielding a typi-
cality measure: the GRW theory speciﬁes a probability distribution over entire
histories of the quantum states, and what matters is the behavior of “almost all”
of those possible histories.
Probability measures and typicality measures are not straightforwardly
understandable in terms of MinP: it is not clear how they should be under-
stood in terms of constraints. The difﬁculty is greater for stochastic dynamics.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

36
Philosophy of Physics
On the typicality approach, one has the option to regard the measures picked
out by the probabilistic boundary conditions as referring to something method-
ological instead of nomological – how in practice one decides whether a law is
supported or refuted by evidence. However, the probabilities in the stochastic
dynamics are clearly nomological and not just a methodological principle of
theory choice.
Chen and Goldstein (2022, sect. 3.3.3) discuss ﬁve interpretive strategies that
are available on MinP. Barrett and Chen (2023) have recently proposed a con-
straint account of probabilistic laws, where the nomic constraint is expressed in
terms of Martin-Löf randomness. The proposal is attractive from the perspec-
tive of MinP, since it provides a uniﬁed basis for understanding all candidate
laws in terms of constraining laws. However, there is much room for future
work. As I shall discuss later, the problem of probabilistic laws is difﬁcult on
all accounts of laws. Solving it may turn on questions about the relation between
probability and typicality, and their relation to physical possibility.
3.4 Summary
MinP is an intelligible and attractive proposal for understanding fundamen-
tal laws of nature. It vindicates the non-Humean conviction that laws govern
while remaining ﬂexible enough to accommodate the variety of kinds of laws
entertained in physics. In particular, it does not require that laws presume a
fundamental direction of time. MinP illuminates metaphysics but is not unduly
constrained by it.
4 Other Accounts
In this section, I survey ﬁve inﬂuential accounts of laws and compare them to
MinP: Humean Reductionism, Platonic Reductionism, Aristotelian Reduction-
ism, Langean Reductionism, and Maudlinian Primitivism. With the exception
of Humean Reductionism, they are more restrictive than MinP because of their
metaphysical posits. Moreover, two of them–Aristotelian Reductionism and
Maudlinian Primitivism–are explicitly committed to a fundamental direction
of time.
4.1 Humean Reductionism
We start with Humean Reductionism, a metaphysically austere account that
is as ﬂexible as MinP (if not more so). On this view, laws do not govern but
merely summarize what actually happens in the world. Fundamental reality
consists solely in the Humean mosaic, a concrete example of which is a four-
dimensional spacetime occupied by particles and ﬁelds. At the fundamental
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
37
level, laws of nature do not exist and do not move stuff around. Laws are deriv-
ative of and ontologically dependent on the actual Humean mosaic. The laws
are the way they are because of what the actual trajectories of particles and
histories of ﬁelds are, not the other way around, in contrast to the governing
picture of laws, such as the one given by MinP. On MinP, the patterns in the
Humean mosaic are ultimately explained by the laws; on Humean Reduction-
ism, the laws are ultimately explained by the Humean mosaic, which in turn is
not really explained by anything.
Following Ramsey, Lewis (1973, 1983, 1986) proposes a “best-system”
analysis of laws that shows how laws can be recovered from the Humean
mosaic. The basic idea is that laws are certain regularities of the Humean
mosaic. However, not any regularity is a law, since some are accidental. One
needs to be selective about which regularities to count as laws. Lewis sug-
gests we pick those regularities in the best system of true sentences about
the Humean mosaic. The strategy is to consider various systems (collections)
of true sentences about the Humean mosaic and pick the system that strikes
the best balance among various theoretical virtues, such as simplicity and
informativeness.
For a concrete example, let the Humean mosaic (the fundamental ontol-
ogy) be a Minkowski spacetime occupied by massive, charged particles and
an electromagnetic ﬁeld. The locations and properties of those particles and
the strengths and directions of the ﬁeld at different points in spacetime is the
matter distribution, which corresponds to the local matters of particular fact.
Suppose the matter distribution is a solution to Maxwell’s equations. Consider
three systems of true statements (characterized below using the axioms of the
systems) about this mosaic:
• System 1: {Spacetime point (x1,y1,z1,t1) has ﬁeld strengths E1 and B1 with
directions ®v1 and ®v1′ and is occupied by a particle of charge q1; spacetime
point (x2,y2,z2,t2) has ﬁeld strengths E2 and B2 with directions ®v2 and ®v2′
and is not occupied by a charged particle; ……}
• System 2: {“Things exist.”}
• System 3: {Maxwell’s equations, the Lorentz force equation, and Newton’s
law of motion}
System 1 lists all the facts about spacetime points one by one. It has much infor-
mational content but it is complicated. System 2 is just one sentence that says
there are things but does not tell us what they are and how they are distributed.
It is extremely simple but has little informational content. System 3 contains six
equations. It has less information about the world than System 1 but has much
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

38
Philosophy of Physics
more than System 2. It is more complicated than System 2 but much less so than
System 1. System 1 and System 2 are two extremes; they have one virtue too
much at the complete expense of the other. In contrast, System 3 strikes a good
balance between simplicity and informativeness. System 3 is the best system
of the mosaic. Therefore, according to the best-system analysis, the axioms of
System 3 are the fundamental laws of this world.
On this approach and unlike on MinP, laws are not fundamental facts that
govern the universe, but are merely descriptive of and derivative from the Hum-
ean mosaic. Laws do not push or pull things, enforce behaviors, or produce the
patterns. Laws are just winners in a competition among systematic summaries
of the mosaic. Beebee (2000) calls it the “non-governing conception of laws of
nature.” Laws are merely those generalizations which ﬁgure in the most eco-
nomical true axiomatization of all the particular matters of fact that happen to
obtain.
Despite the simplicity and appeal of Lewis’s analysis, there is an obstacle.
The theoretical virtue of simplicity is language-dependent. For example, sup-
pose there is a predicate F that applies to all and only things in the actual
spacetime. Consider the following system:
• System 4: {∀xF(x)}
This is informationally equivalent to System 1 and more informative than Sys-
tem 3, and yet it is simpler than System 3. If we allow competing systems to
use predicate F, there will be a system (namely System 4) that is overall better
than System 3. Given the best-system analysis, the actual laws of the mosaic
would not be Maxwell’s equations but “∀xF(x).” To rule out such degenerate
systems, Lewis places a restriction on language. Suitable systems that enter
into the competition can invoke predicates that refer to only natural properties.
For example, the predicate “having negative charge” refers to a natural prop-
erty, while the disjunctive predicate “having negative charge or being the Eiffel
Tower” refers to a less natural property. Some properties are perfectly natural,
such as those invoked in fundamental physics about mass, charge, spacetime
location, and so on. It is those perfectly natural properties that the axioms in
the best system must refer to. The predicate F applies to all and only things
in the actual world, which makes up an “unnatural” set of entities. F is not
perfectly natural; it is an example of a gruesome predicate connected to Good-
man’s problem of induction (Section 2.6). Hence, System 4 is not suitable. The
requirement that the axioms of the best system refers only to perfectly natural
properties is an important element of Lewis’s Humeanism.
Over the years, Lewis and his followers have, in various ways, extended and
modiﬁed the best-system analysis of laws on Humean Reductionism. I have
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
39
elsewhere called the updated view Reformed Humeanism about Laws, but for
simplicity here I will just call it the Best System Account (BSA):
Best System Account (BSA) The fundamental laws are the axioms of the best
system that summarizes the mosaic and optimally balances simplicity, infor-
mativeness, ﬁt, and degree of naturalness of the properties referred to. The
mosaic contains only local matters of particular facts, and the mosaic is the
complete collection of fundamental facts.
BSA can accommodate various kinds of laws of nature. Without going into too
much detail, we note the following features:
1. Chance. Although chance is not an element of the Humean mosaic, it can
appear in the best system. Humeans can introduce probability distributions as
axioms of the best system (Lewis 1980). This works nicely for stochastic the-
ories such as the GRW theory. Humeans can evaluate the contribution of the
probability distributions by using a new theoretical virtue called ﬁt. A system is
more ﬁt than another just in case it assigns a higher (comparative) probability
than the other does the history of the universe. For certain mosaics, the inclusion
of probability in the best system can greatly improve the informational content
without sacriﬁcing too much simplicity. Hence, ﬁt can be seen as the proba-
bilistic extension of informativeness. Humeans can also allow what is called
“deterministic chance” (Loewer 2001). Take a deterministic Newtonian theory
of particle motion and add to it PH and SP, which can be represented as a uni-
form probabilistic distribution, conditionalized on a low-entropy macrostate of
the universe at t0. The Humean account of chance (both stochastic and deter-
ministic) is arguably one of the simplest and clearest to date, but it still faces
the Big Bad Bug (Lewis 1994) and the zero-ﬁt problem (Elga 2004).
2. Flexibility with respect to the forms of laws. Humean Reductionism is
entirely ﬂexible regarding the forms of laws. Every example discussed in
Section 3.3 can be regarded as a best-system law that ﬁgures in the optimal
summary of the Humean mosaic. Lewis (1983) maintains that “only the regu-
larities of the system are to count as laws” (p.367). However, there is no reason
to limit the Humean account to laws about general facts (Callender 2004). This
ﬂexibility is a signiﬁcant advantage Humean Reductionism has over some other
accounts of laws (Loewer 2012).
3. Flexibility with respect to perfect naturalness. For Lewis, perfect natural-
ness is a property of properties. Perfectly natural properties pick out the same
set of things as Armstrong’s theory of sparse universals (more on that in Sec-
tion 2.2). However, the chief motivation for Lewis’s use of perfect naturalness
is to rule out systems that use “gruesome” predicates. If that is the issue, as
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

40
Philosophy of Physics
Hicks and Schaer (2017) suggest, we can simply require that “degree of natural-
ness” of the predicates involved be a factor in the overall ranking of competing
systems, and the best system should also optimally balance degree of natural-
ness of the predicates together with the rest of the theoretical virtues, such as
simplicity, informativeness, and ﬁt. The ﬂexibility with respect to perfect natu-
ralness also allows the best system to refer to nonfundamental properties such
as entropy, as may be necessary if the Past Hypothesis is a fundamental law.
Comparisons with MinP. Humean Reductionism and MinP are similar in
several respects. First, neither requires a fundamental direction of time, and
both permit a reductionist understanding of it. Second, both views are ﬂexi-
ble enough to accommodate the distinct kinds of laws entertained in physics.14
Third, both views emphasize the importance of simplicity (and other theoretical
virtues) in laws and scientiﬁc explanations.
Let me turn to their differences. First, on Humean Reductionism, the pat-
terns in the Humean mosaic have no ultimate explanation; after all, the mosaic
grounds what the laws are. Many reject Humean Reductionism for that rea-
son.15 On MinP, suitable explanations of the patterns must not be merely
summaries of the mosaic. On MinP, fundamental laws are metaphysically fun-
damental facts that exist in addition to the mosaic. They govern the mosaic and
explain its patterns by constraining it in an illuminating manner.
Second, they also differ regarding the modal proﬁle of laws. This has been
much discussed in the literature (see e.g. Carroll (1994) and Maudlin (2007)).
On MinP, since fundamental laws are primitive facts, there can be a physically
possible world corresponding to an empty Minkowski spacetime governed
by the Einstein equation. However, on Humean Reductionism, that world is
one where the simplest summary is just the laws of special relativity, and it
is impossible to have such a world where the law is the Einstein equation
(Maudlin 2007, pp. 67–68). To allow two worlds with the same mosaic (empty
Minkowski spacetime) but different laws (laws of special relativity and those of
general relativity), which is accepted in scientiﬁc practice, is to endorse non-
supervenience of the laws on the mosaic. Therefore, Humean Reductionism
seems to be in conﬂict with scientiﬁc practice while MinP is not.16
14 Humean reductionism of chancy or probabilistic laws is one of its selling points, as such laws
are difﬁcult to understand on non-Humeanism. However, Humean reductionism also faces its
own problems with chance, such as the Big Bad Bug and the zero-ﬁt problem mentioned earlier.
15 There is an ongoing debate about the status and nature of explanation on Humeanism. For some
examples, see Loewer (2012), Lange (2013), and Emery (2019, 2023). For a discussion that
non-Humeanism offers better explanation than Humeanism, see Hildebrand (2022, Sect. 7).
16 See Roberts (2008) for a Humean account of laws based on a contextualist semantics that may
alleviate this worry.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
41
Third, some Humeans suggest that, precisely because of the metaphysi-
cal difference concerning supervenience, Humeanism has an epistemological
advantage over non-Humean views such as MinP (Earman and Roberts 2005).
Since Humean laws are supervenient on the mosaic, and since the mosaic is
all that we can empirically access (we do not directly see the laws), we are in
a better position to determine laws on Humeanism than on non-Humeanism.
This argument becomes less convincing once we remind ourselves that we are
not given the mosaic; the mosaic in modern physics is as theoretical as the laws.
I return to this point in Section 5.
Finally, Humean Reductionism faces what Lewis (1994) calls the prob-
lem of “ratbag idealism.” Since the best systematization is constitutive of
lawhood, and if what counts as best depends on us, lawhood may become
mind-dependent. In contrast, on MinP, fundamental laws are what they are
irrespective of our psychology and judgments of simplicity and informa-
tiveness. Hence, MinP respects our conviction about the objectivity and
mind-independence of fundamental laws. See Section 7 for more discussions.
4.2 Platonic Reductionism
With Humean Reductionism, nothing ultimately explains the patterns in the
Humean mosaic. Those with a governing conception of laws may seek to
ﬁnd a deeper explanation. In virtue of what is every massive particle in the
world behaving according to the formula F = ma? What, if anything, enforces
the pattern and makes sure nothing deviates from it? On MinP, it is the laws
themselves.
Dretske (1977), Tooley (1977), and Armstrong (1983) propose a different
non-Humean account of governing laws, one that seeks to understand them in
terms of universals. The universals that they accept are in addition to things in
the Humean mosaic. They are “over and above” the Humean mosaic. In tradi-
tional metaphysics, universals are repeatable entities that explain the genuine
similarity of objects. Let us start with some mundane examples. Two cups are
genuinely similar in virtue of their sharing a universal Being a Cup. The univer-
sal is something they both instantiate and something that explains their genuine
similarity. A cup is different from a horse because the latter instantiates a dif-
ferent universal Being a Horse. Now, those universals are not fundamental,
and they may be built from more fundamental universals about physical prop-
erties. Dretske, Tooley, and Armstrong use universals to provide explanations
in science. For them, the paradigm examples are universals that correspond to
fundamental physical properties, such as mass and charge. On their view, laws
of nature hold because of a certain relation obtaining among such universals.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

42
Philosophy of Physics
This theory of laws has connection to Plato’s theory of forms.17 Let us call it
Platonic Reductionism.18
Consider the world where F = ma holds for every massive particle. In such
a world, any particle with mass m instantiates the universal having mass m, any
particle under total force F instantiates the universal being under total force F,
and any particle with acceleration F/m instantiates the universal having accel-
eration F/m. The universals are multiply instantiated and repeated, as there are
many particles that share the same universals. Those universals give unity to
the particles that instantiate them. The theory also postulates, as a fundamen-
tal fact, that the universal having mass m and the universal being under total
force F necessitate the universal having acceleration F/m. Hence, if any par-
ticle instantiates having mass m and being under total force F, then it has to
instantiate having acceleration F/m. It follows that every particle has to obey
F = ma.19 This adds the necessity and the oomph that are missing in Humean
Reductionism.
With Platonic Reductionism, the regularity is explained by the metaphys-
ical postulate of universals and the necessitation relation N that hold among
universals. Following Hildebrand (2013), we may summarize it as follows:
Necessitation For all universals F and G, N(F,G) necessitates the regularity
that all Fs are Gs.
Some clariﬁcatory remarks:
1. Universals. (i) The appeal to universals is indispensable in this the-
ory of laws. The theory is committed to a fundamental ontology of objects
(particulars) and a fundamental ontology of universals. Hence, Platonic Reduc-
tionism is incompatible with nominalism about universals. (ii) Defenders such
as Armstrong appeal to a sparse theory of universals, where the fundamental
universals correspond to the fundamental properties we ﬁnd in fundamental
physics. The sparse universals correspond to the perfectly natural properties
that Lewis invokes in his account. Consider Lewis’s example of the predicate
F that denotes the property shared by all and only things in the actual world.
For Armstrong,“∀xF(x)” does not express a fundamental law because objects
with property F are not genuinely similar, and F is a property that does not
correspond to one of the fundamental, sparse universals.
17 For an overview of Plato’s theory of forms, see Kraut (2017).
18 In the literature it is sometimes called the Dretske–Tooley–Armstrong (DTA) account of laws
or the Universalist account of laws. Calling it Platonic reductionism may be controversial. But
see the discussion in Carroll (1994, appendix A1).
19 This example about F = ma does not exactly ﬁt in Armstrong’s schema of “All F’s are G.” See
Armstrong (1983, ch.7) for a proposal for accommodating “functional laws.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
43
2. Necessity. (i) The necessity relation among universals is put into the theory
by hand. It is a postulate that such a relation holds among universals and does
necessitate regularities. (It is also postulated that the N relation among univer-
sals is itself a universal.) To some commentators, it is unclear why the postulate
is justiﬁed (Lewis 1983, p.366). In response, a defender of Platonic Reduc-
tionism may take the necessity relation simply as a primitive and stipulate its
connections to regularities (Schaffer 2016). This defense is also available on
other non-Humean accounts.
(ii) Armstrong (1983, p.172) understands probabilistic laws as giving “a
probability of necessitation” between two universals. What is “a probability
of a necessitation?” Conceptually, whether F necessitates G seems like a mat-
ter that does not admit of degree. What does this probability mean, and how
does it relate to actual frequencies and why should it constrain our credences?
Even if one accepts the intelligibility of the necessitation relation, one may be
unwilling to accept the intelligibility of objective probability of a necessitation
and one may be puzzled by how the probability of a necessitation can explain
the regularities.
On Platonic Reductionism, it is unclear how we should think about the
direction of time. Even though there is a strong connection between the neces-
sitation relation N and causation, it does not seem that the main defenders build
the direction of time into N. Nevertheless, if Platonic Reductionism does not
have room for treating the Past Hypothesis as a fundamental law, it may need
to invoke a fundamental direction of time for worlds like ours. Perhaps Pla-
tonic Reductionism is best paired with a primitivism about the direction of
time.
Comparisons with MinP. Platonic Reductionism and MinP agree that there
are governing laws that do not supervene on the Humean mosaic, but disagree
on whether governing laws should be analyzed in terms of or are reducible to
relations among universals.
While Platonic Reductionism is ontologically committed to fundamental
universals, MinP is not. I do not think that universals offer additional explana-
tory beneﬁts. The motivating idea of Platonic Reductionism is that universals
are properties that genuinely similar objects share, and it is partly in virtue of
the universals shared by those objects that the objects behave in the same way
everywhere and everywhen. The metaphysics of N is a complicated business,
and it seems to create more mystery than it dispels. In contrast, on MinP there
are fundamental laws that govern the world by constraining the physical possi-
bilities. Explanation in terms of simple laws seems clear enough to vindicate the
non-Humean intuition that there is something more than the mosaic that gov-
erns it. Moreover, MinP is compatible with various metaphysical views about
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

44
Philosophy of Physics
properties such as realism and nominalism. A realist attitude toward laws does
not require a realist attitudes toward properties.
Unlike MinP, Platonic Reductionism places restrictions on the form of fun-
damental laws. On Platonic Reductionism, all laws need to be recast in the form
of relations among universals, and it is unclear how to do so for laws in modern
physics (see also Hildebrand and Metcalf (2021, Sect 3.2).) Consider a differen-
tial equation that expresses a candidate fundamental law such as (2). What are
the universals that they actually relate? Assuming that velocity and acceleration
are derived quantities, what are the universals that correspond to the deriva-
tives on either side of the equations? Armstrong argues that universals must be
instantiated in some concrete particulars. As Wilson observes (p.439), differ-
ential equations conﬂict with Armstrong’s principle about the instantiation of
universals, as the values of the derivatives are calculated from values possessed
by non-actual states (those in the small neighborhood around the actual one)
that are not instantiated. In contrast, MinP has no difﬁculty accommodating
laws expressed by differential equations.
Moreover, some candidate fundamental laws involve properties that do not
seem to correspond to universals. For example, PH applies to only one moment
in time. As such, it is a spatiotemporally restricted law that seems in tension
with the approach involving universals (universal, repeatable, and multiply
instantiated). Tooley (1977) considers an example of Smith’s Garden, and there
he seems open to accept spatiotemporally restricted laws if they are signiﬁcant
enough. One can devise semantic tricks to understand them in terms of univer-
sals, but it is hard to see what the point is. In contrast, MinP has no difﬁculty
accommodating spatiotemporally restricted laws; they can function perfectly
as constraints on the universe that are about speciﬁc places or times.
4.3 Aristotelian Reductionism
The next view is most commonly associated with contemporary defenders of
dispositional essentialism. On this view, laws are not fundamental entities; nei-
ther do they govern the world in any metaphysically robust sense. Laws do not
push or pull things around. Instead, the patterns we see are explained by the
fundamental properties that objects instantiate. Those properties are the seats of
metaphysical powers, necessity, and oomph. Those properties make objects, in
a certain sense, “active” (Ellis 2001, p.1). Such properties are often called “dis-
positions,” and also sometimes called “powers,” “capacities,” “potentialities,”
and “potencies.”20 However, they are different from the universals in Platonic
20 For an overview of the metaphysics of dispositions, see Choi and Fara (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
45
Reductionism or the natural properties in Humean Reductionism, which may
be viewed as “passive.” If there are any laws (and there is an internal debate
about this question among defenders of this fundamental dispositional ontol-
ogy), they derive from or originate in the fundamental dispositions of material
objects.
Roughly speaking, objects with dispositions have characteristic behaviors
(also called manifestation) in response to certain stimuli (Bird 2007, p.3). For
example, a glass has a disposition to shatter when struck; an ice cube has a
disposition to melt when heated; salt has a disposition to dissolve when put
into water. On this view, fundamental properties are similarly dispositional:
negatively charged particles have a disposition to attract positively charged
particles; massive particles have a disposition to accelerate in a way that is
proportional to the total forces on them and inversely proportional to their
masses. Moreover, a dispositional essentialist holds that some properties have
dispositional essences, which means that their essences can be characterized in
dispositional terms.21
Among those who endorse a dispositionalist fundamental ontology, not eve-
ryone accepts that fundamental laws, which are usually taken to be universally
valid and always true, arise from dispositions. For example, Cartwright (1983,
1994) and Mumford (2004) deny the need for such laws. Nevertheless, the dis-
positional essentialists need not abandon laws. They can maintain that laws
supervene on or reduce to dispositions. Because of its Aristotelian roots (Ellis
2014), we call such a view Aristotelian Reductionism about laws.22 Aristotelian
Reductionists maintain that (i) the metaphysical powers, necessity, and oomph
reside in the fundamental dispositions; (ii) laws are metaphysically derivative
of the dispositions; (iii) laws are metaphysically necessary.
How are laws derived from dispositions? Bird proposes that we can derive
laws from certain counterfactual conditionals associated with dispositional
essences. A more recent approach is that of Demarest (2017, 2021) and
Kimpton-Nye (2017) that seek to combine a dispositional fundamental ontol-
ogy with a best-system analysis of lawhood. Let us focus on the approach
of Demarest. She proposes that dispositions (she follows Bird and calls them
potencies) do metaphysical work. They produce their characteristic behaviors,
resulting in patterns in nature. Their characteristic behaviors, in different pos-
sible worlds, can be summarized in simple and informative axiomatic systems,
21 Some, such as Bird (2007), go further and claim that all perfectly natural properties in Lewis
(1986)’s sense or all sparse universals in Armstrong (1983)’s sense have dispositional essences.
22 Many defenders of this view suggest that even though it has roots in Aristotle, it is not
committed to many aspects of Aristotelianism.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

46
Philosophy of Physics
and the best one contains the true laws of nature. That is like Humean Reduc-
tionism except that (i) Demarest’s fundamental ontology includes potencies and
(ii) the summary is not of just the actual distribution of potencies but also all
merely possible ones. In this way, her proposal may be an alternative develop-
ment of Bird’s suggestion that we can derive laws from potencies, though she
does not rely on counterfactuals.
In contrast to Humean Reductionism, here the patterns are ultimately
explained by the potencies. How do potencies explain? Demarest appeals to
dynamic production (Demarest 2017, pp.51–52). The potencies at an earlier
time explain how things move at a later time by dynamically producing, deter-
mining, or generating the patterns. Demarest’s view seems committed to a
fundamental direction of time. The account of dynamic explanation presup-
poses a fundamental distinction between past and future, that is between the
initial and the subsequent states of the world. The initial arrangement of par-
ticles and potencies metaphysically ground subsequent behaviors of particles.
The commitment of a fundamental direction of time does not seem optional on
her view.
Moreover, the metaphysical framework of fundamental dispositions already
seems committed to a fundamental direction of time, independently of the issue
of laws. For example, it is natural to interpret the discussions by Ellis, Bird,
Mumford as suggesting that the manifestation of a disposition cannot be tempo-
rally prior to its stimulus, which presupposes a fundamental direction of time.23
Therefore, although Aristotelian Reductionism does away with the governing
conception of laws, the view seems committed to a fundamental direction of
time twice over.
Comparisons with MinP. Aristotelian Reductionists do not think that laws
govern in a metaphysically robust sense. In contrast, MinP vindicates the con-
viction that laws do. Aristotelian Reductionism is committed to a fundamental
ontology of dispositions. MinP is not. Most physicists today may be unfamiliar
with the concept of fundamental dispositions. They are familiar with the con-
cept of fundamental laws and how they ﬁgure in various scientiﬁc explanations.
Hence, MinP seems more science-friendly.
Moreover, it is natural to read dispositional essentialists such as Bird, Mum-
ford, and Ellis as having an implicit commitment to a fundamental direction of
time. Demarest’s account is more explicit in linking the dispositional essen-
tialist ontology and the account of nomic explanations to that of dynamic
metaphysical dependence, or what I call dynamic production. As noted in
23 In contrast, Vetter (2015) is open to a temporally symmetric metaphysics but assumes temporal
asymmetry in her account of dispositions (which she calls potentialities).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
47
Section 3.3, it is difﬁcult to understand how dynamic production works even in
simple cases such as Hamilton’s equations and much less in relativistic space-
times. Requiring dynamic production presumably rules out theories that permit
CTCs, as well as purely spatial laws, or even worlds for which spacetime is
emergent. In contrast, MinP is not committed to a fundamental direction of
time, and MinP is entirely open to those possibilities (even though we may have
other considerations, beyond the conception of laws, to not consider them).
Finally, there are problems speciﬁc to accounts (such as Bird’s) that ana-
lyze laws in terms of dispositions. Bird (2007) lists four problems (p.211): (i)
fundamental constants, (ii) conservation laws and symmetry principles, (iii)
principles of least action, and (iv) multiple laws relating distinct properties.
Problem (i) arises because slight differences in the constants do not require the
properties to be different; problem (ii) because conservation laws and symme-
try principles do not seem to be manifestations of dispositions; problem (iii)
because the principles seem to commit to the physical possibilities of alter-
nate histories, something not allowed on dispositional essentialism; problem
(iv) because a third law relating two properties will not be the outcome of the
dispositional natures of those properties. Such problems do not arise on MinP.
4.4 Langean Reductionism
Lange (1999, 2005, 2009) develops a non-Humean account where laws are
explained by counterfactuals. He suggests that counterfactuals (instead of laws
as on MinP) should be regarded as ontologically basic. Let us call the view
Langean Reductionism. It is also more restrictive than MinP.
To unpack his views, we need to understand his deﬁnition of lawhood. Let
us denote the set of (ﬁrst-order) laws of nature together with their logical con-
sequences as Λ. It is understood to include only what Lange (2009, p.17) calls
“sub-nomic truths,” those that do not directly make claims about lawhood, such
as F = ma, but not it is a law that F = ma. On Lange’s account (p.42), Λ stands
in a special relationship to counterfactuals. He proposes that Λ is the “largest
nonmaximal sub-nomically stable set” of truths about the universe. Roughly
speaking, Λ is the largest set that is (1) not the set of all (sub-nomic) truths
about the universe, and (2) counterfactually stable under any (sub-nomic) sup-
position that is consistent with Λ. To satisfy (2), Λ must be such that, for any
sub-nomic proposition p that does not make claims about lawhood or conﬂict
with Λ, every member of Λ would still be true if p were true.24
24 For a more precise and complete deﬁnition of (2), which involves nested counterfactuals, see
Lange (2009, p.29).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

48
Philosophy of Physics
This special relationship between Λ and counterfactuals, on Lange’s view,
provides a principled and sharp distinction between laws and accidents. It
allows us to deﬁne laws from counterfactuals in a noncircular way, achieving
one of the central aims of Lange’s project and distinguishing it from all other
accounts in the literature.
The nonmaximality condition (1) plays a crucial role here. Lange shows that
every set containing accidents, with the possible exception of the set of all
sub-nomic truths, lacks the special property of sub-nomic stability. As Lange
explains (p.30), on many logics of counterfactuals, the set of all sub-nomic
truths (including all accidents) also forms a sub-nomically stable set, albeit a
maximal one (because it cannot be expanded without becoming inconsistent).
Without the further constraint that laws cannot form a maximal set, there will be
no principled and sharp distinction between laws and accidents, for sub-nomic
stability does not guarantee lawhood. One can deﬁne laws to be the stable
set that contains no accidents, but that would be circular, a feature he wants
to avoid. What does the trick is deﬁning laws to be the largest nonmaximal
sub-nomically stable set.
What make a proposition a law of nature are the associated counterfactuals,
which are regarded by Lange as metaphysically fundamental. This reverses the
direction of metaphysical explanation, as we usually think that laws support
counterfactuals and not the other way around (Section 2.3). However, Lange
does not deny that sometimes our knowledge of laws can be used to evaluate
counterfactuals, even though laws depend on counterfactuals.
This view is arguably compatible with the Past Hypothesis being a funda-
mental law. Hence, it is compatible with a reductionist understanding of the
direction of time, and it does not assume that laws must dynamically produce
the states of the universe in order to govern.
Comparisons with MinP. Langean reductionism is one of the more ﬂexi-
ble non-Humean accounts of laws, as it can accommodate a wide variety of
laws. However, it is still more restrictive than MinP. Because Lange requires
that Λ be nonmaximal, Langean Reductionism is incompatible with even the
metaphysical possibility of strong determinism.
To see the conﬂict, let us suppose strong determinism is metaphysically pos-
sible. Consider a possible world w where strong determinism is true. The laws
of w is compatible with only w. Thus, the Λ at w, being logically closed, entails
all (sub-nomic) truths at w. That makes Λ the maximal sub-nomically stable set
at w, contradicting the requirement that Λ be nonmaximal. Hence, deﬁning Λ
to be nonmaximal rules out the metaphysical possibility of strong determinism.
I regard that as a signiﬁcant and under-appreciated cost of Lange’s account.
Strong determinism is logically consistent and conceptually coherent. On what
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
49
grounds are we entitled to dismiss it as metaphysically impossible? Moreover,
there can be scientiﬁcally motivated, empirically adequate, and theoretically
virtuous candidates for laws that are strongly deterministic and provide new
insights into the foundations of physics (Sections 2.4 and 3.3). Ruling out strong
determinism by ﬁat seems contrary to the methodology of naturalistic meta-
physics. I think the lesson here is that we should rethink the original motivation
for a noncircular distinction between laws and accidents and modify Lange’s
account in light of the possibility of strong determinism.
In contrast, strong determinism is not only allowed on MinP but serves as
a good example of how laws constrain the universe – strongly deterministic
laws rules out every world except the actual world. If such laws are simple,
they provide strong and compelling explanation for every fundamental event
in spacetime.
4.5 Maudlinian Primitivism
All previous accounts surveyed in this section attempt to reduce laws to
something else, such as the Humean mosaic, universals, dispositions, and coun-
terfactuals. An alternative view is simply to take laws as ontological primitives.
An inﬂuential primitivist account is developed by Maudlin (2007). His ver-
sion of primitivism, which in one aspect is similar to MinP, comes with more
metaphysical commitments than MinP.
As a primitivist about laws, he suggests that we should not analyze or reduce
laws into anything else. Maudlin is also committed to primitivism about the
direction of time: that the distinction between past and future is metaphysically
fundamental and not reducible to anything else. Maudlin combines the two
commitments into a metaphysical package (p.182).
For Maudlin, laws produce or generate later states of the world from ear-
lier ones. In this way, via the productive power of the laws, subsequent states
of the world (and its parts) are explained by earlier ones and ultimately by
the initial state of the universe. This idea about productive explanation, for
example, allows Maudlin’s account to vindicate a widespread intuition about
Bromberger’s ﬂagpole. The shadow is produced by the circumstances and the
length of the pole (together with the laws). Although we can deduce from the
laws the pole length based on the circumstances and the shadow length, the
pole length is not produced by them. Hence, given the laws, the pole length
and the circumstances explain, but are not explained by, the shadow length.
Maudlin suggests that his package yields an attractive picture by being closer
to our initial conception of the world. He is committed to all three theses
discussed in Section 2.4: Only FLOTEs, Dynamic Production, and Temporal
Direction Primitivism. We may summarize the package as follows:
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

50
Philosophy of Physics
Maudlinian Primitivism Fundamental laws are certain ontological primitives
in the world. Only dynamical laws (in particular, laws of temporal evolu-
tion) can be fundamental laws. They operate on the universe by producing
later states of the universe from earlier ones, in accord with the fundamental
direction of time.
Maudlin allows there to be primitive stochastic dynamical laws—those laws
that involve objective probability such as the GRW collapse laws. Hence,
dynamic production need not be deterministic. An initial state can be com-
patible with multiple later states, determining only an objective probability
distribution over those states. Perhaps the objective probability can be under-
stood as propensity, with stochastic production implying variable propensities
of producing various states, in proportion to their objective probabilities and in
accord with the direction of time. However, even if deterministic production
is an intelligible notion, it is not clear that stochastic production or propen-
sity is as intelligible. (Compare this with the earlier point about “probabilistic
necessitation” in Platonic Reductionism.)
Comparisons with MinP. Maudlinian Primitivism and MinP agree that fun-
damental laws are metaphysically fundamental and that they govern. They
disagree about how they do it.
For Maudlin, dynamic production is essential, and every fundamental law
needs to have the form of a dynamical law (in the narrow sense of a FLOTE).
For laws to produce, they operate according to the fundamental direction of
time, providing an intuitive picture close to our pre-theoretic conception of the
world: “the universe is generated from a beginning and guided toward its future
by physical law” (p.182). MinP is not committed to a fundamental direction of
time; nor is it committed to dynamic production as how laws govern or explain.
On MinP, explanation by simple constraint is good enough. Many candidate
fundamental laws such as the Einstein equation are not (in and of themselves)
FLOTEs that produce later states of the universe from earlier ones. For the
same reason, PH, WCH, IPH, and NBWF cannot be Maudlinian laws. And
neither can a purely spatial constraint such as Gauss’s law25 or the simple rule
responsible for the Mandelbrot world. On MinP, they can all be understood as
fundamental laws that express simple constraints.
The difﬁculty with dynamic production is not just that it precludes certain
candidate fundamental laws. It is also difﬁcult to understand the notion itself.
What does dynamic production mean and what are its relata? Does it relate
25 In personal communication, Maudlin suggests that he now regards (4) as expressing a
metaphysical analysis or a deﬁnition of ρ in terms of the divergence of E.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
51
instantaneous states or sets of instantaneous states of the universe? If it relates
instantaneous states, it is hard to understand dynamic production even in para-
digm examples of FLOTEs such as the one expressed by Hamilton’s equations.
(The initial data is not conﬁned to a single moment in time, if we understand
momentum as partly reducible to variations in positions over some time inter-
val.) The notion becomes even less natural in relativistic settings. Moreover, on
a simple understanding of dynamic production, the beginning of the universe
does metaphysical work; it is what gets the entire productive enterprise started.
However, for spacetimes with no temporal boundaries, it is unclear where to
start the productive explanation. In contrast, constraints operate on the entire
spacetime, regardless of whether there is an “initial” moment. Thus, MinP does
not require a ﬁrst moment in time. (Perhaps a more sophisticated understanding
of dynamic production does not either.)
On MinP, even if the universe lacks a fundamental direction of time, we can
still recover a notion of productive explanation at a non-fundamental level. For
example, we can use PH to deﬁne a (nonfundamental) direction of time in the
usual way: earlier is deﬁned as being closer to the time of PH, while later is
deﬁned as being further away from that. We may regard FLOTEs as evolv-
ing earlier states of the universe into later ones (with respect to PH). In such
a universe, dynamic production may be metaphysically derivative. Still, we
can contemplate a (non-fundamental) productive explanation of Bromberger’s
ﬂagpole and vindicate the intuition that the pole length and the circumstances
explain, but are not explained by, the shadow length. Therefore, the intuitive
picture behind Maudlinian Primitivism can be preserved even if there is no
fundamental notion of dynamic production or a fundamental direction of time.
4.6 Summary
We have surveyed ﬁve inﬂuential accounts of laws in the philosophical litera-
ture, and compared them with MinP. All four non-Humean accounts discussed
here are more restrictive than MinP. Even though Humean Reductionism dis-
agrees with MinP regarding the metaphysical status of laws, they agree on
many ﬁrst-order judgments about which equations express laws. This suggests
that the fundamental disagreement between Humeanism and non-Humeanism
is much more subtle than is often recognized.
5 Simplicity
Physical laws are strikingly simple, although there is no a priori reason they
must be so. We have discussed the relevance of simplicity in Sections 3 and 4.1.
Here we shall take a more systematic look at its role in the epistemology of
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

52
Philosophy of Physics
laws. I propose that nomic realists of all types (Humeans and non-Humeans)
should accept that simplicity is a fundamental epistemic guide for discovering
and evaluating candidate laws. As it turns out, this epistemological principle
is independent of the metaphysical posits about laws in both Humeanism and
non-Humeanism.
5.1 Nomic Realism and the Epistemic Gap
Many physicists and philosophers are realists about physical laws. Call realism
about physical laws nomic realism. It contains two parts:
Metaphysical Realism: Physical laws are objective and mind-independent;
more precisely, which propositions express physical laws are objective and
mind-independent facts in the world.26
Epistemic Realism: We have epistemic access to physical laws; more pre-
cisely, we can be epistemically justiﬁed in believing which propositions
express the physical laws, given the evidence that we will in fact obtain.27
Nomic realism gives rise to an apparent epistemic gap: if laws are really
objective and mind-independent, it may be puzzling how we can have epi-
stemic access to them, since laws are not consequences of our observations.
The epistemic gap can be seen as an instance of a more general one regarding
theoretical statements on scientiﬁc realism (Chakravartty 2017).
The accounts surveyed in Sections 3 and 4 all aspire to satisfy nomic realism.
Let us focus on BSA and MinP, as representatives of Humeanism and non-
Humeanism. Do they vindicate epistemic realism? Their metaphysical posits,
by themselves, do not guarantee epistemic realism. This should be clear on
MinP. Since there is no metaphysical restriction on the form of the fundamental
laws, if they are entirely mind-independent primitive facts about the world, how
do we know which propositions are the laws? In fact, an analogous problem
exists on BSA. This claim may surprise some philosophers, as it is often thought
that BSA has an epistemic advantage over non-Humean accounts like MinP,
26 A weaker version of metaphysical realism maintains that laws are not entirely mind-dependent.
That will accommodate more pragmatic versions of the Humean best-system accounts (e.g.
Loewer (2007b), Cohen and Callender (2009), Hicks (2018), Dorst (2019), Jaag and Loew
(2020), and the volume edited by Hicks et al. (2023)), since on such views the mosaic
still partially determines the best system. The arguments below should apply with suitable
adaptations.
27 The terminology is due to Earman and Roberts (2005). Here I’ve added the clause “given the
evidence that we will in fact obtain.” My version of epistemic realism is logically stronger than
theirs, since theirs refers to all possible evidence we can obtain.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
53
precisely because BSA brings laws closer to us. BSA deﬁnes laws in terms
of the mosaic, and the mosaic is all we can empirically access (Earman and
Roberts 2005).
The problem is that we are not given the mosaic. Just like laws, the mosaic
entertained in modern physics is a theoretical entity that is not entailed by our
observations. Our beliefs about its precise nature, such as the global structure
of spacetime, its microscopic constituents, and the exact matter distribution,
are as theoretical and inferential as our beliefs about laws. They are all parts
of a theory about the physical world. Just as MinP requires an extra epistemic
principle to infer what the laws are, BSA requires a similar principle to infer
what the mosaic is like. The latter, on BSA, turns out to be equivalent to a
strong epistemic principle concerning what we should expect about the best
system given our limited evidence, which because of its limitation pins down
neither the mosaic nor the best system. (See (Hildebrand 2022, Section 8) for
a similar perspective; see also (Chen and Goldstein 2022, Section 4.1).)
After all, on BSA laws are not summaries of our observations only, but of
the entire spacetime mosaic constituted by the totality of microphysical facts,
a small minority of which show up in our observations. The ultimate judge of
which system of propositions is the optimal true summary depends on the entire
mosaic, a theoretical entity. (For this reason, BSA should not be confused as
a version of strict empiricism.) And in current physics, our best guide to the
mosaic is our best guess about the laws. At the end of the day, MinP and BSA
turn out to require the same epistemic principle concerning laws. On neither
account does the epistemic principle follow from the metaphysical posits about
what laws are.
To sharpen the discussion, let us suppose, granting Lewis’s assumption of
the kindness of nature (Lewis 1994, p.479), that given the mosaic ξ there is a
unique best system whose axioms express the fundamental law L:
L = BS(ξ)
(11)
with BS(·) the function that maps a mosaic to its best-system law.28 Let us stip-
ulate that for both BSA and MinP, physical reality is described by a pair (L,ξ).
For both, we must have that ξ ∈ΩL, with ΩL the set of mosaics compatible with
L. This means that L is true in ξ. On BSA, we also have that L = BS(ξ). So in
a sense, all we need in BSA is ξ; L is not ontologically extra. But it does not
follow that BSA and MinP are relevantly different when it comes to epistemic
realism.
28 We might understand pragmatic Humeanism as recommending that we use another best-system
function BS′(·) that is “best for us.”
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

54
Philosophy of Physics
Let E denote our empirical evidence consisting of our observational data
about physical reality. Let us be generous and allow E to include not just our
current data but also all past and future data about the universe that we in fact
gather. There are two salient features of E:
• E does not pin down a unique ξ. There are different candidates of ξ that yield
the same E. (After all, E is a spatiotemporally partial and macroscopically
coarse-grained description of ξ.)
• E does not pin down a unique L. There are different candidates of L that
yield the same E. (On BSA, this is an instance of the previous point; on
MinP, this is easier to see since L can vary independently of ξ, up to a
point.)
Hence, on BSA, just as on MinP, E does not pin down (L,ξ). There is a gap
between what our evidence entails and what the laws are. Ultimately, the gap
can be bridged by adopting simplicity (among other theoretical virtues) as an
epistemic guide. Nevertheless, it helps to see how big the gap is so that we can
appreciate how much work needs to be done by simplicity and other epistemic
guides.29
The epistemic gaps can be illustrated by considering cases of empirical
equivalence. If different laws yield the same evidence, it is puzzling how we
can be epistemically justiﬁed in choosing one over its empirically equivalent
rivals, unless we rule them out by positing substantive assumptions that go
beyond the metaphysical posits of nomic realism. Here I brieﬂy mention three
kinds of algorithms for generating empirical equivalents. For a more in-depth
discussion, see Chen (2023c).
Algorithm A: Moving parts of ontology (what there is in the mosaic) into
the nomology (the package of laws).
General strategy. This strategy works on both BSA and MinP. Given a theory
of physical reality T1 = (L,ξ), if ξ can be decomposed into two parts ξ1&ξ2,
we can construct an empirically equivalent rival T2 = (L&ξ1,ξ2), where ξ1 is
moved from ontology to nomology.
29 It is worth contrasting the current setup with the inﬂuential framework suggested by Hall (2009,
2015). To articulate a core idea of BSA, Hall imagines a Limited Oracular Perfect Physicist
(LOPP) who has as her evidence all of ξ and nothing else. Her evidence ELOPP contains vastly
more information than E. On BSA, ELOPP pins down (L, ξ). Actually, this is still incorrect.
On BSA, we also need the assumption that ELOPP corresponds to the entire spacetime, and the
mosaic does not “continue” beyond ELOPP. This subtlety has not been sufﬁciently appreciated
in the literature. Notice that ELOPP is as theoretical for Humeans as for non-Humeans. The
Humean’s best guess about what is in ELOPP depends on her expectation about what L looks
like given E.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
55
Example. Consider the standard theory of Maxwellian electrodynamics,
TM1:
• Nomology: Maxwell’s equations, Lorentz force law, and Newton’s law of
motion.
• Ontology: a Minkowski spacetime occupied by charged particles with
trajectories Q(t) and an electromagnetic ﬁeld F(x,t).
Here is an empirically equivalent rival, TM2:
• Nomology: Maxwell’s equations, Lorentz force law, Newton’s law of
motion, and an enormously complicated law specifying the exact functional
form of F(x,t) that appears in the dynamical equations.
• Ontology: a Minkowski spacetime occupied by charged particles with
trajectories Q(t).
Our evidence E is compatible with both TM1 and TM2. The outcome of every
experiment in the actual world will be consistent with TM2, as long as the out-
come is registered as certain macroscopic conﬁguration of particles (Bell 2004).
We can think of the new law in TM2 as akin to the Hamiltonian function in clas-
sical mechanics, which is interpreted as encoding all the classical force laws,
except that specifying F(x,t) is much more complicated than specifying a typi-
cal Hamiltonian. Both F(x,t) and the Hamiltonian are components of respective
laws of nature that tell particles how to move.30 Given metaphysical realism,
at most one of the two theories has the correct nomology.
Algorithm B: Changing the nomology directly.
General strategy. This strategy is designed for MinP. We can generate empir-
ical equivalence by directly changing the nomology. Suppose the actual mosaic
ξ is governed by the law L1. Consider L2, where ΩL1 , ΩL2 and ξ ∈ΩL2. L1 and
L2 are distinct laws because they have distinct sets of models. Since E (which
can be regarded as a coarse-grained and partial description of ξ) can arise from
both, the two laws are empirically equivalent. There are inﬁnitely many such
candidates for ΩL2. For example, ΩL2 can be obtained by replacing one mosaic
in ΩL1 with something different and not already a member of ΩL1, by adding
30 Note that we can decompose the standard ontology in many other dimensions, corresponding
to more ways to generate empirically equivalent laws for a Maxwellian world. This move is
discussed at length by Albert (2022). Similar strategies have been considered in the “quantum
Humeanism” literature. See Miller (2014), Esfeld (2014), Callender (2015), Bhogal and Perry
(2017), and Chen (2022a).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

56
Philosophy of Physics
some mosaics to ΩL1, or by removing some mosaics in ΩL1. L2 is empirically
equivalent with L1 since E is compatible with both.31
Example. Let L1 be the Einstein equation of general relativity, with ΩL1 =
ΩGR, the set of general relativistic spacetimes. Assume that the actual space-
time is governed by L1, so that ξ ∈ΩL1. Consider L2, a law that permits
only the actual spacetime and completely speciﬁes its microscopic detail, with
ΩL2 = {ξ}. Since our evidence E arises from ξ, it is compatible with both L1
and L2. Since it needs to encode the exact detail of ξ, in general L2 is much
more complicated than L1.32 Given metaphysical realism, at most one of L1
and L2 corresponds to the actual law.
Algorithm C: Changing the nomology by changing the ontology.
General strategy. This strategy is designed for BSA. On BSA, we can change
the nomology by making suitable changes in the ontology (mosaic), which
will in general change what the best system is. Suppose the actual mosaic ξ
is optimally described by the actual best system L1 = BS(ξ). We can consider a
slightly different mosaic ξ′, such that it differs from ξ in some spatiotemporal
region that is never observed and yet E is compatible with both ξ and ξ′. There
are inﬁnitely many such candidates for ξ′ whose best system L2 = BS(ξ′) dif-
fers from L1. Alternatively, we can expand ξ to ξ′ , ξ such that ξ is a proper
part of ξ′. There are many such candidates for ξ′ whose best system L2 = BS(ξ′)
differs from L1, even though E is compatible with all of them.
Example. Let L1 be the Einstein equation of general relativity, with ΩL1 =
ΩGR, the set of general relativistic spacetimes. Assume that the actual space-
time is globally hyperbolic and optimally described by L1, so that L1 = BS(ξ).
Consider ξ′, which differs from ξ in only the number of particles in a small
spacetime region R in a far away galaxy that no direct observation is ever
made. Since the number of particles is an invariant property of general rela-
tivity, it is left unchanged after a “hole transformation” (Norton 2019). We can
use determinism to deduce that ξ′ is incompatible with general relativity, so that
L1 , BS(ξ′). Let L2 denote BS(ξ′). L1 , L2 and yet they are compatible with
the same evidence we obtain in ξ. Since ξ′ violates the conservation of num-
ber of particles, L2 should be more complicated than L1. Given metaphysical
realism, at most one of L1 and L2 corresponds to the actual law.
Algorithms A, B, and C can be combined to generate more sophisticated
cases of empirical equivalence. The question they raise is this: what breaks
the tie among empirical equivalents and epistemically justiﬁes our belief in the
31 See Manchak (2009, 2020) for more examples.
32 L2 is a case of strong determinism; see Section 2.4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
57
intuitively correct law, given the evidence that we will in fact obtain? In other
words, in cases of empirical equivalence, how can we hold on to epistemic
realism given our commitment to metaphysical realism? To do so, we need a
tie breaker.
5.2 Nomic Simplicity
I propose that simplicity is a fundamental epistemic guide to lawhood. Roughly
speaking, simpler candidates are more likely to be laws, all else being equal. It
secures epistemic realism in cases of empirical equivalence where simplicity
is the deciding factor. In particular, we should accept this principle:
Principle of Nomic Simplicity (PNS) Other things being equal, simpler
propositions are more likely to be laws. More precisely, other things being
equal, for two propositions L1 and L2, if L1 >S L2, then L[L1] >P L[L2],
where >S represents the comparative simplicity relation, >P represents the
comparative probability relation, and L[·] denotes is a law, which is an
operator that maps a proposition to one about lawhood.33
As a fundamental principle, PNS is not justiﬁed by anything else.34 But what
is special about PNS, and why not use the oft-cited principle of simplicity as
below?
Principle of Simplicity (PS) Other things being equal, simpler propositions
are more likely to be true. More precisely, other things being equal, for two
propositions L1 and L2, if L1 >S L2, then L1 >P L2, where >S represents the
33 For example, L[F = ma] expresses the proposition that F=ma is a law. The proposition F=ma
is what Lange (2009) calls a “sub-nomic proposition.”
34 Saying that simplicity is a fundamental epistemic guide to lawhood does not mean it is the only
such guide. Recall that PNS contains the proviso “other things being equal.” But sometimes
other factors are not held equal, and we need to consider overall comparisons of theoretical
virtues (epistemic guides) and their balance. Other theoretical virtues can also serve as episte-
mic guides for lawhood. For example, informativeness and naturalness are two such virtues.
A simple equation that does not describe much or describe things in too gruesome manners is
less likely to be a law. We can formulate a more general principle:
Principle of Nomic Virtues (PNV) For two propositions L1 and L2, if L1 >O L2, then
L[L1] >P L[L2], where >O represents the relation of overall comparison that takes into
account all the theoretical virtues and their tradeoffs, of which of which >S is a contributing
factor, >P represents the comparative probability relation, and L[·] denotes is a law, which
is an operator that maps a proposition to one about lawhood.
What is overall better is a holistic matter, and it can involve trade-offs among the theoretical
virtues such as simplicity, informativeness, and naturalness. PNV should be thought of as the
more general epistemic principle than PNS. I shall mainly focus on PNS, but what I say below
should carry over to PNV.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

58
Philosophy of Physics
Figure 7 ΩGR is nested within ΩGR+.
comparative simplicity relation, >P represents the comparative probability
relation.35
The reason is that PS leads to probabilistic incoherence while PNS straight-
forwardly avoids it. Whenever two theories have nested sets of models, say
ΩL1 ⊂ΩL2, the probability that L1 is true cannot be higher than the probability
that L2 is true. For concreteness, consider an example from spacetime physics.
Let ΩGR denote the set of models compatible with the fundamental law in gen-
eral relativity – the Einstein equation, and let ΩGR+ denote the union of ΩGR
and a few random spacetime models that do not satisfy the Einstein equation
(see Figure 7). Suppose there is no simple law that generates ΩGR+. While the
law of GR (the Einstein equation) is presumably simpler than that of GR+, the
former cannot be more likely to be true than the latter, since every model of GR
is a model of GR+, and not every model of GR+ is a model of GR. This is an
instance of the problem of nested theories, as ΩGR is a subclass of and nested
within ΩGR+.
On PS, in the case of nested theories, we have probabilistic incoherence. If
L1 is simpler than L2, applying the principle that simpler laws are more likely
to be true, we have L1 >P L2. However, if L1 and L2 are nested with ΩL1 ⊂ΩL2,
the axioms of probability entail that L1 ≤P L2. Contradiction!
On PNS, we can avoid the problem. Even though we think that the Einstein
equation is more likely to be a law, it is less likely to be true than the law of GR+.
According to PNS, what simplicity selects here is not truth in general, but truth
about lawhood, that is whether a certain proposition has the property of being
a fundamental law. Let us assume that fundamental lawhood is factive, which
is granted on both BSA and MinP. Hence, lawhood implies truth: L[p] ⇒p.
35 It may be too demanding to require a total order that induces a normalizable probability dis-
tribution over the space of all possible laws. It is less demanding to formulate PS in terms of
comparative probability.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
59
However, truth does not imply lawhood: p ⇏L[p]. This shows that L[p] is
logically inequivalent to p. This is the key to solve the problem of coherence.
On PNS, the contradiction that inﬂicts PS is removed, because more likely
to be a law does not entail more likely to be true. If L1 and L2 are nested, where
L1 is simpler than L2 but ΩL1 ⊂ΩL2, then L1 ≤P L2. It is compatible with the
fact that L[L1] >P L[L2]. What we have is an inequality chain:
L[L2] <P L[L1] ≤P L1 ≤P L2
(12)
From the perspective of nomic realism, one can consistently endorse PNS
without endorsing PS. Some facts are laws, but not all facts are laws. Laws
correspond to a special set of facts. On BSA, they are the best-system axioms.
On MinP, they are the primitive facts that constrain physical possibilities.
This is a simple solution to the problem of nested theories / problem of
coherence, one that is suitable for both BSA and MinP.36
5.3 Theoretical Benefits
We should accept PNS because of its theoretical beneﬁts. Here I highlight six
attractive consequences of PNS.
Empirical equivalence. PNS is useful for resolving cases of empirical equiv-
alence constructed along Algorithms A-C. For Algorithm A, T2 will in general
employ much more complicated laws than T1. For example, the laws of TM2
specify F(x,t) in its exact detail. For Algorithm B, L2 will in general be more
complicated than L1, if ΩL2 is obtained from ΩL1 by adding or subtracting a
few models. For example, a strongly deterministic theory of some sufﬁciently
complex general relativistic spacetime, as described in the example, needs to
specify the exact detail of that spacetime, will employ laws much more com-
plicated than the Einstein equation. For Algorithm C, even though the mosaics
of L1 and L2 are not that different, if L1 is a simple system, then in general L2
will not be. In fact, given enough changes from the actual mosaic, there may
not be any optimal system that simpliﬁes the altered mosaic to produce a good
system. With PNS, we are justiﬁed in choosing the theoretical package with
simpler laws, which agrees with standard theory choice.
Reﬂecting on our judgments in such cases, we may conclude that PNS is
one posit we should make to justify epistemic realism about laws. It is what
we presuppose when we set aside (or give less credence to) those empirical
equivalents as epistemically irrelevant. As such, it is not merely a pragmatic
36 It can be generalized to comparisons of laws that do not have nested sets of models (Chen
2023c). My solution in the context of laws is, in some aspect, similar to the solution proposed
by Henderson (2023) in terms of a “generative view” of scientiﬁc theories.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

60
Philosophy of Physics
principle, although it may have pragmatic beneﬁts. Simpler laws may be easier
to conceive, manipulate, falsify, and the like. But if it is an epistemic guide, it
is ultimately aiming at certain truths about lawhood and providing epistemic
justiﬁcations for our believing in such truths. There is, to be sure, the option of
retreating from epistemic realism. But it is not open to nomic realists.
Induction. We want to know what the physical reality (L,ξ) is like. Given
our limited evidence about some part of ξ and some aspect of L, what justiﬁes
our inference to other parts of ξ or other aspects of L that will be revealed
in upcoming observations or in observations that could have been performed?
It does not follow logically. Without some a priori rational guide to what
(L,ξ) is like or probably like, we have no rational justiﬁcation for favoring
(L,ξ) over any alternative compatible with our limited evidence. On a given
L we know what kind of ξ to expect. But we are given neither L or ξ. With-
out further inferential principles, it is hard to make sense of the viability of
induction.
In Section 2.6, we discussed the potential connection between laws and
induction. What does induction require of laws? One might demand that laws
hold the same way everywhere and everywhen, but that is either vacuous or
too inﬂexible. A better answer is the simplicity of laws, as required by PNS.
A simple law can give rise to a complicated mosaic with an intricate matter
distribution. The complexity is only apparent, because behind all the surface
phenomena is a simple law that is discoverable. By assuming that the universe
is governed by a simple law, one may make reasonable guesses about unob-
served parts of the universe, based on a simple rule compatible with observed
data. But nomic simplicity does not forbid laws about boundary conditions or
about particular individuals. Some simple laws may even have temporal vari-
ations, such as a time-dependent function F =
1
t+kma for some constant k.
As long as the temporal variation and spatial variation are not too extreme
as to require complicated laws, we can still inductively learn about physical
reality based on available evidence, even in a non-uniform spacetime with
dramatically different events in different regions.
In my view, a compelling argument that PNS is a fundamental epistemic
principle can be made by its vindication of induction. The rationality of induc-
tively learning about physical reality is indispensable to scientiﬁc practice and
nomic realism. We can make a transcendental argument: science presupposes
induction, so we have to believe in the epistemic rationality of induction. If
Hume is right, induction has no noncircular epistemic justiﬁcation. Deduc-
tive and probabilistic justiﬁcations of induction require premises that can be
learnt only through induction. Therefore, whatever justiﬁcation we offer for
induction cannot completely satisfy the skeptic. We have to start somewhere
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
61
by postulating fundamental epistemic principles that clarify how and why
induction works.
Symmetry. Symmetry principles play important roles in theory construction
and discovery. Physicists routinely use symmetries to justify or guide their
physical postulates. However, whether symmetries hold is an empirical fact,
not guaranteed by the world a priori. So why should we regard symmetry prin-
ciples as useful, and what are they targeting? I suggest that certain applications
of symmetry principles are defeasible guides for ﬁnding simple laws. In such
cases, they are epistemically useful to the extent they are defeasible indicators
for simplicity.37 Consider the toy example
F = ma for (−∞,t] and F =
(
8m9 −1
7m5 + πm3 + km2 + m
)
a for (t,∞)
(13)
with F given by Newtonian gravitation. This law violates time-translation
invariance and time-reversal invariance. In this case, we have a much better
law that is time-translation and time-reversal invariant:
F = ma for all times
(14)
The presence of the two symmetries in (14) and the lack of them in (13), indicate
that all else being equal we should prefer (14) to (13). We can explain this
preference by appealing to their relative complexity. Equation (14) is much
simpler than (13), and the existence of the symmetries are good indicators of
the relative simplicity. However, in this comparison, we are assuming that both
equations are valid for the relevant evidence (evidence obtained so far or total
evidence that will ever be obtained). The preference is compatible with the fact
that if empirical data is better captured by (13), we should prefer (13) to (14).
In the relevant situations where symmetry principles are guides to simplicity,
they are only defeasible guides. Symmetry principles are not an end in itself for
theory choice. I shall provide two more examples to show that familiar sym-
metry principles are not sacred and can be ultimately sacriﬁced if we already
have a reasonably simple theory that is better than the alternatives.
The ﬁrst is the toy example of the Mandelbrot world (Section 3.2). The phys-
ical reality consisting of (LM,ξM) is friendly to scientiﬁc discovery. If we were
inhabitants in that world, we can learn the structure of the whole ξM from the
structure of its parts, by learning what LM is. However, LM is not a law with
37 For a related perspective, see North (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

62
Philosophy of Physics
any recognizable spatial or temporal symmetries.38 Nevertheless, the physical
reality described by (LM,ξM) is a perfect example of an ultimate theory (though
not of the actual world). It is an elegant and powerful explanation for the pat-
terns in the Mandelbrot world. What could be a better explanation? I suggest
that none would be, even if it had more symmetries. In this case, we do not need
symmetry principles to choose the right law, because we already have a simple
and good candidate law. The lack of symmetries is not a regrettable feature of
the world, but a consequence of its simple law.
The second and more realistic example is the Bohmian Wentaculus (Chen
2021a, 2022a, 2023d). With the Initial Projection Hypothesis (§3.3.2), the ini-
tial quantum state is as simple as the Past Hypothesis. This allows us to adopt
the nomic interpretation of the quantum state, and understand the mosaic ξB
as consisting of only particle trajectories in spacetime, with the fundamental
dynamical law LB as given by this differential equation:
dQi
dt = ℏ
mi
Im∇qiWIPH(q,q′,t)
WIPH(q,q′,t) (Q)
= ℏ
mi
Im∇qi⟨q|e−iˆHt/ℏˆWIPH(t0)eiˆHt/ℏ|q′⟩
⟨q|e−iˆHt/ℏˆWIPH(t0)eiˆHt/ℏ|q′⟩
(q = q′ = Q)
(15)
Since the quantum state is nomic, as speciﬁed by a law, the right hand side
should be the canonical formulation of the fundamental dynamical law for this
world. Notice that the right hand side of the equation is not time-translation
invariant, as at different times the expression
Im∇qi⟨q|e−iˆHt/ℏˆWIPH(t0)eiˆHt/ℏ|q′⟩
⟨q|e−iˆHt/ℏˆWIPH(t0)eiˆHt/ℏ|q′⟩
will in general take on different forms. However, the physical reality described
by the Bohmian Wentaculus may be our world, and the equation can be discov-
ered scientiﬁcally. The law is a version of the Bohmian guidance equation that
directly incorporates a version of the Past Hypothesis. Hence, (LB,ξB) describes
a physical reality that is friendly to scientiﬁc discovery and yet does not validate
time-translation invariance.
In the Bohmian Wentaculus world, symmetry principles can be applied, but
the fundamental dynamical law explicitly violates time-translation invariance.
In such cases, the lack of symmetries is not a problem, because we already
have found the simple candidate that has the desirable features. Again, the
time-translation non-invariance is a consequence of its simple law. PNS takes
38 There is, however, the reﬂection symmetry about the real axis. But it does not play any useful
role here, and we can just focus on the upper half of the Mandelbrot world if needed.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
63
precedence over symmetry principles and are the deeper justiﬁcation for theory
choice.
Dynamics. We have good reasons to allow fundamental laws of boundary
conditions. However, many boundary conditions are not suitable candidates
for fundamental lawhood. Epistemic guides such as simplicity allow us to be
selective in postulating boundary condition laws, and to give more weight to
proposals that include dynamical laws.
The examples of good boundary condition laws have a common feature: they
are simple to specify. Many boundary conditions contain a great deal of correla-
tions, but only a select few are good candidates for fundamental laws, namely
those that are also sufﬁciently simple. One may wonder why we choose the
Past Hypothesis, a macroscopic description, over a precise microscopic initial
condition of the universe. The answer is that the former is much simpler than
the latter and is still sufﬁciently powerful to explain a variety of temporally
asymmetric regularities. The simplicity of the boundary condition laws make
it almost inevitable that we will have dynamical laws in addition to boundary
condition laws. The scientiﬁc explanations of natural phenomena come from
the combination of simple boundary conditions and dynamical laws. As such,
dynamical laws have to carry a lot of information by themselves.
Determinism. Nomic realism is often accompanied with other reasonable
expectations about laws. On MinP, given any mosaic ξ, there are many pos-
sible choices of L such that ξ ∈ΩL and mosaics do not cross in ΩL. Here is an
algorithm to generate some of them: construct a two-member set ΩL = {α, β}
such that α and β agree at no time (or any Cauchy surface). Any law with such a
domain meets the deﬁnition of determinism. As long as α is not a world where
every logically possible state of the universe happens some time in the uni-
verse, it is plausible to think that there are many different choices of β that can
ensure determinism. Without a further principle about what we should expect
of L, determinism is too easy and almost trivial on MinP. On BSA, the problem
is the opposite. It becomes too difﬁcult and almost impossible for a world to be
deterministic. Given the evidence E we have about the mosaic, even though E
may be optimally summarized by a deterministic law L, it does not guarantee
(or make likely, without further assumptions) that the entire mosaic is optimally
summarized by a deterministic law L. Small “perturbations” somewhere in the
mosaic can easily make its best system fail determinism.39
Hence, there is a question of what nomic realists should say that constitutes a
principled reason to think that determinism is not completely trivial (on MinP)
and not epistemically inaccessible (on BSA). With PNS, determinism is no
39 See Builes (2022) for a related argument.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

64
Philosophy of Physics
longer trivial on MinP. Given any mosaic ξ, even though there are many deter-
ministic candidates compatible with and true at ξ. Not every mosaic will be
compatible with a relatively simple law that is deterministic. The non-triviality
of determinism on MinP is the fact that it is non-trivial to ﬁnd a law that is
simple and deterministic, as that is not guaranteed for every metaphysically
possible mosaic. With PNS, determinism is no longer epistemically inaccessi-
ble on BSA. This follows from the more general principle that PNS gives us
epistemic justiﬁcation to hold beliefs about parts of the mosaic that we have not
observed and will never observe. We are justiﬁed in believing that the best sys-
tem of the actual mosaic is relatively simple, even though the actual evidence
does not entail that. If the actual evidence can be optimally summarized by a
deterministic law restricted to the actual evidence, we have epistemic justiﬁ-
cation to make inferences about regions that will not be observed – the entire
mosaic, ξ, can be summarized by a simple law that happens to be deterministic.
Explanation. There is a strong connection between nomic realism and sci-
entiﬁc explanation. The point of postulating laws, on BSA and on MinP, is to
provide scientiﬁc explanations. However, not all candidate laws provide the
same quality of explanation or same kind of explanation. Hence, on both ver-
sions of nomic realism, we might wonder if there is a principled reason to think
that we will have a successful scientiﬁc explanation for all phenomena.
On MinP, explanations must relate to us (Section 3.2). Constraints, in and of
themselves, do not always provide satisfying explanations. Many constraints
are complicated and thus insufﬁcient for understanding nature. For example,
the constraint given by just ΩL = {ξM}, which requires a complete speciﬁcation
of the mosaic, is insufﬁcient for understanding the Mandelbrot world. Knowing
why there is a pattern requires more than knowing the exact distribution of
matter. On MinP, many candidate laws can constrain the mosaic. But not all
have the level of simplicity to provide illumination about the mosaic. With
PNS, we expect the actual constraint to be relatively simple. The constraint
given by the Mandelbrot law should be preferred to that given by ΩL = {ξM}.
The simple law provides a successful explanation while the more complicated
one does not.
On BSA, it is built in the notion of laws that they systematize the mosaic.
However, whether there is a systematization that is simpler than the mosaic is
a contingent matter, depending on the detailed, microscopic, and global struc-
tures of the mosaic. Not every mosaic supports a systematization that provides
illumination in the sense of unifying the diverse phenomena in the mosaic. BSA
only entails that the best system is no more complex than the exact speciﬁcation
of the mosaic. For example, some mosaics may support no better optimal sum-
mary than the exact speciﬁcation of the mosaic itself. Hence, on BSA, having
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
65
successful explanations is not automatic. It requires the mosaic to be favor-
able. On BSA, some mosaics are favorable: they support optimal summaries
that are simpler than themselves and provide “Humean explanations” about the
mosaic. In fact, in a sense, most mosaics are not favorable (Lazarovici 2020).
There exist mosaics underdetermined by actual evidence that do not support
any good summaries. Given the actual evidence, with PNS, we are epistemi-
cally justiﬁed in inferring that the actual best system is relatively simple such
that it can provide a “Humean explanation” about the actual mosaic. In effect,
we are expecting that the actual Humean mosaic is a favorable one that com-
pletely cooperates with our scientiﬁc methodology and is such that it can be
uniﬁed in a reasonably simple best system.
5.4 Summary
I suggest that nomic realists accept the principle of nomic simplicity as an
epistemic guide for discovering and evaluating candidate laws. It vindicates
epistemic realism when there is empirical equivalence (at least in those cases
discussed in Section 5.1), avoids probabilistic incoherence when there are
nested theories, and supports realist commitments regarding induction, symme-
tries, dynamics, determinism, and explanation. With many theoretical beneﬁts
for only a small price, it is a great bargain.
6 Exactness
Another hallmark of laws is their exactness, in contrast to the pervasive vague-
ness we ﬁnd in ordinary language. A good way to understand something is to
study its opposite. In this section, I discuss a model of nomic vagueness and a
case study.
6.1 Nomic Exactness
Many predicates we use in everyday contexts do not have determinate bound-
aries of application. Is John bald when he has exactly 5250 hairs on his head?
There are determinate cases of “bald,” but there are also borderline cases of
“bald.” In other words, predicates such as “bald” are indeterminate: there are
individuals such that it is indeterminate whether they are bald.40 Moreover,
the boundaries between “bald” and “borderline bald” are also indeterminate.
There do not seem to be sharp boundaries anywhere, a phenomenon known as
40 There are subtleties about how best to characterize vagueness. For reviews on vagueness and
the sorites, see Keefe and Smith (1996), Sorensen (2018), and Hyde and Raffman (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

66
Philosophy of Physics
higher-order vagueness. Vagueness gives rise to many paradoxes (such as the
sorites) and serious challenges to classical logic.
We might expect that, at the level of fundamental physics, the kind of vague-
ness that “infects” ordinary language should disappear. That is, the fundamental
laws of physics, the predicates they invoke, and the properties they refer to
should be exact. The expectation is supported by the history of physics and the
ideal that physics should deliver an objective and precise description of nature.
All the paradigm cases of candidate fundamental laws of nature are not only
simple and universal, but also exact, in the sense that, for every class of worlds,
fundamental laws either determinately apply or determinately fail. Suppose the
fundamental laws are Newton’s equation of motion F = ma and law of univer-
sal gravitation F = Gm1m2/r2: there is no vagueness about whether a physical
history satisﬁes the laws. In other words, nomologically possible worlds form
a set.
Fundamental nomic exactness – the ideal (roughly) that fundamental laws
are exact – supports an important principle about the mathematical express-
ibility of fundamental laws. If some fundamental laws are vague, it will be
difﬁcult to describe them mathematically in a way that genuinely respects their
vagueness and does not impose sharp boundaries anywhere. The kind of math-
ematics we are used to, built from a set-theoretic foundation, does not lend
itself naturally to model the genuine fuzziness of vagueness. One could go fur-
ther: the language of mathematics and the language of fundamental physics are
supposed to be exemplars for the “ideal language,” a language that is exact,
suggested in Frege’s Begriffsschrift, Russell’s logical atomism, and Leibniz’s
characteristica universalis. The successful application of mathematical equa-
tions in formulating laws seems to leave no room for vagueness to enter into a
fundamental physical theory. If there is fundamental nomic vagueness, and if
vagueness is not completely mathematically expressible, then the fundamental
physical theory is not completely mathematically expressible.
6.2 Nomic Vagueness
How should we understand the exactness of paradigm fundamental laws of
nature? Let us start with the familiar case of Newtonian mechanics (with New-
tonian gravitation). Its laws can be expressed as a set of differential equations
that admit a determinate set of solutions. Those solutions specify all and only
the possible histories compatible with the laws; each solution represents a
nomologically possible world of the theory.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
67
Figure 8 The motion of a projectile in Newtonian mechanics. Picture from
Zátonyi Sándor, (ifj.) Fizped, CC BY-SA 3.0
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0>, via Wikimedia Commons
Consider the projectile motion illustrated in Figure 8. Suppose that the pro-
jectile has unit mass m and the gravitational acceleration is g. We can specify
the history of the projectile with the initial height, initial velocity, maximum
height, and distance traveled. There is a set of histories compatible with the
laws. For any history of the projectile, it is either determinately compatible
with the equations or determinately incompatible with the equations.
If W represents the space of all possible worlds, then the nomologically pos-
sible worlds of Newtonian mechanics corresponds to ΩNM, a proper subset in
W that has a determinate boundary, where the boundary is not in spacetime but
in modal space. For any possible world w ∈W, either w is contained in ΩNM or
it is not. For example, in Figure 9, w1 is inside but w2 is outside ΩN. In other
words, w1 is nomologically possible while w2 is nomologically impossible if
Newtonian laws are true and fundamental. Call ΩNM the domain of Newtonian
mechanics. We can capture an aspect of fundamental nomic exactness as the
exactness of the domain:
Domain Exactness A fundamental law L is domain-exact if and only if, (a)
for any world w ∈W, there is a determinate fact about whether w is contained
inside L’s domain of worlds, that is L’s domain has no borderline worlds, (b)
L’s domain, which may also be called L’s extension, forms a set of worlds, (c)
L’s domain is not susceptible to sorites paradoxes, and (d) L’s domain has no
borderline borderline worlds, no borderline borderline borderline worlds, and
so on.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

68
Philosophy of Physics
Figure 9 An exact fundamental law and a vague fundamental law
represented in modal space.
In contrast, a domain-vague law has none of (a)–(d). Intuitively, a domain-
vague law has a vague boundary in the following sense. In Figure 9, a domain-
vague law is pictured by a “collection” of worlds with a fuzzy boundary. Just
as a cloud does not have a clear starting point or a clear end point, the fuzzy
“collection” of worlds does not delineate the worlds into those that are clearly
compatible and those that are clearly incompatible with the law. To borrow
the words of Sainsbury (1990), a domain-vague law classiﬁes worlds “without
setting boundaries” in modal space. For example, w3 is clearly contained inside
the domain of the vague law, since it is so far away from the fuzzy boundary;
but w4 is not clearly contained inside the domain of the vague law, and neither
is it clearly outside; w2 is clearly outside the domain. More precisely, I propose
that we understand domain vagueness as the opposite of domain exactness:
Domain Vagueness A fundamental law L is domain-vague if and only if L
meets all four conditions below.
(a′) L has borderline worlds that are not determinately compatible with it. For
some world w ∈W, there fails to be a determinate fact about whether w is
contained inside L’s domain of worlds.
(b′) L lacks a well-deﬁned extension in terms of a set of models or a set of
nomological possibilities. Nomological necessities and possibilities turn
out to be vague.
(c′) L is susceptible to sorites paradoxes. We can start from a world that is
determinately lawful, proceed to gradually make small changes to the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
69
world along some relevant dimension, and eventually arrive at a world
that is determinately unlawful. But no particular small change makes the
difference between determinately lawful and determinately unlawful.
(d′) L possesses higher-order domain-vagueness. Whenever there are border-
line lawful worlds, there are borderline borderline lawful worlds, and so
on. It seems inappropriate to draw a sharp line anywhere. This reﬂects the
genuine fuzziness of domain vagueness.
Domain vagueness has features similar to those of ordinary-language vague-
ness. Domain exactness and domain vagueness capture the kind of fundamental
nomic exactness and fundamental nomic vagueness we are most interested in
here. (There is another kind of fundamental nomic vagueness that results from
vague objective probabilities or typicalities. See Goldstein (2012). Fenton-
Glynn (2019) offers an account of imprecise (but not vague) chances in the
best-system theory.)
6.3 A Case Study
The Past Hypothesis (PH) presents a case of fundamental nomic vagueness.
To begin, we review some reasons for taking PH to be a candidate fundamen-
tal law. Given its role in explaining the Second Law of Thermodynamics, we
have good reasons to take PH to be a law of nature. If PH is logically inde-
pendent from other fundamental laws, such as the dynamical laws of temporal
evolution, it cannot be derived from other fundamental laws. Hence, PH fails
the necessary condition for non-fundamental laws (Section 2.7) and has to be
a fundamental law.41
To see the vagueness of PH, we will examine several versions of PH. Here
is one version of PH that is sometimes proposed:
Super Weak Past Hypothesis (SWPH) At one temporal boundary of space-
time, the universe has very low entropy.
SWPH is obviously vague. How low is low? The collection of worlds with
“low-entropy” initial conditions has fuzzy boundaries in the space of possible
worlds. Hence, if SWPH were a fundamental law, then we would have domain
vagueness.
However, SWPH may not be detailed enough to explain all the tempo-
ral asymmetries. For example, in order to explain the temporal asymmetries
41 For more discussions about the lawful status of PH, see Albert (2000, 2015), Callender (2004),
Loewer (2007a), and Chen (2022b, 2023a).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

70
Philosophy of Physics
of records, intervention, and knowledge, Albert (2000) and Loewer (2020b)
suggest that we need a more speciﬁc condition that narrows down the ini-
tial microstates to a particular macrostate. One way to specify the macrostate
invokes exact numeral values for the macroscopic variables of the early uni-
verse. Let S0,T0,V0,D0 represent the exact values (or exact distributions) of
(low) entropy, (high) temperature, (small) volume, and (roughly uniform)
density distribution of the initial state. Consider the following version of PH:
Weak Past Hypothesis (WPH) At one temporal boundary of space-time, the
universe is in a particular macrostate M0, speciﬁed by the macroscopic
variables S0, T0, V0, and D0.
WPH is a stronger version of PH than SWPH. By picking out a particular
(low-entropy) macrostate M0 from many macrostates, WPH more severely con-
strains the initial state of the universe. WPH is also more precise than SWPH.
(Some may even complain that the WPH is too strong and too precise.) Unfor-
tunately, WPH is still vague. The collection of worlds compatible with WPH
has fuzzy boundaries. If WPH were a fundamental law, then we would still have
nomic (domain) vagueness: there are some worlds whose initial conditions are
borderline cases of being in the macrostate M0, speciﬁed by the macroscopic
variables S0,T0,V0, and D0.
The vagueness of WPH is revealed when we connect the macroscopic vari-
ables to the microscopic ones. Which set of microstates realizes the macrostate
M0? There is hardly any sharp boundary between those that do and those that do
not realize the macrostate. A macrostate, after all, is a coarse-grained descrip-
tion of the physical state. As with many cases of coarse-graining, there can be
borderline cases. (The vagueness of macrostates is similar to the vagueness of
“is bald” and “is a table.”) In fact, a macrostate can be vague even when it
is speciﬁed with precise values of the macro-variables. This point should be
familiar to those working in the foundations of statistical mechanics.42 How-
ever, it is worth spelling out the reasons to understand where and why such
vagueness exists.
There is a systematic way to think about the vagueness of the thermodynamic
macrostates in general and the vagueness of M0 in the WPH. In the Boltzman-
nian account of classical statistical mechanics, macrostates and microstates can
be understood as certain structures on phase space (Figure 10).
42 Commenting on the vagueness of the macrostate boundaries, Loewer (2007a) writes, “Obvi-
ously, the notion of macro state is vague and there are many precisiﬁcations that would serve
the purposes of statistical mechanics.” Goldstein et al. (2020) write, “there is some arbitrariness
in where exactly to ‘draw the boundaries.”’
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
71
Figure 10 A diagram of phase space where macrostates have fuzzy
boundaries. The macrostate M0 represents the initial low-entropy condition
described by WPH. X0 is the actual initial microstate. The picture is not drawn
to scale.
• Phase space: in classical mechanics, phase space is a 6N-dimensional space
that encodes all the microscopic possibilities of the system.
• Microstate: a point in phase space, which is a maximally speciﬁc descrip-
tion of a system. In classical mechanics, the microstate speciﬁes the
positions and the momenta of all particles.
• Macrostate: a region in phase space in which the points inside are mac-
roscopically similar, which is a less detailed and more coarse-grained
description of a system. The largest macrostate is thermal equilibrium.
• Fuzziness: the partition of phase space into macrostates is not exact; the
macrostates have fuzzy boundaries. Their boundaries become exact only
given some choices of the “C-parameters,” including the size of cells for
coarse-graining and the correspondence between distribution functions and
macroscopic variables.
• Entropy: S(x) = kBlog|M(x)|, where | · | denotes the standard volume mea-
sure in phase space. Because of Fuzziness, in general, the (Boltzmann)
entropy of a system is not exact.
We can translate WPH into the language of phase space: at one temporal bound-
ary of space-time, the microstate of the universe X0 lies inside a particular
macrostate M0 that has low volume in phase space.
Fuzziness is crucial for understanding the vagueness and higher-order vague-
ness of macrostates. Without specifying the exact values (or exact ranges of
values) of the C-parameters, the macrostates have fuzzy boundaries: some
microstates are borderline cases for certain macrostates, some are borderline
borderline cases, and so on. The fuzzy boundary of M0 illustrates the existence
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

72
Philosophy of Physics
of borderline microstates and higher-order vagueness. There will be a precise
identiﬁcation of macrostates with sets of microstates only when we exactly
specify the C-parameters (or their ranges). In other words, there is a precise
partition of microstates on phase space into regions that are macroscopically
similar (macrostates) only when we make some arbitrary choices about what
the C-parameters are. In such situations, the WPH macrostate M0 would cor-
respond to an exact set Γ0 on phase space, and the initial microstate has to be
contained in Γ0.
However, proponents of the WPH do not specify a precise set. A precise
set Γ0 would require more precision than is given in statistical mechanics – it
requires the speciﬁc values of the coarse-grained cells and the speciﬁc corre-
spondence with distribution functions. (In the standard quantum case, it also
requires the precise cut-off threshold for when a superposition belongs to a
macrostate.) The precise values of the C-parameters could be added to the
theory to make WPH into a precise statement (which I call the Strong Past
Hypothesis in Chen (2022b)). But they are nowhere to be found in the proposal,
and rightly so.43
Some choices of the C-parameters are clearly unacceptable. If the coarse-
graining cells are too large, they cannot reﬂect the variations in the values of
macroscopic variables; if the coarse-graining cells are too small, they may not
contain enough gas molecules to be statistically signiﬁcant. Hence, they have to
be macroscopically small but microscopically large (Albert (2000) p.44(fn.5)
and Goldstein et al. (2020)). However, if we were to make the parameters (or the
ranges of parameters) more and more precise, beyond a certain point, any extra
precision in the choice would seem completely arbitrary. They correspond to
how large the cells are and which function is the correct one when deﬁning the
relation between temperature and sets of microstates. That does not seem to cor-
respond to any objective facts in the world. (How large is large enough and how
small is small enough?) In this respect, the arbitrariness in precise C-parameters
is quite unlike that in the fundamental dynamical constants. (In Chen (2022b),
I discuss their differences in terms of a theoretical virtue called “traceability.”)
Moreover, not only do we lack precise parameters, we also lack a precise set of
permissible parameters (hence no exact ranges of values for the C-parameters).
There shouldn’t be sharp boundaries anywhere. Suppose size m is borderline
large enough and size n is determinately large enough. Small changes from m
will eventually get us to n, but it is implausible that there is a sharp transition
from borderline large enough to determinately large enough. Similarly, there
43 For example, see descriptions of SWPH and WPH in Goldstein (2001), Albert (2000), and
Carroll (2010).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
73
shouldn’t be a sharp transition between borderline large enough to borderline
borderline large enough, and so on. That is higher-order vagueness.
Because of higher-order vagueness, we need to take standard mathemati-
cal representation of WPH with a grain of salt. The macroscopic variables –
adjustable parameters in WPH – need to be coarse-grained enough to respect
the vagueness. For example, we may represent the temperature of M0 as 1032
degrees Kelvin. But temperature does not have the exactness of real numbers.
A more careful way to represent the vague temperature should be “1032-ish
degrees Kelvin,” where the “-ish” qualiﬁer signiﬁes that temperature is vague
and the number 1032 is only an imperfect mathematical representation.44 Its
exactness is artiﬁcial. Hence, WPH should be characterized as a macrostate M0
speciﬁed by S0-ish entropy, T0-ish temperature, and so on.
The vagueness here is appropriate, since macroscopic variables only make
sense when there are enough degrees of freedom (such as a large number of
particles). In practice, however, such vagueness rarely matters: there will be
enough margins such that to explain the thermodynamic phenomena, which
are themselves vague, we do not need the extra exactness. The vagueness dis-
appears for all practical purposes. Nevertheless, WPH is a genuine case of
fundamental nomic vagueness and it is a possibility to take seriously.
6.4 Summary
I have suggested that fundamental laws of physics can be vague, and PH pro-
vides an example. However, nomic vagueness may be an artifact of classical
mechanics and can be naturally avoided in quantum mechanics (Chen 2022b,
Sect. 4). Hence, nomic exactness may be a metaphysically contingent feature
of the universe that depends on the actual laws.
7 Objectivity
The ﬁnal hallmark of laws I want to discuss is their objectivity. Laws are objec-
tive features of reality that do not depend on our beliefs or desires. They are
mind-independent. However, the metaphysics of laws can make a difference to
how we understand their objectivity.
7.1 Ratbag Idealism
Humeanism and non-Humeanism offer different understandings about the
objectivity of laws. Let us focus on BSA and MinP. On BSA, assuming that
we are relying on the right theoretical virtues and have appropriate access to
44 Thanks to Alan Hájek for discussions here.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

74
Philosophy of Physics
the mosaic, the best summaries will be the true laws. There is a certain sense
that, in principle, we are guaranteed to be right. On MinP, even if we rely on
the correct theoretical virtues and the correct scientiﬁc methodology, we can
still be mistaken about what the true laws are. Epistemic guides are defeasible
and fallible indicators for truth: they do not guarantee that we ﬁnd the true laws
(although we may be rational to expect to ﬁnd them). There are fundamental,
objective, and mind-independent facts about which laws govern the world, and
we can be wrong about them. This is not a bug but a feature of MinP, sympto-
matic of the robust kind of realism that we endorse. For realists, this is exactly
where they should end up; fallibility about the fundamental reality is a badge
of honor.
On BSA, since the best systematization is constitutive of lawhood, and what
counts as best may depend on us, lawhood can become mind-dependent. In a
passage about “ratbag idealism,” Lewis (1994) discusses this worry and tries
to offer a solution:
The worst problem about the best-system analysis is that when we ask where
the standards of simplicity and strength and balance come from, the answer
may seem to be that they come from us. Now, some ratbag idealist might say
that if we don’t like the misfortunes that the laws of nature visit upon us, we
can change the laws – in fact, we can make them always have been differ-
ent – just by changing the way we think! (Talk about the power of positive
thinking.) It would be very bad if my analysis endorsed such lunacy. . . .
The real answer lies elsewhere: if nature is kind to us, the problem needn’t
arise. . . . If nature is kind, the best system will be robustly best – so far ahead
of its rivals that it will come out ﬁrst under any standards of simplicity and
strength and balance. We have no guarantee that nature is kind in this way,
but no evidence that it isn’t. It’s a reasonable hope. Perhaps we presuppose
it in our thinking about law. I can admit that if nature were unkind, and if
disagreeing rival systems were running neck-and-neck, then lawhood might
be a psychological matter, and that would be very peculiar. (p.479)
For Lewis, the solution is conditionalized on the hope that nature is kind to
us in this special way: the best summary of the mosaic will be far better than
its rivals. That may be a generous assumption, but it seems consistent with
scientiﬁc practice.
In contrast, the worry about ratbag idealism does not arise on MinP; the
objectivity of laws can be secured without appealing to the hope that nature
is kind to us. On MinP, fundamental laws are what they are irrespective of
our psychology and judgments of simplicity and informativeness. Even though
the epistemic guides provide some guidance for discovering and evaluating
them, they do not guarantee arrival at the true fundamental laws. Moreo-
ver, changing our psychology or judgments will not change which facts are
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
75
fundamental laws. Hence, MinP respects our conviction about the objectivity
and mind-independence of fundamental laws.
7.2 A Package Deal
Despite the difference regarding the metaphysical objectivity of laws, there is
a convergence in methodological principles underlying MinP and BSA, which
may be traced back to epistemic principles that are somewhat mind-dependent.
In Section 7.3, we discuss the epistemic version of ratbag idealism.
So far we have focused on fundamental laws. Fundamental laws are concep-
tually connected to fundamental ontology (fundamental material entities and
their properties). On MinP, we regard both as metaphysical primitives and eval-
uate them in a package. In this respect, MinP is similar to Loewer’s Package
Deal Account (PDA), a descendent of BSA that regards both as co-equal ele-
ments of a package deal (Loewer 2020c, 2021), but they also have signiﬁcant
differences.
On PDA, we look for the best systematization in terms of a package of
laws and (material) ontology; the package is supervenient on the actual world.
Thus, fundamental laws and fundamental ontology enter the discussion in the
same way, at the same place, and on the same level. MinP shares this feature,
although fundamental ontology and fundamental laws are merely discovered
by us and not made by us or dependent on us. On PDA, given the actual
world (of which we have very limited knowledge), we evaluate different pack-
ages of laws + ontology, and we evaluate them based on our actual scientiﬁc
practice. Hence, there will be some degree of relativism. Relative to differ-
ent scientiﬁc practice or a different set of scientists, the judgement as to the
actual laws + ontology would have been different. Consequently on PDA, fun-
damental laws and fundamental ontology are dependent on us in a signiﬁcant
way.
On MinP, we may use the best package-deal systematization as a guide to
discover the laws and ontology; given the actual world (of which we have very
limited knowledge), we evaluate different packages of laws + ontology, and we
evaluate them based on our actual scientiﬁc practice. Hence, there will be some
degree of uncertainty. Relative to different scientiﬁc practice or a different set
of scientists, the judgement as to the actual laws + ontology would have been
different. Still, what they are is metaphysically independent of our belief and
practice.
Here I quote a passage from Loewer (2021). Although we disagree on
the metaphysics, we agree on how the enterprise of physics should be
understood:
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

76
Philosophy of Physics
The best way of understanding the enterprise of physics is that it begins,
as Quine says, “in the middle” with the investigation of the motions of
macroscopic material objects e.g., planets, projectiles, pendula, pointers, and
so on. Physics advances by proposing theories that include laws that explain
the motions of macroscopic objects and their parts. These theories may (and
often do) introduce ontology, properties/relations, and laws beyond macro-
scopic ones with which it began and go onto to posit laws that explain their
behaviors. . . . . . The ultimate goal of this process is the discovery of a theory
of everything (TOE) that speciﬁes a fundamental ontology and fundamental
laws that that cover not only the motions of macroscopic objects with which
physics began but also whatever additional ontology and quantities that have
been introduced along the way. (pp. 30–31)
From the perspective of MinP, this is an excellent description of how funda-
mental laws and ontology are discovered – in a package.
7.3 Humeanism and Non-Humeanism
Let us return to the problem of ratbag idealism. (Hall 2009, Section 5.6) sug-
gests that, facing the problem that the simplicity criterion in the BSA is too
subjective, Lewis and other Humeans can “perform a nifty judo move.” If
non-Humeans regard simplicity as an epistemic guide to laws, it follows that
“central facts of normative epistemology are also up to us.” Hall suggests that
this is more objectionable than the ratbag idealism of BSA. A defender of BSA
may reasonably embrace ratbag idealism and take laws to be pragmatic tools
to structure our investigation of the world. With that viewpoint, we can expect
that what laws are is somewhat up to us. However, there is no reason on non-
Humeanism why fundamental epistemological and normative facts should be
up to us. So the non-Humeans face a worse problem of ratbag idealism.
My analysis in Section 5 suggests that both Humeans and non-Humeans need
to adopt fairly strong epistemological principles such as PNS. On Humeanism,
there are two independent appeals to simplicity (among other theoretical
virtues). The metaphysical analysis of laws with BSA requires laws be no
more complicated than the mosaic. But not all mosaics support simple laws;
in fact, many metaphysically possible mosaics may not have any regularity
that deserves the label of laws. To believe, on BSA, that simple laws exist is
to believe that the actual mosaic is very special. The epistemic guide to sim-
ple laws serves as an epistemic and normative restriction of possible candidate
mosaics Humeans ought to consider. Why the Humean mosaic should be so
nice on BSA is basically the same question as why fundamental constraints
should be so simple on MinP. So on both BSA and MinP, epistemological and
normative facts are up to us. Humeans cannot avoid the problem that “central
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Laws of Physics
77
facts of normative epistemology” may be up to us, unless they retreat to anti-
realism about the mosaic. Insofar as they also need PNS, Humeans cannot
perform the nifty judo move without undermining their own position.
Moreover, the analysis reveals a deeper difference between Humeanism and
non-Humeanism. On MinP, we should assume (by PNS) that certain fundamen-
tal facts of the world are simple. In contrast, on BSA, we should assume (by
PNS) that certain superﬁcial facts of the world (best-system laws), grounded in
a complex fundamental reality, are simple. The assumption on MinP, it seems
to me, is more believable than the corresponding one on BSA. It is easier to
believe that nature at some deep level is simple. It is harder to believe that
nature at some deep level is complicated in a certain way to give rise to a sim-
ple appearance. Of course, this will not persuade the committed Humeans, for
presumably they are willing to accept the consequence. However, for many
people on the fence or coming to the debate for the ﬁrst time, the choice between
Humeanism and non-Humeanism should be clear.45
7.4 Summary
On non-Humeanism such as MinP, laws are objective. On Humeanism, in con-
trast, we need further assumptions about the mosaic to maintain their objectivity
and to reject ratbag idealism. Insofar as there is an epistemic version of rat-
bag idealism concerning the objectivity of epistemic guides, it is not a special
problem for non-Humeanism.
8 Conclusion
Laws occupy a central place in a systematic philosophy of the physical world.
They can be regarded as fundamental facts that govern the universe by con-
straining its physical possibilities. With this minimal primitivist account, one
accepts that laws transcend the concrete physical reality they govern, but need
not presume a fundamental direction of time or require a fundamental ontology
of universals, dispositions, or counterfactuals. The account allows one to con-
template a variety of candidate fundamental laws, and to understand the marks
of the nomic as arising from methodological and epistemological principles. It
is not the only viewpoint available, but it is one I recommend to anyone look-
ing for an account that illuminates metaphysics but is not unduly constrained
by it.
45 See also Chen and Goldstein 2022 (pp.57–58). This argument requires more space to develop,
which I leave to future work. I am indebted to discussions with Tyler Hildebrand and Boris
Kment about this point.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

78
Philosophy of Physics
In this Element, we have surveyed some of the considerations, concepts, and
tools in philosophical discussions about laws and several issues regarding the
metaphysics and the epistemology of laws. There are many more questions to
explore, such as the following:
• What is a good criterion for determining when two laws are equivalent?
• How to develop a satisfactory account of probabilistic laws?
• How are laws of physics related to laws of the special sciences (insofar as
the latter employ laws)?
• How should different accounts of laws inform theories of causation and
counterfactuals?
I hope this Element has provided the readers with a philosophical foundation to
continue thinking about laws of physics and the many topics they are connected
to.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
Adlam, E. (2022a). Determinism beyond time evolution. European Journal for
Philosophy of Science, 12(4):73.
Adlam, E. (2022b). Laws of nature as constraints. Foundations of Physics,
52(1):28.
Albert, D. Z. (2000). Time and Chance. Harvard University Press.
Albert, D. Z. (2015). After Physics. Harvard University Press.
Albert, D. Z. (2022). Physical laws and physical things (manuscript).
Armstrong, D. M. (1983). What Is a Law of Nature? Cambridge University
Press.
Arnowitt, R., Deser, S., and Misner, C. W. (1962). The dynamics of gen-
eral relativity. In Witten, L., editor, Gravitation: An Introduction to Current
Research, pages 227–264. New York: Wiley.
Ashtekar, A. and Gupt, B. (2016a). Initial conditions for cosmological pertur-
bations. Classical and Quantum Gravity, 34(3):035004.
Ashtekar, A. and Gupt, B. (2016b). Quantum gravity in the sky: Interplay
between fundamental theory and observations. Classical and Quantum
Gravity, 34(1):014002.
Barrett, J. A. (1995). The distribution postulate in Bohm’s theory. Topoi,
14(1):45–54.
Barrett, J. A. and Chen, E. K. (2023). Algorithmic randomness and probabilistic
laws. arXiv preprint:2303.01411.
Beebee, H. (2000). The non-governing conception of laws of nature. Philoso-
phy and Phenomenological Research, 61:571–594.
Bell, J. S. (2004). Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Physics: Collected
Papers on Quantum Philosophy. Cambridge University Press.
Ben-Menahem, Y. (2018). Causation in Science. Princeton University Press.
Bhogal, H. (2017). Minimal anti-Humeanism. Australasian Journal of Philos-
ophy, 95(3):447–460.
Bhogal, H. and Perry, Z. (2017). What the Humean should say about entangle-
ment. Noûs, 51(1):74–94.
Bird, A. (2007). Nature’s Metaphysics: Laws and Properties. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Builes, D. (2022). The ineffability of induction. Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research, 104(1):129–149.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

80
References
Callender, C. (2004). Measures, explanations and the past: Should “special”
initial conditions be explained? The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 55(2):195–217.
Callender, C. (2015). One world, one beable. Synthese, 192(10):3153–3177.
Callender, C. (2017). What Makes Time Special? Oxford University Press.
Carroll, J. W. (1994). Laws of Nature. Cambridge University Press.
Carroll, J. W. (2018). Becoming Humean. In Ott, W. and Patton, L., editors,
Laws of Nature, pages 122–138. Oxford University Press.
Carroll, S. (2010). From Eternity to Here: The Quest for the Ultimate Theory
of Time. Penguin.
Cartwright, N. (1983). How the Laws of Physics Lie. Oxford University Press.
Cartwright, N. (1994). Nature’s Capacities and Their Measurement. Oxford
University Press.
Chakravartty, A. (2017). Scientiﬁc realism. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-
sity, Summer 2017 edition.
Chen, E. K. (2021a). Quantum mechanics in a time-asymmetric universe: On
the nature of the initial quantum state. The British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 72(4):1155–1183. doi.org/10.1093/bjps/axy068.
Chen, E. K. (2021b). The cosmic void. In Bernstein, S. and Goldschmidt, T.,
editors, Non-being: New Essays on the Metaphysics of Nonexistence, pages
115–138. Oxford University Press.
Chen, E. K. (2022a). From time asymmetry to quantum entanglement: The
Humean uniﬁcation. Noûs, 56:227–255.
Chen, E. K. (2022b). Fundamental nomic vagueness. The Philosophical
Review, 131(1) 1–49.
Chen, E. K. (2022c). Strong determinism. Philosophers’ Imprint, forthcoming,
arXiv:2203.02886.
Chen, E. K. (2023a). The past hypothesis and the nature of physical laws. In
Loewer, B., Eric Winsberg and Weslake, B., editors, The Probability Map of
the Universe: Essays on David Albert’s Time and Chance, pages 204–248.
Harvard University Press.
Chen, E. K. (2023b). The preordained quantum universe. Nature, 624:513–515.
Chen, E. K. (2023c). The simplicity of physical laws. arXiv preprint:
2210.08143.
Chen, E. K. (2023d). The Wentaculus: Density matrix realism meets the arrow
of time. In Bassi, A., Goldstein, S., Roderich Tumulka and Zanghì, N., edi-
tors, Physics and the Nature of Reality: Essays in Memory of Detlef Dürr.
Springer, forthcoming.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
81
Chen, E. K. and Goldstein, S. (2022). Governing without a fundamental direc-
tion of time: Minimal primitivism about laws of nature. In Ben-Menahem,
Y., editor, Rethinking the Concept of Law of Nature, pages 21–64. Springer.
Choi, S. and Fara, M. (2021). Dispositions. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University, Spring 2021 edition.
Cohen, J. and Callender, C. (2009). A better best system account of lawhood.
Philosophical Studies, 145(1):1–34.
Deckert, D.-A. (2010). Electrodynamic Absorber Theory: A Mathematical
Study. PhD thesis, Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich.
Demarest, H. (2017). Powerful properties, powerless laws. In Jacobs, J. D.,
editor, Causal Powers, pages 38–53. Oxford University Press Oxford.
Demarest, H. (2021). Powers, best systems, and explanation. Manuscript.
Dirac, P. A. (1937). The cosmological constants. Nature, 139(3512):323.
Dorst, C. (2019). Towards a best predictive system account of laws of nature.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 70(3):877–900.
Dorst, C. (2023). Productive laws in relativistic spacetimes. Philosophers’
Imprint (forthcoming).
Dretske, F. (1977). Laws of nature. Philosophy of Science, 44:248–268.
Dürr, D., Goldstein, S., and Zanghì, N. (1992). Quantum equilibrium and the
origin of absolute uncertainty. Journal of Statistical Physics, 67(5–6):843–
907.
Earman, J. (1986). A Primer on Determinism, volume 32. D. Reidel.
Earman, J. and Roberts, J. T. (2005). Contact with the nomic: A challenge
for deniers of Humean supervenience about laws of nature part II: The
epistemological argument for Humean supervenience. Philosophy and Phe-
nomenological Research, 71(2):253–286.
Elga, A. (2004). Inﬁnitesimal chances and the laws of nature. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy, 82(1):67–76.
Ellis, B. (2001). Scientiﬁc Essentialism. Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, B. (2014). The Philosophy of Nature: A Guide to the New Essentialism.
Routledge.
Emery, N. (2019). Laws and their instances. Philosophical Studies, 176(6):
1535–1561.
Emery, N. (2023). Naturalism Beyond the Limits of Science: How Scien-
tiﬁc Methodology Can and Should Shape Philosophical Theorizing. Oxford
University Press.
Esfeld, M. (2014). Quantum Humeanism, or: Physicalism without properties.
The Philosophical Quarterly, 64(256):453–470.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

82
References
Fenton-Glynn, L. (2019). Imprecise chance and the best system analysis.
Philosophers’ Imprint, 19(23):1–44.
Fernandes, A. (2023). The Temporal Asymmetry of Causation. Cambridge
University Press.
Foster, J. (2004). The Divine Lawmaker: Lectures on Induction, Laws of Nature,
and the Existence of God. Clarendon Press.
Friederich, S. and Evans, P. W. (2019). Retrocausality in quantum mechan-
ics. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Summer 2019 edition.
Ghirardi, G. (2018). Collapse theories. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-
sity, Fall 2018 edition.
Ghirardi, G., Rimini, A., and Weber, T. (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for micro-
scopic and macroscopic systems. Physical Review D, 34(2):470.
Goldstein, S. (2001). Boltzmann’s approach to statistical mechanics. In Bric-
mont, J., Dürr, D., Galavotti, M. C., et al., editors, Chance in Physics, pages
39–54. Springer.
Goldstein, S. (2012). Typicality and notions of probability in physics. In
Yemima Ben-Menahem and Meir Hemmo, editors, Probability in physics,
pages 59–71. Springer.
Goldstein, S. (2017). Bohmian mechanics. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-
sity, Summer 2017 edition.
Goldstein, S., Lebowitz, J. L., Tumulka, R., and Zanghì, N. (2020). Gibbs
and Boltzmann entropy in classical and quantum mechanics. In Allori,
V., editor, Statistical Mechanics and Scientiﬁc Explanation: Determinism,
Indeterminism and Laws of Nature, pages 519–581. World Scientiﬁc.
Hall, N. (2004). Two concepts of causation. In Collins, J., Hall, N., and
Paul, L., editors, Causation and Counterfactuals, pages 225–276. MIT
Press.
Hall, N. (2009). Humean reductionism about laws of nature. Manuscript.
http://philpapers.org/rec/HALHRA.
Hall, N. (2015). Humean reductionism about laws of nature. In Barry Loewer
and Jonathan Schaffer, editors, A companion to David Lewis, pages 262–277.
John Wiley & Sons.
Hartle, J. (1996). Scientiﬁc knowledge from the perspective of quantum cos-
mology. In John L. Casti and Anders Karlqvist, editors, Boundaries and
Barriers: On the Limits to Scientiﬁc Knowledge. Addison-Wesley; arXiv:gr-
qc/9601046.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
83
Hartle, J. B. (1997). Quantum cosmology: Problems for the 21st century. In K.
Kikkawa, Hiroshi Kunitomo, and H. Ohtsubo, editors, Physics in the 21st
century, pages 179–199. World Scientiﬁc; arXiv:gr-qc/9701022.
Hartle, J. B. and Hawking, S. W. (1983). Wave function of the universe.
Physical Review D, 28(12):2960–2975.
Henderson, L. (2022). The problem of induction. In Zalta, E. N. and Nodelman,
U., editors, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research
Lab, Stanford University, Winter 2022 edition.
Henderson, L. (2023). On the mutual exclusivity of competing hypotheses. In
Schupbach, J. N. and Glass, D. H., editors, Conjunctive Explanations: The
Nature, Epistemology, and Psychology of Explanatory Multiplicity, pages
170–194. Routledge.
Hicks, M. T. (2018). Dynamic Humeanism. The British Journal for the Philos-
ophy of Science, 69(4): 983–1007.
Hicks, M. T. and Schaer, J. (2017). Derivative properties in fundamental laws.
The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 68(2):411–450.
Hicks, M. T., Jaag, S., and Loew, C., editors (2023). Humean Laws for Humean
Agents. Oxford University Press.
Hildebrand, T. (2013). Can primitive laws explain? Philosophers’ Imprint,
13:1–15.
Hildebrand, T. (2022). Laws of Nature. Cambridge University Press.
Hildebrand, T. and Metcalf, T. (2021). The nomological argument for the
existence of God. Noûs 56(2):443–472.
Hitchcock, C. (2023). Causal Models. In Zalta, E. N. and Nodelman, U., edi-
tors, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University, Spring 2023 edition.
Hoefer, C. (2002). Freedom from the inside out. Royal Institute of Philosophy
Supplements, 50:201–222.
Hoefer, C. (2016). Causal determinism. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-
sity, Spring 2016 edition.
Hyde, D. and Raffman, D. (2018). Sorites paradox. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University, Summer 2018 edition.
Ismael, J. (2016). How Physics Makes Us Free. Oxford University Press.
Ismael, J. T. (2009). Probability in deterministic physics. The Journal of
Philosophy, 106(2):89–108.
Jaag, S. and Loew, C. (2020). Making best systems best for us. Synthese,
197:2525–2550.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

84
References
Keefe, R. and Smith, P. (1996). Introduction. In Keefe, R. and Smith, P., editors,
Vagueness: A Reader, pages 1–57. MIT Press.
Kimpton-Nye, S. (2017). Humean laws in an unHumean world. Journal of the
American Philosophical Association, 3(2):129–147.
Kraut, R. (2017). Plato. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, Fall 2017
edition.
Kutach, D. N. (2002). The entropy theory of counterfactuals. Philosophy of
Science, 69(1):82–104.
Lange, M. (1999). Laws, counterfactuals, stability, and degrees of lawhood.
Philosophy of Science, 66(2):243–267.
Lange, M. (2005). Laws and their stability. Synthese, 144(3):415–432.
Lange, M. (2009). Laws and Lawmakers: Science, Metaphysics, and the Laws
of Nature. Oxford University Press.
Lange, M. (2013). Grounding, scientiﬁc explanation, and Humean laws. Phil-
osophical Studies, 164(1):255–261.
Lange, M. (2016). Because without Cause: Non-casual Explanations in Science
and Mathematics. Oxford University Press.
Lazarovici, D. (2018). Against ﬁelds. European Journal for Philosophy of
Science, 8(2):145–170.
Lazarovici, D. (2020). Typical Humean worlds have no laws. Manuscript.
philsci-archive.pitt.edu/17469/.
Lewis, D. (1973). Counterfactuals. Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1979). Counterfactual dependence and time’s arrow. Noûs, 13:455–
476.
Lewis, D. (1980). A subjectivist’s guide to objective chance. In Jeffrey, R. C.,
editor, Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability, volume 2, pages 263–293.
University of California Press.
Lewis, D. (1983). New work for a theory of universals. Australasian Journal
of Philosophy, 61:343–377.
Lewis, D. (1986). Philosophical Papers II. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1994). Humean supervenience debugged. Mind, 103:473–490.
Loewer, B. (2001). Determinism and chance. Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics,
32(4):609–620.
Loewer, B. (2007a). Counterfactuals and the second law. In Price, H. and Corry,
R., editors, Causation, Physics, and the Constitution of Reality: Russell’s
Republic Revisited, pages 293–326. Oxford University Press.
Loewer, B. (2007b). Laws and natural properties. Philosophical Topics,
35(1/2):313–328.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
85
Loewer, B. (2012). Two accounts of laws and time. Philosophical Studies,
160(1):115–137.
Loewer, B. (2020a). The consequence argument meets the Mentaculus. In
Loewer, B., Winsberg, E., Brad Weslake, editor, Time’s Arrows and the
Probability Structure of the world. Harvard University Press, forthcoming.
Loewer, B. (2020b). The Mentaculus vision. In Allori, V., editor, Statisti-
cal Mechanics and Scientiﬁc Explanation: Determinism, Indeterminism and
Laws of Nature, pages 3–29. World Scientiﬁc.
Loewer, B. (2020c). The package deal account of laws and properties (pda).
Synthese, 199(1–2):1065–1089.
Loewer, B. (2021). What breathes ﬁre into the equations. Manuscript.
Manchak, J. (2020). Global Spacetime Structure. Cambridge University
Press.
Manchak, J. B. (2009). Can we know the global structure of spacetime? Stud-
ies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics, 40(1):53–56.
Maudlin, T. (2007). The Metaphysics within Physics. Oxford University Press.
Maudlin, T. (2019). Philosophy of Physics: Quantum Theory, volume 9.
Princeton University Press.
McKenzie, K. (2022). Fundamentality and Grounding. Cambridge University
Press.
Meacham, C. J. (2023). The nomic likelihood account of laws. Ergo, 9, 230–
284.
Miller, E. (2014). Quantum entanglement, Bohmian mechanics, and Humean
supervenience. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 92(3):567–583.
Montague, R. (1974). Formal Philosophy: Selected Papers of Richard Mon-
tague. Yale University Press.
Mumford, S. (2004). Laws in Nature. Routledge.
Myrvold, W. (2017). Philosophical issues in quantum theory. In Zalta, E. N.,
editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research
Lab, Stanford University, Spring 2017 edition.
North, J. (2021). Physics, Structure, and Reality. Oxford University Press.
Norton, J. D. (2019). The Hole Argument. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford Univer-
sity, Summer 2019 edition.
Page, D. N. (2009). Symmetric-bounce quantum state of the universe. Journal
of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, 2009(9):026.
Penrose, R. (1974). The role of aesthetics in pure and applied mathemati-
cal research. Bulletin of the Institute of Mathematics and Its Applications,
10:266–271.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

86
References
Penrose, R. (1979). Singularities and time-asymmetry. In Hawking, S. and
Israel, W., editors, General Relativity, pages 581–638. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Penrose, R. (1989). The Emperor’s New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds,
and the Laws of Physics. Oxford University Press.
Roberts, J. T. (2008). The Law-Governed Universe. Oxford University Press.
Rovelli, C. (2019). Where was past low-entropy? Entropy, 21(5):466.
Russell, B. (1913). On the notion of cause. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society, 13:1–26.
Sainsbury, R. M. (1990). Concepts without boundaries. Inaugural Lecture
Given at King’s College London on 6 November 1990.
Schaffer, J. (2016). It is the business of laws to govern. dialectica, 70(4):577–
588.
Sorensen, R. (2018). Vagueness. In Zalta, E. N., editor, The Stanford Ency-
clopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University,
Summer 2018 edition.
Sutherland, R. I. (2008). Causally symmetric Bohm model. Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 39(4):782–805.
Tooley, M. (1977). The nature of laws. Canadian Journal of Philosophy,
7(4):667–698.
Uzan, J.-P. (2011). Varying constants, gravitation and cosmology. Living
Reviews in Relativity, 14(1):1–155.
Vetter, B. (2015). Potentiality: From Dispositions to Modality. Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Wallace, D. (2010). Gravity, entropy, and cosmology: In search of clarity. The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 513–540.
Weatherall, J. O. (2019a). Part 1: Theoretical equivalence in physics. Philoso-
phy Compass, 14(5):e12592.
Weatherall, J. O. (2019b). Part 2: Theoretical equivalence in physics. Philoso-
phy Compass, 14(5):e12591.
Weinberg, S. (1992). Dreams of a Final Theory: The Search for the Fundamen-
tal Laws of Nature. Pantheon.
Wheeler, J. A. and Feynman, R. P. (1945). Interaction with the absorber as the
mechanism of radiation. Reviews of Modern Physics, 17(2–3):157.
Wheeler, J. A. and Feynman, R. P. (1949). Classical electrodynamics in terms
of direct interparticle action. Reviews of Modern Physics, 21(3):425.
Wigner, E. (1985). Events, laws of nature, and invariance principles. In
Zichichi, A., editor, How Far Are We from the Gauge Forces – Proceedings
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

References
87
of the 21st Course of the International School of Subnuclear Physics, Aug
3–14, 1983, pages 699–708. Plenum.
Wigner, E. P. (1964). Symmetry and conservation laws. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 51(5):956–
965.
Williams, P. (2023). Philosophy of Particle Physics. Cambridge University
Press.
Woodward, J. and Ross, L. (2021). Scientiﬁc Explanation. In Zalta, E. N., edi-
tor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab,
Stanford University, Summer 2021 edition.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Sheldon Goldstein for invaluable discussions about laws of
physics over many years. The topics in this Element are directly related to
those explored in our joint paper on minimal primitivism (MinP). I thank Shelly
Yiran Shi and Bosco Garcia for their research assistance and helpful comments
on several earlier drafts, Tyler Hildebrand for stimulating discussions and valu-
able feedback, two anonymous reviewers of Cambridge University Press and
the editor James Owen Weatherall for insightful comments. I am also grateful
to Emily Adlam, David Albert, Jeffrey Barrett, Craig Callender, Eugene Chua,
Christopher Dorst, Nina Emery, Ned Hall, James Hartle, Boris Kment, Marc
Lange, Barry Loewer, Tim Maudlin, Chris Meacham, Kerry McKenzie, John
Roberts, Carlo Rovelli, Charles Sebens, Elliott Sober, Eric Watkins, partici-
pants in the lecture series “Laws of Nature” at Wuhan University in September
2023 and the graduate seminar “Laws and Randomness” at UC San Diego in
fall 2023. This project is supported by an Academic Senate Grant from UC San
Diego.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The Philosophy of Physics
James Owen Weatherall
University of California, Irvine
James Owen Weatherall is Professor of Logic and Philosophy of Science at the University
of California, Irvine. He is the author, with Cailin O’Connor, of The Misinformation Age:
How False Beliefs Spread (Yale, 2019), which was selected as a New York Times Editors’
Choice and Recommended Reading by Scientific American. His previous books were
Void: The Strange Physics of Nothing (Yale, 2016) and the New York Times bestseller The
Physics of Wall Street: A Brief History of Predicting the Unpredictable (Houghton Mifflin
Harcourt, 2013). He has published approximately fifty peer-reviewed research articles in
journals in leading physics and philosophy of science journals and has delivered over 100
invited academic talks and public lectures.
About the Series
This Cambridge Elements series provides concise and structured introductions to all the
central topics in the philosophy of physics. The Elements in the series are written by
distinguished senior scholars and bright junior scholars with relevant expertise,
producing balanced, comprehensive coverage of multiple perspectives in the philosophy
of physics.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The Philosophy of Physics
Elements in the Series
Structure and Equivalence
Neil Dewar
Emergence and Reduction in Physics
Patricia Palacios
The Classical–Quantum Correspondence
Benjamin H. Feintzeig
Idealizations in Physics
Elay Shech
The Temporal Asymmetry of Causation
Alison Fernandes
Special Relativity
James Read
Philosophy of Particle Physics
Porter Williams
Foundations of Statistical Mechanics
Roman Frigg and Charlotte Werndl
From Randomness and Entropy to the Arrow of Time
Lena Zuchowski
Philosophy of Physical Magnitudes
Niels C. M. Martens
The Philosophy of Symmetry
Nicholas Joshua Yii Wye Teh
Laws of Physics
Eddy Keming Chen
A full series listing is available at: www.cambridge.org/EPPH
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009026390 Published online by Cambridge University Press

