CHILDHOOD
SEXUAL ABUSE
A Reference Handbook

Other Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Conflicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Cults, James R. Lewis
Forest Fires, Philip N. Omi
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine, III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Hate Crimes, Donald Altschiller
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Hurricanes, Patrick J. Fitzpatrick
Illicit Trafficking, Robert J. Kelly, Jess Maghan, Joseph DiSerio
International Environmental Disputes, Aaron Schwabach
Invasion of Privacy, Kevin M. Keenan
Juvenile Justice, Donald J. Shoemaker and Timothy W. Wolfe
Native American Issues, William N. Thompson
New Slavery, Kevin Bales
Punishment in America, Cyndi Banks
United Nations System, The, Chadwick F. Alger
U.S. Homeland Security, Howard Ball
Violence in the Media, Nancy Signorielli
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
Upcoming Titles
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Intellectual Property, Aaron Schwabach
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


CHILDHOOD
SEXUAL ABUSE
A Reference Handbook,
Second Edition
Karen L. Kinnear
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2007 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kinnear, Karen L.
Childhood sexual abuse : a reference handbook / Karen L. Kinnear.
p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-10: 1-85109-905-0 (hard copy : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-85109-906-9 (e-book)
ISBN-13: 978-1-85109-905-4 (hard copy : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-1-85109-906-1 (e-book)
1.  Child sexual abuse. 2.  Child sexual abuse—Prevention.
3.  Sexually abused children.  I. Title.  
HV6570.K55 2007
362.76--dc22
2006035241
ISBN-13: 978-1-85109-905-4
(ebook) 978-1-85109-906-1
ISBN-10: 1-85109-905-0
(ebook) 1-85109-906-9
11  10  09  08  07    10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

To Stephen and Kathleen,
with the hope that your generation will see
reduced numbers of children who are
sexually abused.


Contents
Preface, xv
1
Background and History, 1
Child Sexual Abuse Defined, 1
Characteristics of Child Sexual Abuse, 3
Who Is Abused? 4
Perpetrators, 5
Parents/Step-Parents, 8
Siblings, 11
Other Family Members, 13
Causes, 13
Effects, 14
Post-Traumatic Stress Syndrome, 18
Sexual Disorders, 18
Eating Disorders, 19
Substance Abuse, 19
Depression, 20
Indicators of Childhood Sexual Abuse, 20
Intervention/Treatment, 21
Reporting, 22
Investigation, 23
Treatment, 24
Interviewing the Child, 24
Medical Examinations, 25
Social and Law Enforcement Services, 25
The Legal System, 26
Children as Witnesses, 27
Use of Expert Witnesses, 29
Child Advocate Programs, 30
ix

Prevention, 31
Parental Education Programs, 32
Prevention Programs for Professionals, 32
Prevention Programs for Children, 33
Other Types of Child Sexual Abuse, 34
Child Exploitation and Prostitution, 34
Cults and Ritual Abuse, 35
Child Pornography and Sex Rings, 38
References, 40
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 47
Identifying Abuse, 47
Estimates of Incidence and Prevalence of Sexual
Abuse, 48
Children’s Credibility, 49
Perpetrators, 50
Homosexuals, 50
Teachers, 51
Female Offenders, 53
Coaches, 54
Juvenile Sex Offenders, 55
Treatment, 55
The Use of Anatomically Detailed Dolls, 57
Interviewing the Mother, 59
Confronting the Abuser, 60
Recidivism, 61
Chemical Castration, 64
Repression/False Memories, 65
Community Notification Laws, 69
Juvenile Offenders and Community Notification, 71
Prevention, 72
Sexual Abuse Committed by Clergy, 75
Statutes of Limitations, 78
Online Predators, 79
References, 80
3
Worldwide Perspective, 85
International Laws and Conventions, 85
Other Conventions, 87
Regional Laws and Conventions, 88
Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse, 89
Developed Regions/Countries, 89
x
Contents

Developing Regions/Countries, 95
In School, 99
In Orphanages, 100
At Work, 101
By Marriage, 102
In War, 102
In Refugee Camps, 103
In Police Custody, 104
On the Streets, 104
Worldwide Issues, 104
The Internet and Child Pornography, 105
Functions of Child Pornography, 107
Legislation against Child Pornography, 108
Virtual Child Pornography, 113
Child Prostitution, 114
Child Trafficking, 115
Ritual Abuse, 117
Castration of Repeat Sex Offenders, 118
References, 119
4
Chronology, 123
References, 154
5
Biographical Sketches, 157
Dr. Gene Abel, 157
Louise Armstrong, 158
Marilyn Van Derbur Atler, 159
Fred Berlin, 160
Lucy Berliner, 161
Douglas Bersharov, 161
Barbara Blaine, 162
John Briere, 163
Sandra Butler, 163
Jon R. Conte, 164
Christine Courtois, 165
Thomas Doyle, 165
David Finkelhor, 166
Gilbert Gauthe, 167
Henry Giarretto, 168
Gail Goodman, 169
Judith Herman, 170
Michael Jackson, 170
Contents
xi

C. Henry Kempe, 171
Ruth S. Kempe, 171
Kenneth V. Lanning, 172
Bernard Law, 173
Mary Kay Letourneau, 173
Elizabeth Loftus, 174
Virginia McMartin, 175
Kelly Michaels, 176
Alice Miller, 176
Richard Ofshe, 177
Florence Rush, 178
Diana Russell, 178
Suzanne Sgroi, 179
Paul Shanley, 180
Roland C. Summit, 181
Hollida Wakefield, 182
References, 183
6
Facts and Statistics, 185
Prevalence and Incidence, 185
Prevalence, 186
Incidence, 189
Signs and Symptoms of Sexual Abuse, 194
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse, 196
State Sex Offender Registries, 218
Federal (U.S.) Laws, 218
The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act
(CAPTA) of 1974, P.L. 93–247, 220
Keeping Children and Families Safe Act of 2003, P.L.
108–36, 221
Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) of 1978, P.L.
95–608, 221
Family Preservation and Support Services
Program, enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act of 1993, P.L. 103–66, 222
Adoption and Safe Families Act (ASFA) of 1997, P.L.
105–89, 222
Child Abuse Prevention and Enforcement Act of 2000,
P.L. 106–177, 223
xii
Contents

Contents
xiii
The Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990, P.L.
101–647, 223
Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation Act
of 1977, 224
Communications Decency Act (CDA) of 1996, P.L.
104–104, 224
The Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 (CPPA),
P.L. 104–208, 224
Protection of Children from Sexual Predators Act of
1998, P.L. 105–314, 224
Other Federal Laws and Codes to Protect Children, 225
International Conventions, 231
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 231
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking
in Persons, Especially Women and Children,
Supplementing the UN Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime (United Nations
2003), 231
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution
and Child Pornography, 232
Summary of Significant Court Cases in U.S. Courts, 232
New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747 (1982), 232
Osborne v. Ohio, 495 U.S. 103 (1990), 233
Idaho v. Wright, 497 U.S. 805 (1990), 234
Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844
(1997), 234
Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S. 234 (2002), 235
Stogner v. California, 539 U.S. 607 (2003), 235
Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 542 U.S. 656
(2004), 236
Smith et al. v. Doe et al., 538 U.S. 84 (2002), 236
United States v. American Library Association, 539 U.S.
194 (2003), 237
United States v. Hilton, 363 F. 3d 58 (1st Cir. 2004), 237
Cummings v. State of Arkansas, 353 Ark. 618 (Ark. Sup.
Ct. 2003), 238
Doe v. Chamberlin, 299 F. 3d 192 (3rd Cir. 2002), 238
References, 239

7
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies,
241
8
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources, 281
Books, 281
Journal Articles, 306
Training Materials, Manuals, 315
Videos, 319
Internet Resources, 323
Glossary, 325
Index, 329
About the Author, 343
xiv
Contents

Preface
T
he purpose of this book is to provide a survey of the available
literature and other resources on the topic of childhood sexual
abuse and to direct readers to sources for further research. The
literature and resources available provide insight into the causes,
treatment, and prevention of childhood sexual abuse. Tremen-
dous growth in knowledge and research has occurred in this field
in recent years, and this book provides a resource for students,
writers, and researchers as well as professionals in the field.
Thoughts and attitudes toward childhood sexual abuse have
changed over the years. Earlier, many people believed that if chil-
dren were sexually abused, they had brought the abuse on them-
selves by somehow seducing the adult, and that they were not
harmed by this contact. Over time, however, the attitude that chil-
dren were responsible for any sexual abuse they experienced
changed to the realization that the adults involved were respon-
sible, not the children. The extent and seriousness of the effects of
sexual abuse have also been recognized and studied, from earlier
attitudes that little damage was done to a child who was fondled
or otherwise abused to the current understanding that the effects
of this abuse can be manifested in many ways and can indeed be
serious. This book reviews current knowledge and resources in
order to help the reader understand the issues involved in this
important and timely topic.
This book, like other books in the Contemporary World Is-
sues series, provides a balanced survey of the resources available
and a guide to further research on the topic of childhood sexual
abuse. Chapter 1 reviews the literature concerning types of sex-
ual abuse, causes, effects, indicators of childhood sexual abuse,
xv

intervention and treatment, the legal system, and prevention.
Chapter 2 examines the major problems, controversies, and solu-
tions in the field, including identifying abuse, various perpetra-
tors, treatment issues, repression and false memories, and com-
munity notification laws. Chapter 3 offers a worldwide
perspective, examining international laws and conventions, inci-
dence and prevalence, worldwide issues, child trafficking, ritual
abuse, and treatment. Chapter 4 provides a chronology of the
significant events relevant to issues surrounding childhood sex-
ual abuse. Chapter 5 offers biographical sketches of individuals
who have played or are currently playing key roles in the area of
childhood sexual abuse. Chapter 6 provides statistical informa-
tion on the prevalence and incidence of child sexual abuse, as
well as state statutes defining sexual abuse of children, sum-
maries of U.S. laws and international conventions, and sum-
maries of a sample of U.S. Supreme Court and Court of Appeals
cases. Chapter 7 provides a directory of private and public or-
ganizations, associations, and governmental agencies involved
in treating children who have been sexually abused, as well as
those that treat offenders. In Chapter 8, books, handbooks, man-
uals, periodicals, and videos are annotated; the literature varies
from popular accounts to primary research and provides a wide
perspective on this problem.
xvi
Preface

1
Background and History
S
ociety’s views toward and definitions of child sexual abuse
have changed over the years. Sexual relations between adults
and children were not always considered abusive and against
the law. In early Christian history, women were considered the
property of first the father and then the husband, and had no
rights of their own; female children also were considered prop-
erty and had no rights. In fact, both the Bible and Talmud encour-
aged men to have sexual relations with young girls; they were
allowed to do so through socially sanctioned marriage, concubi-
nage, and slavery. The Talmud indicates that a “female of ‘three
years and one day’ could be betrothed by sexual intercourse with
her father’s permission. Intercourse with one younger was not a
crime but invalid” (Rush 1980, 17).
Over time, attitudes have changed. In the United States and
many other countries, children are no longer seen as possessions,
adult sexual relations with children are generally considered
wrong, and laws exist to protect children from sexual relations
with adults.
Child Sexual Abuse Defined
While specific definitions of child sexual abuse may vary consid-
erably, certain elements exist in almost every definition: exploita-
tion of the child; use of coercion, gentle though it may be; and
some level of gratification gained by the adult.
1

Fraser defines child sexual abuse as “the exploitation of a
child for the sexual gratification of an adult” (Fraser 1981, 58).
Baker and Duncan suggest that “[a] child (anyone under 16 years)
is sexually abused when another person, who is sexually mature,
involves the child in any activity which the other person expects
to lead to their sexual arousal” (Baker and Duncan 1985, 458). The
Children’s Bureau of the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, in their 2003 report on child maltreatment, defines sex-
ual abuse as the “involvement of the child in sexual activity to
provide sexual gratification or financial benefit to the perpetrator,
including contacts for sexual purposes, molestation, statutory
rape, prostitution, pornography, exposure, incest, or other sexu-
ally exploitative activities” (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, Administration for Children, Youth and Fami-
lies 2005, 107).
Sexual abuse also can be defined situationally—that is, by
the situation or circumstances in which it occurs. For example, in
some families or cultures, it is acceptable, even expected, that
family members kiss on the mouth or have a great deal of physi-
cal contact. In other families and cultures, such behavior would
be considered inappropriate.
Definitions of sexual abuse often are broken down further
into contact and noncontact abuse. Contact abuse can include any
activity from kissing to oral sex to intercourse. Noncontact sexual
abuse includes such activities as exhibitionism and sexual talk in-
tended to arouse the adult. Sexually abusive behavior can range
from an adult walking around naked in front of children to sex-
ual intercourse. According to Jon Conte, it may include exhibi-
tionism, voyeurism, kissing, fondling, fellatio, cunnilingus, vagi-
nal or anal intercourse, or child pornography (Conte 1986).
Suzanne Sgroi suggests that abusive behavior can include nudity,
the adult disrobing in front of a child, exposing his or her genitals
to the child, covertly watching the child undress or bathe, kissing
the child in an intimate way, fondling the child inappropriately,
masturbating while a child watches, masturbating the child, mas-
turbating each other, fellatio, cunnilingus, penetrating the anus or
vagina with a finger or other object, penetrating the anus with a
penis, or actual sexual intercourse (Sgroi 1988).
Legally, child sexual abuse is defined in the Child Abuse Pre-
vention and Treatment Act (see Chapter 6) as:
the employment, use, persuasion, inducement, entice-
ment, or coercion of a child to engage in, or assist any
2
Background and History

other person to engage in, any sexually explicit con-
duct or the rape, molestation, prostitution, or other
form of sexual exploitation of children, or incest with a
child. (Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act, as
Amended, June 25, 2003)
Legal definitions can be either civil or criminal. Civil statutes con-
sider sexual abuse a practice from which a child should be pro-
tected; through these laws, designated professionals must report
child sexual abuse, and the child protection agencies must investi-
gate these reports. Certain sexual acts are prohibited by criminal
statutes; they specify what sexual acts are considered criminal and
the penalties for breaking these laws. The penalties differ depend-
ing on the age of the child, the level of force used, the relationship
between the child and the offender, and the type of sexual act.
Characteristics of Child Sexual Abuse
Child sexual abuse is characterized by several conditions, which
may determine whether or not an incident is considered sexual
abuse. One condition is lack of consent. Children do not consent
to sexual abuse because they usually are not able to understand
fully what is being proposed to them, and they are not in a posi-
tion to refuse any sexual contact with appropriate power. Chil-
dren are not capable of consenting to sexual activities with an
adult; just because the child participates in this abuse does not
mean that the child has consented. Another condition is exploita-
tion. Children are manipulated or coerced into sexual behavior by
adults who are stronger, more resourceful, and more knowledge-
able. They may buy the child gifts, persuade the child that all fa-
thers teach their daughters about sex, threaten the child with
punishment or with the death of the other parent (“if your mother
ever finds out, she’ll probably die of a heart attack”), or provide
attention to the child in other ways.
Ambivalence is also a characteristic in child sexual abuse.
Children often feel ambivalent about what is happening to them;
they do not like or understand the sexual part of the experience,
but they may enjoy the attention they are receiving, as well as any
rewards or special privileges they may receive because of the
abuse. Some children may be confused because some of the phys-
ical sensations they experience are enjoyable; these sensations
make them feel good. However, they know that the behavior is
Characteristics of Child Sexual Abuse
3

wrong, and although they want the abuse to stop, they do not
want to stop receiving the gifts, privileges, or attention they gain
by remaining silent.
Force is another factor or characteristic of child sexual abuse
that is always present, even if it is not physical. Usually defini-
tions contain an element of power or force: that “it is forced,
tricked, or coerced sexual behavior between a young person and
an older person” (Conte 1986, 2). Many ways exist, both physical
and psychological, to force the child into a sexual relationship.
These may include threatening to withhold attention or special
favors, killing an animal in front of the child and telling her that
the same fate awaits her if she does not cooperate, threatening to
abuse other siblings in the family, or suggesting that the family
will be broken up if the child tells anyone. A related factor is se-
crecy; the abuser must somehow convince the child that he or she
should not tell anyone else about the abuse. Ways to keep the
child silent include threats, force, bribery, and intimidation.
Dr. Roland Summit has identified the “sexual abuse accom-
modation syndrome,” a means of characterizing the responses of
girls who are sexually abused by adults, often by their father or
another close male relative. The syndrome has five characteris-
tics: (1) secrecy; (2) helplessness; (3) entrapment and accommo-
dation; (4) delayed unconvincing disclosure; and (5) retraction.
Summit believes that children feel helpless in abusive situations
because the abuser has sworn them to secrecy by threatening
them with harm, telling them that no one will believe them, or in
some other way coercing them into secrecy. Once the sexual abuse
has occurred, the child feels trapped and either continues to
maintain the secret or decides to disclose it to the other parent or
another trusted adult. If the disclosure is not believed or causes
too much stress for the child to handle, the child may retract the
disclosure (Summit 1983; Conte 2002). Some controversy contin-
ues to exist concerning the validity of Summit’s syndrome.
Who Is Abused?
The general perception is that girls are more likely to be abused
sexually than boys, and the statistics generally support that per-
ception. Most studies show that the overall prevalence of sexual
abuse of girls is higher than that of boys. For example, Bolen and
4
Background and History

Scannapieco found that the prevalence of boys who were sexually
abused was 13 percent, while the prevalence of girls being abused
was 30 to 40 percent (Bolen and Scannapieco 1999). While girls
generally are sexually abused more frequently than boys, there
are certain exceptions. For example, research on the sexual abuse
allegations against the Catholic Church indicates that boys are
abused far more frequently than girls; some surveys put the per-
centage of boys abused by Catholic priests at 81 percent (Terry
and Tallon 2004). Furthermore, most researchers will agree that
child sexual abuse is significantly under-reported. Males are gen-
erally less likely to report sexual abuse (see Chapter 6).
A study of sexual abuse rates among Caucasians, African
Americans, and Hispanic Americans generally showed no signif-
icant differences between the groups, except in the area of recog-
nizing and reporting child sexual abuse: Caucasian Americans
were less likely than African Americans and Hispanic Americans
to recognize and report such abuse (Lowe et al. 2005).
Perpetrators
We often believe that children’s safety is threatened more by
strangers than by people known to the children. At home and in
school, parents and teachers emphasize to children that they
should not talk to strangers or accept candy or rides. The image
of dirty old men in trench coats ready to flash or snatch children
is common. However, the truth is that children who are sexually
abused are most likely to be abused by someone they know and
trust, including parents, siblings, teachers, day-care operators,
priests, or coaches. Sexual abusers come from all walks of life, all
races, and all socioeconomic levels. Furthermore, adults are not
the only abusers.  Adolescents and teenagers, including brothers
and sisters, are also capable of abusing children.
In an attempt to identify abusers, Conte found that there are
no unique characteristics that separate abusers from nonabusers.
The ages, psychological characteristics, demographic informa-
tion, and histories of men who have sexually abused children
vary considerably. Studies using the MMPI (Minnesota Multi-
Phasic Inventory) to determine the identifying characteristics of
abusers have not been able to develop a profile of abusers that is
distinct from that of nonabusers. Most of these studies have
Perpetrators
5

examined incarcerated sexual offenders, rather than studying
abusers who are still out in the community (those who are not
stereotyped as dirty old men) (Conte 1986).
Although determining consistent identifying characteristics
has proven difficult, Conte has suggested six clinical characteris-
tics that are helpful in providing a framework for understanding
abusers: denial, sexual arousal, sexual fantasy, social skills, cog-
nitive distortions, and other psychological and social problems
(Conte 1985). Many perpetrators deny that they are abusing any-
one or deny that what they are doing is sexual abuse. Most per-
petrators also are sexually aroused by children. Sexual fantasies
have been suggested as a behavior characteristic of abusers; al-
though its significance remains unclear, many researchers be-
lieve that the role of sexual fantasy should be considered.
Abusers also may have problems relating to other adults, indi-
vidually and in group social situations. They may find that it is
easier to interact with children. Cognitive distortions help
abusers rationalize their behavior and include statements such
as: “The child didn’t physically resist, therefore she must have
wanted it,” and “Having sex with my daughter helped teach her
about sex in a safe way.” Adult abusers believe that these state-
ments are true and are thus able to continue the abusive behav-
ior even though they are hurting the children and risking severe
punishment if discovered. Finally, many abusers display other
psychological and social characteristics, including drug and al-
cohol abuse, depression, poor self-image, and feelings of inade-
quacy. Most adults who sexually abuse children are not likely to
admit this behavior. Serious consequences, both legal and social,
face anyone who is convicted of child sexual abuse, and thus
such denial is easily understandable.
Nicholas Groth, a psychologist who has worked with inmates
in a state prison system, developed a system for classifying child
abusers into one of two broad categories: regressed or fixated. Re-
gressed abusers are adult men who live fairly normal, ordinary
lives; they had girlfriends as teenagers and have wives and chil-
dren as adults. At some point in their lives, however, often in their
thirties, they develop a sexual interest in children, primarily young
girls. Fixated abusers, on the other hand, develop an interest in
children while still young, usually in their teens, and continue to be
interested in children; they may never be sexually interested in
someone their own age (Groth 1978). John Crewdson developed a
6
Background and History

third category of abuser: the crossover abuser, who is usually a fa-
ther whose primary sexual interest is in children (Crewdson 1988).
Lanning (2001) examined sexual offenders by focusing on
their motivation; he hypothesized that they can be placed on a
continuum from preferential offenders to situational offenders.
Preferential abusers appear to be more intelligent and have more
deviant sexual needs and desires; this category includes pe-
dophiles. Situational child molesters do not tend to have any of
the compulsive sexual preferences that the preferential offenders
have. They are more likely to abuse depending on the situation in
which they find themselves; for example, if they work in a day-
care setting they may sexually abuse children, but they do not
normally seek out children for abusive activities.
Sgroi found that child sexual offenders apparently are not
motivated primarily by sexual desire; as Burgess and Groth also
discovered, offenders tend to abuse children sexually to serve
nonsexual needs, primarily the need to feel powerful and in con-
trol (Sgroi 1982).
Pedophiles are one subcategory of abuser, and generally they
are considered the most dangerous and least likely to be rehabil-
itated. Pedophilia is defined in this way:
A. Over a period of at least 6 months, the person
experiences recurrent, intense, sexually arousing
fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors involving sexual
activity with a prepubescent child or children (generally
age 13 years or younger).
B. The person has acted on these sexual urges, or the
sexual urges or fantasies cause marked distress or
interpersonal difficulty.
C. The person is at least age 16 years and at least 5 years
older than the child or children in Criterion A. (APA
2000, 571–572)
Pedophiles often explain their behavior as helping the child
understand the processes and pleasures of sexual activity. They
generally believe that the child also derives pleasure from the ac-
tivity. They also may explain away their behavior by claiming
that the child was sexually provocative and lured them into the
activity. Estimates of the numbers of pedophiles are difficult to
make and may vary considerably because pedophiles rarely seek
Perpetrators
7

help; their behavior and activities are discovered when someone
else reports them. Most diagnosed pedophiles are men.
Parents/Step-Parents
In most cases of incest, fathers are the perpetrators; daughters are
usually the victims. Instances of mother-son, father-son, and
mother-daughter incest also occur, although father-daughter in-
cest is by far the most commonly reported. Because of the chang-
ing nature of the U.S. family, with more second marriages and
blended families, several researchers have started comparing
rates of incest committed by biological fathers with that of step-
fathers. Russell interviewed a random sample of more than 900
adult women in San Francisco, and found that 17 percent, ap-
proximately one in six, had been sexually abused by a stepfather,
while 2 percent, or approximately one in forty, had been sexually
abused by their biological father. When Russell studied the seri-
ousness of the abuse, she found that 47 percent of the stepfathers,
compared with 26 percent of the biological fathers, committed
“very serious sexual abuse” with their children (Russell 1984).
Other studies agree with Russell’s finding that children are more
often sexually abused by stepfathers than by biological fathers
(Herman 1981; Gordon and Creighton 1988).
In a study on the perception that children are more likely to
be abused by a stepfather than a biological father, Claxton-
Oldfield and Whitt (2003) found that less than half (45 percent) of
the 186 university students questioned believed that children are
at higher risk of sexual abuse by stepfathers. A study in the
United Kingdom of biological fathers, stepfathers, and father sub-
stitutes supported this finding; stepfathers are more likely than
biological fathers to abuse a child sexually, although biological fa-
thers are more likely to engage in sexual intercourse with a child
(Gordon and Creighton 1988).
Fathers may sexually abuse one child, or all of their children,
for a variety of reasons. They may be promiscuous, indiscriminant
about whom they engage in sexual activities; they may have an in-
tense desire for children (pedophilia), and their children are the
most available children around; or they may choose a daughter for
sexual activities because their wives are not satisfying to them and
they do not want to “destroy” the family by having sexual rela-
tions outside of the family. They use their position of authority to
control their daughters and obtain sexual pleasure from them.
8
Background and History

Getting help is often difficult for many incest victims, al-
though when other siblings are threatened, the victim may de-
cide to reveal the abuse. Research indicates that when a daugh-
ter believes that a younger sister is threatened with similar
abuse, she is more likely to report the abuse (see, for example,
Gordon 1988).
Finkelhor suggests reasons why parents are more likely than
other offenders to be reported as perpetrators of child sexual abuse. 
One is that they are conspicuous, create concern, and are
thus likely to be pursued by those who know about
them until they become official statistics. Another is that,
although many families try to contain knowledge about
parent-child incest, the dynamics are so volatile and the
potential for conflict so great that parent-child incest is
more difficult to hush up permanently than other kinds
of children’s sexual abuse. Therefore, although the moti-
vation for silence may be greater, it is less likely to be
achieved. (Finkelhor 1979, 140)
Most people are more likely to perceive closeness between a
father and daughter as sexual abuse than a similar relationship
between a mother and son. If a daughter naps or sleeps in the
same bed as her father, many people may see that as wrong, but,
as Kempe and Kempe suggest, a “mother who allows her boy to
sleep in her bed may be thought to ‘infantilize’ him but not to be
acting on unconscious incestuous impulses” (Kempe and Kempe
1984, 69).
Fathers who sexually abuse their daughters generally have
no compassion for their victim and do not recognize that any con-
sequences exist for their behavior. Many offenders may be horri-
fied at their own behavior, but not enough to stop the abuse.
Many incestuous fathers have a deep and constant need for un-
conditional love and attention. In some cases, they see incest, like
rape, as an act of power and control (Forward and Buck 1978).
Contrary to the beliefs of some researchers and others, moth-
ers in the home of an incestuous father-daughter relationship may
not always know about the incest. If they are aware of it, they may
not always be consciously allowing the father to molest the
daughter. Many mothers may be giving up their personal power,
letting their husbands dominate and control them; the mothers be-
come the silent partners in the incest. Men in these situations are
looking for power and control, as well as unconditional love, and
Perpetrators
9

they can find it most easily when they can lead the mother into
denying that anything is wrong, which allows the father to molest
the daughter.
In cases of mother-son incest, the father is often absent from
the home. The mother relies on her son to be “the man of the
house,” to take care of things the way a man would. The son may
love his mother but hate the fact that she is forcing him into his
father’s role. Forward and Buck believe that “because there is
often no element of force involved, the boy almost invariably
comes away with crushing guilt feelings, for he believes he must
accept his share of the blame without the mitigating excuse of
having been violated” (ibid., 74).
Cases of mother-son incest are often difficult to uncover be-
cause many boys are not sure they have been abused. Even
though they may feel exploited and used, societal attitudes vary
considerably depending on whether the person is male or female.
There is not such a great stigma placed on boys who have sex as
on girls who have sex. Often, boys and the friends of boys who
have sex with an adult female claim that they are lucky because
they have had the opportunity to have sex with an experienced
female. Also, mothers may be able to get away with more
fondling and touching of their sons’ genitals and other parts of
their bodies because of motherly responsibilities such as bathing
and dressing (Crewdson 1988).
Mic Hunter found similar attitudes:
Many of my clients were told by friends or family when
they talked about a woman being sexual with them
when they were boys that they ought to feel happy, be-
cause they were lucky to have the opportunity to be sex-
ual at such a young age. In addition to being told that
they were fortunate to have had the opportunity to be
sexual by the perpetrator(s) of the sexual abuse, friends,
or family, these men also got this message from the
media. (Hunter 1990, 36)
Researchers have found other negative impacts that mother-
son incest has on sons. Nasjleti believes that boys “often fear that
having sex with the mother is indicative of their having a mental
illness. Because mothers are viewed as nonsexual beings in this
culture, incapable of sexually abusing their own children, boys
molested by their mothers often assume responsibility for their
own molestation” (Nasjleti 1980, 273).
10
Background and History

Kempe and Kempe believe that the number of incest cases
may continue to rise, in large part because of changes in the struc-
ture of the family: more divorces, more blended families, an in-
crease in acceptance of sexuality in general, and a “more tolerant
view of sexual acts between nonrelated household members who
come from divorced or previously separated homes. This is par-
ticularly true of brother-sister incest between stepchildren who
are living as a family but are not related” (Kempe and Kempe
1984, 48).
In most cases of child sexual abuse committed by a family
member, physical force or violence is rarely used, primarily be-
cause the child has a trusting and dependent relationship with
the abuser. Because the abuser has control and dominance over
the child, he or she is often able to coerce the child into sexual ac-
tivities without resorting to violence. However, some studies in-
dicate that more violence may be used to persuade the child to
participate than most experts originally have thought. Burgess
and her colleagues studied forty-four cases of attempted and
completed sexual abuse by a family member and found that 39
percent of the offenders pressured the child to participate in the
sexual activity, while 61 percent threatened harm or used physi-
cal force. In those cases in which force was threatened or used, the
offending parent resorted to intimidation to gain power over the
child (Burgess, Holmstrom, and McCausland 1977).
Siblings
Most researchers agree that sibling abuse is probably more com-
mon than statistics indicate, in part because both offender and
victim may be embarrassed and ashamed of their behavior and
unwilling or unable to confide in anyone. Sibling abuse has often
been ignored in the past, because much of the abusive behavior is
considered normal (for example, children fight, wrestle, and play
doctor with each other). Parents do not spend all of their time
with their children, and therefore they cannot always be aware of
what their children are doing. Siblings have plenty of time to play
with each other, and they also have time to abuse each other. Pro-
fessionals are currently becoming more aware of sibling abuse
and the consequences of this abuse for the victims.
Children do not often report sexual abuse to their parents or
other trusted adults, and that also holds true for cases of sibling
abuse, for many of the same reasons. The victims initially may not
Perpetrators
11

be aware that the behavior is abusive; if an older sibling is the
abuser, he or she may use the power and authority of the “older
brother or sister” to keep the younger child quiet; victims may be
threatened with retaliation, either physical or emotional, if they
tell; victims may feel that they are responsible for the abuse or for
not resisting the abuse when it first began; or the family environ-
ment may not encourage revelation of the abuse.
While sexual abuse of siblings may stop because the perpe-
trator loses interest before parents or other authority figures be-
come aware of it, some research indicates that sibling abuse can
continue into adulthood. There are instances of brother-sister
abuse that occurs even after the children have grown and moved
away from home. For example, one girl assumed that her
brother’s sexual abuse of her would stop when he went away to
college; however, when she visited him in his dormitory room, he
tried to force her to have sex with him. Another woman who had
been sexually abused by her older brother was amazed when her
brother tried to rape her even though she was married and had
several children (Wiehe 1990).
When treating victims of sibling incest, professionals must be
aware of how these cases can divide parents, who must choose
between two children. Whom do they support, the victim or the
perpetrator? This issue is often difficult for parents. Marianne
Celano, in a meeting sponsored in conjunction with the Sixth Na-
tional Symposium on Child Sexual Abuse, describes this
dilemma:
Parents of victims of sibling incest have to divide their
concern between two children, and they sometimes have
to make a choice to remove one child. Many parents al-
ternate between sympathy for the victim and sympathy
for the offender, whom they may perceive as immature,
emotionally unstable or victimized him- or herself. I
have had a case in which a child was victimized by her
older brother and the entire extended family rallied be-
hind the older brother and protected him by sending
him out of state to elude criminal prosecution. The vic-
tim was furious and blamed herself for the abuse. (Lloyd
1990b, 5)
Other speakers at this meeting emphasized the importance
of involving the justice system and of holding perpetrators ac-
countable for their actions; they believe that to be the best way to
12
Background and History

prevent the perpetrator from abusing again and becoming part of
the adult criminal justice system.
Multidisciplinary teams must be involved to help parents
and children survive and heal from the experience. Professionals
often find working with families in which sibling abuse has oc-
curred a challenge because of the issues involved; for instance,
breaking up families is difficult, as is trying to reunite them in a
healthful manner. Many families find it extremely difficult to con-
tinue as a family unit. The sexual abuse may raise all sorts of feel-
ings, such as resentment, anger, and confusion, and it often cre-
ates a lack of trust among family members.
Other Family Members
Other family members, including uncles, aunts, and grandpar-
ents, also are capable of abusing children in their families. The
characteristics of cases of grandfather-granddaughter incest are
usually quite similar to those of father-daughter incest. The
young girls feel responsible for the incest, and grandfathers mo-
lest their granddaughters for many of the same reasons, and
share many of the same characteristics, as other abusers.
Causes
Many theories exist that attempt to explain the causes of child-
hood sexual abuse. Some theories focus on the family or the of-
fender. Theories focusing on the family perspective suggest that
family dynamics are to blame for the abuse. For example, fathers
may blame the mothers for abandoning them and believe that
they themselves are not at fault, but rather that the family situa-
tion caused it. On the other hand, some professionals who sug-
gest the offender as the primary cause of the abuse work in insti-
tutions that house offenders; they may fail to examine the role of
families in the victimization, or its impact on the family (Faller
1993).
Other professionals who focus on the offender use different
theories to explain child sexual abuse. For example, biological
theories look for organic explanations, such as physiological fac-
tors like hormone levels (see Berlin 1983; Marshall and Barbaree
1990; Marques et al. 2000). Psychodynamic theories examine
unresolved problems that occurred during various stages of the
Causes
13

perpetrator’s development (see Holmes and Holmes 2002;
Schwartz 1995). Behavioral theories focus on deviant sexual be-
havior as a learned condition (see Laws and Marshall 1990). At-
tachment theories examine how humans need to establish strong
bonds with others, and how when emotional stress or loss occurs,
they act out and abuse children (see Marshall 1989; Seidman et al.
1994; Mulloy and Marshall 1999; Ward et al. 1995; Marshall and
Marshall 2002). Integrated models or theories attempt to examine
all of the reasons why individuals sexually abuse children, be-
lieving that there is not one cause for such behavior.
Finkelhor suggests that four conditions must be met for sex-
ual abuse to occur: (1) factors relating to the offender’s motivation
to abuse a child sexually; (2) factors leading the offender to over-
come internal inhibitions to sexual abuse; (3) factors leading the
offender to overcome external inhibitions; and (4) factors leading
the offender to believe that the child will provide little resistance
to the abuse (Finkelhor 1986).
Faller suggests another model, in which some causal fac-
tors—such as being sexually aroused by children and a propen-
sity to act on that arousal—are prerequisites for the occurrence of
sexual abuse. Contributing factors can come from the family sys-
tem, the culture, and the offender’s current life situation, person-
ality, or previous experiences (Faller 1993).
Effects
Children are affected in many ways by sexual abuse. The type
and severity of the effects often depend on a variety of factors, in-
cluding the age of the child when the abuse first occurred; how
long the abuse lasted; the developmental status of the child; the
relationship of the abuser to the child; whether force was used to
ensure the child’s participation, and the degree of force used; the
degree of shame or guilt experienced by the child; and the reac-
tion of the child’s parent(s) and other professionals if and when
the child reveals the abuse or it is discovered by another person.
Children who have been sexually abused may display negative
behaviors and attitudes, but studies have not clarified whether
those behaviors existed before the sexual abuse occurred or were
the effects of the abuse or the intervention process.
Hollenberg and Ragan believe that it is difficult to generalize
the effects of sexual abuse on children:
14
Background and History

Just as no single profile of child sexual abuse exists, there
is no definitive description of the impact of sexual abuse
on child victims. The effects of child sexual abuse are
characterized by great variation and range from short-
term effects to those that endure throughout adulthood.
Many of the symptoms associated with child sexual
abuse victimization—such as low self-esteem, anxiety,
hostility, depression, hyperactivity, and psychosomatic
disturbances—are common to a range of other problems
as well. (Hollenberg and Ragan 1991, 179)
Finkelhor divides the effects of child sexual abuse into four
main categories: traumatic sexualization, stigmatization, be-
trayal, and powerlessness. Traumatic sexualization results from
inappropriate sexual contacts and relationships; the effects that
victims may experience include avoidance of sex, disgust with
anything sexual, a consuming interest in sex, or problems with
sexual identity. Stigmatization results as children realize that sex-
ual abuse is socially and morally unacceptable behavior and be-
lieve that they are responsible for the abuse or feel guilty because
they have been abused; as a result, children may withdraw from
friends and family members. Betrayal results when children real-
ize that the adult they had trusted has hurt them; children may
have a difficult time trusting other adults after they have been
abused. Feelings of powerlessness can occur when children real-
ize that they cannot stop the abuse or they may occur at a later
time, if and when they reveal the abuse, when the intervention
process begins, and they are overwhelmed by all that is happen-
ing to them (Finkelhor 1984).
Several studies examine the duration of abuse as a factor. In
a study of women who were sexually abused as children, Russell
found that 73 percent of those women whose abuse lasted for
more than five years considered the experience extremely or con-
siderably traumatic, compared with 62 percent whose abuse
lasted from one week to five years, and 46 percent who were
abused only once (Russell 1986). On the other hand, Finkelhor
found no relationship between the seriousness of the effects and
the duration of the abuse (Finkelhor 1979). In still other studies,
such as one conducted by Christine Courtois, researchers have
found that those people who have been sexually abused for the
longest duration feel the least amount of trauma from the experi-
ence (Courtois 1979).
Effects
15

Following sexual abuse, a child’s self-image often develops
largely from that abuse experience; many children believe that
they are dirty or bad and end up with low self-esteem. Children
may learn to numb the feelings associated with the abuse expe-
rience, hoping to feel better about life and in the process increase
levels of self-esteem. This coping strategy may help the child to
dim the experience but does nothing to enhance feelings of self.
A sexually abused child typically loses trust in adults and
other people in authority who are supposed to be nurturing and
protective. Abusers, especially family members, often use
shame or fear to keep the child from reporting the abuse to any-
one who might be able to help. “This is our little secret,” “Don’t
tell your mother, it would kill her,” “You don’t want anyone else
to know what you are doing,” and other similar comments are
frequently made by abusers to ensure silence and obedience
from the child. Abused children may feel a great deal of fear
within this relationship, with a powerful adult making the rules.
The child may be so frightened and ashamed about what is hap-
pening that he or she may be too embarrassed to reveal the
abuse to anyone. Silence is thus ensured. When the abuser offers
comfort after the abuse, perhaps by providing special privileges
or gifts, confusion is normal, and the child may feel guilty for
what is happening.
Sexually abused children may suppress their own needs and
wants, believing that they are secondary to the needs of the adult.
Or they may believe that they do not deserve anything, that their
main purpose in life now is to please the adult and fulfill the
adult’s needs. The basic need of all children to feel safe, secure,
loved, and protected by their parents is not fulfilled for abused
children. Therefore they try to please everyone else, without real-
izing that they are important and have their own needs and de-
sires that should be fulfilled.
Children normally become socialized and learn about sex
with their peer group. They grow up together. However, sexually
abused children learn about sex and their sexuality from an adult;
it is defined by the adult, with adult terms and expectations. Con-
fusion about sexuality and relationships occurs because the child
sees relationships defined on the basis of sex—that is, the rela-
tionship does not exist without sex (Breslin 1990).
The effects of sexual abuse may be long lasting and devas-
tating to victims, even as adults. For example, Dr. Richard
16
Background and History

Berendzen, former president of the American University in
Washington, D.C., was physically and sexually abused by his
mother. He studied and worked hard, however, and believed
that he had overcome the effects of the abuse—until he went
home for his father’s funeral and relived some of the experience.
He began telephoning day-care centers, pretending to have a
child needing day care, and asked several questions about sexual
abuse; the calls were traced to his office, and he was forced to re-
sign as president of the university. He sought treatment at the
Sexual Disorders Clinic at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore
and finally was able to understand what had happened to him
and to do what he believed he needed to become a survivor
(Berendzen and Palmer 1993). His experience clearly demon-
strates that people who are sexually abused as children may suf-
fer from long-lasting effects even when they think they are fine
and have outgrown the experience.
As suggested earlier, the effects of sexual abuse for boys may
be different in some ways than it is for girls. For example, Mike
Lew observes:
Since men “are not supposed to be victims,” abuse (and
particularly sexual abuse) becomes a process of demas-
culinization (or emasculation). If men aren’t to be vic-
tims (the equation reads), then victims aren’t men. The
victimized male wonders and worries about what the
abuse has turned him into. Believing that he is no longer
an adequate man, he may see himself as a child, a
woman, gay, or less than human: an irreparably dam-
aged freak. (Lew 1988, 41)
Consequently, a man who has been sexually abused as a child
may feel a need to prove to himself that he is a man, searching for
wealth, recognition, and power.
Some adults who have been sexually abused as children seek
help for some of their problems. Often these problems may be re-
lated to the sexual abuse, although they are not aware of the con-
nection. They may have entered therapy to get help with depres-
sion, eating disorders, substance abuse, or other problems, not
realizing that their early experiences of sexual abuse could be at
the source of those problems. Several problem areas for sexual
abuse victims are discussed below.
Effects
17

Post-Traumatic Stress Syndrome
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders provides
the following definition of post-traumatic stress disorder:
The essential feature of Post Traumatic Stress Syndrome
is the development of characteristic symptoms follow-
ing exposure to an extreme traumatic stressor involving
direct personal experience of an event that involves ac-
tual or threatened death or serious injury, or other threat
to one’s physical integrity . . . (Criterion A1).  The per-
son’s response to the event must involve intense fear,
helplessness, or horror (or in children, the response must
involve disorganized or agitated behavior (Criterion
A2).  The characteristic symptoms resulting from the ex-
posure . . . include persistent reexperiencing of the trau-
matic event (Criterion B), persistent avoidance of stimuli
associated with the trauma and numbing of general re-
sponsiveness (Criterion C), and persistent symptoms of
increased arousal (Criterion D).  The full symptom pic-
ture must be present for more than 1 month (Criterion
E), and the disturbance must cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning (Criterion F). (APA 2000,
463)
People who have been sexually abused as children may push
aside the memory of the event; however, at some point they may
relive the event, and often experience intense emotional distress
as a result. The feelings experienced are similar to those felt by
Vietnam War veterans; both have complied with what others ex-
pected of them, and both were informed by others that what they
were doing was right.
Sexual Disorders
Adults who have been sexually abused as children may exhibit
sexual acting out or promiscuous behavior. They may be trying to
overcome feelings of powerlessness that they experienced as chil-
dren, or they may be confused over the boundaries of behavior
that define affection, sex, and abuse. Jon Briere and Karin Meisel-
man, in separate studies, examined a control group and a group
18
Background and History

who had been sexually abused as children; they found that adults
sexually abused as children were more likely than the control
group to experience sexual problems as adults (Briere 1984;
Meiselman 1978).
Eating Disorders
Wiehe found that several respondents in his study on sibling
abuse suffered from eating disorders, including bulimia and
anorexia (Wiehe 1990). Many victims of sexual abuse are con-
cerned about their physical appearance. Some may lose weight,
while others may gain weight to ensure that no one is attracted to
them. In another study, Wonderlich et al. examined data on
twenty sexually abused girls and twenty nonabused girls be-
tween the ages of ten and fifteen years. They found that those
who had been sexually abused were more likely to be dissatisfied
with their weight and exhibited higher levels of purging and di-
eting behaviors (Wonderlich et al. 2000). 
Substance Abuse
Many studies have established a link between sexual abuse and
alcohol or drug problems in later life. In Wiehe’s study on sibling
abuse, he found that 25 percent of respondents admitted having
a substance abuse problem with either alcohol or drugs (Wiehe
1990). In studying female drug abusers at a community treatment
center, Jean Benward and Judianne Densen-Gerber interviewed
118 patients and found that 44 percent had been sexually abused
as children: 45 percent of the abuse experiences occurred when
the child was nine years old or younger; 73 percent of the inci-
dents occurred before the child reached her thirteenth birthday.
Based on their results, Benward and Densen-Gerber speculated
that those girls who submitted to the sexual encounter without
putting up a fight were more likely to exhibit psychological prob-
lems, including substance abuse (Benward and Densen-Gerber
1975).
Singer, Petchers, and Hussey found that adolescents who
had been sexually abused as children had significantly different
patterns of drug use and abuse. These patterns included the reg-
ular use of cocaine and stimulants, frequent drinking and drug
use, and being high on drugs more often than those who had not
Effects
19

been sexually abused. Their findings suggest that people who
have been sexually abused as children may use mood-altering
substances to help them deal with their emotional difficulties and
help in their interpersonal relationships (Singer et al. 1989).
Depression
Adults who were sexually abused as children may also exhibit
more serious bouts of depression than other people. Briere and
Runtz, in studying a nonclinical sample of 278 university women,
found that 15 percent had been sexually abused before the age of
fifteen, and that those women exhibited more depressive symp-
toms than women who had not been sexually abused (Briere and
Runtz 1988).
In Wiehe’s study of sibling abuse, he found that 26 percent of
his respondents had been hospitalized for depression and 33 per-
cent had attempted suicide (Wiehe 1990). Other studies have also
found rates for depression and attempted suicide higher for those
people who were sexually abused as children than for those who
were not. DeYoung found that 68 percent of the women she stud-
ied who had been sexually abused as children had attempted sui-
cide, and half of those had tried more than once (DeYoung 1982).
Another study examined seventy-four individuals, including
forty-eight women, admitted to a general hospital after attempt-
ing suicide. The researchers found that 35 percent of the respon-
dents had experienced severe sexual abuse as children (Ystgaard
et al. 2004).
Indicators of Childhood Sexual Abuse
Most professionals differentiate between physical indicators and
psychosocial indicators of child sexual abuse. Physical indicators
usually are determined by a medical professional. In the past sev-
eral years, medical professionals have gained increased experi-
ence in recognizing the signs of child sexual abuse. However, in a
discussion of medical indicators, the reader should keep in mind
that, in most cases of child sexual abuse, no medical evidence of
the abuse exists. When physical indicators are present, the ones
that most likely indicate sexual abuse are pregnancy and venereal
disease. Other indicators include semen in the vagina of a child, a
torn hymen, vaginal injury, an injury to the penis or scrotum,
20
Background and History

labial adhesions, vulvovaginitis, chronic urinary tract infections,
anal bruising, or pharyngeal gonorrhea as a result of oral sex.
Sexual-psychosocial indicators include statements from chil-
dren about sexual matters that a child of that age would not likely
know of, sexually explicit drawings or comments, sexual aggres-
sion when playing with other children, suggestions of sex with
adults, and in some cases, masturbation. Children often experi-
ment with masturbation as they are growing, but if children mas-
turbate many times each day, cannot stop, or insert various ob-
jects into their vagina or anus, these may be signs that they have
been sexually abused.
Some nonsexual psychosocial indicators of sexual abuse in-
clude sleep disturbances, bedwetting, regressive behavior, fear of
certain people, fear of being left alone, cruelty to animals, eating
disturbances, depression, or social withdrawal. These symptoms
also may be indicators of other problems in the family, so profes-
sionals must be extremely careful when diagnosing sexual abuse
based solely on any of these nonphysical indicators.
Intervention/Treatment
One of the major concerns about the ways in which authorities in-
tervene in cases of child sexual abuse is the damage that may be
done to the child in the process of trying to help. Accused parents
may try to blame the child or may focus on how the allegation has
destroyed the family. Social and legal responses may pull the
child from the home, or frighten the child with medical examina-
tions, court appearances, and endless interviews with strangers
who want to know in detail exactly what happened to the child.
MacFarlane believes that
[a]lthough society reacts with predictable horror at what
is done to children by sex offenders, it apparently does
not share a similar concern for what subsequently may
happen to children in the hands of our intervention sys-
tem. Whether a child has been sexually assaulted by a
stranger, an acquaintance, or a family member, when the
incident is disclosed, the family is usually experiencing
extreme crisis as it works through feelings of anger, fear,
shock, and confusion. During this vulnerable period, the
criminal justice, health, and social service systems may
Intervention/Treatment
21

descend upon a child and family with such a devastat-
ing impact that recipients are left with the feeling that
the “cure” is far worse than the original problem. Many
authorities agree that the emotional damage resulting
from the intervention of “helping agents” in our society
may equal, or far exceed, the harm caused by the abu-
sive incident. (MacFarlane 1978, 81)
Many things can happen to a child and the child’s family
when sexual abuse is believed to have occurred, especially if the
offender is a family member. The child may be removed from the
home; the perpetrator may be arrested and jailed; the child may
be placed in foster care; the family’s economic security may be in
jeopardy if the father is the offender and he is jailed; the child may
feel guilty and responsible for breaking up the family; and the
family members may feel embarrassed and ridiculed by former
friends and neighbors.
Faller suggests several practices that may reduce the trauma
to the child of the initial investigation. These include minimizing
the number of interviews of the child, using a skilled and sensi-
tive interviewer to minimize the negative effects of the interview;
allowing a support person to be present with the child; and con-
ducting the interview in a safe and comforting environment. The
trauma to the child of the medical exam can be mitigated by get-
ting the child’s permission for the exam and by using a sensitive
health professional (Faller 1993).
Reporting
Reporting child sexual abuse to the authorities can be frightening,
both to the child and to the family, and it can threaten the emo-
tional and financial security of the family if a parent is the abuser.
There are many reasons for reporting abuse, as well as for not re-
porting abuse.
Reasons for reporting include the following:
•
The child may feel relieved that someone else knows
about the abuse and reassured by contact with the
authorities.
•
The abuse will stop.
•
The offender will not abuse other children.
•
Most cases do not go to trial; they are settled out of
22
Background and History

court, so the family often does not have to worry about
the child’s having to testify in court.
•
Children’s sense of justice and right can be affirmed.
•
Crime victim compensation, which is financial
assistance provided to victims of crime, is available only
to those people who report the crime to law enforcement
agencies.
The many reasons that people may have for not reporting
sexual abuse include the following:
•
Family members believe that they can confront the
abuser themselves and stop the abuse.
•
Family members may be afraid that the offender will be
sent to jail, threatening the financial security of the
family.
•
The police cannot be trusted.
•
Family members may be afraid that they are accusing
the wrong person.
•
The family will be embarrassed and possibly threatened
by other family members, friends, neighbors, and
society.
•
The child may have to go through too much trauma.
•
Family members do not want to “ruin the lives” or
reputation of another family (if the abuse has been
committed by a nonfamily member).
Investigation
Child Protection Services (CPS) personnel are the local authorities
in the investigation of child sexual abuse. Both federal and state
legislation mandates that the CPS protect children and investi-
gate cases of sexual abuse when the sexual abuse is perpetrated
by a family member. When the offender is not in a caretaking role,
law enforcement personnel often are responsible for investigating
the case, although CPS may also be involved.
Most states mandate that health care, mental health, and ed-
ucation professionals report all suspected cases of child sexual
abuse; others, such as day-care providers or church officials, may
be required to report in some states. Once CPS receives a report,
Intervention/Treatment
23

they are required to investigate the allegations within a specified
period of time, usually between twenty-four hours and five days,
depending on the state. Many states require that law enforcement
personnel participate in the investigation with CPS personnel
when sexual abuse is alleged, primarily to gather evidence in the
event that offenders are prosecuted.
Treatment
A variety of treatment options exists for children who have been
sexually abused, as well as for their families. Treatment programs
for child sexual abuse typically offer a variety of services that may
include art and play therapy, marital counseling, psychological
testing, individual and group therapy, parenting classes, sub-
stance abuse programs, court advocacy, and life skills courses.
Multidisciplinary teams are often used to help develop compre-
hensive case management and treatment plans, as well as to re-
view progress in each case.
Treatment goals in cases of child sexual abuse usually in-
clude reducing the crisis atmosphere that the family is experienc-
ing; helping the family to cope with the situation; helping family
members to control rage, hurt, and other emotions; helping fam-
ily members to accept the existence of the abuse so that they can
enter and profit from treatment; and reducing the family’s isola-
tion from society.
Interviewing the Child
Several issues arise when interviewing a child thought to have
been sexually abused, including where the interview should
occur, when it should occur, who should be present, how infor-
mation will be recorded, and how many interviews may be re-
quired. Experts generally agree that the interview should take
place in a location that the child believes is safe.
In most states, the CPS worker conducts the interview; in
some states law enforcement personnel are also present, while in
other states law enforcement personnel spend their time inter-
viewing the alleged offender. Interviews may be videotaped, or
audiotaped, or the interviewer may simply take notes on what is
said. Child Advocacy Centers (CACs), child-oriented facilities
specifically organized to centralize the investigation of child sex-
24
Background and History

ual abuse, are located in many cities. Usually housed in old
homes or other homelike buildings to encourage the child to feel
safe, CACs attempt to provide a comfortable, safe environment in
which CPS personnel and other professionals can interview the
child and provide a variety of services to the child and family.
Medical Examinations
Medical examination of a child may be performed for a number
of reasons. The exam can reassure the child and parents that the
child is healthy and will not be permanently harmed physically
by the abuse. As physicians see more cases of child sexual abuse
they are able to recognize the physical signs, if any exist, and are
therefore becoming more reliable in their diagnoses of sexual
abuse. Also, children who have been forced to have sexual inter-
course with an adult may be at high risk for any number of sexu-
ally transmitted diseases, including AIDS, and the sooner such
conditions are diagnosed the sooner treatment can begin.
Social and Law Enforcement Services
Social service agencies can play an important role in treating the
child and the family in sexual abuse cases. Often children are not
the only ones in need of support. If the abuse has been perpe-
trated by a family member, either the child or the family member
is generally removed from the home. If one parent is charged
with sexual abuse, that parent may be jailed if the rest of the fam-
ily decide to prosecute, or the parent may have left the home. In
either case, the family may now be in need of some type of finan-
cial support or other help until the situation is resolved. Emer-
gency housing may be needed to remove the child and other fam-
ily members from the home, and they may also need food or
medical assistance. Social service agencies can help families find
the needed shelter, financial support, and other types of help.
Law enforcement agencies are required to ensure that the
victim is safe from further abuse and that the offender is pre-
vented from harming others. They are also involved if family
members decide to press charges against the offender. Law en-
forcement personnel may also participate in multidisciplinary
teams to help in case management.
Social and Law Enforcement Services
25

Some studies indicate that police officers in many areas
may need additional training in the handling of child sexual
abuse cases. In a survey of 250 police academies, Daly found
that officers received generalized training but were for the most
part not fully prepared to deal with child sexual abuse cases
(Daly 2004).
The Legal System
The use of the legal system to protect children and prosecute of-
fenders presents several complex issues. Many experts believe
that children are often more traumatized by the court proceed-
ings than by the sexual abuse. Court proceedings can be long and
drawn out and quite frightening for a young child. Being on the
witness stand and enduring questions of a very personal nature
are hard for anyone, but especially a child. Some experts believe
that children are better off not being involved in criminal
proceedings—that is, that charges not be pressed—while other
experts believe that, in the long run, the child benefits by the ex-
perience. Statistics show that most cases do not go to trial (see
Chapter 6).
State statutes have improved over the years, with most now
specifically defining prohibited acts involving sexual abuse of
children. For example, many laws prohibiting incest used to re-
quire evidence of sexual intercourse in order to obtain a convic-
tion. Today, many of the laws define incest broadly and do not al-
ways require such evidence.
State juvenile or family courts usually specify the procedures
necessary to place a child in emergency custody, to remove an al-
leged abuser from the home, to authorize the placement of the
child in protective services or with other substitute caretakers,
and to terminate parental rights. All states have reporting laws,
and approximately one-half of them require that reports be made
directly to a child protective services office; the other half specify
that either a child protective services office or law enforcement
agency receives the reports.
Many communities recognize the importance of minimizing
the trauma a child receives when involved in the legal process.
These communities have looked for innovative ways to minimize
the trauma, by coordinating multidisciplinary teams and services
to minimize repeated interviews; by coordinating civil and crim-
26
Background and History

inal court proceedings; and by initiating policies, procedures, and
projects to set up pretrial diversion programs for first-time of-
fenders who show remorse and desire treatment. A diversion pro-
gram focuses on the positive development and self-image of
youth by diverting them from the criminal justice process and
teaching them how to be responsible adults.
Children as Witnesses
When children are required to testify in court, prosecutors must
play an active role in preparing the children for the trial. Even
though some jurisdictions have created special units to prosecute
sex crimes and crimes against children, most prosecutors are not
comfortable with child witnesses; they are not familiar with chil-
dren’s needs, and they are not trained in dealing with children
(National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect 1991). In most in-
stances, child sexual abuse cases do not come to trial; they are re-
solved by plea bargains, often because prosecutors do not want to
risk losing a case based on the testimony of a child and would
rather attempt a plea bargain.
More than half of the states presume that children are com-
petent to testify in court proceedings. Based on the 1990 Federal
Victims of Child Abuse Act, competency hearings in federal
courts can be held only after a written motion and demonstration
of compelling need. Young children are generally capable of tes-
tifying in court, depending on their own developmental status,
stress level, language ability, and socioeconomic factors. While
some attorneys and other experts believe that children are highly
suggestible, most research indicates that this is not the case when
they are asked to remember something of critical importance in
their lives. Some defense attorneys may suggest that children
have been coached or brainwashed into suggesting that they have
been abused; other defense attorneys may suggest that the chil-
dren believe the abuse really happened when in fact it did not.
Another concern for those in the legal profession is recanta-
tion of allegations by child witnesses. Some children may become
so frightened by the intensity and length of the legal process, or
may be under such great pressure from family members, that
they may recant their charges to relieve the stress they feel.
In criminal cases of sexual abuse of children, basic conflicts
exist between the rights of the accused and the rights and needs
of the child. For example, in adult criminal cases, the accused has
The Legal System
27

the right to face the accuser, to confront and cross-examine wit-
nesses, and to receive a public trial. When children are involved,
the issue of face-to-face confrontation is especially critical. Many
experts believe that requiring a child to face the sexually abusing
adult in court is too traumatic for many children to handle.  The
adult, a person of authority in the child’s life, may intimidate the
child enough to make the child unwilling or unable to testify.
Therefore, many courts have allowed children to have their testi-
mony videotaped, so that they do not have to face their abuser. In
1990, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Maryland v. Craig (1990)
that a Maryland law allowing children to testify via a closed-
circuit television outside of the courtroom, with only the prose-
cutor and defense attorney present, did not violate the defen-
dant’s right of confronting the accuser.
The reliability of children as witnesses has also been ques-
tioned. Can they accurately remember what happened to them?
Do they remember details? Often the child’s testimony may pro-
vide the only evidence of sexual abuse—most abusers do not
abuse children in front of witnesses, and often there is no physi-
cal evidence of the abuse. Some experts believe that children
often have a difficult time distinguishing fact from fantasy; others
believe that children are unlikely to disclose facts about sexual
abuse if they have not been sexually abused, and that they rarely
lie about abuse.
Several studies have also shown that children are highly re-
sistant to accepting misinformation about events that concern
their personal safety and well-being. Goodman and her col-
leagues found that children as young as four years old were able
to provide accurate accounts of events as long as those events had
some significance to them. The children rarely recalled wrong in-
formation and resisted accepting misinformation as fact. Children
were more likely to leave out information than to provide incor-
rect information (Goodman et al. 1990). In another study, Good-
man and her colleagues examined children’s memories of stress-
ful events. They hypothesized that while, over time, children
would retain less and less information about an event, those chil-
dren who were highly stressed would retain more information
than the less stressed children, and they would resist attempts at
misinformation. They found that children who were most
stressed were the most resistant to misinformation and recalled
more details than less stressed children. While the amount of in-
formation the children recalled decreased after one year, the
28
Background and History

amount of incorrect information did not increase during the same
period (Goodman et al. 1991).
Because of the increasing number of child sexual abuse re-
ports, more and more children are being required to testify in
court proceedings against their abusers. The ability of jurors to as-
sess the reliability of children’s allegations of child sexual abuse
is critical in determining the guilt or innocence of the alleged
abuser.
After reviewing three studies on the effects on children of
testifying in cases of sexual abuse, Debra Whitcomb and her col-
leagues found inconclusive evidence of harm or benefit:
Based on the results of these studies, it cannot be stated
conclusively that testifying is either harmful or benefi-
cial to sexually abused children. . . . Virtually all of the
children improved emotionally, regardless of their expe-
rience in court. At worst, testifying may impede the im-
provement process for some children . . . at best, it may
enhance their recovery. . . . Only a small number of chil-
dren appeared to suffer long-term trauma from the ex-
perience of testifying. (Whitcomb et al. 1994, 5)
Use of Expert Witnesses
In recent years, both the prosecution and defense have made in-
creased use of expert witnesses in court proceedings. Many re-
searchers believe that this trend is disturbing, including Debra
Whitcomb, who cites four reasons:
1. Child sexual abuse is a relatively new and inexact field
of study. Much remains unknown, and there are many
areas of controversy.
2. The majority of behavioral scientists who testify as
experts in these cases are not certified as forensic
specialists in their respective disciplines (which include
psychiatry, psychology, social work counseling, and, to a
lesser extent, pediatrics). They may have little
knowledge of the very circumscribed role expert
testimony should play in most criminal cases.
3. A small number of behavioral scientists have become, in
effect, professional experts who “ride circuit” around the
country to testify in well-financed cases. This practice is
The Legal System
29

detrimental both to the legal profession and to the
mental health professions.
4. The absence of consensus among behavioral scientists
about many of the issues surrounding child sexual abuse
and children’s testimony . . . paves the way for “battles of
the experts” which tend to obscure, rather than clarify,
the fact-finding process. (Whitcomb 1992, 111)
The presence of expert witnesses can have a serious impact
on the level of stress the child experiences. For example, oppos-
ing experts may be called upon to conduct a psychological or
physical examination of the child, adding to the child’s confusion
and stress. The majority of courts do agree on one subject—that
prosecution witnesses almost universally are not allowed to ex-
press any direct opinions about the credibility of specific children
as witnesses. However, many defense attorneys will suggest that
children’s testimony is not reliable because of improper question-
ing techniques, that children are unable to distinguish between
fantasy and reality, and that children are unable to distinguish be-
tween truth and lies.
Child Advocate Programs
Community-based victim assistance and advocacy programs can
be found throughout the United States. These programs offer a
variety of services, such as referrals for counseling services; noti-
fication of court dates, investigation status, and case dispositions;
provision of relevant information; accompaniment of the child
and family to court proceedings; assistance with transportation
and family support; and emotional support.
In juvenile court hearings, child victims of abuse have a
guardian ad litem (GAL) appointed by the court to represent their
best interests. The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act of
1974, as amended, requires that a GAL be appointed in states that
want to receive federal funds. Guardians ad litem usually play a
larger role than child victim advocates. States vary in what they
allow the GALs to do: their roles may include attending all depo-
sitions, hearings, and trial proceedings; recommending to the
court measures to ensure the child’s welfare; possessing all re-
ports, evaluations, and records to advocate effectively for the
child; and coordinating resource delivery and special services
that the child may require.
30
Background and History

Prevention
While many professionals believe that prevention is an impor-
tant part of reducing the incidence of child sexual abuse, effec-
tive means of prevention are still being sought. Teaching chil-
dren that they have a right to control access to their bodies, how
to distinguish “good” from “bad” touches, not to keep secrets
about bad touches, how to say no to someone, and that it is im-
portant to tell someone about the abuse are critical in protect-
ing children, but the effectiveness of this approach is still un-
determined. Children who are sexually abused are often placed
in situations in which they are afraid of the abuser, are threat-
ened with harm, fear breaking up the family, have no one to
trust, or may indeed tell the other parent but find him or her
unconvinced. Many children are embarrassed and therefore un-
able to tell anyone. Although teaching children to tell someone
about abuse may not be the most effective way of preventing
future sexual abuse, until professionals are able to determine
what makes a person sexually abuse a child and how to find
and help that person before abuse occurs, it may be the most
effective means of reducing the number of children sexually
abused.
Prevention efforts have grown in popularity since the late
1970s. Activities can be grouped into four main categories: (1)
public awareness; (2) provision of materials to parents to teach
their children about sexual abuse; (3) education for profession-
als; and (4) prevention education programs for all children. Sev-
eral national organizations—such as the National Center of
Child Abuse and Neglect, the American Medical Association,
the National Education Association, the National Committee to
Prevent Child Abuse, and the Committee for Children—have
developed sexual abuse prevention resources for parents, to
help them in talking with their children about sexual abuse. In
1985, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services de-
veloped the Model Child Care Standards Act—Guidance to
States to Prevent Child Abuse in Day Care Facilities, to help de-
velop ways of screening day-care workers. The National Com-
mittee for the Prevention of Child Abuse encourages the devel-
opment of quality sexual abuse prevention programs by
publishing guidelines for local projects to use in creating such
programs.
Prevention
31

Parental Education Programs
Many people believe that providing prevention education for
parents is the most effective means of reaching the children. Par-
ents can reinforce information contained in educational materials
better than any other group. However, many parents have a dif-
ficult time talking with their children about sex and may also
have trouble talking about sexual abuse. Finkelhor studied 521
parents of children between the ages of six and fourteen in the
Boston metropolitan area. He found that only 29 percent of the
parents discussed sexual abuse with their children; when those
discussions did occur, only 22 percent mentioned the possibility
of abuse by a family member, and only 65 percent discussed the
possibility of someone asking the child to take off his or her
clothes. Most parental discussions with children occurred when
the child was approximately nine years old; many studies have
shown that at least one-third of all child sexual abuse occurs be-
fore the child reaches age nine, and therefore these parental dis-
cussions may have occurred too late to prevent abuse (Finkelhor
1982). Also, if either parent is the one abusing the child, then he
or she is not likely to agree to teach the child about sexual abuse.
Prevention Programs for Professionals
Teachers, pediatricians, day-care workers, clergy, police, and
other professionals who come into frequent contact with children
must be trained in ways to identify the sexually abused child, as
well as in ways to prevent abuse. Finkelhor and Araji have rec-
ommended several objectives for setting up professional training
programs:
1. Professionals must be able to communicate, in ways that
children can understand, any information about the
nature and dynamics of sexual abuse.
2. They must be taught to identify children who have been
or are being sexually abused, or who are at high risk of
being abused.
3. They must be able to question a child about the
possibility of abuse with sensitivity and understanding.
4. They must know how to react when a child divulges
sexual abuse, without showing alarm or panic, and
without blaming the child.
32
Background and History

5. They must be able to refer children and their families to
proper resources for treatment and support.
6. They must be able to talk with the child about the basic
concepts of preventing sexual abuse. (Finkelhor and
Araji 1983)
Prevention Programs for Children
Most prevention programs are focused on teaching children
about sexual abuse and what to do if someone attempts to abuse.
Most of these programs take into account the age and cultural
background of the child, as well as the economic status of the
child’s family, when designing and presenting programs.
Conte believes that all prevention programs aimed at chil-
dren should include the following ideas:
•
Children own their bodies and nobody has the right to
share them.
•
There is a difference between good touches and bad
touches.
•
Secrets about touching or other forms of abuse should
never be kept.
•
Children should trust their own feelings about
something being right or wrong.
•
Children should be taught how to say no.
•
Children should be encouraged to tell someone if they
are being abused. (Conte 1986)
Gillham takes a slightly different perspective in looking at
prevention programs. He categorizes prevention activities into
three groups: primary, secondary, and tertiary. Primary preven-
tion activities include increasing the awareness among all groups
having contact with children of child molesters and their charac-
teristics; recognizing that boys are at risk almost as much as girls;
teaching children how to deal with strangers; teaching children
about the privacy of their bodies; establishing legal policies that
catch serious molesters and repeat offenders and keep them be-
hind bars; and teaching children about all types of abuse. Sec-
ondary prevention activities include creating an atmosphere in
which children feel safe to report abuse; encouraging parents,
teachers, and other caretakers to act when they suspect that a child
has been sexually abused; encouraging and training teachers to be
Prevention
33

aware of the signs of sexual abuse; recognizing that children
rarely lie about something as serious as sexual abuse; being par-
ticularly aware of children at high risk for sexual abuse; and, if
the offender lives in the same home as the child, removing the of-
fender from the home. Tertiary prevention requires the provision
of supportive responses to the disclosure that a child has been
sexually abused; minimizing the impact of the interview and
treatment process; convincing children that they are not to blame
for the abuse; and offering counseling services to adults who
were abused as children (Gillham 1991).
Other Types of Child Sexual Abuse
Child Exploitation and Prostitution
Child prostitution exists in most countries, from Southeast Asia to
the United States. It may be more open and accepted in some de-
veloping countries, but wherever children are seen as desirable
sexual objects, sexual exploitation of children can be found. In
Western countries, the majority of child prostitutes are runaways;
in Latin America, they are street children. The need for children
to earn a living is often cited as the most common reason why
children become prostitutes—either the children themselves de-
cide to become prostitutes, or their families sell them into prosti-
tution (Moorehead 1990). Chapter 3 explores this topic in more
detail.
In the United States in 1988, the National Incidence Studies
estimated that 450,000 children left home and stayed away for at
least one night; another 27,000 children were thrown out of their
homes. Many of those children end up on the streets, trying to
survive as best they can, often through activities such as pornog-
raphy, sexual exploitation, and drugs (Faller 1993). According to
the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children,
[s]exual victimization of these homeless children occurs
in every state. Outreach workers in New York City esti-
mate that children as young as eight years old are forced
to prostitute themselves for money, affection, and drugs.
Some children are held in virtual bondage. They have
multiple sex partners on a daily basis and are bought
and sold by exploiters. Many contract diseases such as
34
Background and History

tuberculosis (TB), hepatitis-B, gonorrhea, syphilis,
chlamydia, and human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
They often are malnourished and practice poor hygiene,
leaving them vulnerable to disease. (National Center for
Missing and Exploited Children 2002, vii)
Some organizations, such as the Rene Guyon Society and the
North American Man/Boy Love Association (NAMBLA), believe
that most child exploitation and sexual abuse laws should be re-
moved from the statutes. Members advocate sex with children,
arguing that children are fully capable of entering into loving re-
lationships with adults, and that it is only our Victorian upbring-
ing that prohibits us from realizing that there is nothing wrong
with sex between a child and an adult.
Cults and Ritual Abuse
Allegations of children being sexually abused in cults and in rit-
ual abuse have grown in recent years. Ritual abuse may include
malicious acts of physical, sexual, and psychological abuse; group
acts of religious worship involving abuse; and terrorizing people
psychologically in order to force them to participate in certain ac-
tivities. It may include animal or human sacrifice. Satanism is not
always involved.
Lloyd believes that no clear, consistent definition of ritual
abuse exists. The news media and professionals in the field of
child sexual abuse may apply the term to situations that include
any bizarre acts of either physical, sexual, or psychological abuse
of children; abuse acts involving children during religious wor-
ship or displays of demonic powers; and psychological intimida-
tion of children to force them to believe in demonic powers. Lloyd
defines ritual child abuse as “the intentional physical abuse, sex-
ual abuse, or psychological abuse of a child by a person responsi-
ble for the child’s welfare, when such abuse is repeated and/or
stylized and is typified by such other acts as cruelty to animals or
threats of harm to the child, other persons, and animals” (Lloyd
1990a, 2). Ritual abuse is defined by Susan Kelley as “repetitive
and systematic sexual, physical, and psychological abuse of chil-
dren by adults as part of cult or satanic worship” (Kelley 1988,
228).
The study of Satanism is still relatively new, especially as it
relates to child sexual abuse; few studies have been conducted,
Other Types of Child Sexual Abuse
35

and most professionals in the field have limited knowledge
about satanic cults and ritual abuse. Satanic cults are said to pro-
gram their followers using techniques that are known only to the
high priests and priestesses. According to most professionals in
the field of cults and mind control, no one has yet found a prac-
ticing satanic cult that murders babies or animals. Katchen and
Sakheim found that “[m]any Satanists believe therefore that a re-
lationship exists between incest, magic, idolatry, sacrifice, and
the consumption of blood. . . . It is thereby assumed that forbid-
den incestuous relationships, the consumption of blood, the
human sacrifice all prove the power to do magic” (Katchen and
Sakheim 1992, 25).
Kenneth Lanning, the FBI’s expert on ritual abuse, found
that
[f]or at least eight years, American law enforcement has
been aggressively investigating the allegations of vic-
tims of ritual abuse. There is little or no evidence for the
portion of their allegations that deals with large-scale
baby breeding, human sacrifice and organized satanic
conspiracies. Now it is up to mental health profession-
als, not law enforcement, to explain why victims are al-
leging things that don’t seem to be true. Mental health
professionals must begin to accept the possibility that
some of what these victims are alleging just didn’t hap-
pen and that this area desperately needs study and re-
search by rational, objective social scientists. (Lanning
1991, 172)
Crewdson examined satanic child abuse and found that, in
most cases, real physical evidence has rarely been found, al-
though some investigations have turned up suggestions of some
type of ritual abuse:
In Richmond, Virginia, one person was convicted in a
sexual abuse case where police recovered candles and
other ritualistic paraphernalia. In El Paso, Texas, across
the Rio Grande from Mexico, a young prosecutor named
Deborah Kanof won a conviction of a thirty-five-year-
old mother who had been charged with abusing eight
children at the East Valley YWCA. Some of the victims in
that case said they had been taken from the “Y” to a
nearby house, where they were made to have sex with
the teacher while men dressed in masks and werewolf
36
Background and History

costumes looked on. The woman got life in prison plus
311 years, the longest sentence for child sexual abuse in
Texas history. (Crewdson 1988, 125)
Finkelhor and his colleagues, in their study of children sexu-
ally abused in day-care settings, found that children who were rit-
ually abused appeared to suffer the most serious psychological
impairments (Finkelhor et al. 1988).
Lanning suggests several possible explanations for why
people think that they have been victims of ritual, or satanic,
abuse. One explanation is pathological distortion:
The allegations in question may be errors in processing
reality influenced by underlying mental disorders such
as dissociate disorders, borderline or histrionic person-
ality disorders, or psychosis. These distortions may be
manifested in false accounts of victimization in order to
gain psychological benefits such as attention and sym-
pathy. . . . Although not always pathological, many “vic-
tims” may develop pseudomemories of their victimiza-
tion and eventually come to believe the events actually
occurred. (Lanning 1992, 24)
Another possible explanation is traumatic memory—that is,
events may become confused or distorted as a result of severe
trauma. Victims may dissociate from the events by forcing their
minds to go somewhere else, in order to avoid the experience and
the memory of the abusive experience. Lanning considers re-
pressed memory:
It may be that we should anticipate that individuals se-
verely abused as very young children by multiple of-
fenders with fear as the primary controlling tactic will
repress the memory. This repressed memory of their
victimization may be distorted and embellished when
later recalled. Perhaps a horror-filled yet inaccurate ac-
count of victimization is not only not a counterindica-
tion of abuse, but is in fact a corroborative indicator of
extreme physical, psychological, and/or sexual abuse.
(ibid., 25)
Lanning includes normal childhood fears and fantasy; mis-
perceptions, confusion, and trickery; overzealous intervenors;
urban legends; or a combination of many factors as other possible
explanations.
Other Types of Child Sexual Abuse
37

Child Pornography and Sex Rings
Child pornography and sex rings are another form of child sexual
abuse. Many pedophiles enjoy looking at photographs of naked
children and use those photographs to excite their own sexual de-
sires. Child sex rings are also used by pedophiles to share and ex-
change children for the explicit purpose of having sexual inter-
course with these children.
One effective way of catching pedophiles is through the sale
and exchange of child pornography. Many pedophiles enjoy tak-
ing pictures of their young victims. Crewdson found that:
[h]omemade pornography not only feeds the pe-
dophile’s fantasies, it becomes a permanent record of the
children he has known. The victims themselves may not
stay young forever, but in the pedophile’s album the
eight-year-old remains forever eight. Not only do pic-
tures of smiling children validate his behavior; such
photographs also have a more practical application. In
attempting to break down the resistance of a prospective
victim, the pedophile can produce documentary evi-
dence that children have sex with adults. (Crewdson
1988, 101)
Child pornography may also be used to review and select
children for sexual intercourse. Offenders may leave pictures of
children in various erotic poses where other children can see
them, in the hope that these other children may think that the be-
havior is acceptable and be encouraged to try similar activities. A
father may show child pornography to his own child in order to
“prove” to the child that there is nothing wrong with what he
wants to do with the child.
Some pedophiles who have trouble finding young children
to molest will search for or create their own child sex rings. Lan-
ning defines child sex rings as “one or more offenders simultane-
ously involved sexually with several child victims” (Lanning
1992, 9). Child sex rings are not necessarily commercial and do
not always imply group sex. Offenders usually interact sexually
with one child at a time. Characteristics of child sex rings include
multiple victims and multiple offenders, and the children in-
volved are usually adolescent boys, rather than girls, who are
more likely to be sexually abused within the family.
38
Background and History

Burgess divides child sex rings into three categories: solo,
transition, and syndicated. Offenders keep their activities and
any photographs they have secret in the solo rings, which always
involve one offender and multiple victims. Offenders share their
children, experiences, and photographs with other offenders in
transition rings. Syndicated rings operate under a well-defined
structure that recruits children, offers sexual services, produces
pornography, and has an extensive list of customers (Burgess 1984).
Lanning divides child sex rings into two types: historical child
sex rings and multidimensional child sex rings. Historical child sex
rings have the following characteristics in common: offenders are
male; most offenders are true pedophiles; at least two-thirds of the
children involved are boys; sexual motivation is the only reason the
offenders participate; offenders collect child pornography and
child erotica; and offenders usually control the children through
the use of seduction. Initially, offenders usually control boys
through the “use of bonding, competition, and peer pressure”
(Lanning 1992, 14). In order to bond boys together, the offenders
can either use an existing organization, such as the Scouts or a
sports team, or can create their own organization, such as a com-
puter club or cult. Later, when attempting to keep a boy in the ring
when he wants to leave, or when trying to get rid of a boy, the of-
fenders may resort to blackmail, threats of violence, or actual vio-
lence. The boys rarely think of themselves as victims and therefore
do not reveal the sexual abuse to anyone outside of the ring. Many
of the boys involved are the more vulnerable boys in society; they
are searching for attention and love, and they believe that belong-
ing to a sex ring is one way of receiving that attention (ibid.).
Multidimensional child sex rings have the following charac-
teristics in common: multiple offenders and multiple victims, the
use of fear to control the victims, and involvement of some type
of bizarre or ritualistic activity. In these rings, approximately half
of the victims are girls; the offenders may not be true pedophiles,
because they may not have sex as their primary motive; authori-
ties investigating these groups have not found photographs of the
victims, child pornography, or sexual paraphernalia; and the of-
fenders control the children by frightening them and creating
traumatic memories. Types of bizarre or ritualistic activities in-
clude “ceremonies, chanting, robes and costumes, drugs, use of
urine and feces, animal sacrifice, torture, abduction, mutilation,
murder, and even cannibalism and vampirism” (ibid., 18).
Other Types of Child Sexual Abuse
39

In investigating cases of child sexual abuse and child ex-
ploitation, Lanning believes that
[l]aw enforcement officers must stop looking at child
sexual abuse and exploitation through a keyhole—
focusing on one act, by one offender, against one victim,
on one day. Law enforcement must “kick the door open”
and take the big picture—focusing on proactive tech-
niques, offender typologies, patterns of behavior, multi-
ple acts, multiple victims, and child pornography. This is
absolutely essential in the investigation of child sex
rings. (ibid., 31)
In general, investigators must document any indicators of
sexual abuse that they find; document both victim and offender
patterns of behavior; identify adult witnesses and suspects; col-
lect any medical evidence; search for other victims; obtain search
warrants early in the process so that evidence is not destroyed;
collect all physical evidence; search for all corroborative evidence,
including child pornography and child erotica; monitor events
with body tape recorders or video recorders, if possible, without
involving or endangering the child; use surveillance techniques
in monitoring the suspects; and be creative in prosecuting of-
fenders. It is important that the investigators understand the se-
duction process when looking into sex rings; young boys may be
hesitant to admit to being involved in sex rings because of the fear
of being thought homosexual and the embarrassment of being
caught in such activities (Lanning 1992).
The growth and popularity of the Internet over the past ten
to fifteen years has also facilitated and encouraged the activities
of pedophiles by making photographs available quite easily.
Computerized bulletin boards are another tool currently avail-
able to pedophiles for finding others with similar interests, and
often for finding young people, primarily young boys, to meet.
See Chapter 2 for a discussion of the problems and issues of child
pornography.
References
APA (American Psychiatric Association). 2000. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed. Washington, DC: American Psychi-
atric Association.
40
Background and History

Baker, Anthony W., and Sylvia P. Duncan. 1985. “Child Sexual Abuse: A
Study of Prevalence in Great Britain.” Child Abuse and Neglect 9, no. 4:
457–467.
Benward, Jean, and Judianne Densen-Gerber. 1975. “Incest as a
Causative Factor in Antisocial Behavior: An Explanatory Study.” Con-
temporary Drug Problems 4: 323–340.
Berendzen, Richard, and Laura Palmer. 1993. Come Here: A Man Over-
comes the Tragic Aftermath of Childhood Sexual Abuse. New York: Villard.
Berlin, F. S. 1983. “Sex Offenders: A Biomedical Perspective and a Status
Report on Biomedical Treatment.” Pp. 83–123 in The Sexual Aggressor:
Current Perspectives on Treatment, edited by J. G. Greer. New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold.
Bolen, R. M., and M. Scannapieco. 1999. “Prevalence of Child Sexual
Abuse: A Corrective Metanalysis.” Social Service Review 73, no. 3: 281–313.
Breslin, Eleanor E. 1990. “Introduction.” In Therapy for Sexually Abused
Children and Their Siblings: Group Therapists’ Guide, edited by Joanne Szy-
balski and Susan Setziol. San Jose, CA: Giarretto Institute.
Briere, Jon. 1984. “The Effects of Childhood Sexual Abuse on Later Psy-
chological Functions: Defining a Post-Sexual Abuse Syndrome.” Paper
presented at the third National Conference on Sexual Victimization of
Children, Children’s Hospital National Medical Center, Washington,
D.C. (April).
Briere, Jon, and Marsha Runtz. 1988. “Symptomatology associated with
Prior Sexual Abuse in a Non-Clinical Sample.” Child Abuse and Neglect 12:
51–59.
Burgess, Ann W. 1984. Child Pornography and Sex Rings. Lexington, MA:
Lexington.
Burgess, Ann W., Lynda Lytle Holmstrom, and Maureen P. McCausland.
1977. “Child Sexual Abuse by a Family Member: Decisions Following
Disclosure.” Victimology: An International Journal 2, no. 2: 236–250.
Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act, as Amended. June 25, 2003.
Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services.
Claxton-Oldfield, Stephen, and Lisa Whitt. 2003. “Child Abuse in Step-
father Families: Do People Think It Occurs More Often Than It Does in
Biological Father Families?” Journal of Divorce and Remarriage 40: 17–33.
Conte, Jon R. 1985. “Clinical Dimensions of Adult Sexual Abuse of Chil-
dren.” Behavioral Sciences and the Law 3: 341–354.
Conte, Jon R. 1986. A Look at Child Sexual Abuse. Chicago: National Com-
mittee for Prevention of Child Abuse.
Conte, Jon R., ed. 2002. Critical Issues in Child Sexual Abuse: Historical,
Legal and Psychological Perspectives. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
References
41

Courtois, Christine. 1979. “The Incest Experience and Its Aftermath.” Vic-
timology: An International Journal 4: 337–347.
Crewdson, John. 1988. By Silence Betrayed: Sexual Abuse of Children in
America. Boston: Little, Brown.
Daly, Lawrence J. 2004. “Police Officers Do Not Receive Adequate Train-
ing to Prepare Them to Handle Child Sexual Abuse Investigations.”
Northfield, MN: Institute for Psychological Therapies. Available at:
http://www.ipt-forensics.com/journal/issues04.htm (accessed Septem-
ber 28, 2006).
DeYoung, Mary. 1982. The Sexual Victimization of Children. Jefferson, NC:
McFarland.       
Faller, Kathleen Coulborn. 1993. Child Sexual Abuse: Intervention and Treat-
ment Issues. Washington, DC: National Center on Child Abuse and Ne-
glect.
Finkelhor, David. 1979. Sexually Victimized Children. New York: Free
Press.
Finkelhor, David. 1982. “Child Sexual Abuse in a Sample of Boston Fam-
ilies.” Unpublished paper. Durham, NH: University of New Hampshire
Family Violence Research Program.
Finkelhor, David. 1984. Child Sexual Abuse: New Theory and Research. New
York: Free Press.
Finkelhor, David. 1986. A Sourcebook on Child Sexual Abuse. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Finkelhor, David, and Sharon Araji. 1983. “The Prevention of Child Sex-
ual Abuse: A Review of Current Approaches.” Unpublished paper pre-
pared for the National Center on Prevention and Control of Rape.
Finkelhor, David, Linda Williams, and Nanci Burns. 1988. Sexual Abuse in
Day Care: A National Study. Durham, NH: University of New Hampshire
Family Laboratory.
Forward, Susan, and Craig Buck. 1978. Betrayal of Innocence: Incest and Its
Devastation. New York: Penguin.
Fraser, B. G. 1981. “Sexual Child Abuse: The Legislation and the Law in
the United States.” In Sexually Abused Children and Their Families, edited
by Patricia Beezley Mrazek and C. Henry Kempe. New York: Pergamon.
Gillham, Bill. 1991. The Facts about Child Sexual Abuse. London: Cassell
Educational.
Goodman, Gail S., J. E. Hirschman, D. Hepps, and L. Rudy. 1991. “Chil-
dren’s Memory for Stressful Events.” Merrill-Palmer Quarterly 37:
109–158.
42
Background and History

Goodman, Gail S., L. Rudy, B. L. Bottoms, and C. Aman. 1990. “Chil-
dren’s Concerns and Memory: Issues of Ecological Validity in the Study
of Children’s Eyewitness Testimony.” In Knowing and Remembering in
Young Children, edited by R. Fivush and J. Hudson. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Gordon, Linda. 1988. Heroes of Their Own Lives: The Politics and History of
Family Violence, Boston 1880–1960. New York: Viking.
Gordon, M., and S. J. Creighton. 1988. “Natal and Non-Natal Fathers as
Sexual Abusers in the United Kingdom: A Comparative Analysis.” Jour-
nal of Marriage and the Family 50, no. 1: 99–105.
Groth, Nicholas A. 1978. “Guidelines for Assessment and Management
of the Offender.” In Sexual Assault of Children and Adolescents, edited by
Ann Burgess et al. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Herman, Judith L. 1981. Father-Daughter Incest. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Hollenberg, Elizabeth, and Cynthia Ragan. 1991. Child Sexual Abuse: Se-
lected Projects. Washington, DC: National Center on Child Abuse and Ne-
glect.
Holmes, S. T., and R. M. Holmes. 2002. Sex Crimes: Pattern and Behavior.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hunter, Mic. 1990. Abused Boys: The Neglected Victims of Sexual Abuse.
New York: Columbine.
Katchen, Martin H., and David K. Sakheim. 1992. “Satanic Beliefs and
Practices.” In Out of Darkness: Exploring Satanism and Ritual Abuse, edited
by David K. Sakheim and Susan E. Devine. New York: Lexington.
Kelley, Susan J. 1988. “Ritualistic Abuse of Children: Dynamics and Im-
pact.” Cultic Studies Journal 5: 228–236.
Kempe, Ruth S., and C. Henry Kempe. 1984. The Common Secret: Sexual
Abuse of Children and Adolescents. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Lanning, Kenneth V. 1991. “Ritual Abuse: A Law Enforcement View or
Perspective.” Child Abuse and Neglect 15: 171–173.
Lanning, Kenneth V. 1992. Child Sex Rings: A Behavioral Analysis. Arling-
ton, VA: National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
Lanning, Kenneth V. 2001. Child Molesters: A Behavioral Analysis. Arling-
ton, VA: National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
Laws, D. R., and W. L. Marshall. 1990. “A Conditioning Theory of the Eti-
ology and Maintenance of Deviant Sexual Preference and Behavior.” Pp.
257–275 in Handbook of Sexual Assault: Issues, Theories, and Treatment of the
Offender, edited by W. L. Marshall. New York: Plenum.
References
43

Lew, Mike. 1988. Victims No Longer: Men Recovering from Incest and Other
Sexual Child Abuse. New York: Harper and Row.
Lloyd, David. 1990a. Ritual Sexual Abuse: Understanding the Controversies.
Huntsville, AL: National Resource Center on Child Sexual Abuse.
Lloyd, David. 1990b. Sibling Incest: Proceedings of a Think Tank. Huntsville,
AL: National Children’s Advocacy Center.
Lowe, Walter, Thomas Pavkov, Casanova Gisele, and Joseph Wetchler.
2005. “Do American Ethnic Cultures Differ in Their Definitions of Child
Sexual Abuse?” American Journal of Family Therapy 33, no. 2: 147–166.
MacFarlane, Kee. 1978. “Sexual Abuse of Children.” In The Victimization
of Women, edited by J. Chapman and M. Gates. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Marques, J. K., C. Nelson, J. M. Alarcon, and D. M. Day. 2000. “Preven-
tion Relapse in Sex Offenders: What We Learned from SOTEP’s Experi-
mental Treatment Program.” Pp. 321–340 in Remaking Relapse Prevention
with Sex Offenders, edited by D. R. Laws. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Marshall, L. E., and W. L. Marshall. 2002. “The Role of Attachment in Sex-
ual Offending: An Examination of Preoccupied-attachment-style Offend-
ing Behavior.” Pp. 1–7 in The Sex Offender: Current Treatment Modalities
and Systems Issues, edited by Barbara Schwartz. Kingston, NJ: Civic Re-
search Institute.
Marshall, W. L. 1989. “Intimacy, Loneliness and Sexual Offenders.” Be-
havior Research Therapy 27: 491–503.
Marshall, W. L., and H. E. Barbaree. 1990. “An Integrated Theory of the
Etiology of Sexual Offending.” Pp. 257–275 in Handbook of Sexual Assault:
Issues, Theories, and Treatment of the Offender, edited by W. L. Marshall.
New York: Plenum.
Meiselman, Karin. 1978. Incest: A Psychological Study of Causes and Effects
with Treatment Recommendations. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Moorehead, Caroline, ed. 1990. Betrayal: A Report on Violence toward Chil-
dren in Today’s World. New York: Doubleday.
Mulloy R., and W. L. Marshall. 1999. “Social Functioning.” Pp. 93–110 in
Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Sexual Offenders, edited by W. L. Mar-
shall, D. Anderson, and Y. Fernandez. Chichester, West Sussex (England):
John Wiley and Sons.
Nasjleti, M. 1980. “Suffering in Silence: The Male Incest Victim.” Child
Welfare 49: 269–275.
National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (NCCAN). 1991. Sympo-
sium on Judicial Needs Relating to Child Sexual Abuse. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
44
Background and History

National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. 2002. Female Juve-
nile Prostitution: Problem and Response. Arlington, VA: National Center on
Missing and Exploited Children.
Rush, Florence. 1980. The Best Kept Secret: Sexual Abuse of Children. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Russell, Diana E. 1984. “The Prevalence and Seriousness of Incestuous
Abuse: Stepfathers vs. Biological Fathers.” Child Abuse and Neglect 8: 15–22.
Russell, Diana E. 1986. The Secret Trauma: Incest in the Lives of Girls and
Women. New York: Basic.
Schwartz, B., ed. 1995. The Sex Offender: Corrections, Treatment and Legal
Practice. Kingston, NY: Civic Research Institute.
Seidman, B. T., W. L. Marshall, S. M. Hudson, and P. J. Robertson. 1994.
“An Examination of Intimacy and Loneliness in Sex Offenders.” Journal
of Interpersonal Violence 9: 518–534.
Sgroi, Suzanne. 1982. Handbook of Clinical Interventions in Child Sexual
Abuse. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Sgroi, Suzanne. 1988. Vulnerable Populations: Evaluation and Treatment of
Sexually Abused Children and Adult Survivors. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Singer, M., M. Petchers, and D. Hussey. 1989. “The Relationship between
Sexual Abuse and Substance Abuse among Psychiatrically Hospitalized
Adolescents.” Child Abuse and Neglect 13: 319–325.
Summit, Roland. 1983. “Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syn-
drome.” Child Abuse and Neglect 7: 177–193.
Terry, Karen J., and Jennifer Tallon. 2004. The Nature and Scope of the Prob-
lem of Sexual Abuse of Minors by Catholic Priests and Deacons in the United
States. New York: John Jay College of Criminal Justice.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for
Children, Youth and Families. 2005. Child Maltreatment 2003. Washington,
DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Ward, T., K. Louden, S. M. Hudson, and W. L. Marshall. 1995. “A De-
scriptive Model of the Offence Chain for Child Molesters.” Journal of In-
terpersonal Violence 10, no. 4: 452–472.
Whitcomb, Debra. 1992. When the Victim Is a Child. 2d ed. Washington,
DC: National Institute of Justice.
Whitcomb, Debra, Gail S. Goodman, Desmond K. Runyan, and Shirley
Hoak. 1994. “The Emotional Effects of Testifying on Sexually Abused
Children.” National Institute of Justice Research in Brief. U.S. Depart-
ment of Justice (April).
References
45

Wiehe, Vernon N. 1990. Sibling Abuse: Hidden Physical, Emotional, and Sex-
ual Trauma. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Wonderlich, S. A., R. D. Crosby, J. E. Mitchell, and J. A. Roberts. 2000.
“Relationship of Childhood Sexual Abuse and Eating Disturbance in
Children.” Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychi-
atry 39, no. 10: 1277–1283.
Ystgaard, Mette, Ingebjorg Hestetun, Mitchell Loeb, and Lars Mehlum.
2004. “Is There a Specific Relationship between Childhood Sexual and
Physical Abuse and Repeated Suicidal Behavior?” Child Abuse and Ne-
glect 28, no. 8: 863–875.
46
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
T
his chapter will explore some of the major problems, issues,
and controversies concerning child sexual abuse. Identifying
children who have been sexually abused and the related diffi-
culties in accurately estimating incidence and prevalence will be
examined. The various types of perpetrators are examined,
including teachers, coaches, and female offenders, as well as the
question of whether homosexuals (especially male homosexuals)
are more likely to abuse children sexually. Treatment options are
explored, including the use of anatomically detailed dolls and
issues with interviewing the mother when the father is the
alleged abuser. Recidivism rates are discussed, and specifically
the issue of whether child sexual abusers can be rehabilitated or
“cured,” and the use of chemical castration to control sexual
urges. The controversies over the use of community notification
laws are reviewed. Issues surrounding the various prevention
programs are examined. Current controversies regarding
repressed and false memories, as well as sexual abuse committed
by Catholic clergy, are discussed.
Identifying Abuse
Many difficulties exist in accurately determining the number of
children who have been sexually abused. For one thing, there are
questions of children’s credibility—that is, whether or not they
47

can be believed when they claim to have been sexually abused.
The validity of repressed memory is still being questioned. Re-
searchers are not able to determine the number of children who
are sexually abused because of the many reasons children have
for not telling.
Estimates of Incidence and Prevalence of Sexual Abuse
Estimates of the number of children who are sexually abused are
difficult to make. If the abuse is reported to the authorities, Child
Protective Services usually becomes involved, and the numbers
are reported. Most researchers agree, however, that more children
are sexually abused than the number reported; the question is,
how many more.
Numbers from the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Administration for Children, Youth and Families, indi-
cate that the number of substantiated cases of child sexual abuse
has fallen for the past several years, dropping 40 percent from
1992 to 2000. Researchers and other professionals in the field dif-
fer on the reasons for this decline. Finkelhor and Jones put forth
six suggested reasons. One possible reason is that Child Protec-
tive Services (CPS) may have been adopting more conservative
standards of identifying and counting the number of cases of
child sexual abuse. Cases that involved allegations of abuse from
children whose parents were divorced or in the process of getting
a divorce, and cases involving allegations that appeared difficult
to prove, were not being counted as official cases of abuse.
Second, CPS may not have been counting cases that did not
involve a primary caregiver, since those cases are not within CPS
jurisdiction. Because of increasing caseloads in many states, some
state agencies have narrowed their focus and responsibilities.
This may have eliminated a number of cases that otherwise
would have been counted in the statistics. States have been re-
quired by law to treat cases of child sexual abuse by caretakers; in
the past they also may have treated children who were abused by
someone other than a caretaker, but because of shrinking budgets
and increased caseloads, they may have narrowed their focus to
caretakers only.
Third, there may have been changes to the data collection
and classification methods.  For example, some states went from
classifying cases as substantiated, indicated, or unsubstantiated
to classifying them as either substantiated or unsubstantiated.
48
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Fourth, professionals have become hesitant to report such
cases because of the negative publicity in the news media. There
has been an increasing focus on false allegations, and an in-
creased number of lawsuits being filed against those who have
made reports of abuse.
Fifth, the 1980s brought an increased focus on child sexual
abuse. As a result, older children as well as adults who had been
sexually abused as children started reporting the abuse to the au-
thorities. Therefore, reports of sexual abuse in the 1980s and 1990s
included past as well as more recent cases of abuse.
Sixth, the decline could be real—that is, child sexual abuse is
truly on the decline. Finkelhor and Jones find support for this hy-
pothesis: (1) there has been a decline in the number of self-reports
of sexual abuse; (2) other indicators of crime, sexual behavior, and
family problems also show a drop in numbers over the same pe-
riod; (3) child sexual abuse has seen increased focus since the
early 1980s, with increased intervention and prevention activities;
and (4) increased numbers of abusers have been incarcerated.
They suggest that additional studies need to be conducted to ex-
amine this decline. Data-tracking systems should be improved,
and evaluations of prevention efforts should be undertaken
(Finkelhor and Jones 2004).
Children’s Credibility
Many children who are sexually abused have no physical com-
plaints or indications that they have been abused sexually, unless
actual sexual intercourse or other penetration has occurred. Chil-
dren who know their assailants generally experience less genital
trauma than those who are abused by strangers, because “such
trauma might arouse suspicion that abuse is occurring” (Ham-
merschlag 2002). Because there are frequently no physical symp-
toms associated with child sexual abuse and no physical evi-
dence, one of the most important indicators of abuse is the child’s
account of the incident.
Several researchers agree that children are more susceptible
than adults to providing the answers they think the interviewer
wants, to conforming to expectations, and to responding to lead-
ing questions. While researchers disagree considerably on the ex-
tent of suggestibility and whether it actually leads to false allega-
tions of sexual abuse, they generally agree that children are
suggestible to such a significant degree that professionals in the
Identifying Abuse
49

field should be concerned (Ceci and Friedman 2000). The problem
may be most severe when children are asked leading questions
and are exposed to the use of other techniques that may suggest
answers to them, an issue examined during and after the Mc-
Martin trial and other trials of alleged sexual abuse of children in
daycare settings.
Investigators have found that when a child is asked to tell the
investigator what happened, in their own words, the child’s in-
formation is generally more accurate than when the child is asked
to respond to yes or no questions, or when asked leading ques-
tions. Unfortunately, the information provided by the child may
not be very detailed. By asking questions to elicit additional in-
formation, the investigator risks encouraging the child to respond
by providing information that the child thinks the investigator
wants to hear. Researchers suggest that investigators should
avoid asking suggestive questions, at least until they are con-
vinced that the child can provide no additional information with-
out help.
Perpetrators
Issues surrounding perpetrators of sexual abuse include the fol-
lowing: Are homosexuals more likely to be abusers, especially
those in the priesthood, than heterosexuals? Can a sex offender be
cured? Have community registration laws made children safer?
Other issues include the crisis over priests in the Catholic Church
sexually abusing children and the continuing revelations of
teachers sexually abusing their students.
Homosexuals
Are homosexuals more likely to abuse children than are hetero-
sexuals? In Shakeshaft and Cohan’s (1995) study of sexual abuse
of children committed by educators, 24 percent of the male edu-
cators targeted male students, and all of them described them-
selves as heterosexual. Earlier studies have found no relationship
between homosexuality and male child sexual abuse. For exam-
ple, Freund and his colleagues (1984) found no differences be-
tween the response of male homosexuals to pictures of male chil-
dren and that of male heterosexuals to pictures of female
children. Jenny et al. (1994) examined the medical records of 352
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

cases of child sexual abuse and found no indication that homo-
sexuals were more likely to abuse children sexually than were
heterosexuals; in only two cases was the molester a gay or lesbian
adult.
After reviewing the scientific literature on this topic, Groth
and Gary wrote:
Are homosexual adults in general sexually attracted to
children and are preadolescent children at greater risk of
molestation from homosexual adults than from hetero-
sexual adults? There is no reason to believe so. The re-
search to date all points to there being no significant re-
lationship between a homosexual lifestyle and child
molestation. There appears to be practically no re-
portage of sexual molestation of girls by lesbian adults,
and the adult male who sexually molests young boys is
not likely to be homosexual. (Groth and Gary 1982, 147)
In 1998, McConaghy reviewed the literature on this topic and
found no support for the theory that homosexuals are more likely
to abuse children sexually than heterosexuals (McConaghy 1998).
Teachers
From teachers in local school districts around the country who
have sexual relations with students and make the local news
when they are caught, to Mary Kay Letourneau (see Chapter 5),
who made national news after having a sexual relationship with
one of her students, increasing numbers of reports of sexual
abuse of students by teachers are in the headlines. Teachers are
considered caregivers and “persons in a position of trust” and are
held to a high standard of behavior around children. Just like the
public’s reaction to news of priests and other clergy sexually
abusing children, society does not expect teachers to break that
sacred trust.
There have been no national prevalence or incidence studies
that focused on sexual abuse of children by teachers. Some stud-
ies have examined this topic as part of a larger prevalence or in-
cidence study, or on a regional basis. For example, Cameron and
his colleagues studied the sexual attitudes and experiences of
4,340 adults. One question concerned sexual advances made to-
ward the individual by various caretakers, and 4.1 percent of the
respondents reported a physical sexual experience with a teacher
Perpetrators
51

(Cameron et al. 1986). In a survey of 1989 high school graduates
in North Carolina, Wishnietsky studied the extent of sexual abuse
by teachers. He found that 17.5 percent of the graduates reported
that they had experienced sexual touching by a teacher, and 13.5
percent reported having had sexual intercourse with a teacher
(Wishnietsky 1991).
Stein and her colleagues analyzed data gathered from a sex-
ual abuse survey published in Seventeen magazine. The response
to the survey included approximately 4,200 girls in grades 2
through 12 who reported that they had experienced sexual ha-
rassment or abuse during the school year. Of those, 3.7 percent
said that a teacher, administrator, counselor, or other staff mem-
ber was the abuser (Stein et al. 1993).
Shakeshaft examined data gathered for the American Associ-
ation of University Women in 2000; respondents included stu-
dents in 8th through 11th grade who were asked about their ex-
periences of sexual harassment or abuse. An analysis of the data
indicated that 9.6 percent of all respondents reported contact or
noncontact sexual misconduct that was unwanted; 8.7 percent re-
ported only noncontact sexual misconduct; and 6.7 percent re-
ported contact misconduct (Shakeshaft 2003).
In terms of numbers of male and female teachers who sexu-
ally abuse students, studies indicate a wide disparity between
male and female perpetrators: Hendrie (1998) examined newspa-
per articles reporting on sexual abuse of students by teachers and
found that 20 percent were female teachers and 80 percent male
teachers (in 244 cases over a six-month period). Gallagher (2000)
reported 4 percent female and 96 percent male in his study. Jen-
nings and Tharp (2003) found that 12.7 percent of perpetrators
were female and 87.3 percent were male in a study of 606 teach-
ers in Texas who were disciplined for sexual misconduct.
In addition to the concern over teachers having sexual con-
tact with students, some observers believe that once a teacher is
found to have had sexual contact with a student, male teachers
appear to receive a more severe penalty than female teachers. In
2005 a twenty-five-year-old female schoolteacher in Florida,
Debra Lefave, was charged and pleaded guilty to two counts of
lewd and lascivious battery for having had sexual relations with
a fourteen-year-old student. Lefave avoided a prison sentence
with her plea and will serve three years of house arrest and
seven years on probation. Several other examples can be found
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

of female teachers who have also received light sentences.
Pamela Diehl-Moore pleaded guilty in 2000 to sexual assault (for
having had a sexual relationship with a thirteen-year-old male
student) as part of a plea agreement to avoid a three-year prison
sentence. Tiffany Copley, a former teacher, received a one-to-fif-
teen-year prison sentence, with all but six months suspended, for
having had sexual relations with two fifteen-year-old boys.
LeFave’s and Moore’s plea agreements, as well as other well-
publicized cases of child sexual abuse committed by teachers,
have led to discussions of whether female offenders are consid-
ered less of a threat to reoffend and as a result receive lighter sen-
tences when convicted. Research is just beginning to examine
this topic.
Not every state has a specific law prohibiting sexual relations
between teachers and students. Those states that do not have spe-
cific laws often rely on statutory rape laws to prosecute offenders.
Another issue relating to teachers who sexually abuse chil-
dren is the lack of a national register of teachers who have been
found guilty or convicted of the sexual abuse of students. Not un-
like the hierarchy in the Catholic Church, which often would
move a priest who was accused of sexual abuse of children to an-
other parish, school officials may protect a teacher who has been
accused of sexually abusing children by allowing the teacher to
resign when accused of sexual abuse (this is successful only when
charges are not brought against the teacher). Those advocating
for a national system of notification and registration of teachers
convicted of child sexual abuse argue that such a system would
protect children.
Female Offenders
Women committed only 3.5 percent of all sexual assaults or rapes
committed by a single perpetrator in 2003, according to the U.S.
Bureau of Justice Statistics, which is consistent with the rate since
1996. As a result of the small number of women who sexually
abuse children, few studies have been conducted on the charac-
teristics of female offenders. In a 1991 comparative study of men
and women who sexually abuse children, Allen examined sev-
enty-five male and sixty-five female perpetrators in the Midwest.
Results indicated that charges were lodged against male and fe-
male offenders in almost equal numbers (55 percent of the men
Perpetrators
53

and 52 percent of the women). Surprisingly, this study found that
female offenders were more likely to receive jail sentences than
male offenders (30 percent of the women, versus 25 percent of the
men) (Allen 1991).
Denov (2003) believes that the number of female sex offend-
ers is higher than statistics indicate. She examined previous re-
search and advances the theory that women are seen as generally
incapable of aggressive behavior, that they are seen as nurturing,
protective of others, caring, and nonsexual. The general societal
perception is that a woman could not sexually abuse a child.
Other researchers have found similar results. For example, one
study surveyed 180 female and 180 male undergraduates on their
perceptions of the effects of sexual abuse on the child. The un-
dergraduates generally viewed sexual abuse of a male by a fe-
male as less representative of this type of abuse than the sexual
abuse of a female by a male, and they viewed the effects of the
abuse as less harmful to males than to females (Broussard et al.
1991).
Coaches
A special relationship often exists between sports coaches and
their players. Players look up to coaches for guidance and trust
their advice, and advice is often given concerning the larger is-
sues of life, not just  sports. Some coaches have taken advantage
of their position of trust and have sexually abused children in
their care. For example, in 2002, a volunteer basketball coach in
Brooklyn, New York, pleaded guilty to sexually abusing a twelve-
year-old girl during practice at the YMCA. Prior to that, he had
been convicted of sexually abusing several girls and had received
a sixty-day jail term (Katz 2002). In 2003, a soccer coach was
found guilty of the sexual abuse of six boys while they were trav-
eling on soccer team trips in New York (Gibbons and Campbell
2003).
Some individuals and organizations have called for a na-
tional registry of coaches, like the one proposed for teachers, to
help protect children. Others have called for more stringent
screening of coaches, but no uniform solution has been adopted.
Some sports organizations screen the individuals who apply for
coaching and other staff positions; in some organizations the
screening is mandatory, while in others it is voluntary.
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Juvenile Sex Offenders
The number of juveniles involved in sexual offenses against other
juveniles and children is growing in the United States. While at
one time this behavior was attributed to a “boys will be boys” at-
titude, law enforcement officials are now treating this behavior
more seriously. Researchers began to discover that many adult
sexual offenders they studied had begun their abusive behavior
while they were juveniles (Righthand and Welch 2001).
Professionals have distinguished two types of juvenile sex
offenders: those that abuse peers or adults, and others that target
children (ibid.). Each group has distinctive characteristics, ac-
cording to several researchers. Juvenile sex offenders who abuse
their peers or adults tend to prefer to assault females. They are
more likely to commit the sexual offense in conjunction with
other criminal activity; are more likely to have a history of crimi-
nal behavior, including nonsexual offenses; and are more likely to
display other delinquent-type behavior, higher levels of aggres-
sive and violent behavior, and to employ a weapon in committing
the assault. Juvenile sex offenders who tend to abuse younger
children victimize girls at a slightly higher rate than boys. Almost
half of the offenders assault at least one male. Almost half are sib-
lings or relatives of the abused child; they tend to have low self-
esteem, are frequently depressed, and often lack social skills
(Richardson et al. 1997; Monto et al. 1998; Kaufman et al. 1996).
Treatment
Issues concerning treatment include the best treatment methods,
effects of the treatment on the child and family, the effectiveness
of anatomically detailed dolls, problems interviewing the mother
when the father or other male relative is the abuser, confronting
the abuser, recidivism rates, and treatment options such as chem-
ical or physical castration.
In research for the National Center on Child Abuse and Ne-
glect, Berliner and Conte studied the effects of disclosures and in-
tervention on children who have been sexually abused. They
found that these children did not associate the process of inter-
vention with any negative feelings or impacts. The idea that re-
moving a child from the home after sexual abuse has occurred
Treatment
55

causes more stress than the abuse itself was not supported in their
findings. Berliner and Conte did discover, however, that children
were less anxious when their parents and the professionals they
were interacting with were honest about what was happening
and what would happen to them; children who were shielded
from that knowledge were more anxious. Children were also ca-
pable of understanding the need for intervention, yet the level of
the children’s anxiety increased as the number of professionals
with whom they were required to interact rose. The researchers
concluded that professionals working with sexually abused chil-
dren must consider each child individually, not rely on parents
for accurate reports of the child’s anxiety levels. They also found
that the experience of testifying in court is not necessarily trau-
matic to the child (Berliner and Conte 1990).
In assessing the sexually abused child and determining the
appropriate treatment, Sgroi considers ten important issues that
may have an impact on the decision to provide services and treat-
ment to the child: the “damaged goods” syndrome, guilt, fear, de-
pression, low self-esteem and poor social skills, repressed anger
and hostility, inability to trust, blurred role boundaries and role
confusion, pseudomaturity, and self-mastery and control (Sgroi
1998).
In studying current treatment approaches and programs,
Hollenberg and Ragan found that
[c]urrent research indicates that significant gaps exist in
available treatment services in cases of child sexual
abuse. Perhaps because child sexual abuse has been re-
garded primarily as the child’s problem, most of the
available treatment programs limit their focus to the
child victim following an incident of sexual abuse. It is
increasingly apparent, however, that sexual abuse is part
of a cluster of serious intergenerational family problems
that need to be addressed through family-oriented treat-
ment. This is most apparent in regard to the importance
of maternal support, which several studies have found
to be a vital resource for the sexually abused child’s re-
covery. Thus, mental health services that target a range
of familial problems and help nonoffending parents sup-
port their sexually abused children may contribute pos-
itively to the children’s recovery. (Hollenberg and Ragan
1991, 184–185)
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The Use of Anatomically Detailed Dolls
Anatomically detailed dolls, formerly known as anatomically cor-
rect dolls, are usually cloth dolls with certain body features (fin-
gers, mouths, penises, vaginal openings, anal openings, and
pubic hair) that allow children to demonstrate any sexual activi-
ties in which they were involved. They were introduced in the
late 1970s and became popular in the 1990s, being used in prepar-
ing for many of the day-care sexual abuse trials.
The use of anatomically detailed dolls is one means of as-
sessing the extent and nature of the alleged sexual abuse. Some
professionals are adamant about the reliability and validity of
using these dolls, while other experts believe that their use does
not yield reliable results. Proponents believe that the dolls help
the child recall details of the sexual abuse and provide a means
of expressing what happened to them by allowing them to show
the abuse rather than trying to verbalize the experience. On the
other hand, some professionals argue that the dolls may suggest
possibilities to children that lead to false allegations of sexual
abuse, may encourage sexual exploration without actually vali-
dating previous abuse, may encourage children to fantasize
about events, and may be too suggestive for young children to
understand.
In a study comparing abused and nonabused children and
their actions in playing with anatomically detailed dolls, Jam-
pole and Weber found that those children who were sexually
abused were more likely than the nonabused children to involve
the dolls in sexual activities: only two nonabused children out of
ten engaged the dolls in sexual play (Jampole and Weber 1987).
In another study, Glaser and Collins found that children used the
dolls in 78 percent of their play activities, and only two out of the
eighty-six nonabused children incorporated sexual activities in
their play with the dolls (Glaser and Collins 1989). Other studies
have shown similar results. Some report that none of their
nonabused children involved the dolls in any type of sexual ac-
tivity (Sivan et al. 1988; August and Foreman 1988). While these
studies indicate that only children who have been sexually
abused are likely to have the dolls engage in sexual activities,
some studies do indicate that nonabused children will some-
times engage in sexual doll play. Ceci and Bruck believe that the
dolls should not be used for evaluating or diagnosing children
who may have been abused or raped. Because the use of these
Treatment
57

dolls is not standardized, additional research should be con-
ducted before accepting the validity of the results (Ceci and
Bruck 1995).
Even if the dolls themselves are not suggestive, some re-
searchers argue that therapists and other professionals can use
them in suggestive ways, depending on how they are introduced
to the child and what types of questions are asked. Cathy Maan
suggests that training should be provided to all professionals in-
volved in using these dolls to treat children who have been sexu-
ally abused (Maan 1994). Maan reports that the American Profes-
sional Society on the Abuse of Children has developed
preliminary guidelines on ways to use these dolls in investigating
cases of sexual abuse of children. She cites five uses that the or-
ganization views as acceptable:
1. As an icebreaker to help initiate discussions with
children about sexual matters.
2. As anatomical models (for example, to assess children’s
knowledge of bodily functions).
3. To help children demonstrate rather than describe their
experiences. This is especially important if the children’s
verbal skills are limited, or if they are too embarrassed
to describe their experiences.
4. As a stimulus for children’s memories. (For example,
features of the dolls such as pubic hair or genitalia may
help sexually abused children remember the details of
the abuse.)
5. As a screen. Exposure to the dolls represents an
opportunity for children to spontaneously disclose
aspects of their sexual abuse. (ibid., 3)
Some sexual abuse investigators find the use of dollhouses
beneficial, especially with preschoolers. These dollhouses
should be fairly sturdy and large and can provide a context in
which the child can describe the abusive behavior. The child can
position dolls within the dollhouse to show where the abuse
took place, and it may help them to remember certain events.
The use of dollhouses also can provide another opportunity for
the investigator to get to know the child, and to provide an un-
derstanding of how the child thinks about family and family ac-
tivities (Faller 1993).
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Interviewing the Mother
If the child has been sexually abused by the father or stepfather,
the mother is often put in an extremely stressful situation, caught
between her husband and her child. However, interviewing the
mother is critically important in determining her ability to sup-
port the child. As Faller states:
A major purpose of the initial interview with the mother
is to assess her ability to provide support for the child.
Mothers whose children have been sexually victimized
by someone who is close to them, such as a spouse, are
placed in a very difficult position. Often they have no
inkling of the abuse until confronted by a professional.
Mothers who are consciously aware of the victimization
and condone or accept it are extremely rare. However,
some mothers ignore signs of sexual abuse, for a variety
of reasons, or are preoccupied with matters other than
their children’s well-being. . . .
[I]nitial denial is common. . . . Mothers should not be
disparaged because they require time and sometimes
treatment to believe their children have been sexually
abused. Only when denial persists for months in the face
of compelling evidence, and the victim is blamed,
should the mother be considered unworkable. (ibid., 34)
Kempe and Kempe also believe that the mother should be
helped to recognize and understand her own emotions and feel-
ings. They observe that “the mother often feels criticized and
pressured by both professionals and friends to divorce her hus-
band in order to appear to be a good mother” (Kempe and Kempe
1984, 148). Mothers should be encouraged to take their time, to
try to sort out and understand everything that is happening to
them, and to determine what is in their own best interest as well
as that of the child.
Information to be gathered from the mother includes past his-
tory of abuse or neglect, past history of sexual abuse, current liv-
ing situation, education level, employment history, parenting
skills, style of discipline, relationship with spouse or partner, sex-
ual history, history of substance abuse or mental illness, criminal
history, and beliefs about the allegations of sexual abuse of the
child. This same information should be gathered from the offender.
Treatment
59

Confronting the Abuser
For people who admit, as adults, that they were abused as chil-
dren, and for people who recover repressed memories of abuse as
children, some therapists believe that healing from these experi-
ences can occur only if they confront the abuser. However, con-
frontation is often a serious undertaking, to be considered very
carefully and thoughtfully. Mike Lew suggests that for some
people it could be a “logical next step in recovery; for others it
could be a dangerous and self-destructive act” (Lew 1988, 228).
He believes that confrontation means facing the abuse and stand-
ing up to it, not necessarily having a direct encounter with the
abuser. “Confrontation is not the goal of recovery, it is a tool for
recovery. Its value lies in how it is used. You deserve to take
enough time to make the best decision for yourself. You can
change your mind about the confrontation at any time during this
process” (ibid., 231).
In her book with Katherine Ketchum, Dr. Elizabeth Loftus, a
psychologist and leading expert in the field of memory, discusses
the fact that many people who have retrieved repressed memo-
ries of abuse with the help of therapists are then asked whether
they want to confront the abuser with those memories:
She can either continue with therapy, working to resolve
her grief and rage in a private, noncombative way, or she
can choose to stand up to the abuse (and stand up for
herself) by confronting her abusers. The decision to con-
front is never promoted as easy or risk-free. Most incest-
survival authors warn that confrontations should be
considered only if and when the survivor is fully pre-
pared and well along the road to recovery. (Loftus and
Ketcham 1994, 171)
Most people who consider confronting their abusers are told
to build up their support systems (of friends and relatives), to re-
hearse the meeting, and to analyze their reasons for wanting to
confront the abuser. Once they face their abuser, they are often
met with denial and outrage on the part of the accused. Lew sug-
gests that the accuser remember that he or she is not required to
provide proof or to convince the abuser or the rest of the family
that the abuse actually did happen. The only purpose should be
to free the person abused—in essence, to “take back your power,
to prove to yourself that you will not be frightened or controlled
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

any longer, and thus to guarantee that you will never be a victim
again” (Lew 1988, 231).
Laws concerning the sexual exploitation of children have
been passed in all states, and in 1977 the U.S. Congress passed the
Federal Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation Act,
which has been amended several times since it first became law.
In 1984 the U.S. Attorney General’s Task Force on Family Vi-
olence issued its recommendations, which would minimize the
trauma to the victim of violence while still protecting the rights of
the accused. The recommendations included using the same pros-
ecutor throughout the court process, allowing hearsay evidence
at preliminary hearings to minimize the number of times the vic-
tim is required to testify, allowing the child’s testimony to be pre-
sented on videotape, using anatomically detailed dolls to de-
scribe abuse, appointing a special volunteer advocate for the
child, legally presuming that children are competent witnesses,
permitting flexible courtroom settings, controlling press cover-
age, and limiting court continuances of each case (U.S. Attorney
General’s Task Force on Family Violence 1984).
Recidivism
Arguments have been made for incarcerating the perpetrator for
the remainder of his or her life, believing that there are no suc-
cessful means of treating people who sexually abuse children.
Other experts believe that at least some perpetrators can be
saved—that is, they can be successfully treated.
The primary issue in treating sexual offenders is whether or
not they can be treated and safely released back into society. Lit-
tle research has been conducted on this topic; many of the studies
focus on offenders being caught and convicted a second or third
time. Because the focus is on being convicted again, many experts
believe that the studies do not adequately measure the reoccur-
rence of sexual abuse; most sexual abuse of children is not re-
ported and does not come to the attention of the proper authori-
ties. Also, many offenders, especially family members, are never
convicted and sent to prison, which makes studying them ex-
tremely difficult.
Finkelhor also questions the generalizability of results ob-
tained from criminal justice system subjects:
A major problem with research on sexual abusers has to
do with the fact that almost all such research is based on
Treatment
61

subjects recruited from the criminal justice system, ei-
ther incarcerated offenders or probationers in treatment.
This fact certainly casts doubt on the generalizability of
almost all known findings about sexual abusers. Incar-
cerated offenders or probationers in treatment constitute
at most a very tiny and unrepresentative fraction of all
sexual abusers. . . . Thus those sex abusers who are con-
victed or even seen within the criminal justice system
are a small fraction of all offenders, and probably those
who were most flagrant and repetitive in their offend-
ing, most socially disadvantaged, and least able to per-
suade criminal justice authorities to let them off. It seems
virtually certain that such a group cannot be deemed
representative of offenders. (Finkelhor 1986, 138)
Several studies found that men who sexually abused boys or
were exhibitionists were more likely to repeat their offenses than
those who sexually abused girls (Frisbee and Dondis 1965). Other
researchers also have found that those who sexually abuse boys
often start the abuse earlier and are more committed to their pe-
dophilia as a lifestyle (Quinsey et al. 1995; Groth 1979). In 1980,
Meyer and Romero discovered that only two factors predicted re-
cidivism: a prior arrest for a sex offense and a history of indecent
exposure (Meyer and Romero 1980).
Brian Abbott studied the reoffense rates of incest offenders
eight years after treatment. He studied seventy-two offenders
who were accepted into the Child Sexual Abuse Treatment Pro-
gram (CSATP) in San Jose, California. These offenders had a par-
ent/child–type relationship with the abused children (father,
stepfather, adoptive father, uncle, grandfather, etc.); a bond of
trust had existed between the child and the offender, and the of-
fender did not show any evidence of a primary sexual attraction
to children. The offenders were treated in the CSATP: twenty-six
completed the program, twenty were discharged because of lack
of progress, and twenty-six left the program prematurely. Recidi-
vism rates were studied over an eight-year period. The reoffense
rate for the overall sample was 5.5 percent. All reoffenders came
from the group who were discharged from the program for lack
of progress. Abbott concludes:
These findings indicate that treating the incest offender
in the community in conjunction with a county jail sen-
tence and probation supervision does not significantly
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

jeopardize community safety and, in fact, the offender is
less likely to re-offend than if committed to state prison,
with or without treatment. This finding is of importance
in light of the fact that it is much more cost-effective to
treat the offender in the community rather than commit-
ting him to state prison either with or without treatment.
(Abbott 1991, 27–28)
In another study, researchers found that 19 percent of those
abusers who sexually abused their own children, compared with
29 percent of abusers who abused other children, were recidi-
vists—that is, they continued to abuse children after they were
initially caught (Smith et al. 1985).
Bedarf (1995) analyzed recidivism rates of sex offenders and
found that as early as 1950, before there was widespread knowl-
edge of sex offenders, the recidivism rate was only 7 percent. In
1965, only 10 percent of the 3,000 sex offenders followed for up
to twenty-four years were subsequently convicted of another
sexual offense. In the 1970s, mental health professionals believed
that sex offenders had high recidivism rates, while law enforce-
ment personnel and criminologists were re-examining their be-
liefs that sex offenders had high recidivism rates. Many of these
studies examined all sex offenders, not just those involved in
child sexual abuse.
A 1994 study of data from prisons in fifteen states examined
recidivism rates for sex offenders; the 9,691 offenders released
represent two-thirds of all male sex offenders released from all
state prisons in the United States. An analysis of the data indi-
cated that 4,295 of the sex offenders released had been convicted
of child sexual abuse. When compared with the 9,691 sex offend-
ers released and the 262,420 non–sex offenders released during
the study period, the researchers found that the child sexual
abusers were more likely to be rearrested for sexually abusing a
child (Langan et al. 2003).
A meta-analysis of recidivism studies conducted by Hanson
and Bussiere found that the overall recidivism rate for sex of-
fenders who abused children was 12.7 percent, while the rate for
rapists was 18.7 percent (Hanson and Bussiere 1998). Within the
group of sex offenders who abuse children, men who were
convicted of the sexual abuse of a family member were less likely
to reoffend than men who sexually abused an unrelated child
(Quinsey et al. 1995).
Treatment
63

Chemical Castration 
One suggested means to prevent offenders from offending again
is chemical castration or some other type of hormonal treatment
that suppresses the offender’s sexual drive. For example, the
drug medroxyprogesterone acetate (Depo Provera), which has
primarily been used for birth control by women, and cypropro-
terone, which has been used to control prostate cancer, both sup-
press the male sex drive.
Beginning in the 1990s, state legislatures as well as the gov-
ernments in some foreign countries enacted legislation that re-
quires certain sex offenders to submit to chemical castration in
order to be released back into society. California passed a law in
1996 that mandated chemical castration for repeat child sex of-
fenders. Florida’s law, passed in 1997, provides offenders with the
option of choosing physical castration, while Georgia’s law re-
quires sexual offenders who have molested children to take hor-
mone shots that lower their sex drives. Montana’s law, passed in
1997, allows judges to impose chemical castration for repeat
rapists and child molesters.
Groups such as the ACLU argue against both chemical and
physical castration of sex offenders in prison, claiming that it is
unconstitutional. Castration interferes with an individual’s right
to procreate and the right to refuse medical treatment. Under the
law in some states, the judge ultimately determines whether the
offender should be castrated; if chemically castrated, it is the
judge who will determine if and when the offender stops using
the drug. To many, mandatory chemical castration is not medical
treatment but, rather, cruel and unusual punishment. Also, its ef-
fectiveness is questionable, since some offenders may be able to
counteract the drug’s effects with other drugs. Also, the adminis-
tration of the drugs does not get to the underlying psychological
reasons for the deviant behavior (Spalding 1997).
Other researchers believe that chemical or physical castra-
tion—or the use of both—is the best way to protect the public from
repeat sexual offenders. Many offenders will serve their time and
be released from prison; because the success rate for rehabilitating
sex offenders is low, most sexual offenders will likely be back on
the streets to molest another child. In addition, many see castra-
tion as treatment for the offender rather than as punishment.
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Repression/False Memories
The subject of repressed memories continues to be controversial.
In the past several years, many articles and books have been writ-
ten about adults who recall—often with the help of a therapist—
one or more incidents of sexual abuse that they experienced as a
child but have just recently remembered. Therapists who work
with these adults, as well as other experts in the field, truly be-
lieve that the memories are real; how could someone recall these
experiences, often quite vividly and in great detail, if they did not
really happen? Yet other experts, as well as the families of these
“victims,” often believe that the accounts are fabricated. They
question how anyone could forget something as serious as sexual
abuse; many believe that therapists, using a checklist of symp-
toms of child sexual abuse, incorrectly identify the client’s current
problems as child sexual abuse.
Therapists who believe in repressed memories often are
looking for something that happened in a person’s childhood to
explain why the person currently suffers from depression, obe-
sity, anxiety, anorexia, or an assortment of other problems. They
use a checklist that includes such symptoms as difficulty falling
or staying asleep, nightmares, feeling different from other people,
fear of the dark, fear of trying new experiences, and eating disor-
ders. The therapists discover that their clients have a number of
these characteristics, and they suggest sexual abuse as a possible
cause of the clients’ problems. Many clients will at first deny that
they were sexually abused as children, but, desperate to find a
cause for their problems and open to therapists’ suggestions, they
may start thinking about the possibility of abuse. With their ther-
apist’s help and over time, many clients start to believe that they
were indeed sexually abused as children and begin to remember
specific instances of abuse.
The mental health profession has been divided over the con-
cept of repressed memories. Some researchers and clinicians be-
lieve that childhood sexual abuse can be determined by a set pro-
file, a group of characteristics that can be checked off a list, and
that repressed memories are valid indicators of such abuse. Vic-
tims of sexual abuse can be treated only by confronting these
memories, believing them, and working to overcome their life
problems. Other clinicians and researchers are less ready to
Repression/False Memories
65

acknowledge the validity of repressed memories in identifying
abuse victims. They believe that therapists may inadvertently
help a person believe that he or she was sexually abused as a
child based on minimal evidence—especially if a checklist of var-
ious characteristics is used.
The American Psychological Association (APA) believes that
most adults who were sexually abused as children remember the
abuse, even though they may not understand exactly what hap-
pened or why. Researchers who study the dynamics of human
memory agree that memories can be forgotten and, after a certain
amount of time has passed, can be recalled. Memories can also be
suggested to a person and then “remembered” as a true event.
Further research into repressed and recovered memories is
needed to better understand this controversial topic. In the mean-
time, until more is known about memory and repressed memory,
the APA believes that psychiatrists must focus on helping their
clients resolve their problems without letting their own personal
beliefs influence the patient (American Psychological Association
2006).
People who believe that repressed memories of early child-
hood sexual abuse are true believe that many traumatic memories
are hidden away in our unconscious minds, although some of the
emotions associated with them work their way into our conscious
lives and can have a major effect on how we see life and cope with
its many problems. They believe that the mind buries these terri-
ble memories; when we are better able to cope with them, usually
with the help of therapists, we are able to pull these memories
from the hidden recesses of our brains and recall these experi-
ences in great detail. Only by bringing these memories into our
conscious minds are we able to work them out—and help resolve
many of our current problems that have been created by these ex-
periences.
Sigmund Freud was convinced that emotions can be power-
ful enough to block memory, that traumatic memories can be re-
pressed and may never become conscious. He compared the re-
covery of repressed memories to excavating an ancient buried
city, one layer at a time. Using the case of Lucy R., Freud demon-
strated his theory that “an idea must be intentionally repressed
from consciousness” in order for hysterical symptoms to develop
in a person (Freud and Breuer 1895). Even though Freud changed
his mind regarding his theory about hysteria (that women be-
come hysterical because of something that happened to them sex-
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ually in early life), Judith Herman believes that the “legacy of
Freud’s inquiry into the subject of incest was a tenacious preju-
dice, still shared by professionals and laymen alike, that children
lie about sexual abuse” (Herman 1981, 11).
Ellen Bass and Laura Davis believe that repressed memories
are often found in victims of childhood sexual abuse (Bass and
Davis 1994). E. Sue Blume also believes that repression is a com-
mon characteristic among all survivors of childhood sexual abuse
(Blume 1990).
For many researchers and other professionals in the field of
child sexual abuse, it is easy to believe that children may repress
these memories, especially if the abuse is committed by the
child’s father. Fathers are supposed to be the protectors of the
family—they are not supposed to hurt their own children. Many
people believe that there can be nothing worse for a child to bear
than to have been sexually abused by the person that he or she
trusts the most.
Dr. Elizabeth Loftus believes that, despite decades of re-
search on various aspects of memory, no scientific evidence cur-
rently exists to support the idea that memories of trauma are rou-
tinely repressed and reliably recovered years later. Her research
has “helped to create a new paradigm of memory, shifting our
view from the video-recorder model, in which memories are in-
terpreted as the literal truth, to a reconstructionist model, in
which memories are understood as creative blendings of fact and
fiction” (Loftus and Ketcham 1994, 5).
Many experts, including Loftus, understand the importance
of memory and our belief that we can trust our memories, that
they are reliable and can help us make sense of our lives. Most
people do not want to believe that their minds, their memories,
can play tricks on them, that they can distort their reality and pro-
vide a false sense of history, of what has happened in their lives.
Michael Yapko also questioned the validity of repressed
memories. He believes that culture and current social conditions
play a role in the growth of the belief in repressed memories:
[T]he epidemic of allegations of child sexual abuse does
not exist independently of the culture in which the alle-
gations are made. In the past, when therapists were
convinced that abuse reports were sheer fantasy, there
wasn’t much of an abuse problem. Now that the media
and the mental health profession have announced that it
is widespread, we are beginning to see the phenomenon
Repression/False Memories
67

in more and more instances. . . . [In] ever-increasing
numbers, therapists all across the country are actively or
passively encouraging clients to identify themselves as
victims of abuse—or, to be “politically correct,” as
“abuse survivors.” (Yapko 1994, 19–20)
Yapko also discusses another aspect of therapy and the ap-
peal of “discovering” that a client has been sexually abused as a
child. This discovery provides a scapegoat for the individual,
someone else who can be blamed for one’s problems or failures
(Yapko 1994).
Yapko and others are concerned about the innocent people
whose lives are changed forever when repressed memories of
childhood sexual abuse surface. So-called victims who accuse
family members of horrendous acts of abuse destroy families and
themselves. Confronting and accusing a family member of sexual
abuse, based solely on the basis of repressed memories, has dev-
astating effects on both the accuser and the family member being
accused. If the allegation of abuse is not true, the family members
usually are devastated by these allegations and by the inevitable
destruction of the family. Many family members do not under-
stand the concept of repressed memories: “Either you remember
something or you don’t” is the feeling of many people when con-
fronted with this issue.
Psychologist Carol Tavris, in an article on incest in the New
York Times Book Review, takes on Ellen Bass and Laura Davis, who
wrote The Courage to Heal, and others who believe in repressed
memories and repressed memory therapy. She finds fault with
the incest-survivor recovery movement:
The problem is not with the advice they offer to victims,
but with their effort to create victims—to expand the
market that can then be treated with therapy and self-
help books. To do this, survival books all hew to a for-
mula based on an uncritical acceptance of certain prem-
ises about the nature of memory and trauma. They offer
simple answers at a time when research psychologists
are posing hard questions. . . . Uniformly these books
persuade their readers to focus exclusively on past abuse
as the reason for their present unhappiness. Forget fight-
ing with Harold and the kids, having a bad job or no job,
worrying about money. Healing is defined as your real-
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ization that you were a victim of sexual abuse and that it
explains everything wrong in your life. (Tavris 1993, 1)
Based on current research on repressed memory, no defini-
tive conclusions can be drawn about the validity of such memo-
ries. Researchers will continue to study them to determine
whether these memories are real or only a result of suggestion by
therapists and other trusted adults.
Community Notification Laws
Community notification laws have a short history resulting from
the efforts of local communities responding to the abduction of
children—especially two well-known children, Jacob Wetterling
and Megan Kanka. In 1989, Jacob, his brother Trevor, and Aaron,
a friend of the brothers, were riding their bicycles when they were
stopped by a masked man with a gun. The man asked the boys
their ages and released Trevor and Aaron—telling them to run to-
ward the woods and not look back. By the time the boys turned
around, Jacob and the man had disappeared. Even though the po-
lice reached the crime scene within minutes of Jacob’s disappear-
ance, they were unable to locate Jacob or his abductor. Hundreds
of local law enforcement personnel, FBI agents, and volunteers
searched for clues, but Jacob was never found. In 1994 the U.S.
Congress passed the Jacob Wetterling Crimes against Children
and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Program (as part of
the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994),
which requires states to implement a registry of sex offenders and
crimes against children.
On July 29, 1994, seven-year-old Megan Kanka was invited
into Jesse Timmendequas’s home to see his puppy. He took her to
his room, began to touch her inappropriately and, when she tried
to run, raped her and strangled her with a belt. Her body was
found the following day in a field at Mercer County Park, New
Jersey. The murder outraged Mercer County, especially when the
public was informed that Timmendequas was a convicted sex of-
fender who could live wherever he wanted without his neighbors
knowing about his record as a sex offender.
Megan’s family and neighbors launched a campaign for
legislation that would notify community organizations and
neighbors when a convicted sex offender was moving into their
Community Notification Laws
69

neighborhood. New Jersey governor Christine Todd Whitman
signed the first group of laws, named Megan’s Law, just three
months after Megan’s death. Every state now has a version of
Megan’s Law on their books. A national version of Megan’s Law
was signed by President Clinton in 1996; it amended the Jacob
Wetterling Crimes against Children and Sexually Violent Of-
fender Registration Program, requiring states to create their
own systems for registering all sex offenders in their jurisdic-
tions with the local police and adding a provision for commu-
nity notification.
Guidelines for community notification laws have been de-
veloped in all states and include notification based on three lev-
els of risk. Level 1 is for those offenders who have a low risk of re-
offending. Information can be shared with other law enforcement
authorities and any victim or witness to the offense. Level 2 is for
medium-risk offenders and usually adds schools, day-care cen-
ters, businesses and other organizations, and community groups
to the list of those who should be notified when a sex offender
moves into the neighborhood. Level 3 is for high-risk offenders,
the most dangerous offenders, those who are most likely to reof-
fend. The general public is usually notified when a level 3 of-
fender moves into the neighborhood.
The effectiveness of these laws has been hotly debated. On the
one hand, communities are notified when potential sex offenders
move into their neighborhoods, providing them with heightened
awareness of the potential danger to their children. They allow
parents and neighbors to keep an eye on their children. On the
other hand, they can prevent convicted sex offenders, who have
technically paid their debt to society, to resume a “normal” life, in-
cluding finding a job and a place to live. They can promote vigi-
lantism, as neighbors may work to prevent the offender from
moving into their neighborhood or provoke actual attacks on the
offender. For example, in the state of Washington, after Joseph
Gallardo, a convicted child sexual abuser, decided to move back to
his old neighborhood following his release from prison, the neigh-
bors held a protest and burned down his home. Other sex offend-
ers have received death threats, been assaulted, and been forced to
move from their neighborhood (Montana 1995).
Some experts suggest that by forcing sex offenders out of
some neighborhoods, they encourage them to relocate to areas
where the notification laws aren’t strongly enforced. They also
make it difficult for offenders to readjust to freedom and to rein-
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

tegrate themselves into society. Some professionals believe that
sex offenders are never truly rehabilitated and that therefore
these community notification laws reinforce the idea that the sex
offender will never be able to change. If they aren’t able to work
their way back into society, they may turn again to children for
companionship (ibid.).
There have been several challenges to these community noti-
fication laws in various states, often based on issues of equal pro-
tection, double jeopardy, and cruel and unusual punishment.
Challenges based on equal protection argue that the law classifies
sex offenders separately from all other criminals, which violates
equal protection; proponents argue that classifying sex offenders
separately promotes public safety. Challenges based on double
jeopardy argue that the offenders have paid their debt to society
and should not continue to be punished. Challenges based on
cruel and unusual punishment are similar to the double jeopardy
challenges, in that the offender has already paid for his crime and
should not be punished forever.
Another issue surrounding community notification laws is
the threat of vigilantism against offenders. There have been in-
stances of community members banding together and chasing the
offender out of their neighborhood. Threats against the lives of
some offenders have been made, and many offenders have been
attacked or murdered. In 1997 in California, an offender whose
name was released to the public had his car fire-bombed. Other
offenders have had people shooting at their houses, fire-bombing
their homes, and physically attacking them. In 2006, two men in
Maine were gunned down by a man who had obtained informa-
tion about them from the state’s registry of sexual offenders. Pur-
suant to a 2006 Missouri State Supreme Court decision, the ongo-
ing duty to register for pre-1995 offenses was invalidated;
however, all other provisions remain in effect.
Juvenile Offenders and Community Notification
There are special considerations and concerns when the offender is
a juvenile. The success rate for treatment of juveniles who commit
sex crimes against other children is fairly high—several studies
have demonstrated that juvenile offenders who have participated
in treatment programs have a recidivism rate of between 7 and 13
percent over five years, compared with a recidivism rate of be-
tween 15 and 50 percent for nonsexual offenses. However, the
Community Notification Laws
71

reporting requirement of community notification laws makes it
difficult for juveniles to recover and reclaim their lives; they are
marked as sex offenders, ridiculed, and shunned by neighbors.
Young people generally have a harder time overcoming the
shame conveyed by being named as a sexual offender; the juve-
nile justice system generally focuses on rehabilitation, but young
offenders often find it difficult to focus on rehabilitation when the
community is rallying against them (Wind 2003).
Prevention
Prevention efforts are an important part of teaching children how
to protect themselves and in lowering the number of new child
sexual abuse cases. Most professionals in the field believe that
prevention is important, although they may differ on the best
means of prevention. Current issues of concern in this area in-
clude the effectiveness of the ways in which researchers measure
the success of these programs, potential side effects of the pro-
grams, the degree to which these programs are geared to the de-
velopmental levels of the child, the degree of parental involve-
ment in such programs, the means of presenting information to
the child, and the differing perspectives of victims and offenders
(Roberts and Miltenberger 1999).
In evaluating programs, several studies have shown that
programs geared at elementary school–age children have shown
some positive gains. One review of twenty-five studies reported
that children exposed to these programs have shown significant
gains in knowledge about child sexual abuse and what to do if
someone abuses them (Finkelhor and Strapko 1992). The National
Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse summarized the
successes of prevention programs:
With respect to the children, participants who have re-
ceived these instructions demonstrate an increase in
knowledge about safety rules and are more aware of
what to do and who to turn to if they have been or are
being abused. However, children have greater difficulty
in accepting the idea that abuse may occur at the hands
of someone they know. Also, relatively little is known
about whether any of the concepts presented in the
classroom settings translate into behavioral changes that
would prevent sexual assault. Parents and teachers who
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

have attended the informational meetings which gener-
ally precede the classroom presentations report greater
understanding of the problem of sexual abuse and
greater confidence in how to respond to a child’s disclo-
sure. Further, while not preventing initial maltreatment,
the programs do create an environment in which chil-
dren can more easily disclose prior or ongoing maltreat-
ment. As with all prevention programs, these gains are
not universal across all participants; some children, par-
ents, and teachers remain uninformed following the pre-
sentations. (National Committee for the Prevention of
Child Abuse 1986, 1–2)
Generally, research suggests that children younger than five
years old are not able to retain information presented to them
about sexual abuse and make a connection between the informa-
tion and anything that might ever happen to them. Some children
are just too young or immature to understand many of the con-
cepts about sexual abuse that are presented to them. Many in-
structions are difficult for young children to understand. The Na-
tional Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse agrees:
Many child development specialists and concerned ad-
vocates feel these instructions place an inappropriate
burden on young children to be self-protective. They
argue that most preschoolers cannot distinguish be-
tween appropriate and inappropriate touch, nor can
they take the actions necessary to protect themselves
from harm. Rather than targeting the child for interven-
tion, proponents of this position suggest that parents
need to be reached and made more aware of their re-
sponsibility to protect their children. On the other hand,
other experts stress that it is important to integrate
safety concepts into a child’s educational process begin-
ning at the earliest possible age.  (ibid., 2)
Many programs, even those for older children, have found
that when they retested children on the information about sexual
abuse they had been given, many retained little information over
time, especially after a period of eight months to a year had
passed.
Conte suggests that, until researchers better understand the
process by which children are coerced into being sexually abused,
prevention programs will have limited success:
Prevention
73

There has not yet been a systematic study of the victim-
ization process toward the end of identifying new con-
cepts or skills that might be useful in preventing child
sexual abuse. The more that is learned about the coer-
cive process that sexual abuse is, the more questions are
raised about whether current prevention activities are
likely to be all that useful to children exposed to this co-
ercion. Nothing that current prevention efforts teach, for
example, is likely to be helpful in overcoming the fear
instilled in children by the violent dismemberment of a
living animal before them, with the threat that they or
ones they love will be similarly treated if they tell about
their abuse. (Conte 1986, 34) 
Early prevention programs focused on teaching children to
stay away from strangers, believing that most sex offenders were
strangers. However, as more research focused on perpetrators, in-
vestigators began to realize that children were more likely to be
abused by someone they know. As a result, prevention programs
began to focus on offenders known to the children.
Based on a review of twenty-seven control group studies on
the effectiveness of existing school-based, child sexual abuse pre-
vention programs, Davis and Gidycz found that children who
participated in prevention programs at school were more likely to
improve their knowledge and skills concerning sexual abuse than
were nonparticipants (Davis and Gidycz 2000). While this and
other studies focus on the effectiveness of prevention programs in
teaching children about sexual abuse, few studies have been con-
ducted on whether these and other prevention programs actually
prevent a child from being sexually abused.
Finkelhor and his colleagues conducted a national telephone
survey of 2,000 children between the ages of ten and sixteen
years. They found that children who participated in school-based
prevention programs demonstrated greater knowledge concern-
ing sexual abuse and also were more likely to exhibit protective
behaviors and use protective strategies when threatened with
abuse (Finkelhor and Dziuba-Leatherman 1995). In a follow-up
study the next year, Finkelhor and his colleagues contacted many
of the 2,000 children previously studied and again found that
children who had participated in school-based programs con-
cerning sexual abuse prevention were more likely to use protec-
tive strategies. However, there was no indication that those pre-
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

vention programs actually helped children avoid becoming vic-
tims of sexual abuse (Finkelhor et al. 1995).
Later studies have provided some indication that school-
based programs may help children to avoid becoming victims of
sexual abuse. Gibson and Leitenberg, in a study of 825 female un-
dergraduates, found that women who had not participated in a
school-based prevention program were almost twice as likely to
have been sexually abused as a child as those who had partici-
pated (Gibson and Leitenberg 2000). In another, smaller study, Ko
and Cosden surveyed high school students and found that those
who had participated in a child abuse prevention program (not
specifically on sexual abuse, but on the broader topic of child
abuse) were no less likely to be sexually abused than those who
had not participated in such a program (Ko and Cosden 2001).
Sexual Abuse Committed by Clergy
While most of the attention concerning clergy abuse has been fo-
cused on the Catholic Church, other denominations also have is-
sues with their clergy committing sexual abuse of children. For
example, in 2004, nine victims who accused a governing body of
the Lutheran Church in Marshall, Texas, of concealing a former
pastor’s past sexual abuse history were awarded almost $37 mil-
lion by a Texas jury. The former pastor, who was the church’s pas-
tor from 1997 to 2001, had been convicted on child pornography
charges and sentenced to five years in federal prison. He was
more recently sentenced to 397 years in state prison after being
convicted on eleven counts of multiple sex crimes against chil-
dren.
In 1984, one of the first public cases of clergy abuse was filed
in Louisiana. The priest, Gilbert Gauthe, was sentenced to twenty
years in prison after pleading guilty to thirty-nine counts of sex-
ual battery. The following year, as more incidents were reported
and cases filed, a report was drafted by three individuals familiar
with the Gauthe case. The report estimated the legal and financial
liability as a result of sexual abuse of minors by priests and pro-
vided guidelines on ways to respond to the allegations of abuse.
The U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops drafted the Charter
for the Protection of Children and Young People in response to
the growing awareness of the problem of child sexual abuse by
Catholic priests. They created two entities to address the problem:
Sexual Abuse Committed by Clergy
75

the National Review Board and the Office of Child and Youth
Protection.
One of the mandates of the National Review Board was to
evaluate the “causes and context” of this crisis, and in 2004 the
board issued its report (U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops
2004). While most priests in the United States “fulfill their roles
honorably and chastely,” the board found that “there were credi-
ble allegations that several thousand priests, comprising four per-
cent of priests in ministry over the last half-century, committed
acts of sexual abuse of minors” (ibid., 4). Specifically, the research
indicated that 4,392 priests were accused of sexually abusing a
minor between 1950 and 2002—or 4 percent of the 109,694 priests
active during that period. Some 10,667 minors were abused, and
81 percent of them were male. The number of allegations ap-
peared to have peaked in the 1970s, decreasing thereafter. Ana-
lyzed by number of allegations per priest, the results indicated
that 56 percent of the accused priests had one allegation made
against them; 27 percent had two or three allegations; 14 percent
had four to nine; and 3 percent had ten or more allegations made
against them. In terms of the type of abusive behavior reported
(not all allegations were described), 27 percent of the priests al-
legedly performed oral sex on the children, and 25 percent en-
gaged in penile penetration or attempted penetration.
Most of the time when abuse was alleged, the diocese did
take some type of action. However, not all priests were removed
from contact with minors; some were simply transferred to an-
other diocese where they could again engage in abusive behavior.
The study found that slightly more than 100 priests actually
served time in prison for sexually abusing a minor. In many other
cases, the abuse was not reported to civil authorities.
Following the Gauthe case that first brought widespread at-
tention to allegations of abuse in the Catholic Church, lawsuits
were filed throughout the country. The Church could no longer
hope that the incidence of sexual abuse by priests was localized
in a few dioceses. Lawsuits were filed across the country, includ-
ing Santa Fe, Boston, Dallas, New York, Phoenix, and Los Ange-
les, but the news focused primarily on the archdiocese of Boston.
Father John Geoghan was transferred from one parish to another,
even though many allegations had been made against him; the
first allegation was made in 1979 and continued into the 1990s.
He was indicted in 1999 on child rape charges and in 2002 was
convicted of indecent assault and battery and sentenced to ten
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

years in prison where, in 2003, he was murdered. Another priest,
Father Paul Shanley, even caught the attention of the Vatican in
1978, after he had made several comments in public that ap-
peared to support homosexual conduct with minors. He was al-
leged to have abused several young boys but was allowed to re-
main in the ministry until 1996. The archbishop of Boston at the
time, Cardinal Law, later admitted that he had transferred priests
accused of sexual abuse of minors to other parishes. He later
apologized and resigned as archbishop in 2002. That same year,
Pope John Paul II met with cardinals from the United States and
leaders of the Conference to the Vatican to discuss the problems
of priests and the sexual abuse of minors.
In 2002 the USCCB adopted the Charter for the Protection of
Children and Young People as well as the Essential Norms, which
set standards for how to deal with sexual abuse of minors, in-
cluding the permanent removal from the ministry of any priest
who sexually abuses a minor. In effect, the Church instituted a
zero-tolerance policy that called for the removal of a priest for any
act of sexual abuse—no matter what the abusive behavior en-
tailed. The zero-tolerance policy even applied to priests who had
reported themselves in order to get help; the Church realized that
these measures were necessary to deal with the problem of sexual
abuse committed by priests and the growing news media atten-
tion.
In its report, the National Review Board also had something
to say about celibacy and about homosexuality. The report indi-
cated that, while the authors did not believe that celibacy led to
the sexual abuse of minors, the Church needed to do a better job
in explaining celibacy and in preparing young priests for a celi-
bate life. On the issue of homosexuality, the report’s authors were
concerned because most of the targets of the sexual abuse were
boys; therefore, they assumed that the priests who committed
most of the abuse were homosexual. The report’s authors be-
lieved that they “must call attention to the homosexual behavior
that characterized the vast majority of the cases of abuse observed
in recent decades. That eighty-one percent of the reported victims
of child sexual abuse by Catholic clergy were boys shows that the
crisis was characterized by homosexual behavior” (ibid., 80).
This scandal has damaged the Church’s credibility and au-
thority, and it will have to change its attitude and work to regain
the trust that has been lost. The Review Board believes that there
are several steps that the Church can take to ensure children’s
Sexual Abuse Committed by Clergy
77

safety and to regain trust and respect. These recommendations in-
clude: (1) further study of the causes and context of sexual abuse,
(2) careful screening of candidates to the priesthood, (3) increased
sensitivity and better response to allegations of sexual abuse, (4)
better accountability of Church leaders, (5) increased communi-
cation and cooperation with civil authorities, and (6) better and
more meaningful participation of the Christian laity (U.S. Confer-
ence of Catholic Bishops 2004). According to other observers, the
Church must clearly describe the actions it will take to prevent
additional occurrences of sexual abuse, as well as show more re-
morse for its past behavior and more compassion to its victims
(Robertson 2005).
Statutes of Limitations
Over the past several years, there has been increasing debate over
extending the civil and criminal statutes of limitations in child
sexual abuse cases. In essence, all states have time limits for filing
a lawsuit to recover damages. On the criminal side of the law, fed-
eral, state, or local governments have a certain amount of time to
bring charges against individuals for alleged offenses (as opposed
to murder, which is the only criminal offense that does not cur-
rently have a statute of limitations associated with it). On the civil
side, plaintiffs have a certain amount of time in which to bring
charges against a party whom they believe has injured them in
some way. In cases of child sexual abuse, there are both civil and
criminal options to punishing the perpetrator.
Proponents of these limits have good reasons for supporting
them. Statutes of limitations for criminal offenses force law en-
forcement agencies to investigate alleged crimes in a timely man-
ner, ensure that evidence is collected before it becomes stale or is
destroyed, ensure that the alleged offender has a speedy trial, and
protect the public from alleged criminals who otherwise could be
out on the streets committing additional crimes before they are
charged and prosecuted. In addition, witnesses may move out of
the area, disappear, or forget the details of their testimony if too
much time passes before a case is investigated and brought to trial.
Opponents believe that the current court system is set up to
protect defendants’ rights to timely evidence collection and a
speedy trial. Many also believe that in many cases, especially in
cases of child sexual abuse, the abuse is not disclosed immedi-
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ately, or is repressed, and victims need additional time to think
about bringing charges against the perpetrator.
Generally, in civil cases, the statute of limitations begins to
run at the time of the offense; however, sometimes the offense is
not readily apparent, and in those cases, legislatures have created
a means by which the statute can be frozen, or tolled, especially
when the victim suffers some type of mental deficiency, has not
reached the age of majority, or is not aware of the harm caused. In
such cases, the statute of limitations begins when the plaintiff be-
comes aware or should become aware of the offense and the dam-
ages. Most states currently suspend the statute of limitations
when the person is a minor.
The problem with statutes of limitations in cases of child sex-
ual abuse originally centered on adults who were abused as chil-
dren but did not tell anyone until years afterward. It became more
apparent when individuals began to recall memories of sexual
abuse that had been repressed for many years. This issue is still
hotly discussed, as more individuals are coming forth and admit-
ting that they have been abused by Catholic clergy or others and
had told no one because they were afraid, embarrassed, or pres-
sured to keep quiet.
At least twenty-eight states currently have extended the
statute of limitations regarding child sexual abuse, and some oth-
ers are considering doing so. See Chapter 6 for more information
on each state’s statute.
Online Predators
The growing popularity of the Internet, especially among chil-
dren and teens, also brings with it a growing population of pred-
ators that use the Internet to locate potential sexual abuse victims,
as well as to locate child pornography. See Chapter 3 for a dis-
cussion of issues relating to Internet solicitations and child
pornography (Internet and child pornography reach beyond the
physical borders of the United States). One issue currently in the
news is the role of police and other adults who pose as juveniles
online to catch online predators.
Statistics vary on the number of solicitations that juveniles
receive online, but some researchers believe that as many as 20
percent of children are solicited each year (Finkelhor et al. 2000).
While some of these solicitations may be relatively harmless,
Online Predators
79

others can pose a greater danger to young children and teens, and
may include involvement with adults that can lead to sexual
abuse or exploitation.
Results from the National Juvenile Online Victimization
Study indicate that law enforcement agencies are successful in
stopping some offenders before they molest a child. While some
people believe that having a police officer pose as a juvenile in
order to catch a potential abuser is entrapment, the prosecution of
these individuals has for the most part been successful. While
some offenders raise entrapment as a defense, judges and juries
have largely not been in agreement.
References
Abbott, Brian R. 1991. Sexual Re-offense Rates among Incest Offenders Eight
Years after Leaving Treatment. San Jose, CA: Giarretto Institute.
Allen, Craig. 1991. Women and Men Who Sexually Abuse Children: A Com-
parative Analysis. Orwell, VT: Safer Society.
American Psychological Association. 2006. “Questions and Answers
about Memories of Childhood Abuse.” http://www.apa.org/topics
/memories.html.
August, R., and B. Foreman. 1988. “A Comparison of Sexually and Non-
Sexually Abused Children’s Behavioral Responses to Anatomically Cor-
rect Dolls.” Child Psychiatry and Human Development 20, no. 1: 39–47.
Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis. 1994. The Courage to Heal: A Guide for Sur-
vivors of Child Sexual Abuse. 3d ed. New York: HarperPerennial.
Bedarf, Abril R. 1995. “Examining Sex Offender Community Notification
Laws.” California Law Review 83: 885.
Berliner, Lucy, and Jon R. Conte. 1990. “Effects of Disclosure and Inter-
vention on Sexually Abused Children.” Final report to NCCAN of grant
#90CA1181. Seattle: University of Washington Sexual Assault Center.
Blume, E. Sue. 1990. Secret Survivors: Uncovering Incest and Its Aftereffects
in Women. New York: Ballantine.
Broussard, S., N. G. Wagner, and R. Kazelskis. 1991. “Undergraduate Stu-
dents’ Perceptions of Child Sexual Abuse: The Impact of Victim Sex, Per-
petrator Sex, Respondent Sex, and Victim Response.” Journal of Family Vi-
olence 6: 267–278.
Cameron, Paul, William Cobrun, Jr., Helen Larson, Kay Proctor, Nels
Forde, and Kirk Cameron. 1986. “Child Molestation and Homosexual-
ity.” Psychological Reports 58: 327–337.
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Ceci, Stephen, and Maggie Bruck. 1995. Jeopardy in the Courtroom: A Sci-
entific Analysis of Children’s Testimony. Washington, DC: American Psy-
chological Association.
Ceci, Stephen J., and Richard D. Friedman. 2000. “The Suggestibility of
Children: Scientific Research and Legal Implications.” Cornell Law Review
86: 33.
Conte, Jon. 1986. A Look at Child Sexual Abuse. Chicago: National Com-
mittee for Prevention of Child Abuse.
Davis, M., and C. Gidycz. 2000. “Child Sexual Abuse Prevention Pro-
grams: A Meta-Analysis.” Journal of Clinical Child Psychology 29, no. 2:
257–265.
Denov, Myriam S. 2003. “The Myth of Innocence: Sexual Scripts and the
Recognition of Child Sexual Abuse by Female Perpetrators.” Journal of
Sex Research 40, no. 3: 303–308.
Faller, Kathleen Coulborn. 1993. Child Sexual Abuse: Intervention and
Treatment Issues. Washington, DC: National Center on Child Abuse and
Neglect.
Finkelhor, David. 1986. A Sourcebook on Child Sexual Abuse. Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Finkelhor, D., N. Asdigian, and J. Dziuba-Leatherman. 1995. “The Effec-
tiveness of Victimization Prevention Instruction: An Evaluation of Chil-
dren’s Responses to Actual Threats and Assaults.” Child Abuse and Ne-
glect 19, no. 2: 141–153.
Finkelhor, David, and J. Dziuba-Leatherman. 1995. “Victimization Pre-
vention Programs: A National Survey of Children’s Exposure and Reac-
tions.” Child Abuse and Neglect 19, no. 2: 129–139.
Finkelhor, David, and Lisa M. Jones. 2004. Explanations for the Decline in
Child Sexual Abuse Cases. Washington, DC: Office of Juvenile Justice and
Delinquency Prevention.
Finkelhor, David, Kimberly J. Mitchell, and Janis Wolak. 2000. Online Vic-
timization: A Report on the Nation’s Youth. Alexandria, VA: National Cen-
ter for Missing and Exploited Children.
Finkelhor, David, and Nancy Strapko. 1992. “Sexual Abuse Prevention
Education: A Review of Evaluation Studies.” In Child Abuse Prevention,
edited by D. Willis, E. Holder, and M. Rosenberg. New York: John Wiley.
Freud, Sigmund, and Josef Breuer. 2004 [1895]. Studies on Hysteria. New
York: Penguin Classics.
Freund, K., G. Heasman, I. G. Racansky, and G. Glancy. 1984. “Pedophilia
and Heterosexuality vs. Homosexuality.” Journal of Sex and Marital Ther-
apy 10: 193–200.
References
81

Frisbee, L. V., and E. H. Dondis. 1965. Recidivism among Treated Sex Of-
fenders. Sacramento: California Department of Mental Hygiene.
Gallagher, Bernard. 2000. “The Extent and Nature of Known Cases of In-
stitutional Child Sexual Abuse.” British Journal of Social Work 30: 795–817.
Gibbons, Michael, and Dana Campbell. 2003. “General Aspects of Recre-
ation Law: Liability of Recreation and Competitive Sport Organizations
for Sexual Assaults on Children by Administrators, Coaches and Volun-
teers.” Legal Aspects of Sport 13: 185–229.
Gibson, L., and H. Leitenberg. 2000. “Child Sexual Abuse Prevention
Programs: Do They Decrease the Occurrence of Child Sexual Abuse?”
Child Abuse and Neglect 24, no. 9: 1115–1125.
Glaser, D., and C. Collins. 1989. “The Response of Young, Non-Sexually
Abused Children to Anatomically Correct Dolls.” Journal of Child Psy-
chology and Psychiatry 30: 547–560.
Groth, Nicholas. 1979. Men Who Rape. New York: Plenum.
Groth, Nicholas, and T. S. Gary. 1982. “Heterosexuality, Homosexuality,
and Pedophilia: Sexual Offenses against Children and Adult Sexual Ori-
entation.” Pp. 143–152 in Male Rape: A Casebook of Sexual Aggressions, ed-
ited by A. M. Scacco. New York: AMS.
Hammerschlag, Margaret R. 2002. Sexually Transmitted Diseases and Child
Sexual Abuse. Washington, DC: Office of Juvenile Justice and Delin-
quency Prevention.
Hanson, R. K., and M. Bussiere. 1998. “Predicting Relapse: A Meta-analy-
sis of Sexual Offender Recidivism Studies.” Journal of Consulting and Clin-
ical Psychology 66, no. 2: 348–362.
Hendrie, Caroline. 1998. “A Trust Betrayed: Sexual Abuse by Teachers.”
Education Week (December 2, 9, 16).
Herman, Judith L. 1981. Father-Daughter Incest. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Hollenberg, Elizabeth, and Cynthia Ragan. 1991. Child Sexual Abuse: Se-
lected Projects. Washington, DC: National Center on Child Abuse and
Neglect.
Jampole, L., and M. K. Weber. 1987. “An Assessment of the Behavior of
Sexually Abused and Non-Sexually Abused Children with Anatomically
Correct Dolls.” Child Abuse and Neglect 11: 187–192.
Jennings, Diane, and Robert Tharp. 2003. “Betrayal of Trust.” Dallas
Morning News (May 4, 5, 6).
Jenny, C., T. A. Roesler, and K. L. Poyer. 1994. “Are Children at Risk for
Sexual Abuse by Homosexuals?” Pediatrics 94: 41–44.
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Katz, Nancie. 2002. “Jail for Coach in Sex Abuse,” New York Daily News
(July 16), p. 2.
Kaufman, K. L., D. R. Hilliker, and E. L. Daleiden. 1996. “Subgroup Dif-
ferences in the Modus Operandi of Adolescent Sexual Offenders.” Child
Maltreatment 1: 17–24.
Kempe, Ruth S., and C. Henry Kempe. 1984. The Common Secret: Sexual
Abuse of Children and Adolescents. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Ko, S., and M. Cosden. 2001. “Do Elementary School-Based Child Abuse
Prevention Programs Work? A High School Follow-Up.” Psychology in the
Schools 38, no. 1: 57–66.
Langan, Patrick A., Erica L. Schmitt, and Matthew R. Durose. 2003. Re-
cidivism of Sex Offenders Released from Prison in 1994. Washington, DC: Bu-
reau of Justice Statistics.
Lew, Mike. 1988. Victims No Longer: Men Recovering from Incest and Other
Sexual Child Abuse. New York: Harper and Row.
Loftus, Elizabeth, and Katherine Ketcham. 1994. The Myth of Repressed
Memory: False Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse. New York: St.
Martin’s.
Maan, Cathy. 1994. “Current Issues in Using Anatomical Dolls.” Violence
Update 4: 1–4.
McConaghy, Nathaniel. 1998. “Paedophilia: A Review of the Evidence.”
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry 32, no. 2: 252–265.
Meyer, L., and J. Romero. 1980. Ten-Year Follow-up of Sex Offender Recidi-
vism. Philadelphia: Joseph Peters Institute.
Montana, Jenny. 1995. “Note: An Ineffective Weapon in the Fight against
Child Sexual Abuse: New Jersey’s Megan’s Law.” Journal of Law and Pol-
icy 3: 569–602.
Monto, M., G. Zgourides, and R. Harris. 1998. “Empathy, Self-Esteem,
and the Adolescent Sexual Offender.” Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research
and Treatment 10: 127–140.
National Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse. 1986. Child As-
sault Prevention with Preschoolers: What Do We Know? Chicago: National
Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse.
Quinsey, V. L., et al. 1995. “Actuarial Prediction of Sexual Recidivism.”
Journal of Interpersonal Violence 10: 85.
Richardson, G., T. P. Kelly, S. R. Bhate, and F. Graham. 1997. “Group Dif-
ferences in Abuser and Abuse Characteristics in a British Sample of Sex-
ually Abusive Adolescents.” Sexual Abuse: A Journal of Research and Treat-
ment 9: 239–257.
References
83

Righthand, Sue, and Carlann Welch. 2001. Juveniles Who Have Sexually Of-
fended: A Review of the Professional Literature. Washington, DC: U.S. De-
partment of Justice.
Roberts, Jennifer A., and Raymond G. Miltenberger. 1999. “Emerging Is-
sues in the Research on Child Sexual Abuse Prevention.” Education and
Treatment of Children 22, no. 1: 84-103.
Robertson, Kathleen R. 2005. “Dark Days for the Church: Canon Law and
the Response of the Roman Catholic Church to the Sex Abuse Scandals.”
Washington University Global Studies Law Review 4: 161–185.
Sgroi, Suzanne. 1998. Vulnerable Populations: Evaluation and Treatment of
Sexually Abused Children and Adult Survivors. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Shakeshaft, Charol. 2003. “Educator Sexual Abuse.” Hofstra Horizons
(Spring): 10–13.
Shakeshaft, Charol, and Audrey Cohan. 1995. “Sexual Abuse of Students
by School Personnel.” Phi Delta Kappan 76, no. 7: 513–520.
Sivan, Abigail B., D. P. Schor, G. K. Koeppl, and L. D. Noble. 1988. “In-
teraction of Normal Children with Anatomical Dolls.” Child Abuse and
Neglect 12: 295–304.
Smith, Peggy, Marvin Bohnstedt, Elizabeth Lennon, and Kathleen Grove.
1985. Long-Term Correlates of Child Victimization: Consequences of Interven-
tion and Non-Intervention. Washington, DC: National Center on Child
Abuse and Neglect.
Spalding, Larry Helm. 1997. “Chemical Castration: A Return to the Dark
Ages.” http://www.aclufl.org/about/newsletters/1997/chem.cfm.
Stein, Nan D., Nancy Marshall, and Linda R. Tropp. 1993. Secrets in Pub-
lic: Sexual Harassment in Our Schools. Wellesley, MA: Wellesley Centers for
Women.
Tavris, Carol. 1993. “Beware the Incest-Survivor Machine.” New York
Times Book Review 78 (January 3): 1.
U.S. Attorney General’s Task Force on Family Violence. 1984. Final Report
of the U.S. Attorney General’s Task Force on Family Violence. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops (USCCB). 2004. A Report on the Cri-
sis in the Catholic Church in the United States. Washington, DC: U.S. Con-
ference of Catholic Bishops.
Wind, Timothy E. 2003. “The Quandary of Megan’s Law: When the Child
Sex Offender Is a Child.” John Marshall Law Review 37: 73–124.
Wishnietsky, Dan H. 1991. “Reported and Unreported Teacher-Student
Sexual Harassment.” Journal of Educational Research 84, no. 3: 164–169.
Yapko, Michael D. 1994. Suggestions of Abuse: True and False Memories of
Childhood Sexual Trauma. New York: Simon and Schuster.
84
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Worldwide Perspective
A
ccording to UNICEF’s 2004 report on the state of the world’s
children, there are 2.2 billion children in the world. Some 1.9
billion of them live in developing countries, and 1 billion of
them live in poverty.
This chapter will explore the characteristics of child sexual
abuse around the world. It will examine how child sexual abuse
is defined and dealt with in other countries. There are similari-
ties in the characteristics of child sexual abuse among the devel-
oped countries, including the European countries, Canada, Aus-
tralia, and New Zealand. The focus and characteristics of child
sexual abuse in developing countries may differ from that of de-
veloped countries, and those differences will be explored. Cul-
tural and religious differences also play a role in definitions,
identification, treatment, and punishment of child sexual abuse.
Finally, major issues that are of worldwide concern will be ex-
amined, including child pornography, child prostitution, and sex
tourism.
International Laws and Conventions 
There are many international laws and conventions that protect
children from abuse and exploitation, including sexual abuse and
sexual exploitation. A brief description of the major laws and
conventions is provided here. The United Nations has been a
major player in the development of many of the international
85

laws and conventions currently in existence. The major ones in-
clude the following:
The UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, ratified by
every country (as of 2005) except Somalia and the United States,
is the most comprehensive treaty on children’s rights. It was
adopted in 1989 and entered into force in 1990. According to Ar-
ticle 19, children have the right to protection “from all forms of
physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent
treatment, maltreatment or exploitation including sexual abuse,
while in the care of parent(s), legal guardian(s), or any other per-
son who has the care of the child.” Article 32 recognizes “the
right of the child to be protected from economic exploitation and
from performing any work that is likely to be hazardous . . . or to
be harmful to the child’s health or physical, mental, spiritual,
moral, or social development.” Article 34 specifically requires
state parties to protect their children from sexual exploitation,
urging them to implement measures to prevent the inducement
of a child into sexual activity, prostitution, pornography, or other
unlawful sexual practices. Articles 35 and 36 require state parties
to ensure the protection of children against abduction, sale, or
trafficking, and against any form of exploitation prejudicial to
the child’s welfare.
The International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR) entered into force in 1966. It provides for the protection
of children against violence and other forms of abuse. For exam-
ple, Article 8 protects all persons from being held in slavery or
servitude; all forms of the slave trade are prohibited, and no one
can be required to perform forced or compulsory labor. Article 24
requires that all children have the right to all forms of protection
as required by their status as minors.
The Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment was adopted in 1984 and
entered into force in 1987. It protects all persons, including chil-
dren, from torture or cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or
punishment.
The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the UN
Convention against Transnational Organized Crime entered into
force in September 2003. Its purpose is to prevent and combat
trafficking in persons, especially women and children; to protect
86
Worldwide Perspective

and assist victims; and to promote cooperation among state par-
ties in meeting its objectives.
The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography was adopted in May 2000 and entered into force in
January 2002. It recognized the growing use of children in prosti-
tution and pornography and prohibits the sale of children, child
prostitution, and child pornography.
Other Conventions
The Hague Convention on Jurisdiction, Applicable Law, Recogni-
tion, Enforcement and Co-Operation in Respect of Parental Re-
sponsibility and Measures for the Protection of Children entered
into force in January 2002. State parties are required to take meas-
ures to protect children in the areas of parental responsibility and
contact, protection and care, custody disputes, their representa-
tion, and protection of their property.
The Yokohama Global Commitment 2001, adopted by the
Second World Congress against Commercial Sexual Exploitation
of Children, requested that states “take adequate measures to ad-
dress negative aspects of new technologies, in particular child
pornography on the Internet, while recognizing the potential of
new technologies for the protection of children from commercial
sexual exploitation, through dissemination and exchange of in-
formation and networking among partners.”
The Convention Concerning the Prohibition and Immediate
Action for the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour
(ILO Convention No. 182) defines the use, procurement, or offer
of a child for prostitution, for the production of pornography, or
for pornographic purposes.
The 2002 outcome document of the UN General Assembly’s
twenty-seventh special session, A World Fit for Children, asked
states to “raise awareness of the illegality and harmful conse-
quences of sexual exploitation and abuse, including through the
Internet,” and to “take necessary measures, including through en-
hanced cooperation between Governments, intergovernmental
organizations, the private sector and non-governmental organi-
zations to combat the criminal use of information technologies,
Other Conventions
87

including the Internet, for the purposes of the sale of children, for
child prostitution, child pornography, child sex tourism, pae-
dophilia and other forms of violence and abuse against children
and adolescents” (UN General Assembly 2002, 18).
Regional Laws and Conventions
The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), in
its 2001 Declaration and its Plan of Action on Trafficking in Per-
sons, appealed to its member states to focus attention on imple-
menting existing international agreements for eliminating traf-
ficking in persons, including children, and on criminal justice
responses to trafficking. It suggested that each member state es-
tablish a National Task Force on Trafficking in Persons.
The African Union, during the 2002 session of its Labour and
Social Affairs Commission, identified the elimination of child
trafficking as an organizational priority.
The African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights, adopted
in 1981 and entered into force in 1986, requires, in Article 18, that
the state “shall ensure the elimination of every discrimination
against women and also ensure the protection of the rights of the
woman and the child as stipulated in international declarations
and conventions.”
The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,
adopted in 1990 and entered into force in 1999, contains several
articles relating to the protection of the child from all types of sex-
ual abuse. Article 15 protects the child from “all forms of eco-
nomic exploitation.” Article 16 directs state parties to protect the
child from “all forms of torture, inhuman or degrading treatment
and especially physical or mental injury or abuse, neglect or mal-
treatment including sexual abuse.” Article 17 protects children
who are detained from torture or other inhuman treatment and
requires that they be separated from adults while in detention.
Article 21 protects children from harmful social and cultural prac-
tices, prohibiting child marriage and the betrothal of girls and
boys, specifying that the minimum age of marriage is eighteen
years. Article 27 protects children against all forms of sexual ex-
ploitation and sexual abuse, specifically any sexual activity, child
prostitution, and child pornography. Article 29 prohibits the ab-
duction, sale, or trafficking of a child for any reason.
88
Worldwide Perspective

Incidence and Prevalence of
Child Sexual Abuse
Children throughout the world can be exposed to violence and
abuse. War zones and refugee camps are two areas that are often
in the headlines. However, children throughout the world are at
risk for sexual abuse in other areas as well: schools, orphanages,
at home, at work, and on the streets. Perpetrators include family
members, neighbors, law enforcement personnel, teachers, and
strangers. A 1996 study of violence against children in eighteen
countries conducted by Human Rights Watch found that children
throughout the world were exposed to varying levels and types
of violence, including sexual abuse. While in police custody chil-
dren are beaten and sexually abused, and young girls who live on
the streets have reported that they are sometimes forced to pro-
vide sex to the police in order to avoid being arrested or as a con-
dition of their release from police custody. In juvenile correctional
institutions children are exposed to physical and sexual assaults,
forced labor, harassment, torture, and other forms of abuse. In
schools, children, especially girls, are at risk for sexual abuse from
other students and from teachers. In refugee camps and war
zones, women and children are at high risk for sexual abuse
(Human Rights Watch 2001a).
The following sections provide a survey of child sexual
abuse research from various countries. For organizational pur-
poses, the countries are divided into developed and developing
countries according to UN definition. Developed countries are
those countries that are considered capitalist and industrial, and
include countries in North America, Europe, Japan, Australia,
and New Zealand. Developing regions include Africa, the
Caribbean, Central and South America, Asia (excluding Japan),
and Oceania (excluding Australia and New Zealand).
Developed Regions/Countries
Sexual abuse of children in developed/industrialized countries—
such as Western Europe, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and
Japan—is similar to that in the United States. These countries have
similar issues and laws concerning the sexual abuse of children.
Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
89

The developed countries generally define a child as a person
under the age of eighteen years, following the definition pro-
vided in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. Table 3.1
provides information concerning age of majority, age of consent
for sexual activity, and age of consent for marriage in selected
countries.
(continues)
90
Worldwide Perspective
TABLE 3.1
Age of Majority, Age of Consent for Sexual Activity, and Age for Consent for
Marriage for Selected Countries
Country
Age of Simple Majority
Age of Consent for
Sexual Activity
Age of Consent for
Marriage
Albania
14
Not specified
16 – female
18 – males
Argentina
18
15
21
Armenia
18
16
18 – males
17 – females
16 – females under
exceptional circumstances
Australia
18
16
18
16 – with parental purpose
Austria
18
Not specified
18
Azerbaijan
18
Not specified
18 – males
17 – females
Bahamas
18
16
18
Bahrain
21
Only through marriage
15
21 if girl does not have
parental consent
Barbados
18
16
Belarus
18
18
18
Belgium
18
16
18
Bhutan
18
Bolivia
18
14 – females
16 – males
16 – males
14 – females
Bosnia Herzegovina
18
15
18
16 if court allows
Brazil
21
females – after puberty
16 – with parental consent
Brunei
18
16
18
Bulgaria
18
Not specified
16
Burundi
females – 18
males – 21
Not specified
18 – females
21 – males
Cambodia
18
16
18 – females
20 – males

(continues)
Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
91
TABLE 3.1 (continued)
Age of Majority, Age of Consent for Sexual Activity, and Age for Consent for
Marriage for Selected Countries
Country
Age of Simple Majority
Age of Consent for Sexual
Activity
Age of Consent for
Marriage
Canada
Fixed by province
14
Fixed by province
China
18
Not specified
22 – males
20 – females
China (Hong Kong)
18
16
21
Colombia
18
12 – females
14 – males
14 – females
16 – males
Croatia
18
14
18
Czech Republic
18
15
18
Denmark
18
15
18
Djibouti
18
18
18
Dominica
18
16
18
Egypt
21
18
16
Finland
18
16
18
France
18
15
18 – males
15 – females
Germany
N/A
N/A
18
Gibraltar
17
16
18
Greece
18
15
18
Guatemala
18
14 – females
16 – males
18
Guinea
21
15
17 – females
18 – males
Guyana
18
16
18
Hungary
18
14
18
16 – with parental consent
Iceland
18
14
18
India
18
18
18 – males
21 – females
Indonesia
18 – males
15 – females
19 – males
16 – females
18 – males
15 – females
Ireland
18
17
18
Italy
18
14
18
Jamaica
18
N/A
18
16 – with parental consent
Japan
20
13
18 –males
16 – females

(continues)
92
Worldwide Perspective
TABLE 3.1 (continued)
Age of Majority, Age of Consent for Sexual Activity, and Age for Consent for
Marriage for Selected Countries
Country
Age of Simple Majority
Age of Consent for Sexual
Activity
Age of Consent for
Marriage
Kenya
18
16
21
Latvia
18
16
18
Lebanon
18
15
18 – males
15 – females
Lesotho
21
14
18 – males
16 – females
Lithuania
18
Not specified
18
15 – by decision of court
Malta
18
18
16
Mauritania
18
16
21
Mexico
18
18
16 – males
14 – females
Monaco
21
15
21
Mongolia
N/A
16
18
Myanmar
16
N/A
20
Netherlands
18
N/A
18
Norway
18
16
18
Oman
18
Not allowed prior to marriage
Not specified; generally 18
Pakistan
18 – male
16 – female
18 – male
16 – female
18 – male
14 – female
Panama
18
14 – males
12 – females
16 – males
14 – females
Peru
18
16 – 18
18
Poland
18
15
18 – females
21 – males
Portugal
18
18
16
Puerto Rico
18
14
16
Romania
18
15
16
Saudi Arabia
18
Not allowed prior to marriage
18
Singapore
21
16
18
Slovakia
18
15
18
Slovenia
18
15
18
16 – certain conditions
South Africa
21
Not specified
21
Swaziland
21
12 – females
14 – males
21
earlier with parental consent

In the United Kingdom, estimates of the number of children
sexually abused are difficult to acquire because of the lack of re-
porting for a variety of reasons, including fear, shame, and em-
barrassment. According to one report, approximately 70,000
crimes were reported between 1980 and 2001 that involved gross
indecency with a child and unlawful sexual intercourse (National
Criminal Intelligence Service 2005). Some experts believe that as
many as 95 percent of all cases of child sexual abuse go unre-
ported. As of 2005, the NCIS also reported that more than 18,000
individuals were listed on sex offender registries (ibid.).
Several studies have been conducted concerning the inci-
dence and prevalence of child sexual abuse in Australia (Gold-
man and Goldman 1988; Higgins and McCabe 1994; Fleming
1997; Mazza et al. 1996; Martin 1996; Goldman and Padayachi
1997; Swanston et al. 1997; Dinwiddie et al. 2000; Nelson et al.
2002). In one study of child abuse and neglect cases reported in
1993–1994, researchers found that 28,711 cases of child abuse
were substantiated: 19 percent of those were sexual abuse, and 74
percent of all sexual abuse cases involved abuse of a young girl. 
Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
93
TABLE 3.1 (continued)
Age of Majority, Age of Consent for Sexual Activity, and Age for Consent for
Marriage for Selected Countries 
Country
Age of Simple Majority
Age of Consent for Sexual
Activity
Age of Consent for
Marriage
Sweden
18
15
18
Switzerland
18
16
18
Syria
18
13
17
Tanzania
16
18
18
Thailand
18
N/A
17
Turkey
18
Not specified
17
Ukraine
18
Established by medical
examiner
18 – males
17 – females
Uruguay
18
N/A
14 – males
12 – females
Uzbekistan
16
16
17
Venezuela
18
Not specified
18

Reviewing all of the studies conducted, Andrews, Gould,
and Corry determined that the adjusted prevalence rate for sex-
ual abuse was 5.1 percent in males and 27.5 percent in females.
The mean age at the beginning of the abuse was ten years, and
most abuse occurred before the age of twelve. In 40 percent of the
reported incidents, the abuser was a family member, and was
known to the child in 75 percent of the cases (Andrews et al.
2002).
In a study of child abuse and family violence in Western Aus-
tralia’s Aboriginal communities, researchers found that child sex-
ual abuse in those communities arises “from multiple causes, many
of which related to cultural disintegration, unresolved community
trauma and racial abuse” (Stanley et al. 2002, 11). Many cases are
probably not reported to the authorities, for fear of reprisals or em-
barrassment. Another study indicated that of the 4,073 Aboriginal
children in out-of-home care in June 2001, approximately 80 per-
cent had been sexually abused (Stanley et al. 2002).
The Canadian Incidence Study of Reported Child Abuse and
Neglect was conducted in 1998 and was the first nationwide
study of child abuse and neglect in that country. Findings indi-
cated that there were approximately 21.52 investigations of child
abuse and neglect per 1,000 children in Canada, and 45 percent of
those abuse allegations were substantiated. Some 10 percent of
the investigations concerned child sexual abuse, and 38 percent of
those were substantiated. The study found that the most common
forms of sexual abuse included touching and fondling of the gen-
itals, completed sexual activity, and adults exposing their genitals
to children.
Medical personnel in New South Wales have been required
to report suspected cases of physical and sexual abuse of chil-
dren since 1977. In 1987, teachers, counselors, social workers,
and early childhood workers were added to the list of mandated
reporters. Doctors, nurses, and police personnel have been re-
quired to report since 1993 in Victoria. Teachers and school prin-
cipals were added to the list in 1994, and by 1995 reports had in-
creased by 58 percent. Queensland medical personnel were
mandated to report in 1937. In South Australia, medical person-
nel, nurses, dentists, pharmacists, psychologists, police, proba-
tion officers, social workers, teachers, family day-care workers,
and governmental and nongovernmental workers in the fields of
health, welfare, education, child care, and residential services to
children were mandated reporters as of 1993 (ibid.).
94
Worldwide Perspective

The 1995 results of a study of the prevalence of child sexual
abuse in Spain indicated that prior to the age of seventeen years,
15 percent of males and 22 percent of females had been abused
(Lopez et al. 1995).
Developing Regions/Countries
The developing countries consist of less industrialized countries,
many of which do not have reporting systems in place to track
cases of child abuse, especially child sexual abuse. See Table 3.2
for information concerning reporting systems in selected coun-
tries. Definitions of child sexual abuse may vary from country to
country, depending on cultural and social values.
For many children in developing countries, survival is fore-
most on their minds. They live in poverty, often not attending
school but working to help support the family; this is especially
true for girls. Parents work hard to support their families, often
with the help of the children, but the cycle of poverty is difficult
to escape. The government’s attention is not focused on child sex-
ual abuse, because it rarely makes the headlines. Children who
have no parents are often left to fend for themselves. The age of
consent may also be lower in developing countries than in devel-
oped countries; for example, the age of maturity for girls in Pak-
istan is sixteen.
Studies of the prevalence and incidence of child sexual abuse
have been conducted with limited samples in many countries.
For example, in Nicaragua, a random sample of literate men and
women between the ages of twenty-five and forty-four years in
the city of Leon were interviewed concerning sexual abuse when
they were children. Results indicated that 20 percent of the men
and 26 percent of the women reported that they had been sexu-
ally abused as children (Olsson et al. 2000).
Prior to 1997, no studies had been conducted on the sexual
abuse of children in Pakistan; a 1997 study focused on one
province of the country. At the time, the local newspapers had re-
ported forty-six cases of child sexual abuse over a three-month
period, including sexual assaults, rapes, incest, and exposure to
pornographic materials. Generally, child sexual abuse was con-
sidered to be a domestic affair and police rarely interfered. The
study reported in 2001 included seventy-four children in three
out of four provinces who had been sexually abused: thirty boys
and forty-four girls. They ranged in age from five to eighteen,
Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
95

96
Worldwide Perspective
TABLE 3.2
Child Abuse Records and Policies in Selected Countries
Country
Official Records
Maintained by
Government
Official Government
Policy Regarding Child
Abuse and Neglect
Elements of Policy
Regarding Reported
Abuse
Argentina
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Armenia
No
No
Australia
Yes
No
Bahrain
Yes
Yes
Voluntary reporting of
suspected abuse
Brazil
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Bulgaria
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Cameroon
No
Yes
No mandatory reporting
Canada
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
China
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Colombia
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Congo
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Côte D’Ivore
No
Yes
No mandatory reporting
Denmark
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Egypt
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
El Salvador
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
England
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Estonia
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
France
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Georgia
Yes
No
N/A
Germany
Yes
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Ghana
yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Hong Kong
Yes
No
N/A
Hungary
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
(continues)

Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
97
TABLE 3.2 (continued)
Child Abuse Records and Policies in Selected Countries
Country
Official Records
Maintained by
Government
Official Government
Policy Regarding Child
Abuse and Neglect
Elements of Policy
Regarding Reported
Abuse
India
No 
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Indonesia
No
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Israel
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Italy
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Jordan
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Kenya
Yes
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Krygyzstan
No
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Latvia
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Lebanon
No
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Liberia
No
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Malaysia
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Mauritius
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Mexico
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Mongolia
No
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Nepal
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Netherlands
Yes
No
N/A
New Zealand
Yes
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Nigeria
No
Yes
No reporting requirements
Pakistan
No
No
N/A
Palestinian Territory
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Peru
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Philippines
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Poland
No
No
N/A
Portugal
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Romania
Yes
No 
N/A
(continues)

including twenty-six children who were thirteen or younger
when they were first abused. Perpetrators included immediate
family, acquaintances, neighbors, teachers, shopkeepers, and
strangers (UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific 2001).
In a study conducted in Ethiopia, Kenya, and Uganda on vi-
olence against girls, the researchers studied a variety of forms of
violence, including physical, psychological, and sexual violence
perpetrated against young girls. Three research teams selected
98
Worldwide Perspective
TABLE 3.2 (continued)
Child Abuse Records and Policies in Selected Countries
Country
Official Records
Maintained by
Government
Official Government
Policy Regarding Child
Abuse and Neglect
Elements of Policy
Regarding Reported
Abuse
Russian Federation
No
No
N/A
Rwanda
Yes
Yes
No reporting requirement
Saudi Arabia
No
No
N/A
Scotland
Yes
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Serbia and Montenegro
No
No
N/A
Singapore
Yes
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Slovak Republic
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
South Africa
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Spain
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Sri Lanka
Yes
Yes
Voluntary reporting
Sweden
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Switzerland
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Syria
No
No
N/A
Thailand
No
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
Ukraine
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals
United States
Yes
Yes
Mandated reporting by
certain professionals

500 young women from a variety of social classes and groups in
the capital cities of each country. Sexual violence included verbal
abuse, rape, sexual harassment, exploitation, trafficking, and
harmful traditional practices including genital mutilation. The
most common form of sexual abuse was being spoken to in a sex-
ual manner, experienced by more than 85 percent of the girls in
Uganda, 65 percent in Kenya, and over 50 percent in Ethiopia. In-
decent sexual touching was experienced by 53 percent of the girls
in Uganda, 44 percent in Kenya, and 42 percent in Ethiopia. Forty-
two percent of the girls in Uganda, 30 percent in Ethiopia, and 26
percent in Kenya had been raped (African Child Policy Forum
2006).
Similar to findings for the developed countries, children in
developing countries are sexually abused not only at home but
also at other, seemingly safe locations outside the home. Several
specific locations are discussed below.
In School
In 1998, according to UNICEF, almost two-thirds of the 130 mil-
lion children not attending school in developing countries were
girls. When girls do attend school, they are often subjected to var-
ious types of abuse, including sexual abuse. Boys may also be at
risk of sexual abuse, but girls more frequently experience sexual
assault, abuse, sexual harassment, and rape by classmates and
teachers.
In South African schools, a Human Rights Watch study
found that the incidence of rape, sexual assault, and sexual ha-
rassment of girls was widespread, and that both teachers and
male students were the offenders. Girls were raped in school
bathrooms, in empty classrooms and hallways, and in hostels and
dormitories. They were frequently fondled, subjected to aggres-
sive sexual advances, and verbally degraded. The atmosphere
created by the abuse was difficult for many of the girls to with-
stand; some quit school because of the abuse or fear of abuse.
Others were determined to stay in school, wanting the education
and believing that the abuse was the price they had to pay to be
educated (Human Rights Watch 2001d).
The reactions of those in authority often were not very sym-
pathetic to the girls brave enough to report the sexual abuse. School
officials treated the schoolgirls who reported being sexually
Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
99

abused by their male classmates or teachers with indifference,
disbelief, or hostility. Parents in South Africa repeatedly told
Human Rights Watch that schools asked them not to get the po-
lice involved or to draw publicity to problems of sexual violence
at school. In one instance, a school principal persuaded a parent
to drop rape charges against a teacher, promising “to take care of
the matter.” Nothing was done, and the teacher continued to
teach at the school (ibid.). In another instance, it was found that a
teacher accused of raping a student had been reported at other
schools for similar offenses. None of the schools had reported him
to the police, however, leaving him free to continue his pattern of
abuse in new schools and against other children (Human Rights
Watch 2001a).
Some countries, including South Africa, may require girls to
submit to virginity examinations before being allowed to attend
school. In Turkey, a 2001 decree required girls studying in gov-
ernment-sponsored medical high schools to undergo virginity
examinations, specifically for those girls “known to be having
sex or engaging in prostitution.” Girls who fail these examina-
tions, which entail intimidation and pain, are expelled from
school. The examinations, which had been banned since 1999,
also violate the “girls’ right to bodily integrity. In the past, girls
have attempted suicide rather than submit to this abusive exam-
ination” (ibid., 17).
In Orphanages
Orphanages are another place where sexual abuse of children has
been reported. Children in orphanages, especially the sick and
abandoned, may not have anyone protecting them from abuse. A
study of abuse in an orphanage in Shanghai found that, when
workers in Shanghai’s orphanage tried to expose abuses, they
were demoted and harassed. The orphanage director, accused of
abusing and raping children in the orphanage, used his control
over bonuses, staff assignments, and housing allocations to ha-
rass his opponents and reward supporters. A speech therapist
was suspended from her duties and transferred to a position
cleaning bathrooms and windows. An orphanage driver was at-
tacked and badly beaten by a group of employees loyal to the di-
rector. Eventually, all of the critical staff were forced from their
jobs (Human Rights Watch 1996b).
100
Worldwide Perspective

At Work
According to the International Labor Organization (ILO), there
are approximately 250 million children between the ages of five
and fourteen who work in developing countries, and almost half
of them work full-time. In India children often work as bonded
laborers, working off the debts of their families. Girls were sub-
jected to sexual abuse, and those working inside Indian factories
were frequently targeted for sexual assault by the factory own-
ers. The practice was so prevalent that it was difficult for these
girls later to get married. Because of the high rate of abuse,
everyone assumed that the factory girls had been “touched”—
that is, molested or raped by their employers. As a consequence,
they were shunned as potential brides (Human Rights Watch
1998).
In Kenya, a study of girls working as housemaids found that,
of twenty-five girls aged nine to sixteen years who were inter-
viewed in depth, eighteen were HIV-positive. Of those eighteen,
most had worked in several homes and reported being sexually
abused in all or most of them. Fifteen of the girls said that their
first sexual experiences were coerced and were with their em-
ployer or someone in his family or circle of friends (Human
Rights Watch 2001b). Kenya is estimated to have about 1 million
children who have lost parents to AIDS, and many more whose
parents are ill with the disease. In Kenya and many other African
countries, these AIDS-affected children are likely to have to leave
school and seek work, and they may wind up on the streets or in
jobs that put them at risk of violence, including sexual abuse
(Human Rights Watch 2001a).
In a 1998 study in Sri Lanka, Human Rights Watch inter-
viewed approximately seventy children who were domestic
workers. Several of the Sri Lankan girls who were interviewed
also experienced sexual abuse at the hands of their employer,
their employer’s children, or their employer’s friends. Such abuse
is frequently known to agents who arrange for the children’s em-
ployment. One agent told Human Rights Watch of how he had re-
cruited more than a thousand children for domestic service when
he knew that the primary purpose of the recruitment was sexual
(ibid.).
In Ecuador, where Human Rights Watch interviewed forty-
five children who had worked on banana plantations in early
Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
101

2001, researchers found that girls working in banana packing
plants routinely experience sexual harassment in the workplace.
“He goes around touching girls’ bottoms. . . . I was taking off ba-
nana plastic coverings, and he touched my bottom. He keeps
bothering me,” one twelve-year-old girl said, speaking of one of
her supervisors. “He gave my cousin the nickname ‘whore.’” An-
other twelve-year-old girl said that the boss of the packing plant
makes lewd remarks “when we bend down to pick up plastic
bags” (ibid.).
Boys and girls can also be put to work in small shops or fac-
tories. Boys from Bangladesh, for example, are often sent to work
in manufacturing industries and sweatshops in India and Pak-
istan. Others, including the disabled, are used for organized beg-
ging (UNICEF 2003).
By Marriage
In many countries, some girls are taken for forced marriage. In
2002 the government of the United Kingdom reported that, in the
previous 18 months, it had dealt with more than 240 cases of
forced marriage and helped with the repatriation of 60 young
people. Not all victims were female; in about 1.5 percent of cases,
the unwilling partner was the husband. Forced marriage is also a
huge problem in many African countries, including Ethiopia,
Gambia, and Nigeria (ibid.).
In War
During armed conflicts, children may be subjected to rape, sexual
assault, and other violent crimes. For example, in Sierra Leone,
children have been murdered, mutilated, tortured, beaten, raped,
and enslaved for sexual purposes. Some of the atrocities commit-
ted by the rebel Revolutionary United Front (RUF) were unthink-
able. Infants and children were thrown into burning houses, the
hands of toddlers as young as two were severed with machetes,
and girls as young as eight were sexually abused (Human Rights
Watch 1999a). A newspaper reporter in Sierra Leone told Human
Rights Watch, “There was rampant raping. I saw a fifteen-year-
old girl raped right before me. They left her, but they captured
others, and among them was a seven-year-old girl (Human
Rights Watch 2001a).
102
Worldwide Perspective

In Colombia, thousands of children have been recruited into
guerrilla forces and pro-government, military-backed paramili-
taries. The Colombian paramilitaries have recruited children as
young as eight years old, and according to some estimates, up to
50 percent of some paramilitary units are made up of children.
Girls are reportedly subjected to high levels of sexual abuse by
adult members of the paramilitaries (ibid.).
In Refugee Camps
Women and girls in refugee camps are vulnerable to rape, sexual
assault, and other forms of sexual violence. While investigating
the conditions of Burundian refugees in Tanzania refugee camps
in 1998 and 1999, Human Rights Watch found that girls were sub-
ject to high levels of sexual abuse. In 1997, the International Res-
cue Committee conducted a survey of 3,800 women and girls; re-
searchers found that approximately 26 percent of girls and
women between the ages of twelve and forty-nine reported hav-
ing been subjected to violence either during flight from Burundi
or while in the camp. They found that girls were often attacked
while carrying out routine daily tasks such as gathering firewood,
collecting vegetables, farming, or seeking local employment
(Human Rights Watch 2000).
Human Rights Watch received a number of testimonies from
girls who had been raped in or near the Tanzanian camps. A fif-
teen-year-old girl reported that she was raped by two Tanzanian
villagers in April 1999 while in the forest gathering firewood with
a female friend. A sixteen-year-old girl was raped in October
1999, while collecting firewood outside a camp, by a refugee she
described as a fifteen-year-old boy. Another sixteen-year-old girl
was raped by two men while traveling to visit her uncle with her
younger brother. “The two men took off my clothes, in the pres-
ence of my brother. They blindfolded me and raped me, one after
the other. I would like the assailants to be punished for raping
me.” Although all three of these girls reported the rapes to the po-
lice, only one of the assailants was apprehended. He was released
and subsequently fled (Human Rights Watch 2001a).
Many children are victimized not only by the initial abuse
but also by the failure of authorities to take effective action
against the perpetrator, or by acts of retaliation in response to
their attempts to seek justice.
Incidence and Prevalence of Child Sexual Abuse
103

In Police Custody
Human Rights Watch found that children in the juvenile ward of
a Pakistani prison rioted after members of the prison staff beat a
thirteen-year-old boy for complaining of sexual abuse by the
head warden. A legal aid center reported that such cases were far
from isolated, and that they received many reports of sexual
abuse of juveniles by both prison staff and adult inmates (Human
Rights Watch 1999b).
In Jamaica, a fifteen-year-old Jamaican girl who ran away
from home was picked up by police as a child “in need of care
and protection” and taken to the local police station. During her
second night in the lockup, she said that a police officer came to
her and asked her age. When she told him, he asked if she had
ever had sex. She said no, and he then tied her down with a belt,
and raped and beat her (ibid.).
When children are put into adult prisons, they are frequently
abused physically and sexually. Even in developed countries,
children are sexually abused while in police custody and in
prison. For example, in the United States a sixteen-year-old sen-
tenced to eight years for arson was sent to an adult prison and
within a week was raped by fellow prisoners (Human Rights
Watch 2001c).
On the Streets
Children living on the streets are also at high risk for physical and
sexual abuse. For example, a study in Bulgaria found that police
harass and beat street children, extort money and sex from them,
and demand oral sex from young girls (Human Rights Watch
1996a). Another study in Guatemala revealed similar abuse by
police; young girls reported being raped by police and threatened
by the police if they reported the rape. One girl reported that the
police threatened to imprison her for marijuana if she reported
the rape to anyone (Human Rights Watch 1997).
Worldwide Issues
Sexual abuse of children is found throughout the world, and
there are certain issues that are better examined as global issues
rather than issues related to individual countries or groups of
104
Worldwide Perspective

countries. These areas include child pornography, child prostitu-
tion, and sex-trafficking.
The Internet and Child Pornography
The Internet has become an effective and efficient source of infor-
mation in general, and a dynamic educational tool for children
and adults. It is also a resource and vehicle for reproducing and
disseminating child pornography, and providing a means for so-
liciting and procuring children for sex. Its speed, ease of use,
availability, and low cost have speeded the growth and distribu-
tion of child pornography. Governments around the world are
working to develop effective safeguards for protecting children
from solicitations and restricting or banning child pornography.
Child pornography has become a multibillion-dollar interna-
tional industry, generating more than $3 billion annually. All
Western nations publicly denounce child pornography as being
depraved and immoral. Participation is difficult to track and
largely underground. Prior to the Internet, access to child pornog-
raphy was complicated and could be expensive. However, today
it is considered a worldwide problem, and pictures of children are
traded around the world. The Internet has become a vast resource
for pedophiles looking for child pornography; it has made these
images readily accessible, and easy to produce and distribute.
The growing popularity of digital and video cameras, and
even cell phone photo capabilities, has made it relatively simple
and inexpensive to produce child pornography. As of July 2005,
there were approximately 938 million people accessing the Inter-
net and more than 35 million websites, with the numbers contin-
uing to grow. There were approximately 4.2 million pornographic
websites, including 372 million pornographic pages, and more
than 100,000 websites that offer child pornography (TopTenRE-
VIEWS 2006).
Some countries go into great detail in defining child pornog-
raphy, while others, especially those countries with little access to
the Internet, provide less detail in their definitions. For example,
child pornography legislation in South Africa is highly detailed,
while legislation in Barbados refers only to “photographs” when
describing child pornography.
One factor to be considered in examining child pornography
is how various countries and legislation define a child—this gen-
erally is a chronological age, but social and cultural factors also
Worldwide Issues
105

affect the definition. The UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child and many countries in the West define a child as a person
under the age of eighteen years. However, the age of consent for
sexual activity varies from country to country; it is sixteen or
fourteen in some jurisdictions (see Table 3.1). For example, in
Australia and its territories, for the purposes of pornography, a
child is defined as a person under the age of sixteen years in the
Crimes Amendment (Child Pornography) Act 2004. The age of
consent in the United States varies from state to state, being as
low as fifteen in some jurisdictions. Often Western jurisdictions
are likely to view children as dependent on their parents until the
age of eighteen, while in other cultures childhood does not last
that long.
Another factor is what constitutes pornography. Definitions
of child pornography also vary among jurisdictions. A basic defi-
nition is “the visual depiction of children involved in sexually ex-
plicit activities” (Levesque 1999, 62). Article 2 of the Optional Pro-
tocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the Sale of
Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography defines it as
“any representation, by whatever means, of a child engaged in
real or simulated explicit sexual activities or any representation of
the sexual parts of a child for primarily sexual purposes.” The In-
terpol standing working group on offenses against minors de-
fines child pornography as “the consequence of the exploitation
or sexual abuse perpetrated against a child. It can be defined as
any means of depicting or promoting sexual abuse of a child, in-
cluding print and/or audio, centred on sex acts or the genital or-
gans of children” (Fournier de Saint Maur 1999).
Some jurisdictions suggest that child pornography contains
obscene material; others suggest that it just contain sexualized be-
havior. These differing criteria mean that it is quite possible for a
picture to be regarded under laws that emphasize sexual qualities
as child pornography but to fail in jurisdictions where obscenity
or public morality definitions prevail (Taylor and Quayle 2003).
For example, in the United States, pictures of naked children, not
in any sexual or sexualized pose, are not generally considered to
be pornography.
Suggestions that child pornography is acceptable if the child
consents to the photographs being taken are not valid, because
children are considered not able to consent to participating in
child pornography or any other sexual activity.
106
Worldwide Perspective

Functions of Child Pornography
Some research suggests that viewing child pornography leads to
the sexual abuse of real children, while other research indicates
that those who view or use child pornography have never abused
a child and never intend to do so. Some offenders may use images
of child pornography to help them overcome their fears and inhi-
bitions and go out and sexually abuse children, while others may
fulfill their desires by viewing the pornographic images and
never need or want to abuse a child (Quayle and Taylor 2002;
Marshall 2000; Jenkins 2001).
In a study of thirteen men who were convicted of various
child pornography offenses—that is, images were found on their
computers—Taylor and his colleagues found six ways in which
the men used the images they had found on the Internet. The men
used the images for sexual arousal, as collectibles, to facilitate so-
cial relationships, to avoid reality (real life), as therapy, and as an
anonymous source of a wide variety of materials. Several of the
men used the images as a way of arousing themselves, creating
fantasies to go along with the images; the wide availability and
ease of access gave several of these men a sense of justification and
legitimacy—that if the images are readily available, they must be
all right to use. Others collect images, completing sets of images as
if they were stamp or baseball card collections, which also ap-
peared to give them legitimacy in the minds of the offenders. 
Some of the men found that child pornography helped them
to meet others like themselves—especially in chat rooms—and re-
inforced their behavior, making them believe that their actions
were legitimate. Such contacts also helped to provide additional
sources of child pornographic images. These relationships may
also help the offender avoid real life, by creating enough contact
or actual friendships on the Internet that he does not feel isolated.
Some of the men interviewed claimed that by accessing the im-
ages on the Internet, they do not feel the need to go out and find
actual children to abuse, implying that they would sexually abuse
children if they did not view pornography. Finally, some of the
men indicated that the Internet has made it easier to access child
pornographic materials: it is anonymous, and there is more vari-
ety available than before the advent of the Internet (Taylor et al.
2001).
Worldwide Issues
107

Legislation against Child Pornography
Laws have been enacted by the U.S. Congress and the states to
protect children from pornography and predators on the Internet.
The constitutionality of many of these laws has been challenged,
and some have been overturned. While the First Amendment
does not protect pornography that involves real children, virtual
child pornography creates a different problem. Morphing permits
an image that is not obscene to be transformed into a porno-
graphic image; this technique actually can create a computer-
generated image of a child from adult pornography images.
The first attempt by the U.S. Congress to regulate transmis-
sion of pornography to children was the Communications De-
cency Act of 1996, which “prohibited the transmission in inter-
state or foreign commerce of obscene or indecent images to any
recipient under the age of eighteen. The CDA also prohibited
knowingly sending or displaying patently offensive material in a
manner that was available to persons under eighteen. . . . The
Supreme Court eventually struck down the CDA as a content-
based regulation of speech that was unconstitutionally vague and
overbroad” (Martin 2002).
Following the ruling that struck down the CDA, Congress
passed the Child Online Protection Act (COPA). COPA prohibits
any individual or entity from knowingly making a communica-
tion using the World Wide Web for commercial purposes when
that communication is available to minors and is harmful to mi-
nors. Congress intended COPA to limit the scope of the content
prohibition to commercial speech on the Web that is harmful to
minors. The Supreme Court heard the case and in 2004 upheld
the lower court injunction against enforcing COPA (Ashcroft v.
ACLU, 542 U.S. 656 [2004]).
With the advent of digital-imaging technology, real children
were not required in the production of child pornography. There
are two types of computer-generated pornography: computer-
altered and virtual. Computer-altered images are images of actual
children that have been altered in some way—for example, pic-
tures of innocent children in which their clothes have been re-
moved or they are posed in provocative positions. Virtual images
are created by the computer without using photographs of real
children.
As a result of this new technology, Congress passed the Child
Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 (CPPA) to prevent the
108
Worldwide Perspective

production of virtual child pornography. In the U.S. Senate report
on the CPPA, photo imaging and related technologies allow
people to produce “visual depictions of children engaging in sex-
ually explicit conduct which are virtually indistinguishable to an
unsuspecting viewer from unretouched photographs of actual
minors engaging in such conduct” (S. Rep. No. 104–358, at 8
[1996]). The CPPA defined child pornography as “any visual de-
piction, including any photograph, film, video, picture, or com-
puter, or computer-generated image or picture, whether made or
produced by electronic, mechanical, or other means, of sexually
explicit conduct.”
In 2002, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the ban on virtual
child pornography in the CPPA abridges the freedom to engage
in a substantial amount of lawful speech and is therefore over-
broad and unconstitutional under the First Amendment.
Many initiatives are under way to combat and prevent online
child pornography. They range from legislative measures, the
starting point to addressing the phenomenon with a human
rights perspective, to the establishment of specialized units
within law enforcement agencies, action plans, working groups,
codes of conduct, hotlines, and awareness-raising campaigns
(Petit 2004).
In England and Wales, for the purposes of child pornogra-
phy, a child is defined as being under the age of sixteen under the
Protection of Children Act of 1978. The act prohibits four aspects
of child pornography: taking or permitting to be taken an inde-
cent photograph of a child, or manipulating an image to appear
to be an indecent photograph, showing or distributing such pho-
tographs, having in one’s possession such photographs, and pub-
lishing an advertisement for such a photograph (Protection of
Children Act, 1978, c. 37, § 1 [Eng.]). The Criminal Justice and
Public Order Act of 1994 further defined a photograph to include
negatives, films, video recordings, and stored data (Criminal Jus-
tice and Public Order Act, 1994, c 33 § 84[3][b]). In addition, pos-
session of child pornography is prohibited by Section 160 of the
Criminal Justice Act of 1988 (Criminal Justice Act, 1988, c. 33 § 160
[Eng.]).
The United Kingdom has also created the Paedophile On
Line Investigation Team (POLIT), which was formed in 2003 as
part of the National Crime Squad as the single point of contact in
the United Kingdom for supporting, coordinating, and assisting
national and international investigations of Internet-related child
Worldwide Issues
109

abuse, including sexual abuse. Between January 2004 and July
2005, POLIT received more than 2,500 referrals. The team also de-
veloped ChildBase, a sophisticated database to help identify vic-
tims of abuse, as well as the abusers themselves. Software helps
to detect whether the victim or abuser is known to other law en-
forcement agencies; faces can be mapped and compared against
images already in the database. As of August 2005, the ChildBase
database contains approximately 220,000 images of abuse, in-
volving approximately 20,000 children from around the world.
The National Crime Squad also participates in the Virtual
Global Taskforce (VGT), which is developing several initiatives to
reduce the incidence of child sexual abuse via the Internet. The
taskforce is an international partnership among law enforcement
agencies and industry in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom,
the United States, and Interpol. Their website acts as a gateway
for information concerning child sexual abuse; it allows individ-
uals to report instances of online sexual abuse in various coun-
tries, and offers links to other resources.
The forty-three member states of the Council of Europe,
along with four nonmember states (Canada, Japan, South Africa,
and the United States), were concerned about all types of crimi-
nal activity, including child pornography, occurring on the Inter-
net and other computer networks. As a result, in 2001 they en-
acted the Convention on Cybercrime, which entered into force in
2004; it is the first international treaty to address several types of
crimes that are committed on the Internet. The convention defines
prohibited conduct, including child pornography. It includes de-
scriptions of basic national legal procedures and human rights
safeguards that all member nations should include in their legal
systems, and it suggests several areas where international coop-
eration is appropriate.
In England, although Internet service providers (ISPs) are re-
quired to remove illegal content from their servers when they be-
come aware of that material, they are not required to search their
servers for such material. Some ISPs are working on ways to find
illegal content on their servers. For example, the Demon Internet,
an ISP in the United Kingdom, has developed and tested a system
that automatically extracts child pornography and other illegal
material from Usenet groups. Their engine scans more than
25,000 newsgroups, looking for material that has been reported to
the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF), and then removes it from
the newsgroups.
110
Worldwide Perspective

IWF is an independent organization based in the United
Kingdom that gathers information on illegal child abuse images
found on the Internet. Working with all the major search engine
organizations, the IWF has become the primary hotline for re-
porting indecent images on the Internet. They forward informa-
tion regarding substantiated complaints to the National Criminal
Intelligence Service/Interpol for dissemination to appropriate
law enforcement agencies. Almost 20,000 complaints were made
to the IWF in 2003, and some type of action was taken in 17 per-
cent of the complaints. In 2004 more than 17,000 complaints were
made, and action was taken in 20 percent of them. Most of the il-
legal content was found on websites (90 percent), with the re-
mainder on Usenet groups (2 percent), proprietary groups (1 per-
cent), and other sources (7 percent). Some 40 percent of the
websites containing illegal content were located in the United
States; 31 percent were in Russia, 12 percent in Europe, 13 percent
in Asian countries, 1 percent in the United Kingdom, and 3 per-
cent in other countries (Internet Watch Foundation Annual Report
2004).
The Hotline for Child Pornography on Internet in The Nether-
lands requests that Internet users who find child pornography
sites report them to the hotline. The national commissioner of po-
lice in Denmark established an Internet home page where indi-
viduals can report information on suspected distribution of child
pornography directly to the police.
In addition to child pornography, the Internet also serves as
a means for child sexual abusers to locate children who can be
lured into performing various sexual acts. Whether the predator
searches for a child in person or over the Internet, the process is
similar—the predator targets a child, initiates a friendship, pro-
vides gifts to the child, and does whatever else he or she believes
is necessary to earn the child’s trust. The advantage of the Inter-
net to the predator is that it is anonymous—no one is there to ob-
serve the predator and child together and question the relation-
ship.
The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children pro-
vided funding for a survey on Internet victimization of youth in
1999. Four types of victimization were examined: sexual solicita-
tion and approaches, aggressive sexual solicitation, unwanted ex-
posure to sexual materials, and harassment. The survey results
indicated that one child out of five had received a sexual ap-
proach or solicitation over the past year; one in thirty-three had
Worldwide Issues
111

received an aggressive sexual solicitation; one in four had an un-
wanted exposure to sexual materials, including pictures of naked
people or people having sex; and one in seventeen was threat-
ened or otherwise harassed. Girls were targeted more than boys
(66 percent to 34 percent), and 77 percent were fourteen or older.
The youngest age group, ten to thirteen years old, constituted 22
percent of the solicitations but were more distressed by the con-
tact than the older children. The characteristics of the perpetrators
were not always known; when known, they were more often
male (67 percent, to 19 percent female) and under eighteen years
of age (48 percent, to 24 percent eighteen years of age or older).
This does not fit the stereotype of “dirty old men” in search of
young children. In addition, only 25 percent of the children who
were approached on the Internet told a parent, and 40 percent
who reported an unwanted exposure told a parent. The authors
concluded that
the survey presents a complex picture about Internet re-
lationships. Many young people are forming close
friendships through the Internet, and some are forming
close friendships with adults. Most such relationships
appear to have no taint of sexual exploitation and ap-
pear to be positive and healthy. The fact that our survey
found few sexually oriented relationships between
youth and adult does not mean they never occur. They
certainly do occur, but probably at a level too infrequent
to be detected by a survey of this size. They seem to be
few in a much larger set of seemingly benign friend-
ships. (Finkelhor et al. 2000)
Another study focusing on ways in which juveniles become
victims of sex crimes initiated through the Internet surveyed a
random sample of 2,574 federal, state, and local law enforcement
agencies between October 2001 and July 2002. The researchers
found that 76 percent of the juveniles were between the ages of
thirteen and fifteen; all were twelve years old or older. Three-
fourths of the victims were female. Almost all (99 percent) of the
offenders were male; approximately three-fourths (76 percent)
were twenty-six years old or older. The offenders most often ini-
tiated the contact in chat rooms (76 percent), and spent between
one and six months communicating with the juvenile. Communi-
cations included online contact through the chat room, telephone
conversations (79 percent), sending pictures to victims (48 per-
112
Worldwide Perspective

cent), offers of money or gifts, including jewelry, teddy bears, cell
phones, and digital cameras. Most of the offenders were open in
their desires—80 percent talked about sexual topics, while many
others lured victims by posing as their friends or as owning or
managing modeling agencies. Eighty-three percent of the offend-
ers met face-to-face with the victims, who willingly went with
them—to a hotel, movie, or restaurant; 89 percent of the encoun-
ters included oral sex, sexual intercourse, or other sexual activity
with the victim. Forty-one percent spent at least one night with
the victim. These findings indicate that, contrary to popular opin-
ion and many prevention efforts, predators using the Internet are
not always pedophiles who attempt to lure the child into meeting
them by disguising their real intent. The authors suggest that a
major challenge for prevention is determining the best methods
for reaching the population of young teens who are willing to
participate voluntarily in sexual relationships with adults whom
they meet online (Wolak et al. 2004).
Chat rooms are increasingly used by predators to meet and
groom children for eventual sexual encounters. Some countries
have enacted legislation regarding such grooming or luring prac-
tices and are cooperating to monitor chat rooms and protect chil-
dren. For example, the National Crimes Squad in the United
Kingdom is working with the FBI in the United States and officers
in Australia to monitor chat room conversations. The Virtual
Global Task Force, composed of international police chiefs, has set
up a fake child pornography website to identify and catch pe-
dophiles.
Queensland (Australia) has a law that specifically targets
adults who groom children using a variety of electronic means,
including e-mail and Internet chat rooms. It is an offense for an
adult to use any electronic communication to solicit a child under
the age of sixteen for the purposes of engaging in a sexual act. The
government of Australia followed Queensland’s lead and, in
2004, enacted an antigrooming law specifically targeting the use
of telecommunications to groom a child for sexual purposes.
Virtual Child Pornography
Another issue that arises with regard to child pornography and
the Internet is whether virtual child pornography can be consid-
ered child pornography in the sense that it is harmful to children.
Virtual child pornography is computer-generated; no child is
Worldwide Issues
113

being harmed in the making of virtual child pornography. In the
United States, the Supreme Court ruled in 2002 (Ashcroft v. Free
Speech Coalition, 535 U.S. 234 [2002]) that provisions in the Child
Pornography Prevention Act that ban simulated or virtual child
pornography are unconstitutional.
Many individuals and organizations believe that virtual
child pornography is harmful to children. Child pornography, ac-
cording to many, causes child abuse; therefore it does not matter
that no child is harmed in the making of the pornography, be-
cause individuals viewing the images may be more likely to
abuse children sexually. Just as perpetrators use images of child
pornography to seduce children, trying to show them that “other
children do it, so it must be all right,” they can use these virtual
images to encourage real children to participate in sexual activi-
ties. If virtual pornography is permitted, then it may be impossi-
ble to prove in court whether an image is real or simulated; some
predators may be found not guilty on the basis of reasonable
doubt.
Others argue that virtual child pornography is a good thing.
If pedophiles are busy creating virtual images of children in var-
ious sexual poses and activities, then they will not be using and
abusing real children. Therefore, children will be safe from sexual
exploitation. However, most legislators and other professionals in
the field of child sexual abuse believe that child pornography, vir-
tual or real, harms children; some state legislators are considering
banning virtual pornography, and attempts at the federal level
continue.
Child Prostitution
According to UNICEF, there are roughly 10 million child prosti-
tutes throughout the world. Many of these children get coerced
into prostitution because their families are poor and need the in-
come, because they have no family, or because they are trafficked.
Increasing population in Pakistan, as in many other develop-
ing countries, has put stress on the economic development of the
country. Despite these pressures, however, “Pakistani society has
stood for high value, respect and dignity of human life. Because
of its strong social structure, cultural values and norms, women
generally enjoy respect and regard in society. As a Muslim state,
Pakistan forbids the practice of prostitution, and it is viewed as a
114
Worldwide Perspective

social stigma. Although prostitution is not legal in Pakistan, its
practice in certain segments of society where poverty forces
women to earn their livelihood through prostitution cannot be
denied” (UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the
Pacific 2001).
Commercial sexual exploitation of children is below the
radar in Pakistan but is known to exist, although statistics are
hard to come by. A 2001 study found three basic categories of sex-
ual exploitation—girls who were sold or married for profit, fe-
male prostitutes, and male prostitutes. The researchers believe
that, for various reasons including societal norms and values, the
serious problem of child sexual abuse and sexual exploitation re-
mains a hidden social problem in Pakistan. It also appeared that
because of sociocultural taboos, public displays of affection be-
tween an adult male and a male child were often accepted, while
such expressions between an adult male and girl child were not
tolerated. This may be a contributing factor to the existence of
commercial sexual exploitation of boys. The age at which children
are first commercially exploited ranged from twelve to fifteen
years (37.1 percent), with one boy as young as six years old being
reported. The research indicates that the family was the primary
contributing factor in forcing 26.6 percent of the children into a
life of prostitution and sexual exploitation. The secondary path-
way into prostitution and abuse was “friends” who either forced
or enticed the child.
Child Trafficking
Many purposes exist for trafficking in children, according to the
traffickers—from general migration, especially in Africa and
parts of Asia, to labor, sex, and child marriage. Trafficking gener-
ally requires the movement of people from one country, known as
the country of origin, to another country, known as the country of
destination. In some cases, they travel through another country,
the transit country, before they reach the destination. Third World
countries are often countries of origin, while the more developed
countries are more likely to be destination countries.
Countries of origin have traditionally been more aware of
child trafficking. Transit countries are more likely to perceive
trafficking as a non-national issue, and that is a major obstacle
to the control of national borders and coastlines. Countries of
Worldwide Issues
115

destination tend to show some indifference, as the problem
originated in another country and does not concern their own
children. They tend to view the problem as outside of their ju-
risdiction.
The trafficking in children has become a global phenomenon,
and it is of growing concern for the international community as a
whole—governments, international agencies, nongovernmental
organizations, and the news media. The links between trafficking
and the worst forms of exploitation of children are very appar-
ent—in the Southeast Asia region, for example, the number of
younger children who are being trafficked is rising alongside a
clear increase in the number of child prostitutes.
Any study of trafficking must take into account cultural and
other factors unique to each country. Poverty is certainly one fac-
tor, but weak governments, armed conflicts, and attitudes toward
women and children are just some of the other factors. Families
are tempted with false promises of a better life or an immediate
cash payment for a child. Traffickers may tell the parents that
their child will receive a good education and a secure job. In some
cases the parents may suspect the truth, but their extreme poverty
and lack of knowledge of trafficking may blind them to the truth
of the situation.
Countries in which gender discrimination is strong or sanc-
tioned are more likely to be open to trafficking of women and
children, which may be seen as being morally acceptable. Cul-
tures in which women and children are seen as inferior and weak
are prime candidates for traffickers. Poor families may be en-
couraged to sell their children outright or hire them out; girls are
more likely than boys to be subject to this practice, as they are not
perceived as valuable to the family.
At the regional level, there is an increasing acknowledgment
of the importance of a human rights approach in the development
of laws to address trafficking. This is supported by the adoption
of the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child and
the initiative to finalize the optional protocol to the African Char-
ter on Human and Peoples’ Rights concerning the rights of
women. It is also reflected in the critical work of the African Com-
mittee on the Rights and the Welfare of the Child, which, at its
first session in 2001, identified the need for a human rights–based
response to the problem of trafficking  (Innocenti Research Cen-
tre 2003).
116
Worldwide Perspective

Ritual Abuse
Ritual abuse is generally seen as the prolonged, sadistic abuse in
a secret group setting, usually under the aegis of Satanism, Chris-
tianity, witchcraft, and numerous pagan or other belief systems
(see Chapter 1 for an overview of ritual abuse). Children are usu-
ally the victims, and the abuse can be physical, emotional, or sex-
ual in nature. Attention to ritual abuse and its victims began in
the United States following the publication of Michelle Remembers,
a book about the author’s alleged escape from a satanic cult when
she was a child.
The day-care center abuse cases, beginning with the Mc-
Martin case, increased public attention to and awareness of this
topic. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, allegations of ritual abuse
began to appear in England, Australia, New Zealand, and a few
other, primarily English-speaking countries. In 1991 the health
secretary of the British government ordered a study of ritual
abuse, following allegations of children being forced to partici-
pate in various activities during occult and other mysterious cer-
emonies. Some estimates of the number of children in England
subjected to some type of ritual abuse were as high as 4,000. The
study, conducted by Professor Jean La Fontaine, studied 967 cases
that alleged organized ritual abuse and 86 cases of alleged ritual
abuse between 1988 and 1991 in England. Allegations of human
sacrifice were made in 35 cases, but no evidence was found to
support the allegations. In 28 cases, allegations were made of in-
dividuals wearing ceremonial robes while participating in the rit-
uals, but only two of those allegations proved true. As was the
case with similar interviewing techniques used in the United
States, this study found that the interviews with the children were
not well done, and that questioning was often aggressive and
suggestive (La Fontaine 1994).
In 1988, a case involving allegations of ritual abuse made
headlines in New South Wales, when a mother claimed that her
three-year-old daughter was being abused while at a day-care
center. During the investigation, which included interviews with
most of the children attending the center, many of the children
claimed that they had been abducted; assaulted with various ob-
jects, including knives, pins, and hammers; sexually abused;
given drugs; and forced to watch animal sacrifices and other
Ritual Abuse
117

forms of ritual abuse. The magistrate judge dismissed all of the
charges on the grounds that the information gathered by investi-
gators had been contaminated by the use of leading questions
(Guilliatt 1996). Following the publicity of this case and other
similar cases, however, new allegations began to appear through-
out Australia.
Concerns over ritual abuse began to appear in New
Zealand in 1991, when the Ritual Action Network was estab-
lished. Members included social workers, counselors, and at
least one police officer. Funded in part by the government, the
group ran workshops concerning ways to recognize ritual
abuse. Soon after one of their first workshops, a mother accused
Peter Ellis, a day-care center worker at the Christchurch Civic
Crèche, of sexually abusing her son. During an investigation,
parents of the children were given a list of ritual abuse symp-
toms and began to ask their children questions about their ex-
periences. Following intensive interviews with the children, sto-
ries surfaced of rituals involving human and animal sacrifice,
insertion of various items into children’s body cavities, forcing
children to stand naked while female workers danced in a circle
around them, and other bizarre activities. Ellis was convicted in
1993 of abusing seven of the children in the day-care center and
served seven years in prison.
Castration of Repeat Sex Offenders
The debate over castration—either through drugs or actual phys-
ical castration—of sex offenders is not limited to the United
States. Many countries had policies regarding castration long be-
fore the United States began to consider this method of control of
sexual offenders. For example, Sweden has allowed castration
since legislation was enacted in 1944. Individuals must be over
twenty-three years old and must be considered a threat to society
if not treated; they also must consent to the procedure, and it
must be performed by a licensed physician (Russell 1997).
Denmark was the first country in Europe to enact legislation
regarding castration. Enacted in 1929 and amended in 1935, it au-
thorized castration without the permission of the offender, but
that provision was removed in 1967. It can now be performed
only by informed consent.
118
Worldwide Perspective

The Czech Republic’s law, enacted in 1966 and amended in
1991, permits castration to be performed only on a voluntary
basis and after being approved by a special committee.
Norway’s castration law was passed in 1977. An individual
may be castrated if it can be demonstrated that he is a continuing
threat to society because of abnormal sexual urges (ibid.).
References
African Child Policy Forum. 2006. Violence against Girls in Africa: A Retro-
spective Survey in Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda. Addis Ababa: African Child
Policy Forum.
Andrews, Gavin, Bronwyn Gould, and Justine Corry. 2002. “Child Sexual
Abuse Revisited.” Medical Journal of Australia 176: 458–459.
Dinwiddie, S., A. C. Heath, M. P. Dunne, et al. 2000. “Early Sexual Abuse
and Lifetime Psychopathology: A Co-twin Control Study.” Psychology
and Medicine 30: 41–52.
Finkelhor, David, Kimberly J. Mitchell, and Janis Wolak. 2000. Online Vic-
timization: A Report on the Nation’s Youth. Arlington, VA: National Center
for Missing and Exploited Children.
Fleming, J. M. 1997. “Prevalence of Childhood Sexual Abuse in a Com-
munity Sample of Australian Women.” Medical Journal of Australia 166:
65–68.
Fournier de Saint Maur, Agnes. 1999. “Sexual Abuse of Children on In-
ternet: A New Challenge for INTERPOL.” Paper presented at the Con-
ference on Sexual Abuse of Children, Child Pornography and Pae-
dophilia on the Internet: An International Challenge, January 18–19.
Goldman, J. D. G., and U. K. Padayachi. 1997. “The Prevalence and Na-
ture of Child Sexual Abuse in Queensland, Australia.” Child Abuse and
Neglect 21: 489–498.
Goldman, R. J., and J. D. G. Goldman. 1988. “The Prevalence and Nature
of Child Sexual Abuse in Australia.” Australian Journal of Sex, Marriage
and Family 9: 94–106.
Guilliatt, Richard. 1996. Talk of the Devil. Melbourne: Text Publishing.
Higgins, D. J., and M. P. McCabe. 1994. “The Relationship of Child Sex-
ual Abuse and Family Violence to Adult Adjustment: Toward an Inte-
grated Risk-Sequelae Model.” Journal of Sex Research 31: 255–267.
Human Rights Watch. 1996a. Children of Bulgaria: Police Violence and Arbi-
trary Confinement. New York: Human Rights Watch.
References
119

Human Rights Watch. 1996b. Death by Default: A Policy of Fatal Neglect in
China’s Orphanages. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 1997. Guatemala’s Forgotten Children: Police Violence
and Arbitrary Detention. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 1998. The Small Hands of Slavery: Bonded Child Labor
in India. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 1999a. Getting Away with Murder, Mutilation and
Rape: New Testimony from Sierra Leone. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 1999b. Prison Bound: The Denial of Juvenile Justice in
Pakistan. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 2000. Seeking Protection: Addressing Sexual and Do-
mestic Violence in Tanzania’s Refugee Camps. New York: Human Rights
Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 2001a. Easy Target: Violence against Children World-
wide. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 2001b. In the Shadow of Death: HIV/AIDS and Chil-
dren’s Rights in Kenya. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 2001c. No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons. New
York: Human Rights Watch.
Human Rights Watch. 2001d. Scared at School: Sexual Violence against Girls
in South African Schools. New York: Human Rights Watch. 
Innocenti Research Centre. 2003. Trafficking in Human Beings, Especially
Women and Children, in Africa. Florence, Italy: UNICEF Innocenti Re-
search Centre.
Internet Watch Foundation Annual Report. 2004. Cambridge: Internet
Watch Foundation.
Jenkins, Phillip. 2001. Beyond Tolerance: Child Pornography on the Internet.
New York: New York University Press.
La Fontaine, Jean S. 1994. The Extent and Nature of Organized and Ritual
Abuse: Research Findings. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
Levesque, Roger J. R. 1999. Sexual Abuse of Children: A Human Rights Per-
spective. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Lopez, F., E. Carpintero, A. Hernandez, M. J. Martin, and A. Fuertes.
1995. “Prevalence and Sequelae of Childhood Sexual Abuse in Spain.”
Child Abuse and Neglect 19, no. 9: 1039–1050.
Marshall, W. L. 2000. “Revisiting the Use of Pornography by Sexual Of-
fenders: Implications for Theory and Practice.” Journal of Sexual Aggres-
sion 67: 67–77.
Martin, G. 1996. “Reported Family Dynamics, Sexual Abuse, and Suici-
120
Worldwide Perspective

dal Behaviours in Community Adolescents.” Archives of Suicide Research
2: 183–195.
Martin, Richard. 2002. “State Regulation of Pornographic Internet Trans-
missions: The Constitutional Questions Raised by Senate Bill 144.”
Florida State University Law Review 29: 1109–1138.
Mazza, D., L. Dennerstein, and V. Ryan. 1996. “Physical, Sexual and
Emotional Violence against Women: A General Practice-Based Preva-
lence Study.” Medical Journal of Australia 164: 14–17.
National Criminal Intelligence Service (NCIS). 2005. “United Kingdom
Threat Assessment of Serious and Organised Crime 2003: Sex Offences
against Children Including Online Abuse.” http://www.ncis.co.uk
/ukta/2003/threat09.asp (accessed May 14, 2006).
Nelson, E. C., A. C. Heath, P. A. F. Madden, et al. 2002. “Association be-
tween Self-Reported Childhood Sexual Abuse and Adverse Psychosocial
Outcomes.” Archives of General Psychiatry 59: 139–145.
Olsson, Ann, Mary Ellsberg, Staffan Berglund, Andres Herrera, Elmer
Zelaya, Rodolfo Pena, Felix Zelaya, and Lars-Ake Persson. 2000. “Sexual
Abuse during Childhood and Adolescence among Nicaraguan Men and
Women: A Population-Based Anonymous Survey.” Child Abuse and Ne-
glect 24, no. 12: 1579–1589.
Petit, Juan Miguel. 2004. “Report on the Rights of the Child.” Report sub-
mitted by the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution,
and child pornography. New York: UN Economic and Social Council.
Quayle, Ethel, and Max Taylor. 2002. “Child Pornography and the Inter-
net: Perpetuating a Cycle of Abuse.” Deviant Behavior: Interdisciplinary
Journal 23: 331–333.
Russell, Stacy. 1997. “Castration of Repeat Sexual Offenders: An Interna-
tional Comparative Analysis.” Houston Journal of International Law 19:
425–459.
Stanley, Janet, Katie Kovacs, Adam Tomison, and Kyllie Cripps. 2002.
Child Abuse and Family Violence in Aboriginal Communities—Exploring
Child Sexual Abuse in Western Australia. Melbourne: Australian Institute
of Family Studies.
Swanston, H. Y., J. S. Tebbutt, and B. I. O’Toole. 1997. “Sexually Abused
Children 5 Years after Presentation: A Case-Control Study.” Pediatrics
100: 600–608.
Taylor, M., G. Holland, and E. Quayle. 2001. “Child Pornography, the In-
ternet and Offending.” ISUMA, The Canadian Journal of Policy Research 2
(Summer): 94–100.
Taylor, Max, and Ethel Quayle. 2003. Child Pornography: An Internet
Crime. New York: Brunner Routledge.
References
121

TopTenREVIEWS. 2006. “Internet Pornography Statistics.” Available at:
http://internet-filter-review.toptenreviews.com/internet-pornography-
statistics.html (accessed September 29, 2006).
UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific. 2001. Sex-
ually Abused and Sexually Exploited Children and Youth in Pakistan. New
York: United Nations.
UN General Assembly. 2002. “A World Fit for Children.” Resolution
adopted by the General Assembly, May 10.
UNICEF. 2003. End Child Exploitation: Stop the Traffic! New York: UNICEF.
Wolak, Janis, David Finkelhor, and Kimberly Mitchell. 2004. “Internet-
Initiated Sex Crimes against Minors: Implications for Prevention Based
on Findings from a National Study.” Journal of Adolescent Health 35:
424–430.
122
Worldwide Perspective

4
Chronology
S
exual relations between adults and children have a long his-
tory. In early Christian history, women were considered the
property of first the father and then the husband; female chil-
dren were also considered property and had no rights. The early
church considered twelve the age at which a young girl could be
married; future husbands would examine these young girls much
as they would measure the value of a horse.
Both the Bible and the Talmud encouraged men to have sex-
ual relations with young girls. They were allowed to do this
through socially sanctioned marriage, concubinage, and slavery.
As Florence Rush wrote: “The Talmud held that a female child of
‘three years and one day’ could be betrothed by sexual inter-
course with her father’s permission. Intercourse with one
younger was not a crime but invalid” (Rush 1980, 17).
In Hindu law and tradition, a girl must be married before
puberty; if she is not married before she starts menstruating, she
and her family are doomed to a tragic afterlife. A female child is
born without a soul, and her only salvation is to be married be-
fore her first menstrual period. This, along with being a faithful
and obedient wife, will often guarantee that she will have a
peaceful afterlife.
In ancient Greece pubescent girls were forced to marry men
usually between fifteen and twenty years older than themselves,
and boys from noble families, at age ten, were required to have
adult male lovers, who also would act as the boys’ teachers and
counselors. An adult man would court a young boy, and, once
the boy’s father had approved of and selected one lover for his
123

son, the lover was allowed by law to “possess the boy by rape”
(ibid., 50).
The remainder of this chapter presents a chronological list of
major events in the more recent history of child sexual abuse.
900
Lady Murasaki writes Tales of Gengi, the story of her
experiences with royal Japanese court manners. She
was adopted by Prince Gengi of Japan at the age of
ten. She was obviously more than a daughter to him,
and in describing the situation, she says that if she
were truly his daughter, “convention would not have
allowed him to go on living with her on terms of such
complete intimacy” (Lady Murasaki 1955, 146).
1179
The Catholic Church begins to sentence clerics who
have molested boys and young men to a monastic life
(France 2004).
1500s
Legislation is enacted in England that begins the
process of protecting young children from sexual
abuse. Boys are protected from forced sodomy, while
girls under ten years of age are protected from forcible
rape.
1576
Jurists in England rule that a female child can consent
to sex at age ten and can be married at age twelve.
Thus, having sexual relations with a female child
under the age of ten is a felony, and having sexual re-
lations with a female child between the ages of ten
and twelve is a misdemeanor. It is still common for
men to make exceptions to this rule, and female chil-
dren generally are given little or no protection. Prior
to this ruling, sexual relations with a child under the
age of three according to Hebrew practice, and sex
with a child under the age of seven according to
canon law, are considered invalid, meaning that it
was not believed to have occurred and was therefore
ignored.
1600
The Piarist schools are founded in Rome by José de
Calasanz, a priest who came to Rome from Spain, as
124
Chronology

the first free schools for poor children, established pri-
marily to teach children vocational skills.
1646
Pope Innocent X abruptly closes the Piarist schools
after allegations are made of sexual abuse of the chil-
dren by teachers (Liebreich 2004).
1672
In Connecticut, a father is found guilty of incestuous
acts with his daughter and is executed. However, the
child is also blamed as partially responsible and is
punished for her role in the incest; she is sentenced to
a whipping (Oates 1990).
1828
In India, Ram Mohan Ray tries to eliminate child mar-
riage but is not able to gather enough followers or to
persuade the legislature to enact such a law. Child
marriage has a long Hindu tradition, and was a com-
mon practice among many Hindu families in India.
1870s
In London, more than 20,000 children live on the
streets, many of them dying of illness and starvation.
Boys usually survive by stealing and girls by becom-
ing prostitutes.
1877
The American Humane Association is founded as the
only national organization working to protect both
children and animals from abuse, neglect, cruelty,
and exploitation. Their Children’s Division works to
break the cycle of abuse through training, risk assess-
ment, research, and policy development programs
initiated to provide effective child protective systems.
They begin their efforts by working to protect ani-
mals and add children to their repertoire when they
realize that no other organization exists to help and
protect children.
1879
The London Committee for the Suppression of the
Traffic of British Girls for the Purpose of Continental
Prostitution is set up by Alfred Dyer and Benjamin
Scott and is joined by several prominent members of
the campaign against the Contagious Diseases Acts.
Chronology
125

1883
The British Criminal Law Amendment Bill is passed
by the House of Lords; the House of Commons passes
it in 1885. The legislation raises the age of consent for
girls from thirteen to sixteen years. Some of the provi-
sions are enacted in response to what some referred to
as “a moral panic about the sale of children into pros-
titution” (Smart 1989).
1897
Sigmund Freud begins to doubt the validity of his the-
ories on hysteria, in which he first believed that many
of his female clients had been sexually abused by their
fathers, resulting in hysteria. He had theorized that
these women were seduced by their fathers and then as
adults experienced a variety of symptoms, including
loss of appetite, vomiting, sneezing, and temporary
blindness. He now believes that many of his patients
were not sexually abused by their parents; they were
merely attracted to the opposite-sex parent when they
were very young. He will later develop his theory of
the Oedipus complex, in which he theorizes that chil-
dren are sexually attracted to their opposite-sex parent.
1910
Reginald Wright Kauffman writes The House of
Bondage, in which he describes women who become
prostitutes, the current social attitudes that lead chil-
dren into prostitution, how they are seduced into it,
and how they have difficulty escaping from it.
In the United States, child protection agencies start a
campaign against sexual attacks on young girls. The
focus is on attacks by strangers, and the girls are often
blamed as sex delinquents rather than being seen as
victims. Many people believe that the young girls are
the seducers and that most men cannot help but be
lured by them.
1917
The Code of Canon Law of the Catholic Church con-
demns priests who exploit minor children, as well as
those who solicit sexual favors during confession.
1920s
Sociologists start studying delinquent girls and dis-
cover that many have been victims of sexual abuse
126
Chronology

within their families. Up until this time, many experts
believed that strangers, not family members, were the
primary abusers of young girls.
1924
The first Declaration of the Rights of the Child is
passed by the League of Nations. In its five brief arti-
cles it does not provide specific rights for children but
offers only aspirations—that children should be cared
for and protected: if they are hungry, they should be
fed, and they should be the first to receive relief dur-
ing times of distress.
1927
Many sources indicate that more than 80 percent of
the people in India participate in child marriages.
Katherine Mayo writes Mother India, a book about the
lower status of women and the abuse that young girls
are subjected to in child marriages. Because she is an
outsider (she is American), many Indians attack her,
claiming that she does not understand the reasons for
child marriage and that she has manipulated the facts;
she is also accused of racism. Nevertheless, her de-
scriptions of what happens to child brides, based on a
review of hospital records and interviews with med-
ical personnel, are horrifying to most people outside
of India. She describes the ruptured vaginas, lacerated
bodies, peritonitis, venereal disease, and death of
young women who are the victims of what most
people consider sexual abuse. Many Indians, includ-
ing poet Rabindranath Tagore, respond to her criti-
cisms by condoning child marriage and denying that
it is abusive to the young girls (Mayo 1927).
1937
Dr. Lauretta Bender and Dr. Abram Blau, after study-
ing children who have been sexually assaulted, con-
clude that children are not necessarily innocent in
cases of sexual abuse. They also hypothesize that these
children may not be irreparably harmed by the sexual
relations with an adult. Bender and Blau believe that in
some cases the children are the actual seducers, rather
than the adults—that these young girls either looked
seductively at the men or dressed provocatively, and
that the men were the victims (Bender and Blau 1937).
Chronology
127

1950
In order to protect young girls, Israel forbids a father
or groom from setting up a marriage with a girl who
has not yet reached her sixteenth birthday. The Israelis
later realize that this is not against the law according
to the Talmud, and in 1960 they will strengthen this
law by declaring that any person contracting a mar-
riage for a young woman under the age of seventeen,
no matter what the ancient law stipulates, will be sub-
ject to imprisonment or fines or both.
1953
Dr. Alfred Kinsey and his colleagues publish their
landmark study of sexual behavior, Sexual Behavior in
the Human Female. The researchers seem surprised to
find that one in four women they interviewed report
some sort of undesired sexual contact or experience
initiated by an adult man. In cases of what we would
today call sexual abuse, Kinsey also believes that
men are in danger of being persecuted by females in-
tent on protecting children and themselves. By pun-
ishing the offender, the law often damages everyone
involved more than any pain the sexual abuse
causes. For example, Kinsey and his colleagues cite
cases in which men are thrown in jail for exposing
themselves: their families are left destitute, their
wives divorce them, and the children often become
wards of the court. They believe that this is much
more damaging than the physical and emotional
pain inflicted on the child by the sexual abuse (Kin-
sey et al. 1953).
1954
Olympia Press publishes Lolita by Vladimir Nabokov.
It is banned in many public libraries and denounced
by many critics. The story centers on an aging Euro-
pean pedophile, Humbert Humbert, and Lolita, a
twelve-year-old American who is kidnapped by
Humbert, drugged, and sexually abused by him. He
imprisons her, watches her every move, and thwarts
her attempts at escape, until she finally gets away.
1959
The second Declaration on the Rights of the Child is
passed by the United Nations. It indicates that children
have the right to “special safeguards.” Principle 9 pro-
128
Chronology

vides that children “shall be protected against all
forms of neglect, cruelty and exploitation.”
1962
Seven couples who advocate legalizing sex with chil-
dren start the Rene Guyon Society. They work to-
ward getting this policy enacted into law but do not
allow anyone who claims to have had sex with chil-
dren to join their organization, because that behavior
is still illegal. They advocate for policies that would
allow children to have sexual relations with other
children as well as to allow sex between children and
adults. Their motto is “Sex by year eight or else it’s
too late.”
C. Henry Kempe, a pediatrician from Denver, Col-
orado, and his colleagues, in an article in the Journal of
the American Medical Association, describe the battered
child syndrome, including characteristics of physi-
cally abused children that all physicians should be
able to determine and that should help them more
easily identify abused children. This is the first formal
recognition of child abuse in the medical community.
This article results in a surge of research on abuse—
physical, sexual, and psychological—and brings na-
tional attention to the seriousness and extent of child
abuse (Kempe et al. 1962).
The Catholic Church secretly sends “Instruction on
the Manner of Proceeding in Cases of Solicitation” to
the world’s bishops. This document provides lengthy
directions for trying a priest accused of sexual abuse
and spells out punishments ranging from suspension
of duties to excommunication and defrocking or lai-
cization.
1963
California becomes the first state to enact a manda-
tory reporting law regarding the reporting of child
abuse, including child sexual abuse. Physicians,
teachers, and certain other professionals have
greater responsibilities toward children and their
protection.
Chronology
129

1964
The Sex Information and Educational Council of the
United States (SIECUS) is founded and is the first or-
ganization to provide honest and straightforward in-
formation about sex to parents, children, and teachers.
Among other activities, it denounces all acts of sexual
exploitation and sexual abuse. However, the organiza-
tion also believes that children often are unable to re-
port events accurately, may willingly participate in
the sexual activity, may actually precipitate sexual re-
lations, and for the most part are not significantly
harmed by exposure to fondling and exhibitionism.
1967
All states in the United States have now adopted
statutes regarding child abuse.
1969
The Children’s Division of the American Humane As-
sociation, under the direction of Vincent DeFrancis,
publishes the results of its study of sexual crimes per-
petrated against children in Brooklyn and the Bronx,
New York. They studied a sample group of 250 cases
reported to police and child protection agencies. This
is one of the first studies to estimate the prevalence
and incidence of sexual abuse of children and to take
into consideration the emotional trauma done to the
child by such abuse (DeFrancis 1969).
1970
Parents Anonymous, a national self-help group for
parents to help prevent child abuse, is founded. The
national organization offers a variety of services to
local chapters, including parent support groups, par-
ent education workshops, and advocacy and public
awareness activities. The organization will offer more
than 2,100 groups this year for children and their par-
ents at no charge to the families.
The National Commission on Obscenity and Pornog-
raphy publishes a report concluding that pornogra-
phy is not necessarily harmful to children or adults.
Pornography may actually encourage open discus-
sions between parents and children about sex. It is
“not a factor in the causation of crime” and as a result
“is not a matter of public concern” (Report of the Com-
130
Chronology

mission on Obscenity and Pornography 1970, xi). This re-
port does not discuss the exploitation of children who
appear in all types of child pornography and denies
that children are victimized by pornography.
1971
Henry Giarretto establishes one of the first model
treatment programs, now known as the Child Sexual
Abuse Treatment Program, in Santa Clara County,
California. The Juvenile Probation Department (JPD)
in Santa Clara, the designated reporting agency for all
cases of child sexual abuse, has difficulty providing
coordinated services to sexually abused children and
their families. Members of the JPD ask Giarretto, a
marriage and family counselor, to help establish a
pilot project to provide counseling to the children and
their families. At the end of the eight-week pilot proj-
ect period, everyone who is involved in the project
recognizes the benefits of this program. It is ex-
panded to include the coordination of services re-
quired by the family, such as financial advice and
legal assistance, and to help facilitate the reunifica-
tion of the family.
1972
The C. Henry Kempe National Center for the Preven-
tion and Treatment of Child Abuse and Neglect is es-
tablished. Its purpose is to provide a clinically based
resource for training, consultation, program develop-
ment and education, and research into all forms of
child abuse and neglect. The center is committed to
multidisciplinary approaches to improve the recogni-
tion, treatment, and prevention of all forms of abuse
and neglect, including sexual abuse.
1973
The Runaway Youth Act is passed by the U.S. Con-
gress. It authorizes the spending of $8 million to de-
velop shelters for children who have run away from
home. Many people believe that this will help protect
the estimated 1 million children living on the streets
and protect them from becoming prostitutes, getting
involved in drugs and alcohol, or becoming involved
in pornography.
Chronology
131

1974
The National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect
(NCCAN) is established by the Child Abuse Preven-
tion and Treatment Act (Public Law 93–247) as the pri-
mary federal agency charged with helping states and
communities address the problems of child maltreat-
ment. NCCAN oversees all federal child abuse and
neglect efforts and allocates child maltreatment funds
appropriated by Congress. They are responsible for
conducting research on the causes, prevention, and
treatment of child abuse and neglect; collecting, ana-
lyzing, and disseminating information to profession-
als concerned with child abuse and neglect; increasing
public awareness of the problems of child maltreat-
ment; and assisting states and communities in devel-
oping programs relating to the prevention, identifica-
tion, and treatment of child abuse and neglect.
Marian Wright Edelman organizes the Children’s De-
fense Fund (CDF) to protect America’s youth. She
wants to provide a strong and effective voice for all
children, to educate the nation about the needs of chil-
dren, and to encourage the support of children before
they get sick, are abused, drop out of school, or get
into trouble.
1976
Alfred M. Freedman and his colleagues write Modern
Synopsis of Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry II, a
psychiatric text used in many medical schools. It pro-
claims that “the occurrence of mother-son incest be-
speaks more severe pathology than does father-
daughter incest” (Freedman et al. 1976, 772).
NCCAN supports the first comprehensive incidence
study of child abuse and neglect. Known as the Na-
tional Incidence Study, in its written report, published
in 1981, it estimates that 44,700 cases of child sexual
abuse, or 0.7 per 1,000 children, were known to pro-
fessionals during the period from April 1979 to March
1980 (National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect
1981).
132
Chronology

In Louisiana, two fathers complain that Father Gilbert
Gauthe inappropriately kissed their young sons.
Bishop Gerard Frey orders Father Gauthe into psy-
chotherapy, but the bishop never suspends or cen-
sures Gauthe in any way.
1977
The federal Protection of Children against Sexual Ex-
ploitation Act of 1977 is passed by the U.S. Congress.
This law prohibits the production of any sexually ex-
plicit material that uses a child under the age of six-
teen if the material will cross interstate lines. Penalties
include ten years in prison and a $10,000 fine. This law
focuses on the transporting, shipping, or mailing of
child pornography, and little can be done to prevent
someone from giving this type of material away or in
other ways exchanging it for something else. The law
prevents only the sale of this type of material. Many
experts realize that this law does very little to stop the
growing market for child pornography.
1978
The North American Man/Boy Love Association
(NAMBLA) is formed. Members advocate for sexual
relations between men and boys, arguing that chil-
dren should be sexually liberated because children are
fully capable of entering into sexual relations with ap-
propriate knowledge and understanding of what is
happening. They also believe that the age of consent
laws in all states should be abolished.
The Protection of Children Act of 1978 is passed in the
United Kingdom. This law makes it an offense for a
person to take, or permit to be taken, any indecent
photograph of a child, or to distribute or show such
photographs, or to possess such photographs, or ad-
vertise them to others.
1979
The Illusion Theater in Minneapolis, Minnesota, pro-
duces the first live-theater program focusing on the
prevention of sexual abuse. Children are the primary
audience for this program, which focuses on letting
Chronology
133

1979
children know that it is not acceptable if someone
(cont.)
abuses them sexually, that it is not their fault, and that,
if they have any questions or if they have been sexually
abused, it is all right to talk to another adult about it.
Sociologist Diana Russell conducts the first truly ran-
dom study to estimate the extent of sexual abuse of
children. She interviews more than 900 women from
the San Francisco area about their sexual experiences
as children. Her findings indicate that 38 percent of
the women had been sexually abused as children
(Russell 1986).
1980
Michelle Remembers is published, the story of Michelle
Smith and her escape from a satanic cult. The publica-
tion of this book triggers many reports from other
people of satanic cults and ritual abuse, and it leads to
growing interest and controversy regarding satanic
cults.
Florence Rush publishes The Best Kept Secret: Sexual
Abuse of Children, one of the first comprehensive stud-
ies on child sexual abuse. Rush, with detailed research
and analysis, shows that child sexual abuse is not the
occasional deviant act of some stranger, but a common
occurrence in many families. With a historical
overview of the sexual abuse of children, she shows
how sexual abuse is still condoned in today’s society.
Five sexual abuse treatment and training institutes are
funded by the National Center on Child Abuse and
Neglect (NCCAN). These include: (1) the Joseph J. Pe-
ters Institute in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, (2) the
Knoxville Institute for Sexual Abuse Treatment in
Knoxville, Tennessee, (3) the Child Abuse Unit for
Studies, Education, and Services (CAUSES) in
Chicago, Illinois, (4) the Sexual Assault Center at the
Harborview Medical Center in Seattle, Washington,
and (5) the Institute for the Community as Extended
Family (ICEF) in San Jose, California. Each of these in-
stitutes is founded to add to the knowledge of child
134
Chronology

sexual abuse and to demonstrate ways to disseminate
this information nationally to professionals.
Several parishioners in St. John Parish in Henry,
Louisiana, complain to Bishop Frey that Father Gilbert
Gauthe spends more time with young boys than his
adult parishioners. They are also concerned because
he frequently has removed children from class for
weekend sleepovers. Bishop Frey does not become
concerned over this complaint, and because it is un-
signed, he dismisses the letter as unreliable. He subse-
quently names Father Gauthe to be the diocesan chap-
lain for the Boy Scouts.
1981
The Boy Scouts publish the Scoutmaster Handbook,
their first publication to include information about
sexual abuse. The discussion focuses on men infiltrat-
ing troops for the sole purpose of sex, but the empha-
sis of the document is on young boys who are search-
ing for sex, not adults who molest children.
Even though the allegations of sexual abuse commit-
ted by Father John Geoghan are well known, the arch-
diocese of Boston places him back into the ministry as
an assistant pastor at St. Brendan’s Church in Dorch-
ester, Massachusetts. The pastor at St. Brendan’s is un-
aware of the earlier allegations against Father Ge-
oghan and welcomes his arrival. In addition, the
archdiocese does not tell Geoghan to stay away from
children. Not knowing of Geoghan’s past, the pastor
at St. Brendan’s makes Father Geoghan responsible
for the altar boys and CCD (Confraternity of Christian
Doctrine) classes.
1982
In a case before the U.S. Supreme Court, Ferber v. New
York, the plaintiff is a bookstore owner who was con-
victed, under New York state law, of promoting the
sexual performance of a child under the age of sixteen
after he sold two films of boys masturbating to an un-
dercover police officer. This is the first time that the
U.S. Supreme Court has considered the problem of
Chronology
135

1982
child pornography, and it upholds the state law, rul-
(cont.)
ing that “states are entitled to greater leeway in the
regulation of pornographic depictions of children”
(New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747 [1982]). See Chapter 6
for a more detailed description of this and other rele-
vant Supreme Court cases.
1983
Dr. Roland Summit publishes an article about the
Child Abuse Accommodation Syndrome, in which he
convincingly argues that children tend to remain
silent about their experiences of sexual abuse. Many
therapists and prosecutors believe that, if children
deny that anything has happened to them, they are
hiding the truth. This theory will come into play in
later trials and convictions of several day-care em-
ployees at preschools throughout the country (Sum-
mit 1983).
A two-and-a-half-year-old child alleges that his
teacher at the McMartin Preschool in southern Cali-
fornia has hurt his bottom. Subsequent investigations
at this preschool and others in the same area find at
least 350 children who claim to have been sexually
abused while attending preschool. After repeated
questioning by authorities, children say that they have
watched other children being sexually abused as well
as being sexually abused themselves. Allegations in-
clude fondling, exposure to vaginal, oral, and anal
sex, and ritualistic and satanic acts of abuse. After
seven years of legal proceedings and much news
media attention, no one is convicted.
On September 26, two young girls and their mothers
go to the police department in Jordan, Minnesota,
and tell the officers that James John Rud, a twenty-
seven-year-old trash collector, has sexually abused
the two young girls. Within six months, the case will
attract national attention. Two-dozen men and
women, many of them well respected in the commu-
nity, will be charged in a conspiracy of sex, torture,
and murder. The victims are their own children. The
children will eventually allege acts of not only sexual
136
Chronology

abuse but also murder. The stories seem incredible,
and many lawyers insist that the children have made
everything up. What appear as strong cases against
some parents end up as bizarre stories that no one be-
lieves; the prosecutor’s behavior in all of the cases is
soundly criticized, and all charges are eventually
dropped. This is a classic case of charges of sexual
abuse being made only to have the children’s imagi-
nations and the public’s fear take over. In the end,
people believe that some children were indeed sexu-
ally abused, but everyone involved in the case got
carried away and overreacted. Many families are hurt
financially and emotionally, but nothing is resolved.
An organization named VOCAL (Victims of Child
Abuse Laws) is started in Minnesota by people who
claim to have been falsely accused of sexually abusing
children. It is started as a result of the many people
charged with sexually abusing children in Jordan,
Minnesota, who believe that they have been rail-
roaded by the legal system and want to offer support
to others who have been falsely accused.
The Catholic Church revises the Code of Canon Law.
Several of the canons refer to child sexual abuse: cler-
ics are prohibited from having sexual contact with mi-
nors, and punishment is described if the cleric dis-
obeys this policy (Canon 1395). Canons 1717, 1718,
and 1719 describe the requirements for investigations
into cases in which a cleric is accused; Canon 1922 re-
stricts an accused cleric’s activities.
1984
The U.S. Congress passes the Child Protection Act,
which expands the Protection of Children against
Sexual Exploitation Act of 1977. It eliminates the re-
quirement for a commercial transaction, strengthens
prosecuting authority against the producers and dis-
tributors of child pornography, and raises the statu-
tory age of a minor to eighteen. This legislation is an
attempt to answer the Supreme Court’s decision in
New York v. Ferber by eliminating the requirement that
child pornography be obscene to be criminal.
Chronology
137

1984
The U.S. Senate holds its first hearing on the importa-
(cont.)
tion of child pornography from foreign countries.
The Attorney General’s Task Force on Family Violence
presents its final report. They find that many children
typically endure up to twelve or more separate inter-
views through the course of court hearings in cases of
child sexual abuse. The task force makes several rec-
ommendations to minimize the trauma to the victim of
violence while still protecting the rights of the accused.
They recommend using the same prosecutor through-
out the court process, allowing hearsay evidence at
preliminary hearings to minimize the number of times
that the victim is required to testify, allowing the
child’s testimony to be presented on videotape, using
anatomically detailed dolls to describe abuse, appoint-
ing a special volunteer advocate for the child, legally
presuming that children are competent witnesses, al-
lowing flexible courtroom settings, controlling press
coverage, and limiting court continuances of each case.
A grand jury in Schriever, Louisiana, indicts Father
Gilbert Gauthe on thirty-four counts of aggravated
crimes against nature, immoral acts, producing child
pornography, and aggravated rape. This indictment
draws national attention to the sexual abuse of chil-
dren being committed by priests.
1986
The Children’s Justice Act is passed by the U.S. Con-
gress and becomes law. It provides funds to the states
to train law enforcement personnel in ways to manage
child abuse. To receive funding, each state must estab-
lish an interdisciplinary task force that includes med-
ical and mental health professionals, child advocates,
judges, and attorneys. The purpose is to improve the
chances of prosecution while reducing the trauma to
the victims.
The Child Sexual Abuse and Pornography Act of 1986,
Public Law 99–628, 100 Stat. 3510 (1986), is passed by
the U.S. Congress. This legislation bans the produc-
tion of and advertisements for child pornography.
138
Chronology

A conference is held in Nairobi in which twenty-two
countries participate. The participants created the
African Network for the Prevention and Protection
against Child Abuse and Neglect.
1987
The first documented case of ritual sexual abuse in
England is reported in Congleton in Cheshire. Seven
children in an extended family are believed to have
been sexually abused, and the diaries kept by their
foster parents reveal stories of witch parties, the mur-
der of babies, and the killing of animals.
1988
The Boy Scouts introduce “Youth Protection Guide-
lines,” a course on sexual abuse for professional and
volunteer leaders. The course, presented on video-
tape, describes what sexual abuse of children is and
how troop leaders can work to prevent the sexual
abuse of Boy Scouts. Presenters include David Finkel-
hor and Kenneth Lanning, both sex abuse experts. In-
formation is provided on new rules developed by the
organization to combat the sexual molestation of
scouts, such as requiring more than one adult leader
on all trips, limiting conversations between an adult
and a scout to areas where they can be observed by
other people, and prohibiting an adult from sharing a
tent with a young scout.
Kelly Michaels is found guilty and sentenced to
forty-seven years in prison in one of the most bizarre
and disturbing day-care cases in the country. Chil-
dren attending the Wee Care preschool in Maple-
wood, New Jersey, allege that Michaels, their teacher,
would gather them together at nap time and lead
them through the church that housed Wee Care into
a choir room. In this room, she made them remove
their clothes and often removed her own clothing as
well. The children report that they were forced to en-
gage in sexual acts, to eat feces and urine, and to lick
peanut butter off her genitals. Many of the children
also accuse Michaels of putting kitchen utensils and
Lego toys into their vaginas and rectums. None of
the staff members say that they suspected any of
Chronology
139

1988
these activities. In 1993, Michaels’s conviction is
(cont.)
overturned and all charges dropped.
The National Network of Children’s Advocacy Cen-
ters is formed in response to the need for a coordi-
nated effort to provide services to children who are
sexually abused. The National Network consists of
member and affiliate programs that provide technical
assistance, training, and networking for communities
that want to establish a children’s advocacy center.
These centers offer coordinated, multidisciplinary
services to children who have been abused, particu-
larly those who have been sexually abused, and their
families. Each center offers a variety of services, usu-
ally coordinated by a case management team. The Na-
tional Network establishes minimum standards that
each member program must meet to be part of the net-
work.
The U.S. Congress passes the Child Protection and
Obscenity Enforcement Act, which prohibits the use
of computers to transport, distribute, or receive child
pornography. The act requires “all persons producing
material containing visual depictions made after Feb-
ruary 6, 1978, showing actual explicit sexual activity
to determine the true age of the performers, to main-
tain records containing this information, and to affix
to each copy of the material a statement about where
these records could be found.”
1989
The United Nations adopts the Convention on the
Rights of the Child (UNCRC), which, among other
items, prohibits child prostitution, child trafficking,
and other illegal sexual practices with children under
the age of eighteen years.
1990
In a case argued before the U.S. Supreme Court, Os-
borne v. Ohio (495 U.S. 103 [1990]), the plaintiff is con-
victed of possessing four photographs of a naked boy.
The U.S. Supreme Court rules in the state’s favor, in-
dicating that the state can constitutionally forbid the
possession of child pornography.
140
Chronology

The U.S. Supreme Court rules in Maryland v. Craig
(497 U.S. 836 [1990]) that a Maryland law that allows
children to provide testimony in a sexual abuse case
using closed-circuit television outside of the court-
room with only the prosecutor and defense attorney
present does not violate the defendant’s right to con-
front his accuser.
The Victims of Child Abuse Act is passed by the U.S.
Congress. It allows children testifying in court to use
anatomically correct dolls to demonstrate what hap-
pened to them, presumes children to be competent
witnesses, protects children’s privacy, allows children
to testify via closed-circuit television or by using
videotaped testimony, authorizes the appointment of
a guardian ad litem to protect the best interests of the
child, and provides for victim impact statements from
the children. Speedy trials are encouraged, as are the
use of multidisciplinary teams to treat and help the
sexually abused child. The statute of limitations for
beginning prosecution of child sexual abuse allega-
tions is also extended until the child reaches the age of
twenty-five.
An international campaign to End Child Prostitution
in Asia Tourism (ECPAT) is started.
1991
A Predatory Offender Registration Statute is enacted
in Minnesota as a result of the brutal abduction of
eleven-year-old Jacob Wetterling. Individuals who
have been convicted of a variety of child-related of-
fenses are required to register as predatory offenders
when they are released from prison.
1992
A former priest, James Porter, estimates that he sexu-
ally abused as many as 100 children when he was a
priest. Defrocked in 1974, he is living with his wife
and children in Minnesota when the allegations arise.
In the end, 101 people come forward, claiming that he
abused them when they were children. The publicity
concerning the allegations against him draws atten-
tion to priest abuse of children and leads to a growing
Chronology
141

1992
number of cases against priests and the Catholic
(cont.)
Church.
1993
Former priest James Porter is indicted by a grand jury
on forty-six counts of sodomy and indecent assault on
thirty children in Massachusetts. Porter pleads guilty
and is sentenced to eighteen to twenty years in the
state prison.
President Bill Clinton signs into law the National
Child Care Protection Act, sponsored by Representa-
tive Patricia Schroeder (D-CO), to create a national
database of convicted child molesters. Youth organi-
zations will be able to submit the names of their em-
ployees and volunteers to a state agency that is desig-
nated to run these names through the database of
molesters, as well as through the FBI’s database of
convicted criminals, which includes murderers and
kidnappers.
The New Jersey Court of Appeals rules that Kelly
Michaels from the Wee Care preschool in Maplewood
did not receive a fair trial, in part because the judge’s
questioning of the children was not impartial. The rul-
ing states that the judge questioned the children in his
chambers, and while the jury watched on closed-cir-
cuit television he played ball with them, sometimes
held them on his lap and knee, whispered in their ears
and had them whisper in his ear, and encouraged and
complimented them. The state appeals the decision,
and the New Jersey Supreme Court affirms the appel-
late court’s ruling.
The Boston archdiocese of the Catholic Church puts in
place written policies on handling sexual abuse com-
plaints that are made against Catholic clergy.
At their semiannual meeting, the U.S. bishops’ main
agenda topic is sexual misconduct. They create an ad
hoc subcommittee on sexual abuse, made up entirely
of bishops. The subcommittee is given a broad man-
date, including the power to ask Rome for the power
142
Chronology

to laicize sex offenders. The bishops also adopt a brief
resolution that establishes a new national policy for
dealing with individual allegations of abuse. It fo-
cuses on removing clergy promptly once the allega-
tions against them are proved, reporting confirmed
instances of abuse to civil authorities when required
by law to do so, and informing the community when
appropriate.
The Council of Representatives of the American Psy-
chological Association votes to establish a working
group to review current research into memories of
childhood abuse and to identify future research and
training needs.
1994
In the United States, agents from the U.S. Immigration
and Customs Enforcement Agency’s Operation Preda-
tor program arrest 237 individuals in what is believed
to be one of the largest investigations into Internet
child pornography at the time. More than 1,000 indi-
viduals are arrested in Australia, Canada, China, Den-
mark, Finland, Japan, Liechtenstein, The Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the
United Kingdom. An Internet billing company, Reg-
pay, is charged with providing credit card billing serv-
ices to fifty child pornography websites, with operat-
ing at least four of its own child pornography
websites, and with money laundering.
On July 29, Megan Kanka stops to talk to her neigh-
bor, Jesse Timmendequas (a convicted sex offender),
about his new puppy. She is never seen alive by her
family again. Timmendequas would later confess to
sexually abusing her and then killing her.
The U.S. Congress passes the Jacob Wetterling Crimes
against Children and Sexually Violent Offender Regis-
tration Program (as part of the Violent Crime Control
and Law Enforcement Act of 1994), requiring states to
implement a registry of sex offenders and crimes
against children.
Chronology
143

1994
The International Bureau for Children’s Rights is cre-
(cont.)
ated to address violence against children throughout
the world. One of their aims is to ensure that signato-
ries will guarantee that the rights of every child within
their borders are protected. The bureau’s International
Tribunal for Children’s Rights provides coordinated
intervention in behalf of children by lawyers, judges,
criminologists, and human rights experts.
1995
At least four states (Florida, Missouri, Ohio, and Ok-
lahoma) pass laws that require convicted sex offend-
ers to be electronically monitored for the remainder of
their lives. Laws vary according to the type of sex of-
fender and the type of monitoring device required—
electronic or GPS.
Cardinal Hans Hermann Groer, the archbishop of Vi-
enna, is accused of repeatedly molesting young boys
at an all-male Catholic high school in Austria. He re-
jects the allegations but is forced to resign.
1996
Megan’s Law is signed by President Bill Clinton. It
amends the Jacob Wetterling Crimes against Children
and Sexually Violent Offender Registration Program,
requiring all states to create their own systems for
having sex offenders in their jurisdiction register with
the local police. It also adds a provision for commu-
nity notification. The hope is that Megan’s Law will
help the public better protect themselves from sexual
offenders, and that it would discourage offenders
from abusing again.
The U.S. Congress passes the Communications De-
cency Act, which makes it a crime for anyone to post
indecent or obscene materials on the Internet. The law
is challenged by the American Civil Liberties Union
on First Amendment grounds. The U.S. District Court
for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania enters a pre-
liminary injunction against enforcement. The case
reaches the U.S. Supreme Court, which affirms the
lower court decision, finding that “provisions of the
CDA prohibiting transmission of obscene or indecent
144
Chronology

communications by means of telecommunications de-
vice to persons under age 18, or sending patently of-
fensive communications through use of interactive
computer service to persons under age 18, were con-
tent-based blanket restrictions on speech, and, as
such, could not be properly analyzed on First Amend-
ment challenge as a form of time, place, and manner
regulation” (Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521
U.S. 844 [1997]).
The Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 is en-
acted into law. It bans “sexually explicit pornographic
images of children that ‘appears to be’ or ‘conveys the
impression’ that a minor is depicted.” The law is later
overturned (Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S.
234 [2002]).
The Internet Watch Foundation (IWF) is established as
an independent organization based in the United
Kingdom that works to resolve problems of illegal
material on the Internet. The IWF forwards informa-
tion regarding substantiated complaints to the Na-
tional Criminal Intelligence Service/Interpol for dis-
semination to appropriate law enforcement agencies.
The Australian Catholic Church agrees to settle 126
cases and pays U.S.$1.7 million in compensation, as
well as another $850,000–$1.1 million for victims’
counseling. The Church also apologizes to the victims
(“Australian Church Apologizes for Abuse,” BBC
News, June 8, 2002, at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi
/asia-pacific/2032698.stm).
ECPAT organizes the World Congress against the
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children in Stock-
holm, Sweden, to focus on ways to mobilize the
world to find effective means of combating the com-
mercial sexual exploitation of children. More than 120
countries participate; representatives are from inter-
governmental organizations, NGOs, and the com-
mercial community. An Agenda for Action is adopted
that commits “governments to mobilize the business 
Chronology
145

1996
sector, including the tourism industry, against the use
(cont.)
of its networks and establishments for the commer-
cial sexual exploitation of children.”
A U.S. federal grand jury indicts thirteen people from
the United States, and three from Australia, Canada,
and Finland, on charges of planning, organizing, and
participating in the online molestation of ten-year-old
girls. The defendants participated in real-time photo
shoots in which they sent messages requesting pho-
tos of the girls in certain poses; one person shot the
photos with a digital camera and transmitted the
photos to the group. All of the defendants are mem-
bers of the “Orchid Club,” a private, online child
pornography organization that shares sexually ex-
plicit images and videos of girls as young as five. To
join the Orchid Club, members were required to
know the password to access photos and online chat
sessions. Initiation to the club required an aspiring
member to describe a personal experience with a
child (Stewart 1997).
1997
Approximately 10,000 sites can be found on the Inter-
net that contain sexually explicit material (Miller
1999).
Father John Geoghan is arrested and charged with
criminal sexual assault of a minor. He is accused of
crimes against twenty-eight children.
The International Tribunal for Children’s Rights holds
its First Hearings in Paris, France, focusing on ways to
use extraterritorial legislation to protect children from
sexual exploitation. They develop several recommen-
dations toward that end (see Chapter 6 for details).
In England, the legislature passes the Sex Offenders
Act of 1997, which requires sexual offenders to regis-
ter with the police but does not provide for public no-
tification of sex offenders.
146
Chronology

1998
The Protection of Children from Sexual Predators
Act of 1998 criminalizes and increases penalties for
conduct involving child sexual abuse and child
pornography.
The Child Online Protection Act (COPA) is passed and
requires commercial websites to collect a credit card
number or other proof of age before allowing Internet
users to view material deemed harmful to minors. The
law is challenged on the grounds that it violates the
First Amendment. The U.S. District Court grants a
preliminary injunction against enforcement. The
Court of Appeals affirms, and the U.S. Supreme Court
affirms the lower court’s ruling (Ashcroft v. American
Civil Liberties Union, 542 U.S. 656 [2004]).
A European meeting of the International Dimension
of Sexual Exploitation of Children is held in Madrid,
organized by the Spanish Ministry of Justice and the
International Bureau for Children’s Rights to further
the implementation of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and to work to develop effective means of
protecting children.
The International Tribunal for Children’s Rights
holds its second hearings in Brazil, focusing on the
development of solutions to the exploitation of chil-
dren that could be implemented on regional and na-
tional levels.
In Operation Cathedral, led by Interpol, ninety-six
people are arrested in twelve countries. The biggest
equipment seizure involves forty-eight gigabytes of
child pornography files that are seized at the home of
a man in Finland. In the United Kingdom, the size of
the seizure is estimated at a minimum of 250,000 im-
ages. In the United States, the biggest seizure at an in-
dividual’s home is 75,000 images. Total seizures
amount to 500,000 images and more than 120 videos
of child pornography.
Chronology
147

1999
The number of sites on the Internet that contain sexu-
ally explicit material has grown to between 30,000 and
60,000.
The Convention on the Rights of the Child has been
ratified by 191 countries, but children are increasingly
victims of violence.
The U.S. Congress provides funding and directs the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children
to conduct the first national survey on risks that chil-
dren face when they are on the Internet, with a focus
on unwanted sexual solicitations and pornography.
The Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention is
adopted by the International Labor Organization
(ILO). Article 3 specifically prohibits sexual exploita-
tion of children.
The International Tribunal for Children’s Rights holds
its Third Hearings in Colombo, Sri Lanka, focusing on
ways in which to foster international cooperation in
fighting child sexual exploitation.
2000
The Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 is
passed in the United States to punish traffickers, pro-
tect victims, and prevent trafficking. It also requires
the U.S. Department of State to submit a report to
Congress each year on foreign governments’ at-
tempts to eliminate severe forms of trafficking in
persons.
In June, the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops drafts
the Charter for the Protection of Children and Young
People, in response to the growing awareness of the
problem of child sexual abuse by Catholic priests.
They create two entities to address the problem: the
National Review Board and the Office of Child and
Youth Protection.
The Child Internet Protection Act (CIPA) is enacted,
mandating that public schools and libraries install fil-
148
Chronology

ters on computers with Internet access. CIPA is ruled
constitutional in 2003 (Am. Library Ass’n v. United
States, 201 F. Supp. 2d 401 [E. D. Pa 2002], rev’d 123 S.
Ct. 2297 [2003]).
In England, the body of eight-year-old Sarah Payne is
found buried in a shallow grave, murdered by a pe-
dophile. As a result of a large public outcry asking for
better notification and registration of sexual offenders,
the legislature amends the Sex Offenders Act of 1997
by tightening up the registration of sex offenders with
the police, but it does not go as far as Megan’s Law in
the United States. It does not provide the public with
the names or exact locations of sex offenders, but
rather sets up “risk panels” to determine the risk that
each offender poses to the public.
The UN Protocol, also known as the Palermo Proto-
col, is enacted as a supplement to the UN Conven-
tion against Transnational Organized Crime. Its pri-
mary purpose is to help prevent, suppress, and
punish trafficking, especially trafficking in women
and children.
The UNICEF Regional Office for West and Central
Africa and the International Organization for Migra-
tion’s Dakar Bureau adopt a memorandum of under-
standing concerning trafficking of women and chil-
dren, as well as the recruitment of children into the
armed forces.
2001
Interpol announces that it believes human trafficking,
including trafficking in children, generates $19 billion.
The first Africa-Europe Ministerial Conference is held
in Brussels in October. The issue of trafficking in
women and children is identified as a major problem.
Government representatives indicate their desire to
develop a plan of action to deal with the issue.
The 2nd World Congress against Commercial Sexual
Exploitation of Children is held in Yokohama, Japan.
Chronology
149

2001
The Economic Community of West African States
(cont.)
(ECOWAS) adopts a Declaration and Plan of Action
against Trafficking in Persons during its annual sum-
mit, held in Dakar in December.
The dioceses of Orange and Los Angeles are sued by
Ryan DiMaria for the abuse he suffered as a high
school student at Santa Margarita High School at the
hands of the school’s principal, Father Michael Harris;
Harris had a history of sexually abusing students.
Church officials settle DiMaria’s suit for $5.2 million,
the largest publicly disclosed settlement ever paid by
the Catholic Church to an individual claiming abuse.
They also agree to a policy devised by Ryan DiMaria,
who has just graduated from law school, to protect
children in the future. Referred to as “Ryan’s Law,” it
requires the Church to hire monitors for all diocesan
Catholic schools, to create a toll-free number for vic-
tims to call, and to ban all priests from being alone in
social settings with minors.
In Dallas, eleven former altar boys allege that Father
Rudolph Kos had sexually abused them hundreds of
times. Local diocesan officials reject pleas to settle the
case, and instead argue at trial that Father Kos (and,
by association, all priests) are actually independent
contractors, not employees, and therefore responsible
for their own actions. The jurors are not convinced.
They believe instead Father Tom Doyle, and others
who provide expert testimony, and find Church lead-
ers grossly negligent. They hand down a $119.6 mil-
lion judgment against the Church.
2002
The Vatican rejects the policy submitted by the U.S.
Catholic Conference of Bishops for dealing with alle-
gations of the sexual abuse of children because it
does not conform to requirements of canon law. The
bishops change the policy, but the debate will con-
tinue over whether the changes are needed and
whether the policy conveys the appropriate message
to victims.
150
Chronology

Father John Geoghan goes on trial for putting his
hand into the bathing suit of a ten-year-old boy. After
a short deliberation, the jury finds Geoghan guilty of
indecent sexual assault on a minor. The judge sen-
tences him to nine to ten years in prison.
The Australian Catholic Church is hit with another
sexual abuse scandal. George Pell, the archbishop of
Sydney, is alleged to have offered to pay victims of
sexual abuse for their silence in 1993. Later in the year,
Archbishop Pell is accused of having abused a twelve-
year-old boy in the 1960s. He denies both allegations
but agrees to step down temporarily from his post
while the Church investigates the charges. He is later
cleared of charges.
Cardinal Bernard Law, the archbishop of Boston, trav-
els to Rome, where Pope John Paul II accepts his res-
ignation.
Massachusetts becomes the thirtieth state to add
clergy to the list of individuals required to report sus-
pected sexual abuse of children to the authorities. Car-
dinal Bernard Law in the past had opposed the re-
quirement.
The UNICEF Medium Term Strategic Plan for
2002–2005 goes into effect. Among other items, two of
its priorities are fighting HIV/AIDS and increasing
protection of children from violence, abuse, exploita-
tion, and discrimination.
The New Partnership for Africa’s Development
(NEPAD) is formulated and entered into by the G8
governments in their meeting in Canada. It provides
the framework for helping African nations to focus
on developing democracy and sound economic man-
agement, and seeks to promote peace, good gover-
nance, and human rights. It recognizes the critical
role that children will play in the success of its
programs.
Chronology
151

2002
The U.S. Supreme Court holds that the ban on virtual
(cont.)
child pornography in the Child Pornography Preven-
tion Act of 1996 (CPPA) abridges the freedom to en-
gage in a substantial amount of lawful speech and is
therefore overbroad and unconstitutional under the
First Amendment (Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535
U.S. 234 [2002]).
2003
The Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals, in Gunderson v.
Hass (339 F. 3d 639 [8th Cir. 2003]), upholds the re-
quirement that a defendant who is cleared of preda-
tory offense charges is still required to register as a
predatory offender under Minnesota law because he
was convicted of a nonpredatory offense that arose
out of the same set of circumstances as the charged
predatory offense.
The U.S. Supreme Court upholds the constitutionality
of the Children’s Internet Protection Act, which re-
quires schools and libraries receiving federal funds for
Internet access either to filter or to block access to vi-
sual depictions that are child pornography, obscene,
or material considered harmful to minors.
The U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement Of-
fice begins its Operation Predator program, an initia-
tive to safeguard children from foreign national pred-
ators, pedophiles, international sex tourists, child
pornographers who use the Internet to attract chil-
dren, and human traffickers. During its first two years
of operations, the program arrests more than 6,000
child predators.
The Sexual Offences Act of 2003 is enacted in the
United Kingdom and includes legislation to protect
children against sexual assaults, indecent photo-
graphs, exploitation, pornography, and trafficking.
In the United Kingdom, the Paedophile On Line In-
vestigation Team is created to support, coordinate,
and assist national and international investigations of
Internet-related child sexual abuse.
152
Chronology

The U.S. Congress passes the Prosecutorial Remedies
and Other Tools to End the Exploitation of Children
Today Act of 2003 (PROTECT Act), which has been
written to correct flaws in the Child Pornography Pre-
vention Act. It bans virtual child pornography.
Gerald Thomas, a former pastor in a Lutheran church
in Texas, is convicted and sentenced to 397 years in the
state prison after being found guilty of eleven counts
of multiple sex crimes against children. He is already
serving a five-year sentence in federal prison on child
pornography charges. In 2004, a Texas jury will award
almost $37 million to the nine plaintiffs who accuse
the Lutheran governing body of knowing about and
hiding Thomas’s history of abuse.
Michael Jackson is charged with ten counts of molest-
ing a child, conspiracy, and providing alcohol to mi-
nors. In 2005 he will be acquitted on all counts.
California enacts a new law that lifts the statute of lim-
itations for one year on civil child sexual abuse cases
that are filed against individuals, as well as negligence
cases filed against groups. Other states will consider
similar action.
2004
More than 100,000 sites on the Internet contain sexu-
ally explicit materials.
2005
Debra Lefave, a twenty-five-year-old teacher in
Florida, reaches a plea agreement with prosecutors
after being charged with two counts of lewd and las-
civious battery as a result of having sexual relations
with a fourteen-year-old student. As part of the plea
agreement, Lefave will serve three years of house ar-
rest and seven years of probation.
An investigation of UN peacekeepers working in the
Democratic Republic of Congo finds at least 150 alle-
gations of rape and sexual abuse of women and girls,
some as young as thirteen, committed by the peace-
keepers.
Chronology
153

2005
The Roman Catholic Church sends out questionnaires
(cont.)
to all faculty and students at more than 220 seminar-
ies in the United States. The questionnaire asks about
the existence of homosexuality in the seminaries. The
Church indicates that this is a service to U.S. bishops
trying to recover from the sex abuse scandal, but crit-
ics see it as the Church’s view that equates pedophiles
with homosexuals and as a poorly disguised attempt
to rid the Church of all homosexual priests.
There are at least forty-five regional task forces partic-
ipating in the Internet Crimes against Children (ICAC)
Task Force Program. These task forces help state and
local police to develop effective programs to respond
to sexual enticement of children on the Internet.
Douglas Smith, who had been with the Boy Scouts of
America for thirty-nine years, is sentenced to eight
years in prison after pleading guilty to one count of re-
ceiving and distributing child pornography. Investi-
gators had searched his home and computer and
found 520 images of child pornography, including
video clips.
2006
A special agent for the Wyoming Task Force on Inter-
net Crimes against Children traces a movie depicting
the rape of a two-year-old to a computer in Colorado.
The agent is unable to find the computer because the
Internet service provider (ISP) does not maintain
records relating to specific accounts. Colorado state
legislators are considering a bill to require all ISPs in
Colorado to maintain their records for at least one
year.
References
Bender, Lauretta, and Abram Blau. 1937. “The Reaction of Children to
Sexual Relations with Adults.” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry 7:
500–518.
DeFrancis, Vincent. 1969. Protecting the Child Victim of Sex Crimes Com-
mitted by Adults. Denver: American Humane Association.
154
Chronology

France, David. 2004. Our Fathers: The Secret Life of the Catholic Church in an
Age of Scandal. New York: Broadway.
Freedman, Alfred M., Harold I. Kaplan, and Benjamin J. Sadock. 1976.
Modern Synopsis of Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry II. Baltimore, MD:
Williams and Wilkins.
Kempe, C. Henry, F. N. Silverman, B. F. Steele, W. Droegemueller, and
H. K. Silver. 1962. “The Battered Child Syndrome.” Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Association 181: 17–24.
Kinsey, Alfred C., Wardell B. Pomeroy, Clyde E. Martin, and Paul H. Geb-
hard. 1953. Sexual Behavior in the Human Female. Philadelphia: W. B. Saun-
ders.
Lady Murasaki. 1955. The Tales of Gengi. New York: Doubleday Anchor.
Liebreich, Karen. 2004. Fallen Order: Intrigue, Heresy, and Scandal in the
Rome of Galileo and Caravaggio. Berkeley, CA: Grove/Atlantic.
Mayo, Katherine. 1927. Mother India. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Miller, Heather L. 1999. “Strike Two: An Analysis of the Child Online
Protection Act’s Constitutional Failures.” Federal Communications Law
Journal 52: 155, 159–160.
National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (NCCAN). 1981. Study
Findings: National Study of the Incidence and Severity of Child Abuse and Ne-
glect. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Service.
Oates, R. K. 1990. “Understanding the Problem.” In Understanding and
Managing Child Sexual Abuse, edited by R. K. Oates. Sydney: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich.
Report of the Commission on Obscenity and Pornography. 1970. New York:
Bantam.
Rush, Florence. 1980. The Best Kept Secret: Sexual Abuse of Children. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Russell, Diana E. H. 1986. The Secret Trauma: Incest in the Lives of Girls and
Women. New York: Basic.
Smart, C. 1989. Feminism and the Power of Law. London: Routledge.
Stewart, Jennifer. 1997. “If This Is the Global Community, We Must Be on
the Bad Side of Town: International Policing of Child Pornography on
the Internet.” Houston Journal of International Law 20: 205–246.
Summit, Roland. 1983. “The Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syn-
drome.” Child Abuse and Neglect 7: 177, 181–188.
Chronology
155


5
Biographical Sketches
M
any people throughout the country, and the world, have
contributed in some way to the field of child sexual abuse.
Some have devoted their entire lives to studying the prob-
lem, while others, with broader interests, have nevertheless had
an impact in this field. This chapter profiles some of the more
prominent researchers, writers, political activists, offenders, and
others who have been of note.
Dr. Gene Abel
Dr. Abel is the director of the Behavioral Medicine Institute of At-
lanta, the largest treatment program in the southeast United
States for sex offenders. Approximately 250 people are in treat-
ment at any given time, and 90 percent of them are child moles-
ters. Abel is also professor of psychiatry at Emory University
School of Medicine and Morehouse University School of Medi-
cine. He is internationally known for his research work with sex-
ually aggressive people, primarily adults who sexually abuse
children. He has headed six federal research projects for NIMH
and has published more than 100 medical articles in numerous
scientific journals. Dr. Abel also maintains a database containing
the results of his research with 400 known sex offenders and over
100 normal people; this database can provide information on a
variety of topics.
157

One of his best known accomplishments is the Abel Screen,
which he developed as a method of screening people to determine
those who may have a sexual interest in children or may already
be sexually abusing children. It has proven to be a reliable and
cost-effective technique. The screen consists of a series of four eas-
ily administered tests; the combined scores reveal twenty separate
types of sexual interest. The first test consists of computer-
generated slides of children, adolescents, adults, and couples; the
individual rates his interest in each slide. The second test is a phys-
iologic measure of the subject as he views the slides and is taken
without the subject’s knowledge. The final two tests are question-
and-answer tests.
The Abel Screen can be used as the first step in evaluating
someone who might be at high risk of being a sex offender and
who perhaps should not be placed in environments in which
children are present. If a person fails the screen, the next step in
assessment is usually the administration of more intrusive
measures.
Louise Armstrong
In 1978, Louise Armstrong wrote Kiss Daddy Goodnight, a compi-
lation of first-person accounts of incest. Written from a feminist
perspective, Armstrong believes that the primary focus in at-
tempting to reduce the incidence of incest is to alter the cultural
assumption that men have the right to control their wives and
children, with the added implication that control includes sexual
abuse. She demonstrated that courts often rule in favor of abusers
and against the women who try to protect their children from
abuse. As a political activist, she believes that political action is
the primary means to change cultural attitudes. Also, she is not a
fan of therapy, believing that it serves only to encourage victims
to live within the system and adapt to current cultural norms. It
leads to the assumption that cycles of violence are inevitable.
Armstrong is also the author of Rocking the Cradle of Sexual
Politics: What Happened When Women Said Incest, in which she dis-
cusses incest, how she became involved in speaking out about in-
cest, and her disagreements with the directions that research has
taken concerning this topic.
158
Biographical Sketches

Marilyn Van Derbur Atler
Marilyn Van Derbur, Miss America of 1958, in 1991 stood before
a small audience at the University of Colorado Health Sciences
campus (who had come to hear about plans for a new program at
the Kempe National Center, which is dedicated to preventing and
treating child abuse and neglect) and revealed that she was an in-
cest survivor. She had been sexually abused as a young girl by her
father, from the time she was five years old until she left home for
college at the age of eighteen. Her father, Francis S. Van Derbur,
was a well-known philanthropist, socialite, and Denver business-
man. He died in 1984, years before his daughter revealed her se-
cret to the world. Marilyn was one of four sisters, growing up in
a family that had everything: they went skiing in the winter and
rode their horses in the summer, they attended the proper
schools, took music lessons, and played games. The girls also had
something else, however, a father who sexually abused at least
two of them.
In her four-page disclosure of childhood sexual abuse, Van
Derbur wrote: “People ask me why I didn’t tell what was hap-
pening to me. . . . In order to survive, I split into a day child, who
giggled and smiled, and a night child, who lay awake in a fetal
position, only to be pried apart by my father. Until I was 24, the
day child had no conscious knowledge of the night child” (Loftus
and Ketcham 1994, 79). She pushed herself hard to win her fa-
ther’s approval, but the day child never received much attention
from her father. She graduated Phi Beta Kappa; won the Miss
America pageant, sometimes making more than 200 appearances
in one day; and was a member of the University of Colorado ski
team. Yet her father never gave her the kind of love and attention
she was looking for. When she was twenty-four years old, the
memories of sexual abuse became conscious. She currently trav-
els around the country talking to a variety of groups about incest.
She has developed, with others, several videos to help educate
the public about child sexual abuse and to help victims recover
from their experiences.
Biographical Sketches
159

Fred Berlin
Fred Berlin received his B.A. in psychology from the University of
Pittsburgh in 1964, his M.A. in psychology from Fordham Uni-
versity in 1966, and both his Ph.D. in psychology (1970) and his
M.D. (1974) from Dalhousie University in Canada. He completed
his residency in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sci-
ence at the Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. In
1980, he founded and currently is the director of the Sexual Dis-
orders Clinic; he is also an associate professor in the Department
of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences of the Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity School of Medicine. The Sexual Disorders Clinic is cur-
rently known as the National Institute for the Study, Prevention
and Treatment of Sexual Trauma.
Working with in-patients who manifest some type of sexual
disorder, as well as with victims of sexual trauma, Berlin and his
associates are dedicated to the prevention of sexual trauma by
learning more about the abusers and their disorders as well as
about the victims of sexual abuse. Over the years, Berlin and his
colleagues determined that mandatory reporting of child sexual
abuse usually kept undetected adult abusers from entering treat-
ment. Mandatory reporting also deters patient disclosures about
child sexual abuse that occurs during treatment, and it does not
help determine the number of abused children. When reporting
became mandatory in Maryland (in 1989) the rate of self-referrals
dropped from about seven per year (seventy-three over a ten-
year period) to zero. The researchers’ conclusion was that the
law, which was intended to protect children, deters abusers from
coming forward and entering treatment. Berlin believes that
mandatory reporting requirements should not be applied to psy-
chiatrists.
Berlin has many publications. He has been an invited partic-
ipant to the White House Conference on Child Sexual Abuse. He
has spoken to a variety of groups and meetings, including the
Colleges of Judges in several states, the national Symposium on
the Child Victim of Sexual Abuse, and the National Conference of
Catholic Bishops, where he delivered the keynote address on sex-
ual problems in the clergy.
160
Biographical Sketches

Lucy Berliner
Lucy Berliner, the director of the Sexual Assault Center at Har-
borview Hospital in Seattle, Washington, is internationally recog-
nized for her pioneering work in assessing and treating children
who have been sexually abused. Known for training other clini-
cians around the world in specialized intervention methods, she
has written and lectured throughout the country on sexual as-
sault. Berliner has testified in court in cases of child sexual abuse,
often in which she is asked to testify as to whether she believes
that a child has been abused. She has mixed feelings about pro-
viding this type of testimony. Because no standards exist among
mental health workers for evaluating these cases, judges can look
at several evaluations from different professionals and believe
that one is better than another; this can lead to inconsistency in
the outcome of these cases. She also worries about therapists who
believe that they have special insights in these cases, as well as
about other professionals—including those in the legal field—
who believe that therapists do indeed have special insights. “Any
individual mental health professional has to be darn careful
about setting themselves up to say, ‘I have some special ability
and insight into the truth that no one else has.’ I mean all you are
doing is forming an opinion that will be a piece of the mosaic”
(Hechler 1988, 162). Berliner has a master’s degree in social work.
Douglas Besharov
Douglas Besharov is currently a research scholar at the Ameri-
can Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research and a profes-
sor at the University of Maryland School of Public Policy. He
was the first director of the National Center on Child Abuse and
Neglect in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
from 1975 to 1979 (then the Department of Health, Education
and Welfare). He received his law degree from New York Uni-
versity. Well known for his thoughts on inappropriate investi-
gations in child sexual abuse cases and on removal of children
from their homes, he was a keynote speaker at the first VOCAL
Biographical Sketches
161

(Victims of Child Abuse Laws) conference. He has written ex-
tensively on the problems with mandatory reporting laws,
which have led to an increase in the number of child sexual
abuse reports made to authorities. He believes that by convinc-
ing the public that children are being sexually abused and that
any suspicion of abuse must be reported, children have been
made more vulnerable than ever before. According to Besharov,
the rate of unfounded reports of sexual abuse has risen by more
than 65 percent, which means that more time is spent investi-
gating reports; many of those reports may not be investigated in
a timely manner, and therefore those children who really are
being abused may be in greater danger of additional abuse be-
fore investigators can help them.
Barbara Blaine
Beginning in 1969, when she was thirteen years old, Barbara
Blaine was sexually abused by Father Chet Warren, a Catholic
priest. He continued to molest her for four years, and told her not
to tell anyone because no one would understand or believe her.
She kept her secret until 1974, when she attended a Catholic re-
treat and told another priest about Father Warren. The priest re-
sponded by telling her that Jesus would forgive her, acting as
though the abuse were her own fault. Despite that priest’s re-
sponse, the retreat gave her a newfound strength and increased
her self-esteem. In 1985, she told her family about the abuse; her
mother, a devout Catholic, went directly to the Church, expecting
them to take care of the situation. Father Warren was sent to ther-
apy, denied the allegations of abuse, and eventually was dis-
missed from the Church, although he was not formally laicized
through official church proceedings. Blaine later found out that
Father Warren had abused others and that the Church was aware
of his behavior as early as 1970.
Blaine told her story on various talk shows; she never re-
vealed the priest’s name until she appeared on the Oprah Winfrey
Show, at which time she finally revealed his name. She continued
to meet other victims of sexual abuse by priests and in 1989
founded Survivors Network for Those Abused by Priests (SNAP),
an activist organization working to help survivors deal with their
abuse (see Chapter 7 for a description of SNAP).
162
Biographical Sketches

John Briere
Dr. Briere is associate professor of psychiatry and psychology at
the Keck School of Medicine at the University of Southern Cali-
fornia and director of the Psychological Trauma Program at LAL-
USC Medical Center. He received an M.A. from California State
University and his Ph.D. from the University of Manitoba. He is
a past president of the International Society for Traumatic Stress
Studies and the author of many books, articles, and psychological
tests relating to trauma-related distress and interpersonal vio-
lence. The focus of his research includes victims of violence, psy-
chological trauma, long-term effects of child abuse, and psycho-
logical assessment of post-traumatic states.
In Child Abuse Trauma: Theory and Treatment of the Lasting Ef-
fects, Briere examined the long-term effects of all forms of child
abuse, including sexual abuse, and described how this abuse af-
fects the victim’s psychosocial functioning as an adult.
Focusing their attention on the controversy over repressed
memories of sexual abuse, Briere and Jon Conte, a clinical social
worker and researcher, reported the results of a study to deter-
mine the role of repressed memory in sexual abuse trauma. They
studied 450 patients who reported having been sexually abused
as children, and among their findings was the fact that more than
half of the patients reported no memory of their abuse between
the time it occurred and their eighteenth birthday. Briere and
Conte concluded that amnesia appears to be a common phenom-
enon among survivors of sexual abuse. However, Briere appears
to have modified his thoughts recently on repressed memory (see
Chapter 2 for a discussion of repressed memories in child sexual
abuse cases).
Sandra Butler
In Conspiracy of Silence: The Trauma of Incest, Sandra Butler focused
attention on a topic that, until the book’s publication in 1978, was
not discussed publicly. Written from a feminist perspective, it has
become a classic reference on child sexual abuse perpetrated by a
family member, providing a historical perspective on the issue.
When she was conducting research for the book, she thought that
Biographical Sketches
163

professionals treating victims of incest could answer questions
that she had after reviewing the literature on the topic. What she
found was what she referred to as a “conspiracy of silence”: she
believed that women’s reality is created and defined by men and
clinicians, scholars, and theorists who are trained by men. A “con-
spiracy of silence” is created by this belief system, and feminists
“must break out part of the silence by speaking the truth of our
lives and experiences so that the theory, the funding, the clini-
cians, and the criminal justice personnel will be made to respond
to us with clarity, respect, and immediacy” (from “Incest: Whose
Reality, Whose Theory,” undated, found at http://www.trc-
cmwar.ca/articles).
Butler is an associate professor in the School of Social Work
at the University of Maine. She is a former codirector of the Insti-
tute for Feminist Training, which focuses on training in feminist
psychological theory and practice, political activism, and cross-
cultural perspectives. She received her M.S.W. from Washington
University and her Ph.D. from the University of Washington.
Jon R. Conte
A clinical social worker and researcher, Jon Conte is currently an
associate professor and the associate dean of academic affairs at
the School of Social Service Administration at the University of
Chicago. He has taught in the School of Social Work at the Uni-
versity of Washington. He frequently lectures at both national
and international meetings and conferences and has written
many publications. Conte was the principal investigator on a
study that examined the effects of childhood sexual experiences
on both child and adult survivors. For a project funded by the Na-
tional Institute of Mental Health, he studied ways of educating
children in the prevention of sexual abuse. Other areas of interest
include the etiology of sexual violence and the effects of preven-
tion education. He is the founding editor of the Journal of Inter-
personal Violence and is past president of the American Profes-
sional Society on the Abuse of Children. He has also appeared on
many local and national radio and television programs, including
Good Morning America, Donahue, and a PBS special titled “What
Your Child Should Know about Sexual Abuse.” He has worked
with John Briere in attempting to prove the existence of repressed
memories.
164
Biographical Sketches

As an expert on memory, in 2005 he appeared as a witness for
the plaintiffs in the case against the Catholic Diocese of Spokane,
Washington. He has evaluated the allegations of 300 to 400 people
who claim to have been abused by members of the clergy and has
developed personal injury evaluations to determine the damages
that result from sexual abuse.
Christine Courtois
A psychologist in independent practice in Washington, D.C.,
Christine Courtois is co-founder of the CENTER: Posttraumatic
Disorders Program at the Psychiatric Institute of Washington,
where she is also a clinical and training consultant. She received
her Ph.D. in psychology from the University of Maryland in
1979. Working in the area of post-traumatic stress, she is the au-
thor of three books: Recollections of Sexual Abuse: Treatment Princi-
ples and Guidelines (1999), Adult Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse: A
Workshop Model (1993), and Healing the Incest Wound: Adult Sur-
vivors in Therapy (1988), in addition to many articles concerning
sexual abuse. A former member of the board of directors of the
International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, she continues
to conduct professional training on topics relating to traumatic
stress.
Thomas Doyle
The Reverend Thomas Doyle first warned Roman Catholic bish-
ops of the growing sexual abuse scandal in the Catholic Church
in 1984, following the widespread publicity of the case in
Louisiana against Father Gilbert Gauthe. Doyle was ordained as
a Catholic priest in the Dominican Order in 1970. He has been an
aide to the Vatican representative in Washington, has served as
an Air Force chaplain, and was at Ramstein Air Force Base in
Germany from 2001 until he was transferred to Seymour Johnson
Air Force Base in North Carolina. This recent reassignment is
widely believed to have been in retaliation for his active and
vocal involvement in helping children who have been abused by
Catholic priests. In 1985, in response to the sexual abuse case
against Father Gilbert Gauthe, Doyle, Ray Mouton, and Father
Mike Peterson wrote a report titled “The Problem of Sexual
Biographical Sketches
165

Molestation by Roman Catholic Clergy: Meeting the Problem in
a Comprehensive and Responsible Manner.” They analyzed the
financial and legal liability of the Church and suggested policies
and procedures that should be adopted in response to the prob-
lem. While the executive committee of the U.S. Conference of
Catholic Bishops did not adopt their recommendations and did
not present the report to the full conference, the report did influ-
ence the policies on dealing with sexual abuse that many dio-
ceses later adopted.
David Finkelhor
David Finkelhor, a leading expert on child sexual abuse, received
his B.A. in social relations in 1968 from Harvard University, his
Ed.M. in sociology from the Harvard Graduate School of Educa-
tion in 1971, and his Ph.D. in sociology from the University of
New Hampshire in 1978. He specializes in the areas of mental
health, social psychology, sexual behavior, family violence, victi-
mology, and criminology. He is currently the codirector of the
Family Research Laboratory at the University of New Hampshire
and a professor of sociology.
Finkelhor has written extensively on child sexual abuse and
family violence. With his associates at the Family Research Labo-
ratory, he conducted a national study of sexual abuse in day care.
Results indicated that day-care centers do not place children at a
significantly higher risk of sexual abuse than other settings, but
results did suggest to parents that one way of reducing the risk of
sexual abuse to their children is to get more involved in the day-
care center’s activities. In 1986, Finkelhor and several of his col-
leagues reviewed ten years of research on child sexual abuse and
published A Sourcebook on Child Sexual Abuse, which helps others
working in the field of sexual abuse as well as the general public
to understand many of the current statistics on child sexual
abuse.
Finkelhor has received many research grants from the Na-
tional Institute of Mental Health, the National Center on Child
Abuse and Neglect, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delin-
quency Prevention, the Boy Scouts of America, and the National
Institute on Aging. He has conducted research on incest and fam-
ily sexual abuse, parental attitudes and reactions to sexual abuse,
166
Biographical Sketches

family violence, the development and dissemination of knowl-
edge of child sexual abuse, sexual abuse in day care, the charac-
teristics of incest offenders, the incidence of missing children, pa-
ternal characteristics and risk of sexual abuse in U.S. Navy
families, and youth victimization prevention. He has made pro-
fessional presentations on incest and sexually abused children to
the Conference on Sexually Abused Children, the Vermont
Planned Parenthood Association, the New Hampshire Nurses
Association, the Sixth Annual Workshop on Child Abuse and Ne-
glect, the National Center for the Prevention and Control of Rape,
and Harvard Medical School. He is on the editorial boards of the
International Journal of Child Abuse and Neglect and the Journal of In-
terpersonal Violence and is an associate editor of the journal Vio-
lence and Victims.
Gilbert Gauthe
Gilbert Gauthe was the first Catholic priest brought to trial for
sexually abusing children. In 1984, he was indicted on thirty-four
counts of various sex crimes against children. For ten years his su-
periors knew about his abuse but told him only to confess his
sins, hoping that would solve the problem. He was moved from
parish to parish and appeared to garner complaints at every
parish. While he was pastor at two churches in Louisiana, he had
slumber parties with the young altar boys, after scheduling altar
boy practice for early in the morning and telling the parents that
the boys might as well stay overnight so the parents did not have
to make the long drive to the church early in the morning. One of
the boys complained to his father, who called the bishop’s office,
and soon all of the parents were aware of the abuse. The parents
sued the Church, which quickly settled the case, and Church offi-
cials believed that their troubles were over. However, in 1986 an
eleven-year-old boy testified in court about how Gauthe had sex-
ually abused him, hospitalizing him as a result of the severe
abuse. The jury convicted Gauthe, and the court sentenced him to
twenty years in prison. After serving ten years, he was released
but not deemed “cured.” Ten months after being released, how-
ever, he was arrested in Texas for molesting a three-year-old boy.
He was sentenced to seven years’ probation, and the Church was
ordered to pay the boy $1 million.
Biographical Sketches
167

Henry Giarretto 
Henry Giarretto founded the Child Sexual Abuse Treatment Pro-
gram (CSATP) in Santa Clara, California, in 1971, and organized
several self-help groups associated with the program, including
Parents United, Daughters and Sons United, and Adults Mo-
lested as Children United. Giarretto held a B.A., an M.A., and a
Ph.D. in psychology. He published articles in several professional
journals and in fifteen anthologies on child abuse, and he wrote a
book on child sexual abuse treatment, Integrated Treatment of Child
Sexual Abuse: A Treatment and Training Manual in 1982. He pre-
sented papers at major national and international conferences on
child abuse.
Giarretto formed CSATP in response to the need for coordi-
nated services for sexually abused children and their families.
The Santa Clara Juvenile Probation Department (JPD) was the re-
porting agency for all cases of child sexual abuse; the help they
provided to families was often fragmented, creating further
trauma to the child and the family. Members of the JPD asked Gi-
arretto, then a marriage and family counselor, to help establish a
pilot project to provide counseling to the children and their fam-
ilies. At the end of the eight-week project, everyone who partici-
pated in the program recognized its benefits and decided to ex-
pand it to include the coordination of services required by the
family, such as financial advice and legal assistance, and to help
facilitate the reunification of the family. This reunification could
take place only after individual counseling sessions were held to
help each family member cope with the abuse and other dys-
functional aspects that may have contributed to it. The program’s
focus is on healing and resocializing the family through the use of
humanistic psychology.
Giarretto believed that compassion and caring are the two
critical qualities that affect the ability to treat families success-
fully. He saw his role as a family advocate, listening to the prob-
lems within the family with compassion and helping family
members work out their difficulties. All families, indeed all indi-
viduals, are doing the best they can under the circumstances in
which they find themselves. The role of the counselors at CSATP
is to give these families, first as individuals, the help, support,
and tools they need to understand why they do what they do and
to understand their feelings and emotions about themselves and
168
Biographical Sketches

each other. Once they can help the individuals to grow, they can
help the families reunite.
In the 1980s, Giarretto developed a model to distinguish pe-
dophiles from abusers who commit incest. He first described the
model in California and persuaded many people that individuals
who commit incest should receive preferential treatment, because
he believed that people who molest their own children should not
be treated as pedophiles. Although not everyone agreed, this so-
called Giarretto model grew in popularity throughout the United
States during the 1980s and served as a model for family reunifi-
cation: the Parents United organization modeled itself on this be-
lief. Parents United became a popular treatment program used by
social workers, child and family service workers, and mandated
reporters. Unfortunately, many of the graduates of such programs
were able to escape incarceration by participating in group coun-
seling programs that claimed to have a high success rate but also
had a high number of repeat, recidivist offenders.
Gail Goodman
In her positions as professor of psychology at the University of Cal-
ifornia, Davis, a consultant to the Sacramento County Child Pro-
tective Services, professor of forensic psychology at the University
of Oslo (Norway), and director of the Center of Social Sciences and
Law, Gail Goodman is prominent in the field of child sexual abuse.
She has conducted research and published many articles about
children’s testimony in cases of child sexual abuse, children’s
memory, and children’s perceived credibility as witnesses, specifi-
cally in testifying about events they have experienced or wit-
nessed. She has conducted studies exploring the relationship be-
tween questions asked during hearings to determine whether
children are competent witnesses and the children’s accuracy in
testifying, and another study on the susceptibility of children to
leading questions asked by prosecutors or defense attorneys.
Goodman has also conducted a survey for the National Cen-
ter on Child Abuse and Neglect that investigated more than
12,000 accusations of ritual sexual abuse committed by satanic
cults. The researchers could not find one case with convincing ev-
idence of the existence of a well-organized satanic cult that sexu-
ally molested children.
Biographical Sketches
169

She has received many awards for her work. She received her
academic degrees (B.A., M.A., and Ph.D.) from the University of
California at Los Angeles.
Judith Herman
A leading expert on trauma and abuse, Judith Herman is a clini-
cal professor of psychiatry at Harvard Medical School and is di-
rector of training at the Victims of Violence Program at Cam-
bridge Hospital. She received her M.D. from Harvard Medical
School and trained in general and community psychiatry at
Boston University Medical Center. She has written several books
on sexual and domestic violence, including child sexual abuse. In
Father-Daughter Incest, first published in 1981, Herman reported
on an extensive clinical study of forty incest victims and inter-
views of professionals in the field, including mental health, child
protection, and law enforcement professionals. An updated edi-
tion of the book, published in 2000, provides an overview of the
research and findings of studies conducted following its initial
publication. In Trauma and Recovery, she explores various trauma
experienced as a result of domestic violence, combat, and politi-
cal terrorism and explores those experiences and options for re-
covery. In another study, with Emily Schatzow, Herman worked
with fifty-three women in group therapy sessions and encour-
aged them to try to find evidence that their memories of abuse
were accurate. Three-quarters of the women were able to corrob-
orate their memories with information from other sources.
Michael Jackson 
An American pop star, Michael Jackson began his career in music
when he was four years old, singing with his brothers Tito, Jackie,
Jermaine, and Marlon. They formed the Jackson Five, with
Michael as lead singer, and had a successful music career. Michael
made a solo album, Got to Be There, in 1972, while still a member
of the Jackson Five, and he became an international star in 1983
following the release of his music video Thriller.
Beginning to be considered eccentric by many in the late
1980s, his appearance changed, and there were reports that he
often slept in a hyperbaric chamber and that he had made an
170
Biographical Sketches

attempt to purchase the bones of the Elephant Man. Many people
believed that he was simply a harmless eccentric and continued
to enjoy his music. However, in 1993 a thirteen-year-old boy ac-
cused Jackson of sexually abusing him. Although no charges were
ever filed, Jackson settled with the boy’s family for an unknown
amount, reported to be in the millions of dollars. Jackson again
was accused in 2003 of molesting a child, conspiracy, and provid-
ing alcohol to minors. He was acquitted by the jury on all counts,
and the verdict stunned many observers. After he was cleared,
Jackson vowed that he would never again share his bed—or bed-
room—with a child.
C. Henry Kempe
Charles Henry Kempe received his M.D. from the University of
California in 1945 and interned in pediatrics in 1945 and 1946. At
the University of Colorado Medical Center in Denver, he was a
professor of pediatrics and microbiology and chairman of the De-
partment of Pediatrics from 1956 through 1973. During that time,
he also headed the battered children’s team. He was founder and
director of the C. Henry Kempe National Center for the Preven-
tion and Treatment of Child Abuse and Neglect. He was a con-
sultant to the U.S. attorney general, the U.S. Department of De-
fense, and the World Health Organization, and he was a member
of the American Pediatric Society, the American Society for Pedi-
atric Research, the American Public Health Association, and the
American Association of Immunology. In 1984, he was nominated
for the Nobel Peace Prize. Kempe played a key role in defining
the “battered child syndrome,” a means of helping doctors to
identify children who have been abused. His wife, Ruth Kempe,
was also well known in the field of child abuse and was instru-
mental in much of the initial work done to draw widespread at-
tention to the problem in the 1960s.
Ruth S. Kempe
Ruth Svibergson Kempe received her B.A. in 1943 from Radcliffe
College and her M.D. from Yale School of Medicine in 1946. She
completed her internship and residency in pediatrics at New
Haven Hospital and completed a residency in child psychiatry at
Biographical Sketches
171

the University of Colorado School of Medicine in 1961. From 1961
to 1973 she was an assistant clinical professor of pediatrics at the
University of Colorado School of Medicine, and from 1973
through 1978 she was an assistant professor of psychiatry and pe-
diatrics there. She became a staff psychiatrist at the C. Henry
Kempe National Center for the Prevention and Treatment of
Child Abuse and Neglect. With her husband, C. Henry Kempe,
she wrote Healthy Babies, Happy Parents in 1958, Child Abuse in
1978, and The Common Secret: Sexual Abuse of Children and Adoles-
cents in 1984. Ruth Kempe has written and lectured widely on
child abuse, and she and her husband played an important role in
bringing the problem of child abuse to national attention and in
promoting prevention and treatment programs.
Kenneth V. Lanning
Prior to becoming a private consultant on crimes against children,
Kenneth Lanning was the supervisory special agent assigned to
the Behavioral Science Unit at the FBI Academy in Quantico, Vir-
ginia, which helps law enforcement agencies and prosecutors
throughout the United States by developing practical applica-
tions of the behavioral sciences to the field of law enforcement
and criminal justice. 
Lanning is a well-known expert in the area of child sex rings
and child sexual abuse in satanic cults. He has identified two
major types of sex rings: historical child sex rings and multidi-
mensional child sex rings. He has spent years researching, pub-
lishing, lecturing, and consulting on the sexual victimization of
children, as well as the characteristics of those who sexually
abuse children. He has written about child sex rings and the be-
havior of child molesters, and he provides a law enforcement per-
spective on those issues. He is a member of the advisory board of
the Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers (ATSA) and
a former member of the Boy Scouts of America Youth Protection
Expert Advisory Panel. In addition, he has testified before the
President’s Task Force on Victims of Crime, the U.S. Attorney
General’s Task Force on Family Violence, and the U.S. Attorney
General’s Commission on Pornography. Lanning has also testi-
fied on several occasions before the U.S. Senate and House of
Representatives and has appeared frequently as an expert witness
in state and federal courts.
172
Biographical Sketches

Bernard Law 
Bernard Law became archbishop of Boston in 1984 and years later
became embroiled in the child sexual abuse scandal that hit the
Church. In 1998, Father John Geoghan of Boston was removed
from the priesthood after his conviction of child sexual abuse and
after many other victims came forward as a result of the resultant
publicity. More than 600 people have claimed to be abused by
priests in Boston, and more than 400 plaintiffs have sued or are
suing the archdiocese. On April 29, 2006, the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of Boston revealed that the archdiocese has paid out
more than $150 million in legal settlements to alleged victims of
sexual abuse perpetrated by priests and was, at that time, run-
ning a deficit of $46 million.
Bernard Law, however, appeared uncaring to the victims of
the abuse and more than willing to protect accused priests. Car-
dinal Law appeared to survive the crisis, even though many
called for his resignation, until a court in 1998 ordered the arch-
diocese to release additional personnel files as part of one case
against the Church and many people again began calling for his
resignation. A 2003 report issued by the Massachusetts attorney
general found that Cardinal Law and others in the archdiocese
had not violated any laws, but the report did indicate that there
had been institutional acceptance of the abuse. Finally, in 2002, he
resigned as archbishop, although he still remains a cardinal. In
2004 he was named as the archpriest of St. Mary Basilica in Rome.
Mary Kay Letourneau
Mary Kay Letourneau is a former schoolteacher in Washington
State who spent seven years in prison after being convicted of
statutory rape for having had a sexual relationship with a thir-
teen-year-old student, Vili Fualaau. The relationship was discov-
ered by her husband, who told other family members about it;
one of her cousins reported the relationship to local child protec-
tion services professionals. In 1997 she was arrested and pleaded
guilty to two counts of second-degree statutory rape. The court
suspended the prison sentence and required that she serve six
months in county jail and enroll in a sexual deviancy treatment
program for three years. Released from jail early, Letourneau, as
Biographical Sketches
173

a condition of the early release, was not allowed to see Fualaau.
However, she was again found with Fualaau, and her seven-year
prison sentence was reimposed. Her husband divorced her while
she was in prison. Following her release in 2004 she married
Fualaau in 2005, and is helping to raise their two children.
This case received national attention, in part because it in-
volved an adult woman and a boy. Some critics of her sentencing
believed that boys are not as emotionally affected by sexual rela-
tions with an adult as girls, and that the abuse is less criminal
than that between an adult man and a girl. In fact, Fualaau often
claimed that he was not a victim.
Elizabeth Loftus
Elizabeth Loftus is one of the country’s foremost experts on mem-
ory. She received her B.A. in mathematics and psychology from
UCLA in 1966, her M.A. in psychology from Stanford University
in 1967, and her Ph.D. in psychology from Stanford in 1970. She
is currently a distinguished professor in the departments of Psy-
chology and Social Behavior; Criminology, Law, and Society; and
Cognitive Sciences. Previously, she was a professor of psychology
at the University of Washington in Seattle.
Loftus has spent more than twenty-five years conducting
laboratory studies on memory, supervising graduate students,
and writing eighteen books and more than 250 scientific articles.
Her books include Eyewitness Testimony: Psychological Perspective,
The Myth of Repressed Memory (with Katherine Ketcham), and Wit-
ness for the Defense: The Accused, the Eyewitness, and the Expert Who
Puts Memory on Trial (with Katherine Ketcham). Much of her
work concerns the malleability of memory, the ways in which our
memories of events can be distorted, confused, and incorrect.
When testifying in court as an expert on memory, she tried to clar-
ify for the judge and the jury the process of memory: “Think of
your mind as a bowl filled with clear water. Now imagine each
memory as a teaspoon of milk stirred into the water. Every adult
mind holds thousands of these murky memories. . . . Who among
us would dare to disentangle the water from the milk?” (Loftus
and Ketcham 1994, 3). She believes that memories have a spiritual
quality more than a physical reality.
Recently, Loftus has found herself in the center of a major
controversy on the validity of recovered memories (see Chapter
174
Biographical Sketches

2). As a result of her research, she believes that for the most part
repressed memories do not exist. However, she is quick to point
out her concern that if people do not believe in the possibility of
these memories, we may be returning “to those days, not so very
long ago, when a victim’s cries for help went unheard and accu-
sations of sexual abuse were automatically dismissed as fantasy
or wish-fulfillment” (ibid., 32). She has seen both sides, including
the families destroyed by allegations of sexual abuse that could
not be substantiated at all except for the recovered memories and
the pain of the alleged victim. She acknowledges that memory is
not a black and white entity: it is difficult to understand, and no
one knows for certain whether or not repressed memories are true.
Virginia McMartin
Virginia McMartin operated the McMartin Preschool in Manhat-
tan Beach, California, when, in 1983, she and her grandson, Ray-
mond Buckey, along with five other child-care staff members,
were charged with molesting more than 350 children over a ten-
year period. The investigation started with some mothers’ suspi-
cions that Raymond Buckey might have abused their children.
When the mothers went to talk with Virginia McMartin’s daugh-
ter and Raymond’s mother, Peggy Buckey, she did not take their
concerns seriously. However, a few weeks later when one child
came home from the preschool with blood on his anus, his
mother became concerned and took him to the Manhattan Beach
Police Department and then to a local hospital. The doctors told
her that her son had been sodomized, and a full-scale investiga-
tion of the McMartin Preschool began. During the ensuing inves-
tigation, investigators found that many of the children said that
they had seen other children being sexually abused and that they
had been sexually abused themselves. Some of the allegations in-
cluded fondling, exposure to vaginal, oral, and anal sex, and rit-
ualistic and satanic acts of abuse. After seven years of legal pro-
ceedings and a great deal of news media attention, no one was
convicted.
Prior to these allegations, Virginia McMartin had been con-
sidered an upstanding member of the community. She was a
member of an established Manhattan Beach family, she had re-
ceived many awards from the city for her civic service, and her
preschool had received great praise from child-care inspectors,
Biographical Sketches
175

who described it as well run, well staffed, and well equipped.
Most parents were impressed with the way she operated her
school, including the planning and organization of birthday par-
ties, field trips, and educational projects.
Kelly Michaels
Working at the Wee Care Day Nursery in New Jersey, Kelly
Michaels was accused by one of the children of taking his tem-
perature by inserting a thermometer into his rectum. Investiga-
tors interviewed the three- and four-year-old children, who pro-
vided graphic details of sexual abuse as a result of intense and
repeated questioning. In the end, Michaels was charged with 131
counts of sexual abuse against twenty children. None of the other
teachers or care workers ever saw any of this abuse occurring.
However, Michaels was convicted of 115 counts of abuse and was
sentenced in 1988 to forty-seven years in prison. Some of the
other teachers admitted that they did not come to her aid because
they believed that prosecutors might have charged them as well.
Michaels spent seven years in prison before her conviction was
overturned.
Alice Miller
With a Ph.D. in psychology and sociology, Alice Miller has been a
practicing psychoanalyst and instructor in psychoanalysis for
more than twenty years. When Thou Shalt Not Be Aware was first
published in Germany in 1981, Miller was virtually the only per-
son in Europe to write about the sexual abuse of children. She vis-
ited the United States in 1982 and was delighted to see that the
topic was written about openly in this country. She believes that
children are “used and misused for adults’ needs, including sex-
ual needs, to a much greater extent than we realize” (Miller 1986,
309). She wrote that emotions that are blocked because of this
abuse inevitably lead to emotional and physical problems. While
attempting to integrate her theories into the mainstream of psy-
choanalytic theory, she realized that this was an impossible task.
She believes that psychoanalysts tend to ignore the prevalence of
sexual abuse of children and to deny the serious effects of this
abuse. She argues that therapists must start listening to the chil-
176
Biographical Sketches

dren and identify with them in order to understand them. Thera-
pists must become advocates for their clients instead of repre-
senting current societal theories and values. They must not spare
the parents at any cost, but must understand the ways in which
sexuality can be used to control or have power over those weaker
in society.
Richard Ofshe
Richard Ofshe is a professor of sociology at the University of Cal-
ifornia, Berkeley. An expert on mind control and cults, he is well
known for his research into extreme techniques of influence and
social control. Ofshe is quick to admit that no one knows for cer-
tain that cults that kill babies and sexually abuse children and
adults even exist, because no one has found any concrete proof of
their existence. He is quite aware of all the rumors of satanic rit-
ual abuse, and of the people who believe in or claim to have par-
ticipated, usually against their will, in such rituals. He doubts
that multiple personality disorder exists as a separate and readily
identifiable disorder, and he tends to believe that these are highly
suggestible people and that therapists suggest, unwittingly,
symptoms that these patients will start manifesting. However, he
is not willing to rule out the possibility that satanic cults exist.
Ofshe shared a Pulitzer Prize in 1979 for his research into the
Synanon cult in southern California. Other subjects he has writ-
ten about include the thought-control techniques developed in
Communist China, North Korea, and the Soviet Union, and how
those techniques have been used by religious cults in the United
States.
Ofshe testified for the prosecution in the trial of Paul Ingram,
one of the better-known cases involving repressed memories of
childhood sexual abuse. While Ofshe did not discount the possi-
bility of the existence of a satanic cult, he still had not seen any
conclusive evidence of one. The Ingram case was no exception.
Ofshe believed that Ingram was visualizing events that had not
occurred; nonetheless, those visualizations were real to him. Ofshe
continues to search for verifiable evidence that satanic cults exist.
In 1994, he and Ethan Watters wrote Making Monsters: False
Memories, Psychotherapy, and Sexual Hysteria, which explained
the ways in which the false memories of Elaine Franklin led to
the conviction of her father for sexual abuse. Franklin’s father
Biographical Sketches
177

eventually won his appeal for a new trial, based in part on sec-
tions in the book concerning Elaine’s therapy sessions.
Florence Rush
As a social worker at a residence for neglected and dependent
girls, an activist in the Congress of Racial Equality, and a member
of Older Women’s Liberation, Florence Rush was no newcomer to
social issues during the 1960s. However, after attending a speak-
out on rape in New York City in which women had an open
forum to tell their stories and share their emotions concerning
rape, she realized the impact of sexual assault on women. Draw-
ing on her experience as a social worker, she spoke during a sub-
sequent conference on rape about her theories concerning the sex-
ual abuse of children. Much of the information she shared that
day was later developed into her book, The Best Kept Secret: Sex-
ual Abuse of Children. This book, which quickly became a classic in
the field, was one of the first to counter the common beliefs about
the sexual abuse of children that were held prior to the 1980s. She
exposed the historical abuse of children and argued against the
common beliefs that children usually were not seriously harmed
by sexual abuse and that they were often the instigators of the
abuse. According to many professionals in the field, she was the
first theorist to believe absolutely that the child is innocent in
cases of sexual abuse.
Diana Russell
Born in Cape Town, South Africa, Diana Russell is a naturalized
U.S. citizen. She received her B.A. from the University of Cape
Town in 1958, a postgraduate diploma from the London School
of Economics and Political Science in 1961, and her M.A. and
Ph.D. in sociology from Harvard University. She was a profes-
sor of sociology at Mills College in Oakland, California, and cur-
rently is a researcher, writer, and consultant. She has been a
member of the coordinating committee of the International Tri-
bunal on Crimes against Women, a research consultant for the
California Commission on Crime Control and Violence Preven-
tion, and a founding member of Women against Violence in
Pornography and Media.
178
Biographical Sketches

Much of her early research was on women and rape. In The
Politics of Rape: The Victim’s Perspective, she presented a compre-
hensive study on sexual assault against women, dispelling many
of the myths that surrounded rape. Her interviews with rape vic-
tims revealed that rapes could be perpetrated by men the victims
knew, including friends and lovers, not just by strangers, as had
been widely believed. In Rape in Marriage, she wrote about the
sexual abuse of women by their husbands, presenting informa-
tion gathered from almost 1,000 women.
The Secret Trauma: Incest in the Lives of Girls and Women de-
tailed her findings in a study of women who had been sexually
abused as children. Many of her findings were important to the
study of incest. She found that 73 percent of those women whose
abuse lasted for more than five years considered the experience
extremely or considerably traumatic, compared with 62 percent
of those whose abuse lasted from one week to five years, and 46
percent of those who were abused only once. No relationship was
evident between the occurrence of sexual abuse and the father’s
level of education or his occupation. Girls who lived with their
natural mother but without their natural father were more likely
to be sexually abused. Similar rates of abuse occurred for African
Americans and for Caucasians, and if a mother worked outside
the home, the children were at higher risk of sexual abuse. Rus-
sell found that women who had experienced incest as children
were more likely to experience problems later in life than women
who had not been sexually abused as children. Her study was one
of the first to combine stringent scholarship with an empathetic
understanding of the incest victim.
In Sexual Exploitation: Rape, Child Sexual Abuse, and Workplace
Harassment, Russell examines the relationship between sexual ex-
ploitation and patriarchal attitudes in our society. In The Epidemic
of Rape and Child Sexual Abuse in the United States (see Chapter 8),
she examines the findings of various incidence and prevalence
studies and discusses the wide variations in those studies.
Suzanne Sgroi
Suzanne Sgroi received her B.A. from Syracuse University in 1964
and her M.D. at the State University of New York in 1968. She was
assistant project director and then health director for the Con-
necticut Child Welfare Association Children’s Advocacy Center
Biographical Sketches
179

in Hartford, and she was a member of the advisory board and
steering committee of the Sex Crimes Analysis Unit of the Con-
necticut State Police. She currently is executive director of New
England Clinical Associates, a private office devoted to the treat-
ment of child sexual abuse, and director of the Saint Joseph Col-
lege Institute for Child Sexual Abuse Intervention, both in West
Hartford, Connecticut.
Sgroi is well known in the field of child sexual abuse and has
written extensively on the subject. In assessing the sexually
abused child and determining the appropriate treatment, she be-
lieves that ten impact issues should be kept in mind. These in-
clude the “damaged goods” syndrome, guilt, fear, depression,
low self-esteem and poor social skills, repressed anger and hostil-
ity, inability to trust, blurred role boundaries and role confusion,
pseudomaturity, and self-mastery and control (Sgroi 1988). 
Paul Shanley 
Paul Shanley was ordained as a priest in 1960 in West Roxbury,
Massachusetts. Allegations of sexual abuse of children against
him surfaced fairly quickly—he allegedly abused an altar boy be-
ginning in 1960; the first complaint against him occurred in 1961.
Working with alienated youth, Shanley had many opportunities
to abuse young boys, who were unlikely to complain to anyone
about the abuse. He had a cabin in the woods where the abuse al-
legedly took place. He was moved from one parish to another by
Church officials, never having to account for his actions, even
though Church officials began receiving allegations of abuse com-
mitted by Shanley in 1967. The Boston archdiocese paid $40,000
to one alleged victim of his abuse. Shanley was arrested in 2002
on charges of child rape, defrocked in 2004, and convicted on two
counts of child rape and two counts of indecent assault and bat-
tery on a child in 2005; he was sentenced to twelve to fifteen years
in prison.
Both Archbishop Humberto Medeiros and Bernard Law, who
succeeded Medeiros as archbishop of the Boston archdiocese in
1984, were well aware of the many allegations against him, his
unusual opinions on sexuality and homosexuality, and on state-
ments he made endorsing man-boy sexuality. Both Medeiros and
Law were slow to recognize the extent of Shanley’s abuse of
180
Biographical Sketches

young boys. In fact, Shanley moved to Palm Springs, California,
around 1990 and, according to a report submitted to the U.S. Con-
ference of Catholic Bishops, “was provided with a letter of intro-
duction to the Bishop of San Bernardino stating that he was a
priest ‘in good standing’” (National Review Board for the Protec-
tion of Children and Young People 2004, 42).
Roland C. Summit
The “believe the children” idea was popularized by Dr. Roland
Summit in an influential article in the journal Child Abuse and Ne-
glect in 1983. Summit wrote that “children never fabricate the
kinds of explicit sexual manipulations they divulge in complaints
or interrogations.” Summit, who developed his theories without
the benefit of any kind of scientific evidence, also claimed that de-
nial of abuse is itself frequently a sign of abuse. If a person sus-
pects that a child is being abused, but the child is unable to vol-
unteer information, then the professional must attempt to elicit
the information with specific and potentially leading questions.
But victims are worthless without perpetrators. So to tie the
two together, Summit offers this observation: “Unless there is a
special support for the child and immediate intervention to force
responsibility on the father, the girl will follow the ‘normal’
course and retract her complaint” (Summit 1983, 187).
Developed around 1983 by Summit as a diagnostic tool, the
Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syndrome (CSAAS) is at the
center of a dispute: whether CSAAS can be used to distinguish
between abused and nonabused children if the cluster of defined
symptoms is presented. Summit has noted that since his original
identification and description of CSAAS, which he referred to as
“a clinical observation,” it “has become both elevated as gospel
and denounced as dangerous pseudoscience.” In fact, Florida
overturned two convictions for retrial on the grounds that it was
error to admit CSAAS as evidence. (See Chapter 6 for a summary
of these and other cases.)
Prior to the McMartin case, Summit was already well known
in the mental health field for his theories on child sexual abuse.
He had written and lectured extensively on the subject since 1975
and had served since 1979 as a consultant on child sex abuse to
law enforcement officials, including the Los Angeles district
Biographical Sketches
181

attorney. Summit’s deep involvement in the McMartin case came
about while he served as a prosecution witness during the trial
and in his role as the Los Angeles County Department of Mental
Health liaison to Manhattan Beach during the early stages of the
McMartin case.
Summit praised the hysteria-induced news media hype and
community gossip as a public service. Without that type and ex-
tent of press coverage, the researchers and other professionals
would not be able to gather this information and would be
trapped by old myths about child sexual abuse. Summit com-
plained that investigators were limiting the ability of parents to
cope by discouraging them from meeting and discussing the case.
The community’s priority, he explained, should be to support the
children. Hundreds of children had escaped sexual assault, he
claimed, because of the publicity about the McMartin case.
Hollida Wakefield
As a forensic psychologist, Hollida Wakefield found herself in the
middle of the day-care and recovered memories controversy in
the late 1980s, when the first cases of children in day-care centers
telling their parents about all types of bizarre behavior allegedly
perpetrated by day-care workers began surfacing. By the early
1990s, she had been involved in several cases. Since 1988 her pri-
mary research interests in the area of child abuse have included
the use of anatomically detailed dolls, evaluation of child wit-
nesses in abuse cases, and allegations of abuse in day-care set-
tings. She is currently a codirector of the Institute for Psychologi-
cal Therapies in Northfield, Minnesota.
She is coauthor (with Ralph Underwager) of Accusations of
Child Sexual Abuse, The Real World of Child Interrogations, and Re-
turn of the Furies: An Investigation into Recovered Memory Therapy.
Wakefield and Underwager are founders of the False Memory
Syndrome Foundation, and in their book Return of the Furies, they
investigate the validity of repressed or false memory, noting that
thousands have been falsely accused. They provide possible rea-
sons for the initial popularity of this theory.
182
Biographical Sketches

References
Armstrong, Louise. 1978. Kiss Daddy Goodnight. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Armstrong, Louise. 1994. Rocking the Cradle of Sexual Politics: What Hap-
pened When Women Said Incest. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Briere, John. 1992. Child Abuse Trauma: Theory and Treatment of the Lasting
Effects. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Courtois, Christine. 1993. Adult Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse: A Work-
shop Model. Lewiston, NY: Manticore.
Courtois, Christine. 1996. Healing the Incest Wound: Adult Survivors in
Therapy. Rev. ed. New York: W. W. Norton.
Courtois, Christine. 1999. Recollections of Sexual Abuse: Treatment Princi-
ples and Guidelines. New York: W. W. Norton.
Finkelhor, David. 1986. A Sourcebook on Child Sexual Abuse. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage.
Giarretto, Henry. 1982. Integrated Treatment of Child Sexual Abuse: A Treat-
ment and Training Manual. Palo Alto, CA: Science and Behavior.
Hechler, David. 1988. The Battle and the Backlash: The Child Sexual Abuse
War. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Herman, Judith. 1997. Trauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of Violence from
Domestic Abuse to Political Terror. New York: Basic.
Herman, Judith. 2000. Father-Daughter Incest. Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Kempe, C. Henry, and Ruth S. Kempe. 1958. Healthy Babies, Happy Par-
ents. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Kempe, Ruth S., and C. Henry Kempe. 1978. Child Abuse. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Kempe, Ruth S., and C. Henry Kempe. 1984. The Common Secret: Sexual
Abuse of Children and Adolescents. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Loftus, Elizabeth. 1996. Eyewitness Testimony: Psychological Perspective.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Loftus, Elizabeth, and Katherine Ketcham. 1991. Witness for the Defense:
The Accused, the Eyewitness, and the Expert Who Puts Memory on Trial. New
York: St. Martin’s.
Loftus, Elizabeth, and Katherine Ketcham. 1994. The Myth of Repressed
Memory: False Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse. New York: St.
Martin’s.
Biographical Sketches
183

Miller, Alice. 1986. Thou Shalt Not Be Aware: Society’s Betrayal of the Child.
Trans. Hildegarde and Hunter Hannum. New York: Meridian.
National Review Board for the Protection of Children and Young People.
2004. A Report on the Crisis in the Catholic Church in the United States. Wash-
ington, DC: U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Ofshe, Richard, and Ethan Watters. 1994. Making Monsters: False Memo-
ries, Psychotherapy, and Sexual Hysteria. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Rush, Florence. 1980. The Best Kept Secret: Sexual Abuse of Children. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Russell, Diana E. H. 1975. The Politics of Rape: The Victim’s Perspective.
New York: Stein and Day.
Russell, Diana E. H. 1984. Sexual Exploitation: Rape, Child Sexual Abuse,
and Workplace Harassment. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Russell, Diana E. H. 1990. Rape in Marriage. Rev. ed. Bloomington: Indi-
ana University Press.
Russell, Diana E. H. 1999. The Secret Trauma: Incest in the Lives of Girls and
Women. New York: Basic.
Russell, Diana E. H., and Rebecca M. Bolen. 2000. The Epidemic of Rape and
Child Sexual Abuse in the United States. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Sgroi, Suzanne. 1988. Vulnerable Populations: Evaluation and Treatment of
Sexually Abused Children and Adult Survivors. Lexington, MA: Lexington.
Summit, Roland. 1983. “The Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syn-
drome.” Child Abuse and Neglect 7: 177, 181–188.
Underwager, Ralph, and Hollida Wakefield. 1989. The Real World of Child
Interrogations. Springfield, IL: C. C. Thomas.
Wakefield, Hollida, and Ralph Underwager. 1988. Accusations of Child
Sexual Abuse. Springfield, IL: C. C. Thomas.
Wakefield, Hollida, and Ralph Underwager. 1994. Return of the Furies: An
Investigation into Recovered Memory Therapy. Chicago: Open Court.
184
Biographical Sketches

6
Facts and Statistics
T
his chapter presents general facts and statistics on the preva-
lence and incidence of childhood sexual abuse, children who
may be most at risk for abuse, and signs and symptoms of sex-
ual abuse. State statutes providing definitions of child sexual
abuse are provided, along with state sex offender registry web-
sites and summaries of federal laws and international conven-
tions. The final section summarizes selected U.S. Supreme Court
and lower court decisions that pertain to a variety of issues that
have come before the courts concerning child sexual abuse.
Prevalence and Incidence
Studies to determine the prevalence of child sexual abuse focus
on estimating the proportion of the population who will be sexu-
ally abused as children, while studies to determine the incidence
of child sexual abuse focus on determining the number of new
cases arising during a given time period, usually a year.
Experts and researchers often differ in their estimates of the
extent of child sexual abuse. Many reasons for these differences
exist, but most experts will agree that the reporting of child sex-
ual abuse probably underestimates the extent of the abuse, based
upon our assumptions about incest and the incest taboo, on re-
search conducted on adults who were sexually abused as children
but did not report the abuse, and on societal factors such as dif-
fering expectations of male and female sexual behavior. Most es-
timates come from three sources: research studies conducted on
185

adults who were sexually abused as children, annual reports of
sexual abuse made to child protection agencies, and the National
Incidence Studies, two federally funded studies.
Prevalence
Most prevalence studies start with the assumption that the major-
ity of cases of child sexual abuse are never reported to authorities
and that the most reliable method of estimating the prevalence is
to gather information from victim or perpetrator self-reports.
Many factors influence the reporting of child sexual abuse, how-
ever. Parents, family members, and some professionals may hesi-
tate to report incidents to the authorities because of the stigma and
the resulting trauma to the family; they may also fear breaking up
the family, or they may believe that they can deal with the prob-
lem themselves. Our society traditionally and legally supports the
integrity and sanctity of the family, offering many families protec-
tion from the public eye and public censure. Children often will
keep their abuse to themselves, not even telling parents or other
close family members; they may, however, reveal the abuse later in
life, either while in therapy or when trying to overcome the
trauma it inflicted on their lives. Studies of the prevalence of child
sexual abuse often discover that adults admit that they never re-
ported the abuse when it was happening to them.
For the purposes of determining the prevalence of the prob-
lem, researchers have defined child sexual abuse in various ways.
Some include acts such as exhibitionism, while others limit their
definitions to actual physical contact. Some include only adults as
perpetrators, while others include peers as well as adults, believ-
ing that children are capable of sexually abusing other children.
These definitions usually exclude sexual exploration between
teenagers.
Finkelhor and his colleagues conducted a national survey of
a random sample of respondents in 1985 to determine the preva-
lence of child sexual abuse. They found that 27 percent of the
women (out of 1,481 women) and 16 percent of the men (out of
1,145 men) disclosed some form of sexual abuse while they were
children; the median age for boys was 9.9 years, and the median
age for girls was 9.6 years (Finkelhor et al. 1990). Diana Russell
studied prevalence using a random sample of more than 900
households in San Francisco. She found that 54 percent reported
at least one instance of incestuous or extrafamilial sexual abuse
186
Facts and Statistics

before the age of fourteen (Russell 1986). Wyatt sampled 248
women in Los Angeles County and found that 62 percent re-
ported at least one instance of sexual abuse before the age of
eighteen (Wyatt 1985).
The Committee for Children estimates that “at least one in
four girls and one in ten boys will be sexually abused before
reaching the age of 18. The actual incidence is probably much
greater, especially for boys” (Committee for Children 1993, 8).
Christine Courtois believes that “a very substantial per-
centage of the female population, possibly as high as twenty
percent, has had an experience of incestuous abuse at some time
in their lives, twelve percent before the age of fourteen, sixteen
percent before the age of eighteen. Possibly five percent of all
women have been abused by their fathers. Boys are also sexu-
ally victimized within the family, but in smaller numbers”
(Courtois 1988, 5).
In his landmark study of sexual behavior, Alfred Kinsey and
his colleagues found that one in four women interviewed for his
research study had reported experiencing as a child some sort of
undesired sexual contact or other sexual experience initiated by
an adult male. Kinsey was surprised that most of the women re-
ported that they were frightened by this contact:
It is difficult to understand why a child, except for its
cultural conditioning, should be disturbed by having its
genitalia touched, or disturbed by seeing the genitalia of
another person. . . . Some of the more experienced stu-
dents of juvenile problems have come to believe that the
emotional reactions of the parents, police and other
adults . . . may disturb the child more seriously than the
contacts themselves. The current hysteria over sex of-
fenders may well have serious effects on the ability of
many of these children to work out sexual adjustments
some years later in their marriages. (Kinsey et al. 1953,
121).
Kinsey also believed that males were in danger of being per-
secuted by females intent on protecting the children and them-
selves. He claimed that the law, by prosecuting offenders, did
more harm than 
was ever done by the individual in his illicit sexual ac-
tivity. The histories which we have accumulated contain
Prevalence and Incidence
187

many such instances. The intoxicated male who acci-
dentally exposes his genitalia before a child may receive
a prison sentence which leaves his family destitute for
some period of years, breaks up his marriage, and leaves
three or four children wards of the state and without the
sort of guidance which the parents might well have sup-
plied. . . . The child who has been raised in fear of all
strangers and all physical manifestations of affection
may ruin the lives of the married couple who had lived
as useful and honorable citizens through half or more of
a century, by giving her parents and the police a dis-
torted version of the old man’s attempt to bestow grand-
fatherly affection upon her. (Ibid., 20–21)
Sandra Butler, in her research for her book Conspiracy of Si-
lence: The Trauma of Incest, began to understand the reasons why
incest was kept a secret but was appalled at the level of denial
and lack of services provided by the professional community to
incest victims and their families. She says:
Priests, ministers and rabbis insisted “that” [incest] did
not happen among their parishioners. Although there
were a few men who did admit “that” was mentioned in
the sanctity of the confessional or in private conversa-
tion, they felt untrained and unskilled in ways to deal
with incestuous assault and seldom attempted counsel-
ing or intervention with the members of such troubled
families. Pediatricians, other doctors and nurses did not
see “that” in their practices, and one young resident in a
Midwestern city assured me that contrary to all the med-
ical literature I had read, “Seven-year-olds can catch gon-
orrhea from dirty sheets.” Occasionally I found a clinical
report of “that” published in a medical journal or a paper
presented to a group of psychiatrists by a peer who was
working with a sexually abused client. But overwhelm-
ingly I encountered silence. (Butler 1985, 8–9)
Butler goes on to say that
[as] long as we continue to believe that incestuous assault
can happen only in other families, we can avoid examin-
ing our own lives. As long as we insist upon imagining
the incestuous aggressor to be an easily identifiable,
skulking, lascivious male who ravishes his luscious and
188
Facts and Statistics

budding daughter across town, we can keep a safe dis-
tance. This distance protects us from sexual feelings we
may have experienced for older family members and any
possible interplay that may have occurred in our own
childhood as well as feelings we may have toward our
children as we watch them developing to young men and
women. While most of us do not act upon these feelings,
it is our refusal to acknowledge to ourselves that we have
ever had such feelings that creates our silence, aversion
and unwillingness to openly discuss the issues involved
in incestuous abuse. (Ibid., 11)
Incidence
The National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (NCCAN) in
1976 supported the first comprehensive incidence study of child
abuse and neglect. Known as the National Incidence Study, it es-
timated that 44,700 cases of child sexual abuse, or 0.7 per 1,000
children, were known to professionals during the period from
April 1979 to March 1980 (National Center on Child Abuse and
Neglect 1981). Repeated in 1986, the study revealed a threefold in-
crease, estimating that 138,000, or 2.2 per 1,000 children, were
known to authorities during that year. When they expanded the
definition of child sexual abuse to include those acts committed
by caretakers, the researchers found that the number jumped to
155,000, or 2.5 per 1,000 children (Sedlak 1987).
Since 1989, the National Committee for Prevention of Child
Abuse has conducted an annual survey of all fifty states to exam-
ine the trends in reports of child abuse and neglect. In 1993 the re-
searchers estimated that 2,989,000 children had been reported to
child protective services as alleged victims of abuse or neglect,
and of those, 15 percent, or approximately 450,000, were cases of
child sexual abuse (McCurdy and Daro 1994).
Bahroo (2003) reports that between 100,000 to 500,000 chil-
dren are sexually abused in the United States annually. Between
15 and 25 percent of children will be sexually abused by the time
they reach their eighteenth birthday; analyzed by sex, between 30
and 40 percent of girls, and 10 and 15 percent of boys, will be sex-
ually abused (Bahroo 2003).
According to the FBI, 109,062 females were forcibly raped in
1992. The U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics survey of the states and
the District of Columbia examined forcible rape by the age of the
Prevalence and Incidence
189

victim. While thirty-six states reported that they did not analyze
their statistics by age, the remaining fourteen states and the Dis-
trict of Columbia provided information on 26,427 cases of forcible
rape. According to their findings, approximately one-third of all
rape victims were under the age of thirteen in Delaware, Michi-
gan, and North Dakota; under the age of sixteen in Nebraska,
Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin; under the age of seventeen in Al-
abama; and under the age of eighteen in the District of Columbia
and Idaho (Langan and Harlow 1994).
Many of these studies do not include the incidence of sexual
abuse of children while in day care or by nonparental caretakers,
such as teachers, priests, or babysitters. David Finkelhor and his
colleagues examined all cases of sexual abuse of children while in
day care reported from 1983 through 1985. They identified 270
cases and estimated the incidence of child sexual abuse in day-
care settings to be 5.5 per 10,000 children enrolled. They con-
cluded that children attending day care are not at a dispropor-
tionately higher risk of child sexual abuse than are other children
in other settings. The high number of abuse reports from day-care
settings, they believe, is a reflection of the large number of chil-
dren placed in day care in this country, rather than an indication
that those children are at a higher risk of abuse (Finkelhor et al.
1989).
In a study of the national statistics for 2004, the most recent
year available, based on data voluntarily submitted to the Chil-
dren’s Bureau of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser-
vices, the National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect examined
numbers of reports of child abuse and neglect, rates of abuse and
neglect, and other information concerning victims and perpetra-
tors. The results, shown in Table 6.1, indicate that the number of
children who were sexually abused in the United States stayed
relatively stable for the years 2000 through 2004. The rate of chil-
dren sexually abused also stayed the same for the years 2000
through 2004: 1.2 percent of all children in the United States are
sexually abused each year.
More than one-half of the perpetrators of the sexual abuse
were parents (29.1 percent) or other relatives (27.7 percent). Table
6.2 provides the breakdown by perpetrator.
The majority of child sexual abuse victims are between the
ages of four and eleven years (73.2 percent). The age distribution
of child victims of sexual abuse is indicated in Table 6.3.
190
Facts and Statistics

As reported by state agencies, most of the children sexually
abused are white, with African American and Hispanic children
ranking second and third, respectively. See Table 6.4 for the dis-
tribution of child sexual abuse victims by race.
Prevalence and Incidence
191
TABLE 6.1
Number of Children Reported to Be Sexually Abused, by Year
Year
Number of Children
2000
87,770
2001
86,857
2002
88,688
2003
87,078
2004
84,398
Source: Adapted from NCANDS data for 2004 (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services 2006).
TABLE 6.2
Type of Perpetrator of Sexual Abuse of Children
Perpetrator
Number
Percent
Parent
13,957
29.1
Other relative
13,271
27.7
Foster parent
191
0.4
Residential facility staff
131
0.3
Child day-care provider
1,115
2.3
Unmarried partner of parent
3,150
6.6
Legal guardian
34
<0.1
Other professional
264
0.6
Friends or neighbors
1,302
2.7
Other
11,022
23.0
Unknown or missing data
3,459
7.2
Total
47,896
100.0
Source: Adapted from NCANDS data for 2004 (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services 2006).

The distribution of child sexual abuse cases by state is shown
in Table 6.5. Table 6.5 displays some interesting numbers. Many
of the states with large populations, such as California, New York,
Florida, Ohio, and Texas, also show relatively high numbers of
children who have been sexually abused. However, there are
192
Facts and Statistics
TABLE 6.3
Sexually Abused Children by Age Group
Age Range of Child
Number
Percent
<1–3
5,145
10.7
4–7
17,018
35.3
8–11
18,294
37.9
12–15
7,480
15.5
Unknown
278
0.6
Total
48,215
100.0
Source: Adapted from NCANDS data for 2004 (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services 2006).
TABLE 6.4
Sexually Abused Children by Race
Race of Child Victim
Number
Percent
White
29,716
56.8
African American
9,350
17.9
Hispanic
8,905
17.0
Multiple race
465
0.9
Asian
322
0.6
American Indian or Alaska Native
307
0.6
Pacific Islander
99
0.2
Unknown
3,183
6.0
Total
52,347
100.0
Source: Adapted from NCANDS data for 2004 (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services 2006).

Prevalence and Incidence
193
TABLE 6.5
Sexually Abused Children by State
State
Number
State
Number
Alabama
2,263
Alaska
no report
Arizona
426
Arkansas
2,021
California
7,932
Colorado
1,024
Connecticut
631
Delaware
208
District of Columbia
109
Florida
5,384
Georgia
2,447
Hawaii
196
Idaho
117
Illinois
5,912
Indiana
3,922
Iowa
849
Kansas
813
Kentucky
927
Louisiana
776
Maine
521
Maryland
1,885
Massachusetts
1,67
Michigan
1,451
Minnesota
847
Mississippi
905
Missouri
2,619
Source: Adapted from NCANDS data for 2004 (U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services 2006).
Montana
152
Nebraska
384
Nevada
169
New Hampshire
176
New Jersey
662
New Mexico
340
New York
2,867
North Carolina
1,178
North Dakota
156
Ohio
7,541
Oklahoma
867
Oregon
1,150
Pennsylvania
2,822
Rhode Island
163
South Carolina
849
South Dakota
76
Tennessee
3,579
Texas
6,822
Utah
2,552
Vermont
520
Virginia
1,100
Washington
464
West Virginia
451
Wisconsin
4,034
Wyoming
72
Total
84,398

other states, such as Utah, Missouri, and Tennessee, that also
show relatively high rates of sexual abuse of children, especially
when compared with their total populations. One reason for this
anomaly may be that states vary on how they define child sexual
abuse and whom they designate as mandatory reporters; another
may be that some states are more aggressive in their tracking and
reporting of child sexual abuse.
Signs and Symptoms of Sexual Abuse
Most professionals agree on the symptoms that children typically
display when they have been sexually abused, although they
readily agree that a child displaying any of these symptoms has
not necessarily been sexually abused. These symptoms may also
be caused by other conditions or situations. The following list of
signs of possible sexual abuse (by age group) is excerpted from
material issued by the Victim Services Agency (1991, 61–63) in
New York. 
Children Eighteen Months and Under:
•
urinary and bowel problems
•
fretful behavior
•
flat affect
•
lacerations of sex organs
•
bleeding, discharge, or odors from sex organs
•
inappropriate fear of adults
•
fear of being abandoned
•
excessive clinging behavior or the opposite
•
failure to thrive
•
excessive crying
•
extreme behavior change
•
sleep disturbances
Toddlers and Preschoolers:
•
fear of a particular adult or specific places
•
sex play with toys
•
poor peer relationships
•
lacerations of sex organs
•
bleeding, discharge, or odors from sex organs
194
Facts and Statistics

•
depersonalization
•
fear, guilt, or anxiety
•
regressive or non–age appropriate behavior
•
increase in genital play
•
toileting issues
•
fear of refusal
•
new problems in bowel or bladder control
•
sexual acting out that is age inappropriate
•
advanced knowledge of detailed adult sexual activity
School Age Children:
•
sleep disturbances
•
school problems
•
poor peer relationships (feel older than peers)
•
depersonalization
•
school phobias
•
anorexia
•
role confusion
•
self-blame
•
fear
•
low self-esteem
•
wish for normal family
•
responsible for family
•
running away
Adolescents:
•
school problems
•
drug or alcohol use
•
clinical depression
•
promiscuity
•
prostitution
•
suicide attempts
•
overly compliant behavior
•
poor body image
•
eating disorders
Adults (Effects from Being Sexually Abused as a Child):
•
problems with intimacy
•
confusion in sexual identity
Signs and Symptoms of Sexual Abuse
195

•
lack of trust
•
poor body image
•
sexual dysfunction
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse 
All states include a definition of sexual abuse in their statutes.
Some states refer in general terms to sexual abuse, while others
are quite specific in their definitions. Sexual exploitation, includ-
ing allowing the child to engage in prostitution or in the produc-
tion of child pornography, is an element of the definition of sex-
ual abuse in most jurisdictions.
Alabama
Sexual Abuse § 26–14–1(1)-(3). Sexual abuse includes:
•
The employment, use, persuasion, inducement,
enticement, or coercion of any child to engage in,
or having a child assist any other person to engage
in, any sexually explicit conduct
•
Any simulation of the conduct for the purpose of
producing any visual depiction of the conduct
•
The rape, molestation, prostitution, or other form
of sexual exploitation of children
•
Incest with children 
Sexual exploitation includes:
•
Allowing, permitting, or encouraging a child to
engage in prostitution
•
Allowing, permitting, encouraging, or engaging in
the obscene or pornographic photographing,
filming, or depicting of a child for commercial
purposes 
Alaska
Sexual Abuse § 47.17.290.
196
Facts and Statistics

•
Child abuse or neglect includes sexual abuse or sexual
exploitation
•
Sexual exploitation includes the following conduct by a
person responsible for the child’s welfare:
•
Allowing, permitting, or encouraging a child to
engage in prostitution
•
Allowing, permitting, or encouraging a child to
engage in actual or simulated activities of a
sexual nature that are prohibited by criminal
statute 
Arizona
Sexual Abuse § 8–201. Abuse shall include:
•
Inflicting or allowing sexual abuse
•
Sexual conduct with a minor
•
Sexual assault
•
Molestation of a child
•
Commercial sexual exploitation of a minor
•
Sexual exploitation of a minor
•
Incest
•
Child prostitution 
Arkansas
Sexual Abuse § 12–12–503. Sexual abuse means:
•
Sexual intercourse, deviate sexual activity, or sexual
contact by forcible compulsion
•
Attempted sexual intercourse, deviate sexual activity, or
sexual contact
•
Indecent exposure
•
Forcing, permitting, or encouraging the watching of
pornography or live sexual activity 
Sexual exploitation means allowing, permitting, or encour-
aging participation or depiction of the juvenile in prostitution, ob-
scene photographing, filming, or obscenely depicting a juvenile
for any use or purpose.
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
197

California
Sexual Abuse Penal Code § 11165.1.
•
Sexual abuse means sexual assault or sexual
exploitation as defined below:
•
Sexual assault includes rape, statutory rape,
rape in concert, incest, sodomy, lewd or
lascivious acts upon a child, oral copulation,
sexual penetration, or child molestation.
•
Sexual exploitation refers to any of the following:
•
Depicting a minor engaged in obscene acts;
preparing, selling, or distributing obscene
matter that depicts minors; employing a minor
to perform obscene acts
•
Knowingly permitting or encouraging a child to
engage in, or assisting others to engage in,
prostitution or a live performance involving
obscene sexual conduct, or to either pose or
model alone or with others for purposes of
preparing a film, photograph, negative, slide,
drawing, painting, or other pictorial depiction,
involving obscene sexual conduct
•
Depicting a child in, or knowingly developing,
duplicating, printing, or exchanging any film,
photograph, video tape, negative, or slide in
which a child is engaged in an act of obscene
sexual conduct 
Colorado
Sexual Abuse § 19–1–103.
•
Abuse or child abuse or neglect means any case in
which a child is subjected to sexual assault or
molestation, sexual exploitation, or prostitution
•
Sexual conduct means any of the following:
•
Sexual intercourse, including genital-genital,
oral-genital, anal-genital, or oral-anal, whether
between persons of the same or opposite sex or
between humans and animals
198
Facts and Statistics

•
Penetration of the vagina or rectum by any
object
•
Masturbation
•
Sexual sadomasochistic abuse 
Exceptions §§ 19–1–103; 19–3–103:
•
Those investigating cases of child abuse shall take into
account child-rearing practices of the culture in which
the child participates
•
The reasonable exercise of parental discipline is not
considered abuse
•
No child who, in lieu of medical treatment, is under
treatment solely by spiritual means through prayer in
accordance with a recognized method of religious
healing shall, for that reason only, be considered
neglected
•
The religious rights of the parent shall not limit the
access of a child to medical care in a life-threatening
situation
Connecticut
Sexual Abuse § 46b–120. Abuse includes sexual molestation or ex-
ploitation.
Delaware
Sexual Abuse Tit. 16, § 902. Abuse includes sexual abuse and ex-
ploitation.
District of Columbia
Sexual Abuse § 16–2301. Sexual abuse means:
•
Engaging in, or attempting to engage in, a sexual act or
sexual contact with a child
•
Causing or attempting to cause a child to engage in
sexually explicit conduct
•
Exposing the child to sexually explicit conduct 
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
199

Sexual exploitation means a parent, guardian, or other custodian
allows a child to engage in prostitution, or engages a child or al-
lows a child to engage in obscene or pornographic photography,
filming, or other forms of illustrating or promoting sexual con-
duct.
Florida
Sexual Abuse § 39.01. Sexual abuse of a child means one or more
of the following acts:
•
Any penetration, however slight, of the vagina or anal
opening of one person by the penis of another person,
whether or not there is the emission of semen
•
Any sexual contact or intentional touching between the
genitals or anal opening of one person and the mouth or
tongue of another person
•
The intentional masturbation of the perpetrator’s
genitals in the presence of a child
•
The intentional exposure of the perpetrator’s genitals in
the presence of a child, or any other sexual act
intentionally perpetrated in the presence of a child, if
such exposure or sexual act is for the purpose of sexual
arousal or gratification, aggression, degradation, or
other similar purpose
•
The sexual exploitation of a child, that includes
allowing, encouraging, or forcing a child to solicit for or
engage in prostitution, or engage in a sexual
performance 
Georgia
Sexual Abuse § 19–7–5(b). Sexual abuse means a person’s em-
ploying, using, persuading, inducing, enticing, or coercing any
minor who is not that person’s spouse to engage in any act that
involves:
•
Sexual intercourse, including genital-genital, oral-
genital, anal-genital, or oral-anal, whether between
persons of the same or opposite sex
•
Bestiality or masturbation
200
Facts and Statistics

•
Lewd exhibition of the genitals or pubic area of any
person
•
Flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude
•
Condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of a person who is
nude
•
Physical contact in an act of apparent sexual stimulation
or gratification with any person’s clothed or unclothed
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks or with a female’s
clothed or unclothed breasts
•
Defecation or urination for the purpose of sexual
stimulation
•
Penetration of the vagina or rectum by any object except
when done as part of a recognized medical procedure 
Sexual exploitation means conduct by a child’s parent or
caretaker who allows, permits, encourages, or requires that child
to engage in prostitution or sexually explicit conduct for the pur-
pose of producing any visual or print medium depicting such
conduct.
Exceptions § 19–7–5(b):
•
Physical forms of discipline may be used as long as
there is no physical injury to the child
•
No child who in good faith is being treated solely by
spiritual means through prayer in accordance with the
tenets and practices of a recognized church or religious
denomination by a duly accredited practitioner thereof
shall, for that reason alone, be considered to be an
abused child
•
Sexual abuse does not include consensual sex acts
between persons of the opposite sex who are minors or
a minor and adult who is no more than 5 years older
Hawaii
Sexual Abuse § 350–1. Child abuse or neglect means when the
child has been the victim of:
•
Sexual contact or conduct including, but not limited to,
sexual assault
•
Molestation or sexual fondling
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
201

•
Incest
•
Prostitution
•
Obscene or pornographic photographing, filming, or
depiction, or other similar forms of sexual exploitation 
Idaho
Sexual Abuse § 16–1602. Abused means any case in which a child
has been the victim of sexual conduct, including rape, molesta-
tion, incest, prostitution, obscene or pornographic photograph-
ing, filming or depiction for commercial purposes, or other simi-
lar forms of sexual exploitation harming or threatening the child’s
health, welfare, or mental injury to the child.
Illinois
Sexual Abuse Ch. 325, § 5/3. Abused child means a child whose
parent, immediate family member, any person responsible for the
child’s welfare, any individual residing in the same home as the
child, or a paramour of the child’s parent commits or allows to be
committed any sex offense against the child.
Indiana
Sexual Abuse §§ 31–34–1–3; 31–34–1–4; 31–34–1–5. A child is a
child in need of services if before the child becomes 18 years of
age the child is the victim, lives in the same household as another
child who was the victim, or lives in the same household as the
adult who was convicted of a sex offense as defined in the crimi-
nal statutes pertaining to:
•
Rape
•
Criminal deviate conduct
•
Child molesting
•
Child exploitation or possession of child pornography
•
Child seduction
•
Sexual misconduct with a minor
•
Indecent exposure
•
Prostitution
•
Incest 
202
Facts and Statistics

A child is a child in need of services if before the child be-
comes 18 years of age the child’s parent, guardian, or custodian
allows the child:
•
To participate in an obscene performance
•
To commit a sex offense prohibited by criminal statute
Iowa
Sexual Abuse § 232.68. Child abuse or abuse means:
•
The commission of a sexual offense with or to a child
•
Allowing, permitting, or encouraging the child to
engage in prostitution
•
The commission of bestiality in the presence of a minor
by a person who resides in a home with a child, as a
result of the acts or omissions of a person responsible for
the care of the child 
Kansas
Sexual Abuse § 38–1502. Sexual abuse means any act listed below,
committed with a child, regardless of the age of the child:
•
Unlawful sexual act
•
Rape
•
Indecent liberties with a child or aggravated indecent
liberties with a child
•
Indecent solicitation of a child or aggravated indecent
solicitation of a child
•
Sexual exploitation of a child
•
Aggravated incest 
Kentucky
Sexual Abuse § 600.020. Abused or neglected child means a child
whose health or welfare is harmed or threatened with harm when
his parent, guardian, or other person exercising custodial control
or supervision of the child:
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
203

•
Commits or allows to be committed an act of
sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, or prostitution
upon the child
•
Creates or allows to be created a risk that an act of
sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, or prostitution
will be committed upon the child 
Sexual abuse includes, but is not necessarily limited to, any
contacts or interactions in which the parent or guardian uses or
allows, permits, or encourages the use of the child for the pur-
poses of sexual stimulation of the perpetrator or another person.
Sexual exploitation includes, but is not limited to, allowing,
permitting, or encouraging the child to engage in prostitution, or
an act of obscene or pornographic photographing, filming, or de-
picting of a child.
Louisiana
Sexual Abuse Ch. Code art. 603. Abuse includes any one of the
following acts that seriously endanger the physical, mental, or
emotional health of the child:
•
The involvement of the child in any sexual act with
a parent or any other person
•
The aiding or toleration by the parent or caretaker
of the child’s sexual involvement with any other
person
•
The aiding or toleration by the parent of the child’s
involvement in pornographic displays
•
Any other involvement of a child in sexual activity
constituting a crime under the laws of the State 
Child pornography means visual depiction of a child en-
gaged in actual or simulated sexual intercourse, deviate sexual in-
tercourse, sexual bestiality, masturbation, sadomasochistic abuse,
or lewd exhibition of the genitals.
Crime against a child includes rape, sexual battery, incest,
carnal knowledge of a juvenile, indecent behavior with a juvenile,
pornography involving juveniles, or molestation of a juvenile.
204
Facts and Statistics

Maine
Sexual Abuse Tit. 22, § 4002.
•
Abuse or neglect means a threat to a child’s health
or welfare by sexual abuse or exploitation by a
person responsible for the child
•
Serious harm includes sexual abuse or exploitation
Maryland
Sexual Abuse Fam. Law § 5–701.
•
Sexual abuse means any act that involves sexual
molestation or exploitation of a child by a parent
or other person who has permanent or temporary
care, custody, or responsibility for supervision of a
child, or by any household or family member
•
Sexual abuse includes incest, rape, sexual offense
in any degree, sodomy, and unnatural or perverted
sexual practices
Massachusetts
Sexual Abuse Ch. 119, § 51A. Injured, abused, or neglected child
includes sexual abuse.
Michigan
Sexual Abuse § 722.622.
•
Sexual abuse means engaging in sexual contact or
sexual penetration with a child, as those terms are
defined in the penal code
•
Sexual exploitation includes allowing, permitting,
or encouraging a child to engage in prostitution, or
allowing, permitting, encouraging, or engaging in
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
205

the photographing, filming, or depicting of a child
engaged in a sexual act. 
Minnesota
Sexual Abuse § 626.556. Sexual abuse means the subjection of a
child by a person responsible for the child’s care, a person who
has a significant relationship to the child, or a person in a position
of authority to any act that constitutes criminal sexual conduct.
Sexual abuse includes any act that involves a minor that consti-
tutes a violation of prostitution offenses. Sexual abuse also in-
cludes threatened sexual abuse.
Mississippi
Sexual Abuse § 43–21–105.
•
Abused child includes sexual abuse or sexual
exploitation
•
Sexual abuse means obscene or pornographic
photographing, filming, or depiction of children for
commercial purposes, or the rape, molestation, incest,
prostitution, or other such forms of sexual exploitation
of children under circumstances that indicate that the
child’s health or welfare is harmed or threatened
Missouri
Sexual Abuse § 210.110. Abuse includes sexual abuse.
Montana
Sexual Abuse § 41–3–102.
•
Sexual abuse means the commission of sexual assault,
sexual intercourse without consent, indecent exposure,
deviate sexual conduct, ritual abuse, or incest
•
Sexual exploitation means allowing, permitting, or
encouraging a child to engage in a prostitution
offense, or allowing, permitting, or encouraging
sexual abuse of children
206
Facts and Statistics

•
Physical or psychological harm to a child means
the harm that occurs whenever the parent or
other person responsible for the child’s welfare
commits or allows sexual abuse or exploitation of
the child
Nebraska
Sexual Abuse § 28–710. Abuse or neglect means knowingly, in-
tentionally, or negligently causing or permitting a minor child to
be:
•
Sexually abused
•
Sexually exploited by allowing, encouraging, or forcing
such person to solicit for or engage in prostitution,
debauchery, public indecency, or obscene or
pornographic photography, films, or depictions
Nevada
Sexual Abuse §§ 432B.100; 432B.110 Sexual abuse includes acts
upon a child constituting:
•
Incest
•
Lewdness with a child
•
Sadomasochistic abuse
•
Sexual assault
•
Statutory sexual seduction
•
Mutilation of the genitalia of a female child, aiding,
abetting, encouraging, or participating in the mutilation
of the genitalia of a female child, or removal of a female
child from this State for the purpose of mutilating the
genitalia of the child 
Sexual exploitation includes forcing, allowing, or encourag-
ing a child:
•
To solicit for or engage in prostitution
•
To view a pornographic film or literature
•
To engage in filming, photographing, or recording on
videotape, or posing, modeling, depicting, or a live
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
207

performance before an audience that involves the
exhibition of a child’s genitals or any sexual conduct
with a child 
New Hampshire
Sexual Abuse § 169-C:3. Sexual abuse means the following activ-
ities under circumstances that indicate that the child’s health or
welfare is harmed or threatened with harm:
•
The employment, use, persuasion, inducement,
enticement, or coercion of any child to engage in,
or having a child assist any other person to engage
in, any sexually explicit conduct or any simulation
of such conduct for the purpose of producing any
visual depiction of such conduct
•
The rape, molestation, prostitution, or other form
of sexual exploitation of children, or incest with
children
New Jersey
Sexual Abuse §§ 9:6–8.9; 9:6–8.21. Abused child means a child
under the age of 18 years whose parent, guardian, or other person
having his custody and control commits or allows to be commit-
ted an act of sexual abuse against the child.
New Mexico
Sexual Abuse § 32A-4–2.
•
Abused child means a child who has suffered
sexual abuse or sexual exploitation inflicted by the
child’s parent, guardian, or custodian
•
Sexual abuse includes, but is not limited to,
criminal sexual contact, incest, or criminal sexual
penetration, as those acts are defined by State law
•
Sexual exploitation includes, but is not limited to:
•
Allowing, permitting, or encouraging a child to
engage in prostitution
208
Facts and Statistics

•
Allowing, permitting, encouraging, or engaging a
child in obscene or pornographic photographing
•
Filming or depicting a child for obscene or
pornographic commercial purposes 
New York
Sexual Abuse Soc. Serv. Law § 371. Abused child means a child
less than 18 years of age whose parent or other person legally re-
sponsible for his or her care commits, or allows to be committed,
an act of sexual abuse against such child, as defined in title H, ar-
ticle 130 of the penal law.
North Carolina
Sexual Abuse § 7B-101. Abused juvenile means any juvenile less
than 18 years of age whose parent, guardian, custodian, or care-
taker commits, permits, or encourages the commission of a viola-
tion of the following laws regarding sexual offenses by, with, or
upon the juvenile:
•
First and second degree rape or sexual offense
•
Sexual act by a custodian
•
Crime against nature or incest
•
Preparation of obscene photographs, slides, or
motion pictures of the juvenile
•
Employing or permitting the juvenile to assist in a
violation of the obscenity laws
•
Dissemination of obscene material to the juvenile
•
Displaying or disseminating material harmful to
the juvenile
•
First and second degree sexual exploitation of the
juvenile
•
Promoting the prostitution of the juvenile
•
Taking indecent liberties with the juvenile,
regardless of the age of the parties 
North Dakota
Sexual Abuse § 50–25.1–02.
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
209

•
Abused child means an individual under the age of 18
years who is suffering from or was subjected to any sex
offenses against a child
•
Harm means negative changes in a child’s health that
occur when a person responsible for the child’s welfare
commits, allows to be committed, or conspires to
commit against the child a sex offense as defined in
chapter 12.1–20
Ohio
Sexual Abuse §§ 2151.031; 2907.01; 2919.22.
•
Abused child includes any child who is the victim of
sexual activity where such activity would constitute an
offense, except that the court need not find that any
person has been convicted of the offense in order to find
that the child is an abused child
•
Sexual conduct means vaginal intercourse between a
male and female; anal intercourse, fellatio and
cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight,
of any part of the body or any instrument, apparatus, or
other object into the vaginal or anal cavity of another.
Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse
•
Sexual contact means any touching of an erogenous
zone of another, including without limitation, the thigh,
genitals, buttocks, pubic region, or if the person is a
female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person
•
A person commits the crime of endangering children
when the person does any of the following to a child:
Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ,
use, or allow the child to act, model, or in any other way
participate in, or be photographed for, the production,
presentation, dissemination, or advertisement of any
material or performance that the offender knows or
reasonably should know is obscene, sexually oriented,
or nudity-oriented matter
210
Facts and Statistics

Oklahoma
Sexual Abuse Tit. 10, § 7102.
•
Harm or threatened harm to a child’s health or safety
includes, but is not limited to, sexual abuse or sexual
exploitation
•
Sexual abuse includes, but is not limited to, rape, incest,
and lewd or indecent acts or proposals, as defined by
law, by a person responsible for the child’s health, safety,
or welfare
•
Sexual exploitation includes, but is not limited to:
•
Allowing, permitting, or encouraging a child to
engage in prostitution, as defined by law, by a
person responsible for the child’s health, safety,
or welfare
•
Allowing, permitting, encouraging, or engaging
in the lewd, obscene, or pornographic
photographing, filming, or depicting of a child
by a person responsible for the child’s health,
safety, or welfare
Oregon
Sexual Abuse § 419B.005. Abuse means:
•
Rape of a child, that includes but is not limited to, rape,
sodomy, unlawful sexual penetration, and incest
•
Sexual abuse
•
Sexual exploitation, including but not limited to:
•
Contributing to the sexual delinquency of a
minor
•
Any other conduct that allows, employs,
authorizes, permits, induces, or encourages a
child to engage in the performing for people to
observe, or the photographing, filming, tape
recording, or other exhibition that, in whole or
in part, depicts sexual conduct or contact,
sexual abuse involving a child, or rape of a
child
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
211

•
Allowing, permitting, encouraging, or hiring a
child to engage in prostitution 
Pennsylvania
Sexual Abuse Tit. 23, § 6303. Child abuse shall mean any of the
following:
•
An act or failure to act by a perpetrator that causes
sexual abuse or sexual exploitation of a child under
18 years of age
•
Any recent act, failure to act, or series of such acts
or failures to act by a perpetrator that creates an
imminent risk of sexual abuse or sexual
exploitation of a child under 18 years of age
•
Sexual abuse or exploitation means the
employment, use, persuasion, inducement,
enticement, or coercion of any child to engage in or
assist any other person to engage in any sexually
explicit conduct or any simulation of any sexually
explicit conduct for the purpose of producing:
•
Any visual depiction, including photographing,
videotaping, computer depicting, or filming of
any sexually explicit conduct
•
The rape, sexual assault, involuntary deviate
sexual intercourse, aggravated indecent assault,
molestation, incest, indecent exposure,
prostitution, statutory sexual assault, or other
form of sexual exploitation of children
Rhode Island
Sexual Abuse § 40–11–2. Abused and/or neglected child means a
child whose physical or mental health or welfare is harmed or
threatened with harm when his or her parent or other person re-
sponsible for his or her welfare:
•
Commits or allows to be committed against the
child an act of sexual abuse
•
Sexually exploits the child in that the person
allows, permits, or encourages the child to engage
in prostitution
212
Facts and Statistics

•
Sexually exploits the child in that the person
allows, permits, encourages, or engages in the
obscene or pornographic photographing, filming,
or depiction of the child in a setting that taken as a
whole suggests to the average person that the child
is about to engage in or has engaged in any sexual
act, or that depicts any such child under 18 years
of age performing sodomy, oral copulation, sexual
intercourse, masturbation, or bestiality
•
Commits or allows to be committed any sexual
offense against the child
•
Commits or allows to be committed against any
child an act involving sexual penetration or sexual
contact if the child is under 15 years of age; or if
the child is 15 years or older, and (1) force or
coercion is used by the perpetrator, or (2) the
perpetrator knows or has reason to know that the
victim is a severely impaired person, or physically
helpless 
South Carolina
Sexual Abuse § 20–7–490. Child abuse or neglect or harm occurs
when the parent, guardian, or other person responsible for the
child’s welfare commits or allows to be committed against the
child a sexual offense or engages in acts or omissions that present
a substantial risk that a sexual offense would be committed
against the child.
South Dakota
Sexual Abuse § 26–8A-2. Abused or neglected child means a child
who is subject to sexual abuse, sexual molestation, or sexual ex-
ploitation by the child’s parent, guardian, custodian, or any other
person responsible for the child’s care.
Tennessee
Sexual Abuse § 37–1–602. Child sexual abuse means the commis-
sion of any act involving the unlawful sexual abuse, molestation,
fondling, or carnal knowledge of a child under 13 years of age that
on or after November 1, 1989, constituted the criminal offense of:
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
213

•
Aggravated rape, sexual battery, or sexual exploitation
of a minor
•
Criminal attempt for any of the offenses listed above
•
Especially aggravated sexual exploitation of a minor
•
Incest
•
Rape, sexual battery, or sexual exploitation of a minor 
Child sexual abuse also means one or more of the following acts:
•
Any penetration, however slight, of the vagina or anal
opening of one person by the penis of another person,
whether or not there is the emission of semen
•
Any contact between the genitals or anal opening of one
person and the mouth or tongue of another person
•
Any intrusion by one person into the genitals or anal
opening of another person, including the use of any
object for this purpose
•
The intentional touching of the genitals or intimate
parts, including the breasts, genital area, groin, inner
thighs, and buttocks, or the clothing covering them, of
either the child or the perpetrator
•
The intentional exposure of the perpetrator’s genitals in
the presence of a child, or any other sexual act
intentionally perpetrated in the presence of a child, if
such exposure or sexual act is for the purpose of sexual
arousal or gratification, aggression, degradation, or
other similar purpose
•
The sexual exploitation of a child, which includes
allowing, encouraging, or forcing a child to solicit for or
engage in prostitution, or engage in sexual exploitation
of a minor 
Exceptions § 37–1–602: Child sexual abuse does not include
acts intended for a valid medical purpose, or acts that may rea-
sonably be construed to be normal caretaker responsibilities, in-
teractions with, or affection for a child.
Texas
Sexual Abuse Fam. Code § 261.001. Abuse includes the following
acts or omissions by a person:
214
Facts and Statistics

•
Sexual conduct harmful to a child’s mental,
emotional, or physical welfare, including conduct
that constitutes the offense of indecency with a
child, sexual assault, or aggravated sexual assault
•
Failure to make a reasonable effort to prevent
sexual conduct harmful to a child
•
Compelling or encouraging the child to engage in
sexual conduct
•
Causing, permitting, encouraging, engaging in,
or allowing the photographing, filming, or
depicting of the child if the person knew or
should have known that the resulting
photograph, film, or depiction of the child is
obscene or pornographic
•
Causing, permitting, encouraging, engaging in, or
allowing a sexual performance by a child 
Utah
Sexual Abuse § 62A-4a–402.
•
Harm or threatened harm means damage or
threatened damage to the physical or emotional
health and welfare of a child through neglect or
abuse, and includes but is not limited to incest,
sexual abuse, sexual exploitation, or molestation
•
Sexual abuse means acts or attempted acts of
sexual intercourse, sodomy, or molestation directed
towards a child
•
Sexual exploitation of minors means knowingly
employing, using, persuading, inducing, enticing,
or coercing any minor to pose in the nude for the
purpose of sexual arousal of any person or for
profit, or to engage in any sexual or simulated
sexual conduct for the purpose of photographing,
filming, recording, or displaying in any way sexual
or simulated sexual conduct, and includes
displaying, distributing, possessing for the purpose
of distribution, or selling material depicting minors
in the nude, or engaging in sexual or simulated
sexual conduct
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
215

Vermont
Sexual Abuse Tit. 33, § 4912.
•
An abused or neglected child also means a child who is
sexually abused or at substantial risk of sexual abuse by
any person
•
Sexual abuse consists of any act or acts by any person
involving sexual molestation or exploitation of a child
including, but not limited to, incest, prostitution, rape,
sodomy, or any lewd and lascivious conduct involving a
child
•
Sexual abuse also includes the aiding, abetting,
counseling, hiring, or procuring of a child to perform or
participate in any photograph, motion picture,
exhibition, show, representation, or other presentation
which, in whole or in part, depicts sexual conduct,
sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse involving a
child
Virginia
Sexual Abuse § 63.2–100. Abused or neglected child means any
child less than 18 years of age whose parents or other person re-
sponsible for his or her care commits or allows to be committed
any act of sexual exploitation or any sexual act upon a child in vi-
olation of the law.
Washington
Sexual Abuse § 26.44.020.
•
Abuse or neglect means the sexual abuse or sexual
exploitation of a child by any person under
circumstances that indicate that the child’s health,
welfare, and safety are harmed
•
Sexual exploitation includes:
•
Allowing, permitting, or encouraging a child to
engage in prostitution by any person
•
Allowing, permitting, encouraging, or engaging
in the obscene or pornographic photographing,
filming, or depicting of a child by any person 
216
Facts and Statistics

West Virginia
Sexual Abuse § 49–1–3. Child abuse and neglect or child abuse or
neglect means sexual abuse or sexual exploitation of a child by a
parent, guardian, or custodian who is responsible for the child’s
welfare, under circumstances that harm or threaten the health
and welfare of the child.
Sexual abuse means the acts of sexual intercourse, sexual in-
trusion, or sexual contact, when they occur under the following
circumstances:
•
As to a child who is less than 16 years of age, those acts
that a parent, guardian, or custodian shall engage in,
attempt to engage in, or knowingly procure another
person to engage in with the child, notwithstanding the
fact that the child may have willingly participated in
such conduct or the fact that the child may have
suffered no apparent physical, mental, or emotional
injury as a result of such conduct
•
As to a child who is 16 years of age or older, those acts
that a parent, guardian, or custodian shall engage in,
attempt to engage in, or knowingly procure another
person to engage in with the child, notwithstanding the
fact that the child may have consented to such conduct
or the fact that the child may have suffered no apparent
physical, mental, or emotional injury as a result of such
conduct 
Sexual abuse also means any conduct whereby a parent,
guardian, or custodian displays his or her sex organs to a child, or
procures another person to display his or her sex organs to a
child, for the purpose of gratifying the sexual desire of the person
making such display, or of the child, or for the purpose of af-
fronting or alarming the child.
Sexual exploitation means an act whereby:
•
A parent, custodian, or guardian, whether for financial
gain or not, persuades, induces, entices, or coerces a
child to engage in sexually explicit conduct
•
A parent, guardian, or custodian persuades, induces,
entices, or coerces a child to display his or her sex organs
for the sexual gratification of the parent, guardian,
State Definitions of Child Sexual Abuse
217

custodian, or a third person, or to display his or her sex
organs under circumstances in which the parent,
guardian, or custodian knows such display is likely to be
observed by others who would be affronted or alarmed 
Wisconsin
Sexual Abuse § 48.02. Abuse means any of the following:
•
Sexual intercourse or sexual contact
•
A violation of the statute regarding the sexual
exploitation of a child
•
Permitting, allowing, or encouraging a child to engage
in prostitution
•
A violation of the statute that prohibits causing a child
to view or listen to sexual activity
•
A violation of the statute that prohibits the exposure of
the genitals to a child 
Wyoming
Sexual Abuse § 14–3–202. Abuse with respect to a child means the
commission or allowing the commission of a sexual offense
against a child, as defined by law.
State Sex Offender Registries
Each state is required by federal law to maintain a sex offender
registry. Table 6.6 provides the website addresses for each state’s
sex offender registry.
Federal (U.S.) Laws
Summaries of several laws, at the federal level, are included in this
section. Beginning with the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment
Act, initially passed in 1974, the U.S. government has enacted sev-
eral laws to protect children and their families and provide services
to those families. Some of these laws focus specifically on child sex-
ual abuse, while others have broader coverage that includes chil-
dren who are exposed to all types of abuse and neglect.
218
Facts and Statistics

Federal (U.S.) Laws
219
TABLE 6.6
Website Addresses for State Sex Offender Registries, by State
State
Web Address
Alabama
http://www.dps.state.al.us/public/abi/system/so  
Alaska
http://www.dps.state.ak.us/nSorcr/asp/ 
Arizona
http://www.azsexoffender.org/
Arkansas
http://www.acic.org
California
http://meganslaw.ca.gov/disclaimer.htm
Colorado
http://sor.state.co.us/
Connecticut
http://www.state.ct.us/dps/Sor.htm
Delaware
http://www.state.de.us/dsp/sexoff/index.htm
District of Columbia
http://mpdc.dc.gov/serv/sor/sor.shtm
Florida
http://www3.fdle.state.fl.us/sexual_predators
Georgia
http://www.ganet.org/gbi/sorsch.cgi
Hawaii
http://pahoehoe.ehawaii.gov/sexoff/
Idaho
http://www.isp.state.id.us/identification/sex_offender/index.html
Illinois
http://www.isp.state.il.us/sor/frames.htm
Indiana
http://www.ai.org/cji/html/sexoffender.html
Iowa
http://www.state.ia.us/government/dps/dci/isor/
Kansas
http://www.accesskansas.org/kbi/ro.shtml
Kentucky
http://kspsor.state.ky.us 
Louisiana
http://www.lasocpr.lsp.org/socpr/ 
Maine
http://www.informe.org/sor/ 
Maryland
http:www.dpscs.state.md.us/sor/   
Massachusetts
http://www.mass.gov/sorb/community.htm 
Michigan
http://www.mipsor.state.mi.us/ 
Minnesota
http://www.dps.state.mn.us/bca/Invest/Documents/
Page-07.html 
Mississippi
http://SOR.MDPS.STATE.MS.US
Missouri
http://mshp.dps.Missouri.gov/MSHPWeb/PatrolDivisions/
CRID/SOR/SORPage.html
Montana
http://svor.doj.state.mt.us/
Nebraska
http://www.nsp.state.ne.us/sor/
Nevada
http://www.nvrepository.state.nv.us/SexOffender.htm
New Hampshire
http://www.oit.nh.gov/nsor/search.asp
New Jersey
http://www.njsp.org/info/reg_sexoffend.html
(continues)

The Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA)
of 1974, P.L. 93–247
Amended 1978, 1984, 1988, 1992, 1996, 2003
Following C. Henry Kempe’s identification of the battered child
syndrome in 1961, doctors and other medical personnel began to
take notice of child abuse, including child sexual abuse. In the
next several years, the general public became more aware of
abused children. While several states had established laws re-
garding the reporting of child abuse and neglect, these laws were
not uniform, and not every state had such a law. Public interest
220
Facts and Statistics
TABLE 6.6 (continued)
Website Addresses for State Sex Offender Registries, by State
State
Web Address
New Mexico
http://www.nmsexoffender.dps.state.nm.us/servlet/hit_serv.class
New York
http://www.criminaljustice.state.ny.us/nsor/
North Carolina
http://sbi.jus.state.nc.us/DOJHAHT/SOR/Default.htm
North Dakota
http://www.ndsexoffender.com
Ohio
http://www.esorn.ag.state.oh.us
Oklahoma
http://dpcapp8.doc.state.ok.us/servlet/page?_pageid=190&_dad=po
rtal30 &_schema=PORTAL30  
Oregon
http://egov.oregon.gov/OSP
Pennsylvania
http://www.pameganslaw.state.pa.us/
Rhode Island
http://www.paroleboard.ri.gov/L3_offenders/listings.htm
South Carolina
http://www.scattorneygeneral.org/
South Dakota
http://www.dci.sd.gov/administration/id/sexoffender/index.asp
Tennessee
http://www.ticic.state.tn.us//SEX_ofndr/search_short.asp
Texas
http://records.txdps.state.tx.us/
Utah
http://www.udc.state.ut.us/asp-bin/sexoffendersearchform.asp
Vermont
http://170.222.24.9/cjs/s_registry.htm
Virginia
http://www.vsp.state.va.us/vsp.html
Washington
http://ml.waspc.org/Accept.aspx?ReturnUrl=/index.aspx   
West Virginia
http://www.wvstatepolice.com/sexoff/
Wisconsin
http:widocoffenders.org
Wyoming
http://attorneygeneral.state.wy.us/dci/so/so_registration.html

encouraged the federal government to examine the issue of child
abuse and neglect and establish uniform state guidelines for the
reporting of child abuse and neglect.
The purpose of the act was to protect children from abuse
and neglect by increasing the identification, reporting, and inves-
tigation of child abuse and neglect as well as to monitor and en-
courage research, and compile research results and provide them
to the public. States were provided with assistance in developing
child abuse and neglect programs, and intervention was encour-
aged to actively protect children. The National Center on Child
Abuse and Neglect (see Chapter 7) was established, administer-
ing grant programs, identifying issues for further research, and
serving as the primary source of information on various aspects
of child abuse and neglect. The National Clearinghouse on Child
Abuse and Neglect Information was also established to gather
and disseminate information on child abuse and neglect.
Keeping Children and Families Safe Act of 2003, P.L.
108–36, amended the Child Abuse and Prevention
Treatment Act
The Keeping Children and Families Safe Act reauthorized
CAPTA, the Adoption Opportunities, Abandoned Infants Assis-
tance, and Family Violence Prevention and Services acts. One rea-
son it was enacted was general concern among legislators and
their constituents that many children and their families were not
receiving adequate protection or treatment. The act encourages
enhanced links between child protective service agencies and
public health, mental health, and developmental disabilities
agencies and focuses increased attention on children who are in-
fected with HIV or have a life-threatening illness and children
placed in adoptive families.
Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA) of 1978, P.L. 95–608
State courts were removing a high proportion of Indian chil-
dren from their families and placing them off the reservations
in non-Indian environments; there was growing concern that
the courts were not aware of the cultural and social aspects of
Indian society and that these children were losing their
heritage. The appropriateness of this removal was questioned,
Federal (U.S.) Laws
221

and this act was passed to protect the best interests of American
Indian children and their families. Among other benefits, this
act established minimum standards for removal of children,
provided assistance to the tribes to operate child and family
service programs, and provided funds to the tribes to improve
child welfare services.
Family Preservation and Support Services Program,
enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1993, P.L. 103–66
Title XIII, Chapter 2, Subchapter C, Part 1
Amended Title IV-B of the Social Security Act
This program was enacted out of concern that the number of re-
ported cases of child abuse and neglect was increasing; the focus
of services appeared to be on treatment rather than on prevention;
and child welfare services were not coordinated with other serv-
ices needed by many families. The program provided funding to
states to establish a continuum of family-focused services for at-
risk children and their families; required states to develop a com-
prehensive planning process to help provide family support and
preservation activities; and provided funding to encourage states
to incorporate prevention strategies into their treatment programs.
Adoption and Safe Families Act (ASFA) of 1997, P.L.
105–89, amended Title IV-E of the Social Security Act
Supporters of this act wanted to promote permanency in foster
care, ensure that abused and neglected children were in safe envi-
ronments, accelerate permanent placements of children, and make
the child welfare system increasingly accountable for the welfare
of these children. The act reauthorized the Family Preservation
and Support Services Program, renaming it the Safe and Stable
Families Program. It ensured the safety of abused and neglected
children by ensuring that health and safety concerns are ad-
dressed as states place children in foster/permanent care. It also
required the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to
report on the scope of substance abuse in the child welfare system,
added “safety of the child” to all case plan and review process
222
Facts and Statistics

steps, and required criminal background checks for foster and
adoptive parents who receive federal funds for care of a child.
Child Abuse Prevention and Enforcement Act of 2000,
P.L. 106–177
The Child Abuse Prevention and Enforcement Act of 2000 was en-
acted in response to concerns that responses to reports of child
abuse and neglect were inadequate. The act addressed these con-
cerns about the level and quality of responses by allowing states
to use federal law enforcement funds to provide timely and accu-
rate criminal history background information to child welfare
agencies, organizations, and programs that provide services to
protect abused and neglected children, including children who
have been sexually abused.
The act allows law enforcement agencies to use federal funds
to enforce child abuse and neglect laws, including laws to protect
children from sexual abuse, to promote prevention programs, and
to establish cooperative programs between law enforcement
agencies and news media organizations to collect and dissemi-
nate information concerning suspected criminal offenders.
The Victims of Child Abuse Act of 1990, P.L. 101–647
This act was enacted to address problems faced by abused chil-
dren during investigations into the validity of the abuse. It en-
courages the development of model technical assistance and
training programs to improve the way in which courts handle
child abuse and neglect cases, and it facilitates adoption of laws
to protect children against a second assault on them in the court-
room. Children are provided with the right to have an adult ac-
company them into court during testimony and to assist them
during other procedures and processes. Criminal justice person-
nel are to be provided with training on current innovative tech-
niques for investigating and prosecuting cases of child abuse, in-
cluding cases of child sexual abuse. Communities are encouraged
to develop Children’s Advocacy Centers as a multidisciplinary
approach to investigating, prosecuting, and treating child abuse
cases. The National Court Appointed Special Advocate (CASA)
Association provides technical assistance, information, and other
support to local CASA programs and assists in developing new
programs in communities.
Federal (U.S.) Laws
223

Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation Act of
1977
This act was the first attempt by the federal government to regu-
late child pornography. It focused on the commercial production
and dissemination of visual and print images of minors engaged
in any sexually explicit activity.
Communications Decency Act (CDA) of 1996, P.L.
104–104, part of the Telecommunications Act
This act was enacted by Congress to criminalize the “knowing
transmission of obscene or indecent messages” to minors along
with sending or displaying clearly offensive materials to minors.
It was challenged in Reno v. ACLU (521 U.S. 844 [1997]), and the
Supreme Court found that the statute was overbroad according to
the First Amendment. The justices held that provisions of the CDA
prohibiting transmission of obscene or indecent communications
by means of telecommunications devices to persons under age
eighteen, or sending patently offensive communications through
use of interactive computer service to persons under age eighteen,
was content-based blanket restrictions on speech.
The Child Pornography Prevention Act of 1996 (CPPA),
P.L. 104–208
This act added virtual child pornography, images that appear to
be of minors, to the definition of child pornography. However, the
statute was struck down by the Supreme Court (see Ashcroft v.
Free Speech Coalition (535 U.S. 234 [2002]), noting that speech
“within rights of adults to hear may not be silenced completely in
an attempt to shield children from it.”
Protection of Children from Sexual Predators Act of
1998, P.L. 105–314
The purpose of this act is to protect children from sexual predators
and from child pornography, and to prevent sexual abuse. It pro-
hibits the transfer of obscene materials to minors and increases the
224
Facts and Statistics

penalties for sexual offenses against children and for repeat
offenders. Online service providers are required to report evi-
dence of child pornography offenses to law enforcement agencies.
Other Federal Laws and Codes to Protect Children
Several other means exist to protect children against sexual abuse
and sexual exploitation, and they are found primarily in the Fed-
eral Criminal Code under Title 18 of the U.S. Code (USC), which
defines a “minor” as a child under the age of eighteen unless
specified otherwise. Excerpts from the relevant sections are pro-
vided below.
Section 1466A. Obscene Visual Representations of the Sexual Abuse of
Children
Any person who knowingly produces, distributes, receives, or
possesses with intent to distribute, a visual depiction of any kind
that depicts a minor engaging in sexually explicit behavior, or
that is obscene, or depicts an image that appears to be that of a
minor shall be fined and imprisoned not less than 5 years and not
more than 20 years; persons with prior convictions shall be fined
and imprisoned for not less than 15 years nor more than 40 years.  
Section 1470. Transfer of Obscene Material to Minors
Whoever, using the mail or any facility or means of interstate or
foreign commerce, knowingly transfers obscene matter to another
individual who has not attained the age of 16 years knowing that
such other individual has not attained the age of 16 years, or at-
tempts to do so, shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not
more than 10 years, or both.
Section 2241(a)(c). Aggravated Sexual Abuse
Whoever, in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the
United States or in a federal prison, knowingly causes or attempts
to cause another person to engage in a sexual act by using force
against that other person, threatening or placing them in fear that
another person will be subjected to death, serious bodily injury,
or kidnapping, or attempts to do so, shall be fined and impris-
oned for any term of years or life, or both.
Whoever knowingly crosses a state line with intent to engage
in a sexual act with a person who has not attained the age of 12
Federal (U.S.) Laws
225

years; or in the territorial jurisdiction of the United States or in a
federal prison engages in a sexual act with a person who has not
attained the age of 12 years; or whoever engages in a sexual ac-
tivity by using force, threat, or other means described above, with
an individual who has attained 12 years but has not attained 16
years of age shall be fined, imprisoned for any term of years or
life, or both.
Section 2243. Sexual Abuse of a Minor or Ward
Whoever, in the territorial jurisdiction of the United States or in a
federal prison knowingly engages in a sexual act (or attempts to
do so) with another person who has attained the age of 12 years
but not 16 years and is at least four years younger than the per-
son so engaging shall be fined, imprisoned not more than fifteen
years, or both.
Section 2251(a)(b)(c). Sexual Exploitation of Children
Any person who employs, uses, persuades, induces, entices, or
coerces any minor to engage in; or who has a minor assist any
other person to engage in; or who transports any minor in inter-
state or foreign commerce with the intent that such minor engage
in, any sexually explicit conduct for the purpose of producing
any visual depiction of such conduct. This statute applies when
the person knows that such visual depiction will be, or has actu-
ally been, transported in interstate or foreign commerce or
mailed.
Any parent, legal guardian, person, or organization having
custody or control of a minor who knowingly permits such
minor to engage in or assists any person to engage in sexually
explicit conduct for the purpose of producing any visual depic-
tion of such conduct. This statute also applies if such visual de-
piction will be or has actually been transported in interstate or
foreign commerce, mailed, and/or such depiction was pro-
duced with materials that have been mailed, shipped, or trans-
ported in interstate or foreign commerce by any means, includ-
ing by computer.
Any person, who knowingly prints, publishes, or causes to
be made, any notice or advertisement seeking or offering to re-
ceive, exchange, buy, produce, display, distribute, or reproduce
any visual depiction involving the use of a minor engaging in sex-
ually explicit conduct. This statute also applies when such person
226
Facts and Statistics

knows that such notice or advertisement will be, or has been,
transported in interstate or foreign commerce by any means, in-
cluding by computer.
Penalties under this section shall include a fine, imprison-
ment for not less than fifteen nor more than 30 years unless the
person has a prior conviction, in which case they shall be fined
and imprisoned for not less than twenty-five years nor more than
fifty years. If the person has two or more convictions, they shall
be fined and imprisoned not less than thirty-five years nor more
than life.
Section 2251A(a)(b). Selling or Buying of Children
Any parent, legal guardian, or other person having custody or
control of a minor who sells, offers to sell, or otherwise transfers
custody or control of such minor with knowledge that, as a con-
sequence of the sale or transfer, the minor will be portrayed in a
visual depiction engaging in, or assisting another person to en-
gage in sexually explicit conduct, shall be punished by imprison-
ment for not less than thirty years or for life and by a fine.
Any person who purchases, offers to purchase, or otherwise
obtains custody or control of a minor with knowledge that, as a
consequence of the sale or transfer, the minor will be portrayed in
a visual depiction engaging in, or assisting another person to
engage in sexually explicit conduct shall be punished by impris-
onment for not less than 30 years or for life and by a fine.
Section 2252. Certain Activities Relating to Material Involving the
Sexual Exploitation of Minors
Any person who knowingly possesses in the territorial juris-
diction of the United States one or more images, books, maga-
zines, periodicals, films, videotapes, or other matter which con-
tain any visual depiction of a minor engaged in sexually
explicit conduct.
Any person who knowingly transports or ships in interstate
or foreign commerce, by any means including by computer or
mail, any visual depiction of a minor engaged in sexually explicit
conduct.
Any person who knowingly receives, reproduces, or distrib-
utes any visual depiction of a minor engaged in sexually explicit
conduct that has been mailed, or has been shipped or transported
in interstate or foreign commerce.
Federal (U.S.) Laws
227

Any person who knowingly sells, or possesses with intent to
sell, any visual depiction of a minor engaged in sexually explicit
conduct that has been mailed, or has been shipped or transported
in interstate or foreign commerce. Punishment in this section
includes a fine, and imprisonment for not less than five years and
not more than twenty years, unless the person has a prior convic-
tion, in which case they shall be fined and imprisoned for not less
than fifteen years nor more than forty years.
Section 2252A. Certain Activities Relating to Material Constituting or
Containing Child Pornography
Any person who knowingly mails, transports, or ships in inter-
state or foreign commerce child pornography by any means, in-
cluding by computer.
Any person who knowingly receives or distributes any child
pornography or any book, magazine, film, videotape, computer
disk, or any other material containing child pornography that has
been mailed, transported, or shipped in interstate or foreign com-
merce by any means, including by computer.
Any person who knowingly reproduces any child pornogra-
phy for distribution through the mail, or in interstate or foreign
commerce by any means, including by computer.
Any person who knowingly sells or possesses with the intent
to sell any child pornography.  Punishment in this section in-
cludes a fine, and imprisonment for not less than five years and
not more than twenty years, unless the person has a prior convic-
tion, in which case they will be fined and imprisoned for not less
than fifteen years nor more than forty years.
At times, portions of this Section may not apply when the in-
dividual is in possession of less than three child pornography im-
ages and in good faith promptly took reasonable steps to destroy
each image, report the matter to a law enforcement agency,
and/or afford that agency access to the image.
Section 2253. Criminal Forfeiture; and Section 2254. Civil Forfeiture
A person who is convicted of an offense under Sections 2251,
2251A, 2252, 2252A, 2260 or Sections 2421, 2422, 2423 shall forfeit
any visual depiction described in Sections 2251, 2251A, 2252; any
property constituting gross profits or other proceeds obtained
from such offense; and any property used or intended to be used
to commit or to promote the commission of the above offenses.
228
Facts and Statistics

Section 2260(a)(b). Production of Sexually Explicit Depictions of a
Minor for Importation into the United States
A person outside the U.S. who employs, uses, persuades, induces,
entices, or coerces any minor to engage in, or who has a minor
assist any other person to engage in, or who transports any minor
with the intent that such minor engage in any sexually explicit
conduct for the purpose of producing any visual depiction of
such conduct, intending that the visual depiction will be im-
ported into the U.S. or waters within 12 miles of a U.S. coast.
A person outside the U.S. who knowingly receives, trans-
ports, ships, distributes, or possesses with intent to transport,
ship, sell or distribute any visual depiction of a minor engaged in
sexually explicit conduct, intending that the visual depiction will
be imported into the U.S. or waters within 12 miles of a U.S. coast.
Punishment for anyone in this section includes a fine, imprison-
ment of not more than ten years, or both.  If the person has a prior
conviction, they shall be fined, imprisoned for not more than
twenty years, or both.
Section 2421. Transportation Generally
Whoever knowingly transports any individual in interstate or
foreign commerce, or in any Territory or Possession of the United
States, with intent that such individual engage in prostitution or
in any sexual activity for which any person can be charged with
a criminal offense shall be fined or imprisoned not more than ten
years or both.
Section 2422. Coercion and Enticement
Whoever knowingly persuades, induces, entices, or coerces any
individual to travel in interstate or foreign commerce, or in any
Territory or Possession of the United States, to engage in prostitu-
tion or in any sexual activity for which any person can be charged
with a criminal offense shall be fined under this title and impris-
oned not less than five years and not more than thirty years.
Section 2423(a). Transportation of Minors with Intent to Engage in
Criminal Sexual Activity
Whoever knowingly transports or attempts to transport any indi-
vidual under the age of 18 years in interstate or foreign com-
merce, or in any Territory or Possession of the United States, with
intent that the individual engage in prostitution or in any sexual
Federal (U.S.) Laws
229

activity for which any person can be charged with a criminal of-
fense shall be fined and imprisoned not less than 5 years and not
more than thirty years.
Section 2423(b). Interstate or Foreign Travel with Intent to Engage in a
Sexual Act with a Juvenile
Whoever knowingly travels or conspires to do so in interstate or
foreign commerce, or in any Territory or Possession of the United
States, with the intent to engage in any sexual activity with a per-
son under 18 years of age for which any person can be charged
with a criminal offense shall be fined, imprisoned not more than
30 years, or both.
Section 2425. Use of Interstate Facilities to Transmit Information about
a Minor
Whoever, using the mail or any facility or means of interstate or
foreign commerce, knowingly initiates or attempts to initiate the
transmission of the name, address, telephone number, social se-
curity number, or electronic mail address of any individual who
has not attained the age of 16 years with the intent to entice, en-
courage, offer, or solicit that minor to engage in any sexual activ-
ity that can be charged as a criminal offense shall be fined, im-
prisoned not more than five years or both.
Title 42 of the U.S. Code (USC) concerns public health and
welfare. The following are summaries from the Federal Criminal
Code and Rules under Title 42 that relate to child sexual abuse.
Section 13032. Reporting of Child Pornography by Electronic
Communication Service Providers
Creates a mandatory reporting requirement for electronic com-
munication service providers, Internet Service Providers, and re-
mote computing service providers to report violations of federal
child pornography laws to any law enforcement agency and/or
the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
Section 14072. Pam Lychner Sexual Offender Tracking and Identification
Act of 1996
A registered sex offender must notify and register with both the
FBI and state authorities within ten days of moving to a new
state. Registration includes providing a current address, finger-
prints, and photograph for inclusion in the FBI’s National Sex Of-
fender Registry (NSOR).
230
Facts and Statistics

International Conventions
Convention on the Rights of the Child, G.A. res. 44/25,
annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc.
A/44/49 (1989), entered into force September 2,
1990
The Convention on the Rights of the Child defines a child as
“every human being below the age of eighteen years unless
under the law applicable to the child, majority is attained ear-
lier” (Article 1). All parties to the convention must take appro-
priate measures to protect the child from discrimination or pun-
ishment (Article 2). Article 11 requires all parties to “combat the
illicit transfer and non-return of children abroad.” All parties are
required to protect children from all forms of physical and men-
tal violence, including sexual abuse and exploitation (Articles 19
and 34).
A Committee on the Rights of the Child is established to ex-
amine the progress of reaching the goals of the convention, and
all parties should submit reports to the committee providing
information on the measures they have taken to support the con-
vention (Article 43).
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing
the UN Convention against Transnational Organized
Crime (United Nations 2003)
This protocol was established to prevent and combat trafficking
and sexual exploitation in persons, focusing on women and chil-
dren, and to promote cooperation among all parties to the con-
vention in preventing trafficking and sexual exploitation. It is a
supplement to the UN Convention against Transnational Orga-
nized Crime. A child is defined as a person under the age of 18
years. All parties are required to adopt legislative and other meas-
ures creating criminal consequences for trafficking and exploita-
tion. Prevention policies and programs must be established by all
parties to combat these activities, and they are required to share
information.
International Conventions
231

Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the
Child on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography 
This protocol grew out of concern over the increasing interna-
tional traffic in children, including the sale of children, child pros-
titution, and child pornography; the growing ease of obtaining
child pornography on the Internet; and the fact that female chil-
dren are at greater risk of sexual exploitation. Parties to the pro-
tocol agree to prohibit child prostitution and child pornography
and establish criminal penalties for sexually exploiting a child
through sale, child prostitution, or child pornography, and pro-
ducing or distributing child pornography, among other activities.
Also required are the provision of services to child victims, pro-
tection of children and their families during the legal process,
training of service providers, and adoption of laws, policies, and
programs to prevent the sale and exploitation of children.
Within two years of the entry into force of the protocol, each
party is required to submit a report to the Committee on the
Rights of the Child that describes in detail the steps it has taken
to meet the requirements of the protocol.
Summary of Significant Court Cases in
U.S. Courts
In this section, several important Supreme Court cases are pro-
vided, along with a sample of lower court cases that show the va-
riety of cases that have been brought in the courts.
New York v. Ferber, 458 U.S. 747 (1982)
A New York statute prohibits individuals from knowingly pro-
moting a sexual performance by a child under the age of sixteen
by distributing material that depicts a sexual performance. The
statute defines sexual performance as “any performance or part
thereof which includes sexual conduct by a child less than sixteen
years of age.”
Paul Ferber, the proprietor of a bookstore in Manhattan that
specializes in sexually oriented products, sold two films to an un-
dercover police officer. The films depicted young boys mastur-
232
Facts and Statistics

bating. Ferber was indicted on two counts of violating the two
New York statutes that control dissemination of child pornogra-
phy. A jury acquitted Ferber on the two counts of promoting an
obscene sexual performance but found him guilty on two counts
under §263.15, which did not require proof that the films were ob-
scene. The Appellate Division of the New York Supreme Court af-
firmed, and the verdict was appealed. The New York Court of
Appeals reversed, holding that §263.15 violated the First Amend-
ment.
The U.S. Supreme Court was asked to decide whether the
law violated the First Amendment. This was the Court’s first ex-
amination of a statute that specifically targeted child pornogra-
phy, and it found that the state’s interest in preventing child sex-
ual exploitation was a compelling “government objective of
surpassing importance.” The law was carefully crafted to protect
children from the mental, physical, and sexual abuse associated
with pornography and did not violate the First Amendment. The
Court found that, in respect to child pornography, a “trier of fact
need not find that the material appeals to the prurient interest of
the average person; it is not required that sexual conduct por-
trayed be done so in a patently offensive manner; and the mate-
rial at issue need not be considered as a whole” (764).
Osborne v. Ohio, 495 U.S. 103 (1990)
Osborne was convicted of possession of four photographs of a
nude male adolescent in sexually explicit poses. He appealed,
challenging the state statute that prohibited any person from pos-
sessing or viewing any materials showing a minor who is not his
child in a state of nudity, unless the material is presented for a
bona fide purpose or if the possessor knows that the minor’s par-
ents or guardians have consented to the photographing of the
child. Osborne challenged Ohio’s right to proscribe his posses-
sion of the pornography. An intermediate appellate court and the
Ohio State Supreme Court affirmed his conviction.
The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Ohio could indeed con-
stitutionally forbid the possession of child pornography. Children
are harmed physiologically, emotionally, and mentally when they
are the subject in the production of child pornography. The
statute, by penalizing individuals for possessing child pornogra-
phy, would provide an opportunity to “destroy a market for the
Summary of Significant Court Cases in U.S. Courts
233

exploitative use of children.” The Court also determined that, be-
cause child pornography is a permanent record of the abuse of
children who are used in its production, its “continued existence
causes the child victims continuing harm by haunting the chil-
dren in years to come.” The Court relied on the justifications in
Ferber of preventing exploitation of children and destroying the
market for child pornography.
Idaho v. Wright, 497 U.S. 805 (1990)
Wright was charged under Idaho law with two counts of lewd
conduct with a minor, specifically her 5.5- and 2.5-year-old
daughters. At the trial, while it was agreed that the younger
daughter was not “capable of communicating to the jury,” the
court admitted, under Idaho’s residual hearsay exception, certain
statements she had made to a pediatrician having extensive ex-
perience in child abuse cases. The doctor testified that she had re-
luctantly answered questions about her own abuse, but had spon-
taneously volunteered information about her sister’s abuse.
Wright was convicted on both counts, but appealed only from the
conviction involving the younger child.
The State Supreme Court reversed, finding that the admis-
sion of the doctor’s testimony under the residual hearsay excep-
tion violated Wright’s rights under the Confrontation Clause. The
court noted that the child’s statements did not fall within a tradi-
tional hearsay exception and lacked “particularized guarantees of
trustworthiness” because the doctor had conducted the interview
without procedural safeguards: he failed to videotape the inter-
view, asked leading questions, and had a preconceived idea of
what the child should be disclosing. This error, the court found,
was not harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. The court held that
the admission of the child’s hearsay statements violated Wright’s
Confrontation Clause rights.
Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844
(1997)
At issue in this case was whether the provisions of the Commu-
nications Decency Act (CDA) of 1996 that prohibit the transmis-
sion of indecent and patently offensive materials to minors over
the Internet violate the First Amendment. The CDA was the gov-
ernment’s first attempt to make the Internet safe for minors. Find-
234
Facts and Statistics

ing that the governmental interest in protecting children from
harmful materials does not justify an unnecessarily broad sup-
pression of speech addressed to adults, the Supreme Court up-
held the lower court ruling that, while the state had an interest in
protecting children, the CDA was overbroad in attempting to ac-
complish this purpose.
Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition, 535 U.S. 234 (2002)
The Free Speech Coalition, a trade association involved in the
adult entertainment industry, and other parties—including Bold
Type, Inc., the publisher of a book dedicated to the ideals and phi-
losophy associated with nudism, Jim Gingerich, a painter of
nudes, and Ron Raffaelli, a photographer that specializes in nude
and erotic photographs—sought injunctive relief by a pre-
enforcement challenge to the “appears to be” and “conveys the
impression” provisions of the Child Pornography Protection Act
of 1996. At issue was whether the Child Pornography Prevention
Act (CPPA) of 1996 abridges freedom of speech where it pro-
scribes a significant universe of speech that is neither obscene
under Miller v. California nor child pornography under New York
v. Ferber.
The district court granted the government’s motion for sum-
mary judgment and upheld the CPPA. The court found that the
interests advanced by the government were sufficiently com-
pelling to satisfy the intermediate level of scrutiny that it thought
should be applied. However, the Ninth Circuit reversed, finding
that the CPPA was unconstitutionally vague and overbroad. The
U.S. Supreme Court found that the CPPA cannot be read as pro-
hibiting obscenity; a ban on virtual child pornography abridges
the freedom to engage in a substantial amount of lawful speech
and thus is overbroad and unconstitutional under the First
Amendment. The ruling suggested “that the Government’s inter-
est in enforcing prohibitions against real child pornography can-
not justify prohibitions on virtual child pornography” (259).
Stogner v. California, 539 U.S. 607 (2003)
The law at issue in Stogner was enacted by the California legisla-
ture in 1993. It provided that a defendant accused of sex-related
child abuse crimes could be prosecuted—even though the statute
of limitations had expired—if the victim reported an allegation to
Summary of Significant Court Cases in U.S. Courts
235

the police, if there was independent evidence to corroborate the
victim’s allegations, and if the prosecution began within one year
of the victim’s report (Cal. Penal Code § 803[g], amended by 2003
Cal. Legis. Serv. 73).
Marion Stogner was indicted in 1998 for sex-related child
abuse committed between 1955 and 1973. Without the law en-
acted in 1993, the state could not have brought charges against
Stogner. Stogner moved to dismiss the complaint against him on
the grounds that the Ex Post Facto Clause forbids revival of a pre-
viously barred prosecution. The trial court agreed and dismissed
the complaint; however, the California Court of Appeals reversed
the lower court’s ruling. The U.S. Supreme Court held that a law
enacted after a previously applicable limitations period expires
violates the Ex Post Facto Clause when it is applied to revive a
previously time-barred prosecution.
The Stogner decision is important because it clearly estab-
lishes that the government may not retroactively void the statute
of limitations for criminal prosecutions, even though the Court’s
decision should have no effect on laws pertaining to civil liability.
Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties Union, 542 U.S. 656
(2004) 
The U.S. Congress attempted to narrow the focus of the Commu-
nications Decency Act (CDA) following the Supreme Court’s de-
cision in Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union. The Child Online
Protection Act (COPA) was the result. COPA imposes criminal
penalties of a $50,000 fine and six months in prison for the know-
ing posting, for “commercial purposes,” of World Wide Web con-
tent that is “harmful to minors.” At issue in this case was whether
COPA’s use of “community standards” to identify “material that
is harmful to minors” violates the First Amendment. The
Supreme Court held that the Court of Appeals was correct to af-
firm a ruling by the District Court that enforcement of COPA
should be enjoined because the statute likely violates the First
Amendment.
Smith et al. v. Doe et al., 538 U.S. 84 (2002)
Two convicted sex offenders and the wife of one of them brought
an action that challenged the constitutionality of Alaska’s Sex Of-
fender Registration Act as a violation of the Ex Post Facto Clause,
236
Facts and Statistics

which forbids retroactive punishment. The Alaska Sex Offender
Registration Act requires that convicted sex offenders register
with law enforcement authorities, and some of the information
provided is made public. The two sex offenders pleaded nolo
contendere to sexual abuse of a child. Following their release
from prison in 1990 and completion of a rehabilitative program,
they were required to register as sex offenders. They contended
that, since the Alaska law was enacted in 1994, it constituted
retroactive punishment. The U.S. Supreme Court held that the
Alaska act was nonpunitive and that its retroactive application
did not violate the Ex Post Facto Clause.
United States v. American Library Association, 539 U.S.
194 (2003)
At issue in this case was whether the Children’s Internet Protec-
tion Act (CIPA) induces public libraries to violate the First
Amendment, by requiring them to install Internet filtering soft-
ware on their computers in order to qualify for federal spending.
The American Library Association and others challenged the law,
claiming that it improperly required them to restrict the First
Amendment rights of their patrons. The U.S. Supreme Court held
that, because the use of Internet filtering software by public li-
braries does not violate their patron’s First Amendment rights,
CIPA does not induce libraries to violate the Constitution and is a
valid exercise of Congress’s spending power.
United States v. Hilton, 363 F. 3d 58 (1st Cir. 2004) 
Hilton appealed his conviction in the U.S. District Court for the
District of Maine on one count of violating the Child Pornogra-
phy Prevention Act (CPPA), by possessing child pornography.
Following the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in Ashcroft v. Free
Speech Coalition, holding that the government may not criminalize
possession of nonobscene sexually explicit images that appear to,
but do not in fact, depict actual children, Hilton sought and was
granted postconviction relief. The government appealed. The
First Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the grant of relief vacating
Hilton’s conviction, holding that a doctor’s testimony that an
image looks as though it depicts an actual child based on the
physical characteristics of the child in the image is not sufficient
evidence that the image depicts an actual child.
Summary of Significant Court Cases in U.S. Courts
237

Cummings v. State of Arkansas, 353 Ark. 618 (Ark.
Sup. Ct. 2003)
James and Donna Cummings were convicted in Circuit Court,
Logan County, Arkansas, of producing, directing, or promoting a
sexual performance, and allowing a child to engage in sexually
explicit conduct for use in visual or print media. James Cum-
mings had taken pictures of his thirteen-year-old stepdaughter in
various stages of undress and loaded them onto his computer. At
some point, they were posted to a website. His stepdaughter tes-
tified that James had videotaped her posing nude with her
mother, Donna. On appeal, the court ruled that the evidence was
sufficient to support a finding that James and Donna Cummings
knowingly engaged a minor victim in sexually explicit or lewd
conduct, as required to support convictions for producing, direct-
ing, or promoting sexual performance by a child and permitting
a child to engage in sexually explicit conduct for use in visual or
print media. The thirteen-year-old victim testified that she posed
for photographs that James took for a website; photographs de-
picted the victim in various states of undress that exposed her
breasts and pubic area. The victim testified that James videotaped
her posing nude with Donna Cummings, and that the male voice
on the videotape directing her to pose was that of James Cum-
mings. The Supreme Court of Arkansas upheld the convictions.
Doe v. Chamberlin, 299 F. 3d 192 (3rd Cir. 2002)
Kathryn Lesoine is the wife of William Lawson Chamberlin; his
daughter is Lesoine’s stepdaughter. In August 1995, Lesoine
took photographs of her stepdaughter and three friends at the
beach near their home on Martha’s Vineyard. One friend was
Jane Doe (1), then fifteen years old, and another was Jane Doe
(2), then sixteen years old. In March 1996, she took photos of the
same two plaintiffs in her studio at the Chamberlin home in
Pennsylvania. In the beach photos the girls were naked, taking
a shower. In the studio photos, they were partially clothed. An-
other amateur photographer saw the photos that Lesoine had
taken and informed the mother of Jane Doe (2), who informed
her husband and the parents of Jane Doe (1), of the photos’ ex-
istence. The parents asked the Lackawanna County district at-
torney to investigate. The Lesoine house was searched and the
238
Facts and Statistics

photos found, but the district attorney determined that they did
not justify prosecution.
The parents of Jane Doe (1) and Jane Doe (2) filed an
amended complaint in the Middle District of Pennsylvania ask-
ing for damages for violation of the Protection of Children against
Sexual Exploitation Act, as well as violation of state law. The dis-
trict judge granted summary judgment for the defendants on the
federal claim and declined to exercise jurisdiction on the state
claims. The parents of the two Jane Does appealed, and the ap-
pellate court affirmed the lower court’s ruling. Nude photos of
minors, taken in a shower on the beach, were not lascivious and
therefore did not qualify as sexually explicit conduct, as required
for violation of the statute prohibiting knowing possession of
films and other materials, showing sexual exploitation of minors.
The photos depicted the natural activity of washing off sand;
pubic areas of minors were not focal; the shower was not a place
associated with sexual activity; and minors did not display any
sexual coyness.
References
Bahroo, Bhagwan A. 2003. “Pedophilia Psychiatric Insights.” Family
Court Review 41: 497–507.
Butler, Sandra. 1985. Conspiracy of Silence: The Trauma of Incest. New York:
Bantam.
Committee for Children. 1993. Child Abuse and Neglect. Seattle, WA: Com-
mittee for Children.
Courtois, Christine. 1988. Healing the Incest Wound: Adult Survivors in
Therapy. New York: W. W. Norton.
Finkelhor, David, Gerald T. Hotaling, I. A. Lewis, and Christine Smith.
1990. “Sexual Abuse in a National Survey of Adult Men and Women:
Prevalence, Characteristics, and Risk Factors.” Child Abuse and Neglect 14:
19–28.
Finkelhor, David, Linda Williams, and Nanci Burns. 1989. Nursery
Crimes: Sexual Abuse in Day Care. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Kinsey, Alfred C., Wardell B. Pomeroy, Clyde E. Martin, and Paul H.
Gebhard. 1953. Sexual Behavior in the Human Female. Philadelphia: W. B.
Saunders.
Summary of Significant Court Cases in U.S. Courts
239

Langan, Patrick A., and Caroline Wolf Harlow. 1994. “Child Rape Vic-
tims, 1992.” Crime Data Brief. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Jus-
tice, Bureau of Justice Statistics.
McCurdy, Karen, and Deborah Daro. 1994. Current Trends in Child Abuse
Reporting and Fatalities: The Results of the 1993 Annual Fifty State Survey.
Chicago: National Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse.
National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (NCCAN). 1981. Study
Findings: National Study of the Incidence and Severity of Child Abuse and Ne-
glect. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Russell, Diana E. H. 1986. The Secret Trauma: Incest in the Lives of Girls and
Women. New York: Basic.
Sedlak, A. J. 1987. Study of National Incidence and Prevalence of Child Abuse
and Neglect Final Report. Prepared for the National Center on Child Abuse
and Neglect. Washington, DC: Westat.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on
Children, Youth and Families. 2006. Child Maltreatment 2004. Washington,
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Victim Services Agency. 1991. Incest Treatment: A Curriculum for Training
Mental Health Professionals. New York: Victim Services Agency.
Wyatt, Gail E. 1985. “The Sexual Abuse of Afro-American and White
American Women in Childhood.” Child Abuse and Neglect 9: 507–519.
240
Facts and Statistics

7
Directory of Organizations,
Associations, and Agencies
T
his chapter describes organizations, listed alphabetically, that
work in a variety of ways with children who have been sexu-
ally abused, or with the abusers themselves. They may be
research oriented, prevention oriented, or service oriented. These
organizations represent the types of services offered by programs
throughout the country. This list is by no means inclusive of all
organizations dealing with childhood sexual abuse.
Adults Molested as Children United 
232 East Gish Road
San Jose, CA 95112
Telephone: 408-453-7616
As one component of the Parents United program (see separate
entry) of the Giarretto Institute, this self-help program was
founded in 1981 to help adults who were sexually abused as chil-
dren. The program’s goals include re-evaluating and developing
values, confronting the perpetrator, stopping self-destructive be-
havior, showing members how to make choices in their lives, be-
coming active by living in the present, learning self-awareness
and self-help skills, forming new kinds of relationships, and help-
ing members to feel good about themselves. The emphasis in the
open group meetings is on self-help and support by allowing
members to tell their stories and receive feedback. Professionals
at each meeting help to redirect negative feelings and behavior to-
ward positive and constructive activities.
241

American Bar Association (ABA)
Center on Children and the Law
740 15th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: 202-662-1720
Fax: 202-662-1775
Website: abanet.org/child/home2.html
The center was founded in 1978 by the ABA Young Lawyers Di-
vision to improve children’s quality of life by improving laws,
policies, and judicial procedures concerning children; conducting
research and disseminating results; enhancing skills of legal pro-
fessionals; educating and assisting nonattorneys in understand-
ing child-related law; and increasing public awareness. Areas of
expertise include child abuse and neglect, including child sexual
abuse and exploitation, child welfare and child protective service
system enhancement, foster care, termination of parental rights,
parental substance abuse, child custody, and parental kidnap-
ping. Working with child welfare agencies to develop curricula
and training materials, the center offers training programs in ad-
vanced trial skills for child welfare agency attorneys, interstate
child support enforcement, improving attorney/caseworker
teamwork, reducing delays in termination of parental rights
cases, legal training for child welfare caseworkers, and a judicial
legal training curriculum on drugs, alcohol, and families. State-
wide policy studies are conducted to help states update child
welfare laws and procedures.
Publications: Children’s Legal Rights Journal, a quarterly peri-
odical that contains articles written for anyone interested in the
protection of children under the law, updates on new cases, legis-
lation, and news; Sexual Relationships between Adult Males and
Young Teen Girls: Exploring the Legal and Social Responses, which re-
ports on study findings concerning interventions in statutory
rape cases; Child Sexual Abuse Judicial Education Manual, for judges
and other professionals, providing training units on multidisci-
plinary issues, a bibliography, listings of experts in the fields of
law, medicine, and social science, and major conferences and
training programs related to multidisciplinary issues involving
sexual abusers and victims, and reprints of materials; and A Judi-
cial Primer of Child Sexual Abuse Cases. 
American Humane Association 
Children’s Division
242
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

63 Inverness Drive E
Englewood, CO 80112-5117
Telephone: 303-792-9900; 800-227-5242
Fax: 303-792-5333
Website: http://www.americanhumane.org
The American Humane Association was founded in 1877 and is
the only national organization working to protect both children
and animals from abuse, neglect, cruelty, and exploitation. Their
Children’s Division works to break the cycle of abuse through
training, risk assessment, research, and policy development pro-
grams initiated to provide effective child protective systems.
Through their child advocacy efforts, they work to influence the
development of better laws and public policy. They offer contin-
uing education programs and set program standards and pro-
gram evaluation methods that have improved the quality of care
and services. They sponsor national conferences and regional
workshops and offer a variety of publications.
They also operate the National Resource Center on Child
Abuse and Neglect. This center provides current information
about the causes and effects of child abuse and neglect, including
child sexual abuse. They advocate for national standards, im-
proved child welfare policies, and federal and state legislation
important to the support of children and their families. The cen-
ter provides resource materials for professionals, advocates, leg-
islators, and the general public, as well as various programs en-
hancing community awareness.
Publications: Protecting Children and Animals: Agenda for a
Non-Violent Future; and Helping in Child Protective Services: A Com-
petency-Based Casework Handbook. Posters, informative brochures,
and resource packets are also available.
American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children, Inc.
(APSAC)
P.O. Box 30669
CHO 3B-3406
Charleston, SC 29417
Telephone: 843-764-2905; 877-402-7722
Fax: 803-753-9823
Website: http://www.apsac.org
The American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children is an
interdisciplinary society of professionals working with abused
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
243

and neglected children and their families. Their mission is to im-
prove society’s response to abused and neglected children
through the promotion of effective interdisciplinary approaches
to identifying, intervening in, treating, and preventing abuse and
neglect. Members include psychologists, social workers, attor-
neys, physicians, nurses, law enforcement personnel, child pro-
tection workers, and administrators, researchers, and members of
allied professions. Several task forces usually are working on
guidelines for professionals in the field. Task forces currently are
working on guidelines in the areas of medical evaluation of phys-
ical and sexual abuse, treatment of sexually abused children, and
the use of anatomically correct dolls. APSAC works to encourage
research in all areas of child abuse and neglect, to further inter-
disciplinary professional education, to develop national guide-
lines for professionals in the field, to improve coordination
among professionals, and to provide guidance, support, and en-
couragement to professionals.
Association for Sexual Abuse Prevention (ASAP)
210 Pratt Avenue
Huntsville, AL 35801
Telephone: 256-533-KIDS (5437)
Fax: 256-534-6883
Website: http://www.nationalcac.org/ncac
Founded in 1986, the Association for Sexual Abuse Prevention
emphasizes the importance of developing effective prevention
strategies in dealing with child sexual abuse, promoting collabo-
rative prevention activities at the national as well as local level,
and, eventually, eliminating the sexual abuse of children. ASAP
is working to develop a national movement and strategy for
eliminating sexual abuse, encouraging individuals and organiza-
tions committed to preventing sexual abuse to communicate, ed-
ucate, and network with each other. ASAP promotes excellence
in the field of prevention through emphasizing comprehensive
primary prevention approaches, creating new effective ap-
proaches, and supporting criteria for effective prevention pro-
grams and activities.
Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers (ATSA)
4900 Griffith Drive, Suite 274
Beaverton, OR 97005
244
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Telephone: 503-643-1023
Fax: 503-643-5084
Website: http://www.atsa.com
The Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers offers an in-
terdisciplinary approach to the treatment of sexual offenders, in-
cluding those that prey on children. Its purpose is to foster re-
search and the exchange of information concerning sexual
offenders, encourage professional education, and promote the ad-
vancement of standards and practices in the area of evaluation
and treatment of sex abusers. Conferences are held regarding re-
search and treatment of sexual abusers. The association also
awards research grants, develops state chapters and policy state-
ments, and has established the Collaborative Outcome Project,
which investigates effective treatment programs and practices.
Association of Sites Advocating Child Protection (ASACP)
5042 Wilshire Blvd., #540
Los Angeles, CA 90036
Telephone: 323-908-7864
Website: http://www.asacp.org
A nonprofit organization founded in 1996, the Association of Sites
Advocating Child Protection focuses on eliminating child
pornography from the Internet. It operates an online hotline for
web users to report child pornography sites. Once a report is re-
ceived, ASACP reviews the report and forwards the information
to the appropriate governmental agencies, including the FBI, the
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, and appro-
priate European hotlines. Members are informed of current and
pending laws and regulations relating to child pornography.
ASACP also works to educate its members and other interested
individuals, organizations, and governments about issues con-
cerning child abuse and child pornography. The staff have also
developed best practices guidelines for adult sites, search engines
and directories, billing companies, TGPs, hosting companies, and
adult dating sites.
Awareness Center
P.O. Box 65273
Baltimore, MD 21209
Telephone: 443-857-5560
Website: http://theawarenesscenter.org
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
245

Also known as the Jewish Coalition against Sexual Abuse/As-
sault (JCASA), the Awareness Center is an international Jewish
organization that addresses sexual violence in Jewish communi-
ties throughout the world. It acts as a clearinghouse for informa-
tion and resources on sexual assault, child sexual abuse, clergy
abuse, and sex offenders. A speakers’ bureau is available, and an
international conference on sexual violence in Jewish communi-
ties is in the planning stages. A wide variety of articles concern-
ing child sexual abuse is available from their website.
Blue Sky Bridge
P.O. Box 19122
Boulder, CO 80308
Telephone: 303-444-1388
Fax: 303-444-2045
Website: www.blueskybridge.org
Blue Sky Bridge is a nonprofit organization formed in 1996 to
ensure that children who have been sexually abused and their
families have access to a variety of services provided in a safe,
compassionate, and culturally sensitive environment. Their Com-
munity Resource Program provides educational opportunities
and resources to parents, professionals who work with children,
and others interested in the prevention of child sexual abuse.
Their Case Management Program ensures that a variety of direct
services are provided to children and their families. Forensic in-
terviews are conducted in their child-friendly facility, using state
of the art video and audio taping. Support groups are offered to
victims of child sexual abuse and their nonoffending parents. The
Court School Program teaches children about the court system,
the people who will be involved, and court procedures in a safe
environment.
Center for Sex Offender Management (CSOM)
c/o Center for Effective Public Policy
8403 Colesville Road, Suite 720
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Telephone: 301-589-9383
Fax: 301-589-3505
Website: http://www.csom.org
The goal of the Center for Sex Offender Management is to im-
prove public safety by improving the management of adult and
246
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

juvenile sex offenders who are now out of prison. Established in
1997, CSOM is sponsored by the Office of Justice Programs, U.S.
Department of Justice, in collaboration with the National Institute
of Corrections, State Justice Institute, and the American Probation
and Parole Association. It disseminates current information about
managing sex offenders to those responsible for their manage-
ment. Major activities include an information exchange, training
and technical assistance programs, and resource sites.
Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (CCAN)
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
P.O. Box 26901, CHO 3B 3406
Oklahoma City, OK 73190
Telephone: 405-271-8858
Fax: 405-271-2931
Website: http://www.ccan.ouhsc.edu/home.asp
The Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (CCAN) was established
at the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center with its
main purpose to coordinate the Health Sciences Center’s efforts
to treat and prevent child abuse and neglect, including child sex-
ual abuse. The center conducts various training programs, in-
cluding the Interdisciplinary Training Program in Child Abuse
and Neglect and Child Abuse Medical Examiners Training. Con-
ferences are conducted on child abuse and neglect and juvenile
sex offender training to professionals who work with juvenile sex
offenders.
Child and Family Advocacy Center (CFAC)
1000 W. Hively Avenue
Elkhart, IN 46515
Telephone: 574-295-2277
Fax: 574-295-7642
Website: http://www.capselkhart.org
The Child and Family Advocacy Center was formed to provide
leadership and coordination of services to children who have al-
legedly been abused, both physically and sexually. The center’s
goal is to provide leadership and coordination services to agen-
cies to create a multidisciplinary, standardized response to child
abuse investigations, improve treatment of children and their
families, and provide more effective primary and secondary
prevention. Law enforcement or child protective service teams
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
247

conduct integrated forensic interviews to gather evidence for
criminal and civil proceedings. They have developed and imple-
mented countywide standardized protocols regarding child
abuse investigations, polygraph procedures, protective custody
strategies, and the collection of physical evidence. A follow-up
meeting with the family is conducted at intervals of one month,
three months, and six months to ensure that the child and family
are receiving all necessary services. 
Child Lures Prevention
5166 Shelburne Road
Shelburne, VT 05482
Telephone: 802-985-8458
Fax: 802-985-8418
Website: http://childlures.com
The mission of Child Lures Prevention is to raise public aware-
ness concerning the prevalence of childhood sexual abuse and ex-
ploitation and related crimes against children and to work to
make prevention of those crimes a national priority.
Publications include the Child Lures Prevention Parent Guide,
which offers specific prevention strategies for each of the sixteen
lures described, tips for keeping children safe, and what to do if a
child is sexually abused or goes missing. Other publications in-
clude Internet Safety Tips; What to Do If Your Child Discloses Sexual
Abuse; and Missing Child Early Response System.
Child Molestation Research and Prevention Institute 
1100 Piedmont Avenue, Suite 2
Atlanta, GA 30309
Telephone: 404-872-5152
Website: http://www.childmolestationprevention.org
This program is a national nonprofit organization dedicated to
preventing child sexual abuse through research, education, and
family support activities. Their goals include a drastic reduction
in the number of children who are sexually abused, the education
of professionals who work with children to help identify and treat
children quickly and effectively, the education and support of
families, the training of volunteers who can teach prevention of
sexual abuse, and the implementation of research focusing on
prevention.
248
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Publications include The Stop Child Molestation Book: What Or-
dinary People Can Do in Their Everyday Lives to Save Three Million
Children, written by Gene Abel, M.D., and Nora Harlow, which
offers specific strategies for preventing child sexual abuse.
Child Sexual Abuse Treatment Program (CSATP)
The Giarretto Institute
232 E. Gish Road
San Jose, CA 95112
Telephone: 408-379-3796
Website: http://www.emq.org/about/services/giarretto.html
Founded in 1971, the Child Sexual Abuse Treatment Program has
provided in-depth professional treatment and guided self-help
services to more than 20,000 sexually abused children and their
families. It is the first program to have provided integrated pro-
fessional and self-help services. Prior to Hank Giarretto’s death in
2003, the Giarretto Institute, its parent organization, was a non-
profit, licensed psychology clinic specializing in the treatment of
child sexual abuse. EMQ Children and Family Services has taken
over the program, which offers individual, family, and group
therapy to children and their families as well as guided self-help
support. The program’s goals are to encourage positive changes
within the family in order to ensure the safety and well-being of
the child. Program personnel focus on stopping the abuse and
preventing its reoccurrence, alleviating the child’s feelings of
guilt and anger, developing high self-esteem by encouraging the
development of healthy family relationships, and teaching par-
ents positive and effective parenting and communication skills.
Intensive workshops and one-day basic and advanced seminars
are offered to professionals who work in the field of child sexual
abuse, including mental health professionals, child protective
services workers, probation officers, attorneys, police, judges,
medical professionals, and educators. Programs supported in-
clude Adults Molested as Children United, Parents United, and
Daughters and Sons United (see separate listings).
Child Watch
P.O. Box 691782
Orlando, FL 32869
Telephone: 407-290-5100 (business); 1-888-CHILDWATCH
(hotline)
Website: http://wwwchildwatch.org
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
249

Child Watch was started in 1993 as a private, nonprofit organiza-
tion. Their purpose is to help prevent child abduction, primarily
through the use of their KIDGUARD safety program, which
teaches parents and children how to recognize situations in which
children might be in danger and how to react and prevent child
abduction. If a child is abducted, Child Watch will assist the fam-
ily in the search for the missing child by providing free investiga-
tive and search and rescue services.
Child Welfare League of America
440 First Street, NW, Third Floor
Washington, DC 20001
Telephone: 202-638-2952
Fax: 202-638-4004
Website: http://www.cwla.org
The Child Welfare League focuses on improving care and serv-
ices for abused, neglected, or dependent children, youth, and
their families. The league provides consultation services, con-
ducts research, maintains a library and information services, de-
velops standards for child welfare practice, and administers spe-
cial projects.
Publications: Children’s Voice Magazine and Child Welfare Jour-
nal, presenting articles for child welfare professionals; In Their
Own Words: A Sexual Abuse Workbook for Teenage Girls, written by
two therapists who tell of the experiences of young women who
have been sexually abused; What Only a Mother Can Tell You about
Child Sexual Abuse, providing tips to parents whose children have
been sexually abused, as told by a mother whose own child was
sexually abused; and Treating the Aftermath of Sexual Abuse: A
Handbook for Working with Children in Care. Confronting Child Sex-
ual Abuse, a video training series for professionals involved in
providing services to children who have been sexually abused.
Childhelp USA
15757 N. 78th Street
Scottsdale, AZ 85260
Telephone: 480-922-8212
Fax: 480-922-7061
Website: http://www.childhelpusa.org
Childhelp USA is one of the largest nonprofit organizations focus-
ing on the prevention and treatment of child abuse and neglect,
250
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

including child sexual abuse. They have offices in Los Angeles;
Rochester, Michigan; Fairfax and Culpeper, Virginia; and
Knoxville, Tennessee; they also operate the Village of Childhelp in
Beaumont, California, and the Alice C. Tyler Village of Childhelp
East in Lignum, Virginia, as well as the Childhelp National Child
Abuse Hotline (800-4-A-CHILD), which includes 62,000 local serv-
ice organizations. Children at both Childhelp villages receive psy-
chological therapy, speech therapy, recreational therapy, play ther-
apy, and art therapy, and also participate in ranch activities, sports
programs, and a chapel program. The villages offer parenting
classes and family therapy for abusive parents. Community re-
sources are encouraged and provided, including a speakers’ bu-
reau, parenting resources, and public information programs.
Childnet International
Studio 14 Brockley Cross Business Centre
96 Endwell Road
London SE4 2PD England
Telephone: +44 (0)20 7639 6967
http://www.childnet-int.org
A nonprofit organization, Childnet International’s purpose is to
help children benefit from the growing ease of use of interna-
tional communications, specifically the Internet, while protecting
them from the negative aspects of the Internet. Information is
gathered from child welfare organizations, educational groups,
governments, and international agencies and disseminated to a
wide range of individuals and organizations on how to protect
children from the negative aspects of the Internet. They focus on
three primary areas: helping children to use the Internet con-
structively, helping them acquire safe skills for using the Internet,
and working with other individuals and organizations to help
protect children from exploitation.
Children of the Night
14530 Sylvan Street
Van Nuys, CA 91411
Telephone: 818-908-4474; toll free: 800-551-1300
Fax: 818-908-1468
Website: http://www.childrenofthenight.org
Children of the Night is a private, nonprofit organization begun
in 1979 to assist child prostitutes between the ages of eleven and
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
251

seventeen. Many of these children were first victimized by a par-
ent or other caregiver, and then were kicked out or felt forced to
run away from home to prevent further abuse. The program of-
fers a residential program, where the children attend an on-site
school. They formulate a “life plan” with the assistance of case-
workers, attend independent living classes, and participate in
various recreational activities. Counselors and other staff mem-
bers help these children to prepare to live normal lives in main-
stream society.
Children’s Advocacy and Treatment Center
322 NW F Street
Grants Pass, OR 97526
Telephone: 541-474-5437
Fax: 541-471-6254
The Children’s Advocacy and Treatment Center offers a sanctu-
ary and resource for children, promoting a homelike atmos-
phere to provide the sexually abused child with a feeling of
safety and security. The center’s goal is to prevent the child from
being revictimized by coordinating the child’s community, legal,
and treatment needs, thus ensuring that the child’s care and
well-being are the first priority of all team members. Treatment
facilities equipped with special therapy rooms and office space
are provided to help make the child feel accepted, warm, and se-
cure. All sexually abused children in the area are taken into the
center. Investigative interviews are conducted by a trained team
of law enforcement and social work personnel. Videotapes of in-
terviews are made to minimize the need for multiple interviews.
A court-appointed special advocate (CASA) program is offered
that provides a specially trained volunteer appointed by a judge
to represent the best interests of abused children in court, and to
ensure continuity in all judicial proceedings. These volunteers
are trained to help develop a plan to provide permanency for a
child; they conduct a complete investigation of the case by in-
terviewing all involved parties and then submit a report to the
court that includes an independent recommendation as to what
services are in the best interest of the child. They help to ensure
that the case is kept active and that the child understands the
court system. They also monitor the treatment plan set up by the
court.
252
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Children’s Advocacy Center of Georgia
P.O. Box 1192
Decatur, GA 30031
Telephone: 404-377-6127
Fax: 303-377-1365
Website: http://wwwcacga.org
The Children’s Advocacy Center of Georgia provides a variety of
services to children who have been abused, including those who
have been sexually abused. Services include videotaped inter-
views that are conducted in a safe, child-friendly environment,
forensic medical examinations, crisis intervention and emotional
support services, counseling and medical services, an interdisci-
plinary review of cases, and professional training and community
education. They have several locations throughout the state.
Committee for Children
568 First Avenue South, Suite 600
Seattle, WA 98104
Telephone: 800-634-4449; Seattle area: 206-343-1223
Fax: 206-438-6765
Website: http://www.cfchildren.org
Founded in 1979, the Committee for Children is a nonprofit or-
ganization providing educational materials, original research,
training, and community education for the prevention of child
abuse and youth violence. They offer a client support line for
people who are in the process of implementing their programs, a
preview library which provides free preview copies of their cur-
ricula and videos, and research assistance; they also publish Pre-
vention Update, a newsletter.
Publications: Talking about TouchingTM, a curriculum to help
children from preschool through high school avoid becoming vic-
tims of sexual abuse; Yes You Can Say No, a video that teaches as-
sertiveness and reporting skills; and What Do I Say Now?, a video
packet that assists educators in leading parent-education meet-
ings on prevention of child abuse.
Corner House
Interagency Child Abuse Evaluation Center
2502 10th Avenue South
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
253

Minneapolis, MN 55404
Telephone: 612-813-8300
Fax: 612-813-8330
Website: http://www.cornerhousemn.org
Corner House is a partnership of public and private agencies
providing a safe and welcoming environment to children who
have been sexually abused. Agencies involved in providing
services include Hennepin County Children and Family Service,
the Hennepin County attorney, the Minneapolis Police Depart-
ment, the Minneapolis Children’s Medical Center, suburban po-
lice jurisdictions in Hennepin County, and the Hennepin
County Medical Center. Their purpose is to improve the assess-
ment and investigation of child sexual abuse by emphasizing
the needs of sexually abused children, facilitating coordination
of services, and sharing the knowledge, skills, and expertise of
all professionals involved in child sexual abuse prevention and
treatment. Videotaped interviews are conducted by profession-
als sensitive to the dynamics of child sexual abuse. A medical
team conducts nonemergency physical examinations in a
friendly homelike environment. A case team reviews cases and
makes recommendations for treatment. The interagency team
meets monthly to discuss issues of concern to the coordination
of services. The partnership’s training and resource center offers
an interviewer training course for police officers, child protec-
tion workers, and assistant county attorneys. Additional train-
ing courses include advanced forensic interview training, pre-
assessment training, videotaped interview assessment, and
on-site interview training.
Publications: A workbook, Interviewing Children Reliably and
Credibly, contains information on the art and science of an inter-
view, dynamics of sexual abuse, the “child first” doctrine, the in-
terview process, essential skills and tools, cultural competency,
and making a determination.
Crimes against Children Research Center (CCRC)
University of New Hampshire
No. 126 Horton Social Science Center
20 College Road
Durham, NH 03824
Telephone: 603-862-1888
Fax: 603-862-1122
Website: http://www.unh.edu/ccrc
254
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

The Research Center, created in 1998 at the University of New
Hampshire and currently directed by David Finkelhor, focuses
on reducing crimes against children, including child abduction,
rape, assault, and physical and sexual abuse, through research
into the impact of those crimes. The CCRC has four primary
goals: to encourage greater recognition of the extent to which
children are victimized, to provide protection of child victims, to
provide services and programs to help rehabilitate child victims,
and to encourage greater public accountability through an eval-
uation of the justice system and its effects on children. It pro-
vides research and statistics to the general public, law enforce-
ment personnel, policy-makers, and child welfare and therapy
professionals.
Darkness to Light 
7 Radcliffe Street, Suite 200
Charlestown, SC 29403
Telephone: 843-965-5444; toll free: 1-866-FOR-LIGHT (1-866-367-
5444)
Fax: 843-965-5449
Website: http://www.darkness2light.org
This program focuses specifically on the prevention of child sex-
ual abuse by encouraging adults to help prevent such abuse. They
work to reduce the incidence through educational and public
awareness activities, and provide adults with the means of iden-
tifying children who have been abused. The organization’s
newest program, Stewards of Children, is a sexual abuse preven-
tion training program that offers training for organizations that
serve children and youth.
Publications: 7 Steps to Protecting Our Children from Child Sex-
ual Abuse: A Guide for Responsible Adults.
Daughters and Sons United
232 East Gish Road
San Jose, CA 95112
Telephone: 408-453-7616
Daughters and Sons United is the children’s component of Par-
ents United (see separate entry). This program closely coordi-
nates their activities with the Child Sexual Abuse Treatment Pro-
gram of the Giarretto Institute and is available at approximately
ninety local Parents United chapters across the nation. Local
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
255

programs can help to alleviate the trauma each sexually abused
child experiences by providing intensive emotional support dur-
ing the initial crisis, helping the children understand their feel-
ings, and assuring the children that they are not alone (that is,
that other children have also been sexually abused). Chapters aim
to promote personal growth and communications skills, to help
alleviate any guilt the child may feel, to prevent self-abusive be-
havior, to prevent future dysfunctional patterns in relationships,
and to break the multigenerational pattern of abuse. Members
meet regularly under the guidance of professionals who lead dis-
cussions on topics relevant to members’ physical and emotional
well-being. They may also participate in community education
programs.
FaithTrust Institute
2400 N. 45th Street, #10
Seattle, WA 98103
Telephone: 206-634-1903
Fax: 206-634-0115
Website: http://wwwfaithtrustinstitute.org
The FaithTrust Institute, an international and multifaith organiza-
tion, provides a wide range of resources and services, including
training, consultation, and educational materials to end sexual
and domestic violence. The institute was formed in 1977 by the
Rev. Dr. Marie M. Fortune after she discovered that many of her
clergy colleagues were silent on the issue of domestic violence
and did not know how to minister to women and children who
were sexually abused or the victims of other types of domestic vi-
olence. In addition, public and other social service agencies were
unable to assist these individuals with religious questions. The in-
stitute has developed training and other educational materials to
address various religious and cultural issues relating to sexual
abuse and other forms of domestic violence. 
False Memory Syndrome Foundation 
1955 Locust St.
Philadelphia, PA 19103
Telephone: 215-940-1040
Fax: 215-940-1042
Website: http://www.fmsfonline.org
256
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

The purpose of the False Memory Syndrome Foundation is to ex-
amine the reasons why and how this syndrome occurs, to prevent
new cases, to help the victims, and to help reconcile and reunite
family members. In order to achieve those goals, the foundation
works with professionals to publicize the nature and prevalence
of this syndrome, to provide access to counseling, to promote and
sponsor scientific and medical research into the causes of this syn-
drome, and to help determine reliable methods of distinguishing
between true cases of sexual abuse and those created by false
memories. Information on causes, current research, and legal
rights also is provided.
Four Corners Child Advocacy Center
140 N. Linden
Cortez, CO 81321
Telephone: 970-565-8155
The Four Corners Child Advocacy Center is a private, nonprofit
program dedicated to the well-being of sexually and physically
abused children. It is a grassroots community and professional re-
sponse to the more than 300 cases of physical and sexual abuse re-
ported locally each year. The center’s goal is to minimize the emo-
tional trauma to children and their families during the
investigation and prosecution of child abuse. They operate a home
in which the goal is to create a safe, nurturing, and child-friendly
atmosphere. A trained volunteer victim advocate provides emo-
tional support as well as information and guidance. Agencies, pro-
fessionals, and therapists come to see the child at the center for in-
vestigative interviews, medical exams, pretrial preparation, and
therapy. Services can be coordinated to provide the best, most ef-
fective treatment possible. The center also offers community edu-
cation and prevention programs, an information clearinghouse,
and training programs for professionals and lay persons. Im-
provement of the regional response to abuse is achieved through
coordination of federal, tribal, state, and local efforts.
Garth House
Mickey Mehaffy Children’s Advocacy Center
1895 McFadden
Beaumont, TX 77701
Telephone: 409-838-9084
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
257

Fax: 409-838-9106
Website: http://www.centerforchildprotection.org
/Regional_Centers.htm
The Garth House, a nonprofit program begun in 1991, attempts to
provide an environment that reflects the physical and emotional
atmosphere of a home, rather than the atmosphere of a clinic or
institution. Children who have been sexually or physically
abused are referred to Garth House by law enforcement officials
and child protective services personnel. Professionals provide
their services to the children in one location, preventing the child
from being shuttled around from police headquarters to Child
Protective Services offices to physicians and then to mental health
professionals. Each interview is videotaped and made available
to all agencies involved in the provision of services. The video-
tape can be used by law enforcement personnel and the district
attorney’s office in criminal or civil proceedings. Weekly meet-
ings are held, and all agencies involved participate in reviewing
cases. Staff members also maintain a data file in order to provide
comprehensive statistical information about sexual and physical
abuse.
Generation Five 
2 Massasoit Street
San Francisco, CA 94110
Telephone: 415-285-6658
Fax: 415-861-6659
Website: http://generationfive.org/index.html
The purpose of this program is to work to end sexual abuse of
children within five generations. Generation Five is a nonprofit
organization that provides leadership training to activists, pro-
fessionals working in the field of child sexual abuse, and mem-
bers of the community. They work with service providers to en-
sure that support is available to survivors, offenders, and
affected families. Their Community Response Project is a model
program designed to encourage individuals, communities, and
existing agencies to take a leadership role in working to end
child sexual abuse.
Healing Alliance 
P.O. Box 429
Pewee Valley, KY 40056
258
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Telephone: 502-241-5544
Fax: 502-241-0031
Website: http://www/healingall.org
The Healing Alliance was organized by individuals who were
victims of clergy abuse. The program offers positive options to in-
dividuals who have been sexually abused by clergy members.
They reach out to individuals through meetings and conferences
throughout the United States, and they provide information
about sexual abuse. They operate the Farm, a place where victims
of sexual abuse can gather to relax and talk with others who have
had similar experiences. It is not considered a treatment center,
but rather a safe place in which to gather, socialize, and exchange
information. They offer guided exercises and workshops on a va-
riety of topics. Their programs are developed as a supplement to
any therapy that survivors may be receiving at home.
Incest Survivors Anonymous 
P.O. Box 17245
Long Beach, CA 90807-7245
Telephone: 562-428-5599
Website: http://www.lafn.org/medical/isa/home.html
Founded in 1980 by an incest survivor, Incest Survivors Anony-
mous is a twelve-step program that aims to help incest survivors
and their family members, spouses, and friends recover from
their experiences. They have adapted the Twelve Steps and
Twelve Traditions from Alcoholics Anonymous to help people
who have experienced incest. While the format of their group
meetings may vary, they often choose a topic relating to incest
and talk freely about their feelings, experiences, and memories. In
their meetings, members seek understanding, acceptance, for-
giveness, and serenity. The goals of the program are to recognize
the negative behavior patterns and programming that many
people who have been sexually abused have developed in child-
hood, often in response to fear, and to develop a new way of life,
with peace of mind and understanding.
Incest Survivors Resource Network International (ISRNI)
P.O. Box 7375
Las Cruces, NM 88006-7375
Telephone: 505-521-4260
Fax: 505-521-3723
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
259

In 1983 at the New York City Friends Meeting House, the Incest
Survivors Resource Network International was founded as an ed-
ucational resource for both national and international community
and professional organizations. It is operated as a religious group
focusing on world peace witness by survivors of incest interested
in the relationship between unresolved traumatic stress and vio-
lence in the world. ISRNI encourages communication and coop-
eration between professionals and self-help organizations. It op-
erates the first national helpline answered by survivors of incest.
It cosponsors several conferences, including the National Forum
on Victim Rights, with the National Organization for Victim As-
sistance.
International Society for Prevention of Child Abuse and
Neglect (ISPCAN) 
245 W. Roosevelt Road
Building 6, Suite 39
West Chicago, IL 60185
Telephone: 630-876-6913
Fax: 630-876-6917
Website: http://www.ispcan.org
One of the few multidisciplinary international organizations that
works to prevent child abuse, neglect, and exploitation, ISPCAN
encourages the cooperation of participants throughout the world.
They work to prevent all forms of abuse, including physical and
sexual abuse, neglect, emotional abuse, child fatalities, child pros-
titution, the use of children in war, and child labor.
Kempe Center
1825 Marion Street
Denver, CO 80218
Telephone: 303-864-5300
Website: http://www.kempecenter.org
The Kempe Center was opened in 1972 to provide a clinically
based resource for training, consultation, program development
and education, and research into all forms of child abuse and ne-
glect. The center is committed to multidisciplinary approaches to
improving the recognition, treatment, and prevention of all forms
of abuse and neglect. Several programs have been instituted to
help children and their families, including Therapeutic Preschool,
the Family Evaluation Team, the Child Advocacy and Protection
260
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Team, the Community Caring Project, the Perpetration Preven-
tion Project, the National Child Abuse and Neglect Clinical Re-
source Center, and the Prevention Research Center for Family
and Child Health.
Kids First, Inc.
110 South Pool Street
P.O. Box 23
Elizabeth City, NC 27909
Telephone: 252-331-1653
Kids First, established in 1992, offers advocacy and support serv-
ices to child victims of sexual and physical abuse, including child
and family counseling, forensic medical examinations, a Kids in
Court school to help prepare child witnesses for their upcoming
court appearances, community education programs, and training
programs for professionals who work with sexually and physi-
cally abused children and their families. The program offers a
multidisciplinary team approach: team members include repre-
sentatives from departments of social services, law enforcement,
sheriff’s departments, the district attorney’s office, and the med-
ical community; also included are adult probation personnel,
court counselors, public school system personnel, guardian ad
litem program members and representatives from local and state
governments, juvenile services divisions, child abuse hotlines,
and mental health services. Once a case is reported to the center,
the director assigns a primary team that is responsible for coordi-
nating a comprehensive plan to help the child and the child’s
family. 
King County Sexual Assault Resource Center
P.O. Box 300
Renton, WA 98057
Telephone: 425-226-5062
Fax: 425-271-6332
Website: http://www/kcsarc.org
Originally founded as King County Rape Relief, this resource
center is a nonprofit organization providing services to women,
children, and men who have been sexually victimized. The staff’s
goal is to help all clients make the transition from victim to sur-
vivor. Individual counseling is provided for children who have
been sexually abused, and the families of these children receive
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
261

family therapy and support. The center’s philosophy is that edu-
cation is the key to preventing and eventually eliminating sexual
assault, and it offers a wide variety of educational and training
programs to educators, service providers, professionals, and the
community. Their advocacy staff offer crisis intervention and con-
fidential support and information twenty-four hours a day, med-
ical information, legal information, advocacy, court accompani-
ment, and forensic medical examinations for children that are
coordinated through the County Health Department. Training
workshops are provided on topics such as ending sexual vio-
lence, striving for empowerment (an education support group
model for teenage girls), chemical dependency and sexual assault
(based on the premise that many children who are sexually
abused grow up to have problems with alcohol and drugs), and
related risks, including child abuse, family violence, and chemi-
cal dependency.
Publications: He Told Me Not to Tell, a booklet on how to talk
with children about sexual abuse. Other publications available on
their website include Talking to Your Children about Sexual Assaults;
Sex Offender Grooming Techniques; and Tips for Internet Safety and
Information about Internet Victimization.
La Rabida Joli Burrell Children’s Advocacy Center
202 Lakewood Boulevard
Park Forest, IL 60466
Telephone: 708-481-9799
Fax: 708-481-9951
Website: http://www.larabida.org
The La Rabida Joli Burrell Children’s Advocacy Center provides
a safe and child-friendly environment for children who have been
sexually abused or those who have experienced other psycholog-
ical trauma. Investigative, therapeutic, and other support services
are provided to children and their families. Investigative services
include child-friendly interviews, conducted by individuals
trained in child mental health and forensic interviewing tech-
niques. These interviews are observed by law enforcement, child
protective services, and the state attorney’s office to minimize the
number of times a child must be interviewed. Therapeutic serv-
ices include psychotherapy provided by staff who have expertise
in child abuse and trauma. The program also runs support
groups for parents and other caregivers of sexually abused chil-
262
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

dren, individual parent/caregiver support, case management
and referral services, and legal advocacy.
Lake County Children’s Advocacy Center
323 N. West Street
Waukegan, IL 60085
Telephone: 708-360-6870
The Lake County Children’s Advocacy Center was founded as a
result of a 1985 task force on child sexual abuse. The center is a co-
operative effort between the Illinois Department of Children and
Family Services, the Lake County Sheriff’s Police, the Waukegan
Police Department, the state’s attorney’s office, and local law en-
forcement agencies; it employs a multidisciplinary treatment con-
cept to help victims of child sexual abuse. The center’s multidis-
ciplinary and single-interview approach is designed to reduce the
trauma that children often face when being subjected to multiple,
independent interviews. The goal is to implement a strong social
and legal support structure to minimize trauma and stress to the
child, using a highly trained staff to conduct sensitive and thor-
ough investigations. Crisis intervention and court advocacy for
children and their families are provided by a social worker. A
speakers’ bureau is available to interested organizations and
groups.
LaPorte County Child Abuse Prevention Council
7451 W. Johnson Rd.
Michigan City, IN 46360
Telephone: 219-874-0007
The LaPorte County Child Abuse Prevention Council was
founded in 1989 as a nonprofit organization dedicated to increas-
ing community awareness of child abuse and neglect and coordi-
nating services for children and their families. They provide com-
munity education through a speakers’ bureau as well as
information and referral services. Family programs include a par-
ent education program, a school body-safety program, and parent
support groups. The council plans to meet family needs through
survivors’ groups, people against child abuse groups, and an an-
nual survivors’-days workshop. Professionals in the field of child
abuse receive training, consultation services through a child
abuse advisory team, and legislative advocacy. The council also
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
263

operates Dunebrook, a multidisciplinary child abuse prevention
care center designed to offer a warm, safe place in which children
can be interviewed and other services can be coordinated.
Making Daughters Safe Again (MDSA)
Telephone: 877-735-5603
Website: http://mdsa-online.org
This online program provides support and advocacy for sur-
vivors of sexual abuse committed by their mothers. The organi-
zation, founded in 2000, offers support to survivors as well as
programs that focus on the lack of knowledge and publicity about
mother-daughter sexual abuse. It provides a unique online sup-
port program for survivors, and their website contains additional
information on the topic.
Midwest Regional Children’s Advocacy Center
345 N. Smith Ave.
St. Paul, MN 55102
Telephone: 651-220-6000
Website: http://www.childrensmn.org
The Midwest Regional Children’s Advocacy Center is a regional
resource center for children, professionals, and programs in diag-
nosing, treating, and preventing child abuse. The center provides
diagnosis, treatment, and consultation services for sexually, phys-
ically, and emotionally abused children. It is the only site in Min-
nesota for comprehensive multidisciplinary training in the area of
child abuse; more than 1,000 law enforcement personnel, child
protection workers, county attorneys, medical professionals, and
mental health professionals are trained each year. 
Mothers against Sexual Abuse (MASA)
P.O. Box 371
Huntersville, NC 28070
Website: http://www.againstsexualabuse.org
Mothers against Sexual Abuse focuses on protecting children
from sexual abuse. It offers educational programs to teachers,
caregivers, and professionals in the area of detection and preven-
tion of child sexual abuse and provides educational materials to
families of children who have been sexually abused. A resource
referral network that can assist in the recovery of children and
264
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

adults who have been sexually abused is provided. Educational
conferences are organized for professionals in the field, survivors,
and anyone else concerned about sexual abuse. MASA also initi-
ates and supports legislation that protects children from sexual
abuse.
National Center for Assault Prevention (NCAP)
606 Delsea Drive
Sewell, NJ 08080
Telephone: 908-369-8972; toll free: 800-258-3189
Website: http://www.ncap.org
The purpose of the National Center for Assault Prevention is to
protect children and improve their quality of life by reducing in-
stances of interpersonal violence through training in assault pre-
vention. The program is the host agency for the Child Assault
Prevention (CAP) program, which holds educational seminars
that address child abuse and neglect.
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children
Charles B. Wang International Children’s Building
699 Prince Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
Telephone: 703-274-3900
Hotline: 800-THE-LOST [(800) 843-5678]
Fax: 703-274-2200
Website: http://www.missingkids.com
The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children was
mandated by the U.S. Congress in 1984 and in 1990 merged with
the Adam Walsh Child Resource Center. Since 1984 it has handled
almost 700,000 calls through its toll-free hotline for reporting in-
formation on missing or exploited children. The center offers a
staff of case managers who are former law enforcement and social
service professionals. Services provided include instructions on
how to conduct an investigation into the whereabouts of the
missing or exploited child, national distribution of the child’s
photo, and legal and technical assistance. The case enhancement
and information analysis unit helps local law enforcement agen-
cies by providing useful, up-to-date information about the child.
Project ALERT (America’s Law Enforcement Retiree Team) offers
free, on-site support to state and local police in missing or
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
265

exploited child cases. The center also receives tips on people who
participate in child pornography. The CyberTipLine provides on-
line reporting of sexual abuse or exploitation of children. It offers
educational programs to children, teachers, parents, health care
professionals, and law enforcement personnel. The legal staff of-
fers information to attorneys, families, and legislators.
Publications: Child Molesters: A Behavioral Analysis; Child Mo-
lesters Who Abduct: Summary of the Case in Point Series; Child
Pornography: The Criminal Justice System Response; Internet Sex
Crimes against Minors: The Response of Law Enforcement; and Family
Abduction. Brochures include topics such as child protection, tips
to help prevent sexual exploitation of children, rules for safety,
and the Just in Case . . . Series, which offers advice on finding pro-
fessional help for children who have been sexually assaulted, ad-
vice on choosing day care and preventing the exploitation or sex-
ual abuse of children, on what to do if your child is sexually
abused or exploited, and on other related topics.
National Center for Prosecution of Child Abuse
99 Canal Center Plaza, Suite 510
Alexandria, VA 22314
Telephone: 703-549-4253
Fax: 703-836-3195
Website: http://www.ndaa.org/apri/programs/ncpca
The purpose of the National Center for Prosecution of Child
Abuse is to improve the handling of child abuse cases by provid-
ing expert training and technical assistance, research, a clearing-
house on case law, and information on statutory initiatives, court
reforms, and other legal matters. The center conducts national
conferences on a variety of topics, including online crimes against
children, multidisciplinary investigation and prosecution of
computer-facilitated child sexual exploitation, and interviewing
and preparing children for court. Their attorneys conduct state
and local training on all aspects of child abuse prosecution.
National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect (NCCAN)
National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect
Information
Children’s Bureau/ACYF
1250 Maryland Avenue, SW, Eighth Floor
Washington, DC 20024
Telephone: 703-385-7565; 800-394-3366
266
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Fax: 703-385-3206
Website: http://www.childwelfare.gov
The National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect was established
in 1974 by the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (Public
Law 93-247) as the primary federal agency charged with helping
states and communities address the problems of child maltreat-
ment. NCCAN oversees all federal child abuse and neglect efforts
and allocates child maltreatment funds appropriated by Con-
gress. They are responsible for conducting research on the causes,
prevention, and treatment of child abuse and neglect; collecting,
analyzing, and disseminating information to professionals con-
cerned with child abuse and neglect; increasing public awareness
of the problems of child maltreatment; and assisting states and
communities in developing programs relating to the prevention,
identification, and treatment of child abuse and neglect.
NCCAN operates a clearinghouse that collects, stores, or-
ganizes, and disseminates information on all aspects of child mal-
treatment. They provide services and products in a variety of
areas to organizations, researchers, and the general public. Man-
uals, reports, directories, catalogs, literature reviews, annotated
bibliographies, and fact sheets are available through the clearing-
house. For a fee, clearinghouse information specialists provide
custom searches of the child abuse and neglect database.
Publications: Child Sexual Abuse: Intervention and Treatment Is-
sues, a manual designed for all professionals working in the field
of child sexual abuse; Child Sexual Abuse, a review of the current
literature on child sexual abuse; and annotated bibliographies on
interviewing techniques used with sexual abuse victims, male
victims of sexual abuse, prevention, treatment for victims, and
treatment for perpetrators.
National Child Abuse Defense and Resource Center
(NCADRC)
P.O. Box 638
Holland, OH 43528
Telephone: 419-865-0513
Fax: 419-865-0526
Website: http://www.falseallegation.org
A nonprofit organization, the National Child Abuse Defense and
Resource Center was founded to offer help to people who have
been falsely accused of some form of child abuse, including sex-
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
267

ual abuse. The program’s goals are to provide information to
professionals, organizations, and government units; to ensure
that due process, constitutional rights, human rights, and family
concerns are considered when people are reported for abuse; to
reduce public hysteria over child sexual abuse; to ensure that
those implementing child abuse law and policy are properly
trained and qualified; to help formulate laws and policies that
define child abuse and specify investigative procedures; and to
provide information and emotional support to all people falsely
accused of sexual abuse. They operate an extensive library of re-
search materials, legal case law, and articles. All of the staff mem-
bers are volunteers; they provide general information and may
offer limited advice on steps people can take when falsely ac-
cused. They can also recommend attorneys and other experts in
the field.
Publications: Guilty until Proven Innocent: A Manual for Sur-
viving False Allegations of Child Abuse, by Kimberly Hart, the cur-
rent executive director of NCADRC; and Making Monsters, by
Richard Ofshe and Ethan Waters, which discusses false memo-
ries, psychotherapy, and sexual hysteria. These are samples of
available publications.
National Children’s Advocacy Center
210 Pratt Avenue
Huntsville, AL 35801
Telephone: 205-533-5437
Website: http://www.nationalcac.org
The National Children’s Advocacy Center is a nonprofit organi-
zation composed of members and affiliates whose mission is to
provide technical assistance, training, and networking opportuni-
ties to help communities establish and maintain children’s advo-
cacy centers. The goals of the centers are to provide quality serv-
ices for victims of child abuse, particularly child sexual abuse.
There are four regional child advocacy centers in the United
States—located in the Midwest, the Northeast, the South, and the
West—and, in addition, each state has child advocacy centers af-
filiated with the national center. The regional centers have been
established through the U.S. Department of Justice’s Office of Ju-
venile Justice and Delinquency Prevention to provide informa-
tion, consulting services, training, and technical assistance in the
268
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

development of new programs and in the improvement of current
programs. As of this writing, there are almost 500 programs
throughout the country. 
National Committee to Prevent Child Abuse
332 South Michigan Avenue
Suite 1600
Chicago, IL 60604
Telephone: 312-663-3520
Fax: 312-939-8962
This volunteer organization is dedicated to involving all con-
cerned citizens in actions to prevent child abuse in all of its forms,
including physical abuse, emotional maltreatment, neglect, and
sexual abuse. Activities include prevention programs, public
awareness, education and training, research, and advocacy.
Publications: A Look at Child Sexual Abuse, by Jon Conte,
which reviews current information; Sexual Victimization of Chil-
dren, which explains the various forms of sexual exploitation of
children, characteristics of molesters, and behavioral characteris-
tics of children who have been molested; Basic Facts about Child
Sexual Abuse; Talking about Sexual Abuse, a guide for parents; What
Every Kid Should Know about Sexual Abuse; and You Don’t Have to
Molest That Child, which speaks directly to molesters and poten-
tial molesters.
National Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges 
P.O. Box 8970
Reno, NV 89507
Telephone: 775-784-6012
Facsimile: 775-784-6628
Website: http://www.ncjfcj.org
The National Council of Juvenile and Family Court Judges pro-
vides direction on juvenile and family law to the nation’s juvenile
and family jurists. It offers continuing education to judges, refer-
ees, probation officers, social workers, law enforcement person-
nel, and other juvenile justice professionals. It stays abreast of the
changing areas of the law in such areas as child abuse and ne-
glect, crack babies, foster care, custody issues, school violence,
gangs, and serious juvenile crime, and it offers programs ad-
dressing current topics in those areas.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
269

National Organization against Male Sexual Victimization
PMB 103
5505 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20015
Telephone: 800-738-4181
Website: http://www.malesurvivor.org
Founded in 1995, this organization helps to bring together pro-
fessionals and other individuals interested in a better under-
standing of, and treatment for, men who were sexually abused as
children. The program organizes annual conferences on male sex-
ual victimization, provides information on male victimization,
and offers referrals to victims. They also provide an online bul-
letin board and chat room.
North American Man/Boy Love Association (NAMBLA)
P.O. Box 174 Midtown Station
New York, NY 10018
Telephone: 212-631-1194 (voice mail)
Website: http://216.220.97.17/
Founded in 1978, the North American Man/Boy Love Associa-
tion (NAMBLA) is a political, civil rights, and educational organ-
ization that works to end the oppression of men and boys in mu-
tual relationships to which both consent, by building support and
understanding of those relationships; by providing information
and education to the general public on the positive aspects of
man/boy love, by cooperation with lesbian, gay, feminist, and
other liberation movements, and by support of the effort to free
all people from sexual oppression. They make it clear on their
website that they “condemn sexual abuse and all forms of coer-
cion.” However, they believe that young people can make in-
formed decisions as to their sexual activities and should not be
prohibited by law from engaging in sexual activities with adults.
They strongly oppose all legislation concerning age of consent
and any other laws that would deny boys the “full enjoyment of
their bodies and control over their own lives.” NAMBLA does not
act as a clearinghouse to match individuals together.
Publications include the NAMBLA Journal; A Call for Justice by
Fri Beslut, which advocates a boy’s right to decide what he wants
to do with his body; and Liberation: Participation, Not Passivity.
270
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Northeast Regional Children’s Advocacy Center
4 Terry Drive, Suite 16
Newtown, PA 18940
Telephone: 800-662-4124
Fax: 215-860-3112
Website: http://www.nrcac.org
The Northeast Regional Children’s Advocacy Center is a non-
profit organization composed of members and affiliates whose
mission is to provide technical assistance, training, and net-
working opportunities to help communities establish and
maintain children’s advocacy centers. The centers’ goals are to
provide quality services for helping victims of child abuse, par-
ticularly child sexual abuse. General information packets con-
tain a description of CACs, including membership criteria, lit-
erature concerning the benefits of interagency coordination,
and sample interagency agreements. The centers have also pro-
duced the publication Developing a Children’s Advocacy Center
Four-Step Methodology, which explains the steps to take to de-
velop a children’s advocacy center. In addition, they offer an
on-site training/technical assistance program and a mentoring
program.
Northern Kentucky Children’s Advocacy Center
103 Landmark Drive, Suite 360
Bellevue, KY 41073
Telephone: 859-261-3441
Fax: 859-261-9788
The Northern Kentucky Children’s Advocacy Center of the St.
Luke’s Hospitals is dedicated to providing a child-friendly en-
vironment for the prevention, evaluation, and treatment of
child sexual abuse. Services offered include interviewing serv-
ices, multidisciplinary case reviews, counseling and support
groups for children and their families, a comprehensive track-
ing system, community education, training programs for pro-
fessionals, and medical examinations. The center coordinates
the community’s response to child sexual abuse under one roof,
with the goal of preventing the revictimization of children by
eliminating the need for multiple interviews and visits to sev-
eral agencies.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
271

Parents Anonymous (PA)
The National Organization
675 West Foothill Boulevard, Suite 220
Claremont, CA 91711
Telephone: 909-621-6184
Fax: 909-625-6304
Website: http://www.parentsanonymous.org
Parents Anonymous was founded in 1970 as a national parent
self-help program to prevent child abuse and neglect, with spe-
cialized groups for children. The national organization provides
leadership and support to state and local organizations, which
offer more than 2,100 groups for parents and children; these
groups are offered free of charge to families. Their programs in-
clude parent support groups, parent education workshops, home
visitation services, stressline (stress hotline) services, advocacy,
and public awareness activities. All of these programs are based
on seven guiding principles: mutual assistance, empowerment,
support, ownership, caring, nonviolence, and anonymity and
confidentiality. PA designs and helps to implement new pro-
grams, develops curricula and materials, conducts workshops
and conferences, provides professional consultation services, en-
courages public awareness activities, conducts and encourages
research, and provides information and referral services to par-
ents, professionals, and the general public.
Parents United International, Inc. 
615 15th Street
Modesto, CA 95354
Telephone: 209-572-3446
Fax: 209-524-7780
Website: http://members.tripod.com/~Parents_United
/Chapters/PUI.htm
Parents United is a self-help organization dedicated to assisting
parents, children, and others concerned with child sexual abuse.
It began under the direction of Hank Giarretto and is one of the
best-known national organizations representing the interests of
sexually abused children and their families. It has two associated
programs: Daughters and Sons United, and Adults Molested as
Children United (see separate entries). Members may include of-
fenders, spouses of offenders, children who have been sexually
abused, adults molested as children, and others, including siblings,
272
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

step-parents, parents, and spouses. The organization works
closely with law enforcement, social services, the judicial system,
and other professional agencies. The goal is to help individuals
who have been sexually abused to explore the factors that might
have contributed to the abuse and work through the damage the
abuse caused. Community education is also an important part of
the program.
Pueblo Child Advocacy Center
301 West 15th Street
Pueblo, CO 81003
Telephone: 719-583-6332
The Pueblo Child Advocacy Center is a nonprofit organization es-
tablished in 1986 to break the cycle of sexual and physical child
abuse through intervention and prevention services. The center
works closely with other local agencies to coordinate services
provided to children and their families. These agencies include
police and sheriff’s departments, social services personnel, the
district attorney’s office, mental health professionals, health de-
partment personnel, and medical personnel.  Children are inter-
viewed at the center, medically examined, provided with therapy,
and sometimes prepared for court proceedings. The program is
one of the original six child advocacy centers developed in the
country and is a nationally recognized model program. The cen-
ter offers a setting designed to be warm and nurturing in which
investigations, medical examinations, crisis intervention, victim
assistance, and treatment services are provided. Interagency
problem solving, open communications, and professional skills
development are encouraged and facilitated by the program,
which also encourages community commitment to preventing
the physical and sexual abuse of children. 
Safer Society Foundation, Inc.
P.O. Box 340
Brandon, VT 05733-0340
Telephone: 802-247-3132 
Fax: 802-247-4233
Website: http://www.safersociety.org
A nonprofit organization, Safer Society offers research, advocacy,
and referral services for the prevention and treatment of sexual
abuse throughout the country. They maintain a computerized
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
273

database of agencies, institutions, and individuals who provide
specialized assessment and treatment services for juvenile and
adult sex offenders; a computer file containing those programs
that treat abused children is also maintained. Referrals are made
for individuals and family members to programs, professionals,
and specialized treatment programs throughout the country. The
society conducts specialized training institutes, which are inten-
sive three-day educational workshops, on issues of current im-
portance in the field of sexual abuse prevention and treatment.
Consultation services are provided to states and counties to help
plan and set up comprehensive treatment programs.
Publications: Shining Through: Pulling It Together after Sexual
Abuse, by Mindy Loiselle and Leslie Bailey Wright, a workbook
for young women who have been sexually abused; Female Adoles-
cent Sexual Abusers, by Marcia R. Turner and Tracey N. Turner, an
exploratory study of mothers who molest their daughters; guided
workbooks for adult sex offenders; Women and Men Who Sexually
Abuse Children, by Craig Allen, a comparative study of female and
male abusers; Adults Molested as Children, by Euan Bear, a manual
for adults beginning to remember and face being abused as chil-
dren; and “Mother-Son Incest: The Unthinkable Broken Taboo,” a
literature review of findings on this often ignored subject.
St. Clair Children’s Advocacy Center 
18200 Alabama Highway 174
Pell City, AL 35125
Telephone: 205-338-8847
Fax: 205-338-1979
The St. Clair Children’s Advocacy Center offers programs to chil-
dren who have been physically or sexually abused and to their
families. It offers a forum for agency representatives and profes-
sionals who work with abused children to coordinate their work
to assist the children and their families. Before the Advocacy Cen-
ter was organized, child abuse victims would undergo multiple
interviews to satisfy the needs of the Department of Human Re-
sources, law enforcement officials, the district attorney, and
providers of mental health counseling services. Their program,
the Children’s Place, replaces that system with a united approach,
offering a nonthreatening environment in which children who are
believed to have been sexually or severely physically abused and
their nonoffending family members can go for interviews, evalu-
ation, intervention, evidence gathering, and counseling. The cen-
274
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

ter strives to provide children with a warm, nonthreatening envi-
ronment and someone to talk to about their problems. The pro-
gram also provides training and education for professionals. 
St. Luke’s Regional Medical Center
Children at Risk Evaluation Services (CARES) Program
190 E. Bannock Street
Boise, ID 83712
Telephone: 208-386-3063
Website: http://www.stlukesonline.org/SLCH/services
/CARES/index.html
The Children at Risk Evaluation Services Program was founded
in 1989 in response to the need for a neutral, centralized service
for the assessment and evaluation of children who are alleged vic-
tims of sexual abuse. It provides a comprehensive evaluation of
the alleged abuse by using videotaped interviews conducted by
specially trained registered nurses and audiotaped physical ex-
aminations, conducted by a physician or a pediatric nurse practi-
tioner. The program seeks to minimize the trauma to which child
victims of sexual abuse are exposed. It provides a sensitive, pro-
fessional, and caring environment; expert and comprehensive
evaluation; a cooperative effort with community agencies; a safe,
controlled, and confidential setting for patients and their families;
and a quick response to referrals made to help protect and meet
the needs of children.
Salt Lake County Children’s Justice Center
257 11th Avenue
Salt Lake City, UT 84103
Telephone: 801-355-0781
Fax: 801-355-3578
Website: http://www.cjcslc.org/
The Children’s Justice Center offers a homelike facility in which
to provide services to children who have been sexually or physi-
cally abused. It offers a child-friendly environment, designed to
make children feel safe and comfortable. A multidisciplinary
team coordinates the interview process, assesses the need for sup-
port services, and reviews police investigation results, child pro-
tection issues, medical concerns, treatment issues, and prosecu-
tion concerns. The program offers a comprehensive child and
family interview process, audiotaped and videotaped interviews,
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
275

counseling and treatment referrals, victim-witness support serv-
ices, community education, professional training, support and in-
formation services for parents, case staffings, and assistance and
coordination on difficult cases. They also screen cases for prose-
cution and monitor case progress.
Sexual Abuse Investigative Team (SAINT)
3444 East Bonanza Road
Las Vegas, NV 89101
Telephone: 702-455-5592
Website: http://www.caclasvegas.com/saint.htm
The SAINT program uses a multidisciplinary approach in dealing
with sexual abuse of children to reduce the trauma to child vic-
tims. Members of the multidisciplinary team include law en-
forcement personnel, the district attorney, child protective serv-
ices personnel, medical personnel, and mental health counselors.
The program provides a nonthreatening, child-friendly location
for interviews and medical examinations, reduces the number of
interviewers who question the child, conducts forensically com-
plete medical examinations, and provides crisis intervention, as-
sessment, and referral for long-term therapy. They have a com-
fortable, nonthreatening interview room with a one-way mirror
that allows for observation of the interviews by appropriate pro-
fessionals; audio and videotaping equipment is also available.
Forensic medical examinations are conducted in a brightly deco-
rated room by specially trained medical practitioners, in an effort
to reduce the trauma that sexually abused children experience
when examined in a cold, institutional setting. Therapeutic assis-
tance is provided to the children and their families.
Sexual Assault Recovery Anonymous Society (SARA)
P.O. Box 16
Surrey, BC V3T 4W4 Canada
Telephone: 604-584-2626; toll free: 1-866-SARA
Fax: 604-584-2636
Website: http://www.sarasociety.ca
The Sexual Assault Recovery Anonymous Society believes that
every child who has been sexually abused can heal from the
trauma of that abuse. The program helps those individuals by
providing self-help literature, adult groups, and groups for
teenage girls. They offer public education activities—including
276
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

presentations at local high schools and service clubs and relevant
publications to professionals—and work with other self-help
groups. 
Southern Regional Children’s Advocacy Center
210 Pratt Avenue
Huntsville, AL 35801
Telephone: 256-533-KIDS
Fax: 256-327-3859
Website: http://www.nationalcac.org/professionals/srcac
Established through a grant from the U.S. Department of Justice’s
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, the South-
ern Regional Children’s Advocacy Center provides a variety of
resources to individuals and organizations hoping to develop
their own children’s advocacy center. Information, consulting
services, training, and technical assistance are offered to help
communities determine their capacity to provide services, estab-
lish facilities, prevent trauma to children by limiting the number
of contacts children have with community professionals and the
courts, increase community understanding of child abuse, iden-
tify and develop funding sources, and other activities necessary
for establishing a children’s advocacy center.
Stop Educator Sexual Abuse, Misconduct, and Exploitation
(SESAME)
P.O. Box 94601
Las Vegas, NV 89193
Telephone: 702-371-1290
Website: http://www.sesamenet.org
The SESAME program believes that the imbalance of power be-
tween students and teachers can create an environment that can
lead to a teacher sexually abusing a student. This national pro-
gram works to prevent sexual exploitation, abuse, and harassment
of students by teachers and other school administrators and staff.
Activities include increasing public awareness; encouraging re-
covery of victims through support and newsletters; encouraging
victims to report their abuse to the proper authorities; advocating
for implementation of sexual harassment policies, regulations,
and laws for the protection of students; and promoting adoption
of professional standards and codes of ethics to which teachers
and other school administrators and staff should subscribe.
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
277

Stop It Now!
351 Pleasant Street
Northampton, MA 01060
Telephone: 413-587-3500
Fax: 413-587-3505
Website: http://www.stopitnow.org
This program is concerned with ending the sexual abuse of chil-
dren through the use of public advocacy. It was founded on the
principle that our society has the ability to challenge unwanted
human behaviors and to change them through intelligent use of
mass media. While they believe that children should be warned
and trained to prevent their own sexual abuse, this program’s
focus is to put the burden of stopping the sexual abuse of children
on the shoulders of adults. They also believe that, because most
experts agree that a large proportion of sexual abusers can and
will stop their harmful behavior if they are reached and are pro-
vided with good treatment programs, society must hold them re-
sponsible for their criminal behavior and expect them to change.
Their Reach Out program works to stop abuse by challenging of-
fenders to stop their abuse and seek treatment, helping to identify
potential abusers and encouraging them to seek help, empower-
ing family and friends to confront the abuser, and creating a so-
cial climate in this country that will not tolerate the sexual abuse
of children. They use op-ed articles, a speakers’ bureau, talk
shows, television and radio public service announcements, mag-
azine articles, and slogans to educate the public about childhood
sexual abuse.
Survivor Connections, Inc.
52 Lyndon Road
Cranston, RI 02905
Telephone: 401-941-2548
Fax: 401-941-2335
Website: http://members.cox.net/survivorconnections
Survivor Connections was started in 1993 by Frank Fitzpatrick for
survivors of sexual abuse perpetrated by Catholic priest James
Porter. Over time, Fitzpatrick and others realized the great need
of all survivors of sexual abuse for information and support. The
organization created the first database of reported sexual offend-
ers in 1993. 
278
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

Survivors Network of Those Abused by Priests (SNAP)
P.O. Box 6416
Chicago, IL 60680
Telephone: 877-762-7432
Website: http://www.snapnetwork.org
Survivors Network of Those Abused by Priests is the oldest,
largest, and most active support group for individuals who have
been abused by religious authority figures, including priests,
ministers, bishops, deacons, and nuns. Founded in 1989 by Bar-
bara Blaine, SNAP has helped thousands of survivors and offers
support services over the phone, online through their website,
and at national meetings held two times each year. Their website
is full of helpful news and information concerning sexual abuse.
Survivors of Incest Anonymous
World Service Office
P.O. Box 190
Benson, MD 21018-9998
Telephone: 410-893-3322
Website: http://www.siawso.org
Survivors of Incest Anonymous is a twelve-step program organ-
ized to help incest survivors and their family members, spouses,
and friends recover from their incest experiences. They have
taken the Twelve Steps and Twelve Traditions from Alcoholics
Anonymous and adapted them to incest. In their meetings they
seek understanding, acceptance, forgiveness, and serenity. They
strive to recognize the negative behavior patterns they developed
in childhood in order to survive their experiences and develop a
new, more positive way of life.
VOICES in Action 
8041 Hosbrook Road, Suite 236
Cincinnati, OH 45236
Telephone: 800-7-VOICE-8 (800-786-4238)
Website: http://www.voices-action.org
VOICES (Victims of Incest Can Emerge Survivors) is a nonprofit
organization founded in 1980 as a self-help group providing sup-
port for victims of incest and child sexual abuse. The program’s
goals are to help victims of incest and child sexual abuse become
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies
279

survivors and to educate the public in the area of child sexual
abuse, its prevalence and impact, and ways to prevent it. VOICES
serves as a clearinghouse for the gathering and disseminating of
information regarding incest; it works to help victims find support
in their efforts to move from victim to survivor, fosters programs
that reflect the needs of incest victims, generates public-awareness
activities and educational programs, facilitates research in the
field of child sexual abuse, and offers programs to make the pub-
lic aware of the importance of prevention and education.
Women Incested Needing Group Support (WINGS)
WINGS Foundation, Inc.
8725 W. 14th Street, Suite 150
Lakewood, CO 80215
Telephone: 303-238-8660; 800-373-8671
Fax: 303-238-8482
Website: http://www.wingsfound.org
Women Incested Needing Group Support is a nonprofit organi-
zation founded in 1982 by survivors of incest. The group is dedi-
cated to helping women tackle the issue of sexual abuse and start
the healing process. It is a peer support group whose goal is to
foster a confidential and caring environment in which members
can share experiences and learn from each other. WINGS offers a
clearinghouse for information on psychotherapists specializing in
treating sexual abuse, weekly support group meetings, a sexual
abuse handbook, organized social and recreational activities, a
speakers’ bureau, and assistance in starting WINGS groups in
local areas.
280
Directory of Organizations, Associations, and Agencies

8
Selected Print and
Nonprint Resources
T
his chapter contains descriptions of recently published books,
handbooks, manuals, journal articles, and training guides on
childhood sexual abuse. Because so many books and journal
articles have been published recently, this chapter contains a rep-
resentative sample on various topics within this field. By no
means is it a comprehensive listing of the current literature. Also
included here are nonprint resources including films, videocas-
settes, DVDs, and other sources of information.
Books
Ainscough, Carolyn, and Kay Toon. 2000. Surviving Childhood
Sexual Abuse: Practical Self-Help for Adults Who Were Sexually
Abused as Children. Rev. ed. Cambridge, MA: De Capo. ISBN
1–5556–1225–3.
Ainscough and Toon offer practical advice to adults who were
sexually abused as children. They explain how understanding the
past is key to surviving the experience. Chapters focus on the
damage caused by abuse; anxiety, fears, and nightmares resulting
from the abuse; emotional effects such as depression and low self-
esteem; eating disorders and negative body image often experi-
enced by victims of childhood sexual abuse; feelings the victim
experienced against the  abuser; how to overcome the problems
281

created by the abuse; and suggestions for ways to prevent child
sexual abuse.
Anderson, Orieda Horn, and Shirley Paceley. 2003. Safe Begin-
nings: Protecting Our Children from Sexual Abuse. Decatur, IL:
Blue Tower Training Center. ISBN 1–9315–6820–0.
Anderson and Paceley, who were sexually abused as children,
speak from personal experience as they describe strategies for
protecting children from being sexually abused. Individual
chapters cover attitudes about sexuality, key skills to help chil-
dren develop a healthy self-concept and help protect them, the
different messages that society sends boys and girls in which
girls are seen as victims, ways in which to create a safe environ-
ment, strategies that managers and administrators can employ to
create safe environments for children in group settings, and
symptoms of child abuse. The importance of keeping children
safe once they get into school, the importance of participating in
child advocacy efforts, and ways in which parents can protect
their children are also discussed.
Angelica, Jade Christine. 2002. We Are Not Alone: A Guidebook
for Helping Professionals and Parents Supporting Adolescent
Victims of Sexual Abuse. Binghamton, NY: Haworth [Haworth
Maltreatment and Trauma Press]. ISBN 0–7890–0924–2.
In 1990, Angelica was asked by the Child Abuse Project of the
Middlesex County, Massachusetts, district attorney’s office to de-
velop a court-oriented resource for children who had been sexu-
ally abused and were in the criminal justice system. This book
grew out of that assignment. Angelica aims to help guide children
who have been sexually abused through the social services and
criminal justice systems. She describes the criminal justice sys-
tem, reasons for becoming involved with the criminal justice sys-
tem, cases accepted for prosecution, typical evidence, inherent
barriers for child victims, courtroom modifications, and prepar-
ing the victims for trial. The importance of understanding the vic-
tims is explored. Part 2 explores social service and criminal justice
policies and procedures, as well as the importance and use of
multidisciplinary teams. In Part 3, adolescent victims share their
experiences. Finally, Part 4 guides adolescent victims through the
adjudication process.
282
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Arnaldo, Carlos A., ed. 2001. Child Abuse on the Internet: Ending
the Silence. New York: Berghahn. ISBN 1–57181–245–8.
Based on presentations made during the international conference
on Sexual Abuse of Children, Child Pornography and Pedophilia
on the Internet, sponsored by UNESCO in 1999, this book exam-
ines the impact that the Internet has made on the market for the
sexual exploitation of children. Part 1 examines the sexual abuse
of children; the sociological, psychological, and legal aspects of
child pornography and pedophilia; and their presence on the In-
ternet. Part 2 explores the strategies employed by governments,
individuals, parents, NGOs, and other organizations to combat
the problems faced by children on the Internet. Part 3 provides
the Declaration and Plan of Action adopted by conference partic-
ipants, as well as other useful information on follow-up activities.
Baker, Robert A., ed. 1998. Child Sexual Abuse and False Memory
Syndrome. Amherst, NY: Prometheus. ISBN 1–5739–2182–3.
Psychologist Robert Baker has gathered contributors who exam-
ine the controversies surrounding false memories of child sexual
abuse. Part 1 examines memory and its recovery, including chil-
dren’s memories of stressful events. Part 2 looks at repression
and amnesia, including a review of the literature and whether
memories of childhood sexual abuse can be repressed. Part 3 ex-
plores hypnosis, suggestion, and iatrogenesis, including the va-
lidity of repressed memories, a case study of an actual court case,
and the process of retrieving memories. In Part 4, professional
problems and ethical issues are examined, including the reliabil-
ity of children’s statements, avoiding false claims of child sexual
abuse, and ethical issues for the family therapist. Part 5 focuses
on research and legal implications, and the final part summa-
rizes the information and discusses suggestions for future re-
search and actions.
Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis. 1994. The Courage to Heal: A Guide
for Women Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse. 3d ed. New York:
Harper-Perennial. ISBN 0–0609–5066–8.
When Ellen Bass and Laura Davis originally wrote this book, first
published in 1988, little information was available about the sex-
ual abuse of children, and no real support was available for adult
Books
283

survivors. Few therapists knew much about sexual abuse, and
there were even fewer support groups available for adult sur-
vivors. This book was, and still is, an excellent resource for infor-
mation related to sexual abuse. Topics covered include recogniz-
ing the damage that the sexual abuse has done, learning how to
cope, deciding to heal, remembering the abuse, telling someone
about the abuse, understanding that it was not the victim’s fault,
grieving, mourning, anger, disclosure, and forgiveness. The au-
thors discuss how to change past patterns with regard to feelings,
intimacy, sex, children, parenting, and counseling. Several stories
of survivors are presented to help the reader understand that
other women have been sexually abused, that they are not alone,
and that they can heal.
Bolen, Rebecca M. 2001. Child Sexual Abuse: Its Scope and
Our Failure. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum. ISBN
0–306–46576–0.
Bolen set out to provide a comprehensive review of the empirical
literature on child sexual abuse. As her research evolved, how-
ever, she realized that the book would not be complete unless she
examined the discrepancies between the current knowledge base
and the professional response to child sexual abuse. Part 1 pro-
vides a historical overview of child sexual abuse and an exami-
nation of the prominent theories regarding its cause and treat-
ment. Part 2 reviews the empirical knowledge base, including
incidence and prevalence, extrafamilial and intrafamilial abuse,
risk factors, and offending and nonoffending guardians. Part 3
examines the professional response to child sexual abuse. The
book’s intended audience includes professionals in the fields of
law enforcement, government, medicine, and mental health.
Boston Globe Investigative Staff. 2003. Betrayal: The Crisis in the
Catholic Church. New York: Back Bay. ISBN 0–3167–7675–0.
Reporters for the Boston Globe broke the sexual abuse scandal in
the Boston archdiocese of the Catholic Church in January 2002.
This book details the story of the abuse and the cover-up by
Church officials. Beginning with the story of Father John Ge-
oghan and his abuse of young boys in the Church, the book pro-
vides an intriguing, behind-the-scenes look at the Catholic
Church, the investigations conducted by the Church, detailed
284
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

descriptions of the priests and where they were sent following
initial allegations of abuse were raised, and those in authority
who knew about the abuse. The issues of whether a large number
of priests are involved in sexually abusing young children and, if
so, why they abuse children are explored.
Brohl, Kathryn, and Joyce Case Potter. 2004. When Your Child Has
Been Molested: A Parents’ Guide to Healing and Recovery. Rev.
ed. New York: Jossey-Bass. ISBN 0–7879–7103–0.
As the title implies, Brohl wrote this book to provide a guide to
help parents of children who have been sexually abused. She
takes parents through the process from first learning that a child
has been molested to professional treatment and support, the
forensic interview, and the judicial process. Parents are provided
with additional information concerning working with a coun-
selor, understanding grief, helping the child to recover, the im-
pact on family members, dealing with extended family members,
and strengthening family communications.
Brown, Alyson, and David Barrett. 2002. Knowledge of Evil:
Child Prostitution and Child Sexual Abuse in Twentieth Century
England. Portland, OR: Willan. ISBN 1–9032–4063–8.
Brown and Barrett examine child prostitution in England be-
tween the 1880s and the 1980s. They view child prostitution as a
form of child sexual abuse and pull together a variety of primary
sources, including archival records and contemporary newspa-
pers, to explore this topic. Topics include the socioeconomic con-
texts within which child prostitution occurs and the negative
views and assumptions toward children who are involved in
prostitution.
Butler, Edgar W., Hiroshi Fukurai, Jo-Ellan Dimitrius, and
Richard Krooth. 2001. Anatomy of the McMartin Child Molesta-
tion Case. Lanham, MD: University Press of America. ISBN
0–7618–1983–5.
The authors provide a detailed analysis of the McMartin day-care
sexual molestation case, examining the children’s stories, the
charges, the trial, the verdicts, and the aftermath. The book re-
veals how society and the criminal justice system dealt with the
children, their parents, and the day-care providers, all in the
Books
285

search for justice. The authors raise critical questions about the
criminal justice system, the behavior of the mass media, and the
input and effectiveness of the therapists and other helping pro-
fessionals. Individual chapters focus on the evolution of charges,
the pretrial publicity, preliminary hearings, pretrial events prior
to the first trial, impaneling the jury, the first trial, the jurors and
their verdicts, the aftermath, the second McMartin trial, the con-
stitutional rights of both the child abuse victims and the alleged
perpetrators, and reform of the system.
Campbell, Terrence W. 1998. Smoke and Mirrors: The Devastat-
ing Effect of False Sexual Abuse Claims. New York: Insight. ISBN
0–3064–5984–1.
False allegations of child sexual abuse have consistently attracted
a great deal of news media attention and have had a disastrous ef-
fect on the lives of all involved—from the families of those alleg-
ing the abuse to those accused of committing the abuse. Part 1 ex-
amines these false allegations, focusing on the origins of false
allegations, interviewing or indoctrinating children, misinterpre-
tations, and the persuasiveness of play therapy. Part 2 explores
claims of repressed memories, whether they are science fiction or
scientific fact, and the creation of repressed memories.
Ceci, Stephen J., and Helene Hembrooke. 2001. Expert Witnesses
in Child Abuse Cases: What Can and Should Be Said in Court.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. ISBN
1–55798–515–4.
The editors have gathered together lawyers, psychologists, and
social workers to discuss various aspects of expert witness testi-
mony and provide recommendations on the proper role of expert
witnesses in cases of child abuse. Part 1 provides an overview of
the use of expert witnesses, comparing the use of such witnesses
and ethical standards for psychologists who serve as expert wit-
nesses. Part 2 examines the actual experience of expert witnesses,
including those used in child sexual abuse cases. Part 3 discusses
the types of evidence offered in cases of alleged child abuse, its
admissibility, and the effects of this testimony. Finally, Part 4 sum-
marizes the usefulness of the expert witnesses and current
thoughts in the field, including a discussion of the impact of
Daubert on child sexual abuse prosecutions.
286
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Cling, B. J., ed. 2004. Sexualized Violence against Women and
Children: A Psychology and Law Perspective. New York: Guil-
ford. ISBN 1–5938–5061–1.
Contributors to this volume provide information on the nature,
prevalence, and psychological consequences of a variety of ac-
tions, including rape, stalking, sexual harassment, and child sex-
ual abuse. Part 1 examines sexualized violence against women.
Part 2 explores sexualized violence against children, and includes
a discussion of recovered memories of sexual abuse. Part 3 fo-
cuses on the sexual offenders, and includes contributions on man-
aging and treating the sexual offender, Megan’s Law, and mater-
nal violence.
Conte, Jon R., ed. 2002. Critical Issues in Child Sexual Abuse:
Historical, Legal, and Psychological Perspectives. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage. ISBN 0–7619–0911–7.
Written in part as a tribute to Roland Summit, this volume in-
cludes articles from six contributors who discuss the impact of
Summit’s ideas in the field of child sexual abuse. Chapter 1 pro-
vides an in-depth interview with Summit, who presents an
overview of child sexual abuse as he sees it. The following chap-
ters discuss prosecution of child sexual abusers, historical per-
spectives and views of child sexual abuse prior to the 1980s and
1990s, when Summit began examining this type of abuse, expert
testimony, recovered memories of child sexual abuse, and ap-
proaches to treatment in dissociative identity disorder patients.
Cossins, Anne. 2000. Masculinities, Sexualities, and Child Sexual
Abuse. Boston: Kluwer Law International. ISBN 90–411–1355–X.
Cossins examines the issue of why most child sexual abuse acts
are committed by men and male adolescents against female and
male children. She believes that existing theories don’t ade-
quately explain why men typically are the offenders. Cossins be-
lieves that an offender’s relationship with other men, and
whether he experiences powerlessness as a result, is the key to
understanding why he chooses to abuse children sexually, since
sexuality is a key social practice for alleviating feelings of pow-
erlessness and for establishing relations of power with other
men. Specifically, the theory argues that the extent to which a
Books
287

man believes in the relationship between sexuality and experi-
ences of masculinity and power will be a key variable in deter-
mining whom he chooses as a sexual partner. Individual chap-
ters focus on the male problem of child sexual offending, current
explanations of child sexual abuse, a sociological theory, and a
test of the power/powerlessness theory. Cossins concludes that
“child sex offending needs to be tackled as a relatively wide-
spread social problem, rather than a rare and aberrant type of
sexual behavior committed by a handful of men” (p. 260).
Courtois, Christine A. 1996. Healing the Incest Wound: Adult
Survivors in Therapy. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN
0–393–31356–5.
Courtois offers specific knowledge and guidelines for clinicians
and therapists to help adults recovering from incest. Part 1 pro-
vides a general overview of incest, by category, type, characteris-
tics, and individual and family dynamics. Part 2 explores the
symptoms exhibited by adults who experienced incest as children,
as well as the long-term secondary effects, using four different the-
ories: traumatic stress or victimization theory, developmental the-
ory, feminist theory, and loss theory. Part 3 discusses the relevant
issues and strategies employed in treating incest victims.
Davies, Graham M., and Tim Dalgleish, eds. 2001. Recovered
Memories: Seeking the Middle Ground. New York: John Wiley
and Sons. ISBN 0–471–49132–2.
Davies, Dalgleish, and the other contributors to this volume offer
a well-balanced examination of the issues surrounding recovered
memories. Part 1 explores the social aspects, including a sociohis-
torical perspective; effects of recovered memories on the individ-
ual, the family, and the community; and legal dilemmas. Part 2
examines the evidential aspects, including case-based analyses of
authentic and fabricated discovered memories and an analysis of
whether it is possible to distinguish between true and false mem-
ories. Part 3 looks at the clinical aspects, including therapeutic
techniques, clinicians’ beliefs and practices, practice-based guide-
lines, and functional memory loss. Part 4 offers concluding com-
ments.
De Young, Mary. 2004. The Day Care Ritual Abuse Moral Panic.
Jefferson, NC: McFarland. ISBN 0–7864–1830–3.
288
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

De Young, a university sociologist, offers the reader a sociological
analysis of the day-care ritual abuse panic that began in the
United States in the mid-1980s. She introduces the concept of
“moral panic” and applies it to the ritual abuse scare. The ideo-
logical, political, and economic forces that led to the panic are ex-
plored, along with the importance of the McMartin day-care case
as the precipitating incident that brought ritual abuse to the pub-
lic’s attention. The interest groups that played a role in the growth
of the panic, the spread of the panic to foreign countries, and the
outcome are also discussed.
Denov, Myriam S. 2004. Perspectives on Female Sexual Offend-
ing: A Culture of Denial. Aldershot, England: Ashgate. ISBN
0–7546–3565–1.
In her examination of female sexual offenders, Denov conducted
in-depth interviews with fifteen survivors of sexual abuse,
twelve police officers, and ten psychiatrists in two Canadian
cities, and she was a participant observer for three months with
a police sexual assault unit. This book explores the results of that
research. Denov believes that sexual abuse by women is under-
reported, and this under-reporting has negative consequences
for the children victimized. She provides a framework for un-
derstanding the reasons why people find it difficult to believe
that women can and do sexually abuse children. Police also may
have a difficult time in proving the abuse: traditionally, evidence
of sexual abuse includes sperm, DNA, penetration—all male-
oriented pieces of evidence. Denov also discusses the view of
many police officers as well as psychiatrists that female sexual
offenders are often seen as harmless and not a threat to society.
In her final chapter, Denov argues that sexual offenses commit-
ted by women are frequently overlooked or minimized, and
must be examined in more depth.
Dokecki, Paul R. 2004. The Clergy Sexual Abuse Crisis: Reform
and Renewal in the Catholic Community. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press. ISBN 1–58901–006–X.
Dokecki analyzes the sexual abuse scandal plaguing the Catholic
Church by examining clergy sexual abuse through the actions of
the priest/abuser and the organizational process of the Church—
specifically, the use and abuse of power. He uses the McKeown
case as a starting point: McKeown was a priest who served in
Books
289

several parishes throughout Tennessee, admitted to sexually mo-
lesting approximately thirty boys, and was first sent to St. Luke’s
Institute and then to the Hartford Institute for Living for treat-
ment. Dokecki examines McKeown’s story and then explores
clergy sexual abuse in a historical, cultural, and organizational
context. He looks at the use and abuse of power exhibited by
many Church officials, the various theories of human behavior,
and ecclesiastical perspectives of the clergy sexual abuse system,
and offers recommendations on ways in which to reform Church
governance and policies to prevent child sexual abuse.
Dorais, Michel. 2002. Don’t Tell: The Sexual Abuse of Boys. Trans-
lated from French by Isabel Denholm Meyer. Montreal: McGill-
Queen’s University Press. ISBN 0–7735–2261–1.
While many books have been written about the sexual abuse of
girls, fewer focus on sexual abuse of boys. Written in part to help
professionals become more aware of the characteristics and dy-
namics of the sexual abuse of boys, Dorais presents the detailed
stories of twelve boys who experienced sexual abuse; each de-
scribes a different type of sexual abuse and the boy’s reactions to
it. Dorais offers a glimpse into the devastating impact of sexual
abuse on its victims.
Durham, Andrew. 2003. Young Men Surviving Child Sexual
Abuse: Research Stories and Lessons for Therapeutic Practice.
New York: John Wiley and Sons. ISBN 0–4708–4459–0.
Durham focuses on the experiences of young boys who were sex-
ually abused as children, using their stories to examine the im-
pact of their experiences on their lives as well as on society as a
whole. Part 1 examines the theoretical and social context of child
sexual abuse, facts and myths regarding sexual abuse of boys,
and the development of a sensitive approach to researching child
sexual abuse. Part 2 offers the young men’s stories, while Part 3
examines the implications for treatment.
Faller, K. C. 2003. Understanding and Assessing Child
Sexual Maltreatment. 2d ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. ISBN
0–7619–1997–X.
Faller provides a comprehensive review of the multiple skills and
knowledge that are needed by child protection workers and other
professionals working with children, specifically children who
290
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

have been sexually abused. Chapters focus on definitions and
signs of abuse, the importance of collaboration with other profes-
sionals and services, assessment strategies, children’s memory is-
sues, and allegations of sexual abuse in day-care and foster-care
settings, as well as in divorce situations.
Finkel, Martin A., and Angelo P. Giardino. 2001. Medical Evalua-
tion of Child Sexual Abuse: A Practical Guide. 2d ed. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage. ISBN 0–7619–2082–X.
A basic reference manual for the medical evaluation of children
who are suspected of having been sexually abused, this book ex-
amines the physical examination and diagnosis of sexually
abused children, interviewing children, collecting evidence for
criminal investigations, and documenting examinations. Addi-
tional chapters focus on legal issues, collecting forensic evidence,
issues specific to nurses, and the special needs of adolescents.
France, David. 2004. Our Fathers: The Secret Life of the Catholic
Church in an Age of Scandal. New York: Broadway. ISBN
0–7679–1430–9. Bibliography, Index.
As a senior editor at Newsweek, France covered the emerging sto-
ries of the sexual abuse of children by priests in the Catholic
Church. In this book, France provides a historical view of the
Church, beginning in the 1950s, to answer the question of how
widespread the abuse scandal was and how the Church could
have let this abuse happen. He takes the reader through a chrono-
logical account of priest after priest who was charged with sexu-
ally abusing children and how individuals within the Church hi-
erarchy reacted.
Hagood, Maralynn M. 2000. Art Therapy Sex Abuse. Philadel-
phia: Jessica Kingsley. ISBN 1–8530–2228–4.
Hagood offers a comprehensive examination of the use of art
therapy in counseling children who have been sexually abused.
She discusses the various models that have been proposed and
tested in the field, and describes successful applications. The use
of art in counseling for various audiences is discussed, including
counseling sexually abused children, mothers of sexually abused
children, adult survivors, and adolescent sex offenders. She de-
scribes the dangers of interpreting artwork in diagnosing issues
of concern to sexually abused children.
Books
291

Hammel-Zabin, Amy. 2003. Conversations with a Pedophile: In
the Interest of Our Children. Fort Lee, NJ: Barricade. ISBN
1–56980–247–5.
Dr. Hammel-Zabin met Alan, a pedophile, while working as a
music therapist in the maximum security prison where Alan was
incarcerated, serving several life sentences for sexually abusing
young boys. In a series of letters to Hammel-Zabin—letters that
can help parents and the general public spot warning signs and
prevent child sexual abuse—Alan describes the steps he took to
locate a child. Abused by her father and grandfather as a young
child, Hammel-Zabin reflects on his descriptions of what he has
done, as well as on her own experiences of incest. She believes
that the only way to prevent pedophilia is to understand it.
Jenkins, Philip. 2001. Beyond Tolerance: Child Pornography On-
line. New York: New York University Press. ISBN 0–8147–4262–9.
Jenkins examines the online subculture of child pornography
from the view of the participants themselves, primarily using in-
formation posted on message boards that cater to individuals at-
tempting to gather pornographic images of young children. Jenk-
ins, focusing on men who are attracted to adolescent or
prepubescent girls, examines efforts to regulate Internet content,
explores the reasons why society generally does not believe that
the online threats to children are serious, and explores the online
child pornography subculture and theories of deviance. Individ-
ual chapters focus on the concept of child pornography; the or-
ganization of the online subculture, including newsgroups on
Usenet, storyboards, interest groups, and bulletin boards; the
structure of the online community; rationalizations that users cre-
ate to justify their activities; responses of law enforcement and
private organizations; the global reach of the online subculture;
and ways to reduce online child pornography.
Johnston, Moira. 1998. Spectral Evidence: The Ramona Case: In-
cest, Memory, and Truth in Napa Valley. Boulder, CO: Westview.
ISBN 0–8133–3587–6.
Johnston tells the story of how Holly Ramona, when she was
nineteen years old, began to have flashbacks—memories of being
raped by her father—and the ensuing accusations and lawsuits.
Marche Isabella and Richard Rose, Holly Ramona’s therapists, set
up a meeting with Gary Ramona, Holly’s father, in which Isabella
292
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

and Gary’s wife, Stephanie, confronted Gary about the abuse.
Johnston takes the reader through the flashbacks, the confronta-
tion, the lawsuit, and all of the repercussions from these recov-
ered memories. She shows how the family was destroyed by the
accusations, and describes the lawsuits that Holly filed against
her father and the malpractice case that he filed against the ther-
apists.
Kempe, Ruth S., and C. Henry Kempe. 1984. The Common Secret:
Sexual Abuse of Children and Adolescents. New York: W. H. Free-
man. ISBN 0–8147–4262–9. References, index.
Ruth and Henry Kempe, long known for their work with abused
and neglected children, wrote this book to help readers—students,
nurses, physicians, teachers, ministers, priests, lawyers, legisla-
tors, and the general public—understand the extent of child sex-
ual abuse and the major issues surrounding it. Chapters provide
information on definitions and incidence, extrafamilial sexual
abuse, incest, legal aspects, comprehensive first aid after child-
hood sexual abuse, evaluation and treatment of extrafamilial sex-
ual abuse, evaluation and treatment of incest, the effects of abuse
on children and adolescents, and ways in which to prevent child
sexual abuse. Appendices provide information on a model crimi-
nal diversion program, forms for evaluation and case records, and
educational materials on child sexual abuse. The authors have in-
cluded examples from case histories throughout the book.
Kitzinger, Jenny. 2004. Framing Abuse: Media Influence and Pub-
lic Understanding to Sexual Violence against Children. London:
Pluto. ISBN 0–7453–2331–6.
Many people believe that the mass media shape our perceptions
of how we think about things, that certain stories attract our at-
tention, that journalists use a variety of strategies to persuade us
to respond in certain ways. Kitzinger has provided insight into
the media influence through interviews with 500 journalists, cam-
paigners, survivors of sexual abuse, and the public, using sexual
abuse of children as a case study. Chapters examine the news
media’s role in contemporary society, feminist initiatives chal-
lenging sexual violence, the emergence of incest as a social prob-
lem, stereotypes of sexual abusers, the role of media in commu-
nity notification laws, and the impact of disputed allegations of
abuse.
Books
293

Koenig, Linda J., Lynda S. Doll, Ann O’Leary, and Willo Pequeg-
nat, eds. 2003. From Child Sexual Abuse to Adult Sexual Risk:
Trauma, Revictimization, and Intervention. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. ISBN 1–59147–030–7.
The editors have gathered a wide variety of experts and re-
searchers in the field to examine the latest research into the effects
of child sexual abuse on adult sexual health. They explore the the-
ory that children who have been sexually abused are more likely
to participate in risky sexual behavior as adults and, as a result,
may experience negative reproductive and sexual health prob-
lems, including sexually transmitted diseases, HIV infection, un-
wanted pregnancy, and adult sexual violence. Individual authors
explore the theory and research of the epidemiology and trauma
of child sexual abuse, as well as resulting sexual health and risk
behaviors as adults. The final chapter suggests areas for future re-
search.
Krane, Julia. 2003. What’s Mother Got to Do with It? Protecting
Children from Sexual Abuse. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
ISBN 0–8020–0958–1.
This book examines the social relations that form the basis of
child welfare practices that aim to protect children from child sex-
ual abuse—specifically, the fact that women are held responsible
for the welfare of their children and are often blamed when they
are unable to protect them. Krane conducted in-depth interviews
of seven female social workers and eight nonoffending mothers
from a particular child welfare agency in Ontario, Canada. Four
additional nonoffending women are discussed, even though they
weren’t interviewed. Offenders were related to the women in a
variety of ways: as current or former husbands, a common-law
partner or his brother or nephew, son, adoptive grandson, son’s
friend, and daughter-in-law’s husband. Victims included sixteen
female and one male child. Krane presents the results of her
study, including a review of the child welfare literature, the statu-
tory issues, and the processes of protecting children, including
legal and therapeutic practices, that rely on mothers as protectors
of their children.
La Fontaine, Jean. 1998. Speak of the Devil: Tales of Satanic
Abuse in Contemporary England. New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. ISBN 0–521–62934–9.
294
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

In the early 1980s, allegations of satanic abuse in day-care settings
began to appear in the United States. By the end of the 1980s, sim-
ilar allegations surfaced in Great Britain. La Fontaine, an anthro-
pologist, was asked by the Department of Health in Great Britain
to examine the allegations of satanic abuse, and this book de-
scribes her research and findings. She reviews the geographic dis-
tribution of these allegations between 1987 and 1992. She reviews
the lack of evidence available to support the allegations, the role
of social workers and children in perpetuating the scare, and the
role that the adults played in creating these alleged memories, ei-
ther through selective interpretation of innocent remarks or sug-
gestive interviewing.
Levesque, Roger J. R. 1999. Sexual Abuse of Children: A Human
Rights Perspective. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN
0–253–33471–3.
Levesque, who is a lawyer and a psychologist, brings a unique
perspective to an examination of child sexual abuse—specifically,
how human rights law can provide an understanding of what can
be done to protect children from child sexual abuse. Chapters ex-
plore child sexual maltreatment across world cultures, the global
human rights revolution, deconstructing childhood and sexual
maltreatment, and various forms of sexual maltreatment. Offend-
ers, both adult and juvenile, are examined. Levesque looks at the
ways in which different types of abuse across cultures can be
linked with one another, and how differing social views of chil-
dren may put them at risk for sexual abuse.
Lew, Mike. 2004. Victims No Longer: The Classic Guide for Men
Recovering from Sexual Child Abuse. Rev. ed. New York: Harper-
Collins. ISBN 0–06–053026–X.
Written as a handbook for men recovering from childhood incest
and other types of sexual abuse, and for the people who care
about these men, this book is intended to reach a wide audience.
Lew also wanted to provide a framework in which healing can
take place, show people that recovery is possible, start people
thinking about and discussing childhood sexual abuse, and share
some of the experiences of men in recovery to help others just be-
ginning on that road. Chapters include a discussion of the myths
and realities of incest, messages about masculinity that often
make it difficult for men to admit that they were sexually abused
Books
295

as children, men and feelings, sexuality and homosexuality,
strategies for survival, forgetting, denying, distancing, pretend-
ing, numbing, self-image, self-esteem, telling the secret, relation-
ships and the importance of social support, individual and group
counseling, forgiving and forgetting, and moving on. An ex-
panded list of resources is provided in this revised edition.
Mather, Cynthia, and Kristina E. Debye. 2004. How Long Does It
Hurt? A Guide to Recovering from Incest and Sexual Abuse for
Teenagers, Their Friends, and Their Families. Rev. ed. San Fran-
cisco: Jossey-Bass. ISBN 0–7879–7569–9. Bibliography, index.
As a survivor of child sexual abuse, Mather speaks from first-
hand experience of the wide range of feelings that a sexually
abused child experiences, including the confusion, fear, sadness,
and despair encountered by many children. In Part 1 she focuses
on the abuse itself, if it was really abuse, and Internet sex crimes.
Part 2 focuses on telling someone about the abuse, including
chapters on telling someone, what people will say, what is hap-
pening to the child, living with the child’s family after the story
comes out, and going to court. Part 3 looks at healing, forgive-
ness, and sexuality. Finally, Part 4 provides information regarding
offenders, what friends of victims need to know, and what some
survivors would like everyone to know. 
Miller, Alice. 1986. Thou Shalt Not Be Aware: Society’s Betrayal
of the Child. Translated by Hildegarde and Hunter Hannum.
New York: Meridian. ISBN 0–253–33471–3. Bibliography.
Dr. Miller, in this groundbreaking book, presents her premise that
sexually abused children have obeyed the dictum “Thou shalt not
be aware,” believing that they are to blame for what happened to
them. Miller argues that therapists have harmed those they have
treated by trying to make them fit neatly into popular psycholog-
ical theories, instead of listening to and learning from them. She
argues that therapists must start listening to the children, and
must identify with them, in order to understand them. Therapists
must become advocates for their clients instead of representing
current societal theories and values. They must not spare the par-
ents at any cost, but must understand the ways in which sexuality
can be used to control or have power over those weaker in society.
296
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Moffatt, Gregory K. 2003. Wounded Innocents and Fallen Angels:
Child Abuse and Child Aggression. Westport, CT: Greenwood.
ISBN 0–275–97848–6.
When children are abused, including when they are sexually
abused, research has shown that they may become aggressive
against adults, other children, or personal property belonging to
themselves or others. Written for professionals, including coun-
selors, teachers, and psychologists, as well as for the general
public, this book explores crimes against children and the result-
ing aggressive behavior that those children may exhibit. Follow-
ing a description of three child abuse cases that made headlines
throughout the country, Part 1 explores the prevalence of child
abuse, the prevalence and effects of Munchausen Syndrome by
proxy, physical and emotional abuse and neglect, child sexual
abuse, child abduction, and treating victimized children. Indi-
vidual case studies are presented, describing the experiences of
abuse and the short- and long-term effects of the abuse. Part 2 of
the book focuses on the aggressive and violent actions of chil-
dren who have been abused, discussing how these children be-
come bullies, murderers, or sexual predators, or how they may
destroy their own property or the property of others. Finally,
Moffatt offers specific strategies for treating such children, as
well as suggesting the role that parents, medical personnel, and
religious communities can play in treating and preventing child
abuse.
Murphy, Jenny. 2001. Art Therapy with Young Survivors of Sex-
ual Abuse: Lost for Words. New York: Taylor and Francis. ISBN
0–415–20571–9. Index.
Murphy offers a practical guide to working with children who
have been sexually abused, using art therapy as a valuable tool
in helping them to heal. Part 1 focuses on the therapeutic rela-
tionship in context, including male therapist countertransference
and how assessment using art and play therapy can help chil-
dren disclose sexual abuse. In Part 2, Murphy explores working
with individuals, including using the reflective image, use of
sand and water, a developmental approach to art therapy, and a
case study. Part 3 focuses on experiences with art therapy in
groups.
Books
297

Noblitt, James Randall, and Pamela Sue Perskin. 2000. Cult and
Ritual Abuse: Its History, Anthropology, and Recent Discovery
in Contemporary America. Rev. ed. Westport, CT: Praeger. ISBN
0–275–96664–X.
Allegations of child sexual abuse as part of ritual abuse were
often headlines in the 1980s and 1990s. While allegations of abuse
in these settings have dropped off, they still occasionally occur.
This book grew out of one therapist’s personal experiences in
treating individuals who made allegations of having been sexu-
ally abused as children. The authors begin by examining the his-
tory of ritual abuse reported in various religions, cults, and other
organizations. They explore the use of ritual abuse in various set-
tings and offer several theories regarding possession, ritual
abuse, and dissociation. They conclude that the diagnosis of dis-
sociative identity disorder, or DID, is what was historically
known, especially in non-Western societies, as possession.
Ogilvie, Beverly A. 2004. Mother-Daughter Incest: A Guide for
Helping Professionals.
Binghamton, NY: Haworth. ISBN
0–7890–0917–X.
Written to provide guidance for therapists who work with
women who have been sexually abused by their mothers, this
book examines the issues faced by these female victims. Sexual
abuse by men is examined more frequently than abuse by women
and, as a result, victims of female abusers tend to suffer silently,
according to Ogilvie, silenced “by a society that continues to deny
that mothers do sexually abuse their daughters” (p. 7). For this
book, Ogilvie interviewed sixty-two adult women who were sex-
ually abused by their mothers. Part 1 examines the enigma of
mother-daughter incest. Part 2 focuses on common themes
among daughters, including shame, feeling trapped with no
place to go, betrayal and grief, identification with and differenti-
ation from the mother, impaired sexual development, and diffi-
culty in coping. Part 3 examines common themes among mothers,
including being emotionally needy and unstable, and boundary
violations. In Part 4, specific counseling interventions are offered.
Finally, Part 5 explores special issues such as stepmothers versus
biological mothers who abuse, the effect of the gender of the ther-
apist, transference, countertransference, and theoretical frame-
works and treatment approaches.
298
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Parkinson, Patrick. 2003. Child Sexual Abuse and the Churches:
Understanding the Issues. Binghamton, NY: Haworth. ISBN
0–3406–3015–9.
Parkinson explores the relationship between child sexual abuse
and the role of the Church in responding to such abuse in Aus-
tralia and elsewhere. He examines breaking the silence of abuse
perpetrated by members of the clergy and the Church’s responsi-
bility in protecting children and dealing with perpetrators; the
nature and prevalence of child sexual abuse; the perpetrators of
sexual abuse; the process of victimization, including choosing
and grooming the victim; controversies and issues concerning
child sexual abuse, including sexual relations between children
and adults, repressed memories, and ritual abuse; effects of abuse
on children; issues specific to clergy abuse of children; forgive-
ness; issues in child protection for Christians; disclosure, investi-
gation, and the legal process; procedures with clergy abuse of
children; and ways to make churches safe for children.
Plante, Thomas G., ed. 2004. Sin against the Innocents: Sexual
Abuse by Priests and the Role of the Catholic Church. Westport,
CT: Praeger. ISBN 0–2759–8175–4.
Plante has gathered professionals in a wide variety of fields, in-
cluding mental health professionals, theologians, canon lawyers,
ethicists, journalists, and victim advocates, to examine the issues
of sexual abuse committed by clergy in the Catholic Church. The
view of the Vatican on the scandal in the United States, canon
law as it applies to the priests who are abusing children, prom-
ises made by the Church hierarchy to end the abuse, and the role
of oversight review boards are discussed. The issues of celibacy
among priests and homosexuality are explored. Implications for
future research, programs for survivors, insights from attach-
ment theory, treatment issues and the Church hierarchy, barriers
to responding to the crisis, and collaboration among the Church,
mental health organizations, and the criminal justice system are
examined.
Prendergast, William E. 2004. Treating Sex Offenders: A Guide to
Clinical Practice with Adults, Clerics, Children, and Adolescents.
Binghamton, NY: Haworth. ISBN 0–7890–0930–0.
Books
299

The characteristics of adult, adolescent, and child sex offenders
are described in this reference book, along with treatment options
depending on the type of offense as well as the perpetrator’s mo-
tivation for offending. The first part of the book explores obses-
sive-compulsive characteristics, personality characteristics, the
need for control, and sexual performance problems that can lead
to sexually abusive behavior. The second part describes treatment
options for sexual offenders, including strategies for treatment,
depending on whether the offender was sexually abused as a
child or is a pedophile, a father sexually abusing a child, or a sex-
ually assaultive or seductive offender.
Pryor, Douglas W. 1999. Unspeakable Acts: Why Men Sexually
Abuse Children. New York: New York University Press. ISBN
0–8147–666–8.
While many books focus on men after they have sexually abused
young children, this book examines what makes men make that
decision to abuse, and how they become abusers in the first
place. Pryor focuses on what makes them cross the line into crim-
inal behavior, and how such information can help prevent the
sexual abuse of children. Thirty men who abused their own chil-
dren or other children were interviewed for this book. Pryor ex-
amines how their lives prior to the abusive acts contributed to
the abuse, how the men became interested in the abuse of the
child, how the abuse began, how it continued over time, how the
abusers felt as they were abusing the child, and how they
stopped abusing children.
Quinsey, Vernon L., and Martin Lalumiere. 2001. Assessment of
Sexual Offenders against Children. 2d ed. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage. ISBN 0–7619–2431–0.
In this updated edition, Quinsey and Lalumiere review relevant
literature on the topic of assessing child molesters for mental
health professionals. General characteristics of sex offenders and
implications for research are discussed, and recommended as-
sessment instruments are made.
Rabinowitz, Dorothy. 2003. No Crueler Tyrannies: Accusations,
False Witness, and Other Terrors of Our Times. New York: Simon
and Schuster. ISBN 0–7432–2834–0.
300
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

During the 1980s and 1990s many accusations were made, cases
filed, and day-care workers sent to prison for child sexual abuse
and ritual abuse acts that children allegedly experienced in their
care. Rabinowitz explores many of these cases, focusing on the
case against the Amiraults, a mother and her two adult children
who operated a preschool in Malden, Massachusetts. All three of
them were sent to prison on charges of child sexual abuse, even
though no physical or scientific evidence was produced at the
trial. They were convicted on the basis of the testimony of children
who were highly coached and asked leading questions through-
out the investigation. Other cases explored include the case
against Kelly Michaels, a New Jersey nursery school worker;
Patrick Griffin, a physician who was falsely accused of molesta-
tion; and Grant Snowden, a Miami, Florida, police officer who was
sentenced to five consecutive life terms for sexual abuse of a three-
year-old, a crime that he did not commit. Rabinowitz examines
these and other cases and analyzes the evidence produced, expos-
ing the results as social injustice based on public hysteria.
Reavey, Paul, and Sam Warner, eds. 2003. New Feminist Stories of
Child Sexual Abuse: Sexual Scripts and Dangerous Dialogues.
London: Routledge. ISBN 0–415–25943–6.
Reavey and Warner focus on female child sexual abuse and how
this topic is discussed and examined. They demonstrate that
“child sexual abuse is never transparent in terms of what it
means: either as an event itself or in the memory of it. It is some-
thing that, as survivors, theoreticians or practitioners, we make
sense of in the re-telling, and how we make sense of it shifts ac-
cording to the contexts in which we speak, with whom we
speak,” and the person whom we speak about (p. 1). Part 1 ex-
plores the cultural and political landscape of child sexual abuse in
both Western and non-Western environments. Contributors ex-
amine the various ways in which societies speak about child sex-
ual abuse, including the ways that different cultures understand
childhood, sex and gender issues, and child sexual abuse. Part 2
examines how we interpret theories and intervene in the lives of
women who have been sexually abused.
Richardson, Sue, and Heather Bacon, eds. 2001. Creative Re-
sponses to Child Sexual Abuse: Challenges and Dilemmas.
Philadelphia: Jessica Kingsley. ISBN 1–85302–884–3.
Books
301

Beginning with the 1987 child sexual abuse allegations made in
Cleveland and in the United Kingdom, and the public furor that
followed, Richardson and Bacon examine treatment issues
based on the theory of attachment. The book addresses the chal-
lenges that professionals face in treating victims of child sexual
abuse. Chapters focus on an exploration of attachment and
trauma theories of child sexual abuse, disclosure, the stories of
victims as told by the mothers, pediatricians and recognition of
child sexual abuse symptoms, advocacy issues, therapy, legal
and trial issues, and surviving the impact of child sexual abuse
and response to the abuse, including ways to manage fear and
to promote healing.
Rosencrans, Bobbie. 2001. The Last Secret: Daughters Sexually
Abused by Mothers. Brandon, VT: Safer Society Foundation. ISBN
1–884444–36–9.
Based on the results of a questionnaire Rosencrans sent to daugh-
ters who were sexually abused by their mothers, this book pro-
vides insight into the experiences of these women. She describes
their experiences, the effects of the abuse, and the extent of the re-
lationship that these women have with their mothers. Most of the
women never discussed the abuse with anyone; even those who
were in therapy often did not mention the abuse they experienced
as young girls.
Rush, Florence. 1980. The Best Kept Secret: Sexual Abuse of Chil-
dren. New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 0–1307–4781–5.
In this classic on child sexual abuse, Rush counters the common
beliefs about the sexual abuse of children that were held prior to
the 1980s, including the belief that children usually are not seri-
ously harmed by sexual abuse and that they are often the instiga-
tors of the abuse. She provides a detailed historical analysis of
child sexual abuse throughout history, including both Christian
and Judaic traditions concerning children, as well as early Greek
actions toward children, child marriage in India, and growing up
in Victorian England. The ways in which law, religion, the news
media, and psychological theories have contributed to the vic-
timization of children are explored. Sexual abuse of boys, more
common than many people once believed, is discussed. Child
prostitution and child pornography also are examined.
302
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Russell, Diana E. H., and Rebecca M. Bolen. 2000. The Epidemic of
Rape and Child Sexual Abuse in the United States. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage. ISBN 0–7619–0301–1.
Russell and Bolen analyze various incidence and prevalence sur-
veys of rape and child sexual abuse conducted in the United
States. The first part of the book focuses on rape and the second
part on child sexual abuse. In Part 2 they examine the law and
legal statutes relating to child sexual abuse, the incidence and
prevalence of child sexual abuse, and comparisons of child sexual
abuse prevalence rates and the epidemic of child rape. They ex-
plore the various definitions of child sexual abuse and the
methodologies used by various researchers to collect data.
Sanderson, Christiane. 2004. The Seduction of Children: Empow-
ering Parents and Teachers to Protect Children from Child Sexual
Abuse. New York: Jessica Kingsley. ISBN 1–84310–748–X.
Sanderson’s purpose in writing this book is to provide parents,
teachers, and other adults with a basic knowledge and overview
of child sexual abuse in order to protect children from abuse and
eventually to prevent it from occurring. Chapter 1 focuses on a
definition of child sexual abuse, historical evidence and cultural
experiences in defining it. Chapter 2 examines the development
of children’s sexuality. Chapter 3 focuses on the child sex abuser,
presenting profiles of different types of abusers and their moti-
vations. Chapter 4 looks at the use of the Internet, child pornog-
raphy, and the dangers of Internet grooming. In Chapter 5,
Sanderson examines how abusers groom children offline, be-
friending parents or other adults in children’s lives. Chapter 6
assesses the impact of child sexual abuse on the children. The
signs and symptoms of child sexual abuse are examined in
Chapter 7. Chapter 8 gives the reader an understanding of the
various ways in which children respond to child sexual abuse.
Chapter 9 explores the most effective ways of protecting chil-
dren, and the final chapter examines ways to prevent child sex-
ual abuse.
Schultz, Pamela D. 2005. Not Monsters: Analyzing the Stories of
Child Molesters. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. ISBN
0–74275–3057–4.
Books
303

With her perspective as a survivor of child sexual abuse, Schultz
examines the impact of child sexual abuse on the victims as well
as on the perpetrators. She provides a narrative study of nine per-
petrators that she interviewed, providing the reader with an in-
depth look into the lives of these offenders, their motives for com-
mitting their crimes, their treatment while in prison, and their
hopes for the future.
Silverman, Jon, and David Wilson. 2002. Innocence Betrayed:
Paedophilia, the Media and Society. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
ISBN 0–7456–2888–5.
The authors examine the issues surrounding community notifica-
tion laws that attempt to “name and shame” pedophiles in the
community in order to prevent them from reoffending, as well as
other attempts to best protect children from sexual offenders. It
examines Sarah’s Law, enacted following the murder of eight-
year-old Sarah Payne in July 2000 in the United Kingdom. The au-
thors report on the results of their interviews with pedophiles,
some of whom were still in prison at the time of their interview,
and others who had been released; they were located in England,
Wales, and North America. Silverman and Wilson also inter-
viewed victims of sexual abuse.
Spanos, Nicholas P. 2001. Multiple Identities and False Memo-
ries: A Sociocognitive Perspective. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. ISBN 0–1307–4781–5.
Spanos, a leading expert in the study of hypnosis, does not be-
lieve that multiple personality disorder (MPD) is a legitimate psy-
chiatric disorder but rather a cultural construct, having a history
in earlier beliefs about demonic possession: it is believed and en-
couraged today by misguided psychotherapists and their pa-
tients. He examines the myths and reality of hypnosis, high hyp-
notizability and dramatic behaviors, hypnotic amnesia, and
distortions of memory. The seduction theory regarding child sex-
ual abuse is explored, along with recovered memories of child
sexual abuse. Complex false memories and UFO abductions, as
an example of complex false memory, are explored. Spanos dis-
cusses cross-cultural studies of spirit and demonic possession, the
social functions of possession, and dissociation and multiple per-
sonality disorders.
304
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Spiegel, Josef. 2003. Sexual Abuse of Males: The SAM Model of
Theory and Practice. London: Taylor and Francis. ISBN
1–5603–2403–1.
Spiegel examines the biological, psychological, interpersonal,
familial, and social characteristics of victims of childhood sexual
abuse, based on life histories of more than 1,000 sexually abused
boys and adult men who were sexually abused as children. The
first part presents an overview of the dynamics and effects on
boys of being sexually abused, and describes the development
of the SAM model. Spiegel provides excerpts from case histories
to illustrate the dynamics of the cycle of abuse. Part 2 discusses
the treatment of boys and men who have been sexually abused,
and focuses on philosophical assumptions and principles, antic-
ipating issues that may be raised during treatment as well as the
objectives of treatment. Finally, strategies for intervention are
discussed.
Taylor, Max, and Ethel Quayle. 2003. Child Pornography: An In-
ternet Crime. London: Taylor and Francis. ISBN 1–58391–244–4.
The expanding scope of the Internet and its wide availability to
children bring up concerns regarding the protection of children
from harmful influences. Taylor and Quayle examine the ways in
which child pornography is used on the Internet and the social
context in which it appears. They offer a model of offending be-
havior and explain how it can help us to understand all aspects of
sexual offending and treatment. In addition, the authors believe
that a more comprehensive understanding of the connections be-
tween possession of child pornography and the actual commit-
ment of sexual offenses is necessary in order to develop success-
ful models for protecting children from sexual predators.
Van Dam, Carla. 2001. Identifying Child Molesters: Preventing
Child Sexual Abuse by Recognizing the Patterns of the Offenders.
Binghamton, NY: Haworth. ISBN 0–7890–0743–6.
Van Dam, a clinical and forensic psychologist, wrote this book to
provide parents with tools to help protect their children from sex-
ual predators. The hope is that these tools will help to identify in-
dividuals who might molest children and will help parents and
children know what to do when faced with a potential molester.
Books
305

Chapters focus on knowing that child sexual abuse is a problem;
knowing why it is a problem, including psychological, moral, and
cultural issues; prevalence; the characteristics of child molesters;
the grooming process; social climates that help to foster child sex-
ual abuse; visible grooming; and setting boundaries to help pre-
vent child sexual abuse.
Wortley, Richard, and Stephen Smallbone, eds. 2006. Situational
Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse. Monsey, NY: Criminal Justice.
ISBN 1–881798–61–5.
Contributors to this volume include criminologists as well as re-
searchers who focus on sexual offenders and their behavior, and
ways of preventing the sexual abuse of children. Chapters include
applying situational principles to sexual abuse of children, clini-
cal perspectives on situational as well as dispositional factors in
child sexual abuse, legislation enacted to prevent abuse, preven-
tion and investigation of abuse, a situational prevention model
for child sexual abuse, places where predators meet children, the
use of the Internet, situational prevention of crimes perpetrated
by intellectually challenged individuals, various approaches to
the treatment of sex offenders, and strategies used by offenders to
encourage the participation of children in sexual activity.
Journal Articles
Alaggia, Ramona, and Stacey Kirshenbaum. 2005. “Speaking the
Unspeakable: Exploring the Impact of Family Dynamics on
Child Sexual Abuse Disclosures.” Families in Society: The Journal
of Contemporary Social Services 86, no. 2: 227–234.
The authors report on a study of twenty male and female sur-
vivors of child sexual abuse to identify various family dynamics
that could affect a child’s willingness to disclose sexual abuse.
They discuss four major themes which suggest that disclosure of
child sexual abuse can be significantly compromised when vari-
ous conditions exist, including rigidly defined gender roles based
on a patriarchic family structure; the occurrence of family vio-
lence; closed or indirect communications patterns; and social iso-
lation. They point out the necessity of identifying barriers to dis-
closure in order to ameliorate them effectively, because if children
are not able to disclose to an adult the fact that they were sexually
306
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

abused, the effects are potentially devastating. Implications for
treatment of children and their families, including the relevance
of established methods of family assessment, are examined.
Banyard, Victoria L., Linda M. Williams, and Jane A. Siegel. 2004.
“Childhood Sexual Abuse: A Gender Perspective on Context
and Consequences.” Child Maltreatment: Journal of the American
Professional Society on the Abuse of Children 9, no. 3: 223–238.
The authors conducted a gender analysis of 128 women and 69
men gathered from an examination of childhood hospital records,
looking for patterns among survivors. Results indicated that men
and women had similar consequences from the sexual abuse they
experienced. The researchers also examined variances in the men-
tal health of 106 male victims and nonvictims and found that the
higher the number of incidents of abuse and other traumas, the
higher the number of mental health symptoms.
Bascelli, Elizabeth, Daniela Paci, and Patrizia Romito. 2004.
“Adolescents Who Experienced Sexual Abuse: Fears, Needs
and Impediments to Disclosure.” Child Abuse and Neglect: The In-
ternational Journal 28, no. 10: 1035–1048.
Adolescents who have been sexually abused may be afraid to re-
veal the abuse to their parents or other persons in authority. This
study examined the reasons for children’s fear of disclosure. The
researchers conducted in-depth interviews with thirty-six young
people in Italy who had been sexually abused. Results indicated
that the primary reasons that subjects gave for not revealing the
abuse included fear of not being believed, shame, and fear of cre-
ating trouble for the family. When the subjects did reveal the
abuse, they received limited support from the adults. The authors
suggest that professionals need to be better trained to respond
when abuse is disclosed.
Berliner, Lucy. 1998. “Sex Offenders: Policy and Practice.” North-
western University Law Review 92: 1203–1224.
Berliner studied sexual offenders, how they are viewed and
treated, and how they are treated differently from other types of
criminal offenders. The first part of the article examines sexual of-
fenders as a special case, why they are treated differently, and the
consequences of sexual abuse on women and children, which is
generally associated with higher levels of psychological harm than
Journal Articles
307

other crime categories. The characteristics of sexual offenders are
also examined. The next section looks at legislative responses to sex
offenders, including treatment options, standards and penalties,
and legislation enacted specifically to deal with sexual offenders.
Boakes, J. 1999. “False Complaints of Sexual Assault: Recovered
Memories of Childhood Sexual Abuse.” Medicine, Science, and
the Law 39, no. 2: 112–120.
Recovered memories of childhood sexual abuse remains a con-
troversial topic. This article discusses false memories recovered in
therapy and the influence of the beliefs and practices of therapists
in “recovering” these memories. The problems faced in diagnosis,
issues of confidentiality, and the role that the expert witness plays
in educating the court and the legal community are discussed.
Cinq-Mars, Caroline, John Wright, Mireille Cyr, and Pierre Mc-
Duff. 2003. “Sexual At-Risk Behaviors of Sexually Abused Ado-
lescent Girls.” Journal of Child Sexual Abuse 12, no. 2: 1–18.
Several researchers have found that girls who have been sexually
abused may participate in sexually risky behaviors as adoles-
cents. This study examined sexually at-risk behavior: researchers
interviewed 125 sexually abused adolescent girls between the
ages of twelve and seventeen, looking at variables such as partic-
ipation in consensual sexual activity, age at first consensual inter-
course, number of sexual partners, use of condoms, and resulting
pregnancies. Results indicated that the more severe the abuse—
that is, penetration, more than one perpetrator, physical coercion,
and more than one incident of abuse—the more likely that the
girls will indulge in risky behaviors. While family characteristics
were strongly correlated with sexual activity, those characteristics
were not significant with regression analysis.
Cott, Melissa A., and Steven N. Gold. 2004. “Ethnicity and Sex-
ual Orientation as PTSD Mitigators in Child Sexual Abuse Sur-
vivors.” Journal of Family Violence 19, no. 5: 319–325.
In this study, the researchers explored the relationship between
certain demographic characteristics of survivors of child sexual
abuse and scores on the Impact of Scale instrument. The study in-
cluded 257 women who had been sexually abused as children
and were experiencing psychological difficulties relating to that
abuse. Demographic variables included marital/relationship sta-
308
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

tus, religious affiliation, ethnicity, level of education, spouse’s ed-
ucational level, income, and sexual orientation. Subjects who in-
dicated that they were asexual had fewer intrusive and total post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptoms than heterosexuals,
lesbians, and bisexuals. Hispanics reported fewer intrusive PTSD
symptoms than non-Hispanic Caucasians.
Gibbons, Michael, and Dana Campbell. 2003. “Symposium: Gen-
eral Aspects of Recreation Law: Liability of Recreation and
Competitive Sport Organizations for Sexual Assaults on Chil-
dren by Administrators, Coaches and Volunteers.” Journal of
Legal Aspects of Sport 13: 185–229.
This article is part of a symposium on recreation law and exam-
ines the growing number of sexual assaults on children by
coaches and coaching staff. Child sexual abuse as a social prob-
lem is examined, and federal and state legislation designed to
protect children from sex offenders is reviewed. A variety of na-
tional and state sports organizations for youth are explored to de-
termine how they approach the issue of sexual abuse of partici-
pants. Potential legal claims against organizations, if they fail to
protect participants from sexual assault, are discussed. Suggested
elements for an organization’s screening program are provided to
help minimize the chances of hiring a potential sex offender.
Gibson, L. E., and H. Leitenberg. 2000. “Child Sexual Abuse Pre-
vention Programs: Do They Decrease the Occurrence of Child
Sexual Abuse?” Child Abuse and Neglect: The International Journal
24, no. 9: 1115–1125.
The authors conducted this study to determine if rates of sexual
abuse were different among female college undergraduates that
had participated in a sexual abuse prevention program during
their childhood. The study included a survey of 825 undergradu-
ates regarding sexual experiences: they were asked about their
histories of sexual abuse, their participation in prevention pro-
grams when they were young, their current levels of sexual satis-
faction, and their sexual behaviors. Almost two-thirds (62 per-
cent) reported that they had participated in a prevention program
while in school. Eight percent of those who attended a prevention
program revealed that they had later been sexually abused, com-
pared with 14 percent among those who had never participated
in a prevention program.
Journal Articles
309

Jensen, Tine K., Wenke Gulbrandsen, Svein Mossige, and Sissel
Reichelt. 2005. “Reporting Possible Sexual Abuse: A Qualitative
Study on Children’s Perspectives and the Context for Disclo-
sure.” Child Abuse and Neglect: The International Journal 29, no. 12:
1395–1413.
Researchers gathered data from therapeutic sessions and follow-
up interviews with twenty-two children and their families re-
garding the context in which children were able to disclose their
sexual abuse. Children were asked to describe what made it diffi-
cult to talk about their abuse, and what helped to make it easier.
Results indicate that children need a supportive structure in
which to reveal their abuse, one in which they are presented with
an opportunity to talk about what they have experienced. Chil-
dren also appeared sensitive to the needs of their families and to
the consequences to themselves, their family, and the abuser.
Johnson, Dawn M., Timothy C. Sheahan, and Kathleen M. Chard.
2003. “Personality Disorders, Coping Strategies, and Posttrau-
matic Stress Disorder in Women with Histories of Childhood
Sexual Abuse.” Journal of Child Sexual Abuse 12, no. 2: 19–39.
The authors examined relationships among coping strategies,
personality disorders, and post-traumatic stress disorder in adult
females who had been sexually abused as children. The women
exhibited several personality disorders, with specifically
avoidant, antisocial, dependent personality disorders occurring
more often than borderline personality disorders. The researchers
found a significant correlation between avoidant coping and
post-traumatic stress severity. Women who experienced severe
PTSD also were more likely to exhibit avoidant behaviors and de-
pendent personality disorders.
Kogan, Steven M. 2005. “The Role of Disclosing Child Sexual
Abuse on Adolescent Adjustment and Revictimization.” Journal
of Child Sexual Abuse 14, no. 2: 25–47.
Using a subsample of 111 adolescents from the National Survey of
Adolescents who reported having been sexually abused, the au-
thor found that adolescents who promptly disclosed the abuse to
an adult were less affected by the abuse than those who did not
disclose the abuse or disclosed it long after it had occurred. These
adolescents also were less likely to experience or report addi-
tional sexual abuse.
310
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Kouyoumdjian, Haig, Andrea R. Perry, and David J. Hansen.
2005. “The Role of Adult Expectations on the Recovery of Sexu-
ally Abused Children.” Aggression and Violent Behavior 10, no. 4:
475–489.
This article reports the results of a study to examine the role that
adult expectations play in children’s recovery from sexual abuse.
Results indicate that parental support is a strong variable in pre-
dicting how well a child will recover from sexual abuse. Investi-
gations of the role that the expectations of adults—including par-
ents, teachers, and other professionals—play in how well
children recover from such abuse should be conducted. Recom-
mendations for future research are included.
Lowe, Walter, Thomas Pavkov, Gisele Casanova, and Joseph
Wetchler. 2005. “Do American Ethnic Cultures Differ in the De-
finitions of Child Sexual Abuse?” American Journal of Family
Therapy 33, no. 2: 147–166.
For this study, researchers examined how members of different
ethnic groups—Caucasian Americans, African Americans, and
Hispanic Americans—define child sexual abuse, and whether
there are differences among those definitions. Results indicated
that there were no significant differences among the different eth-
nic groups’ definitions of child sexual abuse, or in their willing-
ness to report child sexual abuse, except at the least severe levels
of abuse, in which African Americans and Hispanic Americans
were more likely to recognize child sexual abuse and report it
than were Caucasian Americans.
Mangold, Susan Vivian. 2003. “Reforming Child Protection in
Response to the Catholic Church Child Sexual Abuse Scandal.”
University of Florida Journal of Law and Public Policy 14: 155–178.
Mangold analyzes child protection policy reform in response to
the child sexual abuse scandal within the Catholic Church. She
begins with an analysis of the two previous reform periods in
the development of child protection: the first in the 1960s and
1970s, when there was the first widespread recognition of abuse
by the medical community; the second in the 1980s and 1990s,
when there was a move away from family preservation follow-
ing serious child abuse by parents. The second part of this arti-
cle examines the Catholic Church and the sexual abuse scandal;
this period represents another reform period that she believes
Journal Articles
311

will result in the expansion of mandatory reporting laws. The
final two parts examine the collaborative ramifications of the
mandatory reporting systems suggested in Part 2, including
children’s rights and parental rights in the child welfare system
and ways of legislating intervention without harming parents
and children.
Martin, Graham, Helen A. Bergen, Angela S. Richardson, Leigh
Roeger, and Stephen Allison. 2004. “Sexual Abuse and Suicidal-
ity: Gender Differences in a Large Community Sample of Ado-
lescents.” Child Abuse and Neglect: The International Journal 28, no.
5: 491–503.
In this study, 2,485 students from twenty-seven schools in South
Australia, average age of fourteen years, completed a question-
naire regarding sexual abuse and suicidality, measures of depres-
sion, hopelessness, and family functioning. Researchers found
that boys who self-reported sexual abuse tended also to have sui-
cidal thoughts, plans, threats, self-injury, and suicide attempts.
Girls who experienced sexual abuse and reported high distress
over the abuse had a threefold increase in risk of suicidal
thoughts and plans, compared with girls who were not abused.
Boys who were sexually abused and reported high distress over
the abuse had a tenfold increase in risk of suicidal plans and
threats compared with boys who were not abused.
Plummer, C. A. 2001. “Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse: A Sur-
vey of 87 Programs.” Violence and Victims 16, no. 5: 575–588.
Prevention programs attempt to provide children with knowl-
edge and skills that will help to prevent their sexual abuse. This
study attempts to determine how prevention programs function
within the context of their communities. Plummer reports the re-
sults of a study of eighty-seven prevention programs. Variables in
the study included funding, types of materials used, types of ap-
proaches used, barriers encountered to successful prevention,
length of time the program was in existence, demographics of the
population served, and demographics of those leading the local
prevention programs. Results indicated that program existence is
dependent on a variety of factors, including adequate funding,
level of community involvement and denial, and competing
agendas.
312
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Redlich, A. D. 2001. “Community Notification: Perceptions of
Its Effectiveness in Preventing Child Sexual Abuse.” Child Sex-
ual Abuse 10, no. 3: 91–116.
Community notification laws were enacted in response to the sex-
ual abuse and murder of Megan Kanka by a neighbor who was a
convicted sex offender. These laws generally authorize local law
enforcement agencies to notify communities when a convicted
sexual offender moves into the neighborhood. The laws are pop-
ular with the general public, but few studies have been conducted
to determine their effectiveness. The authors of this study inter-
viewed 109 community members, 78 law enforcement officials,
and 82 law students to determine their attitudes toward commu-
nity notification laws, as well as other techniques used to prevent
child sexual abuse. They found that law enforcement officials
were more likely to support community notification than com-
munity members or law students, and that the law students were
concerned that these laws violate an individual’s constitutional
rights. Women were more likely than men to support these laws.
Renk, K., L. Liljequist, A. Steinberg, G. Bosco, and V. Phares. 2002.
“Prevention of Child Sexual Abuse: Are We Doing Enough?”
Trauma, Violence and Abuse: A Review Journal 3, no. 1: 68–84.
Following a review of the literature on the prevention of child
sexual abuse, the authors suggest that not enough is being done
to prevent the sexual abuse of children. Even though prevention
efforts focus primarily on educating children, the authors believe
that additional efforts need to focus on adults who are in a posi-
tion to help children avoid situations in which they may be
abused. Efforts also must focus on adults who sexually abuse
children. Prevention programs should be implemented at the
community level, including at schools, neighborhood centers,
churches, and other local agencies.
Richards, Lauren Metivier, and Bruce A. Thyer. 2005. “Behavioral
Interventions with Female Victims of Childhood Sexual Abuse:
A Review.” Journal of Evidence-Based Social Work 1, no. 4: 1–14.
Because social workers are often the ones who work directly with
the victims of child sexual abuse and their families, the authors
saw the need to provide an overview of research findings on the
Journal Articles
313

effects of child sexual abuse on the victims. A discussion of the
most effective treatment and intervention techniques is also pre-
sented. The authors conclude that the use of behavioral and cog-
nitive behavioral interventions shows some limited success in re-
ducing symptoms and behaviors associated with the experience
of child sexual abuse. Finally, the authors offer suggestions for
areas of future research.
Roberts, Ron, Tom O’Connor, Judy Dunn, and Jean Golding. 2004.
“The Effects of Child Sexual Abuse in Later Family Life: Men-
tal Health, Parenting and Adjustment of Offspring.” Child
Abuse and Neglect: The International Journal 28, no. 5: 525–545.
This study examined the relationship between being sexually
abused as a child before the age of thirteen years and later men-
tal health, family structure, parenting behaviors, and adjust-
ment in children. The sample was composed of 8,292 families
from Avon, England, who were part of the larger Avon Longitu-
dinal Study of Parents and Children (an ongoing study of
women and their children). Results indicated that an experience
of child sexual abuse can have long-term effects for adult men-
tal health, parenting relationships, and child adjustment in fu-
ture generations.
Savell, Sheila. 2005. “Child Sexual Abuse: Are Health Care
Providers Looking the Other Way?” Journal of Forensic Nursing 1,
no. 2: 78–81, 85.
Based on statistics indicating that, in 2002, health care profession-
als made only 7.8 percent of the child abuse reports, Savell sug-
gests that screening for child sexual abuse should be part of basic
checkups and other common encounters with children. She also
believes that valid screening techniques should be developed.
Scheutze, Pamela, and Rina Das Eiden. 2005. “The Relationship
between Sexual Abuse during Childhood and Parenting Out-
comes: Modeling Direct and Indirect Pathways.” Child Abuse
and Neglect: The International Journal 29, no. 6: 645–659.
The authors examined the relationship between childhood sexual
abuse and parenting outcomes, including the parents’ level of
stress, their feelings of competence, and their identified means of
disciplining their children. Participants in the study included 263
pregnant women, 107 of whom were sexually abused as children.
314
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

They were interviewed twice for the study: once when they were
between the 28th and 32nd week of their pregnancy, and once
again after giving birth, when their child was between two and
four years of age. Results indicate that women who experienced
sexual abuse as a child were more likely to be depressed and ex-
perienced more partner violence.
Ullman, Sarah E., and Henrietta H. Filipas. 2005. “Gender Dif-
ferences in Social Reactions to Abuse Disclosures, Post-Abuse
Coping, and PTSD of Child Sexual Abuse Survivors.” Child
Abuse and Neglect: The International Journal 7: 767–782.
This study examined the differences between the ways in which
men and women disclose their abusive experiences, their social
reactions to the abuse, ways they cope with their abuse, and post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) of adult survivors of child sex-
ual abuse. The study used a sample of 733 college students who
completed a questionnaire about their demographics, experiences
with sexual abuse, means and timing of disclosure, coping strate-
gies, and other people’s reactions to their abuse. Results indicated
that the female students were more likely than the men to experi-
ence greater occurrences of childhood sexual abuse, more severe
abuse, more distress and need to blame themselves following the
abuse, and relied more on various coping methods such as with-
drawal and attempts to forget the experience. The longer the
women delayed the disclosure, the greater the severity of their
PTSD symptoms.
Training Materials, Manuals
American Prosecutors Research Institute. 2005. Finding Words:
Interviewing and Preparing Children for Court. Alexandria, VA:
American Prosecutors Research Institute.
This training manual provides information on interviewing chil-
dren who have been sexually abused and preparing them for a
trial. A five-day training curriculum is included that covers effec-
tive interviewing, how children experience sexual abuse, diver-
sity issues and the interview process, processes of disclosure, the
use of age-appropriate guidelines when questioning children, the
interview process, use of anatomical dolls, problems in the inter-
Training Materials, Manuals
315

view process, child development, hearsay and the victim, corrob-
oration, suggestibility, preparing the child as a witness, and testi-
fying in court. Suggested readings are provided, and a selection
of articles from the news media regarding court cases are in-
cluded.
Cobble, James, Richard Hammar, and Steven Klipowicz. 2005.
Reducing the Risk of Child Sexual Abuse in Your Church Refer-
ence Manual. Rev. ed. Carol Stream, IL: Christianity Today inter-
national.
This reference manual can be purchased separately or as part of
the Reducing the Risk Kit, which also includes a reference book and
a DVD set of six videos. The training manual provides the reader
with detailed lesson plans to help train church officials, staff, and
volunteers in ways to make the church safe for children. The six
videos are (1) “Making Your Church Safe from Child Sexual
Abuse,” (2) “The Behavioral Profile of Molesters,” (3) “Selecting
and Screening Workers,” (4) “Principles of Supervision,” (5) “Re-
sponding to Allegations of Abuse,” and (6) “Implementing a Risk
Reduction Program in Your Church.”
Durham, Duane, John Keating, Andrew Leggett, and Margaret
Osmond. 1998. Treating the Aftermath of Sexual Abuse: A Hand-
book for Working with Children in Care. Washington, DC: Child
Welfare League of America.
The focus of this handbook is on ways to treat children in care
who have been sexually abused. The physical and emotional im-
pact on a child of being sexually abused is examined, along with
the effect of abuse on their basic life experiences.
Finkelhor, David, Kimberly J. Mitchell, and Janis Wolak. 2000.
Online Victimization: A Report on the Nation’s Youth. Arlington,
VA: National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
Funded by the U.S. Congress through a grant to the National
Center for Missing and Exploited Children, this report examines
the problem of the risks faced by children on the Internet in order
to help policy-makers, law enforcement professionals, and par-
ents better understand the risks that children face and what can
be done to reduce those risks. The authors conducted a telephone
survey of 1,501 youth, between the ages of ten and seventeen,
who regularly use the Internet. Interview topics included sexual
316
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

solicitations, exposure to unwanted sexual materials, their knowl-
edge of Internet safety procedures, and the nature and types of
friendships they may have made over the Internet.
McGlone, Gerard J., Mary Shrader, and Laurie Delgatto. 2003.
Creating Safe and Sacred Places: Identifying, Preventing, and
Healing Sexual Abuse. Winona, MN: Saint Mary’s.
This manual was developed to assist churches, schools, and
youth organizations in the creation of safe environments that will
protect children from abuse. The first part of the manual offers an
overview of child sexual abuse, types of abuse, offenders, warn-
ing signs, cyber sex and abuse, the long-term effects of child sex-
ual abuse, and sexual abuse in the Catholic Church. The second
part of the manual provides training sessions for young children,
clergy, and parents. These sessions include training strategies,
group activities, suggestions for getting discussions started, and
quizzes. The third part offers additional resources, including a
sample code of conduct, a sample parish statement, questions to
ask when screening volunteers, recommended organizations, and
a community prayer service.
Morgan, Nancy. March 2005. Resource Guide for Parents, Care-
givers, and Service Providers Working with Alaska Native Chil-
dren: How to Help When Someone You Care about Has Been Sex-
ually Abused. Seattle: Providence Health System.
This resource guide provides helpful information on sexual abuse
and community resources to help sexually abused children once
they return to their rural communities. Divided into six sections,
the guide offers basic information on investigation of sexual
abuse, warning signs, what to do if sexual abuse is suspected,
safety tips for children, self-care for survivors and caregivers,
guidelines for survivor support groups, a suggested reading list,
answers to frequently asked questions, and a list of national and
Alaskan resources concerning child sexual abuse.
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. 2002. Female
Juvenile Prostitution: Problem and Response, 2d ed. Alexandria,
VA: National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
The purpose of this book is to provide organizations and individ-
uals with an understanding of the problems of child prostitution
in order to provide better services to this population. The Office
Training Materials, Manuals
317

of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention of the U.S. De-
partment of Justice, which funded this project, estimates that in
1999 more than 1.5 million children left their homes, were thrown
out, or were asked to leave by their parents or guardians. These
children are often sexually exploited, either through prostitution
or pornography or other exploitative activities. Chapters include
case histories, steps to establishing a program to help victims, and
a case study of a successful program.
National Center for Missing and Exploited Children. 2003. A
Model State Sex Offender Policy. Arlington, VA: National Center
for Missing and Exploited Children.
The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, in re-
sponse to the challenge facing lawmakers in developing effective
sexual offender management policies, has developed this model
policy. This document provides background information on sex
offenders, the development of a triage approach to managing sex
offenders, and the reasons for developing a comprehensive crim-
inal justice response. The authors provide eight goals of their rec-
ommended sex-offender policy.
National Sexual Violence Resource Center. 2005. Preventing Child
Sexual Abuse: A National Resource Directory and Handbook.
Enola, PA: National Sexual Violence Resource Center.
In addition to providing information from more than 400 sexual
abuse prevention programs throughout the country, this hand-
book offers effective strategies for reducing child sexual abuse.
Various types of programs are reviewed to help readers establish
or improve current child sexual abuse prevention efforts. Entries
on individual programs provide target audiences, a brief sum-
mary of the program, and contact information.
Saunders, B. E., L. Berliner, and R. F. Hanson, eds. 2004. Child
Physical and Sexual Abuse: Guidelines for Treatment (Revised
Report: April 26, 2004). Charleston, SC: National Crime Victims
Research and Treatment Center.
To provide the best services to child victims of physical and sex-
ual abuse, therapists need to have the best, most reliable infor-
mation regarding treatment of these children. The purpose of this
publication is “to encourage the use of mental health treatment
protocols and procedures that have a sound theoretical basis, a
318
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

good clinical-anecdotal literature, high acceptance among practi-
tioners in the child abuse field, a low chance for causing harm,
and empirical support for their utility with victims of abuse” (p.
5). By providing direction to the mental health community in the
treatment of child physical and sexual abuse, these guidelines en-
courage therapists to make informed treatment decisions.
Videos
Close to Home
Type:
Videotape
Length:
79 minutes
Date:
2001
Cost:
$95.00
Source:
http://www.directcinema.com
The purpose of this video is to raise awareness of child sexual
abuse. Five personal accounts of being sexually abused as a child
are presented by adults survivors of child sexual abuse, as are
children who have more recently been sexually abused. Con-
victed offenders are also heard from; in group therapy sessions
they describe the strategies they used in picking and grooming
children.
Confronting Child Sexual Abuse: A Video Training Series
Type:
Videotape
Length:
unknown
Date:
1993
Cost:
$295.00
Source:
Child Welfare League of America
440 First Street, NW, Third Floor
Washington, DC 20001-2085
Telephone: 202-638-2952
www.cwla.org
With an introduction by Oprah Winfrey, this two-part training se-
ries examines the daily realities of casework experiences with
child sexual abuse. Dramatizations as well as real-life coverage of
social workers investigating allegations of child sexual abuse,
conducting home visits, and other activities demonstrate the joys
and frustrations of working with this population.
Videos
319

Healing Years
Type:
Videotape
Length:
52 minutes
Date:
2001
Cost:
$90.00
Source:
The Safer Society Foundation, Inc.
P.O. Box 340
Brandon, VT 05733
802-247-3132
www.safersociety.org
Girls who are sexually abused by their fathers or other close rela-
tives have a particularly difficult time dealing with all the emo-
tions they experience throughout the ordeal, and even after the
abuse has stopped. This documentary profiles three women who
experienced incest as children: Marilyn Van Derbur, a former
Miss America; Janice Mirikitani, president of the Glide Memorial
Church in San Francisco; and seventy-eight-year-old Barbara
Hamilton. The effects of the incest reach beyond the victims to
their families and society as a whole.
Hiding in Plain Sight: Tales of an American Predator
Type:
DVD
Length:
93 minutes
Cost:
$17.95
Source:
Custom Flix
140 Du Bois Street, Suite A
Santa Cruz, CA 95060
800-853-6077
www.customflix.com
This documentary presents the story of Peter Martin Ebel, also
known as Allan Scott, an imposter and child sexual abuser who
terrorized his victims over a thirty-year period. At various times
he pretended to be a priest, teacher, doctor, author, or pilot. His
targets were young boys, usually around twelve years of age. He
was finally caught and convicted for production of child pornog-
raphy in 2001. Key players are interviewed, including parents,
children, psychiatrists, the district attorney involved in the case,
and the arresting officer. Viewers come away with a better un-
derstanding of how offenders convince children to play along
with them.
320
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

I Am the Boss of My Body: Preventing Child Sexual Abuse
Type:
Videotape
Length:
18 minutes
Date:
1999
Cost:
$69.00
Source:
The Health Connection
55 W. Oak Ridge Drive
Hagerstown, Maryland 21740
800-548-8700
www.healthconnection.org
In this entertaining video for children from five through eight
years, information is presented that will help to protect them
from being sexually abused by helping them to become aware of
their own feelings, likes, and dislikes. Encouraging them to be-
come “the boss” of their bodies, the video presents a variety of sit-
uations in which the children can learn to become “the boss” and
avoid being sexually abused.
She’s Just Growing Up, Dear
Type:
Videotape
Length:
16 minutes
Date:
1996
Cost:
$99 to purchase; $50 to rent
Source:
New Day Films
190 Route 17M
P.O. Box 1084
Harriman, NY 10926
888-367-9154
www.newday.com
In this video, an adult woman begins to confront her sexual abuse
as a child and understand how it has affected her as an adult.
Viewers have an opportunity to understand how to place child
sexual abuse within a cultural context, showing how family
members respond to accusations of sexual abuse.
Stories No One Wants to Hear
Type:
Videotape
Length:
27 minutes
Date:
1993
Cost:
$149
Videos
321

Source:
Fanlight Productions
800-937-4113
www.fanlight.com
Retrieving memories of childhood sexual abuse that have been
buried or repressed for many years is often difficult and trauma-
tizing to the individuals involved. This video documents the
process of retrieving such memories, telling the stories of four
women who discover that they had been sexually abused as chil-
dren—in three cases by their mothers, and in the fourth by a
brother. This video is interesting not only because it discusses the
controversial subject of retrieval of repressed memories but also
because it talks about mother-daughter incest, a type of incest not
often talked about.
View from the Shadows: Volume 1
Type:
Videotape
Length:
18 minutes
Date:
2000
Cost:
$189.00
Source:
Intermedia
1165 Eastlake Avenue E., Suite 400
Seattle, WA 98109
800-553-8336
www.intermedia-inc.com
This video presents interviews with sex offenders, parents, adults
who were sexually abused as children, and experts in the field in
order to prevent child sexual abuse. Offenders describe their mo-
tivations for abusing children and their rationalizations for their
behavior. Parents are encouraged to talk with their children about
sex and sexual abuse.
View from the Shadows: Volume 2
Type:
Videotape
Length:
22 minutes
Date:
2001
Cost:
$189.00
Source:
Intermedia
1165 Eastlake Avenue E., Suite 400
Seattle, WA 98109
800-553-8336
www.intermedia-inc.com
322
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Children and families share their experiences in dealing with
child sexual abuse. Topics include the signs of abuse, patterns of
abuse, the process of disclosure, and factors influencing the deci-
sion to file charges against the perpetrator.
Why God, Why Me?
Type:
DVD
Length:
35 minutes
Date:
2002
Cost:
$29.95
Source:
Custom Flix
140 Du Bois Street, Suite A
Santa Cruz, CA 95060
800-853-6077
www.customflix.com
The effects of being sexually abused as a child are often devastat-
ing. This video focuses on adults who were sexually abused as
children. Emotional and poignant, these personal stories help
viewers to understand many of the feelings that sexual abuse vic-
tims have about themselves and their abuse, including the rea-
sons why they may view traditional family life as threatening.
Internet Resources
In addition to many of the programs listed in Chapter 7 that have
websites full of information, there are several websites that pro-
vide additional information relevant to the field of child sexual
abuse.
http://www.kids.getnetwise.org
Organized and operated by a coalition of Internet industry cor-
porations and public interest organizations, this website offers in-
formation to help parents and children make wise decisions con-
cerning their children’s use of the Internet. The site provides an
online safety guide, tools for families to protect children, links to
safe educational and entertaining websites for kids, and guide-
lines for identifying online trouble and reporting it to law en-
forcement agencies.
http://www.mapsexoffenders.com
Internet Resources
323

This site provides information on sex offenders in forty-five
states, with the goal of mapping all fifty states as soon as possi-
ble, in order to provide local communities with an easy-to-find re-
source for tracking the presence of sexual offenders in their neigh-
borhoods. A link to click on for a map of sexual offenders in one’s
neighborhood is provided.
http://www.netsmartz.org
The Netsmartz Workshop and website is run by the National
Center for Missing and Exploited Children and the Boys and
Girls Clubs of America as a resource for children, parents, and
other guardians, educators, and law enforcement agencies. It
teaches children how they can remain safe when using the Inter-
net. Their goals include enabling children to recognize dangers
while using the Internet; helping children to understand that
people they meet on the Internet should not be considered their
friends; encouraging children to report dangerous incidents or
victimization to a trusted adult; encouraging and enhancing com-
munity educational efforts; and increasing the ability of children
and adults to communicate with each other concerning Internet
safety issues.
324
Selected Print and Nonprint Resources

Glossary
anorexia nervosa
a serious medical disorder characterized by a patho-
logical fear of gaining weight. It generally occurs among young women
while in their teens and early twenties. Symptoms may include trou-
blesome eating patterns, malnutrition, and generally excessive weight
loss.
bulimia
generally considered a serious medical/psychological disor-
der characterized by periods of binge eating followed by purging, which
can include vomiting, use of enemas, and excessive use of laxatives and
diuretics. May also include periods of compulsive exercise in an attempt
to lose weight.
concubinage
the state of being a concubine—a woman who cohabits
with a man but is considered to be of lower social status. In certain early
societies, a young girl or woman could be contracted to a man as sec-
ondary to his wife, a position in which she would have few legal rights
and in which she would be expected to provide sexual services to the man.
cunnilingus
oral stimulation of the clitoris or vulva.
defendant
a person or entity (such as an organization or school)
charged with a civil or criminal action.
dissociative identity disorder
once known as multiple personality dis-
order, this condition is characterized by a person having more than one
discrete identity. Generally considered to be a result of severe childhood
trauma, including the experience of sexual abuse as a child.
exhibitionism
behavior that includes a psychological need to exhibit
parts of one’s body that are usually covered by clothes—specifically, gen-
italia or buttocks. Both males and females can be exhibitionists, but gen-
eral patterns indicate that men are more likely to be exhibitionists than
women, at least in instances of exhibiting genitalia to children.
expert witness
a witness, such as a medical expert, who has specific ed-
ucation, knowledge, training, or experience and is called on to provide
testimony in a trial concerning relevant facts that are beyond the com-
mon knowledge of normal people. For example, persons with specific
medical training and knowledge may be called on as expert witnesses to
325

examine the child and provide testimony confirming a diagnosis of sex-
ual abuse.
fellatio
oral stimulation of the penis.
guardian ad litem
a guardian for a child appointed by the court for the
purpose of representing the child’s best interests in a particular lawsuit.
incest
sexual intercourse between two or more persons who are closely
related; marriage between these individuals is generally forbidden by
law. Primary examples include sex between fathers and daughters,
mothers and sons, or brothers and sisters.
incidence
studies that focus on determining the number of new cases
of child sexual abuse arising during a given time period, usually one
year.
plaintiff
the person or entity who institutes a legal claim or action.
plea bargain
a negotiated agreement between the prosecution and de-
fense in which the defendant pleads guilty to a lesser offense or offenses
in exchange for a more lenient sentence or dismissal of additional
charges.
prevalence
studies concerning the prevalence of child sexual abuse
focus on estimating the proportion of the population who will be sexu-
ally abused as children, generally expressed as a percentage of the pop-
ulation.
pseudomemory
in cases of child sexual abuse, false memories that are
generally believed to be created during hypnosis or other types of thera-
peutic treatments. The existence and validity of pseudomemories or re-
covered memories are questioned by many researchers.
psychosomatic
a condition that generally has physical symptoms, but
the symptoms are created from mental or emotional causes. The term
also refers to the influence of the mind on the body, and is generally used
when referring to medical conditions, diseases, or disorders.
recantation
an act of recanting, or withdrawing, an earlier statement or
testimony. In cases of child sexual abuse, testimony provided by a child
to prosecutors or other investigators may be withdrawn by the child
when put in a stressful courtroom situation, possibly because of fear of
facing the abuser in the courtroom.
recidivism
the tendency to relapse into a previous pattern of behavior.
In the field of child sexual abuse, the term is usually applied to sexual of-
fenders who may be unable to stop their offending behavior once out of
prison.
sodomy
a sexual act between two people consisting of oral or anal con-
tact or penetration. Generally, it is more commonly defined as oral or
anal sex between two men.
326
Glossary

syndrome
a grouping of signs or symptoms that are found together
and that form an identifiable pattern.
voyeurism
a sexual disorder that is generally characterized by the act
of watching unsuspecting individuals who are in the process of undress-
ing or who are naked. The voyeur generally seeks sexual stimulation
from the experience.
vulvovaginitis
inflammation of the vulva and vagina.
Glossary
327


ABA. See American Bar
Association
Abduction, 69
Abel, Gene, 157–158
Aboriginal communities, 94
Abusers. See Perpetrators
Accommodation syndrome, 4
ACLU. See American Civil
Liberties Union
Administration for Children,
Youth and Families, 48
Adoption and Safe Families Act
(ASFA), 222–223
Adults abused as children, 49, 60,
66, 79
Adults Molested as Children
United, 241
Africa, 89, 101, 102, 115
African Americans, 5
African Charter on Human and
Peoples’ Rights, 88, 116
African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, 88, 116
African Committee on the Rights
and the Welfare of the
Child, 116
African Union, 88
Age, distribution of child sexual
abuse by, 190, 192 table 6.3
Age of consent, for sexual
activity, 90–93 table 3.1, 95,
106
Age of majority, for sexual activity,
90–93 table 3.1
Age of maturity, 95
Aggression, 55
AIDS, 25, 35, 101
Alabama, 196
Alaska, 196
Alaska Sex Offender Registration
Act, 237
Alcohol abuse, 6, 19–20
Allegations, recantation of, 27
Ambivalence, 3–4
American Association of
University Women, 52
American Bar Association (ABA),
242
American Civil Liberties Union
(ACLU), 64
American Humane Association,
242–243
American Medical Association,
31
American Professional Society
on the Abuse of Children
(APSAC), 58, 243–244
Animal sacrifice, 35
Anorexia, 19
APSAC. See American
Professional Society on the
Abuse of Children
Arizona, 197
Arkansas, 197–198
Armstrong, Louise, 158
ASACP. See Association of Sites
Advocating Child
Protection
ASAP. See Association for Sexual
Abuse Prevention
ASFA. See Adoption and Safe
Families Act
Index
329

Ashcroft v. American Civil Liberties
Union, 236
Ashcroft v. Free Speech Coalition,
114, 235–237
Asia, 89, 111, 115, 116
Association for Sexual Abuse
Prevention (ASAP), 244
Association for the Treatment of
Sexual Abusers (ATSA),
244–245
Association of Sites Advocating
Child Protection (ASACP),
245
ATSA. See Association for the
Treatment of Sexual
Abusers
Attachment theories, 14
Attention, 9
Aunts, 13
Australia, 85, 89, 93–94, 106, 110,
113, 117, 118
Authority, 8, 12, 16, 28
Awareness Center, 245–246
Bangladesh, 102
Bass, Ellen, 68
Battles of the experts, 30
Behavioral scientists, 29–30
Behavioral theories, 14
Berendzen, Richard, 16–17
Berlin, Fred, 160
Berliner, Lucy, 161
Besharov, Douglas, 161–162
Betrayal, 15
Bible, 1
Biological fathers, 8
Biological theories, 13
Blaine, Barbara, 162
Blue Sky Bridge, 246
Bold Type, Inc., 235
Boys, as victims, 17
Briere, John, 163, 164
Brother-sister incest, 11, 12
Buckey, Peggy, 175
Buckey, Raymond, 175
Bulgaria, 104
Bulimia, 19
Burundi, 103
Butler, Sandra, 163–164
CACs. See Child Advocacy
Centers
California, 62, 64, 71, 198
Camera technology, 105
Canada, 85, 89, 94, 110
Canadian Incidence Study of
Reported Child Abuse and
Neglect, 94
CAPTA. See Child Abuse
Prevention and Treatment
Act
Caretakers, 48, 51, 189, 190
Caribbean, 89
Castration, 118–119
Catholic Church, 5, 50, 53, 75–78
credibility and authority of, 77
Caucasian Americans, 5
CCAN. See Center on Child Abuse
and Neglect
CCRC. See Crimes against
Children Research Center
CDA. See Communications
Decency Act
Celibacy, 77
Center for Sex Offender
Management (CSOM),
246–247
Center on Child Abuse and
Neglect (CCAN), 247
Central America, 89
CFAC. See Child and Family
Advocacy Center
Chamberlin, William Lawson,
238
Charter for the Protection of
Children and Young
People, 75, 77
Chat rooms, 107, 112, 113
Chemical castration, 55, 64
Child, definition of, 90, 95,
105–106, 109
Child Abuse Prevention and
Enforcement Act, 223
Child Abuse Prevention and
Treatment Act (CAPTA),
2–3, 30, 218, 220
330
Index

Child Advocacy Centers (CACs),
24–25
Child advocate programs, 30
Child and Family Advocacy
Center (CFAC), 247–248
ChildBase, 110
Child erotica, 39
Child exploitation, 1, 2, 3,
34–35, 40
Child Lures Prevention, 248
Child Molestation Research
and Prevention
Institute, 248–249
Child Online Protection Act
(COPA), 108, 236
Child pornography, 38, 39
definition of, 105–106, 109
functions of, 107
as international industry,
105
on the Internet, 40, 105–106,
107, 108, 109–110, 111
legislation against, 105, 108–113
Child Pornography (Crimes
Amendment) Act, 106
Child Pornography Prevention
Act (CPPA), 108–109,
114, 224, 235, 237
Child prostitution, 34–35,
114–115, 116
Child Protective Services
(CPS), 23, 24, 25, 48–49
Child sex rings, 38–39
Child sexual abuse
causes of, 13–14
characteristics of, 3–4
conditions for, 14
decline in, 48–49
definition of, 1–3, 186
in early Christian history, 1
effects of, 14–20
as global issue, 104–105
identifying, 47–50
incidence of, 48–49, 89–104,
185–186, 189–194
indicators of, 20–21, 40
legal definition of, 2–3
motivation for, 14
prevalence of, 48–49, 185–186,
186–189
signs of, 194–196
state definitions of, 196–218
symptoms of, 49, 65–66,
194–196
types of, 8–13, 34–40
Child Sexual Abuse Treatment
Program (CSATP), 62, 249
Child trafficking, 114, 115–116
Child Watch, 249–250
Child Welfare League of America,
250
Child witnesses, 27–29
confrontation of accuser by,
27–28
juror assessment and, 29
recantation of allegations by, 27
reliability of, 28, 29
resistance to misinformation
and, 28–29
suggestibility of, 27
Childhelp USA, 250–251
Childnet International, 251
Children
credibility of, 47–48, 49–50
elementary school–age, 72–73
homeless, 34–35
older, 49, 73
preschool, 58, 73
prevention programs for, 33–34
sex with, advocates of, 35
suggestibility of, 27, 49–50
Children of the Night, 251–252
Children’s Advocacy and
Treatment Center, 252
Children’s Advocacy Center of
Georgia, 253
Children’s Bureau of the U.S.
Department of Health and
Human Services, 190
Children’s Internet Protection
Act (CIPA), 237
Christchurch Civil Crèche, 118
Christianity, 117
CIPA. See Children’s Internet
Protection Act
Civil cases, 78, 79
Index
331

Civil statutes, 3
Clergy, 50, 75–78, 79
Coaches, 54
Cognitive distortions, 6
Colombia, 103
Colorado, 198–199
Committee for Children, 31, 253
Communications Decency Act
(CDA), 108, 224, 236
Community notification laws,
69–72
challenges to, 71
effectiveness of, 70
guidelines for, 70
juvenile offenders and, 71–72
perpetrator relocation and,
70–71
vigilantism and, 70, 71
Community registration laws, 50
Compassion, 9
Competency hearings, 27
Computer-altered pornography,
108
Computer-generated
pornography, 108, 109, 113
Conference to the Vatican, 77
Confrontation, 27–28, 60–61, 68
Connecticut, 199
Consent, 3
Contact abuse, 2
Conte, Jon R., 164–165
Contract diseases, 34–35
Control, 7, 8, 9–10, 39
Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or
Punishment, 86
Convention Concerning the
Prohibition and Immediate
Action for the Elimination
of the Worst Forms of Child
Labour, 87
Convention on Cybercrime, 110
Convention on the Rights of the
Child, 231
Conventions, international, 85–88,
231–232
COPA. See Child Online Protection
Act
Coping strategy, 16
Copley, Tiffany, 53
Corner House, 253–254
Council of Europe, 110
The Courage to Heal (Bass and
Davis), 68
Courtois, Christine, 165
Court proceedings, 21, 23, 26–27
expert witnesses in, 29–30
witnesses in, 27–29
CPPA. See Child Pornography
Prevention Act
CPS. See Child Protection Services
Credibility, of children, 47–48,
49–50
Crewdson, John, 6–7, 36–38
Crimes against Children Research
Center (CCRC), 254–255
Crimes Amendment (Child
Pornography) Act, 106
Criminal cases, 78–79
Criminal Justice Act, 109
Criminal Justice and Public Order
Act, 109
Criminal justice system, 12–13,
21–22
Criminal statutes, 3
Crossover abusers, 7
Cruel and unusual punishment,
64, 71
CSATP. See Child Sexual Abuse
Treatment Program
CSOM. See Center for Sex
Offender Management
Cults, 35–37
Culture, 67–68
Cummings, Donna, 238
Cummings, James, 238
Cummings v. State of Arkansas, 238
Cyproproterone, 64
Czech Republic, 119
Damaged goods syndrome, 56
Darkness to Light, 255
Data-tracking systems, 49
332
Index

Daughters and Sons United,
255–256
Davis, Laura, 67, 68
Day care settings, 37
Day care workers, 31, 57, 117, 118,
190
Defense attorneys, 27–28, 30
Delaware, 199
Delayed unconvincing disclosure,
4
Demon Internet, 110
Denial, 6, 188
Denmark, 111, 118
Depo Provera, 64
Depression, 6, 15, 17, 20–21
Developed regions/countries,
incidence of child sexual
abuse in, 89–90, 90–93,
93–95
Developing regions/countries,
incidence of child sexual
abuse in, 89, 95, 98–99
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 18
Diehl-Moore, Pamela, 53
Digital-imaging technology,
108–109
Disclosures, 55–56, 73
District of Columbia, 199–200
Diversion program, 27
Doe v. Chamberlin, 238–239
Dollhouses, 58
Dolls, anatomically detailed, 57–58
Double jeopardy, 71
Doyle, Thomas, 165–166
Drug abuse, 6, 19–20
Duration, 15
Eating disorders, 17, 19, 21
Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS),
88
ECOWAS. See Economic
Community of West African
States
Ecuador, 101–102
Ellis, Peter, 118
E-mail, 113
England, 109, 110, 117
Entrapment, 4
Equal protection, 71
Essential Norms, 77
Ethiopia, 98–99, 102
Europe, 85, 89, 111, 118
Expert witnesses, 29–30
Exploitation, 3, 34–35, 40
Ex Post Facto Clause, 236–237
External inhibitions, 14
FaithTrust Institute, 256
False allegations, 49, 57
False memory, 65–69. See also
Repressed memory
False Memory Syndrome
Foundation, 256–257
Families
changing nature of, 8, 11
intergenerational, 56
Family courts, 26
Family Preservation and Support
Services Program, 222
Father-daughter incest, 8, 9–10, 13
Fathers, 3, 8, 9, 13
child pornography and, 38
repressed memory and, 67
Father-son incest, 8
FBI, 69, 113, 189–190
Fear, 16, 18, 21, 31, 37, 39
Federal Criminal Code and Rule,
excerpts from, 225–230
Federal laws, 218
Federal Protection of Children
Against Sexual Exploitation
Act, 61
Federal Victims of Child Abuse
Act, 27
Female offenders, 53–54
Ferber, Paul, 232–233
Finkelhor, David, 166–167
First Amendment, 108, 109
Fixated abusers, 6
Florida, 52, 64, 200
Force, 3, 4, 10
Foreign countries, 64
Index
333

Forensic specialists, 29
Four Corners Child Advocacy
Center, 257
Franklin, Elaine, 177–178
Freud, Sigmund, 66–67
Fualaau, Vili, 173–174
GAL. See Guardian ad litem
Gallardo, Joseph, 70
Gambia, 102
Garth House, 257–258
Gauthe, Gilbert, 75, 76, 165, 167
Gender discrimination, 116
Generation Five, 258
Geoghan, John, 76–77, 173
Georgia, 64, 200–201
Giarretto, Henry, 168–169
Gingerich, Jim, 235
Goodman, Gail, 169–170
Grandfather-granddaughter
incest, 13
Grandparents, 13
Groth, Nicholas, 6, 7
Guardian ad litem (GAL), 30
Guatemala, 104
Guilt, 10, 14, 15, 16
Hague Convention on Jurisdiction,
Applicable Law,
Recognition, Enforcement
and Co-Operation in
Respect of Parental
Responsibility and
Measures for the Protection
of Children, 87
Hawaii, 201–202
Healing Alliance, 258–259
Health system, 21–22
Helplessness, 4, 18
Herman, Judith, 170
High-risk offenders, 70
Hispanic Americans, 5
Historical child sex rings, 39
HIV, 101
Homeless children, 34–35
Homosexuality, 77
Homosexuals, 50–51
Hormonal treatment, 64
Hotline for Child Pornography on
the Internet, 111
Human rights, 116
Human sacrifice, 35, 117
Hysteria, 66–67
ICCPR. See International
Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
ICWA. See Indiana Child Welfare
Act
Idaho, 202
Idaho v. Wright, 234
Illinois, 202
Inadequacy, feelings of, 6
Incarceration, 49, 61, 62
Incest, 8–13, 26, 36
Incest-survivor recovery
movement, 68
Incest Survivors Anonymous, 259
Incest Survivors Resource
Network International
(ISRNI), 259–260
Incidence, of child sexual abuse,
48–49, 51, 76, 89–104,
185–186, 189–194
in developed regions/countries,
89–90, 90–93, 93–95
in developing
regions/countries, 89, 95,
98–99
in marriage, forced, 102
in orphanages, 89, 100
in police custody, 89, 104
in refugee camps, 89, 103
in schools, 89, 99–100
statistics on, 189–190, 191, 191
table 6.1, 191 table 6.2, 192,
192 table 6.3, 192 table 6.4,
193 table 6.5, 194
on the streets, 89, 104
in war zones, 89, 102–103
at work, 89, 100–101
Indecent exposure, 62
India, 101, 102
Indiana, 202–203
Indian Child Welfare Act (ICWA),
221–222
334
Index

Indicated cases, 48
Ingram, Paul, 177
Integrated theories, 14
Intergenerational families, 56
Internal inhibitions, 14
International conventions, 85–88,
231–232
International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights
(ICCPR), 86
International laws, 85–88
International Society for
Prevention of Child Abuse
and Neglect (ISPCAN), 260
Internet
child pornography on, 40,
105–106, 107, 108, 109–111
predators and, 79–80, 108,
111–113
Internet service providers (ISP),
110
Internet Watch Foundation (IWF),
110–111
Interpol, 106, 110, 111
Intervention, 14, 15, 21–25, 55–56
Interviewing, 21, 22, 24–25, 49–50,
117–118
of mothers, 59
Intimidation, 4, 11, 35
Investigation, 21–22, 23–24
Iowa, 203
ISP. See Internet service providers
ISPCAN. See International Society
for Prevention of Child
Abuse and Neglect
ISRNI. See Incest Survivors
Resource Network
International
IWF. See Internet Watch
Foundation
Jackson, Michael, 170–171
Jacob Wetterling Crimes Against
Children and Sexually
Violent Offender
Registration Program, 69, 70
Jamaica, 104
Japan, 89, 110
John Paul II, 77
Johns Hopkins Hospital, 17
Juror assessment, 29
Juvenile correctional institutions,
89
Juvenile courts, 26, 30
Juvenile offenders
community notification laws
and, 71–72
recidivism and, 71–72
types of, 55
Juveniles, as victims, 112–113
Kanka, Megan, 69–70
Kanof, Deborah, 36
Kansas, 203
Keeping Children and Families
Safe Act, 221
Kempe, C. Henry, 171, 172
Kempe, Ruth S., 171–172
Kempe Center, 260–261
Kentucky, 203–204
Kenya, 98–99, 101
Ketcham, Katherine, 174
Kids First, Inc., 261
King County Sexual Assault
Resource Center, 261–262
Labour and Social Affairs
Commission, 88
Lafave, Debra, 52, 53
La Fontaine, Jean, 117
Lake County Children’s Advocacy
Center, 263
Lanning, Kenneth V., 7, 36–40,
172
LaPorte County Child Abuse
Prevention Council,
263–264
La Rabida Joli Burrell Children’s
Advocacy Center, 262–263
Latin America, 34
Law, Bernard, 77, 173, 180
Law enforcement, 23, 24, 36, 40,
89, 104, 109, 110, 112
Law enforcement agencies, 25–26,
78
online predators and, 80
Index
335

Laws, 61
community notification, 69–72
community registration, 50
conventional, 88
federal, 218
international, 85–87
regional, 88
reporting, 26
Lawsuits, 49
Catholic Church and, 76–77
Legal profession, 27, 30
Legal rights, 27–28
Legal system, 13, 21, 26–30, 53, 64
Lesoine, Kathryn, 238
Letourneau, Mary Kay, 51,
173–174
Loftus, Elizabeth, 174–175
Louisiana, 204
Low-risk offenders, 70
Maine, 71, 205
Making Daughters Safe Again
(MDSA), 264
Marriage, forced, 102
Maryland, 205
Maryland v. Craig, 28
MASA. See Mothers Against
Sexual Abuse
Massachusetts, 205
Masturbation, 21
McMartin, Virginia, 175–176
McMartin case, 50, 117, 182
MDSA. See Making Daughters
Safe Again
Medeiros, Humberto, 180
Media, 49, 67, 77
Medical examinations, 21, 22, 25
Medium-risk offenders, 70
Medroxyprogesterone acetate
(Depo Provera), 64
Megan’s Law, 70
Memory
suggestibility and, 66
traumatic, 37, 39. See also
Repressed Memory
Mental health profession
repressed memory and, 65–69
Mental health professionals, 23, 36
Mercer County, 69
Michaels, Kelly, 176
Michelle Remembers, 117
Michigan, 205–206
Mickey Mehaffy Children’s
Advocacy Center, 257–258
Midwest Regional Children’s
Advocacy Center, 264
Miller, Alice, 176–177
Mind control, 36
Minnesota, 206
Minnesota Multi-Phasic Inventory
(MMPI), 5
Misinformation, resistance to,
28–29
Mississippi, 206
Missouri, 206
Missouri State Supreme Court, 71
MMPI. See Minnesota Multi-
Phasic Inventory
Model Child Care Standards Act—
Guidance to States to
Prevent Child Abuse in Day
Care Facilities, 31
Montana, 64, 206–207
Morphing, 108
Mother-daughter incest, 8
Mothers
denial of, 59
interviews of, 59
role of, in incest, 9–10
Mothers Against Sexual Abuse
(MASA), 264–265
Mother-son incest, 8, 9, 10
Motivation, 7, 39
Mouton, Ray, 165–166
Multidimensional child sex rings,
39
NAMBLA. See North American
Man/Boy Love Association
National Center for Assault
Prevention (NCAP), 265
National Center for Missing and
Exploited Children, 111,
265–266
National Center for Prosecution of
Child Abuse, 266
336
Index

National Center on Child Abuse
and Neglect (NCCAN), 27,
31, 55, 190, 266–267
National Child Abuse Defense and
Resource Center
(NCADRC), 267–268
National Children’s Advocacy
Center, 268–269
National Clearinghouse on Child
Abuse and Neglect
Information, 266–267
National Committee for Prevention
of Child Abuse, 189
National Committee to Prevent
Child Abuse, 31, 269
National Council of Juvenile and
Family Court Judges, 269
National Crime Squad, 109, 110,
113
National Criminal Intelligence
Service/Interpol, 111
National Education Association, 31
National Incidence Studies, 34, 189
National Juvenile Online
Victimization Study, 80
National Organization Against
Male Sexual Victimization,
270
National organizations, 31
National registry of coaches, 54
National registry of teachers, 53
National Review Board, mandates
of, 76–78
National system of notification, 53
National Task Force on Trafficking
in Persons, 88
NCADRC. See National Child
Abuse Defense and
Resource Center
NCAP. See National Center for
Assault Prevention
Nebraska, 207
Netherlands, 111
Nevada, 207–208
New Hampshire, 208
New Jersey, 69, 70, 208
New Mexico, 208–209
News media, 49, 67, 77
New South Wales, 94, 117
New York, 209
New York Times Book Review, 68–69
New York v. Ferber, 232–233, 235
New Zealand, 85, 89, 117, 118
Nicaragua, 95
Nigeria, 102
Noncontact abuse, 2
Nonsexual psychosocial
indicators, 21
North America, 89
North American Man/Boy Love
Association (NAMBLA), 35,
270
North Carolina, 209
North Dakota, 209–210
Northeast Regional Children’s
Advocacy Center, 271
Northern Kentucky Children’s
Advocacy Center, 271
Norway, 119
Numbing of feelings, 16
Oceania, 89
Office of Child and Youth
Protection, 76
Ofshe, Richard, 177–178
Ohio, 210
Oklahoma, 211
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act, 222
Online predators, 79–80. See also
Internet
Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Sale of
Children, Child Prostitution
and Child Pornography, 87,
106, 232
Oregon, 211–212
Orphanages, 89, 100
Osborne v. Ohio, 233–234
PA. See Parents Anonymous (PA)
Paedophile On Line Investigation
Team (POLIT), 109–110
Paganism, 117
Pakistan, 95, 98, 102, 104, 114–115
Index
337

Parental education programs, 32
Parents Anonymous (PA), 272
Parents/step-parents, 8–11
Parents United International, Inc.,
272–273
Pathological distortion, 37
Pedophiles
child pornography and, 38, 39,
40
definition of, 7
Pennsylvania, 212
Perpetrators
classification of, 6–7
clinical characteristics of, 6
distribution of child sexual
abuse by, 190, 191 table 6.2
identifying characteristics of,
5–6
other family members as, 13
parents/step-parents as, 8–11
relocation of, 70–71
research on, 61–63
siblings as, 11–13
treatment for, 61–64, 118–119
types of, 50–55
Peterson, Mike, 165–166
Physical castration, 64
Physical evidence, 28, 36, 40, 49
Physical examinations, 30
Physical force, 11
Physical indicators, 20–21
Physical symptoms, 49
Physicians, 25
Plan of Action on Trafficking in
Persons, 88
Plea bargains, 27
Police custody, 89, 104
Police officers, 26, 32
Policy, regarding child sexual
abuse, 96–98 table 3.2
POLIT. See Paedophile On Line
Investigation Team
Post-Traumatic Stress Syndrome,
18
Power, 3, 4, 7, 9–10
Powerlessness, 15, 18
Predators, Internet, 111–113. See
also Perpetrators
Preferential offenders, 7
Pregnancy, 20
Prevalence, of child sexual abuse,
4–5, 48–49, 185–186, 186–189
in developed regions/countries,
89–90, 90–93, 93–95
in developing
regions/countries, 89, 95,
98–99
in marriage, forced, 102
in orphanages, 89, 100
in police custody, 89, 104
in refugee camps, 89, 103
in school, 89, 99–100
on the streets, 89, 104
in war zones, 89, 102–103
at work, 89, 100–101
Prevention, 72–75
activities, 33–34
categories of, 31
effective means of, 31
Prevention programs, 31, 32–33, 34
effectiveness of, 72–75
Primary caregiver, 48
Primary prevention, 33
Prison, 104
Professional experts, 29–30
Professionals, prevention
programs for, 32–33
Promiscuity, 18
Prosecution, harm done by,
187–188
Prosecutors, 27, 29
Protection of Children Act, 109
Protection of Children against
Sexual Exploitation Act, 224,
239
Protection of Children from Sexual
Predators Act, 224–225
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and
Punish Trafficking in
Persons, Especially Women
and Children,
Supplementing the UN
Convention against
Transnational Organized
Crime, 86–87, 231
Psychodynamic theories, 13–14
338
Index

Psychological examinations, 30
Psychosocial indicators, 20, 21
Pueblo Child Advocacy Center,
273
Punishment, 64, 71, 78
Race, distribution of child sexual
abuse by, 191, 192 table 6.4
Raffaelli, Ron, 235
Rapists, 63, 64
Recantation of allegations, 27
Recidivism, 61–63
of juvenile offenders, 71–72
Reconstructionist model, 67
Records, government, of child
sexual abuse, 96–98 table
3.2
Recovery, 56, 60, 66
Refugee camps, 89, 103
Registries, sex offender, 69, 70, 71
of coaches, 54
state, 218, 219–220 table 6.6
of teachers, 53
Regressed abusers, 6
Rehabilitation, 64, 70, 71, 72
Reliability, of child witnesses, 27,
28, 29
Rene Guyon Society, 35
Reno v. American Civil Liberties
Union, 234, 236
Repeat offenders, 53, 62, 64
treatment for, 118–119
Reporting, 5, 9, 12–13, 16, 49, 93,
186
laws, 26
mandated, 94
reasons for, 22–23
reasons for not, 23
Repressed memory, 37, 60, 65–69.
See also Memory
Research, on perpetrators, 61–62
Resistance, 14, 38
Retraction, 4
Revolutionary United Front
(RUF), 102
Rhode Island, 212–213
Ritual abuse, 35–37, 117–118
Ritual Action Network, 118
RUF. See Revolutionary United
Front
Rush, Florence, 178
Russell, Diana, 178–179
Russia, 111
Safer Society Foundation, Inc.,
273–274
SAINT. See Sexual Abuse
Investigative Team
Salt Lake County Children’s
Justice Center, 275–276
SARA. See Sexual Assault
Recovery Anonymous
Society
Satanism, 35–36, 117
Scapegoat, 68
Schatzow, Emily, 170
Schools, 89, 99–100
Scouts, 39
Secondary prevention, 33–34
Second World Congress against
Commercial Sexual
Exploitation of Children,
87
Secrecy, 4
Self-esteem, 15, 16
Self-help books, 68–69
Self-image, 6, 16, 27
Self-reports, 186
SESAME. See Stop Educator
Sexual Abuse, Misconduct,
and Exploitation
Seventeen magazine, 52
Sex, 16
with children, advocates of, 35
Sex rings, 38–40
categories of, 39
characteristics of, 38, 39
types of, 39
Sexual Abuse Investigative Team
(SAINT), 276
Sexual activity
age of consent for, 90–93 table
3.1
age of majority for, 90–93 table
3.1
Sexual arousal, 2, 6, 14, 18
Index
339

Sexual Assault Recovery
Anonymous Society
(SARA), 276–277
Sexual desire, 7, 38
Sexual disorders, 18–19
Sexual Disorders Clinic, Johns
Hopkins Hospital, 17
Sexual fantasy, 6
Sexuality, 16
Sexually transmitted diseases, 25
Sexual-psychosocial indicators, 21
Sgroi, Suzanne, 2, 7, 179–180
Shame, 14, 16
Shanghai, 100
Shanley, Paul, 77, 180–181
Sibling abuse, 20
Sibling incest, 11–13
parents of victims of, 12
reporting of, 12–13
treatment for, 12–13
Sierra Leone, 102
Silence, 16, 188–189
Situational abuse, 2
Situational offenders, 7
Smith et al. v. Doe et al., 236–237
SNAP. See Survivors Network of
Those Abused by Priests
Social conditions, 67–68
Social Security Act, Title IV-B,
222
Social service agencies, 25
Social service system, 21–22
Social skills, 6
Solo rings, 39
South Africa, 99–100, 105, 110
South America, 89
South Australia, 94
South Carolina, 213
South Dakota, 213
Southeast Asia, 116
Southern Regional Children’s
Advocacy Center, 277
Spain, 95
Sports organizations, 54
Sri Lanka, 101
St. Clair Children’s Advocacy
Center, 274–275
St. Luke’s Regional Medical
Center, 275
State, distribution of child
sexual abuse by, 192,
193, 193 table 6.5, 194
State sex offender registries,
218, 219–220 table 6.6
State statutes, 26
Statutes of limitations
adults abused as children
and, 79
in civil cases, 78, 79
in criminal cases, 78–79
law enforcement agencies
and, 78
Statutory rape laws, 53
Stepfathers, 8
Stigma, 10
Stigmatization, 15
Stogner, Marion, 236
Stogner v. California, 235–236
Stop Educator Sexual Abuse,
Misconduct, and
Exploitation (SESAME),
277
Stop It Now!, 278
Strangers, 49, 74
Street children, 34–35
Streets, incidence of child
sexual abuse on the
streets, 89, 101, 104
Substance abuse, 17, 19–20
Substantiated cases, 48
Suggestibility
of children, 27, 49–50
memory and, 66
Suicide, 20
Summit, Roland, 4, 181–182
Survival books, 68–69
Survivor Connections, Inc.,
278
Survivors Network of Those
Abused by Priests
(SNAP), 279
Survivors of Incest
Anonymous, 279
Sweden, 118
340
Index

Symptoms, of child sexual
abuse, 49, 65, 194–196
Syndicated rings, 39
Talmud, 1
Tanzania, 103
Tavris, Carol, 68–69
Teachers, 33–34, 50, 51–53, 72, 73
Telecommunications Act, 224
Tennessee, 213–214
Tertiary prevention, 34
Testifying, 56, 61
Testimony, videotaped, 28
Texas, 214–215
Therapy, 68
Threats, 4, 5, 11, 35, 39
Timmendequas, Jesse, 69
Title IV-B, Social Security Act, 222
Traffickers, 115, 116
Transition rings, 39
Trauma, 22, 23, 26–27, 37, 39
Traumatic memory, 37
Traumatic sexualization, 15
Treatment
goals of, 24
for perpetrators, 61–65,
118–119
for repeat offenders, 118–119
for victims, 9, 12–13, 17, 21–25,
55–61, 65–66
Treatment programs, 24, 56
Trust, 5, 11, 13, 15, 16, 31
Turkey, 100
Uganda, 98–99
Uncles, 13
Unconditional love, 9–10
UN Convention against
Transnational Organized
Crime, 86–87
UN Convention on the Rights of
the Child, 86, 90, 106
Underwager, Ralph, 182
UN General Assembly, 87–88
United Kingdom, 93, 102, 109–110,
111, 113
United Nations, 85, 89
United States, 86, 104, 106, 110,
111, 113, 114, 117, 118
United States v. American Library
Association, 237
United States v. Hilton, 237
Unsubstantiated cases, 48
U.S. Attorney General’s Task
Force on Family Violence,
61
U.S. Conference of Catholic
Bishops (USCCB), 75, 76, 77
U.S. Congress, 61, 69
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 31, 190
Administration for Children,
Youth and Families, 48
U.S. Supreme Court, 28, 108, 109,
114
cases, 232–237
USCCB. See U.S. Conference of
Catholic Bishops
Utah, 215
Van Derbur Atler, Marilyn, 159
Venereal disease, 20
Vermont, 216
VGT. See Virtual Global Taskforce
Victims, 4–5
boys as, 10, 17, 38
juveniles as, 112–113
treatment for, 9, 12–13, 17,
21–25, 55–61, 65–66
Victims of Child Abuse Act, 223
Video-recorder model, 67
Vietnam War veterans, 18
Vigilantism, 70, 71
Violence, 11, 55
Violent Crime Control and Law
Enforcement Act, 69
Virginia, 216
Virginity examinations, 100
Virtual child pornography,
108–109, 113–114
Virtual Global Taskforce (VGT),
110, 113
Virtual pornography, 108
VOICES in Action, 279–280
Index
341

Wakefield, Hollida, 182
Wales, 109
Warren, Chet, 162
War zones, 89, 102–103
Washington State, 70, 216
Watters, Ethan, 177–178
Weapons, 55
Western Australia, 94
Western countries, 34
Western Europe, 89
West Virginia, 217–218
Wetterling, Jacob, 69, 70
Whitman, Christine Todd, 70
WINGS. See Women Incested
Needing Group Support
Wisconsin, 218
Witchcraft, 117
Witnesses, 78
child, 27–29, 61
expert, 29–30
Women Incested Needing Group
Support (WINGS), 280
Women’s rights, 116
Work, incidence of child sexual
abuse at, 89, 100–101
A World Fit for Children (UN
General Assembly), 87–88
Wyoming, 218
Year, distribution of child sexual
abuse by, 190, 191 table
6.1
Yokohama Global Commitment
2001, 87
342
Index

About the Author
Karen L. Kinnear holds an M.A. in sociology and is a paralegal,
as well as a professional researcher, editor, and writer with more
than twenty years of experience in sociological, economic, statis-
tical, and financial analysis. Among her previous publications are
Violent Children: A Reference Handbook; Gangs: A Reference Hand-
book; Women in the Third World: A Reference Handbook; and Single
Parents: A Reference Handbook, all part of ABC-CLIO’s Contempo-
rary World Issues series.
343

