THE SINOPEDIA SERIES
THE SINOPEDIA SERIES
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
History
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

Th e Sinopedia Series
Editorial Board
Chief Advisor: Wang Chen
Chief  Conceptualiser:  Wang Zhongwei
Executive Producer: Guo Changjian
Publisher: Li Xiangping
Chief Editor: Wu Wei
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

Th e Sinopedia Series
China’s 
History
CAO DAWEI
SUN YANJING
Australia • Brazil • Japan • Korea • Mexico • Singapore • Spain • United Kingdom • United States
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

© 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd 
Original Chinese edition © 2010 China Intercontinental Press
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the 
copyright herein may be reproduced, transmitted, stored or used 
in any form or by any means graphic, electronic, or mechanical, 
including but not limited to photocopying, recording, scanning, 
digitalizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or 
information storage and retrieval systems, without the prior writ-
ten permission of the publisher.
China’s History
Cao Dawei and Sun Yanjing
Publishing Director: 
Paul Tan
Editorial Manager: 
Yang Liping
Associate Development Editor: 
Tanmayee Bhatwadekar
Associate Development Editor: 
Joe Ng
Senior Product Director: 
Janet Lim
Product Managers: 
Kevin Joo 
Lee Hong Tan   
Assistant Publishing Manager: 
Pauline Lim
Production Executive: 
Cindy Chai   
Translators: 
Xiao Ying 
Li Li 
He Yunzhao
Copy Editor: 
Jane Lael
Cover Designer: 
Ong Lay Keng
Compositor: 
Integra Software Services, 
Pvt. Ltd.
Printed in Singapore
1 2 3 4 5 12 11 10
For permission to use material from this 
text or product, submit all requests online at 
www.cengageasia.com/permissions
Further permissions questions can be emailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
ISBN-13: 978-981-4319-78-2
ISBN-10: 981-4319-78-3
Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd
5 Shenton Way #01-01
UIC Building
Singapore 068808
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized  learning 
s olutions with oﬃ  ce locations around the globe, including 
 Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, Mexico, Brazil and Japan. 
Locate your local oﬃ  ce at: www.cengage.com/global
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by 
Nelson Education, Ltd.
For product information, visit www.cengageasia.com
asia.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

Table of Contents
Preface vii 
Chapter 1. Th e Origin of Chinese Culture 3
Chapter 2.  Th e Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou Dynasties: Early States 
 and Bronze Civilization 17
Chapter 3. Th e Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods: 
  States Contend for Power, Control, and Social Reform 31
Chapter 4. Th e Qin and Han Dynasties: Establishment and Development 
   of a Great Unifi ed Country 53
Chapter 5. Th e Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties: Regime 
   Division and Ethnic Concentration 77
Chapter 6. Th e Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open 
  Age 95
Chapter 7. Th e Song and Yuan Dynasties: Cultural Collision 
   and Fusion and Socioeconomic Advances 119
Chapter 8. Th e Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War): 
  Prosperity of the Farming Civilization and Crisis before 
  Modern Times 145
Chapter 9. Th e Decline and Struggle of Modern China 177
Chapter 10. Th e People’s Republic of China: In Search of Socialist 
   Modernization 189
Appendix. Chronological Table of the Chinese Dynasties 201
Index 203
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

Preface
One of the earliest civilizations in the world, China is the only ancient  civilization 
in world history with no interruption. Th e Chinese people have inherited a com-
mon culture and history longer than have any other people on earth.
Separated from the western civilization by mountains, deserts, and oceans, 
China is geographically independent. Fertile farmlands, prairies, and coastal 
areas for fi shing and trading are spread over a vast space.
China’s territory is the third largest in the world today, and up until the 
modern age, it had always been the largest. Its population was one-third of the 
global total over a fairly long time in history.
Living in East Asia’s northern temperate zone, China’s ancestors nurtured 
an agrarian economy. They stepped into the threshold of civilization from a 
stable agricultural community, and their clan chiefs grew into a new ruling 
class. Th us, kindred ties and a state administrative system fused into an under-
lying social structure, resulting in a tradition that emphasizes inwardness, com-
munity, human relations, and centralized power.
Intensive cultivation marked with the use of iron tools developed in the 
Yellow and Yangtze river basins in ancient China, forging an individual farm-
ing economy, private land ownership, and tenant contractual relationships.
Th e natural economy-based centralism, boasting a highly centralized state 
power and a well-organized hierarchy, competently exercised jurisdiction 
over a large population across a vast territory via professional offi  cials selected 
through imperial examinations, and created smooth and efficient road and 
communication networks.
Th e application of a single writing system via characters and the prevalence 
of Confucian philosophy and culture have exerted a profound infl uence on the 
homogeneity and cohesion of the Chinese civilization.
The world experienced significant changes during the Ming and Qing 
dynasties (1368–1911). Major European countries entered into the industrial 
age. The rise of capitalism threw the whole world into a vast maelstrom of 
commodity circulation. Western powers swarmed into other continents across 
the oceans and established colonies. China reached a new peak in its course 
of farming civilization and showed some signs of modernization. However, 
the emperors of the early Qing Dynasty (1644–1991) turned a blind eye to 
the historical trend and kept China from the outside world. Th ey stubbornly 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

viii 
PREFACE
promoted the farming system while discouraging the budding industrial 
 civilization. Hence, the positions of China and the West were overwhelmingly 
reversed, leading to a meteoric decline of China in the midst of industrial 
 civilization.
Th e First Opium War broke out from 1840 to 1842. Th ree score years from 
then on, China, invaded and insulted by western powers, was forced to ink a 
series of unequal treaties to cede territory and pay indemnities, and fell into a 
colonial and semi-colonial abyss.
Th e invasion brought severe tribulations to the Chinese people and accel-
erated the disintegration of the restrictive traditional natural economy, giving 
rise to national capitalists and working classes and reducing the bankrupted 
peasantry to semi-proletariats.
During the century-long modernization dating from the Opium War, the 
Chinese people constantly promoted the development of national industry 
through struggles against imperialism, feudalism, and capitalism. Th e Revolu-
tion of 1911 led by Dr. Sun Yat-sen overthrew the Qing Dynasty, and helped 
the spread of concepts such as democracy and republic. Next, the revolution 
guided by the Communist Party of China won the great victory of national 
independence and people’s liberation.
October 1, 1949 witnessed the founding of the People’s Republic of China, 
inaugurating a new era toward socialist modernization. The reform and 
opening-up policy with Chinese characteristics was implemented after 30 
years of zigzagging exploration. Th e policy galvanized China’s eff orts to prac-
tice democracy and rule of law in the political fi eld and established a socialist 
market-oriented economy, enabling the country to actively participate in inter-
national competition and cooperation in economy. All these are done to work 
toward an affl  uent, democratic, cultural, sustainable, and harmonious society.
Ancient China’s Silk Road played an important role in promoting China’s 
relations with the outside world. Th e introduction of China’s three great inven-
tions—paper, gunpowder, and compass—to the western world expedited the 
formation of the bourgeois society. Meanwhile, western culture’s eastward 
penetration and the promotion of Marxism signifi cantly infl uenced the course 
of Chinese history. Today, the Chinese nation, with its brand-new forward-
looking philosophy of pursuing modernization and opening up to the outside 
world, has integrated itself into the global community and will contribute sig-
nifi cantly to safeguarding world peace and stability.
Th is book traces the unique trajectory and sums up the distinct features of 
the Chinese civilization and attempts to unlock the secret behind the continu-
ity of the Chinese nation over thousands of years.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

1
3
1
Primitive Humans and Tribes
China, a country with the highest number of primitive human sites in the 
world, has not only preserved the most abundant materials related to the ori-
gin of human beings, but also has had a fairly complete evolutionary process 
 without serious interruptions.
In the early Paleolithic Period (about 250,000 to 2 million years ago), 
 China’s ancient ancestors were scattered over a vast area that covers today’s 
 Yunnan, Sichuan, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Henan, Hebei, Jiangsu, Anhui, Hubei, 
 Guizhou, Inner Mongolia, Liaoning, and Beijing. Several hundred sites of the 
late Paleolithic Period, dating to about 10,000 to 40,000 years ago, have been 
found across China.
The progression from Yuanmou Man to Peking Man and then to Upper 
Cave Man outlines the evolution of early humans in China. Yuanmou Man 
dates to 1.7 million years ago, and was named aft er Yuanmou, Yunnan, where 
their fossils, two teeth and some handmade stone instruments, were unearthed. 
Coal dust and burned bones were found in clay layers. Yuanmou Man fossils 
are believed to be the earliest human remains in the Chinese territory.
Th e sedimentation layer of the caveman site at Longgu Mountain, Zhouk-
oudian, Beijing, is over 40 meters deep. Archeological study shows that Peking 
Man started to live in Zhoukoudian about 700,000 years ago and lived there for 
about 500,000 years. More than 17,000 pieces of stoneware, including  choppers, 
scrapers, and arrowheads, were unearthed from the area. The six- meter-thick 
The Origin of 
Chinese Culture
Chapter 1
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

4 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Burned bones unearthed in the Peking Man Site indicate mastery of ﬁ re.
ash layer is evidence of Peking Man’s 
 ability to use fire for warmth, to cook 
food, give light, and drive away beasts. 
Peking Man, while retaining some physi-
cal features of apes, walked upright and 
had a brain capacity much higher than the 
ape’s, about 76 percent of that of modern 
humans.
Remains of the Upper Cave Man were 
found in caves at the top of Longgu Moun-
tain. Three pieces of human skull bones 
and some skeleton fossils; bone needles 
created by scratching, cutting, grinding, 
and drilling; pierced stone pearls, clam 
shells, and beast tusks; and other adorn-
ments were unearthed at the site. These 
indicate that the Upper Cave Man, who 
lived about 18,000 years ago, had mastered 
The restored head portrait of 
Peking Man.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 1 The Origin of Chinese Culture 
5
the skill of drilling wood to make fire. 
Manmade fire is deemed the beginning 
of human  history. Upper Cave Man had 
nearly the equivalent brain capacity of 
modern human beings, as well as a similar 
physique and appearance.
About 10,000 years ago, the Chinese 
ancestors entered into the Neolithic 
Period. More than 7,000 sites, centered 
in the valleys of the Yangtze and Yellow 
rivers, are spread over a vast area. The 
Banpo Site of the Yangshao Culture (5,000 
to 7,000 years ago) and the Hemudu 
Site of the Hemudu Culture (5,300 to 
7,000 years ago) are representative of the 
early Neolithic Period, while the Long-
shan site (4,000 to 4,500 years ago) is 
typical of the late Neolithic Period.
The Banpo Site in the Yellow River 
basin, located in the Banpo  village of 
Xi’an, Shaanxi, dates back 6,000 years 
and covers an area of about 50,000 square 
meters. The Banpo people lived in half-
buried caves built with wood, branches, 
or grass, and each had a stove made of clay and a kang, a fire-warmed brick 
sleeping platform. More than 200 silos used to preserve food were found. Tools 
and bones were excavated from the site, as were colorful porcelains with geo-
metric patterns and human and animal designs.
The 7,000-year-old Hemudu Site in Hemudu Village, Yuyao, Zhejiang, is 
typical of the Yangtze River basin settlements, whose stilt style of architecture 
has for thousands of years been a major architectural form used in areas south 
of the Yangtze.
In the Neolithic Period, the ancient people widely used stone-made axes, 
spades, hoes, knives, millstones, and other ground-stone tools. They planted 
millet, rice, cabbage, mustard, and other crops, and raised pigs, dogs, oxen, 
goats, chickens, and other livestock.
Th e Xi’an Banpo Site and the Lintong Jiangzhai Site of the Yangshao  Culture 
both have a central communal activity area surrounded by small residential 
rooms. Kilns for baking pottery were located near the residential quarters. A 
moat for protection was excavated around the village, and its tombs lie beyond 
the moat. Th e Niuheliang Site of the Hongshan Culture has a temple for wor-
shipping a goddess and a large altar. Th ese sites indicate the existence of a clan, 
The restored head portrait of Upper 
Cave Man.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

6 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Bone needles and adornments made by Upper Cave Man.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 1 The Origin of Chinese Culture 
7
Pig-pattern black pottery bowl unearthed at the Hemudu Culture Site, Yuyao County, 
Zhejiang
Rice unearthed at the Hemudu Culture Site, Yuyao County, Zhejiang.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

8 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Grinding stones of the Neolithic Age, unearthed in Peiligang, Xinzheng County, Henan.
Clay mask of an earthen goddess of the Hongshan Culture period, unearthed at Niuheliang, 
Liaoning.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 1 The Origin of Chinese Culture 
9
a kinship-based community with families as the basic units. A tribe  normally 
consisted of a few clans.
Th e progression from being hunter-gatherers to doing primitive  agriculture 
and  livestock husbandry, as well as the resulting settlements and clan society 
are all signs of increased productivity brought about by profound changes in 
mode of production and social structure.
Glimmer of Civilization in Legendary Times
Around 3,000 BC, the Tigris and Euphrates valleys in West Asia and Egypt in 
Africa entered the threshold of civilization, as did the Yellow River Valley and 
the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River in China. The history of 
remote antiquity was passed down mainly through oral myths and legends, and 
later was recorded in written documents.
Huangdi (Yellow Emperor) and Yandi (Flame Emperor) were the chieft ains 
of tribal groups along the Yellow River some 4,000 to 5,000 years ago. Later 
generations, in their eff orts to enumerate their ancestors’ feats, attributed key 
inventions to these two leaders.
An altar at the Hongshan Culture Site, Niuheliang, Liaoning.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

10 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Yandi, also known as Shennong Shi, the legendary founder of primitive 
agriculture and medicine, is said to have invented pottery and established 
 markets for exchange. Huangdi, also known as Xuanyuan Shi, invented bows, 
arrows, and vehicles, and taught people sewing and building. He ordered his 
subordinates to invent characters, the calendar, arithmetic, and music. His 
The Portrait of Huangdi (rubbing from the stone sculpture of the Han Dynasty at Wu’s 
Memorial Temple in Jiaxiang, Shandong).
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 1 The Origin of Chinese Culture 
11
wife, Lei Zu, created the skill set of planting mulberry, 
raising silkworms, and weaving brocade with the silk 
produced.
The extant tombs and cultural relics of the 
Neolithic Period (4,000 to 8,000 years ago) provide 
evidence for these legends. Silkworm cocoons and 
spinning wheels unearthed in Xiaxian County, Shanxi, 
prove that sericulture and textiles were popular at the 
time. Colored earthen kettles in the shape of ships 
unearthed at the Banpo Site are indicators of ship-
building. Symbols discovered at Banpo and other sites 
show the rudiments of written characters. Clay xun 
(globular fl ute) excavated in Banpo and bone fl utes in 
Wuyang, Henan, testifies to the existence of musical 
instruments in the Neolithic period.
Unearthed in Banpo, pottery zeng, pots with a 
hole at the bottom, show that people steam-cooked 
their food. The house layout and pottery patterns 
illustrate arithmetic progression and symmetric 
design. Th e number symbols of I, II, III, X, 人, 十 (ten), 
The Mausoleum of Huangdi at Huangling County, Shaanxi, is a place where his descendants 
burn incense in his honor.
Bone ﬂ utes of the 
Neolithic Age, unearthed 
at Jiahu, Wuyang 
County, Henan.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

12 
CHINA’S HISTORY
and 八 (eight) engraved on pottery unearthed at Wuyang, Henan, are the same 
in meaning as those of later inscriptions on bones and tortoise shells. Some 
bone fl utes still have the half-line mark for drilling holes, indicating accurate 
calculation.
Th ese inventions, key elements that advanced the Chinese ancestors into the 
age of civilization, are the root source of many later great  achievements. Huangdi 
and Yandi, therefore, are respected as the fi rst ancestors of the  Chinese people.
Th e Huangdi and Yandi tribes, originating from the Loess Plateau in north-
ern Shaanxi, continued to expand eastward along the Yellow River. Together, 
Boat-shaped painted pottery kettles of the Yangshao Culture period, unearthed at Beishouling, 
Baoji, Shaanxi.
A painted pottery basin of the Neolithic Age, 
unearthed at the Banpo Site, Shaanxi. The 
decorative pattern features a human face 
with two ﬁ sh in its mouth.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 1 The Origin of Chinese Culture 
13
they defeated the Chiyou Tribe in the river’s 
lower reaches. Later, Huangdi defeated the 
Yandi in the Banquan campaign to cap-
ture the central plains, gradually achieving 
the integration of the Yandi, Huangdi, and 
 Chiyou tribes, creating the main population 
base of the Chinese nation.
Dragon images were discovered in Puyang, 
Henan, in tombs that date back 6,000 years. 
The dragon image was formed by integrat-
ing the totems of many tribes, refl ecting their 
progression from conducting inter-tribal wars 
to forging alliances that led to the formation of 
the majority population of the Chinese people.
In the late Neolithic Period, productivity 
increased rapidly. Bronze artifacts unearthed 
in Gansu, Qinghai, and other places indicate 
that bronze and stoneware were both used 
in this period, about 4,000 years ago. More 
than 100 pieces of pottery and jadeware were 
found in tombs of this era.
Th e heroes of this period are Yao, Shun, 
and Yu, famous chieftains of the Yellow 
River valley tribes who ruled after Yandi 
and Huangdi. The area suffered severe 
floods during the times of Yao and Shun. 
Yu directed the people to dredge the rivers, 
A human-shaped pottery pot of 
the Neolithic Age, unearthed at 
Dadiwan, Qin’an, Gansu.
A dragon laid with conches unearthed from a tomb at Puyang, Henan. It is honored as the 
“First Dragon in China.”
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

14 
CHINA’S HISTORY
The stone carving of Yu’s water control project at Yuwangtai, Kaifeng.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Agriculture originated from three regions in the world: West Asia, 
East Asia, and Central and South America. The agricultural center of 
East Asia is China, whose agriculture dates back some 10,000 years 
and became well developed 7,000 to 8,000 years ago. 
China’s primitive agriculture and animal husbandry had distinctive 
features when compared to the rest of the world. In China, millet 
dominated in the North and rice in the South; in West Asia, wheat 
and barley were the major crops. Central and South America grew 
mainly potatoes and corn. In terms of animal husbandry, dogs, pigs, 
chickens, and water buffalo were among those fi rst raised in China. 
The list later expanded to include three more domestic  animals––
horses, cattle, and sheep. Sheep and goats were dominant in West 
Asia, and alpacas were the only livestock raised in Central and South 
America. 
FEATURES OF CHINA’S PRIMITIVE AGRICULTURE
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 1 The Origin of Chinese Culture 
15
and aft er thirteen years of hard work, the disasters were fi nally brought under 
 control. He also led the people to build irrigation  projects. Agricultural pro-
duction in the Central Plains developed rapidly and Yu’s infl uence extended to 
the Yangtze and Huaihe river basins.
According to historical records, Yu set up nine prefectures, built new roads, 
controlled nine lakes, and removed numerous mountains. This helped break 
tribal boundaries and integrate various tribes into a unifi ed social community. 
Yu also gave instructions on production based on the geological features of dif-
ferent regions, asked the regions to pay tributes, and distributed grain among 
the regions to maintain an overall balance. Yu’s extraordinary capabilities and 
enormous achievements helped him establish authority over the whole region.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

2
17
2
Presence of the State and Change of Dynasties
Th e Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou dynasties were an important period for the 
formation and development of early states.
Around 2070 BC, Yu set up Xia, the first dynasty in Chinese history. Yu 
divided the whole country into nine regions and established the capital in 
Yangcheng (today’s Dengfeng). The administrative regions included today’s 
Henan, Hebei, Shanxi, Shandong, Shaanxi, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Anhui, Hubei, 
and so on. Yu also collected all the bronze in the state to make nine huge Dings 
(ancient cooking vessels), symbols of supreme authority.
Th e Xia Dynasty built palaces and cities with walls and moats for protec-
tion, established management institutions for diff erent matters, and set up offi  -
cial posts at diff erent levels. Furthermore, it also defi ned tributes and taxes, set 
up military forces, created rituals and criminal laws, built jails, and carried out 
other functions of a sovereign state.
The succession of authority from Yao and Shun to Yu was originally per-
formed through peaceful abdication of power. Yu, by means of his authority, 
used his son Qi’s power to defeat the Dongyi Tribe Chieft ain Yi, the planned suc-
cessor of Yu, and conquered other rebellious tribes. From then on, the hereditary 
system replaced the abdication system, a practice followed in later dynasties.
While there are few historical records of the Xia Dynasty, archeological 
excavations complement the historical records, presenting a relatively complete 
cultural view of the dynasty.
The Xia, Shang, and 
Western Zhou Dynasties: 
Early States and Bronze 
Civilization
Chapter 2
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

18 
CHINA’S HISTORY
The area and period of existence suggested by the Erlitou cultural relics 
from Yanshi, Henan, generally match the location of the Xia Dynasty. At the 
site, the earliest palace cluster discovered in China to date was discovered. Stan-
dard and orderly in layout, symmetrical along the central line, it was equipped 
with roads and pottery-pipe ditches, and had a temple for off ering sacrifi ces to 
ancestors. Jade, pottery, and bronze ritual ware were excavated at the site. Cast 
bronze and pottery mills were distributed around the city, indicating a social 
division of labor. Th e diff erence in tomb systems and funereal articles, and the 
more than thirty skeletons with signs of binding and execution, were indicative 
of the era’s social hierarchy. All indicate the establishment of the rudiments of a 
country in the Xia Dynasty.
The Xia Dynasty lasted more than 470 years. The final ruler of the Xia, 
being cruel and extravagant, was opposed by the masses and deserted by his 
followers. Around 1600 BC, Tang, the chieft ain of the Shang Tribe that lived 
in the lower reaches of the Yellow River, united numerous tribes to terminate 
the Xia Dynasty and establish the Shang Dynasty with Bo as its capital (Yanshi, 
Henan). The capital was later relocated several times. In 1300 BC,  Pangeng, 
ruler of the Shang, moved the capital to Yin (today’s Anyang, Henan), where 
the dynasty regime stayed till its end. Th us, the Shang Dynasty, the fi rst docu-
mented era of China, is also called the Yin Dynasty. The Shang Dynasty’s 
highly developed hierarchy consisted of a king, nobles, commoners, and slaves, 
who were known for their use of jade, bronze, horse-drawn chariots, ancestor 
worship, and highly organized armies.
Th e sovereignty of the Shang Dynasty lasted more than 500 years, until the 
Zhou Tribe rose from the Weishui River and replaced it.
A drawing of restored palaces at the Erlitou Site.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 2 The Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou Dynasties 
19
Bronze Ligui of the Western Zhou Dynasty. Its 32-character inscription records the historical 
event of the punitive expedition to the Shang Dynasty by Emperor Wuwang of the Zhou 
Dynasty.
Jade image of a Shang Dynasty 
person, unearthed in the Fuhao Tomb 
of the Yin Ruins in Anyang, Henan.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

20 
CHINA’S HISTORY
In 1046 BC, King Wu of the Zhou, together with more than 800 tribes, 
defeated the troops of King Zhou of the Shang Dynasty and established the 
Zhou Dynasty, called the Western Zhou, with its capital in Haojing (west of 
today’s Xi’an, Shaanxi). During the Zhou Dynasty, the empire was unified, a 
middle class emerged, and iron replaced bronze for tools and weapons. And 
Confucius developed a code of ethics that has dominated Chinese thought and 
culture for over twenty-fi ve centuries.
At the end of the nine centuries of Zhou rule, the Western Zhou Dynasty 
regime declined due to the rise of vassal lords. In 771 BC, the northwestern 
Quanrong ethnic group captured Haojing and killed Emperor Youwang, mark-
ing the end of the Western Zhou Dynasty.
Bronze Yu Ding (tripod cauldron) of the Western Zhou Dynasty. In the inner wall of the Ding, 
291 engraved characters in 19 lines describe the conferment of an aristocratic title to Yu in 
the 23rd year of the reign of King Kang of the Zhou Dynasty, and the awarding of subjects 
and slaves to him. The Ding is a valuable artifact in the study of the Western Zhou feudal 
system.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 2 The Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou Dynasties 
21
Early States and Religious Society
Chinese civilization originated in the central plains, where an intensive agri-
cultural economy prevailed and blood ties didn’t collapse even during the 
centuries of civilization of society. The need for water control, for fighting 
external wars, and for handling other public aff airs increasingly strengthened 
the blood-relation-based family organizations that connected the single, sepa-
rated, natural agricultural economies. Th is further consolidated the rights and 
positions of clan leaders, who later became members of a new ruling class 
that integrated political power, religious authority, and financial and mili-
tary power, and religious authority. In other words, clan-based organizations 
melted into state forms, shaping basic patterns for a patriarchal and feudal 
society.
People lived together in communities based on blood relations in the Xia 
and Shang dynasties. Th ese clustering tribes were called Fangguo (Clan State). 
Leaders depended more on traditional clans and ties of kinship, and ruled on 
the basis of subordination among clans. The influence of this union of clan 
states didn’t directly penetrate into neighboring kingdoms.
In the early Western Zhou Dynasty, the king established rituals as well 
as patriarchal and feudal systems to beef up the state’s rule over neighboring 
regions, all of which resulted in intensifi ed state administrative functions.
Th e patriarchal system was based on inheritance of land, property, and the 
position of blood relations. Th e King of Zhou, who called himself the “son of 
Heaven” and passed the throne of the Zhou Dynasty to the eldest son of his 
legal wife, was titled emperor of the state. Th e brothers of the eldest son would 
inherit part of the king’s property and were honored as vassals or princes of the 
state, and they were supreme rulers within their own  jurisdiction. 
Based on the patriarchal principle, the system was designed to enroll the 
royal relatives in the feudal system, thereby cementing the rule of the Zhou 
Dynasty. Th e relatives were given “both citizens and land” and were supposed 
to manage local aff airs, pay visits and tributes regularly, and off er services to 
fulfi ll their responsibility to safeguard the court. Th e feudal system, based on 
tenants of the same surname, broke the old kin-based state borders, and helped 
establish authority in some rich regions, key strategic areas, and military places. 
The resulting network, which reached from the central government down to 
the local areas, contributed to the country’s stability and pushed the economic 
and cultural development of peripheral areas. In neighboring areas, a small 
number of relatives-in-law, ministers, and descendants of nobles were awarded 
“citizens and land” with a view to unifying other tribes and stabilizing political 
situations.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

22 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou dynasties, which diff erentiated political 
positions based on kin relationships, were societies with stringent class hier-
archies. As Th e Commentary by Zuo on Th e Spring and Autumn Annals goes, 
“There are ten social hierarchies, just as there are different days in life.” The 
king ruled over ministers, who were superior to scholars, who were followed by 
servants at lower levels. Nobles with various privileges were oft en administra-
tive offi  cials at all levels, constituting the ruling class.
Th e imperial family and nobles owned many slaves. Prisoners or crimi-
nals, these slaves could be given away or sold. In addition to being used for 
hard labor, slaves were also killed as sacrifi ces to ancestors or buried alive 
with deceased nobles. More than 500 were offered as sacrifices in a single 
festival during the Shang Dynasty. However, strict patriarchal ties of kinship 
ensured that ordinary clansmen were not reduced to the status of “tools that 
could speak.” Th e ordinary clansmen had their own families and means of 
production. As the main laborers of the agricultural and handicraft  industry, 
they belonged to the civilian class and undertook services for the court and 
for nobles.
To conquer those outside and oppress those inside their kingdom, the 
Shang and Zhou dynasties maintained a powerful army. Jails and cruel crimi-
nal laws that involved execution, burying people alive, and cutting off  the noses 
and feet of human beings were established as important means to maintain the 
reign of the nobles.
In the Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou dynasties, both nobles and civil-
ians lived in social networks woven by clan or patriarchal ties. In addition to 
the establishment of the kin and region-integrated patriarchal clan and feudal 
systems, a series of ritual and musical systems used to regulate behavior were 
formulated to “diff erentiate and rank the nobles and the commoners” and to 
maintain the hierarchy and social order.
In the Western Zhou Dynasty, offering sacrifices to ancestors was equal 
in importance to wars, and was an important rite to safeguard the patriarchal 
clan system and enhance national integration. Guided by the idea of “destiny 
is conditional and favors those with virtues,” the Zhou abandoned the Shang’s 
blind belief in ghosts and gods and promoted the morality of respecting ances-
tors and the thought of “holding moral and caring people in high esteem.” Th is 
helped to enlighten the people and to safeguard the hierarchical system and 
social order, showing a certain degree of rationalism.
By adopting a chain of innovative measures regarding government, West-
ern Zhou Dynasty leaders cleverly combined kinship with the state regime, 
which helped stabilize the society, maintain the social order, and enhance 
national cohesion. In the meantime, breaking the old Xia and Shang dynas-
ties’ pattern of confl icts among independent clans also strengthened the king’s 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 2 The Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou Dynasties 
23
 control over all parts of the state and pushed forward economic and cultural 
development in remote areas.
Brilliant Bronze Civilization
Both Shang and Western Zhou dynasties had more extensive territories than 
that of the Xia. Combined, they made up the largest country in the world. 
With rapid social and economic growth and the gradual maturity of the state 
form of rule, civilization during the Shang and Zhou made a great leap for-
ward, mainly through the development of cities, the beginnings of a written 
language via inscriptions on bones and tortoise shells, and the creation of 
bronze from tin and copper.
The capital of the Shang covered an area of 30 million square meters, 
and boasted a population of 140,000 and a thriving commercial sector with 
“nine markets.” The Western Zhou had 3 million citizens nationwide and 
saw even more development in urban cities, roads, accommodations, and 
postal services.
Ghost and god worship was popular in the Shang Dynasty. The nobles 
always cast lots in the event of sacrifices, war, fishing, hunting, and disease, 
among others. They engraved the results, known as “oracle inscriptions,” 
on tortoise shells or bones. The ancient characters used are called Jiaguwen 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
The square-fi elds system adopted in the Shang and Zhou dynasties 
refers to farmland divided into square fi elds. Inside each square fi eld, 
the crisscrossed ditches and paths resembled the Chinese character 
Jing (幷). State-owned in name, the fi elds were actually owned by 
royal families and nobles. In exchange for certain tributes, civilians 
could use but not own them. No sales or transfers were allowed. 
Each fi eld was divided into nine squares. The outer eight patches 
were private, the central one public. Village members were allowed 
to work in the “private fi elds” only after fi nishing work in the “public 
fi elds,” for the nobles.
THE SQUARE-FIELDS SYSTEM
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

24 
CHINA’S HISTORY
(inscriptions on bone or tortoise 
shell). Since the 19th century, more 
than 150,000 pieces of bone and 
shell with inscriptions have been 
unearthed, from places such as 
the Yin Ruins in Henan, indicat-
ing extensive use of Jiaguwen in the 
Shang Dynasty. Use of these ancient 
characters marked the start of Chi-
na’s recorded history.
Characters cast on bronze ware 
from the Western Zhou Dynasty 
are called Jinwen (inscriptions 
on bronze). Jiaguwen and Jinwen 
incorporated six kinds of charac-
ter-shaping principles, including 
pictography, pictophonetic com-
pounds, ideographs, logical aggre-
gates, associative transformation, 
and borrowing, paving the way 
for the development of Chinese 
characters. A total of 4,500 Jiagu-
wen characters have been found so 
Bronze Jue of the Xia Dynasty, 
unearthed at Erlitou, Yanshi 
County, Henan, is the earliest 
bronze vessel discovered in 
China to date.
A piece of complete tortoise shell.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 2 The Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou Dynasties 
25
Oracle inscription on ox bones saying “farming together” documents the Shang Dynasty 
Monarch’s order to his subjects to till lands jointly.
far. While the number of Jinwen characters increased greatly, so did passage 
lengths, including one long inscription with nearly 500 characters. Jiaguwen 
and Jinwen are the forerunners of the Chinese characters used today. Exten-
sive use of characters indicates that social development had reached a higher 
stage. Th e use of a writing system goes beyond time and space, as it records 
the thoughts, language, and  experiences of human beings and documents 
intricate natural and social phenomena. This enabled communication and 
tradition and greatly drove cultural development  forward.
The development of the bronze casting industry during the Shang and 
Zhou dynasties greatly increased what people could produce and hence their 
quality of life. About 10,000 pieces of bronze ware cast in the Shang Dynasty 
have so far been unearthed.
More than 5,000 pieces came from the tombs of the Guo Kingdom of the 
Western Zhou Dynasty. Th e tombs’ bronze pieces were primarily weapons, like 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

26 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Bronze Zhao You of the Western Zhou Dynasty. Inside is a forty-four-character inscription 
that describes the Monarch of Zhou’s awarding 50 square li (12.4 square kilometers) in the 
Bi area to Zhao, important evidence for the study of the square-ﬁ elds system.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 2 The Xia, Shang, and Western Zhou Dynasties 
27
daggers, spears, battle-axes, and arrowheads, and tools like knives and axes, as 
well as a few fi ttings for carriages and farm tools.
Bronze mining, smelting, and casting techniques matured in the Shang 
Dynasty. Th e site of an ancient copper mine from the Western Zhou, located 
in Tonglü  Mountain, Daye, Hubei, covers an area of about 2 square kilometers 
at a depth of 60 meters. Silos, inclined alleys, and fl at valleys, were adopted for 
excavation. Drainage systems were built, and ventilation problems inside the 
mine were resolved as well.  Residue from the ancient mine contains a copper 
content of only 0.7 percent. Th e craft smen of the Shang Dynasty could accu-
rately calculate the proper proportions of copper and tin, and made bronze of 
diff erent hardness.
Shang and Zhou bronze ware was famous not only for their great num-
ber and diverse categories, but also for their spectacular shapes and superb 
craftsmanship. The Simuwu Ding, unearthed in the Yin Ruins, is grand in 
size and exquisite in pattern. Th e largest extant bronze piece in the world, it 
is 133 centimeters high and weighs more than 800 kilograms. Th e majestic 
bronze Ding is a symbol of the brilliant civilization of the Shang and Zhou 
dynasties.
Bronze bell chimes of the Western Zhou Dynasty. Chimes were the main ritual instruments 
played at sacriﬁ ces, banquets, and other events of nobles.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

28 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Ancient Egypt, ancient Babylon, and the Harappan culture in the 
Indus River Valley, which coexisted with China’s Xia and Shang dynasties, 
 successively declined aft er creating splendid civilizations. However, the rise and 
fall of the Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties accumulated the successive genes of 
the Chinese culture in the form of bronze production technology, and in the 
use of written language as a way to communicate cultural values forward. Th e 
gradually maturing political system, social structure, and rituals of the early 
states had a profound infl uence on later generations.
The Simuwu Bronze Ding of the Shang Dynasty, unearthed in Wuguan Village, Anyang, 
Henan, is the heaviest bronze piece discovered in China to date.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

3
31
3
The Five Powers in the Spring and Autumn 
Period and the Seven States in the Warring 
States Period
In 770 BC, the second year aft er the Western Zhou Dynasty ended, King Ping 
of the Zhou Dynasty relocated the capital to Luoyi (today’s Luoyang, Henan), 
known as the Eastern Zhou in history. Th e Spring and Autumn Period (770–477 
BC) was named aft er the State of Lu’s chronicle Th e Spring and Autumn Annals, 
and the Warring States Period (477–221 BC) aft er the confl icts among states 
for the throne.
During this 550-year period, the territory governed by the court 
declined, shrinking to a radius of 600 li (300 kilometers). Vassals stopped 
paying visits and tributes, and the king, therefore, had to “announce a 
state of hunger” and “beg for money and chariots.” He thus became highly 
dependent on the vassals. King Huan of the Zhou Dynasty, shot by troops 
of the Zheng, lost his dignity as a king. Tenants waged hundreds of wars 
against each other.
Duke Huan of Qi took power in the Spring and Autumn Period. He named 
Guan Zhong as the prime minister, who later launched large-scale reforms. 
Economically, Guan Zhong encouraged trade and the reclaiming of barren 
land. Militarily, he organized strong armies. Politically, he promoted the slogan 
of “respecting the king and dispelling aliens,” joining hands with all the states 
The Spring and Autumn and 
Warring States Periods: 
States Contend for Power, 
Control, and Social Reform
Chapter 3
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

32 
CHINA’S HISTORY
in the central plains and working to safeguard Chinese culture. In 651 BC, the 
State of Qi initiated a meeting of all the vassals in Kuiqiu, which the king of the 
Zhou Dynasty sent a representative to attend. Th at established the position of 
Duke Huan of Qi in the central plains.
The states of Jin and Chu rose successively after the State of Qi. After 
decades of exile, Duke Wen of Jin returned to his home state, taking the 
throne and making vigorous eff orts to rejuvenate his country. Defeating the 
troops of Chu in the Battle of Chengpu in 632 BC, he organized a meeting 
of all vassals where his leadership position was established. Th e State of Chu 
in the South thrived once again after Duke Zhuang took office. In 606 BC, 
the troops of Chu threatened Luoyi, capital of the Zhou Dynasty, and Chu 
brazenly asked about the size and weight of the Ding of Zhou, exposing his 
ambition to replace the king. Before long his troops marched northward once 
again, defeating the troops of Jin at Bi and ensuring the domination of Duke 
Zhuang of Chu.
Land and Water Battle Scenes inscribed on a bronze kettle from the Warring States Period, 
unearthed in Chengdu, Sichuan.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
33
In the late Spring and Autumn Period, the states of Wu and Yue in the 
South rose to power in succession. Th e State of Wu in the lower reaches of 
the Yangtze River captured the capital of the State of Chu in 506 BC. It also 
later swallowed the State of Yue in the Qiantang River basin, defeated the 
troops of Qi in the North, and met all the vassals at Huangchi, Henan. King 
Goujian of Yue, aft er being defeated and captured, endured much humilia-
tion and hardship for twenty years. But he fi nally conquered Gusu, the capi-
tal of Wu, by dispatching troops after King Fuchai of Wu had squandered 
the national wealth. Years later, he further annexed the State of Wu and 
marched into the central plains, becoming the last leader in the Spring and 
Autumn Period.
In the early Warring States Period, the patriarchal and feudal system was 
destroyed and the king’s privileges were transferred to lower levels. Some min-
isters and senior officials, who grew to be important players through imple-
menting reforms, gradually carved up and replaced the privileges and positions 
of former vassals, paving their way into positions of power. In 403 BC, the 
A portrait brick of Duke Huan of Qi and his minister Guan Zhong.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

34 
CHINA’S HISTORY
states of Han, Zhao, and Wei divided the State of Jin, and Tianshi, a senior 
 offi  cial of Qi, replaced Jiangshi to become the vassal. Th e wars among vassals 
got more frequent, resulting in a pattern where seven powers, known as the 
states of Han, Zhao, Wei, Qi, Chu, Yan, and Qin, coexisted and fought against 
each other to seek power and control. Following the dominance of Dukes Wen 
of Wei in the central plains, the war between Qi and Wei, and the confronta-
tion between Qin and Qi, the State of Qin grew strong through Shang Yang’s 
reforms. Qin defeated the troops of Zhao at Changping in 260 BC, which led 
to the rise of Qin and the chaotic situation of “vertical alliance and horizontal 
 collaboration.”
The sword of Gou Jian, King of Yue.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
35
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Seven powers strove to seek hegemony in the Warring States Period. 
Besides using military force, each state also resorted to  political and 
diplomatic means. The six eastern states joined hands to form a 
south-north vertical alliance to confront the State of Qin, called the 
“vertical alliance.” Meanwhile, the State of Qin, located in the west, 
took advantage of the confl icts among the eastern states, and tacti-
cally went into collaboration with part of the six states and fi nally 
attacked all of them one by one, called a “horizontal collaboration.” 
The eastern states sometimes followed the State of Qin and some-
times followed the State of Chu for the sake of their own interests. 
Some advisors, like Su Qin and Zhang Yi, traveled around the states, 
persuading vassals to adopt a vertical alliance or a horizontal collabo-
ration and were called “Men of Alliance and Collaboration.”
VERTICAL ALLIANCE AND HORIZONTAL 
COLLABORATION
Bronze mirror, unearthed in Yunmeng, Hubei, with 
patterns of warriors of the Qin State during the 
Warring States Period ﬁ ghting beasts, showing 
the belligerent character of the people of Qin after 
Shang Yang’s reform.
The wars of the Spring and Autumn and Warring States period brought 
serious disasters to the people and broke the old social order, paving the way 
for a new system. Th e fi ve powers of the Spring and Autumn Period—namely 
Qi, Jin, Chu, Wu, and Yue (or Qi, Song, Jin, Qin, and Chu)—and the seven 
states of the Warring States—namely Qi, Chu, Yan, Qin, Han, Zhao, and Wei—
all worked for reform and rose toward a new reunifi cation.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

36 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Social Reforms Triggered by the Use of Iron 
Tools and the Use of Oxen to Plow
The Spring and Autumn Period witnessed profound reforms and changes in 
ancient Chinese society. Improvement in tools and techniques were the under-
lying cause of large-scale social reforms.
The Iron Age starts from the Spring and Autumn Period. Hard, sharp, 
iron tools replaced wood and stone instruments in agricultural production. In 
the Warring States Period, iron plows drawn by two oxen were used, promot-
ing ease of cultivation. Large-scale compulsory collective cultivation was the 
norm. Historical records of “being slow for collective cultivation while work-
ing quickly for private land” reflect the profound reforms that resulted from 
the ability of an individual with oxen to plow land. Thanks to the improved  
efficiency, a great deal of barren land was reclaimed. Products reaped from 
the extra private land were no longer presented to the kings. Owners of these 
private lands leased it to peasants and collected rent, which greatly aroused the 
production enthusiasm of individual peasants. Inefficient, backward, collec-
tive cultivation of “public fi elds” was strongly opposed, leading to stretches of 
weedy, uncultivated land. Th e vassals, therefore, had to lease the “public fi elds” 
to peasants for cultivation, marking the collapse of the 
square-fi elds system. A landowner economy, based on land 
privatization and individual cultivation, rapidly expanded.
The surge in private property ownership and private 
cultivation broke the old system of the patriarchal nobles’ 
hereditary occupation of fiefs and their military and 
 political power, abolished their hereditary privileges in 
position and salary, and initiated reforms aimed at devel-
oping a private property economy, enriching the country 
and forging a mighty army.
Guan Zhong of the State of Qi in the Spring and 
Autumn Period initiated a policy of “collecting tributes and 
taxes according to the size and quality of land.” Th e State 
of Lu implemented a policy of “initial tax on land per-mu,” 
which provided that taxes be levied based on actual land 
size regardless of ownership. Th ese tax reforms, in nature, 
confi rmed the validity of privately owned land in the form 
of state laws. Later on, the State of Qin launched a  policy 
An iron sword with gold nose and head, unearthed in Houchuan, Shanxian, Henan, Spring 
and Autumn Period.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
37
of “destroying square fi elds and allowing 
land sales,” which further legalized and 
popularized privately owned land and 
paved the way for the state’s ruling over 
landowners.
Li Kui, appointed by Duke Wen of 
the State of Wei in the Warring States 
Period, worked out The Book of Law to 
beef up rules regarding private property. 
Duke Dao of the State of Chu appointed 
Wu Qi to reform the old hereditary and 
official administration systems, thereby 
consolidating the centralized monarchy. 
Th e reform confronted fi erce resistance, 
as it was damaging to the interests of 
the old nobles. For instance, aft er Duke 
Dao of the State of Chu passed away, 
the conservative side killed Wu Qi, 
who had been hiding at the side of the 
King’s body for shelter. However, after 
many setbacks, reforms took place in 
Qi, Jin, Zheng, Wu, Yue, Wei, Chu, Qin, 
Han, Zhao, Yan, and other vassal states, 
including Shang Yang’s Political Reform 
in the State of Qin, in the middle War-
ring States Period.
In 356 BC, Duke Xiao of the State 
of Qin appointed Shang Yang to launch 
political reform, which included reward-
ing cultivation and feats in battle, abolishing the square-fields system and 
field boundaries, and establishing a county system. The new law abolished 
the hereditary position and salary system and set up twenty ranks for politi-
cal and economic privileges to be awarded based solely on performance. Th e 
reform subverted the nobles’ privileges and improved the morale and battle-
eff ectiveness of the army. It also ruled that those who achieved a high output of 
grain and cloth would be exempt from duty service and taxes, thereby inspir-
ing production activity and improving state power. “Abolishing the square-
fi elds system and the fi eld boundaries” refers to opening the boundaries of the 
square fi elds occupied by the nobles and admitting the legality of private land. 
Th e new law also divided the State of Qin into 31 (or 41) counties to replace 
the old system. The county magistrates and assistants were appointed and 
Mold for simultaneous casting of two 
iron sickles of the Warring States 
Period, unearthed in Gudonggou, 
Xinglong County, Hebei.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

38 
CHINA’S HISTORY
 dismissed by the duke, and no hiring of kin was allowed. Th e State of Qin also 
compiled household registrations and implemented penalties that implicated 
those related to the one charged or found guilty. Normally, fi ve or ten families 
formed a unit to supervise one another. In addition, Shang Yang formulated 
Qin rules and uniform standards of weight and measurement, making great 
contributions to unifi cation.
Shang Yang carried out two stages of reform in the State of Qin over 
a period of twenty years, gradually making Qin powerful and rich. Shang 
Yang executed laws rigidly. He cut off  the nose and tattooed the face of the 
Prince’s tutor and that of anyone who suborned the Prince to block reform. 
When the Prince came into power, Shang Yang was executed by being 
 fastened to five chariots and pulled apart. But the laws continued and the 
new policies prevailed. Th e rapid rise of Qin in the remote western areas in 
the later Warring States period was largely attributed to Shang Yang’s new 
policy. A century after the death of Shang Yang, Duke Yingzheng of Qin 
A Zun tray unearthed from Marquis Yi of Zeng’s Tomb in Suixian County, Hubei, showcases 
the remarkable casting process and sophisticated bronze technology of the Warring States 
Period.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
39
took advantage of the infl uence of Shang Yang’s reform to help accelerate the 
pace of national unifi cation.
Qin paid great attention to agriculture, laying a solid economic foundation 
for unification. The Dujiangyan Irrigation Project built by Qin’s Shu County 
Major Li Bing continues to irrigate thousands of mu
1 of land, making the 
Chengdu Plain a fertile place, free of starvation caused by fl ood and drought. 
Th e Zhengguo Channel, constructed in the Weihe River Plain under the lead-
ership of Zheng Guo, irrigated 2.8 million mu of farmland, creating another 
enormous granary in the central Shanxi Plain.
Th e policy of honoring military exploits forged a brave army. Th e tri-ridge 
arrows unearthed from the Qin’s terracotta warriors and horses pit were sharp 
enough to penetrate armor. The six states’ military force could not do any-
thing but escape in the face of the Qin army, whose overwhelming power was 
described as “a heavy weight on bird’s eggs.”
Enterprising policies and leaders being open enough to absorb the 
merits of other states were important factors for Qin’s unification. In 238 
BC, shortly after Duke Yingzheng of Qin came into power, the state of 
Han sent Zheng Guo to persuade Yingzheng to dig a channel in the Jinghe 
basin to divert water for irrigation, a request intended to exhaust the 
national strength of Qin and hinder its pace of marching eastward. But 
the plot failed before the channel was built and Zheng Guo was arrested. 
Zheng argued that building the channel could do nothing but offer a few 
years more for the State of Han, even though it consumed a great deal of 
 fiscal revenue. But for the State of Qin, the great project would benefit 
later  generations. Hearing this, Yingzheng changed his mind and let Zheng 
 continue its construction.
1 A Chinese unit of area. 1 mu equals 666.6 square meters.
The Square Bronze Sheng made by Shang Yang is a standard bronze measuring instrument 
that uniﬁ ed the metrology of the Qin State.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

40 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Some patriarchal ministers of Qin argued that ministers of foreign origin 
should be dismissed since they came to Qin for persuasion and estrangement. 
Li Si, a minister from Chu, submitted “Remonstrance on Dispelling Ministers 
of Foreign Origin” to refute them with the instances that the dukes of Qin used 
ministers of foreign origin to build Qin.
Yingzheng then became aware of the importance of foreign ministers and 
cancelled the order for dispelling ministers and called Li Si back. He and other 
foreign ministers played an active role in helping Yingzheng unify the other six 
states into one country.
From 230 BC to 221 BC, Yingzheng directed his army to conquer six states 
and established the fi rst centralized empire in Chinese history.
Instances of vassals contending for hegemony and progress in social reform 
were interwoven into the period. Collapsed ritualism and musical systems and 
social turmoil off ered an open space for reform in states. Reform was the only way 
to make the country and army powerful enough to win the competition.  Warfare 
for merging and seizing power was endowed with the added significance of 
expanding reform and new policies. 
Dujiangyan Irrigation System, constructed under the leadership of Li Bing and his son, still 
plays a role in ﬂ ood control and irrigation today. 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
41
Cultural Awakening and Contention of a 
Hundred Schools of Thought
In the late Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period, iron tools 
and ox-plow farming enhanced productivity, boosted commerce and town 
prosperity, and seriously impacted the traditional ritual order. In the reform 
fever of various states, a batch of scholars broke the parochial clan network 
and moved freely. Th ey maneuvered among various political groups and gave 
lectures here and there, greatly enlarging their fi eld of vision and promoting 
cultural awakening.
In the Spring and Autumn Period, the pattern of “cultural learning exclu-
sive to offi  cials and nobles” was broken, and the scholars’ “private schools” 
for spreading culture gradually prevailed. For instance, Confucius of the 
State of Lu vigorously promoted the thought of “education for all.” He had 
more than 3,000 disciples, including 72 famous ones, some of humble birth. 
Widespread education paved the way for a booming culture in this period of 
transformation.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

42 
CHINA’S HISTORY
An intensive yeoman economy showed greater advantage over  simple 
and extensive farming, which further aroused the enthusiasm of the 
 producers. Furthermore, the highly-developed handicraft and commercial 
sectors and the reforms in all states aimed at building a more prosperous 
society helped achieve great scientific and technological progress in the 
Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods. Bronze casting techniques 
matured, resulting in a vast number of superb bronze artworks. Raw iron 
could be smelted as early as the Spring and Autumn Period, and cast iron 
techniques were invented in the Warring States Period, 2,000 years earlier 
than those in the West. The Spring and Autumn Period saw the produc-
tion of the world’s earliest cementite steel. The Warring States Period wit-
nessed the accomplishment of the Dujiangyan Irrigation System, built by 
the masses and led by Li Bing and his son. Th e irrigation system, consisting 
of the fi sh-mouth water diversion dike, bottleneck and fl ying, and weir, was 
able to prevent and drain fl oods, as well as irrigate and carry boats. It helped 
the Chengdu Plain develop into a land of abundance, and today irrigates 
tens of millions of mu of land.
Th e Shi Star Catalog, the world’s fi rst star catalog, recorded the positions of 
more than 120 stars, and recorded the world’s earliest observations of comets 
in 613 BC. Arithmetically, the 9x9 Formula for Multiplication and the Method 
of Count Calculating were invented. Th e Mohist Canon, written in the War-
ring States Period, includes the Lever Principle and the Th eory of Buoyancy, 
as well as knowledge about acoustics and optics—outstanding achievements 
in ancient China. Medically, Bian Que, a famous doctor in the Warring States 
Period, established the theory of four diagnostic procedures, namely inspec-
tion, auscultation (listening to the sounds of internal organs) and olfaction 
(attention to odors), inquiry, and pulse-taking and palpation. Chinese doctors 
have used these Oriental medicine procedures for 2,000 years. Bian Que was 
thus reputed as the “ancestor of Chinese pulse-taking science.”
Great scientific advances sped up the awakening of rationalism and cul-
tural spirit. The Spring and Autumn Period saw the emergence of  China’s 
first poetry collection, The Book of Odes, a compilation of 305 odes written 
during the 500 years from the early Western Zhou to the middle Spring and 
Autumn Period. The book has three parts, namely Feng, Ya, and Song. The 
Feng  section (also named Guofeng) is of the highest quality. Its folk songs 
include satires on the ruling class, praises for popular protest, and wishes 
for beautiful love. In simple and rich language, The Book of Odes con-
tains four-character lines and many refrains, marking the birth of Chinese 
poetry. The inclination toward realism and use of rhetorical devices such as 
Fu (straightforward narrative), Bi (explicit comparisons), and Xing (implied 
comparisons) had a far-reaching influence on poets of later generations. 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
43
In the subsequent Warring States Period, Chu odes, a new form of poetry 
based on folk songs in the state of Chu in the south, emerged and became 
popular, because its free-style sentences were more suitable for expressing 
complicated feelings.
Written by Qu Yuan, The Lament, a collection of famous works in Chu 
odes form, expressed his political aspirations and patriotic feelings. Th e poems 
feature the repeated use of symbols and metaphors, and combine myth, legend, 
historical fi gures, and natural scenes with magnifi cent words, distinctive imagi-
nation, strong feelings, and profound concepts.
The Book of Odes, with Guofeng as its representative, and the Chu odes, 
with Th e Lament as their representative, are collectively referred to as Feng Sao, 
which refl ects the emergence of an early cultural spirit and started the realistic 
and romantic styles, respectively, of ancient Chinese poetry.
Portrait of Qu Yuan.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

44 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Two great thinkers with far-reaching infl uence on Chinese history emerged 
in the Spring and Autumn Period—Confucius and Lao Tze.
Confucius, named Qiu and style-named Zhongni, was a thinker of the State 
of Lu. His thoughts were mainly recorded in Th e Analects of  Confucius, a book 
compiled by his disciples. Th e essence of Confucianism is Ren  (benevolence) 
and Li (ritual norms). He advocated the idea that “the benevolent loves his 
 fellow people,” and requested the rulers experience and observe the situation 
of the people. He was against tyranny and arbitrary punishment. He advocated 
the codes of loyalty and tolerance, and called for “not doing to  others what you 
don’t want to be done to you” (do unto others as you would have them do unto 
you) and understanding others as a way to harmonize personal relationships 
and stabilize the social order.
Confucius also valued “ruling by morality” and “ruling with the ritual 
norms.” He saw that one could maintain the political and educational  system 
of the country by encouraging self restraint, restoring rituals, and practic-
ing moral behavior. He attempted to correct the chaotic social class order in 
accordance with the ritual system of the Zhou Dynasty and make it perfectly 
justifiable, reflecting his conservative political ideology. However, Confu-
cius was not against improving and reforming obsolete ritual customs and 
political orders on the basis of maintaining an outdated social class system. 
Portrait of Confucius.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
45
Mencius and Xun Zi in the War-
ring States Period inherited and 
developed Confucius’ theory and 
made the political ideals and moral 
norms of Confucianism the main-
stream of traditional thought in 
China for more than two millen-
nia.
Lao Tze, surnamed Li, named 
Er, and style-named Dan, was a 
thinker of the State of Chu. Erudite 
and knowledgeable, he was once the 
historical official in the royal court 
of the Eastern Zhou, responsible for 
managing collections. Confucius 
once asked Lao Tze about “ritual 
norms.”
The Tao Te Ching, a book 
compiled by the followers of Tao-
ism in the Warring States Period, 
records the thought of Lao Tze 
and is replete with the philosophy 
and wisdom typical of the oriental 
world. Lao Tze denied the absolute 
authority of destiny, advocated 
following natural laws, and  ruling 
without intervention. “Ruling 
without intervention” means not 
 intervening arbitrarily. Lao Tze 
warned the rulers not to oppress 
the common people too much.
However, his ideal that “though 
the noises made by the chickens 
and dogs can be heard, the people 
do not contact each other until 
death” and his  concept of “making 
the people ignorant and without 
desire” led to some negative eff ects. 
His philosophy is rich in dialectic 
thinking. Lao Tze pointed out that 
everything has two contradictory 
Lao Tze on an Ox. It is said that Lao 
Tze, seeing that the Zhou Dynasty was 
declining, rode an ox out of the Hangu 
Pass and vanished from the earthly life.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

46 
CHINA’S HISTORY
sides, for example—high and low, front and rear, existence and void, diffi  cult 
and easy, life and death, noble and  humble—and everything could shift  to the 
opposite. Lao Tze has been regarded by later generations as the founder of 
Taoism. His thought has had and continues to have a great infl uence on Chi-
nese culture, including  philosophy and ethics, as well as the mode of think-
ing, morality, and personality of the Chinese people.
Th e increasingly intense competition among all vassal states for power and 
control in the Warring States Period led to a more urgent need for  talented 
people. Th e profound social reforms off ered those scholars with an expanded 
consciousness a broad stage for independent thinking and creative exploration.
Duke Xuan of Qi had hotels built near Jimen, Linzi, capital of Qi to accom-
modate literary talents and persuasive talkers, and awarded scholars such as 
Zou Yan, Tian Pian, and Shen Dao mansions and official titles to encourage 
them to write books and establish theories. Th e scholars’ hotels at Jimen then 
grew into a center for communication among various academic schools. Rep-
resentatives from diff erent classes and schools off ered diff erent opinions on dif-
ferent issues and held discussions with one another, resulting in “contention of 
a  hundred schools of thought.”
Among the active schools of thought were Confucianism, the Mohist 
School, Taoism, Legalism, the Yin-Yang School, the School of Names, the 
 Military School, and the School of Eclectics.
Portrait of Mencius.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
47
Mencius and Xun Zi were the representatives of Confucianism in the War-
ring States Period. Mencius further developed Confucius’ “benevolence” into a 
systematic political doctrine, proposing the concept that “Th e people are the most 
important element in a state; next are the gods of land and grain; least is the ruler 
himself.” He also stressed that “righteousness comes first and then the  benefit” 
and “giving one’s life for righteousness” is commendable. He is particularly 
known for his aphorism that one should “never be corrupted by wealth or title, 
never depart from your principles when in poverty and hardship, and surrender 
never to power and force.” Xun Zi said that ruling a state should be based on 
ritual norms and supplemented by laws. He also held the opinion that “nature has 
its laws” and they won’t be changed by human will, but humans should give play 
to their abilities to “make use of the objective laws” and thus benefi t themselves.
The founder of Mohist School was Mo Tzu, a man of humble birth in the 
State of Lu. Once a craftsman, he later became a senior official of the State 
of Song. Mo Tzu advocated “universal love,” going far beyond the concept of 
“benevolence” based on diff erent classes proposed by Confucius. He considered 
all people to be equal, whether nobles or commoners. He also upheld “respecting 
the wise,” employing talented people regardless of class, and proposed “respect-
ing the working people,” stressing the position of labor in the society. Mo Tzu 
opposed extravagance and waste, and advocated “thrift  in daily life and funerals.”
The book Mo Tzu also greatly contributes to natural science and logical 
 science. Th e Mohist School refl ects the interests of the working class, especially 
those of craft smen. 
Zhuang Tzu inherited and developed the thoughts of Lao Tze and was the 
representative of Taoism in the Warring States Period. Named Zhou and born in 
the State of Song, he despised wealth and fame, and hated the unfair social phe-
nomena of “stealing ideas from one person is plagiarism, and stealing ideas from 
many is research.” He once refused the request of the Duke of Chu to be a senior 
offi  cial, and instead earned a living by making straw sandals and wrote books 
for recreation. Zhuang Tzu upheld the idea that “natural law” has its own roots 
and everything is the same in nature. On this basis, he put forward a playful liv-
ing attitude of pondering over nothing, and worrying about nothing. He pointed 
out that “dimensions are limitless, and time is endless.” He recognized the infi n-
ity of time and space and believed that humans need only obey the natural laws. 
Politically, Zhuang Tzu upheld the thought of ruling without intervention.
Han Fei, a philosopher of the late Warring States Period, was an integrator 
of Legalism. In his philosophy, the ruler fi rmly controls the state with the help 
of three concepts—his position of power (Shi), certain techniques (Shu), and 
laws (Fa)—to set up a monarchic despotism. He believed laws were the basis 
of handling state aff airs, techniques were the tools for the emperor to control 
the ministers, and power was the regime and influence of the emperor. He 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

48 
CHINA’S HISTORY
 advocated “ruling a state according to law” and that “laws don’t protect pow-
erful persons,” which was of positive significance for attacking the privileges 
of former nobles and maintaining the emerging centralized system of private 
property ownership.
Han Fei believed that society keeps developing and changing, and that his-
tory will never repeat itself. He was against the historical concept of  Confucians, 
“confi rming the ancient practice and denying today’s practice,” and advocated 
reform. In his opinion, ruling the people with the politics of ancient kings 
was as ridiculous as standing by a tree stump waiting for a hare to dash itself 
against it. Han Fei’s philosophy met the requirements of establishing a central-
ized regime and was embraced by Yingzheng, which made Han’s philosophy the 
guiding concept of ruling the country.
In the thousand years since the Western Han Dynasty, Han Fei’s thought 
and Confucianism supported each other and became the theoretical 
Portrait of Zhuang Tzu.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 3 The Spring and Autumn and Warring States Periods 
49
 foundation of the ruling thought of ancient China. Th e spirit of reform became 
the theoretical weapon for progressive thinkers and politicians in the following 
generations.
Leaders of the Yin-Yang school of thought that emerged in the late Warring 
States Period popularized the Th eory of Five Elements, that is, “Metal, Wood, 
Water, Fire, and Earth.” Social evolution, according to the Yin-Yang School, 
mirrors the cyclic changes of the fi ve elements, the “natural laws” that control 
everything. Representatives of this school of thought include Zou Yan of the 
State of Qi, who had a great influence on the social ideology in the Qin and 
Han dynasties.
Th e School of Names, represented by Hui Shi and Gongsun Long, analyzed 
and “rectifi ed” the situation where names (words) were mixed up with objects 
in times of social reform. Followers viewed the similarity-diff erence relations 
from a philosophical perspective, and pointed out the distinctions between 
feelings and objective facts, as well as existence and attributes. This helped 
develop logic in China.
Portrait of Han Fei.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

50 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e founder of the Military School was Sun Wu, a stragetist in the Spring 
and Autumn Period. His Art of War reveals many tactics of deploying troops 
as well as military laws, such as exercising systematic and overall control. His 
complete system of military theories is considered a classic book of military 
science that can ensure “fi ghting a hundred battles with no danger of defeat” 
and enjoys a truly high reputation worldwide.
Th e representative of the Military School in the Warring States Period was 
Sun Bin, a descendant of Sun Wu. As the military advisor of Qi, Sun Bin once 
directed the classic battle known as “saving the Zhao by besieging the capital of 
the Wei.” Inheriting the thoughts of Sun Wu, he stressed commanding the rules 
of war and creating favorable situations for oneself, and he emphasized the role 
of the individual. His military thoughts were compiled into the book Sun Bin’s 
Art of War, which exists in bamboo-slip versions from the Han Dynasty.
Th e School of Eclectics, shaped in the late Warring States Period, was a 
combination of the above. Lu’s Spring and Autumn Annals is its most famous 
representative work. Focusing on the idea of “acting according to the ways 
of nature,” the book integrates many schools of thought on the topic of state-
governing politics. Th e Eclectics held that kings should respect teachers and 
advocate education, put public interests in front of their own, employ talented 
people, and rule with no arbitrary intervention. Kings should also follow the 
will of the people and unify the country with righteous armies.
The argument among the pre-Qin schools and their mutual influence 
greatly helped promote intellectual and cultural progress. The creative con-
cepts and theories established in all these works cover many fi elds, including 
politics, economy, military science, laws, education, philosophy, history, lit-
erature, art, and natural science, jointly constituting the original classics that 
guide Chinese ideology today and the fundamental spirit of traditional Chi-
nese culture.
Around the 5th century BC, both Eastern and Western civilization reached 
a high level of development. Th ey jointly created a spectacle that marked the 
start of a brand new era in human history. Th e city-state democratic politics 
of ancient Greece, established on the basis of a slavery economy, gave rise to 
such great thinkers as Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Meanwhile the profound 
yeoman reforms and social transformation in China’s Spring and Autumn and 
Warring States periods created an ideal environment for the rise of many cul-
tural masters, like Confucius and Lao Tze. Th e philosophers of both east and 
west jointly built numerous loft y monuments for human civilization.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

4
53
4
Qin Dynasty Lays the Foundation for the Great 
Unifi cation
The Qin and Han dynasties, from 221 BC to 220 AD, were the first unified 
multiethnic centralized states in Chinese history, laying the foundation for a 
united empire.
In 221 BC, Qin continued expansion outward aft er annexing the six states. 
It suppressed the Baiyue people on the southeastern coast and in southern 
China and the ethnic groups in southwestern areas and established admin-
istrative organs there for unifi ed management. Qin’s troops also attacked the 
Huns in the north, regained the Great Bend of the Yellow River for its people 
to migrate to and cultivate, and constructed the Great Wall to consolidate its 
northern defense. Finally, Qin established an unprecedented vast empire with a 
population of 20 million multiethnic people.
Yingzheng, aft er unifying the six states, called himself “Shihuangdi” (the 
fi rst emperor) because “his virtues were equal to the Th ree August Ones (Fu Xi, 
Nu Wa, and Shen Nong) and his merits were greater than those of the Five 
Emperors (Huangdi, Zhuan Xu, Di Ku, Yao, and Shun).” Aft er establishing his 
supreme power, he carried on the social reforms that started during the Spring 
and Autumn and the Warring States periods and implemented a series of mea-
sures to intensify centralized sovereignty.
With respect to the political system, Emperor Shihuang believed that the 
feudal system was the source of the ceaseless wars of the Spring and Autumn 
The Qin and Han Dynasties: 
Establishment and 
Development of a Great 
Unified Country
Chapter 4
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

54 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Period and thought “it’s time to set up armies because peace has returned and 
the country is unifi ed.” He accepted the suggestion of Li Si to award his sons 
and the offi  cials who performed deeds of great merit in ways other than giving 
them an estate, and further established a complete set of bureaucratic adminis-
tration systems at both central and local levels.
The emperor controlled the country’s military power, and his descen-
dants inherited the throne from generation to generation. At the central level 
were three chief ministers and nine departments. Th e “three chief ministers” 
referred to the prime minister, military minister, and supervision minister. Th e 
prime minister assisted the emperor in handling political affairs and led all 
other officials. The military minister assisted the emperor in military affairs, 
Portrait of Emperor Shihuang of the Qin Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
55
and the supervision minister was responsible for supervision and law enforce-
ment as well as literature management. Th e three ministers were not subject to 
one another and all obeyed the emperor’s orders.
Th e nine departments included the administrative organizations at the cen-
tral level and those in charge of royal aff airs. Th e system established  imperial 
power as supreme, and the prime minister as the leading offi  cial. All offi  cials 
were responsible for their own business. This has laid a foundation for the 
organizational pattern of Chinese central government.
Th e emperor established two levels of administrative organizations nation-
wide, namely prefectures and counties, and shaped their local bureaucratic 
administrative systems. Th e prefecture, the higher-level administrative organ 
of the central government, directly governed the local. Th e supreme executive 
of the prefecture was named the prefecture governor (Junshou). Th e Juncheng 
(prefecture governor’s assistant) helped the prefecture governor  handle 
 administrative affairs, criminal punishment, and prison affairs, while the 
 Junwei (prefecture governor’s assistant offi  cer) was in charge of military aff airs 
and public security.
County governments were set up under the prefecture. The responsibili-
ties of the county executive, county executive’s assistant, and county executive’s 
assistant officer were similar to those of the officials at the prefectural level. 
The prefecture and county officials were assessed, appointed, and dismissed 
by the central government. Under the county level were the basic organization 
township and Li (administrative units of twenty-fi ve neighboring households). 
Among the township offi  cials, Sanlao was responsible for education, Sefu was 
responsible for case hearing and taxation, and Youjiao was responsible for pub-
lic security.
Th e country governed the people and levied taxes through the three chief 
ministers and nine departments as well as through administrative organiza-
tions at various local levels. Th e individual household became the basic unit of 
society in the country.
In the economic sphere, Emperor Shihuang ordered landlords and 
 yeomen who owned land to base both household registrations and taxes on 
actual land area occupied. Th us, private ownership of land was confi rmed by 
law to protect the advanced landowner economy mode. Before the unifi ca-
tion of the Qin Dynasty, the currencies of diff erent vassal states had diff erent 
shapes, sizes, and weights, and the measuring units were not the same, which 
hindered the development of nationwide commodity exchange and tax 
 collection. In 221 BC, Emperor Shihuang unified the currency and weight 
and measure standards to strengthen regional economic ties. This encour-
aged ease in the exchange of goods and services, enhancing the country’s 
economic unity.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

56 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Bronze weight of the Qin Dynasty. Engraved on its body are the characters for “eight jin”
and the imperial decree for unifying the metrology, issued on the 26th year of the Qin 
Dynasty.
Upon uniﬁ cation by Emperor Shihuang of the Qin Dynasty, the spade-shaped coins, knife-
shaped coins, and bronze shells circulated in previous kingdoms were uniﬁ ed into a round 
coin with a square hole.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
57
Aft er unifi cation, the Qin removed barricades built by the six states, uni-
fied vehicle specifications, and built a network of roads centered around its 
capital, Xianyang (northeast of today’s Xianyang, Shaanxi). In the course of 
conquering the Lingnan area (today’s Guangdong and Guangxi provinces), the 
Lingqu Canal was dug to link the Yangtze River and the Pearl River systems. A 
wide valley road was built in the hills from today’s Yibin, Sichuan, to Qujing, 
Yunnan. These  measures ensured the smooth communication of political 
decrees and the ease of dispatching an army, promoted economic and cultural 
exchanges among the regions and ethnic groups, and forged a solid material 
foundation for a unifi ed state.
Before unifi cation, the Chinese language varied from state to state in terms 
of pronunciation and spelling. Aft er unifi cation, Emperor Shihuang made the 
 Xiaozhuan (small seal character) the standard for the whole country. It helped 
in terms of communicating political decrees and cultural exchange, and greatly 
intensified the the people’s sense of identification and belonging to a single 
Chinese  culture. In the subsequent 2,000 years, written Chinese remained a 
unifi ed form, and had a profound infl uence on the consolidation of a unifi ed 
multiethnic country.
Aft er unifi cation, the Qin Dynasty also absorbed certain relevant rules and 
regulations of the former six states to formulate the legal system of Qin, which 
covered a wide range of laws, including criminal, procedure, civil, economic, 
and administrative.
In 213 BC, some conservative Confucians insisted that “no sustainable 
governance would be achieved without imitating ancient people and follow-
ing long-established rules.” Li Si firmly criticized those opponents. Emperor 
Shihuang accepted the suggestion of Li Si and further strengthened ideological 
control. He allowed public schools only, prohibited private schools, ordered the 
historiographers to burn historical records and all folk books, including The 
Book of Odes, Th e Book of History, and other books of all schools. He kept only 
A tiger-shaped tally issued by Emperor Shihuang of the Qin Dynasty to generals stationed in 
Yangling. It is divided into two halves with a 12-character inscription on both parts saying, “the 
tally for troop movement with the emperor holding the right part and the generals in Yangling 
the left.” The left and right halves must match each other for troop dispatch.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

58 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e History of Qin and books on medicine and forestation. He also ruled that 
those participating in private discussions on the Book of Odes and the Book of 
History would be executed, as would the entire family of those who questioned 
and criticized the government policy.
In 212 BC, some scholars and alchemists accused Emperor Shihuang of 
being “greedy for power” and “glad at severe penalty.” More than 400 people 
were arrested and buried alive under the crime of defamation. Although the 
action of burning books and burying scholars alive suppressed opponents and 
safeguarded his centralized reign, the emperor’s cruel manner caused a huge 
loss to the status of Chinese culture and had a negative political infl uence. Most 
wars and projects initiated by Emperor Shihuang were of progressive signifi -
cance. However, the heavy taxation, the rigid penalties, the urgent deployment 
of men for his projects, and the construction of palaces and tombs, brought a 
heavy burden and suff ering to the people. In 210 BC, Emperor Shihuang died 
of illness during a tour of inspection.
Emperor Ershi of the Qin Dynasty succeeded to the throne. The ruling 
classes were embroiled in internal discord, resulting in heavier taxation, more 
cruel punishment, and a rapidly intensifying social division. In 209 BC, a 
large-scale peasant uprising led by Chen Sheng and Wu Guang eupted, which 
heavily shook the rule of the Qin Dynasty. In 207 BC, the Qin Dynasty ended 
under the attack of Xiang Yu, Liu Bang, and other forces. Aft er the four-year 
Chu-Han War, Liu Bang defeated Xiang Yu in 202 BC and set up the Han 
Dynasty in Chang’an (today’s Xi’an), known in history as the Western Han 
Dynasty.
Though the Qin Dynasty ended only after the rule of two emperors, the 
new systems established by Emperor Shihuang made pioneering contribu-
tions to the development of China as a unifi ed multiethnic country and took 
 Chinese history on a new path in its following 2,000 years.
Western Han Dynasty’s Strategies to 
Consolidate Centralized Rule
Th e tyranny and turmoil in the closing years of the Qin Dynasty left  a shabby, 
jittery economy for the early Han Dynasty, whose rulers learned lessons from 
the collapse of the Qin and applied a policy of rehabilitation. During the period 
of Emperor Wendi and Jingdi, the economy recovered and society stabilized, 
resulting in the fi rst peaceful period in Chinese ancient history.
Based on this, Emperors Wudi of the Han Dynasty abolished the  tyranny 
of the Qin and continued its unifying and expansionary policy. Moreover, 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
59
some  adjustments and renewals were made, further consolidating the unifi ed 
 multiethnic country initiated by Qin.
Economically, the Han regime reduced taxes and the use of unpaid labor in 
exchange for taxes, and rewarded production. Liu Bang, Emperor Gaozu of the 
Han Dynasty, instigated a range of favorbale measures. He released soldiers to 
farm in the fi elds, off ered amnesty for and enlisted refugees, freed servants and 
maids, exempted some and reduced the numbers of those doing unpaid labor, 
and set land rent at 1/15, resulting in a mass movement of population back into 
agricultural production.
Emperor Wendi used rates of agricultural and textile development to evalu-
ate local offi  cials and reduced the land rent to 1/30. Th ese measures accelerated 
recovery and development of agriculture. Emperor Wudi further promoted the 
offi  cial monopoly of salt and iron, collected industrial and commercial taxes, 
established buff er institutions to control prices, unifi ed the currency, prohib-
ited private coin casting, and implemented other fi nancial reforms. Th us, the 
country fi rmly stabilized the economy and increased fi nancial income, laying a 
solid economic foundation for a unifi ed empire.
As for the state regime, the Western Han Dynasty experienced its ups and 
downs. In the early Han Dynasty, Liu Bang rewarded some high-achieving 
 ministers by granting them titles of vassals despite their family names being 
 diff erent from the royal one. Feudal and prefecture organizations coexisted. Th e 
area of seven vassals’ fi efs equaled half of the territory of the Western Han Dynasty. 
Th ey had their own troops and constituted a threat to the imperial power.
Liu Bang exterminated the vassals successively and subinfeudated his 
nephews. He hoped to rely on Liu’s families to defend the borders. With the 
passing of time, the vassals of the same surname gradually became more pow-
erful and did things in their own way. They established laws, collected taxes 
and tributes, and cast coins without permission from the central government. 
Th ey became more wealthy than the emperor.
Th ese vassals organized armed rebellions to challenge the central author-
ity. Emperor Jingdi’s acceptance of Minister Chao Cuo’s suggestion to “remove 
monarchs” aroused the joint rebellion of Wu, Chu, and five other states. 
Emperor Jiingdi was forced to kill Chao Cuo to apologize to the seven states, 
but that didn’t stop an attack from rebel forces. Finally, General Zhou Yafu 
defeated the rebels. After putting down the rebellions, the court revoked the 
vassals’ power.
Emperor Wudi learned a lesson from the rebellion caused by feoffi  ng and 
promulgated the “fi ef expansion order” for further distribution of fi ef to greatly 
reduce the vassals’ might. He also divested 106 nobles of their rank at one sac-
rifi ce ceremony on the pretext that the gold they presented was of insuffi  cient 
weight and poor quality.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

60 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Meanwhile, Emperor Wudi also strengthened imperial power by control-
ling both central and local administrative institutions. To do this, he promoted 
some middle and lower officials, who formed a “central court” to assist the 
emperor in decision-making, while an “outer court” led by the prime minister 
exclusively took care of political aff airs. Th e supervision system was an impor-
tant part of the centralized political system and was greatly strengthened in 
the Han Dynasty. Emperor Wudi established the position of Silixiaowei at the 
 central level to supervise the behavior of offi  cials and imperial members.
He also divided the country into thirteen supervision areas and sent one 
Cishi (provincial governor) to each area to inspect local offi  cials and to curb 
and attack illegally rich people on behalf of the central government, thus 
enhancing the centralized regime.
The rulers of the Han Dynasty practiced the recommendation system. 
Local officials recommended talented people to the court, which appointed 
them according to their capabilities upon examination. The government 
enrolled people with special reputations and capabilities to offi  ciate in the court, 
a process called zheng (enrollment). Th e practice under which a senior offi  cial 
recruited his subordinates was called pi. Th e offi  cial selection system attached 
more importance to the capabilities of the talents, but could easily be subverted 
by cronyism, giving rise to phenomena such as a recommended scholar who 
was unable to read, and a recommended Xiaolian (a role model of being fi lial to 
one’s parents and clean as an offi  cial) who did not live with his parents.
Eaves tile saying “Han’s dominance over China,” unearthed from the Chang’an site, Xi’an, 
Shaanxi.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
61
To avoid decades of governance by an offi  cial in a place that might result in 
corruption or set-up of a separate regime, the Han Dynasty set terms for major 
local offi  cials; their origins and any blood relations with their superior leaders 
would be taken into consideration as well.
Th e prevalence of the quiet and inactive Taoism in the early Han Dynasty 
had created a rather liberal intellectual space, a departure from the growing 
centralization. Th e political situation during the reign of Emperor Wudi was 
stable, and national power was strong. Hence, ideological control was strength-
ened. Emperor Wudi adopted Dong Zhongshu’s suggestion of “rejection of 
various philosophical schools and exclusive reverence of  Confucianism.” Con-
fucianism, which propagated centralized rule, held the position of dominant 
offi  cial ideology. Th e policy penetrated into politics,  ideology, culture, and edu-
cation, helping to attack local regimes and consolidate centralization. It had a 
far-reaching infl uence by intensifying both Chinese culture and the monarch’s 
control of popular thought.
The renovation measures concerning politics, economy, ideology, and 
other aspects implemented by Emperor Wudi, based on actual situations, 
proved quite fruitful and drove forward the development of the unifi ed multi-
ethnic country initiated by Qin.
Consolidating Northern Borders and 
Developing the Western Regions
The Qin and Han dynasties saw the rise of nomadic Huns living in the 
 northern Mongolian Plateau. The oases west of Yumen Pass and Yangguan 
Pass, including present-day Xinjiang, Central Asia, and areas even further west, 
were called Western Regions, where “thirty-six kingdoms,” including Wusun 
and Cheshi, were created.
Th e Huns, who conquered the Western Regions in the early Han Dynasty, 
confronted the Qin and Han dynasty forces along the natural north–south 
 agricultural boundary between them. The relationship between both parties 
had a direct effect on the stability and development of the river bends, the 
Western Regions, and even the unifi ed multiethnic country.
In 215 BC, General Meng Tian, dispatched by Emperor Shihuang of the 
Qin Dynasty, led 300,000 soldiers to attack the Huns, regaining the previously 
occupied river bends and establishing counties there. To defend against the 
Huns, the Qin Dynasty reinforced the old walls along the northern borders 
built by the former states of Yan, Zhao, and Qin. The effort resulted in the 
 initial formation of the world famous Great Wall that extends from Lintao, 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

62 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Gansu, in the west to Liaodong in the east. Twelve prefectures were set up 
along the walls. Th e vast number of people who immigrated there to consoli-
date the border areas laid the foundation for stabilizing the northern borders 
and developing the Western Regions.
Th e early Han Dynasty saw a depressed economy and failures in its defensive 
wars against the Huns. Even peace-making marriages and bribery couldn’t stop 
the Huns from achieving a large-scale intrusion. Relying on improved national 
strength, Emperor Wudi waged two great battles successively in places south and 
north of the Yellow River, driving the Huns out of the South Desert. He further 
sent Wei Qing and Huo Qubing to chase the Huns in the North Desert. Mean-
while, a vigorous eff ort was made to build walls along the areas west of the Yellow 
River, with beacon towers at short intervals extending west to Lop Nur in Xinjiang.
Before long, the Huns broke up into several groups. Huhanye, Khan of 
the Huns, led his troops to submit to the Han Dynasty and agreed that “the 
Han Dynasty and Hun are one family and no cheating or attacking is allowed.” 
Emperor Yuandi of the Han Dynasty accepted the request of the Huns for a 
peace-making marriage and married Wang Zhaojun, a court lady, to Huhanye 
as a princess.
The site of Western Han’s Great Wall at Yumen Pass, Dunhuang, Gansu.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
63
Th e unifi cation of the Hun and Han peoples resulted in decades of peace 
and stability in the northern border areas. Consolidating borders with walls, 
reclaiming land, building roads, and increased bilateral trade all followed the 
peace-making marriages between the Han Dynasty and the Huns. Th is facili-
tated both social and economic development in the central plains, and helped 
spread advanced culture into the border areas.
Livestock in the early Han Dynasty were few, and offi  cials had to travel in 
oxcarts. While under the regime of Emperor Wudi, areas south of the Great 
Wall saw “hordes of horses and cattle in fi elds.” Livestock were used for farm-
ing and transportation, greatly enhancing productivity in the central plains. 
In the meantime, the Huns traded horses and cattle with inland merchants 
for daily necessities, which further spurred the development of a livestock 
economy.
Numerous unearthed cultural relics serve as proof that the iron plows, cur-
rencies used, and weighing and measuring instruments employed in such areas 
 Zhaojun to the Border Area by Qiu Ying in the Ming Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

64 
CHINA’S HISTORY
as Gansu, Ordos of Inner Mongolia, and Liaoyang of Northeast China diff ered 
little from those adopted in inland areas.
The Han exploitation of the Western Regions is best showcased by the 
development of the Silk Road. It began in Chang’an, ran through the Hexi 
Corridor and present-day Xinjiang, to Central and West Asia, and finally to 
Europe. Along the land route that spanned the Asian and European continents, 
techniques of casting iron, digging wells, and making iron plows, and the con-
cepts of plowing with oxen, raising silkworms, and reeling silk, as well as large 
quantities of metal tools and silk fabrics were transported from east to west, 
speeding the social progress of western areas. In return, the Akhal-Teke breed 
of horses, camels, fur goods, grapes, megranate fruit, benne (sesame), walnuts, 
and other products of the Western Regions, as well as wonderful foreign music 
and dances, were introduced to inland areas, blowing a fresh breath into to 
 traditional Chinese culture.
Th e Silk Road also connected the Han Dynasty with countries of ancient 
civilization, such as Kushan, Arsacid, and Rome. In the 1st century BC, the 
Roman emperor Caesar once wore a “coat of Heaven” made of Chinese silk, 
and the Europeans called the Han Dynasty “Seres,” meaning “the country 
of silk.” Plinius, a Roman natural historian, mentioned in his book Natural 
 History that, “despite the variety of iron, none equaled the iron from China (the 
Han Dynasty).” Furthermore, the Buddhism of ancient India, the art of ancient 
Rome, and various foreign sculptures and paintings were introduced from west 
to east. The opening of the Asia-Europe passageway, called the Silk Road by 
later generations, tightly connected the Western Regions with the central plains 
Fresco from the tomb of the Han Dynasty in Helinge’er, Inner Mongolia, depicts the farming 
life of the northern nomadic people at the time.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
65
and produced a far-reaching infl uence on cultural exchanges between east and 
west and the development of human civilization.
The territory under Emperor Wudi, twice as large as that of the Qin 
Dynasty, supporting a population of 60 million at the peak of his rule. The 
establishment of such a vast and populous empire required mature 
 political 
and economic systems, efficient management, harmonious relationships 
Piece of a Dunhuang fresco: Zhang Qian bids farewell to Emperor Wudi of the Han Dynasty.
Gold coin of the Eastern Roman Empire, unearthed along the Silk Road.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

66 
CHINA’S HISTORY
between the central and local governments and among ethnic groups, and 
a concentrated power based on consistent cultural concepts and values. 
Although territories changed, dynasties were replaced, and regime divisions 
and mergers were constant occurrences, the grand trend of unity was never 
reversed.
At the end of the Western Han Dynasty, Wang Mang, a relative of the 
emperor on his wife’s side, seized power and crowned himself in 9 AD, 
 starting the Xin Dynasty that eventually replaced the Western Han. But, 
 fourteen years later, insurgent peasant armies Lulin (Greenwoods) and 
 Chimei (Red Eyebrow) captured Chang’an and exterminated Xin. In 25 AD, 
Liu Xiu resumed the Han Dynasty in Luoyang, known as the Eastern Han 
Dynasty. Liu Xiu released servants and maids and reduced taxation. Th e soci-
ety and economy recovered and developed. The power of the local despots 
he relied on expanded accordingly. At the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, 
eunuchs and the relatives of the emperor on his wife’s side controlled the 
court. Struggle and strife led to social turbulence, and under the onslaught 
of the Huangjin (Yellow Turban) Peasant Uprising, imperial power declined 
and fell into the hands of scattered warlords. In 220 AD, Cao Pi dethroned 
Emperor Xiandi of the Han Dynasty and established the Wei Dynasty in 
Luoyang, marking the end of the Eastern Han.
Booming Culture of the Qin and Han 
Dynasties
Th e establishment of a unifi ed country paved the way for sustainable cultural 
growth. The Qin and Han dynasties witnessed further advances in science 
and culture. Th e invention of paper is China’s most prominent contribution to 
human civilization. Chinese characters fi rst appeared on pottery, tortoise shells, 
and bronze ware, and later on bamboo slips and silk cloth, all of which were 
either heavy or expensive and made cultural communication diffi  cult.
In the early Western Han Dynasty, workmen, while beating pods into 
silk, found that characters could be written on the remaining silk membranes. 
Enlightened by the process, the Chinese people adopted fl ax as a raw material 
to produce the earliest plant fi ber paper, which was still rough and not suitable 
for writing. In the Eastern Han Dynasty, the eunuch Cai Lun resorted to tree 
bark, fl ax cloth, rags, old fi shing nets, and other readily available raw materials 
to make a high quality yet inexpensive paper called “Marquis Cai Paper.” From 
then on, paper was produced on a large scale and became the most popular 
material for writing.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
67
China’s paper-making technique was fi rst exported to Korea and Vietnam, 
then to Japan in the 7th century, to Arabian counties in the 8th century, and to 
Europe in the 12th century. Paper played a signifi cant role in worldwide com-
munication, education, and trade, and had a profound impact on the progress 
of world civilization.
The iron-smelting sector of the Han Dynasty remained as advanced as 
before. Quenching techniques were invented and coal was used as a fuel for 
A hemp paper map from the Western Han Dynasty, unearthed in Fangmatan, Tianshui, Gansu.
A bronze galloping horse from the Eastern Han Dynasty, unearthed in Wuwei, Gansu.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

68 
CHINA’S HISTORY
smelting. In the Eastern Han Dynasty, wind power was used to smelt metal, 
and a low-temperature steel-making technique was invented and popularized. 
With regard to ship-building, more efficient sculls, more flexible stern steer-
ing wheels, cloth sails that relied on wind power, and more fi rm anchors were 
invented, leading to improved navigation techniques.
In the handicraft  sector, the superb black porcelains made in the late East-
ern Han Dynasty marked the maturity of porcelain-making techniques first 
initiated in China. Improved silk embroidery workmanship resulted in more 
diverse categories of embroidery. Their exquisite patterns and bright colors 
enabled them to be exported to East Asia and Europe in large quantities and 
were reputed by the Romans to be “the world’s number one fabric.”
With regard to the measurement of celestial bodies, Zhang Heng of the 
Eastern Han Dynasty invented the earliest “armillary sphere” (instrument with 
rings showing the positions of heavenly bodies) that revolved with hydraulic 
power. He also invented a seismograph that could precisely measure the direc-
tion of earthquakes thousands of miles away—more than 1,700 years earlier 
than  similar devices invented in Europe.
Unlike Greek classical mathematics that focused on theorem proving, 
ancient Chinese mathematics focused on the creation of algorithms, especially 
those that solved equations. Th e Zhou Bi Mathematical Manual written in the 
Pottery Boat of the Eastern Han Dynasty, unearthed in Guangzhou, Guangdong.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
69
Seismograph invented by Zhang Heng (model).
Page from Liu Hui’s The Nine Chapters on Mathematical Art.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

70 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Portrait of Hua Tuo.
Western Han Dynasty first records a special case in geometry known as the 
Pythagorean Th eorem, about 500 years earlier than that proposed in the west.
The Nine Chapters on Mathematical Art written during the Eastern Han 
Dynasty was a collection of mathematical achievements from pre-Qin to the 
Han Dynasty, and was respected as the most important book of its kind. Th e 
book records all the algorithms for practical problems closely related to pro-
duction, such as those relevant to land areas, grain, trade, warehouse size, 
earthworks, and tax, and those that summarize ways of calculating positive and 
negative numbers, plus ways to solve quadratic equations. Its presence marked 
the formation of the ancient Chinese mathematical system in which counting 
rods were used as the calculation tool, and the decimal system was adopted.
Th e Nine Chapters on Mathematical Art was introduced to Japan in the Sui 
and Tang dynasties, and some parts of the book spread to India and the Arab 
world, and even to Europe.
Many famous doctors and classic books emerged in the Han Dynasty. 
Th e Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine written during the Western 
Han is a pioneering book of traditional Chinese medical theory. The book, 
in two parts, has 162 articles in eighteen volumes. It discusses basic theories 
 concerning the body, physiology, causes of disease, and diagnosis, as well as 
acupuncture, channels and collaterals, and health care.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
71
Emperor Shen Nong’s Materia Medica, written during the Eastern Han 
Dynasty, is a summary of medicines used since the Warring States Period, 
and became the foundation for subsequent Chinese pharmacology. Zhang 
Zhongjing, known as the “Medicine Saint” in the Eastern Han Dynasty, pro-
posed a set of traditional Chinese theories in Th e Treatise on Febrile Diseases, 
including the three causes of disease and treatment according to syndrome 
diff erentiation. Hua Tuo, a highly skilled doctor in the Eastern Han, invented 
Mafeisan, the earliest surgical anesthetic, performed the fi rst abdominal cavity 
operation in China, and invented the fi ve-animal frolics.
Against the backdrop of unification, the official mainstream ideology in 
the Qin and Han dynasties experienced a transformation from “contention of a 
hundred schools of thought” to “paying supreme tribute to one thought while 
banning all other schools of thought.” Th e legalist thought of the Warring States 
period was adopted by Emperor Yingzheng as a sharp tool for pushing reform; 
through abandoning Confucianism and absorbing part of the diverse thoughts 
of many schools, it further became the dominant ideology guiding the politics 
of the Qin Dynasty aft er unifi cation.
In the early western Han Dynasty, the economy was seriously dam-
aged and a host of neglected tasks cried for attention. Faced with a need to 
rehabilitate the economy, the intellectual field was relatively open, and the 
philosophy of Huang Di and Lao Tze prevailed. During the reign of Emperor 
Wudi, ideological control intensified as the political situation became 
more stable and the economy prospered. Confucianist Dong Zhongshu 
put  forward the opinion of “paying supreme tribute to Confucianism while 
Stone Carving of the Han Dynasty: Sermon.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

72 
CHINA’S HISTORY
 banning all other schools of thought” and “banning all ways of spreading 
other schools of thought” except Confucianism, which he believed could 
make the people know how to behave and who to obey, and thus safeguard 
the  imperial power. Emperor Wudi accepted his suggestion and established it 
as a national strategy.
Th e new Confucianism of Dong Zhongshu, was in fact, a new  ideological 
system shaped by combining many schools of thought—the Yin-Yang School, 
Taoism, and Legalism based on Confucius’ political outlook of maintaining 
the hierarchical system, and the thought of unification highlighted in The 
Kung-Yang Commentary on the Spring and Autumn Annals. Dong Zhongshu 
claimed that “social norms originate in nature, and no changes in social 
norms shall happen without changes in nature.” He advocated that “regality is 
awarded by heaven,” based on the theory of “induction between heaven and 
man.” He also warned that if the emperor was brutal in his rule, the heaven 
would send calamities to condemn and deter him. Therefore, the emperor 
must observe the way of the heaven and exercise benevolent rule. Dong 
emphasized that the emperor should rule the country with benevolence at 
its core and punishment as supplement, and put forward the ethical norms 
of benevolence, righteousness, propriety, wisdom, and fidelity. The three 
cardinal guides—the ruler guides his subjects; the father guides his son; and 
the husband guides his wife—were cardinal relationships that could not be 
changed.
“Paying supreme tribute to Confucianism while banning all other schools 
of thought” is an important event in the history of China. Confucianism’s 
dominant position in politics was conducive to consolidating the unifi ed coun-
try and stabilizing the social order. Confucianism became a required course in 
all schools and was the court’s standard of assessment when selecting offi  cials. 
Th us was the dominant position of Confucianism established in the traditional 
culture of China.
Th e Records of the Grand Historian written by Sima Qian, and Th e Book of 
Han written by Ban Gu are two famous historical books. Sima Qian, once the 
Prefect of the Grand Scribes and Chief of the Secretariat during the regime 
of Emperor Wudi, compiled China’s fi rst general history. He assembled parts 
of previous historical books and the thought of many schools, made use of 
fi les collected by the State, and conducted fi eld investigations and interviews. 
The book includes 130 chapters and more than 500,000 words, recording all 
major historical events during the 3,000 years from the legendary Huangdi to 
Emperor Wudi. 
The Records of the Grand Historian marked a fresh start in documenting 
historical events, systems, human activities, and social changes. It combines 
multiple ways of recording, including Benji (biographical sketches of kings), 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 4 The Qin and Han Dynasties 
73
Biao (tables), Shu (records of systems), Shijia (records of vassals), and Liezhuan 
(biographies), becoming the model for subsequent Chinese historians.
Th e Book of Han written by Ban Gu was the fi rst book of dynastic history, 
offering detailed and in-depth descriptions about the social evolution of the 
Han Dynasty.
Th e achievements of literature in the Han Dynasty were best refl ected in 
the creation of Fu and Yuefu. Fu is a rhymed prose style that combines the 
rational spirit of Th e Book of Odes prior to the Qin Dynasty with the romantic 
expression of the Chu odes. Fu attaches importance to expatiation,  parallelism, 
and ornate language. Sima Xiangru and Yang Xiong were the most notable 
writers of Fu. 
Yuefu was a musical department established during the reign of Emperor 
Wudi of the Han Dynasty. Poems collected, sorted, and recorded by the Yuefu 
department were called Yuefu poetry, which inherited and developed the excel-
lent tradition of the folk songs in The Book of Odes with lively language and 
various forms.
The Terracotta Warriors and Horses of Emperor Shihuang of the Qin 
Dynasty showcase the outstanding artistic achievements of the Qin and 
Han dynasties with their exquisite artistic shapes and spectacular scale. 
Portrait of Sima Qian.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

74 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Nearly 10,000 terracotta warriors and horses have been found. The same 
size as real ones, all have different expressions and lively postures. The 
14,000- square-meter No.1 pit holds a huge army: 6,000 terracotta warriors and 
horses, more than 40 chariots, and 160 war-horses. The army is “marching” 
eastward with the momentum of an avalanche, like a living army, reproducing 
the gallant manner of the Qin troops that bravely fought against the other six 
states in the central plains, manifesting the pioneering spirit of the time and 
the grandness of a unifi ed empire.
Terracotta warriors and horses escorting the Mausoleum of Emperor Shihuang of the Qin 
Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

5
77
5
The Three Kingdoms Period and the Southern 
and Northern Dynasties
Th e period from 220 AD to 589 AD witnessed the rise and fall of the Wei, Jin, 
and Southern and Northern Dynasties. A turbulent political situation, the 
 multiple struggles for domination, and the entry of northern ethnic groups into 
the central plains resulted in long-tem disunity of the country and confronta-
tion between south and north.
Th e main reason for the struggles among local warlords was the malignant 
expansion of local despots since the Eastern Han Dynasty. Upon the establish-
ment of the Eastern Han, Liu Xiu greatly rewarded both ministers and rela-
tives. Some famed families monopolized key offices of the court for several 
generations. Th ey greedily annexed land by means of political privilege and set 
up manors nationwide. Bankrupted and exiled peasants were forced to attach 
themselves to the despots and landlords as tenant peasants.
Using their political privileges, these powerful households tyrannized the 
society. Th ey had economic power over tenant peasants. Th ey built high walls, 
moats, and private armed forces. Seizing the opportunity of a turbulent situa-
tion, they crazily expanded their power, spawning warlord groups that monop-
olized local areas and initiated wars against others. Th e fi nal result was the rise 
of three powers, known as Caowei, Shuhan, and Sunwu.
Cao Cao was once a Commander of Military Standards during the reign 
of Emperor Lingdi at the end of the Han Dynasty. He participated in the 
The Wei, Jin, and Southern 
and Northern Dynasties: 
Regime Division and Ethnic 
Concentration
Chapter 5
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

78 
CHINA’S HISTORY
allied troop crusade against the rebellious minister Dong Zhuo. Cao Cao later 
defeated the Yellow Turbans at Qingzhou, incorporated more than 300,000 
soldiers into his troops, and further established a valiant army called  Qingzhou 
Troops. In 196 AD, Cao Cao took back Emperor Xiandi, who had been held 
under duress by Dong Zhuo, and moved the capital to Xuxian (present-day 
Xuchang, Henan), gaining a favorable position of “coercing the emperor to 
control all his vassals.” In 200 AD, he won the battle at Guandu against the 
troops of Yuan Shao and gained control over areas both north and south of the 
Yellow River.
Cao Cao further conquered Wuhuan of Liaoxi, which basically unifi ed the 
northern part of China. In 208 AD, he led a troop southward but was defeated 
by the allied army of Sun Quan and Liu Bei at Chibi, resulting in a pattern of 
the whole country being controlled by three regimes. Retreating to the north, 
Cao Cao successively occupied Guanzhong and Liangzhou and expanded the 
scope of his power in the northwestern areas. Politically, Cao Cao respected 
the wise and believed talent was the only criterion for selecting officials. He 
also beefed up the centralized rule and attacked those who were getting rich 
or powerful through illegal means. Economically, he prohibited land merg-
ers, and implemented the Tuntian System (a kind of government-encouraged 
agricultural system) and the Zudiao System (a tax system). He recruited exiled 
peasants to reclaim barren land on a large scale. Th ese eff orts greatly promoted 
the development of the northern economy, which had been damaged by cease-
less wars, and helped widespread areas of desolate fi elds morph into a land of 
harvest and abundance. Aft er Cao Cao’s death in 220 AD, Cao Pi dethroned 
Emperor Xiandi and established the Wei Dynasty, historically called Caowei.
Chibi. The War at Chibi was decisive to the formation of the Three Kingdoms.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 5 The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties 
79
Liu Bei was a descendant of the royal family of the Han Dynasty. Aft er 
the family fortunes declined in his early years, he went to his relative, Liu 
Biao, the governor of Jinzhou, for help. As a man of ambition, Liu Bei 
always sought positions of power and control and went everywhere to fi nd 
those who could assist him. It is said he once paid three visits to a thatched 
 cottage in  Longzhong, Jinzhou, to engage Zhuge Liang. Following the death 
of Liu Biao, Liu Bei controlled  Jinzhou. In 211 AD, he attacked Hanzhong 
and further occupied Yizhou in Sichuan, consolidating his rule over the 
southwestern region. In 221 AD, Liu Bei declared himself a descendant 
of the former imperial family and established a state, historically called 
 Shuhan, with Chengdu as its capital. Assisted by Prime Minister Zhuge 
Liang, Liu Bei implemented clean politics and paid particular attention to 
the state’s relationship with local ethnic groups.  Economically, he also made 
a vigorous eff ort to popularize raising silkworms, to develop iron smelting, 
and to encourage textile and other handicraft   sectors, leading to the rapid 
development of the southwestern regions and close ties with the central 
plains.
Terracotta ofﬁ cials or soldiers of the Western Jin Dynasty, unearthed in Changsha, Hunan.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

80 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Sun Quan, who relied on rich and powerful landlords and inherited his 
family fortunes in areas south of the Yangtze, was confronted with Caowei 
across the Yangtze and rapidly expanded in areas south of the river. He later 
drove the forces of Liu Bei from Jingzhou and occupied Lingnan, extending 
his scope of power southeastward. In 229 AD, Sun Quan ascended the throne, 
established Jianye (present-day Nanjing) as the capital, and changed the state 
tile to Wu, historically called Sunwu.
Wei, Shu, and Wu each achieved regional unification, respectively 
 making significant contributions to local social progress. Caowei was 
the strongest of all. Upon Zhuge Liang’s death, the Shuhan regime was 
 monopolized by eunuchs, resulting in political corruption and  waning 
national strength.  Caowei finally eliminated the regime in 263 AD. After 
Emperor Mingdi of Caowei died, minister Sima Yan seized the regime and, 
in 266 AD, came into power and changed the state title to Jin,  historically 
called the Western Jin. In the later period of Sunwu, the tyrannical and 
 extravagant Emperor Sun Hao aroused widespread complaints and anger 
among the people. In 280 AD, the Western Jin ended Sunwu, thereby 
 unifying the whole country. Due to bureaucratic corruption, the  Rebellion 
of Eight Princes and the consequent sharpened class contradictions and 
 ethnic conflicts, the Western Jin lasted for only thirty years and was 
ended by the northern ethnic regime in 316. In 317, the remaining royal 
 family of the Western Jin moved to areas south of the Yangtze and estab-
lished  Jiankang (present-day Nanjing, Jiangsu) as the capital of the state, 
 historically called Eastern Jin, which lasted about 100 years.
Ladies’ Outing, brick carving of the Southern Dynasties.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 5 The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties 
81
In 420 AD, Liu Yu overthrew the Eastern Jin and changed the state title to 
Song. From then on, the areas south of the Yangtze witnessed frequent changes 
of regimes from Song (420–479), to Qi (479–502), to Liang (502–557), and to 
Chen (557–589), collectively called the Southern Dynasties in Chinese history.
A dozen ethnic regimes took root in the north from 304, generally called 
the Sixteen States Period. In 439, the Northern Wei, led by the Tuobas from the 
 Xianbei ethnic group, unifi ed the Yellow River Valley. Later on, aft er divisions 
and replacements, the Eastern Wei (534–550), the Northern Qi (550–577), 
the  Western Wei (535–556), and the Northern Zhou (557–581) stood out and 
were called the Northern Dynasties. The Northern and Southern Dynasties 
confronted each other and are collectively called the Southern and Northern 
Dynasties.
Drastic social turmoil and long-term wars led to national division, 
 economic decline, and destruction of the social fabric. Aft er more than three 
centuries of chaos, many northern ethnic groups gradually merged with one 
another during the regime confl icts and exchanges. Th e southern areas expe-
rienced unprecedented economic development and laid a solid foundation for 
subsequent reunifi cation.
Development of Areas South of the Yangtze
Due to ecological diversity in ancient China, three major economic zones—
the stockbreeding zone north of Jieshi, Longmen; the traditional agricultural 
zone in the central plains in the Yellow River basins; and the areas south of 
the Yangtze—took shape as early as the Qin and Han dynasties. Different 
regions had distinctive  economic features that complemented one another. 
Th e  central plains, including present-day Henan, Shandong, and Hebei, as well 
as  southern Shanxi, northern Jiangsu, and northern Anhui, enjoyed superior 
natural  conditions and were developed earlier. Th e region is home to Chinese 
 civilization and has long been the economic center of China. While areas south 
of the Yangtze, with hot, wet weather and widespread forests and wetlands, saw 
the dominance of hunting, fi shing, and lumbering.
In the Qin and Han dynasties, parts of the area south of the Yangtze were 
preliminarily developed, while areas like Chuyue still featured vast land and a 
sparsely distributed population. But the backward situation was soon changed 
in the Eastern Jin and Southern Dynasties, as the national economic center 
started to move southward.
The Wei and Jin dynasties experienced the second period of freezing 
weather in ancient China. Wars, excessive reclamation, and freezing weather 
rapidly destroyed agricultural ecology in the Yellow River Valley. In  contrast, 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

82 
CHINA’S HISTORY
areas south of the Yangtze showed a huge potential for economic  development 
with better weather conditions and abundant resources.
Aft er moving southward, the Western Jin eff ectively prevented the  invasion 
of northern nomads by relying on the natural moat of the Yangtze. In 383, 
an 800,000-soldier troop of the Di ethnic group marched southward, but was 
defeated by the 80,000-soldier troop of the Eastern Jin, which resolutely waged 
a counterattack at Feishui. The soldiers saved the area south of the Yangtze 
from invasion, providing a relatively stable environment for local economic 
development.
Th e Rebellion of Eight Princes in the Western Jin Dynasty and the immi-
gration of northern nomads to inland areas led to decades of chaos in northern 
China and large-scale southward migration from the central plains.
During the 170 years from the end of the Western Jin to the early 
 Southern dynasties, up to 900,000 people moved to the south, one-sixth of 
its total  population. Th is migration helped import both labor and advanced 
tools and production techniques southward, offering a powerful impetus 
to the economic growth south of the Yangtze. Stretches of barren land were 
reclaimed, and many water conservancy projects were constructed. Iron 
plows drawn by oxen were adopted, and a crop system combining paddy rice 
and wheat planting was created. Craft smen also moved from north to south 
on a large scale, helping create a boom in the handicraft  sector. Silk weav-
ing, iron smelting, and pottery works enhanced the prosperity of commerce 
in the cities. According to Th e Book of the Song Dynasty, the southern area 
became the most prosperous place in the country during the Eastern Jin and 
Ox-cart, brick carving from the Southern Dynasties.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 5 The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties 
83
 Southern dynasties. Ancient China’s economic center started to shift from 
the  northern Yellow River Valley to the southern Yangtze River’s middle and 
lower reaches.
Gathering of Northern Ethnic Groups
Th e relationship between the northern ethnic groups and the Han group is an 
important factor in Chinese history. Since the time of the Eastern Han Dynasty, 
the northern and northwestern ethnic groups, like the Huns, Xianbei, Jie, Di, 
and Qiang, had been forced to move into the hinterlands and become tenant 
peasants, soldiers, or even servants, further sharpening the divisions between 
ethnic groups. Some ethnic regimes were set up during the struggle against the 
Han rulers. Th ese groups continuously advanced to the central plains when the 
Han reign was under duress.
At the time of the Wei and Jin dynasties, the northern ethnic groups’ 
migration resulted in a “half population in northwestern prefectures.” In the 
midst of great chaos, they kept their original clan organization and set up 
ethnic regimes. Th ey revolted against oppression, strengthened their power, 
struggled for wealth, and attacked one another, intensifying social turbu-
lence and wars. On the other hand, the ethnic groups were registered as 
national households mainly engaged in agriculture. Th ey lived together and 
married local people. Th e frequent exchanges resulted in a general trend of 
harmony.
After decades of living together through thick and thin, most ethnic 
groups acknowledged the culture of the central plains, regarding themselves 
offspring of Yandi and Huangdi. Most imitated the political and economic 
policies of the central plains that had developed to varying degrees since the 
Harrowing land, brick carving of the Wei and 
Jin dynasties.
Messenger, mural of the Wei and Jin 
dynasties.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

84 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Emperor Xiaowendi dressed in Han clothes on an imperial inspection, discovered in Longmen 
Grottoes, Luoyang.
Han and Wei dynasties. For instance, Liu Yuan, an aristocrat of Hun, was well 
acquainted with classical works on Confucianism as well as with Th e Records of 
the Grand  Historian, Th e Book of Han, and Th e Art of War. He claimed himself 
the nephew of the emperor of the Han Dynasty and established a state with the 
title of Han. His successor, Liu Cong, was equally acquainted with literature 
and history and was good at calligraphy, capable of cursive handwriting and 
offi  cial script, and wrote hundreds of poems and odes. Fu Jian of the Pre-Qin 
Dynasty declared his intent to “mix all the ethnic groups into one family.” He 
attached great importance to Han Chinese offi  cials, courteously treated distin-
guished persons of all ethnic groups, and worked to popularize Confucianism 
and the systems of the Han Chinese in an all-around way. Aft er the Northern 
Wei built by the Xianbei ethnic group unifi ed the north, ethnic group accul-
turation sped up.
At the beginning of the Northern Wei reunification, many outdated 
 traditions were still in existence. For instance, in war, the infantries for assault 
were composed of Han Chinese and other ethnic groups, while the Xianbei 
cavalries supervised them from behind. Th is and other forms of social injustice 
aroused intense resistance.
Queen Mother Feng, a Han Chinese who grew up in the central plains 
 culture, prompted Tuoba Hong, Emperor Xiaowendi of the Northern Wei, who 
 succeeded to the throne at fi ve, to reform.
To smoothly promote reform and better learn the culture of the central 
plains, Emperor Xiaowendi moved his capital from the remote Ping Cheng 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 5 The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties 
85
(today’s Datong, Shanxi) to Luoyang, which became the capital for several 
dynasties. After the move, he greatly promoted the Han Chinese-oriented 
 policies, government organization, rituals, and codes. For life and customs, 
Ethnic-style clothes and Xianbei language were prohibited. Xianbei persons 
were to adapt their surnames per the Han Chinese style. He also advocated 
 marriage between the Xianbei and the Han Chinese, and forbade marriage 
between Xianbei persons of the same surname.
During the reform, Emperor Xiaowendi set himself as an example to  others 
by changing his royal surname from “Tuoba” to “Yuan” and renamed himself 
“Yuan Hong.” He also married the daughter of a Han Chinese  minister and 
married his daughter to a Chinese man. Th ese all-around reforms in politics, 
economy, culture, and customs accelerated the the blending of ethnic groups 
into the Han Chinese culture.
Not only did the southern economy achieve an unprecedented boom, the 
northern ethnic groups gradually gathered together in the confl icts and were 
Dunhuang fresco of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, documenting a highly active business scene 
business scene along the Silk Road.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

86 
CHINA’S HISTORY
 converted by the civilization of the central plains. Without disturbing  landlords 
who occupied land, the System of Equal Distribution of Land practiced in 
the Northern Wei area distributed land to peasants according to household 
 population. Th at properly solved the problem of matching land and labor, and 
significantly pushed forward the means of production in the central plains, 
having a far-reaching infl uence on Chinese history.
Ethnic food, clothing, beds, music, and dances, all with the unique 
features of northern ethnic groups, as well as other advanced techniques 
of livestock breeding, disease prevention, and medical treatment, were 
gradually merged into the daily life of the Han Chinese, enriching the cul-
ture of the central plains. The ethnic group acculturation, epitomized by 
Emperor Xiaowendi’s reform, laid a solid foundation for a deepened national 
 reunifi cation.
During the Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern dynasties, the 
 non- Chinese world also experienced a huge change. The Gupta Empire rose 
in India. Th e Arsacid Dynasty was ended by the Persian Empire. Th e brilliant 
ancient culture of Rome was interrupted by the invasion of other countries. 
Chinese culture continued and developed along a winding way, though experi-
encing prolonged disunity and wars.
Colorful and Diverse Culture in the Wei, Jin, 
and Southern and Northern Dynasties
Th e extension and development of Chinese culture during the period were also 
refl ected in science, technology, and culture. Agronomy, medicine, mathemat-
ics, geology, calligraphy, painting, and sculpture surpassed those of the Qin and 
Han dynasties.
Th e period saw the invention of a method used to produce steel by com-
bining pig iron and wrought iron, the creation of the rotating water cart, 
a highly efficient tool for irrigation, as well as the cultivation of a superior 
 silkworm breed that could produce pods eight times a year. In  addition, oil and 
natural gas were used for lighting, and even to create fi re in an attack.
Th e book Essential Techniques for the Peasantry, written by Jia Sixie in the 
Wei State, systematically summarizes the experiences in  farming, raising stock, 
fishing, and other production activities in the middle and lower reaches of 
the Yellow River, as well as the ways they processed and stored food. It is the 
fi rst complete agricultural book in China, and is the world’s fi rst  agricultural 
 encyclopedia.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 5 The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties 
87
The Commentary on the Waterways Classic, written by geographer Li 
Daoyuan, is a book of notes on previous works. Using more than 300,000 
words, it goes into detail about 1,250 rivers as well as the mountains, 
 landscapes,  evolution of  counties, local products, customs, history, and  legends 
in areas along the waterways. The Commentary on the Waterways Classic is 
more than an excellent  comprehensive geographical work; it is also of great 
 signifi cance in literature.
Zu Chongzhi, a mathematician in the Southern Dynasty, concluded that 
the value of pi falls between 3.1415926 and 3.1415927, an achievement preced-
ing the West by 1,000 years. He formulated the Daming Calendar, concluding 
that a year actually includes 365.24281481 days, with an error of no more than 
50 seconds. Zu Chongzhi was also good at making mechanical instruments, 
successfully duplicating the compass cart, even though its creation techniques 
had been lost for generations. Zu also created water mills, and a “thousand-li 
Page from Essential Techniques for the Peasantry.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

88 
CHINA’S HISTORY
ship” that could travel hundreds of li per day. In the 1960s, to  commemorate 
his great  contributions to world science and culture, the International 
 Astronomical Union named a ring mountain on the moon as the “Mountain of 
Zu Chongzhi.”
The collapse of the Eastern Han and the ensuing severe turbulence 
destroyed the overwhelming supremacy of Confucianism and led to a 
 flourishing of  legalism and metaphysics. Taoism and Buddhism introduced 
between the  Western and Eastern Han dynasties were particularly prosperous, 
posing a  challenge to the Confucianism that indulged in absurd arguments and 
dogmas.
Th e metaphysics that emerged between the Wei and Jin dynasties respected 
Lao Tze and Zhuang Tzu, and advocated “void is the nature of everything” and 
“acting in accordance with natural laws.” Its representatives, such as Ji Kang and 
Ruan Ji, brazenly declared that “they despise King Tang of the Shang Dynasty 
and King Wu of the Zhou Dynasty, and belittle Zhougong and Confucius,” both 
Portrait of Zu Chongzhi.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 5 The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties 
89
speaking and behaving beyond established ritual and legal norms. Metaphysics 
grew as the dominant school of thought at that time, driving forward the devel-
opment of philosophical thinking and the liberation of individuals.
Buddhism, introduced into the central plains from ancient India during 
the Western and Eastern Han dynasties, prospered in the Wei and Jin dynas-
ties. Buddhism emphasizes karma and samsara. Buddhists told people they 
could attain happiness in their aft erlife, even when they had to tolerate pain in 
the current life, so long as they earnestly kept up Buddhist practices. Buddhist 
doctrines allowed maintenance of the hierarchical order, off ered converts spiri-
tual support, and were particularly attractive to the poor, who were struggling 
in the turbulent world of the time.
The Southern and Northern dynasties witnessed the peak of Buddhism 
in China. As the poems of Du Fu, a poet of the Tang Dynasty, described, “As 
many as 480 temples in the Southern and Northern dynasties are shrouded in 
mist and drizzle.” In the Northern Dynasties, the number of Buddhist  temples 
increased to more than 30,000, and monks and nuns to three  million. The 
spread of Buddhism injected fresh elements and had a huge impact on tradi-
tional Chinese culture in such aspects as ideology, culture, art, and  literature.
Taoism, established at the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, is a native reli-
gion of China combining Taoist thought and supernatural art. Reconstructed 
by Ge Hong in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, it was lifted to an official position. 
Taoism advocates harmony between heaven and human beings, attainment of 
the highest state of spiritual enlightenment, and becoming immortal through 
self-cultivation and making of the immortality pills according to the Taoist 
doctrine. Tao Hongjing of the Southern Dynasties further established a system 
of immortals, ranging from the Jade Emperor to the City God and Kitchen 
God, which had a far-reaching infl uence upon ancient  Chinese people.
The successive rise of metaphysics, Buddhism, and Taoism greatly 
 destabilized Confucianism, creating an open, diverse and lively atmosphere 
in the ideological world, which led to competition among Confucianism, 
 Buddhism, and Taoism.
Th e Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern dynasties saw social turbulence 
and the collapse of ritual norms, which gave rise to calligraphy as an ideal form 
for scholars to express their thoughts and pursuits. Chinese character  writing 
gradually evolved into a self-conscious calligraphic art. Wang Xizhi of the East-
ern Jin Dynasty was known as the Sage of Calligraphers and his  calligraphy 
featured fine brush strokes and aesthetically pleasing handwriting, bringing 
to mind the image of floating clouds or a flying dragon . His Preface to the 
Orchid Pavilion, which represents the pinnacle of the calligraphic art in the Jin 
Dynasty, is known as the “best running-hand work.”
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

90 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Preface to the Orchid Pavilion by Wang Xizhi of the Eastern Jin Dynasty. 
Ode to the Goddess of Luo (part) by Gu Kaizhi in the Eastern Jin Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 5 The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties 
91
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

92 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e Wei and Jin dynasties were the fi rst important developmental period 
for traditional Chinese painting, marked by the appearance of paintings with 
true individuality. Scholar-bureaucrats of the time advocated free discus-
sion and stressed the spirit while evaluating a person. Gu Kaizhi, a famous 
artist in the Eastern Jin Dynasty, was a representative of the spirit-oriented 
style. He insisted that the “spirit of a fi gure shall be expressed through outer 
appearances” and especially highlighted the traits of fi gures. While painting a 
Buddhist image for the Waguan Temple in Jiankang, Gu didn’t draw the eyes 
until the rest of the painting was fi nished, which immediately made the image 
extremely vivid and won praise and adoration from all witnesses, who subse-
quently gave alms to the temple.
Frequent exchanges with ethnic groups in the Western Regions and for-
eign nations helped enrich the Chinese art forms, such as music, dance, and 
grotto sculptures in the Wei, Jin, Southern, and Northern dynasties. Grotto 
sculptures that combine sculpture and painting particularly reflect the high-
est achievements of the time. Yungang Grottoes in Pingcheng (present-day 
Datong, Shanxi), initiated in the early Northern Wei Dynasty, boast spectacular 
scale with more than 50,000 Buddhist statues and flying apsaras. The largest 
Buddhist statue among them, 13.7 meters high, was carved with superb craft s-
manship. Aff ected by Indian Buddhist art styles, the Buddhist statues have high 
Yungang Grottoes (located at Datong, Shanxi). Carving of the grottoes started in the second 
year of the Xing’an Period, Northern Wei and was largely completed before the dynasty’s 
capital relocation to Luoyang.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 5 The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern Dynasties 
93
noses, deep-set eyes, and serious facial expressions, traits typical of the ethnic 
people of the Western Regions. Longmen Grottoes in Luoyang, Henan, were 
created aft er Emperor Wendi of the Northern Wei Dynasty moved the  capital 
there. One-third of the thousands of grottoes and habitats were excavated 
 during the Northern Wei Dynasty. The Buddhist statues, which look solemn 
and kindly, are dressed in exquisitely carved clothes, and show cultural features 
of the central plains.
The thoughts and culture of the Wei, Jin, and Southern and  Northern 
dynasties were not interrupted in the era of confrontation between the 
 Southern and Northern dynasties. On the contrary, they thrived and featured 
the dominance of the central plains culture and the fusion of diverse  elements. 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

6
95
6
Reunifi cation and the Sui Dynasty
From the end of the 6th century to the early 10th century, a unifi ed empire was 
rebuilt in China, and China entered into its heyday.
In 581, Yang Jian, a relative of the emperor of the Northern Zhou, replaced 
the dynasty and renamed the nation Sui, with its capital in Chang’an (today’s 
Xi’an, Shaanxi). Yang Jian or Emperor Wendi of the Sui Dynasty was the 
son-in-law of a Xianbei noble and the granduncle of Emperor Jingdi of the 
 Northern Zhou Dynasty, who succeeded to the throne at age seven. His fam-
ily itself was the epitome of cultural fusion. Yang Jian was surrounded by a 
group of Han Chinese officials and Xianbei nobles deeply influenced by the 
Chinese culture. Furthermore, his position as a royal relative entrusted to assist 
handling politics rendered him great power and privileges. Th at facilitated the 
Sui’s smooth replacement of Zhou and the subsequent establishment of the Sui 
Dynasty, the fi rst dynasty ruled by the Han Chinese people and accepted by the 
minorities in the Northern Dynasties.
In 589, the Sui troops crossed the Yangtze River and ended the Chen 
Dynasty, capturing Jiankang within eight days and reuniting China aft er 400 
years of separation. The Sui integrated the Yellow River and Yangtze River 
economic areas, greatly intensified the political, economic, and cultural ties 
between north and south, and promoted rapid growth of the economy.
After reunification, Emperor Wendi and his successor Emperor Yangdi 
promulgated a series of political and economic reforms to further intensify 
The Sui and Tang Dynasties: 
A Prosperous and Open Age
Chapter 6
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

96 
CHINA’S HISTORY
the centralized sovereignty and develop the economy. At the beginning of 
Emperor Yangdi’s reign, he started to build Luoyang to better display its func-
tion as an economic center. Meanwhile, a 2000-km-long canal from Zhuojun 
(today’s Tongzhou District, Beijing) in the north to Yuhang (today’s  Hangzhou, 
 Zhejiang) in the south was also being built. The Grand Canal, linking five 
 rivers—the Haihe, the Yellow, the Huaihe, the Yangtze, and the Qiantang 
 rivers—became an important political, economic, and cultural tie, and played 
an important role in consolidating and promoting development along the 
canal.
The period from the start of the Sui Dynasty to the early regime of the 
Emperor Yangdi saw vast expanses of territory and powerful national strength. 
With substantial increases in population and land reclaimed, the state’s  offi  cial 
granaries could contain millions to thousands of millions of dan (one dan 
equals 50 kg). Extra granaries were built for relief in times of harvest failure. At 
the end of the regime of Emperor Wendi, “the grain storage nationwide could 
meet the needs of the people for the next 50 to 60 years.”
During the reign of Emperor Yangdi, cloth and silk in Dongdu piled up like 
mountains. Stored products of the Sui Dynasty remained until the 20th year of 
the Tang Dynasty, inspiring Ma Duanlin, a historian of the Yuan Dynasty, to 
say “no other dynasty in history could compare with the Sui.”
Emperor Yangdi determinedly and dauntlessly pursued his policy of 
reform, with great achievements. Most of his projects and political and 
 economic reforms were of strategic signifi cance, contributing to the  fl ourishing 
Gongchen Bridge in Hangzhou, the ﬁ rst bridge over the Grand Canal.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
97
of the Tang Dynasty that followed. However, he paid little attention to the 
burden this put on the people. The emperor continuously engaged millions 
of people in civil works and engaged others in wars against (Korean) Koryo, 
resulting in desolated lands and starving people everywhere. Civilians went so 
far as to break their own hands and feet to escape from labor and army service. 
Emperor Yangdi’s tyranny gave rise to nationwide peasant uprisings. Sui rap-
idly perished. In 618, Li Yuan seized the opportunity and established the Tang 
Dynasty in Chang’an.
Splendid Early Tang Dynasty
In 626, Li Shimin, honored with great feats in founding the Tang Dynasty and 
achieving national  reunifi cation, changed his reign title to Zhenguan. Th e pow-
erful Sui Dynasty’s quick collapse deeply shocked Li Shimin, Emperor Taizong 
of the Tang Dynasty. He realized emperors “will be the head when honest and 
upright, and isolated when brutal and tyrannical.”
So, he successively freed 6,000 court girls and promised not to hold 
grand ceremonies of worship of heaven on mountains, pray for celestial 
beings, or conduct large-scale touring. He was also open to advice and 
tolerant toward his ministers’ comments. His minister, Wei Zheng, often 
cited the end of the Sui Dynasty as a means to criticize his faults in  public. 
Emperor Taizong, when extremely angered by the 
criticism, once told the empress that he would kill 
Wei Zheng sooner or later, but he eventually accepted 
Wei’s suggestions. That gave rise to an open and free 
political atmosphere between the emperor and his 
ministers.
Emperor Taizong believed that “winning talented 
 people is fundamental to national prosperity.” With an 
open mind and unique insight, he didn’t stick to the 
beaten track in employing talented people. He chose 
from former leaders of the insurgent troops, former min-
isters of the Sui Dynasty, favorite ministers of his politi-
cal opponents, and ordinary people of humble birth. 
Those wise and brave people later played an important 
role in formulating and implementing reform and stabi-
lizing the political situation.
During his reign, Emperor Taizong drew on the 
experiences and lessons of the Sui Dynasty, rolling out 
Emperor Taizong of 
the Tang Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

98 
CHINA’S HISTORY
a series of policies aimed to stabilize society and develop the economy. He 
 vigorously adjusted productive relations, social relations, and relations inside 
the ruling group, which resulted in clean politics and economic prosperity. 
Th e period was thus called the “Peaceful and Prosperous Zhenguan Period” in 
 history.
Li Zhi, Emperor Gaozong, the successor of Emperor Taizong, was a  coward 
and weak in health. Wu Zetian, the queen, was actively engaged in political 
aff airs. Aft er Li Zhi passed away, Wu Zetian ascended the throne in 690, becom-
ing the only female emperor in Chinese history. She controlled the empire for 
half a century. Her father, a nouveau riche, rose with Li Yuan, Emperor Gaozu, 
but was looked down upon by the hereditary nobles for his humble origin. 
Emperor Gaozong’s decision to install Wu Zetian as his empress was once 
strongly opposed by his senior ministers. However, with the support of those 
ministers with no scholarly background, Wu Zetian stepped onto the political 
stage as an empress. Aft er seizing power, she ruled that all offi  cials, including 
soldiers promoted to fi ft h-ranking offi  cials due to their feats, should be included 
in the name catalog previously reserved exclusively for hereditary offi  cials.
 Wu Zetian, the only female emperor in Chinese history.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
99
She also put cruel officials in important positions so they could frame 
 people for crimes and kill noted families and ministers who embraced resis-
tance—as a way to break the tradition of prestigious families’ monopoly of high 
rank and politics. Moreover, Wu held examinations and questioned applicants 
herself. She selected talents from common landlords regardless of rank or fam-
ily. Luo Binwang, one of the four outstanding poets of the early Tang Dynasty, 
once wrote A Call to Crusade against Wu Zetian, saying she was ruthless and 
rapacious, and “is hated by both people and the god, and can’t be tolerated by 
the heaven and earth.” Instead of fl ying into a rage, Wu spoke highly of Luo’s 
talent and chided the prime minister for not hiring him.
During her regime, Wu followed the policies of the Zhenguan Period: To 
reward farming and sericulture, and reduce labor service and taxation. Being 
prudent in wars resulted in continuous economic development. According to 
Assembled Essentials of the Song Dynasty, households nationwide rose from 3.8 
million in 652 AD, a time right before she came into power, to 6.15 million in 
705 AD, when she abdicated the crown.
A Kaiyuan Iron Ox from the Tang Dynasty at Pujindu. During the Kaiyuan Period, the Tang 
government cast 0.8 million kilograms of iron images of oxen, humans, mountains, and 
columns as ground anchors to build a pontoon bridge between the banks of the Yellow River 
at Pujindu. Salt, iron, and coal from Shanxi were subsequently transported across the Yellow 
River to Chang’an, Shaanxi Province.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

100 
CHINA’S HISTORY
In 712, Li Longji ascended the throne and was called Emperor Xuanzong. 
During his early term, he carried on reforms, adjusting official systems, and 
developing production. Th at led to a highly stable society, a thriving economy 
with bumper harvests and aff ordable grain, and a population growth of up to 
10 million households. The period also saw an unprecedented development 
in handicraft s, such as porcelain and textiles, and a surge in iron product cat-
egories, scale of production, and new techniques. Th e state power of the Tang 
Dynasty had reached its culmination, and the period was thus honored as the 
Kaiyuan Flourishing Age.
Reforms of the Sui and Tang Dynasties
Th e prosperity of the early Tang hinged on the economic and social develop-
ment then. Land cultivation and irrigation using bent shaft  plows and scoop 
waterwheels granted greater freedom to individual peasants. This led to the 
rapid development of intensively cultivated small land parcels and produced 
a great number of middle and small landlords. Meanwhile, the population of 
decadent gentry and landlords, crushed by widespread peasant wars at the end 
of the Sui Dynasty, gradually declined. Th e individual cultivation-based land-
lords broke the fetters of hereditary noble households and started to play an 
important role in state politics, initiating a range of far-reaching innovations in 
the prevailing systems.
Establishment of the Three-Ministry and Six-Department System in 
the Sui and Tang dynasties represents a significant change in the ancient 
Chinese official system. Zhongshu Ministry (Imperial Secretariat), Menxia 
Ministry (Imperial Chancellery), and Shangshu Ministry (State) were the 
supreme administrative organizations of the country, in charge of decision-
making and drafting orders, and the review and execution of state affairs, 
 respectively. Under the Shangshu Ministry, six departments were set up. 
The  Department of Civil Appointment was in charge of the appointment 
and  assessment of officials. The Department of Finance was in charge of 
land resources,  household  registry, taxation, and financial affairs. The 
Department of Rites was in charge of ritual affairs, celebrations, sacrifices, 
schools, and  imperial examinations. The Department of War was in charge 
of officer selection, serviceman registry, military orders, and weapons. The 
Department of Punishments was in charge of laws, orders, the judiciary, 
criminal punishment, and prisons. The  Department of Works was in charge 
of civil engineering, irrigation and flood control, arable land, roads, and 
the like. The heads of these three ministries were prime ministers. They 
discussed state affairs and assisted the emperor in ruling the country, while 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
101
supplementing each other and checking each other. The responsibilities of 
the six departments were well divided and became the  formal administra-
tive institutions of the country.
The expostulation system was designed to supervise and correct major 
policies of the court. Even orders of the emperors were examined in the Tang 
Dynasty. Th e Menxia Ministry had the exclusive right to reject reports of the 
offi  cials and to review and return orders of the emperor. During the Zhenguan 
Period, the Wuhua Panshi system was also implemented, allowing offi  cials of 
concerned departments to overview all major military events and present their 
views to the emperor for a fi nal decision. To ensure administrative effi  ciency, 
offi  cials who intentionally delayed the deadline of the joint signature would be 
punished.
The Wei, Jin, and Southern and Northern dynasties stressed family 
 background when selecting officials. Descendants of noble birth could get 
 promoted to ministers and monopolize the positions for generations, even 
though some were ignorant, incompetent, and unenterprising. But things had 
changed in the Sui and Tang dynasties with the increasingly bigger role of the 
Civilian (left) and warrior ﬁ gures (right) of the Tang Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

102 
CHINA’S HISTORY
 emerging  commoner-landlord class, hence the establishment of the official 
selection  system with imperial examinations.
Under the imperial exam system, the central government chose officials 
via regular imperial examinations and emphasized that capabilities were the 
standard for official selection. The imperial examinations were divided into 
 Jinshi and Mingjing. Mingjing was designed to test the capability of reciting 
classics. Jinshi mainly focused on poetry and ode writing and strategies on 
current affairs, aimed at testing the person’s capability of governing political 
aff airs and solving social problems. Th e scholars had to pass further examina-
tions of the organization department. Outstanding ones would be chosen and 
appointed. Another way to be appointed was to fi rst act as an assistant in the 
local  government, and then be recommended by senior offi  cials.
The Wild Goose Pagoda in Xi’an, built in the third year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong (652). 
The new Jinshi degree-holders of the imperial examinations of the Tang Dynasty carved their 
names on the pagoda tablets, considered a supreme honor for scholars.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
103
The official selection system based on imperial examinations broke the 
monopoly of the rich and powerful families, expanded the social foundation 
for the central regime, and injected a fresh force into social development. It 
created a relatively objective, equitable, and fair offi  cial selection mechanism, 
ensuring the continuous introduction of talented people and providing the 
state organization with a systematic guarantee of vigorous, stable, and effi  cient 
performance.
Tang’s laws simplifi ed the system of the Sui and had lighter penalties. Exe-
cution was very prudently applied, and fi ve reviews were required. Comment 
on Law of the Tang Dynasty, the earliest extant legal code in China, has had a 
great infl uence on Asian countries throughout history.
The Early Tang Dynasty made certain adjustments based on the System 
of Equal Distribution of Land adopted since the Northern Wei and Sui dynas-
ties. Provisions on awarding land according to numbers of slaves, maids, buqu 
(a social class between slaves and ordinary people), and cattle were canceled, 
keeping the despotic economy in check to some extent. Offi  cials of fi ve-rank 
(out of nine) or higher and those honored due to military feats were also 
awarded a certain parcel of land based on rank and merit, which served as an 
important way to support the emerging landlord class. Restrictions on sales 
of some types of land, like permanently held land and bestowed land, were 
 loosened, further facilitating the development of private ownership.
With regard to the tax and corvee system, the Tax-Labor-Substitution 
 System was implemented widely, which allowed replacement of corvee with 
payment by silk or cloth. In the middle Tang Dynasty, land mergers and the false 
reporting of household population led to the collapse of the System of Equal 
Stone rubbing of Jinshi Scholars’ names on Wild Goose Pagoda tablets.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

104 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Distribution of Land. Th e court also changed the Tax-Labor-Substitution System 
to the Dual-Tax System, speeding the process of land privatization and the devel-
opment of the commoner-landlord economy. Th e Dual-Tax Law stipulated that 
taxes be levied on property size—not on population—which released control 
over peasants. In addition, coins largely replaced physical goods as a means of 
paying tax, and nobles, bureaucrats, and merchants were all required to pay tax, 
too. Th at expanded the government’s tax base and increased its  revenue. 
These significant systematic reforms implemented in the Sui and Tang 
dynasties reflected the development of the emerging commoner-landlord 
 system and their political pursuits as well. Th ey initiated a new trend for future 
social development and made the Sui and Tang dynasties a critical turning 
point in ancient Chinese history.
Hu and Han are “Members of One Family”
The Tang Dynasty was witness to another grand unification. The central 
 government and the border ethnic groups developed closer relations. Emperor 
Taizong announced that, “I love the Han and ethnic groups equally, though 
most have favored the former all along.”
Farming, a fresco from Dunhuang.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
105
Aft er defeating the Eastern Turks in the South Desert during the Zhenguan 
Period, the Tang Dynasty adopted the policy of “all tribes following their local 
customs.” Turkish aristocrats were still the governors, and generals had juris-
diction over tribal members. All previous ethnic customs and ways of life were 
retained. In the meantime, nearly 10,000 Turks moved to Chang’an, includ-
ing more than 100 Turkish chieftains who were honored as senior officials 
with fi ve-rank or above. Before long, the Tang Dynasty set up the Protectorate 
 General of Anxi in the Western Regions; the Protectorate General of Beiting 
was further established during the regime of Wu Zetian, respectively governing 
areas south and north of Tianshan Mountain.
Moved by the open policy, chieftains of northwestern tribes addressed 
Emperor Taizong respectfully as Tian Khan (the great heavenly Khan) and 
supported him as their mutual leader. During the later Zhenguan Period, more 
than ten tribes in the North Desert, including the Huihe, submitted to the Tang 
Dynasty in succession, and opened a “road of Khan” in the desert. Th e court 
set up sixty-eight posthouses along the path to receive emissaries and off er ser-
vices for traveling businessmen. Aft er that, Emperor Suzong, Emperor Dezong, 
and Emperor Muzong all married one of their princesses to the Huihe Khan 
for peace-making purposes.
Emperor Taizong also accepted the request of Songzan Gambo, the chief-
tain of Tubo on the Tibetan Plateau, to marry Princess Wencheng to him. 
When the princess entered Tibet, she brought handiworks, grains, vegetable 
seeds, herbal medicines and tea, as well as more than 100 kinds of produc-
tion techniques and medical books, making Tubo “gradually affected by the 
advanced culture” and greatly boosting the local economic and cultural growth. 
Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty Meeting Tibetan Emissaries (part) by Yan Liben portrays 
Tibetan King Songzan Gambo’s envoys to Chang’an, where he seeks a marriage alliance 
with the Tang Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

106 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Aft er succeeding to the throne, Emperor Gaozong conferred the title of Chief 
Commandant of Escorting Cavalry upon Songzan Gambo and honored him 
as the King of Xihai Jun. During the reign of Emperor Zhongzong, he further 
married Princess Jincheng to Chidai Zhudan, the king of Tubo, who called 
himself the “nephew” of the emperor, and said, “Tubo and Han are members of 
one family.”
In 823, the Tang Dynasty and Tubo entered into an alliance in Changqing. 
Th e Monument to the Tang-Tubo Alliance still stands in front of the Jokhang 
Temple in Lhasa today, serving as witness to the friendly relations between the 
Tang Dynasty and Tibet.
Th e mid-seventh century saw the rise of Heishui and Sumo tribes of the 
Mohe ethnic group in the Songhua River and Heilongjiang River basins. 
 During the Zhenguan Period, Heishui Mohe started to pay tribute to the Tang 
Dynasty. In the early eighth century, the Tang Dynasty established the Heishui 
Governor-General Mansion and appointed its chieft ain as the governor. In the 
beginning of Kaiyuan Period, Emperor Xuanzong conferred the title of King 
of Bohai upon Dazuorong and honored him as the Governor of Huhan Prefec-
ture. Bohai had close relations with the central plains, and its capital, Shangjing 
Longquanfu (present-day Bohai Town, Anning City, Heilongjiang Province) 
was modelled on Chang’an of the Tang Dynasty. The prefecture and county 
system were also copied, as well as the advanced production techniques of the 
central plains.
A Dunhuang fresco depicting the integration of Han and northern ethnic groups in music and 
dance during the Tang Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
107
There were six tribes—Six Zhaos—in the Erhai area during the Sui and 
Tang dynasties. In the early eighth century, the Tang Dynasty supported South 
Zhao to unify the Six Zhaos, and Emperor Xuanzong honored its chieftain 
as the King of Yunnan. Th e advanced techniques from the central plains pro-
moted the development of the local economy. When growing stronger, South 
Zhao came into confl ict with the Tang Dynasty, resulting in a time of alternat-
ing war and peace. At the end of the eighth century, South Zhao once again 
submitted to the Tang Dynasty. In 794, the King of South Zhao met the emis-
sary team of the Tang Dynasty at the Divine Temple in  Diancang Mountain. 
From then on, South Zhao has been deeply aff ected by the Tang Dynasty in a 
wide range of aspects, such as administrative organization,  production tech-
niques, and way of living, making great contributions to the development of 
the southwestern regions.
With more than 800 provinces, prefectures, and counties established in the 
border areas inhabited by ethnic groups, the early Tang Dynasty boasted a terri-
tory reaching the sea in the east, the Anxi and Congling Mountain areas in the 
west, the Mongol Plateau in the north, and the South Sea in the south, and was 
characterized by unprecedented affl  uence and power. Both folk customs and art 
also showed signs of communication and the merging of ethnic and Han cul-
tures. Th e ethnic groups greatly appreciated silk and porcelain and central plains 
food, like dumplings, and tea became an important material for exchange.
Meanwhile, the central plains saw the popularity of ethnic clothes and 
food. Frescoes and sculptures from the Tang Dynasty also refl ect the distinct 
 glamour of the Western Regions, either in expression or artistic style. The 
dancers and bands were mostly from diverse ethnic groups, and the musical 
instruments include those of both ethnic and Han styles, manifesting the char-
acteristics of a time when ethnic groups and Han were members of one family.
Openness and Communication
Th e Sui and Tang dynasties boasted developed inbound and outbound trade routes. 
The land route ran from present-day North Korea in the east, through the Silk 
Road, to present-day India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, and the Persian Gulf in the 
west. It further extended to many European and African countries through Central 
Asia and the Mediterranean Sea. Th e sea route started from today’s South Korea 
and Japan in the east and ended in the Persian Gulf in the west. Tang Dynasty poli-
cies that encouraged openness and communication, as well as the smooth land and 
sea routes, gave rise to extremely frequent Sino-foreign exchanges.
Japan had sent its emissaries to the Tang Dynasty thirteen times, with hun-
dreds of Japanese students going with each mission. In 645, Japan launched 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

108 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Taika Reform, taking the Tang Dynasty as a model in many aspects  including 
political, legal, and land and tax systems, and even the construction of its 
 capital city. Ku Kai, a Japanese scholar monk who once went to the Tang 
Dynasty to study Buddhism, adopted the strokes of Chinese characters to cre-
ate Japanese letters called Katakana.
Jianzhen, a monk of the Tang Dynasty, tried to cross the ocean eastward to 
Japan but failed multiple times. He fi nally did it on his sixth attempt, at the age 
of sixty-six. Jianzhen himself carried out monkhood initiation for the  Japanese 
emperor, empress, and prince, as well as for ordinary people from various 
 circles. He gave lectures on Buddhism and introduced Chinese  medicine, 
 architecture, sculpture, calligraphy, painting, and other knowledge to the 
 Japanese people. In the late seventh century, Silla on the Korean Peninsula also 
sent groups of  students to the Tang Dynasty, and imitated such Tang systems 
as the six  departments and offi  cial selection through imperial examinations. 
Deeply aff ected by the Tang Dynasty, Silla displayed a strong Tang style in a 
wide range of areas from science and technology to art, literature, and folk 
customs.
Statute of Jianzhen.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
109
During the early Zhenguan Period, the senior monk Xuanzang made an 
arduous journey west to India, where he studied Buddhism earnestly for fi ve 
years. Th en he toured around many other counties to give Buddhist lectures. 
Seventeen years later, he returned to Chang’an, where he devoted himself 
to translating Buddhist sultras, and The Buddhist Records of the Western 
Regions, compiled by his disciples, describes what he saw and heard along 
his westward journey. He was also entrusted by Emperor Taizong to trans-
late the Tao Te Ching into Sanskrit. Xuanzang’s eff orts with Buddhist scrip-
tures promoted Sino-Indian cultural exchanges and had a great infl uence on 
Chinese history.
Th e Tang Dynasty opened itself to the outside world in an all-around way 
and carried out extensive communication with foreign countries, keeping com-
mercial ties with more than seventy, including countries in West Asia, Europe, 
 Portrait of Xuanzang.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

110 
CHINA’S HISTORY
and Africa. The government permitted foreigners to live in China, marry 
Chinese people, and take part in Chinese examinations for official selection. 
Some foreigners even acted as military offi  cials of the court or servants of the 
emperor. Th e city of Chang’an, capital of the Tang Dynasty, covered an area of 
84 square kilometers and had a population of nearly one million, the world’s 
largest international city then. Arabia saw the establishment of an Arab Empire 
that spanned across Asia, Africa, and Europe in the seventh century, but it col-
lapsed in the ninth century. Europe was in the medieval era of division and 
chaos. Th e prosperous Sui and Tang dynasties, while imposing a far-reaching 
infl uence on neighboring countries and regions, extensively absorbed foreign 
cultures to enrich and develop the Chinese culture. Merchants, scholars, and 
people of ethnic groups, as well as foreign emissaries and students, gathered in 
Tang Dynasty Colored Pottery Figures. On the camel are performers from Middle Asia.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
111
the capital city of Chang’an, and grand feasts fi lled with singing and  dancing 
were  widespread. Women also wore ethnic clothing, rode horses, played ball 
games, and joined various sorts of social, sports, and entertainment activities. 
Th e society was full of vigor and vitality.
Brilliant Culture of the Sui and Tang Dynasties
Th e Sui and Tang dynasties, integrated in territory, prosperous in economy, and 
liberal in politics, promoted the quick development of culture and education. 
A complete school education system from the central to the local was estab-
lished, which taught law, mathematics, and other major subjects. The social 
reforms and systematic renovation during the period also gave fresh impetus to 
advances in science, technology, literature, and art.
The period saw two great inventions that had a significant impact upon 
human civilization, namely wood block printing and gunpowder.
Enlightened by the techniques of seal engraving and printing from 
engraved stones in ancient China, wood-block printing began in the early Tang 
Dynasty. The Zhenguan Period left records of engraving and printing. The 
Vajra Sutra, an exquisitely engraved printing work, done with bright ink in 
the ninth year of the Xiantong Period of the Tang Dynasty (868), is the earliest 
dated wood-block document in the world. Th e invention of wood-block print-
ing that followed in the wake of paper making played a signifi cant role in keep-
ing, spreading, and developing human culture.
In the early Tang Dynasty, Taoists stumbled upon the formula for gun-
powder as they were making medicines. Sun Simiao, a medicine expert 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
The early Tang of China featured extreme courteousness, advanced 
culture, and far-reaching infl uence, presenting a sharp contrast to the 
corruption, chaos, and division of the western world.
While western minds were obsessed with religion and kept in a 
state of darkness, Chinese minds were open, compatible, and curious.
—H. G. Wells, The Outline of History
THE PROSPEROUS TANG DYNASTY 
IN THE EYES OF WESTERNERS
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

112 
CHINA’S HISTORY
in the early Tang Dynasty, recorded how to make gunpowder in the book 
Alchemical Scriptures. “First, put two taels of sulphur and another two taels 
of saltpeter into an earthen pot, then burn the Chinese Honeylocust hot 
and put it inside the pot, which will jointly create raging flames.” There are 
other records of peasant insurgent troops that used gunpowder in wars at 
Vajra Sutra printed in the ninth year of Xiantong Period of Tang (868).
Zhaozhou Bridge in Hebei, built in the Sui Dynasty, is the earliest, well-preserved, single-arch 
stone bridge in the world.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
113
the end of the Tang Dynasty. In addition, gun-
powder was used in hunting, excavation, and 
stone extraction. 
Ancient Chinese architectural art entered a 
period of maturity during the Sui and Tang dynas-
ties. Yu Wenkai, an architect of the Sui Dynasty, 
used drawings and models to design and direct 
the construction of the beautifully laid out city of 
Daxing, which was later expanded into Chang’an 
(Xi’an) during the Tang Dynasty. This and his 
design and construction of Luoyang demonstrate 
the era’s superb techniques in urban construction. 
The Zhaozhou Bridge, designed and built by Li 
Chun, a workman of the Sui Dynasty, is a single-
hole, stone arch bridge 37 meters wide and more 
than 50 meters long. Reputed as “a wonder in 
world bridge-building history,” it is well preserved 
until today.
The Tang Dynasty was the golden age of 
ancient Chinese poetry, with more than 50,000 
poems passed down to present. Prosperity, open-
ness, cultural diversity, and the enterprising spirit 
encouraged by the fresh official selection system 
combined to inspire the brilliance of Tang poetry 
characterized by orderly rhythm and proper paral-
lelism. Gao Shi, Cen Sen, Wang Changling, and 
other frontier poets sang the praises of soldiers and offi  cers. Poems written by 
Meng Haoran, Wang Wei, and other idyllic poets expressed the peaceful har-
mony between man and nature.
Th e most notable poets in the Tang Dynasty were Li Bai and Du Fu. Li Bai, 
called the God of Poetry, wrote poems that are bold and unconstrained, repre-
senting the vigorous and personality-oriented spirit in the prosperous period 
of the Tang Dynasty. 
Du Fu, called the Saint of Poetry, was destitute and homeless and 
worried about the country and the people throughout his life. His poems 
reflect social reality, especially people’s difficult lives amid the chaos 
caused by war. His poems were heavy and indignant, and were called 
“poetic history.”
Paintings of the Tang Dynasty featured greater scope of subject, with 
 figures, landscapes, and flowers and birds becoming independent fine art 
forms. Systematic painting techniques were invented, and diverse schools of 
The Drunk Li Bai, by Su 
Liupeng, depicts Li Bai 
supported by two eunuchs 
after getting drunk in 
the palace of Emperor 
Xuanzong.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

114 
CHINA’S HISTORY
painting emerged. Wu Daozi, respected as the Saint of Artists, combined his 
interest in calligraphy with line drawing, achieving the artistic eff ect of “drift ing 
clothes and  moving lines.”
Th e national reunifi cation in the Sui and Tang dynasties brought about the 
combination of the southern and northern calligraphic styles—gracefulness 
and vigorousness. Th e styles of Ouyang Xun, Yan Zhenqing, and Liu Gongquan 
were representative of the times. Ouyang’s scripts were bold and dignifi ed. Yan’s 
calligraphy was round and simple, while Liu had a serious and vigorous style. 
Zhang Xun and Huai Su were famous for cursive hand, which is smooth, drift -
ing, and unrestrained.
Affected by foreign cultures, the music and dance of the Sui and Tang 
dynasties were colorful in style. Emperor Xuanzong, acquainted with music 
rhythms, once imparted dancing and singing techniques to 300 musicians in 
a pear park, and composed “Dancing in a Gauze Costume” by drawing on the 
styles of Western Regions.
Yan Qingli Stele by Yan Zhenqing in the 
Tang Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 6 The Sui and Tang Dynasties: A Prosperous and Open Age 
115
Ladies of Kingdom Guo on a Spring Outing (part) represents the life of the ladies in the Tang 
Dynasty.
Colored statue in Dunhuang Mogao 
Grottoes. The Bodhisattva, with a round 
face, plump stature, and coiled bun, 
loosely dressed in silk, reﬂ ects the 
prevailing aesthetics of the Tang Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

116 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e Mogao Grottoes, located in Dunhuang, Gansu, a key site along the Silk 
Road, is the world’s largest and best-preserved Buddhist artistic treasure. More 
than 3,000 colorful sculptures and 45,000 square meters of frescoes have been 
preserved at present, most of which are works dating from the Sui and Tang 
dynasties. Statues with diff erent facial expressions look vivid and lively, and the 
frescoes’ smooth, drift ing lines are splendid and charming.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

7
119
7
Confrontations between the Northern and 
Southern Song Dynasties, and the Liao, Xixia, 
and Jin Dynasties
The later period of Emperor Xuanzong’s reign was marked by political cor-
ruption and weakened power and control. Eunuchs 
seized power in the court, and warlords held control 
over local areas. The empire was rocked by sweeping 
peasant uprisings at the end of the Tang Dynasty and 
was put to an end by warlords in 907. In the next fi ft y 
years, the Yellow River Valley was under the reign of 
the Later Liang (907–923), the Later Tang (923–936), 
the Later Jin (936–947), the Later Han (947–950), and 
the Later Zhou (951–960), collectively called the Five 
Dynasties. Th e period from 960 to 1368 saw three his-
torical stages: the Northern Song confronting the Liao 
and the Xixia, the Southern Song confronting the Jin, 
and unifi cation by the Yuan Dynasty. 
In 960, General Zhao Kuangyin initiated a mutiny 
and overturned the Later Zhou to establish the 
Song Dynasty in Bianjing (today’s Kaifeng, Henan), 
called the Northern Song period. The Northern 
The Song and Yuan 
Dynasties: Cultural 
Collision and Fusion and 
Socioeconomic Advances
Chapter 7
Zhao Kuangyin, 
Emperor Taizu of the 
Song Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

120 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Song  successfully quelled the various rebellions and reunited the central 
plains and spacious southern areas.
Having learned what happened when key ministers usurped power and 
warlords revolted, the Northern Song applied a series of measures to “deprive 
them of their power, control their fi nance and grain, and reorganize their forces.”
In the central government, the prime minister’s power was divided 
into three independent sections to enhance the emperor’s control. Tongpan 
(magistrates) were established in local counties to supervise local gover-
nors. On the military front, the right to lead and the right to dispatch were 
separated. Th e imperial guard troop was regularly changed, but the leader 
did not shift  with the troop. Th e central government also selected the elite 
of local troops to enter the imperial guard troop to defend the capital and 
weaken local units.
All tax income was submitted to the central government except a small 
percentage for local expenses. These measures to reinforce central power and 
control were helpful in maintaining unity and stability and promoting  economic 
development. However, some over-corrective actions resulted in redundancies, 
low effi  ciency, enormous expenditure, underperforming military direction, poor 
 eff ectiveness in battle, and other negative eff ects.
In 916, the Khitan chieft ain Yelü Abaoji, who lived in the desert and north-
eastern regions, came to the throne and built the Liao regime in Shangjing 
(today’s Lindong Town, Balin Left  Banner, Inner Mongolia). Th e Khitans, who 
mainly lived as nomads, fishing and hunting, gradually learned farming and 
settlement-building, and invented characters based on Chinese character com-
ponents. Th e Khitan nobles constantly looted southward and forced the Later 
Jin to cede Youzhou, Jizhou, and fourteen other prefectures, then occupied the 
North China Plain.
In 1004, about 200,000 Liao soldiers attacked the Northern Song and 
approached Tanzhou from the north side of the Yellow River near the 
capital, Bianjing. Prime Minister Kou Zhun advised Emperor Zhenzong 
to lead the army himself. The Emperor-led Song army had high morale 
and defeated the Liao troops. Emperor Zhenzong accepted the peace 
negotiation under an advantageous condition and signed the Chanyuan 
Agreement. Under the agreement, the Song would give Liao 100,000 taels 
of silver and 200,000 bolts of thin silk each year, the Liao would with-
draw their army to the boundary, and both parties would become brother 
countries. Although the Chanyuan Agreement, a product of the balance 
of power of Song and Liao, further increased the Northern Song people’s 
burden, a roughly century-long peace was achieved after the agreement. 
Both parties continued to trade, resulting in a flourishing economy and 
cultural development.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
121
In the early Northern Song Dynasty, the nomadic Dangxiang ethnic group 
gradually sprang up in the northwestern region. In 1038, Dangxiang Chief-
tain Yuanhao of the Xixia ascended the throne in Xingqing (today’s Yinchuan, 
Ningxia). The Xixia often invaded the Northern Song and frequently won. 
However, the battles destroyed their normal mutual trade. Th e Northern Song’s 
firm defense caused grain shortages and the financial collapse of the Xixia. 
In 1044, Yuanhao off ered a peace agreement to the Northern Song. Both par-
ties agreed that Yuanhao would cancel the title of emperor and submit to the 
Northern Song. Th e Northern Song gave silver, silk, and tea to Xixia as “annual 
payment” and reopened border trade. From then on, Song and Xia maintained 
a generally peaceful trade relationship.
In the middle and later Northern Song Dynasty, the Jurchen ethnic group 
that fished and hunted in the Heilongjiang River Valley steadily rose up in 
arms against the oppression of the Liao. In 1115, the Wanyan Tribe’s Chieft ain 
Aguda came to the throne and set up the Jin regime in Huining (today’s A’cheng 
in Heilongjiang). Aft er exterminating the Liao in 1125, Jin initiated an invasive 
war against the Northern Song and captured Bianjing the next year. In 1127, 
Emperors Huizong and Qinzong were captured, marking the end of the North-
ern Song.
In 1127, Zhao Gao ascended to the throne and relocated the capital to 
Lin’an (today’s Hangzhou, Zhejiang), known as the Southern Song. Under 
the leadership of Yue Fei and other famous generals, the military and civil-
ian forces of the Southern Song bravely fought against invasion by the Jin 
troops and won major victories. But, vilified by those officials advocating 
surrender, Yue Fei was executed by Emperor Gaozong Zhao Gou under a 
fabricated charge. In 1141, the Song and Jin inked an agreement, stating that 
the Southern Song emperor would submit to the Jin, cede the region north 
of the Huaihe River, and pay silver and silk as annual tributes to the Jin. 
Four Generals Resisting the Jurchens, featuring Liu Guangshi, Han Shizhong, Zhang Jun, 
and Yue Fei of the Southern Song Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

122 
CHINA’S HISTORY
 Pursuant to this agreement, the Southern Song occupied a mere corner on 
the  southern bank of the Yangtze River, a result of the Song–Jin confronta-
tion in the south and north, respectively.
The northern ethnic groups absorbed the culture of the central plains 
 during their expansion. Th e Liao, Xixia, and Jin dynasties successively imitated 
the political system of the central plain dynasties, rewarded land reclamation, 
and moved Han people northward, resulting in further economic exchange and 
ethnic amalgamation.
In 947, Liao Dynasty troops captured Kaifeng and met with strong 
opposition on their way back to the north aft er plundering local properties. 
Emperor Taizong of the Liao Dynasty drew two major lessons from the war—
the futility of “indulging troops in plundering the city” and “robbing people 
of their private properties.” He further shift ed his policies to “governing areas 
based on local customs” and implemented the policy of “dividing  offi  cials into 
two parts, with one part governing the Khitans based on the state systems 
and the other governing the Han Chinese people based on the Han systems.” 
In the regime of Emperor Shengzong, the two diff erent systems adopted in 
the north and south were gradually integrated into one, with the Han Chinese 
system widely applied in the central plains. Encouraged by such measures as 
awarding farm cattle to the poor and exempting those that reclaimed barren 
land from tax and duties, the vast expanses of the northern border areas were 
developed during this period.
In the middle of the 10th century, Liaohai in northeastern China saw 
a  thriving phenomenon described as “hundreds of thousands of registered 
households and “thousands of miles of reclaimed fields.” Meanwhile, great 
advances were taking place in iron-smelting, silk-weaving, porcelain-making, 
wood block printing, and other handicraft  sectors.
The Xixia in northwestern China implemented two systems, namely the 
Han Chinese system and the Dangxiang system, for its offi  cial positions, and 
imitated the offi  cial selection process via imperial examinations. Th e rulers of 
Xixia attached great importance to the culture of the central plains. Xixia char-
acters were based on Han characters, classic books of the central plains were 
translated and printed by movable type printing techniques, and coins with the 
Chinese  characters “Tian Shou Tong Bao” were cast. With regard to produc-
tion, Xixia’s handicraft  sectors, such as iron-smelting, printing, porcelain, and 
wool  textiles, were in leading positions. Printing works with Xixia characters 
that have been preserved until today are the world’s earliest known movable 
type printing work. With advanced vertical bellows, Xixia ironworks could 
produce extremely sharp weapons, reputed as the “No. 1 in the world.” With 
regard to agriculture, the farming techniques of the central plains were adopted 
in an  all-around way, and irrigation systems were built in river bends and in 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
123
Liao Dynasty attendants and horses in a procession.
Iron Smelting in Xixia.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

124 
CHINA’S HISTORY
the Hexi Corridor areas, making great contributions to the development of the 
 northeastern regions.
After eliminating the Liao and Northern Song dynasties and occu-
pied areas north of the Huaihe River, the Jin Dynasty implemented a series 
of reforms in order to better manage the highly developed farming areas. 
 Wanyan Liang, King Hailing of the Jin Dynasty, who was familiar with 
 Chinese characters and loved reading Chinese books, oft en  discussed political 
aff airs with Confucian scholars. In 1153, he moved the capital from Shangjing 
 Huining (present-day Harbin) to Yanjing (present-day Beijing), a city with vast 
expanses of fertile land, full of energetic  and civilized citizens. By  imitating the 
Liao and Northern Song dynasties, the king implemented all-around reforms 
of official systems in 1156, which restricted the hereditary privileges of the 
Jurchen nobles and established a new regime  characterized by centralized 
administration.
Th e Jin also encouraged the Jurchens to move southward to the central 
plains, promoting their move into the land tenancy system. Th e Jin Dynasty 
also printed money and molded cooper and silver coins to advance handi-
crafts and commerce. Meanwhile, the Jurchens were encouraged to marry 
the Han Chinese  people. According to the History of Jin, during the two 
The Marco Polo Bridge (Lugou Bridge), built after Jin’s capital relocation to Zhongdu (Beijing), 
is 266.5 meters long. Sitting on its rails are 501 large and small carved stone lions.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
125
decades following the capital move, the Jurchens gradually changed their 
former customs and  practiced those of Han people in daily life, in music, 
and in many other aspects. Even the descendants of royal families “had 
practiced Han customs since their childhood” as they knew little about their 
own Jurchen culture.
Through decades of confrontation, collision, and communication, the 
 ethnic groups and cultures of north and south further blended on the basis of 
the culture of the central plains.
Social Reforms and the Highly Developed 
Civilization of the Song Dynasty
By implementing a series of measures designed to intensify their centralized 
regimes, the Northern and Southern Song dynasties ended the  divisions caused 
by the Five Dynasties after the Tang Dynasty, and moved forward to achieve 
reunification and stability. In the meantime, troops and people in the central 
plains bravely fought against attacks from northern nomadic ethnic groups, 
off ering a relatively peaceful environment for the southern areas that saw fast 
social and economic growth.
Th e Song Dynasty carried on the reforms of the Sui and Tang, pushing 
forward profound changes in society. Th e Song “didn’t curb land mergers” 
and allowed the free sale of land. In the mid- Northern Song Dynasty, most 
land was privately owned by middle and small landlords.  Agriculture and 
handicraft sectors saw the emergence of contractual relationships. Tenant 
peasants and craft smen were formally registered by the state.
Porcelain Pillow for Child. The porcelain industry of the Song Dynasty thrived, and a great 
deal of porcelain ware, silk, and tea was marketed all over the world via sea routes.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

126 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e land tenancy system and yeoman economy formed the mainstay of the 
national economy, and private handicraft workshops enjoyed rapid growth. In 
1027, Emperor Renzong explicitly ordered that tenant peasants should move 
freely after tenancy contracts ended, and that landowners couldn’t arbitrarily 
block their way. Later on, it was further stipulated that landlords couldn’t use the 
tenant peasants’ families as servants, and that when a tenant peasant died, “his 
wife who gets remarried is allowed to do so and his daughter can marry anybody 
she likes.”
Most handicraft  workshops also employed craft smen, paying wages based 
on contracts, leaving craft smen relatively free.
The adoption of land tenancy and employment systems were landmark 
reforms that resulted in high enthusiasm among the working people and 
greatly boosted social and economic growth.
The population at the end of the Northern Song Dynasty increased to 
100 million, providing vast numbers of people for the workforce. Large-scale 
reclamation of terraces and low-lying fi elds resulted in more farmland—twice 
the area before. New types of farm equipment, such as plowshares with steel 
blades and seedling horses for paddy rice planting, were widely used for inten-
sive farming. Champa paddy rice, a superior breed from Vietnam, was intro-
duced and popularized, greatly increasing grain output. In the Southern Song 
Dynasty, the proverb —“When the area around Dongting Lake has a good har-
vest, the entire country has enough food”—spread across the country, showing 
that the national economic center had shift ed from the Yellow River basin to 
the Yangtze River basin.
Th e Song Dynasty saw huge progress in its handicraft  sector and boasted 
the largest coal yield  in the world. Th e 500-meter laneway of one coal mine 
in Hebi, Henan, could accommodate hundreds of miners. Dating to the late 
Northern Song Dynasty, its facilities for lighting, ventilation, drainage, and 
mining techniques were close to modern levels. The production of smelted 
metals such as iron and copper reached the highest level in the world at the 
time, in both quality and quantity. During the reign of Emperor Shenzong of 
the Northern Song Dynasty, up to 100,000 copper-smelting craft smen worked 
around Qianshan, Xinzhou, alone. The iron output of the Song Dynasty, 
roughly estimated, equaled the combined output of all the European countries 
in the 18th century. At the end of the Southern Song Dynasty, coke was used in 
iron smelting.
As for the textile sector, cotton-spinning production rose during the 
Southern Song Dynasty, with the appearance of new types of tools, such as 
spinning wheels, catapults, and weaving machines. Silk weaving was character-
ized by more colorful patterns and more diversifi ed categories. Th e black and 
white porcelains produced in Jingdezhen, Jiangxi, were sold both at home and 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
127
abroad, and led to the source of the word China, which literally means “the 
country of porcelains.”
The Song Dynasty boasted an unprecedented prosperous commodity 
economy. Commercial activities went beyond the restrictions imposed during 
the Tang Dynasty, such as designated places and times for transactions. A large 
number of commodity distribution centers emerged around cities and major 
traffi  c routes in rural areas, leading to the formation of bazaars and towns of 
diff erent sizes. In the Northern Song Dynasty, a commercial tax was levied in 
towns under the county level, resulting in dense commercial tax networks that 
made the tax a major source of government revenue.
In the early 11th century, Sichuan saw the presence of the world’s earliest 
paper currency, Jiaozi, which was designed to facilitate commercial transac-
tions. In the Southern Song Dynasty, Huizi and other types of paper  currencies 
were widely circulated. Credit transactions with written deadlines and pledged 
by the rich emerged, as did other commercial means of payment, such as Zhiku 
for mortgages, Didian for storage and negotiation, and Bianqianwu, an offi-
cially-operated fi nancial organization for exchange.
Wood block and print of Huizi, a paper currency of the Southern Song Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

128 
CHINA’S HISTORY
A needle shop in Ji’nan, Shandong, 
designed its signpost like this: on the upper side 
was its name, “Ji’nan Liujia Needle Shop.” In the 
middle stood a white rabbit accompanied by 
the words “recognizing the white rabbit in front 
of the shop as the symbol” down both sides. On 
the lower part was the advertisement: “needles 
made of superior steel bars are thin and easy 
to use. Anyone who buys the needles in large 
quantities for wholesale will enjoy special 
offers” —proof of the presence of trademarks 
and advertisements in the Song Dynasty, and 
the formation of a business mode that com-
bined raw material procurement, processing, 
and wholesale trade.
According to historical records, the “trans-
actions of gold, silver, and silk” in Bianjing 
of the Northern Song Dynasty took place in a lane in the southern part, 
where “buildings were spectacular and shops were spacious,” and “every deal 
involved an amazing sum of money”—clearly resembling today’s financial 
streets. Th e city of Bianjing saw densely-distributed shops in more than 400 
sectors, including jewelry shops and high-grade gold and silver shops, and 
large markets for rice, vegetables, meat, fi sh, fruit, cloth, scarves, folding fans, 
belts, combs, needles, and ironware. Morning and night fairs operated along 
the streets.
Th e Song Dynasty also boasted an extremely advanced ship-making sec-
tor and ocean navigation techniques. Large ships capable of carrying tens of 
thousands of dan of grains were equipped with sealed coff erdams and drew 
deep with their pointed bottoms. Compasses were adopted for navigation, 
making trips both safe and speedy. Encouraged by the government, foreign 
trade developed quickly. Trading ships traveled to the West Pacific Ocean, 
Indian Ocean, and Persian Gulf, maintaining trade links with more than fi ft y 
countries and regions.
In addition, superintendents of merchant shipping were posted at impor-
tant ports for administration. Special residential areas were built up for 
foreign merchants. Foreign markets and foreign language schools were also 
allowed. Arabian merchants were permitted to build mosques and public 
cemeteries. In the Southern Song Dynasty, Quanzhou became the world’s 
largest international trade port. The combined foreign trade tax collected 
by the superintendents of merchant shipping in Quanzhou and Guangzhou 
Signpost of the Ji’nan Liujia 
Needle Shop.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
129
Imperial examinations in the Song Dynasty.
came to as much as 2,000,000 strings of copper coins, making up a big part of 
the government’s revenue.
With the surge in economic development and social progress, social 
 structure and social life in the Song Dynasty experienced profound 
changes. The Song Dynasty saw the final withdrawal of scholar-bureau-
crats from the historical stage. Commoner-landlords who became officials 
through imperial examinations took major positions and constituted the 
backbone of the royal ruling group, which resulted in a free and rational 
political atmosphere.
According to historical records, Emperor Shenzong of the Song Dynasty 
once wanted to kill an official guilty of a crime, but was stopped by his 
ministers by citing the “domestic disciplines.” The emperor then changed 
his mind and decided to send the offi  cial into exile, to which the ministers 
responded by saying, “it is better to die when living is a disgrace.” Emperor 
Shenzong sighed, saying, “It’s hard to do even one thing that could make 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

130 
CHINA’S HISTORY
him feel good.” Th e ministers said, “He might as well not do such kind of 
pleasant things.”
From the Tang and Song dynasties forward, the country implemented a 
policy of sharing profi ts between government and business. With this policy, 
the troublesome operation of government-run businesses and franchises 
was contracted to businessmen, and part of the franchised business profits 
were shared. There were franchise certificates for government-monopolized 
 products, such as salt and tea.
Th e participation of the businessmen improved effi  ciency and total profi t. 
The actual income of the government from its share of franchised product 
 revenues greatly increased. Many businessmen, especially those dealing in salt, 
cooperated with the government and got wealthy while serving the country, 
enjoying a respectable position. The Song Dynasty removed the restrictions 
that prevented descendants of those engaged in industrial and commercial 
business from being promoted to offi  cial status. Some rich businessmen mar-
ried into royal families and those of court offi  cials. Every time the results of the 
imperial examination for offi  cials were released, the rich would hurry to select 
the successful candidates to be their sons-in-law, called “catching sons-in-law 
upon release of the candidates list.”
Along the River During the Qingming Festival, by Zhang Zeduan, vividly depicts the prosperity 
of Bianjing, capital of the Northern Song. 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
131
The yeomen and semi-yeomen of the Song Dynasty accounted for more 
than 50 percent of the total population, tenant peasants 35 percent. Both tenant 
peasants and craft smen held the status of civilians.
Economic growth and the rise of cities in the Song Dynasty led to an increase 
in the urban population. Non-peasant urban residents constituted the citizen 
class, which was dominated by businessmen, scholars, and  intellectuals of the 
upper class, craft smen in various fi elds, as well as  mountebanks, fortune-tellers, 
street artists, and coolies. In the city of  Bianjing, as depicted in Along the River 
During the Qingming Festival, a well-known painting of the Song Dynasty, the 
people are from all walks of life— carpenters, blacksmiths,  silversmiths, pottery 
makers, barrel makers, painters, grass shoe weavers, fan makers, and mirror 
makers, as well as those selling oil, salt, paper, porridge, cakes, spices, and drugs. 
Jostling each other in the crowd and working hard for their own businesses, they 
present a vivid and energetic picture of urban life.
An overwhelming majority of the population in the Song Dynasty lived in 
rural areas. Most villagers could maintain their daily life and enjoyed a better 
life than before. Th ey watched opera, listened to story-tellers, and had fun dur-
ing their leisure time, greatly enriching their lives.
A thriving commodity economy and the growth of the citizen class gave 
rise to a booming citizen culture. Restaurants, hotels, and teahouses were 
widespread, the larger ones boasting a daily guest number of up to 1,000. 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

132 
CHINA’S HISTORY
 Recreational places in the cities, called “washe,” hosted operas,  acrobatics, 
history-telling, story-telling, sword-dancing, and other popular programs all 
night long, making it hard for passersby and spectators to tear themselves away. 
These thriving recreational places best demonstrate the tastes of the citizens 
and the vitality of ordinary life at that time.
The profound changes in the production relations and social structure 
during the Song Dynasty took social civilization to a higher level. Mean-
while, many fresh concepts emerged, a sign of an evolving trend toward 
modern society.
Yuan Empire Expanded the Unifi ed 
Multi-ethnic Country
At the end of the 12th century, the Mongol ethnic group, previously under 
the rule of the Liao and Jin dynasties, grew stronger. In 1206, Temujin uni-
fi ed the Mongolian Plateau and established the state of Mongolia. He took 
the title of Genghis Khan. Expeditions led by him and his successors led to a 
rapid conquering of vast areas across Eurasia, bringing severe tribulations to 
the people.
While the Mongolian Empire straddled Europe and Asia, it was actually 
an unstable political and military union that lacked a common economic 
base and comprehensive laws and codes. In 1271, Kublai Khan changed the 
dynastic title to Yuan and set up the capital in Yanjing in order to move the 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
The Song Dynasty of China was so modern it surprised the whole 
world with its unique currency economy, paper notes, circulation 
bills, and highly developed tea and salt workshops. In areas of daily 
life, including art, entertainment, system, and craftsmanship, China 
was a country “second to none” in the world and was proud enough 
to categorize the rest of the world as “unenlightened regions.”
— Jacques Gernet, Daily Life in China on the Eve of the Mongol 
Invasion, 1250-1276
THE HIGHLY DEVELOPED CHINESE CIVILI-
ZATION DURING THE SONG DYNASTY
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
133
 sovereign center toward the central plains. In 1276, Yuan Dynasty troops 
 captured Lin’an, announcing the end of the Southern Song. In 1279, Yuan 
unifi ed the whole country.
Kublai, Emperor Shizu of the Yuan Dynasty, was entrusted to rule over the 
Han settlements in the South Desert in his early years, where he was deeply 
aff ected by the culture of the central plains. Aft er ascending the throne, Kublai 
issued orders that “the state shall put its people fi rst; people shall put food and 
clothes fi rst; and food and clothes shall rely on agriculture and sericulture.” He 
also opposed massacring the inhabitants of a captured city or making them 
servants, and forbade Mongolian nobles to arbitrarily take peasants’ land and 
barren farming land to use as pastures. That way, the “bustling city wasn’t 
aff ected by the war and remained as prosperous as before” when the troops of 
Yuan attacked Lin’an, the capital of the Southern Song Dynasty.
The policy of “attaching great importance to agriculture and sericulture” 
marked a significant turning point in the national policies of the Mongolian 
Empire, accelerating the transformation of a nomadic economy into a farm-
ing civilization. Th e court successively set up organizations and legal systems, 
and attached great importance to the popularization of advanced science and 
technologies, which proved fruitful. Th e Department of Agriculture was set up 
at the central level to take charge of nationwide agricultural and sericultural 
Genghis Khan’s Mausoleum.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

134 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Kublai Khan, Emperor Shizu of the Yuan Dynasty.
affairs. Such criteria as “growing households,” “increasing reclaimed fields,” 
and “aff ordable tax and duties” were adopted as benchmarks of performance 
appraisal.
Many local governments commissioned paintings of farming and weaving, 
making “their offi  cials acquainted with basic knowledge when they passed by 
the pictures.” Encouraging and keeping a sharp focus on farming then became 
the fashion of the time. Kublai further ordered the Department of Agriculture 
to compile the Essentials of Agriculture and Sericulture, based on agricultural 
books of past and present. The book was circulated nationwide and some 
10,000 copies were printed in 1332.
While abolishing some backward Mongolian systems like “integra-
tion of army and civilians,” “dividing and sharing land among people,” and 
hereditary official positions at prefecture and county levels, Kublai imitated 
the systems of former Tang, Song, Liao, and Jin dynasties, “establishing 
officials in charge of different affairs” to stabilize political situations and 
appease the public.
He established three major systems, namely Zhongxingsheng (admin-
istration), Shumiyuan (military affairs), and Yushitai (supervisory body), 
at the central level, and Xuanzhengyuan was set up to manage religious 
aff airs and Tibet. In addition, Xingsheng was established as the local branch 
of the Zhongxingsheng, which was administrated by offi  cials directly dis-
patched by the central government. In some remote areas inhabited by 
ethnic groups, Xuanweisi was set up for administration. To timely convey 
political orders and strengthen rule over local areas, Tongzhengyuan and 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
135
 posthouse systems were established nationwide, delivering top-to-bottom 
and  bottom-to-top files and documents and offering traveling emissaries 
and offi  cials daily necessities and traffi  c tools. All played a big role in con-
solidating the reunifi cation.
To maintain the privileges of Mongolian nobles, the Yuan Dynasty classi-
fi ed people of diff erent ethnic groups into four categories, namely Mongolians, 
Semu people, Han people, and South people, a sign of the dynasty’s racial dis-
crimination. On the other hand, the reunifi cation of the Yuan Dynasty facili-
tated communication and exchange among people from all ethnic groups, 
resulting in the gradual amalgamation of the Khitan and Jurchen people, who 
moved southward to the central plains. Many Persian and Arabian Muslims 
immigrated to China and mixed with the Han and Mongolian people, shaping 
a new community known as the Hui ethnic group.
The Yuan Dynasty accomplished a much wider unification based 
on the civilization of the central plains. With vast territories, the empire 
expanded from areas north of the Yinshan Mountain in the north, to 
islands in South China Sea in the south, and stretched from present-day 
Sakhalin Island in the northeast to areas including Xinjiang and Cen-
tral Asia in the northwest. Yuan officially included Tibet in the Chinese 
reign, and set up an executive secretariat in Yunnan and a patrol inspec-
tion administration in Penghu under the jurisdiction of Jinjiang County, 
Fujian, to administrate Penghu and Liuqiu (present-day Taiwan). The 
effort intensified Yuan’s jurisdiction over and exploration in these areas. 
The Semu people, including the ethnic groups in Xinjiang, became part of 
the top ruling class of the Yuan Dynasty, increasing contact between the 
central plains and Xinjiang areas.
Following the historical retrogression caused by the dynastic change, the 
Yuan Dynasty witnessed rapid economic recovery and further consolidation 
of the unifi ed multi-ethnic country. Th e period also saw smooth domestic and 
inbound–outbound traffic via both land and sea routes, as well as frequent 
Sino-foreign exchanges. Such cities as Dadu (present-day Beijing), Hangzhou, 
and Quanzhou were much more prosperous than in previous eras. Rabban 
Sawma, a Turkic monk, was once sent to Europe from Dadu. He established 
ties with the Roman Church and wrote what he saw and heard in Europe, the 
fi rst Chinese records of this nature.
Marco Polo, an Italian businessman, arrived in Dadu in 1275 through 
the Silk Road and stayed in China for seventeen years, where he was once 
appointed by Kublai as an offi  cial of the Yuan Dynasty. His book, Th e Travels 
of Marco Polo, described many aspects of Chinese life, its bustling cities, social 
situations, folk customs, religious beliefs, and unique products, creating a sen-
sation in European society.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

136 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Diversifi ed Cultures in the Song and Yuan 
Dynasties
In the Song Dynasty, the previous monopoly of power by military officials 
was broken, and the national policy of “desisting from military activities and 
encouraging culture and education” was implemented. Against the backdrop 
of a thriving economy, the rise of the citizen class, and a relatively free  political 
atmosphere, such fields as science and technology and ideology and culture 
took on a new look.
The period saw a complete education system with schools at different 
 levels. Its institutes of higher learning included private academies besides 
Guozijian (the Imperial College) and Taixue (the highest seat of learning).
In 1308, Emperor Renzong of the Song Dynasty issued the order to 
 establish schools in prefectures and counties nationwide. Meanwhile, private 
primary educational institutes and enlightening academies were widespread 
in both urban and rural areas. Th at elementary textbooks, such as Th e Chinese 
Family Names and Th e Th ousand-Character Classic, were popularized in rural 
places, resulting  in far higher levels of overall education and literacy than in 
any previous dynasty.
Th e scientifi c and technological achievements during the Song and Yuan 
dynasties were mainly refl ected in the improvement in and wider application 
of printing techniques, the use of the compass and gunpowder, and the renova-
tion in cotton-spinning techniques.
Bi Sheng, a commoner of the Northern Song Dynasty, invented movable 
type printing, the earliest of its kind in the world. Th e clay blocks he used could 
be disassembled and stored aft er typesetting and printing, and could be reused. 
Th e state of Xixia had movable wood type. Movable type printing was succes-
sively introduced into Korea, Japan, and the Arabian countries. Th e technique 
was further disseminated to Europe in the 13th century, and to Persia and Egypt 
through Xinjiang, thereby making a great contribution to world civilization.
The Song Dynasty saw extensive use of the compass in ocean naviga-
tion.  Sailors fixed the magnetized steel needle on a compass with a carved-in 
mark to indicate north, making all-time navigation possible. In the Southern 
Song Dynasty, the compass was introduced to Europe through Arabia, laying 
a  significant foundation for their global voyages and the discovery of the “New 
Continent.”
Gunpowder-making techniques were improved, and gunpowder was widely 
used in military wars. In the Northern Song Dynasty, Guangbei  Gongchengzuo, 
a state-owned arm shop, successively invented combustible and explosive 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
137
The sutra in Xixia characters, printed with movable type.
Copper gun of the Yuan Dynasty inscribed with “the third year of the Zhishun Period,” 
indicating it was made in 1332. To date, it is the world’s earliest preserved metal gun.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

138 
CHINA’S HISTORY
The cotton spinning wheel, an illustration from The Book of Agriculture by Wang Zhen of the 
Yuan Dynasty.
 firearms, as well as “toxic smoke balls” and pipe-shaped guns used to shoot 
 bullets. In the middle 13th century, gunpowder was introduced to Arabian 
countries and later to Europe, arousing a sensation in European society.
While talking about Europe prior to the presence of textile machines in the 
18th century, in his book Das Capital, Marx said, “It isn’t easier to fi nd a spinner 
who can spin two threads simultaneously than to fi nd a  double-headed man.” 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
The introduction and spread of China’s four great inventions in the 
early European Renaissance period played a big role in the formation 
of the modern world. Papermaking and printing techniques were key 
factors in state reform and opened the door to public education. The 
invention of gunpowder helped end the feudal system and enhanced 
the national military force. The invention of the compass led to the 
discovery of America, making the entire world rather than Europe 
the stage for history.
—Thomas Francis Carter, The Invention of Printing in China and its 
Spread Westward
THE GLOBAL IMPACT OF ANCIENT CHINA’S 
FOUR GREAT INVENTIONS
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
139
Philosopher Zhu Xi.
But in the early 14th century, Huang Daopo, a working woman in the Yuan 
Dynasty, could spin three threads at the same time. Based on the  principle of 
how a hemp spinner worked, she restructured the one-thread spinner powered 
by hand into a three-thread spinner powered by feet. Huang further created a 
set of systematic advanced techniques used in every aspect of  textile-making, 
from cottonseed grinding to cotton fl uffi  ng and spinning, to crossing threads 
and color matching in cloth weaving, which led to fundamental changes in the 
cotton textile sector in the Songjiang area, enabling it to become an important 
part of the handicraft  industry. In the Yuan Dynasty, cotton gradually replaced 
silk and hemp, becoming a widely adopted raw material for clothes.
Guo Shoujing, an astronomer in the Yuan Dynasty, invented a new type of 
armillary sphere, an equatorial torquetum, which was compact and easy to use. 
It was created 300 years earlier than similar devices were invented in Europe. 
Brush Talks from the Dream Brook, written by Shen Kuo of the Northern Song 
Dynasty, covers the latest achievements in a wide range of fields, including 
astronomy, geography, mathematics, chemistry, and medical science. It was 
“a milestone in the Chinese history of science.”
Chinese philosophy underwent great changes in the Song Dynasty. Cheng 
Hao and Cheng Yi of the Northern Song Dynasty and Zhu Xi of the South-
ern Song Dynasty abstracted the concepts of the three cardinal guides and 
fi ve  ethical norms of “law,” and set up the Neo-Confucianism, also known as 
“Cheng-Zhu Neo-Confucianism.” From the height of philosophy they argued 
for the validity of despotism and class differentiation between the monarchs 
and the subjects and between father and son. Th ey insisted on deepening  one’s 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

140 
CHINA’S HISTORY
experience of the  pre-existing “law” on the basis of knowing by means of 
investigation of things to reach an understanding the law. Lu Jiuyuan, a scholar 
of the Southern Song Dynasty, proclaimed that “the universe is my mind and 
vice versa” and that one should conduct self-examination. His philosophy is 
called the School of Mind.
Cheng-Zhu Neo-Confucianism emphasized the immutability of the three 
cardinal guides and fi ve ethical norms to maintain the rule of despots and keep 
the people in line, which generated adverse infl uence. However, Neo-Confu-
cianism does attach importance to will, moral integrity, moral character, self-
discipline, and working hard, and emphasizes one’s social responsibility and 
historical mission, affi  rming the dignity of human beings.
Cheng-Zhu Neo-Confucianism built an exquisite, rigid theoretical system 
that became the mainstream of Confucianism, and had a far-reaching impact 
on China’s political life and cultural education.
In the Song Dynasty, the emerging Ci was the mainstream in Chinese lit-
erature. Ci, also known as “long and short sentences,” made it easy to express 
one’s ideas fl exibly and could be sung to the accompaniment of music. As with 
the poetry of the Tang Dynasty, Ci poetry was another highlight in ancient 
Chinese literature. Th e works of both Su Shi and Xin Qiji were representative 
of the Heroic School of Ci poetry. Su Shi’s Ci poetry was open and vast in con-
ception, and elegant and unconstrained in tone. Th e Ci poetry of Xin Qiji, who 
lived in the midst of chaos caused by war in the Southern Song Dynasty, was 
robust, impassioned, and also plaintive. In the Song Dynasty, the vibrant urban 
life gave rise to the Gracious School of Ci poetry as represented by Liu Yong. 
His poems, periphrastic and implicit, were so popular that there was a saying 
that “where there was a well, there were people singing Liu Yong’s Ci poems.”
Li Qingzhao, the most prominent female Ci poet of the Song Dynasty, 
wrote with a distinct style. In the early stage, her poems were happy and joyful, 
while in the later stage, aft er the collapse of the state and the bereavement of 
her husband, they conveyed feelings of homelessness and regrets.
Zaju opera of the Yuan Dynasty combines multiple performing modes 
to tell a complete story, including poetry and Ci poetry, music, dancing, 
role-playing, singing, and dialogue. A popular form of art, Zaju experienced 
unprecedented development in the period, showing that literature reflective 
of daily life could become popular. Guan Hanqing was the most famous of all 
playwrights in the Yuan Dynasty. His representative work, Th e Injustice Done 
to Dou E, lays bare the offi  cial corruption through the injustice done to Dou 
E, who, grief-stricken, cried out, “Earth! How can you be Earth since you can’t 
tell right from wrong? Heaven! How can you be Heaven since you mistake the 
good for the guilty?”
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 7 The Song and Yuan Dynasties 
141
The Romance of the Western Chamber, written by Wang Shifu, another 
 playwright of the Yuan Dynasty, tells the love story of Zhang Gong and Cui 
Yingying, conveying the common aspiration of young couples to seek for 
free love.
The rise of Neo-Confucianism made scholars pay more attention to 
 self-cultivation. As for calligraphy, there were four great calligraphy artists in 
the Song Dynasty, namely Su Shi, Huang Tingjian, Mi Fu, and Cai Xiang. Th ey 
admired the calligraphic style of the Wei and Jin Dynasties, stressed  personality, 
ignored rules, and advocated working “with verve and without rules.” Th e land-
scape paintings of the time focused more on the impressionistic style and were 
expressive of temperament, verve, and spirit. Among the realistic  paintings that 
showed ordinary life, Along the River During the Qingming Festival, by Zhang 
Zeduan of the Northern Song Dynasty, was the most famous of all. By adopting 
the “scattered dot” painting technique, the painter vividly reproduced, on a fi ve-
meter-long scroll of paper, the prosperous scenes of Bianjing along the Bianhe 
River at the end of the Northern Song Dynasty, making those who watch it feel 
as if they were “personally in the bustling crowds in the city of Bianjing.”
Playwright Guan Hanqing.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

142 
CHINA’S HISTORY
From the 10th to 13th centuries, Europe was oppressed by feudal land own-
ership. The serfs were humble in position, and ideology remained fettered by 
theological obscuration. In contrast, China witnessed three great inventions and 
their application, as well as a sharp rise in both the urban economy and overseas 
trade during the Song Dynasty, becoming a leader of the world at the time.
Yuan Dynasty theater performance, depicted in a mural of Guangsheng 
Temple in Hongdong, Shanxi.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

8
145
8
Measures to Intensify Imperial Power during 
the Ming and Qing Dynasties
The Ming and Qing dynasties (before the Opium War) lasted from 1368 to 
1840 in Chinese history.
At the end of the Yuan Dynasty (1279–1368), the situation of class diff erences 
and national contradictions was deteriorating, which triggered large-scale peas-
ant insurgence. In 1368, Zhu Yuanzhang headed a peasant army to  overthrow 
the Yuan Dynasty, defeat the leaders of other peasant uprisings, and establish the 
Ming Dynasty with its capital in Yingtian (Nanjing, Jiangsu).
Emperor Taizu (Zhu Yuanzhang) and Emperor Chengzu (Zhu Di) of the 
Ming Dynasty enforced imperial power by abolishing the prime minister, 
creating the system of the Grand Secretariat, and setting up secret services 
to enforce control over grassroots thinking and cultural circles. They moved 
the capital to Beijing during their reign, formulating the basic structure of the 
Ming Dynasty system of centralized monarchic despotism. At the same time, the 
rulers of the early Ming Dynasty implemented economic policies to encourage 
cultivation of wastelands, reduce corvee and taxes, reward those who planted 
cash crops, and lift  the social status of the craft smen, which helped recover and 
develop the economy. Th e Yongle Period (1403–1424) of Emperor Zhu Di saw 
The Ming and Qing 
Dynasties (before the 
Opium War): Prosperity of 
the Farming Civilization and 
Crisis before Modern Times
Chapter 8
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

146 
CHINA’S HISTORY
social stability and strong national strength and was another prosperous time 
in Chinese history.
In the early days of the Wanli Period (1573–1620), prime minister Zhang 
Juzheng reformed the taxation and corvee systems and implemented the Sin-
gle-Whip Reform to combine original land taxes, corvee, and incidental taxes 
into one, and levied taxes based on land area. Th e reform stimulated develop-
ment of the commodity economy, and more than thirty industrial and com-
mercial cities emerged south of the lower reaches of the Yangtze River. New 
changes similar to capitalism in western countries appeared in the handicraft  
workshops.
In the late Ming Dynasty, land mergers deteriorated. Peasants, forced out 
of their homeland, abandoned a vast amount of land, which deteriorated into 
wasteland.
At the end of the Ming Dynasty, the invasion of the Late Jin and natural 
disasters over several consecutive years finally triggered large-scale peas-
ant uprisings that involved millions of people and lasted nearly twenty 
years. In March 1644, the insurgent peasant army headed by Li Zicheng 
occupied  Beijing, and Emperor Chongzhen committed suicide. The Ming 
Dynasty came to its end. In April of the same year, the Qing army, which had 
Zhu Yuanzhang, Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
147
arrived at  Shanhaiguan Pass, managed to summon Wu Sangui, commander 
of Ningyuan of the Ming Dynasty, to surrender and conquered the insur-
gent peasant army. Thereafter, the Qing moved the capital from Shengjing 
(Shenyang, Liaoning) to Beijing in September, seizing the supreme dominion 
of the country.
Th e Manchu, who established the Ming Dynasty, were a new federation 
of ethnic groups formed after Nurhachi unified the Jurchen tribes during 
the late Ming Dynasty. Nurhachi proclaimed himself Khan and established a 
kingdom named Late Jin. His son Huangtaiji ascended the throne and pro-
claimed himself emperor in Shengjing and changed the title to Qing. After 
entering Shanhaiguan Pass, the Qing army seized land on a large scale, forced 
the poor to be their servants, and compelled the residents in southeastern 
coastal areas to move inward 30 to 50 li. Th ey also forced the Han people to 
shave their hair and braids with the threat that “if you want to live, you must 
The Ming Tombs. Thirteen emperors of the Ming Dynasty are buried there.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

148 
CHINA’S HISTORY
cut your hair; if you keep your hair, you will be killed” to follow the system 
of the Qing, making it a symbol of the reign of Manchu nobility. Th e policies 
of ethnic group oppression and the backwardness of the production relation-
ship implemented in the early Qing Dynasty worsened the social economy, 
already seriously damaged by years of civil war. Th e trend of evolving into a 
modern society was interrupted.
Th e cruel policies implemented in the early Qing Dynasty aroused fi erce 
resistance. Campaigns against the Qing rulers sped their demise. The basic 
crisis, a separation between the land and the laborers at the end of the Ming 
Dynasty, was removed via peasant warfare. Th is created a favorable environ-
ment for economic recovery in the early Qing Dynasty. During the reigns of 
Portrait of Emperor Kangxi.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
149
Emperor Kangxi, Emperor Yongzheng, and Emperor Qianlong, the social 
economy developed rapidly and reached a new height in the history of China.
The Ming and Qing dynasties saw further strengthened centralism and 
highly infl ated imperial power.
The Six-Department System from the Sui and Tang dynasties remained 
basically unchanged during the Ming and Qing dynasties, while the Three-
Ministry System was adjusted and reformed to further reduce the power of the 
prime ministers and to reinforce the power of the emperor.
During the period of Hongwu (1368–1398) in the early Ming Dynasty, 
the Zhongshu Ministry was cancelled, and the post of prime minister was 
removed. Th e emperor was in direct charge of the six departments and handled 
state aff airs in person. Zhu Yuanzhang set up the position of Diange Daxueshi 
(Imperial Grand Scholar) to help him handle state aff airs and documents. Th e 
cabinet system was developed during the Yongle Period (1403–1424). In the 
early Ming Dynasty, the cabinet had no power to decide state aff airs indepen-
dently and functioned only as an assistant to the emperor. But the power of 
Daxueshi (Grand Scholar) became increasingly strong, and the cabinet head 
resembled the prime minister of earlier times.
Emperor Yongzheng of the Qing Dynasty set up the Military Aff airs Divi-
sion. A hub from which the emperor could issue orders and handle state aff airs, 
the division took part in discussions on all critical state aff airs, such as the mili-
tary and administrative programs, civil and diplomatic aff airs, including offi  cial 
promotions, removals, assignments, and important case hearings, and draft ed 
orders for the emperor.
The Military Affairs Division.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

150 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e ministers of the Military Aff air Division were, however, of lower rank, 
with no dedicated government offi  ce or subordinates, and were forbidden from 
contacting offi  cials without authorization. All reports submitted by the offi  cials 
were presented directly to the Emperor, then forwarded to the Military Aff airs 
Division to ensure that the will of the emperor was followed. The decision-
making and administration system centered on the emperor was effi  cient and 
confi dential, enabling the emperor to maximize his control over the political 
situation and state aff airs.
Th e control of the central government over local areas was beefed up dur-
ing the Ming and Qing dynasties. In the Ming Dynasty, the Buzhengshi Divi-
sion was set up to manage the provincial administrative affairs. The Tixing 
Anchasi and Duzhihui divisions were set up to manage criminal law, and mili-
tary and administrative aff airs, respectively. Th e three divisions, as offi  ces of the 
central government in the provinces, were independent from one other. Th eir 
offi  cials discussed all critical issues before reporting to the central government, 
facilitating vertical leadership.
In the Qing Dynasty, in addition to the viceroy who governed one or sev-
eral provinces, a Xunfu (governor) was set up in the provinces to take charge of 
administrative aff airs. Th e viceroy and Xunfu were favorites of the emperor and 
had the right to send confi dential reports to the emperor. Sometimes the vice-
roy and Xunfu would be based in the same city and kept one another in check. 
Th eir tenure was not long, facilitating the control of the emperor.
Th e Ming and Qing dynasties also promoted reform in the southwestern 
areas. Th ey dismissed the hereditary Tusi and appointed offi  cials called Liuguan 
to manage local administration in a style similar to that of the central plains. 
The Qing Dynasty set up a “general” in the northwestern and northeastern 
areas, respectively, to handle military and administrative affairs and enforce 
control.
In the Ming and Qing dynasties, the supervision system became even 
more rigid. Duchayuan was set up at the central level and was responsible 
for inspecting and impeaching the offi  cials. Duchayuan appointed censors to 
supervise the local offi  cials. Corresponding to the six departments, six special 
divisions were set up to inspect the six departments and rectify their mal-
practices. The supervision system played an active role in cracking down on 
separatist forces, rectifying the offi  cial administration, punishing corruption, 
improving administrative effi  ciency, and consolidating centralist rule. However, 
the focus of the supervision system in the Ming and Qing dynasties was on 
assessing the loyalty of offi  cials, not on assessing their job performance. Hence, 
there was little supervision of and constraints applied to the decision-making 
process of the emperor.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
151
Wooden seal of the Jinyiwei of the Ming Dynasty.
In the Ming and Qing dynasties, the kinship-based clan  organizations 
were widely established in rural areas. Th e wide control net formed by Bao-
jia  (neighborhood administrative system) and clan organizations extended 
even to remote areas and became a powerful tool for the rulers to  control the 
population.
In the early Ming Dynasty, the emperors set up Jinyiwei (Brocade-Clad 
Guards) and the Dong Chang (secret police). The two organizations were 
authorized to detect and investigate crimes via torture and killing. To establish 
The Palace Museum in Beijing is the imperial palace of the Ming and Qing dynasties. Pictured 
is the Taihe Palace, where the emperors’ court ceremonies were held.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

152 
CHINA’S HISTORY
the absolute authority of the imperial power, the Ming Dynasty also instituted 
the Tingzhang System, whereby the emperors could arbitrarily fl og any minister 
who they found unsatisfactory at the imperial court. Th e relationship between 
the king and his ministers became one of a master and his slaves.
Th e centralized regime of the ancient China was well organized and con-
tributed to effi  cient management of a vast territory and a large population by 
professional bureaucrats selected via the imperial examination system. The 
regime was of great signifi cance as it promoted the formation of a multi-ethnic 
nation and boosted economic and cultural development for a long time. How-
ever, the separation of power in ancient China was merely a form of check and 
balance under imperial power and it could not veto the emperor. It was merely 
a supplement to the rule of absolute monarchy.
Consolidation and Development of a Unifi ed 
Multi-ethnic Country
The Ming and Qing dynasties (before the Opium War) witnessed unprece-
dented consolidation and development of China as a unified multi-ethnic 
country.
In the early 16th century, the western colonial forces rapidly expanded 
into the eastern world following Portugal and Spain’s successful opening of 
the  navigation routes. In 1548, troops of the Ming Dynasty heavily defeated 
the invading Portuguese fleet in Shuangyu near Ningbo, Zhejiang, burning 
seventy-seven battleships of diff erent sizes. Aft er that incident, the  Portuguese 
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
The political system of ancient China featured precise specialization 
and functional division, and was managed by professional bureaucrats 
based on rational established rules and precedents. In many aspects, 
China was well-equipped with conditions for its transformation to 
a modern one, but its very perfection gave rise to arrogance and 
almost excluded the possibility of change.
—Gilbert Rozman, The Modernization of China
THE POLITICAL SYSTEM OF ANCIENT 
CHINA
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
153
employed means of deceit and bribery, saying their commercial ships had 
 suff ered windstorm, and were thus permitted to set up sheds in Macao to rest 
and dry their clothes. Th ey went on to build ramparts, barbettes, and offi  cial 
mansions on the pretext of defending the invasion of the Dutch. In 1621, the 
Ming government destroyed the Qingzhou city built by the Portuguese, and 
levied an annual tax of 20,000 taels of silver upon the Portuguese in Macao. 
Th at paved the way for Macao’s later development into a colonial site, though 
the Ming Dynasty still had sovereignty over Macao.
In the middle Ming Dynasty, Japanese warriors, merchants, and pirates 
oft en harassed the southeastern coastal areas. Th ey even once attacked Shang-
hai and Suzhou and fi nally reached Nanjing. In 1555, Qi Jiguang was entrusted 
to resist the Japanese pirates in eastern Zhejiang. He won nine battles in Tai-
zhou and drove the Japanese pirates away in 1565.
In 1598, the Spanish attacked Guangdong, building houses at Hutiaomen. 
But their houses were later burnt down by the Ming troops, and the Spanish 
were chased out of Chinese territory.
In 1642, Dutch colonists invaded and occupied Taiwan, where they cruelly 
exploited the Taiwanese and their resources. In 1661, Zheng Chenggong, who had 
initiated wars against the Qing Dynasty in southeastern coastal areas, led a troop 
of 25,000 soldiers and hundreds of battleships to cross the straits eastward from 
Jinmen, successfully capturing Chiqian City, the strategic site of the Dutch troops. 
Aft er another eight months of siege, he launched a fi erce attack and fi nally forced 
Statue of Zheng Chenggong on the Gulangyu Islet.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

154 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Frederick Coyett, the Dutch Governor, to sign a document of  surrender. Zheng’s 
successful reoccupation of Taiwan checked the further eastward expansion of the 
western colonists, ensured the stability of China’s southeastern provinces, and 
played an indirect role in protecting other Asian countries.
In the 1640s, Russian troops launched large-scale invasions into the main-
land of China, occupying such northeastern areas as Yakesa and Nerchinsk. 
They brazenly plundered the areas, severely infringing upon the sovereignty 
of the Qing Dynasty and endangering both life and property. Qing troops 
waged two counterattacks in Yakesa in 1685 and 1686, defeating the Russian 
troops, who were forced to agree to a peace talk with only dozens of remaining 
soldiers. In 1689, both parties signed the Treaty of Nerchinsk, fi nalizing Qing 
sovereignty over the drainage areas of the Heilong and Wusuli rivers, including 
Kuyedao (Sakhalin Island). The treaty also provided that traveling business-
men of both countries could cross the borders for trade by presenting their 
passports. Aft er the signing of the Treaty of Nerchinsk, the eastern part of the 
border areas between China and Russia enjoyed a relatively peaceful and stable 
situation that greatly facilitated bilateral trade.
The Great Wall of the Ming Dynasty stretches from the Yalu River in the east to Jiayu Pass in 
the west, and is 6,350 kilometers long.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
155
The period from the Ming Dynasty to the early Qing saw effective 
 counterattacks for safeguarding sovereignty, as well as zigzag but generally 
upward development in border areas where ethnic groups lived.
In the early Ming Dynasty, the remaining forces of the Yuan Dynasty that 
retreated to the Mongolian Plateau launched constant military attacks against 
the southern areas. In the middle of the Ming Dynasty, Wala unified all the 
Mongolian tribes, defeating a 500,000-soldier troop of the Ming Dynasty at 
Tumubao. He captured Emperor Yingzong alive and threatened the capital city 
of Beijing. In the early Jiajing Period of the Ming Dynasty, the Andahan Tribe 
of Tatar grew particularly strong. Between the Longqing and Wanli periods, 
Grand Secretary Zhang Juzheng initiated new reforms in the bordering areas 
with a view to “increasing the exchanges between the Han and Mongolians 
externally and reinforcing defensive systems internally.” Vigorous eff orts were 
made to amend and cement the Great Wall and consolidate northern border 
defenses. As a result, Andahan couldn’t get through the northern border. His 
people urgently needed to exchange their goods for the farm produce of the 
central plains, so he begged for peace talks. The court of the Ming Dynasty 
accepted his request, conferring the title of King of Shunyi upon Andahan, 
and agreed to open eleven markets for exchange. From then on, the northern 
border areas saw a growing population, an increase in reclaimed land, and fre-
quent commodity exchange.
Certain key border towns developed into “pearls at the frontiers” that dif-
fered little from the central plains. The Mongolian areas boasted not only a 
booming stockbreeding sector, but also a fast-developing agriculture, a vast 
area of reclaimed land, numerous villages, and the rise of Guihua City (pres-
ent-day Hohhot). Th e Mongolians and Han people gradually merged with one 
another in many ways, such as ideology, culture, and folk customs. Accord-
ing to historical records, the Han people “living in bordering areas somewhat 
looked like the foreign people,” and were called “Han aliens” (Han Yi) during 
the Wanli Period. Th e Mongolian leaders also practiced the customs of Han, 
and even “prayed to be a member of Han in the aft erlife.”
Aft er coming into power in the middle 17th century, Galdan, from Mongo-
lia’s Junggar Tribe in the West Desert, constantly launched attacks on its neigh-
boring tribes. He later occupied areas both north and south of the Tianshan 
mountain range and colluded with the Russians to wage a large-scale rebellion. 
In 1690, Galdan attacked Inner Mongolia, also threatening to attack Beijing. To 
maintain national integrity, Emperor Kangxi of the Qing Dynasty personally 
led his army in war and defeated the rebel forces in Uklark Poktu. Qing troops 
carried out wars against Galdan and his successors for another seventy years. 
Th ey eventually destroyed the aristocratic forces of Junggar in 1571 and unifi ed 
the areas north of the Tianshan mountain range.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

156 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e Qing Dynasty established the post of general in Uliastai (present-day 
Dzhavkhlant, Mongolia) and counselor minister in Hovd (present-day Hovd 
in Mongolia). It also set up many military sentries, Kalun, along the northern 
borders, with many posthouses and smooth post roads, intensifying its direct 
control over the northern border areas. In the meantime, the Qing Dynasty 
paid great attention to cultivating its popularity among the top leaders of ethnic 
groups by implementing the policy of “retaining their own customs based on 
religious beliefs,” retaining their jurisdiction over their respective tribes, reduc-
ing taxes and tributes, awarding ranks of nobility, and paying high salaries. 
Th e royal family of the Qing Dynasty married into the Mongolian noble class. 
In addition, eleven spectacular Lama temples were built outside the Chengde 
Imperial Summer Resort. Th ere, royal Mongolians who were designated to visit 
the emperors of the Qing Dynasty accompanied the emperors to practice mar-
tial arts and go hunting. Th at helped coordinate and develop Qing’s relations 
with all tribes of Mongolia, and helped the Qing Dynasty “rally people of all 
ethnic groups to consolidate power.”
The Imperial Summer Resort and its Outlying Temples at Chengde imitate Tibet’s Potala 
Palace grounds.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
157
In the early Ming Dynasty, the court set up seven garrisons with Hami as 
the center to beef up its control over the northwestern borders. In the early 
Qing Dynasty, the Uygur ethnic group, Islamic converts distributed in areas 
south of the Tianshan mountain range, were called “Huibu.” In 1757, Burhan 
al-Din and Khwaja Jinan, Huibu nobles, launched rebellions. But their tyranny 
and despotism made them quickly lose popularity among the people and led 
to their defeat by the Qing troops. In 1762, aft er suppressing the rebellion, the 
Qing Dynasty established the post of general in Yili, thereby putting a person 
in charge of all military and civil aff airs in areas both south and north of the 
Tianshan mountains. The whole Xinjiang area, including the Balkhash Lake, 
enjoyed unprecedented peace and stability.
During the Yongle Period of the Ming Dynasty, the court set up Nu’ergan 
Dusi in Telin, the estuary of the Heilongjiang River, granting jurisdiction over 
the drainage areas of the Heilongjiang and Wusuli rivers. In 1433, the imperial 
inspector minister of the Ming Dynasty had the stone tablet “Reconstruction of 
the Yongning Temple” erected. Th e tablet recorded details of the court’s admin-
istration over Nu’ergan Dusi in Han, Mongolian, Jurchen, and Tibetan charac-
ters, serving as witness to the joint eff orts of all ethnic groups in developing the 
northeastern areas.
Gold seal granted to the Dalai Lama by the Qing court.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

158 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Telin is where the Manchu people rose and later replaced the Ming Dynasty 
with the Qing Dynasty. In the early Qing Dynasty, the post of general was 
established in Fengtian, in Jilin, and in Heilongjiang to strengthen Qing’s patrol 
and defense along the Sino-Russian border and to check Russian  invasions. 
Th at ensured stability and safety in the border areas and led to unprecedented 
development in Northeast China.
Tibet accepted the jurisdiction of the Ming Dynasty after the Yuan 
Dynasty ended. The court sent troops on several occasions to put down 
rebellions plotted by Junggar nobles and to defeat the invading Gurkha 
tribe. Emperor Shunzhi of the Qing Dynasty formally conferred the title 
of Dalai Lama upon the Fifth Dalai. Emperor Kangxi later conferred the 
title of Panchen Erdini upon the Fifth Panchen. In 1727, the Ming court 
set up the post of Minister to Tibet. In 1793, an imperial decree was 
issued, stipulating that the rights of official appointment and removal, 
administrative, financial, military, and foreign affairs of Tibet were under 
the Minister to Tibet.
Emperor Qianlong further formulated the “Golden Vase Lottery” system, 
ordering that candidates for the reincarnated Living Buddha of Lamaism must 
be supervised by the Minister to Tibet and be determined by drawing lots in 
the golden vase awarded by the court. Those measures helped stabilize the 
political situation in Tibet, pushed forward the local economy, and further 
made Tibet an inalienable part of China.
The Ming and Qing dynasties adopted the policy of “changing tribal 
authorities to regular officials” in southwestern areas, abolishing the post of 
Tusi and implementing a regime system identical to those of inland areas. 
 Furthermore, efforts were made to register households and population, 
 measure land and reclaim barren fields, sort coins and grains, exempt Tusi’s 
miscellaneous taxes and duties, build roads, and set up schools. Advanced 
production techniques were also introduced from the inland areas, promoting 
local economic growth.
Aft er a century-long struggle against invasions from the outside and rebel 
forces from within, the Qing Dynasty finally founded a unified and consoli-
dated country. Its vast territory stretched from Balkhash Lake and Congling in 
the west, to the Sea of Okhotsk and Sakhalin Island in the east, and extended 
from Siberia in the north, to the Paracel Islands and Spratly Islands in the 
south, and to Taiwan and other islands in the southeast—which basically laid 
a foundation for China’s present territory. Some neighboring countries as well 
were subject to or were tributary states of the Qing Dynasty.
Th ere were great advancements in the border areas during the fi rst half 
of the Qing Dynasty. During the reign of Emperor Qianlong, the agricul-
tural produce of northeastern China not only supplied local needs, but was 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
159
also transported to inland areas. The four cities of Qiqi Ha’er, Mo’ergen, 
Hulan, and Heilongjiang boasted grain storage of up to 450,000 dan. Since 
the late Ming Dynasty, some key towns in the border areas between Han and 
Mongolia, such as Zhangjiakou, saw the emergence of various shops, includ-
ing silk, cloth, wool, and grocery shops, that extended four or fi ve li. Areas 
north of the Tianshan mountains boasted up to 560,000 mu of  military 
agricultural colonies during the the mid-reign period of Emperor Qianlong 
alone. In particular, Yili was a place “where there were vast numbers of 
immigrants from inland areas, densely distributed villages, herds of sheep 
and horses, and crowds of merchants. Even the best of Shaoxing and Kunqu 
Opera could be seen there.”
Th e formation and development of China as a unifi ed multi-ethnic country 
was not only refl ected in defi nite political accord, consolidated military defenses 
in border areas, and mutual economic dependency between inland and border-
ing areas, but also in harmonious relations among ethnic groups as well as close 
cultural exchanges.
At a critical time during the resistance of the Russian invasion, Kerk 
Mongolia was completely defeated due to a sudden attack from Galdan of 
the Junggar Tribe. When discussing the solution, the top Mongolian lead-
ers said, “Russians never embrace Buddhism, and they have customs, lan-
guages, and clothes  diff erent from ours, so mixing with the Russians is not 
Gold cup inlaid with treasures, Qing Dynasty, from the Palace Museum in Beijing.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

160 
CHINA’S HISTORY
a  strategy for long-term stability. If we emigrate to the inland areas and 
submit to the Emperor of the Ming Dynasty, we could enjoy a happy life for 
thousands of years.”
In the third year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen of the Ming Dynasty 
(1630), the Turehot Tribe, which had been forced by Junggar to move to areas 
around the Volga River, began their journey back to the motherland in 1770 
after experiencing a great deal of hardship and difficulties. These examples 
show that only when the nomadic economy at the frontiers was combined 
with a commodity economy typical of the central plains and areas south of 
the Yangtze, and when all ethnic groups merged with one another based on a 
shared mutual culture, did the vast expanses of the border areas become part of 
a unifi ed multi-ethnic country.
Prosperity of Farming Civilization and 
Embryonic Modern Industry
Th e period from the 13th to 18th centuries, the heyday of the Ming and Qing 
dynasties, witnessed great advances in agriculture and all-around development 
in both social and economic fi elds.
In the second half of the Ming Dynasty, the Single-Whip Reform was 
implemented, integrating the original land taxes, corvee, and incidental taxes 
into one. Taxes were levied based on land area alone. The reform stimulated 
development of the commodity economy, and some rich people even aban-
doned their land and engaged in commercial business. In the early Qing 
Dynasty, the reform of Substitution of Farming Land Tax for Poll Tax, adopted 
to levy taxes only according to land area, completely canceled the poll tax and 
weakened personal bondage. Th at marked the maturity of the ancient tax sys-
tem and a signifi cant renovation in treatment of the working class.
There was an obvious progression in management and production tech-
niques. Th e Exploitation of the Work of Nature, written at the end of the Ming 
Dynasty, covered about thirty techniques in both industrial and agricultural 
production, gaining for China a leading position in the world. Two-season rice 
was promoted and per unit production increased signifi cantly. Th e introduc-
tion and expanded planting area of high-yield plants such as corn and sweet 
potato, in addition to the widespread planting of cotton, signifi cantly increased 
food and clothing options. Th e big increase in grain output not only satisfi ed 
the needs of the growing population, but also facilitated the cultivation of eco-
nomic crops, paving the way for a fl ow of people from the agricultural sector to 
the handicraft  sector, altering the traditional economy.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
161
Images of the Imperial Capital (part) portrays Beijing in the mid-Ming Dynasty.
The Prosperity of the Southern Capital (part) depicts the serried stores and prosperity of 
Nanjing in the mid-Ming Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

162 
CHINA’S HISTORY
During the Ming and Qing dynasties, the market-responsive private 
 handicraft  sector grew rapidly, replacing government-operated workshops.
Commodity circulation expanded in the middle Ming Dynasty. Silver was 
the major currency, and commercial capital became increasingly active. Busi-
nessmen with huge sums of money traded and transported bulk commodities 
across the country, and became more deeply involved in production.
In the middle and late Ming Dynasty, some distribution centers for handi-
crafts and raw materials that appeared in areas along the Grand Canal and 
south of the Yangzte developed into industrial and commercial cities. Clus-
ters of numerous merchants and intermediary businessmen proliferated; they 
introduced deals for sellers and buyers and appraised commodity quality and 
prices. In Suzhou, Songjiang, Hangzhou, Jiaxing, and Huzhou alone, the more 
than 30 cities and towns of the middle Ming Dynasty increased to more than 
200 in the early Qing Dynasty.
The national strength of the Ming and Qing dynasties was particularly 
reflected in its expanding farmland and growing population. Total area of 
farmed land rose from 850 million mu in the Ming Dynasty to around 1 billion 
mu in the Qing Dynasty. Th e registered population surged from 66 million in 
the early Ming Dynasty to more than 100 million at its end, and reached 410 
million in 1840, the 20th year of the reign of Qing Emperor Daoguang.
From 1720 to 1820, the proportion of China’s GDP in the world’s total 
increased at a rate far higher than that of all European countries combined. 
At the beginning of the 19th century, six of the world’s ten cities with 500,000 
or more residents were in China. From the middle and late Ming Dynasty to 
the early Qing Dynasty, half of the world’s total silver output fl ew into China. 
China was a major center of world economy and trade.
A new form of business operation known as workshop handicraft  emerged 
in some economically developed areas in the middle Ming Dynasty. Histori-
cal records show that in the Wanli Period, most households in Suzhou were 
employed in silk weaving, and “most of the households in the northeast city 
were workshop owners.” The presence of detailed division of labor, such as 
weaver, damask worker, yarn worker, dyer, and cartwright, indicate that pro-
duction had reached a certain size and had a relatively high technique. The 
record that “the workshop owners provide the fund while the workers labor” 
indicates a pure employment relationship.
Th e workshop owners provided production materials and wages, “paying 
by day or hour,” and the laborers enjoyed personal freedom. Records show-
ing employees “as common people who earn their own livings” and “asking 
others who haven’t been employed to substitute for them in case of absence 
due to particular reasons” also indicate that employees had personal freedom. 
In Suzhou, in addition to weavers who worked for the same employer all the 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
163
time, temporary craft smen went to diff erent sites according to their particular 
 specialties, and waited for employment from the big employers. Hence, there 
was a functioning job market.
Th is way of doing business featured a division of labor and a high degree 
of socialization and working effi  ciency. It represents qualitative changes when 
compared to traditional government-operated workshops and small private 
workshops. Private businesses that earned added profi t from labor encouraged 
free employment, an indicator of the early emergence of capitalism.
The Tongsheng Well Contract (1779) in the reign of Emperor Qianlong 
of the Qing Dynasty, and the Tianyuan Well Contract (1796) in the reign of 
Emperor Jiaqing, show that business forms such as a joint partnership, “shar-
ing responsibilities and profits based on respective shares,” had already been 
adopted in the production of salt in Zigong, Sichuan, showing signs of the 
modern stock system.
The changes that differentiated the economy of the late Ming and Qing 
dynasties from previous economic modes indicate that the overdeveloped 
agricultural sector had been changing all along. Rise of the new elements had 
paved the way for the evolution of a civilization based on industry.
Culture of the Ming and Qing Dynasties: 
A Mixture of Old and New
Th e Ming and Qing dynasties saw drastic changes in Chinese society and were 
a turning point of great historical signifi cance. Extraordinarily sharp contra-
dictions and confl icts between old and new forces resulted in a pattern of inter-
twining new and old elements in science and ideology.
The development of a commodity economy triggered the demand for 
renovated techniques, promoted scientifi c and technological growth, and gave 
rise to a number of scientists who made breakthroughs in traditional scientifi c 
fi elds.
An Outline Treatise of Medical Herbs, written by Li Shizhen of the late Ming 
Dynasty, covers an extensive range of subjects, including medicine, pharmacy, 
biology, chemistry, mineralogy, geology, and phenology. He initiated the clas-
sifi cation methods for Chinese medicines, categorizing them in the inorganic 
sphere, plant sphere, and animal sphere based on the principle of “from small 
to big” and “from humble to noble”—a system that clearly incorporates the 
ideas of biological evolution. Li also pointed out the similarities between apes 
and human beings. Darwin cited parts of the book that dwell on the seven 
species of chicks and the domestication of goldfish in his argument for “the 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

164 
CHINA’S HISTORY
 diff erentiation occurring in the domestication of animals and plants.” Li was 
the first to bring forward the idea of the “brain being the house of original 
spirit,” saying human thoughts were the function and product of brains, which 
is of great signifi cance.
The Exploitation of the Work of Nature, an encyclopedia of Chinese 
 science written in the 17th century, covers all major industrial techniques of 
the time, including those of agriculture, textiles, mining, metallurgy,  chemical 
 engineering, boat building, and weaponry; it also contains  bibliographies of 
Chinese and non-Chinese sources, a glossary, and appendices on  Chinese 
dynasties, measurements, and transmission of techniques to the West.  Compiled 
by Song Yingxing in the late period of the Ming Dynasty, the  encyclopedia has 
been translated into Japanese, English, German, French,  Italian, Russian, and 
other languages.
Zhu Zaiyu, a descendant of the royal family of the late Ming Dynasty, 
resigned from his offi  ce on seven occasions in order to commit himself to sci-
entifi c research. He proposed the thought of “principles refl ected by  numbers 
Page from Li Shizhen’s An Outline Treatise of Medical Herbs.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
165
and numbers from principles” and created the Twelve-tone Equal Tempera-
ment, solving the theoretic problem of achieving tone change in musical 
instruments that puzzled people for more than 2,000 years. Joseph Needham 
(1900–1995) called him “a man from the times of Renaissance although he is 
far away from Europe.”
In An Agricultural Encyclopedia, Xu Guangqi of the Ming Dynasty not 
only summarized previous and current achievements, but also incorporated 
ideas and methods from western agricultural science and technologies based 
on long-term experiments. As “the fi rst to introduce the western science,” Xu 
is reputed to be an epoch-making Chinese scientific pioneer in modern his-
tory for his spotlight on mathematical research and persistence in investiga-
tion, experiment, observation, and summary, all elements of modern scientifi c 
research.
Xu Xiake’s Travel Diaries, published in the late years of the reign of 
Emperor Chongzhen of the Ming Dynasty, is distinctive from common travel 
notes in many aspects, such as his descriptions of igneous rock, terrestrial heat 
and springs, the erosive eff ect of fl owing water on rocks, and the dependency of 
Page from The Exploitation of the Work of Nature.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

166 
CHINA’S HISTORY
plants on climate. His scientifi c investigation, featuring precise description and 
in-depth analysis, paved the way for research in natural science. In 1953, the 
Chinese Academy of Science re-investigated the fi ft een water-eroded caves that 
he once explored and drew roughly similar data. Joseph Needham appraised 
his traveling dairies as “having amazing capability in analyzing various sorts of 
landforms and employing a wide range of jargon in a very systematic way,” and 
added that the book “reads more like investigative records fi nished by a fi eld 
explorer in the 20th century than something written by a scholar in the 17th 
century.”
The multitude of scientists who emerged in the late Ming Dynasty paid 
greater attention to experiments and mathematical methods typical of modern 
scientifi c research. Generally speaking, however, science and technology in the 
Ming and Qing dynasties lagged far behind that of the West. Th e high-handed 
cultural policy and the highly stereotyped and rigid writing style adopted for 
the imperial examination only exacerbated the situation, leading to an increas-
ingly wide gap between China and the West.
Th e Ming and Qing dynasties exercised tight control over the ideological 
and cultural fields, and, in the early Qing, literary inquisitions in particular 
were frequently used to crack down on opponents and keep thoughts under 
control. People would be questioned, condemned, and sent to jail for  reasons 
of boldly discussing political affairs and encroaching upon the dignity of 
Xu Guangqi and Italian missionary Matteo Ricci.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
167
 emperors. For instance, Wang Xihou, an official candidate in the imperial 
examination from Jiangxi, was beheaded, as were all of his seven descendents 
because, in his book, he failed to refer properly to the posthumous titles of the 
three emperors, including Kangxi. Hai Chengyin, the provincial governor of 
Jiangxi, was sentenced to death on probation for weak supervision, and another 
two officials were also suspended from duty for not pointing out the “false” 
parts. Th ese cruel literary inquisitions forced intellectuals to divorce their com-
mentaries from real life and to engage in writing books with obsolete thought 
to protect themselves.
In the Ming and Qing dynasties, Neo-Confucianism had occupied a domi-
nant position in the official ideology. The examinations focused on the Four 
Books and Five Classics. Th e Four Books refer to Th e Great Learning, Th e Doc-
trine of the Mean, Th e Confucian Analects, and Th e Works of Mencius. Th e Five 
Classics include Th e Book of Odes, Th e Book of History, Th e Book of Changes, 
The book of Rites, and The Spring and Autumn Annals. All are classic books 
of Confucians. Th e answers had to be based on the notes and commentaries 
of Zhu Xi. Personal views could not be aired, and the writing style was rigid, 
composed of eight parts called “Eight-part Essay” or “Stereotyped Writing.” 
Th e imperial examinations, to a great extent, evolved into a tool of the court to 
bring the people’s thoughts under strict control.
Xie Jishi, a censor during the reign of Emperor Yongzheng, was con-
demned as “unscrupulous” and exiled to the border areas because he made 
notes to the Neo-Confucian books in a way diff erent from those of Cheng and 
Zhu. Such cultural depotism led to a depressing situation among intellectuals 
and seriously hindered scientifi c and cultural growth.
Th e Ming and Qing dynasties witnessed both huge changes and intertwin-
ing contradictions of all sorts. On the one hand, despotic rule increased and 
ritual norms became more and more rigid. On the other hand, the ruling class 
grew extremely corrupt. Political and religious situations got out of control. 
Th e peasants uprising at the end of the Ming Dynasty increased public suspi-
cion of and criticism of the despotism and established rules. Th e emergence of 
new economy and the introduction of modern western science in the middle 
Ming Dynasty off ered fresh impetus to cultural renovation. Some enlightened 
intellectuals at the turn of the Ming and Qing dynasties, responding to the new 
commodity economy, initiated a wave of enlightenment that called for personal 
liberation, equality, and democracy.
Li Zhi of the Ming Dynasty, famous for his heterodoxy, lashed out at the 
Cheng-Zhu Neo-Confucianism being promoted by the ruling class, and denied 
the claim that the doctrines of Confucianism and Mencius were the best. In his 
eyes, Confucius was not a saint, but “a common person” and the Four Books 
and Five Classics should not be the only standards for thinking. Li said every 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

168 
CHINA’S HISTORY
person had unique motives and “individual habits in dressing and eating refl ect 
the relations among people.” It is a natural gift  to seek material pleasure and 
every one can follow one’s nature to emancipate one’s personality.
During the turn of the Ming and Qing dynasties, great thinkers included 
Wang Fuzhi, Huang Zongxi, and Gu Yanwu. Wang Fuzhi emphasized that 
 natural laws are embodied in the material world, and these laws could be 
 correctly understood through observation. His philosophy toppled the theoretic 
foundation of apriorism of Cheng-Zhu Neo-Confucianism. He also confi rmed 
the rationality of emotional desire and selfish desire as natural instincts of 
human beings.
Huang Zongxi alleged in public that, “the emperor is the biggest bane of 
the world.” In his philosophy, the ruler and the subject were not master and 
servant, but equal teacher and friend, completely denying the obsolete ethi-
cal norms of the time. He also advocated substituting “the laws of the world 
enabling every person to get their own share” for “the single law of a family” 
that binds everybody, so as constrain the rule of the emperor.
In view that scholars addicted to reading the annotations of Cheng (Cheng 
Hao and Cheng Yi) and Zhu (Zhu Xi) were seriously removed from reality, Gu 
Yanwu exclaimed that “every person is responsible for the rise and fall of the 
world.” He insisted on being pragmatic and caring about the national economy 
and people’s livelihood, and being dedicated to social reform.
Th e thinkers during the Ming and Qing dynasties also put forward diverse 
theories and assumptions about restricting imperial power. Th e most promi-
nent concept was to advocate freedom of speech, and to establish bottom-to-
top supervision mechanisms to ensure clean politics, proper decisions, and 
social stability.
The progressive thinkers criticized Neo-Confucianism using an unprec-
edented incisive style of writing, initiating a wave of progressive thinking 
characterized by profound and novel philosophical concepts, political insight, 
and a practical, critical spirit. Th eir thoughts had a tremendous, centuries-long 
enlightening infl uence and gave great inspiration to later generations.
In the Ming and Qing dynasties, commercial and industrial towns 
 developed, and the citizen class that emerged promoted the development of 
 literature. Chapter-style novels, developed from play scripts of the Song and 
Yuan dynasties, focused on narration and mirrored people’s lives and social 
reality. Novels became the mainstream literature.
Of the great literary classics that gained nationwide popularity during 
the Ming Dynasty, The Romance of the Three Kingdoms, written by Luo 
Guanzhong, was the first full-length historical novel in Chinese history. 
The Water Margin, written by Shi Nai’an, was the first heroic and martial 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
169
art novel. The Journey to the West, written by Wu Cheng’en, typified the 
genre of immortal beings. The Golden Lotus, written by Xiaoxiaosheng 
from Lanling, was an exemplary novel that describes the ways of life and 
the changes in social customs. Popular short stories that feature ordinary 
citizens during the late Ming Dynasty vividly describe the life experiences 
and pursuits of common people, accurately reflecting the social reality of 
the time.
Th e Qing Dynasty saw the emergence of a number of great critical works. 
A Dream of Red Mansions, written by Cao Xueqin, is the best of these. The 
book focuses on the tragic love story of Jia Baoyu and Lin Daiyu, and presents 
the general condition of society through the rise and fall of a noble family. 
While the plots in the novel are complicated, the narrative threads are clear-
cut. Th e language is concise and vivid, the characters lively and full of person-
ality. Th e book is recognized by many as the pinnacle of China’s classic novels. 
The Grand View Garden (part) drawn by a Qing dynasty artist according to A Dream of Red 
Mansions.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

170 
CHINA’S HISTORY
In addition, Th e Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio, written by Pu Songling, 
is “a book of indignation” aimed to express the author’s dissatisfaction with 
social darkness. Th e Scholars, written by Wu Jingzi, reveals and satirizes the 
ugly side of society.
Painters with highly developed personal styles emerged in the Ming and 
Qing dynasties. Bold and unconstrained, their works stood in sharp contrast to 
traditional Chinese paintings.
Among these painters, the eight famous reclusive artists and Shi Tao 
were all clansmen of the Ming Emperor, and became monks after the Ming 
Dynasty was destroyed. Through calligraphy and paintings, they expressed 
their experience of life and their sorrow over the destroyed old dynasty. 
In the mid-Qing Dynasty, eight artists, known as the Eight Eccentrics of 
Yangzhou, broke conventional rules in painting and manifested works that 
expressed their sharply defined personalities. Most of their works were 
impressionistic in style and focused on flowers and birds. As one of the 
eight eccentrics, Zheng Xie, alias Zheng Banqiao, was good at painting 
orchids and bamboo.
In the middle and late period of the Ming Dynasty, Kunqu Opera—
which combines poetry, music, singing, dance, 
and drama—prevailed on both sides of the 
Yangtze River. It developed into an opera per-
formed nationwide, and is called “the origin 
of all kinds of opera.” Kunqu Opera features 
elegant lyrics and sweet soothing tunes accom-
panied by pauses. Ming performers sang and 
danced; soft  dance and gentle arias were com-
bined to amuse the ears and eyes of the audi-
ence.
Anhui Opera took a dominant role  during 
the reign of Emperor Qianlong of the Qing 
Dynasty by absorbing singing and performing 
styles from Hubei Han Tune, Kunqu Opera, 
Qinqiang melody, and Bangzi melody. On 
such a basis, a new form of opera—Peking 
Opera—came into shape in Beijing. Peking 
Opera is integrated with the essence of ancient 
opera art and presents an almost perfect artis-
tic pattern. By using artistic means of singing, 
speaking, gestures, and acrobatics, performers 
are able to represent the society at large on a 
small stage.
Orchids and Bamboos by 
Zheng Banqiao in the Qing 
Dynasty.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
171
Peking Opera took the distinctive Chinese opera to a new level and 
 continues to shine in the hall of human culture.
Crisis before Modern Times
During the Ming and Qing dynasties, the historical development of the world 
experienced signifi cant changes. One aft er another, the main European coun-
tries leaped from early capitalism to capitalist class revolution and embarked on 
the road to modern industrial civilization.
Th e Chinese empire reached a new height in agricultural civilization and 
some changes from the traditional mode emerged in the social economy, and 
intellectual and cultural circles, with a tendency toward industrial civilization. 
However, when the British capitalist revolution occurred, China was mired 
in peasant wars at the end of the Ming Dynasty, aft er which it entered a track 
completely diff erent from that of western countries.
In western countries, commercial economy replaced the natural economy, 
industrial production replaced handicraft workshops, state power marked by 
rule of law replaced the privilege of kings and nobles, reasoning broke the hold 
of religious doctrines that dated from the Middle Ages, and science overcame 
ignorance. The industrial revolution helped the western bourgeoisie “create 
more massive and more colossal productive forces than those created by all 
preceding generations together.” But the Qing monarchs, even during the pros-
perous era of Emperors Kangxi and Qianlong, knew nothing about the historic 
transformation caused by the spread of industrial civilization, causing the coun-
try to sink into its deepest crisis, a watershed moment when China changed 
from being a leading world power to being a country stuck in the past.
During the Ming and Qing dynasties, the economic structure, character-
ized by a combination of farming and weaving and self-suffi  ciency, still took a 
dominant role throughout the country, but private handicraft  and commercial 
sectors gained strong momentum. From the late Ming Dynasty onward, social 
Thirteen Top Performers: a vivid portrayal of famous Peking Opera actors/actresses of the 
Tongzhi and Guangxu Periods 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

172 
CHINA’S HISTORY
values and morality became money-and benefi t–oriented. Th itherto  despised 
businessmen were granted high social status. Even Emperor  Yongzheng 
sighed when he said, “I feel it ridiculous that businessmen top all the 
 professions—and scholars, on the contrary, are located in the lowest positions.” 
 Correspondingly, proposals that “handicraft  and commerce jointly constitute 
the foundation of society” and “the rich are those the whole state depends 
upon” were put forward in the civil society.
Farming and Weaving vividly details ancient China’s mode of production with men for farming 
and women for weaving.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
173
However, the rulers of the Qing Dynasty believed that “one more person 
engaged in commercial business would reduce one peasant working in the farm-
land,” and thus insisted on implementing the policies of “encouraging all the 
peasants to commit themselves to farming” and “making both labor and land 
exhausted.” Th is highly intensive mode of production, which confi ned vast num-
bers of excessive labor to limited farmland, signifi cantly dampened the impetus 
of scientific innovation. The long-term family production structure featuring 
“man tills and women weaves” also hindered the handicraft  development, and 
froze and consolidated the natural agricultural economy.
Th e rulers of the Qing Dynasty considered that “mining is bound to result 
in the gathering of people, which would further lead to turbulence.” Th erefore, 
on multiple occasions they issued orders forbidding mining, and imposed 
redundant and heavy commercial taxes on the activities of businessmen and 
owners of workshops. Under this policy, businessmen and workshop owners 
could not increase production by accumulating capital, forcing some commer-
cial capital into land exploitation, which inhibited large-scale industrialization.
While practical study prevailed and western learning gradually fl owed into 
the east, the court of the Qing Dynasty still kept pragmatic knowledge about 
science and technology at arm’s length, continued its system of offi  cial selection 
through stereotyped writing, constrained the people’s minds with Neo-Confu-
cianism, and vigorously launched literary inquisitions. Th is made it diffi  cult for 
modern elements in political and ideological fi elds to develop. Instead of using 
uniform, standardized, and effi  cient educational selection mechanisms to push 
for industrialization and social transformation, the Qing Dynasty went against 
the social trend, stubbornly replicating old bureaucratic and legal systems and 
seriously hindering the process of modernization.
Before the 16th century, China’s ocean navigation and ship-making tech-
niques took a leading position in the world. From 1405 to 1433, the Ming 
Dynasty sent Zheng He on voyages to Southeastern Asia and the Indian Ocean. 
Zheng led hundreds of huge ships and thousands of sailors, reaching more 
than thirty countries in Asia and Africa and increasing friendly exchanges 
and economic communication. However, the Ming Dynasty characterized this 
work as “giving more but getting less” and seldom took economic benefi ts into 
account. Th e government forced or supervised the production of most goods 
for export, which led a vast number of craft smen to fl ee, and put an end to the 
feat of ocean navigation, considering it “bad policy.”
Th e Qing court posed as a Celestial Empire, believing that it “had abun-
dant resources and products and didn’t need to exchange goods with alien 
nations.” Meanwhile, it closed its doors to the outside world by prohibiting sea 
trade and foreign trade, with a view to preventing “alien” invasion and avoiding 
anti-Qing forces in coastal areas. It closed all the trade ports except the port 
of Guangzhou, and only allowed the offi  cially franchised organization Shisan 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

174 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Hang to manage foreign trade. Th ough the closed-door policy played a certain 
role in defending the nation against western colonists, it did not narrow the 
gap between the west and China. Instead, the policy curbed the development of 
foreign trade and navigation, and the Qing Dynasty lost an opportunity to tap 
overseas markets, stimulate capital expansion, and promote industrialization 
through foreign trade. Instead it fostered stagnation and took China far away 
from the developmental tide sweeping the world.
After the Ming Dynasty, western Jesuits came to China. They helped 
spread advanced western science and technologies while preaching, allowing 
western learning to fl ow into the eastern world. Th is off ered rare opportuni-
ties for China to broaden its horizon and merge into the tide of industrial 
civilization. Xu Guangqi, at the end of the Ming Dynasty, timely put forward 
the proposal of “overtaking the western counterparts by learning wildly from 
the other’s strong points and combining them with local features based on 
assimilation of knowledge.” But the rulers of the Qing regime stuck to the idea 
that China was diff erent from foreign nations, and that all western knowledge 
originated from Chinese culture. Th e communication between east and west 
came to a halt following the exile of the Jesuits during the reign of Emperor 
Yongzheng.
Shisan Hang, Guangzhou, where foreign trade was handled in the Qing Dynasty
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 8 The Ming and Qing Dynasties (before the Opium War) 
175
The rapid growth of capitalism put the entire world into a torrential 
flow of commodity circulation. Western powers swarmed into other lands 
across the ocean, plundering valuable resources and objects, trading slaves, 
and  establishing colonial rule. That resulted in a swift change in the balance 
between western powers and the Qing Empire. During the reign of Emperor 
Qianlong, George Lord McCartney (1737–1806), an emissary from Brit-
ain, once claimed that it would take only several three-mast battleships to 
destroy the whole coastal fl eet of the Qing Dynasty if China were to forbade 
 Sino- British trade or cause severe loss. Th e seemingly ridiculous prediction did 
come true, causing Emperor Daoguang to sigh and say, “what a shame it is to 
not repel the attack of two alien ships! It is no wonder we are despised by the 
alien nations given our poor military strength.”
The first Opium War in 1840 finally disrupted the natural process of 
 China’s  societal evolution. Th e Chinese people then faced a solemn and ardu-
ous war to gain national independence, and embarked slowly on a complex, 
twisting, and unique road to modernization.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
A great empire with almost two-thirds of the world’s population 
ignored the changes in the outside world, content with things as they 
were. Isolated from the rest of the world, its leaders deceived them-
selves with the illusion that their empire was an extremely perfect 
one. Such an empire was doomed to lose in the fi nal deadly duel.
—Karl Marx, History of the Opium Trade
DOOMED FATE OF THE QING 
EMPIRE
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

9
177
9
Western Powers Invade China, and Chinese 
People Rise in Resistance
In the 16th century, western colonial powers traveled to remote eastern lands 
to seek resources and to create markets and overseas colonies. In 1514, the 
 Portuguese landed on Chinese land, followed by the Spanish, the Dutch, and the 
British. In 1793, a British delegation led by McCartney required the Qing imperial 
court to open trading ports, establish fi rms, and even to provide Zhoushan Islands 
for “dry goods.” Th e Qing imperial court determinedly refused the request.
Britain, with a trade deficit against China, began to smuggle opium into 
the country with intent to seduce Chinese civilians and soldiers to use it. Th e 
 British government counted on the addictive nature of opium to produce 
sales that would overturn their trade defi cit. Th e quantity of opium imported 
reached more than 40,000 chests per year by 1840.
Th e Chinese people suff ered greatly from opium. Had the import contin-
ued with no restriction, China would “have had no troops to resist invasion or 
money to aff ord the army.” Lin Zexu, the government inspector, organized the 
destruction of captured opium in Humen, Guangzhou, in June 1839. Britain’s 
unconscionable response was to invade China in June 1840, launching the 
Opium War. China had backward military equipment and was weak in military 
operations. Moreover, the Emperor of the Qing Dynasty, anxious for a quick 
victory, quickly turned to compromise and surrender aft er failing to win within 
a short time.
The Decline and Struggle of 
Modern China
Chapter 9
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

178 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Therefore, China lost the war. In August 1842, the imperial court of the 
Qing Dynasty signed the Sino–UK Treaty of Nanking, remising land and 
 paying silver to Britain. The treaty humiliated the nation and forfeited its 
 sovereignty.
In the six decades between the Opium War and the early 1900s, China was 
invaded and humiliated by foreign powers several times. Th e Second Opium 
War, the Sino-French War, the Sino-Japanese War, and the invasion of the 
 Eight-Power Allied Forces all forced the imperial court of the Qing Dynasty 
to sign a series of unequal treaties. These treaties affected Chinese political, 
Relief: Destroying Opium at Humen.
On August 29, 1842, Chinese and British representatives inked The Sino–UK Treaty of 
Nanking on board the British vessel Cornwallis.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 9 The Decline and Struggle of Modern China 
179
economic, and  cultural fi elds, and infringed on Chinese territorial  sovereignty, 
jurisdiction, and administration. China, temporarily put off the track of 
 independent  development, found itself gradually reduced to colonial or semi- 
colonial status.
When western powers invaded China, they violently disrupted China’s 
chosen isolation from the outside world, and destroyed the country’s tradi-
tional economy of natural self-suffi  ciency. Th ey established factories and built 
railways in China to exploit cheap labor, dump commodities, and plunder 
resources. At the same time, they spread new social factors, acted uncon-
sciously as a historical tool, and to some extent initiated China’s modernization. 
As western powers attacked China, the national bourgeoisie and proletariat of 
China came into being. With the bankruptcy of a huge number of farmers, a 
semi-proletarian class was created.
Ruins of the Yuanmingyuan Garden. The imperial garden of the Qing Dynasty was burned 
down by the joint Anglo-French army in 1860.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

180 
CHINA’S HISTORY
On Sept. 9, 1945, the ofﬁ cial surrender ceremony of Japanese troops in the Chinese Theater 
was held in Nanjing. Okamura Yasuji, commander-in-chief of the Japanese army, is signing 
the Instrument of Surrender.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
On the eve of the Opium War, the feudal economy that featured 
self-suffi ciency still played a dominant role in China, even though the 
early emergence of capitalism cultivated in the Chinese feudal society 
had grown slowly during centuries of development.
In the wake of the Opium War, one after another treaty ports 
were opened, resulting in a huge infl ux of foreign goods. Foreign 
cotton and cloth replaced local cotton and cloth because of its high 
quality and low price, making “weaving” separate from “farming” in 
China. Songjiang and Taicang in Jiangsu were previously the center of 
China’s cotton textile sector and enjoyed a worldwide reputation for 
clothing and quilting. But “the cloth markets in Songjiang and Taicang 
shrank signifi cantly” after the Opium War due to the increase in sales 
GRADUAL COLLAPSE OF THE NATURAL 
ECONOMY
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 9 The Decline and Struggle of Modern China 
181
After World War I, the Japanese consolidated their power in China. In 
1931, Japan instigated the Mukden Incident and invaded Northeast China, 
then instigated the Marco Polo Bridge Incident in 1937, extending its scope of 
invasion to the whole Chinese territory.
During the fourteen years of the Japanese invasion, Japan turned  occupied 
areas into military and industrial bases to plunder and exploit China’s  economic 
resources, calling it “military management” and  “consignment  operations.” Th e 
Japanese perpetrated the extremely cruel Nanking  Massacre and even used 
chemical weapons against Chinese citizens. According to statistics, the number 
of people killed by Japanese invaders was 35 million, the direct economic loss 
US$100 billion, and indirect economic loss US$500 billion.
During the 100 years aft er the Opium War, the Chinese people shared a hatred 
of invading powers and rose to fight. Guan Tianpei and Chen Huacheng hero-
ically guarded cannon stands in the Opium War. Zuo Zongtang fi ercely beat down 
 Russian invaders and took back Xinjiang. Feng Zicai led his army to victory in the 
important battle of Zhennan Pass. Deng Shichang sacrifi ced his life on the Zhiyuan 
Battleship fi ghting against the Japanese army in the Yellow Sea. Soldiers and civilians 
in Taiwan continued fi ghting aft er the Qing imperial court had to remise the land. 
Th ese heroes represent the brave, fearless fi ghting spirit of the Chinese.
In August 1945, the Chinese people won the Anti-Japanese War aft er eight 
years of fi erce fi ghting, with the support of international anti-Fascist forces.
Democratic Revolutions in Modern China
Aft er the Opium War, Chinese people fought against foreign enemies on the 
one hand, and on the other struggled to overthrow the Qing imperial court to 
establish a democratic political system.
of foreign cloth. The textile-dominated rural areas in the  southeastern 
coastal regions suffered huge losses as well; no cotton was  available 
for spinning and no cloth was available for clothing and quilting. 
Though such phenomena occurred locally, they presaged the  collapse 
of China’s natural economy.
Foreign businessmen also bought large quantities of agricultural 
produce, byproducts, and local specialties from China. They con-
trolled China’s export trade in silk and tea, making the production 
increasingly commercialized, further eroding the base of the natural 
economy of China.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

182 
CHINA’S HISTORY
The Taiping Heavenly Kingdom 
farmers’ uprising, which broke out in 
1851 and lasted fourteen years, shook 
the domination of the Qing Empire. 
When Hong Rengan, one of the rebel 
army leaders, directed the regime, 
he imitated western countries and 
proposed A New Treatise on Political 
Counsel, China’s fi rst social reform pol-
icy with capitalist features. The policy 
advanced the democratic process to 
some extent.
In 1898, the advocates of reform, 
led by Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao, 
persuaded Emperor Guangxu of the 
Qing Dynasty to carry out compre-
hensive reform. The reform required 
the setting up of newspaper offices 
and translation bureaus, freedom of 
speech, training a new type of navy, 
transforming the old imperial exami-
nation  system, establishing new types 
of schools, transforming the fi nancial system, and planning the national budget 
and fi nal settlement. However, the reform lasted only 103 days, as the conser-
vatives, led by Empress Cixi, put an end to the process.
Sun Yat-sen, a pioneer of democratic revolution, established the 
China Revival Society with more than twenty patriotic overseas Chinese 
in 1894. The organization was the first bourgeoisie revolutionary group 
in China. From that time onward, China began its bourgeoisie demo-
cratic revolution. In 1905, the Chinese Revolutionary League was for-
mally founded and its guiding principle was to “repel foreign invaders, 
revitalize China, establish a republic, and divide land equally,” which was 
proposed by Sun Yat-sen. He subsequently simplified the guiding prin-
ciple into the Three People’s Principles, namely nationalism, democracy, 
and the people’s livelihood.
On October 10, 1911, the Wuchang Uprising broke out, fi ring the fi rst shot 
at the Qing imperial court. In the following months, rebellions flared in all 
provinces. Th e Qing Empire disintegrated. Individual independent provinces 
negotiated and approved the Organization Outlines of the Provisional Govern-
ment of the Republic of China and the provisional government implemented a 
presidential republic system.
Dr. Sun Yat-sen and his wife Soong Ching 
Ling.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 9 The Decline and Struggle of Modern China 
183
On January 1, 1912, Sun Yat-sen was sworn in as the interim President of 
the Republic of China in Nanjing, marking the founding of the Republic of 
China. Th e provisional government in Nanjing put into action the Provisional 
Constitution of the Republic of China, stipulating that the sovereignty of the 
Republic of China belonged to all nationals, and citizens had the right to per-
sonal freedom, election, participation in political activities, habitation, free 
speech, publishing, assembly, communication, and freedom of religion. The 
provisional government issued decrees to announce that the Republic of China 
would conduct friendly communications with other countries, observe interna-
tional laws, abolish various taxes, protect national industries, reward overseas 
Chinese people for domestic investments, and advocate moral education for 
citizens under the tenets of “freedom, equality, and aff ection.”.
On February 12, 1912, Emperor Puyi of the Qing Dynasty announced 
his abdication, marking the end of the Revolution of 1911. Th e revolution is 
of great historical signifi cance in that it overthrew the Qing Empire that had 
ruled China for more than 200 years, overturned a 2,000-year-old autocratic 
 monarchy, and established a democratic republic.
After the Revolution of 1911, Chinese political fortunes turned. Wide-
spread skirmishes among warlords led to disasters for both the people and 
the state.
After the victory of the Russian October Revolution in 1917, a number 
of Chinese intellectuals were attracted to Marxism and Leninism. The May 
Fourth Movement, aimed at opposing imperialism and feudalism, dissemi-
nated the ideas of democracy and science, further helping to blend Marxism 
Abdication announcement of Emperor Puyi of the Qing Dynasty, February 12, 1912.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

184 
CHINA’S HISTORY
with the Chinese labor movement. Th e Communist Party of China (CPC) was 
founded in Shanghai in 1921, a milestone in the history of modern China. Th e 
CPC integrated Marxism with the actual conditions of China, contributed to 
the victory of the Anti-Japanese War, won the Liberation War, and founded the 
People’s Republic of China on October 1, 1949.
National Capitalist Development
From the very beginning, China’s national industry had two kinds: govern-
ment-run industries dominated by the state and private capital enterprises.
The Anqing Interior Arsenal, the result of the Westernization Move-
ment of the Qing imperial court, was established in 1861, the fi rst for-profi t, 
government-run enterprise. Prior to the 1870s, the Westernization Movement 
called for “self-renewal.” A number of military factories were set up, includ-
ing the Kiangnan Arsenal, the Fuzhou Ship-Building Bureau, and the Tianjin 
 Manufacturing Bureau. Aft er the 1870s, the Westernization Movement called 
out for “wealth,” and a number of civilian-use factories were built, such as 
the Shanghai Merchants Steamship Bureau, the Kaiping Mining Bureau, the 
 Shanghai Weaving Bureau, and Hanyang Iron Factory. These factories used 
The site of the First National Congress of the CPC, held in Shanghai on July 23, 1921.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 9 The Decline and Struggle of Modern China 
185
advanced technologies and equipment, and their products were for both 
 military and civilian use.
Government-run industry initiated by the Westernization Movement 
marked the beginning of Chinese industrialization and left  a precious legacy 
for Chinese industrial, military, and educational departments.
Private enterprises emerged in the 1870s. Outstanding private companies 
were Shanghai Fachang Machinery Factory, Guangdong Jichanglong Filature 
Factory, and Tianjin Yilaimou Machinery Mill. After the Sino-Japanese War 
in 1894, the Qing imperial court loosened its restrictions on private factories 
and set up the ministry of commerce in 1903 to encourage industrial and 
 commercial development. At that time, a campaign of saving the country 
through industry emerged in China, and a number of industrialists made con-
tributions to the nation.
However, China encountered extreme difficulties in its effort to develop 
modern capitalism. Western powers tried to suppress China’s national 
 industrial development with their abundant capital, technological advantages, 
Kiangnan Arsenal, founded during the Westernization Movement.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

186 
CHINA’S HISTORY
and prerogatives they had gained in China. The high tax rate of the Qing 
Dynasty and extortion by governments at all levels increased the production 
costs, making China’s national industries less competitive. Private enterprises 
had to rely on foreign capital to a certain extent, or seek protection from the 
domestic government for survival.
Th e founding of the Republic of China in 1912 raised the political status of 
the national bourgeoisie and inspired the enthusiasm of national capitalists to 
revitalize industry.
During World War I, major European countries were busy with the war, so 
capital and commodity exports to China were reduced, and Chinese national 
industry developed rapidly. From 1903 to 1908, the number of registered fac-
tories in China was 21 per year. Th e number increased to 41 between 1913 and 
1915, and to 124 between 1916 and 1919. Soon aft er the end of World War I, 
foreign capital staged a comeback, putting Chinese national industry under 
heavy pressure.
In the 1930s, bureaucratic capital, as represented by the four large house-
holds (Chiang, Soong, Kung, and Chen), emerged prior to the Anti-Japanese 
War. Making use of their political rights, they obtained a great deal of resources 
and income by unified purchase and unified sale, monopoly sale, price 
China Cement Works in Nanjing, built during the Republican period, epitomizes China’s early 
national industry.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Chapter 9 The Decline and Struggle of Modern China 
187
 restriction, and bargain measures. Th e four families took up a dominant posi-
tion in national industry.
Aft er the Opium War, Chinese people suff ered from the resulting chaos and 
lowered living standards. During the period of the Republic of China, the limited 
social and economic development did not shake off  their shackles of poverty. Th e 
purchasing power of the legal tender issued by the government of the Republic 
of China is a good example. Before the Anti-Japanese War, 100 yuan was worth 
two bulls. Th at same 100 yuan was worth two eggs in 1945, two pieces of coal in 
1947, and only 0.0001 gram of rice in 1949. In the same year, China had 20,000 
kilometers of railways, of which roughly half could be used. Th e length of  useable 
highway was less than 80,000 kilometers, and most of the roads were located 
in the developed southeastern coastal areas. Highways were not available in 
 mountainous regions or in border areas inhabited by ethnic groups, which made 
up more than two-thirds of the gross land area in the state. As a foreign commen-
tator once said, China was a country that needed to import even an iron nail.
A spinning mill workshop in the Republican period.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

10
189
10
On October 1, 1949, the People’s Republic of China was founded. Over the past 
sixty years, China has been exploring its way toward socialist modernization 
through the introduction of democracy and legal systems in the political fi eld, 
economic reforms, participation in international competition and cooperation, 
and the maintenance of world peace and stability.
Building up the Political System
Since its foundation, New China has dedicated itself to building a political 
system suitable for its practical conditions. Th e political system is composed 
of the people’s congress, which operates by the principle of democratic central-
ism, multi-party cooperation and political consultation under the leadership of 
the Communist Party of China (CPC), and the system of regional autonomy of 
ethnic minorities.
Th e people’s congress system is the fundamental political system of China. 
According to the Constitution of the People’s Republic of China, the power 
of the nation belongs to the people. The National People’s Congress and the 
local people’s congresses at various levels, created by democratic elections, are 
the organs through which people exercise state power. Th ey are responsible to 
the people and subject to their supervision. The National People’s Congress, 
the supreme organ of state power, is entitled to amend the constitution, enact 
laws, elect national leaders, approve national economic development plans, and 
determine war and peace.
The People’s Republic of 
China: In Search of Socialist 
Modernization
Chapter 10
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

190 
CHINA’S HISTORY
October 1, 1949 witnessed the founding of the People’s Republic of China. Chairman Mao Zedong 
proclaims the Announcement of the Central People’s Government on the Tian’anmen Rostrum.
Monument to the People’s Heroes, 
Tian’anmen Square, Beijing.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 Chapter 10 The People’s Republic of China: In Search of Socialist Modernization 
191
Celebrating the 60th anniversary of the founding of the People’s Republic of China on 
October 1, 2009.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Hong Kong and Macao have been part of the Chinese territory since 
ancient times. Hong Kong was occupied by the United Kingdom after 
the Opium War; Macao was occupied by Portugal step by step after 
the mid-16th century.
The Chinese government formulated the policy of “One Coun-
try, Two Systems” to solve the Hong Kong and Macao issues left 
over by history. In December 1984, the Chinese and British govern-
ments signed The Joint Declaration on the Future of Hong Kong. In 
April 1987, the Chinese and Portuguese governments signed The 
 Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration on the Question of Macao.
The Chinese government resumed its exercise of sovereignty 
over Hong Kong on July 1, 1997, and over Macao on December 20, 
1999. On these two days, special administrative regions were estab-
lished, respectively, and the policies of “Hong Kong people admin-
istering Hong Kong,” “Macao people administering Macao,” and “a 
high degree of autonomy” have been implemented.
THE HONG KONG AND MACAO TO CHINA
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

192 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Th e system of multi-party cooperation and political negotiation under the 
leadership of the CPC is characteristic of modern China. Th e fi rst constitution 
of New China formulated in 1954 stipulated the ruling party status of the CPC 
and the right of participation in the management of state aff airs. In 1982, the 
CPC reiterated that it would work closely with democratic parties in the spirit 
of “long-term coexistence, mutual supervision, sincere treatment of each other, 
and the sharing of weal or woe.”
Th e system of regional autonomy of ethnic minorities is implemented in 
response to the fact that China is a unified multi-ethnic country. China has 
fi ft y-six ethnic groups, and Han Chinese account for more than 90 percent of 
the gross population.
Over the years, people from various ethnic groups have come to inhabit 
some areas together, and some ethnic groups are centralized in other areas. 
Regional autonomy of ethnic groups is under the unified leadership of the 
state and aims at national unity and the equality of each ethnic group. Regional 
autonomy is implemented in some areas inhabited by ethnic people, and 
autonomous governments are established to exercise the right to autonomy. At 
present, China has fi ve provincial-level autonomous regions and more than 100 
autonomous prefectures and counties.
Since the 1980s, China has intensified its policy of political reform that 
aimed toward democracy and rule of law. In 1999, the tenet of “governing the 
country according to law” was added to the constitution, a milestone marking 
China’s entry into a new historical stage of building a law-based society.
Socialist Economic Development
When the People’s Republic of China was founded, all sectors of the econ-
omy required full-scale reconstruction. In 1953, the CPC determined the 
“general line during the transition period,” with a view to realizing socialist 
industrialization and completing socialist transformation of the agriculture 
sector, the handicraft  industry, and the capitalist industry and commerce in 
the long term.
In 1953, China began the implementation of the fi rst fi ve-year national eco-
nomic development plan, whose goals were attained in advance in 1957. China 
built up such new sectors as aircraft , motors, electricity generation equipment, 
metallurgical equipment, and high-level smelting. Basic industries took shape. 
Iron and steel, and coal and power facilities were built in the central and west-
ern areas. A reasonable  industrial layout emerged.
At the end of 1956, the socialist transformation of agriculture, the 
 handicraft  industry, and industry and commerce was completed, and a planned 
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 Chapter 10 The People’s Republic of China: In Search of Socialist Modernization 
193
economic system was established. Th e system paved the way for the develop-
ment of  Chinese socialist industrialization and also exposed various defects of 
the system, foreshadowing later diffi  culties in economic development.
Due to underestimation of the arduous, complex, and long-term socialist 
construction process, Chinese economic development sought high speed in 
1958. “Melting iron and steel,” “people’s commune,” and “great leap forward” 
movements took place in China, upsetting the balance of the national econ-
omy, destroying the ecological environment, and dampening people’s initiative 
for production.
Between 1956 and 1966, China’s modernization drive experienced twists 
and turns, yet great achievements were made. An independent, large-scale 
industrial system was established. Power, mining, and machinery industries 
largely thrived. Electronic, nuclear power, and space industries emerged and 
grew fast. Large oilfi elds such as Daqing, Shengli, and Dagang were established. 
The railway linked all provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions, 
except for Tibet.
From 1966 to 1976, China suff ered the social turmoil caused by the Cultural 
Revolution. Grave mistakes in economic development almost destroyed the 
national economy, and seriously hindered China’s industrial modernization. Th e 
Cultural Revolution brought a staggering economic loss of 500 billion yuan.
Farmers are ﬁ lled with the joy of harvest after the implementation of the household contract 
responsibility system.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

194 
CHINA’S HISTORY
The Third Plenary Session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the 
CPC was convened in 1978. A decision was made to carry out reform and 
 opening-up and shift  the focus of the CPC’s work to economic development, 
triggering a series of great economic reforms in China.
Reforms began in rural areas. Th e household contract responsibility system 
motivated farmers by setting farm output quotas for each household, allowing 
them autonomy in production and management. Township and village enter-
prises emerged and fl ourished, promoting rural development and improving 
the farmers’ standard of living.
Reforms in rural areas drove the reforms in urban areas. In 1992, the 14th 
Central Committee of the CPC set the goal of restructuring the economic 
 system, that is, establishing a socialist market-oriented economy by deepen-
ing the reform of state-owned enterprises (SOE), establishing modern cor-
porate governance, and encouraging businesses to become legal entities and 
 competitors. The SOE reform resulted in enhanced competitiveness and the 
rise of a number of dynamic, powerful, large enterprise groups. Some of these 
enterprise groups have now gone global.
During the SOE reform, some problems occurred, such as layoff s. As the 
social security system improves gradually, the situation will ease.
A street in Shenzhen, 1981.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 Chapter 10 The People’s Republic of China: In Search of Socialist Modernization 
195
While carrying on economic reforms, the Chinese government kick-
started opening up as well. Since 1980, China has set up fi ve special economic 
zones along its coastline and opened a host of coastal port cities, attracting for-
eign investments and developing export-oriented industries. In 1990, the cen-
tral government decided to develop and open Pudong, Shanghai. By the 1990s, 
China had created an all-dimensional, multi-tiered, and wide-ranging pattern 
of opening up that encompasses both the eastern coastal and central and west-
ern inland areas.
China entered the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 2001, marking a 
new stage in its opening-up process. WTO membership has put the country in 
a better position to integrate itself into the international economic system.
Over the past three decades, reform and opening up have advanced each 
other and prompted China’s fast economic growth. From 1979 to 2008, China’s 
annual GDP growth rate was 9.8 percent, a rare phenomenon in world eco-
nomic records.
Today’s Shenzhen.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

196 
CHINA’S HISTORY
Pudong, Shanghai, which has evolved from a rural area into a base of hi-tech and modern 
industries.
FYI
FOR YOUR 
INFORMATION
Since 1978, China’s opening up has undergone six phases: (1) trial 
establishment of special economic zones; (2) opening of coastal port 
cities; (3) further opening up of coastal areas; (4) opening and devel-
oping Shanghai’s Pudong New Area; (5) all-around opening of cities 
along the Yangtze River and in border areas, and those of inland 
provincial capital cities; and (6) China’s entry into WTO.
Over the past 30 years, China has successively set up fi ve special 
economic zones, opened 14 coastal port cities and Pudong New 
Area in Shanghai, established 15 bonded areas, 32 economic and 
technological development zones, 52 high-tech development zones, 
and 38 export processing zones; and 13 border cities, 6 cities along 
the Yangtze River, and 18 provincial capitals.
PROCESS OF CHINA’S OPENING UP TO THE 
OUTSIDE WORLD
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 Chapter 10 The People’s Republic of China: In Search of Socialist Modernization 
197
According to World Bank statistics, the per-capita GDP of China was just 
US$230 in 1978, ranking 104th among the 126 countries and regions listed. 
At that time, many Chinese people did not have suffi  cient food or clothing. In 
2008, China’s GDP reached US$4.32 trillion, and China’s economic aggregate 
was third in the world, with its per-capita GDP hitting US$3,266.
In 2002, the 16th CPC Central Committee called for the building of a 
well-off society in an all-around way and set a lofty objective of quadru-
pling China’s GDP of 2000 by 2020 via optimized economic structure and 
enhanced profi ts.
Foreign Relations of Modern China
Aft er World War II, the western and eastern campus confronted each other. As 
soon as the People’s Republic of China was founded, the Chinese government 
started frequent diplomatic activities.
In terms of relations with neighboring and friendly countries, China pro-
posed the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, namely mutual respect for 
each other’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, non-aggression, non-interfer-
ence in each other’s internal aff airs, equality and mutual benefi t, and peaceful 
coexistence. Th ese principles, which were not bound by ideology or social sys-
tem, were gradually recognized by the international community, and became 
Chinese delegates are excited at the decision of the 26th General Assembly of United 
Nations to reinstate the legal seat of the People’s Republic of China in October 1971.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

198 
CHINA’S HISTORY
basic principles for conducting international relations. At the Bandung Confer-
ence of 1955, China advocated the guideline of “seeking common ground while 
reserving differences.” The participants agreed on the Ten Principles on the 
basis of the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, promoting unity and coop-
eration among Asian and African countries.
In 1971, the 26th General Assembly of the United Nations (UN) approved 
a proposal that recovered all legal rights of the People’s Republic of China in 
the UN.
In February 1972, US President Nixon visits China.
China–Japan Peace and Friendship Treaty is inked in Beijing, August 1978.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 Chapter 10 The People’s Republic of China: In Search of Socialist Modernization 
199
Ping Pong diplomacy and the secret visit of Henry Kissinger to China in 1971 
revived the Sino–US relations. US President Richard Nixon visited China in 1972, 
and both sides signed the Sino-US Joint Communiqué, emphasizing the conduc-
tion of Sino–US relations under the Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence. In 
1979, China and the United States established formal diplomatic relations.
Japanese Prime Minister Tanaka Kakuei visited China in 1972, and signed 
the Agreement of Normalized Relations between China and Japan, marking a 
new era in Sino–Japanese relations.
As relations between China and the US and Japan improved, many western 
countries established diplomatic relations with China.
Since the 1980s, China has continued to practice the Five Principles of 
Peaceful Coexistence. China did not ally with any big country or groups of 
countries. Rather it was committed to developing friendly and cooperative 
relations with all counties.
China has also contributed to regional peace and stability. In 1991, China 
joined APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation). China signed the Foun-
dation Declaration of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization with Russia, 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan in Shanghai, to estab-
lish the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. In addition, trade cooperation 
China enters the WTO, marking its position as an important part of the global economic 
system, in December 2001
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

200 
CHINA’S HISTORY
between China and the ASEAN countries developed in an all-around way, and 
the China–ASEAN free trade zone was established in 2001.
Since China recovered its lawful seat in the UN, the country has carried 
out activities in accordance with the objectives and principles of the UN Char-
ter. As a permanent member of the UN Security Council, China actively takes 
part in peacekeeping actions and promotes the UN disarmament plan, making 
positive contributions to moderating the international situation and maintain-
ing world peace.
By the end of 2009, China had established diplomatic relations with 171 
countries, joined more than 100 inter-governmental organizations, and signed 
almost 300 international treaties. Today, China adheres to the principle of 
peace, development, and cooperation, practices an independent foreign policy 
of peace, follows a peaceful development approach, and implements an open-
ing-up strategy of mutual benefi t. China will continue to play a constructive 
role in international aff airs and work toward a more reasonable and just inter-
national order.
In 2008, China hosted the 29th Olympic Games.
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

 
Appendix Chronological Table of the Chinese Dynasties 
201
Appendix:
Chronological Table of the Chinese Dynasties
The Paleolithic Period
Circa 1,700,000–10,000 years ago
The Neolithic Age
Circa 10,000–4,000 years ago
Xia Dynasty
2070–1600 BC
Shang Dynasty
1600–1046 BC
Western Zhou Dynasty
1046–771 BC
Spring and Autumn Period
770–476 BC
Warring States Period
475–221 BC
Qin Dynasty
221–206 BC
Western Han Dynasty
206 BC–AD 8
Eastern Han Dynasty
25–220
Three Kingdoms
220–280
Western Jin Dynasty
266–316
Eastern Jin Dynasty
317–420
Northern and Southern Dynasties
420–589
Sui Dynasty
581–618
Tang Dynasty
618–907
Five Dynasties
907–960
Northern Song Dynasty
960–1127
Southern Song Dynasty
1127–1276
Yuan Dynasty
1271–1368
Ming Dynasty
1368–1644
Qing Dynasty
1636–1911
Republic of China
1912–1949
People’s Republic of China
1949–present
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.


203
INDEX
A
Art of War, 50, 84
Autonomous regions, 192–193
B
Banpo site, 5, 11–12
Bian Que, 42
Bronze, 13, 17–20, 23–28, 32, 35, 38–39, 41, 
56, 66–67
Buddhism, 64, 88–89, 108, 159
C
Calligraphy, 83, 86, 89, 108, 114, 141, 170
Cao Cao, 77–78
Central government, 21, 55, 59–60, 102, 104, 
120, 134, 150, 195
Central plains, 13, 15, 21, 32–34, 63–64, 
81–85, 89, 93, 106–107, 119, 122, 124–125, 
132–133, 160
Cheng-Zhu Neo-Confucianism, 139–140, 
167–168
Chiyou tribe, 13
Chu, State of, 32–35, 37, 41, 43
Ci poetry, 140
Classic of Internal Medicine, 69
Communist Party of China (CPC), 184, 189, 
192, 194, 197
Confucian philosophy, 48, 61
Confucius, 20, 40, 42–43, 45–46, 50, 72, 89, 
167
Cultural Revolution, 193
D
Dalai Lama, 157–158
Democratic Revolution, 181–184
Ding, 20, 27–28, 32
Dujiangyan, 39, 41–42
Dunhuang, 62, 65, 86, 104, 106, 115–116
E
Economic reforms, 96–97, 189, 194–195
Erlitou Culture, 18, 24
F
Feudal system, 20–22, 33, 53, 138
Five Dynasties, 119
Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence, 
197–199
Four great inventions, 138–142
G
Genghis Khan, 132–133
Great Unifi cation, 135
Great Wall, 53, 61–63, 154–155
H
Handicraft  industry, 22, 192
Han Dynasty, 10, 48, 50, 58–69, 71, 73, 77, 79, 
83, 89
Han Fei, 49
Hemudu Culture, 5, 7
Hongshan Culture, 5, 8–9
Huangdi, Yellow Emperor, 9, 69
Hundred Schools of Th ought, 40–50, 71
Huns, 53, 61–63
I
Imperial examination, 100, 102–103, 108, 122, 
129–130, 152, 166–167, 182
J
Japanese invasion, 181
Jiaguwen, 23–25
Jin Dynasty, 79, 82, 89–90, 92, 124–125
Jin, State of, 32, 34–35, 37
Jinwen, 24–25
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

204     INDEX
K
Kangxi, 148–149, 155, 157
Kublai Khan, 132, 134
Kunqu Opera, 159, 170
L
Lao Tze, 44, 46–47, 50, 61, 71, 88
Legalism, 45, 47, 72, 88
Leninism, 183
Liao Dynasty, 122–123
Li Bai, 113
M
Manchu, 147–148, 157
Mao Zedong, 190
Materia Medica, 71
May Fourth Movement, 183
Mencius, 43, 45, 47, 167
Metaphysics, 88–89
Military Aff airs Division, 149
Ming Dynasty, 63, 145–155, 157, 159–171, 
173–174
Mogao Grottoes, 115–116
Mohist School, 45–47
Mongolian Empire, 132–133
Mo Tzu, 47
N
National People’s Congress, 189
Neo-Confucianism, 139–141, 167–168, 173
Neolithic Period, 5, 11, 13
New Democracy, 192
Northern Dynasties, 77–93, 95, 101
Northern Song Dynasty, 121, 126–128, 136, 
139, 141
O
Opening up, 194–196, 200
Opium War, 145–175, 177–178, 180–181, 187, 
191
P
Paleolithic Period, 3
Patriarchal system, 21
Peking Man, 3–4
Peking Opera, 170–171
People’s Republic of China, 184, 189–200
Porcelain, 5, 68, 100, 107, 122, 125, 127
Puyi, Emperor, 183
Q
Qianlong, Emperor, 149, 157–159, 163, 170, 175
Qin, State of, 34–39
Qi, State of, 32, 34–37, 49
R
Republic of China, 182–184, 186–187, 189–200
Revolution of 1911, 183
S
School of Eclectics, 45, 50
School of Mind, 140
School of Names, 45, 49
Sericulture, 11, 99, 133–134
Shang Dynasty, 18–19, 22–25, 27–28, 89
Shang Yang, 34–35, 37–39
Shen Nong, Emperor, 71
Shihuang, Emperor, 53–58, 61, 73–74
Silk Road, 64–65, 86, 107, 116, 135
Sima Qian, 72–73
Socialist Modernization, 189–200
Square-fi elds system, 23, 37
Sun Wu, 49–50
Sun Yat-Sen, 182–183
T
Taoism, 48, 72, 88–89
Terracotta Warriors, 39, 73–74
Th ree Kingdoms Period, 77–81, 93
U
Upper Cave Man, 3–6
W
Wang Xizhi, 89–90
Wang Zhaojun, 62
Wei, State of, 34–35, 37
Westernization Movement, 184–185
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

INDEX     205
Western regions, 61–66, 79, 92–93, 105, 107, 
109, 114, 121
WTO, 195–196, 199
Wudi, Emperor, 58–63, 65, 71–73
X
Xiandi, Emperor, 66, 78
Xixia, 119, 121–124, 136–137
Xuanzang, 109
Xuanzong, Emperor, 100, 106, 107, 113–114, 
119
Xun Zi, 45, 47
Y
Yangdi, Emperor, 96–97
Yangshao Culture, 5, 12
Yan, State of, 34–35, 37, 45, 49, 61
Yin-Yang School, 45, 49, 72
Yuandi, Emperor, 62
Yuanmou Man, 3
Yu, chieft ain, 121
Yue, State of, 33
Z
Zaju Opera, 140
Zhao, State of, 34–35, 37, 50, 61, 107
Zheng He, 173
Zheng, State of, 37
Zhuang Tzu, 46–48, 88
(c) 2011 Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

